sixth edition
grewal • levy

mar.ket.ing
Marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and processes 
for creating, capturing, communicating, delivering, and 
exchanging offerings that have value for customers,  
clients, partners, and society at large.
The definition of marketing, established by the American Marketing Association,  
October 2007. Word in italics was added by authors.
mhhe.com/grewal6e


Marketing
Sixth Edition
Dhruv Grewal, PhD
Babson College
Michael Levy, PhD
Babson College

MARKETING, SIXTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2018 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights 
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous edition © 2016, 2014, 2012, 2010, and 2008. No part of this publication may 
be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent 
of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for 
­distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LWI/LWI 21 20 19 18 17
ISBN 978-1-259-70907-4
MHID 1-259-70907-8
Chief Product Officer, SVP Products & Markets: G. Scott Virkler
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Michael Ryan
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery: Betsy Whalen
Managing Director: Susan Gouijnstook
Brand Manager: Meredith Fossel
Director, Product Development: Meghan Campbell
Lead Product Developer: Kelly L. Delso
Product Developer: Lai T. Moy
Director, Marketing: Robin Lucas
Marketing Manager: Elizabeth Schonagen
Market Development Manager: Andrea Shieve
Digital Product Analyst: Kerry Shanahan
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Terri Schiesl
Program Manager: Mary Conzachi
Content Project Managers: Christine A. Vaughan; Danielle Clement
Buyer: Susan G. Culbertson
Design: Matt Diamond
Content Licensing Specialists: DeAnna Dausener; Ann Marie Jannette
Cover Images: Tomislav Forgo/Getty Images; Jack Anderson/Getty Images; habovka/Getty Images; Devan Muir/Getty Images
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
Typeface: 10/12 STIX Mathjax Main
Printer: LSC Communications
Section/chapter opener strawberry image: © Himbeertoni/Getty Images RF
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Grewal, Dhruv, author. | Levy, Michael, 1950- author.
Title: Marketing / Dhruv Grewal, PhD, Babson College, Michael Levy, PhD, 
    Babson College.
Description: Sixth edition. | New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Education, [2018]
Identifiers: LCCN 2016046062 | ISBN 9781259709074 (alk. paper) | ISBN  
  1259709078 (alk. paper)
Subjects:  LCSH: Marketing.
Classification: LCC HF5415 .G6753 2018 | DDC 658.8—dc23 LC record  
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016046062
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does not indicate  
an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not guarantee the accuracy of  
the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

To my family for their never-ending support;  
my wife Diana; and my children, Lauren and Alex.
—Dhruv Grewal
To Mark Levy, my best friend and brother.
—Michael Levy


	
	
vii
about the authors
Dhruv Grewal
Dhruv Grewal, PhD (Virginia Tech), 
is the Toyota Chair in Commerce and 
Electronic Business and a professor 
of marketing at Babson College. He is 
listed in The World’s Most Influential 
Scientific Minds, Thompson Reuters 
2014 (only eight from the marketing 
field and 95 from economics and 
business are listed). He was 
awarded the 2013 university-wide Distinguished Graduate 
Alumnus from his alma mater, Virginia Tech, the 2012 Lifetime 
Achievement Award in Pricing (AMA Retailing & Pricing SIG), the 
2010 Lifetime Achievement Award in Retailing (AMA Retailing 
SIG), the 2010 AMS Cutco/Vector Distinguished Educator Award, 
the 2010 Lifetime Achievement Award in Retailing (AMA Retailing 
SIG), and in 2005 the Lifetime Achievement in Behavioral Pricing 
Award (Fordham University, November 2005). He is a 
Distinguished Fellow of the Academy of Marketing Science. He 
was ranked first in the marketing field in terms of publications in 
the top-six marketing journals during the 1991–1998 period and 
again for the 2000–2007 period. He ranked eighth in terms of 
publications in JM and JMR during the 2009–2013 period and 
ranked seventh in terms of publications in the Journal of Public 
Policy & Marketing for the period 1992–2001. He was also 
ranked first in terms of publications and third in ­citations for 
pricing research for the time period 1980–2010 in 20 marketing 
and business publications. He has served as VP, research and 
conferences, American Marketing Association Academic Council 
(1999–2001), and as VP, development for the Academy of 
Marketing Science (2000–2002). He was co-editor of Journal 
of Retailing from 2001 to 2007. He co-chaired the 1993 
Academy of Marketing Science Conference, the 1998 Winter 
American Marketing Association Conference, the 2001 AMA 
doctoral consortium, the American Marketing Associa­
tion 2006 Summer Educators Conference, the 2011 DMEF re-
search summit, and the 2012 and 2015 AMA/ACRA Retailing 
Conference.
	
Professor Grewal has published over 140 articles in jour-
nals such as the Journal of Retailing, Journal of Marketing, 
Journal of Consumer Research, Journal of Marketing 
Research, Journal of Consumer Psychology, Journal of Applier 
Psychology, and Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
as well as other journals. He currently serves on numerous edi-
torial and advisory review boards, such as the Journal of 
Retailing, Journal of Marketing (area editor), Journal of Marketing 
Research, Journal of Consumer Psychology, Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science (area editor), Academy of 
Marketing Science Review, Journal of Interactive Marketing, 
Journal of Business Research, and Journal of Public Policy & 
Marketing. He has over 35,000 citations based on Google scholar.
	
He has won a number of awards for his teaching: 2005 
Sherwin-Williams Distinguished Teaching Award, Society for 
Marketing Advances; 2003 American Marketing Association 
Award for Innovative Excellence in Marketing Education; 1999 
Academy of Marketing Science Great Teachers in Marketing 
Award; Executive MBA Teaching Excellence Award (1998); School 
of Business Teaching Excellence Awards (1993, 1999); and 
Virginia Tech Certificate of Recognition for Outstanding Teaching 
(1989). He has won numerous awards for his research: 2016 
Journal of Marketing Sheth Award; William R. Davidson Journal 
of Retailing Best Paper Awards 2010, 2012, and 2016; Luis W. 
Stern Awards 2011 and 2015 (AMA IO Sig); William R. Davidson 
Journal of Retailing Honorable Mention Awards 2010 and 2011; 
Babson College Faculty Scholarship Award (2010 and 2015); 
University of Miami School of Business Research Excellence 
Award for the years 1991, 1995, 1996, and 1998; Best Services 
Paper Award (AMA Services SIG 2002); Stanley C. Hollander 
Best Retailing Paper (AMS 2002 and 2008); and M. Wayne 
DeLozier Best Conference Paper (AMS 2002 and 2008). He 
also received Best Reviewer Awards (Journal of Retailing 2008, 
Journal of Marketing 2014), best area editor (Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science 2016), and a Distinguished 
Service Award (Journal of Retailing 2009).
	
Professor Grewal has taught executive seminars and 
courses and/or worked on research projects with numerous 
firms, such as Dell, ExxonMobil, IRI, Radio Shack, Telcordia, 
Khimetriks, Profit-Logic, McKinsey, Ericsson, Motorola, Nextel, 
FP&L, Lucent, Sabre, Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company, 
Sherwin-Williams and Asahi. He has delivered seminars in the 
United States, Europe, Latin America, and Asia. He has also 
served as an expert witness and worked as a consultant on 
numerous legal cases.
Michael Levy
Michael Levy, PhD (Ohio State 
University), is the Charles Clarke 
Reynolds Professor of Marketing 
Emeritus at Babson College and CEO 
of RetailProf LLC. He received his PhD 
in business administration from The 
Ohio State University and his under-
graduate and MS degrees in business 
administration from the University of 
Colorado at Boulder. He taught at Southern Methodist University 
before joining the faculty as professor and chair of the market-
ing department at the University of Miami.
	
Professor Levy received the inaugural ACRA Academic 
Lifetime Achievement Award presented at the 2015 AMA/ACRA 
(American Marketing Association/American Collegiate Retailing 
Association) Triennial Conference; was recognized for 25 years 
of dedicated service to the editorial review board of the Journal 
Courtesy of Dhruv Grewal
Courtesy of Michael Levy

viii	
about the authors
of Retailing in 2011. He won the McGraw-Hill Corporate 
Achievement Award for Grewal–Levy Marketing 2e with 
Connect in the category of excellence in content and analytics 
(2010); Revision of the Year for Marketing 2e (Grewal–Levy) 
from McGraw-Hill/Irwin (2010); the 2009 Lifetime Achievement 
Award, American Marketing Association, Retailing Special 
Interest Group (SIG); the Babson Faculty Scholarship Award 
(2009); and the Distinguished Service Award, Journal of 
Retailing (2009) (at winter AMA). 
	
He was rated as one of the best researchers in marketing 
in a survey published in Marketing Educator (Summer 1997). He 
has developed a strong stream of research in retailing, business 
logistics, financial retailing strategy, pricing, and sales manage-
ment. He has published over 50 articles in leading marketing 
and logistics journals, including the Journal of Retailing, Journal 
of Marketing, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
and Journal of Marketing Research. He has served on the edi-
torial review boards of the Journal of Retailing, Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, International Journal of 
Physical Distribution and Materials Management, International 
Journal of Business Logistics, ECR Journal, European Business 
Review, and has been on the editorial advisory boards of 
European Retail Research and the European Business Review. 
He is co-author of Retailing Management, 9e (2014), the 
best-selling college-level retailing text in the world. Professor 
Levy was co-editor of the Journal of Retailing from 2001 to 
2007. He co-chaired the 1993 Academy of Marketing Science 
conference and the 2006 summer AMA conference.
	
Professor Levy has worked in retailing and related disci-
plines throughout his professional life. Prior to his academic ca-
reer, he worked for several retailers and a housewares 
distributor in Colorado. He has performed research projects 
with many retailers and retail technology firms, including 
Accenture, Federated Department Stores, Khimetrics (SAP), 
Mervyn’s, Neiman Marcus, ProfitLogic (Oracle), Zale Corporation, 
and numerous law firms.

New to the Sixth Edition
Some exciting new additions  
to the Sixth Edition!
Chapter 1,  “Overview of Marketing,” starts with a discussion of one of the world’s most 
successful chocolate brands, Godiva, which is in keeping with this edition’s cover theme—
how chocolate has gone from a commodity to a high-value branded product through mar-
keting. The Superior Service, Adding Value, Social & Mobile Marketing, and Ethical & 
Societal Dilemma boxes now cover such new topics as in-flight WiFi, Whole Foods 
­purpose-based marketing, the growth of mobile advertising, and free fruit offered by super-
markets to individuals shopping with children. A new section on marketing analytics is  
also accompanied in other chapters by new Marketing Analytics boxes. In this chapter the 
Marketing Analytics box discusses how Starbucks uses analytics to determine new store 
locations. Finally the chapter closes with a new case study on the global chocolate market, 
again in keeping with this edition’s cover theme on how marketing has added value to the 
chocolate industry.
Chapter 2,  “Developing Marketing Strategies and a ­Marketing Plan,” opens with a dis-
cussion on PepsiCo, weaving in a comparison between PepsiCo and Coca-Cola throughout 
the chapter. We introduce a new Superior Service box highlighting Amazon’s new home-­
service option, as well as a new Ethical & Social Dilemma box examining Volkswagen’s 
Dieselgate scandal. The new Marketing Analytics box covers Google’s predictive analytics. 
In addition, the chapter ends with a new case study on the coffee wars between Starbucks, 
Dunkin' Donuts, and McDonald’s. 
Chapter 3,  “Social and Mobile Marketing,” begins with a new opener on how Under 
Armour has successfully used social media in its marketing campaigns. The chapter also 
features a new section that details the wheel of social media engagement. The wheel of 
engagement highlights the information, connected, network, dynamic, and timeless effects 
of social media. The chapter also includes a new Adding Value box describing how 
­Mercedes-Benz uses LinkedIn, an Ethical & Societal Dilemma box on how Disney ­appeals 
to moms, and two new Marketing Analytics boxes: one that covers eHarmony’s analytics 
and the other on how Twitter and Billboard are teaming up to create real-time top music 
lists. 
Chapter 4,  “Conscious Marketing, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Ethics,” is 
re-titled to reflect a new section on conscious marketing, which argues that firms have a 
sense of purpose that encompasses four key principles: (1) recognizing marketing’s greater 
purpose, (2) considering stakeholders and their interdependence, (3) conscious leader-
ship and its role in creating a corporate culture, and (4) understanding that decisions are 
ethically based. Chapter 4 also includes a new opener on the TOMS shoes company, a new 
Marketing Analytics box on how Kellogg’s uses analytics to address GMO concerns, and 
a new Social & Mobile Marketing box on how cell phones are being used to help custom-
ers at the bottom of the pyramid. 
Chapter 5,  “Analyzing the Marketing Environment,” starts with a discussion of Panera 
Bread’s new clean menu. The chapter includes a new Superior Service box on CVS’s mo-
bile MinuteClinic app and a new Marketing Analytics box that highlights Netflix’s predic-
tive analytics. It also includes a new Adding Value box on Google’s self-driving car.
ix

Chapter 6,  “Consumer Behavior,” begins with a discussion of Nike’s partnership with 
the Weather Channel and how it is using the Weather Channel app to advertise. A new 
Marketing Analytics box highlights how H&R Block uses analytics to create new tax ser-
vices. A new Ethical & Societal Dilemma box discusses the allegations of unethical prac-
tices by pharmaceutical firms. 
Chapter 7,  “Business-to-Business Marketing,” starts with an interesting application of 
a B2B market—how Amazon Business serves its partners. The chapter also includes two 
new boxes: Marketing Analytics on cloud computing and Adding Value on Xerox's fashion 
show to sell its latest printer. The chapter also includes a new case study on Staples’ B2B 
business.
Chapter 8,  “Global Marketing,” examines how companies that either market the 
same products globally or have to change their products for the global market have 
­different challenges from those that operate only in domestic markets. The new opener 
highlights the challenges faced by Netflix as it expands to the global economy. New 
examples include Chanel and how they are addressing the exchange rate in China, as 
well as Porsche’s and Marks & Spencer’s marketing fumbles when advertising to the 
Chinese market.
Chapter 9,  “Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning,” opens with a discussion of 
how ABC Family’s segmentation strategy has influenced its recent rebranding effort. A 
new Marketing Analytics box features Starbucks’ wildly popular mobile app, and a new 
Superior Service box highlights how hotels leverage their proximity to universities. The 
chapter also includes a new case study on Mercedes-Benz’s marketing strategy. 
Chapter 10,  “Marketing Research,” begins with a discussion about how research has 
influenced the lingerie company Adore Me to use plus-sized models. A new Superior Ser-
vice box explains how universities analyze usage data to identify when students use 
on-campus gyms to improve their college experience. Finally, the chapter concludes with a 
case study on how the YMCA is redefining itself. 
Chapter 11,  “Product, Branding, and Packaging Decisions”  includes the following 
new boxes: Adding Value about the latest entry-level luxury cars, Marketing Analytics that 
discusses how Macy’s uses analytics to determine its assortment, and Ethical & Societal 
Dilemma that highlights how Mars, Inc. is moving toward sugar labeling on its candy prod-
ucts. This chapter concludes with a new case study describing how Birkenstock has be-
come a fashion brand. 
Chapter 12,  “Developing New Products,” begins with a discussion of Xiaomi’s afford-
able smartphones in Asia; a new Adding Value box explores how Disney licenses its mov-
ies and characters to toy companies; a new Ethical & Societal Dilemma box discusses 
concerns about the rise in the popularity of drones; a new Marketing Analytics box ­focuses 
on GM’s use of big data to develop new cars and features; and a new Adding Value box 
features SkinnyPop snacks.
Chapter 13,  “Services: The Intangible Product,” opens with a new vignette about lu-
lulemon’s new flagship store in New York City, which is designed to provide consumers 
with exceptional customer service. New boxes include ­Adding Value about Pepsi’s new 
Kola House restaurant and Marketing Analytics about Kroger's use of analytics to 
­determine how to reduce wait times during checkout. A new case study highlights the 
differences among Uber, Lyft, and traditional taxis.
Chapter 14,  “Pricing Concepts for Establishing ­Value,” describes pricing concepts us-
ing new examples from Coca-Cola in an Ethical & Societal Dilemma box, Amazon in a 
new Adding Value box, and airline ticket pricing in a Marketing Analytics box.
x

Chapter 15,  “Strategic Pricing Methods,” begins with a discussion of Disney’s new 
surge pricing at its theme parks. Updated examples include two new Ethical & Societal 
Dilemma boxes: one about how Apple is conspiring with publishers to raise the price of 
e-books, and another about the gray market for luxury goods. ­Finally, the chapter ends with 
a new case study on the pizza industry, focusing specifically on Papa John’s, Little Caesars, 
Domino’s, Pizza Hut, and local pizzerias.
Chapter 16,  “Supply Chain and Channel Management,” opens with a vignette on 
IKEA’s innovations in its supply chain. New boxes in this chapter include: Marketing 
­Analytics on Amazon’s anticipatory shipping, Ethical & Societal Dilemma on how con-
sumer demands for organic products is affecting the supply chain, and Adding Value on 
e-tailing in the United States versus India. 
Chapter 17,  “Retailing and Omnichannel Marketing,” begins with a discussion of a 
retail innovator–Amazon. It includes a new Superior Service box on how Burberry is 
seeking to access its customers directly, a new Marketing Analytics box discussing Fresh-
Direct, a new Social & Mobile Marketing box detailing IKEA’s online and in-store retail-
ing strategies, and a new case study about how Macy’s is taking initiatives to maintain its 
competitive advantage.
Chapter 18,  “Integrated Marketing Communications,” starts with Pepsi’s emoji cam-
paign to illustrate how integrated marketing communications is at the forefront of market-
ing. New boxes: Social & Mobile Marketing describing how ­Domino’s uses Snapchat for a 
marketing campaign, Adding Value about Pepsi’s endorsement on the television show Em-
pire, Ethical & Societal Dilemma highlighting how companies take risks when developing 
their IMC programs, Adding Value on the partnership between the NBA and Kia, and 
Marketing Analytics describing how Puma uses Google’s analytics. The chapter concludes 
with a new case study on Pepsi’s Pepsi Max campaign.
Chapter 19,  “Advertising, Public Relations, and Sales Promotions,” starts with 
­McDonald’s “Our Food. Your Questions” campaign. There is a new Social & Mobile 
­Marketing box on how mobile advertising is pushing out digital advertising, a new Adding 
Value box on the use of popular music in advertisements, and a new Marketing Analytics 
box on how CVS uses the data it collects from its loyalty program to target coupons to 
consumers.
Chapter 20,  “Personal Selling and Sales Management,” begins with a discussion of 
IBM’s Watson. The chapter also includes a new Social & Mobile Marketing box highlight-
ing how companies can use mobile CRM systems, and an Adding Value box on how selling 
Tupperware can empower women in Indonesia.
  xi

We are pleased to welcome you to the sixth edition of Marketing! Since 
the first edition, we have committed to emphasizing a basic, yet essential, 
theme: Marketing adds value. This theme comes through not only in our 
instructional features but also in our covers. With each edition’s cover, 
we have featured a product that, because of marketing, has become more 
valuable in the eyes of consumers than it might have otherwise become. 
Last edition we featured coffee; in previous editions, we featured yogurt, 
water, and jeans. For this sixth edition, we feature chocolate. These are all 
familiar products that started out as commodities but became high-value 
branded products because of marketing.
How We Show That Marketing  
Adds Value
As with previous editions of Marketing, we continue to emphasize how marketing has evolved 
into its present-day, integral business function of creating value. We also focus on how firms 
maintain value and rely on value for establishing lasting relationships with their customers. 
	
To keep students engaged with this theme, we offer the following features:
• Adding Value—illustrate how companies add value not only in providing products and 
services but also in making contributions to society.
• Ethical & Societal Dilemmas—emphasize the role of marketing in society.
• Marketing Analytics—feature companies that rely on sophisticated data analyt-
ics to define and refine their approaches to their customers and their markets.
• Marketing Digitally—illustrates how marketers successfully use digital media in 
their marketing campaigns and efforts.
• Social & Mobile Marketing—discuss how social media are used in marketing 
products.
• Superior Service—highlight the emerging role of the service industry.
How We Teach the Basics of Marketing
We understand that for students to appreciate discussions of how marketing adds value, they 
must first develop a basic understanding of key marketing principles and core concepts. In this 
effort, we believe students learn best when they see how a subject relates to them. Through-
out this edition and all those prior, we provide numerous examples of how students engage in 
­marketing activities every day of their lives—either as consumers or sellers of a product or 
service. In addition to providing the traditional study and reinforcement tools of most princi-
ples of marketing products, we also offer ways to help students think critically about and apply 
core concepts:
a letter from the authors
xii

	
	
xiii
Chapter-Opening Vignettes  focus on some of the marketplace challenges 
faced by such well-known companies as Under Amour, PepsiCo, TOMS, Netflix, Amazon, and 
others.
Marketing Applications  encourage students to apply what they have learned to 
marketing scenarios that are relevant to their lives.
End-of-Chapter Cases  help students develop analytical, critical-thinking, and tech-
nology skills.
Progress Checks  throughout each chapter give students the opportunity to stop and 
consider whether their understanding of key concepts is progressing as it should.
Auto-graded Application Exercises in Connect  (such as video cases, 
case analyses, and click-drags) challenge students to apply marketing concepts to real-life 
marketing scenarios, which fosters their critical-thinking skills in lecture and beyond.
Why We Believe in the Value  
of Marketing
Beyond teaching a principles of marketing course and developing a product to be taught, we 
also want to impress upon our students why marketing in and of itself is valuable. Marketing 
creates enduring and mutually valuable relationships between companies and their consumers. 
Marketing identifies what customers value at the local level in order to make it possible for 
firms to expand at the global level. Without marketing, it would be difficult for any of us to learn 
about new products and services. In fact, an understanding of marketing can help students find 
jobs after they finish school. If we can inspire this understanding of the value of marketing in 
our students, then we will have succeeded in demonstrating how marketing adds value . . . to 
their education, their careers, and to their lives.
Dhruv Grewal,
Babson College
Michael Levy,
Babson College 

Required=Results
®
McGraw-Hill Connect®		
 
Learn Without Limits
Connect is a teaching and learning platform 
that is proven to deliver better results for 
students and instructors. 
Connect empowers students by continually 
adapting to deliver precisely what they  
need, when they need it, and how they need 
it, so your class time is more engaging and 
effective.
Mobile
Connect Insight®	
Connect Insight is Connect’s new one-of-a-
kind visual analytics dashboard—now available 
for both instructors and students—that 
provides at-a-glance information regarding 
student performance, which is immediately actionable.  
By presenting assignment, assessment, and topical 
performance results together with a time metric that  
is easily visible for aggregate or individual results, Connect 
Insight gives the user the ability to take a just-in-time approach 
to teaching and learning, which was never before available. 
Connect Insight presents data that empowers students and 
helps instructors improve class performance in a way that is 
efficient and effective.
73% of instructors who use 
Connect require it; instructor 
satisfaction increases by 28% 
when Connect is required.
Students can view  
their results for any 
Connect course.
Analytics
Connect’s new, intuitive mobile interface gives students  
and instructors flexible and convenient, anytime–anywhere 
access to all components of the Connect platform.
©Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Using Connect improves retention  
rates by 19.8%, passing rates by  
12.7%, and exam scores by 9.1%.

SmartBook®  
Proven to help students improve grades and 
study more efficiently, SmartBook contains the 
same content within the print book, but actively 
tailors that content to the needs of the individual. 
SmartBook’s adaptive technology provides precise, 
personalized instruction on what the student 
should do next, guiding the student to master 
and remember key concepts, targeting gaps in 
knowledge and offering customized feedback,  
and driving the student toward comprehension 
and retention of the subject matter. Available on 
tablets, SmartBook puts learning at the student’s 
fingertips—anywhere, anytime.
Adaptive
Over 8 billion questions have been 
answered, making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable, and precise.
THE ADAPTIVE 
READING EXPERIENCE 
DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM 
THE WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and 
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.mheducation.com
Practice Marketing  
Practice Marketing is a 3D, online, single- or multiplayer game that helps 
students apply the four Ps by taking on the role of Marketing Manager for a 
backpack company. By playing the game individually and/or in teams, 
students come to understand how their decisions and elements of the marketing mix affect one another. 
Practice Marketing is easy to use, fully mobile, and provides an interactive alternative to marketing plan 
projects. Log in to mhpractice.com with your Connect credentials to access a demo, or contact your 
local McGraw-Hill representative for more details.

We would like to acknowledge the considerable contributions of Elisabeth Nevins and 
Jenny Esdale for their help throughout the development of this edition of Marketing.
	
We wish to express our sincere appreciation to Leroy Robinson of the University 
of Houston–Clear Lake for his work on the instructor's manual and the PowerPoint 
slides; Melissa Martin of George Mason University for her contributions to the 
Connect instructor’s manual, video guide, and Connect application exercises; and to 
Susan Simpfenderfer of ID8 for her contributions to the test bank. We are grateful 
to Kelly Luchtman at Lightfellow for her continuing hard work on video production. 
Our McGraw-Hill editorial and production staff also deserve recognition for their 
­patient and professional support: executive brand manager, Meredith Fossel; market-
ing manager, Elizabeth Schonagen; senior product developer, Lai Moy; lead content 
project manager, Christine Vaughan; senior content project manager, Danielle 
Clement; senior designer, Matt Diamond; content ­licensing specialists, DeAnna 
Dausener and Ann Marie Jannette; and photo researchers, Danny Meldung and Julie 
De Adder.
	
Our colleagues in industry have been invaluable in providing us with case, video, 
­advertising, and photo materials.
	
Over the years, we have had the opportunity to work with many talented and 
­insightful colleagues. We have benefited from our research and discussions with 
them. Some of these colleagues are: Anne L. Roggeveen, Victoria Crittenden, Anjali 
Bal, Lauren S. Beitelspacher, Krista Hill, Rajendra Sisodia, Bala Iyer (Babson 
College); Ruth Bolton, Steve Brown, and Terry Bristol (Arizona State University); 
Ramon Avila (Ball State University); Joan Lindsey-Mullikin and Norm Borin 
(Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo); Ko de Ruyter (Cass Business School); Larry D. Compeau 
(Clarkson University); Don Lehmann and Keith L. Wilcox (Columbia); Praveen 
Kopalle, Scott Neslin, and Kusum Ailawadi (Dartmouth); Rajneesh Suri (Drexel); 
Rajesh Chandrashekaran (Fairleigh Dickinson University); Gopal Iyer and Tamara 
Mangleburg (Florida Atlantic University); Anthony Miyazaki and Walfried Lassar 
(Florida International University); Hooman Estelami (Fordham University); Ronnie 
Goodstein (Georgetown); V. Kumar (Georgia State University); Scott Motyka (KGI); 
K. Sivakumar (Lehigh University); Martin Wetzels and Dominik Mahr (Maastricht 
University); Yu Ma (McGill University); Maria Elena Vazquez Lira (Monterrey Tec); 
Douglas M. Lambert and Walter Zinn (Ohio State University); Wagner Kamakura 
(Rice); Thomas Rudolph (St. Gallen University); Jens Nordfält (Stockholm School of 
Economics); Zhen Zhu (Suffolk University); Venkatesh Shankar, Mark Houston, and 
Manjit Yadav (Texas A&M); Julie Baker and William Cron (Texas Christian 
University); Rodney C. Runyan (Texas State University); Kristy Reynolds (University 
of Alabama); Merrie Brucks and Ajith Kumar (University of Arizona); Dinesh Gauri 
(University of Arkansas); Nancy M. Puccinelli (University of Bath); Cheryl Nikata 
(University of Illinois, Chicago); David Hardesty (University of Kentucky); Arun 
Sharma, A. Parasuraman, R. Krishnan, Howard Marmorstein, Anuj Mehrotra, Claudia 
Townsend, and Michael Tsiros (University of Miami); Francisco Villarroel Ordenes 
(University of Massachusetts Amherst); A. C. Samli (University of North Florida); 
Monika Kukar Kinney and Kent Monroe (University of Richmond); Abhijit Guha 
(University of South Carolina); Valerie Folkes (University of Southern California); 
Stephanie Noble (University of Tennessee); Robert Peterson (University of Texas at 
Austin); Carolyn Costley (University of Waikato); Rob Palmatier (University of 
Washington); Abhijit Biswas and Sujay Dutta (Wayne State University); and M. Joseph 
Sirgy (Virginia Tech).
acknowledgments

	
	
	
acknowledgments	
xvii
Wendi L. Achey
Northampton Community College
Ebru Ulusoy Akgun
University of Maine
Audrey Ashton-Savage
Peter T. Paul College of Business and 
Economics, University of New Hampshire
Nisreen Bahnan
Salem State University
Linda Jane Coleman
Salem State University
Kevin Joseph Cumiskey
Eastern Kentucky University
Laura Dix
Ferris State University
Kim Donahue
Indiana University, Kelley School of Business 
Indianapolis
Jerome Gafford
University of North Alabama
James Gorman
Houson University of Alabama
Daniel E. Hallock
University of North Alabama
Dana L. E. Harrison
East Tennessee State University
Wendi Achey
Northampton Community College
Praveen Aggarwal
University of Minnesota, Duluth
Maria Aria
Camden County College
Dennis Arnett
Texas Tech University
Gerard Athaide
Loyola College of Maryland
Timothy W. Aurand
Northern Illinois University
Laurie Babin
University of Louisiana  
at Monroe
Ainsworth Bailey
University of Toledo
Aysen Bakir
Illinois State University
Joyce Banjac
Myers University
Harvey Bauman
Lees McRae College
Oleta Beard
University of Washington
Reba Heberlein
Madison Area Technical College
Tarique Hossain
California State Polytechnic University
Elizabeth Jane
Wilson Suffolk University
Mayuresh M. Kelkar
Salem State University
Todd Korol
Monroe Community College
Kathleen A. Krentler
San Diego State University
Jamie Lambert
Ohio University
Marilyn Lavin
University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
Patricia Marco
Madison College
Mary Christene Martin
Fort Hays State University
Carolyn A. Massiah
University of Central Florida
Maria McConnell
Lorain County Community College
Joyce L. Meyer
The University of Alabama
Sandy Becker
Rutgers Business School
Hannah Bell-Lombardo
Bryant University
Ellen Benowitz
Mercer County Community  
College
Gary Benton
Western Kentucky University
Joseph Ben-Ur
University of Houston at Victoria
Patricia Bernson
County College of Morris
Harriette Bettis-Outland
University of West Florida
Parimal Bhagat
Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Amit Bhatnagar
University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
Jan Bingen
Little Priest Tribal College
John Bishop
University of South Alabama–Mobile
Nancy Bloom
Nassau Community College
Susan Myrden
University of Maine
Steve Noll
Madison Area Technical College
Matthew O’Hern
University of Oregon
David Terry Paul
The Ohio State University
Frank Allen Philpot
George Mason University
Lori A. Radulovich
Baldwin Wallace University
Jean Marc Rejaud
Fashion Institute of Technology
Harper Andrew Roehm, Jr.
University of North Carolina–Greensboro
Donald Shemwell
East Tennessee State University
John Striebich
Monroe Community College
Robert Scott Taylor
Moberly Area Community College
Steven A. Taylor
Illinois State University
Deborah Utter
Boston University
Claire Bolfing
James Madison University
Karen Bowman
University of California
Tom Boyd
California State University–Fullerton
Nancy Boykin
Tarleton State University
Cathy Brenan
Northland Community and Technical  
College
Martin Bressler
Houston Baptist University
Claudia Bridges
California State University
Glen H. Brodowsky
California State University, San Marcos
Greg Broekemier
University of Nebraska Kearney
Gary Brunswick
Northern Michigan University
Alan J. Bush
University of Memphis
John Buzza
Monmouth University
	
We would like to thank the following instructors for providing feedback to shape the 
fifth and sixth editions. A special thank you to:
For their contributions to previous editions of Marketing, we gratefully acknowledge:

xviii	
acknowledgments
Linda Calderone
SUNY, Farmingdale
Nathaniel Calloway
University of Maryland, University College
Rae Caloura
Johnson & Wales University
Michaelle Cameron
St. Edwards University
Catherine Campbell
University of Maryland
Carlos Castillo
University of Minnesota, Duluth
Eve Caudill
Winona State University
Carmina Cavazos
University of Saint Thomas
Lindell Chew
Linn University of Missouri
Dorene Ciletti
Duquesne University
Melissa Clark
University of North Alabama
Terry Clark
Southern Illinois University–Carbondale
Joyce Claterbos
University of Kansas
Gloria Cockerell
Collin County College
Paul Cohen
Florida Atlantic University
Mark E. Collins
University of Tennessee
Clare Comm
University of Massachusetts, Lowell
Sherry Cook
Southwest Missouri State University
Stan Cort
Case Western Reserve University
Keith Cox
University of Houston
Ian Cross
Bentley College
Geoffrey Crosslin
Kalamazoo Valley Community  
College
Brent Cunningham
Jacksonville State University
Clayton L. Daughtrey
Metropolitan State College of Denver
Charlene Davis
Trinity University
Joseph DeFilippe
Suffolk County Community College
George Deitz
University of Memphis
Kathleen DeNisco
Erie Community College
Tilokie Depoo
Monroe College
Monique Doll
Macomb Community College
Kimberly Donahue
Indiana University–Purdue University  
at Indianapolis
Jim D’Orazio
Cleveland State University
Michael Dore
University of Oregon
James Downing
University of Illinois–Chicago
Michael Drafke
College of DuPage
Leon Dube
Texas A&M University
Colleen Dunn
Bucks County Community College
John Eaton
Arizona State University–Tempe
Kellie Emrich
Cuyahoga Community College
Nancy Evans
New River Community College
Keith Fabes
Berkeley College
Tina Facca
John Carroll University
Joyce Fairchild
Northern Virginia Community College
David J. Faulds
University of Louisville
Larry Feick
University of Pittsburgh
Karen Flaherty
Oklahoma State University–Stillwater
Leisa Flynn
Florida State University
William Foxx
Auburn University
Alan Friedenthal
Kingsborough Community College
Douglas Friedman
Penn State University
Stanley Garfunkel
Queensborough Community College
S. J. Garner
Eastern Kentucky University
David Gerth
Nashville State Community College
Peggy Gilbert
Missouri State University
Kelly Gillerlain
Tidewater Community College
George Goerner
Mohawk Valley Community College
Jana Goodrich
Penn State Behrend
Robin Grambling
University of Texas at El Paso
Kimberly D. Grantham
University of Georgia
James I. Gray
Florida Atlantic University
Kelly Gredone
Bucks County Community College
Tom Greene
Eastern Washington University
Michael Greenwood
Mount Wachusett Community College
Barbara Gross
California State University–Northridge
David Grossman
Florida Southern College
Hugh Guffey
Auburn University
Reetika Gupta
Lehigh University
John Hafer
University of Nebraska at Omaha
Allan Hall
Western Kentucky University
Joan Hall
Macomb Community College
Clark Hallpike
Elgin Community College
James E. Hansen
University of Akron
Don Hanson
Bryant University
Jeffrey Harper
Texas Tech University
Dorothy Harpool
Wichita State University
Lynn Harris
Shippensburg University
Linda Hefferin
Elgin Community College
Charlane Held
Onondaga Community College
Lewis Hershey
Fayetteville State University
Jonathan Hibbard
Boston University
Tom Hickman
Loyola University
Robbie Hillsman
University of Tennessee–Martin
Nathan Himelstein
Essex County College
Adrienne Hinds
Northern Virginia Community College  
at Annandale

	
	
	
acknowledgments	
xix
John Hobbs
University of Oklahoma
Don Hoffer
Miami University
Craig Hollingshead
Texas A&M University, Kingsville
Donna Hope
Nassau Community College
Ronald Hoverstad
University of the Pacific
Kris Hovespian
Ashland University
James Hunt
University of North Carolina Wilmington
Shane Hunt
Arkansas State University
Julie Huntley
Oral Roberts University
Sean Jasso
University of California–Riverside
Carol Johanek
Washington University, St. Louis
Doug Johansen
University of North Florida
Candy Johnson
Holyoke Community College
Maria Johnson
Macomb Commity College,  
Clinton Township
Keith Jones
North Carolina A&T University
Janice Karlen
CUNY–Laguardia Community College
Eric J. Karson
Villanova University
Rajiv Kashyap
William Paterson University
Josette Katz
Atlantic Cape Community College
Garland Keesling
Towson University
Imran Khan
University of South Alabama–Mobile
Todd Korol
Monroe Community College
Dennis Lee Kovach
Community College of Allegheny County
Dmitri Kuksov
Washington University–St Louis
Jeff Kulick
George Mason University
Michelle Kunz
Morehead State University
Ann T. Kuzma
Minnesota State University, Mankato
John Kuzma
Minnesota State University at Mankato
Sandie Lakin
Hesser College
Timothy Landry
University of Oklahoma
Don Larson
Ohio State University
Felicia Lassk
Northeastern University
J. Ford Laumer
Auburn University
Marilyn Lavin
University of Wisconsin, Whitewater
Kenneth Lawrence
New Jersey IT
Freddy Lee
California State University, Los Angeles
Rebecca Legleiter
Tulsa CC Southeast Campus
Hillary Leonard
University of Rhode Island
Natasha Lindsey
University of North Alabama
Guy Lochiatto
Massachusetts Bay Community College
Paul Londrigan
Mott Community College
Terry Lowe
Heartland Community College
Dolly Loyd
University of Southern Mississippi
Harold Lucius
Rowan University
Alicia Lupinacci
Tarrant Community College
Stanley Madden
Baylor University
Lynda Maddox
George Washington University
Moutusi Maity
University of Wisconsin, Whitewater
Cesar Maloles
California State University, East Bay
Karl Mann
Tennessee Tech University
Cathy Martin
University of Akron
Melissa Martin
George Mason University
Carolyn Massiah
University of Central Florida
Tamara Masters
Brigham Young University
Erika Matulich
University of Tampa
Bob Mayer
Mesa State College
Nancy McClure
University of Central Oklahoma
Maria McConnnell
Lorain County Community College
Dennis Menezes
University of Louisville, Louisville
Mohan Menon
University of South Alabama
Michelle Meyer
Joliet Junior College
Ivor Mitchell
University of Nevada Reno
Mark Mitchell
University of South Carolina
Steven Moff
Pennsylvania College of Technology
Rex Moody
University of Colorado
Rex Moody
Central Washington University at Ellensburg
Melissa Moore
Mississippi State University
Linda Morable
Richland College
Farrokh Moshiri
University of California–Riverside
Dorothy Mulcahy
Bridgewater State College
James Munch
Wright State University–Dayton
Brian Murray
Jefferson Community College
Suzanne Murray
Piedmont Technical College
James E. Murrow
Drury University
Noreen Nackenson
Nassau Community College
Sandra Blake Neis
Borough of Manhattan Community  
College
John Newbold
Sam Houston State University
Keith Niedermeier
University of Pennsylvania
Martin Nunlee
Syracuse University
Hudson Nwakanma
Florida A & M University
Lois Olson
San Diego State University
Beng Ong
California State University, Fresno
Daniel Onyeagba
Argosy University, Atlanta
Karen Overton
Houston Community College
Deborah L. Owens
University of Akron

xx	
acknowledgments
Esther Page-Wood
Western Michigan University
Richard Pascarelli
Adelphi University
Terry Paul
Ohio State University, Columbus
Michael Pearson
Loyola University
Jerry Peerbolte
University of Arkansas–Fort Smith
Glenn Perser
Houston Community College
Diane Persky
Yeshiva University
Susan Peters
California State Polytechnic University at Pomona
Renee Pfeifer-Luckett
University of Wisconsin at Whitewater
Frank Alan Philpot
George Mason University
Gary Pieske
Minnesota State Community and  
Technical College
Jeff Podoshen
Temple University
Carmen Powers
Monroe Community College
Mike Preis
University of Illinois–Champaign
Susan Price
California Polytechnic State University
Lori Radulovich
Baldwin-Wallace College
Bruce Ramsey
Franklin University
Rosemary Ramsey
Wright State University
Srikumar Rao
Long Island University
Kristen Regine
Johnston & Wales University
Joseph Reihing
Nassau Community College
William Rice
California State University–Fresno
Patricia Richards
Westchester Community College
Eric Rios
Eastern University
Ann Renee Root
Florida Atlantic University
Janet Robinson
Mount St. Mary’s College
Tom Rossi
Broome Community College
Heidi Rottier
Bradley University
Juanita Roxas
California State Polytechnic University
Donald Roy
Middle Tennessee State University
Linda Salisbury
Boston College
Nick Sarantakes
Austin Community College
Shikhar Sarin
Boise State University
Carl Saxby
University of Southern Indiana
Diana Scales
Tennessee State University
Dwight Scherban
Central Connecticut State University
James Schindler
Columbia Southern University
Jeffrey Schmidt
University of Oklahoma–Norman
Laura Shallow
St. Xavier University
Dan Sherrell
University of Memphis
Philip Shum
William Paterson University
Lisa Simon
California Polytechnic State University,  
San Luis Obispo
Rob Simon
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Erin Sims
Devry University at Pomona
Lauren Ruth Skinner
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Karen Smith
Columbia Southern University
Lois J. Smith
University of Wisconsin
Julie Z. Sneath
University of South Alabama
Brent Sorenson
University of Minnesota–Crookston
James Spiers
Arizona State University–Tempe
Geoffrey Stewart
University of Louisiana
John Striebich
Monroe Community College
Randy Stuart
Kennesaw State University
James Swanson
Kishwaukee College
James Swartz
California State Polytechnic University
Robert R. Tangsrud, Jr.
University of North Dakota
Steve Taylor
Illinois State University
Sue Taylor
Southwestern Illinois College
Sharon Thach
Tennessee State University
Mary Tharp
University of Texas at San Antonio
Frank Tobolski
Lake in the Hills
Louis A. Tucci
College of New Jersey
Sue Umashankar
University of Arizona
Deborah Utter
Boston University
Ven Venkatesan
University of Rhode Island at Kingston
Bronis Verhage
Georgia State University
Deirdre Verne
Westchester Community College
Steve Vitucci
Tarleton University Central Texas
Keith Wade
Webber International University
Suzanne Walchli
University of the Pacific
Wakiuru Wamwara-Mbugua
Wright State University–Dayton
Bryan Watkins
Dominican University, Priory Campus
Ron Weir
East Tennessee State University
Ludmilla Wells
Florida Gulf Coast University
Thomas Whipple
Cleveland State University
Tom Whitman
Mary Washington College
Kathleen Williamson
University of Houston–Clear Lake
Phillip Wilson
Midwestern State University
Doug Witt
Brigham Young University
Kim Wong
Albuquerque Tech Institute
Letty Workman
Utah Valley University
Courtney Worsham
University of South Carolina
Brent Wren
University of Alabama–Huntsville
Alex Wu
California State University– 
Long Beach

	
	
	
acknowledgments	
xxi
Joseph Yasaian
McIntosh College
Poh-Lin Yeoh
Bentley College
Paschalina Ziamou
Bernard M. Baruch College
Ivan Abel
St. John’s University
Wendi Achey
Northampton Community College
Praveen Aggarwal
University of Minnesota, Duluth
Keanon Alderson
California Baptist University
Rosalyn Amaro
Florida State College at  
Jacksonville
Maria Aria
Camden County College
Jill S. Attaway
Illinois State University
Michelle Barnhart
Oregon State University
Robert Belenger
Bristol Community College
Tom Bilyeu
Southwestern Illinois College
Mark Blake
York College of Pennsylvania
Maurice Bode
Delgado Community College
Brad Cox
Midlands Technical College 
Jean M. Brown
University of Alabama in Huntsville
Gary Brunswick
Northern Michigan University
Desislava Budeva
Ramapo College of New Jersey
Melissa Burnett
Missouri State University
Susan Carder
Northern Arizona University
Ella Carter
Bowie State University
Debi Cartwright
Truman State University
Haozhe Chen
East Carolina University
Angeline Close
The University of Texas at Ausin
Kevin Coulson
Emporia State University
Brent Cunningham
Jacksonville State University
Datha Damron-Martinez
Truman State University
Beth Deinert
Southeast Community College
David DiRusso
Millersville University
Michael Dotson
Appalachian State University
Colleen Dunn
Bucks County Community College
Diane Edmondson
Middle Tennessee State University
Burcak Ertimur
Fairleigh Dickinson University
David J. Faulds
University of Louisville
Amy Feest
Tunxis Community College
Kathleen Ferris-Costa
Bridgewater State University
Troy A. Festervand
Middle Tennessee State University
Paul Fombelle
Northeastern University
John Fraedrich
Southern Illinois University–Carbondale
Theresa E. Frame
Horry Georgetown Technical College
Sheila Fry
Champlain College
Jerome Gafford
Univeristy of North Alabama
Tao (Tony) Gao
Northeastern University
Lance Gentry
Colorado State University–Pueblo
Nabarun Ghose
The University of Findlay
Connie Golden
Lakeland Community College
Lisa Goolsby
Southern Adventist University
Deborah M. Gray
Central Michigan University
Susan Greer
Horry-Georgetown Technical  
College
Cynthia Grether
Delta College
Mike Griffith
Lone Star College–Kingwood
Barbara Gross
California State University, Northridge
Chiquan Guo
The University of Texas–Pan American
Jamey Halleck
Marshall University
Richard Hanna
Northeastern University
David Eric Hansen
Texas Southern University
Jeffrey Harper
Texas Tech University
Perry Hidalgo
Gwinnett Technical College
Diane Holtzman
Richard Stockton College of  
New Jersey
Monica Hodis
St. John Fisher College
Donna Hope
Nassau Community College
Gorman Houston
University of Alabama
Erika Hovland
Temple University
Vince Howe
University of North Carolina, Wilmington
Miriam Huddleston
Harford Community College
James B. Hunt
University of North Carolina, Wilmington
Eva Hyatt
Appalachian State University
Roxanne Jackson
Vance-Granville Community College
Grace Jebakumari Johnson
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee
Victoria Jones
University of North Carolina, Wilmington
Sungwoo Jung
Columbus State University
Vishal Kashyap
Xavier University
Mark Kay
Montclair State University
Sylvia Keyes
Bridgewater State University
Tina Kiesler
California State University, Northridge
Brian Kinard
University of North Carolina, Wilmington
John Kinnett
Columbus State University
We would like to thank all the professors who were instrumental in guiding our revision of 
not only the text, but also Connect and other ancillary materials

xxii	
acknowledgments
Peter Knight
University of Wisconsin, Parkside
Michael W. Kroff
Montana State University
Ann T. Kuzma
Minnesota State University, Mankato
Theodore Labay
Bishop State Community College
Donald W. Larson
The Ohio State University
James R. Lashley
Bowie State University
E. Scott Lathrop
Whitman School of Management,  
Syracuse University
Debra Laverie
Texas Tech University
Cary LeBlanc
Assumption College
David M. Lee
Sam Houston State University
Andrea Licari
St. John’s University
Junsang Lim
Virginia State University
Bryan D. Little
Marshall University
Ruth Lumb
Minnesota State University, Moorhead
Guy Lochiatto
MassBay Community College
Anne Weidemanis Magi
University of South Florida
David Matthews
SUNY Adirondack (Adirondack  
Community College)
Fredric Mayerson
Kingsborough Community College
Myke McMullen
Long Beach Community College
Rajiv Mehta
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Sanjay S. Mehta
Sam Houston State University
Jeffrey Meier
Fox Valley Technical College
Michael Mejza
University of Nevada,  
Las Vegas
Robert Meyer
Parkland College
Elizabeth Miller
Boston College
Iris Mohr
St. John’s University
Josefer Montes
Walla Walla University
Dorothy J. Mulcahy
Bridgewater State University
Jay Mulki
Northestern University–Boston
Benjamin Muller
Portland Community College
Gergana Nenkov
Boston College
John Newbold
Sam Houston State University
Hudson Nwakanma
Florida A&M University
Matt O’Hern
University of Oregon
Richard B. Osborn
York College of Pennsylvania
Rodney Oudan
Worcester State University
Lauren Paisley
Genesee Community College
Mahatapa Palit
Borough of Manhattan Community  
College
Janet Parish
Texas A&M University
Raymond A. Parkins, Jr.
Florida State College at Jacksonville
Ed Petkus
Ramapo College of New Jersey
Julie M. Pharr
Tennessee Tech University
Rajani Ganesh Pillai
North Dakota State University
Sampath Ranganathan
University of Wisconsin–Green Bay
Mohammed Rawwas
University of Northern Iowa
Virginia Reilly
Ocean County College
John E. Robbins
Winthrop University
Ann R. Root
Florida Atlantic University
Robert Rouwenhorst
University of Iowa
Donald P. Roy
Middle Tennessee State University
Alberto Rubio-Sanchez
University of the Incarnate Word
Catherine Ruggieri
St. John’s University, New York
Doreen Sams
Georgia College & State University
Robin Schallie
Fox Valley Technical College
Douglas Scott
State College of Florida
Christine Seel
Delaware Valley College
Daaim Shabazz
Florida A&M University
Abhay Shah
Colorado State University–Pueblo
Rick Shannon
Western Kentucky University
Kenneth Shaw
State University of New York, Oswego
Robert Simon
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Peter D. Simonson
North Dakota State University
David Smith
Bemidji State University
Dennis Spector
Naugatuck Valley Community College
Vernon R. Stauble
San Bernardino Valley College
Susan Steiz
Norwalk Community College
Geoffrey Stewart
University of Louisiana
Karen L. Stewart
Richard Stockton College of New Jersey
Susan Stone
Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
Ray Stroup, Jr.
University of Louisiana at Lafayette
James Swenson
Minnesota State University, Moorhead
Steven Taylor
Illinois State University
Ramendra Thakur
University of Louisiana–Lafayette
Norman Thiel
Walla Walla University
Dennis Tootelian
California State University, Sacramento
Philip Trocchia
University of South Florida, St. Petersburg
Sven Tuzovic
Pacific Lutheran University
Leo Vasquez
San Bernardino Valley College, San Bernardino
Franck Vigneron
California State University Northridge
Doug Wilson
University of Oregon–Lundquist  
College of Business
Roger Wilson
Fairmont State University
Doug Witt
Brigham Young University
Mike Wittmann
The University of Southern Mississippi

	
	
	
acknowledgments	
xxiii
Van R. Wood
Virginia Commonwealth University
Jefrey R. Woodall
York College of Pennsylvania
Kim Wong
Central New Mexico Community College
Ashley Wright
Spartanburg Community College
Elle Wu
Louisiana State University
Charles Wyckoff
Riverside Community College
Ge Xiao
Wilkes University
Jim Zemanek
East Carolina University
Lin Zhang
Truman State University
Lauren Spinner Beitelspacher
Babson University
Barbara Black
University of Miami
Thomas Byrnes
North Carolina State University 
Donna Haeger
Monroe Community College
Todd Korol
Monroe Community College
Melissa Martin
George Mason University
Leroy Robinson
University of Houston, Clear Lake
John Striebech
Monroe Community College
Lois Olson
San Diego State University
	
We express our thanks to all faculty who have contributed to the development of 
digital learning content:
	
A special thank you to Steven A. Taylor of Illinois State University, Elizabeth 
Jane Wilson of Suffolk University, Kevin Bertotti of iTVk, and Becky and Patrick 
of We Write Good for their efforts in authoring and producing the iSee it! videos in 
Connect.
	
We’d also like to thank the team at Hurix—Sumesh Yoganath, Namrata Gunjal, and 
Ashwin Srivastav—for their contributions, as well as Sue Sullivan of Editors, Inc.

brief contents
SECTION 1: ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE  1
1	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  2
2	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  28
	
APPENDIX 2A WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  61
3	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  80
4	
CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY,  
AND ETHICS  116
	
APPENDIX 4A UNDERSTANDING ETHICS USING SCENARIOS  143
5	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  148
SECTION 2: UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE  173
6	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  174
7	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  208
8	
GLOBAL MARKETING  234
SECTION 3: TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE  265
9	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  266
10	
MARKETING RESEARCH  300
SECTION 4: VALUE CREATION  337
11	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  338
12	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  368
13	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  404
SECTION 5: VALUE CAPTURE  431
14	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  432
15	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  458
SECTION 6: VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL  
AND SUPPLY CHAIN  485
16	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  486
17	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  518
SECTION 7: VALUE COMMUNICATION  547
18	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  548
19	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  576
20	 PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  608
Glossary  635
Quiz Yourself Answer Key  650
Name Index  652
Company Index  659
Subject Index  664
xxiv

	
	
table of contents
SECTION 1  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE  1
1	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  2
WHAT IS MARKETING?  4
Marketing Is about Satisfying Customer Needs and Wants  5
Marketing Entails an Exchange  5
Marketing Requires Product, Price, Place, and Promotion Decisions  6
Superior Service 1.1: A Service for Fliers, a Moneymaker for JetBlue Airlines: 
Wi-Fi-Enabled Shopping in the Air  8
Marketing Analytics 1.1: Location, Location, Analytics: Starbucks’ Use of Data  
to Place New Stores  9
Marketing Can Be Performed by Individuals and Organizations  10
Marketing Affects Various Stakeholders  11
Marketing Helps Create Value  12
Adding Value 1.1: The Meaning of Best Value: Whole Foods’ Purpose-Based 
Marketing  14
How Do Marketing Firms Become More Value Driven?  14
Social & Mobile Marketing 1.1: What Comes Around: Marketing Today  16
WHY IS MARKETING IMPORTANT?  17
Marketing Expands Firms’ Global Presence  18
Marketing Is Pervasive across Marketing Channel Members  19
Marketing Enriches Society  19
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 1.1: Free Fruit for Children: What Could Go 
Wrong?  20
Marketing Can Be Entrepreneurial  21
Reviewing Learning Objectives  22
Key Terms  23
Marketing Digitally  23
Marketing Applications  23
Quiz Yourself  24
Chapter Case Study: From Beans to Pralines: The Global Chocolate Market   24
xxv
2	 DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES  
AND A MARKETING PLAN  28
WHAT IS A MARKETING STRATEGY?  30
Customer Excellence  32
Superior Service 2.1: Amazon Is about Products, Delivery, Prices,  
and Now Home Services  33
Operational Excellence  34
Product Excellence  34
Locational Excellence  34
Multiple Sources of Advantage  35
© Charley Gallay/Getty Images
© Craig Barritt/Getty Images

xxvi	
table of contents
THE MARKETING PLAN  35
Step 1: Define the Business Mission  36
Step 2: Conduct a Situation Analysis  37
Adding Value 2.1: Small Coke Cans: Are Consumers Paying More for  
Less, or Are They Just Paying to Get What They Want?  39
Step 3: Identify and Evaluate Opportunities Using STP (Segmentation, 
Targeting, and Positioning)  40
Step 4: Implement Marketing Mix and Allocate Resources  41
Step 5: Evaluate Performance Using Marketing Metrics  43
Social & Mobile Marketing 2.1: Making Snapchat More Strategic: How 
CoverGirl Uses Geotargeting to Leverage the Marketing Potential of  
a Fun App  44
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 2.1: Volkswagen’s “Dieselgate” Scandal  45
Marketing Analytics 2.1: The First Name in Predictive Analytics:  
Google  47
Strategic Planning Is Not Sequential  50
GROWTH STRATEGIES  51
Market Penetration  51
Market Development  51
Product Development  51
Diversification  52
Reviewing Learning Objectives  52
Key Terms  54
Marketing Digitally  54
Marketing Applications  54
Quiz Yourself  55
Toolkit SWOT Analysis  55
Chapter Case Study: The Coffee Wars   55
Appendix 2A: Writing a Marketing Plan  61
3	 SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  80
THE 4E FRAMEWORK FOR SOCIAL MEDIA  82
Excite the Customer  83
Social & Mobile Marketing 3.1: Late-Night Laughs  
to Order  84
Educate the Customer  84
Experience the Product or Service  85
Adding Value 3.1: Educating Customers Using HubSpot  86
Engage the Customer  86
THE WHEEL OF SOCIAL MEDIA ENGAGEMENT  88
The Information Effect  88
The Connected Effect  89
The Network Effect  90
The Dynamic Effect  90
The Timeliness Effect  91
CATEGORIES OF SOCIAL MEDIA  92
© VCG/Getty Images 

	
table of contents	
xxvii
	
	
Social Network Sites  92
Adding Value 3.2: Mercedes-Benz Is LinkedIn  94
Media‐Sharing Sites  95
Thought‐Sharing Sites  96
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 3.1: The Most Powerful and Appealing Target 
Market Might Be … Your Mom?  98
GOING MOBILE AND SOCIAL  99
App Pricing Models  100
HOW DO FIRMS ENGAGE THEIR CUSTOMERS USING SOCIAL MEDIA?  101
Listen  102
Analyze  103
Marketing Analytics 3.1: Finding a Perfect Match: How eHarmony Leverages 
Users’ Data to Identify Dates—and Their Consumption Patterns  104
Do  105
Marketing Analytics 3.2: Measuring the Coolest Tunes: A Billboard Chart for 
the Popularity of Music-Related Tweets  108
Reviewing Learning Objectives  109
Key Terms  109
Marketing Digitally  109
Marketing Applications  110
Quiz Yourself  110
Chapter Case Study: Images, Sales, Brands: How Red Bull Uses Various Social Media 
Techniques to Achieve All Its Objectives  110
4	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY,  
AND ETHICS  116
CONSCIOUS MARKETING  119
MARKETING’S GREATER PURPOSE: CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AS AN  
ELEMENT OF CONSCIOUS MARKETING  121
THE STAKEHOLDERS OF CONSCIOUS MARKETING  122
Employees  123
Marketing Analytics 4.1: How Kellogg’s Uses Analytics to Address GMO 
Concerns  124
Customers  124
Marketplace  125
Adding Value 4.1: Walmart Wants to Be the Corporate “Good Guy”  126
Society  126
Environment  127
INTEGRATING CONSCIOUS MARKETING THROUGHOUT THE FIRM: LEADERSHIP  
AND CULTURE  127
Planning Phase  127
Implementation Phase  128
Social & Mobile Marketing 4.1: How Mobile Phones and Payments Have Created 
a Viable New Market at the Bottom of the Pyramid  129
Control Phase  129
© jackie ellis/Alamy 

xxviii	
table of contents
MARKETING ETHICS AS A CONSCIOUS MARKETING PRINCIPLE  130
The Nature of Ethical and Unethical Marketing Decisions  130
Ethics and Corporate Social Responsibility  131
A Framework for Ethical Decision Making  132
Review Learning Objectives  136
Key Terms  137
Marketing Digitally  137
Marketing Applications  138
Quiz Yourself  138
Chapter Case Study: Is There an App for Good Parenting?  138
Appendix 4A: Understanding Ethics Using Scenarios  143
5	 ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  148
A MARKETING ENVIRONMENT ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK  150
THE IMMEDIATE ENVIRONMENT  151
Company Capabilities  151
Competitors  151
Corporate Partners  152
MACROENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS  153
Culture  153
Demographics  155
Social & Mobile Marketing 5.1: Understanding Connections,  
Both with and by Young Consumers  156
Social Trends  159
Superior Service 5.1: The MinuteClinic Mobile App: The Latest Service 
Expansion by CVS  161
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 5.1: Green Cereal?  162
Technological Advances  162
Marketing Analytics 5.1: When the Best Is Good Enough: Netflix’s Stellar 
Predictive Analytics  163
Adding Value 5.1: Are We There Yet? Google’s Moves to Get Us Closer to 
Driverless Cars  164
Economic Situation  164
Political/Regulatory Environment  165
Responding to the Environment  166
Reviewing Learning Objectives  167
Key Terms  168
Marketing Digitally  168
Marketing Applications  168
Quiz Yourself  169
Chapter Case Study: A Next-Generation Cleanser  169
© B. O’Kane/Alamy 

	
table of contents	
xxix
	
	
SECTION 2  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE  173
6	 CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  174
THE CONSUMER DECISION PROCESS  176
Need Recognition  176
Marketing Analytics 6.1: Tax Time Tactics by H&R Block  178
Search for Information  178
Social & Mobile Marketing 6.1: The Future of Health Is Mobile  180
Evaluation of Alternatives  181
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 6.1: Wearing the “Healthy” Label: Natural and 
Organic Foods  183
Purchase and Consumption  184
Postpurchase  185
FACTORS INFLUENCING THE CONSUMER DECISION PROCESS  188
Psychological Factors  188
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 6.2: Can Marketing Be Life Threatening? 
Allegations of Unethical Practices by Pharmaceutical Firms  191
Social Factors  192
Situational Factors  194
Adding Value 6.1: Doing Everything Right—H-E-B Supermarkets  195
Social & Mobile Marketing 6.2: Ensuring Mobile Dominance through In-Store 
Promotion  197
INVOLVEMENT AND CONSUMER BUYING DECISIONS  198
Extended Problem Solving  199
Limited Problem Solving  199
Reviewing Learning Objectives  200
Key Terms  201
Marketing Digitally  202
Marketing Applications  202
Quiz Yourself  203
Chapter Case Study: The Diet Battle—Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig, and Slim-Fast  203
7	 BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  208
B2B MARKETS  211
Manufacturers and Service Providers  211
Marketing Analytics 7.1: Clouding over Computing Power  213
Resellers  213
Adding Value 7.1: The “Alfonso Versant” Fashion Show: Creating  
Excitement for a New Xerox Printer  214
Institutions  214
Government  214
Social & Mobile Marketing 7.1: iPads Go to Work  215
THE BUSINESS‐TO‐BUSINESS BUYING PROCESS  216
Stage 1: Need Recognition  216
Stage 2: Product Specification  216
Stage 3: RFP Process  217
© dpa picture alliance/Alamy 
© Zuma Press, Inc./Alamy

xxx	
table of contents
Stage 4: Proposal Analysis, Vendor Negotiation, and Selection  217
Stage 5: Order Specification  217
Stage 6: Vendor Performance Assessment Using Metrics  218
THE BUYING CENTER  219
Organizational Culture  220
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 7.1: Is It Business or Bribery?  221
Building B2B Relationships  223
Social & Mobile Marketing 7.2: Making the Most of LinkedIn  224
THE BUYING SITUATION  225
Adding Value 7.2: Getting Out the Message with Inbound Marketing  227
Reviewing Learning Objectives  228
Key Terms  229
Marketing Digitally  229
Marketing Applications  230
Quiz Yourself  230
Chapter Case Study: Staples: The Big Box Retailer That’s Really a B2B Powerhouse  231
8	 GLOBAL MARKETING  234
ASSESSING GLOBAL MARKETS  237
Economic Analysis Using Metrics  237
Analyzing Infrastructure and Technological Capabilities  240
Analyzing Governmental Actions  240
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 8.1: How Chinese Regulations Change Car-Buying 
Practices  241
Analyzing Sociocultural Factors  244
The Appeal of the BRIC Countries  246
Social & Mobile Marketing 8.1: The Growth of Social Networking—Brazil’s Free 
Market versus China’s Restriction  249
CHOOSING A GLOBAL ENTRY STRATEGY  250
Exporting  250
Franchising  251
Strategic Alliance  251
Joint Venture  251
Adding Value 8.1: Tata Starbucks and the Indian Coffee Culture  252
Direct Investment  252
CHOOSING A GLOBAL MARKETING STRATEGY  253
Target Market: Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning  253
Adding Value 8.2: Ponying Up the Latest Ford Mustang  254
Reviewing Learning Objectives  258
Key Terms  259
Marketing Digitally  259
Marketing Applications  259
Quiz Yourself  260
Chapter Case Study: The Globalization of the Most Ubiquitous of American Cuisines—
the Hamburger  260
© Pascal Sittler/REA/Redux 

	
table of contents	
xxxi
	
	
SECTION 3  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE  265
9	 SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  266
THE SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING PROCESS  268
Step 1: Establish the Overall Strategy or Objectives  268
Step 2: Use Segmentation Methods  270
Social & Mobile Marketing 9.1: Is Facebook Over?  272
Marketing Analytics 9.1: A Complete Ecosystem for Coffee Drinkers: The 
Starbucks Mobile Plan  278
Step 3: Evaluate Segment Attractiveness  279
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 9.1: Congressional Hearings and the Ethical 
Considerations for Modern Loyalty Programs  280
Superior Service 9.1: Symbiosis in Your Stay: How Hotels Leverage Their 
Proximity to Universities  281
Step 4: Select a Target Market  283
Step 5: Identify and Develop Positioning Strategy  286
Positioning Methods  289
Positioning Using Perceptual Mapping  291
Reviewing Learning Objectives  294
Key Terms  295
Marketing Digitally  295
Marketing Applications  295
Quiz Yourself  296
Chapter Case Study: Mercedes-Benz  296
10	 MARKETING RESEARCH  300
THE MARKETING RESEARCH PROCESS  302
Marketing Research Process Step 1: Defining the Objectives  
and Research Needs  303
Marketing Research Process Step 2: Designing the Research  303
Adding Value 10.1: A Key Motivation for Waking Teens Early on Weekends 
Disappears: Breakfast All Day at McDonalds  304
Marketing Research Process Step 3: Collecting the Data  304
Marketing Research Process Step 4: Analyzing the Data and  
Developing Insights  305
Superior Service 10.1: Did You Hit the Weights or Swim a Lap Today? Your 
University Wants to Know—For a Good Reason  307
Marketing Research Process Step 5: Developing and Implementing  
an Action Plan  308
SECONDARY DATA  309
Inexpensive External Secondary Data  309
Syndicated External Secondary Data  309
Social & Mobile Marketing 10.1: Nielsen Seeds to Track Viewership,  
Regardless of the Media People Use to Watch  311
Internal Secondary Data  312
Marketing Analytics 10.1: Google Analytics Promises Movie Studios  
the Ability to Predict Performance Weeks Prior to Opening  314
© ABC Family/Courtesy Everett Collection 
© David Paul Morris/Getty Images

xxxii	
table of contents
PRIMARY DATA COLLECTION TECHNIQUES  314
Observation  315
Social Media  316
In‐Depth Interviews  317
Focus‐Group Interviews  318
Survey Research  318
Panel‐ and Scanner‐Based Research  320
Experimental Research  320
Advantages and Disadvantages of Primary and Secondary Research  322
THE ETHICS OF USING CUSTOMER INFORMATION  323
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 10.1: Oh, Say, Can You See? The Implications of 
Mannequins That Capture Shoppers’ Demographic Data  324
Reviewing Learning Objectives  325
Key Terms  326
Marketing Digitally  326
Marketing Applications  327
Quiz Yourself  327
Chapter Case Study: Swim, Lift, Play—But Also Donate: Using Market Research to 
Redefine the YMCA  328
Appendix 10A: Using Secondary Data to Assess Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)  332
SECTION 4  VALUE CREATION  337
11	 PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  338
COMPLEXITY AND TYPES OF PRODUCTS  340
Complexity of Products  340
Types of Products  341
PRODUCT MIX AND PRODUCT LINE DECISIONS  343
Adding Value 11.1: An Entryway to Luxury: The Latest Entry-Level Models from 
High-End Car Brands  344
Marketing Analytics 11.1: How Macy’s Defines Its Assortment through 
Analytics  345
BRANDING  346
Value of Branding for the Customer  347
Brand Equity for the Owner  349
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 11.1: (Not) Marketing Sugary Drinks to Kids  350
BRANDING STRATEGIES  352
Brand Ownership  352
Naming Brands and Product Lines  353
Brand and Line Extensions  354
Co‐Branding  356
Brand Licensing  357
Brand Repositioning  357
Adding Value 11.2: The Global Appeal and Rebranding Efforts of  
American Airlines  359
© Chris McLennan/Alamy 

	
table of contents	
xxxiii
	
	
PACKAGING  359
Product Labeling  361
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 11.2: Mars Inc., an Unlikely but Powerful  
Proponent of Sugar Labeling on Packages  362
Reviewing Learning Objectives  363
Key Terms  363
Marketing Digitally  364
Marketing Applications  364
Quiz Yourself  364
Chapter Case Study: From the Counterculture to the Runway: How Did Birkenstocks 
Become Fashionable?  365
12	 DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  368
WHY DO FIRMS CREATE NEW PRODUCTS?  371
Changing Customer Needs  371
Market Saturation  373
Managing Risk through Diversity  373
Adding Value 12.1: No Fairy Godmother Needed: How Disney Is Leveraging Its 
Inventory of Animated Films to Develop New Live-Action Products  374
Fashion Cycles  374
Improving Business Relationships  375
DIFFUSION OF INNOVATION  375
Innovators  377
Early Adopters  378
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 12.1: Drones in the Sky, Questions  
on the Ground  379
Early Majority  380
Late Majority  380
Laggards  380
Using the Diffusion of Innovation Theory  380
HOW FIRMS DEVELOP NEW PRODUCTS  382
Idea Generation  383
Marketing Analytics 12.1: Data That Help the Brand and the Customer:  
GM’s Big Data Use  385
Social & Mobile Marketing 12.1: When Microsoft Plays Catch-Up  386
Concept Testing  388
Product Development  388
Market Testing  389
Product Launch  390
Evaluation of Results  391
THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE  391
Introduction Stage  393
Growth Stage  393
Maturity Stage  393
Adding Value 12.2: Skinny on Ingredients, Thick on Promise: The Growth of 
SkinnyPop Snacks  394
Decline Stage  396
© Bloomberg/Getty Images 

xxxiv	
table of contents
The Shape of the Product Life Cycle Curve  396
Strategies Based on Product Life Cycle: Some Caveats  397
Reviewing Learning Objectives  397
Key Terms  398
Marketing Digitally  398
Marketing Applications  398
Quiz Yourself  399
Chapter Case Study: Is the Glass Half Full? The Launch, Death Struggles,  
and Potential Reemergence of Google Glass  399
13	 SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  404
SERVICES MARKETING DIFFERS FROM PRODUCT MARKETING  407
Intangible  407
Adding Value 13.1: Kola House Restaurant: Ensuring a Service Experience  
That Includes Pepsi  409
Inseparable Production and Consumption  409
Heterogeneous  410
Perishable  410
PROVIDING GREAT SERVICE: THE GAPS MODEL  411
The Knowledge Gap: Understanding Customer Expectations  412
Marketing Analytics 13.1: Using Analytics to Reduce Wait Time at Kroger  415
The Standards Gap: Setting Service Standards  417
The Delivery Gap: Delivering Service Quality  418
The Communications Gap: Communicating The Service Promise  420
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 13.1: Fake Reviews  421
Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction and Loyalty  422
SERVICE RECOVERY  423
Listening to the Customers and Involving Them in the Service Recovery  423
Finding a Fair Solution  424
Resolving Problems Quickly  424
Reviewing Learning Objectives  425
Key Terms  425
Marketing Digitally  426
Marketing Applications  426
Quiz Yourself  426
Chapter Case Study: Transportation Network Services: Uber vs. Lyft vs. Taxis   427
SECTION 5  VALUE CAPTURE  431
14	 PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  432
THE FIVE CS OF PRICING  435
Company Objectives  435
Customers  438
Adding Value 14.1: Changing Once, Changing Twice, Changing 3 Million Times: 
How Amazon Prices to Win  439
© Bloomberg/Getty Images 
© McGraw-Hill Education 

	
table of contents	
xxxv
	
	
Marketing Analytics 14.1: Airlines Use Price Elasticities to Price Tickets  444
Superior Service 14.1: The Increasing Costs of Play: New Offers and Pricing by 
Disney and Universal Theme Parks  446
Costs  446
Break‐Even Analysis and Decision Making  447
Markup and Target Return Pricing  449
Competition  450
Channel Members  452
Reviewing Learning Objectives  453
Key Terms  453
Marketing Digitally  454
Marketing Applications  454
Quiz Yourself  455
Chapter Case Study: Planet Fitness: Pricing for Success  455
15	 STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  458
CONSIDERATIONS FOR SETTING PRICE STRATEGIES  460
Cost‐Based Methods  460
Competition‐Based Methods  461
Value‐Based Methods  461
Adding Value 15.1: Value at a Premium Price: Moving Consumers Away from a 
View of Cheap as Valuable  463
Adding Value 15.2: Walmart Offers Low-Priced Organic Foods  464
PRICING STRATEGIES  464
Everyday Low Pricing (EDLP)  464
High/Low Pricing  465
New Product Pricing Strategies  465
PRICING TACTICS  467
Pricing Tactics Aimed at Consumers  467
Business Pricing Tactics and Discounts  470
LEGAL AND ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PRICING  472
Deceptive or Illegal Price Advertising  472
Predatory Pricing  473
Price Discrimination  473
Price Fixing  474
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 15.1: The Verdict: Apple Conspired to  
Raise Prices on eBooks  475
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 15.2: Impeding the Gray Market for  
Luxury Goods  476
Reviewing Learning Objectives  477
Key Terms  477
Marketing Digitally  478
Marketing Applications  478
Quiz Yourself  479
Chapter Case Study: Pizza Players, Pizza Prices  479
© Cui Hao/Getty Images 

xxxvi	
table of contents
SECTION 6  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL  
AND SUPPLY CHAIN  485
16	 SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  486
THE IMPORTANCE OF MARKETING CHANNEL/SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT  488
Adding Value 16.1: The Beans May Be Slow Cooked, but the Delivery  
Is Quick  489
Marketing Channels Add Value  490
Marketing Channel Management Affects Other Aspects of Marketing  491
DESIGNING MARKETING CHANNELS  491
Direct Marketing Channel  492
Indirect Marketing Channel  492
MANAGING THE MARKETING CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN  492
Marketing Analytics 16.1: Analytics in Support of Anticipatory Shipping  
by Amazon  493
Managing the Marketing Channel and Supply Chain through Vertical  
Marketing Systems  495
Managing Marketing Channels and Supply Chains through Strategic 
Relationships  499
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 16.1: Shrinking the Supply Chain to Supply  
Organic Demand  500
MAKING INFORMATION FLOW THROUGH MARKETING CHANNELS  501
Data Warehouse  503
MAKING MERCHANDISE FLOW THROUGH MARKETING CHANNELS  504
Distribution Centers versus Direct Store Delivery  504
Adding Value 16.2: E-Tailing in the United States versus India  505
The Distribution (or Fulfillment) Center  506
Superior Service 16.1: Who Will Win the Same-Day Grocery  
War?  507
Customer Store Pick Up  509
Inventory Management through Just‐in‐Time Inventory  
Systems  510
Reviewing Learning Objectives  512
Key Terms  512
Marketing Digitally  513
Marketing Applications  513
Quiz Yourself  514
Chapter Case Study: Zara Delivers Fast Fashion  514
17	 RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  518
CHOOSING RETAIL PARTNERS  521
Superior Service 17.1: Removing the Retailer, Burberry Seeks to Access 
Consumers Directly  522
Channel Structure  522
Customer Expectations  523
Channel Member Characteristics  524
Distribution Intensity  524
© Michael Nagle/Bloomberg/Getty  
Images 
© Elaine Thompson/AP Photo 

	
table of contents	
xxxvii
	
	
IDENTIFY TYPES OF RETAILERS  525
Food Retailers  525
Adding Value 17.1: Meet the Captain and Visit the Island  527
Marketing Analytics 17.1: How FreshDirect Figures Out How and When 
Customers Order  529
General Merchandise Retailers  529
Service Retailers  532
DEVELOPING A RETAIL STRATEGY USING THE FOUR PS  533
Product  533
Adding Value 17.2: Home Depot—Providing Customers Better Access to 
Products  534
Price  535
Promotion  535
Place  537
THE INTERNET AND OMNICHANNEL RETAILING  537
Social & Mobile Marketing 17.1: In-Store and Online Analytics at IKEA  538
Deeper and Broader Selection  538
Personalization  538
Expanded Market Presence  539
Integrated CRM  539
Brand Image  540
Pricing  540
Supply Chain  540
Reviewing Learning Objectives  541
Key Terms  542
Marketing Digitally  542
Marketing Applications  542
Quiz Yourself  543
Chapter Case Study: Making Macy’s Meaningful: Moves by the Retail Chain to Maintain 
Its Competitiveness  543
SECTION 7  VALUE COMMUNICATION  547
18	 INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  548
COMMUNICATING WITH CONSUMERS  550
The Communication Process  550
How Consumers Perceive Communication  552
Social & Mobile Marketing 18.1: Analyzing the Unmeasured: A Snapchat 
Experiment by Domino’s to Test the Channel’s Effectiveness  553
The AIDA Model  554
Adding Value 18.1: Landing an Endorsement Contract on Empire:  
Fiction, Reality, and Pepsi  555
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 18.1: The Need to Take Risks in IMC  557
CHANNELS USED IN AN INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  
STRATEGY  559
Advertising  559
Public Relations  560
© Fox Network/Photofest

xxxviii	
table of contents
Sales Promotions  560
Personal Selling  560
Direct Marketing  560
Online Marketing  561
PLANNING FOR AND MEASURING IMC SUCCESS  563
Goals  563
Setting and Allocating the IMC Budget  564
Measuring Success Using Marketing Metrics  565
Adding Value 18.2: America’s Dream Team, Brought to You by Kia  566
Marketing Analytics 18.1: Puma’s Use of Google Analytics  568
Planning, Implementing, and Evaluating IMC Programs—An Illustration of 
Google Advertising  568
Reviewing Learning Objectives  571
Key Terms  571
Marketing Digitally  572
Marketing Applications  572
Quiz Yourself  573
Chapter Case Study: Taking IMC to the Max: Pepsi Max and Modern 
Communications   573
19	 ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  576
STEP 1: IDENTIFY TARGET AUDIENCE  579
STEP 2: SET ADVERTISING OBJECTIVES  580
Informative Advertising  580
Persuasive Advertising  580
Reminder Advertising  581
Focus of Advertisements  582
STEP 3: DETERMINE THE ADVERTISING BUDGET  583
STEP 4: CONVEY THE MESSAGE  583
The Message  583
The Appeal  584
STEP 5: EVALUATE AND SELECT MEDIA  586
Mass and Niche Media  586
Choosing the Right Medium  586
Determining the Advertising Schedule  587
Social & Mobile Marketing 19.1: What Comes Around: Just as Digital Has 
Pushed Out Traditional, Mobile Is Pushing Out Digital Advertising  588
STEP 6: CREATE ADVERTISEMENTS  588
Adding Value 19.1: Selling Out or Selling Well? The Use and Choice of Popular 
Music in Advertising Campaigns  589
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 19.1: When Makeup Companies Really Do Make Up 
Models’ Faces  591
STEP 7: ASSESSING IMPACT USING MARKETING METRICS  591
REGULATORY AND ETHICAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING  593
PUBLIC RELATIONS  594
SALES PROMOTION  596
Types of Sales Promotion  596
© Rick Diamond/WireImage/Getty Images 

	
table of contents	
xxxix
	
	
Marketing Analytics 19.1: How CVS Uses Loyalty Data to Define Coupons  597
Using Sales Promotion Tools  601
Reviewing Learning Objectives  601
Key Terms  602
Marketing Digitally  602
Marketing Applications  602
Quiz Yourself  603
Chapter Case Study: Making Mastercard Priceless  603
20	PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  608
THE SCOPE AND NATURE OF PERSONAL SELLING  610
Personal Selling as a Career  610
The Value Added by Personal Selling  611
Social & Mobile Marketing 20.1: Managing Relationships While Mobile:  
Sales Reports from the Field  613
THE PERSONAL SELLING PROCESS  613
Step 1: Generate and Qualify Leads  613
Adding Value 20.1: College Athletics Turn to the Pros for Sales Help  615
Step 2: Preapproach and the Use of CRM Systems  616
Adding Value 20.2: Selling in the Cloud: The Growth and Success of 
Salesforce.com  617
Step 3: Sales Presentation and Overcoming Reservations  618
Step 4: Closing the Sale  620
Step 5: Follow‐Up  620
MANAGING THE SALES FORCE  621
Sales Force Structure  622
Recruiting and Selecting Salespeople  623
Sales Training  624
Motivating and Compensating Salespeople  624
Adding Value 20.2: When Tupperware Does More Than Store Food:  
Sales as Empowerment among Indonesian Women  625
ETHICAL AND LEGAL ISSUES IN PERSONAL SELLING  627
The Sales Manager and the Sales Force  628
The Sales Force and Corporate Policy  628
The Salesperson and the Customer  628
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 20.1: When Realtors Become Reality Stars  629
Reviewing Learning Objectives  630
Key Terms  630
Marketing Digitally  630
Marketing Applications  631
Quiz Yourself  631
Chapter Case Study: Alta Data Solutions: Making the Sale  632
Glossary  635
Quiz Yourself Answer Key  650
Name Index  652
Company Index  659
Subject Index  664
© Ben Hider/Getty Images 


ASSESSING THE 
MARKETPLACE
CHAPTER 1
Overview of Marketing
CHAPTER 2
Developing Marketing Strategies and a 
Marketing Plan
CHAPTER 3
Social and Mobile Marketing
CHAPTER 4
Conscious Marketing, Corporate Social 
Responsibility, and Ethics
CHAPTER 5
Analyzing the Marketing Environment
Assessing the Marketplace
Understanding the Marketplace
Targeting the Marketplace
Value Creation
Value Capture
Value Delivery: Designing the 
Channel and Supply Chain
Value Communication
SECTION 1
Section One, Assessing the Marketplace, contains five 
chapters. Following an introduction to marketing in Chapter 1, 
Chapter 2 focuses on how a firm develops its marketing 
strategy and a marketing plan. A central theme of the 
chapter is how firms can effectively create, capture, deliver, 
and communicate value to their customers. Chapter 3 is 
devoted to understanding how one can develop social and 
mobile marketing strategies. Chapter 4 focuses attention 
on marketing ethics. An ethical decision framework is de-
veloped and presented, and the key ethical concepts are 
linked back to the marketing plan introduced in Chapter 2. 
Finally, Chapter 5, Analyzing the Marketing Environment, 
focuses on how marketers can systematically uncover and 
evaluate opportunities.

CHAPTER 1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO1-1	 Define the role of marketing in organizations.
	LO1-2	 Describe how marketers create value for a product or service.
	LO1-3	 Understand why marketing is important both within and outside the firm.
nearly century-long marketing effort by a premium brand 
chocolatier that is determined to keep its customers 
happy and coming back for more.
When Pierre and Joseph Draps first started selling 
chocolate pralines in 1926, they insisted on the idea that 
“Chocolate is a dream.”1 Thus from the very start of the 
company, Godiva has aimed to create an image and an 
experience for consumers that is totally different from 
the humdrum of everyday existence. The chocolates 
OVERVIEW OF 
MARKETING
 N
estled in their lovely and iconic little gold 
boxes, Godiva chocolates can spark the 
­desires of nearly any chocolate lover, just by 
reminding them of the joy they are likely to ex-
perience from tasting the delicious, luxurious treats. It 
seems almost innate: think about Godiva, start to salivate 
in anticipation. But in fact, the appeal of Godiva choco-
lates, as well as every detail that we used to describe 
them in the first sentence of this opener, represents a 

themselves are made with very high-quality ingredients.2 
In addition, Godiva introduces specific innovations and 
recipes for special occasions—from the Signature Lait 
that was created specifically to be handed out to guests 
at the 1939 theatrical release of Gone with the Wind to 
the Egérie Noir, a raspberry ganache treat created in honor 
of the company’s 90th anniversary.3 Collections featuring 
examples of its various editions highlight Godiva’s long-­
standing and storied history; people who buy them can 
feel connected to a sense of both luxury and nostalgia. 
Its packaging, high-quality gold boxes, also evokes lux-
ury.4 Whether consumers buy a single piece of chocolate 
as a treat for themselves or a 140-piece Gold Ballotin col-
lection as an impressive gift for someone else,5 the pack-
age is fancy and pretty, suggesting that the company 
values their purchase, no matter how large or small. 
If they buy the treats from a small Godiva chocolatier, 
they also receive personal service when the salesperson 
wraps up their individually chosen treats with a gold bow. 
If they visit the expansive Godiva counter in Macy’s flag-
ship New York store, they can sample a vast variety of 
options, from soft serve ice cream to just-dipped straw-
berries encased in milk or dark chocolate.6 If instead con-
sumers want something a little more accessible, Godiva 
makes sure that prepackaged offerings are available in 
grocery stores. These mass-produced desserts are not 
quite so personalized, but they also are relatively less 
­expensive than the high-end option.
Thus Godiva tries to make sure it has an option for 
virtually anyone—a less expensive, mass-produced 
­version for shoppers who need a break from their daily 
chores, but also more expensive, delicately made, indi-
vidualized options for those who regard excellent choc-
olate as a necessary indulgence. And with its golden 
boxes and high-end image, Godiva also has long guaran-
teed Valentines and gift givers that their presents would 
© Charley Gallay/Getty Images

4
WHAT IS MARKETING?
Unlike other subjects you may have studied, marketing already is very familiar to you. You 
start your day by agreeing to do the dishes if your roommate will make the coffee. Then you 
fill up your car with gas. You attend a class that you have chosen and paid for. After class, 
you pick up lunch and maybe a chocolate bar for dessert at the cafeteria, which you eat while 
reading a book on your iPad. Then you leave campus to have your hair cut and take in a 
movie. On your bus ride back to school, you pass the time by buying a few songs from 
Apple’s iTunes. In each case, you have acted as the buyer and made a decision about whether 
you should part with your time and/or money to receive a particular product or service. If, 
after you return home, you decide to sell some 
clothes on eBay that you don’t wear much any-
more, you have become a seller. In each of these 
transactions, you were engaged in marketing.
The American Marketing Association 
(AMA) states that “marketing is the activity, 
set of institutions, and processes for creating, 
capturing, communicating, delivering, and ex-
changing offerings that have value for custom-
ers, clients, partners, and society at large.”10 
What does this definition really mean? Good 
marketing is not a random activity; it requires 
thoughtful planning with an emphasis on the 
ethical implications of any of those decisions on 
society in general. Firms develop a marketing 
plan (Chapter 2) that specifies the marketing 
activities for a specific period of time. The 
marketing plan also is broken down into vari-
ous components—how the product or service 
will be conceived or designed, how much it 
should cost, where and how it will be pro-
moted, and how it will get to the consumer. In 
any exchange, the parties to the transaction 
should be satisfied. In our previous example, 
you should be satisfied or even delighted with 
the song you downloaded, and Apple should be 
satisfied with the amount of money it received 
from you. Thus, the core aspects of marketing 
are found in Exhibit 1.1. Let’s see how these 
core aspects look in practice.
 LO1-1	
Define the role of 
marketing in 
organizations.
be appreciated and enjoyed if they splurged on the 
“good” candy.7
Although Godiva embraces its heritage as a Belgian 
company,8 it also has fans and consumers around the 
world. Accordingly, it makes sure that people living any-
where in the world can access not only its products but 
also the stories and experiences that go along with those 
products. For example, it uses social marketing tools to 
tell stories about the five classically trained chefs, each 
with a unique and varied background, who take charge of 
developing new recipes.9
Thus, by adopting the various marketing methods, 
tactics, and recommendations that we describe through-
out this book, Godiva has survived and thrived for nearly 
a century, while making sure that it has a strong founda-
tion to last for decades more.
E X H I B I T  1.1
Core Aspects of Marketing
Marketing
Marketing helps
create value.
Marketing is about
satisfying customer
needs and wants.
Marketing entails
an exchange.
Marketing
requires product,
price, place, and
promotion
decisions.
Marketing aﬀects
various stakeholders.
Marketing can be
performed by both
individuals and
organizations.

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
5
	
	
Marketing Is about Satisfying Customer Needs and Wants
Understanding the marketplace, and especially consumer needs and wants, is fundamental 
to marketing success. In the broadest terms, the marketplace refers to the world of trade. 
More narrowly, however, the marketplace can be segmented or divided into groups of peo-
ple who are pertinent to an organization for particular reasons. For example, the market-
place for soft drinks may include most people in the world, but as Godiva and Hershey’s 
battle for chocolate lovers, they divide the population into a host of categories: luxury 
versus cost-conscious, service-oriented versus self-service, those who purchase chocolates 
for a quick energy-boosting snack versus those who purchase it as a reward for a hard day’s 
work or as a gift for a friend or loved one, and those who prefer “Made in America” versus 
those who prefer the illusion that their chocolates are made in Belgium (even though 
Godiva has manufacturing facilities in the United States). If you manufacture chocolate, 
you want to know for which marketplace segments your product is most relevant, then 
make sure you build a marketing strategy that targets those groups.
Marketing Entails an Exchange
Marketing is about an exchange—the trade of things of value between the buyer and the 
seller so that each is better off as a result. As depicted in Exhibit 1.2, sellers provide 
Some chocolate lovers prefer 
Hershey’s over other brands 
because it is made in Hershey, 
Pennsylvania.
© Tim Shaffer/Reuters
Goods/services
producers
(sellers)
Money and
information
Customers/
consumers (buyers)
Communications
and delivery
E X H I B I T  1.2
Exchange: The Underpinning of Seller–Buyer Relationships

6	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
products or services, then communicate and facilitate the de-
livery of their offering to consumers. Buyers complete the ex-
change by giving money and information to the seller. 
Suppose you learn about a new Godiva chocolate from a 
friend’s tweet, so you visit Godiva’s website to check it out. 
From there you order a box from Amazon’s website. Your 
billing information is already in the company’s system, so you 
do not have to enter your credit card number or other informa-
tion. Furthermore, Amazon creates a record of your purchase, 
which it uses, together with your other purchase trends, to cre-
ate personalized recommendations of other luscious treats 
that you might like. Thus, Amazon uses the valuable informa-
tion you provide to facilitate future exchanges and solidify its 
relationship with you. Nonetheless, not wanting to wait until 
tomorrow to receive your chocolates, you rush down to the 
Godiva store in the mall and buy some, consuming them all 
on your way home.
Marketing Requires Product, Price, Place, 
and Promotion Decisions
Marketing traditionally has been divided into a set of four inter-
related decisions and consequent actions known as the market-
ing mix, or four Ps: product, price, place, and promotion (as 
defined in Exhibit 1.3).11 The four Ps are the controllable set of 
decisions or activities that the firm uses to respond to the wants 
of its target markets. But what does each of these activities in 
the marketing mix entail?
Product: Creating Value  The first of the four Ps is product. 
Although marketing is a multifaceted function, its fundamental 
If you can’t wait for an Amazon delivery of Godiva chocolates, 
go to one of its mall store locations and buy them in person!
© Steve Vidler/Alamy
Communicating
value
Creating
value
Capturing
value
Delivering
value
Product
Price
Place
Promotion
E X H I B I T  1.3
The Marketing Mix

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
7
	
	
purpose is to create value by developing a variety of offer-
ings, including goods, services, and ideas, to satisfy cus-
tomer needs. Take, for example, chocolate. At one time, 
people purchased simple chocolates and cocoa from a local 
supplier and either ate it by itself or combined it with other 
ingredients at home. Imagine the night that a bunch of kids 
got together by a campfire and decided to make a sandwich 
by melting chocolate and marshmallows and holding the 
sweet, creamy, white and brown goop together with graham 
crackers—the night s’mores were born. Today, Hershey’s 
and Mars make a range of chocolates and candies. Hershey’s 
Chocolate candies include Almond Joy, Cadbury, Reese’s, 
and more. Furthermore, Hershey’s “sugar confectionery” 
products range from Jolly Rancher to Twizzlers, its owns Ice 
Breakers Bubble Yum Gum, a line of Hershey’s chocolate 
and Reese’s peanut butter baking goods, and snacks such as 
Mauna Loa mixed nuts.12 Mars chocolate line of products 
includes 3 Musketeers, Milky Way, Snickers, and M&M’s. 
However, Mars is not just in the chocolate business. It also owns Uncle Ben’s; Wrigley 
products that include Double Mint and 5 gum; Life Savers; Altoids; drinks such as Dove 
hot chocolate; and even pet food, including Iams and Pedigree.13 And these treats are 
available both online and through a plethora of retail outlets from grocery to convenience 
stores like 7-Eleven.
Goods are items that you can physically touch. A bag of Godiva chocolate, Nike 
shoes, Pepsi-Cola, a Frappuccino, Kraft cheese, Tide, an iPad, and countless other prod-
ucts are examples of goods. As we describe at the start of this chapter, Godiva makes 
chocolates—but it adds value to its products by using fresh and interesting ingredients of 
the highest quality, packaging the chocolates in gold boxes, using personalized service in 
its boutiques, and creating a nostalgic historical and quality image through its various 
promotional outlets. Hershey’s and Mars sell very good, affordable confections; Godiva 
sells an experience.
Unlike goods, services are intangible customer benefits that are produced by people or 
machines and cannot be separated from the producer. When people buy tickets—whether 
for airline travel, a sporting event, or the theater—they are paying not for the physical ticket 
stub but, of course, for the experience they gain, a lesson that JetBlue has taken to heart, as 
we describe in Superior Service 1.1. For people who like to pick out their chocolates one at 
a time, Godiva offers a full-service experience in their boutiques. Hotels, insurance agen-
cies, and spas similarly provide services. Getting money from your bank, whether through 
an ATM or from a teller, is another example of using a service. In this case, cash machines 
usually add value to the banking experience because they are conveniently located, fast, 
and easy to use.
Many offerings in the market combine goods and services.14 When you go to an 
­optical center, you get your eyes examined (a service) and purchase new contact lenses 
There is nothing like s’mores around a campfire to kindle one’s 
interest in chocolate.
© Stephen Alvarez/National Geographic/Getty Images
Hershey’s and Mars sell very 
good but affordable confections.
Left: © Dean Bertoncelj/Shutterstock RF; 
right: © Kevin Wheal/Alamy

8	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
A Service for Fliers, a Moneymaker for JetBlue Airlines: 
WiFi-Enabled Shopping in the Airi
There is a new retail channel taking off—literally. The “onboard, 
online retail business” refers to the options that more and 
more airlines offer passengers to shop through their mobile 
devices while they fly toward their destination. The retail chan-
nel relies on technology that enables airlines to offer WiFi ac-
cess to customers and cater to customers’ evident desire to 
buy things while flying.
	
According to JetBlue, which began offering WiFi-enabled 
flights at no charge as a service to customers, the expectation 
was that people would check their social media or maybe get 
some work e-mails sent. Instead, it found that many passen-
gers on flights were visiting shopping websites and picking up 
new items to be delivered to their homes. Evidently, those 
kitschy in-flight catalogs that had long been stuck in the seat 
pockets, with their silly gifts and travel kits, had strong market 
appeal. When consumers could go online, they wanted the 
same functions of the in-flight retail catalogs paired with the 
conveniences of ordering and paying online.
	
In response, various players in the market are seeking to 
attract sales by the captive audience of airline passengers. For 
example, in a partnership with Amazon, JetBlue pushes pur-
chases of Amazon content, or else encourages customers to 
invest in purchasing a new Prime membership, which enables 
them to stream the content for free. According to a JetBlue 
spokesperson, a “surprising number” of customers take advan-
tage of this offer, readily signing up to pay the annual fee in 
return for the chance to stream House of Cards on their flight 
to the real Washington, DC, for example.
	
Most carriers charge passengers for the right to access 
the WiFi, whereas JetBlue continues to offer it for free, in the 
belief that it can get more people to use the service that way. 
That means more people are looking at the product and ser-
vice offers for sale, and that means that the resulting pur-
chases are more likely to make up for the costs of the free 
service offer.
	
But there is something of a cost for consumers—namely, 
the prevalence and clutter of advertising that pops up every 
time they go online while onboard. For some, the annoyance of 
the advertising is enough to put them off the idea of shopping. 
Others, though, would even consider paying for the right to 
see that sort of marketing in the air.
Superior Service 1.1
JetBlue has enhanced its service experience by offering 
­on-board WiFi.
© Blend Images/Alamy RF
(a good). If you attend a Bruno Mars concert, you can be enthralled by the world-
class performance. To remember the event, you might want to pick up a shirt or a 
souvenir from the concert. With these tangible goods, you can relive and remem-
ber the enjoyment of the experience over and over again.
Ideas include thoughts, opinions, and philosophies; intellectual concepts 
such as these also can be marketed. Groups promoting bicycle safety go to 
schools, give talks, and sponsor bike helmet poster contests for the members of 
their primary market—children. Then their secondary target market segment, 
parents and siblings, gets involved through their interactions with the young 
contest participants. The exchange of value occurs when the children listen to 
the sponsors’ presentation and wear their helmets while bicycling, which means 
they have adopted, or become “purchasers,” of the safety idea that the group 
marketed.
When you attend a Bruno Mars concert, 
you are paying for a service.
© Rich Polk/Clear Channel/Getty Images

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
9
	
	
Price: Capturing Value  The second of the four Ps is price. Everything has a price, 
­although it doesn’t always have to be monetary. Price, therefore, is everything the buyer 
gives up—money, time, and/or energy—in exchange for the product.15 Marketers must 
determine the price of a product carefully on the basis of the potential buyer’s belief about 
its value. For example, JetBlue Airlines can take you from New York to Denver. The price 
you pay for that service depends on how far in advance you book the ticket, the time of 
year, and whether you want to fly coach or business class. If you value the convenience of 
buying your ticket at the last minute for a ski trip between Christmas and New Year’s Day 
and you want to fly business class, you can expect to pay four or five times as much as 
you would for the cheapest available ticket. That is, you have traded off a lower price for 
convenience. For marketers, the key to determining prices is figuring out how much cus-
tomers are willing to pay so that they are satisfied with the purchase and the seller achieves 
a reasonable profit.
Place: Delivering the Value Proposition  The third P, place, represents all the activi-
ties necessary to get the product to the right customer when that customer wants it. As 
Marketing Analytics 1.1 describes, for Starbucks, that means expanding its storefronts con-
stantly and proactively, so that it is easy for caffeine junkies to find their fix. Creative loca-
tions, such as kiosks at the baggage claim in airports or small booths in grocery stores, 
represent the chain’s effort to improve its offering on this dimension of the marketing mix.
Location, Location, Analytics: Starbucks’  
Use of Data to Place New Storesii
By now, nearly everyone on the planet recognizes the green 
mermaid logo that proudly sits atop every Starbucks sign, 
poster, and cup. The ubiquitous coffee giant maintains more 
than 22,000 locations in more than 66 countries. But its 
growth has not been without a few stumbles and bumps in the 
road. For example, in the last decade, hundreds of newly 
opened stores had to be closed because of their poor perfor-
mance. In analyzing how the company got to that point, Patrick 
O’Hagan, Starbucks’ manager of global market planning, ex-
plained that many of the stores never should have opened. 
However, the staff in charge of these location choices had 
been inundated with so much data, they were unable to use 
them to make profitable decisions. Thus, the Starbucks story 
reveals a great deal about the importance of data analytics.
	
Starbucks began using Esri’s Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) technology as far back as the 1990s. But it has 
perfected its applications of the GIS-provided predictive analyt-
ics only recently. Currently, it is using the information gleaned 
from the technology to plan 1,500 new locations. With the sys-
tem’s ArcGIS Online tool, Starbucks obtains a graphical sum-
mary of the GIS data in map form. These data include both 
location information and demographic details, which the soft-
ware analyzes according to pertinent criteria. The applications 
allow Starbucks’ staff to pinpoint ideal locations that are likely 
to attract substantial traffic and thus boost chainwide sales, 
such that “ArcGIS allows us to create replicable consumer ap-
plications that are exactly what they need.” Because the GIS 
technology is accessible through desktops as well as mobile 
devices, location experts in the field also can combine the high-
tech insights with their real-world observations.
	
Not only does the GIS technology help Starbucks deter-
mine the ideal locations for new stores, but it also can enable 
the company to decide which kinds of stores to open. For ex-
ample, many of the 1,500 planned new stores will feature 
drive-through windows; others will be smaller stores, strategi-
cally placed to provide the greatest customer convenience. 
The new approach already has been proving effective, accord-
ing to results that show that the most recently opened stores, 
particularly those in the Americas, consistently are producing 
great returns and exceeding hurdle rates.
Marketing Analytics 1.1
Starbucks uses Geographic Information Systems (GIS) tech-
nology to pinpoint ideal locations and determine which kinds 
of stores to open in those locations.
© Bhandol/Alamy

10	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Place more commonly deals specifically with retailing and marketing channel man-
agement, also known as supply chain management. Supply chain management is the set of 
approaches and techniques that firms employ to efficiently and effectively integrate their 
suppliers, manufacturers, warehouses, stores, and other firms involved in the transaction 
(e.g., transportation companies) into a seamless value chain in which merchandise is pro-
duced and distributed in the right quantities, to the right locations, and at the right time, 
while minimizing systemwide costs and satisfying the service levels required by the cus-
tomers. Many marketing students initially overlook the importance of marketing channel 
management because a lot of these activities are behind the scenes. But without a strong 
and efficient marketing channel system, merchandise isn’t available when customers want 
it. Then customers are disappointed, and sales and profits suffer.
Promotion: Communicating the Value Proposition  The fourth P is promotion. 
Even the best products and services will go unsold if marketers cannot communicate their 
value to customers. Promotion is communication by a marketer that informs, persuades, 
and reminds potential buyers about a product or service so as to influence their opinions 
and elicit a response. Promotion generally can enhance a product’s or service’s value. 
When the publisher of the well-known Babar books wanted to celebrate the 80th anniver-
sary of the series, it initiated a $100,000 campaign. Working in collaboration with toy and 
bookstores, the campaign did not just suggest people buy the books and read about an ele-
phant king. Instead, it embraced a sense of nostalgia and evoked a simpler time, in which 
grandparents might read pleasant stories to their grandchildren.16
Marketing Can Be Performed by Individuals and Organizations
Imagine how complicated the world would be if you had to buy everything you consumed 
directly from producers or manufacturers. You would have to go from farm to farm buying 
your food and then from manufacturer to manufacturer to purchase the table, plates, and 
utensils you needed to eat that food. Fortunately, marketing intermediaries such as retailers 
accumulate merchandise from producers in large amounts and then sell it to you in smaller 
amounts. The process by which businesses sell to consumers is known as business-to-­
consumer (B2C) marketing; the process of selling merchandise or services from one 
business to another is called business-to-business (B2B) marketing. When Keurig sells 
its machines and coffee to you on its website, it is a B2C sale, but when it sells similar 
items for office use, it is a B2B transaction. Through various Internet sites such as eBay 
and Etsy, consumers market their products and services to other consumers. This third 
category, in which consumers sell to other consumers, is consumer-to-consumer (C2C) 
marketing. These marketing transactions are illustrated in Exhibit 1.4.
When Keurig sells its machines and coffee to you on its website, it is a B2C sale, but when it sells similar 
items for office use, it is a B2B transaction.
Left: Source: Keurig Green Mountain, Inc.; right: © Sergi Alexander/Getty Images

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
11
	
	
Individuals can also undertake activities to market themselves. When you apply for a job, 
for instance, the research you do about the firm, the résumé and cover letter you submit with 
your application, and the way you dress for the interview and conduct yourself during it are all 
forms of marketing activities. Accountants, lawyers, financial planners, physicians, and other 
professional service providers also constantly market their services one way or another.
Marketing Affects Various Stakeholders
Most people think of marketing as a way to facilitate the sale of products or services to 
customers or clients. But marketing can also affect several other stakeholders (e.g., supply 
chain partners, society at large). Partners in the supply chain include wholesalers, retailers, 
or other intermediaries such as transportation or warehousing companies. All of these en-
tities are involved in marketing to one another. Manufacturers sell merchandise to retailers, 
but the retailers often have to convince manufacturers to sell to them. After many years of 
not being able to purchase products from Ralph Lauren because it sells below the manufac-
turers’ suggested retail price (MSRP), TJX Companies, Inc., operators of Marshall’s and 
TJMaxx, among others, is now Ralph Lauren’s largest customer.17
Marketing also can aim to benefit an entire industry or society at large. The dairy in-
dustry targets its “Milk Life” and “Body by Milk” campaigns at different target segments, 
including parents, their children, and athletes. Through this campaign, the allied milk 
E X H I B I T  1.4
Marketing Can Be Performed by Individuals and by Organizations
B2B
B2C
C2C
Manufacturer
(makes monitors)
Retailer
(sells PCs & monitors)
Consumer A
Consumer B
The “Milk Life” and “Body by Milk” marketing campaigns create a high level of awareness for the milk industry.
Left: Courtesy of Lowe Campbell Ewald and MilkPEP; right: © Jonathan Ferrey/Getty Images

12	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
producers have created high levels of awareness about the benefits of drinking milk, in-
cluding the high levels of protein, potassium, and calcium it provides. The focus is largely 
on how drinking milk for breakfast fits in with a healthy lifestyle that helps people main-
tain their focus, weight, and muscle mass. Even the industry’s charitable campaigns reso-
nate with this notion: The Milk Drive, run in conjunction with Feeding America, seeks to 
ensure that local food banks are sufficiently stocked with this nutritious, frequently re-
quested item. Such campaigns benefit the entire dairy industry and promote the health 
benefits of drinking milk to society at large.
Marketing Helps Create Value
Marketers and advertisers spend about $189 billion in the United States and $592 bil-
lion worldwide. Without such spending, and the marketing jobs associated with it, the 
global economy would plummet. If all ad spending on television and on streaming ser-
vices like Hulu were to disappear, consumers would wind up paying around $1200 per 
year to access about a dozen channels each. Some currently available channels that 
­appeal to relatively small, niche audiences likely would not be able to survive, though, 
so the options would shrink overall. Removing all marketing spending would also affect 
many websites. For example, Facebook is so widespread and popular, it likely could 
make up for any lost advertising revenues by charging users just about $12 per year, 
and most users likely would be willing to pay that rate. However, the charges would 
severely limit Facebook’s spread into less developed nations, where $12 is more than 
many people earn in a fortnight. Other sites, such as Buzzfeed, would likely disappear 
altogether.18
But marketing didn’t get to this current level of prominence among individuals, corpo-
rations, and society at large overnight.19 To understand how marketing has evolved into its 
present-day, integral business function of creating value, let’s look for a moment at some of 
the milestones in marketing’s short history (see Exhibit 1.5).
Production-Oriented Era  Around the turn of the 20th century, most firms were produc-
tion oriented and believed that a good product would sell itself. Henry Ford, the founder of 
Ford Motor Company, once famously remarked, “Customers can have any color they want 
so long as it’s black.” Manufacturers were concerned with product innovation, not with 
satisfying the needs of individual consumers, and retail stores typically were considered 
places to hold the merchandise until a consumer wanted it.
Sales-Oriented Era  Between 1920 and 1950, production and distribution techniques 
became more sophisticated; at the same time, the Great Depression and World War II 
1990
1950
1920
Turn of the
century
Turn of the
21st century
Production
Sales
Marketing
Value-based marketing
E X H I B I T  1.5
Marketing Evolution: Production, Sales, Marketing, and Value
Photos (left to right): © Ryan McVay/Getty Images RF; © CMCD/Getty Images RF; © Ted Dayton Photography/Beateworks/Corbis RF; © Ryan McVay/Getty Images RF; 
© McGraw-Hill Education/Mark Dierker, photographer

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
13
	
	
­conditioned customers to consume less or manufacture items themselves, so they planted 
victory gardens instead of buying produce. As a result, manufacturers had the capacity to 
produce more than customers really wanted or were able to buy. Firms found an answer to 
their overproduction in becoming sales oriented: They depended on heavy doses of personal 
selling and advertising.
Market-Oriented Era  After World War II, soldiers returned home, got new jobs, and 
started families. At the same time, manufacturers turned from focusing on the war effort 
toward making consumer products. Suburban communities, featuring cars in every ga-
rage, sprouted up around the country, and the new suburban fixture, the shopping center, 
began to replace cities’ central business districts as the hub of retail activity and a place 
to just hang out. Some products, once in limited supply because of World War II, became 
plentiful. And the United States entered a buyers’ market—the customer became king! 
When consumers again had choices, they were able to make purchasing decisions on the 
basis of factors such as quality, convenience, and price. Manufacturers and retailers thus 
began to focus on what consumers wanted and needed before they designed, made, or 
attempted to sell their products and services. It was during this period that firms discov-
ered marketing.
Value-Based Marketing Era  Most successful firms today are market oriented.20 That 
means they generally have transcended a production or selling orientation and attempt to 
discover and satisfy their customers’ needs and wants. Before the turn of the 21st century, 
better marketing firms recognized that there was more to good marketing than simply dis-
covering and providing what consumers wanted and needed; to compete successfully, they 
would have to give their customers greater value than their competitors did. (The impor-
tance of value is appropriately incorporated into the AMA definition of marketing dis-
cussed earlier.)
Value reflects the relationship of benefits to costs, or what you get for what you 
give.21 In a marketing context, customers seek a fair return in goods and/or services for 
their hard-earned money and scarce time. They want products or services that meet 
their specific needs or wants and that are offered at a price that they believe is a good 
value. A good value, however, doesn’t necessarily mean the product or service is inex-
pensive. If it did, luxury goods manufacturers like Godiva would go out of business. 
There are customers willing to pay asking prices for all types of goods at all price levels 
because, to those individuals, what they get for what they give is a good value. This 
point is central to the marketing strategy adopted by Whole Foods, as Adding Value 1.1 
explains.
A creative way to provide value to customers is to engage in value cocreation.22 In 
this case, customers can act as collaborators to create the product or service. When clients 
work with their investment advisers, they cocreate their investment portfolios; when Nike 
allows customers to custom design their sneakers, they are cocreating. 
In the next section, we explore the notion of value-based marketing further. Specifi-
cally, we look at various options for attracting customers by providing them with better 
value than the competition does. Then we discuss how firms compete on the basis of 
value. Finally, we examine how firms transform the value concept into their value-driven 
activities.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is the definition of marketing?
2.	 Marketing is about satisfying 
 and 
.
3.	 What are the four components of the marketing mix?
4.	 Who can perform marketing?
5.	 What are the various eras of marketing?

14	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
How Do Marketing Firms Become More Value Driven?
Firms become value driven by focusing on four activities. First, they share information 
about their customers and competitors across their own organization and with other firms 
that help them get the product or service to the marketplace, 
such as manufacturers and transportation companies. Second, 
they strive to balance their customers’ benefits and costs. 
Third, they concentrate on building relationships with custom-
ers. Fourth, they take advantage of new technologies and con-
nect with their customers using social and mobile media.
Marketing Analytics  Modern marketers rely on sophisti-
cated data analytics to define and refine their approaches to 
their customers and their markets. Companies such as 
Starbucks, CVS, Kroger, Netflix, and Amazon collect massive 
amounts of data about how, when, why, where, and what peo-
ple buy, and then analyze those data to inform their choices.
Balancing Benefits with Costs  Value-oriented marketers 
constantly measure the benefits that customers perceive 
 LO1-2	
Describe how marketers 
create value for a 
product or service.
Adding Value 1.1
The Meaning of Best Value: Whole Foods’  
Purpose-Based Marketing iii
Some analysts looking at Whole Foods’ dwindling sales num-
bers and decreased earnings would feel the solution to these 
issues is obvious: The grocery chain should lower its prices so 
that consumers consider it more valuable. Whole Foods re-
jects that notion though, arguing instead that value means far 
more than prices. And it has several ideas in mind to prove 
that it is right.
To start, it has introduced a new Responsibly Grown rating 
program, which identifies all fresh produce and flowers ac-
cording to their environmental impact. The program is strin-
gent in its demands. When vendors exert minor environmental 
impacts, they are rated good; those producers that go further 
by, for example, minimizing wasteful plastic usage or ensuring 
conservation areas for bees, earn a ranking of better. The pro-
ducers identified as the best address a vast range of respon-
sibility initiatives, from working conditions for farmers to 
conservation efforts to clean energy to renewable resources 
and so on. For example, one criterion asks farmers how many 
earthworms live in the soil on their farms.
e-oriented initiative follows Whole Foods’ existing efforts 
such as its eco-scale applied to cleaning products and sepa-
rate programs to determine the sustainability and responsibil-
ity associated with animal and fish products. Furthermore, by 
2018, it plans to introduce labels that indicate whether any 
particular food item contains any genetically modified ingredi-
ents. This produce-oriented initiative follows Whole Foods’ ex-
isting efforts such as its eco-scale applied to cleaning products 
and separate programs to determine the sustainability and 
responsibility associated with animal and fish products. 
Furthermore, by 2018, it plans to introduce labels that indicate 
whether any particular food item contains any genetically 
modified ingredients.
In parallel with these new initiatives, Whole Foods has de-
veloped a revised advertising campaign, with a prominent tag-
line that reminds shoppers that “Values matter.” The 
commercials emphasize that by shopping at Whole Foods, 
consumers can be confident that their food has been sourced 
responsibly and fairly. For example, any beef purchased in the 
stores has been raised by responsible ranchers who give the 
cows “room to roam.”
By promoting the idea that “value is inseparable from val-
ues,” Whole Foods seeks to remind shoppers of all that it pro-
vides, in exchange for a somewhat higher price point. In 
particular, it promises that they can make their food choices 
confidently, buoyed by a range of information that Whole 
Foods will make available to them at all times.
Whole Foods’ Responsibly Grown rating program identifies 
all fresh produce and flowers according to their environ-
mental impact.
© Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
Kroger collects massive amounts of data about how, when, 
why, where, and what people buy, and then analyzes those 
data to better serve its customers.
© Daniel Acker/Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
15
	
	
against the cost of their offerings. They use available customer 
data to find opportunities to satisfy their customers’ needs 
­better, keep down costs, and develop long-term loyalties. For 
example, except in a few instances, Hershey’s does not have 
fancy stores with highly paid salespeople to sell its chocolate, 
but its high-quality products are available in self-service stores 
wherever food items are sold. 
Building Relationships with Customers  During the past 
couple of decades, marketers have begun to develop a rela-
tional orientation as they have realized that they need to think 
about their customers in terms of relationships rather than 
transactions.23 To build relationships, firms focus on the life-
time profitability of the relationship, not how much money is 
made during each transaction. Thus, Apple makes its innova-
tions compatible with existing products to encourage consum-
ers to maintain a long-term relationship with the company 
across all their electronic needs.
This relationship approach uses a process known as customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM), a business philosophy and set of strategies, programs, and systems that fo-
cus on identifying and building loyalty among the firm’s most valued customers.24 Firms 
that employ CRM systematically collect information about their customers’ needs and then 
use that information to target their best customers with the products, services, and special 
promotions that appear most important to them.
Connecting with Customers Using Social and Mobile Media  Marketers are 
steadily embracing new technologies such as social and mobile media to allow them to 
connect better with their customers and thereby serve their needs more effectively. 
Businesses take social and mobile media seriously and include these advanced tools in the 
development of their marketing strategies, though as Social and Mobile Marketing 1.1 ex-
plains, even these efforts might not be sufficient to keep up with consumers’ rapidly chang-
ing demands. In turn, 97 percent of marketers assert that they use social media tools for 
their businesses.25  That’s largely because approximately 4.2 billion people link to some 
social media sites through their mobile devices.26 
Hershey’s balances benefits with costs by placing its prod-
ucts in self-service stores.
© Lee Jae-Won/Reuters
Apple makes its new products 
compatible with existing ones 
to maintain a long-term rela-
tionship with its customers.
© Spencer Platt/Getty Images

16	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
What Comes Around: Marketing Todayiv
Social & Mobile Marketing 1.1
The signs of the growth of mobile advertising, at the expense 
of other digital forms such as desktops and laptops, have long 
been evident. But the speed with which this shift is occurring 
seemingly is taking many marketers by surprise, because it is 
virtually unprecedented. Consider some of the numbers: In 
2009, mobile Internet ad spending was $1.3 billion, while in 
2018 it is projected to be $125 billion. Within just a couple of 
years, mobile advertising will be a bigger market than digital 
advertising.
	
Both forms are similar, in the sense that they are clearly 
distinct from traditional marketing and seek to reach tech-
nologically savvy shoppers. But they require unique ap-
proaches and marketing plans, because a campaign that 
works well on a user’s desktop computer might not function 
effectively on a tablet or smartphone. Furthermore, mobile 
marketing offers functionalities and advertising tactics that 
digital ads cannot provide. In addition, mobile advertising 
­allows brands and ­marketers to send timely, location-based 
communications to consumers at the moment they enter a 
store or begin a search for a nearby restaurant on their 
phones. 
	
Another trend occurring apace with this shift is the rise of 
ad-blocking technology. Apple now allows users to install soft-
ware to block banner ads in digital channels. Although con-
sumers indicate that they would like the ability to block 
advertising in mobile settings as well, marketing messages 
contained within apps continue to be prevalent. In this sense, 
advertisers might seek to expand and improve their mobile 
marketing so as to avoid the barriers that consumers can im-
plement on their desktops. In the longer term, though, the shift 
to more mobile marketing likely implies the need for new forms 
of communication, including game-oriented, social content, 
and informational advertising that does not really look like 
­advertising at all.
Yet even with this astounding penetration, only 20 percent of the world’s popula-
tion use Facebook—which means 80 percent still have not signed up.27 The United 
States and United Kingdom may be approaching saturation, but there is still huge 
growth potential for social networks. Before users can sign up for Facebook, though, 
they need access to high-speed Internet. Other countries continue to experience higher 
Facebook growth rates as they gain greater Internet access and as Facebook becomes 
available in more languages (around 140 currently). The global average Internet pene-
tration rate hovers below 50 percent, with massive populations in Africa and Asia still 
limited in their access.28
Beyond social media sites, online travel agencies such as Expedia, Travelocity, 
­Orbitz, Priceline, and Kayak have become the first place that users go to book travel 
arrangements. In 2015, almost 150 million bookings, representing 57 percent of all 
travel bookings, were made on the Internet. Sixty-five percent of same-day booking 
were made from mobile devices.29 Customers who book hotels using travel agencies 
become loyal to the agency that gives them the lowest prices 
rather than to any particular hotel brand. So hotels are using 
social media and mobile applications to lure customers back 
to their specific brands by engaging in conversations with 
them on Facebook and allowing fans of the page to book 
their hotel reservations through Facebook. Some hotel chains 
have mobile applications that allow customers to make 
changes to their reservations, shift check-in and check-out 
times, and add amenities or services to their stays. The hotels 
know a lot about their customers because they collect infor-
mation about their previous visits, including the type of 
room they stayed in, their preferences (from pillows to drinks 
consumed from the minibar), and the type of room service 
they prefer.
Several restaurant chains are exploiting location-based so-
cial media applications such as HappyCow, Yelp, Foodspotting, 
Foursquare, OpenTable, and Seamless.30 By using location-­
based apps on their mobile phones, customers can use, for 
Marketers are increasingly connecting with their customers 
via mobile devices
© Tanya Constantine/Getty Images RF

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
17
	
	
­example, HappyCow to find nearby vegetarian restaurants or 
Yelp to find restaurants that are well rated by users. The re-
sult is that users are driving the way brands and stores are 
interacting with social media. 
Buffalo Wild Wings suggests that its diners check in 
to its locations using their phones. The target customers 
for this chain are young and tech savvy, and with its in-
house games and sports broadcasts, Buffalo Wild Wings 
is uniquely situated to encourage customers to connect 
and bring their friends along. It offers contests and en-
courages frequent visits to win. Customers can earn free 
chicken wings or soft drinks within their first three visits. 
Buffalo Wild Wings’ Game Break allows customers to 
play fantasy-style and real-time games for prizes, whether 
they are in-store using a tablet or anywhere at all on their 
smartphones.31
Make travel arrangements on-
line either through Facebook 
or your mobile app and 
check-in is a breeze.
© Erik Isakson/Getty Images RF
Buffalo Wild Wings attracts young and tech-savvy customers 
to its restaurants by offering contests and games through 
­mobile devices.
© dcwcreations/Shutterstock RF
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Does providing a good value mean selling at a low price?
2.	 How are marketers connecting with customers through social and  
mobile media?
WHY IS MARKETING IMPORTANT?
Marketing once was only an afterthought to production. Early marketing philosophy went 
something like this: “We’ve made it; now how do we get rid of it?” However, marketing not 
only has shifted its focus dramatically but it also has evolved into a major business function 
 LO1-3	
Understand why 
marketing is important 
both within and 
outside the firm.

18	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
that crosses all areas of a firm or organization, as illustrated in Exhibit 1.6. Marketing ad-
vises production about how much of the company’s product to make and then tells supply 
chain managers when to ship it. It creates long-lasting, mutually valuable relationships 
between the company and the firms from which it buys.32 It identifies those elements that 
local customers value and makes it possible for the firm to expand globally. Marketing has 
had a significant impact on consumers as well. Without marketing, it would be difficult for 
any of us to learn about new products and services. Understanding marketing can even help 
you find a job after you finish school.
Marketing Expands Firms’ Global Presence
A generation ago Coca-Cola was available in many nations, but Levi’s and most other U.S. 
brands weren’t. Blue jeans were primarily an American product—made in the United 
States for the U.S. market. But today most jeans, including those of Levi Strauss & Co., are 
made in places other than the United States and are available nearly everywhere. Thanks to 
MTV and other global entertainment venues, cheap foreign travel, and the Internet, you 
share many of your consumption behaviors with college students in countries all over the 
globe. The best fashions, music, and even food trends disseminate rapidly around the 
world. Take a look at your next shopping bag. Whatever it contains, you will find goods 
from many countries: produce from Mexico, jeans from Japan, electronics from Korea. 
Importance
of 
marketing
Can be 
entrepreneurial
Expands global
presence
Enriches society
Pervasive across
channel members
E X H I B I T  1.6
Importance of Marketing
Top left: © Thinkstock/Jupiterimages RF; top right: © Jason Reed/Getty Images RF; middle right: © JG Photography/Alamy RF; 
bottom right: © McGraw-Hill Education/Andrew Resek, photographer; bottom left: © Purestock/SuperStock RF; middle  
left: © Blend Images/Ariel Skelley/Getty Images RF.

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
19
	
	
Global manufacturers and retailers continue to make inroads into the U.S. market. The 
Dutch grocery store giant Ahold is among the top five grocery store chains in the United 
States, though you may never have heard of it because it operates under names such as Stop 
& Shop, Giant, and Peapod in the United States.33 As marketing helps expand firms’ global 
presence, it also enhances global career opportunities for marketing professionals.
Marketing Is Pervasive across Marketing Channel Members
Firms do not work in isolation. Manufacturers buy raw materials and components from 
suppliers, which they sell to wholesalers, retailers, or other businesses after they have 
turned the materials into products (see Exhibit 1.7). Every 
time materials or products are bought or sold, they are trans-
ported to different locations, which sometimes requires that 
they be stored in warehouses operated by yet other organiza-
tions. Such a group of firms that make and deliver a given 
set of goods and services is known as a supply chain or a 
marketing channel. All the various channel members (e.g., 
suppliers, manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers) of the 
supply chain are firms that are likely to provide career oppor-
tunities to marketing professionals.
Effectively managing supply chain relationships often has 
a marked impact on a firm’s ability to satisfy the consumer, 
which results in increased profitability for all parties. Consider 
the agreement between Amazon and the U.S. Postal Service 
(USPS) to expand their supply chain to provide Sunday deliv-
ery of Amazon orders. In a groundbreaking experiment, the 
USPS started delivering packages emblazoned with Amazon’s 
smile logo to customers and businesses on Sundays, the first 
time it had assigned delivery drivers to work on that day. 
­Neither of the USPS’s main competitors, UPS and FedEx, 
­offer Sunday delivery. For Amazon, the deal provides a stellar 
competitive benefit: Buyers can plan on receiving items they 
order every day of the week. The deal appears to be particu-
larly appealing to Amazon’s Prime customers, who pay an an-
nual fee to guarantee two-day delivery. For a shopper browsing 
Amazon on Friday, it means receiving all purchases within 
those two days instead of having to discount Sunday and wait 
for Monday for the delivery.34
Marketing Enriches Society
Should marketing focus on factors other than financial prof-
itability, like good corporate citizenry? Many of America’s 
best-known corporations seem to think so—they have undertaken 
Raw material
Manufacturer
Retailer
Consumer
E X H I B I T  1.7
Supply Chain
You can now receive your 
­Amazon orders on Sunday.
© John Gress/Corbis

20	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
various marketing activities such as developing greener products, making healthier food 
options and safer products, and improving their supply chains to reduce their carbon 
footprint. At a more macro level, firms are making socially responsible activities an 
integral component of everything they do, as the grocers in Ethical and Societal 
Dilemma 1.1 exemplify.
Socially responsible firms recognize that including a strong social orientation in 
business is a sound strategy that is in both its own and its customers’ best interest. It 
Free Fruit for Children: 
What Could Go Wrong?v
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 1.1
Childhood obesity is a serious and global problem. For parents, shopping with hun-
gry  kids who demand sugary snacks sometimes might seem like an equally vexing 
­challenge. In an effort to help resolve both concerns, several grocery store chains are 
offering a new kind of appealing giveaway. Specifically, these grocers set up stands 
that display a range of fruits, with signs offering the produce for free to children under a 
certain age.
	
The idea is that a banana or apple at the start of the shopping trip can keep kids from 
getting hungry and cranky, thus making the shopping experience more pleasant for their 
parents. The fruit options are more healthful and less troublesome than other options, 
such as the free cookies or doughnuts that some in-store bakeries provide for young 
shoppers. Because the fruit is free, it also offers notable benefits over packaged chocolate 
bars, fruit snacks, or granola bars that parents might open up in the aisles even before 
they check out.
	
The fruit giveaway experiments have expanded globally, with chains in the United 
States, United Kingdom, and Australia all taking part. Although many responses have been 
positive, including parents’ praise for stores that help them encourage healthful eating by 
their children, others question the tactic. The key complaint has been hygiene, in that there 
are few options for washing fruit like apples, peaches, and pears before children bite 
down. Still, the generally positive responses have led at least one chain to estimate that it 
will give away approximately 1 million pieces of fruit over the next year.
Should grocery stores offer free fruit to children?
© Hero Images Inc./Alamy RF

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
21
	
	
shows the consumer marketplace that the firm will be around for the long run and 
can be trusted with the marketplace’s business. In a volatile market, investors view 
firms that operate with high levels of corporate responsibility and ethics as safe invest-
ments. Similarly, firms have come to realize that good corporate citizenship through 
socially responsible actions should be a priority because it will help their bottom line in 
the long run.35
Marketing Can Be Entrepreneurial
Whereas marketing plays a major role in the success of large corporations, it also is at the 
center of the successes of numerous new ventures initiated by entrepreneurs, or people 
who organize, operate, and assume the risk of a business venture.36 Key to the success of 
many such entrepreneurs is that they launch ventures that aim to satisfy unfilled needs. 
Some examples of successful ventures (and their founders) that understood their customers 
and added value include: Ben & Jerry’s (Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield); Birchbox 
(Hayley Barna and Katia Beauchamp); Amazon (Jeff Bezos); Netflix (Reed Hastings); and 
OWN (Oprah Winfrey).
An extraordinary entrepreneur and marketer, Oprah Winfrey was a self-made bil-
lionaire before she turned 50 years of age. Winfrey went from being the youngest per-
son and first African American woman to anchor news at WTVF-TV in Nashville, 
Tennessee, to being only the third woman in history to head her own production studio. 
Under the Oprah banner are a variety of successful endeavors, including Harpo Films, 
Oprah’s Book Club, Oprah.com, the Oxygen television network, and the Oprah Winfrey 
Network (OWN). In addition to producing two of the highest-rated talk shows ever on 
television, The Oprah Winfrey Show and Dr. Phil, Harpo Studios has produced films 
such as Beloved and Tuesdays with Morrie. Oprah’s philanthropic contributions are vast 
and varied. Although the charity was dissolved in 2010 when Oprah’s TV show ended, 
through the Oprah Winfrey Foundation and Oprah’s Angel Network, people worldwide 
have raised more than $80 million for scholarships, schools, women’s shelters, and 
When you think of Oprah Winfrey, think big: Harpo Productions, Inc.; O, The Oprah Magazine;  
O at Home magazine; Harpo Films; the OWN television network; not to mention her philanthropic 
work with the Oprah Winfrey Foundation.
© Chris Pizzello/AP Photo

22	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
	
	
Define the role of marketing in organizations.
	
	
Marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and 
processes for creating, capturing, communicating, 
delivering, and exchanging offerings that have 
value for customers, clients, partners, and society 
at large. Marketing strives to create value in many 
ways. If marketers are to succeed, their customers 
must believe that the firm’s products and services 
are valuable; that is, they are worth more to the 
customers than they cost. Another important and 
closely related marketing role is to capture value 
of a product or service based on potential buyers’ 
beliefs about its value. Marketers also enhance 
the value of products and services through vari-
ous forms of communication such as advertising 
and personal selling. Through communications, 
marketers educate and inform customers about 
the  benefits of their products and services and 
thereby increase their perceived value. Marketers 
facilitate the delivery of value by making sure the 
right products and services are available when, 
where, and in the quantities their customers want. 
Better marketers are not concerned about just one 
transaction with their customers; they recognize 
the value of loyal customers and strive to develop 
long-term relationships with them.
	
	
Describe how marketers create value for a 
product or service.
	
	
Value represents the relationship of benefits to 
costs. Firms can improve their value by increasing 
benefits, reducing costs, or both. The best firms 
integrate a value orientation into everything they 
do. If an activity doesn’t increase benefits or 
LO1-1
LO1-2
­reduce costs, it probably shouldn’t occur. Firms 
become value driven by finding out as much as 
they can about their customers and those custom-
ers’ needs and wants. They share this information 
with  their partners up and down the marketing 
channel, so the entire chain collectively can focus 
on the customer. The key to true value-based mar-
keting is the ability to design products and ser-
vices that achieve precisely the right balance 
between benefits and costs. Value-based market-
ers aren’t necessarily worried about how much 
money they will make on the next sale. Instead, 
they are concerned with developing a lasting rela-
tionship with their customers so those customers 
return again and again.
	
	
Understand why marketing is important both 
within and outside the firm.
	
	
Successful firms integrate marketing throughout 
their organizations so that marketing activities 
coordinate with other functional areas such as 
product design, production, logistics, and human 
resources, enabling them to get the right product 
to the right customers at the right time. Marketing 
helps facilitate the smooth flow of goods through 
the supply chain, all the way from raw materials 
to the consumer. From a personal perspective, the 
marketing function facilitates your buying pro-
cess and can support your career goals. Marketing 
also can be important for society through its 
­embrace of solid, ethical business practices. 
Firms “do the right thing” when they sponsor 
charitable events, seek to reduce environmental 
impacts, and avoid unethical practices; such 
LO1-3
Reviewing Learning Objectives
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 List four functions that illustrate the importance of marketing.
2.	 A firm doing the right thing emphasizes the importance of marketing 
to 
.
youth centers.37 Oprah’s latest entrepreneurial venture includes a sizable ownership 
share in WeightWatchers, as we discuss in Chapter 5.
Great and distinguished entrepreneurs have visions of how certain combinations of 
products and services can satisfy unfilled needs.38 They find and understand a market-
ing opportunity (i.e., the unfilled need), conduct a thorough examination of the market-
place, and develop and communicate the value of their products and services to potential 
consumers.

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
23
	
	
outstanding marketers, but an entrepreneurial 
spirit pervades the marketing decisions of firms 
of all sizes.
­efforts endear the firm to customers. Finally, mar-
keting is a cornerstone of entrepreneurialism. Not 
only have many great companies been founded by 
1.	 Visit Godiva (www.godiva.com) and Hershey’s 
(www.hersheys.com). What value do these chocola­
tiers provide customers? How is the value proposition 
different? 
2.	 Go to Facebook.com and click on “About” at the bot-
tom of the page and then click on the About tab. What 
is Facebook’s mission? How could a marketer use 
Facebook, and what other social media tools could 
they use? What are the drawbacks a marketer might 
face when using Facebook to communicate with their 
customers?
3.	 Visit Mondelēz International’s website (www 
.mondelezinternational.com) and then click on the 
“Brand Family” link. In what major categories does 
Mondelēz have brands? Can you identify related catego-
ries in which the company should compete?
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Do you know the difference between needs and wants? 
When companies that sell coffee develop their market-
ing strategy, do they concentrate on satisfying their cus-
tomers’ needs or wants? What about a utility company, 
such as the local power company? A humanitarian 
agency, such as Doctors without Borders?
2.	 People can apply marketing principles to finding a job. 
If the person looking for a job is the product, describe 
the other three Ps.
3.	 What is the difference between a good and a service? 
When you buy a music subscription on Pandora, 
are  you buying a good or a service? Would your 
­answer be different if you bought an MP3 album on 
Amazon?
4.	 One of your friends was recently watching TV and 
saw an advertisement that she liked. She said, “Wow, 
that was great marketing!” Was the ad, in fact, 
­marketing?
5.	 Using the four Ps, discuss how the Apple iBeacon will 
create value for customers.
6.	 Columbia Sportswear sells a men’s fleece vest for $36 
and an Omni-Heat Jacket for $1,200. Is Columbia 
Sportswear providing the target markets for these prod-
ucts with a good value? Explain your answer.
7.	 Assume you have been hired into the marketing depart-
ment of a major consumer products manufacturer such 
as Nike. You are having lunch with some new col-
leagues in other departments—finance, manufacturing, 
and logistics. They are arguing that the company could 
save millions of dollars if it just got rid of the marketing 
department. ­Develop an argument that would persuade 
them otherwise.
8.	 Why do marketers like Apple find it important to em-
brace societal needs and ethical business practices? Pro-
vide an example of a societal need or ethical business 
practice that Apple is addressing.
Marketing Applications
∙	 business-go-business (B2B) 
­marketing,  10
∙	 business-to-consumer (B2C) 
­marketing,  10
∙	 consumer-to-consumer (C2C) 
­marketing,  10
∙	 customer relationship  
management (CRM),  5
∙	 entrepreneur,  21
∙	 exchange,  5
∙	 four Ps (see marketing 
mix),  6
∙	 goods,  7
∙	 ideas,  8
∙	 marketing,  4
∙	 marketing channel,  19
∙	 marketing mix (four Ps),  6
∙	 marketing plan,  4
∙	 relational orientation,  15
∙	 service,  7
∙	 supply chain,  19
∙	 value,  13
∙	 value cocreation,  13
Key Terms 

24	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
FROM BEANS TO PRALINES: THE GLOBAL CHOCOLATE MARKET
Three and a half million tons is a lot—more than most people can really understand. 
Perhaps a more comprehensible number is 11.5 pounds. But from a different perspec-
tive, that second number might be even more remarkable than the first one. The 
3.5 million tons refer to how many cocoa beans—the raw material that represents the 
first step in the making of chocolate—are farmed, processed, shipped, and consumed 
worldwide every year. But that notable 11.5-pound figure indicates how much of 
the finished chocolate product, on average, a single consumer in the United States or 
Europe eats every year.39
	
That’s a lot of chocolate, making for an expansive, massive market. The members 
of the market are diverse and varied, from the international farmers who produce the 
cocoa beans to the processing plants that transform the beans into edible treats to the 
well-known brands that design and produce the bars or candies to consumers who gob-
ble up the finished product. Each transaction in the process involves some form of mar-
keting, adding value along the way so that chocoholics never have to go without their 
favorite treat.
The earliest cocoa beans were grown in the Amazon basin, and farmers in Brazil 
and Ecuador still provide much of the world’s supply. But the value and constantly 
increasing desire for chocolate products encouraged the expansion of the cocoa farm-
ing industry, spreading into Asia and West Africa.40 The quality of the beans clearly 
affects the quality of the final product, leading many farmers and manufacturers to 
agree to follow Fair Trade or organic standards. For exam-
ple, Fair Trade labels guarantee fair treatment of the farm-
ers, most of whom work for minimal wages and live in 
underdeveloped nations. It also requires responsible farm-
ing practices. As a result of the benefits that these 
­guarantees offer, farmers receive higher prices for their 
produce; currently, Fair Trade producers earn about 
$150  more per ton of beans than conventional growers 
would.41 Organic farmers, who adopt the various national-level 
standards for organic farming (e.g., no pesticides), also 
earn more on the beans they sell—anywhere from $100 to 
$300 more per ton. The rationale behind both these initia-
tives is that consumers ultimately will pay more for Fair 
Trade and organic chocolate, though each of these forms 
bchsu_tt
Chapter Case Study 
Chocolate consumers are 
­demanding organic and fair 
traded products.
© Q-Images/Alamy
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself
1.	 Which of the following illustrates marketing’s direct im-
pact on consumers?
a.  Marketing advises production about how much 
product to manufacture.
b.  Marketing creates long-lasting relationships between 
the firm and its suppliers.
c.  Marketing helps firms expand globally.
d.  Marketing helps consumers learn about new products 
and services.
e.  Marketing advises logistics about when to ship 
products.
2.	 The 
 consists of the product, price, place, and 
promotion of an offering.
a.  marketing exchange 
b.  marketing mix
c.  channel of distribution 
d.  value proposition 
e.  marketing plan
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
25
	
	
still account for tiny shares of the overall market. Still, estimates predict substantial 
growth in the organic chocolate market.42
However they choose to farm their beans, farmers then must sell their produce to 
processors. Those processors are located all over the world. The processors take the 
beans, add in sugar and dairy, and arrive at edible food products that they can sell under 
various brands. The number of these processors has grown remarkably in recent years 
in response to growing demand. In particular, less developed nations have sought to 
combine their farming with processing capabilities, such that factories have been 
­popping up in various West African and Asian nations. As a result, in just five years, 
global processing capacity has grown by more than 400,000 metric tons.43 Although the 
growth in the chocolate processing segment is a response to increased demand—sales 
of chocolate increased by 13 percent in the same five-year period—the capacity 
­increases have been so massive that processing supply now outpaces demand. In 
turn, many processing plants, whether newly opened or decades old, are struggling to 
earn a profit.
All these shifts in supply mean that the prices that branded chocolate companies pay for 
their products are variable, and different companies have different needs. Whereas Godiva, 
as we explain in the opener to this chapter, demands the highest quality, other companies 
like Mars or Hershey’s seek a level of quality that is sufficient but not overly expensive. 
These mass-market brands sell far more chocolate than their luxury competitors do; 
for  example, in 2015, Mars’ sales surpassed $18,400 million, and Nestlé brought in 
$11,041 million. These companies constantly compete for market share with their various 
brands, flavors, sizes, and product options. At the same time, luxury brands are engaging 
in their own competition,44 such that Lindt has announced its goal to unseat Godiva as the 
top-selling premium chocolate brand.45
	
But that’s not to suggest that mass-market brands compete with themselves or that 
premium brands do either. Almost regardless of their exact positioning and pricing, each 
chocolate brand seeks to be the one that appeals most to customers by finding just the right 
balance of quality, availability, and price.
	
As a result, customers face more choices than ever before when it comes to their 
chocolate fix. That’s fortunate too, because even as health concerns and global obesity 
crises continue to be prominent news stories, people all over the world are eating more 
and more chocolate, possibly because chocolate, especially dark chocolate, is good for 
you.46 For example, in Brazil—remember, one of the leading sources of cocoa beans—
consumers used to eat about 10.5 ounces each year. Today, that amount has increased to 
90 ounces on average.47 In China, estimates suggest that international chocolate com­
panies will sell $4.4 billion worth of candy by 2020.48
	
As this section reveals, everybody markets and everybody is subjected to the effects 
of marketing. Farmers try to market their beans as better by embracing Fair Trade or or-
ganic standards. Processors struggle to balance demand and supply and seek ways to earn 
enough profits to continue manufacturing. Chocolate brands aim to define their position 
in the market and appeal more to customers through the ways they combine the four Ps. 
And customers keep buying, faced with a wealth of choices, available only because mar-
keting throughout the world makes sure they have access to just the kinds of treats they 
most desire.
Questions
1.	
Choose one of the supply chain members of the chocolate market described in this 
case study and detail how it adds value through its marketing efforts.
2.	
Describe the market for chocolates in the United States. In your discussion explain:
∙  What type(s) of people do they sell to?
∙  How do they appeal to those different groups of people?
∙  How do those people typically procure the products?
∙  Is there a difference between how and why different groups purchase chocolate? 
∙  Compare and contrast how those two “players” use the four Ps.

26	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Endnotes
  1.	 Tim Nudd, “At 90, Godiva Proudly Looks Back as It Charts a 
Path Forward,” AdWeek, March 31, 2016. 
  2.	Godiva, “Our Story,” http://www.godiva.com/experience-godiva/
ourStory.html. 
  3.	Nudd, “At 90, Godiva Proudly Looks Back.”
  4.	Robert Klara, “How a Naked Woman, a Horse, and a Family in 
Belgium Created Godiva Chocolate,” AdWeek, February 10, 
2015. 
  5.	Godiva, “Collections,” http://www.godiva.com/collections. 
  6.	“Godiva Opens New Boutique at Macy’s Herald Square,” PR 
Newswire, November 2, 2015. 
  7.	 Klara, “How a Naked Woman, a Horse, and a Family in Belgium.”
  8.	Godiva, “Our Belgian Heritage,” http://www.godiva.com/our-­
story-our-belgian-heritage/OurStoryArticle2.html. 
  9.	Godiva, “Meet our Chefs,” http://www.godiva.com/experience- 
godiva/MeetOurChefs_RichArticle.html. 
10.	 The American Marketing Association, http://www.marketing-
power.com. We added the word in italics. Discussions of the 
latest revision of the AMA’s marketing definition are wide-
spread. See Gregory T. Gundlach and William L. Wilkie, “AMA’s 
New Definition of Marketing: Perspective and Commentary on 
the 2007 Revision,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 28, 
no. 2 (2008), pp. 259–64; see also the fall 2007 issue of the 
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 26, no. 2, which contains 
eight different perspectives on the new definition.
11.	 The idea of the four Ps was conceptualized by E. Jerome 
McCarthy, Basic Marketing: A Managerial Approach 
(Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1960).
12.	 https://www.thehersheycompany.com/brands/category.aspx#/
Select. 
13.	 http://www.mars.com/global/brands.aspx. 
14.	 Wolfgang Ulaga and Werner Reinartz, “Hybrid Offerings: 
How Manufacturing Firms Combine Goods and Services 
Successfully,” Journal of Marketing 75 (November 2011),  
pp. 5–23.
15.	 Anja Lambrecht and Catherine Tucker, “Paying with Money or 
Effort: Pricing When Customers Anticipate Hassle,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 49 (February 2012), pp. 66–82.
16.	 Stuart Elliot, “A New Coronation for the King of Elephants,” 
The New York Times, November 13, 2012.
17.	 Personal communication, Trang Connelly, TJX Companies, Inc., 
September 2013.
18.	 Simon Dumenco, “Ad Age Imagines a World Without Ads—And 
It’s Not Cheap,” Advertising Age, September 28, 2015.
19.	 Peter C. Verhoef et al., “A Cross-National Investigation into the 
Marketing Department’s Influence within the Firm: Toward 
Initial Empirical Generalizations,” Journal of International 
Marketing 19 (September 2011), pp. 59–86.
20.	George S. Day, “Aligning the Organization with the Market,” 
Marketing Science Institute 5, no. 3 (2005), pp. 3–20.
21.	 Kimmy Wa Chan, Chi Kin (Bennett) Yim, and Simon S. K. Lam, 
“Is Customer Participation in Value Creation a Double-Edged 
Sword? Evidence from Professional Financial Services across 
Cultures,” Journal of Marketing 74, no. 3 (May 2010); Dhruv 
Grewal, Kent B. Monroe, and R. Krishnan, “The Effects of Price 
Comparison Advertising on Buyers’ Perceptions of Acquisition 
Value and Transaction Value,” Journal of Marketing 62  
(April 1998), pp. 46–60.
22.	Anne L. Roggeveen, Michael Tsiros, and Dhruv Grewal, 
“Understanding the Co-Creation Effect: When Does 
Collaborating with Customers Provide a Lift to Service 
Recovery?,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 40, 
no. 6 (2012), pp. 771–90; Sigurd Troye and Magne Supphellen, 
“Consumer Participation in Coproduction: ‘I Made It Myself’ 
Effects on Consumers’ Sensory Perceptions and Evaluations 
of Outcome and Input Product,” Journal of Marketing 76 
(March 2012), pp. 33–46.
23.	Anita Luo and V. Kumar, “Recovering Hidden Buyer-Seller 
Relationship States to Measure the Return on Marketing 
Investment in Business-to-Business Markets,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 50, no. 1 (2013), pp. 143–60; V. Kumar 
and Denish Shah, “Can Marketing Lift Stock Prices?,” Sloan 
Management Review 52, no. 4 (2011), pp. 24–26; V. Kumar et 
al., “Is Market Orientation a Source of Sustainable Competitive 
Advantage or Simply the Cost of Competing?,” Journal of 
Marketing 75 (January 2011), pp. 16–30; Stephen A. Samaha, 
Robert W. Palmatier, and Rajiv P. Dant, “Poisoning Relationships: 
Perceived Unfairness in Channels of Distribution,” Journal of 
Marketing 75 (May 2011), pp. 99–117.
24.	Luo and Kumar, “Recovering Hidden Buyer-Seller Relationship 
States”; V. Kumar, Denish Shah, and Rajkumar Venkatesan, 
“Managing Retailer Profitability—One Customer at a Time!,” 
Journal of Retailing 82, no. 4 (2006), pp. 277–94.
25.	Harsh Ajmera, “Social Media Facts, Figures, and Statistics 
2013,” Digital Insights, http://blog.digitalinsights.in.
26.	Kadie Regan, “10 Amazing Social Media Growth Stats from 
2015,” Social Media Today, August 10, 2015, http://www. 
socialmediatoday.com/social-networks/kadie-regan/2015-08-
10/10-amazing-social-media-growth-stats-2015.
27.	United States Census Bureau, “U.S. and World Population 
Clock,” April 7, 2016, http://www.census.gov/popclock/; We Are 
Social. “Leading Social Networks Worldwide as of January 
2016, Ranked by Number of Active Users (in Millions),” Statista - 
The Statistics Portal. January 2016, http://www.statista.com/
statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-number- 
of-users/.
28.	“Internet Usage Statistics,” Internet World Stats, November 30, 
2015, http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm. 
29.	“Internet Travel Hotel Booking Statistics,” Statistic Brain 
Research Institute, March 3, 2015, http://www.statisticbrain.
com/internet-travel-hotel-booking-statistics/. 
30.	Alex Heath, “8 Apps Every Food Lover Needs,” June 29, 2015, 
http://www.businessinsider.com/the-best-food-apps-2015-6; 
http://www.foodspotting.com/about; http://www.happycow.net/. 
31.	 http://www.bdubsgamebreak.com/Home/About.
32.	Raji Srinivasan, Gary L. Lilien, and Shrihari Sridhar, “Should 
Firms Spend More on Research and Development and 
Advertising During Recessions?,” Journal of Marketing 75 
(May 2011), pp. 49–65. 
33.	http://www.ahold.com. 
34.	Ron Nixon, “Postal Service to Make Sunday Deliveries for 
Amazon,” The New York Times, November 11, 2013.
35.	Philip Kotler, “Reinventing Marketing to Manage the 
Environmental Imperative,” Journal of Marketing 75 (July 2011), 
pp. 132–35; Katherine White, Rhiannon MacDonnell, and John 
H. Ellard, “Belief in a Just World: Consumer Intentions and 
Behaviors toward Ethical Products,” Journal of Marketing 76 
(January 2012), pp. 103–18. 
36.	http://dictionary.reference.com/search?q=Entrepreneurship.

	
OVERVIEW OF MARKETING  CHAPTER ONE	
27
	
	
37.	http://www.oprah.com; https://web.archive.org/web/ 
20110809132838/http://oprahsangelnetwork.org/how-to-help/
thank-you-donors. 
38.	For a series of contributions about how entrepreneurs 
­contribute to society, see the special section on social 
­entrepreneurship in Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 31 
(Spring 2012).
39.	Katy Barnado and Luke Graham, “Future of the Chocolate 
Industry Looks Sticky,” CNBC.com, March 24, 2016, http://www.
cnbc.com/2016/03/24/future-of-the-chocolate-industry-looks-
sticky.html. 
40.	Cadbury, “Cocoa Growing Countries,” https://www.cadbury.
com.au/About-Chocolate/Cocoa-Growing-Countries.aspx. 
41.	 International Cocoa Organization, “The Chocolate Industry,” 
January 28, 2016, http://www.icco.org/about-cocoa/chocolate- 
industry.html. 
42.	Ibid.
43.	Katherine Dunn, “Chocolate Processors Struggle with Factory 
Glut,” The Wall Street Journal, March 24, 2016. 
44.	Nudd, “At 90, Godiva Proudly Looks Back.”
45.	Corinne Gretler, “Lindt Aims to Dethrone Godiva in High-End 
Chocolate Market,” Bloomberg.com, March 8, 2016, http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-08/lindt-profit- 
meets-analysts-estimates-on-russell-stover-revamp. 
46.	https://www.bulletproofexec.com/is-chocolate-good-for- 
you-health-benefits/; http://www.thedailybeast.com/ 
articles/2012/03/28/11-reasons-chocolate-is-good-for- 
your-health.html.
47.	“The BRIC Chocolate Market 2016,” March 21, 2016, http://
www.sbwire.com/press-releases/the-bric-chocolate-market- 
2016/release-674329.htm?utm_source=djournal&utm_ 
medium=feed&utm_campaign=distribution. 
48.	Ibid.
	 i.	 Martha C. White, “Airlines Use Wireless Networks to  
Replace Seat-Back Catalogs,” The New York Times,  
February 1, 2015. 
	ii.	 Barbara Thau, “How Big Data Helps Chains Like Starbucks 
Pick Store Locations—An (Unsung) Key to Retail Success,” 
Forbes, April 24, 2014, http://www.forbes.com; Malcolm 
Wheatley, “Data-Driven Location Choices Drive Latest 
Starbucks Surge,” Data Informed, January 10, 2013, http:// 
data-informed.com/­data-driven-location-choices-drive- 
latest-starbucks-surge/.
	iii.	 Stephanie Strom, “Whole Foods to Rate Its Produce and 
Flowers for Environmental Impact,” The New York Times, 
October 15, 2014; Stuart Elliot, “Whole Foods Asks Shoppers 
to Consider a Value Proposition,” The New York Times, 
October 19, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com.
	iv.	 Miriam Gottfried, “Publishers Face Moving Target in 
Mobile,” The Wall Street Journal, July 7, 2015; eMarketer, 
September 2014.
	v.	 Tom Ryan, “Does It Pay for Grocers to Give Free Fruit to Kids?,” 
Retail Wire, February 4, 2016.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO2-1	 Define a marketing strategy.
	LO2-2	 Describe the elements of a marketing plan.
	 LO2-3	 Analyze a marketing situation using SWOT analyses.
	LO2-4	 Describe how a firm chooses which consumer group(s) to pursue with its marketing efforts.
	 LO2-5	 Outline the implementation of the marketing mix as a means to increase customer value.
	LO2-6	 Summarize portfolio analysis and its use to evaluate marketing performance.
	 LO2-7	 Describe how firms grow their business.
DEVELOPING 
MARKETING 
STRATEGIES AND  
A MARKETING PLAN
CHAPTER 2

© Craig Barritt/Getty Images
 W
e may be getting healthier. We might be 
ordering more salads, exercising a few 
more times a week, and drinking more 
water. But even as these healthy trends 
expand and persist, people still love their carbonated 
­beverages—whether they call them sodas, pop, colas, or 
something else. Faced with these conflicting preferences 
and consumer demands, what’s a cola company to do to 
appeal to buyers and make sure it provides them with 
what they want, where, how, and when they want it? 
For PepsiCo, the latest strategy is to expand the market 
with high-end and special-edition product offerings. The 
company firmly believes that a premium space remains in 
the ongoing cola battle, created by consumers who want 

30
WHAT IS A MARKETING STRATEGY?
A marketing strategy identifies (1) a firm’s target market(s), (2) a related marketing mix 
(its four Ps), and (3) the bases on which the firm plans to build a sustainable competitive 
advantage. A sustainable competitive advantage is an advantage over the competition that 
is not easily copied and can be maintained over a long period of time. A competitive advan-
tage acts like a wall that the firm has built around its position in a market. This wall makes 
it hard for outside competitors to contact customers inside—otherwise known as the market-
er’s target market. Of course, if the marketer has built a wall around an attractive market, 
competitors will attempt to break down the wall. Over time, advantages will erode because 
of these competitive forces, but by building high, thick walls, marketers can sustain their 
advantage, minimize competitive pressure, and boost profits for a longer time. Thus, estab-
lishing a sustainable competitive advantage is key to long-term financial performance.
For Pepsi, this wall involves the bricks of a strong brand and a loyal customer base, 
which were built on the foundation of its strong innovative capabilities. Customers around 
the world know Pepsi and consider it a primary “go-to” brand if they want a refreshing 
drink. This positioning reflects Pepsi’s careful targeting and marketing mix implementation. 
In terms of the four Ps (as we described them in Chapter 1), Pepsi already has achieved 
product excellence with its signature colas, Pepsi and Diet Pepsi. It also is constantly adding 
new products to its product line, as detailed in the opening vignette to this chapter. For ex-
ample, it has launched Caleb’s Kola already and appears poised to release its 1893 beverage 
soon.2 Furthermore, the Pepsi brand is owned by a parent company, PepsiCo, that also owns 
 LO2-1	
Define a marketing 
strategy.
something a little distinctive and unique, rather than just the 
same mass-marketed brands. Accordingly, it has developed 
a range of smaller-batch, distinctive cola options, some of 
which it already has introduced, with others on their way. 
For example, it recently released Caleb’s Kola, which 
features African kola nuts, cane sugar, and unique spices, 
along with a slight citrus flavor. The drink is named after 
Caleb Bradham, the pharmacist who first started selling 
“Brad’s Drink” in 1893 in his North Carolina drug store. 
That beverage, with a few tweaks, was renamed and re-
leased more widely as Pepsi just a few years later. 
Bradham also may be the inspiration for Pepsi’s next 
rollout. It has applied for a trademark for the name “1893 
from the Makers of Pepsi Cola.” The meaning of the trade-
mark has not yet been confirmed by the company, but 
savvy observers recognize the year as the same one in 
which Bradham started selling Brad’s Drink, which origi-
nally contained sugar, caramel, water, lemon, and nutmeg. 
Although both Caleb’s Kola and the 1893 line thus 
appear to hearken back to Pepsi’s past, another recent 
launch of a premium option played on its hypothetical fu-
ture. Noting the arrival of Marty McFly day (i.e., the future 
date set in the modified DeLorean time machine at the 
end of the first Back to the Future film), Pepsi introduced 
a very limited run of “Pepsi Perfect,” which was the ver-
sion of the beverage available in the anticipated future 
depicted in the second entry into the movie series. With a 
production run of only 6,500 bottles, Pepsi Perfect was 
tough to get, offering a clear distinction to those lucky 
few who snagged the collectible bottles (back) in time. 
In contrast with the strategically limited release of 
Pepsi Perfect, both Caleb’s Kola and 1893 appear designed 
to be broader in their distribution. In another, similar move, 
Pepsi announced that it would soon begin developing an 
additional line, called Stubborn Sodas. Thus, through its ef-
forts to address declining consumption, Pepsi has devised 
a refreshed marketing strategy, one that involves diversify-
ing and thereby appealing to those consumers who might 
dismiss conventional colas as too mainstream but love the 
notion of something special and nostalgic to drink.1  
In this chapter, we start by discussing a marketing 
strategy, which outlines the specific actions a firm intends 
to implement to appeal to potential customers. Then we dis-
cuss how to do a marketing plan, which provides a blue-
print for implementing the marketing strategy. The chapter 
concludes with a discussion of strategies firms use to grow.

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
31
	
	
many of the top snack brands; other cola lines; and additional beverage 
products such as Lays, Quaker, Mountain Dew, and Naked—among ­dozens 
of others.3 To market its products, it relies on an extensive distribution 
network that places its familiar and appealing brands in stores in more 
than 200 countries.4 Its pricing also is competitive and strategic. For ex-
ample, customers can readily access a quick drink from a Pepsi soda 
fountain at a higher price by volume, or they can pay a little less per liter 
and buy larger, 2-liter bottles to store and consume at home. Central to its 
promotion efforts are Pepsi’s celebrity endorsements. Pepsi partners with 
some of the world’s biggest musicians, including Madonna, Beyonce, 
and Elton John,5 and sponsors major sports events and leagues, such 
as the Super Bowl, as well as the NBA and WNBA, NHL, NFL, 
and MLB.6
There are four macro, or overarching, strategies that ­focus 
on aspects of the marketing mix to create and deliver value and 
to develop sustainable competitive advantages, as we depict in 
­Exhibit 2.1:7
∙	
Customer excellence: Focuses on retaining loyal customers and 
excellent customer service.
∙	
Operational excellence: Achieved through efficient operations 
and excellent supply chain and human resource management.
∙	
Product excellence: Having products with high perceived value and 
effective branding and positioning.
∙	
Locational excellence: Having a good physical location and Internet presence.
Pepsico owns many brands in-
cluding Gatorade, Lays, Quaker, 
Aunt Jemima, and Aquafina. 
© Steven Senne/AP Photo
Customer
value
Customer
excellence
Operational
excellence
Product
excellence
Locational
excellence
E X H I B I T  2.1
Macro Strategies for Developing Customer Value

32	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Customer Excellence
Customer excellence is achieved when a firm develops value-based strategies for retaining 
loyal customers and provides outstanding customer service.
Retaining Loyal Customers  Sometimes the methods a firm uses to maintain a sustain-
able competitive advantage help attract and maintain loyal customers. For instance, having 
a strong brand, unique merchandise, and superior customer service all help solidify a loyal 
customer base. In addition, having loyal customers is, in and of itself, an important method 
of sustaining an advantage over competitors.
Loyalty is more than simply preferring to purchase from one firm instead of another.8 It 
means that customers are reluctant to patronize competitive firms. Loyal customers drink 
Pepsi even if Coca-Cola goes on sale. More and more firms realize the value of achieving 
customer excellence by focusing their strategy on retaining loyal customers. PepsiCo doesn’t 
think in terms of selling a single case of Mountain Dew for $15; instead, it focuses on satisfy-
ing customers who buy various bottles or cans to keep in their homes all the time, including 
Mountain Dew for the kids, Diet Pepsi for the adults, and Pepsi for guests. It also considers 
whether those consumers might want some salty snacks to go with their beverages and how it 
can help them combine those desires through the purchase of multiple PepsiCo products. Even 
if we just consider cola purchases, it is reasonable to imagine that a household of cola consum-
ers might buy 50 cases of carbonated beverages every year for something like 20 years. In this 
case, the consumer is not a $15 customer who bought a single case; by combining all pur-
chases for the family over the years, we come to the determination that this household rep-
resents a $15,000 customer! Viewing customers with a lifetime value perspective rather than 
on a transaction-by-transaction basis is key to modern customer retention programs.9 We will 
examine how the lifetime value of a customer is calculated in Chapter 10, Appendix 10A.
Another method of achieving customer loyalty creates an emotional attachment 
through loyalty programs. These loyalty programs, which constitute part of an overall cus-
tomer relationship management (CRM) program, prevail in many industries, from airlines 
to hotels to movie theaters to retail stores. With such programs, firms can identify mem-
bers through the loyalty card or membership information the consumer provides when he 
or she makes a purchase. Using that purchase information, analysts determine which types 
of merchandise certain groups of customers are buying and thereby tailor their offering to 
better meet the needs of their loyal customers. For instance, by analyzing their databases, 
banks develop profiles of customers who have defected in the past and use that information 
to identify customers who may defect in the future. Once it identifies these customers, the 
firm can implement special retention programs to keep them.
Providing Outstanding Customer Service  Marketers also may build sustainable 
competitive advantage by offering excellent customer service,10 though consistency in this 
area can prove difficult. Customer service is provided by em-
ployees, and, invariably, humans are less consistent than ma-
chines are. Firms that offer good customer service must instill 
its importance in their employees over a long period of time 
so that it becomes part of the organizational culture.
Disney offers excellent examples of both of these types of 
customer excellence. First, Disney’s My Magic system en-
ables visitors to swipe their Magic Band wristbands to make 
purchases, open their hotel room door, get dinner reservations, 
or check in for rides throughout the park and its grounds. The 
system also enables Disney to collect a remarkable amount of 
information about what each guest is doing at virtually every 
moment of his or her visit to its theme parks.11
Second, its customer service is virtually unparalleled. Vis-
itors to Disney parks are greeted by “assertively friendly” staff 
who have been extensively trained to find ways to provide bet-
ter service. The training includes information about how to rec-
ognize the signs that a visitor is lost, so the Disney employee 
Disney’s employees and cast members provide the highest 
level of customer service.
© Tao Images/agefotostock

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
33
	
	
Amazon Is about Products, Delivery, Prices,  
and Now Home Servicesi
Approximately 85 million customers buy items from Amazon 
that require some sort of installation or construction, from 
large screen televisions to children’s bicycles. If a busy con-
sumer shops on Amazon mainly because of the convenience it 
offers, is she or he likely to have the time and patience to in-
stall or assemble the product?
	
The gap implied by this question has led to the emergence 
of online home services markets at Amazon and other firms 
such as Google. Customers can now click a link to receive 
quotes for services from local professionals. The purchase of a 
big-screen television thus prompts a query about whether the 
buyer wants someone to hang it on the wall. If the customer 
expresses interest, the system provides a list of service provid-
ers as well as clear, detailed quotes for the price of the service.
	
Amazon hopes to extend its reach by convincing its custom-
ers to consider it for services as well as products. Accordingly, 
it already has a roster of providers offering about 700 types of 
services to customers, from the conventional to the obscure 
(just what does a “silk aerialist” do?). Just as it has with prod-
ucts, it will seek to offer the widest selection possible, ensure 
speedy delivery, and provide highly competitive prices.
	
For service providers, joining Amazon promises benefits as 
well as challenges. Local plumbers, lawn care services, and tile 
installers are likely to increase their business if they appear on 
these sites. However, they also face greater price competition, 
such that they likely need to underbid all their local competi-
tors to earn the customer’s business.
	
Although other review sites, such as Angie’s List or Yelp, 
already offer a single source of a range of service provider 
options, sourcing these purchases from a well-known retailer 
offers some added benefits. In particular, people can sign up 
for a needed service during the very occasion during which 
they purchase the item; without pausing, they can buy a new 
stereo system and schedule its installation. In addition, 
Amazon offers the reassurance of its name and reputation. 
Consumers can feel safe, knowing that Amazon has regis-
tered the service providers on its site. Explaining how she 
overcame any reservations about buying an experiential 
­service through Amazon, one first-time service buyer noted, 
“I thought, O.K., Amazon stands behind this.” Because all ser-
vices are guaranteed by Amazon, its smaller, service-specific 
competitors keep struggling, unable to compete with 
Amazon’s reputation for meeting customers’ needs and 
guaranteed ability to reduce buyers’ purchase risks. As a re-
sult, Amazon appears poised to become a dominant provider 
of superior services.
Superior Service 2.1
Amazon is extending its offering from products to services.
Source: Amazon
can offer help locating a destination. It also highlights the need to communicate frequently 
and collaboratively about every aspect of the park, so a custodian at one end of the Magic 
Kingdom likely knows what time a restaurant on the other side opens.12 Although it may take 
considerable time and effort to build such a reputation for customer service, once a marketer 
has earned a good service reputation, it can sustain this advantage for a long time, because a 
competitor is hard pressed to develop a comparable reputation. Superior Service 2.1 de-
scribes Amazon’s latest attempt to shore up and enhance its competitive barriers by introduc-
ing a home service marketplace that may help it achieve a lasting, powerful advantage.

34	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Operational Excellence
Firms achieve operational excellence, the second way to achieve a sustainable competitive 
advantage, through their efficient operations, excellent supply chain management, and 
strong relationships with their suppliers.
All marketers strive for efficient operations to get their customers the merchandise 
they want, when they want it, in the required quantities, and at a delivered cost that is lower 
than that of their competitors. By so doing, they ensure good value to their customers, earn 
profitability for themselves, and satisfy their customers’ needs.
Firms achieve efficiencies by developing sophisticated distribution and information sys-
tems as well as strong relationships with vendors. Like customer relationships, vendor relations 
must be developed over the long term and generally cannot be easily offset by a competitor.13
You are likely aware of, and perhaps have taken advantage of, Amazon’s Prime ship-
ping program that offers, for $99 a year, free two-day shipping on all orders. Perhaps you 
have paid for overnight delivery with Amazon, or if you live in one of the eleven cities in 
the United States that offer it, you may have paid for same-day shipping. With attractive 
shipping options like these, how are other online retailers able to compete? Operational 
excellence is required for Amazon to execute this program effectively. Not only does it 
need to have the technology to coordinate the personal buyers, but it needs to have an ef-
fective human resources hiring program that selects and trains employees capable of going 
the extra mile to please its customers.14
Product Excellence
Product excellence, the third way to achieve a sustainable competitive advantage, occurs 
by providing products with high perceived value and effective branding and positioning. 
Some firms have difficulty developing a competitive advan-
tage through their merchandise and service offerings, espe-
cially if competitors can deliver similar products or services 
easily. However, others have been able to maintain their sus-
tainable competitive advantage by investing in their brand 
­itself; positioning their product or service using a clear, dis-
tinctive brand image; and constantly reinforcing that image 
through their merchandise, service, and promotion. For exam-
ple, with its new product introductions, as described in the 
opening vignette to this chapter, Pepsi clearly is seeking to 
reinforce and emphasize its historical legacy and image as a 
provider of excellent, refreshing, distinctive beverages. 
Bloomberg Businessweek’s top global brands—such as Coca-
Cola, IBM, Microsoft, Google, GE, McDonald’s, Intel, Apple, 
Disney, and Samsung—are all leaders in their respective in-
dustries, at least in part because they have strong brands and a 
clear position in the marketplace.15
Locational Excellence
Locational excellence is particularly important for retailers and 
service providers. Many say, “The three most important things 
in retailing are location, location, location.” For example, most 
people will not walk or drive very far when looking to buy a cup 
of coffee. A competitive advantage based on location is sustain-
able because it is not easily duplicated. Starbucks has developed 
a strong competitive advantage with its location selection. The 
high density of stores it has established in some markets makes 
it very difficult for a competitor to enter that market and find 
good locations. After all, if Starbucks has a store on the corner 
of a busy intersection, no other competitor can take that location 
and will instead have to settle for a less worthy spot.
IBM is one of Bloomberg Businessweek’s top global brands.
© Sean Gallup/Getty Images

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
35
	
	
Multiple Sources of Advantage
In most cases, a single strategy, such as low prices or excellent service, is not sufficient to 
build a sustainable competitive advantage. Firms require multiple approaches to build a 
“wall” around their position that stands as high as possible.
Southwest Airlines consistently has positioned itself as a carrier that provides good 
service at a good value—customers get to their destinations on time for a reasonable price 
without having to pay extra for checked luggage. At the same time, its customers know not 
to have extraordinary expectations, unlike those they might develop when they purchase a 
ticket from Singapore Airlines. They don’t expect food service or seat assignments. But 
they do expect—and even more important, get—on-time flights that are reasonably priced. 
By developing its unique capabilities in several areas, Southwest has built a very high wall 
around its position as the premier value player in the airline industry, which has resulted in 
a huge cadre of loyal customers.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the various components of a marketing strategy?
2.	 List the four macro strategies that can help a firm develop a sustainable 
competitive advantage.
THE MARKETING PLAN
Effective marketing doesn’t just happen. Firms like Pepsi carefully plan their marketing 
strategies to react to changes in the environment, the competition, and their customers by 
creating a marketing plan. A marketing plan is a written document composed of an anal-
ysis of the current marketing situation, opportunities and threats for the firm, marketing 
objectives and strategy specified in terms of the four Ps, action programs, and projected or 
pro forma income (and other financial) statements.16 The three major phases of the market-
ing plan are planning, implementation, and control.17
Although most people do not have a written plan that outlines what they are planning 
to accomplish in the next year, and how they expect to do it, firms do need such a docu-
ment. It is important that everyone involved in implementing the plan knows what the 
overall objectives for the firm are and how they are going to be met. Other stakeholders, 
such as investors and potential investors, also want to know what the firm plans to do. A 
written marketing plan provides a reference point for evaluating whether or not the firm 
has met its objectives.
A marketing plan entails five steps, depicted in Exhibit 2.2. In Step 1 of the planning 
phase, marketing executives, in conjunction with other top managers, define the mission and/
or vision of the business. For the second step, they evaluate the situation by assessing how 
various players, both in and outside the organization, affect the firm’s potential for success. In 
the implementation phase, marketing managers identify and evaluate different opportunities 
by engaging in a process known as segmentation, targeting, and positioning (STP) (Step 3). 
They then are responsible for implementing the marketing mix using the four Ps (Step 4). 
Finally, the control phase entails evaluating the performance of the marketing strategy using 
marketing metrics and taking any necessary corrective actions (Step 5).
As indicated in Exhibit 2.2, it is not always necessary to go through the entire process 
for every evaluation (Step 5). For instance, a firm could evaluate its performance in Step 5, 
then go directly to Step 2 to conduct a situation audit without redefining its overall mission.
We first discuss each step involved in developing a marketing plan. Then we con-
sider ways of analyzing a marketing situation, as well as identifying and evaluating 
­marketing opportunities. We also examine some specific strategies marketers use to 
grow a business. Finally, we consider how the implementation of the marketing mix 
­increases customer value.
 LO2-2	
Describe the elements 
of a marketing plan.

36	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Step 1: Define the Business Mission
The mission statement, a broad description of a firm’s objectives and the scope of activi-
ties it plans to undertake,18 attempts to answer two main questions: What type of business 
are we? What do we need to do to accomplish our goals and objectives? These fundamen-
tal business questions must be answered at the highest corporate levels before marketing 
executives can get involved. Most firms want to maximize stockholders’ wealth by increas-
ing the value of the firms’ stock and paying dividends.19 Let’s look at the two very different 
mission statements of PepsiCo and Coca-Cola:
∙	
PepsiCo’s Mission Statement: “To provide consumers around the world with delicious, 
affordable, convenient and complementary foods and beverages from wholesome 
breakfasts to healthy and fun daytime snacks and beverages to evening treats.”20 
∙	
Coke’s Mission Statement: “To refresh the world . . . To inspire moments of 
optimism and happiness . . . To create value and make a difference.”21
Step 1: Business
mission & objectives
Step 2: Situation analysis
• SWOT
Step 5: 
Evaluate performance
 
using marketing metrics
Control
phase
Implementation
phase
Planning
phase
Step 3: Identify opportunities
Segmentation
Targeting
Step 4: Implement marketing mix
Promotion
Marketing
strategy
Product
Price
Place
Positioning
E X H I B I T  2.2 
The Marketing Plan
PepsiCo’s Mission Statement 
emphasizes the global nature 
of its products, while Coke’s 
evokes emotions like happiness.
Left: © Bloomberg/Getty Images; right: 
Image Courtesy of The Advertising 
­Archives

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
37
	
	
For both of these firms, marketing is primarily responsible for 
enhancing the value of the company’s offering for its custom-
ers and other constituents, whether in pursuit of a profit or 
not. Another key goal or objective often embedded in a mis-
sion statement relates to how the firm is building its sustain-
able competitive advantage.
However, owners of small, privately held firms frequently 
have other objectives, such as achieving a specific level of in-
come and avoiding risks. Nonprofit organizations such as the 
“Pink Ribbon” campaign instead have nonmonetary objectives:
∙	
Pink Ribbon International’s Mission Statement: 
“To create a global community to support breast cancer 
patients, survivors and their families all over the world . . . 
by facilitating forums and blogs where thoughts, 
experience and information can be shared.”22
Step 2: Conduct a Situation Analysis
After developing its mission, a firm would perform a situation 
analysis using a SWOT analysis that assesses both the inter-
nal environment with regard to its Strengths and Weaknesses 
and the external environment in terms of its Opportunities and 
Threats. In addition, it should assess the opportunities and un-
certainties of the marketplace due to changes in Cultural, 
Demographic, Social, Technological, Economic, and Political 
forces (CDSTEP). These factors are discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 5. With this information, firms can anticipate and in-
terpret change, so they can allocate appropriate resources.
Consider how PepsiCo might conduct a SWOT analysis, 
as outlined in Exhibit 2.3. We focus on PepsiCo here, but we 
also recognize that its marketing managers might find it help-
ful to perform parallel analyses for competitors, such as Coca-Cola. 
A company’s strengths (Exhibit 2.3, upper left) refer to the positive internal attributes 
of the firm. In this example, the strengths we might identify include PepsiCo’s diversified 
product portfolio and celebrity endorsements. Pepsi has signed some of the world’s most 
recognized musicians and athletes as spokespersons, from Beyoncé to Michael Jordan and 
David Beckham.23 Building on this forte, it has launched its own Music Platform, Out of the 
Blue, that debuted during a recent Grammy Awards ceremony. The platform aims to con-
nect fans with their favorite artists by giving away extravagant trips to major music festivals, 
Pink Ribbon is a nonprofit organization that supports breast 
cancer patients, survivors, and their families.
© David Westing/Getty Images
A PepsiCo strength is its portfolio of celebrity endorsers like Beyoncé (left) and David Beckham (right).
Left: © Wenn US/Alamy; right: © Clive Brunskill/Getty Images
LO2-3	
Analyze a marketing 
situation using SWOT 
analyses.

38	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
concerts, and other fabulous experiences.24 Another strength comes from its ­efforts to ben-
efit society, such as the PepsiCo Foundation’s Global Citizenship Initiatives, which encour-
age healthy lifestyles, clean water, and women’s empowerment, among other positive goals.
Yet every firm has its weaknesses, and PepsiCo is no exception. Weaknesses (Exhibit 2.3, 
upper right) are negative attributes of the firm. Furthermore, PepsiCo has much lower 
global brand awareness and market share than does its main rival, Coca-Cola.25 Also, 
­PepsiCo’s Aquafina water brand relies on a public water source. It has faced public criti-
cism and negative press that jeopardizes its market position and has had to acknowledge 
that Aquafina is simply tap water in a bottle.26 
E X H I B I T  2.3
Examples of Elements in a SWOT Analysis
Environment
Evaluation
Positive 
Negative
Pepsi
Internal
Strengths 
Brand product portfolio 
Strong celebrity endorsers 
Dedication to charitable and  
social projects
Weakness 
Relatively lower brand awareness 
Water source for bottled water
External
Opportunity 
Emerging countries 
Health food segments 
Bottled water
Threats 
Water scarcity 
Changes to labeling regulations 
Increase competition 
Coca-Cola
Internal
Strengths 
Very strong brand 
Strong global presence 
Excellent customer loyalty 
Weakness 
Over-reliance on carbonated drinks 
Negative sugar-related publicity 
External
Opportunity 
Emerging countries
Threats 
Water scarcity 
Potential market saturation 
Changes to labeling regulations
SWOT analysis of Pepsi, Strategic Management Insight, February 15, 2013, http://www.strategicmanagementinsight.com/
swot-analyses/pepsico-swot-analysis.html; SWOT analysis of Coca-Cola, Strategic Management Insight, February 15, 2013,  
http://www.strategicmanagementinsight.com/swot-analyses/coca-cola-swot-analysis.html.
One of PepsiCo’s Global 
­Citizenship Initiatives is its 
S.M.A.R.T program that identi-
fies which Pepsi/Frito-Lay prod-
ucts are healthier. S.M.A.R.T. 
stands for five steps that en-
courage active living and better 
food choices: Start with a 
healthy breakfast, Move more, 
Add more fruits, vegetables 
and whole grains, Remember 
to hydrate, and try lower- 
calorie or lower-fat foods. 
© Kayte Deioma/Zumapress/Newscomz

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
39
	
	
Opportunities (Exhibit 2.3, lower left) pertain to positive aspects of the external envi-
ronment. Among PepsiCo’s opportunities is the rising demand for healthy food and drink 
options, as we indicated in the opening vignette. That is, the increasing interest for health-
ier options gives PepsiCo new opportunities to expand its product lines, introduce innova-
tive new colas that appeal to people’s preferences for premium options, and offer healthier 
options as well. For example, even with the public sourcing controversy, PepsiCo’s bottled 
water brand Aquafina has seen significant growth.27 Another notable opportunity for 
­PepsiCo is the growth in global markets for snacks and beverages. In particular, it has 
­invested strongly in Brazil, Russia, India, and China (i.e., the BRICs).28 If these efforts are 
successful, PepsiCo can enjoy substantial growth while also reducing its nearly exclusive 
reliance on the U.S. market. There are multiple ways to take advantage of opportunities, 
though; Adding Value 2.1 describes how Coca-Cola is taking another approach to address 
the external environment and provide value to its customers.
Finally, threats (Exhibit 2.3, lower right) represent the negative aspects of the compa-
ny’s external environment. Water scarcity is a significant concern, because the production of 
cola demands substantial amounts of water.29 In addition, increased attention to labeling and 
nutrition facts could threaten to undermine PepsiCo’s appeal.30 Finally, competition in the 
snack-food market continues to increase, not just among the existing members of the market 
Adding Value 2.1
Small Coke Cans: Are Consumers Paying More for Less, or 
Are They Just Paying to Get What They Want?ii
When Coca-Cola checked its sales data recently, it found con-
sistently over the past few quarters that sales of smaller con-
tainers, such as 7.5-ounce cans, were growing fast, while 
traditional packages kept suffering stagnant or even decreas-
ing sales. The evidence has prompted the beverage company 
to revisit its approach, such that its goal is not just to sell Coke 
but rather to sell Cokes.
What’s the difference? Consumer trends have led more peo-
ple to request and purchase small containers of cola, so that 
they can limit their intake and achieve healthier lifestyles. In par-
ticular, parents wanted the smaller containers so that they 
could allow their children to have a treat without loading them 
up with more sugar and caffeine than would be good for the 
kids. Therefore, they sought to be able to buy a 12-pack of small 
cans or bottles rather than a 6-pack of the traditional 12-ounce 
packages. The volume of actual beverages being purchased 
might not change, or even might decline. But the number of 
packages being bought increases. As a result, approximately 14 
percent of Coca-Cola’s product mix now consists of the small 
servings—a move that also reflects the company’s effort to live 
up to its pledge to reduce the number of calories people con-
sume through carbonated beverages. As the president of Coca-
Cola North America explained, “Having a 20 oz. bottle of 
Coca-Cola is pointless if half of it is never consumed.”
In addition to revising its perspective on what customers ac-
tually want, Coke has reinvented its pricing approach. It enjoys a 
beneficial new price platform due to the switch. The cost to 
consumers for the small cans is approximately the same as that 
for the larger packages, meaning that shoppers pay approxi-
mately the same amount of money for substantially less prod-
uct. But for the most part, shoppers appear willing to do so, 
because the smaller packaging meets their needs and rep-
resents a clear response to their requests. The 17 percent sales 
growth in the small size categories affirms this willingness.
As a result of “more people, enjoying more Coke, more 
­often, for a little more money,” Coca-Cola also has increased its 
revenues, despite decreased volume sales. Customer research 
showed that consumers often equate finishing a drink with 
their sense of refreshment. Leaving customers wanting more, 
by giving them smaller containers, thereby helps encourage 
­repurchase and consumption intentions while still making 
those consumers feel happier and more refreshed. The threat 
of cannibalization certainly remains pertinent, such that the 
sales growth in small packages might only come at the cost of 
lost sales of larger ones; yet the company appears confident 
that it is on the right path, ready to offer the “perfect pour” of 
carbonation.
Consumers are demanding smaller containers of Cola to 
limit their intake and achieve healthier lifestyles. So, Coke 
provides the smaller cans on the right.
© Matt Rourke/AP Photo

40	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
but also by new entrants that are coming up with innovative, alternative snacks to appeal to 
consumers’ specific preferences.31 These are just some of the threats that PepsiCo is facing.
Step 3: Identify and Evaluate Opportunities Using STP 
(Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning)
After completing the situation audit, the next step is to identify and evaluate opportunities 
for increasing sales and profits using segmentation, targeting, and positioning (STP). 
With STP, the firm first divides the marketplace into subgroups or segments, determines 
which of those segments it should pursue or target, and finally decides how it should posi-
tion its products and services to best meet the needs of those chosen targets (more details 
on the STP process can be found in Chapter 9).
Segmentation  Many types of customers appear in any market, and most firms cannot 
satisfy everyone’s needs. For instance, among Internet users some do research online, some 
shop, some look for entertainment, and many do all three. Each of these groups might be a 
market segment consisting of consumers who respond similarly to a firm’s marketing 
­efforts. The process of dividing the market into groups of customers with different needs, 
wants, or characteristics—who therefore might appreciate products or services geared 
­especially for them—is called market segmentation.
Let’s look at Hertz, the car rental company. The example in Exhibit 2.4 reveals some 
of the segments that Hertz targets. With the Adrenaline Collection, Hertz offers up the 
Chevrolet Camaro or Corvette, seeking to appeal to thrill seekers and gear heads on vaca-
tion. Its Prestige Collection features various Cadillac and Infiniti models, targeting busi-
ness customers and families who prefer a luxurious ride. With its Green Collection of 
cars such as the Toyota Prius and Ford Fusion, and even some electric vehicle options in 
LO2-4	
Describe how a firm 
chooses which 
consumer group(s) 
to pursue with its 
marketing efforts.
Hertz targets several markets. Its Adrenaline Collection appeals to single people and couples wanting to have fun, while its 
­Prestige Collection appeals to its business customers and families who prefer a luxurious ride.
Source: The Hertz Corporation

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
41
	
	
selected locations, Hertz appeals to environmentally conscious customers. It also offers 
commercial vans for service customers with its Commercial Van/Truck Collection.32 Thus, 
Hertz uses a variety of demographics—gender, age, income, interests—to identify customers 
who might want the Prestige, Green, and Adrenaline Collections, but it also applies psy-
chological or behavioral factors, such as a need to move possessions across town, to iden-
tify likely consumers of its commercial vans.
Targeting  After a firm has identified the various market segments it might pursue, it 
evaluates each segment’s attractiveness and decides which to pursue using a process known 
as target marketing or targeting. For example, Hertz realizes that its primary appeal for 
the SUV/Minivan/4x4 collection centers on young families, so the bulk of its marketing 
efforts for this business is directed toward that group.
Soft drink manufacturers also divide their massive markets into submarkets or seg-
ments. Coca-Cola, for instance, makes several different types of Coke, including regular, 
Coke II, and Cherry Coke. Among its diet colas, it targets Coke Zero to men and Diet Coke 
to women because men prefer not to be associated with diets. It also markets Sprite to those 
who don’t like dark colas, Fruitopia and Minute Maid for more health-conscious consum-
ers, and Dasani bottled water for purists.
Positioning  Finally, when the firm decides which segments to pursue, it must determine 
how it wants to be positioned within those segments. Market positioning involves the 
process of defining the marketing mix variables so that target customers have a clear, dis-
tinctive, desirable understanding of what the product does or represents in comparison 
with competing products. Hertz positions itself as a quality car (and truck) rental company 
that is the first choice for each of its target segments. In its marketing communications it 
stresses that customers will get peace of mind when they rent from Hertz, the market leader 
in the car rental business, and be able to enjoy their journey (e.g., leisure consumers) and 
reduce travel time (e.g., business consumers).33
To segment the coffee-drinker market, Starbucks uses a variety of methods, ­including 
geography (e.g., college campuses versus shopping/business districts) and benefits (e.g., 
drinkers of caffeinated versus decaffeinated products). After determining which of those 
segments represent effective targets, Starbucks positions itself as a firm that develops a 
variety of products that match the wants and needs of the different market segments—
espresso drinks, coffees, teas, bottled drinks, pastries, and cooler foods.
After identifying its target segments, a firm must evaluate each of its strategic oppor-
tunities. A method of examining which segments to pursue is described in the Growth 
Strategies section later in the chapter. Firms typically are most successful when they focus 
on opportunities that build on their strengths relative to those of their competition. In 
Step 4 of the marketing plan, the firm implements its marketing mix and allocates ­resources 
to different products and services.
Step 4: Implement Marketing Mix and Allocate Resources
When the firm has identified and evaluated different growth opportunities by performing 
an STP analysis, the real action begins. It has decided what to do, how to do it, and how 
LO2-5	
Outline the 
implementation of the 
marketing mix as a 
means to increase 
customer value.
	
Segment 1	
Segment 2	
Segment 3	
Segment 4	
Segment 5
Segments	
Single thrill seekers 	
Business customers	
Environmentally	
Families	
Commercial customers 
	
and gear heads on 	
and families who	
­conscious customers 
	
vacation	
­prefer a luxurious ride
	
Adrenaline Collection	
Prestige Collection	
Green Collection	
SUV/Minivan/4x4	
Commercial Van/Truck
Cars Offered	
Corvette ZHZ	
Infiniti QX56	
Toyota Prius	
Toyota Rav 4
	
Chevrolet Camaro	
Cadillac Escalade	
Ford Fusion	
Ford Explorer	
Ford Cargo Van
E X H I B I T  2.4
Hertz Market Segmentation Illustration

42	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
many resources should be allocated to it. In the fourth step of the planning process, 
­marketers implement the actual marketing mix—product, price, promotion, and place—
for each product and service on the basis of what they believe their target markets will 
value. At the same time, marketers make important decisions about how they will allo-
cate their scarce resources to their various products and services.
Product and Value Creation Products  These products include services and consti-
tute the first of the four Ps. Because the key to the success of any marketing program is the 
creation of value, firms attempt to develop products and services that customers perceive 
as valuable enough to buy. Dyson fans and fan heaters draw in and redirect surrounding air 
without potentially dangerous or fast-spinning blades or visible heating elements. Although 
more expensive than conventional fans and space heaters, these sculpturally beautiful ap-
pliances are perceived by consumers to be a valuable alternative to products that haven’t 
significantly changed since the early 1900s.
Price and Value Capture  Recall that the second element of the marketing mix is price. 
As part of the exchange process, a firm provides a product or a service, or some combina-
tion thereof, and in return, it gets money. Value-based marketing requires that firms charge 
a price that customers perceive as giving them a good value for the product they receive. 
Clearly, it is important for a firm to have a clear focus in terms of what products to sell, 
where to buy them, and what methods to use in selling them. But pricing is the only activ-
ity that actually brings in money and therefore influences revenues. If a price is set too 
high, it will not generate much volume. If a price is set too low, it may result in lower- 
than-optimal margins and profits. Therefore, price should be based on the value that the 
customer perceives. Dyson fans can retail for $150 or more; conventional fans retail for 
around $25. Customers can decide what they want from their fan and choose the one at the 
price they prefer.
Dyson creates value with its innovative products (top). It can therefore charge significantly more than the price charged for 
­conventional fans (bottom).
Left: Source: Dyson, Inc.; right: © Stockbyte/PunchStock RF

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
43
	
	
Place and Value Delivery  For the third P, place, the firm must be able, after it has 
created value through a product and/or service, to make the product or service readily 
accessible when and where the customer wants it. Dyson therefore features fans promi-
nently on its website, but also makes sure to place them on Amazon and in Bed Bath and 
Beyond stores. In these locations, consumers previously found other Dyson products, and 
they likely would look for fans there too.
Promotion and Value Communication  Integrated marketing communications 
(IMC) represents the fourth P, promotion. It encompasses a variety of communication 
disciplines—advertising, personal selling, sales promotion, public relations, direct market-
ing, and online marketing including social media—in combination to provide clarity, con-
sistency, and maximum communicative impact.34 Using the various disciplines of its IMC 
program, marketers communicate a value proposition, which is the unique value that a 
product or service provides to its customers and how it is better than and different from 
those of competitors.
To increase its exposure, Dyson not only offers promotions for its products on its web-
site, but also on promotion websites such as coupon.com and Groupon. That is, it makes a 
select number of products available on several promotion channels at a discounted price to 
encourage people to try the innovations.
Step 5: Evaluate Performance Using Marketing Metrics
The final step in the planning process includes evaluating the results of the strategy and 
implementation program using marketing metrics. A metric is a measuring system that 
quantifies a trend, dynamic, or characteristic. Metrics are used to explain why things 
happened and also project the future. They make it possible to compare results across 
regions, strategic business units (SBUs), product lines, and time periods. The firm can 
determine why it achieved or did not achieve its performance goals with the help of these 
metrics. Understanding the causes of the performance, regardless of whether that perfor-
mance exceeded, met, or fell below the firm’s goals, enables firms to make appropriate 
adjustments. Procter & Gamble uses performance metrics to test its new geolocation 
method of reaching users of the popular social networking app Snapchat, as Social & 
Mobile Marketing 2.1 reveals.
Dyson invoked two of the 4Ps, 
price and place, by making a 
select number of fans available 
on Groupon at a heavily dis-
counted price.
© digitallife/Alamy

44	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Making Snapchat More Strategic: How 
CoverGirl Uses Geotargeting to Leverage 
the Marketing Potential of a Fun Appiii
Social & Mobile Marketing 2.1
Companies know well that social media apps can be great for 
their marketing communications, enabling them to reach lots 
of customers in a fun and engaging way. But while some apps 
offer detailed data about how consumers behave, many oth-
ers do not provide any such insights, because their primary 
goal is helping users have fun.
	
Take Snapchat for example. It allows visitors to overlay 
photo filters, but it has no capacity to calculate or show adver-
tisers who is using its branded overlays or what consumers 
do after adopting such a filter. All it can tell them is how many 
people used the focal filter, which is not nearly enough infor-
mation to be used to make any marketing decisions.
	
Recognizing that Snapchat lacked a user-friendly dash-
board or summary statistics that might provide it with straight-
forward insights and marketing data, Procter & Gamble (P&G) 
decided that it needed to do the analytical work on its own. It 
devised an innovative marketing strategy: It would release Star 
Wars–themed lines of cosmetics under its CoverGirl brand, 
available only in Ulta retail stores. At the same time, it would 
allow Snapchat users to apply a related filter to their photos, 
all coinciding with the release of Star Wars: The Force 
Awakens. The social media move was likely to enhance brand 
awareness, by revealing to users that the Star Wars–linked 
products even existed. But P&G also wanted to increase sales. 
To measure these effects, it implemented a detailed, careful 
experiment.
	
First, it created geofilters that reflected the locations of the 
868 Ulta stores in which the new eye and lip cosmetic prod-
uct lines were available. If a consumer was located near one 
of these stores and also visited Snapchat to post a photo, 
she encountered the option to use a filter that featured logos 
for Ulta, CoverGirl, and Star Wars, as well as a frame that 
­surrounded the picture with what looked like light saber rays. 
However, P&G did not make the filter available for every store 
that carried the makeup products. By strategically limiting the 
application of the campaign, it created what was essentially a 
control sample: stores whose consumers could not have seen 
the Snapchat-affiliated advertising campaign whose sales 
could be compared with those that had the campaign.
	
Second, it gathered data about how many Snapchat users 
saw a related ad on the social media site, how many times they 
swiped to look at the filter, and how many times they used that 
filter. Then it correlated these data with sales information avail-
able from Ulta stores that prompted the geolocated campaign 
and those that did not. By combining these data, P&G could 
obtain a pretty clear idea of how many of the sales stemmed 
from the Snapchat campaign because they took place in a fo-
cal store, versus how many sales would have occurred without 
the advertising, according to the sales data for similar but non-
geolocation-linked stores.
	
Third, P&G compared the results of this social media cam-
paign, timed to link with a major movie release, against a simi-
lar campaign that it conducted in 2013, in relation to the 
arrival of a new Hunger Games film in theaters. In that previ-
ous effort though, it relied on traditional television advertising 
and a brand-linked Tumblr blog instead of Snapchat. Although 
the company declined to release exact numbers, it determined 
that the new Snapchat strategy was more efficient, more 
­effective, and less costly. Thus P&G might have invented the 
analytics that make it possible to calculate the returns on 
Snapchat campaigns, but the method holds great promise 
for any marketer willing to undertake similar efforts in social 
media channels.
Through the Snapchat platform, P&G’s CoverGirl brand de-
veloped a Star Wars–themed cosmetics line that is available 
only in Ulta stores. If a consumer was located near an Ulta 
store that had the cosmetics line, and also posted a photo on 
Snapchat, she could use a filter that featured logos for Ulta, 
CoverGirl, and Star Wars, as well as a frame that surrounded 
the picture with what looked like light saber rays.
© Mim Friday/Alamy
Typically, managers begin by reviewing the implementation programs, and their anal-
ysis may indicate that the strategy (or even the mission statement) needs to be reconsid-
ered. Problems can arise both when firms successfully implement poor strategies and when 
they poorly implement good strategies.
Who Is Accountable for Performance?  At each level of an organization, the busi-
ness unit and its manager should be held accountable only for the revenues, expenses, and 

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
45
	
	
profits that they can control. Thus, expenses that affect several levels of the organization 
(such as the labor and capital expenses associated with operating a corporate headquarters) 
shouldn’t be arbitrarily assigned to lower levels. In the case of a store, for example, it may 
be appropriate to evaluate performance objectives based on sales, sales associate produc-
tivity, and energy costs. If the corporate office lowers prices to get rid of merchandise and 
therefore profits suffer, then it’s not fair to assess a store manager’s performance based on 
the resulting decline in store profit.
Performance evaluations are used to pinpoint problem areas. Reasons performance 
may be above or below planned levels must be examined. If a manager’s performance is 
below planned levels, was it because the sales force didn’t do an adequate job, because the 
economy took a downward turn, because competition successfully implemented a new 
strategy, or because the managers involved in setting the objectives aren’t very good at 
making estimates? The manager should be held accountable only in the case of the inade-
quate sales force job or setting inappropriate forecasts. When the fault is difficult to assign, 
the company faces a serious challenge, as Ethical & Societal Dilemma 2.1 explains in rela-
tion to Volkswagen’s attempts to respond to the scandal surrounding falsified emissions 
data for diesel engines in its cars.
Volkswagen’s “Dieselgate” Scandaliv
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 2.1
Consumers protest Volkswagen’s falsification of its cars’ 
emissions.
© John MacDougall/Getty Images
The automotive market really was rocked by scandal when the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency discovered that many of 
the cars that Volkswagen (VW) had sold in the United States 
contained faulty software, apparently installed purposefully. 
The purpose of the software was to detect the amount of 
emissions produced by the cars’ diesel engines—information 
that is critical to regulators that enforce emissions standards, 
as well as to consumers who seek environmentally friendly 
transportation options. But when the cars underwent emis-
sions tests, the software tweaked their performance, making it 
seem better than it was normally.
	
Instead, when driven under normal conditions, the diesel-­
engine cars were emitting approximately 40 times the legal limit 
imposed on nitrogen oxide pollutants. That is, the vehicles were 
polluting illegally, and then the integrated software was falsifying 
the data, so that no one could even identify the damage. But the 
evidence came to light, forcing VW to admit that approximately 
11 million cars worldwide, sold over the course of nearly a de-
cade, had been outfitted with the emissions-cheating software. 
The cars in question came with multiple brand names in the VW 
portfolio, including not just the VW brand but also Skoda, SEAT, 
and Audi. Soon thereafter, the company came under scrutiny 
again when it admitted to finding an irregularity in tests measur-
ing carbon dioxide emissions that could affect an additional 
800,000 vehicles, though subsequent investigations led VW to 
reduce that estimate to only 36,000 cars being affected.
	
In handling the situation, VW has provided examples of both 
what to do and what not to do. The company quickly instituted 
several internal changes, mainly designed to increase the 
amount of oversight and thereby prevent such unacceptable 
practices in the future. In implementing both structural and 
management changes, VW also replaced a number of key exec-
utives. Top executives also firmly asserted that the scandal was 
the result of poor choices by a relatively small group of middle 
managers, not indicative of a wider corporate ethical lapse.
	
The scandal has had powerful and drastic effects on the 
performance of the world’s biggest car manufacturer. Sales in 
the United States dropped by nearly one-quarter, compared 
with same-month sales for the previous year, immediately fol-
lowing the scandalous announcement. The drop—resulting 
both from consumers’ perception that the brand is not trust-
worthy and from the loss of sales that followed from the com-
pany pulling the affected engines off the market—is a 
particular concern for VW today, because the automotive in-
dustry as a whole is on track to post record sales. In addition, 
VW could owe an estimated $18.2 billion in fines related to the 
scandal, not to mention the further legal and reputational 
costs it is likely to accrue. Yet the company’s chief executive 
remains remarkably confident, noting that “Although the cur-
rent situation is serious, this company will not be broken by it.” 
Only time will tell if he is right.

46	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
When it appears that actual performance is going to be be-
low the plan because of circumstances beyond the manager’s 
control, the firm can still take action to minimize the harm. Sim-
ilar to the soft drink industry, the cereal industry has been beset 
by a number of setbacks due to trends in the wider consumer 
environment. People seek to cut carbohydrates out of their diets, 
but cereal is mostly carbs. Many consumers are recognizing 
their allergies to gluten, but many cereals include wheat as a 
main ingredient. In response, the largest cereal maker General 
Mills (GM) has called on its competitors to step up their market-
ing efforts to save the industry. Leading the way, it has increased 
its advertising budget and offers promotional discounts on some 
of its most popular cereal brands, including Cheerios.35
In remarkable cases such as this, marketing managers 
must ask themselves several relevant questions: How quickly 
were plans adjusted? How rapidly and appropriately were 
pricing and promotional policies modified? In short, did I react to salvage an adverse situ-
ation, or did my reactions worsen the situation?
Performance Objectives, Marketing Analytics, and Metrics  Many factors contribute 
to a firm’s overall performance, which makes it hard to find a single metric to evaluate perfor-
mance.36 One approach is to compare a firm’s performance over time or to competing firms, 
using common financial metrics such as sales and profits. Another method of assessing perfor-
mance is to view the firm’s products or services as a portfolio. Depending on the firm’s rela-
tive performance, the profits from some products or services are used to fuel growth for others.
With its extensive data, Google claims that it can use a combination of metrics to predict 
the performance of a major motion picture up to a month prior to the date it opens in theaters. 
Using search volume for the movie title in combination with several other metrics, such as 
the season and whether the movie is a sequel, Google promises a 94 percent accurate predic-
tion of box office performance. Other proprietary metrics include the volume of clicks on 
search ads. If, for example, one movie prompted 20,000 more paid clicks than another film, 
it will bring in approximately $7.5 million more in revenues during its opening weekend. 
Beyond the implications for opening weekend, Google asserts that weekday searches in the 
weeks leading up to the release offer better predictors of continued revenues. That is, if a film 
fan searches for a movie title on a Tuesday, she or he is more likely to hold off on seeing the 
movie rather than rushing out during opening weekend.37 Google’s extensive analytics abili-
ties support its competitive tactics in other markets too, as Marketing Analytics 2.1 describes.
Financial Performance Metrics  Some commonly used metrics to assess performance 
include revenues, or sales, and profits. For instance, sales are a global measure of a firm’s 
activity level. However, a manager could easily increase sales by lowering prices, but the 
profit realized on that merchandise (gross margin) would suffer as a result. An attempt to 
maximize one metric may therefore lower another. Thus, managers must understand how 
their actions affect multiple performance metrics. It’s usually unwise to use only one 
­metric, because it rarely tells the whole story.
In addition to assessing the absolute level of sales and profits, a firm may wish to measure 
the relative level of sales and profits. For example, a relative metric of sales or profits is its 
increase or decrease over the prior year. In addition, a firm may compare its growth in sales or 
profits relative to other benchmark companies (e.g., Coke may compare itself to Pepsi).
The metrics used to evaluate a firm vary depending on (1) the level of the organization 
at which the decision is made and (2) the resources the manager controls. For example, 
while the top executives of a firm have control over all of the firm’s resources and resulting 
expenses, a regional sales manager has control over only the sales and expenses generated 
by his or her salespeople.
Let’s look at Pepsi’s sales revenue and profits (after taxes) and compare them with 
those of Coca-Cola (Exhibit 2.5).
Promotional discounts are one way General Mills is trying to 
save the cereal industry.
© Joe Raedle/Getty Images

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
47
	
	
E X H I B I T  2.5
Performance Metrics: Coke vs. Pepsi
Net sales
Net sales
Net proﬁt
Net proﬁt
Coke
46
44.3
Pepsi
Dollars (in billions)
0
10
20
30
40
60
50
70
80
2014
2015
7.1
7.3
66.7
63.1
6.6
5.5
The First Name in Predictive Analytics: Googlev
In the world of analytics, Google has made a significant name 
for itself because, from the moment it was established, Google 
has put predictive analytics at the heart of the company. As the 
most widely used search engine, Google needs to be able to 
predict which websites and pages a person is seeking, based 
on just a few keywords. Google is so successful at this method 
that few users even bother going to the second page of the 
results list in a Google search. Google now offers Google 
Analytics for companies to help improve their online presence 
by providing insights into customers’ web searching behavior. 
In addition, Google now uses its analytics for more than just its 
search engine. They were critical to the development of 
Android software, Apple’s biggest competitor in the smart-
phone domain. Now with the help of its sophisticated analytics, 
Google is taking on Apple in another domain as well: cars.
	
In Google’s 2015 Android boot camp, the company offi-
cially introduced its Android Auto dashboard interface, 
which will face off against Apple’s CarPlay. Data analytics 
have played a big role in the development of these systems. 
Study after study has shown how dangerous it is to drive 
while using one’s phone. Data even show that driving 
while using a smartphone is equitable to driving while un-
der the influence of alcohol. These startling results have 
spurred top phone system manufacturers’ interest in creat-
ing dashboard platforms. When Google debuted Android 
Auto, it was clear that extensive analytics went into the 
­development of every feature.
	
For example, Google developed a driver distraction lab to 
learn what tasks people do frequently when driving. These 
data informed which functions would be included and how 
they would work in the Android Auto system. According to 
Google’s studies, no action should take longer than two sec-
onds, so every function of Android Auto must be “glanceable.” 
In addition, the interface does not include any “back” or 
­“recent” buttons. Not only are social media apps blocked, but 
texting is accessible only through voice commands. With 
these improvements in the connection between phones and 
cars, data analytics are helping make the world both more 
convenient and safer.
Marketing Analytics 2.1
Data analytics have played a big role in developing Google’s 
Android Auto dashboard interface to help keep drivers safe 
while using electronic dashboard functions.
© Elijah Nouvelage/Reuters

48	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Portfolio Analysis  In portfolio analysis, management evaluates the firm’s various 
products and businesses—its “portfolio”—and allocates resources according to which 
products are expected to be the most profitable for the firm in the future. Portfolio anal-
ysis is typically performed at the strategic business unit (SBU) or product line level 
of the firm, though managers also can use it to analyze brands or even individual items. 
An SBU is a division of the firm itself that can be managed and operated somewhat 
independently from other divisions and may have a different mission or objectives. For 
example, Goodyear is one of the largest tire firms in the world, selling its products on 
six continents and with sales of approximately $18 billion. Its four SBUs are organized 
by geography: North American; Europe, Middle East, African; Latin American; and 
Asia-Pacific.38
A product line, in contrast, is a group of products that consumers may use together or 
perceive as similar in some way. One line of product for Goodyear could be car, van, 
sport-utility vehicle (SUV), and light truck tires; another line could be high-performance 
tires or aviation tires. 
One of the most popular portfolio analysis methods, developed by the Boston Consult-
ing Group (BCG), requires that firms classify all their products or services into a two-by-
two matrix, as depicted in Exhibit 2.6.39 
The circles represent brands, and their sizes are in direct proportion to the brands’ 
annual sales. The horizontal axis represents the relative market share.In general, market 
share is the percentage of a market accounted for by a specific entity,40 and is used to es-
tablish the product’s strength in a particular market. It is usu-
ally discussed in units, revenue, or sales. A special type of 
market share metric, relative market share, is used in this 
application because it provides managers with a product’s rel-
ative strength compared with that of the largest firm in the 
industry.41 The vertical axis is the market growth rate, or the 
annual rate of growth of the specific market in which the 
product competes. Market growth rate thus measures how at-
tractive a particular market is. Each quadrant has been named 
on the basis of the amount of resources it generates for and 
requires from the firm.
Stars  Stars (upper left quadrant) occur in high-growth mar-
kets and are high market share products. That is, stars often 
require a heavy resource investment in such things as promo-
tions and new production facilities to fuel their rapid growth. 
As their market growth slows, stars will migrate from heavy 
users of resources to heavy generators of resources and be-
come cash cows.
Cash Cows  Cash cows (lower left quadrant) are in low-
growth markets but are high market share products. Because 
these products have already received heavy investments to de-
velop their high market share, they have excess resources that 
can be spun off to those products that need it. For example, 
the firm may decide to use the excess resources generated by 
Brand C to fund products in the question mark quadrant.
Question Marks  Question marks (upper right quadrant) ap-
pear in high-growth markets but have relatively low market 
shares; thus, they are often the most managerially intensive 
products in that they require significant resources to maintain 
and potentially increase their market share. Managers must 
decide whether to infuse question marks with resources gen-
erated by the cash cows, so that they can become stars, or 
withdraw resources and eventually phase out the products. 
LO2-6	
Summarize portfolio 
analysis and its use to 
evaluate marketing 
performance.
Goodyear, one of the largest tire firms in the world, organizes 
its strategic business units by geography. This ad for 
high-performance tires, one of Goodyear’s many product 
lines, was designed for its North American SBU.
Source: 2008 The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company. All rights reserved. 
Agency: McCann Erickson/New York, NY. Creative Director: Craig Markus; Art 
Director: Tim Dillingham; Copywriter: Mark Ronquillo; Photographer: © 2007 
Graham Westmoreland/Friend and Johnson.

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
49
	
	
Brand A, for instance, is currently a question mark, but by infusing it with resources, the 
firm hopes to turn it into a star.
Dogs  Dogs (lower right quadrant) are in low-growth markets and have relatively low mar-
ket shares. Although they may generate enough resources to sustain themselves, dogs are 
not destined for “stardom” and should be phased out unless they are needed to complement 
or boost the sales of another product or for competitive purposes. In the case depicted in 
Exhibit 2.6, the company has decided to stop making Brand B.
Now let’s look at Apple and some of its products.42 The four that we will focus our 
attention on are: iPhone, iPod, iMac Desktop, and iPad.
Let’s consider each of these products and place them into the BCG matrix based on the 
data. The iPhone has clearly been the star, with a steady growth rate of 35 percent each quarter.
The iPod tells a different story. With a staggering absolute market share consistently 
above 75 percent, its relative market share is 100 percent. More than 300 million iPods sold in 
a little over 10 years, so this product definitely has been important for Apple. Unfortunately, 
HIGH
HIGH
LOW
Cash cows
Dogs
Stars
Question marks
LOW
Relative market share
Market growth rate
C
B
A
A
E X H I B I T  2.6
Boston Consulting Group Matrix
In which Boston Consulting 
Group quadrant do these 
­products fit?
© Stanca Sanda/Alamy

50	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
the MP3 market is contracting, and sales of iPods have slowed to their lowest level. Com-
bine the lack of growth with a large relative market share and it is likely that the iPod is a 
cash cow for Apple.43 Even as Apple continues to introduce a few new versions, it needs to 
recognize the threat that the iPod could transform into a dog, such that ultimately it might 
be wise to halt its production.44
Although popular with graphic designers, the growth rate of the Mac Desktop has 
slowed enough that it has even declined in some recent quarters. Although some disagree-
ment exists about the exact rate of decline, it appears that sales have dropped by up to about 
3 percent in recent years. It also has a small relative market share in the desktop market, 
such that the iMac tentatively could be classified as a dog. But Apple should not get rid of 
the iMac, because doing so would risk alienating its loyal customers. Furthermore, Apple 
is performing better than its competitors in this market, where PC makers have experienced 
double-digit declines in recent years.45
Finally, we have the iPad, which provided an incredible sales growth rate of 333 per-
cent in the first year after its introduction. Sales peaked in 2014, with 67.99 million units 
sold. But its market share and growth rate have since slowed, such that Apple sold only 
54.85 million units in 2015.46 Where on the BCG matrix would you classify the iPad? 
Does the still excellent market for this product mean that it should be in the star category? 
Or is the erosion of its growth enough to make it a question mark?
Although quite useful for conceptualizing the relative performance of products or ser-
vices and using this information to allocate resources, the BCG approach, and others like 
it, is often difficult to implement in practice. In particular, it is difficult to measure both 
relative market share and industry growth. Furthermore, other measures easily could serve 
as substitutes to represent a product’s competitive position and the market’s relative attrac-
tiveness. Another issue for marketers is the potential self-fulfilling prophecy of placing a 
product or service into a quadrant. Whether it is classified as a star or a question mark has 
profound implications on how it is treated and supported within the firm. Question marks 
require more marketing and production support. 
Strategic Planning Is Not Sequential
The planning process in Exhibit 2.2 suggests that managers follow a set sequence when 
they make strategic decisions. Namely, after they’ve defined the business mission, they 
perform the situation analysis, identify strategic opportunities, evaluate alternatives, set 
objectives, allocate resources, develop the implementation plan, and, finally, evaluate their 
performance and make adjustments. But actual planning processes can move back and 
forth among these steps. For example, a situation analysis may uncover a logical alternative 
that perhaps was not included in the mission statement, which would mean that the mission 
statement would need to be revised. The development of the implementation plan also 
might reveal that insufficient resources have been allocated to a particular product for it to 
achieve its objective. In that case, the firm would need to either change the objective or 
increase the resources; alternatively, the marketer might consider not investing in the prod-
uct at all.
Now that we have gone through the steps of the marketing plan, let’s look at some 
growth strategies that have been responsible for making many marketing firms 
­successful.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the five steps in creating a marketing plan?
2.	 What tool helps a marketer conduct a situation analysis?
3.	 What is STP?
4.	 What do the four quadrants of the portfolio analysis represent?

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
51
	
	
GROWTH STRATEGIES
Firms consider pursuing various market segments as 
part of their overall growth strategies, which may in-
clude the four major strategies in Exhibit 2.7.47 The 
rows distinguish those opportunities a firm possesses 
in its current markets from those it has in new mar-
kets, whereas the columns distinguish between the 
firm’s current marketing offering and that of a new 
opportunity. Let’s consider each of them in detail.
Market Penetration
A market penetration strategy employs the existing 
marketing mix and focuses the firm’s efforts on exist-
ing customers. Such a growth strategy might be 
achieved by attracting new consumers to the firm’s 
current target market or encouraging current custom-
ers to patronize the firm more often or buy more mer-
chandise on each visit. A market penetration strategy generally requires greater marketing 
efforts, such as increased advertising and additional sales and promotions, or intensified 
distribution efforts in geographic areas in which the product or service ­already is sold.
To further penetrate its current customer base, the super-hero entertainment giant, 
­Marvel, has expanded its movie offerings. In collaboration with several production com­
panies, as well as talented directors and well-known star actors, 
Marvel has helped bring the X-Men, Spiderman, Superman, Iron 
Man, and other popular characters to the big screen, where they 
confront some relevant, modern-day topics such as discrimina-
tion, environmental destruction, and international wars—before 
ultimately kicking tail and saving the city. These films have 
grossed massive profits, ranging from $1.5 million to $4 mil-
lion domestically.48 Marvel has further increased its market 
penetration by expanding the distribution of its films. Today, 
Marvel movies can be seen in theaters, accessed on Xfinity, and 
viewed on DVDs available in discount stores, grocery stores, 
and a host of other stores, including book and comic stores. 
Market Development
A market development strategy employs the existing mar-
keting offering to reach new market segments, whether do-
mestic or international. Marvel pursues such a market 
development strategy when it enhances the viewing of its 
movies in global markets. For example, the release of The 
Avengers: Age of Ultron proved to be one of the biggest mov-
ies of all time, grossing almost a half a billion dollars just in 
the domestic market. When we include the international ap-
peal, the success of The Avengers: Age of Ultron is almost 
hard to comprehend: Its international box office sales were 
nearly $950 million, for a total box office of $1.4 billion.49 
These phenomenal results highlight the importance of ex-
panding into new market segments. 
Product Development
The third growth strategy option, a product development 
strategy, offers a new product or service to a firm’s current 
target market. For example, Marvel has launched several 
LO2-7	
Describe how firms 
grow their business.
E X H I B I T  2.7
Markets/Products and Services Strategies
Market penetration
Current
Current
MARKETS
New
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
Product development
New
Market development
Diversiﬁcation
Marvel pursues a market development strategy by releasing 
The Avengers: Age of Ultron globally.
© Marvel Studios/Photos 12/Alamy

52	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
successful series on Netflix, including Jessica Jones, Daredevil, 
Iron Fist, and Luke Cage.50 Unlike traditional network providers, 
Netflix (and its competitors, such as Hulu or Amazon) allows 
viewers to binge watch entire series in one sitting. Binge watch-
ing has become a phenomenally successful pastime for couch 
potatoes worldwide. Netflix has 69 million subscribers world-
wide, including 43 million in the United States alone, making it 
an outstanding new service channel for Marvel character lovers. 
By developing series designed for this format, Marvel can con-
nect with its customers in a new and important way.
Diversification
A diversification strategy, the last of the growth strategies 
from Exhibit 2.7, introduces a new product or service to a mar-
ket segment that currently is not served. Diversification oppor-
tunities may be related or unrelated. In a related diversification 
opportunity, the current target market and/or marketing mix 
shares something in common with the new opportunity.51 In 
other words, the firm might be able to purchase from existing 
vendors, use the same distribution and/or management infor-
mation system, or advertise in the same newspapers to target 
markets that are similar to their current consumers. Marvel has 
pursued related diversification with its home décor, for exam-
ple. Collectables and t-shirts have long been a staple of the 
comic market, but Marvel also has diversified its offerings, ex-
panding to include lamp shades and throw pillows.52
In contrast, in an unrelated diversification, the new 
business lacks any common elements with the present busi-
ness. Unrelated diversifications do not capitalize on either 
core strengths associated with markets or with products. Thus, 
they would be viewed as very risky. For instance, if Marvel 
ventured into the child day care service industry, it would be 
an unrelated diversification, because it is so different from its 
core business and therefore very risky.
Marvel has launched several series on Netflix including 
Daredevil.
© Netflix/Photofest
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the four growth strategies?
2.	 What type of strategy is growing the business from existing customers?
3.	 Which strategy is the riskiest?
	
	
Define a marketing strategy. 
	
	
A marketing strategy identifies (1) a firm’s target 
markets(s), (2) a related marketing mix (four Ps), 
and (3) the bases on which the firm plans to build 
a sustainable competitive advantage. Firms use 
four macro strategies to build their sustainable 
competitive advantage: Customer excellence fo-
cuses on retaining loyal customers and excellent 
LO2-1
customer service. Operational excellence is 
achieved through efficient operations and excel-
lent supply chain and human resource manage-
ment. Product excellence entails having products 
with high perceived value and effective branding 
and positioning. Finally, locational excellence en-
tails having a good physical location and Internet 
presence.
Reviewing Learning Objectives

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
53
	
	
	
	
Describe the elements of a marketing plan. 
	
	
A marketing plan is composed of an analysis of the 
current marketing situation, its objectives, the strat-
egy for the four Ps, and appropriate financial state-
ments. A marketing plan represents the output of a 
three-phase process: planning, implementation, and 
control. The planning phase requires that managers 
define the firm’s mission and vision and assess the 
firm’s current situation. It helps answer the ques-
tions, “What business are we in now, and what do 
we intend to be in the future?” In the second phase, 
implementation, the firm specifies, in more opera-
tional terms, how it plans to implement its mission 
and vision. Specifically, to which customer groups 
does it wish to direct its marketing efforts, and how 
does it use its marketing mix to provide good value? 
Finally, in the control phase, the firm must evaluate 
its performance using appropriate metrics to deter-
mine what worked, what didn’t, and how perfor-
mance can be improved in the future.
	
	
Analyze a marketing situation using SWOT 
analyses.
	
	
SWOT stands for strengths, weaknesses, opportuni-
ties, and threats. A SWOT analysis occurs during 
the second step in the strategic planning process, the 
situation analysis. By analyzing what the firm is 
good at (its strengths), where it could improve (its 
weaknesses), where in the marketplace it might 
­excel (its opportunities), and what is happening in 
the marketplace that could harm the firm (its 
threats), managers can assess their firm’s situation 
accurately and plan its strategy accordingly.
	
	
Describe how a firm chooses which consumer 
group(s) to pursue with its marketing efforts.
	
	
Once a firm identifies different marketing opportu-
nities, it must determine which are the best to pur-
sue. To accomplish this task, marketers go through 
a segmentation, targeting, and positioning (STP) 
process. Firms segment various markets by divid-
ing the total market into those groups of customers 
with different needs, wants, or characteristics who 
therefore might appreciate products or services 
geared especially toward them. After identifying 
the different segments, the firm goes after, or tar-
gets, certain groups on the basis of the firm’s per-
ceived ability to satisfy the needs of those groups 
better than competitors, and do so profitably. To 
complete the STP process, firms position their 
products or services according to the marketing 
mix variables so that target customers have a clear, 
distinctive, and desirable understanding of what the 
product or service does or represents relative to 
competing products or services.
LO2-2
LO2-3
LO2-4
	
	
Outline the implementation of the marketing mix 
as a means to increase customer value.
	
	
The marketing mix consists of the four Ps—product, 
price, promotion, and place—and each P contributes 
to customer value. To provide value, the firm must 
offer a mix of products and services at prices their tar-
get markets will view as indicating good value. Thus, 
firms make trade-offs between the first two Ps, prod-
uct and price, to give customers the best value. The 
third P, promotion, informs customers and helps them 
form a positive image about the firm and its products 
and services. The last P, place, adds value by getting 
the appropriate products and services to customers 
when they want them and in the quantities they need.
	
	
Summarize portfolio analysis and its use to eval-
uate marketing performance.
	
	
Portfolio analysis is a management tool used to eval-
uate the firm’s various products and businesses—its 
“portfolio”—and allocate resources according to 
which products are expected to be the most profit-
able for the firm in the future. A popular portfolio 
analysis tool developed by the Boston Consulting 
Group classifies all products into four categories. 
The first, stars, are in high-growth markets and have 
high market shares. The second, cash cows, are in 
low-growth markets but have high market share. 
These products generate excess resources that can 
be spun off to products that need them. The third 
category, question marks, are in high-growth mar-
kets but have relatively low market shares. These 
products often utilize the excess resources generated 
by the cash cows. The final category, dogs, are in 
low-growth markets and have relatively low market 
shares. These products are often phased out.
	
	
Describe how firms grow their business. 
	
	
Firms use four basic growth strategies: market pene-
tration, market development, product development, 
and diversification. A market penetration strategy di-
rects the firm’s efforts toward existing customers and 
uses the present marketing mix. In other words, it at-
tempts to get current customers to buy more. In a mar-
ket development strategy, the firm uses its current 
marketing mix to appeal to new market segments, as 
might occur in international expansion. A product de-
velopment growth strategy involves offering a new 
product or service to the firm’s current target market. 
Finally, a diversification strategy takes place when a 
firm introduces a new product or service to a new cus-
tomer segment. Sometimes a diversification strategy 
relates to the firm’s current business, such as when a 
women’s clothing manufacturer starts making and 
selling men’s clothes, but a riskier strategy is when a 
firm diversifies into a completely unrelated business.
LO2-5
LO2-6
LO2-7

54	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Marketing Digitally
1.	 The mission statement for The Estee Lauder Com­
panies is “‘Bringing the best to everyone we touch’. 
By ‘The best’, we mean the best products, the best 
people and the best ideas. These three pillars have 
been the hallmarks of our Company since it was 
founded by Mrs. Estee Lauder in 1946. They remain 
the foundation upon which we continue to build our 
success today.” Harley-Davidson, Inc.’s mission state-
ment is more straightforward: “We fulfill dreams 
through the experience of motorcycling, by providing 
to motorcyclists and to the general public an expand-
ing line of motorcycles and branded products and ser-
vices in selected market segments.” (Both statements 
taken from: https://www.missionstatements.com/­
fortune_500_mission_statements.html) These differ-
ent perspectives also reflect the quite different 
positioning adopted by each company. Visit the web-
sites of each manufacturer and review the descriptions 
of the company, its mission, and its values. Do you 
believe these two disparate mission statements reflect 
what the firms do and how they are portrayed in the 
media? Justify your answer. 
2.	 More and more firms seem to be entering the dating ser-
vice industry. Visit http://www.eharmony.com and tour 
the website to find the types of activities and methods 
such companies use to help match compatible couples. 
Then visit http://www.match.com and do the same. 
What are the similarities and differences of these two 
online dating services? Pick one and perform a SWOT 
analysis for it. 
3.	 Black and Decker (http://www.blackanddecker.com) 
and DeWalt (http://www.dewalt.com) are owned by the 
same parent company, and both sell similar products. 
Visit each of their websites and identify what markets 
each brand targets. Next, discuss how the two compa-
nies use the marketing mix differently to target these 
unique target markets. 
Marketing Applications
1.	 How have PepsiCo and Coca-Cola created sustainable 
competitive advantages for themselves? 
2.	 Perform a SWOT analysis for the company that makes 
your favorite shoes.
3.	 How does Coca-Cola segment its market? Describe the 
primary target markets for Coca-Cola. How does it posi-
tion its various offerings so that it appeals to these dif-
ferent target markets? 
4.	 How does Hertz add value for business customers 
through the implementation of the four Ps? 
5.	 Dyson successfully sells its fans and heaters for $150 to 
$400, whereas most conventional fans sell for around 
$25. Explain what is the value it creates and how this 
affects the price it can charge.
6.	 Of the four growth strategies described in the chapter, which 
is the riskiest? Which is the easiest to implement? Why?
Key Terms
∙	 control phase,  35
∙	 customer excellence,  32
∙	 diversification strategy,  52
∙	 implementation phase,  35
∙	 integrated marketing  
communications (IMC),  43
∙	 locational excellence,  34
∙	 market development strategy,  51
∙	 market growth rate,  48
∙	 market penetration strategy,  51
∙	 market positioning,  41
∙	 market segment,  40
∙	 market segmentation,  40
∙	 market share,  48
∙	 marketing plan,  35
∙	 marketing strategy,  30
∙	 metric,  43
∙	 mission statement,  36
∙	 operational excellence,  34
∙	 planning phase,  35
∙	 product development strategy,  51
∙	 product excellence,  34
∙	 product line,  48
∙	 related diversification,  52
∙	 relative market share,  48
∙	 segmentation, targeting, and 
­positioning (STP),  40
∙	 situation analysis,  37
∙	 strategic business unit  
(SBU),  48
∙	 sustainable competitive 
­advantage,  30
∙	 SWOT analysis,  37
∙	 target marketing/targeting,  41
∙	 unrelated diversification,  52

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
55
	
	
7.	 Choose three companies. You believe the first builds 
customer value through product excellence, the second 
through operational excellence, and the third through 
customer excellence. Justify your answer.
8.	 You are in the job market and have received offers from 
three very different firms. Develop a marketing plan to 
help market yourself to prospective employers. 
1.	 After a firm has conducted a SWOT analysis, it would 
typically progress to the next step of marketing plan-
ning, which is 
 and involves using STP (seg-
mentation, targeting, and positioning). 
a.  defining the mission 
b.  conducting a situation analysis 
c.  identifying and evaluating opportunities
d.  implementing the marketing mix
e.  evaluating performance
2.	 Which of the following is a marketing metric that might 
be used to evaluate the performance of a company’s 
­implementation of its marketing plan? 
a.  Four Ps (price, product, promotion, place)
b.  SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, threats, 
­opportunities) 
c.  STP (segmentation, targeting, positioning) 
d.  GM (gross margin)
e.  SBU (strategic business unit) 
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.) 
Quiz Yourself
THE COFFEE WARS
In the coffee and breakfast market, Starbucks vigorously competes with the likes of 
Dunkin’ Donuts and, more recently, McDonald’s. Independent coffeehouses and smaller 
regional chains, seen by many as more hip and less commercial, also continually nip at 
Starbucks’ heels. However, the “coffee war” between Starbucks and Dunkin’ Donuts is 
particularly fierce in the areas in which they compete head to head, even though each chain 
has its geographic strongholds—Dunkin’ in the East and Starbucks in the West.53 Part of 
the reason for this infamous battle might be the dominance of these two brands: Together, 
Starbucks and Dunkin’ Donuts control well over half of the coffee market in the United 
States.54 Moreover, Starbucks can claim some victories over Dunkin’ Donuts, considering 
that its net revenues and stock prices have risen continuously since 2009.55 By 2014, its 
global revenues had reached a record-setting $16.4 billion, and in 2015, its stock surged by 
more than 50 percent for the year.56
	
Starbucks’ ubiquitous stores—from long-standing locations in U.S. cities and towns to 
international expansion into a vast range of new nations—are easy to locate and visit. A 
recent count showed that the chain maintains more than 22,000 stores, spanning 67 coun-
tries.57 By making sure its stores, with their familiar siren logo, are easy to find, Starbucks 
guarantees that most people can readily find a place to get their coffee fix. For the vast 
majority of buyers, an addictive Salted Caramel Mocha, or just a great cup of black coffee, 
is convenient to find and very familiar.
	
There are plenty of jokes about how Starbucks manages to charge upwards of $5 for a 
jolt of caffeine, but a quick glance at its marketing methods and strategies helps explain 
why it can do so. The products it sells are appealing to customers and fulfill their needs: 
They taste good, are available readily and conveniently, and offer the benefit of helping 
them wake up to start their day (or stay awake for a long night of studying). Thus the ex-
change of money for coffee—or tea or juice or yogurt or a nice pastry—is a good value for 
consumers, despite the relatively high cost.
Chapter Case Study 

56	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
	
Starbucks also connects with fans through social marketing channels, including its 
popular My Starbucks Idea site. The site is an innovative approach to developing new 
products. Customers share ideas about everything “Starbucks,” from store designs to new 
drink recipes. They can also join one of the many discussions in the customer forums. The 
site connects customers to its Twitter and Facebook sites too, and it also links users to its 
mobile apps. New capabilities available through the apps allow consumers to order their 
preferred beverage in advance and pay for their drinks or other products, then pop into the 
store to grab their purchases without ever having to wait in line.
	
When it comes to Starbucks’ competition with Dunkin’ Donuts, history shows that the 
two early morning giants actually had coexisted nicely for many years: Dunkin’ Donuts 
made the donuts, and Starbucks brewed the coffee. Starting in 2000 though, Dunkin’ 
­Donuts slowly started encroaching on the upscale coffee market with the Dunkaccino. It 
also joined the “espresso revolution” in 2003, before formally declaring in 2006 its explicit 
intent to enter a head-to-head competition with Starbucks.58
	
Along with expanding its menu to feature specialty espresso drinks, Dunkin’ Donuts 
launched a smartphone app that competes directly with Starbucks’ widely popular ver-
sion. In particular, the new Dunkin’ Donuts app aims to extend the battle to the mobile 
field. It offers not just mobile ordering but also mobile delivery services, called Door-
Dash. The delivery service began in Dallas, Texas; plans are in place to expand it to other 
major U.S. cities.59
	
Although Dunkin’ Donuts still trails Starbucks as a global company—with only 3,100 
stores in 30 countries60—it uses this relatively small size and regional feel strategically, 
leveraging these attributes to adjust flexibly and integrate itself with local communities. 
Accordingly, it has ranked tops in the market for customer loyalty since 2007.61 This 
­focus on loyalty also resonates with the company’s chosen sponsorship efforts. It lends its 
support to professional sports teams with strong local and national followings, including 
all the major league Boston-area teams (Red Sox, Patriots, Celtics, and Bruins), the Dallas 
Cowboys, New York’s Yankees and Mets, and the Tampa Bay Rays. Expanding on the 
strategy, both abroad and to less famous leagues, Dunkin’ Donuts partners with the Liver-
pool football club and the National Women’s Hockey League.
	
Through these partnerships with sports teams, Dunkin’ Donuts encourages consumers 
to interact more closely with it. For example, New England customers receive inducements 
Who is winning the coffee war: 
Starbucks or Dunkin’ Donuts?
© Julia Ewan/The Washington Post/
Getty Images

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
57
	
	
to become DD Perks members and use its mobile app. With its “Pats Win, You Win” pro-
motion, DD Perks members who pay through the app receive a free cup of coffee each time 
the New England Patriots win a game. The popular, vastly successful promotion has con-
tinued for several seasons, during which the Patriots continue winning lots of games, thus 
bringing lots of excited fans into Dunkin’ Donuts stores.62
	
The competition between these two brands is well established and likely to continue, 
especially as Dunkin’ Donuts continues to move away from being exclusively a donut shop 
and toward becoming a more coffee-centered business. As big new competitors such as 
McDonald’s and Taco Bell enter the breakfast, coffee, and espresso markets, both Star-
bucks and Dunkin’ Donuts are likely to continue coming up with new ways to maintain 
their existing customer base, then expand it in the United States and abroad.
Questions
1.	
Perform a SWOT analysis for Starbucks and Dunkin’ Donuts. Based on your analysis, 
in which company would you invest? Justify your answer. 
2.	
Which growth strategies have been pursued by Starbucks and Dunkin’ Donuts in the 
past? Which strategies do you believe will be most successful for the two firms in 
the future? Why? 
3.	
Which marketing metrics would be most helpful for an executive in charge of devel-
oping new products for a coffee chain?
  1.	 E. J. Schultz, “Pepsi Plans New ‘1893’ Soda,” Advertising Age, 
November 4, 2015; Laura Northrup, “The Sale Event for Pepsi 
Perfect Was Deeply Flawed,” Consumerist.com, October 25, 
2015. 
  2.	E. J. Schultz, “Pepsi Plans New ‘1893’ Soda,” Advertising Age, 
November 4, 2015; PepsiCo, “Who We Are,” http://www. 
pepsico.com/Company. 
  3.	PepsiCo, “The PepsiCo Advantage,” https://www.pepsico.com/
docs/album/Investor/barclays_bts_presentation.pdf?sfvrsn=0. 
  4.	PepsiCo, “Who We Are,” http://www.pepsico.com/Company. 
  5.	Robert Klara, “Why Celebrities Want to Be in PepsiCo’s Ads,” 
Advertising Age, June 8, 2015. 
  6.	Beth Kowitt, “PepsiCo Nabs NBA Sponsorship Rights from 
Coca-Cola,” Fortune, April 13, 2015. 
  7.	 Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema, The Disciplines of Market 
Leaders (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995). Treacy and 
Wiersema suggest the first three strategies. We suggest the 
fourth—locational excellence.
  8.	V. Kumar et al., “Establishing Profitable Customer Loyalty for 
Multinational Companies in the Emerging Economies: A 
Conceptual Framework,” Journal of International Marketing 21 
(March 2013), pp. 57–80; Yuping Liu-Thompkins and Leona Tam, 
“Not All Repeat Customers Are the Same: Designing Effective 
Cross-Selling Promotion on the Basis of Attitudinal Loyalty and 
Habit,” Journal of Marketing 77 (September 2013), pp. 21–36.
  9.	Melea Press and Eric J. Arnould, “How Does Organizational 
Identification Form? A Consumer Behavior Perspective,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 38 (December 2011), 
pp. 650–66. 
10.	 Valarie A. Zeithaml, Mary Jo Bitner, and Dwayne D. Gremler, 
Services Marketing: Integrating Customer Focus across the 
Firm, 5th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Irwin, 2009).
11.	 Brooks Barnes, “At Disney Parks, a Bracelet Meant to Build 
Loyalty (and Sales),” The New York Times, January 7, 2013.
12.	 Carmine Gallo, “Customer Service the Disney Way,” Forbes, 
April 14, 2011.
13.	 Diane M. Martin and John W. Schouten, “Consumption-Driven 
Market Emergence,” Journal of Consumer Research 40 
(February 2014), pp. 855–70. Also see articles in special issue 
edited by John T. Mentzer and Greg Gundlach, “Exploring the 
Relationship between Marketing and Supply Chain Management: 
Introduction to the Special Issue,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science 38, no. 1 (2010), pp. 1–4.
14.	 Hilary Stout, “In War for Same-Day Delivery, Racing Madly to 
Go Last Mile,” The New York Times, November 23, 2013,  
http://www.nytimes.com.
15.	 http://www.interbrand.com.
16.	 “Marketing Plan,” American Marketing Association Dictionary, 
http://www.marketingpower.com.
17.	 Donald Lehman and Russell Winer, Analysis for Marketing 
Planning, 7th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2008).
18.	 Nancy J. Sirianni et al., “Branded Service Encounters: 
Strategically Aligning Employee Behavior with the Brand 
Positioning,” Journal of Marketing 77 (November 2013),  
pp. 108–23; Andrew Campbell, “Mission Statements,” Long 
Range Planning 30 (1997), pp. 931–33.
19.	 Gene R. Laczniak and Patrick E. Murphy, “Stakeholder Theory 
and Marketing: Moving from a Firm-Centric to a Societal 
Perspective,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 31 (Fall 
2012), pp. 284–92; Alfred Rappaport, Creating Shareholder 
Value: The New Standard for Business Performance (New 
York: Wiley, 1988).
20.	PepsiCo, “Our Mission & Values,” http://www.pepsico.com/
Purpose/Our-Mission-and-Values.
Endnotes

58	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
21.	 Coca-Cola, “Mission, Vision & Values,” http://www.coca- 
colacompany.com/our-company/mission-vision-values/. 
22.	Pink Ribbon International, http://www.pinkribbon.org.
23.	Robert Klara, “Why Celebrities Want to Be in PepsiCo’s Ads: A 
‘Symbiotic Relationship’ with Stars Like Beckham, Beyoncé and 
Jordan,” Ad Week, June 8, 2015, http://www.adweek.com/
news/advertising-branding/why-celebrities-want-be-pepsicos- 
ads-165217. 
24.	“Pepsi Launches New Music Platform “Out of the Blue” To 
Debut During the 57th Annual Grammy Awards,” PR News-
wire, Feb. 4, 2015, http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
pepsi-launches-new-music-platform-out-of-the-blue-to-debut-
during-the-57th-annual-grammy-awards-300031079.html. 
25.	StreetAuthority, “Coke vs. Pepsi: By the Numbers,” Nasdaq, 
March 24, 2014, http://www.nasdaq.com/article/coke-vs-pepsi-
by-the-numbers-cm337909. 
26.	RT, “PepsiCo Admits Public Source Origins of Its Aquafina  
Bottled Water,” https://www.rt.com/usa/319980-aquafina- 
tap-water-origins/.
27.	Trefis Team, “Non-Carbonated Beverages Spearhead Growth 
for PepsiCo’s North America Business,” Forbes, Dec. 10, 2015, 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2015/12/10/
non-carbonated-beverages-spearhead-growth-for-pepsicos- 
north-america-business/. 
28.	http://www.pepsico.com/Company/Global-Divisions. 
29.	Brian Dumaine, “The Water Conservation Challenge of Coke vs. 
Pepsi,” Fortune, Aug. 20, 2015, http://fortune.com/2015/08/20/
coca-cola-vs-pepsi/. 
30.	Ilan Brat and Mike Esterl, “FDA Proposes Placing Sugar Guide 
on Food Labels,” The Wall Street Journal, July 24, 2015, http://
www.wsj.com/articles/fda-proposes-listing-added-sugar-on-
food-labels-1437774370. 
31.	 Stephanie Strom, “Small Food Brands, Big Successes,” The 
New York Times, Aug. 24, 2015, http://www.nytimes.
com/2015/08/26/dining/start-up-food-business-changing- 
appetites.html?_r=0. 
32.	https://www.hertz.com/rentacar/productsandservices/ 
productsandservicesRegions.do.
33.	https://images.hertz.com/pdfs/VMVWeb.pdf; http://www. 
adweek.com/aw/content_display/creative/new-campaigns/
e3i21cea1586dd4edf5d50f9a17e7f18bf3.
34.	Terence A. Shimp, Advertising Promotion and Other Aspects 
of Integrated Marketing Communication, 8th ed. (Mason, OH: 
South-Western, 2008); T. Duncan and C. Caywood, “The 
Concept, Process, and Evolution of Integrated Marketing 
Communication,” in Integrated Communication: Synergy of 
Persuasive Voices, ed. E. Thorson and J. Moore (Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum, 1996); see also various issues of the Journal of 
Integrated Marketing Communications, http://jimc.medill. 
northwestern.edu.
35.	Nathalie Tadena, “Cheerios Is King of Commercial Spending 
Among Cereal Brands,” The Wall Street Journal, July 17, 2014, 
http://blogs.wsj.com/cmo/2014/07/17/cheerios-is-king-of- 
commercial-spending-among-cereal-brands/.
36.	Ofer Mintz and Imran S. Currim, “What Drives Managerial 
Use of Marketing and Financial Metrics and Does Metric Use 
Affect Performance of Marketing-Mix Activities?,” Journal of 
Marketing 77 (March 2013), pp. 17–40.
37.	Kirsten Acuna, “Google Says It Can Predict Which Films Will Be 
Huge Box Office Hits,” Business Insider, June 6, 2013.
38.	Goodyear, Annual Report 2014.
39.	This discussion is adapted from Roger A. Kerin, Steven W. 
Hartley, and William Rudelius, Marketing, 10th ed. (Burr Ridge, 
IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2011).
40.	P. Farris et al., Marketing Metrics: 50+ Metrics Every 
Executive Should Master (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 
2006), p. 17.
41.	 Relative market share = Brand’s market share ÷ Largest com-
petitor’s market share. If, for instance, there are only two 
products in a market, A and B, and product B has 90 percent 
market share, then A’s relative market share is 10 ÷ 90 = 11.1 
percent. If, on the other hand, B only has 50 percent market 
share, then A’s relative market share is 10 ÷ 50 = 20 percent.  
P. Farris et al., Marketing Metrics: 50+ Metrics Every 
Executive Should Master (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 
2006), p. 19.
42.	Apple Inc., “Form 10-K 2011 Annual Report,” October 30, 2013.
43.	Sherilynn Macale, “Apple Has Sold 300M iPods, Currently 
Holds 78% of the Music Player Market,” The Next Web, 
October 4, 2011, http://thenextweb.com; Chris Smith, 
“iPad Tablet Market Share Down to 57 Per-cent,” Techradar.
com, February 16, 2012, http://www.techradar.com; Ken 
Yeung, “Apple Sold 4.6M Macs and 3.49M iPods in Q4 
FY2013,” The Next Web, October 28, 2013, http:// 
thenextweb.com.
44.	“iPhone, iPad and iPod Sales from 1st Quarter 2006 to 4th 
Quarter 2015 (in Million Units),” Statista, December 4, 2015, 
http://www.statista.com/statistics/253725/iphone-ipad- 
and-ipod-sales-comparison/
45.	Katie Collins, “Apple Mac Sales Down, but the Broader 
PC Market is Even Worse,” CNET, October 9, 2015, http://
www.cnet.com/news/apple-mac-sales-reportedly-hit-two- 
year-low/.
46.	Chuck Jones, “Morgan Stanley Survey Shows Strong 
Demand for Apple’s iPhone and Expects Growth in 2016,” 
Forbes, September 6, 2015, http://www.forbes.com/sites/
chuckjones/2015/09/06/morgan-stanley-survey-shows-
strong-demand-for-apples-iphone-and-expects-
growth-in-2016/
47.	Roger Kerin, Vijay Mahajan, and P. Rajan Varadarajan, 
Contemporary Perspectives on Strategic Market Planning 
(Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1991), Chapter 6; Susan Mudambi, “A 
Topology of Strategic Choice in Marketing,” International 
Journal of Market & Distribution Management (1994),  
pp. 22–25.
48.	Devin Leonard, “Calling All Superheroes,” Fortune, May 23, 
2007; Box Office Mojo, “X-Men (2000),” http://www. 
boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=xmen.htm
49.	The Numbers, “The Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015),” http:// 
www.the-numbers.com/movie/Avengers-Age-of-Ultron-
The#tab=summary
50.	Patrick Cavanaugh, “Netflix Orders a Second Season of 
‘Marvel’s Daredevil’,” Marvel.com, April 21, 2015; Todd Spangler, 
“Netflix, Marvel Pick ‘Luke Cage’ Showrunner, Cheo Hodari 
Coker,” Variety, March 31, 2015. 
51.	 A. A. Thompson et al., Crafting and Executing Strategy, 18th 
ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012). 
52.	Marvel, “Home Décor,” http://shop.marvel.com/home-decor/
53.	Alvin Chang and Matt Carroll, “Split Country: Dunkin’ vs. 
Starbucks,” Boston Globe/Boston.com (n.d.).
54.	Christine Champagne and Teressa Iezzi, “Dunkin’ Donuts and 
Starbucks: A Tale of Two Coffee Marketing Giants,” Fast 
Company Co Create, August 21, 2014, http://www.fastcocreate. 
com/3034572/coffee-week/dunkin-donuts-and-starbucks-a-
tale-of-two-coffee-marketing-giants. 
55.	Starbucks, “Fiscal Year 2015 Annual Report,” http://investor.
starbucks.com
56.	Justin Bariso, “The Strategy that Led Starbucks’s Stock  
Price to Jump 50 Percent?” Inc., December 7, 2015,  

	
DEVELOPING MARKETING STRATEGIES AND A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO	
59
	
	
http://www.inc.com/justin-bariso/what-you-can-learn-from-star-
bucks-continued-success.html. 
57.	Starbucks, “Starbucks Company Profile,” https://news.starbucks.
com/uploads/documents/AboutUs-Company_Profile-Q32015- 
8.6.2015.pdf. 
58.	Champagne and Iezzi, “Dunkin’ Donuts and Starbucks.”
59.	“Dunkin’ Donuts Tests On-The-Go Ordering and Delivery Service 
in Select Markets,” Dunkin’ Donuts Newsroom, November 18, 
2015, http://news.dunkindonuts.com/news/dunkin-donuts-tests-
on-the-go-ordering-and-delivery-service-in-select-markets- 
3105177. 
60.	“Global Presence,” https://www.dunkindonuts.com/dunkindonuts/ 
en/company/global.html.
61.	 “Dunkin’ Donuts,” Dunkin’ Brands, http://dunkinbrands.com/
about/donuts.
62.	Frank O’Laughlin, “Dunkin’ Donuts to Give Away Free Coffee 
When Patriots Win,” Woburn Patch, September 8, 2015, http://
patch.com/massachusetts/woburn/dunkin-donuts-give-away-
free-coffee-when-patriots-win-0.
	 i.	 Hilary Stout, “Amazon, Google, and More Are Drawn to Home 
Services Market,” The New York Times, April 12, 2015; Laura 
Lorenzetti, “Amazon’s Handyman Service Is Expanding to 15 
Cities,” Fortune, July 22, 2015; Harriet Taylor, “Amazon, Google 
Move into On-Demand Home Services,” CNBC, October 1, 2015.
	 ii.	 Seb Joseph, “Coca-Cola Has an Internal Strategy Called 
‘Marketing in Smaller Sizes’ to Make People Buy Its Soda More 
Often for More Money,” Business Insider, November 18, 2015; 
Rachel Arthur, “Coca-Cola Sees Big Success with Small Pack 
Sizes, Celebrating a ‘Tremendous Amount of Positive Growth’,” 
BeverageDaily.com, July 23, 2015; Brooke Metz, “Less Is More: 
For Coca-Cola, Small Packs Mean Big Business,” July 22, 2015, 
http://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/less-is-more-for-­
coca-cola-small-packs-mean-big-business/; Associated Press, 
“Coke, Pepsi, Pledge to Shrink Can and Bottle Sizes to Cut 
Calories,” CBC News, September 23, 2014, http://www.cbc.ca/
news/health/coke-pepsi-pledge-to-shrink-can-and-bottle-sizes-
to-cut-calories-1.2775467 
	iii.	 Tim Peterson, “How P&G Is Tying Snapchat Ads to In-Store 
Sales,” Advertising Age, November 18, 2015. 
	iv.	 William Boston, Hendrink Varnhot, and Sarah Sloat, 
“Volkswagen Blames ‘Chain of Mistakes’ for Emissions Scandal,” 
The Wall Street Journal, December 10, 2015; Russell Hotten, 
“Volkswagen: The Scandal Explained,” BBC News, December 
10, 2015; Alex Davis, “Volkswagen’s US Sales Plummet 25 
Percent as Dieselgate Rolls On,” Wired, December 1, 2015; 
Stephen Edelstein, “Used VW Prices Fall More, with No End to 
Diesel Scandal in Sight,” Green Car Reports, December 9, 
2015, http://www.greencarreports.com/news/1101315_used-vw-
prices-fall-more-with-no-end-to-diesel-scandal-in-sight. 
	 v.	 Aaron M. Kessler and B.X. Chen, “Google and Apple Fight for 
the Car Dashboard,” The New York Times, February 22, 2015, 
http://www.nytimes.com; Tim Stevens, “2014’s Battle for 
Dashboard Supremacy: Apple’s CarPlay vs. Google’s OAA vs. 
MirrorLink,” CNET, March 4, 2014, http://www.cnet.com/
news/2014s-battle-for-dashboard-supremacy-apples-carplay-vs-
googles-oaa-vs-mirrorlink/.


WHY WRITE A MARKETING PLAN?1
A
s a student, you likely plan out much in your 
life—where to meet for dinner, how much time 
to spend studying for exams, which courses to 
take next semester, how to get home for win-
ter break, and so on. Plans enable us to figure out where 
we want to go and how we might get there.
For a firm, the goal is not much different. Any com-
pany that wants to succeed (which means any firm what-
soever) needs to plan for a variety of contingencies, and 
marketing represents one of the most significant. A mar-
keting plan—which we defined in Chapter 2 as a written 
document composed of an analysis of the current mar-
keting situation, opportunities and threats for the firm, 
WRITING A 
MARKETING PLAN
Have a plan. Follow the plan, and you’ll be surprised how  
successful you can be. Most people don’t have a plan.  
That’s why it’s easy to beat most folks.
—Paul “Bear” Bryant, football coach, University of Alabama
APPENDIX 2A
marketing objectives and strategy specified in terms of 
the four Ps, action programs, and projected or pro forma 
income (and other financial) statements—enables market-
ing personnel and the firm as a whole to understand their 
own actions, the market in which they operate, their fu-
ture direction, and the means to obtain support for new 
initiatives.2
Because these elements—internal activities, external 
environments, goals, and forms of support—differ for 
­every firm, the marketing plan is different for each firm as 
well. However, several guidelines apply to marketing plans 
in general; this appendix summarizes those points and 
­offers an annotated example.

62	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
MARKETING PLAN VERSUS BUSINESS PLAN
Of course, firms consider more than marketing when they make plans and therefore 
commonly develop business plans as well. Yet as this book highlights, marketing 
­constitutes such an important element of business that business plans and marketing 
plans coincide in many ways.3 Marketing plans as well as business plans generally 
encompass:
  1.	 Executive summary.
  2.	 Company overview.
  3.	 Objectives or goals, usually according to strategic plan and focus.
  4.	 Situation analysis.
  5.	 Customer segmentation, target marketing, and positioning analysis.
  6.	 Marketing strategy.
  7.	 Financial projections.
  8.	 Implementation plan.
  9.	 Evaluation and control metrics.
10.	 Appendix
A business plan also includes details about R&D and operations, and both may feature 
details about other key topics, depending on the focus of the company and the plan.
STRUCTURE OF A MARKETING PLAN
This section briefly describes each of the elements of a marketing plan.4
Executive Summary
The executive summary essentially tells the reader why he or she is reading this market-
ing plan—what changes require consideration, what new products need discussion, and 
so forth—and suggests possible actions to take in response to the information the plan 
contains.
Company Overview
The company overview provides a brief description of the company, including perhaps its 
mission statement, background, and competitive advantages.
Objectives/Goals
The objectives/goals section offers more specifics about why readers are reading the mar-
keting plan. What does the company want to achieve, both overall and with this particular 
marketing plan?
Situation Analysis
Recall from the chapter text that a situation analysis generally relies on SWOT consider-
ations; the situation section, then, describes the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats facing the company.
STP Analysis
The analysis proceeds by assessing the market in which the company functions, the prod-
ucts it currently offers or plans to offer in the future, and the characteristics of current or 
potential customers.

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
63
	
	
Marketing Strategy
The marketing strategy may be very specific, especially if the plan pertains to, for example, 
a stable product in a familiar market, or it may be somewhat open to varied possibilities, 
such as when the firm plans to enter a new market with an innovative product.
Financial Projections
On the basis of the knowledge already obtained, the marketing plan should provide pos-
sible developments and returns on the marketing investments outlined in the marketing 
strategy.
Implementation Plan
The implementation plans includes the timing of promotional activities, when monitoring 
will take place, and how expansions likely will proceed.
Evaluation and Control Metrics
The firm must have a means of assessing the marketing plan’s recommendations; the mar-
keting plan therefore must indicate the methods for undertaking this assessment, whether 
quantitatively or qualitatively.
Appendix
The final section(s) offers additional information that might be of benefit, such as a list of 
key personnel; data limitations that may influence the findings; and suggestions of the 
plan, relevant legislation, and so forth.
INFORMATION SOURCES5
When writing a marketing plan, you likely can turn to a variety of your firm’s in-house 
information sources, including annual reports, previous marketing plans, published mis-
sion statements, and so on. In addition, various sources offer suggestions and examples that 
may provide you with direction and ideas. A reference librarian can help you find many of 
these sources, which likely are available through your university’s library system.
∙	
Knowthis.com—“a knowledge source for marketing,” http://www.knowthis.com/
tutorials/principles-of-marketing/how-to-write-a-marketing-plan/21.htm.
∙	
Encyclopedia of American Industries—introduces industry structure; arranged by 
SIC and NAICS codes.
∙	
Standard & Poor’s NetAdvantage—surveys of more than 50 industries, with financial 
data about companies in each industry.
∙	
Investext Plus—brokerage house reports.
∙	
IBISWorld—market research on thousands of industries; classified by NAICS code.
∙	
Statistical Abstract of the United States—a vast variety of statistics on a wealth 
of topics.
∙	
U.S. Bureau of the Census—detailed statistical data gathered every 10 years on all 
aspects of the U.S. population.
∙	
County Business Patterns: U.S. Bureau of the Census—payroll and employee 
numbers for most NAICS codes.
∙	
Consumer Expenditure Study: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics—income and 
expenditures by household, classified by various demographics.
∙	
LifeStyle Market Analyst—lifestyle information about geographic areas, lifestyle 
interest groups, and age and income groups.

64	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
∙	
Mediamark Reporter—information about demographics, lifestyles, product and 
brand usage, and advertising media preferences.
∙	
Scarborough Arbitron—local market consumer information for various media in 
75 local markets for consumer retail shopping behavior, product consumption, media 
usage, lifestyle behavior, and demographics.
∙	
Simmons Study of Media and Markets—products and consumer characteristics; 
various media audiences and their characteristics.
∙	
Sourcebook America—demographic data, including population, spending potential 
index, income, race, and Tapestry data, presented by state, county, DMA, and zip 
code, as well as business data by county and zip code.
∙	
Rand McNally Commercial Atlas and Marketing Guide—maps and tables showing 
demographic, industrial, transportation, railroad, airline, and hospital data.
∙	
“Survey of Buying Power,” Sales and Marketing Management—current state, county, 
city, and town estimates of population by age, retail sales by store group, effective 
buying income, and buying power index.
∙	
Annual & 10-K reports from Thomson One Banker, Edgar, and LexisNexis—business 
descriptions, product listings, distribution channels, possible impact of regulations 
and lawsuits, and discussions of strategic issues.
∙	
MarketResearch.com Academic—market research reports on a variety of consumer 
products.
∙	
Mintel Reports Database—market research reports focusing on consumer products, 
lifestyles, retailing, and international travel industry.
LINGUISTIC AND VISUAL  
SUGGESTIONS
Again, recall that all marketing plans differ because all firms differ. However, just as rules 
exist that dictate what makes for good writing, some rules or guidelines apply to all 
well-written marketing plans.
∙	
Maintain a professional attitude in the writing and presentation.
∙	
Keep descriptions and summaries concise. Get to the point.
∙	
Use standard English in a professional tone.
∙	
Proofread the entire plan multiple times to catch grammatical, spelling, or other such 
errors that could dampen the professionalism of the writing.
∙	
Adopt a businesslike tone; avoid flowery or jargon-filled writing.
∙	
Employ active voice rather than passive voice, and present tense rather than past 
tense whenever possible (e.g., “We plan to achieve 30 percent growth in two years” 
rather than “The plan was that 30 percent growth would be achieved by the firm 
within two years”).
∙	
Be positive.
∙	
Avoid meaningless adjectives (e.g., “Our goal is tremendous growth”).
∙	
Be specific; use quantitative information whenever possible.
∙	
Insert graphics to convey important concepts succinctly, including photos, graphs, 
illustrations, and charts.
∙	
Avoid using so many visual elements that they clutter the plan.
∙	
Lay out the plan clearly and logically.

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
65
	
	
∙	
Organize sections logically, using multiple levels of headings, distinguished 
clearly by font differences (e.g., bold for first-level heads, italics for second-level 
heads).
∙	
Consider the use of bullet points or numbered lists to emphasize important points.
∙	
Exploit modern technology (e.g., graphics software, page layout software, laser 
printers) to ensure the plan looks professional.
∙	
Adopt an appropriate font to make the text easy to read and visually appealing—
avoid using anything smaller than 10-point font at a minimum.
∙	
Avoid unusual or decorative fonts; stick with a common serif type to make the text 
easy to read.
∙	
Consider binding the report with an attractive cover and clear title page.
∙	
Generally, aim for a plan that consists of 15–30 pages.
  1.	 This appendix was written by Tom Chevalier, Britt Hackmann, 
and Elisabeth Nevins Caswell, in conjunction with the textbook 
authors (Dhruv Grewal and Michael Levy) as the basis of class 
discussion, rather than to illustrate either effective or ineffec-
tive marketing practice.
  2.	http://www.knowthis.com (accessed May 16, 2008); see also 
“Marketing Plan Online,” http://www.quickmba.com (accessed 
May 16, 2008); “Marketing Plan,” http://www.businessplans.org 
(accessed May 18, 2008).
  3.	Roger Kerin, Steven Hartley, and William Rudelius, Marketing 
(New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2008), p. 53.
  4.	Roger A. Kerin, Steven W. Hartley, and William Rudelius, 
Marketing 12e, Burr Ridge, Il.: McGraw-Hill Education, 2015; 
http://www.knowthis.com (accessed May 16, 2008).
  5.	This listing of sources largely comes from the Babson College 
Library Guide, http://www3.babson.edu, May 12, 2008  
(accessed May 15, 2008). Special thanks to Nancy Dlott.
  6.	This marketing plan presents an abbreviated version of the 
­actual plan for PeopleAhead. Some information has been 
changed to maintain confidentiality.
  7.	 Publishers’ and Advertising Directors’ Conference, September 21, 
2005.
  8.	Mintel International Group, “Online Recruitment–US,”  
January 1, 2005, http://www.marketresearch.com (accessed 
September 1, 2005).
  9.	Corzen Inc., May 1, 2004, http://www.wantedtech.com 
­(accessed May 17, 2004).
10.	 Mintel International Group, “Online Recruitment–US.”
Endnotes

66	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
PEOPLEAHEAD MARKETING  
PLAN ILLUSTRATION6
PeopleAhead Marketing Plan: Condensed
1.	 Executive Summary
PeopleAhead focuses on career advancement done right. Instead of making the job search a 
one-time event, PeopleAhead provides a platform for people to find, advance, and develop 
their careers by sharing career goals, discussing professional development plans, and 
­socializing with other professionals.
	
PeopleAhead culminates the career advancement experience with its proprietary 
­TrueMatch® technology, which identifies synergies between the companies hiring talent 
­(employers) and PeopleAhead members (job candidates) who wish to be hired. By anony-
mously presenting only prequalified career opportunities to members, who confirm their 
­interest and recommend others, PeopleAhead transforms the ineffective online hiring pro-
cess into a highly efficient career-matching system. PeopleAhead was founded by Carlos 
­Larracilla and Tom Chevalier to improve people’s lives by helping them achieve their career 
aspirations. The vision for PeopleAhead was conceived of in January 2006, with a notion 
that personality alignment is critical to matching the right people with the right career oppor-
tunities. Since then, the idea has grown and morphed into a company that matches the right 
person with the right career opportunity by aligning personality, competencies, experience, 
and interests.
	
Tom and Carlos combine human resources, system development, and sales experience to 
deliver a groundbreaking, TrueMatch®-branded talent matching network that makes it easier for 
people to achieve their career aspirations and improves the way companies identify individuals 
who will be able to contribute to their long-term success. The organizational chart of PeopleAhead 
is available in Appendix A.
Note the personalization of 
the company founders, which 
may help readers feel 
connected to the company.
As this plan does, a marketing 
plan should start with a 
positive, upbeat assessment  
of what the company does 
and what it hopes to continue 
doing.
Instead of using separate 
“Executive Summary” and 
“Company Overview” sections, 
this marketing plan begins 
with a general overview that 
includes both aspects and 
answers the key questions: 
“What type of business are 
we?” and “What do we need 
to do to accomplish our 
objectives?” (see Chapter 2).

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
67
	
	
The plan acknowledges both 
a general, potential target 
market and the ideal targets.
As Chapter 2 suggests, the 
plan notes PeopleAhead’s 
sustainable competitive 
­advantage as part of its 
overall mission statement.
By referring to another 
section, the plan makes  
clear where it is heading and 
enables readers to cross- 
reference the information.
The paragraph provides a 
general outline of the firm’s 
objectives; the bulleted list 
offers more specific goals,  
and the subsequent sections 
go into more detail about the 
various factors that may 
influence these objectives.
2.   Strategic Objectives
2.1. Mission
PeopleAhead’s mission is to help individuals with career advancement and improve the 
­human capital in companies. The site will act as a networking platform for professionals  
and career matching as opposed to job and resume-posting searches.
2.2. Goals:
∙   Use brand-matching technology: TrueMatch®
∙   Build critical mass of users.
∙   Drive traffic to the Web site through marketing blitzes.
∙   Utilize word-of-mouth advertising from satisfied users.
2.3. Business Summary
∙   Business customers: This group provides PeopleAhead’s revenues. Customers purchase 
­contact information about the Top Ten PROfiles gleaned from the individual member base 
that have been sorted and ranked by the TrueMatch® technology. PeopleAhead will focus on 
small and medium businesses (see Market Segmentation section), because these entities are 
underserved by large competitors in the online recruitment market, and because research 
shows that this demographic has a less efficient recruitment process that would benefit most 
readily from PeopleAhead’s services. Within this segment, customers include HR managers 
who are responsible for the sourcing of candidates, functional area managers who require 
new talent for their team, and executives whose business objectives rely on human capital 
and efficiency of operations.
∙   Individual members: This group does not pay for services but is the main source of 
data points for PeopleAhead’s TrueMatch® system. PeopleAhead will focus on ­building a 
base of individual members who range from recent graduates to individ­uals with 5–7 years 
of continuous employment. Ideal members are those who are currently employed or will 
be graduating within nine months and are “poised” to make a career change. These 
­individuals can utilize the services to the fullest extent and are valuable candidates 
for business customers.
2.4. Competitive Advantage
∙   TrueMatch® offers a branded technology, marketed to both business customers  
and individual candidates for its “black box” value proposition, which establishes  
PeopleAhead as the category leader for recruitment-matching software. This technology 
­provides a point of differentiation from competitors, which may have technically similar 
matching software but constantly need to reinforce their marketing messages with 
­explanations of their value proposition.
∙   For individual candidates, PeopleAhead will be the favored career advancement platform 
­online, where individuals enthusiastically create a history and have connections (invited friends, 
coworkers, and mentors) in place that will make PeopleAhead a staple among their favorite Web 
sites. PeopleAhead delivers TrueMatch® career opportunities, professional development plans 
that let people establish a professional record, and valuable career advancement tools, including 
automatic position feedback, “recommend-a-friend,” and team-based career networking.
∙   For business customers, PeopleAhead makes online sourcing and qualification of candidates 
quick and efficient by prequalifying potential candidates, seeking recommendations for hard-to-
find individuals, and delivering only the Top 10 most highly qualified candidates who have 

68	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Figures provide a visually 
attractive break in the text 
and summarize a lot of 
­information in an easy-to- 
read format.
Individual members segments
24.4 M
3.7 M
1.3 M
7.4 M
134.5 M
Senior college students
Other college students
Graduate program students
Current employees
Unemployed
In discussing both the external 
market and the internal 
advantages of PeopleAhead, 
the plan carefully distinguishes 
between individual job 
candidates and businesses, 
thus differentiating the focus 
and objectives according to 
this segmentation.
­preconfirmed interest in the available position. PeopleAhead will be the most effective 
­candidate-company matching platform available in the market, delivering prequalified, 
­preconfirmed candidates.
3.   Situation Analysis—Online Recruitment
Online recruitment is the system whereby companies use the Web to locate and qualify 
­prospective candidates for available positions. The methods employed by online recruitment 
service providers to serve this market range from resume aggregation to assessment test 
­application to linking strategies. However, the common underlying objective is to locate 
­candidates who would not be found by traditional recruitment methods and use computing 
power to qualify candidates quickly and with more accuracy than would be possible 
­manually.
3.1. Industry Analysis
Large online recruitment Web sites make this a tedious process by requiring companies 
to search through many resumes manually to find the right candidate. Other sites solicit 
­recommendations for positions. However, resumes are often “enhanced,” such that 
­almost all candidates appear qualified, and information found in the resume or provided 
through a recommendation is simply not sufficient to make an educated hiring decision. 
­Companies need more information and intelligent tools that make this screening 
­process more accurate.
3.1.1. Market Size:
The market size for both member segments in 2005 was as follows:

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
69
	
	
Employment by enterprise type
15.4 M
35.1 M
27.3 M
51.7 M
Very small enterprises
Small enterprises
Medium enterprises
Large enterprises
Company members segments
0.10 M
0.11 M
5.27 M
1.33 M
Very small enterprises
Small enterprises
Medium enterprises
Large enterprises
The most critical issue in examining market size is the relationship between the number of compa-
nies and the number of workers employed, because sales are based on the number of positions 
­(profiles purchased), not the number of companies that use the service.
	
The following figure shows the number of people employed by each enterprise market 
­segment as of January 2006, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. This segment 
­information will be useful in defining PeopleAhead’s target market.

70	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Another visually attractive 
graph summarizes compli­
cated information easily. The 
use of high-quality color can 
add a professional feel to a 
marketing plan.
0
2
4
6
8
$10B
Revenue
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Recruitment advertisement industry growth
Total recruitment advertisement
Total online recruitment market
Main competitors: Monster,
CareerBuilder, and Yahoo/HotJobs
$1.3B
$1.8B
$2.4B
$3.3B
$4.4B
$5.9B
$7.6B
3.1.2. Market Growth
PeopleAhead will operate in the online recruitment market. The growth of this industry is subject 
to two primary constraints: U.S. economic health and online recruitment advertisement adoption 
rates. Understanding these constraints will help identify PeopleAhead’s opportunity. General 
­indicators suggest the U.S. economy (GDP) will grow at an average annual rate of 4% for the next 
decade.7 Online recruitment advertising is expected to grow by 35% per year to reach $7.6 billion 
by 2010.8 Not only is the market expanding, but it is exhibiting rapid adoption by new entities, as 
the following graph shows.9
3.1.3. Market Needs
∙   The right person for the right position: The right employee for one company or position is 
not the same for all others. Not only must companies locate intelligent individuals with rele-
vant experience, but they also prefer people who are aligned with the position requirements 
in terms of personality, competencies, and fit with the company culture.
∙   Prescreening qualification tools: Increasing the number of candidates through online 
­recruitment can be advantageous, but it can also be a hindrance. When sourcing candidates, 
recruiters need tools that help them qualify applicants.
∙   Time savings: Companies need to complete the online sourcing and qualification of 
­candidates quickly. Leaving positions unfilled can cause critical performance gaps to 
emerge within the company.

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
71
	
	
Before engaging in a firm- 
specific SWOT analysis (see 
Chapter 2), this marketing 
plan assesses the external 
market environment further 
and thus establishes a basis 
for the subsequent SWOT 
analysis.
Using a table and bullet  
points, the plan summarizes  
a lot of information  
succinctly and clearly.
Note that the analysis uses 
outside sources to support its 
claims.
∙   Industry best practices: The network-
ing model used by PeopleAhead 
draws on the industry accepted best 
practices contact protocols drawn 
from multiple industries, including 
online feedback, recruitment, and 
­social networking and offline 
­professional networking. True-
Match® software aligns business ob-
jectives with appropriate candidates.
∙   Team expertise: The combined ­ 
talents of the founders include human 
resources, system development, sales, 
and marketing.
∙   Web development expertise:  
PeopleAhead has partnered with 
an award-winning European 
­software ­development provider. 
This company provides quality 
­usually reserved for high-budget 
­projects, at terms that are favorable 
for a start-up company.
∙   Absence of industry “influentials”: 
As a start-up, PeopleAhead does not 
currently have resources to attract 
­influential industry managers.
∙   Inability to guarantee critical mass: 
As is true of many Internet compa-
nies, the business must solve the 
“chicken and egg” puzzle to build 
critical mass.
∙   Verifying efficiency of matching 
­capabilities: In theory, the system has 
an absolute guarantee of effectivity; 
computations make decisions rather 
than humans. However, the matching 
capabilities must be verified as accu-
rate to gain widespread acceptance.
∙   Broad target market: Because 
­PeopleAhead is targeting a wide 
range of businesses, the product 
­being developed has not been 
­“customized” ­ideally for each 
­segment.
External	
OPPORTUNITIES	
THREATS
∙   Service gap: Recruiters are not 
pleased with current online 
­recruitment vendors.
∙   Industry gap: Job turnover is  
every 3.5 years per person.
∙   Demand for productive candidates.
∙   Online recruitment advertising: 
Growing by 35% per year, to  
reach $7.6 billion by 2010.10
3.1.4. Market Trends
The methods by which online recruitment service providers deliver candidates has been 
­undergoing a migration from resume aggregation and search services like Monster and 
­CareerBuilder to new Web 2.0 methodologies that include passive recruitment, “meta 
­tagging,” and social networking.
	
The underlying objective of these Web 2.0 services is to allow individuals to remain on a 
few, trusted Web sites while enabling companies to access those individuals for financial pur-
poses. In parallel, the focus is moving from aggregation of unique visitors toward engaging 
­existing users more intensively. Internet users are growing familiar with sites that encourage 
­socializing, collaborating, and distributing private information online to help improve network 
benefits and need to be engaged to maintain contact.
3.2. SWOT Analysis
	
Positive	
Negative
Internal	
STRENGTHS	
WEAKNESSES
∙   Convergence: Existing competitors 
may form strategic alliances and 
­establish powerful positions before 
PeopleAhead can establish itself.
∙   Inability to protect model: Very little 
­intellectual property created by Web 
sites is protected by law. Although 
­PeopleAhead will pursue aggressive
(continued)

72	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
If PeopleAhead chooses to 
adopt a competitor-based 
pricing strategy (see Chapter 
13), detailed information about 
how other recruitment firms 
work will be mandatory.
Information about competi-
tors’ revenues, customers, 
growth, and so forth often is 
available publicly through a 
variety of sources.
For information that may not 
belong in the main text, an 
appendix offers an effective 
means to provide detail 
without distracting readers.
This section offers the 
“product” component of the 
market/product/customer 
analysis. Because People-­
Ahead’s product is mostly a 
service (see Chapter 12), it 
focuses on some intangible 
features of its offering.
3.3. Competition
Most online recruitment Web sites compete in the active recruitment market, including Monster, 
CareerBuilder, and Yahoo/HotJobs. The pervasive segment includes job seekers who actively 
look for jobs, post their resumes, and search for jobs on company Web sites. Most active recruit-
ers offer free services to users and charge companies on a fee basis. Companies can post jobs 
and search for candidate resumes in the database (average fee for local searches is $500 and na-
tionwide is $1,000). In this first-generation online recruitment business model, competitors face 
the challenge to make the process more user-friendly and reduce the effort required to make 
these sites deliver results.
∙   Monster: Monster.com is the sixteenth most visited Web site in the United States, with more 
than 43 million professionals in its viewer base. Monster earns revenue from job postings, 
­access to its resume database, and advertisements on Web sites of partner companies.
∙   Careerbuilder: Careerbuilder.com has experienced 75% growth for the past five years. This 
job post/resume search company uses its media ownership to attract passive candidates from 
partner Web sites. It achieves growth through affiliate partnerships that host job searches on 
affiliated Web pages, such as Google, MSN, AOL, USA Today, Earthlink, BellSouth, and 
CNN. Job posting is the primary activity, sold together with or separately from resume 
searches.
∙   Passive recruitment: The second generation of online recruitment locates candidates who 
are not necessarily looking for jobs but who could be convinced to move to a new position if 
the right opportunity was presented. The most recognized competitors in this category include 
Jobster, LinkedIn, and H3 (Appendix B).
3.4. Company Analysis
PeopleAhead’s mission is simple: improve people’s lives through career advancement.  
PeopleAhead recognizes that career advancement means many things to many people and 
­provides a fresh perspective on career networking that is flexible yet powerful:
∙   Users are not alone: Finding a job is not easy. Why search solo? PeopleAhead unites groups 
of friends, coworkers, and mentors to create natural, team-based career discovery.
∙   Job posting is not natural: People spend countless hours searching job listings and posting 
resumes, only to be overlooked because their writing style or resume format does not match 
an overburdened recruiter’s preference. Good people, not resumes, make great companies. 
PeopleAhead’s TrueMatch technology matches the right people with the right position. No 
posting, no applying—just good, quality matches.
  IP protection strategies, the model could 
be copied or mimicked by competitors.
∙   Inadequate differentiation: Inability 
to explain our differentiation would 
relegate PeopleAhead to (unfair) 
comparisons with competitors. With-
out differentiation, People­Ahead will 
not be able to create scale through 
network effects.
∙   Fragmented business models: Online 
recruitment is fragmented by recruit-
ment methodology: active (people 
who need jobs), passive (people who 
are not looking but would move if 
enticed), poised (people unsatisfied 
with jobs they have), and network 
(finding people of ­interest based on 
who or what they know).
External	
OPPORTUNITIES	
THREATS

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
73
	
	
The last—and some would  
say most important—piece  
of the analysis puzzle: 
customers.
Although the introduction to 
this appendix and the plan’s 
organization suggest that 
analyses of competitors, 
products, and customers are 
separate, as this plan shows, a 
firm usually cannot address 
one without considering the 
other. Here, in the “customer” 
section, the plan notes what 
its competitors fail to do and 
therefore why it offers a more 
valuable service.
Understanding a target 
customer is not just about 
numbers. PeopleAhead tries 
to consider what customers 
think and feel when searching 
for jobs too.
∙   Professionals being professionals: There is a place online for social networking, pet net-
working, and music networking. So why is there no outlet for career networking online—the 
activity that consumes the majority of our professional lives? PeopleAhead is a place where 
professionals share their experiences, achievements, and objectives with other professionals 
that care and can be found by employers who value their professionalism.
3.5. Customer Analysis
PeopleAhead’s R&D efforts show that the impetus to improve recruitment effectivity is perva-
sive and that unmet needs revolve around a few core issues: the ability to find qualified talent, 
establishing a fit between the candidate and the company culture, verifying the candidate’s 
­career progression, and working quickly and cost effectively. The following customer character-
istics represent ideal attributes that align with PeopleAhead’s service offering. This information 
might be used in conjunction with the Marketing Strategy.
3.5.1. Business Customer
∙   Industry: Because companies that value human capital are more likely to take a chance on a 
start-up that promotes professional development, the broadly defined professional services 
­industry, including insurance, banking, and consulting, is the primary focus.
∙   Functional area: PeopleAhead’s system identifies “people” people, so positions that require 
human interaction are more aligned with system capabilities than those with stringent skill 
­requirements, sets such as programming or accounting.
∙   Size: Large businesses (>1000 employees) have high volume requirements and demand 
­vendors with proven track records; small businesses (<25 employees) hire fewer people and 
may not justify acquisition costs. PeopleAhead aligns best with medium-sized customers.
∙   Hiring need: PeopleAhead serves two types of searches very well: those with too many ap-
plicants and those with too few applicants. By drawing applicants that most systems overlook 
and delivering only the most qualified applicants, the system assures the right candidate is 
identified quickly.
3.5.2. Individual Member
∙   Background: People who value professional development and are familiar with computer 
networking technologies; most are likely college educated, motivated by career success, 
and aware of their professional competencies/deficiencies.
∙   Situation: Members should have a professional development plan to share  
with others who can help them achieve their objectives—likely people who are  
inquisitive about their professional future and not content with their current  
situation. The common industry terminology for this group of people is “poised  
candidates.”
∙   Outlook: Proactive people who research, plan, self-educate, and talk about their career. 
­Probably the clearest example of proactivity is a student who devotes time, effort, and  
financial resources toward career advancement.

74	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
By already identifying key 
markets in the previous 
section, the plan provides a 
foundation for a more specific 
targeting statement in this 
section.
The plan continues with the 
same segmentation through-
out. Here the plan discusses 
targeting and what makes 
each segment attractive.
The final step in the STP 
process: Positioning for the 
segmented, targeted market.
Given its own section in this 
plan, a discussion of the 
marketing mix constitutes a  
key element of the strategic 
planning process (see  
Chapter 2).
PeopleAhead’s mission
According to well-known 
marketing concepts, the 
marketing mix consists of the 
four Ps: product (service here), 
price, place (distribution here), 
and promotion.
The product (service) offering 
must establish the value for 
consumers: Why should they 
expend effort or resources to 
obtain the offering?
4.   Marketing Strategy
4.1. Market Segmentation
4.1.1. Business Customers
∙  Small enterprises. Businesses with 10–99 employees. Companies with fewer than  
10 employees are categorized as “Very Small Enterprises” and will not be a primary  
target market.
∙  Medium enterprises. Businesses with 100–1,000 employees.
4.1.2. Individual Members
∙  Senior college students. Students in the process of searching for a first career.
∙  Graduate program students. Mid-career candidates searching for new career opportunities, 
such as internships, part-time during enrollment, or full-time after graduation.
∙  Current employees. Persons who are currently employed but are poised to locate better 
­career opportunities.
∙  Unemployed. Persons searching for jobs not included in previous segments.
4.2. Target Market
PeopleAhead plans to focus resources on small to medium enterprises (SMEs) in the New En-
gland metro market, including Boston, Providence, Hartford, Stamford, Norwalk, Worcester, and 
Springfield. Online recruitment companies compete for national recruitment spending, but most 
job seekers are locally based, so market penetration is possible by covering a single geographical 
location. By maintaining this focus, PeopleAhead will be better equipped to build a critical mass 
of users that represent the job-seeking population and thus improve both users’ and customers’ 
experience, customer service, and the use of financial resources.
4.3. User Positioning
To the proactive professional, PeopleAhead is career advancement done right—providing a plat-
form to discover, plan, and advance careers by uniting friends, coworkers, and mentors with 
companies searching for the right talent.
5.   Marketing Mix
5.1. Products/Services Offered
The first planned offering is group profiling; users self-associate with groups to share 
­development plans. Access to groupings is permission based and similar to social network-
ing. Members will be able to share professional experiences with people they know. Group 
profiling may prompt “voyeur” networking, such that members join to view the profiles of 
the people they know.
	
PeopleAhead will then open group profiling to business customers, who will be granted 
access to groups of members to target people they want to hire.
	
The next added feature will be user feedback on professional development plans. People-
Ahead will track data from successful member profile matches to provide feedback for members 
who have not been matched successfully.

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
75
	
	
Making the product (service) 
available where and when 
consumers want it may  
seem somewhat easier for 
PeopleAhead because of  
the vast development of the 
Internet; however, the firm  
still needs to consider how  
it can ensure people know 
where and how to access  
its offering.
The plan offers a specific  
time frame, which recognizes 
the potential need to make 
changes in the future, as the 
market dictates.
5.2. Price
In addition to a basic pricing schedule, PeopleAhead will offer bulk pricing and contract pricing 
to business customers to satisfy unique customer needs. The pricing model is expected to remain 
constant, but customer feedback will be analyzed to ensure alignment with their requirements.
	
Continuing the new customer acquisition plan, PeopleAhead will encourage new trials by 
offering promotional pricing to new customers.
5.3. Distribution
∙   PeopleAhead Challenge: The PeopleAhead Challenge will act as a primary user acquisition 
strategy. Selection will be focused on successful target segments demanded by customers.
∙   Direct sales: Direct customer contact is the preferred method of communication during the 
first six months. Telesales is the anticipated eventual sales model, due to reduced costs and 
quicker customer sales cycle, but it limits intimacy between the customer and PeopleAhead. 
During the initial stages, intimacy and excellent customer service are more highly desired 
than reduced cost, and direct sales achieves that objective.
∙   Industry events: Attendance at HR industry and recruitment events will supplement direct 
sales efforts.
∙   Challenge groups: Word-of-mouth distribution by PeopleAhead members.
5.4. Promotion
∙   Public profiling: When the product is ready, with proper precautions for protecting competitive 
advantages, PeopleAhead can increase its Web presence. Strategies include contributing articles 
to recruitment publishers, writing op/ed pieces, public profiling of the founders on Web sites like 
LinkedIn, Ziggs, and zoominfo, and blogging.
∙   Blogger community testimonials: Influential users of blogs will be invited to try the system 
and be granted “exclusive” access to the inner workings of the site. A subsequent linking blitz 
will put opinion pieces in front of recruiters, job seekers, and the investment community.
∙   Strategic alliances: PeopleAhead offers a product that complements the services offered by 
many large organizations. Partner opportunities exist with
a.  Universities, colleges, academic institutions
b.  Professional associations, clubs, industry affiliation groups
c.  Online associations, groups, blogs
d.  Professional services firms, outplacement firms, and executive search firms
Strategic alliances serve multiple purposes: They can help PeopleAhead increase  
public exposure, increase the user base, expand product offerings, and increase revenue  
opportunities. These benefits will be considered and partnerships proposed prior to the  
official launch. For strategic purposes, PeopleAhead prefers to focus on product develop-
ment in the near term (3 months) and then reassess potential alliances after system efficacy 
has been proven.

76	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
© Royalty-Free/Corbis
The marketing plan needs to 
identify not only costs but  
also potential revenues to 
cover those costs.
Certain assumptions or 
marketing research form the 
basis for its estimation of 
start-up costs.
This section contains a lot  
of numbers in a small space; 
the graphs and tables help 
depict those numbers  
clearly and visually.
6.   Financials
Start-up costs consist primarily of Web site design and development, legal representation (busi-
ness formation, contract negotiation, and intellectual property protection), and general overhead. 
PeopleAhead projects start-up expenditures of $70,000 during inception, of which $30,000 has 
been funded by the founding team.
	
After the Web site launches, the cost structure will consist of sales agent salaries, 
­general and administrative operating costs, and marketing. In the first year, marketing 
­expenses are projected to be $6,250 per month. Monthly overhead likely will reach  
$24,750 and remain constant.
	
A.   Projected Income Statement
Pro Forma Income Statement	
	
	
Year 1	
Year 2	
Year 3	
Year 4	
Year 5
Sales	
$56,453	
$2,683,665	
$8,170,655	
$16,312,843	
$30,921,013
Gross Margin	
$54,194	
$2,316,318	
$7,383,829	
$14,780,329	
$28,244,172
Gross Margin %	
96.00%	
86.31%	
90.37%	
90.61%	
91.34%
Net Profit	
($156,906)	
$717,403	
$3,356,768	
$7,035,155	
$14,180,041

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
77
	
	
This plan divides the objectives 
into three categories: overall 
objective, marketing, and 
financial. Although this is a 
marketing plan, it must also 
include other aspects that 
influence marketing, such as 
financial status.
$56K
($157K)
($2.7M)
($8.2M)
($16.3M)
($31M)
($0.7M)
($3.4M)
($7M)
($14.2M)
–10
0
10
20
30
$40M
Revenue
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Revenue and net income projections
Revenues
Net income (proﬁt)
Net income (loss)
7.   Implementation Plan
The launch of PeopleAhead will use a phased approach, beginning with building brand awareness. 
Brand awareness should be developed through the founders’ visible presence at professional events, 
online searches, membership in professional associations, networking, and strategic alliances. This 
visibility will help gain investment capital.
7.1. Objective—Growth
∙  During the first six months of commercial availability, the primary objective is to expand 
both the user and customer base to maintain a 100:1 user to customer ratio.
∙  Business customers: Sign 24 regular customers and 72 occasional customers. Execute 
117 position matches.
∙  Individual members: Convert 10,000 people to PeopleAhead members.
7.2. Marketing Objectives—Growth
∙  PeopleAhead Challenge: Pursue groups that were effective during beta trial and represent a 
cohesive set of profiles. Expand and refine the Challenge to reflect lessons learned.
∙  Increase member networking activity: Increase user numbers through networking initiated 
by existing members. Improve user experience to promote networking.
∙  Increase profile completeness: Increase user engagement with platform.
∙  Generate traffic.
∙  Public relations campaign (PR): Increase awareness of PeopleAhead brand through 
­concentrated PR efforts directed at the target market of customers and users.

78	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
By offering quantitative, direct 
goals, PeopleAhead ensures 
that it can measure its 
progress toward those goals.
7.3. Financial Objectives
∙  Efficient marketing expenditures: 9,000 target users (10,000 year-end total − 1,000 during 
beta) × $5.00 target acquisition cost = $45,000 budget.
∙  Revenue: $482.50 per position × 117 positions = $56,452.50 revenue.
7.4. Key Success Factors:
∙  Economical marketing to relevant constituents: PeopleAhead needs to establish communi-
cation (distribution) channels that pinpoint relevant constituents in a manner consistent with 
mission values. Limited by resources, chosen channels must aggregate many relevant eyes 
with free, minimal, or deferred costs involved.
∙  Crafting of brand identity: The contrast between PeopleAhead and competitors lies not 
only in product differentiation but also in the company’s mission statement and delivery. 
One-time job search is available from thousands of online recruitment sources. Social 
­networking has been covered from diverse angles, attracting many different audiences. 
The challenge is to associate www.PeopleAhead.com and TrueMatch technology with 
­“career advancement done right.” The goal is to become the only company that a person 
thinks of for long-term career discovery, advancement, and development.
∙  Efficient value delivery: The base of customers (both individual and business) needs to 
­receive the proposed value in a timely manner, with consideration given to quality versus 
quantity of results, alignment with existing objectives, and overall experience with the 
­PeopleAhead brand.
∙  Critical mass of business customers and individual users: The matching process requires 
that both customers and users exist in the system from the outset of commercialization. This 
need brings to the forefront the “chicken and egg” scenario; establishing either customers or 
users requires the other constituent to exist already. The exact number that constitutes 
­“critical mass” ranges from 100 users per position to 10 users per position, depending on 
compatibility between each constituency.
∙  System effectivity: The ability of PeopleAhead’s TrueMatch software to provide relevant 
candidate recommendations is critical. The effectiveness of the software depends on the algo-
rithms that match users with positions and the networking protocol that initiates recommen-
dations between users and the people they know. Proposing an inappropriate match could 
jeopardize the credibility of the system.
∙  Intellectual property (IP) strategy: PeopleAhead is engaged in two primary segments of 
online enterprise: online recruitment and social networking. Existing competitors have made 
many efforts to protect their methodologies through U.S. patents. However, precedent has not 
been established for the legal assertions made by these companies. As a result, PeopleAhead 
will assume an offensive IP strategy, consisting of diligent IP infringement review, patent 
­application where appropriate, and aggressive trade secret protection of best practices.
∙  Financial support: The founders’ investment is sufficient to form the business core and take 
delivery of PeopleAhead’s Web site and software. Financial support will be required to fund 
operations, execute the IP strategy, and secure customers and users to meet financial targets. 
Without funding, PeopleAhead will not be able to proceed beyond the product development 
stage.
∙  Sales process: PeopleAhead’s business model requires the acquisition of both business 
customers who have available positions and users who will be matched with those 

	
WRITING A MARKETING PLAN  CHAPTER TWO APPENDIX	
79
	
	
The evaluation section retains 
the segmentation scheme 
established previously 
between business customers 
and individual members.
Additional useful information 
that might clutter the plan 
should appear in an appendix, 
but is not included in this 
illustration.
­positions. These two constituents may be reached through different sales processes 
­without overlap.
8.   Evaluation & Control
PeopleAhead will evaluate user profiles to identify sets of profiles that are valuable to new 
­business customers, which will aid in the selection of subsequent target market customers.
8.1. Business Customers
Face-to-face meetings, phone conversations, and e-mail survey contacts with people  
from a range of industries, company sizes, and functional areas provide a means to  
(1) build relationships with prospective customers, (2) understand customer needs,  
and (3) ensure alignment between PeopleAhead’s product and customers’ recruitment 
­preferences. A summary of the key findings is listed here:
∙  Employee fit: Will the applicant fit our corporate culture? Will the applicant fit with 
the team we’re considering? Will the applicants’ competencies fit with the position 
­requirements?
∙  Pay for performance: Objections to recruitment services focus not on price (though it is a 
consideration) but rather on lack of performance.
∙  Unqualified applicants: Many people who want a job apply, whether they are qualified  
or not. Recruiters then must scan resumes and weed out unqualified applicants instead of 
getting to know the qualified applicants.
∙  Hard costs vs. soft costs: Most companies track the recruitment costs of hiring  
providers, but few measure the time costs of hiring, opportunity costs of hiring the 
wrong employee, or productivity costs of leaving a position unfilled. Recruitment  
performance must be easy to measure. Value selling is difficult in the human resources 
departments.
∙  Valuable recommendations: Most recruiters use online recruitment as a necessary  
but ineffective means of candidate sourcing, secondary to recommendations. Recom­
mendations include the recommender’s judgment of the candidate’s fit with the 
­available position.
8.2. Individual Members
Periodic surveys of various prospective users of online recruitment services indicate  
(1) current services, (2) methods that work well, and (3) biggest problems with online 
­recruitment providers. The following is a qualitative summary of the key findings:
∙  Willingness to try: Careers are important to people; they are averse to spending time  
uploading resume information to online recruitment Web sites only because of the lack  
of perceived value. They will spend time when the career opportunities are perceived as 
valuable.
∙  Frustration: Job seekers are frustrated with available online recruitment providers.  
Networking is the favored method for career advancement.
∙  Lack of differentiation: Regardless of the qualifications a job seeker possesses, it is 
­difficult to make them evident in a traditional resume.
∙  Motivation shift over time: Early professionals are motivated by financial rewards.  
Mid-career professionals recommend people because it helps the people they know.  
Late-career professionals hope to improve their own job search opportunities.
Appendix A. Organizational Chart of PeopleAhead
Appendix B. Competition: Passive Recruiters

 S
ocial media have revolutionized how compa-
nies communicate with, listen to, and learn 
from customers. The influence is far-reaching, 
whether firms are selling online or in stores, 
providing services or products, or dealing primarily with 
consumers or business customers. Modern listening and 
analysis tools allow firms to identify salient, pertinent 
trends and customer input through social media.
For example, Under Armour’s carefully designed so-
cial media plan enables it to connect effectively with cus-
tomers, control buzz, and respond to trends as they arise. 
Largely through its stellar social media use, applied in 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	 LO3-1	 Describe the 4E framework of social media marketing.
	 LO3-2	 Understand the drivers of social media engagement.
	 LO3-3	 Understand the types of social media.
	 LO3-4	 Understand various motivations for using mobile applications and how they are priced.
	 LO3-5	 Recognize and understand the three components of a social media strategy.
SOCIAL  
AND MOBILE 
MARKETING
CHAPTER 3

combination and parallel to various other marketing tac-
tics, Under Armour has overtaken adidas and moved in to 
second place in the sportswear market.1
Some elements of Under Armour’s basic marketing 
strategy, such as leveraging the popularity and authentic-
ity of famous athletic spokespersons, also constitute key 
aspects of its social media strategy.2 Under Armour might 
have half a million Twitter followers,3 but the athletes it 
sponsors have far more; Stephan Curry, pictured above 
for example, has 3.4 million followers.4 As part of the NBA 
phenom’s partnership with Under Armour, in his Twitter 
profile and cover pictures, Curry sports Under Armour 
gear. In parallel, Under Armour’s Twitter cover picture has 
featured Curry prominently.5
© VCG/Getty Images

82
THE 4E FRAMEWORK FOR SOCIAL MEDIA
As we will see throughout the book and as we saw in the chapter opener, social media are 
becoming integral components of any integrated marketing communications strategy. The 
term social media refers to the online and mobile technologies that distribute content to 
facilitate interpersonal interactions. These media use various firms that offer services or 
tools to help consumers and firms build connections. Through these connections, market-
ers and customers share information of all forms—from their thoughts about products or 
images to uploaded pictures, music, and videos.
The changes and advances in social, mobile, and online technologies have created a 
perfect storm, forcing firms to change how they communicate with their customers. Tradi-
tional ways to market their products using brick-and-mortar stores, traditional mass media 
(e.g., print, television, radio), and other sales promotional vehicles (e.g., mail, telemarket-
ing) are no longer sufficient for many firms. The presence of social, mobile, and online 
marketing is steadily expanding relative to these more traditional forms of integrated mar-
keting communications (IMC).
The changing role of traditional media, sales promotions, and retail, coupled with the 
new social, mobile, and online media, has led to a different way of thinking about the ob-
jectives of marketing communications: the 4E framework (see Exhibit 3.1):
∙	
Excite customers with relevant offers.
∙	
Educate them about the offering.
 LO3-1	
Describe the 4E 
framework of social 
media marketing.
Curry’s profile also includes Under Armour’s current 
slogan, #IWILL.6 The brand constantly seeks to develop 
and spread encouraging and inspiring taglines, including 
“I Will,” in its marketing communication.7 Its Facebook 
page contains little explicit advertising; instead, the brand 
posts inspirational quotes, videos, and graphics in an at-
tempt to engage customers with its products and brand.8 
In contrast, Nike, the top brand in the market, uses its 
Facebook page primarily to promote its latest products.9 
On YouTube, Under Armour offers easy access to some 
of its most famous commercials, including the “I will what 
I want” and “Rule Yourself” campaigns. The channel also 
includes a series of interviews with top athletes. Such in-
spirational approaches in turn inform the multiple, spe-
cific social media accounts that Under Armour develops 
for various target markets. For example, different Twitter 
accounts highlight Under Armour’s links to basketball, 
baseball, football, and running.
Inspiring storylines and exciting brand images are 
clearly important, but success on social media also de-
mands the ability to respond actively and promptly to 
customers’ comments. In this sense, Under Armour 
again achieves notable advantages, because it takes 
this aspect seriously. A designated Twitter handle  
@AskTeamUA connects customers directly with cus-
tomer service representatives.10 Customers expect re-
sponses from brands on Twitter, especially if they tweet 
a complaint.11 Therefore, Under Armour’s ability to re-
spond to both negative and positive feedback, often 
within an hour, is fundamental to the success of its so-
cial media presence.
When consumers search for Under Armour on pop-
ular search engines, they usually see a page of company- 
sponsored results. The brand has done the preliminary 
work, through search engine optimization and brand 
building, to control most of the brand-related content peo-
ple see online. Even if an uncontrolled story pops up (e.g., 
when Nike spokesperson LeBron James mockingly asked 
“Who’s that?” in response to a reporter’s question about 
Under Armour), the brand’s own communications domi-
nate the first page of results.12 No company can prevent 
negative comments completely, but Under Armour has 
managed to ensure that most of them are hidden under a 
wave of positive, company-approved messages. Thus the 
@AskTeamUA service is available, but browsers must look 
a bit harder to find the criticisms.

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
83
	
	
∙	
Help them experience products, whether directly or 
indirectly.
∙	
Give them an opportunity to engage with their social 
network.
Social and Mobile Marketing 3.1 recounts how Jimmy Fallon 
got viewers more excited and engaged with his late-night talk 
show by leveraging the power of social media. 
Excite the Customer
Marketers use many kinds of social media–related offers to 
excite customers, including mobile applications (“apps”) and 
games to get the customers excited about an idea, product, 
brand, or company. Firms actively use social networks such as 
Facebook, Pinterest, and Google+ to communicate deals that 
are likely to excite consumers, such as when the Minnesota 
Timberwolves encouraged Facebook fans to post a great shot 
of a dunk onto their Pinterest page for a chance to win tickets 
to a game.13
To excite customers, an offer must be relevant to its tar-
geted customer. Relevancy can be achieved by providing per-
sonalized offers, which are determined through insights and 
information obtained from customer relationship management 
and/or loyalty programs. To obtain these insights and informa-
tion, the firm might use online analytic tools such as Google 
Analytics. 
Social Media
Ex
p
er
ie
nc
e
E
n
g
a
g
e
m
e
n
t
Ed
uc
at
io
n
Ex
ci
te
m
e
nt
E X H I B I T  3.1
The 4E Framework for Social Media
The Minnesota Timberwolves excited Facebook fans by offer-
ing a chance to win tickets by posting pictures of a dunk to 
its Pinterest page. 
© Genevieve Ross/AP Photo

84	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
In some cases location-based software and applications help bring the offer to the 
customers when they are in the ­process of making a purchase decision. For instance, Sta-
ples may provide a loyal customer a relevant coupon, based on previous purchases through 
his or her mobile phone, while the customer is in the store—a very relevant and hopefully 
exciting experience. 
Late-Night Laughs to Orderi
Social & Mobile Marketing 3.1
Social media appear to have brought us full circle. In the early 
days of television, nearly all the advertisements were live. 
Then taping became the main method. But as recent technolo-
gies have made it easy for viewers to speed past or com-
pletely skip the advertising messages, some marketers are 
revisiting the idea of live advertising. This isn’t the same old 
notion though. By recombining an idea from broadcast media 
with new functionalities enabled by social media, marketers 
seek to ensure that viewers are not only interested in the new 
content but even might determine it.
	
A Lexus-sponsored program, “It’s Your Move After Dark,” 
ran on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon over the course of four 
weeks. During the first commercial break on each Thursday’s 
show, a Lexus advertisement prominently displayed a hashtag. 
By linking to it, viewers could submit their ideas for commer-
cials. Then in a later advertising break during the same show, 
an improvisational comedy troupe acted out the chosen ideas. 
The acting troupes—Fun Young Guys, Magnet Theater Touring 
Company, MB’s Dream, and Stone Cold Fox—were all from 
New York and well known for their comedy. In actuality, their 
performances took place under the Brooklyn Bridge, adding to 
the vibrancy and reality of the setting.
	
To appeal to the widest audience of Fallon fans possible, 
separate advertisements were chosen and enacted for the 
East and West Coast broadcasts. The submissions came 
through a wide variety of media channels, including Facebook, 
Twitter, and Tumblr. Such ready access, real-time interactivity, 
and potential influence—together with the promise of funny, 
totally new advertising content and perhaps even a live, on-air 
goof—promised that Fallon’s youthful, edgy audience wanted 
to tune in to the commercials as much as they did to the show.
	
The advertisements are not the only way Fallon has relied 
on social media to connect with his audience of course. He 
has nearly 10 million Twitter followers, and on a regular basis 
he challenges them to post the funniest, silliest, or craziest re-
sponses to topics he provides, such as “#howigotfired,” 
“#whydonttheymakethat,” and “#awkwarddate.” The best contri-
butions are highlighted on Fallon’s Twitter feed but also might 
make it onto the network broadcast when he reads out his 
favorite bits. That is, the consumers of his content also provide 
some of that content.
	
On the flip side, content from the traditional television 
channel constantly makes it onto social media sites. Excerpts 
from Fallon’s shows are some of the most popular YouTube 
videos, including a skit in which President Barack Obama “slow 
jams” the news, a sing-along with Carly Rae Jepson and the 
Roots of “Call Me Maybe” using found materials as instru-
ments, and of course, any skits featuring his pal Justin 
Timberlake. 
	
Fallon has continued these antics and tactics on the The 
Tonight Show. As long as he keeps his viewers excited and 
willing to contribute and engage with him, his social media 
dominance appears likely to persist, regardless of what time 
he appears on people’s televisions.
In an innovative campaign, Jimmy Fallon viewers could submit 
ideas for Lexus commercials via Twitter and see an improvised 
version later in the night on the show.
© Theo Wargo/Getty Images

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
85
	
	
Educate the Customer
An imperative of well-designed social media marketing offers is that they have a clear 
call to action to draw customers through their computers, tablets, and mobile devices 
into online websites or traditional retail stores. When potential customers arrive at the 
websites or stores, the marketer has a golden opportunity to educate them about its value 
proposition and communicate the offered benefits. Some of this information may be new, 
but in some cases, education is all about reminding people about what they already 
know. Therefore, by engaging in appropriate education, marketers are expanding the 
overlap of the benefits that they provide with the benefits that customers require. In this 
sense, the second E of the 4E framework constitutes a method to develop a sustainable 
competitive advantage. Several social media tools are critical in helping marketers edu-
cate their potential customers, such as blogs and blogging tools (e.g., WordPress, 
Twitter), HubSpot (all-in-one marketing software), YouTube, and Google+, as well as 
some lesser known options such as Roost or Schedulicity. Adding Value 3.1 highlights 
how HubSpot can be used to educate customers better.
Experience the Product or Service
Although most of the top videos on YouTube are funny, silly, or otherwise entertaining, 
the site’s most useful contributions may be the vivid information it provides about a 
firm’s goods and services—how they work, how to use them, and where they can be 
obtained. YouTube and similar sites can come relatively close to simulating real, rather 
than virtual, experiences. Such benefits are very common for products that have long 
been sold online—so much so that we might forget that it used to be difficult to assess 
these products before buying them. But today, consumers can download a chapter of a 
new book to their tablet before buying it. They can try out a software option for a month 
before buying it. They often view tutorials on everything from how to purchase caviar to 
cowboy boots. Being able to experience a product or service before buying it has ex-
panded the market significantly.
Staples excites its customers 
by giving them instant rewards 
through their mobile phone 
while they are in the store.
Courtesy of Staples, Inc.

86	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
For other offerings, such as services, social media again offer experience-based infor-
mation that was not previously available unless consumers bought and tried the product or 
service. Sephora has perfected the art of customer service in-store, online, and in social 
media. Customers know they can find beauty advice and makeovers in Sephora stores. But 
they can also visit Sephora.com for information. The advice section contains nearly 1 million 
conversations among Sephora customers, and to facilitate these conversational experi-
ences, Sephora suggests a featured topic each week, asking 
­contributors to indicate their favorite eyebrow products, for ex-
ample. The how-to section contains video tutorials by custom-
ers who offer testimonials about their experiences, as well as 
from beauty professionals who describe how viewers can 
achieve similar experiences with their hair, nail, makeup, and 
skincare beauty tools.14 For customers seeking an experience 
in other settings, Sephora also maintains its own YouTube 
channel featuring not only all the tutorial videos but also dedi-
cated videos that encourage them to experience specific prod-
uct lines, such as the “Kat Von D playlist.”15
Engage the Customer
In a sense, the first three Es set the stage for the last one: 
­engaging the customer. With engagement comes action, the 
­potential for a relationship, and possibly even loyalty and 
­commitment. Through social media tools such as blogging 
Adding Value 3.1
Educating Customers Using HubSpotii
Hy-Line Cruises uses HubSpot to enhance its social media 
presence.
© Oleg Albinsky/Getty Images RF
HubSpot is driven by its motto: “Solve for the customer.” This 
attitude has provided a foundation for the company’s enor-
mous success as it has become the largest provider of in-
bound marketing software and support. Consider one 
example of how it helps companies educate their own 
consumers. 
Hy-Line Cruises is a ferry company with vessels for travel 
to and from Cape Cod and regional islands, deep-sea fishing 
trips, and sightseeing. Although it had a strong Internet pres-
ence through its website and on Facebook and Twitter, it 
didn’t know if its efforts were leading to increased sales. 
Using HubSpot’s SEO (search engine optimization) and blog-
ging tools, Hy-Line began to match its blogging content to the 
keywords and phrases its potential customers were using. 
Not only did the new blogging content contain information 
about ferry services, but it also made recommendations 
about where to eat and what to do once on the Cape and 
islands. It also developed a free downloadable Insider’s Guide 
for each destination, and it kept track of and—through 
e-mail—thanked each potential customer. Compared with 
the previous year, before it started using HubSpot’s services, 
Hy-Line quickly generated 5 times more cruise offers to 
Nantucket and 17 times more Fall Daytrip Specials to 
Martha’s Vineyard.
HubSpot thus has grown to more than 15,000 business 
customers, spanning more than 90 countries. The constant 
growth it has enjoyed since its founding encompasses both 
the number of customers and revenues, which grew by ap-
proximately two-thirds in a recent one-year span. Its prospects 
for continued success also appear excellent, as its stock keeps 
soaring and its business customers keep looking for help 
reaching their own target markets.
Sephora maintains its own You-
Tube channel with dedicated 
videos that encourage custom-
ers to experience specific 
product lines, such as the  
“Kat Von D playlist.”
© Steve Jennings/Getty Images

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
87
	
	
and microblogging, customers actively engage with firms and their own social net-
works. Such engagement can be negative or positive. Positively engaged consumers 
tend to be more profitable consumers, purchasing 20 to 40 percent more than less 
­engaged customers do.16
But negative engagement has the potential to be even more damaging than positive 
engagement is beneficial. American Apparel has come under fire on several occasions 
for its social media posts. In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, in 2012, it sent out an 
e-mail blast to customers on the East Coast, promising 20 percent off all online pur-
chases, “in case you’re bored during the storm.” The company again faced backlash 
when it posted what it thought to be an artistic image of a firework on Tumblr for the 
Fourth of July—but the image turned out to be of the tragic explosion of the Challenger 
space shuttle.17 Many companies also seek to leverage the viral appeal of hashtag cam-
paigns, sometimes without thinking through the potential consequences. When McDonald’s 
launched a Twitter campaign to highlight its supply chain, using the hashtag #McDstories, 
the vagueness of the hashtag allowed consumers to move the conversation in a very 
different direction, sharing horror stories about their negative experiences eating at the 
fast food chain.18
Furthermore, social media engagement is moving past talking with companies, as the 
Wheel of Social Media Engagement in the next section reveals. After years of watching 
users express their deep desire to purchase the products highlighted on their sites, the so-
cial media powerhouses Pinterest and Instagram are adopting new initiatives to facilitate 
purchase transactions. Specifically, they both plan to install “buy buttons” that will enable 
users to click on a featured post or picture to initiate a sales process. On Instagram, the but-
ton is similar in function to the Facebook buy button. Advertisers on the site can include 
buy buttons in their ads, and when users click, the button links them to an external website 
where they can complete their purchase. The process is a little different on ­Pinterest. 
The presence of “buyable” pins signals to users that they may click on the link to receive 
detailed information about available colors, sizes, and other information. If they choose to 
purchase, the order goes directly to the merchant without ever taking the user off the 
­Pinterest site. In a recent survey, 93 percent of Pinterest users—or pinners—noted that they 
would like to use the site to make their purchases. However, these links are unpaid thus far, 
so Pinterest will not earn any revenues on the transaction. Both Instagram and Facebook 
instead can leverage advertising dollars to support their buying capabilities.19
To engage its customers, 
­Pinterest uses “buyable” pins, 
which signal users that they 
may click on the link to receive 
detailed information about 
products.
Source: Pinterest
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the 4Es?
2.	 What social media elements work best for each of the 4Es?

88	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
THE WHEEL OF SOCIAL MEDIA 
ENGAGEMENT20
Marketers recognize the importance of engaging customers; social media engagement 
offers a profitable way to engage customers by taking their current behavior into account 
while also setting the stage for future behavior. Firms work hard to engage customers, and 
social media provide them with unique abilities to target and participate in dynamic con-
versations with individual customers, leading to excellent returns on their investments in 
social media efforts. The growth of social media and their effects in turn stems from sev-
eral related factors.
A unifying framework, the Wheel of Social Media Engagement, comprises these fun-
damental drivers of social media engagement as five related effects, as Exhibit 3.2 shows. 
In the Wheel of Social Media Engagement, we propose that the hub is a repository of past 
and current social media engagements, and the circles around the wheel are the five effects 
that drive social media, as detailed next. 
The Information Effect
The information effect is the outcome of social media in which relevant information is 
spread by firms or individuals to other members of its social network. Information–whether 
because it is funny, cute, instructive, surprising, or interesting—is the key to turning the 
wheel. But the relevance of the information, and therefore its impact, depends on its con-
text and the receiver. Marketers work hard to provide information that is somehow contex-
tually relevant, such as interjecting a humorous advertisement into a social network of 
users who like to joke around and share funny pictures. 
As we think further about the information effect and the incredible magnitude of infor-
mation being conveyed through reviews, Facebook posts, tweets, and so on, it raises the 
 LO3-2	
Understand the 
drivers of social media 
engagement.
Network
Engagement
Dynamic
Connected
Timeliness
Information
E X H I B I T  3.2
The Wheel of Social Media Engagement

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
89
	
	
question: What can and should marketers do with all of it? 
The amount of information available can be overwhelming, 
even for the best marketers. Even when they know a lot 
about potential customers, marketers continue to find it 
challenging to create appeals that consumers embrace and to 
leverage the information they obtain from consumers in 
ways that encourage shoppers to purchase from them.
For example, BMW gained in-depth information about 
visitors to a popular Chinese social media site. Using those 
data, which included income and prior purchase behaviors, 
it determined which visitors were likely to be luxury car 
buyers and targeted advertising at them. That sounds great, 
except that other visitors, who were not targeted, protested 
vehemently. By not showing them luxury car ads, they as-
serted, the car brand and the social media site combined to 
make them feel like “losers.”21
The Connected Effect
The connected effect is an outcome of social media that 
satisfies humans’ innate need to connect with other peo-
ple. This connection in social media is bidirectional: 
People learn what their friends are interested in, but they also broadcast their own inter-
ests and opinions to those friends. Humans seek connections to other people, and social 
media have provided them with a new, easy, and engaging way to do so. In particular, 
BMW gains information about visitors to a Chinese social 
media site to target advertising to them.
Source: BMW Group China
People connect through social 
media by “liking” or “checking 
in” on Facebook.
© Tashauna Johnson Photography/ 
Photoedit

90	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
people can connect by sharing different types of information, whether their location, the 
food they have consumed, exercises they have completed, or a news article that they 
find interesting. And they achieve this connection by checking in, posting a picture to 
Instagram, uploading a video to YouTube, or sharing a link to an article they have liked 
on Facebook.
The need to connect with others has been a powerful evolutionary force throughout 
human history, driving communities as well as civilizations, including our modern tech-
nology civilization. Today, humans are less physically connected, because they shop 
online and have products delivered instead of interacting with the local shopkeeper, and 
they telecommute instead of working in an office with colleagues. But social media em-
power them to connect in novel ways. Some connections involve existing friends and 
colleagues; others refer to acquaintances who might not have been connected in an 
­offline world or with firms, brands, or news outlets that were not available before social 
media created the link.
This increased connection allows consumers to seek social approval for themselves 
and provide social approval to others. For example, consumers click to express their lik-
ing of various posts by members of their social networks. However, the increased forms 
of connections created by this effect also might threaten to annoy users who start looking 
at their smartphones every time they ding. Markets for filters could emerge to help 
­consumers categorize posts and updates in ways that reflect their own preferences. Fur-
thermore, whereas different platforms currently serve distinct purposes (e.g., Facebook 
for personal and LinkedIn for business), these social media outlets might seek to grow by 
encouraging users to visit their platform exclusively, then sort the various purposes from 
that point.
The Network Effect
The connected effect enhances human interaction on a one-to-one basis. But the 
­network effect enables the impact of the interaction to expand exponentially. The 
­network effect is the outcome of social media engagement in which every time a firm 
or person posts information, it is transferred to the poster’s vast connections across 
social media, causing the information to spread instanta-
neously. That is, when a person or company posts some-
thing on social media, other people or firms in their 
network might repost it, as when one “shares” on Facebook. 
The credibility and influence of the original poster and the 
network partners that choose to share the post will deter-
mine the ultimate influence of the post. From a marketing 
perspective, people who discuss products are more likely to 
buy them.22
One way companies can extend their network effects is 
by paying celebrities or pseudo-celebrities with large follow-
ings (i.e., bigger networks), hiring them to write posts about 
or upload pictures with their products. CoverGirl may have 
fewer than 2,000 Twitter followers,23 but one of its Cover-
Girls, Katy Perry, has more than 80 million.24 If Katy Perry 
tweets a closeup of her eyelashes, lengthened using her favor-
ite CoverGirl mascara, CoverGirl will have instantly reached 
all her millions of followers. 
The Dynamic Effect 
The impact of the dynamic effect of social media engage-
ment is twofold. First it describes the way in which informa-
tion is exchanged to network participants through 
back-and-forth communications in an active and effective 
manner. This back-and-forth exchange promotes engagement, 
If Katy Perry tweets a closeup of her eyelashes, lengthened 
using her favorite CoverGirl mascara, CoverGirl will have 
­instantly reached all her millions of followers.
© Photoshot

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
91
	
	
which makes consumers more likely to buy. The dynamic 
­nature of social media is a very efficient way to get information 
or to resolve disputes, and can provide the firm with insights 
into how to best provide a product or service in the future. 
Customers can communicate their level of satisfaction with an 
issue and suggest further actions to be taken. For instance, at 
the Sol Wave House hotel on the beautiful island of Majorca, 
Spain, a Twitter concierge stays in constant contact with its 
guests. If a guest has a problem or a question, the answer is just 
a hashtag away.25
Second, the dynamic effect expands the impact of the net-
work effect by examining how people flow in and out of net-
worked communities as their interests change.26 Consider a 
social network community that is concerned with everything 
chocolate. As it evolves and matures, its members develop var-
ied interests—some want to know where to buy the best choco-
lates, while others are concerned about its health benefits. New 
people join the community, while others leave; and people’s 
interests change, causing them to seek out new and different 
information. Since the community is dynamic, chocolate social media sites can specialize 
to meet the needs of its varied constituents. From a marketing perspective, this dynamic 
effect is very powerful. Marketers can provide very specific information, which should be 
well received by the interested parties. 
The Timeliness Effect
The timeliness effect of social media engagement is concerned with the firm being able to 
engage with the customer at the right place and time—that is, 24/7 from any location. To 
be effective, firms must, in fact, respond quickly, or the timeliness effect benefit dimin-
ishes. Responding in a timely manner can positively impact customers’ buying intentions: 
24 percent of Twitter users who fail to get a quick response say they would not buy as much 
from the company in the future, and 35 percent of them who receive fast responses note 
that they would buy more.27 Further, 70 percent of Twitter users expect a response from 
companies—53 percent of them within an hour! Among customers who tweet a complaint, 
the number who expect responses within an hour jumps to 72 percent. Responding quickly 
Need information from the concierge on best place to dine? 
At the Sol Wave House it’s only a tweet away.
© Ignacio Izquierdo/Rex Features/AP Photo
Coca-Cola engages customers 
in a timely manner by offering 
moviegoers a free Coke at the 
moment they walk through a 
movie theater.
© SeongJoon Cho/Bloomberg/ 
Getty ­Images

92	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
can pay off far better than a slow response in that nearly 50 percent of consumers recom-
mend brands that respond quickly.28
Many customers enjoy the timely interactions with firms when they engage with 
them at the point of purchase. To reach customers at the right time, Coca-Cola relies on 
beacon technology—that is, technology that allows companies to detect where customers 
(who have enabled the feature) are at each moment, through their smartphones.29 In 
2015, Coca-Cola’s pilot campaign offered moviegoers a free Coke at the moment they 
walked through the movie house if they had already downloaded the appropriate app 
from the brand.30
As the Wheel of Social Media Engagement shows, intimate connections can arise be-
tween a firm and customers. Firms increasingly are not only investing time and money in 
creating engagement, but also in capturing engagement data. Social media posts contain 
rich information that a well-equipped company can mine to understand its customers bet-
ter. As a consequence, firms are striving to make profitable customers even more profitable 
through increased engagement. The power of the Internet, mobility, computing, and analyt-
ics that harness the power of social connections all have led to a leapfrog advance in the 
potential to create meaningful engagement with customers. According to the Wheel of 
Social Media Engagement, understanding how to engage effectively with consumers thus 
is important for marketing managers.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the five drivers of social media engagement described in the 
Wheel of Social Media Engagement?
CATEGORIES OF SOCIAL MEDIA
Consider your own Facebook site. Are all your real-life friends your online friends too? Do 
you actually know all the friends registered on your online site? In all likelihood, you host 
online friends you’ve never met, and your circle of virtual friends may be larger than the 
number of people you see regularly or talk to personally. Accordingly, the audience for 
marketers could be bigger on social media sites than through other, more traditional forms 
of media. Such a huge potential audience has gotten the attention of marketers.
Marketers rely on the three types of social media: social networking sites, media-sharing 
sites, and thought-sharing sites (or blogs) (see Exhibit 3.3) to achieve three objectives. 
First, members promote themselves to gain more friends. Second, the sites promote to get 
more members. Third, outside companies promote their products and services to appeal to 
the potential consumers who are active on the sites. 
Social Network Sites
Social network sites are an excellent way for marketers 
to create excitement, the first of the 4Es. People can in-
teract with friends (e.g., Facebook) or business ac-
quaintances (e.g., LinkedIn). Although the amount of 
time people spend on such sites varies, research indi-
cates they are widely used—between one and four 
hours every day.31
Facebook  On this well-known social network plat-
form, more than 1.5 billion monthly active users give 
companies a forum for interacting with their fans.32 Thus 
Facebook not only ensures individual users a way to 
 LO3-3	
Understand the types 
of social media.
Social media
Media-
sharing sites
Thought-
sharing sites
Social
networking sites
E X H I B I T  3.3
Types of Social Media

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
93
	
	
­connect with others, but it also gives marketers the abil-
ity to target their audience carefully. Companies have 
access to the same features that regular users do, includ-
ing a “wall” where they can post company updates, pho-
tos, and videos or participate in a discussion board. Only 
the fans of its page generally have access to such infor-
mation, so the company can specifically target its fans.
Successful companies on Facebook attempt to ex-
cite their customers regularly. On the fan page for the 
discount clothing retailer Forever 21, for example,33 
when a fan clicks to indicate that he or she “likes” a 
certain post, the message gets relayed to a news feed. 
Then every friend of that user sees what he or she 
likes, creating an exciting and huge multiplier effect.
Display advertising with “Facebook ads” instead 
targets specific groups of people according to their pro-
file information, browsing histories, and other prefer-
ences. If online users reveal an interest in ski equipment 
or Burton snowboards, marketers can target both 
groups. Facebook offers a variation on more traditional 
forms of promotion, with the promise of more accurate 
targeting and segmentation.
LinkedIn  A professional instead of casual or friendship- 
based site, LinkedIn allows users to share their profes-
sional lives. With approximately 400 million users, it is 
a place where users can post their résumés, network 
with other professionals, and search for jobs.34 Users 
post to question-and-answer forums, job search, and 
post personal intellectual property such as presentations 
they have given.
The professional networking benefits of LinkedIn 
are particularly valuable for small-business owners. 
Forever 21 excites its customers 
on Facebook.
© Weng lei/Imaginechina/AP Photo
LinkedIn is an excellent place to begin your search for a 
­marketing job.
Source: LinkedIn

94	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Adding Value 3.2
Mercedes-Benz Is LinkedIniii
With all of the social networking sites available now, it can be 
difficult for marketers to decide which one to use to connect 
with its target demographic. Facebook undoubtedly has the most 
users of all social networking sites, so it might seem like the 
smartest choice when launching a social media campaign. How-
ever, if looking to target a specific audience, the number of users 
on Facebook might in and of itself be a reason not to turn to the 
social networking giant as a platform for a marketing campaign.
For example, when the luxury auto brand Mercedes-Benz 
needed to target affluent potential customers with the launch 
of its new E- and C-class models, it turned to LinkedIn. Although 
LinkedIn has a smaller network, its users spend more online—
more than 2.5 times as much as an average U.S. consumer—
which likely signals their relative affluence.
Mercedes’s LinkedIn ad campaign used sponsored updates 
and display ads with product videos. With the sponsored 
­updates, Mercedes could reach more customers and gain 
­real-time insights, according to sophisticated analytics, to im-
prove its future content. Furthermore, the company was able 
to target professionals and senior executives and drive them 
to the company’s website.
The high level of engagement that customers exhibited 
with this campaign in turn inspired Mercedes to employ 
LinkedIn’s platform for a giveaway contest, in which the top 
prize was a new C-class car. The “Driven to Perform” contest 
was unique; users nominated others in their LinkedIn network, 
based on their professional achievements and how they em-
bodied the sophistication of the Mercedes brand. In this sense, 
it represented a perfect fit with LinkedIn, which already pro-
vides a function that enables users to recommend or praise 
colleagues for their professional skills. The contest thus did 
not require LinkedIn users to change their behaviors; it simply 
leveraged those behaviors to target the ideal customers for 
Mercedes-Benz.
To inspire a high level of involvement, Mercedes employed LinkedIn’s platform to give away a 
new C-class car.
© Harold Cunningham/Getty Images
More than 12 million of LinkedIn’s users are small-business owners, making it an excellent 
resource for entrepreneurs to network with like-minded firms, identify the best vendors, or 
build brand reputation by participating in LinkedIn’s professional association groups. But 
its status as the social network for professionals also makes it attractive to marketers seek-
ing to access such consumers, as Adding Value 3.2 ­explains.
Google+  With Google+, the company that essentially defined search engines sought to 
compete in the social media realm. Although it has attracted hundreds of millions of users, 

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
95
	
	
most analysts suggest it is not an effective competitor thus far. Even when users register, 
they do not engage closely with the site; Google+ accounted for a small percent of all so-
cial media shares.35
Yet it would be risky to ignore Google+ completely. It offers several functions that 
other social networking sites do not. For example, its “Communities” feature lets people 
interested in similar topics form their own groups. Unlike Facebook, Google+’s Commu-
nities allow brands to join as members—for example, a paddle brand or seller of suntan 
lotion could easily interact with the members of a group devoted to paddleboarding. More-
over, with Google+’s unique “Hangouts” feature, brands can host discussions or focus 
groups and also post live product demonstrations.36
Media‐Sharing Sites
The World Wide Web has the ability to connect people more easily and in more ways than 
have ever been possible before. Media-sharing sites explicitly rely on this capability to 
enable users to share content they have generated, from videos on YouTube to pictures on 
Flickr and so on. In terms of the 4E framework, companies use such sites to highlight how 
consumers can experience their goods or services as well as encourage consumers to 
­engage with the firm, its other social media outlets, and other consumers.
YouTube  On this video-sharing social media platform with more than 1 billion unique 
monthly visitors, companies gain a chance to express themselves in different ways than 
they have in the past. Because YouTube is owned by Google, its videos show up promi-
nently in Google searches, making it an appealing vehicle for retailers.37 The site’s demo-
graphics indicate visitors are affluent, of the age range most appealing to retailers, and 
racially reflective of the wider U.S. population.38
Companies can broadcast from their own channels—that is, a YouTube site that 
­contains content relevant only to the company’s own products.39 For example, Home Shop-
ping Network (HSN) offers consumers an interesting vehicle to utilize the 4E framework. 
As competition in this field has increased, HSN has added to its communication arsenal an 
integrated social media component that includes Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and Pinter-
est. But perhaps the most powerful tool it has added is its dedicated YouTube channel. 
Products promoted on HSN are available on YouTube almost immediately after they ap-
pear on television. Then HSN marketers can use the information gathered from YouTube 
to target its direct mail campaigns. For example, it could send jewelry promotions to 
households that viewed the YouTube video clip for a necklace. Consumer ­responses get 
monitored 24/7 and measured against hourly sales goals. Thus there’s never a dull moment.
Products promoted on Home 
Shopping Network (HSN) are 
available on its dedicated 
­YouTube channel almost imme-
diately after they appear on 
television.
Courtesy of HSN, Inc.

96	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Instagram  With Instagram, people who have downloaded the app (more than 400 million 
and counting) can take a photo of themselves or their surroundings.40 Then they can upload 
the photo to various social networking sites, including Twitter, Tumblr, or Facebook.
The name of this app evokes the founders’ idea of its use: a sort of modern-day, imme-
diate telegram.41 It has attracted the attention of some of the most famous names in media 
sharing, including Kim Kardashian, Adele, and The Rock—which has increased its popu-
larity even more. When Dr. Dre launched his Beats brand, the Beats by Dre Instagram page 
was instrumental in building brand awareness, attracting approximately 2.5 million follow-
ers.42 The brand posts pictures and videos of celebrities using the products, as well as in-
formation about current events.43 When Eminem released his album SHADYXV, he 
teamed up with Beats by Dre to promote it with a video in which the rapper told the back 
story to his hit single “Lose Yourself.” The video, which was released on the Beats Insta-
gram page, garnered massive publicity for both parties.44
Flickr and Other Photo Sites  Whereas YouTube allows users to share videos, Imgur, 
Flickr, Photobucket, Picasa, and TwitPic allow them to share photos.45 They tend to be less 
popular as marketing tools, yet some innovative companies have found ways to engage 
with customers, such as by hosting picture-posting competitions or using photos to com-
municate core tenets and values.46
The U.K. brand Innocent, known for selling pure, 100 percent fruit smoothies, uses 
Flickr to communicate its quirky brand image. Its photo-posting competitions, such as the 
Funny Shaped Fruit Competition (http://www.flickr.com/groups/funnyshapedfruit/), pro-
vide significant entertainment value. But it also uses Flickr for more serious purposes, such 
as to post photos related to its Big Knit charity promotion.
Thought-Sharing Sites
Thought-sharing sites consist of different types of blogs: corporate, professional, personal, 
and micro. In terms of the 4E framework, blogs are particularly effective at educating and 
engaging users, and in many cases enhance their experience with the products and services 
being discussed.
Blogs  Originally confined to a journal or diary in a person’s room, the blog (from 
­“weblog”) on the Internet has allowed us to make our thoughts open to the world through 
thought-sharing websites. For corporations, the comment section allows marketing manag-
ers to create a two-way dialogue directly with the end users. Blogs provide firms the op-
portunity to educate their customers about their offers and offerings by explaining their 
offerings, and to engage them by responding to their communications, both positive and 
negative. The reach that marketers have to their customer from blogs can be categorized by 
the level of control they offer.
Corporate blogs, which are created by the companies themselves, have the highest 
level of control because, to a large degree, they can control the content posted on them. Of 
course, blogs also allow customers to respond to posts, so the content can never be com-
pletely controlled, but marketing managers have a good opportunity to pepper their blogs 
with the messages they wish their customers to see. The best corporate blogs illustrate the 
importance of engaging customers around the core brand tenets without being overly con-
cerned with a hard sell.
As a trendy provider of clothing, accessories, and home décor, Anthropologie uses its 
blog to educate customers on the latest trends. Rather than sticking just to fashion in its 
online content though, some of Anthropologie’s most successful blog posts have been for 
do-it-yourself recipes for signature cocktails. The posts are successful because they keep 
with the unique and eclectic feel of the brand overall, without being too obvious in their 
marketing or sales-related intentions.47
Lana Del Ray’s Tumblr page might seem like a personal blog, as we define later in 
this section, but it actually represents a corporate blog, because its goal is primarily to 
help launch the musician’s latest releases. Although some of the images are seemingly 
Innocent uses Flickr to post 
photos for its Big Knit charity 
promotion. 
© John Boud/Alamy

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
97
	
	
personal photographs, the page highlights images that will get fans excited about and 
­engaged with the products that Del Ray sells. She controls the content, and she can re-
spond to the thousands of comments her posts spark. For example, to promote the single 
“West Coast,” Del Ray created excitement by taking a few screen captures from the yet-
to-be-released video and providing them exclusively to fans, on a platform already popu-
lar with these consumers.48
From a marketing perspective, professional blogs are those written by people who 
review and give recommendations on products and services. Marketers often offer free 
products or provide modest remuneration to top-rated professional bloggers in the 
hopes of getting a good product review. Marketers have less control over professional 
bloggers than they do their own corporate blogs. But consumers seem to trust profes-
sional bloggers’ reviews much more than corporate blogs and other more traditional 
media, like advertising. 
Such trust may be fleeting, however, as more consumers realize that profes-
sional bloggers are often compensated for positive reviews. That is, by using social 
media influencers such as bloggers, marketers can achieve significant rewards. But 
such tactics require some ethical considerations, especially as companies come under 
fire for paying professional bloggers to use and review products without disclosing the 
monetary benefits they have provided to them. Ethical & Societal Dilemma 3.1 
­explains how Disney has sought to address these concerns in relation to its Social 
­Media Moms. 
Finally, personal blogs are written by people who receive no products or remu-
neration for their efforts. Thus, of the three types of blogs, marketers have the lowest 
level of control over this type. However, personal blogs are useful for monitoring 
what is going on in the marketplace and for responding to customer complaints or 
compliments.
Microblogs  As the name implies, a microblog differs from a traditional blog in size—a 
microblog uses short sentences, short videos, or individual images. The most popular mi-
croblogging site, Twitter, provides another option for companies to educate their custom-
ers by providing corporate and product information, and to engage them by providing a 
platform for two-way communications.
To drive awareness about serious problems in the developing world, the nonprofit or-
ganization Water is Life launched a “Hashtag Killer” campaign. It created a YouTube 
video in which people in Haiti, still struggling to obtain basic housing and security 
needs in the aftermath of a devastating earthquake, read tweets that had been tagged as 
Lana Del Ray’s Tumblr page 
seems like a personal blog but 
is actually a corporate blog 
­because it helps launch the 
musician’s latest releases.
Source: Tumblr

98	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
“#firstworldproblems.” In one, a child sitting on a mound of dirt reads, “I hate when 
my leather seats aren’t heated.” Many Haitians engaged with the campaign, offer-
ing consolation with tweets such as, “I’m sorry your leather seats weren’t heated . . . 
I hope your day gets ­better!” In turn, the campaign invoked the engagement of citi-
zens of wealthier nations, leading to its remarkable success, such that people donated 
enough to ensure more than 1 million days of clean water for people in less developed 
locations.49
The Most Powerful and Appealing Target Market  
Might Be . . . Your Mom?iv
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 3.1
There are a lot of moms out there. And in a breathtakingly 
clever way, Disney has figured out a way to leverage the inter-
est that many of those moms express in Mickey Mouse—and 
all that goes with him—to expand its market, increase its sales, 
enhance its name recognition, and increase its online and so-
cial media presence.
	
The Disney Social Media Moms is a group of approximately 
1,300 parents who receive perks (but not pay) from the enter-
tainment conglomerate. In turn, the company encourages (but 
does not require) them to blog, post, and comment about all 
things Disney. Popular topics include reviews of cruises, tips 
for moving easily through the theme parks, and Pinterest 
boards with ideas for themed birthday parties.
	
The criteria for being chosen as a Disney Social Media 
Mom are not made public, and competition to be picked is 
fierce. According to some analyses of the existing group and 
its members, the preferred moms are very active on social 
media and do not limit their online conversations to topics sur-
rounding Disney. Rather, these bloggers, authors, and Internet 
personalities write about parenting, of course, as well as cook-
ing, crafting, and travel. They also attract substantial followings; 
an average among recently invited Social Media Moms was 
27,000 followers on Twitter.
	
As a Social Media Mom, a consumer might receive an in-
vitation to a special event at Disney World, featuring motiva-
tional sessions, updates on new Disney plans, and talks by 
Disney film producers. They also get substantial discounts in 
the parks and other retail settings and passes that allow 
them to skip many of the lines for rides and other attrac-
tions. However, even after receiving an invitation, attendees 
still must pay entrance fees to get into the park and cover all 
travel expenses for themselves and any family members who 
join them.
	
Still, the 200 or so moms who attended a recent event 
shared overwhelmingly positive assessments of their experi-
ence, including 88 blog posts, nearly 5,000 pictures uploaded 
to Instagram, and 28,500 tweets on Twitter. Marketing like 
this, by regular consumers who share their own experiences 
and thus strongly influence purchases by their peers, is un-
matchable by traditional marketing efforts. But is it ethical 
to offer special treatment to people who claim simply to be 
­reporting on their experiences?
Water is Life’s “Hashtag Killer” 
campaign posted videos on 
YouTube of Haitians reading 
and responding to tweets to 
excite individuals to donate 
to their cause.
Courtesy of WATERisLIFE

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
99
	
	
GOING MOBILE AND SOCIAL
Of the more than 184 million people who have smartphones in the United States,50 approx-
imately 60 percent of them make purchases on these devices.51 About 180 billion apps 
were downloaded globally in 2015.52 In the United States alone, almost $10 billion of mo-
bile downloads and in-app revenues were accrued in 2015, even 
though nearly 93 percent of apps downloaded are free.53 Mobile 
app downloads are expected to grow to 286 billion annually by 
2017.54 Thus, mobile marketing is significant and growing.
As Exhibit 3.4 illustrates, there are seven primary needs 
that apps meet: the need to find “me time,” socialize, shop, ac-
complish, prepare, discover, and self-express.
∙	
The most popular need is all about entertainment and 
relaxation—that is, “me time.” People spend nearly half 
their time on their smartphones seeking fun, whether by 
playing Candy Crush Saga or watching American 
Horror Story through their Netflix app.
∙	
Because apps enable people to stay connected with friends 
both near and far, specialized entrants are growing to meet 
people’s need to socialize. For example, in China, the 
social networking app Weixin (pronounced way-SHEEN) 
allows users to send videos, photos, messages, web links, 
status updates, and news; it has been released as WeChat 
 LO3-4	
Understand various 
motivations for using 
mobile applications and 
how they are priced.
Source: “Vision Statement: How People Really Use Mobile,” Harvard Business Review, January/February 2013, 
http://www.hbr.org.
“Me time”
Seeking relaxation or entertainment
(for example, by watching a funny video,
reading a gossip website, playing solitaire,
or even window shopping for fun)
Socializing
Interacting with
other people
Shopping
Seeking a product
or a service
Accomplishing
Managing ﬁnances,
health, and productivity
Preparation
Planning for
upcoming
activities
Discovery
Seeking news
and information
Self-
expression
Participating in
hobbies and
interests
7%
4%
47
AVERAGE
MINUTES
PER MONTH
PER USER
(METERED)
PERCENTAGE
OF ALL
INTERACTIONS
(EXCLUDES
E-MAIL, SMS
MESSAGES,
AND VOICE
CALLS)
1%
11%
12%
19%
46%
126
410
864
133
61
21
E X H I B I T  3.4
Seven Primary Motivations for Mobile App Usage
With more than 500 million downloads, Candy Crush Saga 
clearly fulfills for many people an important need for 
­unproductive “me time.”
© Gabriel Bouys/AFP/Getty Images

100	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
	
in the United States. Weixin has had a faster adoption rate than either Facebook 
or Twitter have, with more than 300 million users in only three years.55
∙	
Shoppers want to shop anytime they choose. In a process called showrooming, 
a customer visits a store to touch, feel, and even discuss a product’s features with 
a sales associate, and then instantly compares the prices online to see whether a 
better deal is available. Using the showrooming Amazon app, if the Amazon 
price is better, the customer can buy the product online with a single click. 
∙	
On the flip side of the need for fun, the need to accomplish means that 
people seek to manage their finances, improve their health, or become more 
productive through apps.56 MyFitnessPal allows users to track their daily 
exercise, calories, and weight loss, and its social component enables people 
to post their successes. This app also can interact with Fitbit, Jawbone UP, 
and iHealth Wireless Scales.
∙	
Calendars, flight trackers, and trip planning apps help consumers meet 
their need to prepare.57 For example, Business Calendar helps people plan 
their days with an interactive app that integrates multiple calendars (e.g., 
Google Calendar, Outlook Calendar) and allows users to link an event to 
people in their contacts list and put a daily agenda widget on their 
smartphone home screen.
∙	
When people seek information, due to their need to discover, they now turn 
to weather and news apps. Flipboard produces a full-screen magazine, 
aggregating multiple news and entertainment sources to provide top stories, 
entertainment, local news, and business news. Its social component also 
allows readers to send selected stories to friends.
∙	
Finally, people have diverse interests and tastes and thus a need for apps that 
allow them to express themselves. Tapatalk aggregates tens of thousands of 
interest groups into a single app, making it easy to connect aficionados of 
just about any interest or hobby.
As you can see from this discussion, apps can meet several needs at once. Sharing an inter-
esting story with friends via Flipboard can meet the needs of discovery and socialization. 
Consider the person who purchases Chinese food via GrubHub’s app on her ride home; 
she’s not only shopping, but she’s also avoiding making dinner to get some extra me time. 
With this information in mind, apps (and advertising within those apps) can be designed 
and targeted in ways that better apply the 4Es.
App Pricing Models
A key decision for firms producing apps is what to charge 
for them. There are four basic ways of generating revenue 
from apps—ad-supported apps, freemium apps, paid apps, 
and paid apps with in-app purchases.
Ad-supported apps are free to download, but appear as 
ads on the screen. They generate revenues while users interact 
with the app. Although there are many of these types of apps, 
the majority of app revenue is generated from the remaining 
three pricing models, discussed next. 
Freemium apps are apps that are free to download 
but include in-app purchases that enables the user to ­enhance 
an app or game. In Candy Crush Saga, you get five lives to 
play in the game. When you lose a life, it takes 30 minutes in 
real-life time to get that life back. This is where in-app pur-
chases come in. For just $0.99, you can get all five lives back 
immediately so you can keep playing.58 Candy Crush Saga is 
estimated to earn the developer between $623,000 and 
$850,000 a day in revenue from in-app purchases.59
Growing faster than Twitter and Face-
book, Weixin has 300 million users, 
mainly in China, and allows people to 
send videos, photos, messages, web links, 
status updates, and news to friends.
© Keepin sh/Imaginechina/AP Photo
Not only does Flipboard aggregate all of the news important 
to you in one place, its unique format also gives the app the 
look and feel of a printed magazine.
© Alliance Images/Alamy

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
101
	
	
Paid apps charge the customer an upfront price to download the app ($0.99 is the 
most common), but offer full functionality once downloaded. Similar to the freemium 
model, paid apps with in-app purchases require the consumer to pay initially to down-
load the app and then offer the ability to buy additional functionality.
Which is the best pricing model? Time will tell, but it appears that freemium apps 
may be the winner. As Exhibit 3.5 shows, free apps with in-app purchases make up the 
vast majority of revenue from Apple’s App Store in 8 of 10 app categories. According 
to Distimo, a research firm specializing in the mobile app market, 71 percent of apps in 
Apple’s App Store implement a freemium pricing model, and 92 percent of revenues 
from Apple’s App Store and 98 percent from Google’s Play App Store come from free-
mium pricing.60
Free apps with in-app purchases
Paid apps
Paid apps with in-app purchases
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Navigation
Productivity
Books
Education
News
Entertainment
Music
Newsstand
Social Networking
Games
% of revenue generated in Apple’s App Store from January through November 2013, by app category and pricing model
0.5%
22%
55%
24%
70%
1%
29%
22%
1%
77%
56%
1%
43%
5% 0%
95%
31%
1%
68%
31%
4%
65%
0.5%
99%
5%
7%
88%
8%
2%
90%
Source: Adapted from Christel Schoger, “2013 Year in Review,” Distimo Report, December 2013, http://www.distimo.com.
E X H I B I T  3.5
Apple App Store Revenue by App Category Pricing Models
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the seven types of customer motivations for using mobile apps?
2.	 What are the four options for pricing mobile apps?
3.	 What are some of the most popular types of mobile applications?
HOW DO FIRMS ENGAGE THEIR 
CUSTOMERS USING SOCIAL MEDIA?
Now that we have an understanding of the various social and mobile media that are at the 
firm’s disposal, it is important to determine how firms should go about engaging custom-
ers through social and mobile media. The three-stage process found in Exhibit 3.6 involves 
listening to what customers have to say, analyzing the information available through vari-
ous touch points, and implementing (or doing) social media tactics to excite customers.
 LO3-5	
Recognize and 
understand the three 
components of a 
social media strategy.

102	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Listen
From a market research point of view, companies can learn a lot about their customers by 
listening to (and monitoring) what they say on their social networks, blogs, review sites, 
and so on. Customers appear willing to provide their opinions on just about anything that 
involves their interests and purchases—both their own and their friends’. Writing blogs 
and providing opinions via polls about such diverse topics as BOTOX treatments, ASICS 
running shoes, or a particular play of an NFL team during the playoffs all constitute new 
ways that customers communicate with one another—and with marketers who are paying 
attention.
Using a technique known as sentiment analysis, marketers can analyze the content 
found on sites like Facebook, Twitter, and online blogs and reviews to assess the favorable-
ness or unfavorableness of the sentiments. Sentiment analysis allows marketers to analyze 
data from these sources to collect consumer comments about companies and their prod-
ucts. The data are then analyzed to distill customer attitudes and preferences, including 
reactions to specific products and campaigns. Scouring millions of sites with sentiment 
Listen
Analyze
Do
E X H I B I T  3.6
Social Media Engagement Process
The NFL blog is one way fans 
communicate with each other 
during and after games.
Courtesy of NFL Properties, LLC

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
103
	
	
analysis techniques provides new insights into what consumers really think. Companies 
plugged into this real-time information and these insights can become more nimble, allow-
ing for numerous quick changes such as a product rollout, a new advertising campaign, or 
reactions to customer complaints.
Several companies specialize in monitoring social media.61 For example, Salesforce 
.com offers sentiment analysis and then helps its clients such as GE, Kodak, Microsoft, and 
PepsiCo engage with their customers.62 Using sentiment analysis techniques, it processes a 
constant stream of online consumer opinion from blogs, Facebook, and other networking 
sites, including 90 million Twitter tweets a day. The Salesforce.com tools for managing 
consumer sentiment data allow companies to identify opinion trends that might warrant an 
online corporate response. 
Analyze
Fortunately, the companies that help facilitate listening also provide analytic tools to assess 
what customers are saying about the firm and its competitors. There are three main catego-
ries of analysis used for understanding data collected from social media.63
First, it is important to determine the amount of traffic using their sites, visiting their 
blogs, or tweeting about them. Measures used for this purpose include hits (i.e., total re-
quests for a page), visits to a particular site or page, unique visitors to the site, and page 
views (i.e., the number of times any page gets viewed by any visitor).
Second, while knowing how many people are using a firm’s social media is impor­
tant, it is even more critical to learn who those visitors are, what they are doing, and what 
engages and excites them. For example, eHarmony works hard to understand what its 
clients want, both in a service provider and in a mate, as Marketing Analytics 3.1 details. 
To analyze these factors, social media marketers use metrics such as the bounce rate, 
which refers to the percentage of times a visitor leaves the site almost immediately, such 
as after viewing only one page. Analyzing which pages are the most frequent entry and 
exit locations provides direction on how to make a website more effective. In addition, 
following visitors’ click paths shows how users proceed through the information—not 
unlike how grocery stores try to track the way shoppers move through their aisles. A firm 
can use this information to provide users with an easier navigation experience through 
the site so they can more quickly find what they are looking for. The data analysis can 
also reveal conversion rates, a measure that indicates what percentage of visitors or 
potential customers act as the marketer hopes, whether by clicking, buying, or donating. 
Click paths and conversion rates can also reveal what users might have wanted but did 
not find at the site.
Salesforce.com’s Radian6 
­website analyzes customer 
sentiment for its customers, 
which enables them to identify 
opinion trends that might 
­warrant an online corporate 
response.
© copyright salesforce.com, inc.  
Used with permission.

104	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Finding a Perfect Match: How eHarmony Leverages 
Users’ Data to Identify Dates—and Their 
Consumption Patternsv
Some of the same information that enables eHarmony, the on-
line dating service, to connect romantic partners is exactly the 
same sort of detail that enables eHarmony, the marketer, to 
communicate most effectively with its clients and prospective 
customers. The company is upfront in revealing that it collects a 
lot of data about users—that collection is one of its selling 
points. By gathering so much insightful information about users, 
it can better match them with their perfect mates. As a result, 
it possesses massive amounts of information—approximately 
125 terabytes of data, according to one estimate.
	
To leverage those data for its own benefit, eHarmony 
switched from an external data analysis service and brought 
the process in house. Its sophisticated data analytics enable 
the firm’s seven-person team to determine which communica-
tions media sparked responses from which users and when. 
Whereas previously it struggled to grasp when and why peo-
ple became loyal customers depending on the channel they 
used to access its services, today the team gains real-time 
alerts about whether this person used a smartphone to access 
its app, or if that person relied on a tablet to visit its website. It 
carefully calculates the return on its investment in each media 
buy, according to the lifetime value of each customer, classified 
according to the route this customer used to access the ser-
vice, as well as where and when she or he did so. 
	
By enhancing the efficiency of its efforts, eHarmony was 
able to cut its marketing budget by approximately $5 million. 
Furthermore, clients’ requests for additional information have 
dropped by around 75 percent, because eHarmony now 
knows in advance what sorts of details they want and pro-
vides it to them predictively. 
	
These data also inform the personalized service the com-
pany provides. For example, eHarmony has learned that users 
who click onto the website through a display ad are more 
­flexible in terms of their requirements in a potential mate. In 
contrast, users who purchase the service after seeing a tele-
vised advertisement are much more particular and specific 
with regard to the range of ages they will consider in a part-
ner. For users who rely on the eHarmony app, the company 
offers a shorter questionnaire but a wider range of potential 
dates, because these users tend to be younger and more 
open-minded when it comes to dating. 
	
Its confidence in its data analytics capabilities is pushing 
eHarmony’s future moves as well. In addition to adding a 
Spanish-language service, it plans to grow internationally. 
With a commitment to add one new country each quarter for 
the next several years, eHarmony is also learning all sorts of 
new things about its clients. Did you know, for example, that 
people outside the United States are more willing to date a 
smoker than are members of the U.S. dating population? 
eHarmony does.
Marketing Analytics 3.1
eHarmony uses its clients’ data for matchmaking and more 
precise target marketing. 
© iPhone/Alamy
Third, some companies want to analyze data that come from other sites, such as 
measuring where people have come from to get to the company’s site. Did they search 
through Google or Amazon? Did they receive a referral from a friend? Which keywords 
did they use to find the firm? Firms can use keyword analysis to determine what key-
words people use to search on the Internet for their products and services. With this in-
formation, they can refine their websites by choosing keywords to use on their site that 
their customers use. Then they can assess the return on investment (ROI) made by im-
proving the site. This would be done by calculating the incremental profit increase di-
vided by the investment on the site improvement. For social media, it is more challenging 
to determine ROI than for more traditional marketing applications because the revenue 

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
105
	
	
generated by social media is often not directly related to the expenditure. So, instead of 
traditional ROI measures, firms often examine questions like: Does having more Twitter 
followers correlate with having higher sales? Do the company’s Facebook fans buy more 
than nonfans do?64
These analyses require well-trained marketing managers, marketing analytic soft-
ware, and perhaps some help with consulting specialists (e.g., IBM, SAS, Pricewater-
houseCoopers). But almost everyone seems to be turning to Google Analytics these 
days because it offers a sophisticated, in-depth form of analysis, all for free. Not only 
does Google Analytics track the elements included in Exhibit 3.7, but it also is highly 
customizable.65
Do
Even the greatest analysis has little use if firms fail to implement what they have learned 
from analyzing their social and mobile media activity. That is, social media may be all 
about relationships, but ultimately, firms need to use their connections to increase their 
business.66 They might launch a new Facebook campaign, actively blog, or provide mo-
bile offers.
YouTube still earns more daily video views than Facebook does, and being second is 
not a position that Facebook enjoys. Accordingly, it has launched a new program entitled 
Anthology to facilitate the production of marketing videos for advertisers by well-known 
content providers such as College Humor, Vice, Funny or Die, Vox Media, The Onion, 
Tastemade, and Oh My Disney. The resulting videos must be made available through Face-
book. However, in addition to running the communications on Facebook, the advertiser 
also can run them on its own websites, insert them into traditional channels (e.g., televi-
sion), or pay the content provider to run the videos on its site. Such links can benefit adver-
tisers, which obtain high-quality marketing communications designed specifically for a 
social media platform. They also help content providers find new clients and outlets for 
their creativity. But for Facebook, the benefits might be even more critical: By requiring 
that the videos run through its platform, it nearly inevitably increases the number of daily 
views it can attract from consumers.67
E X H I B I T  3.7
Analytics
Type of 	
	
Competitors Offering 
Analytic	
How It’s Used	
Similar Analytics
Content	
Understand what’s popular and what’s 	
Adobe SiteCatalyst, Clickstream,  
	
not on a firm’s website, including page 	
Coremetrics, IBM SurfAid, Mtracking,  
	
load times and site navigation.	
VisiStat
Social	
Track effectiveness of social media 	
Facebook Insights, Twitter Web Analytics, 
	
programs, including information on 	
Webtrends, HootSuite, TweetDeck 
	
social media–referred conversion rates  
	
and engagement metrics.
Mobile	
Track website access from mobile 	
AppClix, Bango, Flurry, Localytics, 
	
devices, track which ads direct people 	
Medialets, Webtrends 
	
to a firm’s app, and understand what  
	
mobile platform performs best.
Conversion	
Measure sales, downloads, video plays,	
ClickTale, KeyMetric, Latitude 
	
or other actions important to a firm.
Advertising	
Track the effectiveness of social, mobile, 	
ad:tech, MediaMelon, MediaCloud, 
	
and search and display ads and divide ad 	
Metronome, Snoobi, Adomic 
	
effectiveness by device, platform, or type.
Source: http://www.google.com/analytics/features/index.html.

106	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
To illustrate how firms might go about undertaking such campaigns, consider 
the steps involved in developing and implementing a Facebook marketing campaign 
(Exhibit 3.8).68 These steps are not unlike the steps used in any integrated marketing 
communications (IMC) program. (See Chapter 17 for more details.) Assume a marketer 
was developing a Facebook marketing campaign for a new product that his or her firm 
has designed.
1.	
Identify strategy and goals. The firm has to determine exactly what it hopes to pro-
mote and achieve through its campaign. Does it want to increase awareness of the 
product? Is it hoping more potential customers might visit and “like” its Facebook 
page? Is its focus mainly on increasing sales of the product? Depending on what the 
company aims to achieve, it might focus on developing a Facebook page, creating a 
Facebook app, or hosting a Facebook event.
2.	
Identify target audience. The next step is to determine whom the firm is targeting. 
As Exhibit 3.9 shows, Facebook enables the firm to perform targeting that is based 
on location, language, education, gender, profession, age, relationship status, likes/
dislikes, and friends or connections. The marketer’s aim is to find an audience big 
Facebook has launched a 
­program titled Anthology to 
­facilitate the production of 
marketing videos for advertis-
ers by well-known content 
providers such as College 
­Humor.
© NetPhotos/Alamy
1
Identify
strategy &
goals
2
Identify
target
audience
Campaign steps
4
Develop
budget
5
Monitor &
change
3
Campaign:
Experiment
& engage
E X H I B I T  3.8
How to Do a Social Media Marketing Campaign

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
107
	
	
enough that they reach all those who might adopt their product, but not so big that 
they end up trying to appeal to someone way outside their target audience.
3.	
Develop the campaign: Experiment and engage. Now that the firm knows who it 
is targeting, the next step is to develop the communications, including the copy and 
images. Here again, the process is not very different from any other IMC campaign. 
There should be a call to action that is clear and compelling. Strong, eye-catching im-
ages and designs are important. And the campaign must appeal to the right custom-
ers. However, an aspect that is more critical with social media than with other forms 
of IMC is that the images and messages need to be updated almost constantly. Because 
people expect changing content online, it would be inappropriate to run the same 
campaign for several months, as the firm might if it was advertising on television, 
for example.
4.	
Develop the budget. Budgeting is key. Facebook allows advertisers to set a daily 
budget: Once their costs (usually per click) reach a certain level, the ad disappears for 
the rest of the day. Of course, this option can be risky if the firm is getting great feed-
back, and all of a sudden, a compelling ad disappears. Therefore, similar to the cam-
paign content, budgets demand nearly constant review. For example, if a competitor 
lowers its price significantly, it might be necessary to follow suit to avoid being 
­excluded from customers’ consideration sets.
5.	
Monitor and change. The final step is to review the success of the campaign and 
make changes as necessary. Facebook’s Ad Manager offers various metrics and re-
ports, such as number of clicks on ads, audience demographics, and ad performance 
for specific time periods. As Marketing Analytics 3.2 details, Billboard is turning to 
Twitter to improve and expand its ability to help brands (i.e., musicians) monitor 
their performance in real time.
Age: (?)
–
35
Demographics
24
2. Targeting
Location
Country: (?)
New York
Cooking
Age: (?)
–
Sex: (?)
Switch to Broad Category Targeting (?)
All
Men
Require exact age match
35
Demographics
Interests
Precise interests: (?)
Everywhere
By State/Province (?)
By City (?)
24
Estimated Reach (?)
266,920 people
 who live in the United
 States
 who live within 50 miles of
 New York, NY
 between the ages of 24 and
 35 inclusive
 who are in the category
 Cooking
E X H I B I T  3.9
Example Facebook Targeting Choices
Source: From http://www.facebook.com/business/ads/.

108	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Measuring the Coolest Tunes: A Billboard Chart 
for the Popularity of Music-Related Tweetsvi
Reaching the top of the Billboard charts is the ultimate goal 
for any kid with a tune in his head or a song just dying to be 
played on her guitar. For years, these ranking charts have re-
lied on traditional metrics: number of plays on radio stations 
and album sales. Clearly, in the modern music market, such 
measurements are out of date and unlikely to provide insight-
ful assessments of which songs are truly generating the most 
interest among the coolest fans.
	
After several false starts, Billboard and Twitter have collab-
orated to come up with what they believe will be the best solu-
tion. Billboard will rank mentions and shares of music 
communicated through Twitter. The social media site is rich 
with discussions of music. According to informal estimates, 
music is the most discussed topic, and 7 of the top 10 accounts 
are held by musicians.
	
The charts will break new ground in several ways. In par-
ticular, they will reflect real-time trends. That is, bands can 
track at virtually every moment how many mentions their 
latest singles are getting. Billboard already integrates infor-
mation from YouTube, but this advance helps solidify its posi-
tion as a list maker for modern music listeners too, not just 
those who rely on the radio. Because they are based on 
users’ own tweets, the charts level the playing field, at least 
somewhat, for newer and unconventional artists. If a 
trend-setting consumer gets lots of his or her followers to 
start talking about an exciting new band, that band is not 
limited to the rules that a music publisher or label estab-
lishes for them.
	
To access these charts, interested readers—fans, music 
professionals, and artists alike—can visit Billboard.com di-
rectly. Of course, they can also reach them through Billboard’s 
own Twitter feed.
	
The first real-time chart to launch was the Billboard 
Trending 140, which ranked the songs moving at the fastest 
speed, in terms of how many times they have been 
­mentioned on Twitter in the previous hour. The Trending 
140 chart also can be filtered to show the rankings of 
songs over the previous 24 hours. Then the list specifies a 
ranking of budding artists, defined by Billboard as artists 
with fewer than 100,000 followers on Twitter who have 
not  been featured previously on Billboard’s Hot 100 or 
200 lists.
	
With this approach, Twitter has staked out its official 
claim: It “wants music business decisions to be based on 
Twitter data.”
Marketing Analytics 3.2
Billboard’s music popularity rankings are based on the number of mentions and shares of ­music com-
municated through Twitter.
Source: Billboard

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
109
	
	
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Describe the 4E framework of social media 
marketing.
	
	
The 4E framework recognizes that marketers must 
excite customers with relevant offers; educate them 
about the offering; help them experience products, 
whether directly or indirectly; and give them an 
­opportunity to engage.
	
	
Understand the drivers of social media 
­engagement.
	
	
The Wheel of Social Media Engagement highlights 
five factors that focus on the uniqueness of social 
media in driving engagement. The five spokes of 
the wheel are: the information effect, connected 
­effect, the network effect, the dynamic effect, and 
the timeliness effect. 
	
	
Understand the types of social media.
	
	
Users of social media employ them to promote 
themselves or their products and services. They do 
so through three main categories: social networking 
sites (e.g., Facebook, LinkedIn), media-sharing sites 
(e.g., YouTube), and thought-sharing sites (e.g., 
blogs, Twitter).
LO3-1
LO3-2
LO3-3
	
	
Understand various motivations for using mobile 
applications and how they are priced.
	
	
As mobile users increase in number and diversity, the 
applications developed to appeal to them are spreading 
as well. Although there are well over a million apps, 
they meet seven basic customer motivations: for “me 
time” and to socialize, shop, accomplish, prepare, dis-
cover, and self-express. By meeting a multiple of these 
motivations, companies can attract large numbers of 
customers. When choosing how to charge for apps, 
firms have four options: ad-supported, freemium, paid 
apps, and paid apps with in-app purchases.
	
	
Recognize and use the three components of a 
­social media strategy.
	
	
Firms engage with customers through social and mo-
bile media using a three-step process. First, they listen 
to the customer using techniques like sentiment analy-
sis. Second, they analyze the data collected in the first 
step using metrics like the bounce rate, click paths, and 
conversion rates. Finally, they use this information to 
develop tactics to engage their customers in a way very 
similar to the process described in Chapter 18.
LO3-4
LO3-5
∙	 ad-supported apps,  100
∙	 blog,  96
∙	 bounce rate,  103
∙	 click path,  103
∙	 conversion rate,  103
∙	 connected effect,  89
∙	 corporate blog,  96
∙	 dynamic effect,  90
∙	 freemium apps,  100
∙	 hit,  103
∙	 in-app purchases,  100
∙	 information effect,  88
∙	 keyword analysis,  104
∙	 microblog,  97
∙	 network effect,  90
∙	 page view,  103
∙	 paid apps,  101
∙	 paid apps with in-app purchases,  101
∙	 personal blog,  97
∙	 professional blog,  97
∙	 sentiment analysis,  102
∙	 showrooming,  100
∙	 social media,  82
∙	 timeliness effect,  91
Key Terms
1.	 Go to http://www.facebook.com/business and learn 
about how to build pages, ads, and sponsored stories 
and how to take advantage of mobile applications. What 
are some of the steps that Facebook suggests a person 
consider when using ads for marketing?
2.	 Go to Hubspot.com and check out its top case studies. 
How do these case studies provide insights into how lis-
tening and analytics can help firms improve their social 
media marketing? 
3.	 Learn about Coca-Cola’s “#shareacoke” social media 
campaign on YouTube (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=5l0cCyElfgg). Which of the 4E components 
does this campaign leverage? 
4.	 A student who graduates with a marketing degree likely 
has a good foundation for jobs that utilize social media. 
Go to Monster.com and search for jobs in your area, using 
the keyword “social media.” Would you be interested in 
pursuing one or more of these positions? Why or why not?
Marketing Digitally

110	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Marketing Applications
1.	 Evaluate Under Armour’s social media strategy using 
the 4E framework. 
2.	 Using the components of the 4E framework, outline 
how an entrepreneur marketing low-sugar candy might 
apply it to their marketing mix efforts. 
3.	 Suppose an herbal tea company introduced a new prod-
uct called Mint-Enhanced Tea—a mint and lemon 
herbal tea. How should it go about creating excitement 
using various social and mobile media tools?
4.	 If you were marketing a new running shoe, what sort 
of mobile applications might enhance your marketing 
efforts?
5.	 Assume you work for a large consumer packaged- 
goods firm that has discovered that its latest line of 
snack foods is moving very slowly off store shelves. 
Recommend a strategy for listening to what consum-
ers are saying on blogs, review sites, and the firm’s 
website. Describe how your strategy might provide 
insights into consumers’ sentiments about the new 
product line.
6.	 As an intern for Starbucks, you have been asked to de-
velop a social media campaign for a new latte. The ob-
jective of the campaign is to increase awareness and 
trial of this new line. Use the listen-analyze-do frame-
work to outline a new campaign.
7.	 You were just hired by a company that wants to produce 
apps that help people become healthier by exercising, 
eating well, and reducing stress. On which customer 
motivations would you recommend the company focus? 
Describe the app you would design, the customer moti-
vations it meets, and why your app is the right design for 
your potential customers.
8.	 The company loves the idea for the app you suggested in 
the previous question, but is concerned about how it will 
make money on the app. Suggest a pricing model for the 
app and discuss why this model will maximize profits.
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself
1.	 Through its Facebook page, a major restaurant chain is 
offering its customers a Groupon coupon for 50 percent 
off the purchase of a meal. In doing so, the restaurant is 
focusing on which aspect of the 4E framework?
a.  Educating
b.  Enlightening
c.  Experiencing
d.  Employing
e.  Exciting
2.	 To get customers excited about a social media–related 
offer, the offer must be: 
a.  innovative and substantial. 
b.  timely and aimed at a broad-based audience.
c.  relevant and aimed at a target audience.
d.  isolated and trendy.
e.  general and unique. 
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
IMAGES, SALES, BRANDS: HOW RED BULL USES VARIOUS SOCIAL 
MEDIA TECHNIQUES TO ACHIEVE ALL ITS OBJECTIVES
It isn’t as if the social media strategy adopted by Red Bull—the energy drink that 
“gives you wings”—is a trade secret. Granted, the private company has a policy that 
discourages employees from giving interviews. But its overall strategy is clear from 
its actions and their outcomes. The success it has accrued from this strategy therefore 
isn’t a matter of doing things differently from anyone else. It’s a function of doing 
them better.
bchsu_tt
Chapter Case Study 

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
111
	
	
To begin, Red Bull distinguishes its goals for leveraging 
social media contacts. Is it hoping for more brand exposure, 
or is it pursuing sales increases? Depending on its ­focus, it 
adopts distinct, appealing methods that are specific and 
unique to each social media ­platform. Then it implements 
these tactics consistently and comprehensively, to increase the 
chances that they will be widely shared and recognized.
Social Media for Name Recognition  When Felix 
Baumgartner (purposefully) fell to Earth from 127,852 feet up, he 
broke all sorts of records. His jump was from the highest height 
ever achieved by a human. During the 4-minute, 20-second 
freefall, he also reached greater speeds—up to Mach 1.25, 
faster than the speed of sound—than anyone else ever has. The 
event was a breakthrough on various levels. Baumgartner’s 
pressure suit was the first version to be able to protect the 
­human body in space but still enable maneuverability. To ad-
dress the threat of ebullism (i.e., when liquid in the body evap-
orates due to high altitudes, causing a person’s blood to literally 
boil), Baumgartner and his team derived new medical tech-
niques with widespread applications. His parachute also ad-
opted a new “reefed” design to reduce drifting, with clear 
implications for airdrops of materials and supplies.69
In reporting on all these remarkable feats, Baumgartner’s 
name was mentioned frequently—though not as frequently as 
the project that sponsored his jump and all the technology that 
went into supporting it: the Red Bull Stratos project. Every of-
ficial mention of the event included the full name, such that 
Red Bull Stratos often appeared as a single term. It was not just 
the Stratos project. It was the Red Bull Stratos project.
And what a project it was, leading to the creation of not 
just scientific ­advances but also a remarkable video. That video, 
taken from the camera mounted on Baumgartner’s helmet, 
­features vast, picturesque views of Earth and the sense of plum-
meting. Red Bull immediately made it available for people to check out at their leisure. But 
the real targets—the people whom Red Bull hoped would be most engaged by the video 
and the stunt in general—were extreme sports fanatics. These folks willingly put their bod-
ies at risk on a regular basis to perform some cool stunt to cause their friends to marvel. 
For them, there may be no better stunt than having some guy fall from space.70 In full 
awareness of this appeal, Red Bull made sure that the video was prominent on its YouTube 
channel. On the day of the jump itself, ­approximately 8 million viewers streamed the video 
live and in real time. Also on that day, the number of subscribers to Red Bull’s YouTube 
channel increased by a remarkable 87,801.71
On Twitter, recognizing that 140 characters was not nearly enough to communicate 
the awesomeness of the stunt, it simply used hashtags and links to connect followers to the 
video, whether through YouTube or on a Red Bull site. Although Red Bull’s main Twitter 
feed did not exhibit any notable differences, the dedicated Red Bull Stratos Twitter feed 
prompted more than 20,000 mentions in tweets by others on that day.
The Red Bull Stratos Facebook page featured several photos during and after the 
jump. Just one shot of a landed Baumgartner, still in his space suit and on his knees beside 
his reefed parachute, prompted more than 20,000 comments, more than 50,000 shares, and 
nearly half a million likes.72
Thus the example of the Red Bull Stratos project and its attendant coverage through 
social media suggests several things Red Bull did well. It knew its audience and its own 
goals and it understood how different channels could help it attain those goals. To ensure 
Sponsored by Red Bull, Felix Baumgartner’s jump reached 
speeds of Mach 1.25.
© Jay Nemeth/Zumapress/Newscom

112	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
that it appealed to the target audience, it engaged them in an exciting, never-before-tried, 
daredevil experience. Moreover, it shared the scientific lessons learned through the project, 
to give those who wanted it an education.
But it also spent a lot of money to get Baumgartner to space and back down again. 
And that meant that it needed to translate some of the brand awareness it developed into 
sales. Luckily for Red Bull, its social media strategy also has room for that effort.
Social Media for Performance  Red Bull does not just send athletes to space. It also 
sponsors them on the pitch, in the form of the New York Red Bull MLS team, which plays 
in Red Bull Arena in Harrison, New Jersey. In one recent game, the team’s star forward 
Thierry Henry scored yet another goal. Afterward, he leaned, with his right arm up against 
the goal post and left hand on his hip. The pose, caught on camera, almost immediately 
became a Twitter meme as amateur photo editors placed him against a variety of 
­backgrounds.73
The team was quick to move on this social media coup. It rapidly posted the photo 
to its website and encouraged fans to vote for it as their favorite shot of the season. Im-
mediately above and below the encouragement to engage with the brand also appeared 
links that would allow fans to purchase tickets for a full season, half season, or individ-
ual games.74
Beyond these consumer-related uses of social and mobile media, Red Bull’s 
­international sales efforts depend on “SoLoMo” (referring to social, location, and 
­mobile) software. Users who download the Red Bull app receive alerts on their 
­smartphones about in-store promotions as soon as they arrive at the retail site. If they 
also attend Red Bull events, such as a flugtag or BMX race, selected patrons might 
even receive a special invitation to come backstage to meet some of the stars of 
the show.
Each of Red Bull’s mobile sales representatives is equipped with her or his own tablet 
computer loaded with mobile software. Thus on visits to retail sites and vendors, the sales-
people can provide the latest inventory information. They also present detailed analytics to 
show vendors how best to position their coolers of Red Bull products and how to line up 
the cans in the display case to encourage sales.75
Combining the Uses of Social Media  When you are as good at engaging and exciting 
people through social media as Red Bull is, the next step might be to make social media 
your main focus. Although the privately held company has not publicized any such plans, 
commentators suggest that it appears poised to transform itself into a media company that 
just happens to sell energy drinks.76 The extent and amount of content it creates, featuring 
extreme sports and even sports it has created (ever hear of ice racing?), is similar in quality 
to sports videos produced by well-known networks. If Red Bull can convince networks to 
purchase its coverage of Shaun White on the half-pipe, it enters a new market. If Shaun 
White happens to be wearing a hat with the Red Bull logo, well then that’s just an added 
bonus.
Such predictions actually resonate quite well with what Red Bull already does in so-
cial media. For example, though it maintains a plethora of Facebook pages and Twitter 
accounts for various events and locations, virtually none of them ever feature pictures of its 
drink product. Instead, they offer exciting in-sport shots or humorous images. Fans can—
and do—comment, but Red Bull rarely responds. That may be because its primary goal is 
to establish an edgy, exciting image as a lifestyle brand, which it feels confident will trans-
late into product sales.77
Questions
1.	
What social and mobile media tools is Red Bull using?
2.	
Evaluate Red Bull’s social media marketing strategy using the 4E framework.
3.	
How should Red Bull assess the effectiveness of these campaigns? Describe how it 
should respond to insights gained by this assessment.

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
113
	
	
Endnotes
  1.	 Sarah Germano, “Under Armour Overtakes Adidas in U.S. 
Sportswear Market,” The Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2015.
  2.	Ibid.
  3.	https://twitter.com/UnderArmour.
  4.	https://twitter.com/StephenCurry30.
  5.	https://twitter.com/UnderArmour.
  6.	Ibid.
  7.	 Yuyu Chen, “How Does Under Armour Differentiate Itself from 
Nike Via Digital Marketing?” ClickZ, October 30, 2015, https://
www.clickz.com/clickz/news/2432655/how-does-under-­
armour-differentiate-itself-from-nike-via-digital-marketing.
  8.	https://www.facebook.com/Underarmour/; Artemiss Berry, 
“How Under Armour and Warby Parker Win with Social 
Media,” National Retail Federation, February 29, 2015, https://
nrf.com/news/how-under-armour-and-warby-parker-win-­
social-media.
  9.	Chen, “How Does Under Armour Differentiate Itself.”
10.	 https://twitter.com/AskTeamUA/with_replies.
11.	 Pamela Vaughan, “72% of People Who Complain on 
Twitter Expect a Response Within an Hour,” HubSpot, 
July 23, 2014, http://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/twitter- 
response-time-data.
12.	 https://www.google.com/#q=under+armour.
13.	 We Are Social, and IAB Singapore, “Leading Social Networks 
Worldwide as of March 2015, Ranked by Number of Active 
Users (in Millions),” Statista, Accessed 19 March 2015, http://
www.statista.com/statistics/272014/global-social-networks-
ranked-by-number-of-users/.
14.	 www.sephora.com.
15.	 www.youtube.com/user/sephora.
16.	 Chris Barry et al., “Putting Social Media to Work,” 2011, Bain & 
Co., http://www.bain.com/Images/BAIN_BRIEF_Putting_social_
media_to_work.pdf.
17.	 Meg Wagner, “Corporate Social Media Fails of 2014: Big 
Brands Make Big Mistakes,” New York Daily News, December 
20, 2014, http://www.nydailynews.com/.
18.	 Seth Fendley, “7 Hilarious Twitter Brand Hashtag Fails,” 
HubSpot, March 12, 2015, http://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/
hilarious-twitter-brand-hashtag-fails.
19.	 Matthew Stern, “Social Sites Move to Boost Retail Sales,” Retail 
Wire, June 5, 2015, http://www.retailwire.com/discussion/ 
18327/social-sites-move-to-boost-retail-sales.
20.	This section draws heavily from Anne L. Roggeveen and 
Dhruv Grewal, “Engaging Customers: The Wheel of Social 
Media Engagement,” Journal of Consumer Marketing, 
­forthcoming. 
21.	 Peter Schrank, “A Brand New Game: As People Spend More 
Time on Social Media, Advertisers Are Following Them,” The 
Economist, August 29, 2015. 
22.	See reviews: Dhruv Grewal, Yakov Bart, Martin Spann, 
and Peter Pal Zubcsek (2016), “Mobile Advertising: A 
Framework and Research Agenda,” Journal of Interactive 
Marketing, 34 (May), 3–14; Aguirre, Elizabeth M., Dhruv 
Grewal, Anne L. Roggeveen and Martin Wetzels (2016), 
“Personalizing Online, Social, and Mobile Communications: 
Opportunities and Challenges,” Journal of Consumer 
Marketing, 33(2), 98–110.
23.	https://twitter.com/covergirl.
24.	http://twittercounter.com/pages/100?version=1&utm_expid= 
102679131-65.MDYnsQdXQwO2AlKoJXVpSQ.1&utm_referrer= 
http%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.com%2Furl%3Fsa%3Dt% 
26rct%3Dj%26q%3D%26esrc%3Ds%26source%3Dweb% 
26cd%3D3%26ved%3D0ahUKEwiv9Pr4ipbKAhUKbj4KHUn 
PCkkQFggoMAI%26ur.
25.	Stephanie Rosenbloom, “A Hotel Room with 140 Characters,” 
The New York Times, October 3, 2013.
26.	“Social Media and Dynamic Social Communities,” SAM 
(Socializing Around Media). http://samproject.net/social-­media-
and-dynamic-social-communities/.
27.	Vaughan, “72% of People Who Complain.”
28.	Ibid.
29.	H.O. Maycotte, “Beacon Technology: The Where, What, Who, 
How and Why,” Forbes, September 1, 2015, http://www.forbes.
com/sites/homaycotte/2015/09/01/beacon-technology-the-
what-who-how-why-and-where/.
30.	Seb Joseph, “Coca-Cola Has Taken a Step Closer to Using 
Beacons to Turn Location-Based Marketing on its Head,” 
The Drum, August 13, 2015, http://www.thedrum.com/
news/2015/08/13/coca-cola-has-taken-step-closer-using-­
beacons-turn-location-based-marketing-its-head.
31.	 Shea Bennett, “28% of Time Spent Online Is Social 
Networking,” Ad Week, January 27, 2015, http://www.adweek.
com/socialtimes/time-spent-online/613474.
32.	We Are Social, and IAB Singapore, “Leading Social Networks 
Worldwide as of March 2015, Ranked by Number of Active 
Users (in Millions),” Statista—The Statistics Portal, http://www.
statista.com/statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-
by-number-of-users/ (accessed March 19, 2015).
33.	Forever 21 Facebook Fan Page, http://www.facebook.com/#!/
Forever21?ref=ts.
34.	Mike Gingerich, “4 Ways to Boost Your Facebook Engagement 
with Promotions,” Social Media Examiner, January 8, 2013, 
http://www.socialmediaexaminer.com/boost-your-facebook-­
engagement-with-promotions/.
35.	Experian, “Most Popular Social Media Websites in the United 
States in December 2014, Based on Share of Visits,” Statista—
The Statistics Portal, http://www.statista.com/statistics/ 
265773/market-share-of-the-most-popular-social-media- 
websites-in-the-us/ (accessed March 19, 2015).
36.	Dorie Clark, “Why You Should Be on Google Plus (Even Though 
No One Else Is),” Forbes, January 14, 2013.
37.	Ross Blum, “Where Have All the Customers Gone?,” p. 8.
38.	“In The Know,” YouTube, Fall 2009, http://www.gstatic.com/­
youtube/engagement/platform/autoplay/advertise/downloads/
YouTube_InTheKnow.pdf.
39.	“Brand Channels,” YouTube, http://www.gstatic.com/youtube/­
engagement/platform/autoplay/advertise/downloads/YouTube_
BrandChannels.pdf.
40.	Instagram. “Number of Monthly Active Instagram Users from 
January 2013 to September 2015 (in Millions).” Statista, 
January 7, 2016. http://www.statista.com/statistics/253577/
number-of-monthly-active-instagram-users/.
41.	 Somini Sengupta, Nicole Perlroth, and Jenna Wortham, “Behind 
Instagram’s Success, Networking the Old Way,” The New York 
Times, April 13, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/14/

114	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
technology/instagram-founders-were-helped-by-bay-area- 
connections.html?pagewanted=all&_r=2&.
42.	Instagram, “beatsbydre,” https://www.instagram.com/ 
beatsbydre/.
43.	Heike Young, “The 30 Most Genius Content Marketing 
Examples of 2014 (So Far),” Salesforce Marketing Cloud, 
August 6, 2014, http://www.exacttarget.com/blog/the-30-­ 
most-genius-content-marketing-examples-of-2014-so-far/.
44.	Shirley Ju, “Instagram Flexin’: Eminem Readies Story Behind 
‘Lose Yourself’ for Beats by Dre,” HipHopDX, November 15, 
2014, http://hiphopdx.com/editorials/id.2647/title.instagram- 
flexin-eminem-readies-story-behind-lose-yourself-for-beats- 
by-dre.
45.	“Top 15 Most Popular Photo Sharing Sites | January 2016,” 
http://www.ebizmba.com/articles/photo-sharing-sites.
46.	“Brands on Flickr,” Supercollider, July 12, 2008, http:// 
geoffnorthcott.com/blog/2008/07/brands-on-flickr/.
47.	Young, “The 30 Most Genius.”
48.	Ibid.
49.	Digital Training Academy, “Social Media Marketing: How 
#FirstWorldProblems Was Hijacked by WATERisLIFE,” 
Digital marketing industry case study library, http://www.
digitaltrainingacademy.com/casestudies/2015/03/social_ 
media_marketing_how_firstworldproblems_was_hijacked_
by_waterislife.php.
50.	David H Deans, “184 Million People in America Own a 
Smartphone,” Social Media Today, March 15, 2015, http://www.
socialmediatoday.com/technology-data/2015-03-15/184- 
million-people-america-own-smartphone.
51.	 Bill Siwicki, “On Smartphones, More Older Folks Make 
Purchases Than Youngsters,” Internet Retailer, April 17, 2014, 
https://www.internetretailer.com/2014/04/17/smartphones-
more-older-folks-make-purchases-youngsters.
52.	http://www.statista.com/statistics/266488/forecast-of-mobile-
app-downloads/.
53.	http://www.statista.com/statistics/241587/number-of-free-­
mobile-app-downloads-worldwide/.
54.	http://www.statista.com/statistics/266488/forecast-of-mobile-
app-downloads/.
55.	David Barboza, “A Popular Chinese Social Networking App 
Blazes Its Own Path,” The New York Times, January 20, 2014.
56.	“Vision Statement: How People Really Use Mobile.” Harvard 
Business Review, January-February 2013, https://hbr.
org/2013/01/how-people-really-use-mobile/ar/1.
57.	Ibid.
58.	Ashley Feinberg, “I Just Spent $236 on Candy Crush, Help,” 
Gizmodo, August 7, 2013, http://www.gizmodo.com.
59.	Stuart Dredge, “Candy Crush Saga: ‘70% of People on the Last 
Level Haven’t Paid Anything,’” The Guardian, September 10, 
2013, http://www.theguardian.com; “Candy Crush Saga Most 
Popular Game App on the Planet,” Metro, January 30, 2014, 
http://www.metro.co.uk.
60.	Josh Wolonick, “Here’s How Big the In-App Purchases Market 
Is for Apple and Google,” Minyanville, January 16, 2014, http://
www.minyanville.com.
61.	 Katie Van Domelin, “Social Media Monitoring Tools—How to 
Pick the Right One,” July 7, 2010, http://www.convinceandconvert.
com/social-media-monitoring/social-media-monitoring-tools-
how-to-pick-the-right-one/.
62.	“New Salesforce.com Features Help to Scale ‘Social’ across 
the Enterprise,” Salesforce.com website, November 12, 2011, 
http://www.Salesforce.com.com.
63.	Laura S. Quinn and Kyle Andrei, “A Few Good Web Analytics 
Tools,” TechSoup May 19, 2011, http://www.techsoup.org.
64.	Christina Warren, “How to Measure Social Media ROI,” 
Mashable October 27, 2009, http://mashable.com/2009/ 
10/27/social-media-roi/.
65.	“iNoobs: What Is Google Analytics?,” http://inspiredm.com; 
http://www.google.com/analytics/features/index.html; http://
www.advanced-web-metrics.com; Kevin Ryan, “What Can the 
Average Marketer Learn from Google Creative Lab?,” 
Advertising Age, April 19, 2013.
66.	Amy Porterfield, “3 Steps to an Effective Social Media 
Strategy,” Social Media Examiner, March 1, 2012, http://www.
socialmediaexaminer.com.
67.	Tim Peterson, “Facebook Opens Branded Video Program on 
YouTube’s Anniversary,” Advertising Age, April 23, 2015, http://
www.adage.com.
68.	Andy Shaw, “How to Create a Facebook Ad Campaign,” Social 
Media Tips, September 23, 2011, http://exploringsocialmedia.
com/how-to-create-a-facebook-ad-campaign/.
69.	Red Bull Stratos, “Scientific Data Review,” http://www.­
redbullstratos.com.
70.	Rick Mulready, “The Secret to Red Bull’s Media Success 
Is There Is No Secret,” November 6, 2013, http:// 
rickmulready.com.
71.	 SocialBakers, “Red Bull Stratos on Social Media,”http://www. 
socialbakers.com.
72.	Ibid.
73.	Jack Bell, “Red Bulls’ Henry Strikes a Pose, and Starts a Trend,” 
The New York Times, September 21, 2013.
74.	 http://www.newyorkredbulls.com/.
75.	Clint Boulton, “Red Bull Eyes ‘SoLoMo’ Software to Grow 
Business,” The Wall Street Journal, April 30, 2012.
76.	Wall Street Journal Live, “Lunch Break: Interview with John 
Jurgensen,” December 20, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
77.	 David Moth, “How Red Bull Uses Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, 
and Google+,” eConsultancy.com, February 21, 2013, http://
econsultancy.com.
	 i.	 Stuart Elliot, “Live Commercials Coming to ‘Late Night,’” The 
New York Times, September 18, 2013; Jeanine Poggi, “Lexus to 
Air Live Ads, Fueled by Social Suggestions, during NBC’s ‘Late 
Night,’” Advertising Age, September 18, 2013; Chris Perry, 
“How Social Media Propelled Fallon’s Tonight Show Takeover,” 
Forbes, April 6, 2013; YouTube, “Late Night with Jimmy Fallon,” 
http://www.youtube.com/user/latenight.
	ii.	 http://www.hubspot.com/customers/hy-line-cruises; “Inbound in 
Number,” HubSpot, http://www.hubspot.com/internet-marketing- 
company; Hubspot Inc. 2014 Annual Report. http://s2.q4cdn.
com/235752014/files/doc_financials/2015/HubSpot-2014-AR_
v001_b3808p.pdf; “HubSpot Inc.” Google Finance. December 14, 
2015, www.google.com/finance. 
	iii.	 LinkedIn Marketing Solution, “Mercedes-Benz USA Gets More 
Mileage from Shareable Content with Sponsored Updates 
from LinkedIn,” https://business.linkedin.com/content/dam/­
business/marketing-solutions/global/en_US/site/pdf/cs/
LinkedIn-MercedesBenz%20SU-CaseStudy-130919.pdfl; 
Andrew Adam Newman, “Mercedes Looks for Up-and-Comers 
on LinkedIn,” The New York Times, July 14, 2014, http://www.
nytimes.com/2014/07/18/business/media/mercedes-looks-for-
up-and-comers-on-linkedin.html; We Are Social, “Leading 
Social Networks Worldwide as of November 2015, Ranked 
by Number of Active Users (in Millions),” Statista—The 
Statistics Portal, December 14, 2015, http://www.statista.com/
statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-number-
of-users/.

	
SOCIAL AND MOBILE MARKETING  CHAPTER THREE	
115
	
	
	iv.	 Lisa Richwine, “Disney’s Powerful Marketing Force: Social 
Media Moms,” Reuters, June 15, 2015; Ernan Roman, “How 
Disney Influences Small Customer Segments for Major Impact,” 
The Huffington Post, August 18, 2015, http://www.huffington-
post.com/; Nadia Cameron, “How to Engage in Influencer 
Marketing: The Controversy and the Opportunity,” CMO, 
June 19, 2015, http://www.cmo.com.au/article/577875/ 
how-­engage-influencer-marketing-controversy-opportunity/.
	v.	 Kate Kaye, “eHarmony’s Love for Data Goes Beyond Dating: It’s 
Good for Marketing Too,” Advertising Age, February 18, 2015, 
http://adage.com; Samuel Greengard, “eHarmony Enhances Its 
Relationship with Big Data,” Baseline, February 2, 2015, http://
www.baseline.com; “IBM Big Data & Analytics Helps eHarmony 
Identify More Compatible Matches in Real Time,” IBM Big 
Data & Analytics Hub, September 8, 2014, http://www. 
ibmbigdatahub.com.
	vi.	 Ben Sisario, “Tweets About Music to Get a Billboard Chart,” The 
New York Times, March 27, 2014, https://www.nytimes.com; 
http://www.billboard.com/billboard-twitter-chart-faq.

CHAPTER 4
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO4-1	 Define conscious marketing.
	 LO4-2	
Describe what constitutes marketing’s greater purpose.
	 LO4-3	
Differentiate between conscious marketing and corporate social responsibility.
	 LO4-4	
Describe the ways in which conscious marketing helps various stakeholders. 
	 LO4-5	
Explain how conscious leadership can produce a conscious culture in the firm.
	 LO4-6	
Describe how ethics constitute an integral part of a firm’s conscious marketing strategy.
	 LO4-7	
Identify the four steps in ethical decision making.
CONSCIOUS 
MARKETING, 
CORPORATE SOCIAL 
RESPONSIBILITY, 
AND ETHICS

B
lake Mycoskie doesn’t just want his custom-
ers to buy his shoes; he wants to turn cus-
tomers into benefactors. In this innovative, 
conscious approach to marketing, his com-
pany, TOMS Shoes, does more than engage in charita-
ble acts. The charitable acts are the company. There is 
no separating TOMS from the social responsibility 
it embraces.
Mycoskie started out manufacturing a revised ver-
sion of a traditional Argentinean shoe called alpargatas 
and selling them to consumers outside their generally im-
poverished source nation. The combination of the com-
fortable shoes and the extreme poverty he observed led 
to a simple code: “With every pair you purchase, 
TOMS will give a pair to a child in need. One for One.” 
Thus, consumers who buy TOMS Shoes do so because 
they know that with their purchase, they help donate 
shoes to people in need. Their choices reflect their desire 
to make their money count for something and to embrace 
a higher purpose.1
As the company has grown, it also has added lines 
of vegan and recycled shoes. It expanded into sun-
glasses, where its One for One philosophy dictates that 
for every pair sold, TOMS provides eye care, such as 
medicines, glasses, or surgery, to someone else in the 
world at risk of losing his or her sight. TOMS has also 
included coffee, bags, and backpacks among its offer-
ings.2 When a customer makes a purchase from the 
TOMS line of coffee, a week’s worth of safe water goes 
to someone in need.3 For each bag purchased, TOMS 
helps provide the materials and training that health care 
providers require to help mothers give birth safely.4 
Backpack purchases help prevent bullying, because 
TOMS provides teachers, school counselors, and other 
© jackie ellis/Alamy

118
school staff with bullying prevention and intervention 
training in return for the purchases.5
More recently, TOMS launched its Animal Initiative, 
in support of National Geographic’s nonprofit Big Cat 
Collection. The nonprofit works to conserve big cat pop-
ulations, including lions, mainly through poaching pre-
vention efforts. The Animal Initiative is unique among all 
of the TOMS initiatives in that the lines dedicated to sup-
port this effort span a variety of products, including 
shoes, sunglasses, and  backpacks, all with animal-­
inspired designs.6
Despite the expanding range of products associated 
with TOMS, its offerings still remain somewhat focused. 
Thus, when it comes to procuring other products—those 
that TOMS doesn’t sell—finding a socially responsible 
seller that actively engages in tactics to benefit people 
and communities is still challenging for individual shop-
pers. To extend his vision more broadly, Mycoskie deter-
mined that he would bring together sellers and vendors 
whose work benefited communities onto one online plat-
form. Then shoppers could visit a single site, where they 
knew that each item they purchased had social as well as 
consumption benefits.
On the TOMS Marketplace website, visitors can 
search by product line (e.g., apparel, tech, accessories), by 
their preferred cause (e.g., education, job creation, water), 
by global region, or by brand. The approximately 200 dif-
ferent products benefit diverse causes: Buying a back-
pack from Stone + Cloth funds education initiatives in 
East Africa; the purchase of handmade wooden head-
phones from LSTN means that LSTN will help restore the 
hearing of a person with hearing impairment.
Although the TOMS model remains dedicated to a 
buy one, give one approach, the Marketplace does not 
require the same commitment from all its 30 or so sell-
ers. Instead, Mycoskie reviews each provider to ensure it 
has an appropriate culture that features “a mission of im-
proving people’s lives baked into its business model.” 
Furthermore, TOMS purchases all the products on the 
site. In that sense, it functions like a wholesaler that not 
only procures supplies but also takes responsibility for 
storing, warehousing, shipping, and other logistics.7
Detractors argue that TOMS actually may do some 
harm, in that its provisions might reduce demand for 
locally produced products. But TOMS already has re-
stored 275,000 people’s eyesight and provided 67,000 
weeks of clean water.8 It also has given away 35 million 
pairs of shoes, so consumers have bought at least that 
many—at an average price of $55 per pair. Clearly, the 
value that consumers find in these cloth shoes goes 
well beyond the simple linen and canvas parts that go 
into making them.
Which is the more important corporate objective: making a profit or protecting customers, 
employees, and the broader needs of society and the environment?9 This question underlies 
a primary dilemma that marketers have long faced. At one point, they might have argued 
that profit was the primary goal of any firm. But over time, firms—and society as a 
whole—came to agree that corporations have social responsibilities to a range of stake-
holders that they must meet. 
Doing so can be harder than it sounds, especially because the goals of different 
shareholder groups often can be at odds. For example, employees in the coal industry 
want to keep their jobs; consumers want cheap energy; society wants clean, sustainable 
energy; and shareholders who own stock in a coal company want to earn profits. But 
those goals often come in conflict, because coal will never be a clean or sustainable 
energy, so to satisfy society, shareholders by definition would lose their source of in-
come. Accordingly, some industries and companies resist the idea that they need to 
acknowledge the impact of their actions on others. However, in the long term, if cus-
tomers believe they can no longer trust a company or that the company is not acting 
responsibly, they will no longer support that company by purchasing its products or 
services or investing in its stock.

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
119
	
	
Ultimately then, modern firms and their marketing efforts must address these notions. 
For corporate leaders, their firm’s ability to balance the needs of various ­stakeholders—
while building and maintaining consumer trust by conducting ethical, transparent, clear 
­transactions that have a positive impact on society and the ­environment—must be of 
­paramount ­importance. It is the role of the firm’s leadership to weigh the trade-offs 
among stakeholders and establish a culture that encourages the company to function in 
a responsible, ethical way.10  Throughout history, regardless of the objectives they 
­embrace, companies and marketers have needed to be ethical in their actions if they 
hope to survive.
As these corporate social responsibilities have grown, and ideas about how they should 
be implemented have expanded, the progression in thinking has moved to encompass the 
relatively more recent concept of conscious marketing. This chapter details these develop-
ments over time, in an effort to describe and explain what conscious marketing means and 
how it depends on ethics and corporate social responsibility. We start by defining con-
scious marketing and its four main components (a higher purpose, stakeholders, conscious 
leadership, and a conscious culture). In particular, we explain why behaving consciously is 
so important to successful marketing. We then examine how a firm can balance the some-
times disparate needs of various stakeholders to create an offering that sustains the com-
pany financially in the long term while also benefiting society and the environment (i.e., 
the triple bottom line). Then we turn our attention to the leaders who establish a conscious 
marketing culture in the firm. Coming full circle, we describe how conscious marketing 
can be integrated into a firm’s marketing strategy and marketing plan (from Chapter 2). 
Finally, we consider ethics as a crucial component of conscious marketing. To help you 
make ethical marketing decisions, we also provide a framework for ethical decision mak-
ing. In Appendix 4A, we present some scenarios that highlight typical ethical challenges 
marketing managers often must face. 
CONSCIOUS MARKETING
Conscious marketing entails a sense of purpose for the firm that is higher than 
­simply making a profit by selling products and services. It encompasses four overriding 
principles:11 
1.	 Recognition of marketing’s greater purpose. When the marketing function  
recognizes that the purpose of business should be more than just making prof-
its—whether the purpose is providing shoes for residents of poor nations, as 
TOMS does, or ensuring employment opportunities for local communities, or 
making strides toward greener production—the actions it undertakes change in 
focus. The resulting engagement improves inputs as well as outcomes of market-
ing actions.
2.	
Consideration of stakeholders and their interdependence. Conscious marketers 
consider how their actions will affect the expansive range of potential stakeholders, 
which are the broad set of people who might be ­affected by a firm’s actions, includ-
ing not just corporate shareholders and customers but also past, current, and  
prospective employees and their families; supply chain partners; government agen-
cies; the physical environment; and members of the communities in which the firm 
operates (defined either locally or on a global scale). Marketers increasingly ac-
knowledge that to serve as many stakeholders as possible and avoid inflicting ­severe 
damage on any others, they must give up their ­exclusive focus on maximizing prof-
its.12 Rather, they ­engage in conscious marketing, such that they attend to the broad 
implications of their actions. By considering these impacts as a foundation for any 
marketing decisions, conscious marketers achieve the most benefits for the largest 
numbers of stakeholders while also ensuring that they avoid causing significant harm 
to any group. For example, when Walmart issued new standards for farms that supply 
 LO4-1	
Define conscious 
marketing.

120	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
it with livestock products, the effects were felt by the supply chain partners who 
might need to adjust their practices, competitors that might need to adopt similar pro-
tections, consumers who can take more assurance that the animals raised for their 
food will not have been fed antibiotics, and animal welfare groups that call the new 
standards “a step in the right direction.”13
3.	
The presence of conscious leadership, creating a corporate culture. A con-
scious marketing approach implies that the firm’s leaders are dedicated to the 
proposition of being conscious at all levels of the business, throughout its entire 
culture. For example, Elon Musk, the visionary head of a range of innovative 
companies (e.g., Tesla, SpaceX, Solar City, Hyperloop), explains, “I like to be in-
volved in things that change the world.”14 Therefore, regardless of whether his 
firm is selling electric vehicles, ­investigating realistic options for building renew-
able public transportation systems, or seeking to colonize space, the vision re-
mains the same: to change the world for the better. The resulting conscious culture 
remains dedicated to the notion that the choices the firm makes reflect its con-
scious consideration of stakeholders, in line with its higher purpose and in accor-
dance with the leader’s ideals. As a result, every member of the firm embodies the 
ideas of conscious marketing, and every stakeholder affected by that marketing 
can recognize the higher principles involved.
Elon Musk, the head of SpaceX, wants to be involved in things 
that change the world. 
© Patrick T. Fallon/Bloomberg/Getty Images
When Walmart issued new standards for livestock products 
that were raised on food without antibiotics or artificial 
growth hormones, it considered multiple stakeholder groups 
including the ranchers that supply the food, its customers, 
and animal welfare groups.
© Don Ryan/AP Photo
4.	
The understanding that decisions are ethically based. Conscious marketers must 
make decisions that are based on sound marketing ethics. Business ethics is con-
cerned with distinguishing between right and wrong actions and decisions that arise 
in a business setting, according to broad and well-established moral and ethical prin-
ciples that might arise in a business setting, and any special duties or obligations that 
apply to persons engaged in commerce. Marketing ethics, in contrast, examines eth-
ical situations that are specific to the domain of marketing, including societal, global, 
or individual consumer issues. They can involve societal issues such as the sale of 
products or services that may damage the environment, global issues such as the use 
of child labor (see Chapter 8), or individual consumer issues such as misrepresenting 
a product in advertising or marketing dangerous products.

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
121
	
	
MARKETING’S GREATER PURPOSE: 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AS 
AN ELEMENT OF CONSCIOUS MARKETING
As we noted previously, the notion of conscious marketing has evolved over time. At one 
point, a popular view held that the only responsibility of a business was to its shareholders, 
so its only purpose was to make a profit.15 In many parts of the world, that view has been 
supplanted with the idea that companies must consider their responsibilities to a wider 
range of stakeholders who make up society. Although there are many and varied defini-
tions of corporate social responsibility (CSR),16 firms generally acknowledge that, in 
addition to economic and legal duties, they have responsibilities to society. These respon-
sibilities are not mandated by any law or regulation but instead are associated with the de-
mands, expectations, requirements, and desires of various stakeholders. For example, one 
definition describes CSR as context-specific actions and policies, taking stakeholders’ ex-
pectations into account, to achieve what is referred to as the triple bottom line: economic, 
social, and environmental performance.17
 Today, virtually all large and well-known companies engage in some form of CSR. 
The available initiatives are vast in their spread, from establishing charitable founda-
tions to supporting and associating with existing nonprofit groups to supporting the 
rights of minority groups to adopting responsible marketing, sales, and production 
practices. Exhibit 4.1 provides several illustrations of the CSR programs undertaken by 
major firms. 
Although CSR is an important element of conscious marketing, it is not the same 
thing. Becoming a conscious marketing organization is a complex effort, and for some 
firms, it may prove virtually impossible to achieve. When marketers work in controversial 
or polluting industries such as tobacco or fossil fuels, their central activities largely bar 
them from becoming conscious marketers. However, they might engage in CSR in an ef-
fort to mitigate the damage that their products cause, such as when cigarette companies 
sponsor public information campaigns or oil companies plant trees to balance out their 
 LO4-2	
Describe what 
constitutes marketing’s 
greater purpose.
E X H I B I T  4.1
Sampling of Major Companies’ CSR Programs
Company	
Illustration of CSR Program
Amazon.com	
Developed nonprofit Simple Pay Donation system to help nonprofits raise 
money easily
BMW	
Light Up Hope and BMW Children’s Safety programs
Coca-Cola	
Spent $102 million through The Coca-Cola Campaign focusing on water  
stewardship, healthy and active lifestyles, community recycling, and education
FedEx	
Transported more than 67 planes’ worth of aid to disaster victims
General Electric	
Ecomagination campaign, GE Volunteers Foundation
Google	
Google.org funds for pro-profit entrepreneurship in Africa, Google China 
Social Innovation Cup for College Students
McDonald’s 	
99 percent of fish come from MSC-fisheries, transitioning to sustainable food 
and packaging sources, Ronald McDonald House charities
Proctor & Gamble	
Live, Learn, and Thrive improves the lives of children worldwide
Southwest Airlines	
Employees donate volunteer hours to Ronald McDonald Houses throughout 
the U.S.
Starbucks	
Develops ecologically friendly growing practices, LEED certified stores
Source: Adapted from http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/most-admired/.

122	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
carbon footprint.18 In addition, these companies might under-
take efforts in other sectors, such as donating time in local 
communities or guaranteeing fair wages, because they recog-
nize the importance of such socially responsible efforts. 
Walmart offers an interesting example in this discus-
sion. The retail giant has been widely criticized as the 
worst-paying company in the United States.19 Yet it also 
engages in extensive CSR programs across the triple bot-
tom line. It has committed to reducing its carbon footprint 
(environmental performance), donates more than $1 billion 
in cash and in-kind items to charitable causes per year (so-
cial performance), and still earns strong profits (economic 
performance).20
Thus, though conscious marketing and CSR have 
some clear connections, they also differ in critical ways, as 
Exhibit 4.2 summarizes.
 LO4-3	
Differentiate between 
conscious marketing 
and corporate social 
responsibility.
Walmart employees protest low wages.
© Jae C. Hong/AP Photo
E X H I B I T  4.2
How Conscious Marketing Differs from CSR21 
Corporate Social Responsibility	
Conscious Marketing
Independent of corporate purpose or culture	
Incorporates higher purpose and a caring culture
Reflects a mechanistic view of business	
Takes a holistic, ecosystem view of business as a 
complex adaptive system
Often grafted on to traditional business model, 	
Social responsibility is at the core of the business 
usually as a separate department or part of PR 	
through the higher purpose and viewing the  
community and the environment as stakeholders
Sees limited overlap between the business and 	
Recognizes that business is a subset of society, 
society, and between business and the planet	
and that society is a subset of the planet
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the criteria for being a conscious marketer?
2.	 Is Walmart a conscious marketer or is it a practitioner of CSR?
THE STAKEHOLDERS OF  
CONSCIOUS MARKETING
Among the key differences between conscious marketing and CSR, we can highlight the 
unique view on shareholders that is absolutely critical to conscious marketing. That is, 
when companies embrace conscious marketing, they appeal not only to their shareholders 
but also to all of their key stakeholders (Exhibit 4.3), including their own employees, con-
sumers, the marketplace, and society at large. The choices they make with regard to what 
they produce and how, and then how they seek to sell those offerings, take a broad range of 
elements into consideration. 
A prominent example appears in the supply chain for processed foods (e.g., cereals, 
salad dressings). For decades, most of these foods have contained ingredients made from 
 LO4-4	
Describe the ways  
in which conscious 
marketing helps 
various stakeholders.

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
123
	
	
plants whose DNA has been manipulated in a laboratory. For example, to help them 
weather frosts better and produce a greater yield of crops, tomatoes might be spliced with 
salmon genes. Such genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, appear in many of the 
foods that U.S. consumers eat daily. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration does not 
require GMO food product labeling,22 so legally, food manufacturers do not have to iden-
tify which of their products contain GMOs. Many consumers express a preference to 
know this information; they also have concerns about the potential negative health effects 
of GMOs. No available scientific evidence confirms these threats. Genetic modifications 
also increase crop yields for farmers and lower production costs. Avoiding a GMO label 
might help companies sell more of their products. Thus far, many food manufacturers 
seem to be fighting GMO labeling, as Marketing ­Analytics 4.1 describes. However, in 
2014 General Mills decided to make some of its products, such as Cheerios, completely 
free of GMOs, and Whole Foods has committed to issuing labels, by 2018, on all GMO-­
containing foods it sells.23
In this example, the stakeholders have contrasting pref-
erences and demands, and they are diverse—they include 
farmers, consumers, manufacturing companies, sharehold-
ers, retailers, and the environment. Let’s consider five stake-
holder categories in more depth to understand the meaning 
and effects of conscious marketing in the modern marketing 
arena, as well as how conscious marketing ultimately can 
benefit firms that undertake it.
Employees
Perhaps the most basic responsibility of a firm is to em-
ployees: to ensure a safe working environment  free of 
threats to their physical safety, health, or well-being. In 
some cases, this basic level of safety seems insufficient to 
ensure responsibility to workers. For example, more firms 
today realize that happy employee families make happy and 
productive employees, so they are offering new benefits 
and options, such as on-site daycare24 or flextime arrange-
ments. When REI thought more consciously about its prac-
tices, it determined that living up to its higher purpose—that 
E X H I B I T  4.3
Key CSR Stakeholders
Employees
Customers
Society
Marketplace
• Partners
• Competitors
• Community
• Environment
• Current customers
• Potential customers
• Employees
• Their families
Whole Foods has committed to issuing labels, by 2018, on all 
GMO-containing foods it sells.
© Ralph Barrera/MCT/Newscom.

124	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
is, helping people enjoy outdoor adventures—meant closing 
its stores on Thanksgiving and the day after, popularly 
known as Black Friday. Although closing meant that REI 
lost some sales, the conscious culture in the firm empha-
sized that employees should be enjoying time outdoors with 
their families too.25
Customers
Especially as changes in the marketing environment emerge, 
firms must consider the effects on their current customers as 
well as future customers they have targeted. Conscious mar-
keting programs must take such shifts and trends into account 
and react to them quickly. Some trends receiving substantial 
attention in modern times include respecting and protecting 
privacy in an electronic world and ensuring the healthiness of 
products, especially those aimed at children. When conscious 
marketing takes on such pertinent issues, it often increases 
consumer awareness of the firm, which can lead to better 
brand equity and sales in the long run. The Walt Disney 
How Kellogg’s Uses Analytics to Address  
GMO Concernsi
Analytics are a valuable tool for helping manufacturers under-
stand the relationship their customers have with their brands. 
For example, Kellogg’s recently suffered its first sales and 
profit decreases in decades. The unprecedented drop in these 
key metrics prompted the company to decide to revamp its 
brand, cleanly and clearly. But what exactly did it need to 
change? Using advanced analytics, Kellogg’s realized that one 
of its brands was getting creamed on social media: Reports 
showed that Kashi, which Kellogg’s has promoted as an all-­
natural option, contained genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs). Consumers were furious, and they made their opin-
ions clear on various social media.
	
In response, Kellogg’s undertook a complete overhaul in an 
attempt to redefine its brands’ core purpose. It consolidated 
its 42 separate company websites into a single umbrella site. 
And it made social media a focal point in its brand overhaul. To 
manage this social media reinvention, Kellogg’s hired a com-
puter whiz to serve as its director of digital and social-media 
strategy. The strategy first went into effect in the United 
Kingdom. To encourage trial of its Krave cereal, it released the 
hashtag “#KravetheSmiler,” then awarded prizes to customers 
who used the hashtag. Throughout the campaign, Kellogg’s 
constantly gathered data, including daily summaries of tweets 
that featured the hashtag, the daily top tweeters, how many 
tweets per hour they received, and so forth.
	
The well-planned campaign worked: Kellogg’s received more 
than 35,000 tweets about Krave cereal. Using specially de-
signed algorithms, Kellogg’s could quickly and effectively comb 
through all the data and award prizes fairly and effectively. 
Although the campaign improved customer relations, the more 
important result might have been the way it provided Kellogg’s 
with new insights and data. With this information, Kellogg’s is 
likely to be able to replicate this success in other social media 
campaigns. For example, it could identify the products in which 
consumers would be willing to allow GMOs and those in which 
they absolutely would reject GMOs. Analytics also might show 
Kellogg’s how to seed communication campaigns to give con-
sumers accurate information about GMOs’ actual threats 
and benefits. Thus far, though, its implementation of careful 
­data-based strategies has boosted the return on investment 
for Kellogg’s brands—in some cases, up to six times more than 
previous methods ever achieved.
Marketing Analytics 4.1
Kellogg’s used social media to introduce and gather data 
about its new Krave cereal.
© studiomode/Alamy
REI closes on Black Friday, the day after Thanksgiving, so its 
employees can enjoy time outdoors with their families.
© Suzi Pratt/Getty Images

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
125
	
	
Company appears to be a strong proponent: In one year, 
Disney gave more than $370 million to charity, and its em-
ployees donated 667,013 hours of their time through 
Disney’s VoluntEAR program. Reflecting its higher purpose 
of ensuring the happiness and enjoyment of children, Disney 
has partnered with Give Kids the World, and its employees 
have renovated 88 vacation villas that the charitable organi-
zation offers to the families of children with life-threatening 
illnesses, so that they can take life-affirming vacations.26
Marketplace 
When one firm in the industry leads the way toward conscious 
marketing, its partners and competitors often have no choice 
but to follow—or run the risk of not doing business or being 
left behind. To address issues such as global warming, water 
scarcity, and energy, GE uses a program it calls ecomagina-
tion. Reflecting the company’s higher purpose, ecomagina-
tion encompasses a business strategy composed of four 
commitments: to double investments in clean research and development (R&D), increase 
revenues from ecomagination products, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and inform the 
public about these issues.27 The initiative for the program came from conscious lead-
ers who recognized that the energy field had great potential to exert long-lasting effects on 
the world. When confronted with such initiatives, other energy companies are forced to 
GE is the industry leader in CSR with its ecomagination program. 
Source: General Electric Company
Walt Disney’s VoluntEAR program is one of the best CSR 
­programs in the world.
© Deshakalyan Chowdhury/Stringer/Getty Images

126	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
make a decision: continue as they have been doing or adopt more responsible practices 
themselves. In either case, the initiating firm enjoys an advantage by gaining a reputation 
for being on the cutting edge of CSR efforts.
Society
Firms expend considerable time and energy engaging in activities aimed at improving the 
overall community and the physical environment, which suggests their increasing recogni-
tion of the importance of a broad range of varied stakeholders. According to a McKinsey 
& Co. survey, 95 percent of CEOs believe that society expects companies to take on public 
responsibilities.28 Broader society, a key stakeholder, demands that companies act respon-
sibly, and companies cannot ignore this. A firm that fails to act responsibly causes damage 
to all the preceding stakeholders as well as to itself. For example, reports that the artificial 
sweeteners in diet sodas might have ill effects, such as long-term weight gain and possible 
Adding Value 4.1
Walmart Wants to Be the Corporate “Good Guy”ii
Walmart is known for its low prices and for driving its vendors 
nearly to tears to get them. Now it is pressuring its vendors to 
supply it with environmentally friendly merchandise with labels 
to prove it. In the future, merchandise sold at Walmart will 
have the environmental equivalent of nutrition labels, providing 
information on the product’s carbon footprint, the amount of 
water and air pollution used to produce it, and other environ-
mental issues. To measure how a vendor’s products are doing, 
it has developed a sustainability index that simultaneously 
takes several issues into consideration. In particular, Walmart 
required its top 200 factories to cut their energy usage by 
20 percent by 2012. Walmart achieved this amazing goal, re-
ducing energy consumption by 2.168 billion kilowatt-hours, or 
the equivalent amount of energy that would be needed to 
power 1.46 million homes for a whole year.
It also has committed to buying more of the products it 
sells in its U.S. stores from U.S. suppliers, in an effort to ad-
dress high unemployment rates. More directly, it has prom-
ised to hire up to 100,000 U.S. veterans, which will help 
address the job challenges many soldiers face upon leaving 
the military.
Nor has Walmart limited its efforts to the United States. It 
has sought to increase food safety in China, where the rela-
tively underdeveloped infrastructure can create the danger of 
contamination of fresh and packaged food products. Walmart 
created a fleet of customized vans outfitted with the latest 
tools for conducting food safety inspections. The vans, staffed 
by trained specialists, deliver the “China Mobile Labs” to 33 
stores throughout Guangzhou, Dongguan, and Shenzhen and 
ensure the safety and quality of the products they sell.
To reduce the use of plastic bags and thereby mitigate 
harm to the environment, Walmart has initiated several cam-
paigns. In particular, plastic bag usage has dropped signifi-
cantly throughout Asia—by 40 percent in Japan, 86 percent in 
China, and 90 percent in India.
Walmart has not always been touted as a good corporate 
citizen, though. In the 1990s, workers at some factories 
­producing clothing for Walmart alleged that they had been 
­subjected to inhumane conditions. More recently, two govern-
mental organizations accused Walmart of buying from 15 facto-
ries that engage in abuse and labor violations, including child 
labor, 19-hour shifts, and below-subsistence wages. It and other 
companies have also been accused of dumping hazardous 
waste in Oklahoma City.
So why is Walmart attempting to position itself as the retail 
industry’s sustainability leader? The initiatives and related pub-
licity position Walmart as a good corporate citizen and thereby 
enhance its image. But the retail giant expects its moves to be 
good for business as well. Its customers, especially younger 
consumers, are increasingly concerned about how the prod-
ucts they use affect the environment and the people who pro-
duce them. Furthermore, Walmart believes that many of these 
initiatives can help streamline its supply chain processes and 
therefore provide additional financial benefits to its suppliers 
and customers.
Why is Walmart attempting to position itself as the retail 
­industry’s sustainability leader? 
Source: Walmart Corporation/Flickr/CC BY 2.0

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
127
	
	
links to developing cancer, have led customers to alter their buying habits. Specifically, 
sales of diet soda have dropped 6.8 percent in a year, more than three times the decline in 
regular soda sales. Even though organizations such as the American Diabetic Association 
and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration have affirmed that diet sodas are safe, the 
broader shift in societal opinions demands that beverage companies seek new options. In 
particular, many companies are researching the potential use of stevia, a plant with natu-
rally sweet properties, to replace the artificial versions.29
Environment
A special category that combines considerations of all these stakeholders is sustainabil-
ity. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Sustainability is based on 
a simple principle: Everything that we need for our survival and well-being depends, 
either directly or indirectly, on our natural environment.” Therefore, sustainable actions, 
including sustainable marketing, allow “humans and nature [to] exist in productive har-
mony, that permit fulfilling the social, economic and other requirements of present and 
future generations.”30 When marketing is truly sustainable, it can benefit all stakehold-
ers: employees, customers, the marketplace, and society, as Adding Value 4.1 details in 
relation to Walmart’s sustainability efforts. We discuss sustainable, or “green,” market-
ing further in Chapter 5.
INTEGRATING CONSCIOUS MARKETING 
THROUGHOUT THE FIRM: LEADERSHIP 
AND CULTURE
For new firms founded on conscious marketing principles, their leaders, who are also their 
founders, establish the standard from the very start. But even if an existing firm seeks to 
move toward a conscious approach to marketing, it can adopt decision rules (as we discuss in 
the next section) and norms that encourage consciousness throughout its entire corporate 
culture. For example, to ensure that conscious marketing is infused into all levels of the firm, 
it can be integrated into each stage of the marketing plan (introduced in Chapter 2), as we 
detail here. In their constant pursuit of conscious marketing, firms can address relevant ques-
tions at each stage of the strategic marketing planning process. For instance, in the planning 
stage, the firm will decide what level of commitment to its ethical policies and standards it is 
willing to declare publicly and how the firm plans to balance the needs of its various stake-
holders. In the implementation stage, the tone of the questions switches from “can we?” serve 
the market with the firm’s products or services in a conscious marketing manner to “should 
we?” be engaging in particular marketing practices. The key task in the control phase is to 
ensure that all potential conscious marketing issues raised during the planning process have 
been addressed and that all employees of the firm have acted ethically.
Planning Phase
With strong leadership, marketers can introduce conscious marketing at the beginning 
of the planning process by including statements in the firm’s mission or vision state-
ments (recall our discussion of various mission statements in Chapter 2). For instance, 
 LO4-5	
Explain how conscious 
leadership can 
produce a conscious 
culture in the firm.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is the difference between conscious marketing and corporate  
social responsibility? 
2.	 Provide a specific example of a conscious marketing firm that considers 
the needs of each of its stakeholders.

128	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
the mission statement for natural skin care company Burt’s Bees is to “create natural, 
Earth-friendly personal care products formulated to help you maximize your well-being 
and that of the world around you,”31 which reflects not only what is good for its custom-
ers but for society in general.
For General Electric, the complexity of its organization and the wealth of ethical is-
sues it faces necessitated an entire booklet, “The Spirit and the Letter.” This booklet pre­
sents not only a statement of integrity from the CEO and a code of conduct, but also details 
policies for dealing with everything from international competition laws to security and 
crisis management to insider trading. In addition, GE publishes an annual citizenship re-
port to determine the scope of its impacts, “produced for the benefit of all stakeholders, 
including GE employees—the people whose actions define GE every day.”32
Newman’s Own mission takes a fairly straightforward perspective: Its simple 
but powerful purpose was to sell salad dressing (initially; it expanded later to 
many other product lines) and use the proceeds to benefit charities. This simple 
idea began with the leadership of Paul Newman, the late actor who whipped up a 
batch of salad dressing to give as holiday gifts one year. When he and a friend 
decided to check with a local grocer to see if it would be interested in the product, 
they found they could sell 10,000 bottles in two weeks. Thus Newman’s Own 
Foundation, the nonprofit organization, grew quickly; today, dozens of products 
with the Newman’s Own and Newman’s Own Organic brands are sold in countries 
around the world, from coffee to popcorn to dog food. Profits from Newman’s 
Own—over $430 million since 1982—have been donated to thousands of chari-
ties, especially Newman’s Hole in the Wall Gang camps for children with 
life-threatening diseases.33 The unique mission of the company and the entrepre-
neurial flair of the founders, along with their conscious leadership, made this non-
profit a smashing, ongoing success. Employees of Newman’s Own have the great 
satisfaction of giving back to society, various charities benefit from the donations, 
and customers enjoy good food with a clear conscience.
Implementation Phase
In the implementation phase of the marketing strategy, when firms are identifying 
potential markets and ways to deliver the four Ps to them, firms must consider 
several pertinent issues. Sometimes a firm’s choice of target market and how it 
pursues it can lead to charges of unethical behavior. For instance, to “like” Grey 
Poupon’s Facebook page, consumers had to apply through their Facebook app. 
This app then examined the customers’ post history and decided whether each 
person had “good taste.” If they had good taste, they could like the page; if not, 
they were not allowed to be part of, as Grey Poupon put it, “the most discerning 
page on Facebook.” Although it may sound fun, several privacy issues challenged 
the ethics of the campaign and created threats to certain stakeholders, because 
users had to allow Grey Poupon to post on their timelines, and Grey Poupon 
gained open access to their post histories.34
Since 1982, Newman’s Own 
has given more than $400 mil-
lion to charities like Newman’s 
Hole in the Wall Gang camps 
for children with life- 
threatening diseases.
(left): © Food Collection/Alamy;  
(right): © Lamperti Francois-Xavier/ 
Abaca/Newscom
Was it unethical for Grey Poupon to 
­allow only those customers whom it 
considered to have Facebook posting 
history that was in good taste to “like” 
its Facebook page? 
Source: Grey Poupon

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
129
	
	
How Mobile Phones and Payments 
Have Created a Viable New Market at 
the Bottom of the Pyramidiii
Social & Mobile Marketing 4.1
We might imagine that the greatest spread of mobile technol-
ogy is among middle-class and wealthy consumers who de-
mand the most advanced phones with innumerable gadgets 
and added features. But in truth, the biggest jumps might be 
coming from the opposite side of the economic divide—namely, 
from some of the poorest consumers in the world.
	
For people living in extreme poverty, basic, functional 
phones offer a vast opportunity for consumption. In sub-­
Saharan Africa for example, consumers rely on text messages 
to communicate with distant contacts, because texts are less 
expensive than phone calls. 
	
More notably, mobile payment services allow these con-
sumers to load as little as a dollar on their phones, which they 
can then use to pay for services that improve their quality of 
life. One woman described her ability to pay less than 
50 cents daily to receive electricity from a solar panel pro-
vider. In the past, taking such small daily payments would have 
been too much work and too inefficient for the service pro-
vider. By linking to a mobile payment system, neither the con-
sumer nor the supplier needs to engage in additional effort. 
And if the consumer isn’t able to load enough onto her phone 
on one day, she can go without electricity until she can reload 
her mobile account with funds, without risk of harming her 
credit or losing access to her account. As one Kenyan invest-
ment firm, which helps poor consumers gain access to micro-­
insurance and savings plans, explains, “If you’re taking a dollar 
off a million people, that’s a reasonable revenue stream, but it 
wasn’t possible to do that without the mobile phone.”
	
Among these consumers, bank accounts are unusual, so 
the mobile payment systems allow them to load funds with the 
assistance of agents that work in local gas stations and 
stores. Once the funds are loaded, they can pay for groceries 
at the point of sale by tapping their phones, or they can send 
funds electronically. This latter functionality is critical, because 
for many Africans, making a trip to pay a bill might mean an 
entire day of lost labor due to travel times. 
	
These benefits have turned Africa into the source of some 
astounding innovations, especially for microbusiness con-
cepts. Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for about 70 percent of 
the world’s poor population, but nearly 65 percent of these 
households have access to at least one mobile phone. In addi-
tion, Africa is the fastest growing mobile market in the world.
	
Mobile payments are being introduced in other impover-
ished areas as well. India has a large impoverished population. 
Out of the 1.2 billion people living in the country, 600 million 
people do not have access to basic necessities such as drink-
ing water and toilets. However, there are 1 billion cell phone 
subscribers in the country, making the number of people with 
access to a cell phone significantly higher than the number of 
those with bank accounts. To push for financial inclusion of 
the impoverished population, a network is being put in place to 
allow for digital payments possible across the country.
In sub-Saharan Africa, consumers rely on text messages to 
communicate with distant contacts, because texts are less 
expensive than phone calls. 
© Jake Lyell/Alamy
In other situations, an implementation can have unforeseen benefits. A conscious mar-
keter might predict some of those benefits, but as Social and Mobile Marketing 4.1 ex-
plains, sometimes positive situations that arise for an entire population can lead to more 
conscious practices by firms. 
Once the strategy is implemented, controls must be in place to be certain that the firm 
has actually done what it has set out to do. These activities take place in the next phase of 
the strategic marketing planning process: the control phase.
Control Phase
During the control phase of the strategic marketing planning process, managers must be 
evaluated on their actions from a conscious marketing perspective. Systems must be in place 
to check whether each conscious marketing issue raised in the planning process was actually 
successfully addressed. Systems used in the control phase must also react to change. The 

130	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
emergence of new technologies and new markets ensures that new potentially troubling is-
sues continually arise. In particular, people expect to be able to move normally in public 
spaces without their location being recorded for subsequent use. Yet marketers regularly 
collect data on people’s location through purchase transactions and posts on social and mo-
bile sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and Flickr. Additionally, several retailers’ credit card 
systems have been violated, resulting in the theft of consumer data of millions of people, the 
most egregious of which were the estimated 110 million at Target and 1.1 million at Neiman 
Marcus at the end of 2013.35 Although most experts blamed the thefts on U.S.-based credit 
card companies’ reticence to adopt a more secure type of credit card that is used in Europe 
and elsewhere, the retailers and their customers suffer the consequences.
Many firms have emergency response plans in place just in case they ever encounter a 
crisis that would negatively impact its conscious marketing philosophy. Conscious market-
ers adopt such contingency plans from the start, reflecting their conscious leadership and 
conscious culture. In this sense, conscious marketing remains an ongoing crucial compo-
nent of the strategic marketing planning process and should be incorporated into all the 
firm’s decision making down the road.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What ethical questions should a marketing manager consider at each 
stage of the marketing plan?
MARKETING ETHICS AS A CONSCIOUS 
MARKETING PRINCIPLE
Decision making according to conscious marketing might sound easy, but as this chapter 
has shown, it is often difficult to balance the needs and preferences of various stakehold-
ers. A key component for making any conscious marketing decision can be very personal 
in that individuals must decide whether their actions are right or wrong based on their 
moral principles. In other words, are they making ethically correct decisions? As noted 
earlier in this chapter, like CSR, marketing ethics is an integral component of a conscious 
marketing initiative. To begin our discussion, we examine the nature of ethical and unethi-
cal marketing decisions and the difference between marketing ethics and CSR.
The Nature of Ethical and Unethical Marketing Decisions
People are expected to know what is and is not ethical behavior based on their ability to 
distinguish right from wrong in a particular culture. Consider product recalls of toys, for 
example. How can certain manufacturers engage in such egregious behavior as using lead 
paint on toys or including magnets that can be swallowed in toys marketed toward young 
children? What makes people take actions that create so much harm? Are all the individu-
als who contributed to that behavior just plain unethical? 
There are no ready answers to such philosophical questions. But when asked in a sur-
vey whether they had seen any unethical behavior among their colleagues, chief marketing 
officers responded that they had observed employees participating in high-pressure, mis-
leading, or deceptive sales tactics (45 percent); misrepresenting company earnings, sales, 
and/or revenues (35 percent); withholding or destroying information that could hurt com-
pany sales or image (32 percent); and conducting false or misleading advertising (31 per-
cent).36 Did all the marketers in these situations view their actions as unethical? Probably 
not. There may have been extenuating circumstances. In marketing, managers often face 
the choice of doing what is beneficial for them and possibly the firm in the short run and 
 LO4-6	
Describe how ethics 
constitute an integral 
part of a firm’s 
conscious marketing 
strategy.

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
131
	
	
taking a conscious marketing perspective by doing what is right 
and beneficial for the firm and society in the long run.
For instance, a manager might feel confident that earnings 
will increase in the next few months and therefore believe it 
benefits himself, his branch, his employees, and his sharehold-
ers to exaggerate current earnings just a little. Another manager 
might feel considerable pressure to increase sales in a retail 
store, so she brings in some new merchandise, marks it at an 
artificially high price, and then immediately puts it on sale, de-
ceiving consumers into thinking they are getting a good deal 
because they view the initial price as the real price. These deci-
sions may have been justifiable at the time and to some stake-
holders, but they have serious long-term consequences for the 
company and are therefore not in concert with a conscious mar-
keting approach. 
To avoid such potentially unethical behaviors, conscious 
marketing seeks to align the short-term goals of each employee 
with the long-term, overriding goals of the firm. To align per-
sonal and corporate goals, firms need to have a strong ethical climate exemplified by the 
actions of corporate leaders and filtered through an ethically based corporate culture. There 
should be explicit rules for governing transactions; these rules should include a code of 
ethics and a system for rewarding and punishing inappropriate behavior. The American 
Marketing Association (AMA) provides a detailed, multipronged “Statement of Ethics” 
that can serve as a foundation for marketers, emphasizing that “As marketers . . . we not 
only serve our organizations but also act as stewards of society in creating, facilitating and 
executing the transactions that are part of the greater economy.”37
Ethics and Corporate Social Responsibility
Although both fall under the conscious marketing umbrella, it is important to distin-
guish between ethical marketing practices and corporate social responsibility programs. 
When a firm embraces conscious marketing, it implements programs that are socially 
responsible, and its employees act in an ethically responsible manner. (See Exhibit 4.4, 
upper left quadrant.) None of the other quadrants in Exhibit 4.4 embodies conscious 
marketing principles. 
A firm’s employees may conduct their activities in an ethically acceptable manner, but 
it may not be considered socially responsible, because its activities have little or no impact 
What is the “real” price? Did the manager bring the T-shirts 
in at an artificially high level and then immediately mark 
them down? 
© Dennis MacDonald/PhotoEdit
E X H I B I T  4.4
Ethics versus Social Responsibility
Both ethically and socially 
responsible
Socially Responsible
Ethical
Unethical
Ethical ﬁrm not involved
with the larger
community
Socially Irresponsible
Questionable ﬁrm
practices, yet donates a
lot to the community
Neither ethically nor
socially responsible

132	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
on anyone other than its closest stakeholders: its customers, employees, and stockholders. It 
does not engage in programs that better society or the environment as a whole (Exhibit 4.4, 
upper right quadrant).
Employees at firms that are perceived as socially responsible can nevertheless take 
actions that are viewed as unethical (Exhibit 4.4, lower left quadrant). For instance, a firm 
might be considered socially responsible because it makes generous donations to charities, 
but if it is simultaneously involved in questionable sales practices it cannot be seen as eth-
ical. The worst situation, of course, is when firms behave both unethically and in a socially 
unacceptable manner (Exhibit 4.4, lower right quadrant).
Customers may be willing to pay more if they can be assured the companies truly are 
ethical.38 According to a poll conducted by Time magazine, even in economically con-
strained settings, 38 percent of U.S. consumers actively tried to purchase from companies 
they considered responsible. The magazine cites the rise of the “ethical consumer” and the 
evolution of the social contract “between many Americans and businesses about what goes 
into making the products we buy.”39
Embracing conscious marketing is one way to enforce this social contract. However, 
even in the most conscious of firms, individual members may face challenges in their ef-
forts to act ethically. Therefore, a framework for ethical decision making can help move 
people to work toward common ethical goals.
A Framework for Ethical Decision Making
Exhibit 4.5 outlines a simple framework for ethical decision making. Let’s consider each of 
the steps.
Step 1: Identify Issues  The first step is to identify the issue. Imagine the use (or misuse) 
of data collected from consumers by a marketing research firm. One of the issues that 
might arise is the way the data are collected. For instance, are the respondents told about 
the real purpose of the study? Another issue might be whether the results will be used in a 
way that might mislead or even harm the public, such as selling the information to a firm 
to use in soliciting the respondents.
Step 2: Gather Information and Identify Stakeholders  In this step, the firm 
­focuses on gathering facts that are important to the ethical issue, including all relevant 
­legal information. To get a complete picture, the firm must identify all the individuals and 
groups that have a stake in how the issue is resolved.
As we detailed previously, stakeholders typically include the firm’s employees, suppli-
ers, the government, customer groups, stockholders, and members of the community in 
which the firm operates. Beyond these, many firms now also analyze the needs of the in-
dustry and the global community, as well as one-off stakeholders such as future genera-
tions and the natural environment. In describing its sustainability and transparency efforts, 
for example, the electronics firm Philips notes that it tries to communicate with and con-
sider “anyone with an interest in Philips.”40
Step 3: Brainstorm Alternatives  After the marketing firm has identified the stake-
holders and their issues and gathered the available data, all parties relevant to the 
 LO4-7	
Identify the four steps 
in ethical decision 
making.
E X H I B I T  4.5
Ethical Decision-Making Framework
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Gather
information
and identify
stakeholders
Brainstorm
and evaluate
alternatives
Choose a
course of
action
Identify
issues

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
133
	
	
­decision should come together to brainstorm any alternative courses of action. In our 
example, these might include halting the market research project, making responses 
anonymous, instituting training on the AMA Code of Ethics for all researchers, and so 
forth. The company leaders and managers then can review and refine these alternatives, 
leading to the final step.
Step 4: Choose a Course of Action  The objective of this last step is to weigh the 
various alternatives and choose a course of action that generates the best solution for the 
stakeholders, using ethical practices based on a conscious marketing approach. 
Management—ideally, conscious leaders—rank the alternatives in order of preference, 
clearly establishing the advantages and disadvantages of each. It is also crucial to investi-
gate any potential legal issues associated with each alternative. Of course, any illegal activ-
ity should be rejected immediately.
To choose the appropriate course of action, marketing managers will evaluate each 
alternative by using a process something like the sample ethical decision-making metric 
in Exhibit 4.6. The conscious marketer’s task here is to ensure that he or she has applied 
all relevant decision-making criteria and to assess his or her level of confidence that the 
decision being made meets those stated criteria. If the marketer isn’t confident about 
the decision, he or she should reexamine the other alternatives. Using Exhibit 4.6, you 
can gauge your own ethical response. If your scores tend to be in the “Yes” area (col-
umns 1 and 2), then the situation is not ethically troubling for you. If, in contrast, your 
scores tend to be in the “No” area (columns 6 and 7), it is ethically troubling, and you 
know it. If your scores are scattered or are in the “Maybe” area (columns 3, 4, and 5), 
you need to step back and reflect on how you wish to proceed. In using such an ethical 
metric or framework, decision makers must consider the relevant ethical issues, evalu-
ate the alternatives, and then choose a course of action that will help them avoid serious 
ethical lapses.
Next, let’s illustrate how the ethical decision-making metric in Exhibit 4.6 can be used 
to make ethical business decisions.
With its sustainability and transparency efforts, Philips takes a global view of its stakeholders.
Source: Philips

134	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Myra Jansen, the head cook at Lincoln High School in Anytown, USA, has had 
enough. Reports showing that children rarely eat enough vegetables have combined with 
studies that indicate school kids have a limited amount of time to eat their lunches. The 
combination has led to increasing obesity rates and troublesome reports about the long-
term effects. Myra has therefore decided that the Tater Tots and hot dogs are out. Vegeta-
bles and healthy proteins are in.
E X H I B I T  4.6
Ethical Decision-Making Metric
The Publicity Test
Would I want to see this action that I’m about to take 
described on the front page of the local paper or in a national  
magazine?
The Moral Mentor Test
Would the person I admire the most engage in this activity?
The Admired Observer Test
Would I want the person I admire most to see me doing this?
The Transparency Test 
Could I give a clear explanation for the action I’m contem-
plating, including an honest and transparent account of 
all my motives, that would satisfy a fair and dispassionate   
moral judge?
The Person in the Mirror Test 
Will I be able to look at myself in the mirror and respect the 
person I see there?
The Golden Rule Test
Would I like to be on the receiving end of this action and all 
its potential consequences?
Decision
Yes
Maybe
No
Test 
1 
2
3
4
5
6
7
Source: Adapted from The Art of Achievement: Mastering the 7 Cs of Business and Life. © 2002 by Tom Morris, published by Andrews McMeel Publishing LLC, 
an Andrews McMeel Universal company, Kansas City, Missouri.
If schools want children to eat 
more healthy foods, should 
they switch to healthier options 
without telling them, or tell 
them even though the children 
might reject the changes?
© Citizen of the Planet/Alamy

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
135
	
	
The problem, of course, is getting the kids to eat raw vegetables, plant proteins, and 
lean meat. For many teenagers, recommending that they eat healthy food at lunch is akin to 
calling detention a play date. But Myra has a plan: She’s going to reformulate various 
menu items using different ingredients and just never tell the students. Thus the regular hot 
dogs will be replaced with turkey or soy dogs. The Tater Tots will contain the more 
­nutrient-dense sweet potatoes instead of the vitamin-deficient regular spuds they used to be 
made out of. She is convinced she can make such switches for most of the menu items, and 
none of the children need to know.
Most of the kitchen staff members are on board with the idea and even have sug-
gested other possible menu switches that would benefit the students by ensuring that 
they receive a well-balanced meal at school. School board members, when apprised of 
the idea, got very excited and praised Myra for her innovative thinking. But the commu-
nity liaison for the school, Salim Jones, whose job it is to communicate with parents and 
other members of the community, is not so sure. Salim is nervous about how students 
will react when they learn that they have been deceived. He also has two small children 
of his own, one of whom has a severe wheat allergy. Thus the Joneses are extremely 
cautious about eating out, always asking for a detailed, specific list of ingredients for 
anything they order.
Using his training in ethical decision making, Salim sits down to evaluate his alterna-
tives, beginning with identifying possible options available to the school district as well as 
the various stakeholders who might be affected by the decision. He comes up with the 
following list:
1.	
Switch out the food without telling students.
2.	
Leave menus as they are.
3.	
Switch out the food ingredients but also tell students exactly what is in each item in 
the cafeteria.
To make a clear recommendation to the board about what would be the best ethical 
choice, Salim decides to evaluate each alternative using a series of questions similar to 
those in Exhibit 4.6.
	
Question 1: Would I want to see this action described on the front page of the  
local paper? The school board’s reaction caused Salim to think that the larger 
community would appreciate the effort to improve students’ health. Thus, option 
1 appears best for these stakeholders, and possibly for society, which may reduce 
the prevalence of obesity among these students. However, he shudders to think 
about how angry students might be if they learned they had been tricked. They 
also likely are accustomed to their menu as it is, and therefore, they would prefer 
option 2.
	
Question 2: Would the person I admire most engage in this activity, and would I want 
him or her to see me engage in this activity? For most of his life, Salim has held up 
Mahatma Gandhi as his ideal for how to act in the world. For Gandhi, truth was 
an absolute concept, not something that could be changed depending on the situation. 
Therefore, Salim believes Gandhi would strongly disapprove of option 1. However, 
Gandhi also worried about the ethics of eating and avoided food choices that had 
negative effects on society, so he might reject option 2 as well.
	
Question 3: Can I give a clear explanation for my action, including an honest ac-
count of my motives? In thinking about his children, Salim realizes that he is priori-
tizing their needs more than he is the needs of other children, such as those who 
struggle with weight issues. That is, he worries that his daughter might unknowingly 
be exposed to wheat in a school cafeteria, so he prefers option 3.
	
Question 4: Will I be able to look at myself in the mirror and respect what I see? By 
bringing up the ethics of this decision, even when it seems as if everyone else has agreed 
with it, Salim feels confident that he has taken the right first step. The option chosen is 
still important, but it is a group decision, and Salim thinks he is doing his part.

136	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
	
Question 5: Would I want to be on the receiving end of this action and its conse-
quences? Salim struggles most with this question. He remembers the kind of junk 
foods he chose when he was in college and the 20 pounds he put on as a result. He 
wishes now that his parents had given him rules to follow about what to eat at school. 
But he also remembers how rebellious he was and knows that he probably would not 
have followed those rules. And at the same time, he hates the idea that someone 
could give him food to eat with falsified ingredients.
On the basis of this exercise, Salim decides that he wants to recommend option 3 to 
the school board. When he does so, Myra Jansen protests loudly: “This is ridiculous! I 
know better what kids should be eating, and I know too that some community liaison has 
no idea what they are willing to eat. You’ve got to trick them to get them to eat right.” An-
other school board member agrees, noting, “They’re just kids. They don’t necessarily have 
the same rights as adults, so we are allowed to decide what’s best for them. And hiding the 
healthy ingredients to get the kids to eat healthy foods is what’s best.”
So what does the school board decide?
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Identify the steps in the ethical decision-making framework
	
	
Define conscious marketing 
	
	
Conscious marketing involves a sense of purpose for 
the firm that is more than simply making a profit by 
selling products and services. It consists of four main 
principles: a greater purpose, consideration of stake-
holders, conscious leadership and culture, and ethics.
	
	
Describe what constitutes marketing’s greater 
purpose.
	
	
Marketers must recognize that the purpose of busi-
ness is more than making profits. The actual pur-
pose might vary, such as providing necessary 
products, ensuring employment opportunities, or 
achieving greener production methods, but in all of 
these cases, the engagement improves the inputs as 
well as the outcomes of marketing actions.
	
	
Differentiate between conscious marketing and 
corporate social responsibility.
	
	
Although CSR is an important element of conscious 
marketing, they are different from one another. CSR 
implies a focus on the triple bottom-line of good 
performance according to economic, environmental, 
and social criteria. Thus good CSR can support and 
LO4-1
LO4-2
LO4-3
help promote conscious marketing. But conscious 
marketing goes beyond just CSR to refer to the over-
all meaning and purpose of the company and its 
marketing. 
	
	
Describe the ways in which conscious marketing 
helps various stakeholders.
	
	
To describe the ways, we first have to identify the 
various stakeholders of a company—namely, cus-
tomers, employees, the marketplace, society, and 
the environment:
∙	 Customers: When companies exhibit con-
scious marketing principles, customers know 
that they can trust the firms to provide healthy, 
ethically acceptable products and services. 
Many customers also feel better about buying 
from a company that engages in responsible 
practices, which provides them with the addi-
tional value of feeling good about buying from 
that company.
∙	 Employees: A firm committed to conscious 
marketing treats its employees with decency 
and respect. For many employees, working for 
LO4-4
Reviewing Learning Objectives

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
137
	
	
an irresponsible firm would be antithetical to 
their own morals and values.
∙	 Marketplace: An industry improves its prac-
tices and avoids scandals when it ensures that 
the participating firms act responsibly and 
appropriately in all areas.
∙	 Society: This stakeholder is local, national, 
or global communities who benefit when 
conscious marketers give thought to how their 
practices might influence values or connec-
tions, such as providing aid to underprivileged 
communities.
∙	 Environmental Sustainability. The benefits of 
conscious marketing might include cleaner air 
and water as well as healthier product options.
	
	
Explain how conscious leadership can produce a 
conscious culture in the firm.
	
	
Conscious marketing should be integrated into the 
very foundation of the firm by its leaders, such as in 
the firm’s mission statement. Then top management 
must follow through and commit to supporting CSR, 
a strong ethical climate in the organization, and con-
scious marketing principles. When considering their 
strategy, conscious marketing firms ask not only 
“can we implement a certain policy?” but also 
LO4-5
“should we do it?” If any action is not ethical or so-
cially responsible, the conscious firm will make 
changes to its marketing strategy.
	
	
Describe how ethics constitute an integral part of 
a firm’s conscious marketing strategy.
	
	
Being a part of an ethically responsible firm should 
be important to every employee, but it is particu-
larly important to marketers because they interact 
most directly with customers and suppliers  and 
make decisions about how their products impact so-
ciety and the environment. Thus marketing issues 
present a multitude of ethical questions and oppor-
tunities to handle.
	
	
Identify the four steps in ethical decision making.
	
	
First, firms can include ethics and social responsi-
bility in their corporate mission. Second, they 
should institute policies and procedures to ensure 
that everyone working for the firm is acting in an 
ethically responsible manner. Third, firms can 
model their ethical policies after a well-established 
code of ethics like the one provided by the Ameri-
can Marketing Association. Fourth, when making 
ethically sensitive decisions, firms can utilize a 
metric such as the ethical decision-making metric 
in Exhibit 4.6.
LO4-6
LO4-7
∙	 business ethics,  120
∙	 conscious marketing,  119
∙	 corporate social responsibility 
(CSR),  121
∙	 marketing ethics,  120
∙	 stakeholders,  119
∙	 triple bottom line,  121
Key Terms
1.	 Perhaps no subdiscipline of marketing receives more 
scrutiny regarding ethical compliance than does direct 
marketing, a form of nonstore retailing in which cus-
tomers are exposed to and purchase merchandise or ser-
vices through an impersonal medium such as telephone, 
mail, or the Internet.41 Ethical issues in direct marketing 
cover a broad spectrum because this means of selling is 
conducted through all forms of communication. The Di-
rect Marketing Association (DMA) takes ethics very 
seriously and has numerous programs to ensure that its 
member organizations comply with its Code of Ethics. Go 
to the website for the DMA (http://www.the-dma.org/). 
Click on “Advocacy.” List the different ways that the 
DMA is involved in assisting consumers and the indus-
try to create a more ethical marketplace.
2.	 An increasing number of firms are stating their strong 
commitment to corporate social responsibility initia-
tives. The Corporate Social Responsibility Newswire 
Service keeps track of these various initiatives and 
posts stories on its website about what various corpora-
tions are doing. Go to http://www.csrwire.com/ and 
choose one story. Write a description of the corporation 
and the initiative.
Marketing Digitally

138	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Marketing Applications
1.	 Distinguish among conscious marketing, CSR, and mar-
keting ethics.
2.	 Develop an argument for why a cosmetics manufacturer 
should build and maintain an ethical climate. 
3.	 A clothing company gives generously to charities and 
sponsors donation drives to help lower-income teen 
girls get reasonably priced prom dresses. It also locates 
its manufacturing plants in countries with few labor 
laws, such that it does not know whether children are 
working in its factories, and works to prevent union ac-
tivity among its employees in the United States. Evalu-
ate this company from an ethical and social 
responsibility perspective.
4.	 Based on the evaluation you developed for Question 3, 
provide responses to the ethical decision-making metric 
from Exhibit 4.6. Provide a rationale for your score for 
each question.
5.	 A company that makes vitamin-infused drinks and other 
“healthy” snacks has the following mission statement: 
“Our goal is to profitably sell good-tasting, healthy 
products and to better society.” Although its products 
are organic, they also are relatively high in sugar and 
calories. The company gives a small portion of its prof-
its to the United Way. Evaluate its mission statement in 
terms of the four principles of conscious marketing. 
6.	 Choose a company that you believe is particularly adept 
at conscious marketing that is not discussed in this chap-
ter. How do you justify your choice? What counterargu-
ments might someone make to suggest that your chosen 
company is not responsible? Consider all key stakehold-
ers in developing both sides of the argument.
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself 
1.	 As noted in your text, which of the following ranks as 
the top unethical behavior by employees as reported by 
chief marketing officers? 
a.  Misrepresenting company earnings.
b.  Withholding information that could hurt the compa-
ny’s image. 
c.  Participating in misleading or deceptive sales  
tactics.
d.  Conducting false or misleading advertising.
e.  Misrepresenting company sales figures. 
2.	 A firm makes generous donations to charities, but its em-
ployees are always being scrutinized for engaging in ques-
tionable sales practices. This firm would be considered:
a.  Ethical but socially irresponsible. 
b.  Ethical and socially responsible. 
c.  Unethical but socially responsible. 
d.  Unethical and socially irresponsible.
e.  Neither ethical nor socially responsible.
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
IS THERE AN APP FOR GOOD PARENTING?
If you’ve gone to a mall or family restaurant recently, it’s likely that you have seen children 
playing games or watching videos on tablets. Whereas it used to be difficult to get children 
to behave in stores or at restaurants, parents are finding that a tablet or smartphone can be 
an effective babysitter. Manufacturers have picked up on this trend and offer several tablets 
designed specifically for kids: Samsung has the Galaxy Tab 3 Kids Edition, LeapFrog sells 
the LeapPad3 PowerLearning Tablet, nabi provides the nabi 2, and Amazon has the Fire 
Kids Edition, to name just a few. 
Chapter Case Study 

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
139
	
	
Producing and selling technology for kids has proven to be a profitable business. 
But when is it too much technology? Both the American Academy of Pediatrics and 
the Mayo Clinic urge parents to not allow children younger than two years of age to 
interact with any device with a screen (television, computer, tablet), out of concern 
that it will have negative effects on children’s brain development, including possible 
language delays and damage to their social, emotional, and cognitive skills.42 Further-
more, research has shown that increased “screen time” (defined as the number of hours 
children spend interacting with any device with an electronic screen) leads to in-
creased risks of obesity, irregular sleep, behavioral problems, and impaired academic 
performance.
Despite such warnings, companies continue to produce technology products geared 
toward younger and younger children.43 One of the latest is Fisher-Price’s Newborn-to-­
Toddler Apptivity Seat44—essentially a small chair for newborns, with a bar that hangs an 
iPad a few inches from the child’s face. As might be expected, the introduction prompted a 
massive outcry from child advocacy groups such as the Campaign for a Commercial-Free 
Childhood (CCFC), which filed complaints with the Federal Trade Commission about 
claims Fisher-Price has posted on its website asserting that the chair, in concert with a 
tablet, actually helps babies’ brain development.
Fisher-Price’s response? It has added a “note to customers” on the product’s web page. 
After suggesting that parents limit their children’s screen time, it goes on to state, “we re-
alize this type of technology in infant products isn’t for everyone. That’s why our Apptivity 
Seat is just one of more than a dozen baby seats we make, giving parents lots of choices 
with the options they prefer for their family’s lifestyle.”45
The company is not alone in its efforts. With the 2-in-1 iPotty, CTA Digital suggests 
that parents affix their tablet to their children’s potty-training seats. Then the children can 
play with an app or watch a video while learning how to use the potty—often a challenging 
task for parents as well as children. Since its introduction, the potty seat has been extremely 
popular, becoming one of the company’s top-selling products.46
The offerings also do not stop at products. Mattel (the parent company of Fisher-Price) 
has developed a suite of iPad Apptivity apps, available for free to parents who buy the 
seat. The early development content shows high-contrast patterns, so babies’ young eyes 
can follow them, and features soothing sounds of nature. For slightly older children, the 
app advances to introduce numbers and letters. Each visual presentation times out after 
10 to 12 minutes.
On an even more advanced level, Netflix has expanded its line of self-produced con-
tent, beyond fan favorites such as Arrested Development or Orange Is the New Black, to 
include series for children.47 By appealing to young consumers, Netflix hopes to increase 
the loyalty of the entire household, reasoning that parents are unlikely to cancel their sub-
scription if Netflix is the only place kids can get the latest episodes of some of their favor-
ite shows.
For parents, innovative products for children can be a lifesaver: They keep kids 
entertained, help with potty training, and offer a convenient distraction. Moreover, 
many parents today already rely heavily on tablets and other screens for their own pur-
poses, making it difficult for them to avoid screen time for their children. In this sense, 
companies are merely providing the products and services that parents, and their 
­children, want.
Questions
1.	
Who benefits from products designed to give children and babies more screen time? 
Who is harmed?
2.	
Who has a greater ethical responsibility in relation to children and screen time: com-
panies or parents? Present arguments for both sides.
Although parents may want  
devices that keep their children 
entertained, screen time at 
such a young age may be 
harmful to children’s cognitive 
development.
© Minneapolis Star Tribune/Zumapress/
Newscom

140	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Endnotes
  1.	 TOMS, “Our Movement,” http://www.toms.com/our-movement; 
Andrew Adam Newman, “‘Buy One, Give One’ Spirit Imbues  
an Online Store,” Los Angeles Times, November 4, 2013.
  2.	TOMS, “Home Page,” http://www.toms.com/?cid=mozilla_ 
suggested&utm_medium=suggested&utm_source=mozilla 
&utm_campaign=retail_apparel1.
  3.	TOMS, “What We Give: The Gift of Water,” http://www.toms.
com/what-we-give-water.
  4.	TOMS, “What We Give: Safe Births,” http://www.toms.com/
what-we-give-safe-births.
  5.	TOMS, “What We Give: Preventing Bullying,” http://www.toms.
com/what-we-give-preventing-bullying.
  6.	TOMS, “The TOMS Animal Initiative,” http://www.toms.com/
the-toms-animal-initiative.
  7.	 George Anderson, “Toms Offers a Different Way to Shop,” 
Retail Wire, November 6, 2013. 
  8.	TOMS, “Corporate Responsibility,” http://www.toms.com/ 
corporate-responsibility.
  9.	Theodore Levitt, Marketing Imagination (Detroit, MI: Free  
Press, 1983). 
10.	 See John Mackey and Raj Sisodia, Conscious Capitalism: 
Liberating the Heroic Spirit of Business (Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business Review Press, 2014). 
11.	 The first three principles draw on Raj Sisodia, “Conscious 
Capitalism: A Better Way to Win,” California Management 
Review 53 (Spring 2011), pp. 98–108. 
12.	 Gene R. Laczniak and Patrick E. Murphy, “Stakeholder Theory 
and Marketing: Moving from a Firm-Centric to a Societal 
Perspective,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 31 (Fall 
2012), pp. 284–92. 
13.	 Stephanie Strom, “Walmart Pushes for Improved Animal 
Welfare,” The New York Times, May 22, 2015. 
14.	 Andrew Khouri and Samantha Masunaga, “Tesla’s Elon  
Musk and His Big Ideas: A Brief History,” Los Angeles Times, 
May 1, 2015. 
15.	 The most famous proponent of this view was Milton Friedman. 
See, for example, Capitalism and Freedom (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2002); or Free to Choose: A Personal 
Statement (Orlando, FL: Harcourt, 1990). 
16.	 For a broad discussion of the range of CSR definitions,  
see “Communicating Corporate Social Responsibility,” 
University Catholique de Louvain, https://www.edx.org/ 
course/communicating-corporate-social-louvainx-louv12x. 
17.	 H. Aguinis, “Organizational Responsibility: Doing Good and 
Doing Well,” in APA Handbook of Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology, Vol. 3, S. Zedeck, ed. (Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association, 2011), pp. 855–79. 
18.	 For a collection of articles discussing such challenges, see 
the “Special Issue on Corporate Social Responsibility in 
Controversial Industry Sectors,” Journal of Business Ethics 110, 
no. 4 (November 2012).
19.	 Thomas C. Frohlich, Michael B. Sauter, and Sam Stebbins, 
“Companies Paying Americans the Least,” 247WallSt.com, 
September 3, 2015. 
20.	Thomas C. Frohlich, Michael B. Sauter, and Sam Stebbins, 
“Companies Paying Americans the Least,” 247WallSt.com, 
September 3, 2015. 
21.	 This table was adapted from John Mackey and Rajendra 
Sisodia, (2013), Conscious Capitalism: Liberating the Heroic 
Spirit of Business (Boston MA: Harvard Business  
Review Press).
22.	U.S. Food and Drug Administration, “Guidance for Industry: 
Voluntary Labeling Indicating Whether Foods Have or Have 
Not Been Derived from Genetically Engineered Plants,” 
November 2015, http://www.fda.gov/food/guidanceregulation/
guidancedocumentsregulatoryinformation/ucm059098.htm.
23.	Laura Parker, “The GMO Labeling Battle Is Heating Up— 
Here’s Why,” National Geographic, January 11, 2014;  
Stefanie Strom, “Major Grocer to Label Foods with Gene-
Modified Content,” The New York Times, March 8, 2013;  
Amy Harmon and Andrew Pollack, “Battle Brewing over 
Labeling of Genetically Modified Food,” The New York Times, 
May 24, 2012. 
24.	Rana Florida, “The Case for On-Site Day Care,” Fast Company, 
October 1, 2014. 
25.	Aaron Katersky and Susannah Kim, “Slew of Retailers Say No 
to Black Friday,” ABC News, October 27, 2015. 
26.	https://thewaltdisneycompany.com/blog/infographic-disneys- 
charitable-giving-reaches-370-million-2013; http://disneyparks.
disney.go.com/blog/galleries/2014/01/disney-cast-members- 
create-an-extreme-village-makeover-for-give-kids-the-world/ 
#photo-5. 
27.	http://www.ge.com/news/our_viewpoints/energy_and_climate.
html; “GE Launches New Ecomagination Healthcare Products, 
Opens Renewable Energy HQ,” GreenBiz, February 2, 2010, 
http://www.greenbiz.com. 
28.	D.B. Bielak, S. Bonini, and J.M. Oppenheim, “CEOs on Strategy 
and Social Issues,” McKinsey Quarterly, 2007, http://www. 
mckinseyquarterly.com. 
29.	United Press International, “Diet Soda Sales: Flat Would Be 
Better,” December 9, 2013, http://www.upi.com. 
30.	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “What Is Sustainability?,” 
http://www.epa.gov/sustainability/basicinfo.htm.
31.	 http://www.burtsbees.com.
32.	See for example General Electric, “2014 Performance,” http://
www.gecitizenship.com; General Electric, “The Spirit and the 
Letter,” http://integrity.ge.com.
33.	http://newmansownfoundation.org.
34.	Ross Wilson, “The Best and Worst of Facebook 2012,”  
Ignite Social Media, December 13, 2012, http://www. 
ignitesocialmedia.com. 
35.	Elizabeth A. Harris, Nicole Perlroth, and Nathaniel Popper, 
“Neiman Marcus Data Breach Worse Than First Said,” The 
New York Times, January 23, 2014.
36.	http://www.cmomagazine.com. This survey was conducted  
in 2006; more recent reports suggest that 41 percent of  
respondents to a 2013 survey reported having seen ethical 
misconduct overall, and 26 percent of these general employees 
considered the misconduct to represent a repeated pattern of 
behavior. See Ethics Resource Center, “2013 National Business 
Ethics Survey,” http://www.ethics.org. 
37.	American Marketing Association, “Statement of Ethics,” April 8, 
2014, https://archive.ama.org/archive/AboutAMA/Pages/
Statement%20of%20Ethics.aspx.
38.	Nielsen, “Global Customers Are Willing to Put Their Money 
Where Their Heart Is When It Comes to Goods and Services 
Committed to Social Responsibility,” June 17, 2014, http://www.
nielsen.com/us/en/press-room/2014/global-consumers-are- 
willing-to-put-their-money-where-their-heart-is.html; Michael 

	 CONSCIOUS MARKETING, CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICS  CHAPTER FOUR	
141
	
	
Connor, “Survey: U.S. Consumers Willing to Pay for Corporate 
Responsibility,” Business Ethics, March 29, 2010, http:// 
business-ethics.com. 
39.	Richard Stengel, “Doing Well by Doing Good,” Time, September 
10, 2009, http://www.time.com. More recent surveys affirm 
this consumer preference too. See for example, “2015 Cone 
Communications/Ebiquity Global CSR Survey,” http://www. 
conecomm.com/2015-global-csr-study. 
40.	“2011 World’s Most Ethical Companies,” Ethisphere, http:// 
ethisphere.com/2011-worlds-most-ethical-companies. 
41.	 http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary.aspx.
42.	See http://www.mayoclinic.org/children-and-tv/art-20047952.
43.	Cecilia Kang, “Infant iPad Seats Raise Concerns about Screen 
Time for Babies,” The Washington Post, December 10, 2013.
44.	http://www.fisher-price.com/img/product_shots/X7045-
newborn-to-toddler-apptivity-seat-d-2.jpg.
45.	http://www.fisher-price.com/en_US/brands/babygear/ 
products/78030.
46.	Kang, “Infant iPad Seats Raise Concerns about Screen Time for 
Babies.”
47.	“Dreamworks Animation to Create Netflix’s First Original Kids’ 
Show,” Advertising Age, February 12, 2013.
i.	
Hannah Tregear, “Case Study/Kellogg’s: Kellogg’s Boosts Social 
Media Campaign ROI,” Brandwatch, November 23, 2013, 
http://www.brandwatch.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/
Brandwatch_CS_Kelloggs.pdf; Jennifer Rooney, “Kellogg’s 
Completes Major Brand Overhaul,” Forbes, May 10, 2012, 
http://www.forbes.com/; E.J. Schultz, “Media Maven Bob Arnold 
Leads Kellogg Into Digital-Buying Frontier,” Advertising Age, 
September 23, 2013, http://adage.com/; Larisa Bedgood,  
“5 Compelling Reasons to Ramp Up Your Digital Marketing 
Strategy,” SmartData Collective, March 18, 2015, http:// 
smartdatacollective.com/lbedgood/305186/5-compelling- 
reasons-ramp-your-digital-marketing-strategy. 
ii.	 “Walmart Energy Efficiency Program Achieves Energy  
Savings of 20% across 210 Supplier Factories in China,”  
PR Newswire, April 22, 2013; Jessica Wohl, “Walmart 
Announces $50 Billion Buy American Campaign,” The 
Huffington Post, January 15, 2013; “Walmart Launches Major 
Initiative to Make Food Healthier and Healthier Food More 
Affordable,” http://walmartstores.com.
iii.	 Heidi Vogt, “Making Change: Mobile Pay in Africa,” The Wall 
Street Journal, January 2, 2015; Leslie Shaffer, “Consumer 
Companies Struggle to Tap Aspirational Middle-Class India,” 
CNBC, November 25, 2015, http://www.cnbc.com/2015/11/25/
consumer-companies-struggle-to-tap-aspirational-middle-class- 
india.html; “How Digital Revolution Can Push Financial Inclusion,” 
CNBC, December 7, 2015, http://www.moneycontrol.com/
news/economy/how-digital-revolution-can-push-financial-­
inclusion_4472241.html.


 I
n this appendix, we present nine ethical scenarios 
designed to assist you in developing your skills at 
identifying ethical issues. There is no one right an-
swer to the dilemmas below, just as there will be no 
correct answers to many of the ethical situations you 
will face throughout your career. Instead, these 
UNDERSTANDING 
ETHICS USING 
SCENARIOS
APPENDIX 4A
­scenarios can help you develop your ethical reasoning 
skills as well as your sensitivity toward ethical issues. 
As mentioned throughout the chapter, Exhibit 4.4 pro-
vides an ethical decision-making metric to assist you in 
evaluating the following and all such ethical dilemmas 
you may face.
Scenario 1: R.J. Reynolds: Promotions to the Youth Market
Tobacco giant R.J. Reynolds sent a set of coasters featuring its cigarette brands and recipes 
for mixed drinks with high alcohol content to young adults, via direct mail, on their 21st 
birthdays (the legal age for alcohol consumption). The alcohol brands in the recipes in-
cluded Jack Daniels, Southern Comfort, and Finlandia Vodka. The reverse side of the 
coaster read, “Go ‘til Daybreak, and Make Sure You’re Sittin’.” The campaign, called 
“Drinks on Us,” clearly promoted abusive and excessive drinking. This campaign was 
eventually stopped because the cigarette company did not have permission to use the alco-
hol brands.
The Federal Drug Administration (FDA) has been given the authority to regulate to-
bacco, including banning certain products, limiting nicotine, and blocking labels such as 
“low tar” and “light” that could wrongly imply certain products are less harmful.1 The law 

144	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
doesn’t let the FDA ban nicotine or tobacco entirely. A committee has been formed to study 
several issues, including dissolvable tobacco products, product changes, and standards, and 
report back to the FDA. Of particular interest is the increase in the share of smokers using 
menthol cigarettes from 31 percent to almost 34 percent in four years, with more pro-
nounced increases among young smokers. It also showed that among black smokers, 82.6 
percent used menthol cigarettes, compared with 32.3 percent for Hispanic smokers and 
23.8 percent for white smokers.2 A ban on cigarettes with flavors such as clove, chocolate, 
or fruit took effect in 2009 because they are believed to appeal to youth.
After graduation, you have an offer to work in either marketing or sales at R.J. Reyn-
olds, the tobacco company that sells many popular brands of cigarettes. The pay and bene-
fits are very competitive. The job market is tight, and if you don’t get a job right away, you 
will have to live with your parents. Should you take the job?
Scenario 2: Car Manufacturer Gives Bribes for Contracts
A car and truck manufacturer just found out that two of its overseas business units have 
been engaging in bribery over a 10-year period of time. The company paid $56 million in 
bribes to more than 20 countries to gain government contracts for their vehicles.3 The com-
pany is now paying millions in criminal and civil charges because of its violation of the 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), and it admits to earning more than $50 million in 
profits based on its corrupt transactions. The car company recorded the bribe payments as 
commissions, special discounts, or necessary payments. Should the manufacturer discon-
tinue its operations with the countries that were unlawfully bribed to buy its cars? Are fi-
nancial fines sufficient to repair the problem? How can companies be sure the commissions 
they earn are true commissions and not a bribe?
Scenario 3: Retailers Lack Ethical Guidelines
Renata has been working at Peavy’s Bridal for nearly a year now. Her sales figures have 
never been competitive with those of her coworkers, and the sales manager has called her 
in for several meetings to discuss her inability to close the sale. Things look desperate; in 
the last meeting, the sales manager told her that if she did not meet her quota next month, 
the company would likely have to fire her.
In considering how she might improve her methods and sales, Renata turned to Marilyn, 
the salesperson in the store who had the most experience. Marilyn has been with Peavy’s 
for nearly 30 years, and she virtually always gets the sale. But how?
“Let me tell you something sweetie,” Marilyn tells her. “Every bride-to-be wants one 
thing: to look beautiful on her wedding day so that everyone gasps when they first see her. 
And hey, the husband is going to think she looks great. But let’s be honest here—not ev-
eryone is all that beautiful. So you have to convince them that they look great in one, and 
only one, dress. And that dress had better be the most expensive one they try, or they 
won’t believe you anyway! And then you have to show them how much better they look 
with a veil. And some shoes. And a tiara . . . you get the picture! I mean, they need all that 
stuff anyway, so why shouldn’t we make them feel good while they’re here and let them 
buy from us?”
Should she follow Marilyn’s advice and save her job?
Scenario 4: Giving Credit Where Credit Isn’t Due
A catalog retailer that carries home and children’s items, such as children’s furniture, cloth-
ing, and toys, was seeking a way to reach a new audience and stop the declining sales and 
revenue trends it was suffering. A market research firm hired by the cataloger identified a 
new but potentially risky market: lower-income single parents. The new market seemed 
attractive because of the large number of single parents, but most of these homes were 
­severely constrained in terms of their monetary resources.
The research firm proposed that the cataloger offer a generous credit policy that would 
allow consumers to purchase up to $500 worth of merchandise on credit without a credit 

	
UNDERSTANDING ETHICS USING SCENARIOS  CHAPTER FOUR APPENDIX	
145
	
	
check, provided they signed up for direct payment of their credit account from a checking 
account. Because these were high-risk consumers, the credit accounts would carry ex-
tremely high interest rates. The research firm believed that even with losses, enough ac-
counts would be paid off to make the venture extremely profitable for the catalog retailer.
Should the cataloger pursue this new strategy?
Scenario 5: The Jeweler’s Tarnished Image
Sparkle Gem Jewelers, a family-owned and -operated costume jewelry manufacturing busi-
ness, traditionally sold its products only to wholesalers. Recently however, Sparkle Gem 
was approached by the charismatic Barb Stephens, who convinced the owners to begin 
selling through a network of distributors she had organized. The distributors recruited indi-
viduals to host jewelry parties in their homes. Sparkle Gem’s owners, the Billing family, 
have been thrilled with the revenue generated by these home parties and started making 
plans for the expansion of the distributor network.
However, Mrs. Billing just received a letter from a jewelry party customer, who ex-
pressed sympathy for Mrs. Billing’s loss. Confused, Mrs. Billing contacted the letter writer, 
who told her that Barb Stephens had come to the jewelry party at her church and told the 
story of Sparkle Gem. According to Stephens’s story, Mrs. Billing was a young widow 
struggling to keep her business together after her husband had died on a missionary trip. 
The writer had purchased $200 worth of jewelry at the party and told Mrs. Billing that she 
hoped it helped. Mrs. Billing was stunned. She and her very-much-alive husband had just 
celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary.
What should Mrs. Billing do now?
Copyright Grantland Enterprises; www.grantland.net. All rights reserved. Used with permission. 
Scenario 6: No Wonder It’s So Good
Enjoy Cola is a new product produced by ABC Beverage and marketed with the slogan 
“Relax with Enjoy.” Unlike other colas on the market, Enjoy does not contain caffeine and 
therefore is positioned as the perfect beverage to end the day or for a slow-paced weekend 
and as a means to help consumers relax and unwind. The market response has been tremen-
dous, and sales of Enjoy have been growing rapidly, especially among women.
ABC Beverage decided not to list on the ingredients label that Enjoy contains a small 
amount of alcohol, because it is not required to do so by the government unless the alcohol 
content is more than 1 percent.

146	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Mia Rodriguez, the marketing director for Enjoy, only recently learned that Enjoy 
contains small amounts of alcohol and is troubled about ABC’s failure to disclose this in-
formation on the ingredients list. She worries about the impact of this omission on con-
sumers who have alcohol sensitivities or those who shouldn’t be consuming alcohol, such 
as pregnant women and recovering alcoholics.
What should Rodriguez do? What would you do in her position?
Scenario 7: Bright Baby’s Bright Idea
Bartok Manufacturing produces a line of infant toys under the Bright Baby brand label. 
The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) recently issued a recall order for 
the Bright Baby car seat gym, a very popular product. According to the CPSC, the gym 
contains small parts that present a choking hazard. The CEO of Bartok Manufacturing, 
Bill Bartok, called an executive meeting to determine the firm’s strategy in response to 
the recall.
Mike Henderson, Bartok’s CFO, stated that the recall could cost as much as $1 million 
in lost revenue from the Bright Baby line. Noting that there had been no deaths or injuries 
from the product, just the potential for injury, Henderson proposed that the remaining in-
ventory of car seat gyms be sold in regions where there are no rules such as the CPSC’s. 
Sue Tyler, the marketing director for Bartok, recommended that the product be repackaged 
and sold under a different brand name so that the Bright Baby name would not be associ-
ated with the product. Bartok, though a bit leery of the plan, agreed to go along with it to 
avoid the monetary losses.
What would you have recommended to the CEO?
Scenario 8: Money from Mailing Lists4
Sports Nostalgia Emporium sells autographed sports memorabilia online. Recently, 
the director of marketing, John Mangold, started using a mailing list he had purchased 
from Marketing Metrix, a marketing research firm that sells consumer information. 
Mangold relies on such purchased mailing lists to grow the company and sends printed 
catalogs to thousands of people each month. The mailing lists he gets from Marketing 
Metrix are much more effective than other mailing lists and generate almost twice as 
much revenue.
In a recent conversation with a sales representative from Marketing Metrix, Mangold 
discovered the reason its lists were so effective: Marketing Metrix tracks the online behav-
ior of consumers and uses that information to create targeted lists. The mailing lists that 
Mangold has been using consist of consumers who visited the websites of Sports Nostalgia 
Emporium’s competitors. Based on what he can discern, Mangold believes that these con-
sumers are not aware that someone is collecting information about their online behavior, 
along with their names and addresses, and selling it to other firms.
Should Mangold continue to use the Marketing Metrix mailing list? If so, should he 
tell his new customers how he got their names and addresses? Do consumers need to give 
consent before firms can collect information about their behavior?
Scenario 9: The Blogging CEO5
David Burdick is the CEO of ACME Bubblegum, a successful public company. As one of 
the cofounders of the company, Burdick has enjoyed speaking and writing about the suc-
cess of ACME Bubblegum for several years. Typically, he speaks at conferences or directly 
to the press, but recently he has been blogging about his firm anonymously. Specifically, 
he defended a recent advertising campaign that was unpopular among consumers and 
pointedly attacked one of ACME Bubblegum’s competitors. Burdick deeply enjoys his 
anonymous blogging and believes that none of his readers actually know that he works for 
ACME Bubblegum.

	
UNDERSTANDING ETHICS USING SCENARIOS  CHAPTER FOUR APPENDIX	
147
	
	
Should Burdick be allowed to praise his company’s performance anonymously online? 
Should he be allowed to attack his competitors without disclosing his relationship with the 
company? How would you feel if the CEO of a company at which you shopped was se-
cretly writing criticisms of his or her competition? How would you feel if you knew a 
writer for your favorite blog was actually closely involved in a company that the blog com-
munity discussed?
  1.	 Michael Felberbaum, “Panel to Examine Menthol Cigarettes’ 
Impact,” Associated Press, March 29, 2010.
  2.	Ibid., based on a study by the Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration in November, 2009.
  3.	Department of Justice, Office of Public Affairs, “Daimler AG 
and Three Subsidiaries Resolve Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
Investigation and Agree to Pay $93.6 Million in Criminal 
Penalties,” press release, April 1, 2010; Michael Connor, 
“Daimler Agrees to Pay $185 Million to Settle Bribery Charges,” 
Business Ethics, March 26, 2010, http://businessethics.com.
  4.	Emily Steel, “How Marketers Hone Their Aim Online,” The Wall 
Street Journal, June 19, 2007, p. B6.
  5.	“Mr. Mackey’s Offense,” The Wall Street Journal, July 16, 2007, 
p. A12.
Endnotes
Copyright Grantland Enterprises; www.grantland.net. All rights reserved. Used with permission. 

CHAPTER 5
T
here is no denying that healthy eating is a grow-
ing trend. Consumers seek out foods that con-
tain less sugar and fat, demand fresh produce 
and meats, and express concerns about geneti-
cally modified organisms. Noting consumers’ efforts to 
avoid processed foods as well, Panera has introduced a 
new “clean menu,” using marketing communications that 
focus mainly on what the food items do not feature rather 
than what they do. 
In particular, Panera has developed a “No No List” of 
ingredients that may not appear anywhere in its clean 
menu. Some of the food culprits are familiar, such as too 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	 LO5-1	 Outline how customers, the company, competitors, and corporate partners affect marketing strategy.
	 LO5-2	
Explain why marketers must consider their macroenvironment when they make decisions.
	 LO5-3	
Describe the differences among the various generational cohorts.
	 LO5-4	
Identify various social trends that impact marketing.
ANALYZING THE 
MARKETING 
ENVIRONMENT

much sugar or too many calories. But the list also reflects 
consumers’ growing awareness of and education about 
the potential negative effects of complex preservatives 
and artificial colorings or flavors. Eliminating all these in-
gredients has required an intricate, in-depth, and lengthy 
development process.
For its broccoli cheddar soup for example, Panera 
had to take great care: It is one of its top selling menu 
items, so the taste, consistency, and appearance could 
not change. But to make its way onto the clean menu, the 
soup also had to exclude all sodium phosphate, a very 
common preservative. Finding cheese that did not con-
tain any of this preservative was a significant challenge 
for the company. Furthermore, it excluded bleached 
wheat flour, which of course altered the color of the 
soup. Because of these detailed analyses and com­
plicated requirements to achieve “clean” status, the 
­redevelopment of the soup underwent more than 60 dif-
ferent iterations. And that was before Panera realized it 
also needed to revise the Dijon mustard it included as an 
ingredient in the soup, because that condiment also con-
tained preservatives. 
The effort may prove worthwhile though. Panera 
sells approximately 200 million servings of soup each 
year, and it might be able to charge more for clean ver-
sions of those soups. According to some polls, 88 per-
cent of consumers indicated they would happily pay more 
for healthier food options. Although these polls tend to 
refer to products on supermarket shelves, they reflect 
broader trends in the market. Furthermore, this ex-
pressed willingness to pay more spans virtually all age 
ranges, from Generation Z to Baby Boomers.
In addition to excluding artificial preservatives, sweet-
eners, and flavors, Panera is expanding its notion of 
© B. O'Kane/Alamy

150
healthy menus to include more plant-based, and fewer 
animal-based, protein sources on its menu board. The 
company has announced new animal welfare standards 
for its suppliers as well. Such moves reflect consumer 
demands for foods that are healthy not just for them but 
also for society and the environment in general. That is, 
vegetarian options tend to be better for consumers and 
the environment, and ethically sourced meat provides 
health as well as societal benefits. 
In these adjustments, Panera is responding to various 
trends in its consumer markets, especially the growing fo-
cus on clean eating and healthy alternatives to traditional 
fast food menus. Although it is not the only company to 
move toward healthier options, it claims to be the first to 
publish a comprehensive list of the ingredients that its menu 
items will no longer include. In this sense, marketing today 
can be just as much about what products don’t contain as it 
is about the specific features and ingredients they do offer.1 
A MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  
ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK
As the opening vignette illustrates, marketers continue to find changes in what their custom-
ers demand or expect and adapt their product and service offerings accordingly. By paying 
close attention to customer needs and continuously monitoring the business environment in 
which the company operates, a good marketer can identify potential opportunities.
Exhibit 5.1 illustrates factors that affect the marketing environment. The centerpiece, as 
always, is consumers. Consumers may be influenced directly by the immediate actions of the 
focal company, the company’s competitors, or corporate partners that work with the firm to 
make and supply products and services to consumers. The firm, and therefore consumers 
indirectly, is influenced by the macroenvironment, which includes various impacts of culture; 
demographics; and social, technological, economic, and political/legal factors. We discuss 
each of these components in detail in this chapter and suggest how they might interrelate.
Because the consumer is the center of all marketing efforts, value-based marketing 
aims to provide greater value to consumers than competitors offer. Therefore, the market-
ing firm must consider the entire business process, all from a consumer’s point of view.2 
 LO5-1	
Outline how customers, 
the company, 
competitors, and 
corporate partners 
affect marketing 
strategy.
E X H I B I T  5.1
Understanding the Marketing Environment
Consumers
Culture
Political/
Legal
Economic
Technology
Competition
Macroenvironment
Corporate
partners
Social
Demographics
Company
Immediate environment

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
151
	
	
Consumers’ needs and wants, as well as their ability to purchase, depend on a host of fac-
tors that change and evolve over time. Firms use various tools to keep track of competitors’ 
activities and consumer trends, and they rely on various methods to communicate with 
their corporate partners. Furthermore, they monitor their macroenvironment to determine 
how such factors influence consumers and how they should respond to them. Sometimes, 
a firm can even anticipate trends.
THE IMMEDIATE ENVIRONMENT
Exhibit 5.2 illustrates the factors that affect consumers’ immediate environment: the com-
pany’s capabilities, competitors, and corporate partners.
Company Capabilities
In the immediate environment, the first factor that affects the consumer is the firm itself. 
Successful marketing firms focus on satisfying customer needs that match their core com-
petencies. The primary strength of Corning is its ability to manufacture glass. The com-
pany initially made its name by producing the glass enclosure to encase Thomas Edison’s 
lightbulb. But by successfully leveraging its core competency in glass manufacturing while 
also recognizing marketplace trends toward mobile devices, Corning shifted its focus. As a 
result, Corning is one of the leading producers of durable, scratch-resistant glass on the 
faces of smartphones and tablets. More than 1 billion mobile devices feature its Gorilla 
Glass.3 Marketers can use analyses of their external environment, like the SWOT analysis 
described in Chapter 2, to categorize any opportunity as attractive or unattractive. If it ap-
pears attractive, they also need to assess it in terms of their existing competencies.
Competitors
Competition also significantly affects consumers in the immediate environment. It is there-
fore critical that marketers understand their firm’s competitors, including their strengths, 
weaknesses, and likely reactions to the marketing activities that their own firm undertakes.
For example, in one of the most competitive markets, the weight loss industry, the 
current ruling competitors are Jenny Craig and Weight Watchers. As both companies work 
to gain market share in this competitive industry, they tend to avoid direct confrontations. 
Thus when asked about Weight Watchers, the Jenny Craig CEO Monty Sharma has chosen 
not to comment, other than to explain that the differences in their programs make any such 
E X H I B I T  5.2
Understanding the Immediate Environment
Consumers
Competition
Corporate
partners
Company
Immediate environment

152	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
comparison unfair.4 In particular, whereas Jenny Craig focuses on delivered meals and per-
sonal consultants, Weight Watchers is famous for its point system. Yet Weight Watchers’ 
recent partnership with Oprah Winfrey has prompted more comparisons. That is, Jenny 
Craig has long relied on Kristie Alley as a spokesperson, a marketing strategy that has been 
credited with helping the company expand its membership rolls by 25 percent.5 This suc-
cess of a well-know spokesperson for one diet company likely was instrumental in Weight 
Watchers’ decision to team up with Winfrey. Although Weight Watchers experienced rev-
enue and profit declines in recent years, following the announcement of its partnership 
with Winfrey, the price of the company’s stock more than tripled.6 These efforts represent 
the companies’ recognition of what their closest competitor is doing. But at the same time, 
each company touts its benefits over its competitors because the ultimate goal, of course, is 
to appeal to consumers.
Corporate Partners
Few firms operate in isolation. For example, automobile manufacturers collaborate with 
suppliers of sheet metal, tire manufacturers, component part makers, unions, transport 
companies, and dealerships to produce and market their automobiles successfully. Parties 
that work with the focal firm are its corporate partners.
Consider an example that demonstrates the role these 
partners play and how they work with the firm to create a sin-
gle, efficient manufacturing system. Unlike most outdoor 
clothing manufacturers that use synthetic, nonrenewable mate-
rials, Nau makes modern urban+outdoor apparel from renew-
able sources such as sustainably harvested eucalyptus and 
recycled plastic bottles. It was founded by a team of entrepre-
neurs who left companies such as Nike and Patagonia. To de-
velop rugged and beautiful clothing from sustainable materials, 
these founders turned to manufacturing partners around the 
world to develop new fabrics that are performance-driven 
and technical. One example of an innovative fabric used in 
Nau’s jackets is a blend of recycled polyester and organic 
Weight Watchers’ partnership with Oprah Winfrey is expected 
to help rejuvenate the weight-loss company.
© Michael Nagle/Bloomberg/Getty Images
Jenny Craig’s spokesperson, Kirstie Alley, has been 
credited with expanding its membership rolls.
© Charles Sykes/Invision for Curves Jenny Craig/AP Photo
Nau works with its corporate 
partners to develop socially  
responsible outdoor (left) and 
urban (right) apparel.
Courtesy of Nau International, Inc. 
­Photography by Matthew D'Annunzio.

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
153
	
	
cotton that is coated and bonded to recycled polyester knit. The result is a water-resistant, 
breathable technical soft shell material that is ideal for outdoor activities. To complement 
the new fabrics, the company uses only organic cotton and wool from “happy sheep,” 
­provided by partners in the ranching industry that embrace animal-friendly practices. Not 
only does Nau represent the cutting edge of sustainability and green business, it also clearly 
demonstrates how “going green” can prompt companies to work more closely with their 
partners to innovate.7
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the components of the immediate environment?
MACROENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
In addition to understanding their customers, the company itself, their competition, and 
their corporate partners, marketers must understand the macroenvironmental factors that 
operate in the external environment. These factors are culture, demographics, social trends, 
technological advances, economic situation, and political/regulatory environment, or 
CDSTEP, as shown in Exhibit 5.3.
Culture
We broadly define culture as the shared meanings, beliefs, morals, values, and customs of 
a group of people.8 Transmitted by words, literature, and institutions, culture is passed 
down from generation to generation and learned over time. You participate in many cul-
tures: Your family has a cultural heritage, so perhaps your mealtime traditions include 
eating rugelach, a traditional Jewish pastry, or sharing corned beef and cabbage to cele-
brate your Irish ancestry on St. Patrick’s Day. In addition, your school or workplace shares 
its own common culture. In a broader sense, you also participate in the cultural aspects of 
the town and country in which you live. The challenge for marketers is to have products or 
services identifiable by and relevant to a particular group of people. Our various cultures 
 LO5-2	
Explain why 
marketers must 
consider their 
macroenvironment 
when they make 
decisions.
E X H I B I T  5.3
The Macroenvironment
Consumers
Culture
Political/
Legal
Economic
Technology
Social
Demographics

154	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
influence what, why, how, where, and when we buy. Two dimensions of culture that mar-
keters must take into account as they develop their marketing strategies are the culture of 
the country and that of a region within a country.
Country Culture  The visible nuances of a country’s culture, such as artifacts, behavior, 
dress, symbols, physical settings, ceremonies, language differences, colors, tastes, and food 
preferences, are easy to spot. But the subtler aspects of country culture generally are 
trickier to identify and navigate. Sometimes the best answer is to establish a universal ap-
peal within the specific identities of country culture. Disney and other global firms have 
successfully bridged the cultural gap by producing advertising that appeals to the same 
target market across countries. The pictures and copy are the same. The only thing that 
changes is the language.
Regional Culture  The region in which people live in a particular country has its own 
­regional culture that affects many aspects of people’s lives, including their dietary tastes and 
preferences. For national and global restaurant chains, it is particularly important to cater to 
these preferences. But implementing completely different menus for each region would cre-
ate significant strains on supply chains. To resolve this dilemma, McDonald’s keeps the 
staple elements of its menu consistent throughout the United States, but it offers slightly 
different variations to appeal to specific regions.9 In the south and southwestern regions of 
the United States, McDonald’s offers a Hot ’n Spicy variant of the McChicken sandwich that 
is not available other areas.10 Such variation is relatively easy for McDonald’s to offer, because 
the only real difference between the Hot ’n Spicy McChicken and the regular McChicken is 
Some firms, like Disney, bridge the cultural gap by using the same advertising in different countries. Only the language is  
different, as illustrated by these two ads for The Avengers. The left photo is for the Russian market; the right photo is for the  
Portuguese market.
(Both): © Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures/Courtesy Everett Collection

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
155
	
	
the spicy breading on the chicken patty. Furthermore, McDonald’s has pledged to continue 
personalizing offerings according to regional tastes,11 even expanding menus in select areas 
with completely new items. For example, in Maine, McDonald’s menu includes a lobster 
roll; in parts of Delaware, Virginia, and Maryland, it features a seasonal crab cake sandwich; 
and in Hawaii—which arguably gets the most regional U.S. customization—McDonald’s 
offers noodle soup and vegetable pie. The chain can sustain these vastly different menu 
items by turning to local sources for the ingredients in the relevant regions.12
Demographics
Demographics indicate the characteristics of human populations and segments, especially 
those used to identify consumer markets. Typical demographics such as age (which in-
cludes generational cohorts), gender, race, and income are readily available from market 
research firms such as IRI. Many firms undertake their own market research as well. For 
example, with its Clubcard loyalty program, U.K.-based grocery chain Tesco collects mas-
sive amounts of data about shoppers who visit its stores. It uses this information to target 
offers. For Tesco’s 16 million cardholders, 9 million different versions of its newsletter 
To accommodate regional cultures, McDonald’s offers regional specialties such as Spam for breakfast in Hawaii (left) and lobster 
rolls in Maine (right).
(left): © Phil Mislinski/Getty Images; (right): © Felix Choo/Alamy
Tesco uses the demographic 
information it collects from  
its 16 million cardholders to 
create 9 million different  
versions of its newsletter that 
offers customized discounts.
© NetPhotos/Alamy

156	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Understanding Connections,  
Both with and by Young Consumersi
Social & Mobile Marketing 5.1
For marketing executives, choices about where and how much 
to spend to appeal to consumers should depend mainly on a 
careful analysis of where those consumers are exposed to 
marketing messages. But when a generation gap appears 
­between marketing executives and consumers, advertising 
choices may reflect marketers’ preferences more than 
­consumers’.
	
A clear manifestation comes from advertising for beauty 
products. Previous generations of consumers often relied on 
insights and advice from big, glossy fashion magazines. Lush, 
expensive, two-page spreads, with glamorous shots of beauty 
products in use seemed effective and appropriate. But 
Millennials (Gen Y) who still read such magazines likely access 
them online and skip quickly over such long and intrusive ads, 
with little appreciation for the quality of the shot. Furthermore, 
recent research shows that such high-quality visual tactics 
used in print advertisements do not translate particularly well 
to online product sites. On retail websites, the pretty pictures 
are largely ineffective because shoppers seek concrete infor-
mation about their purchase decisions.
	
According to Forrester Research, 91 percent of Millennials 
are active Internet users. To reach the web, 59 percent 
of them use smartphones, 35 percent rely on tablets, and 
70 percent employ their laptops. Across these various uses, 
this younger generation of consumers spends an average of 
25 hours online every week.
	
Their electronic media usage is not the only impressive 
number describing these consumers: The Millennial market 
encompasses approximately 105 million consumers, with an-
nual buying power of about $200 billion. Yet even when they 
recognize and appreciate the size and opportunity that these 
consumers represent, many marketers—especially those who 
have reached executive positions after long careers—continue 
to devote the bulk of their media spending to channels that 
Millennials simply don’t use that much anymore, such as mag-
azines and television.
	
The main reason for this error might be a somewhat clichéd 
image of Baby Boomers, confused and overwhelmed by the 
new options created through technological advances. Faced with 
a wealth of choices, such as small independent blogs, content-­
generating sites, and aggregators, these marketing executives 
retreat to familiar ground. If they aren’t sure what each type of 
site does, they can’t determine which is the best option.
	
Even marketers who embrace technology channels for ad-
vertising exhibit a tendency to prefer well-established, widely 
known spaces such as Facebook or Google. For young con-
sumers who seek exciting, interactive media content, such op-
tions have little chances of success.
offer customized discounts for, say, cosmetics to young female shoppers.13 It also uses 
these data to cut food waste, such that by analyzing location and customer data, Tesco can 
create a sales forecast and stocks stores appropriately.14 Not all firms are quite as effective 
in their efforts though, as Social and Mobile Marketing 5.1 describes.
Demographics thus provide an easily understood snapshot of the typical consumer in 
a specific target market, as the next few sections detail.
Generational Cohorts  Consumers in a generational cohort—a group of people of the 
same generation—have similar purchase behaviors because they have shared experiences 
and are in the same stage of life. Applying age as a basis to identify consumers is quite 
useful to marketers, as long as it is used in conjunction with other consumer characteris-
tics. For example, most media are characterized by the consumers who use them.15 Age 
groups can identify appropriate media in 
which firms should advertise, as discussed 
in Social and Mobile Marketing 5.1. 
Although there are many ways to cut the 
generational pie, we describe four major 
groups, as listed in Exhibit 5.4.
Members of Generation Z (Gen Z) 
are also known as Digital Natives be-
cause people in this group were born into 
a world that already was full of electronic 
gadgets and digital technologies such as 
the Internet and social networks.16 These 
technologies are being developed and 
­adopted at an unprecedented rate. Whereas 
 LO5-3	
Describe the differences 
among the various 
generational cohorts.
Generational
cohort
Gen Z
Gen Y
Gen X
Baby Boomers
Range of birth
years
2001–2014
0–15
16–39
40–51
52–70
1977–2000
1965–1976
1946–1964
Age in 2017
E X H I B I T  5.4
Generational Cohorts

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
157
	
	
it took 38 years for the radio to be adopted by 50 million people and 13 years 
for television, it only took 2 years for the same number of consumers to 
sign up for Facebook.
Members of Generation Y (Gen Y), also called Millennials, include 
the more than 60 million people born in the United States between 1977 
and 2000. As the children of the Baby Boomers, this group is the biggest 
cohort since the original postwar World War II boom. It also varies the most 
in age, ranging from teenagers to adults who have their own families.17
The next group, Generation X (Gen X), includes people born between 
1965 and 1976 and represents some 41 million Americans. Vastly unlike 
their Baby Boomer parents, Xers are the first generation of latchkey children 
(those who grew up in homes in which both parents worked), and 50 percent 
of them have divorced parents.
After World War II, the birthrate in the United States rose sharply, re-
sulting in a group known as the Baby Boomers, the 78 million Americans 
born between 1946 and 1964. Now that the oldest Boomers are collecting 
Social Security, it is clear that this cohort will be the largest population 
of 50-plus consumers the United States has ever seen.
Income  Income distribution in the United States has grown 
more polarized—the highest-income groups are growing, 
whereas many middle- and lower-income groups’ real purchasing 
power keeps declining. Although the trend of wealthy households outpacing both poor 
and middle classes is worldwide, it is particularly prominent in the United States. For 
2014, the average weekly income of the richest 5 percent of the population was more 
than $3970, the average (median) weekly income for the United States as a whole was 
$1031, and the poorest 10 percent of the population earned less than $412 per 
week.18 Furthermore, the number of people who earn less than the poverty line ($24,230 
for a family of four in 2014) continues to grow.19 The wealthiest 1 percent control  
34.6 percent of Americans’ total net worth; in comparison, the bottom 90 percent control 
only 26.9 percent.20 The increase in wealthy families may be due to the maturing of the 
general population, the increase in dual-income households, and the higher overall level 
of education. It also may prompt some ethical concerns about the distribution of wealth. 
However, the broad range in incomes creates marketing opportunities at both the high 
and low ends of the market.
Although some marketers choose to target only affluent population segments, others 
have had great success delivering value to middle- and low-income earners. Consider, for 
example, SC Johnson, the parent company of many familiar household brands such as 
Glade, Ziploc, Windex, and Raid. SC Johnson has long been working at the bottom of the 
income pyramid; in the 1960s it began establishing locations in 
impoverished countries. Its most successful project has been in 
Ghana, where SC Johnson uses a direct-sales model and 
coaches to sell and teach customers about the benefits of pest 
control products and how to use them. Furthermore, SC Johnson 
sells these products in refillable containers and bundles them 
with air fresheners, in an effort to boost sales.21
Education  Studies show that higher levels of education lead 
to better jobs and higher incomes.22 According to the U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, employment that requires a college 
or secondary degree accounts for nearly half of all projected job 
growth in the near future. Moreover, average annual earnings 
are higher for those with degrees than for those without. Young 
adults who did not graduate from high school have an average 
annual salary of about $23,900, high school grads earn $30,000, 
and those with bachelor’s degrees earn around $48,500.23
Digital natives are always  
connected.
© Alberto Pomares/E+/Getty Images RF
SC Johnson targets the bottom 
of the income pyramid by  
selling pest control products  
in Ghana.
© Danita Delimont/Alamy

158	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
For some products, marketers can combine education level 
with other data such as occupation and income and obtain 
pretty accurate predictions of purchase behavior. For instance, a 
full-time college student with a part-time job may have rela-
tively little personal income but will spend his or her disposable 
dollars differently than would a high school graduate who 
works in a factory and earns a similar income. Marketers need 
to be cognizant of the interaction among education, income, 
and occupation.
Gender  Years ago gender roles appeared clear, but those male 
and female roles have been blurred. In particular, women today 
outperform men scholastically, earn higher grades on average, 
and graduate from both high school and college at greater rates. 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, recent studies also show that approxi-
mately 15 percent of married women in Western economies 
earn more than their husbands do in the workplace.24 These 
shifts in status, attitudes, and behaviors affect the way many 
firms need to design and promote their products and services. More firms are careful about 
gender neutrality in positioning their products and attempt to transcend gender boundaries, 
especially through increased interactions with their customers. On the basis of its research 
with men, for example, the children’s stroller company Bugaboo International designed a 
high-tech, black-and-chrome contraption with dirt bike tires. 
Best Buy has recognized that women are a massive market for electronics, smart-
phones, and mobile devices. But its stores tended to attract very few female shoppers. 
Therefore, its recent store design revisions aim to appeal to women with household appli-
ance sections that look more like kitchens than like industrial shipyards, and they place 
hand sanitizer dispensers next to the videogame test consoles.25
Ethnicity  Because of immigration and increasing birthrates among various ethnic and racial 
groups, the United States continues to grow more diverse. Approximately 80 percent of all 
population growth in the next 20 years is expected to come from African American, Hispanic, 
and Asian communities. Minorities now represent approximately one-quarter of the popula-
tion; by 2050 they will represent about 50 percent, and nearly 30 percent of the population 
will be Hispanic.26 The United Nations also estimates that approximately 1 million people per 
year will emigrate from less developed nations to the United States over the next 40 years.27 
Many foreign-born Americans and recent immigrants tend to concentrate in a handful of 
metropolitan areas, such as New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Chicago.
Among the different groups, Hispanic buying power was projected to reach $1.3 trillion in 
2015, a cumulative increase of around 25 percent compared with 2010.28 The 50 million His-
panic consumers in the United States have increasing influences on mainstream U.S. culture. 
 LO5-4	
Identify various social 
trends that impact 
marketing.
Best Buy has redesigned its 
stores to appeal to its female 
shoppers by making its appli-
ance sections look more like 
kitchens than like industrial 
shipyards.
© Bruce Bisping/MCT/Newscom
The Hispanic market is so large 
in some areas of the United 
States that some firms, like  
McDonald’s, develop entire 
marketing programs just to 
meet their needs.
© Ethel Wolvovitz/The Image Works

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
159
	
	
Many families have been in the United States for multiple 
generations, and the consumer behavior of these highly 
acculturated Hispanics differs little from that of other 
groups of Americans. For example, they use credit cards, 
are minimally influenced by advertising and product 
placements, exhibit greater sensitivity to in-store promo-
tions, and are likely to shop online and from catalogs.
The census of 2010 counts 42 million African 
American U.S. households, who are more affluent and 
suburban than previous studies have suggested. They 
also tend to be younger, such that 47 percent are between 
the ages of 18 and 49 years (a key age demographic for 
many marketers). The number of black households earning 
more than $75,000 has increased by 47 percent since 2005, 
and it is expected that a majority of black Americans 
now live in the suburbs.29 For example, in the Atlanta 
metropolitan area the city lost 8 percent of its African American households, while the 
surrounding suburbs gained a remarkable 40 percent.30 For this demographic segment, es-
pecially as it moves increasingly to the suburbs, Home Depot has developed particular ap-
peals featuring national figures such as Tom Joyner and Steve Harvey.
Asian Americans make up only about 5.6 percent of the U.S. population, but they also 
represent the fastest-growing minority population, tend to earn more, have more schooling, 
and are more likely to be professionally employed or own a business.
Social Trends
Various social trends appear to be shaping consumer values in 
the United States and around the world, including a greater 
emphasis on health and wellness concerns, greener consum-
ers, and privacy concerns.
Health and Wellness Concerns  As the opening vignette 
for this chapter indicated, health concerns, especially those 
pertaining to children, are prevalent, critical, and widespread. 
In the past 20 years, child obesity has doubled and teenage 
obesity tripled in the United States, leading to skyrocketing 
rates of high blood pressure, high cholesterol, early signs of 
heart disease, and type 2 diabetes among children. The U.S. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also esti-
mates that approximately one-third of U.S. adults are obese, 
and the incidence of diabetes has reached 8.3 percent—with 
much higher rates for people still undiagnosed or classified as 
having prediabetes.31 It is also increasing at alarming rates in 
other countries and among consumers who adopt more 
Western diets.
New advertising guidelines therefore require marketers to 
produce food in reasonably proportioned sizes. Advertised food 
items must provide basic nutrients, have less than 30 percent of 
their total calories from fat, and include no added sweeteners. 
The advertising also cannot be aired during children’s pro-
gramming, and companies cannot link unhealthy foods with 
cartoon and celebrity figures. For example, the SUBWAY 
FRESH FIT FOR KIDS™ offerings meet the American Heart 
Association’s criteria for a heart-healthy meal, since it includes 
lean protein, fruits, vegetables, grains, and milk, all for less 
than 500 calories.32 It has even partnered with Disney in a 
Star Wars-related TV ad promoting healthy children’s meals.33
The United States is like a 
salad bowl, a mix made up of 
people from every corner of 
the world.
© Andrea Laurita/Getty Images RF
This Subway ad speaks directly to the issue of childhood obe-
sity and responds to the new advertising guidelines adopted 
by marketers. The SUBWAY FRESH FIT FOR KIDS™ meal, 
which meets the American Heart Association’s criteria for a 
heart-healthy meal, provides a nutritional choice for customers 
wanting a quick service food alternative for their children.
Source: Subway Franchise Advertising Fund Trust

160	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Accordingly, consumers’ interest in improving their health 
has opened up several new markets and niches focused on healthy 
living. For example, consumer spending on yoga classes, mats, 
and clothing has increased consistently in recent years.34 Yoga 
studios actually combine multiple modern trends: As the econ-
omy sours, people face increasing stress, which they hope to re-
duce through yoga. In addition, yoga studios are relatively 
inexpensive to open and operate, so entrepreneurs and consumers 
appreciate the value for the money they offer. And of course, 
Americans remain consistently on the lookout for exercise mech-
anisms that can help them shed pounds and match media images 
of athletic prowess and beautiful bodies. Thus competition is 
growing in this industry, and some studios have begun to combine 
their basic yoga classes with additional offers to attract clients 
such as food services, acupuncture, or massages.35
Health and wellness concerns have also spurred a number 
of mobile apps, many of which help customers get or stay in 
shape by tracking exercise, calorie intake, and sleep cycles. 
Superior Service 5.1 describes how CVS’s MinuteClinic apps 
helps its patients stay well.
Greener Consumers  Green marketing involves a strategic 
effort by firms to supply customers with environmentally friendly, 
sustainable merchandise and services.36 As we noted in Chapter 4, 
sustainability is a critical ethical consideration for marketers. 
Many consumers, concerned about everything from the purity of 
air and water to the safety of beef and salmon, believe that each 
person can make a difference in the environment. For example, 
nearly half of U.S. adults now recycle their soda bottles and news-
papers, and European consumers are even more green. Germans are required by law to re-
cycle bottles, and the European Union does not allow beef raised on artificial growth 
hormones to be imported.
Demand for green-oriented products has been a boon to the firms that supply them. 
Marketers encourage consumers to replace older versions of washing machines and dish-
washers with water- and energy-saving models and to invest in phosphate-free laundry 
powder and mercury-free and rechargeable batteries. New markets emerge for recycled 
building products, packaging, paper goods, and even sweaters and sneakers as well as for 
more efficient appliances, lighting, and heating and cooling systems in homes and offices. 
Jumping on the green bandwagon, Frito-Lay’s SunChips line of snack foods uses solar 
power at one of its eight production facilities to harness the sun’s energy to produce its 
products.37  Ethical and Societal Dilemma 5.1 examines some of the challenges companies 
face in making green products.
These green products and initiatives suggest a complicated business model. Are they 
good for business? Some green options are more expensive than traditional products and 
initiatives. Are consumers interested in or willing to pay the higher prices for green prod-
ucts? Are firms really interested in improving the environment? Or are they disingenuously 
marketing products or services as environmentally friendly, with the goal of gaining public 
approval and sales rather than actually improving the environment? This type of exploita-
tion is common enough that it even has produced the term greenwashing. Consumers need 
to question whether a firm is spending significantly more money and time advertising be-
ing green and operating with consideration for the environment than actually spending 
these resources on environmentally sound practices.
Privacy Concerns  More and more consumers worldwide sense a loss of privacy. At the 
same time that the Internet has created an explosion of accessibility to consumer informa-
tion, improvements in computer storage facilities and the manipulation of information have 
The practice of yoga is growing 
as more consumers embrace 
healthy lifestyles.
© Plush Studios/Blend Images LLC RF

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
161
	
	
The MinuteClinic Mobile App: The Latest Service 
Expansion by CVSii
There are some apps that are really exciting and “sexy,” prom-
ising vast leaps in technological innovation, achieving new ca-
pabilities mainly to prove that it can be done. And then there 
are apps that seem a lot less exciting but enable users to get 
far more done. In modern marketing environments, companies 
seek a balance between these types of innovations for their 
apps, as is demonstrated readily by CVS Health and the range 
of apps it continues to introduce in connection with its onsite 
MinuteClinics. 
	
On the exciting and thrilling side, CVS Health is experimenting 
with an app that would enable consumers to attach specialty 
lenses and scopes to their smartphones. Then when confronted 
with another earache or a sore throat, they could snap a picture 
of the affected area. The app would provide this visual informa-
tion to a health care provider on duty at a local MinuteClinic, 
who could make an initial diagnosis and recommendations for 
treatment. This prototype conceivably could change the way 
people receive health care (and virtually eliminate late-night trips 
to emergency rooms), but its implementation remains uncertain, 
so CVS Health has not rolled it out quite yet.
	
Instead, it already has established a means for consumers 
to receive a text message when their prescriptions are ready. 
By adding their mobile device number into the system, they get 
timely alerts, so they know when to swing by the store for their 
medications. The adoption of this app has been so extensive—
more than 3 million people used the service within a few 
months of its introduction—that CVS determined other service-­
oriented apps were a good place to expand its offerings. 
	
The latest entry gives consumers a means to check the 
schedules at MinuteClinics near their homes or offices: They 
can gauge wait times if they need to stop in immediately or 
else make an appointment if they have a little flexibility. The 
app also sends them a reminder message 30 minutes in ad-
vance of their appointment, prompting the patients to make 
their way over to their local CVS. The app thus helps the com-
pany leverage its MinuteClinics in additional ways by improv-
ing the service that consumers receive from this health care 
option. In particular, it enables CVS Health to balance the de-
mand for its clinic services more effectively with its supply of 
those services. For example, data gathered from usage of the 
app could help the company redefine the hours of operation 
for its MinuteClinics or adjust the staffing levels to reflect 
heavy and light demand times.
	
As the president of the MinuteClinic division of CVS has 
noted in describing these new service-oriented apps, “I know 
this isn’t as sexy as a new service clinically, but these tran­
sactional things are making a big difference in healthcare, 
because mostly what people want to know is ‘Are you going to 
be able to see them promptly? What’s the service experience 
like?’ Especially in relatively commoditized ambulatory care ac-
tivities, that service is important.”
	
Along similar lines, CVS plans to extend the functions of its 
app even further in the near future. Users soon will be able to 
scan their insurance cards or driver’s licenses, such that the 
app will help them make sure their insurance and contact in-
formation is up to date in the pharmacy’s system. Another 
promising service function would help patients link with 
health care providers in video conferences, such that a wor-
ried parent might ask a nurse to take a look at a child’s rash to 
help determine if a visit to the doctor is necessary. 
	
Yet another new app spans the gap between radical and 
more functional innovations: Nicknamed “Ellen,” after a com-
pany executive’s mother, this new function gives users the op-
tion to share their prescription and health information with 
friends or family. Then, if they fail to pick up or refill their pre-
scriptions in a timely manner, it sends a report to those friends 
and family, giving them all the information they need to nag the 
patient to take better care of him- or herself.
Superior Service 5.1
CVS Health offers a range of apps in connection with its  
onsite MinuteClinics.
Source: MinuteClinic
led to more and better security and credit check services. In recent years there have been a 
number of hacking scandals, perhaps most notably the 2013 Target breach that put millions 
of customers’ credit and personal information at risk. Although companies continuously 
develop new ways to keep customer information safe, some observers suggest hackers are 
just getting more effective. For example in early 2016 it was revealed that some online 

162	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Green Cereal?iii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 5.1
At times it may seem that massive conglomerates are slow to 
change, but some companies are clearly learning some les-
sons when it comes to responsible sourcing. Just a few years 
ago, Nestlé suffered terrible consumer backlash when it 
agreed to purchase a small amount of palm oil (used in its 
chocolate candies) from a company that cleared rain forests 
to access the palms.
	
Wary of such reactions, General Mills (GM) quickly promised 
that all the palm oil used in any of its products and packaging 
would come from responsible, sustainable sources by 2015. 
Recent estimates suggest that such moves are achieving some 
success. The rate of Amazonian deforestation in 2012 was 
lower than at any other point since the Brazilian government 
started tracking this statistic in 1988. But neither GM nor any 
of its competitors in the consumer packaged-goods industry 
have reached the goal of complete sustainability quite yet.
	
Determined not to limit itself to palm oil, GM also committed 
to improving the trade conditions for vanilla farmers who supply 
the raw material for the traditional favorite flavor of its Häagen-­
Dazs ice cream. With a two-year investment of $125 million in 
Madagascar, GM plans to train small vanilla farmers in sustain-
able methods that also increase crop quality, such as yield im-
provements and curing techniques. Ideally, these tactics also will 
enhance the earnings of local farmers and their communities.
	
Next, GM helped found—in collaboration with the U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture (USDA) and Environmental Protec-
tion Agency (EPA)—the U.S. Food Waste Challenge. This 
initiative seeks not only to reduce the environmental impacts 
of waste collected in landfills but also to address spreading 
food insecurity concerns. By reducing the waste and loss of 
food products, the collaborators hope to feed more people 
or at least use the edible remainders for productive uses 
such as animal feed.
	
These examples reflect GM’s overall sustainability mission 
and efforts. It has released Global Responsibility Reports an-
nually for more than 40 years. It also touts its efforts widely 
through its blog, press releases, and other communications. 
GM does run the risk that skeptical consumers will come to 
believe it publicizes its good works to cover up bad behavior. 
But as the CEO of General Mills has readily acknowledged, 
“We’re finding opportunities to collaborate with business, gov-
ernment and non-governmental organizations on important 
systemic solutions. While we’re proud of our progress, we 
also know there is still much more to be done. We are commit-
ted to continued progress in these areas. Our business re-
quires it and future generations depend on it.”
The demand for palm oil can often lead to rain forests such 
as this one being clear cut.
© Warwick Lister-Kaye/Getty Images RF
Fitbit accounts were hacked. The hackers attempted to use the accounts to make fraudulent 
claims on the customer’s warranty for new devices. However, they also gained access to the 
customers’ GPS histories, including typical running routes and sleep history.38
Every time a consumer surfs the web and clicks on a site, online marketers can place 
“cookies” on that user’s computer, showing them where the user starts, proceeds, and ends 
the online encounter—as well as what the user buys and doesn’t buy. For many consumers, 
such close access to their behaviors is an unacceptable invasion of privacy.
Realizing consumers are upset about this issue, the marketing industry as a whole has 
sought to find solutions and self-regulations that would calm customers, satisfy cautious 
regulators, and still enable marketing firms to gain access to invaluable information about 
consumer behaviors. Those attempts appear to have stalled. The online marketing industry 
simply has not been able to agree about how to police itself. It looks like it may be up to 
Congress to address this growing issue.39
Technological Advances
Technological advances have accelerated during the past decade, improving the value of 
products as well as services. Consumers have constant access to the Internet everywhere 
through services such as wifi, mobile hotspots, 4G, and LTE. Smartphones using the iOS 
and Android systems allow for greater computing, data storage, and communication. Tablet 

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
163
	
	
When the Best Is Good Enough: Netflix’s Stellar 
Predictive Analyticsiv
Netflix’s data analytics are groundbreaking. In academic circles, 
its influence has been called a “scientific renaissance” because 
of the techniques the streaming service has pioneered in its 
efforts to handle the massive amounts of data it deals in and 
process payments from across the globe. The power and pre-
cision of Netflix’s predictive analytics have become such com-
mon knowledge that even Netflix pokes fun at itself. In one April 
Fool’s joke, it revised its recommended television and movie 
categories to include classifications such as “TV Shows Where 
Defiantly Crossed Arms Mean Business!” Netflix gathers data 
about every aspect of the viewing process, including not just 
the basics, such as customer ratings, searches, time of day and 
week, and location, but also customer behaviors that take place 
during the movie, such as rewinds, fast-forwards, pauses, and 
how long they let the credits roll. Going even a step further, 
Netflix analyzes every hue of color contained in the cover art 
of the options that it offers and can create a profile of the aver-
age color of titles viewed by each customer.
	
Netflix clearly relies on such customer data to create its 
hallmark personalized suggestions. But in 2010, Netflix chose 
not to enhance its ability to personalize any further. In 2009, a 
team of mathematicians created a new algorithm that would 
have improved Netflix’s personalization by 10 percent, in 
­response to a company-sponsored contest. But Netflix never 
implemented the improved algorithm. Why? There simply 
wasn’t enough value to be gained from it. Various studies 
show that, even for the most personal choices, including their 
love lives, people often forgo what they know already for the 
thrill of what’s new. Thus, Netflix decided that it could deliver 
more value to its customers by offering something new rather 
than a personalized version of what they wanted yesterday. 
Accordingly, it has changed its strategy and its uses of predic-
tive analytics to focus more on creating original content.
	
Netflix challenges traditional approaches to content devel-
opment by using data to help make new shows as well as pro-
duction decisions. This approach has almost guaranteed the 
success of the shows, as evidenced by the release of the third 
season of the award-winning series House of Cards. Before 
this release, the show experienced an unprecedented in-
crease in fans on Facebook and Twitter, approximately double 
the increase that occurred prior to the start of the second 
season. This jump was especially notable, because a show’s 
social growth usually slows after its first or second season. 
Even though the third season initially brought some mixed re-
views, many viewers already had finished watching the entire 
season just a week or so after its release.
Marketing Analytics 5.1
Netflix relies on its advanced technological capabilities not just to suggest 
which movies we should watch but also to develop new content that it is 
confident we will like.
© Victor J. Blue/Bloomberg/Getty Images
computers, starting with the iPad, have extended mobile computing even further by offer-
ing a larger mobile interface in environments that traditionally have limited access.
These examples of advanced technology make consumers increasingly dependent on 
the help they receive from the providers of the technology. As Marketing Analytics 5.1  
details, Netflix relies on its advanced technological capabilities not just to suggest which 
movies we should watch but also to develop new content that it is confident we will like.

164	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
Near-field communication technology takes payments, coupons, and loyalty card data 
from customers as they walk by the scanner. The next broad wave of mobile applications is 
likely to expand the use of wireless payments through applications such as Apple Pay, 
Google Wallet, Master Card’s Easy Pay, and Softcard Mobile Wallet, all of which enable 
customers’ phones to serve as m-wallets.
From the firm’s perspective, the technology called radio frequency identification de-
vice (RFID) enables the firm to track an item from the moment it was manufactured, 
through the distribution system, to the retail store, and into the hands of the final consumer. 
Because they are able to determine exactly how much of each product is at a given point in 
the supply chain, retailers can also communicate with their suppliers and collaboratively 
plan to meet their inventory needs.
Mobile devices enhance the customer’s experience by making it easier to interact with 
the manufacturer or retailer or other customers, and they add a new channel of access, which 
makes customers more loyal and more likely to spend more with a particular retailer. Wal-
greens’ applications and Web Pickup service allow customers to order prescriptions or re-
view their prescription history, check the in-store inventories, and print photos. As Adding 
Value 5.1 summarizes, ever more new and exciting technologies seem poised to enter the 
consumer market.
Economic Situation
Marketers monitor the general economic situation, both in their home country and abroad, 
because it affects the way consumers buy merchandise and spend money. Some major 
Adding Value 5.1
Are We There Yet? Google’s Moves to Get Us Closer  
to Driverless Carsv
Self-driving cars were the central focus at the 2016 Consumer 
Electronics Show (CES). Google’s self-driving cars have been 
the most widely talked-about product, in part because its driv-
erless car program, which began in 2009, is the oldest. Its 
self-driving cars currently being tested include modified Lexus 
SUVs as well as Google-designed prototype vehicles. Google’s 
self-driving cars have logged a significant amount of mileage, 
with an average of 30,000–40,000 miles driven each month 
(the average American drives about 13,500 miles a year). Cur-
rently Google is in talks with Ford to produce the self-driving 
cars—Google gets Ford’s manufacturing expertise; Ford gets 
the self-driving technology. Although Ford already has a fleet 
of self-driving cars, it has announced plans to triple its produc-
tion by the end of 2016.
Although Google has the most advanced driverless car pro-
gram, the latest report shows that there is still plenty of work to 
be done before the cars are completely driverless. From 
September to November 2014, Google reported 341 self-driving 
disengagements, where the driver had to take over control of 
the car. More than 270 of these disengagements were report-
edly due to lapses in the technology; only 69 were due to the 
test drivers opting to take control. On average there was one 
disengagement experienced every 1,244 miles. However, these 
numbers are significantly better than with other self-driving 
cars. For example Bosch’s model had one disengagement every 
41 miles, Nissan experienced a disengagement every 14 miles, 
Mercedes-Benz disengaged every 1 to 2 miles, and Volkswagen 
disengaged once every 57 miles. A Tesla was involved in a fatal 
accident when the car was in self-driving mode.
The Google car might not be ready yet, but it seems to be 
leading the pack and improving rapidly. The 2015 reports of 
self-driving disengagement show a considerable drop from the 
2014 reports, down to just one human intervention every 
5,318 miles. Furthermore, Google recognizes these disengage-
ments as an important aspect of its testing. Driver interven-
tions give Google critical data and insight into the strengths 
and weaknesses of its software, allowing the company to 
make improvements. Google is undoubtedly one of the best 
companies at using data, and as seen by the rapid decline in 
driver intervention, its self-driving cars may soon be ready for 
the general public.
Automakers such as Toyota are collaborating with compa-
nies such as Apple and Google to create a self-driving car.
© Karen Bleier/AFP/Getty Images

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
165
	
	
factors that influence the state of an economy include 
the rate of inflation, foreign currency exchange 
rates, and interest rates.
Inflation refers to the persistent increase in the 
prices of goods and services. Increasing prices cause 
the purchasing power of the dollar to decline; in 
other words, the dollar buys less than it used to.
In a similar fashion, foreign currency fluctua-
tions can influence consumer spending. For instance, 
in the summer of 2002 the euro was valued at 
slightly less than US$1. By 2008, it had risen to an 
all-time high of $1.60, but in early 2016, the euro 
and the dollar were nearly equivalent.40 When the 
euro is more expensive than the dollar, merchandise 
made in Europe is more costly for Americans, but 
European shoppers enjoy bargains on U.S. products. When the dollar is worth more than 
the euro, American-made products become more costly for European consumers, but U.S. 
buyers can get great deals in Europe.
Interest rates represent the cost of borrowing money. When customers borrow money 
from a bank, they agree to pay back the loan, plus the interest that accrues. The interest, in 
effect, is the cost to the customers or the fee the bank charges those customers for borrow-
ing the money. Likewise, if a customer opens a savings account at a bank, he or she will 
earn interest on the amount saved, which means the interest becomes the fee the consumer 
gets for loaning the money to the bank. If the interest rate goes up, consumers have an in-
centive to save more because they earn more for loaning the bank their money; when inter-
est rates go down, however, consumers generally borrow more.
How do these three important economic factors—inflation, foreign currency fluctua-
tions, and interest rates—affect firms’ ability to market goods and services? Shifts in the 
three economic factors make marketing easier for some and harder for others. For instance, 
when inflation increases, consumers probably don’t buy less food, but they may shift their 
expenditures from expensive steaks to less expensive hamburgers. Grocery stores and inex-
pensive restaurants win, but expensive restaurants lose. Consumers also buy less discre-
tionary merchandise, though off-price and discount retailers often gain ground at the 
expense of their full-price competitors. Similarly, the sales of expensive jewelry, fancy 
cars, and extravagant vacations decrease, but the sale of low-cost luxuries, such as personal 
care products and home entertainment, tends to increase.
Political/Regulatory Environment
The political/regulatory environment comprises political parties, government organiza-
tions, and legislation and laws. Organizations must fully understand and comply with any 
legislation regarding fair competition, consumer protection, or industry-specific regula-
tion. Since the turn of the 20th century, the government has enacted laws that promote 
both fair trade and competition by prohibiting the formation of monopolies or alliances 
that would damage a competitive marketplace, which fosters fair pricing practices for all 
suppliers and consumers.
The government enacts laws focused on ensuring that companies compete fairly with 
one another. Although enacted in the early part of the 20th century, these laws remain the 
backbone of U.S. legislation protecting competition in commerce: The 1890 Sherman Anti-
trust Act prohibits monopolies and other activities that would restrain trade or competition 
and makes fair trade within a free market a national goal; the 1914 Clayton Act supports the 
Sherman Act by prohibiting the combination of two or more competing corporations 
through pooling ownership of stock and restricting pricing policies such as price discrimi-
nation, exclusive dealing, and tying clauses to different buyers; and the 1936 Robinson-­
Patman Act specifically outlaws price discrimination toward wholesalers, retailers, or other 
producers and requires sellers to make ancillary services or allowances available to all 
U.S. tourists are flocking to 
other countries such as the  
UK to shop because the value 
of the dollar is high compared 
to other currencies like the 
pound sterling. 
© Samir Hussein/Getty Images 
­Entertainment/Getty Images

166	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
buyers on proportionately equal terms. These laws have been used specifically to increase 
competition. For example, the telephone and energy industries were deregulated, which 
resulted in massive conglomerates such as Ma Bell (the nickname for AT&T) being broken 
into smaller, competing companies.
Legislation has also been enacted to protect consumers in a variety of ways. First, 
regulations require marketers to abstain from false or misleading advertising practices that 
might mislead consumers, such as claims that a medication can cure a disease when in fact 
it causes other health risks. Second, manufacturers are required to refrain from using any 
harmful or hazardous materials (e.g., lead in toys) that might place consumers at risk. 
Third, organizations must adhere to fair and reasonable business practices when they com-
municate with consumers. For example, they must employ reasonable debt-collection 
methods and disclose any finance charges, and they are limited with regard to their tele-
marketing and e-mail solicitation activities. A summary of the most significant legislation 
affecting marketing interests appears in Exhibit 5.5.
Responding to the Environment
As the examples throughout this chapter show, many companies engage in tactics and 
­marketing strategies that attempt to respond to multiple political, regulatory, economic, 
technical, and social developments and trends in the wider environment. For example, in 
2011, responding to several of these trends—pressures from the FCC, the economic status 
Year
Law
Description
1906
Federal Food and Drug 
Act
Created the Food and Drug Administration (FDA); prohibited the manufacture or sale of adulterated or 
fraudulently labeled food and drug products.
1914
Federal Trade Commis-
sion Act
Established the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to regulate unfair competitive practices and practices 
that deceive or are unfair to consumers.
1966
Fair Packaging and  
Labeling Act
Regulates packaging and labeling of consumer goods; requires manufacturers to state the contents of 
the package, who made it, and the amounts contained within.
1966
Child Protection Act
Prohibits the sale of harmful toys and components to children; sets the standard for child-resistant packaging.
1967
Federal Cigarette Labeling 
and Advertising Act
Requires cigarette packages to display this warning: “Warning: The Surgeon General Has Determined 
That Cigarette Smoking Is Dangerous to Your Health.”
1972
Consumer Product  
Safety Act
Created the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), which has the authority to regulate safety 
standards for consumer products.
1990
Children’s Television Act
Limits the number of commercials shown during children’s programming.
1990
Nutrition Labeling and 
Education Act
Requires food manufacturers to display nutritional contents on product labels.
1995
Telemarketing Sales Rule
Regulates fraudulent activities conducted over the telephone. Violators are subject to fines and actions 
enforced by the FTC.
2003
Controlling the Assault of 
Non-Solicited Pornogra-
phy and Marketing Act of 
2003 (CAN-SPAM Act)
Prohibits misleading commercial e-mail, particularly misleading "subject" and "from" lines.
2003
Amendment to the 
­Telemarketing Sales Rule
Establishes a National Do Not Call Registry, requiring telemarketers to abstain from calling consumers 
who opt to be placed on the list.
2003
Do Not Spam Law
Laws created to reduce spam or unwarranted e-mails.
2010
Financial Reform Law
Created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau whose aim is to enforce appropriate consumer-­
oriented regulations on a number of financial firms such as banks, mortgage businesses, and payday and 
student lenders. It also set up the Financial Services Oversight Council to act as an early warning system.
Consumer Protection Legislation
E X H I B I T  5.5

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
167
	
	
of some consumers, increasing capabilities for accessing faster broadband capabilities, and 
calls for greater social responsibility—14 cable companies agreed to provide low-cost 
Internet access to impoverished families.41 Although the program was due to expire in 
2014, Comcast chose to continue to run the program indefinitely, spurring other cable 
companies to do the same.42 This remarkable agreement allows the cable companies to 
promote their social responsibility. But it also ensures that families whose children are eli-
gible for free lunch programs can gain access to the services, opportunities, and options 
available only online. In a constantly changing marketing environment, the marketers that 
succeed are the ones that respond quickly, accurately, and sensitively to their consumers.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the six key macroenvironmental factors?
2.	 Differentiate between country culture and regional culture.
3.	 What are some important social trends shaping consumer values and  
shopping behavior?
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Outline how customers, the company, competi-
tors, and corporate partners affect marketing 
strategy.
	
	
Everything a firm does should revolve around the 
customer; without the customer, nothing gets sold. 
Firms must discover their customers’ wants and 
needs and then be able to provide a valuable product 
or service that will satisfy those wants or needs. If 
there were only one firm and many customers, a 
marketer’s life would be a piece of cake. But be-
cause this situation rarely occurs, firms must moni-
tor their competitors to discover how they might be 
appealing to their customers. If a firm does not 
monitor its competitors, the firm’s customers might 
soon belong to its competitors. Though life certainly 
would be easier without competitors, it would be 
difficult, if not impossible, without corporate part-
ners. Good marketing firms or departments work 
closely with suppliers, marketing research firms, 
consultants, and transportation firms to coordinate 
the extensive process of discovering what customers 
want and finally getting it to them when and where 
they want it. Each of these activities—discovering 
customer needs, studying competitors’ actions, and 
working with corporate partners—helps add value 
to firms’ products and services.
	
	
Explain why marketers must consider their mac-
roenvironment when they make decisions.
	
	
What are the chances that a fast-food hamburger 
restaurant would be successful in a predominantly 
Hindu neighborhood? Not good. Marketers must be 
LO5-1
LO5-2
sensitive to such cultural issues to be successful, and 
they must also consider customer demographics—
age, income, market size, education, gender, and 
ethnicity—to identify specific customer target groups. 
In any society, major social trends influence the way 
people live. In no other time in history has technol-
ogy moved so rapidly and had such a pervasive in-
fluence on the way we live. Not only do marketers 
help identify and develop technologies for practical, 
everyday uses, but technological advances help mar-
keters provide consumers with more products and 
services more quickly and efficiently. The general 
state of the economy influences how people spend 
their discretionary income. When the economy is 
healthy, marketing success comes relatively easily. 
But when the economy gets bumpy, only well-honed 
marketing skills can yield long-term successes. Nat-
urally, all firms must abide by the law, and many le-
gal issues affect marketing directly. These laws 
pertain to competitive practices and protecting con-
sumers from unfair or dangerous products.
	
	
Describe the differences among the various  
generational cohorts.
	
	
Generational cohorts are groups of consumers of the 
same generation. They are likely to have similar pur-
chase and consumption behaviors due to their shared 
experiences and stages of life. The four main types 
include Gen Z (born 2001–2016), Gen Y (born 1977–
2000), Gen X (1965–1976), and Baby Boomers 
(1946–1964). Each of these segments exhibits differ-
ent consumption patterns, attitudes toward the world, 
and preferences with regard to marketing efforts.
LO5-3

168	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
	
	
Identify various social trends that impact  
marketing.
	
	
Social trends have a tremendous impact on what 
consumers purchase and consume. Understanding 
LO5-4
these trends—health and wellness, green marketing, 
and privacy issues—can help marketers serve their 
customers better.
∙	 Baby Boomers,  157
∙	 country culture,  154
∙	 culture,  153
∙	 demographics,  155
∙	 Digital Native,  156
∙	 economic situation,  164
∙	 foreign currency fluctuations,  165
∙	 Generation X (Gen X),  157
∙	 Generation Y (Gen Y),  157
∙	 Generation Z (Gen Z),  156
∙	 generational cohort,  156
∙	 green marketing,  160
∙	 greenwashing,  160
∙	 inflation,  165
∙	 interest rates,  165
∙	 macroenvironmental factors,  153
∙	 Millennials,  157
∙	 political/regulatory environment,  165
∙	 regional culture,  154
∙	 technological advances,  162
Key Terms
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Seventh Generation is the leading brand of nontoxic, en-
vironmentally safe household products in the United 
States. Visit its website (http://www.seventhgeneration 
.com) and review the philosophy behind the business. 
Next, review the site to identify the products the com-
pany offers. Briefly summarize some of the consumer 
trends you think are reflected. Describe the ways in 
which Seventh Generation’s products address the wants 
and needs of its customers.
2.	 Visit The Cool Hunter (http://www.thecoolhunter.net) 
and identify examples that would provide marketers in-
sights regarding social trends.
3.	 Visit and explore the website of your favorite breakfast 
cereal. Identify the demographics of its target customer. 
Evaluate the effectiveness of its marketing strategy.
Marketing Applications
1.	 Assume you are going to open a new store selling fit-
ness products. Describe it. Who are your competitors? 
What would you do to monitor your competitors’ ac-
tions? Who are your customers? What are you going to 
do to appeal to them? What are your social responsibili-
ties, and how will you meet them?
2.	 How would your approach to buying a computer differ 
from your parents’ approach? What about buying an 
outfit to wear to a party? How can firms use their knowl-
edge of different age or generational cohorts to market 
their products and services better?
3.	 How can firms use customer demographics like income, 
market size, education, and ethnicity to market to their 
customers better?
4.	 Identify some of the ethnicity changes in the United States. 
Describe how they might affect the marketing practices of 
(a) a radio station in Texas, (b) food retailers in cities, and 
(c) a home furnishing store in New York City.
5.	 Identify some recent technological innovations in the 
marketplace and describe how they have affected con-
sumers’ everyday activities.
6.	 Why should a T-shirt shop in the United States care 
about the value of the Hong Kong dollar?
7.	 Several social trends were discussed in the chapter. For 
each of these trends, choose a retailer or service pro-
vider that you believe has seized the moment by grasp-
ing the importance of the trend and successfully 
marketing to its customers as a result. 
8.	 Identify a company that you believe does a particularly 
good job of marketing to different cultural groups. Jus-
tify your answer.
9.	 Examine the consumer protection legislation in Exhibit 
5.5. Which law do you believe has had the biggest im-
pact on society in general? Which has had the largest 
impact on you personally? Justify your answer.

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
169
	
	
1.	 ABC Company knew that its customers were interested 
in environmentally friendly business practices, so it be-
gan marking all of its products as environmentally 
friendly because they were made with all-natural ingre-
dients, even though ABC’s plant was one of the worst 
polluters in town. The new term for this practice is
a.  deceptive advertising.
b.  greenwashing.
c.  environmental exploitation.
d.  virtual greening. 
e.  enviromarketing. 
2.	 One of the goals of value-based marketing is
a.  to provide the greatest value for the least profit.
b.  to sell products for the highest possible price.
c.  to offer greater value than competitors offer.
d.  to determine the value of the brand.
e.  to sell to all consumers, regardless of their needs.
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
A NEXT-GENERATION CLEANSER43
Taking an Iroquois directive—“In our every deliberation, we must consider the impact of our 
decisions on the next seven generations”—the consumer product company Seventh Genera-
tion has applied a distinctly modern sensibility to derive a long-term approach to the market-
ing environment. Although its mission statement might be focused on future generations, its 
efforts to appeal to current consumers are always responsive to their immediate demands.
	
From its start in Vermont in 1988, Seventh Generation has grown to become a national 
brand with more than $200 million in revenues.44 Its growth has been sparked largely by 
consumer desires to buy more sustainable, environmentally safe green products. Approxi-
mately 71 percent of consumers in a recent survey indicated that they thought it was im-
portant to buy green offerings (up from 66 percent in 2008), and consumer demand for 
products in a wide range of categories continues to grow.45
But even as more categories appear to offer promising green opportunities for market-
ers, the primary purchase area continues to be groceries and household products—exactly 
the space that Seventh Generation dominates. As it has gained brand recognition and trust, 
it also has proactively altered its market. That is, Seventh Generation does not simply wait 
for customers to request options. It creates entirely new categories.
With a new line of detergents, Seventh Generation began promoting the idea that per-
haps chemical brighteners—common to virtually all commercially available detergents, 
even those that avoid dyes or fragrances—are not necessary. The company took care not to 
suggest these chemicals were dangerous. It just says they’re unnecessary, and for consum-
ers interested in environmental concerns, that may be enough.
Previously, household magazines such as Good Housekeeping or Real Simple might 
have ranked the best detergent, the best dishwashing soap, and the best surface cleaner. But 
Chapter Case Study 
Seventh Generation dominates 
the environmentally friendly 
cleaning products market in 
the United States.
© HO Marketwire/Newscom

170	
Section One  ASSESSING THE MARKETPLACE
the entry of companies such as Seventh Generation has created new categories: best green 
detergent, best green dishwashing soap, and best green cleaner. Seventh Generation prod-
ucts consistently emerge victorious in these new category contests.46
 In addition, to maintain its brand recognition, it uses extensive multimedia marketing 
initiatives. In print ads, it highlights the environmentally friendly contents of its laundry 
detergent. It provides free samples to active bloggers, along with blacklights so these con-
sumers can test their own clothes to see the residues left by other detergents. Dozens have 
posted the results of their own in-home experiments.47
Yet its products also cost more, which offers a significant challenge in the very 
price-competitive cleaning products market. Even as many consumer product companies 
increasingly tout their down-market brands, Seventh Generation introduced a 4× concen-
trated laundry detergent that costs significantly more. The new derivation avoids all vola-
tile organic compounds and relies on enzymes to get clothes clean.48
In 2013, Seventh Generation spent a significant sum to acquire bobble, a company that 
produces reusable, self-filtering water bottles. Because many consumers worry about using 
environmentally unfriendly plastic water bottles, but also are not willing to trust unfiltered 
tap water, the new product provides an effective solution. With this move, Seventh Genera-
tion also appears poised to “extend our influence and spread our practices more broadly by 
acquiring innovative brands in the sustainability space,” in the words of the company CEO.49
Questions
1.	
What consumer trends does Seventh Generation respond to most effectively?
2.	
Which consumer trends might it be missing?
Endnotes
	 1.	 Beth Kowitt, “Panera Really Wants You to Know What’s Not in 
Its Soups,” Fortune, January 5, 2016; “Panera Changing Soup to 
‘Clean’ Recipe,” Fox2Now.com (St. Louis), January 7, 2016; 
Nancy Gagliardi, “Consumers Want Healthy Foods—And Will 
Pay More for Them,” Forbes.com, February 18, 2015. 
	2.	 Peter F. Drucker, The Essential Drucker (New York: 
HarperCollins, 2001).
	3.	 “Corning Announces Third-Quarter Results,” Corning News 
Release, October 24, 2012, http://www.corning.com.
	4.	 Mallory Schlossberg, “One of the Oldest Diet Companies in 
America is Thriving Without Organic Food or Going Carb-Free,” 
Business Insider, January 10, 2016, http://www.businessinsider.
com/jenny-craig-ceo-interview-2016-1.
	5.	 Jessica Wohl, “Oprah vs. Kirstie: Let the Celebrity ‘Wellness’ Battle 
Begin,” AdvertisingAge, December 30, 2015, adage.com/article/
cmo-strategy/oprah-vs-kirstie-celebrity-wellness-battle/301961/. 
	6.	 Ibid.
	 7.	 http://www.nau.com; Chris Dannen, “Wanted: The Light, 
Recycled Trench,” Fast Company, November 19, 2010, http://
www.fastcompany.com; Polly Labarre, “Leap of Faith,” Fast 
Company, June 2007.
	8.	 Del I. Hawkins and David L. Mothersbaugh, Consumer Behavior: 
Building Marketing Strategy, 11th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/ 
Irwin, 2009); Philip Cateora and John Graham, International 
Marketing, 16th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012).
	9.	 Katie Little, “Hot McDonald’s Items You (Probably) Can’t Order,” 
CNBC, July 30, 2015, http://www.cnbc.com/2015/04/16/hot-
mcdonalds-items-you-probably-cant-order.html. 
10.	 “Fast Food Review: Hot ’n Spicy McChicken from McDonald’s,” 
GrubGrade, March 7, 2011, http://www.grubgrade.com/reviews/
fast-food-review-hot-n-spicy-mcchicken-from-mcdonalds/. 
	11.	 Katie Little, “Hot McDonald’s Items You (Probably) Can’t Order,” 
CNBC, July 30, 2015, http://www.cnbc.com/2015/04/16/hot-
mcdonalds-items-you-probably-cant-order.html. 
	12.	 “Fast Food Reference: McDonald’s U.S. Regional/Seasonal 
Menu Items,” Brand Eating, August 2, 2011, http://www.­
brandeating.com/2011/08/fast-food-reference-mcdonalds-us.­
html#2DvdA6r3JuFR6squ.99. 
	13.	 “The Top Customer Loyalty Programs and Why they Work,” 
Consumer Strategist, March 3, 2015, http://www.consumer-
strategist.com/top-customer-loyalty-programs/. 
	14.	 Mark van Rijmenam, “Tesco and Big Data Analytics, a  
Recipe for Success?” DataFloq, December 22, 2014,  
https://datafloq.com/read/tesco-big-data-analytics-recipe- 
success/665. 
	15.	 Geoffrey E. Meredith, Charles D. Schewe, and Janice Karlovich, 
Defining Markets, Defining Moments: America’s 7 
Generational Cohorts, Their Shared Experiences, and Why 
Businesses Should Care (New York: Wiley, 2002).
	16.	 “Consumers of Tomorrow: Insights and Observations about 
Generation Z,” Grail Research, June 2010.
	17.	 Suzy Menkes, “Marketing to the Millennials,” The New York 
Times, March 2, 2010; Pamela Paul, “Getting Inside Gen Y,” 
American Demographics 23, no. 9; Sharon Jayson, “A Detailed 
Look at the Millennials,” USA Today, February 23, 2010.
	18.	 Carmen DeNavas-Walt and Bernadette D. Proctor, “Income and 
Poverty in the United States: 2014,” September 2015, https://
www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2015/
demo/p60-252.pdf.
	19.	 Ibid.
	20.	Dave Gilson and Carolyn Perot, “It’s the Inequality, Stupid,” 
Mother Jones (March/April 2011), http://motherjones.com; 

	
ANALYZING THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  CHAPTER FIVE	
171
	
	
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
“Growing Unequal? Income Distribution and Poverty in OECD 
Countries,” 2008, http://www.oecd.org.
	21.	 Erik Simanis and Duncan Duke, “Profits at the Bottom of the 
Pyramid,” Harvard Business Review, October 2014, https://hbr.
org/2014/10/profits-at-the-bottom-of-the-pyramid. 
	22.	http://www.census.gov; http://www.infoplease.com.
	23.	“Income of Young Adults,” National Center for Education 
Statistics (n.d.), https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=77.
	24.	Richard Thaler, “Breadwinning Wives and Nervous Husbands,” 
The New York Times, June 1, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com.
	25.	Miguel Bustillo and Mary Ellen Lloyd, “Best Buy Tests New 
Appeals to Women,” The Wall Street Journal, June 16, 2010. 
	26.	Jeffrey S. Passel and D’Vera Cohn, “U.S. Population Projections: 
2005–2050,” Pew Research Center, http://pewhispanic.org.
	27.	 Joel Kotkin, “The Changing Demographics of America,” Smithsonian 
Magazine (August 2010), http://www.smithsonianmag.com.
	28.	Julie Jargon, “Pizza Chain Seeks Slice of Bicultural Pie,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 30, 2010, http://online.wsj.com.
	29.	Todd Wasserman, “Report: Shifting African American Population,” 
Adweek, January 12, 2010, http://www.adweek.com; U.S. Bureau 
of the Census, “Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the 
Current Population Survey,” http://www.census.gov.
	30.	Nielsen, “The State of the African-American Consumer,” 
September 2011, p. 5.
	31.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “National Diabetes 
Fact Sheet, 2011,” http://www.cdc.gov.
	32.	http://www.subway.com/subwayroot/about_us/Social_
Responsibility/NutritionalLeadership.aspx. 
	33.	Dan Galbraith, “Subway Partners with Disney on Star Wars–
Themed Fresh Fit for Kids Meal Promotion,” The Packer, 
December 21, 2015. 
	34.	Yoga Buzz, “Yoga Biz Thrives Despite Economy,” October 24, 
2011, http://blogs.yogajournal.com.
	35.	Catherine Clifford, “Yoga: The Booming Business of Zen,” 
CNNMoney, October 18, 2011, http://money.cnn.com.
	36.	This definition of green marketing draws on work by Jacquelyn 
A. Ottman, Green Marketing: Opportunity for Innovation 
(Chicago: NTC Publishing, 1997).
	37.	“SunChips Marketing Campaign Brings Light to Its Solar Energy 
Efforts,” PR Newswire, April 3, 2008, http://www.prnewswire.
com/news-releases/sunchips-marketing-campaign-brings-light-
to-its-solar-energy-efforts-57042102.html.
	38.	Dan Mangan, “There’s a Hack for That: Fitbit User Accounts 
Attacked,” CNBC, January 8, 2016, http://www.cnbc.com/2016/01/ 
08/theres-a-hack-for-that-fitbit-user-accounts-attacked.html. 
	39.	John Bussey, “Taming the Spies of Web Advertising,” The Wall 
Street Journal, August 8, 2013.
	40.	http://www.irs.gov/.
	41.	 Brendan Greeley, “Providing Internet Access to the Poor,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, November 17, 2011, http://www.­
businessweek.com.
	42.	Brian Fung, “It Shouldn’t Take a Merger for Low-Income 
Americans to Get Cheap Broadband,” The Washington Post, 
March 5, 2014, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-
switch/wp/2014/03/05/it-shouldnt-take-a-merger-for-low-­
income-americans-to-get-cheap-broadband/. 
	43.	http://www.seventhgeneration.com.
	44.	Serena Ng, “Seventh Generation Picks Up Bobble Brand,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 30, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
	45.	“71% of Consumers Think Green When Purchasing,” 
Environmental Leader, April 3, 2013; “Seventh Gen, Whole 
Foods Top Green Brands Ranking,” Environmental Leader, June 
10, 2011, http://www.environmentalleader.com.
	46.	“The Best Cleaning Products,” Real Simple, http://www.­
realsimple.com.
	47.	Andrew Adam Newman, “Seventh Generation Highlights Its 
Chemical-Free Detergent,” The New York Times, December 29, 
2010, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/30/business/media/ 
30adco.html; “Seventh Generation Promotes Eco-Friendly 
­Detergents through Multichannel Marketing Initiative,” 
­December 30, 2010, http://www.ricg.com.
	48.	Dan D’Ambrosio, “Seventh Generation Looks to Buck Trend in 
Concentrated Laundry Detergent Market,” Burlington Free 
Press, October 13, 2011.
	49.	“Seventh Generation Acquires bobble for Undisclosed Sum,” 
press release, May 31, 2013, http://seventhgeneration.mwnews-
room.com/press-releases/seventh-generation-acquires-bobble-­
for-undisclosed-1022443.
	 i.	 Bonnie Fuller, “Baby-Boomer Marketers Are Misreading 
Millennials’ Media Behavior,” Advertising Age, May 13, 2013; 
Chingching Chang, “Dual System Model Comparisons of Print 
Advertisements and e-Store Product Pages: The Influence of 
Dominant Pictures on Decision Making,” working paper (under 
review at Journal of Advertising).
	 ii.	 Michael Fitzgerald, “Not Just a Pharmacy: CVS Unveils Its Digital 
Innovation Lab,” Fast Company, June 19, 2015; Jonah Comstock, 
“CVS MinuteClinic App to Get New Wait Times, Remote 
Scheduling Features,” Mobile Health News, December 10, 2015. 
	iii.	 Emily Steel, “Nestlé Takes a Beating on Social-Media Sites,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 29, 2010, http://online.wsj.com; 
Jerry Lynch, “Achieving a Sustainable Palm Oil Commitment,” 
Taste of General Mills, December 7, 2012, http://www.blog.­
generalmills.com; “Haagen-Dazs and General Mills to Help 
Smallholder Vanilla Farmers Increase Yields and Improve 
Sustainability Practices in Madagascar,” MarketWatch, press 
release, February 20, 2013; “General Mills Joins U.S. Food 
Waste Challenge as Founding Partner,” The Wall Street 
Journal, June 4, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; “General Mills 
Reports Progress on Global Responsibility Efforts,” The New 
York Times, April 30, 2013, http://markets.on.nytimes.com.
	iv.	 Scott M. Fulton III, “Netflix Has an Exchange So Complex That It 
Has Triggered a Scientific Renaissance,” The New Stack, 
February 24, 2015, http://thenewstack.io/netflix-exchange-­
complex-triggered-scientific-renaissance/; Ben Kunz, “Why 
Netflix Walked Away from Personalization,” ThoughtGadgets, 
January 4, 2014, http://www.thoughtgadgets.com/why-netflix-­
walked-away-from-personalization/; Amol Sharma, “Amazon 
Mines Its Data Trove to Bet on TV’s Next Hit,” The Wall Street 
Journal, November 1, 2013, http://www.wsj.com/; Derrick 
Harris, “Netflix Analyzes a Lot of Data about Your Viewing 
Habits,” Gigaom, June 14, 2012, https://gigaom.com/2012/06/14/
netflix-analyzes-a-lot-of-data-about-your-viewing-habits/; Phil 
Simon, “Big Data Lessons from Netflix,” Wired, March 11, 2014, 
http://www.wired.com/; Marianne Zumberge, “‘House of Cards’ 
Sees Unusual Social-Media Spike Ahead of Season 3,” Boston 
Herald, February 27, 2015, http://www.bostonherald.com/.
	 v.	 John Greenough, “Self-Driving Cars Took Center Stage at CES,” 
Business Insider, Jan. 14, 2015, http://www.businessinsider.
com/self-driving-cars-ces-2016-01; https://www.google.com/­
selfdrivingcar/where/; Alyssa Newcomb, “Google Self-Driving 
Cars: What We Learned from Latest Report,” ABC News, Jan. 14, 
2015, http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/google-driving-cars-
learned-latest-report/story?id=36285705; U.S. Department of 
Transportation Federal Highway Administration, “Average 
Annual Miles per Driver by Age Group,” https://www.fhwa.dot.
gov/ohim/onh00/bar8.htm; Samantha Masunaga, “Self-Driving 
Cars Aren’t Ready Yet: Here’s How Often Human Drivers Need 
to Grab the Wheel,” Los Angeles Times, January 14, 2016, 
http://www.latimes.com/business/autos/la-fi-hy-self-driving-cars-
20160113-story.html, Bill Vlasic and Neal E. Boudette, “Self-
Driving Tesla Was Involved in Fatal Crash, U.S. Says,” The New 
York Times, June 30, 2016.   


The three chapters in Section Two, Understanding the 
Marketplace, focus on three levels of marketing: to individ-
ual consumers; from business to business; and on the 
global playing field. Chapter 6, Consumer Behavior, dis-
cusses why individual consumers purchase products and 
services. The consumer decision process is highlighted. 
Chapter 7, Business-to-Business Marketing, explores the 
whys and hows of business-to-business buying. Finally, 
Chapter 8, Global Marketing, focuses on global markets. 
Thus, the three chapters in Section Two move from creat-
ing value for the individual consumer, to creating value for 
the firm or business, to creating value on the global level.
SECTION 2
CHAPTER 6
Consumer Behavior
CHAPTER 7
Business-to-Business Marketing
CHAPTER 8
Global Marketing
Assessing the Marketplace
Understanding the 
Marketplace
Targeting the Marketplace
Value Creation
Value Capture
Value Delivery: Designing the 
Channel and Supply Chain
Value Communication
UNDERSTANDING  
THE MARKETPLACE

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO6-1	 Articulate the steps in the consumer buying process.
	 LO6-2	 Describe the difference between functional and psychological needs.
	 LO6-3	 Describe factors that affect information search.
	 LO6-4	 Discuss postpurchase outcomes.
	 LO6-5	
List the factors that affect the consumer decision process.
	 LO6-6	
Describe how involvement influences the consumer decision process.
CONSUMER 
BEHAVIOR
Y
ou get up in the morning, gearing up in your 
mind for a good run to start your day. But what 
do you put on: shorts or sweats? Do you need a 
sweatshirt, or would your technical top be a bet-
ter option? And what about rain gear? To answer these 
questions, you need information about the weather, and 
because you’re a modern consumer, you likely pick up your 
phone to check your favorite weather prediction app. Like 
a lot of people, maybe you click on the Weather Channel’s 
app to find the temperature, rain chances, or humidity.
And that’s exactly why Nike has begun posting adver-
tisements in the Weather Channel’s app and developing a 
CHAPTER 6

simultaneous weather-oriented campaign for various ad-
vertising channels. Nike recognizes that consumers fre-
quently face a key decision at the point at which they 
check the weather on their phones or mobile devices. 
This decision often revolves around what they should 
wear, and Nike wants to make sure that its brand is prom-
inent and evident, prompting people to lean toward Nike's 
undershirts or gym shorts as they select their apparel. 
Furthermore, the app is specific to the weather con-
ditions the consumer sees. If an early morning jogger 
checks the weather and finds that it is cold and dark out, 
the embedded link to Nike’s site will take him or her di-
rectly to the page featuring a cold weather vest with re-
flective stripes, for example. 
Around the same time it started inserting its advertis-
ing on the Weather Channel app, Nike also released a new 
advertising campaign, “Snow Day,” in which dozens of star 
athletes from various sports awaken to snowy conditions 
but head out, equipped in Nike gear, to enjoy a quick pick-up 
game. The idea is to remind consumers that even in terri-
ble weather, exercising can be fun and safe, especially if 
they are wearing the cold weather gear that Nike sells.
The parallel campaigns reflect several insights Nike 
has gained. First, virtually everybody complains, thinks, 
and talks about the weather, so it can reach a broad audi-
ence by cooperating with the Weather Channel. Second, 
Nike recognizes the potential limitations imposed by new 
ad-blocking software for apps. By integrating its market-
ing communications within the app, it can sidestep those 
blockades and ensure that consumers see its advertising. 
Third, recent evidence indicates that people using apps 
engage more with the brands appearing within them than 
do consumers in most other channels. According to some 
reports, U.S. consumers spend approximately 60 percent 
of their time online interacting with mobile apps. 
Therefore, to drive its broader e-commerce strategy, Nike 
is looking to interact with potential users in the channels 
that they use the most.1
Source: Nike

176	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
We are all consumers, and we take this status for granted. But we are also complex and ir-
rational creatures who cannot always explain our own choices and actions. This inability 
makes the vitally important job of marketing managers even more difficult, in that they 
must be able to explain consumers’ behavior to give marketers as clear an understanding of 
their customers as possible.
To understand consumer behavior, we must ask why people buy goods or services. 
Using principles and theories from sociology and psychology, marketers have been able to 
decipher many consumer choices and develop basic strategies for dealing with consumer 
behavior. Generally, people buy one product or service instead of another because they 
perceive it to be the better value for them; that is, the ratio of benefits to costs is higher for 
a particular product or service than for any other.
However, benefits can be subtle and less than rationally assessed, as we shall see. Con-
sider Katie Smith, who is thinking of buying a new outfit for a job interview. She requires 
something fashionable but professional looking and doesn’t want to spend a lot of money. 
In making the decision about where she should buy the outfit, Katie asks herself:
∙	
Which alternative gives me the best overall value—the most appropriate yet 
fashionable outfit at the lowest price?
∙	
Which alternative is the best investment—the outfit that I can get the most use of?
Because Katie might have several reasons to choose a particular store or outfit, it is crit-
ical for companies such as Banana Republic or Macy’s to key in on the specific benefits that 
are most important to her. Other factors that might influence Katie go beyond her conscious 
awareness, which means that the retailers need to be even more 
well versed in her decision process than she is.2 Only then can 
they create a marketing mix that will satisfy Katie.
In this chapter, we explore the process that consumers 
go through when they buy products and services. Then we 
discuss the psychological, social, and situational factors that 
influence this consumer decision process. Throughout the 
chapter, we emphasize what firms can do to influence con-
sumers to purchase their products and services.
THE CONSUMER  
DECISION PROCESS
The consumer decision process model represents the steps 
that consumers go through before, during, and after making 
purchases.3 Because marketers often find it difficult to deter-
mine how consumers make their purchasing decisions, it is 
useful for us to break down the process into a series of steps 
and examine each individually, as in Exhibit 6.1.
Need Recognition
The consumer decision process begins when consumers rec-
ognize they have an unsatisfied need and they would like to 
go from their actual, needy state to a different, desired state. 
The greater the discrepancy between these two states, the 
greater the need recognition will be. For example, your 
stomach tells you that you are hungry, and you would rather 
not have that particular feeling. If you are only a little hun-
gry, you may pass it off and decide to eat later. But if your 
stomach is growling and you cannot concentrate, the need—
the difference between your actual (hungry) state and your 
Need
recognition
Information
search
Alternative
evaluation
Purchase
and
consumption
Post-
purchase
E X H I B I T  6.1
The Consumer Decision Process

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
177
	
	
desired (not hungry) state—is greater and 
you’ll want to eat immediately to get to your 
desired state. Furthermore, your hunger con-
ceivably could be satisfied by a nice, healthy 
salad, but what you really want is a bowl of ice 
cream. Wants are goods or services that are not 
necessarily needed but are desired.4 Regardless 
of the level of your hunger, your desire for ice 
cream will never be satisfied by any type of 
salad. Consumer needs like these can be classi-
fied as functional, psychological, or both.5
Functional Needs  Functional needs per-
tain to the performance of a product or service. 
For years, BMW has made functionally supe-
rior motorcycles. BMW’s K1600 model has an 
inline six-cylinder motor, something previ-
ously available only in BMW automobiles, 
combined with a stiff aluminum frame. Thus it 
offers remarkable power on a lightweight bike, 
enabling it to outperform the best luxury tour-
ing bikes in terms of comfort as well as serious 
sporty motorcycles in terms of speed. Of 
course, not everyone in need of a transporta-
tion function needs the power and speed of a BMW. A bicycle, a motor scooter, or a car 
can perform this function as well.  It just depends on the specific needs of the purchaser.
As Marketing Analytics 6.1 notes, virtually everyone must pay 
taxes, and H&R Block seeks to convince taxpayers to let it help them 
meet this highly functional need.
Psychological Needs  Psychological needs pertain to the personal 
gratification consumers associate with a product and/or service.6 
Purses, for instance, provide a functional need—to transport wallets 
and other personal items and keep them organized and safe. So why 
would anyone pay more than $5,000 for a purse that does not perform 
these tasks any better than a $100 purse? Because they seek to satisfy 
psychological needs. Each year, Lana Marks produces a single 
Cleopatra clutch purse valued at $250,000. The purse is extravagantly 
embellished; one version featured more than 1,500 black and white di-
amonds, 18-carat gold, and alligator skin. The company permits one 
star each year to bring its purse to the Oscars; recent winners of this 
informal contest were Charlize Theron and Helen Mirren.7 Even 
though these bags are not known for being particularly practical, strong 
demand for Lana Marks bags persists among women who love exciting 
(and expensive) purses.
These examples highlight that most goods and services seek to 
satisfy functional as well as psychological needs, albeit to different de-
grees. Whereas the functional characteristics of a BMW K1600 are its 
main selling point, it also maintains a fashionable appeal for bikers and 
comes in several colors to match buyers’ aesthetic preferences. Lana 
Marks purses satisfy psychological needs that overshadow the func-
tional needs, though they still ultimately serve the function of carrying 
personal items.
Successful marketing requires determining the correct balance  
of functional and psychological needs that best appeal to the firm’s  
target markets.
 LO6-1	
Articulate the steps in 
the consumer buying 
process.
 LO6-2	
Describe the 
difference between 
functional and 
psychological needs.
What needs does a BMW K1600 satisfy?
© Zuma Press, Inc./Alamy
Do Lana Marks bags, like this 
one carried by Bingbing Li,  
satisfy psychological or  
functional needs?
© Ethan Miller/Getty Images

178	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Tax Time Tactics by H&R Blocki
Taxes may be among the few certainties in life, but they usually 
are not considered one of the more fun features. But in an 
attempt to make the inevitable a little less painful, H&R Block is 
seeking to make “tax season” a time that regular consumers 
actually can enjoy, if they do it right. The basis for the claim 
stems mostly from the company’s in-depth analysis of its cus-
tomer data. An elite analytics team, The Tax Institute at H&R 
Block, learned by poring over reams of data that approxi-
mately half of the consumers who do their own taxes make 
mistakes in their returns. Then the team of tax attorneys and 
CPAs went deeper into the data and determined that about 
half of those mistaken returns led to people receiving smaller 
refunds than they actually deserved. In turn, it developed an 
advertising campaign that promises to “get your billions back” 
for taxpayers who rely on its professional services.
	
But H&R Block also acknowledges that more than one-
third of U.S. taxpayers continue to do their taxes themselves, 
so it offers online assistance too. With H&R Block’s software, 
taxpayers can complete and submit their federal and state 
income tax returns for less than $10, while still receiving some 
limited online help from the tax professionals. Although it has 
been offering the online service for more than 15 years, its 
more recent analysis of customer data showed that a $9.99 
price would be likely to drive interest while also reinforcing 
the enjoyable idea of saving money. Moreover, confusion 
among taxpayers about new laws and regulations (especially 
those related to the Affordable Care Act) created another 
opening for H&R Block to attract potential customers, promis-
ing that it can help them understand their tax liabilities and 
responsibilities, whether they come in to brick-and-mortar 
storefronts with all their receipts or aim to complete their 
paperwork at home.
	
These moves reflect the tax service’s recent adoption of an 
advanced data analytics platform called Domo, which com-
bines various sources and types of information into a single, 
straightforward format. According to H&R Block’s manager of 
analytics and operations, “With Domo, we already have align-
ment on what we are measuring, so we no longer spend time 
each week discussing the data itself. Instead, we can ask bet-
ter questions about the business and make decisions based 
on the information we have.”
Marketing Analytics 6.1
H&R Block uses analytics to make tax preparation more  
enjoyable, at a price that its customers deem reasonable.
© Paul Sakuma/AP Photo
Search for Information
The second step, after a consumer recognizes a need, is to search for information about the 
various options that exist to satisfy that need. The length and intensity of the search are 
based on the degree of perceived risk associated with purchasing the product or service. If 
the way your hair is cut is important to your appearance and self-image, you may engage in 
an involved search for the right salon and stylist. Alternatively, an athlete looking for a 
short buzz cut might go to the closest, most convenient, and cheapest barber shop. 
Regardless of the required search level, there are two key types of information search: in-
ternal and external.
Internal Search for Information  In an internal search for information, the buyer 
examines his or her own memory and knowledge about the product or service gathered 
through past experiences. For example, every time Katie wants to eat salad for lunch, she 
and her friends go to Sweet Tomatoes, but if she’s craving dessert, she heads straight to 
The Cheesecake Factory. In making these choices, she relies on her memory of past expe-
riences when she has eaten at these restaurant chains.
External Search for Information  In an external search for information, the buyer 
seeks information outside his or her personal knowledge base to help make the buying de-
cision. Consumers might fill in their personal knowledge gaps by talking with friends, 

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
179
	
	
family, or a salesperson. They can also scour commercial 
media for unsponsored and (it is hoped) unbiased informa-
tion, such as that available through Consumer Reports, or 
peruse sponsored media such as magazines, television, or 
radio. Perhaps the most common sources of external infor-
mation these days are online search engines, such as 
Google and Bing.
The Internet provides information in various ways.8 
For example, while watching an episode of Fox’s Scream 
Queens, Katie saw one of the Chanels wearing a fantastic 
outfit that included a flare dress and pearl choker. She 
pulled her laptop over, went to WornOnTv.net, and found 
the focal episode, which in turn told her where to purchase 
the items she loved. The choker was designed by Baroni 
and available for $119, and the dress cost $48.9 But Katie 
is also a savvy shopper, so when she searched for “Baroni 
pearl choker” on Bing, she found that she could get it at a 
lower price from another retailer. Satisfied with that pur-
chase, she began flipping through a magazine and saw  
Reese Witherspoon wearing a pair of adorable jeans. This 
time she navigated directly to TrueFit.com, which featured 
those very jeans, designed by 7 For All Mankind, on its 
home page.10 Katie entered her measurements and style 
preferences, and the website returned recommendations of 
jeans that would be a good fit for her.
All these examples are external searches for informa-
tion. Katie used the television show’s dedicated site to find 
a style she liked; she referred to a magazine for additional 
style tips; and, using the web, she found jeans that would 
be a perfect fit for her. All these events took place without 
Katie ever leaving her home to go to the store or try on 
dozens of pairs of pants.
Factors Affecting Consumers’ Search Processes  It 
is important for marketers to understand the many factors 
that affect consumers’ search processes. Among them are 
the following three factors: perceived benefits versus per-
ceived costs of search, the locus of control, and the actual 
or perceived risk.
The Perceived Benefits versus Perceived Costs of Search  Is it worth the time and effort 
to search for information about a product or service? For instance, most families spend a 
lot of time researching the housing market in their preferred area before they make a pur-
chase, because homes are a very expensive and important purchase with significant safety 
and enjoyment implications. They likely spend much less time researching which inexpen-
sive dollhouse to buy for the youngest member of the family.11
The Locus of Control  People who have an internal locus of control believe they have 
some control over the outcomes of their actions, in which case they generally engage in 
more search activities. With an external locus of control, consumers believe that fate or 
other external factors control all outcomes. In that case, they believe it doesn’t matter how 
much information they gather; if they make a wise decision, it isn’t to their credit, and if 
they make a poor one, it isn’t their fault. People who do a lot of research before purchasing 
individual stocks have an internal locus of control; those who purchase mutual funds are 
more likely to believe that they can’t predict the market and probably have an external lo-
cus of control. These beliefs have widespread effects. For example, when people believe 
that they can choose their own consumption goals (internal locus of control), they work 
Katie liked the picture of Reese 
Witherspoon in jeans that she 
found in a magazine so much 
that she navigated to TrueFit.com 
and purchased them.
© JB Lacroix/WireImage/Getty Images
 LO6-3	
Describe factors that 
affect information 
search.

180	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
harder to achieve them than if those goals feel imposed upon them (external locus of control).12 
Social and Mobile Marketing 6.1 discusses how consumers are gaining a greater internal 
locus of control over their health by using smartphone apps.
Actual or Perceived Risk  Five types of risk associated with purchase decisions can delay 
or discourage a purchase: performance, financial, social, physiological, and psychological. 
The higher the risk, the more likely the consumer is to engage in an extended search.
Performance risk involves the perceived danger inherent in a poorly performing 
product or service. An example of performance risk is the possibility that Katie Smith’s 
new interview outfit is prone to shrinking when dry cleaned.
Financial risk is risk associated with a monetary outlay and includes the initial cost 
of the purchase as well as the costs of using the item or service.13 Katie is concerned not 
The Future of Health Is Mobileii
Social & Mobile Marketing 6.1
A host of new applications and mobile links make it easier 
than ever for consumers to maintain their own health and 
well-being with just a few clicks. Whether the condition is 
chronic or new, these health-related offerings seek to make it 
easier for health care consumers to understand their options, 
consider solutions, and recognize when to seek immediate 
medical care. They also facilitate providers’ efforts to stay up 
to date with the latest treatments and advances. Consider a 
few examples:
• 
The award-winning app mySugr turns the tedious task 
of glucose monitoring into a game for diabetics. They 
earn points for each data entry they make that helps 
them tame a monster named Diabetes. The app enables 
users to record their food consumption and take snap-
shots of what they have eaten, provides immediate data 
analyses, produces a summary report that users can 
send to their doctors, and maintains the data in a cen-
tral location.
• 
Doctor Mole allows people to take a selfie (i.e., self- 
portrait) of any suspicious skin growth. Using augmented 
reality technology, the app applies the well-established 
criteria for assessing the risk associated with each mole 
(i.e., asymmetry, borders, color, diameter). Users can de-
termine whether they have a potentially cancerous malig-
nancy or just a new freckle.
• 
With BurnMed, users draw on a displayed image of a 
body to indicate the extent of the burn suffered, whether 
by themselves, a friend, or a patient. This app seeks to 
target laypeople as well as medical practitioners. In a lay 
setting, users can determine the seriousness of a burn 
they might have suffered at home. In a medical practice, 
emergency staff can quickly determine the appropriate 
treatment when faced with a crisis such as a tanker ex-
plosion that burns hundreds of victims.
• 
The vCath training tool is expressly for medical students 
who need to learn to insert neurosurgical catheters. In 
patients this step is critical and risky because students 
have little opportunity for practicing their technique. The 
app enables them to do so virtually, as many times as they 
wish, before facing actual patients.
	
Along with these dedicated apps, various hospitals and 
doctors are experimenting with software that reminds pa-
tients to take their medicine or when their next appointments 
are. By encouraging positive behaviors, these technology ad-
vances should lead to greater consumer health and happiness 
as well as benefits for society as a whole.
Smartphone apps empower consumers to take control of 
their health in exciting new ways.
Source: mySugr/GmbH. -K. Rose

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
181
	
	
only that her new outfit will provide her with the professional appearance she is seeking 
but also that the cost of dry cleaning will not be exorbitant. Retailers recognize that buy-
ing professional apparel can be a financial burden and therefore offer guarantees that the 
products they sell will perform as expected. Their suppliers are also well aware that dry 
cleaning is expensive and can limit the life of the garment, so many offer easy-to-care-
for washable fabrics.
Social risk involves the fears that consumers suffer when they worry others might not 
regard their purchases positively. When buying a fashionable outfit, consumers like Katie 
consider what their friends would like. Alternatively, because this job interview is so im-
portant, Katie might make a conscious effort to assert a distinctive identity or make a 
statement by buying a unique, more stylish, and possibly more expensive outfit than her 
friends would typically buy. She also hopes to impress her prospective boss rather than her 
pals with her choice.
Physiological risk could also be called safety risk. Whereas performance risk in-
volves what might happen if a product does not perform as expected, physiological (or 
safety) risk refers to the fear of an actual harm should the product not perform properly. 
Although physiological risk is typically not an issue with apparel, it can be an impor­
tant issue when buying other products, such as a car. External agencies and government 
bodies publish safety ratings for cars to help assuage this risk. Consumers compare the 
safety records of their various choices because they recognize the real danger to their 
well-being if the automobile they purchase fails to perform a basic task, such as stop-
ping when the driver steps on the brakes or protecting the passengers in the cabin even 
if the car flips.
Finally, psychological risks are those risks associated with the way people will feel if 
the product or service does not convey the right image. Katie Smith, thinking of her outfit 
purchase, read several fashion magazines and sought her friends’ opinions because she 
wanted people to think she looked great in the outfit—and she wanted to get the job!
Recent research suggests that psychological risks might help explain why consumers 
often think that “bigger is better.” In particular, this research helps explain why some enjoy 
buying large-sized menu items at restaurants. Especially when consumers feel powerless or 
more vulnerable, they equate larger sizes—whether in televisions, houses, or menu items—
with improved status.14
Evaluation of Alternatives
Once a consumer has recognized a problem and explored the possible options, he or she 
must sift through the choices available and evaluate the alternatives. Alternative evalua-
tion often occurs while the consumer is engaged in the process of information search. 
For example, Katie Smith would rule out various stores because she knows they won’t 
carry the style she needs for the job interview. Once in the right kind of store, she would 
try on lots of outfits and eliminate those that do not fit, do not look good on her, or are 
not appropriate attire for the occasion. Consumers forgo alternative evaluations alto-
gether when buying habitual (convenience) products; you’ll rarely catch a loyal Pepsi 
drinker buying Coca-Cola.
Attribute Sets  Research has shown that a consumer’s mind organizes and categorizes 
alternatives to aid his or her decision process. Universal sets include all possible choices 
for a product category, but because it would be unwieldy for a person to recall all possible 
alternatives for every purchase decision, marketers tend to focus on only a subset of 
choices. One important subset is retrieval sets, which are those brands or stores that can be 
readily brought forth from memory. Another is a consumer’s evoked set, which comprises 
the alternative brands or stores that the consumer states he or she would consider when 
making a purchase decision. If a firm can get its brand or store into a consumer’s evoked 
set, it has increased the likelihood of purchase and therefore reduced search time because 
the consumer will think specifically of that brand when considering choices.
Katie Smith knows that there are a lot of apparel stores (universal set). However, only 
some have the style that she is looking for, such as Macy’s, The Gap, and Banana Republic 

182	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
(retrieval set). She recalls that Macy’s is where her mother shops and The Gap is a favorite 
of her younger sister. But she is sure that Banana Republic and Macy’s carry business attire 
she would like, so only those stores are in her evoked set.
When consumers begin to evaluate different alternatives, they often base their evalua-
tions on a set of important attributes or evaluative criteria. Evaluative criteria consist of 
salient, or important, attributes about a particular product. For example, when Katie is 
looking for her outfit, she might consider things like the selling price, fit, materials and 
construction quality, reputation of the brand, and the service support that the retailer offers. 
At times, however, it becomes difficult to evaluate different brands or stores because there 
are so many choices,15 especially when those choices involve aspects of the garment that 
are difficult to evaluate, such as materials and construction quality.
Consumers use several shortcuts to simplify the potentially complicated decision pro-
cess: determinant attributes and consumer decision rules. Determinant attributes are 
product or service features that are important to the buyer and on which competing brands 
or stores are perceived to differ.16 Because many important and desirable criteria are 
equal among the various choices, consumers look for something special—a determinant 
attribute—to differentiate one brand or store from another. Determinant attributes may 
appear perfectly rational, such as health and nutrition claims offered by certain foods and 
beverages, or they may be more subtle and psychologically based, such as the stitching on 
the rear pockets of those 7 For All Mankind jeans that Reese Witherspoon was wearing. 
Ethical and Societal Dilemma 6.1 highlights the use of determinant attributes describing 
food and beverages marketed as natural when in fact they are not.
Consumer Decision Rules  Consumer decision rules are the set of criteria that con-
sumers use consciously or subconsciously to quickly and efficiently select from among 
several alternatives. These rules are typically either compensatory or noncompensatory.
Compensatory  A compensatory decision rule assumes that the consumer, when evalu-
ating alternatives, trades off one characteristic against another, such that good characteris-
tics compensate for bad characteristics.17 For instance, Hanna Jackson is looking to buy 
breakfast cereal and is considering several factors such as taste, calories, price, and natural/
organic claims. But even if the cereal is priced a little higher than Hanna was planning to 
spend, a superb overall rating offsets, or compensates for, the higher price.
Macy’s is part of the retrieval set of stores available to women for business apparel, but Banana Republic is in the evoked set for 
young women looking for business apparel.
Left: © McGraw-Hill Education/Mark Dierker, photographer; right: © Sang Tan/AP Photo

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
183
	
	
Although Hanna probably would not go through the formal process of making the 
purchasing decision based on the multi-attribute model described in Exhibit 6.2, this ex-
hibit illustrates how a compensatory model would work.18 Hanna assigns weights to the 
importance of each factor. These weights must add up to 1.0. So, for instance, for Hannah, 
taste is the most important, with a weight of 0.4, and calories are least important, with a 
weight of 0.1. She assigns weights to how well each of the cereals might perform, with 1 
being very poor and 10 being very good. Hanna thinks Cheerios has the best taste, so she 
assigns it a 10. Then she multiplies each performance rating by its importance rating to get 
an overall score for each cereal. The rating for Cheerios in this example is the highest of the 
Wearing the “Healthy” Label: Natural  
and Organic Foodsiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 6.1
With competition for shelf space always at a premium, today’s 
supermarket aisles are more crowded than ever. Much of the 
new competition comes from natural and organic foods, which 
comprised about 10 and 5 percent, respectively, of the more 
than $700 billion U.S. food industry in 2013.
For a consumer facing a dizzying array of choices, these 
natural foods offer a unique appeal: They promise to improve 
personal and planetary health. Organic and natural food com-
panies claim that their foods are safer and more nutritious 
because they are produced with only natural ingredients.
Consumers generally believe that these claims mean the 
food contains no artificial or highly processed ingredients. Yet 
Snapple’s “natural” bottled iced tea contains high-fructose 
corn syrup, a highly processed and controversial form of 
sugar. In California, most organic strawberry farmers use 
seeds and plants from nurseries that are not organic, includ-
ing growers producing fruit for Driscoll Strawberry Associ-
ates, the largest berry distributor in the world. The farmers 
argue that once their plants bear fruit, they halt their use of 
chemical pesticides and herbicides, so the berries themselves 
are still organic. These companies thus might be contradicting 
consumer expectations, but they are not actually violating fed-
eral requirements.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) regulates the 
production of organic foods. Products bearing the USDA Or-
ganic label must be grown using organic, not conventional, 
farming methods. That regulation means using natural fertiliz-
ers such as manure or compost, beneficial insects or birds 
rather than chemical herbicides to control insects, and crop 
rotation or other manual methods rather than chemical herbi-
cides to control weeds. Animals raised for meat production 
must be given organic feed and access to the outdoors rather 
than antibiotics, growth hormones, and other medications.
Yet the USDA’s National Organic Program (NOP) regula-
tions do not explicitly govern the production of seeds and 
planting stock. Advocates who want to see sustainable pro-
duction methods used throughout the food-growing process 
have called on the USDA to outlaw the use of chemical fumi-
gants, including methyl bromide, a widely used pesticide and 
soil sterilizer known to deplete the ozone layer. Furthermore, 
NOP regulations allow conventional agricultural stock to be 
used whenever organically grown seeds and plants are not 
commercially available.
Nor does the USDA regulate the production of foods la-
beled “natural,” except for meats and poultry, which must 
be minimally processed and free of artificial colors, fla-
vors, sweeteners, preservatives, and ingredients. No 
such specifics govern other foods that choose to 
carry the natural label rather than an organic claim.
For the consumer, the organic and natural food 
experience is also about perception. Some shoppers 
may believe these foods deliver healthful benefits, but 
studies also reveal that simply identifying a grocery 
item as a healthy food option may affect their eating 
experience. Specifically, people may perceive that 
health-oriented foods do not taste good or satisfy 
their need to curb their appetites. Students given 
snacks labeled “health bars” reported feeling hungry 
afterward and craving foods they enjoyed more. In 
another study, respondents widely perceived “that 
‘healthy’ isn’t going to meet enjoyment goals,” which 
likely reflects consumers’ assumption that healthy foods 
won’t taste good.
How healthful is Snapple?
© Bloomberg/Getty Images

184	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
three cereals [(0.4 × 10) + (0.1 × 8) + (0.3 × 6) + (0.2 × 8) = 8.2)]. This multi-attribute 
model allows the trade-off between the various factors to be incorporated explicitly into a 
consumer’s purchase decision.
Noncompensatory  Sometimes, however, consumers use a noncompensatory decision 
rule in which they choose a product or service on the basis of one characteristic or one sub-
set of a characteristic, regardless of the values of its other attributes.19 So although Cheerios 
received the highest overall score of 8.2, Hanna might still pick Kashi because she is partic-
ularly sensitive to claims of natural or organic contents, and this brand earned the highest 
score on this attribute (i.e., a 10). Once a consumer has considered the possible alternatives 
and evaluated the pros and cons of each, he or she can move toward a purchase decision.
Purchase and Consumption
After evaluating the alternatives, customers are ready to buy. However, they don’t always 
patronize the store or purchase the brand or item on which they had originally decided. It 
may not be available at the retail store, for example. Retailers therefore turn to the conver-
sion rate to measure how well they have converted purchase intentions into purchases. One 
method of measuring the conversion rate is the number of real or virtual abandoned carts 
in the retailer’s store or website.
When it realized that approximately two-thirds of decisions about home improvements 
are made by women, Home Depot embarked on a strategy to increase its conversion rate by 
appealing more to women. It has implemented in-store renovations to ensure that female 
consumers not only visit its stores but also make their purchases there rather than from its 
main rival, Lowe’s. In particular, whereas Home Depot once purposefully embraced a sort 
of construction site feel, with wheeled pallets and jumbled displays of nuts and bolts, the 
renovated stores feature better lighting and cleaner product displays. In addition, greeters at 
Taste
Calories
Natural/Organic 
Claims
Price
Overall 
Score
Importance Weight
0.4
0.1
0.3
0.2
Cheerios 
© Michael J. Hruby
10
8
6
8
8.2
Post
© Michael J. Hruby
8
9
8
3
7.1
Kashi  
© Michael J. Hruby
6
8
10
5
7.2
Compensatory Purchasing Multi-Attribute Model for Buying Cereal
E X H I B I T  6.2

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
185
	
	
the entrance help people find what they need. In addi-
tion to the greeters, Home Depot is enhancing customer 
service by mounting devices throughout stores to enable 
shoppers to check prices or find particular items, and it 
is providing more training to employees, encouraging 
them to provide more effective assistance to shoppers 
who might be less familiar with hardware and home im-
provement projects.
To make sure that shoppers can find everything 
they want and therefore don’t have the desire to shop 
elsewhere, Home Depot is expanding its product lines 
to feature familiar names such as Martha Stewart and 
include more décor and convenience items for the 
household. The idea is that a trip to Home Depot can be 
a family event, because it carries items for parents of 
either gender, as well as small projects for kids. If these 
family members want to install their new purchases on 
their own, Home Depot offers do-it-yourself workshops 
in stores as well as video tutorials online. If they want 
to have the product installed by professionals, Home Depot provides a list of qualified, 
rated subcontractors available for the work. Thus the retailer seeks to become the sole 
source for all its customers’ home improvement needs, from the smallest project to the 
largest remodeling.20
Postpurchase
The final step of the consumer decision process is postpurchase behavior. Marketers are 
particularly interested in postpurchase behavior because it entails actual rather than poten-
tial customers. Satisfied customers, whom marketers hope to create, become loyal, pur-
chase again, and spread positive word of mouth, so they are quite important. There are 
three possible postpurchase outcomes, as illustrated in Exhibit 6.3: customer satisfaction, 
postpurchase cognitive dissonance, and customer loyalty (or disloyalty).
Customer Satisfaction  Setting unrealistically high consumer expectations of the prod-
uct through advertising, personal selling, or other types of promotion may lead to higher 
initial sales, but it eventually will result in dissatisfaction if the product fails to achieve 
high performance expectations. (For a related discussion about communication gaps, 
 LO6-4	
Discuss postpurchase 
outcomes.
When Home Depot realized that the majority of home improvement decisions are made by women, it implemented changes from 
its traditional construction site feel (left) to include cleaner product displays (right).
Left: © Capture +/Alamy; right: © Paul Bersebach/Zumapress/Newscom
Customer
loyalty
Customer
satisfaction
Postpurchase
cognitive
dissonance 
E X H I B I T  6.3
Components of Postpurchase Outcomes

186	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Stores collect customer information for their CRM  
programs from their loyalty cards.
© Mark Lennihan/AP Photo
see Chapter 13.) This failure can lead to dissatisfied customers and the potential for nega-
tive word of mouth.21 Setting customer expectations too low is an equally dangerous strat-
egy. Many retailers fail to put their best foot forward. For instance, no matter how good the 
merchandise and service may be, if a store is not clean and appealing from the entrance, 
customers are not likely to enter.
Marketers can take several steps to ensure postpurchase satisfaction:
∙	
Build realistic expectations, not too high and not too low.
∙	
Demonstrate correct product use—improper usage can cause dissatisfaction.
∙	
Stand behind the product or service by providing money-back guarantees and warranties.
∙	
Encourage customer feedback, which cuts down on negative word of mouth and 
helps marketers adjust their offerings.
∙	
Periodically make contact with customers and thank them for their support. This 
contact reminds customers that the marketer cares about their business and wants 
them to be satisfied. It also provides an opportunity to correct any problems. 
Customers appreciate human contact, though it is more expensive for marketers than 
are e-mail or postal mail contacts.
Postpurchase Cognitive Dissonance  Postpurchase cognitive dissonance is an in-
ternal conflict that arises from an inconsistency between two beliefs or between beliefs and 
behavior. For example, you might have buyer’s remorse after purchasing an expensive tele-
vision because you question whether this high-priced version offers appreciably better 
quality than does a set of similar size but at a lower price—or whether you need a televi-
sion at all, considering your ability to stream content through your computer. Postpurchase 
cognitive dissonance generally occurs when a consumer questions the appropriateness of a 
purchase after his or her decision has been made.
Postpurchase cognitive dissonance is especially likely for products that are expensive, 
are infrequently purchased, do not work as intended, or are associated with high levels of 
risk. Marketers direct efforts at consumers after the purchase is made to address this  
issue.22 General Electric sends a letter to purchasers of its appliances, mentioning the high 
quality that went into the product’s design and production, thus positively reinforcing the 
message that the customer made a wise decision. Some clothing manufacturers include a 
tag on their garments to offer the reassurance that because of their special manufacturing 
process, perhaps designed to provide a soft, vintage appearance, there may be variations in 
color that have no effect on the quality of the item. After a pang of dissonance, satisfaction 
may then set in.
Let’s check back in with our friend Katie to recognize these effects. After Katie pur-
chased her interview outfit at Macy’s, she tried it on for some of her friends. Her boyfriend 
said he loved it, but several of her girlfriends seemed less im-
pressed. Katie thought it made her look more mature. Because 
of these mixed signals, some dissonance resulted and mani-
fested itself as an uncomfortable, unsettled feeling. To reduce 
the dissonance, Katie could:
∙ 
Take back the outfit.
∙ 
Pay attention to positive information, such as looking up 
ads and articles about this particular designer.
∙ 
Seek more positive feedback from friends.
∙ 
Seek negative information about outfits made by 
designers not selected.
Customer Loyalty  In the postpurchase stage of the decision- 
making process, marketers attempt to solidify loyal relationships 
with their customers. They want customers to be satisfied with 
their purchases and buy from the same company again. Loyal 
customers will buy only certain brands and shop at certain 

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
187
	
	
stores, and they include no other 
firms in their evoked set. As we ex-
plained in Chapter 2, such custom-
ers are therefore very valuable to 
firms, and marketers have designed 
detailed analytics software and 
customer relationship management 
(CRM) programs specifically to 
acquire and retain them.
Undesirable 
Consumer 
Behavior  Although firms want 
satisfied, loyal customers, some-
times they fail to attain them. 
Passive consumers are those who 
don’t repeat purchase or recom-
mend the product to others. More 
serious and potentially damaging, 
however, is negative consumer be-
havior such as negative word of 
mouth and rumors.
Negative word of mouth oc-
curs when consumers spread neg-
ative information about a product, service, or store to others. When customers’ 
expectations are met or even exceeded, they often don’t tell anyone about it. But when 
consumers believe that they have been treated unfairly in some way, they usually want to 
complain, often to many people. The Internet and social media have provided an effec-
tive method of spreading negative word of mouth to millions of people instantaneously 
through personal blogs, Twitter, and corporate websites. In turn, some firms rely on lis-
tening software offered by companies like Salesforce.com (as we discussed in Chapter 3), 
then respond to negative word of mouth through customer service representatives—
whether online, on the phone, or in stores—who have the authority to handle complaints. 
Many companies also allow customers to post comments and complaints to proprietary 
social media sites.
For example, Whirlpool set up Facebook pages for its appliance brands Maytag,  
KitchenAid, and Whirlpool. Customers may share their thoughts on these sites without fear 
that their negative feedback will be deleted from the site. Whirlpool believes that it should 
keep the bad comments to open up discussions and emphasize the proactive measures the 
company is taking to remedy service or product failures.23 If a customer believes that 
positive action will be taken as a result of the complaint, he or she is less likely to complain 
to family and friends or through the Internet. (A detailed example of word of mouth  
appears in Chapter 13.)
Whirlpool posts good as well 
as bad comments on Twitter. It 
believes that posting negative 
comments opens up discus-
sions and emphasizes the pro-
active measures the company 
is taking to remedy service or 
product failures.
Source: Whirlpool
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Name the five stages in the consumer decision process.
2.	 What is the difference between a need and a want?
3.	 Distinguish between functional and psychological needs.
4.	 What are the various types of perceived risk?
5.	 What are the differences between compensatory and noncompensatory 
decision rules?
6.	 How do firms enhance postpurchase satisfaction and reduce cognitive  
dissonance?

188	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
FACTORS INFLUENCING THE  
CONSUMER DECISION PROCESS
The consumer decision process can be influenced by several factors, as illustrated in 
Exhibit 6.4. First are psychological factors, which are influences internal to the customer, 
such as motives, attitudes, perception, learning, and lifestyle. Second are situational fac-
tors, such as the specific purchase situation, a particular shopping situation, or temporal 
state (the time of day), that affect the decision process. Third are social factors, such as 
family, reference groups, and culture, that also influence the decision process. And fourth 
are the elements of the marketing mix, which we discuss throughout this book.
Every decision people make as consumers will take them through some form of the 
consumer decision process. But, like life itself, this process does not exist in a vacuum.
 LO6-5	
List the factors that 
affect the consumer 
decision process.
Marketing
mix
Psychological
factors
Situational
factors
Social
factors
Consumer
Decision
Process
Family
Reference groups
Culture
Motives
Attitudes
Perceptions
Learning
Lifestyle
Purchase situation
Shopping situation
Temporal state
Product
Price
Place
Promotion
E X H I B I T  6.4
Factors Affecting the Consumer Decision Process
Psychological Factors
Although marketers can influence purchase decisions, a host of psychological factors 
affect the way people receive marketers’ messages. Among them are motives, attitudes, 
perception, learning, and lifestyle. In this section, we examine how such psychological 
factors can influence the consumer decision process.24
Motives  In Chapter 1 we argued that marketing is all about satisfying customer needs and 
wants. When a need, such as thirst, or a want, such as for a Diet Pepsi, is not satisfied, it 
motivates us, or drives us, to get satisfaction. So, a motive is a need or want that is strong 
enough to cause the person to seek satisfaction.
People have several types of motives. One of the best-known paradigms for explaining 
these motive types, developed by Abraham Maslow over 70 years ago, is called Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs.25 Maslow categorized five groups of needs: physiological (e.g., food, 
water, shelter), safety (e.g., secure employment, health), love (e.g., friendship, family), es-
teem (e.g., confidence, respect), and self-actualization (people engage in personal growth 
activities and attempt to meet their intellectual, aesthetic, creative, and other such needs). 

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
189
	
	
The pyramid in Exhibit 6.5 illustrates the theoretical progres-
sion of those needs.
Physiological needs deal with the basic biological neces-
sities of life—food, drink, rest, and shelter. Although for most 
people in developed countries these basic needs are generally 
met, there are those in developed as well as less developed 
countries who are less fortunate. However, everyone remains 
concerned with meeting these basic needs.26 Marketers seize 
every opportunity to convert these needs into wants by re-
minding us to eat at Taco Bell, drink milk, sleep on a Beau-
tyrest mattress, and stay at a Marriott.
Safety needs pertain to protection and physical well- 
being. The marketplace is full of products and services that are 
designed to make you safer, such as airbags in cars and bur-
glar alarms in homes, or healthier, such as vitamins and or-
ganic meats and vegetables.
Love needs relate to our interactions with others. Hair-
cuts and makeup make you look more attractive, deodorants 
prevent odor, and greeting cards help you express your feel-
ings toward others.
Esteem needs allow people to satisfy their inner desires. 
Yoga, meditation, health clubs, and many books appeal to 
people’s desires to grow or maintain a happy, satisfied outlook on life.
Finally, self-actualization occurs when you feel completely satisfied with your life 
and how you live. You don’t care what others think. You drive a Ford Fusion because it 
suits the person you are, not because some celebrity endorses it or because you want others 
to think better of you.
E X H I B I T  6.5
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
Self-
actualization
Esteem
Love
Safety
Physiological
In this ad, Taco Bell satisfies the physiological need of food 
while letting the consumer know that healthy eating can 
also be delicious.
Source: Taco Bell
Yoga satisfies esteem needs by helping people satisfy their 
inner desires.
© Purestock/SuperStock RF

190	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Which of these needs apply when a consumer makes a purchase 
from Starbucks? On the surface, Starbucks satisfies physiological needs 
by providing food and drink. But Starbucks also satisfies safety needs, 
such as those related to healthier living, by publishing the calorie, fat, 
and sugar contents of all of its products and offering healthy alterna-
tives, such as a spinach, feta, and egg white breakfast wrap.27 Further-
more, Starbucks satisfies love needs through its powerful focus on 
creating relationships with customers: Baristas call each customer by 
his or her name, and the store environment encourages customers to sit 
a while, talk, and work together while enjoying their beverages. For 
many customers, Starbucks’ in-store environment even encourages 
them to better themselves. The music at low volume as well as warm 
beverages create an ideal setting in which to read a book or work on a 
project, such that it helps people satisfy their esteem needs. Good mar-
keters add value to their products or services by nudging people up the 
needs hierarchy and offering information on as many of the pyramid of 
needs as they can.
Attitude  We have attitudes about almost everything. For instance, we 
like this class, but we don’t like the instructor. We like where we live, 
but we don’t like the weather. An attitude is a person’s enduring evalu-
ation of his or her feelings about and behavioral tendencies toward an 
object or idea. Attitudes are learned and long lasting, and they might 
develop over a long period of time, though they can also abruptly 
change. You might like your instructor for much of the semester—until 
she returns your first exam. The one thing attitudes have in common for 
everyone is their ability to influence our decisions and actions.
An attitude consists of three components. The cognitive compo-
nent reflects our belief system, or what we believe to be true; the affec-
tive component involves emotions,28 or what we feel about the issue at hand, including our 
like or dislike of something; and the behavioral component pertains to the actions we 
undertake based on what we know and feel. For example, Matt and Lisa Martinez see a 
poster for the latest Avengers movie. The ad lists quotes from different movie critics who 
call it a great and exciting film. Matt and 
Lisa therefore come to believe that the critics 
must be correct and that the new Avengers 
movie will be a good movie (cognitive com-
ponent). Later they catch an interview with 
Robert Downey Jr., who talks about making 
the movie and his enjoyment playing Tony 
Stark (Iron Man). Therefore, Matt and Lisa 
start to believe the movie will be fun and en-
gaging because they appreciate action adven-
tures and have enjoyed previous Marvel films 
(affective component). After weighing their 
various options—which include numerous 
other movies, other entertainment options 
such as attending a concert instead, or just 
staying home—Matt and Lisa decide to go 
see the movie (behavioral component).
Ideally, agreement exists among these 
three components. But when there is incon-
gruence among the three—if Matt and Lisa 
read positive reviews and like action films 
but do not find Robert Downey Jr. an appeal-
ing actor—cognitive dissonance might occur. 
Which category of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs are  
satisfied by a visit to Starbucks?
© Bandphoto/UPPA/Photoshot
Based on positive reviews (cognitive component) and positive feelings (affective 
component), many movie watchers will go see the latest Avengers movie  
(behavioral component) and come away with a positive attitude.
© Collection Christophel/Alamy

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
191
	
	
Matt and Lisa might decide their reviews and their liking of action films will outweigh 
their dislike of Robert Downey Jr. and go see the movie. If they then find the movie unen-
joyable because he is a primary star, they may feel foolish for having wasted their money.
Such dissonance is a terrible feeling that people try to avoid, often by convincing 
themselves that the decision was a good one in some way.29 In this example, Matt and Lisa 
might focus on the special effects and the romantic elements of the movie while mentally 
glossing over the parts that featured the actor they did not enjoy. In this way, they can con-
vince themselves that the parts they liked were good enough to counterbalance the part 
they didn’t like, and thus they make their moviegoing experience a positive event overall.
Although attitudes are pervasive and usually slow to change, the important fact from a 
marketer’s point of view is that they can be influenced and perhaps changed through per-
suasive communications and personal experience. Marketing communication—through 
salespeople, advertisements, free samples, or other such methods—can attempt to change 
what people believe to be true about a product or service (cognitive) or how they feel to-
ward it (affective). Because of these effects, marketers have an ethical responsibility to 
communicate truthfully, as Ethical and Societal Dilemma 6.2 reflects. If the marketing 
communication is successful, the cognitive and affective components work in concert to 
affect behavior. Continuing with our example, suppose that prior to viewing the movie ad, 
Matt and Lisa thought they wanted to see Fast and Furious, but when they heard such good 
things about Avengers, they decided to see it instead. The ad positively influenced the cog-
nitive component of their attitude toward Avengers, making it consistent with their affec-
tive component.
Perception  Another psychological factor, perception, is the process by which we select, 
organize, and interpret information to form a meaningful picture of the world. Perception 
in marketing influences our acquisition and consumption of goods and services through 
our tendency to assign meaning to such things as color, symbols, taste, and packaging. 
Culture, tradition, and our overall upbringing determine our perception of the world. For 
instance, Lisa Martinez has always wanted an apartment in the Back Bay neighborhood of 
Can Marketing Be Life Threatening? Allegations  
of Unethical Practices by Pharmaceutical Firmsiv
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 6.2
In separate lawsuits brought in Illinois and California, local au-
thorities have charged that five large pharmaceutical firms be-
haved illegally in promoting painkilling drugs to consumers and 
health care providers. Specifically, the suits assert that through 
“aggressive marketing” tactics, the pharmaceutical companies 
pushed doctors to prescribe powerful opioid drugs to patients 
whose ailments did not meet the extreme conditions for which 
these drugs initially were developed. The result, according to 
the attorneys bringing the suits, has been a vast increase in 
addiction rates and incalculable damage to society.
	
Opioid painkillers originally emerged as solutions for pa-
tients suffering from extreme, acute pain that could not be re-
lieved by other drugs. These patients were severely disabled by 
their pain or suffered from serious conditions such as cancer. 
The prescriptions were intended to be limited because of the 
substantial risk of addiction that the painkilling drugs created.
	
According to the recent lawsuits, though, the pharmaceuti-
cal companies put their desire for increased profits ahead of 
their responsibility to help doctors prescribe their products 
appropriately. They allege that pharmaceutical sales represen-
tatives encouraged doctors to prescribe the drugs for less 
severe pain and injuries to create a broader market of end 
users for their products. In addition, the lawsuits argue that 
some of the companies tried to downplay the risk of addiction 
in their general marketing communications.
	
These misleading claims in turn have led to significantly 
negative implications for society, according to the lawsuits. No 
one questions the fact that rates of opioid addiction have in-
creased rapidly in recent years. What is at question is why. 
According to the city of Chicago and two California counties, 
these increased rates can be attributed directly to the mis-
leading, irresponsible, and unethical marketing practices of the 
drug companies. As a result, because taxpayers must pay the 
millions of dollars in health care costs associated with dealing 
with drug addiction, even people who are not directly affected 
by the epidemic suffer. For example, Chicago has asserted 
that more than 1,000 emergency room visits in one year 
stemmed from opioid abuse or overdoses. According to one of 
the district attorneys bringing suit in California, the goal of 
these legal efforts is not to limit the company’s ability to sell 
but rather to “require these companies to change their con-
duct and to tell people—to tell the doctors, to tell the patients—
tell them that these drugs are dangerous. Tell them they are 
addictive, and you could overdose on them, and you could die.”

192	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Boston because her favorite aunt had one, and they had a great time visiting for 
Thanksgiving one year. However, from his past experiences Matt has a different percep-
tion. Matt thinks Back Bay apartments are small, expensive, and impractical for a couple 
thinking about having children—though they would be convenient for single people who 
work in downtown Boston. In recent years, however, the city of Boston, working with de-
velopers to create larger, modern, and more affordable apartments and using promotion to 
reposition the perception of apartments in the Back Bay for young couples, has labored to 
overcome the long-standing negative perceptual bias that Matt and many others hold.30
Learning  Learning refers to a change in a person’s thought process or behavior that 
arises from experience and takes place throughout the consumer decision process. After 
Katie Smith recognized that she needed an outfit for her job interview, she started looking 
for ads and searching for reviews and articles on the Internet. She learned from each new 
piece of information, so her thoughts about the look she wanted in an outfit were different 
from those before she had read anything. She liked what she learned about the clothing line 
from Macy’s. She learned from her search, and it became part of her memory to be used in 
the future, possibly so she could recommend the store to her friends.
Learning affects attitudes as well as perceptions. Throughout the buying process,  
Katie’s attitudes shifted. The cognitive component came into play for her when she learned 
Macy’s had one of the most extensive collections of career apparel. Once she was in the 
store and tried on some outfits, she realized how much she liked the way she looked and felt 
in them, which involved the affective component. Then she made her purchase, which in-
volved the behavioral component. Each time she was exposed to information about the store 
or the outfits, she learned something different that affected her perception. Before she tried 
them on, Katie hadn’t realized how easy it would be to find exactly what she was looking 
for; thus, her perception of Macy’s selection of career clothing changed through learning.
Lifestyle  Lifestyle refers to the way consumers spend their time and money to live. For 
many consumers, the question of whether the product or service fits with their actual life-
style (which may be fairly sedentary) or their perceived lifestyle (which might be out-
doorsy) is an important one. Some of the many consumers sporting North Face jackets 
certainly need the high-tech, cold weather gear 
because they are planning their next hike up 
Mount Rainier and want to be sure they have 
sufficient protection against the elements. 
Others, however, simply like the image that the 
jacket conveys—the image that they might be 
leaving for their own mountain-climbing expe-
dition any day now—even if the closest they 
have come has been shoveling their driveway.
A person’s perceptions and ability to learn 
are affected by his or her social experiences, 
which we discuss next.
Social Factors
The consumer decision process is influenced 
from within by psychological factors but also 
by the external social environment, which con-
sists of the customer’s family, reference groups, 
and culture.31 (Recall Exhibit 6.4.)
Family  Many purchase decisions are made 
about products or services that the entire family 
will consume or use. Thus, firms must consider 
how families make purchase decisions and un-
derstand how various family members might 
influence these decisions.
Gen Xers tend to shop at  
Target, Kmart, and Walmart.
© Stockbroker/Purestock/SuperStock RF

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
193
	
	
When families make purchase decisions, they often consider the needs of all the fam-
ily members. In choosing a restaurant, for example, all the family members may participate 
in the decision making. In other situations, however, different members of the family may 
take on the purchasing role. For instance, the husband and teenage child may look through 
car magazines and Consumer Reports to search for information about a new car. But once 
they arrive at the dealership, the husband and wife, not the child, decide which model and 
color to buy, and the wife negotiates the final deal.32
Influencing a group that holds this much spending power is vitally important. Tradi-
tional food retailers are already caught in a squeeze between Walmart, which lures low-end 
customers, and specialty retailers like Whole Foods, which targets the high end. Knowing 
how children influence food-buying decisions is a strategic opportunity for traditional su-
permarkets and their suppliers to exploit. Currently, the age cohorts referred to as Gen Xers 
and Millennials (remember from Chapter 5 that these groups were born anywhere between 
1965 and 2000) tend to shop at Target, Kmart, and Walmart and spend more at those stores 
than do other generational groups.33 Getting these groups to prefer one store, chain, or 
product over another can make a difference in the bottom line as well as in the chances for 
survival in a difficult marketplace.
Reference Groups  A reference group is one or more persons whom an individual uses 
as a basis for comparison regarding beliefs, feelings, and behaviors. A consumer might 
have various reference groups, including family, friends, coworkers, or famous people the 
consumer would like to emulate. These reference groups affect buying decisions by  
(1) offering information and (2) enhancing a consumer’s self-image.34
Reference groups provide information to consumers directly through conversation, ei-
ther face-to-face or electronically, or indirectly through observation. For example, Katie 
received valuable information from a friend about where she should shop for her interview 
outfit. On another occasion, she heard a favorite cousin who is a fashionista praising the 
virtues of shopping at Macy’s, which solidified her decision to go there.
With the increasing popularity of blogs, more and more people also get recommenda-
tions for products from their favorite bloggers. When you follow a blog about kittens, you 
might notice that the author posts a scathing review of a particular cat tree or strongly 
recommends a product that encourages kittens to use their litter boxes. Because this blog-
ger offers insights you appreciate, you go out to buy the litter box product but avoid adding 
that cat tree to your shopping cart. In realizing the vast influence of this reference group, 
companies today offer prominent bloggers free products and sometimes even pay them to 
write positive reviews.35
Bloggers can influence their 
readers to buy or not buy  
certain products or services.
© geekygirlreviewsblog.com

194	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Consumers can identify and affiliate with reference groups 
to create, enhance, or maintain their self-image. Customers who 
want to be seen as earthy might buy Birkenstock sandals, 
whereas those wanting to be seen as high fashion might buy 
Lana Marks bags. 
Reference groups are a powerful force, especially among young 
consumers. For example, the primary way teenagers have expressed 
their personalities has long been through their fashion choices, which 
has made them an appealing market for retailers such as Abercrombie 
and Fitch and American Eagle. The teen market is also using social 
media, smartphones, and various apps to communicate and express 
their self image. As a consequence teens seek out places that offer 
free Wi-Fi, such as fast food restaurants, coffee shops, and casual 
eateries.36
Culture  We defined culture in Chapter 5 as the shared meanings, 
beliefs, morals, values, and customs of a group of people. As the 
basis of the social factors that affect your buying decisions, the cul-
ture or cultures in which you participate are not markedly different 
from your reference groups. That is, your cultural group might be 
as small as your reference group at school or as large as the country 
in which you live or the religion to which you belong. Like refer-
ence groups, cultures influence consumer behavior. For instance, 
the culture at Katie’s college is rather fashion conscious. This influ-
ences, to some extent, the way she spends, how she dresses, and 
where she shops.
Situational Factors
Psychological and social factors typically influence the consumer decision process the 
same way each time. For example, your motivation to quench your thirst usually drives you 
to drink a Coke or a Pepsi, and your reference group at the workplace coerces you to wear 
appropriate attire. But sometimes situational factors, or factors specific to the situation, 
override or at least influence psychological and social issues. These situational factors are 
related to the purchase and shopping situation as well as to temporal states.37
Purchase Situation  Customers may be predisposed to purchase certain products or ser-
vices because of some underlying psychological trait or social factor, but these factors may 
change in certain purchase situations. For instance, Samantha Crumb considers herself a 
If you aspire to a high fashion 
image, carry a Lana Marks bag. 
© Michael Buckner/Getty Images
Situational factors may influence your purchase decisions. If you are buying jewelry for yourself, you might browse the clearance 
counter at Macy’s (left). But if you are buying a gift for your best friend’s birthday, you may go to Tiffany & Co (right).
Left: © RosaIreneBetancourt 4/Alamy; right: © Victor J. Blue/Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
195
	
	
thrifty, cautious shopper—someone who likes to get a good deal. But her best friend is 
having a birthday, and she wants to get her some jewelry. If she were shopping for herself, 
she might seek out the clearance merchandise at Macy’s. But because it is for her best 
friend, she went to Tiffany & Co. Why? She wanted to purchase something fitting for the 
special occasion of having a birthday.
Shopping Situation  Consumers might be ready to purchase a product or service but be 
completely derailed once they arrive in the store. Marketers use several techniques to influ-
ence consumers at this choice stage of the decision process, as Adding Value 6.1 describes 
using one example.38
Store Atmosphere  Some retailers and service providers have developed unique images 
that are based at least in part on their internal environment, also known as their atmospher-
ics.39 Research has shown that, if used in concert with other aspects of a retailer’s strategy, 
music, scent, lighting, and even color can positively influence the decision pro-
cess.40 Restaurants such as Outback Steakhouse and The Cheesecake Factory have devel-
oped internal environments that are not only pleasant but also consistent with their food 
Adding Value 6.1
Doing Everything Right—H-E-B Supermarketsv
When it comes to consumer behavior, the research is clear: If 
they want to succeed, companies selling to consumers need 
to attract consumers’ attention, affection, and commitment; put 
them in a great mood, perhaps by offering them something for 
nothing; and help people make their decisions easily and in a 
way that causes them to feel smart and informed. It may be 
clear, but few companies are applying these lessons as effec-
tively as a regional grocery store chain in Texas, H-E-B.
First, H-E-B gets its regional customers excited and en-
tranced by playing on their shared identity of being from 
Texas. This option might be less effective in other regions 
with a weaker sense of identity, but in Texas, the idea that 
H-E-B is just like its consumers garners it substantial atten-
tion and affection. Then once it has people in its stores, it 
gets them to engage and commit to actually buying by adding 
tear-off coupons to its displays. Rather than just seeing a 
sale sign, customers must undertake the action of tearing off 
a coupon. This action is not particularly strenuous of course, 
but the simple move increases the chances that shoppers 
will follow through on their already committed effort by com-
pleting the purchase.
Second, H-E-B sets up an appealing and enjoyable atmo-
sphere that seeks to put shoppers in a better mood. In partic-
ular, a plethora of coupons give buyers an additional item for 
free after they purchase. People simply love things for free, so 
the constant reminder of how much they can get, seemingly at 
no cost, enhances their moods. As if that were not enough, 
H-E-B also gives away lots of free samples. In addition to food 
samples, to keep shoppers’ blood sugar levels up it specializes 
in wine samples. Because alcohol releases dopamine in peo-
ple’s brains, just a small sip of a nice Zinfandel can leave shop-
pers in a better mood.
Third, the entire operation seeks to make it easier for con-
sumers to buy the products they want and feel pleased with 
their purchases. H-E-B has avoided loyalty cards and instead 
simply offers all consumers in the store the same deals on the 
same items. Thus, shoppers do not need to remember to bring 
their store coupons or stick their loyalty cards in their wallets 
before they leave for their grocery run. The fresh food dis-
plays also offer obvious highlights of their freshness: a con-
stant smell of rotisserie chicken near the deli display, a 
guacamole prepping station featuring chefs carving out the 
avocados right in front of shoppers, and sushi chefs working 
in the center of the store. 
As a result, even though H-E-B remains a regional chain 
with limited name recognition outside Texas, its ranking on a 
recent “consumer delight index” placed it on par with such well-
known customer favorites as Trader Joe’s and Whole Foods.
Fabio Viviani, TopChef’s fan favorite, cooks up Italian  
meatballs at H-E-B.  
© Rachel Denny Clow/AP Photo

196	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
and service. Some Wegmans and Whole Foods stores have built bars and restaurants inside 
their stores, where customers can stop and relax, have a glass of wine or a bite to eat, but 
still get their shopping done for the week.41
Salespeople  Well-trained sales personnel can influence the sale at the point of purchase 
by educating consumers about product attributes, pointing out the advantages of one item 
over another, and encouraging multiple purchases. Each Apple store features a simple lay-
out that enables shoppers to play with the latest gadgets, though the real key to success is 
the salespeople. Apple keeps its product lines relatively minimal so salespeople can be-
come familiar with every product in the store. For more technical questions, Apple 
Geniuses are available and consultations can be scheduled.42 The company takes nothing 
for granted when training its employees, such that it uses role-playing scenarios, lists 
banned words, and specifies exactly how to communicate with agitated cus-
tomers. Although technical expertise is a must, Apple also looks for sales-
people with “magnetic personalities” and trains them in a five-point selling 
technique: approach customers warmly, probe politely to assess their needs, 
present solutions the customer can do today, listen and resolve worries the 
customer may still have, end by giving the customer a warm goodbye and 
invite them back.43 What’s that spell?
Crowding  Customers can feel crowded because there are too many people, 
too much merchandise, or lines that are too long. If there are too many peo-
ple in a store, some people become distracted and may even leave.44 Others 
have difficulty purchasing if the merchandise is packed too closely together. 
This issue is a particular problem for shoppers with disabilities.
In-Store Demonstrations  The taste and smell of new food items may at-
tract people to try something they normally wouldn’t. Similarly, some fash-
ion retailers offer trunk shows, during which their vendors show their whole 
line of merchandise on a certain day. During these well-advertised events, 
customers are often enticed to purchase that day because they get special 
assistance from the salespeople and can order merchandise that the retailer 
otherwise does not carry.
Promotions  Retailers employ various promotional vehicles to influence 
customers once they have arrived in the store. An unadvertised price promo-
tion can alter a person’s preconceived buying plan. Multi-item discounts, 
such as “buy one, get one free” sales, are popular means to get people to buy 
The Cheesecake Factory has 
developed atmospherics that 
are not only pleasant but also 
consistent with its image, 
menu, and service.
© Kumar Sriskandan/Alamy
In-store demonstrations, such as this one in an 
Albertson’s grocery store, attract consumers 
to try and buy. 
Source: Albertson’s, Inc.

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
197
	
	
more than they normally would.45 Because many people regard clipping coupons from the 
newspaper as too much trouble, some stores make coupons available in the store, on the 
Internet, or on their cell phones. Another form of promotion is offering a free gift with  
the purchase of a good or service. This type of promotion is particularly popular with  
cosmetics, and Sephora has worked hard to integrate various elements of its shopping  
situation to encourage purchase, as Social and Mobile Marketing 6.2 shows.
Packaging  It is difficult to make a product stand out in the crowd when it competes for 
shelf space with several other brands.46 Customers spend just a few seconds standing in 
front of products as they decide whether to buy them.47 This problem is particularly diffi-
cult for consumer packaged goods such as groceries and health and beauty products. 
Marketers therefore spend millions of dollars designing and updating their packages to be 
more appealing and eye catching. This is why Pringles keeps packaging its chips in tubes 
that differ greatly from the formless bags farther down the aisle. But not all product pack-
aging can, or should, remain the same, the way Pringles has. Doublemint Gum undertook 
its first packaging redesign nearly a century after its 1914 product launch. The move was 
designed to help the chewing gum appeal to a younger audience, even while it maintained 
its loyal base of older consumers. Another  
aging brand, Kraft’s Macaroni & Cheese,  
similarly redesigned its packaging, which it 
launched originally in 1937.48
Temporal State  Our state of mind at any par-
ticular time can alter our preconceived notions of 
what we are going to purchase. For instance, 
some people are morning people, whereas others 
function better at night. Therefore, a purchase 
situation may have different appeal levels  
Ensuring Mobile Dominance through 
In-Store Promotionvi
Social & Mobile Marketing 6.2
Some consumers rely on websites to 
reach their favorite retailers. Others 
like to head to the stores themselves 
to check out the options. Still others 
want a mobile app that enables them 
to shop quickly and on the go. And in-
creasingly, today’s customers demand 
that retailers offer them all of these 
options, consistently and constantly, 
so that they can pick and choose  
the channel they want to use at any 
specific time.
	
This demand is the impetus for the 
latest developments in the marketing 
strategy of Sephora, the specialized 
beauty product retailer. Although it has long maintained a 
good reputation for its interactive website, the company re-
mains in constant pursuit of a strategy that enables it to reach 
all its customers through the most channels and as frequently 
as possible. It integrates these efforts with its constantly 
evolving loyalty program, in an effort to become nearly irresist-
ible to beauty product consumers.
Users of the most recent version of 
its mobile app, Sephora to Go, can en-
gage in any activities they would pursue 
in stores. The close alignment across 
these channels provides a seamless ex-
perience. In addition, the app encour-
ages customers to sign up for the 
loyalty program and create a Beauty 
Insider account. Once they have done 
so, they gain a mobile version of their 
loyalty card. They can check their loy-
alty points at any time  and redeem 
them however they wish. Downloadable 
bar codes also are available, which can 
be scanned in stores.
Simultaneously, Sephora’s in-store signage encourages 
shoppers to sign up for the loyalty program and create a 
Beauty Insider account. That is, both channels issue similar 
calls to action. Moreover, the in-store signs encourage brick-
and-mortar shoppers to take advantage of the benefits they 
can gain from interacting with the retailer, either online or 
through mobile apps.
Sephora engages its customers in the 
store with its mobile app, Sephora to Go.
© Victor J. Blue/Bloomberg/Getty Images
Doublemint Gum changed its packaging after 100 years to appeal to a 
younger audience, while still being attractive to its older customers.
© Mahathir Mohd Yasin/Shutterstock RF

198	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
• Greater attention
• Deeper processing
Develops
strong attitudes
and purchase
intentions
High involvement
Low involvement
Generates weak
attitudes and
increased use
of cues
• Less attention
• Peripheral processing
Message (e.g., ad)
depending on the time of day and the type of person the consumer is. Mood swings can alter 
consumer behavior.49 Suppose Samantha received a parking ticket just prior to shopping at 
Tiffany & Co. It is likely that she would be less receptive to the salesperson’s influence than 
if she came into the store in a good mood. Her bad mood might even cause her to have a less 
positive postpurchase feeling about the store. Because retailers cannot affect what happens 
outside the store very much, they should do everything possible to make sure their custom-
ers have a positive shopping experience once they are in the store.
The factors that affect the consumer decision process—the marketing mix, psycholog-
ical factors, social factors, and situational factors—are all affected by the level of consumer 
involvement, the subject of the next section.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are some examples of specific needs suggested by Maslow’s hierar-
chy of needs?
2.	 Which social factors likely have the most influence on (a) the purchase of 
a new outfit for a job interview and (b) the choice of a college to attend?
3.	 List some of the tactics stores can use to influence consumers’ decision 
processes.
INVOLVEMENT AND CONSUMER  
BUYING DECISIONS
Consumers make two types of buying decisions, depending on their level of involvement: 
extended problem solving or limited problem solving (which includes impulse purchases 
and habitual decision making). Involvement is the consumer’s degree of interest in the 
product or service.50 Consumers may have different levels of involvement for the same type 
of product. One consumer behavior theory, the elaboration likelihood model illustrated in 
Exhibit 6.6, proposes that high- and low-involvement consumers process different aspects 
of a message or advertisement.
If both types of consumers viewed ads for career clothing, the high-involvement con-
sumer (e.g., Katie, who is researching buying an outfit for a job interview) will scrutinize 
 LO6-6	
Describe how 
involvement influences 
the consumer decision 
process.
E X H I B I T  6.6
Elaboration Likelihood Model

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
199
	
	
all the information provided (price, fabric quality, construction) and process the key ele-
ments of the message more deeply. As an involved consumer, Katie likely ends up judging 
the ad as truthful and forming a favorable impression of the product, or else she regards the 
message as superficial and develops negative product impressions (i.e., her research sug-
gests the product is not as good as it is being portrayed).
In contrast, a low-involvement consumer will likely process the same advertisement in 
a less thorough manner. Such a consumer might pay less attention to the key elements of 
the message (price, fabric quality, construction) and focus on elements such as brand name 
(Macy’s I·N·C) or the presence of a celebrity endorser. The impressions of the low-­
involvement consumer are likely to be more superficial.
Extended Problem Solving
The buying process begins when consumers recognize that they have an unsatisfied need. 
Katie Smith recognized her need to buy a new outfit for a job interview. She sought infor-
mation by asking for advice from her friends, reading fashion magazines, and conducting 
research online. She visited several stores to determine which had the best options for her. 
Finally, after considerable time and effort analyzing her alternatives, Katie purchased an 
outfit at Macy’s. This process is an example of extended problem solving, which is com-
mon when the customer perceives that the purchase decision entails a lot of risk. The po-
tential risks associated with Katie’s decision to buy the outfit include financial (did I pay 
too much?) and social (will my potential employer and friends think I look professional?) 
risks. To reduce her perceived risk, Katie spent a lot of effort searching for information 
before she actually made her purchase.
Limited Problem Solving
Limited problem solving occurs during a purchase decision that calls for, at most, a mod-
erate amount of effort and time. Customers engage in this type of buying process when 
they have had some prior experience with the product or service and the perceived risk is 
moderate. Limited problem solving usually relies on past experience more than on external 
information. For many people, an apparel purchase, even an outfit for a job interview, 
could require limited effort.
A common type of limited problem solving is impulse buying, a buying decision 
made by customers on the spot when they see the merchandise.51 When Katie went to the 
Typically, fashion apparel purchases (left) require extended problem solving, whereas grocery shopping normally requires limited 
problem solving (right).
Left: © YinYang/Getty Images RF; right: © Phil Walter/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

200	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
grocery store to do her weekly shopping, she 
saw a display case of popcorn and Dr Pepper 
near the checkout counter. Knowing that some 
of her friends were coming over to watch a 
movie, she stocked up. The popcorn and soda 
were an impulse purchase. Katie didn’t go 
through the entire decision process; instead, 
she recognized her need and jumped directly to 
purchase without spending any time searching 
for additional information or evaluating alter-
natives. The grocery store facilitated this im-
pulse purchase by providing easily accessible 
cues (i.e., by offering the popcorn and soda in a 
prominent display, at a great location in the 
store, and at a reasonable price).
Some purchases require even less thought. 
Habitual decision making describes a purchase 
decision process in which consumers engage in 
little conscious effort. On her way home from 
the grocery store, for example, Katie drove past 
an In-N-Out Burger and swung into the drive-
through for a cheeseburger and Diet Coke. She 
did not ponder the potential benefits of going to 
Wendy’s instead for lunch. Rather, she simply 
reacted to the cue provided by the sign and en-
gaged in habitual decision making. Marketers 
strive to attract and maintain habitual purchasers 
by creating strong brands and store loyalty (see 
Chapters 11 and 12) because these customers 
don’t even consider alternative brands or stores.
Picking up a hamburger at a drive-through fast-food restaurant like In-N-Out 
Burger requires little thought. It is a habitual decision.
© K. Rousonelos
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 How do low- versus high-involvement consumers process the information 
in an advertisement?
2.	 What is the difference between extended versus limited problem solving?
	
	
Articulate the steps in the consumer buying  
process.
	
	
The consumer buying process consists of five main 
steps: First, during need recognition, consumers sim-
ply realize they have an unsatisfied need or want that 
they hope to address. Second, they begin to search 
for information to determine how to satisfy that 
LO6-1
need. Third, during the alternative evaluation stage, 
they assess the various options available to them to 
determine which is the best for their purposes. 
Fourth, the purchase stage involves obtaining and us-
ing the product. Finally, consumers enter the post-
purchase stage, during which they determine whether 
they are satisfied or dissatisfied with their choice.
bchsu_tt
Reviewing Learning Objectives

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
201
	
	
	
	
Describe the difference between functional and 
psychological needs.
	
	
Functional needs pertain to the performance of a 
product or service. Psychological needs pertain to 
the personal gratification consumers associate with 
a product and/or service.
	
	
Describe factors that affect information search.
	
	
The information search that people undertake var-
ies depending on both external and internal factors. 
Among the former, the type of product or service 
dictates whether people can make an easy, quick 
decision or instead must undertake significant re-
search to find the best purchase option. A person’s 
perceptions of the benefits versus the costs of the 
search also determine how much effort they under-
take. These perceptions often relate closely to their 
perception of the risk involved in their purchase. 
Finally, people’s locus of control, whether external 
or internal, strongly influences their information 
search actions.
	
	
Discuss postpurchase outcomes.
	
	
Marketers hope that after their purchase, consumers 
are satisfied and pleased with their purchase, which 
can lead to customer loyalty, a positive postpurchase 
outcome. However, consumers also may suffer post-
purchase dissonance, or buyer’s remorse.
LO6-2
LO6-3
LO6-4
	
	
List the factors that affect the consumer decision 
process.
	
	
The elements of the marketing mix (product, 
place, promotion, and price) have significant ef-
fects, of course. In addition, social factors, such 
as family and culture, influence not only what a 
consumer buys but also how a consumer goes 
about making a purchase decision. The psycho-
logical factors that influence purchase decisions 
include motives, attitudes, perceptions, learning, 
and lifestyle. Finally, the specific factors that 
mark the purchase situation, like the store setting 
or even the time of day, can alter people’s deci-
sion process.
	
	
Describe how involvement influences the con-
sumer decision process.
	
	
More involved consumers, who are more inter-
ested or invested in the product or service they are 
considering, tend to engage in extended problem 
solving. They gather lots of information, scruti-
nize it carefully, and then make their decisions 
with caution, to minimize any risk they may con-
front. In contrast, less involved consumers often 
engage in limited problem solving, undertake im-
pulse purchases, or rely on habit to make their 
purchase decisions.
LO6-5
LO6-6
∙	 affective component,  190
∙	 attitude,  190
∙	 behavioral component,  190
∙	 cognitive component,  190
∙	 compensatory decision rule,  182
∙	 consumer decision rules,  182
∙	 conversion rate,  184
∙	 culture,  194
∙	 determinant attributes,  182
∙	 esteem needs,  189
∙	 evaluative criteria,  182
∙	 evoked set,  181
∙	 extended problem solving,  199
∙	 external locus of control,  179
∙	 external search for  
information,  178
∙	 financial risk,  180
∙	 functional needs,  177
∙	 habitual decision making,  200
∙	 impulse buying,  199
∙	 internal locus of control,  179
∙	 internal search for  
information,  178
∙	 involvement,  198
∙	 learning,  192
∙	 lifestyle,  192
∙	 limited problem solving,  199
∙	 love needs,  189
∙	 Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,  188
∙	 motive,  188
∙	 multi-attribute model,  183
∙	 need recognition,  176
∙	 negative word of mouth,  187
∙	 noncompensatory decision rule,  184
∙	 perception,  191
∙	 performance risk,  180
∙	 physiological needs,  189
∙	 physiological risk,  181
∙	 postpurchase cognitive  
dissonance,  186
∙	 psychological needs,  177
∙	 psychological risk,  181
∙	 reference group,  193
∙	 retrieval sets,  181
∙	 safety needs,  189
∙	 safety risk,  181
∙	 self-actualization,  189
∙	 situational factors,  194
∙	 social risk,  181
∙	 universal sets,  181
Key Terms

202	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Visit the Shopkick site (http://www.shopkick.com) and 
describe the benefits it offers consumers. How are these 
offers likely to influence consumers’ behavior? Click on 
the Download tab. What kinds of need appeals does this 
company make to encourage shoppers to join?
2.	 Customers use a variety of methods to provide  
feedback to companies about their experiences.  
Planetfeedback.com was developed as one such venue. 
Visit its website (http://www.planetfeedback.com) and 
identify the types of feedback that customers can  
provide. Look over the feedback for Verizon by typing 
“Verizon” in the company search space. Summarize 
some of the most recent comments. What is the ratio of 
positive to negative comments about Verizon during 
the last year or so? Describe the effects these comments 
might have on customer perceptions of Verizon.
3.	 Different companies emphasize different aspects of  
attitude in making decisions. Explore the Microsoft 
(http://www.microsoftstore.com) and Apple (store.apple 
.com) stores online. Discuss the primary attitude compo-
nents they are targeting and how the two stores differ.
4.	 Companies often emphasize either the functional or 
psychological needs their products fulfill. Go to Car 
and Driver’s website (http://www.caranddriver.com) 
and identify a luxury car company that emphasizes 
functional needs and one that emphasizes psycholog-
ical needs.
Marketing Applications
  1.	 Does buying Kashi cereal satisfy a consumer’s func-
tional or psychological needs? How might this infor-
mation help a Kashi brand manager better promote the 
product?
  2.	 When consumers buy a new notebook computer, what 
sort of information search (internal versus external) 
would they conduct? If you were a marketing manager 
for Sony, how would you use this information?
  3.	 Explain the factors that affect the amount of time and 
effort a consumer might take when choosing an oral 
surgeon to get his or her wisdom teeth removed. How 
would your answer change if the consumer were look-
ing for a dentist to get a cleaning? How should the of-
fice manager for a dental practice use this information?
  4.	 When evaluating different alternatives for a Saturday 
night outing at a fine restaurant, explain the difference 
between the universal set, the retrieval set, and the 
evoked set. From which set of alternatives will the con-
sumer most likely choose the restaurant?
  5.	 What can retailers do to make sure they have satisfied 
customers after the sale is complete?
  6.	 Tazo makes a blend of exotic green teas, spearmint, 
and rare herbs into a tea called Zen. Using Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs, explain which need(s) is (are) being 
fulfilled by this tea.
  7.	 You recently were invited to a formal event at the home 
of the president of your university. You decide such an 
event warrants a completely new outfit. Describe three 
social factors that might influence your purchase  
decision.
  8.	 Trek has designed a new off-road bicycle designed to 
stand up to the rugged conditions of trail riding. De-
velop a theme for an advertising strategy that covers all 
three components of attitude.
  9.	 What can a marketer do to positively influence a situa-
tion in which a consumer is ready to buy but has not yet 
done so?
10.	 You were recently hired by a multichannel retailer that 
promotes itself as an American firm selling only American- 
made goods. The products featured in advertising and 
in catalogs tell stories of the firms that produced the 
goods in the United States. The sales response to the 
firm’s Made in the USA position has been incredible 
because it resonates with its customers’ values. As a 
result, growth has been impressive. One day while 
speaking to a vendor, you find out a shipment of mer-
chandise will be delayed because the product is coming 
from overseas and is late. A few days later you hear a 
similar story. As it turns out, the firm just barely earns 
the Made in the USA label. Though technically the 
products meet a standard to be classified as American 
made, you worry that the firm is not being truthful to 
its customers. You decide to write a letter to the VP of 
marketing detailing your concerns. What would you 
put in the letter?

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
203
	
	
1.	 The salient or important attributes about a particular 
product that consumers use to make product evaluations 
are called:
a.  attribute set.
b.  affective components.
c.  evaluative criteria.
d.  psychological decision rules.
e.  situational factors.
2.	 Because not all purchase intentions result in an actual 
purchase, marketers calculate the _____ to measure how 
effectively a decision to purchase a specific product  
results in a completed purchase. 
a.  performance risk
b.  compensatory decision rate
c.  noncompensatory decision rate
d.  decision heuristic
e.  conversion rate
(Answers to these two questions are provided in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
THE DIET BATTLE—WEIGHT WATCHERS, JENNY CRAIG,  
AND SLIM-FAST52
Want to lose weight? For about half of the U.S. population, the answer is yes,53 and for 
weight-loss companies, that’s the right answer. The weight-loss industry, worth over  
$60 billion,54 is growing steadily because lifestyles and food choices keep working against 
people’s desire to lose weight. Many Americans spend their days sitting in front of a com-
puter and their evenings sitting in front of a television. Restaurant meals, prepared foods, 
and high-fat, high-sugar snacks have replaced home-cooked meals, whole grains, and fresh 
produce. Exercise is limited to clicking a mouse or turning an ignition key. These habits are 
fattening (both literally and figuratively) the profits for the weight-loss industry, as well as 
expanding belt sizes. By the time we factor in diet pills, specially packaged weight-loss 
meals and snacks, diet programs, and the whole range of products and services promising 
bathing-suit bodies, we’ve got a highly lucrative market.
Three recognized diet aid behemoths, Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig, and Slim-Fast, 
share a substantial piece of the pie. These companies stress their flexibility and ability to 
accommodate a wide range of lifestyles. They also showcase success stories.55 But they 
approach dieting differently in their quest for new members.
The Big Three  The current market leader, Weight Watchers International, now boasts 
groups in more than 30 countries worldwide. The program teaches portion control and the 
basics of good nutrition, allowing members to select their own foods. A point system, 
based on nutritional value, encourages members to select healthy foods, exercise appro-
priately, and control portions.56 Dieters record meals and snacks in a paper journal or on 
their mobile app. Although members can follow the Weight Watchers regimen without 
support, the company notes that the most successful members are those who weigh in at 
weekly group sessions and attend meetings. Weight Watchers members can prepare their 
own food, dine out, or purchase Weight Watchers-prepared or -endorsed dinners, snacks, 
and desserts at most grocery stores. To further support dieters in making healthy food 
choices, Weight Watchers increased the number of points for fat content and reduced 
them for fiber.
Weight Watchers has recently teamed up with Oprah Winfrey, causing the company’s 
stock price to triple almost instantly.57 The company had been struggling to stand out, es-
pecially among younger audiences that found the appeal of wearable health-tracking de-
vices like the Fitbit highly compelling.58  Winfrey’s first commercial for the company was 
Chapter Case Study 

204	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
met with an outpouring of excitement and support on Twitter.59 Thus, the partnership 
seems likely to be a success for Weight Watchers, though what continues to set it apart re-
mains its core offering of meetings, personal coaching, and branded food.60
Jenny Craig instead promises a unique and comprehensive plan for food, body, and 
mind.61 Members eat meals and snacks prepared and packaged by Jenny Craig, supple-
mented by fresh fruits and vegetables. Jenny Craig’s offerings provide portion control and 
accommodate busy schedules by reducing meal prep time. Members meet weekly on a 
one-on-one basis with a personal counselor and are encouraged to develop an exercise 
program. Like Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig offers customized programs for men and 
teenagers and for those who prefer to lose weight on their own rather than travel to a center. 
In its efforts to retake the market leadership position from Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig is 
promoting itself as the “don’t-do-it-yourself” weight loss option. It also has reenlisted  
Kristie Alley as a spokesperson.62
Slim-Fast offers dieters a combination of three small and healthy snacks, two meal- 
replacement shakes, and one 500-calorie meal daily.63 By eating six small meals daily,  
dieters maintain steady glucose levels, and the plan ensures adequate intakes of  
carbohydrates, protein, and fiber.64
Other diet programs abound, but even when people lose weight on these regimens, the 
losses tend to be temporary because the diets are based on unsustainable eating patterns, 
such as eliminating major food groups (e.g., no carbohydrates). Two of the big diet compa-
nies also offer social reinforcement and flexibility, which appears to help people remain 
committed to their weight-loss programs.
Defining the Difference  Perhaps the most significant difference among Jenny Craig, 
Slim-Fast, and Weight Watchers is the amount of effort required. Jenny Craig dieters don’t 
have to think about what they eat; everything is prepared for them. Dieters on the Weight 
Watchers plan must learn how to make the right choices from among the foods that surround 
them in their daily lives. Slim-Fast combines both ease and education, but it provides fewer 
choices for controlled meals than Jenny Craig does. Each program competes heavily for 
members, particularly in the early months of the year, when Americans return to the scales 
after indulging for the holidays.
The diet giants are locked in another battle as well, this one targeted at men. Although 
a completely different program isn’t necessary—both genders need to cut calories and in-
crease exercise to lose weight—marketing specifically to men has the power to bring in 
new members.
If you want to lose weight, which company would you prefer, Weight Watchers (left) or Slim Fast (right)?
Left: © Michael Nagle/Bloomberg/Getty Images; right: © Perry Correll/Shutterstock RF

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
205
	
	
While the Weight Watchers programs are identical for men and women, the men’s 
website is tailored to their interests and concerns, focusing more on working out and less 
on the eating plan. The men’s site also mentions the link between obesity and erectile dys-
function, implying that a man’s sex life might improve if he loses weight.65
Jenny Craig’s men’s program also is very similar to its women’s program, but tweaked 
to accommodate differences in food cravings and issues with portion control. Men on this 
program, Jenny Craig promises, can still have a beer and fries once in a while.66
The Slim-Fast program tends to appeal to men because they like to lose weight on 
their own rather than participating in group meetings.67 The company has used male celeb-
rities, including a former New York mayor, to sell its products.
Technology Support for Dieters  Dieters have a variety of electronic devices to help 
track food consumption and exercise. Using any Internet-ready device, Weight Watchers 
members can check point values for foods, including meals at popular restaurants, and add 
snacks or meals to their daily journal. Similar services and applications for fitness training 
are available via mobile apps. Using a camera-equipped cell phone, for example, dieters 
can photograph a meal and send the picture to a registered dietitian, who replies with rec-
ommendations for modifying portions or food choices. Theoretically this approach is more 
honest than keeping a food diary, because dieters may be tempted not to record full 
amounts. These services require additional fees though.
Questions
1.	
Trace how you might go through the steps in the consumer decision process if you 
were thinking of going on a diet and using any of these diet programs.
2.	
How have Weight Watchers, Slim-Fast, and Jenny Craig created value?
3.	
Identify the determinant attributes that set the Weight Watchers, Slim-Fast, and Jenny 
Craig programs apart. Use those attributes to develop a compensatory purchasing 
model similar to the one in Exhibit 6.2.
4.	
How can Weight Watchers, Slim-Fast, and Jenny Craig increase the probability of 
customer satisfaction?
5.	
Which factors examined in this chapter might have the most impact on consumers’ 
propensity to go on a diet and choose one of these diet programs?
Endnotes
	 1.	 Sydney Ember, “Nike Embraces Weather App in Campaign to 
Sell Gear Suited to Local Conditions,” The New York Times, 
October 29, 2015.
	2.	 For example, when trying on a dress, Katie might be influenced 
by the way that same dress looks on a salesperson in the 
store. See Darren W. Dahl, Jennifer J. Argo, and Andrea C. 
Morales, “Social Information in the Retail Environment: The 
Importance of Consumption Alignment, Referent Identity, and 
Self-Esteem,”Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 5 
(February 2012), pp. 860–71.
	3.	 For a detailed discussion of customer behavior, see Michael R. 
Solomon, Consumer Behavior: Buying, Having, and Being,  
11th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2014).
	4.	 Martin R. Lautman and Koen Pauwels, “Metrics That Matter: 
Identifying the Importance of Consumer Wants and 
Needs,”Journal of Advertising Research 49, no. 3 (2009), 
339–59.
	5.	 Liz C. Wang et al., “Can a Retail Web Site Be Social?” Journal 
of Marketing 71, no. 3 (2007), pp. 143–57; Barry Babin, William 
Darden, and Mitch Griffin, “Work and/or Fun: Measuring 
Hedonic and Utilitarian Shopping Value,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 20 (March 1994), pp. 644–56.
	6.	 Jing Xu and Norbert Schwarz, “Do We Really Need a Reason 
to Indulge?” Journal of Marketing Research 46, no. 1 (February 
2009), pp. 25–36.
	 7.	 “Lana Marks Cleopatra Bag,” Lord Glamour, February 8, 2014, 
http://www.lordglamour.com/; Lopa Mohanty, “10 Most 
Expensive Handbag Brands in the World,” Fashion Lady, May 31, 
2013, http://www.fashionlady.in/; “Celebrities,” Lana Marks, 
http://www.lanamarks.com/.
	8.	 Peng Huang, Nicholas H. Lurie, and Sabyasachi Mitra, 
“Searching for Experience on the Web: An Empirical 
Examination of Consumer Behavior for Search and Experience 
Goods,” Journal of Marketing 73, no. 2 (March 2009),  
pp. 55–69.
	9.	 http://www.nordstrom.com; http://www.baronidesigns.com.
	10.	 http://www.truefit.com.
	11.	 Lan Luo, Brian T. Ratchford, and Botao Yang, “Why We Do 
What We Do: A Model of Activity Consumption,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 50 (February 2013), pp. 24–43.

206	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
	12.	 Ying Zhang et al., “Been There, Done That: The Impact of Effort 
Investment on Goal Value and Consumer Motivation,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 38, no. 1 (June 2011), pp. 78–93.
	13.	 Debabrata Talukdar, “Cost of Being Poor: Retail Price and 
Consumer Price Search Differences across Inner-City and 
Suburban Neighborhoods,” Journal of Consumer Research 
35, no. 3 (October 2008), pp. 457–71.
	14.	 David Dubois, Derek D. Rucker, and Adam D. Galinsky, “Super 
Size Me: Product Size as a Signal of Status,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 38, no. 6 (April 2012), pp. 1047–62.
	15.	 Benjamin Scheibehenne, Rainer Greifeneder, and Peter M. 
Todd, “Can There Ever Be Too Many Options? A Meta-Analytic 
Review of Choice Overload,” Journal of Consumer Research 
37, no. 3 (October 2010), pp. 409–45.
	16.	 The term determinance was first coined by James Myers and 
Mark Alpert nearly three decades ago; http://www.sawtooth-
software.com.
	17.	 http://www.sawtoothsoftware.com.
	18.	 Julie R. Irwin and Rebecca Walker Naylor, “Ethical Decisions 
and Response Mode Compatibility: Weighting of Ethical 
Attributes in Consideration Sets Formed by Excluding versus 
Including Product Alternatives,” Journal of Marketing Research 
46, no. 2 (April 2009), pp. 234–46; Richard Lutz, “Changing 
Brand Attitudes through Modification of Cognitive Structure,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 1, no. 1 (1975),  
pp. 125–36.
	19.	 Caroline Goukens, Siegfried Dewitte, and Luk Warlop, “Me, 
Myself, and My Choices: The Influence of Private Self-
Awareness on Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research 46,  
no. 5 (October 2009), pp. 682–92.
	20.	James M. Kerr, “How Appealing to Women Has Helped The 
Home Depot,” ManagementIssues.com, October 3, 2014.  
	21.	 “Beware of Dissatisfied Consumers: They Like to  
Blab,” Knowledge@Wharton, March, 8, 2006, based on the 
“Retail Customer Dissatisfaction Study 2006” conducted by 
the Jay H. Baker Retailing Initiative at Wharton and The Verde 
Group.
	22.	Goutam Challagalla, R. Venkatesh, and Ajay K. Kohli, “Proactive 
Postsales Service: When and Why Does It Pay Off?” Journal of 
Marketing 73, no. 2 (March 2009), pp. 70–87.
	23.	Randall Stross, “Consumer Complaints Made Easy. Maybe Too 
Easy,” The New York Times, May 28, 2011, http://www.nytimes.
com.
	24.	For a more extensive discussion on these factors, see Banwari 
Mittal, Consumer Behavior (Cincinnati, OH: Open Mentis, 2008); 
J. Paul Peter and Jerry C. Olson, Consumer Behavior and 
Marketing Strategy, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill 
Education, 2010.
	25.	A. H. Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1970).
	26.	Kelly D. Martin and Ronald Paul Hill, “Life Satisfaction, Self-
Determination, and Consumption Adequacy at the Bottom of 
the Pyramid,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 6 (April 
2012), pp. 1155–68; Hazel Rose Markus and Barry Schwartz, 
“Does Choice Mean Freedom and Well-Being?” Journal of 
Consumer Research 37, no. 2 (August 2010), pp. 344–55.
	27.	http://www.starbucks.com/menu/nutrition/35-under-350. 
	28.	For recent research on the link between emotions and con-
sumer behavior, see the “Emotions and Consumer Behavior” 
special issue of Journal of Consumer Research 40 (February 
2014).
	29.	Leonard Lee, On Amir, and Dan Ariely, “In Search of Homo 
Economicus: Cognitive Noise and the Role of Emotion in 
Preference Consistency,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, 
no. 2 (2009), pp. 173–87; Anish Nagpal and Parthasarathy 
Krishnamurthy, “Attribute Conflict in Consumer Decision 
Making: The Role of Task Compatibility,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 34, no. 5 (February 2008), pp. 696–705.
	30.	http://www.bostonbackbay.com/.
	31.	 For more discussion on these factors, see Mittal, Consumer 
Behavior; Peter and Olson, Consumer Behavior and Marketing 
Strategy; Michael Levy, Barton A. Weitz, and Dhruv Grewal, 
Retailing Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/McGraw-
Hill, 2013), Chapter 4; and the “Social Influence and Consumer 
Behavior” special issue of Journal of Consumer Research 40 
(August 2013).
	32.	Juliano Laran, “Goal Management in Sequential Choices: 
Consumer Choices for Others Are More Indulgent than 
Personal Choices,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 2 
(August 2010), pp. 304–14.
	33.	Todd Hale, “Mining the U.S. Generation Gaps,” Nielsen Wire, 
March 4, 2010, http://blog.nielsen.com.
	34.	Gokcen Coskuner-Balli and Craig J. Thompson, “The Status 
Costs of Subordinate Cultural Capital: At-Home Fathers’ 
Collective Pursuit of Cultural Legitimacy through Capitalizing 
Consumption Practices,” Journal of Consumer Research 40 
(June 2013), pp. 19–41.
	35.	Carol Bryant, “The Truth about Paid Product Reviews and 
Disclosure,” Blog Paws, September 5, 2013, http://www.blog-
paws.com; see sites that recruit bloggers to do paid reviews: 
http://www.sponsoredreviews.com, http://www.payperpost.
com, http://www.reviewme.com.  
	36.	Elizabeth A. Harris and Rachel Abrams, “Plugged-In Over 
Preppy: Teenagers Favor Tech Over Clothes,” The New York 
Times, August 27, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com. 
	37.	For an expanded discussion on these factors, see Peter and 
Olson, Consumer Behavior and Marketing Strategy. For some in-
teresting experiments involving consumers’ physical positioning 
and its effects on behavior, see Jeffrey S. Larson and Darron M. 
Billeter, “Consumer Behavior in ‘Equilibrium’: How Experiencing 
Physical Balance Increases Compromise Choice,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 50 (August 2013), pp. 535–47.
	38.	Tracey S. Dagger and Peter J. Danaher, “Comparing the Effect 
of Store Remodeling on New and Existing Customers,” Journal 
of Marketing (forthcoming). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/
jm.13.0272.
	39.	The concept of atmospherics was introduced by Philip Kotler, 
“Atmosphere as a Marketing Tool,” Journal of Retailing 49 
(Winter 1973), pp. 48–64.
	40.	Sylvie Morin, Laurette Dubé, and Jean-Charles Chebat, “The 
Role of Pleasant Music in Servicescapes: A Test of the Dual 
Model of Environmental Perception,” Journal of Retailing 83, 
no. 1 (2007), pp. 115–30.
	41.	 http://www.wegmans.com; http://wholefoodsmarket.com/
stores/cooking-classes/; Tracy Turner, “New Hangout 
Supermarket,” Columbus Dispatch, March 20, 2011.
	42.	Tim Bajarin, “6 Reasons Apple Is So Successful,” Time, May 7, 
2012, http://techland.time.com.
	43.	Carmine Gallo, “Apple’s Secret Employee Training Manual 
Reinvents Customer Service in Seven Ways,” Forbes, August 
30, 2012.
	44.	Ahreum Maeng, Robin J. Tanner, and Dilip Soman, 
“Conservative When Crowded: Social Crowding and Consumer 
Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research 50 (December 2013), 
pp. 739–52; Alexander Chernev and Ryan Hamilton, 
“Assortment Size and Option Attractiveness in Consumer 
Choice among Retailers,” Journal of Marketing Research 46, 
no. 3 (June 2009), pp. 410–20; Marc-Andre Kamel, Nick 
Greenspan, and Rudolf Pritzl, “Standardization Is Efficient but 
Localization Helps Shops to Stand Out,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 21, 2009.

	
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR  CHAPTER SIX	
207
	
	
	45.	Jeffrey Trachtenberg, “Publishers Bundle E-Books to Boost 
Sales, Promote Authors,” The Wall Street Journal, February 11, 
2011.
	46.	Pierre Chandon et al., “Does In-Store Marketing Work? Effects 
of the Number and Position of Shelf Facings on Brand 
Attention and Evaluation at the Point of Purchase,” Journal of 
Marketing 73, no. 6 (November 2009), pp. 1–17.
	47.	Kirk Henderson and Kusum Ailawadi, “Shopper Marketing: Six 
Lessons for Retail from Six Years of Mobile Eye Tracking 
Research,” Review of Marketing Research 12 (2014).
	48.	Christine Birkner, “Thinking Outside of the Box,” Marketing 
News, March 30, 2011.
	49.	Dan King and Chris Janiszewski, “Affect-Gating,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 38, no. 4 (December 2011), pp. 697–711.
	50.	Mittal, Consumer Behavior; Peter and Olson, Consumer 
Behavior and Marketing Strategy.
	51.	 Yuping Liu-Thompkins and Leona Tam, “Not All Repeat 
Customers Are the Same: Designing Effective Cross-Selling 
Promotion on the Basis of Attitudinal Loyalty and Habit,” 
Journal of Marketing 77 (September 2013), pp. 21–36; Karen 
M. Stilley, J. Jeffrey Inman, and Kirk L. Wakefield, “Planning to 
Make Unplanned Purchases? The Role of In-Store Slack in 
Budget Deviation,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 2 
(2010), pp. 264–78; doi: 10.1086/651567.
	52.	This case was written by Kate Woodworth in conjunction with 
Dhruv Grewal and Michael Levy as the basis of class discus-
sion rather than to illustrate either effective or ineffective mar-
keting practices.
	53	 Justin McCarthy, “Fewer Americans Say They Want to Lose 
Weight,” Gallop, November 27, 2015, http://www.gallup.com/
poll/186920/fewer-americans-say-lose-weight.aspx?g_source= 
WEIGHT&g_medium=topic&g_campaign=tiles.  
	54.	John Kell, “Lean Times for the Diet Industry,” Fortune, May 22, 
2015, http://fortune.com/2015/05/22/lean-times-for-the-diet- 
industry/. 
	55.	PR Newswire, “Jenny Craig Showcases Real Member Success 
Stories in 2016 & Announces New Foods, Plus Introduces a 
New Retail Starter Kit,” January 5, 2016, http://www.multivu.
com/players/English/7727051-jenny-craig-campaign-kirstie-
alley-cheers/. 
	56.	https://www.weightwatchers.com/us/our-approach. 
	57.	Tara Lachapelle, “Weight Watchers Gets Pounded,” Bloomberg, 
January 21, 2016, http://www.bloomberg.com/gadfly/articles/ 
2016-01-21/weight-watchers-turnaround-trouble-reveals- 
its-flaws.  
	58.	John Kell, “Lean Times for the Diet Industry,” Fortune, May 22, 
2015, http://fortune.com/2015/05/22/lean-times-for-the-diet- 
industry/.  
	59.	Megan McCluskey, “Oprah’s New Weight Watchers 
Commercial Is Sending the Internet on an Emotional Roller 
Coaster,” Time, December 29, 2015, http://time.com/4163543/
oprah-weight-watchers-commercial-making-internet-emotional/.  
	60.	Tara Lachapelle, “Weight Watchers Gets Pounded,” Bloomberg, 
January 21, 2016, http://www.bloomberg.com/gadfly/articles/ 
2016-01-21/weight-watchers-turnaround-trouble-reveals- 
its-flaws.
	61.	 http://www.jennycraig.com/site/corporate/company-profile. 
	62.	Tara Lachapelle, “Weight Watchers Gets Pounded,” Bloomberg, 
January 21, 2016, http://www.bloomberg.com/gadfly/articles/ 
2016-01-21/weight-watchers-turnaround-trouble-reveals- 
its-flaws; Jade Scipioni, “Kirstie Alley on Jenny Craig, Oprah, & 
‘Cheers’ Reunion,” Fox Business, January 14, 2016, http://www.
foxbusiness.com/features/2016/01/14/kirstie-alley-on-jenny-
craig-oprah-cheers-reunion.html.  
	63.	http://www.slim-fast.com/plan/.
	64.	“Slim-Fast Diet,” US News Wellness, http://health.usnews.com/
best-diet/slim-fast-diet?utm_source=huffingtonpost.com&utm_
medium=referral&utm_campaign=pubexchange_article. 
	65.	http://weightwatchers.com/men/.
	66.	http://www.jennycraig.com/site/learn/article/a-healthy-diet-for-
men.
	67.	Chris Sherwood, “Does Slim-Fast Work for Men?” Live Strong, 
November 12, 2015, http://www.livestrong.com/article/284239-
does-slim-fast-work-for-men/.
	 i.	 Kathy Collins, “Here’s How to Use Analytics to Tell a Brand 
Story,” Forbes, April 4, 2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
onmarketing/2014/04/07/heres-how-to-use-analytics-to-tell-a-
brand-story/; Ashley Rodriguez, “H&R Block Ushers in ‘Refund 
Season’ with Slew of New Ads,” Advertising Age, January 9, 
2015, http://adage.com; “H&R Block Turns to Domo to Make 
Data Avalanche Less Taxing,” June 25, 2013, http://www.domo.
com/news/press/hr-block-turns-to-domo-to-make-data- 
avalanche-less-taxing.
	 ii.	 Bianca Banova, “The Future of Mobile Technology in Medicine: 
Innovative Medical Apps,” MedCity News, April 24, 2013, http://
medcitynews.com; William Cook, “Is That Little Mole a Big 
Problem?” Daily Mail, October 3, 2012, http://www.dailymail.co.
uk; “mySugr App, Award-Winning iPhone App That Gamifies 
Blood Sugar Monitoring for People with Diabetes, Launches in 
US,” The Wall Street Journal, June 6, 2013, press release, 
http://online.wsj.com; Mike H, “ ‘Diabetes Monster’ App Actually 
Motivates!” Diabetes Mine, June 19, 2013, http://www. 
diabetesmine.com.
	iii.	 Ronnie Cummins, “ORCA to Attack ‘Natural’ Products Labeling 
Fraud,” Organic Consumers Association, March 7, 2013, http://
www.organicconsumers.org; Ashby Jones, “Is Your Dinner ‘All 
Natural’ ?” The Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2011; “Diet 
and Nutrition Report,” Consumer Reports, February 2009, 
http://www.consumerreports.org; Rachel Gross, “Farmers Seek 
to Raise Standards for Berries,” The New York Times, 
September 23, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com; Mayo Clinic 
Staff, “Organic Foods: Are They Safer? More Nutritious?”  
http://www.mayoclinic.com; Natural and Organic Foods 
Backgrounder, Food Marketing Institute, http://www.fmi.org; 
Stacey R. Finkelstein and Ayelet Fishbach, “When Healthy Food 
Makes You Hungry,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 3 
(October 2010), pp. 357–67.
	iv.	 John Schwartz, “Chicago and 2 California Counties Sue Over 
Marketing of Painkillers,” The New York Times, August 24, 
2014, http://www.nytimes.com.
	 v.	 Roger Dooley, “The Smartest Supermarket You Never Heard 
Of,” Forbes, January 28, 2014, http://www.forbes.com.
	vi.	 Lauren Johnson, “Sephora Magnifies Mobile Ambitions via In-
Store Signage, Updated App,” Mobile Commerce Daily, August 
23, 2013.

CHAPTER 7
BUSINESS-TO-
BUSINESS 
MARKETING
I
f you haven’t shopped at Amazon recently, you know 
someone who has. Amazon.com is the largest 
Internet retailer in the United States; it even is the 
ninth largest retailer of any type, earning $49.3 million 
in annual U.S. sales (accounting for a little more than half 
of its total annual sales of $83.3 million).1 When most of 
us think of Amazon, we think about what we, as consum-
ers, can buy there—currently, just about anything. But 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO7-1	 Describe the ways in which business-to-business (B2B) firms segment their markets.
	 LO7-2	 List the steps in the B2B buying process.
	 LO7-3	 Identify the roles within the buying center.
	 LO7-4	 Describe the different types of organizational cultures.
	 LO7-5	 Detail different buying situations.

by using third-party providers. These entities expand its 
marketplace presence by providing its customers a larger 
assortment of merchandise. Although Amazon makes 
less money by selling a book through a third party than if 
it sold that book itself, it does not have to incur the ex-
penses of storing merchandise, fulfilling orders, or trans-
porting it to the customer. The third-party providers 
benefit from their exposure on Amazon’s website. If, in 
the future, Internet sales are taxed by state governments, 
Amazon is poised to help its smaller and often less so-
phisticated third-party providers collect the taxes, a ser-
vice for which it will derive significant additional revenues.
Amazon Business is strictly a B2B operation. 
Competing with the likes of Staples (see this chapter’s 
case study), Amazon Business sells millions of products 
necessary to run a business, from janitorial supplies to tools 
to soft drinks.3 Similar to its business-to-consumer cousin 
Amazon Prime, Amazon Business offers free two-day  
Amazon is much more than just a company that supplies 
consumers with books, household products, clothing, and 
so forth. Its business-to-business (B2B) transactions are 
significant and permeate multiple areas.
When you purchase a book on Amazon, you gener-
ally have two choices: Buy it directly from Amazon, or pur-
chase it through Amazon but from a third-party vendor. If 
you go the direct route, Amazon has already purchased 
the book from a publisher and is holding it in an Amazon 
fulfillment center2—a B2B transaction. If you take the 
third-party route, Amazon acts as an agent for the  
supplier and takes a commission of about 10 percent of 
the value of the merchandise for the right to sell it on 
Amazon’s platform—another B2B transaction.
The symbiotic relationships that Amazon has with its 
third-party providers are significant and likely to continue 
expanding in the future. Similar to other online market-
places such as eBay, Amazon derives significant revenues 
© dpa picture alliance/Alamy

Business-to-business (B2B) marketing refers to the process of buying and selling goods 
or services to be used in the production of other goods and services for consumption by the 
buying organization and/or resale by wholesalers and retailers. Therefore, a typical B2B 
marketing transaction involves manufacturers (e.g., GE, Levi’s, Siemens, IBM, Ford) sell-
ing to wholesalers that, in turn, sell products to retailers. B2B transactions can also involve 
service firms (e.g., UPS, Oracle, Accenture) that market their services to other businesses 
but not to the ultimate consumer (e.g., you). The distinction between a B2B and a  
business-to-consumer (B2C) transaction is not the product or service itself; rather, it is the 
ultimate user of that product or service. Another key distinction is that B2B transactions 
tend to be more complex and involve multiple members of both the buying organization 
(e.g., buyers, marketing team, product developers) and the selling organization (e.g., sellers, 
R&D support team), whereas B2C often entails a simple transaction between the retailer 
and the individual consumer.
The demand for B2B sales is often derived from B2C sales in the same supply chain. 
More specifically, derived demand reflects the link between consumers’ demand for a 
company’s output and the company’s purchase of necessary inputs to manufacture or as-
semble that particular output. For example, if more customers want to purchase staplers 
Another piece of Amazon’s B2B puzzle is its robot 
army. Okay, it might not be an army, but over the course 
of a decade, it has purchased and put into service more 
than 30,000 Kiva warehouse robots to automate its ful-
fillment centers. The Kiva robots perform relatively com-
plex but still standard tasks, such as moving merchandise 
throughout the distribution centers. But they also are 
equipped with language perception, object recognition, 
and software that enable them to gain a basic semantic 
understanding of voice commands.8 At one point, 
Amazon cultivated B2B relationships with other compa-
nies by selling them robots so that they could automate 
their own supply chains. More recently though, having 
recognized that the Kivas are part of its own sustainable 
competitive advantage, it has renamed them simply 
Amazon robots, stopped supplying them to other firms, 
and are using all of Kiva’s production internally. In this 
way, rather than expand its B2B sales, Amazon has at-
tempted to limit the sale of robots (and patented its tech-
nology) so that it can maintain its dominance in other 
categories.9
Even though virtually everyone has heard of Amazon, 
most consumers have no idea of its true reach. With 
these varied and extensive B2B operations, Amazon 
stretches even further than you knew. It’s the best B2B 
company that you never heard of, but knew all along.
shipping on orders over $49 and extra discounts for buy-
ing large quantities. Any B2B customers can compare 
prices from multiple sellers just like on Amazon.com. In 
addition, customers can chat with product experts, a fea-
ture that often is very necessary when purchasing techni-
cal products.
Amazon also has close B2B relationships with tradi-
tional delivery services, even though it has been expand-
ing its own delivery capabilities. It continues to rely heavily 
on the U.S. Postal Service. Because of this close connec-
tion, the Postal Service even altered operating procedures 
that it had maintained for centuries and agreed to deliver 
Amazon packages on Sundays.4 It also keeps up its links 
with other delivery companies such as UPS, recognizing 
that it might need them in the future. Finally, it is investing 
in its own delivery trucks, another B2B transaction.5
But as an alternative to these traditional B2B deliv-
ery companies, Amazon is experimenting with an alterna-
tive delivery mechanism called Prime Air, which promises 
to offer same-day delivery with the help of Amazon 
drones.6 The development of drones has been managed 
internally under a cloak of secrecy. It has required close 
B2B relationships and commitments by partners not to 
disclose any information, so that Amazon could gather 
raw materials and parts and engage in necessary techni-
cal consulting.7
210

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
211
	
	
(a B2C transaction), a company that produces them must purchase more metal from its 
supplier to make additional staplers (a B2B transaction).
Similar to organizations that sell directly to final consumers in B2C transactions, 
B2B firms focus on serving specific types of customer markets by creating value for 
those customers. Recognizing the growing demand for ever-increasing smartphone con-
nectivity in cars, both Apple (with its CarPlay) and Google (with its Android-based 
Open Automotive Alliance) are making deals to integrate their operating systems into 
cars. Ferrari, Audi, Mercedes-Benz, and Volvo all offer CarPlay in select models, and  
it can also be added as an aftermarket system; Google has deals with Lexus, Honda, 
Hyundai, and General Motors.10
Also like B2C firms, many B2B companies find it productive to focus their efforts on 
key industries or market segments. Although the average large corporation has over 175 
social media accounts, small-business owners often struggle to maintain a single social 
media account on each of the major networks.11 Enter the B2B firm Constant Contact.12 
This firm provides a centralized dashboard for small businesses to manage their social 
media accounts as well as templates for posts and help on creating social media campaigns. 
Constant Contact could target businesses of any size, but it has become one of the leaders 
in small-business social media management by narrowing its efforts on this key market 
segment.13
In this chapter, we look at the different types of B2B markets and examine the B2B 
buying process, with an eye toward how it differs from the B2C buying process we dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. Several factors influence the B2B buying process, and we discuss 
these as well.
B2B MARKETS
The most visible types of B2B transactions are those in which manufacturers and service 
providers sell to other businesses. However, resellers, institutions, and governments also 
may be involved in B2B transactions. Therefore, in the next sections we describe each of 
these B2B organizations (see Exhibit 7.1).
Manufacturers and Service Providers
Manufacturers buy raw materials, components, and parts that allow them to make and 
market their own goods and ancillary services. For example, the German-based 
Volkswagen Group, the largest auto manufacturer in Europe, owns and distributes the 
Audi, Bentley, Bugatti, Lamborghini, Seat, Skoda, Scania, VW, and VW Commercial 
Vehicles brands.14 Whereas purchasing agents formerly spent 70 percent of their time 
 LO7-1	
Describe the ways in 
which business-to-
business (B2B) firms 
segment their markets.
Apple (left) and Google (right) both offer smartphone connectivity for specific car manufacturers.
Left: © Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images; right: © Kyodo/AP Photo

212	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Resellers
B2B markets
Government
Manufacturers/
service
providers
Institutions
searching for, analyzing, validating, and forwarding information about parts and compo-
nents, today they can use VWSupplyGroup.com to communicate with suppliers for all 
transactions, from procurement to logistics. The VW Group system is used by 45,600 
suppliers.15 Purchasing agents receive product descriptions directly from suppliers online, 
which means search processes that used to take two hours now require about nine min-
utes. Users of the system receive alerts of potential parts shortages before they occur and 
thus can focus on efficiencies instead of redundant paperwork.
IBM provided the consulting services nec-
essary to design the Volkswagen Group’s sys-
tem. IBM, which was once a major manufacturer 
of computers and related products, now gener-
ates 90 percent of its profits from its software, 
consulting, and financing businesses—all of 
which are considered services. Like Volkswagen 
Group, it requires a host of B2B products and 
services to support these businesses. For in-
stance, the airlines that IBM consultants and 
service providers rely on to shuttle them around 
the globe also use a mix of products such as air-
planes and fuel as well as consulting, legal, and 
other services. As Marketing Analytics 7.1 de-
scribes, IBM is constantly working to ensure 
that it can provide the features, data, and capa-
bilities its business customers need.
E X H I B I T  7.1
B2B Markets
German-based Volkswagen 
Group, the largest auto manu-
facturer in Europe, owns and 
distributes numerous brands.
© Oliver Hardt/AFP/Getty Images/
Newscom

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
213
	
	
Resellers
Resellers are marketing intermediaries that resell manufactured products without significantly 
altering their form. For instance, wholesalers and distributors buy Xerox products and sell 
them to retailers (B2B transaction), then retailers resell those Xerox products to the ultimate 
consumer (B2C transaction). Alternatively, these retailers may buy directly from Xerox. Thus, 
wholesalers, distributors, and retailers are all resellers. Retailers represent resellers and engage 
in B2B transactions when they buy fixtures, capital investments, leasing locations, financing 
operations, and merchandise for their stores. To appeal to resellers and keep them interested in 
what it has to offer, Xerox works hard to ensure that its innovative products appeal to them and 
their customers. Adding Value 7.1 explains how it is promoting its HD printer technology to 
enhance its value, its commercial customers’ value, and in the end, the consumers’ value. 
Clouding over Computing Power i
As their computing power and security demands escalate, few 
businesses want to maintain their own hardware and servers 
anymore. Instead, they look to the cloud, where they seek to 
purchase more computing power, provided at a faster speed, 
with lower costs.
	
In response, traditional mainframe providers such as IBM 
are moving to expand their presence in the cloud. In particular, 
IBM has devoted billions of dollars to enhancing its cloud capa-
bilities. First, it purchased a cloud company called SoftLayer for 
$2 billion to add that firm’s 13 cloud computing centers to IBM’s 
own 12 data centers. Second, it is allocating an additional  
$1.2 billion to expand its cloud computing centers worldwide.
	
The services provided by these cloud centers will include 
not just power and data storage but also access to some of 
IBM’s proprietary software and related products. Perhaps 
most famously, for some of the best IBM clients it will offer 
access to Watson, IBM’s famous Jeopardy-winning computer.
	
The Singaporean bank DBS Group Holdings plans to use 
Watson to provide up-to-date insights and lessons to its finan-
cial planners, who in turn will share that information with high-
net-worth clients. With Watson analyzing the massive amounts 
of financial data available in nearly real time, DBS hopes to im-
prove the customized advising services it provides to wealthy 
clients, who then may agree to do more of their investing with 
the bank. To gain this access, DBS will pay around $12 million 
over three years. It also agreed to share its own data, contrib-
uting and updating Watson’s knowledge stores constantly.
	
Because Watson is only as good as the data that feeds it, 
IBM also has followed an acquisitive path, purchasing and  
obtaining rights to ever-increasing amounts of data. One of  
its recent acquisitions, the digital assets of The Weather 
Company, includes approximately four gigabytes of data every 
second from approximately 40 million smartphones, nearly 
150,000 weather stations, and 50,000 daily airline flights. The 
Weather Company currently collects all these data to offer 
up-to-the-minute weather information to consumers who sub-
scribe to its services. In return, those consumers actually pro-
vide much of the data through their linked smartphones. 
These weather-related offerings certainly remain valuable, but 
IBM plans to take the big data even further by combining them 
with other reams of information. For example, IBM already has 
partnerships in place that allow it to receive data from diverse 
firms such as Johnson & Johnson, Apple, and Twitter.
	
Under Armour has announced it will be relying on Watson 
to expand its analytics capabilities too. In this new collabora-
tion, Under Armour will introduce a personal fitness app that 
enables users to measure their activity and receive real-time 
instruction from coaches. They also can enter their informa-
tion into the system and agree to participate in app-based 
competitions with other people of the same age or from the 
same city. Beyond activity levels, the app allows users to track 
and compare their sleep habits, meals, and nutrition levels.
	
With its massive data, one of the primary goals for IBM—
and Watson—is better targeted, more informative, and more 
helpful advertising. In one example suggested by the Weather 
Company CEO, by combining health information, sentiment 
analysis from Twitter, weather data, and details of a user’s buy-
ing habits, Watson could identify and recommend preventative 
practices or medications to help a consumer avoid catching 
the flu or limit seasonal allergies.
Marketing Analytics 7.1
Watson, IBM’s super computer, is being used by some of 
its best customers including the Singaporean bank DBS 
Group Holdings and Under Armour.
© Andrew Spear/The Washington Post/Getty Images

214	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Institutions
Institutions such as hospitals, educational organiza-
tions, and religious organizations also purchase all 
kinds of goods and services. A public school system 
might have a $40 million annual budget for textbooks 
alone, which gives it significant buying power and en-
ables it to take advantage of bulk discounts. However, if 
each school makes its own purchasing decisions, the 
system as a whole cannot leverage its combined buying 
power. Public institutions also engage in B2B relation-
ships to fulfill their needs for capital construction, 
equipment, supplies, food, and janitorial services.
Government
In most countries, the central government is one of the 
largest purchasers of goods and services. For example, 
the U.S. federal government spends nearly $4 trillion 
annually on procuring goods and services. If you add in 
what state and local governments spend, these numbers 
Adding Value 7.1
The “Alfonso Versant” Fashion Show: Creating Excitement  
for a New Xerox Printerii
Xerox enjoys a strong reputation as a steady provider of 
equipment to business customers—but steady also can mean 
boring. Drumming up excitement for new products in its core 
market, document management, isn’t exactly easy. Therefore, 
when a New Zealand branch of Xerox launched its new HD 
printer, the Versant 2100, it decided to get creative and host a 
fashion show, designed and produced fully through the use of 
the new printer.
Noting that the name Versant had a high fashion ring to it, 
the Xerox team decided to make up a designer, Alfonso 
Versant. It sent out glossy lookbooks of the designer’s fash-
ions, all printed on the Versant 2100. The direct mail cam-
paign also included invitations to a fashion show, sent to 
business customers that might consider purchasing the 
products. These customers all were in the business of print-
ing high-quality materials themselves, so the key was to 
demonstrate the remarkable and added-value capabilities of 
the Versant 2100. In support of this effort, Xerox solicited 
designs for a fashion show from fashion school students, 
who had to produce everything they designed by using only 
materials that came out of the Versant 2100. Highlighting the 
varieties of paper the printer could use, the students inte-
grated not just traditional paper but also tissue paper and 
card stock in their designs. 
Thus the direct mail campaign with the lookbook of designs 
clearly highlighted what the Versant 2100 could do, appealing 
to business customers who wanted to be able to promise 
their own customers that they could undertake complex print 
jobs easily and professionally. The lookbook included some tra-
ditional information about the printer too, but the main focus 
was on the creative and fun products that the project would 
produce. By the time the fashion show rolled around, Xerox 
was able to showcase 14 dresses and demonstrate how its 
new printer could offer value to its customers—while also 
achieving the added social benefit of collaborating with  
students to give them some real-world experience. 
Overall, the event was a huge success for Xerox. Three 
months after the event, the New Zealand branch had sur-
passed its sales targets by a remarkable 240 percent; it alone 
accounted for 34 percent of total sales in the Asia-Pacific re-
gion, even though New Zealand makes up less than 1 percent 
of the region in area.
Xerox created excitement for its HD printer, the Versant 
2100, by hosting a fashion show for the fictitious designer, 
Alfonso Versant.
Courtesy of MarketingSherpa and Fuji Xerox
The U.S. Department of Defense spends over $500 billion a year on 
everything from nuts and bolts to this F-14 Tomcat jetfighter.
© Stocktrek Images/Getty Images RF

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
215
	
	
iPads Go to Workiii
Social & Mobile Marketing 7.1
Since their introduction, iPads have rocketed into widespread 
use for gaming, online access, music, videos, and e-mail. Tech-
savvy business executives and educators also have noted 
some advantages of these devices that could make them use-
ful at work as well as at play. Tablet computers weigh less and 
cost less than laptop computers. Uploaded e-books can be 
more up to date and are less expensive than physical text-
books. And in both the classroom and the workplace, the use 
of iPads extends the enthusiastic adoption of technology that 
is already occurring naturally in social contexts.
	
These devices, educators have learned, go beyond delivery 
of course materials: They save additional funds for schools and 
increase the value for students. Students can watch videos or 
tutorials, take notes, or use interactive programs that demon-
strate particular skills. They can scroll effortlessly through doc-
uments or between texts to reach a section relevant to the 
current class discussion. Part-time and distance students can 
communicate more readily with their classmates, potentially en-
hancing collaboration and team-based learning. Visual learners, 
children with autism spectrum disorders or learning disabilities, 
and students who have grown up using electronic devices in 
various facets of their lives all can benefit from the interactive 
nature of iPads. And all students benefit from developing com-
fort with technology, a vital skill set in tomorrow’s workforce.
	
The iPad is finding fans in the workplace as well. Executives, 
staff members, and clients at companies as diverse as Wells 
Fargo Bank, the business management software developer 
SAP, and Daimler’s Mercedes-Benz have adopted the device. 
Airplane pilots have begun replacing paper binders full of flight 
manuals, navigation charts, and other materials with iPads. 
Siemens Energy has equipped some of its wind turbine ser-
vice technicians with iPads so that they have convenient  
access to manuals, checklists, and cameras, even from atop  
a 300-foot tower. iPad’s manufacturer, Apple, claims that 
80 percent of Fortune 100 companies are either using the 
device or have launched pilot projects to try it.
	
Whether in the classroom or in the workplace, iPads are 
not without their disadvantages. Schools may save money in 
textbook costs but will need funding for repairs and wireless 
infrastructure. Tablets may enhance learning, but they cannot 
replace teachers or peer-to-peer interactions. Academic and 
business users find that the virtual keyboard is challenging for 
composing longer text, sharing applications is burdensome, 
and multitasking is impossible. Some companies are put off by 
iPad security breaches; others reject Apple’s traditional focus 
on the consumer market, which is often at the expense of 
business sales. Despite these challenges, the iPad has gained 
a strong foothold in both the classroom and the workplace.
Eighty percent of Fortune 100 companies are either using 
the iPad or have launched pilot projects to try it.  
© Ariel Skelley/Getty Images RF
reach staggering proportions. For example, the Department of Defense was slated to re-
ceive $561 billion in fiscal year 2016, and $14 billion of that amount was to be dedicated 
to working with cybersecurity firms that can provide services to help the U.S. government 
protect against cyberterrorism attacks.16 Thus the government, and the Department of 
Defense in particular, represents a spending force to be reckoned with.
Across these various B2B markets, purchasing methods might vary with the range of 
options being pursued. As Social and Mobile Marketing 7.1 highlights, iPads are playing 
increasing roles in educational institutions and businesses, which suggests that institutions 
need to start making thoughtful purchasing decisions about them too.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the various B2B markets?

216	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
THE BUSINESS‐TO‐BUSINESS  
BUYING PROCESS
As noted in the previous section, the B2B buying process is unique (Exhibit 7.2): It both 
parallels the B2C process and differs in several ways. Both start with need recognition, but 
the information search and alternative evaluation steps are more formal and structured in 
the B2B process. Typically, B2B buyers specify their needs in writing and ask potential 
suppliers to submit formal proposals, whereas B2C buying decisions are usually made by 
individuals or families and do not need formal proposals. Thus, for an individual to buy a 
tablet computer, all that is required is a trip to the store or a few minutes online and perhaps 
some preliminary research about iPads versus competitors.
For a school to buy thousands of tablet computers, however, it must complete requi-
sition forms, accept bids from manufacturers, and obtain approval for the expenditure. 
The final decision rests with a committee, as is the case for most B2B buying decisions, 
which often demand a great deal of consideration. Finally, in B2C buying situations, cus-
tomers evaluate their purchase decision and sometimes experience postpurchase cognitive 
dissonance. But formal performance evaluations of the vendor and the products sold gen-
erally do not occur in the B2C setting, as they do in the B2B setting. Let’s examine all six 
stages in the context of a university buying tablets for its incoming first-year 
students to use as resources.
Stage 1: Need Recognition
In the first stage of the B2B buying process, the buying organization recog-
nizes, through either internal or external sources, that it has an unfilled need. 
Hypothetical University wants to ensure that its students are well educated and 
able to participate in a technologically connected workforce. It also seeks to 
grant them affordable access to required educational resources, from textbooks 
to library access to administrative tasks. The administration of the university 
also has reviewed research suggesting that portable devices, including tablet 
computers, can enhance students’ in-class learning because they can directly 
and constantly interact with the materials and take notes in conjunction with 
the lecture and text, rather than only hearing information or seeing it on a 
whiteboard. The tablets also support innovative learning methodologies, such 
as the uses of interactive clickers in lecture-based courses. Using this informa-
tion, the university has determined it will issue a tablet to each of the 1,200 
students entering as its next freshman class.
Stage 2: Product Specification
After recognizing the need and considering alternative solutions, including 
laptop computers, the university wrote a list of potential specifications that 
vendors might use to develop their proposals. The school’s specifications in-
clude screen size, battery life, processor speed, how the device connects to the 
Internet, and delivery date. In addition, the board of directors of the university 
has requested that a bundle of educational apps be preloaded on the tablets, 
that all other apps be removed, and that each tablet come equipped with a 
 LO7-2	
List the steps in the 
B2B buying process.
Need
recognition
Product
speciﬁcation
RFP
process
Proposal
analysis
and supplier
selection
Order
speciﬁcation
Vendor
performance
assessment
using metrics
E X H I B I T  7.2
Business-to-Business Buying Process
The first step in the B2B decision process 
is to recognize that the university needs to 
purchase 1,200 tablets.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Mark Dierker, photographer

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
217
	
	
screen protector, power cord, cover, stand, keyboard, and headphones. The school hopes  
to obtain a four-year service contract that includes replacement within 24 hours for any 
tablets that are returned to the vendor for servicing.
Stage 3: RFP Process
The request for proposals (RFP) is a common process through which organizations invite 
alternative vendors or suppliers to bid on supplying their required components or specifica-
tions. The purchasing company may simply post its RFP needs on its website or work through 
various B2B web portals or inform their preferred vendors directly. Because the university 
does not have a preferred vendor for tablets yet, it issues an RFP and invites various tablet 
suppliers, technology companies, and other interested parties to bid on the contract.
Smaller companies may lack the ability to attract broad attention to their requests, so 
they might turn to a web portal, an Internet site whose purpose is to be a major starting 
point for users when they connect to the web. Although there are general portals such as 
Yahoo! or MSN, B2B partners connect to specialized or niche portals to participate in on-
line information exchanges and transactions. These exchanges help streamline procurement 
or distribution processes. Portals can provide tremendous cost savings because they elimi-
nate periodic negotiations and routine paperwork, and they offer the means to form a sup-
ply chain that can respond quickly to the buyer’s needs.
Small- to medium-sized companies looking for skilled service workers also can use 
portals such as Guru.com, started to help freelance professionals connect with companies 
that need their services, whether those services entail graphic design and cartooning or 
­finance and accounting advice. Currently, more than 1.5 million professionals list their 
offerings on this service-oriented professional exchange, and more than 30,000 companies 
regularly visit the site to post work orders. Guru.com thus provides value to both compa-
nies and freelancers by offering not only a site for finding each other but also dispute reso-
lution, escrow for payments, and a means to rate freelancer quality.17
Stage 4: Proposal Analysis, Vendor Negotiation, and Selection
The buying organization, in conjunction with its critical decision makers, evaluates all the 
proposals it receives in response to its RFP. Hypothetical University reviews all proposals 
it receives, together with the board of directors, representatives from the teachers’ union, 
and members of the student government. Many firms narrow the process to a few suppli-
ers, often those with which they have existing relationships, and discuss key terms of the 
sale, such as price, quality, delivery, and financing. The university likely considers the bid 
by the company that installed computers in its library, assuming that provider performed 
well. Some firms have a policy that requires them to negotiate with several suppliers, par-
ticularly if the product or service represents a critical component or aspect of the business. 
This policy keeps suppliers on their toes; they know that the buying firm can always shift 
a greater portion of its business to an alternative supplier if it offers better terms.
The university evaluates proposals on the basis of the amount of experience the vendor 
has with tablet computers and similar technology products because it wants to make sure 
that its investment is reliable in the short term and flexible enough to accommodate new 
apps or updates. In addition, the school wants to be sure the technology will remain rele-
vant in the longer term and not become obsolete. The vendor’s ability to meet its specifica-
tions also is important because if the processor is too slow, students are unlikely to make 
use of the devices. The vendor’s financial position provides an important indication of 
whether the vendor will be able to stay in business.
Stage 5: Order Specification
In the fifth stage of the B2B buying process, the firm places its order with its preferred 
supplier (or suppliers). The order includes a detailed description of the goods, prices, de-
livery dates, and, in some cases, penalties for noncompliance. The supplier then sends an 
acknowledgment that it has received the order and fills it by the specified date. In the case 

218	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
of the school’s tablets, the terms are clearly laid out regarding when and how the vendor is 
expected to perform any preventive maintenance, who the contact person is for any prob-
lems with delivery or the tablets themselves, and under what circumstances the vendor will 
be expected to provide a replacement for a malfunctioning tablet. Issues such as mainte-
nance and replacement are important, because the university does not plan to keep any  
inventory of extra tablets on hand.
Stage 6: Vendor Performance Assessment Using Metrics
Just as in the consumer buying process, firms analyze their vendors’ performance so they 
can make decisions about their future purchases. The difference is that in a B2B setting, 
this analysis is typically more formal and objective. Let’s consider how Hypothetical 
University might evaluate the tablet vendor’s performance, as in Exhibit 7.3, using the 
following metrics: delivery (based on promised delivery date), quality, customer service, 
and issue resolution.
1.	
The buying team develops a list of issues that it believes are important to consider in 
the vendor evaluation.
2.	
To determine the importance of each issue (column 1), the buying team assigns an 
importance score to each (column 2). The more important the issue, the higher its 
score, but the importance scores must add up to 1. In this case, the buying team  
believes that customer service and quality are most important, whereas the issue  
resolution and delivery are comparatively less important.
3.	
In the third column, the buying team assigns numbers that reflect its judgments about 
how well the vendor performs. Using a 5-point scale, where 1 equals poor perfor-
mance and 5 equals excellent performance, the university decides that the tablet  
vendor performs quite well on all issues except product quality.
4.	
To calculate an overall performance score in the fourth column, the team combines 
the importance of each issue and the vendor’s performance scores by multiplying 
them. Because the tablet vendor performed well on the most important issues, when 
we add the importance/performance scores in column 4, we find that the overall  
evaluation is pretty good—4.2 on a 5-point scale.
(1)
Key Issues
(2)
Importance Score
(3)
Vendor’s Performance
(4)
Importance ×  
Performance 
(2) × (3)
Customer service
0.40
5
2.0
Issue resolution
0.20
4
0.8
Delivery
0.10
5
0.5
Quality
0.30
3
0.9
Total
1.0
4.2
E X H I B I T  7.3
Evaluating a Vendor’s Performance
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Identify the stages in the B2B buying process.
2.	 How do you perform a vendor analysis?

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
219
	
	
THE BUYING CENTER
In most large organizations, several people are responsible for buying decisions. These 
buying center participants can range from employees who have a formal role in purchas-
ing decisions (i.e., the purchasing or procurement department) to members of the design 
team who will specify the equipment or raw materials needed for employees who will be 
using a new ­machine that is on order. All these employees are likely to play different roles 
in the buying process, which vendors must understand and adapt to in their marketing and 
sales efforts.
We can categorize six buying roles within a typical buying center (see Exhibit 7.4). 
One or more people may take on a certain role, or one person may take on more than one 
of the following roles: (1) initiator, the person who first suggests buying the particular 
product or service; (2) influencer, the person whose views influence other members of the 
buying center in making the final decision; (3) decider, the person who ultimately deter-
mines any part of or the entire buying decision—whether to buy, what to buy, how to buy, 
or where to buy; (4) buyer, the person who handles the paperwork of the actual purchase; 
(5) user, the person who consumes or uses the product or service; and (6) gatekeeper, the 
person who controls information or access, or both, to decision makers and influencers.18
To illustrate how a buying center operates, consider purchases made by a hospital. 
Where do hospitals obtain their X-ray machines, syringes, and bedpans? Why are some 
medical procedures covered in whole or in part by insurance, whereas others are not? Why 
might your doctor recommend one type of allergy medication instead of another?
The Initiator—Your Doctor  When you seek treatment from your physician, he or she 
initiates the buying process by determining the products and services that will best address 
and treat your illness or injury. For example, say you fell backward off your snowboard 
 LO7-3	
Identify the roles within 
the buying center.
Buying
center
Inﬂuencer
Decider
Buyer
User
Initiator
Gatekeeper
E X H I B I T  7.4
Buying Center Roles

220	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
In the buying center, the  
medical device supplier is  
the influencer, whereas the 
doctor is the initiator.
© Custom Medical Stock Photo RF
and, in trying to catch yourself, you shattered your elbow. You require surgery 
to mend the affected area, which includes the insertion of several screws to 
hold the bones in place. Your doctor promptly notifies the hospital to schedule 
a time for the procedure and specifies the brand of screws she wants on hand 
for your surgery.
The Influencer—The Medical Device Supplier, the Pharmacy  For 
years your doctor has been using ElbowMed screws, a slightly higher-priced 
screw. Her first introduction to ElbowMed screws came from the company’s 
sales representative, who visited her office to demonstrate how ElbowMed 
screws were far superior to those of its competition. Your doctor recognized 
ElbowMed as a good value. Armed with empirical data and case studies, 
ElbowMed’s sales rep effectively influenced your doctor’s decision to use 
that screw.
The Decider—The Hospital  Even though your doctor requested ElbowMed 
screws, the hospital ultimately is responsible for deciding whether to buy 
ElbowMed screws. The hospital supplies the operating room, instrumentation, 
and surgical supplies, and, therefore, the hospital administrators must weigh a 
variety of factors to determine whether the ElbowMed screw is not only best for 
the patients but also involves a cost that is reimbursable by various insurance 
providers.
The Buyer  The actual buyer of the screw will likely be the hospital’s materials manager, 
who is charged with buying and maintaining inventory for the hospital in the most cost-­
effective manner. Whereas ElbowMed screws are specific to your type of procedure, other 
items, such as gauze and sutures, may be purchased through a group purchasing organiza-
tion (GPO), which obtains better prices through volume buying.
The User—The Patient  Ultimately, the buying process for this procedure will be greatly 
affected by the user, namely you, and your broken elbow. If you are uncomfortable with the 
procedure or have read about alternative procedures that you prefer, you may decide that 
ElbowMed screws are not the best treatment.
The Gatekeeper—The Insurance Company  Your insurer may believe that ElbowMed 
screws are too expensive and that other screws deliver equally effective results and there-
fore refuse to reimburse the hospital in full or in part for the use of the screws.
In the end, the final purchase decision must take into consideration every buying cen-
ter participant. Ethical and Societal Dilemma 7.1 examines the unethical, illegal, but also 
international practice of influencing the influencers through expensive gifts and payments.
Organizational Culture
A firm’s organizational culture reflects the set of values, traditions, and customs that 
guide its employees’ behavior. The firm’s culture often comprises a set of unspoken guide-
lines that employees share with one another through various work situations. For example, 
Walmart buyers are not allowed to accept even the smallest gift from a vendor, not even a 
cup of coffee. This rule highlights its overall corporate culture: It is a low-cost operator 
whose buyers must base their decisions only on the products’ and vendors’ merits.
At GE, the culture aims to ensure that members and partners regard B2B as a source 
of innovation, not a “boring-to-boring” proposition. Rather than lament the relatively less 
glamorous process of B2B, GE has “decided we are geeky and we are proud of it.”19 There-
fore, rather than turning to some of the more conventional uses of Instagram, General 
Electric (GE) relies on the social media site to communicate with “its people,” those fol-
lowers it affectionately refers to as #AVgeeks. What GE offers to its business customers is 
mainly advanced technology and scientifically based products and services. But those sorts 
of offerings are exactly what get geeks excited, so it offers content that they can share with 
other geeks, as well as with their own customers. In addition to uploading quotes from 
 LO7-4	
Describe the different 
types of organizational 
cultures.

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
221
	
	
Is It Business or Bribery?iv
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 7.1
occur in the context of large business transactions. Increas-
ingly, players in the world’s economies thus are pushing for an 
end to foreign bribery.
In some parts of the world, accepting money, offering expen-
sive gifts, or distributing payments to government and busi-
ness officials to influence business decisions is considered an 
acceptable business practice. In other nations, these practices 
are unethical and illegal. As the world moves to a more global 
economy, pressure is mounting to level the playing field by 
eliminating bribery. Yet companies that have traditionally relied 
on business bribery argue that criminalizing this activity will 
negatively affect their ability to compete. How do executives 
doing business on an international scale respond when a be-
havior that could earn them a lucrative contract in one coun-
try could earn them jail time in another?
	
Whenever businesses cooperate with one another or com-
panies intersect with governments, the opportunity exists for 
bribery. An extravagant gift or economic incentive may mean 
one contractor lands a lucrative contract. A private exchange 
of money between an executive and a public official may result 
in the official driving a new car while the executive’s company 
bypasses a restriction that could hinder its growth. These 
types of interactions occur behind closed doors and between 
two people, yet they can have significant repercussions, in-
cluding unsafe infrastructure, bridges, and buildings, if they 
Although in some parts of the world bribes are part of doing 
business, in the United States they are unethical and illegal.
© James Lauritz/Photodisc/Getty Images RF
Source: Bribes Payers Index Report 2011. Transparency International. http://www.transparency.org/bpi2011/results.
Netherlands
0
2
4
6
8
10
Switzerland
Belgium
Germany
Japan
Australia
Canada
Singapore
United Kingdom
United States
France
Spain
South Korea
Brazil
Hong Kong
Italy
Malaysia
South Africa
Taiwan
India
Turkey
Saudi Arabia
Argentina
United Arab Emirates
Indonesia
Mexico
China
Russia
8.8
8.8
8.7
8.6
8.6
8.5
8.5
8.3
8.3
8.1
8.0
8.0
7.9
7.7
7.6
7.6
7.6
7.6
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.4
7.3
7.3
7.1
7.0
6.5
6.1
Bribe payers index, 2011
10 = never engage in bribery
Perceived corruption levels by country and companies’ propensity to bribe
(continued)

222	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
	
One tactic they are using is a public report called the Bribe 
Payers Index, published by Transparency International, that 
compares corruption rates of countries and industries. This 
investigation reveals unexpected trends, such as evidence that 
bribes passing from one business to another are almost as 
common as bribes slipped to public officials. By highlighting 
those business sectors or countries perceived as the worst 
offenders, the Bribe Payers Index also aims to bring about 
change, whether through embarrassment or economic reper-
cussions that result when companies refuse to do business in 
corrupt economies. Finally, this report highlights suggestions 
for reducing corruption and incentives for improvement.
	
As summarized in the graph opposite, the Transparency  
International Bribe Payers Index reveals that all the world’s 
28 largest economies engage in bribery; China and Russia 
emerged as those most likely to be using money and gifts to 
influence decisions. Both countries have recently begun en-
forcing legal repercussions for companies and individuals 
that engage in international business bribery. For example, 
when reports surfaced that representatives of GlaxoSmith-
Kline (GSK) had bribed doctors, medical practices, and hospi-
tals to prescribe only GSK drugs, China’s news media and 
central government reacted with anger. Calling the drug com-
pany a “criminal godfather,” Chinese authorities encouraged 
consumers to boycott its products. A boycott occurs when a 
group refuses to deal commercially with an organization to 
protest against its policies. As a result, GSK’s business reve-
nues fell by two-thirds in China.
	
The Transparency International report also highlights posi-
tive results of reduced corruption: A business survey con-
ducted in Europe found that two-thirds of respondents believe 
that a company with a reputation for ethical behavior enjoys a 
commercial advantage. Findings such as these, along with im-
proved transparency added to business practices, interna-
tional anticorruption standards, monitoring and enforcement 
of anticorruption business policies and laws, and empower-
ment of whistle-blowers, may also help reduce international 
bribery rates.
Marie Curie on International Women’s Day for example,20 the @generalelectric Instagram 
page highlights pictures taken on its production floor and research labs. It encourages cus-
tomers to submit depictions of how they use GE products in their own locations, from a 
monorail in Sydney to oil rigs in Singapore.21 Employees upload their own shots, giving 
business customers an insider’s view of what is going on with GE and how the products 
they purchase get made.22
Organizational culture also can have a profound influence on purchasing decisions. 
Corporate buying center cultures can be divided into four general types: autocratic, demo-
cratic, consultative, and consensus (as illustrated in Exhibit 7.5). Knowing which buying 
center culture is prevalent in a given organization helps the seller decide how to approach 
that particular client, how and to whom to deliver pertinent information, and to whom to 
make sales presentations.
In an autocratic buying center, even though there may be multiple participants, one 
person makes the decision alone, whereas the majority rules in a democratic buying center. 
Consultative buying centers use one person to make a decision but solicit input from others 
before doing so. Finally, in a 
consensus buying center, all 
members of the team must 
reach a collective agreement 
that they can support a particu-
lar purchase.
Cultures act like living, 
breathing entities that change 
and grow, just as organiza-
tions do. Even within some 
companies, culture may vary 
by geography, by division, or 
by functional department. 
Whether you are a member 
of the buying center or a sup-
plier trying to sell to it, it is 
extremely important to un-
derstand the buying center's 
culture and the roles of the 
key players in the buying 
process. Not knowing the 
GE communicates with its B2B 
customers via Instagram by 
providing interesting pictures 
that geeks love, like its Guinness 
World Record holder combined- 
cycle, the most efficient in the 
world.
Source: General Electric Company/ 
Instagram

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
223
	
	
Buying culture
Democratic
Consensus
Consultative
Autocratic
E X H I B I T  7.5
Organizational Buying Culture
roles of the key players could waste a lot of time and even alienate the real decision 
maker.
Building B2B Relationships
In B2B contexts there are a multitude of ways to enhance relationships, and these methods 
seem to be advancing and evolving by the minute. For example, blogs and social media 
can build awareness, provide search engine results, educate potential and existing clients 
about products or services, and warm up a seemingly cold corporate culture. Fiberlink 
offers document and mobile enterprise management services. To make its offerings and 
content more engaging, it launched a series of fun 
­webinars and video campaigns filled with pop culture 
references. One webinar, “Game of Phones,” used 
comparisons from the popular HBO series Game of 
Thrones to highlight the different mobile operating 
systems and detail how Fiberlink’s platform could en-
able business customers to leverage their content on 
all of them. Thus Apple, as the current market leader, 
was presented as the House Lannister; Android was 
the House Targaryen because the factors that kept it on 
the sidelines also have helped it gain power; and 
Windows was House Stark because it is “full of battle 
scars.” The engaging campaign allowed the company 
to generate 20 percent more new leads than previous 
campaigns had achieved.23
An expert who offers advice and knowledge about 
products increases brand awareness, and a blog is a 
great medium for this information. Web analytics, such 
To make its offerings more en-
gaging, Fiberlink launched a se-
ries of fun webinars and video 
campaigns, like this one that 
“plays” with the popular HBO 
series Game of Thrones.
Source: androidcentral.com 

224	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
as traffic on the website and the number of comments, can offer tangible evaluations, but a 
better measure is how often the blog gets mentioned elsewhere, the media ­attention it re-
ceives, and the interaction, involvement, intimacy, and influence that it promotes. 
The LinkedIn.com social network is mainly used for professional networking in the 
B2B marketplace (see Social and Mobile Marketing 7.2). Twitter, the microblogging site, 
is also valuable for B2B marketers because they can communicate with other businesses as 
often as they want. Companies such as HootSuite make it easier for companies using Twitter 
to manage their followers, update their posts, track analytics, and even schedule tweets, just 
as they would to manage a traditional marketing campaign.24
When executives confront an unfulfilled business need, they normally turn to white 
papers prepared by potential B2B marketers.25 White papers are a promotional technique 
used by B2B sellers to provide information about a product or service in an educational con-
text, thereby not appearing like a promotion or propaganda. The goal of white papers is to 
provide valuable information that a potential B2B buyer can easily understand and that will 
help the company address its problems with new solutions. For instance, say a B2B seller has 
a technologically advanced solution for an inventory problem. Since the executives of the 
Making the Most of LinkedInv
Social & Mobile Marketing 7.2
Business-to-business (B2B) marketing may seem relatively im-
personal, but even in formalized, standardized buying situa-
tions, personal relationships count. Social media, with a bit of 
a tweak, play a key role in this setting, just as they do in con-
sumer contexts. Perhaps the best example is LinkedIn, the so-
cial media site for business professionals. Launched in 2003, 
the site attracts approximately two new members every single 
second. It has more than 400 million members worldwide, 
about 10 percent of whom are college students or recent 
graduates. The site is available in more than 19 languages and 
more than 200 countries, which means that it can help B2B 
interactions overcome geographic boundaries.
	
In particular, LinkedIn can boast that executives from all the 
Fortune 500 companies have memberships on its site. 
Accordingly, its promise for networking, whether individually 
or for the company, is virtually unsurpassed. Such networking 
entails several key groups:
• 
Customers and prospective customers. LinkedIn allows  
a firm or its representatives to introduce themselves to 
possible buyers, using a credible and easily accessible 
format. The Q&A option on LinkedIn pages also allows 
customers to ask questions and suppliers to demonstrate 
their expertise.
• 
Investors. The LinkedIn page offers tangible evidence of 
the firm’s existence and its promise, which is critical infor-
mation for outsiders who might be willing to invest in its 
development.
• 
Suppliers. By starting their own group on LinkedIn, B2B 
buyers might better identify which suppliers in the market 
are best matched with their needs and most interested in 
providing the resources they need.
• 
Employees and prospective employees. LinkedIn is a 
great source for finding employees who are diligent,  
professional, interested, and qualified. Furthermore, if a 
firm retains its links to former employees, it can gain a 
good source of referrals—assuming those employees left 
on good terms.
• 
Analysts. The job of an analyst is to find detailed informa-
tion about a company and then recommend it, or not, to 
the market. LinkedIn gives firms a means to provide that 
information in a credible but still firm-controlled context.
	
The site also provides sophisticated analytics for keeping 
track of all these networking opportunities. Users can see who 
visits their pages, which descriptions they view, and even com-
pare their LinkedIn performance against competitors’ pages.
LinkedIn is perhaps the best social media site for networking 
with business professionals.
© Paul Sakuma/AP Photo

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
225
	
	
potential B2B buying firm are not technologically oriented, the B2B seller creates a white 
paper to explain the solution in nontechnological terms so that the buying firm’s executives 
can understand and appreciate the solution before they consider a purchase.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the six buying roles?
2.	 What are the types of cultures that exist in buying centers?
THE BUYING SITUATION
The type of buying situation also affects the B2B decision process. Most B2B buying situa-
tions can be categorized into three types: new buys, modified rebuys, and straight rebuys 
(see Exhibit 7.6). To illustrate the nuances among these three buying situations, consider 
how colleges and universities develop relationships with some of their suppliers. Most uni-
versities negotiate with sports apparel manufacturers, such as Nike, Reebok, and New 
Balance, to establish purchasing agreements for their sports teams. Those with successful 
sports teams have been very successful in managing these relationships, to the benefit of 
both the team and the company.26 Large universities that win national championships, such 
as the University of Alabama or University of Southern California (USC), can solicit spon-
sorships in exchange for free athletic equipment, whereas less popular teams or smaller 
schools typically must accept an upfront sponsorship and then agree to buy from that vendor 
for a specified period of time. In exchange for this sponsorship, the vendors gain the right to 
sell apparel with the university logo and require the school’s team to purchase only their 
equipment. Many apparel companies make a significant portion of their revenue through 
sponsorship deals that grant them the right to sell apparel with popular university logos.
 LO7-5	
Detail different buying 
situations.
Modiﬁed rebuy
New buy
Buying situations
Straight rebuy
E X H I B I T  7.6
Buying Situations

226	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
In a new buy situation, a customer purchases a good or service for the first time,27 
which means the buying decision is likely to be quite involved because the buyer or the 
buying organization does not have any experience with the item. In the B2B context, the 
buying center is likely to proceed through all six steps in the buying process and involve 
many people in the buying decision. Typical new buys might range from capital equipment 
to components that the firm previously made itself but now has decided to purchase  
instead. For example, a small college might need to decide which apparel company to  
approach for a sponsorship. For smaller colleges, finding a company that will sponsor  
multiple sports teams—such as women’s soccer as well as men’s basketball—is a priority, 
though it also must balance other considerations such as the length of the contract. Some 
vendors offer perks to attract new buyers; New Balance offers teams that sign up for long-
term contracts custom fittings for their players’ shoes. Each season, a sales team from New 
Balance visits the school and custom fits each player to achieve the best fit possible.
With another sort of example, Adding Value 7.2 highlights how HubSpot helps buyers 
become more informed about products before engaging in the B2B buying process.
Another example of a new buy occurs in the fashion industry, where runway shows offer 
wholesale buyers an opportunity to inspect new lines of clothing and place orders. Designer 
sales often occur during private meetings with buyers, both before and after runway shows. 
Buyers meet with the designers, discuss the line, and observe a model wearing the clothing. 
The buyer’s challenge, then: determine which items will sell best in the retail stores he or she 
represents while trying to imagine what the item will look like in regular, as opposed to 
model, sizes. Buyers must also negotiate purchases for orders that may not be delivered for as 
long as six months. Buyers can suggest modifications to make the clothing more or less ex-
pensive or more comfortable for their customers. Buyers and designers recognize the signif-
icant value of this relationship, which occasionally prompts buyers to purchase a few items 
from a designer even if those items do not exactly fit the store’s core customers’ tastes. Doing 
so ensures that the buyer will have access to the designer’s collection for the next season.28
In a modified rebuy, the buyer has purchased a similar product in the past but has 
decided to change some specifications such as the desired price, quality level, customer 
service level, options, and so forth. Current vendors are likely to have an advantage in  
acquiring the sale in a modified rebuy situation as long as the reason for the modification 
is not dissatisfaction with the vendor or its products. The Ohio State University’s sports 
department might ask adidas to modify the specifications for its basketball shoes after no-
ticing some improvements made to the adidas shoes used by the University of Michigan.
Schools like the University of 
Alabama negotiate with sports 
apparel manufacturers, such 
as Nike, to get free athletic 
equipment. The manufacturers, 
in turn, get to sell apparel with 
the university logo.
© Bob Rosato/Sports Illustrated/Getty 
Images

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
227
	
	
Adding Value 7.2
Getting Out the Message with Inbound Marketingvi
Search engines, company web pages, social media sites, and 
the blogosphere have transformed the way businesses learn 
about and shop for products and services. Unlike in the not-so-
distant past, when a prospective customer had little knowl-
edge of a vendor’s products at first contact, today’s customers 
have searched the Internet using relevant keywords and re-
viewed company websites by the time they speak with a ven-
dor. As a result, they are well informed and seriously interested 
in a purchase, adding new efficiency to B2B transactions. But 
this development works only if companies have the marketing 
savvy to use today’s technology to their advantage.
Two entrepreneurs noticed that small companies and start-
ups without the skills to use these tools effectively get lost in 
the noise, even if prospective customers are searching for 
vendors in their niche. Furthermore, companies that enlist 
marketing firms are disadvantaged if those firms rely solely on 
traditional best practices such as print advertising, telemarket-
ing, and trade shows. To help these businesses, the two entre-
preneurs launched a software marketing program, HubSpot, 
designed to help companies transform their marketing ap-
proach. The idea was to abandon intrusive outbound market-
ing, which people are increasingly able to screen out, and 
replace it with inbound marketing. Inbound marketing, defined 
as any marketing tactic that relies on earning customer inter-
est rather than buying it, is built on the understanding that 
Facebook, Twitter, online user reviews, smartphones, blogs, 
and websites are the true force behind the way consumers in 
today’s marketplace actually learn and shop.
HubSpot’s software contains easy-to-use tools that help 
companies get noticed, convert website visitors to customers, 
and analyze the effectiveness of marketing efforts across  
channels. Among the tools in the first category, for example, is a 
keyword grader that helps companies create content and a list 
of relevant keywords to improve search engine odds and ranking. 
Using the lead conversion tools, marketers without technical 
skills can create landing pages with customizable lead capture 
forms, auto-response e-mails, and thank-you pages. These tools 
can also be used to send customized e-mails to new leads on a 
self-selected schedule. The marketing analytics tools allow 
HubSpot’s customers to track competitors, evaluate the impact 
of a blog, and compare the effectiveness of all marketing chan-
nels to provide important insight into the behaviors of custom-
ers and the value of each channel to the bottom line.
HubSpot’s approach has been successful for both the 
founders and their customers. The company, launched in June 
2006, currently has over 13,000 customers.
One customer, the nonprofit National Institute for Fitness and 
Sport (NIFS), wanted to increase its visibility with corporate and 
retirement fitness centers. After experiencing difficulty driving 
traffic to the company website—and after an expensive market-
ing company campaign proved ineffective—NIFS turned to 
HubSpot. The results were increases in traffic and leads by more 
than 200 percent and an increase in social media traffic of  
16 percent. According to NIFS’s director of media, the fitness com-
pany “picked up a number of requests for proposals from busi-
nesses that never would have paid attention to us initially because 
we were able to raise where we sit in the search engines.”
Companies such as HubSpot are taking advantage of 
changes that have already occurred in the marketplace to re-
duce costs and improve the effectiveness of marketing. As 
technology evolves and more business and individual shop-
pers use online information to make their purchasing deci-
sions, businesses will have to adapt their marketing strategies 
to encompass new technologies and new shopping behaviors.
HubSpot helps its customers get noticed on the Internet.
© Hubspot

228	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Straight rebuys occur when the buyer or buying organization simply buys additional 
units of products that had previously been purchased. Many B2B purchases are likely to 
fall in the straight rebuy category. For example, sports teams need to repurchase a tremen-
dous amount of equipment that is not covered by apparel sponsorships, such as tape for 
athletes’ ankles or weights for the weight room. The purchase of bottled water also typi-
cally involves a straight rebuy from an existing supplier.
These varied types of buying situations call for very different marketing and selling 
strategies. The most complex and difficult is the new buy because it requires the buying or-
ganization to make changes in its current practices and purchases. As a result, several mem-
bers of the buying center will likely become involved, and the level of their involvement will 
be more intense than in the case of modified and straight rebuys. In new buying situations, 
buying center members also typically spend more time at each stage of the B2B buying pro-
cess, similar to the extended decision-making process that consumers use in the B2C process. 
In comparison, in modified rebuys the buyers spend less time at each stage of the B2B  
buying process, similar to limited decision making in the B2C process (see Chapter 6).
In straight rebuys, however, the buyer is often the only member of the buying center 
involved in the process. Like a consumer’s habitual purchase, straight rebuys often enable 
the buyer to recognize the firm’s need and go directly to the fifth step in the B2B buying 
process, skipping the product specification, RFP process, proposal analysis, and supplier 
selection steps.
Over the course of a B2B relationship, the type of buying process also can change. The 
buying process for restaurants appears poised to undergo a significant transformation because 
of the potential mergers between food distributors in the United States. Restaurants that once 
considered their purchases of hamburger meat a straight rebuy might find that they need to 
reconsider the process. Because the merger would create a single, dominant food supplier, the 
new company will gain much more power over pricing. In turn, restaurants might need to 
enter into a modified rebuy (e.g., purchase lower-quality hamburger to cut costs).
Thus, in various ways B2B marketing both differs from and mirrors the consumer be-
havior (B2C) process we detailed in Chapter 6. The differences in the six stages of the 
buying process make sense in view of the many unique factors that come into play. The 
constitution of the buying center (initiator, influencer, decider, buyer, user, and gate-
keeper), the culture of the purchasing firm (autocratic, democratic, consultative, or consen-
sus), and the context of the buying situation (new buy, modified rebuy, straight rebuy) all 
influence the B2B buying process in various ways, which means that sellers must be  
constantly aware of these factors if they want to be successful in their sales attempts.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 How do new buy, straight rebuy, and modified rebuy differ?
	
	
Describe the ways in which business-to-business 
(B2B) firms segment their markets.
	
	
All firms want to divide the market into groups of 
customers with different needs, wants, or characteris-
tics who therefore might appreciate products or ser-
vices geared especially toward them. On a broad 
level, B2B firms divide the market into four types: 
LO7-1
manufacturers or service providers, resellers, institu-
tions, and government. Manufacturers and service 
providers purchase materials to make their products 
and components and offer expertise to help run their 
businesses, such as computer and telephone systems. 
Resellers are primarily wholesalers, distributors, or 
retailers that sell the unchanged products. Institutions 
bchsu_tt
Reviewing Learning Objectives

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
229
	
	
include nonprofit organizations such as hospitals, 
schools, or churches. Finally, governments purchase 
all types of goods and services; in the United States, 
defense is among the largest expenditures.
	
	
List the steps in the B2B buying process.
	
	
Similar to the B2C buying process, the B2B process 
consists of several stages: need recognition; product 
specification; the RFP process; proposal analysis, 
vendor negotiation, and selection; order specifica-
tion; and vendor performance assessment using 
metrics. The B2B process tends to be more formal-
ized and structured than the customer buying  
process.
	
	
Identify the roles within the buying center.
	
	
The initiator first suggests the purchase. The influ-
encer affects important people’s perceptions and fi-
nal decisions. The decider ultimately determines at 
least some of the buying decision—whether, what, 
how, or where to buy. The buyer handles the details 
of the actual purchase. The user consumes or em-
ploys the product or service. The gatekeeper con-
trols information and access to decision makers and 
influencers. In B2B situations, it is likely that sev-
eral people, organized into a buying center, will be 
involved in making the purchase decision. The ven-
dor must understand the relationships among the 
LO7-2
LO7-3
participants of the buying center to be effective. A 
firm’s organizational culture can also influence the 
decision process. For instance, if a firm is trying to 
sell to a young, high-tech computer component 
manufacturer, it might be well advised to send sales-
people who are fluent in technology-speak and can 
easily relate to the customer.
	
	
Describe the different types of organizational 
cultures.
	
	
Firm culture consists of unspoken guidelines that 
employees share through various work situations. 
They generally can be classified as autocratic, in 
which one person makes most decisions; demo-
cratic, where the majority rules; consultative, in 
which one person makes decisions based on the in-
put of others; or consensus, which requires all mem-
bers of the team to reach collective agreement.
	
	
Detail different buying situations.
	
	
The buying process depends to a great extent on the 
situation. If a firm is purchasing a product or service 
for the first time (i.e., new buy), the process is much 
more involved than if it is engaging in a straight re-
buy of the same item again. A modified rebuy falls 
somewhere in the middle, such that the buyer wants 
essentially the same thing but with slightly different 
terms or features.
LO7-4
LO7-5
∙	 autocratic buying center,  222
∙	 boycott,  222
∙	 business-to-business (B2B)  
marketing,  210
∙	 buyer,  219
∙	 buying center,  219
∙	 consensus buying center,  222
∙	 consultative buying center,  222
∙	 decider,  219
∙	 democratic buying center,  222
∙	 derived demand,  210
∙	 distributor,  213
∙	 gatekeeper,  219
∙	 inbound marketing,  227
∙	 influencer,  219
∙	 initiator,  219
∙	 modified rebuy,  226
∙	 new buy,  226
∙	 organizational culture,  220
∙	 request for proposals (RFP),  217
∙	 reseller,  213
∙	 straight rebuy,  228
∙	 user,  219
∙	 web portal,  217
∙	 white papers,  224
∙	 wholesaler,  213
Key Terms 
Net Savvy
1.	 Ballymaloe Country Relish is an Irish delicacy sold in fine 
food stores throughout Ireland. For consumers outside  
Ireland, it also lists various sellers in different countries. 
Visit ballymaloecountryrelish.ie and click on “Stocklist” 
to find the most convenient source for you personally. 
Why does Ballymaloe offer such information and direct 
links to other retailers? What benefits does doing so 
provide the relish maker, the retailer, and customers?
2.	 Siemens worked with the custom motorcycle manufac-
turer Orange County Chopper to build the Smart Chop-
per—the first electric motorcycle. Visit http://www.usa 
.siemens.com/smartchopper/ to learn about the specifi-
cations and details of this new form of chopper. How is 
Siemens using this innovation to improve its relation-
ships with its business customers? What other outcomes 
might this services provider expect from its efforts?

230	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Marketing Applications
1.	 Provide an example of each of the four types of B2B 
organizations.
2.	 What are the major differences between the consumer 
buying process discussed in Chapter 6 and the B2B buy-
ing process discussed in this chapter? Use buying iPads 
for personal use versus buying more than 100 iPads for 
a firm to illustrate the key points.
3.	 Assume you have written this textbook and are going to 
attempt to sell it to your school. Identify the six mem-
bers of the buying center. What role would each play in 
the decision process? Rank them in terms of how much 
influence they would have on the decision, with 1 being 
most influential and 6 being least influential. Will this 
ranking be different in other situations?
4.	 Now provide an example of the three types of buying 
situations that the bookstore at your school might face 
when buying textbooks.
5.	 Finally, discuss for which types of products the book-
store would do a straight rebuy and for which it would 
pursue a modified rebuy.
6.	 Mazda is trying to assess the performance of two manu-
facturers that could supply music systems for its vehicles. 
Using the information in the accompanying table, deter-
mine which manufacturer Mazda should use.
7.	 Describe the organizational culture at your school or 
job. How would knowledge of this particular organiza-
tion’s culture help a B2B salesperson sell products or 
services to the organization?
8.	 You have just started to work in the purchasing office of 
a major pharmaceutical firm. The purchasing manager 
has asked you to assist in writing an RFP for a major 
purchase. The manager gives you a sheet detailing the 
specifications for the RFP. While reading the specifica-
tions, you realize that they have been written to be ex-
tremely favorable to one bidder. How should you handle 
this situation?
1.	 Which of the following statements regarding the B2B 
buying process is true? 
a.  The B2B buying process is identical to the B2C 
buying process.
b.  The B2B buying process is less complex than the 
B2C buying process.
c.  In the B2B buying process, decisions are made 
quickly and without much consideration.
d.  In the B2B buying process, formal performance 
evaluations of the vendor generally do not occur. 
e.  In the B2B buying process, the search for informa-
tion and evaluation of alternatives is more formal 
and structured.
2.	 In a 
 situation, the buying center is likely to 
proceed through all six steps in the buying process and 
involve many people in the buying decision. 
a.  straight rebuy
b.  standard rebuy
c.  modified rebuy
d.  new buy 
e.  capital buy
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
Issues
Importance 
Weights
Manufacturer 
A’s Performance
Manufacturer  
B’s Performance
Sound
0.4
5
3
Cost
0.3
2
4
Delivery time
0.1
2
2
Brand cachet
0.2
5
1
Total
1
Performance Evaluation of Brands

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
231
	
	
STAPLES: THE BIG BOX RETAILER THAT’S REALLY  
A B2B POWERHOUSE
Probably every reader of this book has visited a Staples store or its website at least once, 
needing to stock up on back-to-school supplies, grab a roll of packing tape, or take a look 
at the newest printers available in the market. Clearly, selling to individual consumers is 
important to Staples. But some of its greatest growth, and some of its most important mar-
keting efforts, relate to its Staples Advantage division, which provides business customers 
with services and support.
	
This support may be most valuable for small businesses, which often lack the re-
sources to manage all their various functions on their own. Most straightforwardly, Sta-
ples Advantage provides companies with the behind-the-scenes supplies that are 
necessary to keep the doors open: coffee machines, sugar, and creamer to stock em-
ployee break rooms; janitorial supplies and floor mats that keep the place looking clean; 
paper towels and soap dispensers in restrooms; and office equipment to ensure that 
workers can keep their files organized and their workspaces productive. To facilitate 
these offerings, Staples has begun equipping all its B2B sales associates in the field with 
iPads that are loaded with a virtual assistant. Thus, rather than relying on their recall or 
a bulky product catalog, they can depend on the virtual tool to determine which type of 
furniture polish will save their business clients the most money while still enabling them 
to keep all their surfaces free of dirt.29 
	
To appeal even more to these small-business owners and provide them with not just 
office supplies but also ideas on how to run their offices, Staples has introduced the 
Quick Wins app. The app tracks the small businesses’ performances on a range of mea-
sures, including social media engagement, website traffic, and financial metrics, all in 
one place. In this case, the innovative offering is a clear response to customer demand. 
Through its research, Staples determined that approximately 41 percent of its small-­
business customers expressed their need for help with these measures of performance, 
but they also did not know which metrics were most important or how to measure them 
accurately. Worried about their ability to keep up with the information, respondents to 
Staples’ surveys also noted that they would prefer for all the information to be available 
in one easy-to-read dashboard. In helping business customers track key data regularly, 
Staples promises to develop customized, specific suggestions for how the business cus-
tomers can expand their firms and increase business. Furthermore, through the Quick 
Wins app, users can interact with other small-business owners, seeking answers and 
­support from their peers.30
Once they determine their performance, small-business owners likely identify sources 
of improvement. Pursuing such improvements often requires new investments, especially 
monetary ones—a resource that small-business owners usually lack. Therefore, Staples’ 
latest service introduction is Lendio, an online financing arm that facilitates loans for 
these customers. Accessing the loan forms through Staples’ main website, business cus-
tomers can provide the necessary information.31 Lendio then forwards the information to 
a relevant lender and maintains the financing agreement. In just a few months, Lendio had 
facilitated close to $1.5 million in loans to small firms, such as Bubba Nubb’s Lunch 
Wagon, which used the loan to equip its food truck, or Hitt Medical Writing, which spent 
the money to hire new employees and expand its capacity to provide content to medical 
publications.32
By spreading and expanding its B2B offerings, Staples effectively protects against 
upheaval in any one market. Sales that it categorizes as B2B account for approximately 
one-third of its $23 billion in annual revenue. The revenues earned through Lendio for ex-
ample are still just a tiny percentage of those totals, but by adding this service, Staples 
achieves two critical goals. First, it establishes itself as a source for such services, so the 
Chapter Case Study 

232	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
contributions to its bottom line might grow over time. Second, it makes sure that it is avail-
able for every need that a business customer might imagine. By doing so, it becomes a true 
partner that businesses turn to so that they can serve their own customers. 
Questions
1.	
Imagine a small business that has long bought its office supplies from Staples. It 
reads about Lendio and considers whether to solicit a loan. What kind of buying  
situation has this small business entered? 
2.	
What attributes should this small business use to evaluate Staples as vendor? What 
about Lendio? Using those attributes for Staples and Lendio, perform two separate 
vendor analyses.
Endnotes
	 1.	 David Schultz, “Top 100 Retailers 2015,” Stores Magazine, July 1, 
2015; National Retail Foundation, “Top 100 Retailers Chart 2015,” 
https://nrf.com/2015/top100-table. 
	2.	 Pierre Mitchell, “Amazon Takes Stage with Oracle, Enters B2B 
Market—So What?” Spend Matters, February 3, 2015. 
	3.	 Clare O’Connor, “Amazon Launches Amazon Business 
Marketplace, Will Close AmazonSupply,” Forbes, April 28, 2015. 
	4.	 Ron Nixon, “Postal Service to Make Sunday Deliveries for 
Amazon,” The New York Times, November 11, 2013. 
	5.	 Marshall Hargrave, “Amazon.com, Inc. (AMZN): Sights Set On 
The Shipping Industry,” ETF Daily News, January 7, 2016, http://
etfdailynews.com/2016/01/07/amazon-com-inc-amzn-sights-set-
on-the-shipping-industry/. 
	6.	 “Amazon Unveils Futuristic Plan: Delivery by Drone,” CBS News, 
December 1, 2013, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/amazon- 
unveils-futuristic-plan-delivery-by-drone/. 
	 7.	 “Amazon Prime Air,” http://www.amazon.com/
b?node=8037720011.
	8.	  “Our Vision,” https://www.amazonrobotics.com/#/vision. 
	9.	 Steve Banker, “Robots In the Warehouse: It’s Not Just Amazon,” 
Forbes, January 11, 2016, http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
stevebanker/2016/01/11/robots-in-the-warehouse-its-not-just- 
amazon/3/#51e85eff4550. 
	10.	 Samuel Gibs, “Battle for the Car: Will Google, Apple, or 
Microsoft Dominate?” The Guardian, March 6, 2014, http://
www.theguardian.com. 
	11.	 Corey Eridon, “The Average Large Company Has 178 Social 
Media Accounts,” Hub Spot, January 10, 2012, http://blog. 
hubspot.com. 
	12.	 http://www.constantcontact.com. 
	13.	 Ibid. 
	14.	 http://www.volkswagenag.com. 
	15.	 http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/content/en/
brands_and_products.html. 
	16.	 “The President’s Budget for Fiscal Year 2016,” Office of 
Management and Budget, February 2, 2015, https://www.white-
house.gov/sites/default/files/omb/budget/fy2016/assets/budget.pdf. 
	17.	 http://www.guru.com. 
	18.	 These definitions are provided by http://www.marketingpower.
com (the American Marketing Association’s website). We have 
bolded the key terms. 
	19.	 E. J. Schultz, “GE Tells the Secret of Making Geeky Cool,” 
Advertising Age, October 5, 2013, http://adage.com. 
	20.	Meghan Keaney Anderson, “10 Exceptional B2B Content 
Marketing Examples,” HubSpot, June 9, 2015, http://blog. 
hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/33505/10-B2B-Companies- 
That-Create-Exceptional-Content.aspx.
	21.	 https://www.pinterest.com/generalelectric/geinspiredme/. 
	22.	http://blog.business.instagram.com/post/30960118045/ge- 
instagrapher-contest-a-look-inside-general. 
	23.	Erin Hogg, “Case Study–B2B Content Marketing: Video 
Campaign Leveraging Pop Culture Lifts New Leads Generated 
20%,” Marketing Sherpa, February 4, 2015, http://www. 
marketingsherpa.com/article/case-study/video-campaign- 
leverages-pop-culture. 
	24.	http://www.hootsuite.com. 
	25.	Tracey Peden, “The Use of White Papers in Today’s B2B 
Market,” Marketing Resources Blog, May 28, 2013, http://blog.
ubmcanon.com/bid/285080/.
	26.	Michael Krause, “How Does Oregon Football Keep Winning?  
Is It the Uniforms?,” Grantland, August 30, 2011, http://www.
grantland.com.
	27.	Fabiana Ferreira et al., “The Transition from Products to 
Solutions: External Business Model Fit and Dynamics,”  
Industrial Marketing Management 42, no. 7 (2013), pp. 1093–1101; 
Mark W. Johnston and Greg W. Marshall, Contemporary 
Selling: Building Relationships, Creating Value (New York: 
Routledge, 2013); Barton A. Weitz, Stephen B. Castleberry, and 
John F. Tanner, Selling Building Partnerships, 6th ed. (Burr 
Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill /Irwin, 2005), p. 93.e
	28.	Leslie Kaufman, “Stone Washed Blue Jeans (Minus the Wash),” 
The New York Times, November 1, 2011, http://www.nytimes.
com.
	29.	Robert Hackett, “Staples, Never Stationary,” Forbes, March 9, 
2015. 
	30.	Mike Troy, “Staples’ New Digital Tool to Help Small Biz,” Retailing 
Today, January 4, 2016. 
	31.	 See http://www.staples.com/sbd/cre/business-loans/. 
	32.	Paul Demery, “Staples Connects Growing Businesses with  
Its Online Financing Service,” Internet Retailer, May 28, 2015, 
https://www.internetretailer.com/2015/05/28/staples- 
connects-growing-businesses-its-online-financing-se. 
	 i.	 Quentin Harvey, “IBM Plans Big Spending for the Cloud,” The 
New York Times, January 17, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com; 
Alex Barinka, “IBM’s Watson to Help Rich DBS Clients with 
‘Jeopardy’ Smarts,” Bloomberg Technology, January 8, 2014, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/; Robert McMillan, “IBM Buys 
Weather Company’s Digital Assets, Expanding Move into Data 

	
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVEN	
233
	
	
Crunching,” The Wall Street Journal, October 28, 2015; Dan 
Berthiaume, “Under Armour Seeks Deep Understanding of 
Customer Fitness,” Retailing Today, January 8, 2016; Lauren 
Goode, “IBM’s Watson Will Tell You When to Sleep, Exercise, 
and Eat,” The Verge, January 7, 2016, http://www.theverge.
com/2016/1/7/10726592/ibm-under-armour-watson-ua-record-
app-ces-2016. 
	 ii.	 Kayla Cobb, “Case Study–Event Marketing: Fuji Xerox Achieves 
240% of Sales Target Via a Fashion Show,” Marketing Sherpa, 
September 16, 2015, http://www.marketingsherpa.com/article/
case-study/b2b-achieves-target-with-fashion-show#; Courtney 
Eckerle, “Fuji Xerox Launches New B2B Product with a Fashion 
Show,” Marketing Sherpa Blog, December 29, 2015, http://
sherpablog.marketingsherpa.com/marketing/fuji-xerox-fashion- 
show/; http://www.xerox.com/about-xerox/75th-anniversary/
enus.html.
	iii.	 Stephanie Reitz, “Many US Schools Adding iPads, Trimming 
Textbooks,” Yahoo Finance, September 3, 2011, http://finance.
yahoo.com; “Do iPads in Schools Change Behavior?,” February 
22, 2011, http://www.ipadinschools.com; Nick Wingfield, “Once 
Wary, Apple Warms Up to Business Market,” The New York 
Times, November 15, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com; Rachel King, 
“Apple Woos Businesses Despite Security Worries,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, July 7, 2010, http://www.msnbc.msn.com; Dawn 
Kawamoto, “iPad 2 Launch Adds Muscle to Apple’s Invasion of 
Corporate America,” Daily Finance, March 10, 2011, http://www.
dailyfinance.com; Leander Kahney, “iPad May Replace 
Computers and Textbooks in Schools, Experts Predict,” Cult of 
Mac, http://www.cultofmac.com.
	iv.	 Sean Silverthorne, “Business Ethics: Pay the Bribe?,” CBS 
Money Watch, http://www.cbsnews.com; Stephen H. Unger, 
“Ethical Aspects of Bribing People in Other Countries,” http://
www1.cs.columbia.edu; Transparency International, “Bribe 
Payers Index 2011,” http://bpi.transparency.org/; “International 
Back Scratching,” The Economist, November 2, 2011, http://
www.economist.com; Julia Kollewe, “GlaxoSmithKline’s Boss’s 
2013 Bonus Doubled, Despite Scandal in China,”The Guardian, 
February 27, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com; Ernst and 
Young, “European Fraud Survey 2011: Recovery, Regulation and 
Integrity,” http://www.ey.com.
	 v.	 LinkedIn Press Center, “About Us,” http://press.linkedin.com; Heidi 
Cohen, “5 LinkedIn Business Goals,” March 25, 2011, http:// 
heidicohen.com; Maria Tabaka, “How to Launch a Linked- In 
Company Page,” Inc., April 17, 2011, http://www.inc.com.
	vi.	 http://www.hubspot.com; http://www.hubspot.com/customer- 
case-studies/; “Should Your Startup Be Hubspotting?” Tech 
Cocktail, May 6, 2013, http://www.tech.co; “2013 State of 
Inbound Marketing,” HubSpot, May 2013, http://www. 
stateofinboundmarketing.com, http://www.hubspot.com/ 
2014-year-in-review. 

CHAPTER 8
 I
n its home country, Netflix has approximately 34 million 
U.S. subscribers. That’s a lot of streaming viewers, but it 
isn’t nearly enough to ensure the company’s long-term sur-
vival. Accordingly, Netflix has initiated a staged approach 
to going global, entering one or two international markets 
at a time, in an attempt to ensure that its positioning and 
offers align with each market’s demands and regulations.
In 2012, Netflix started with six international markets: 
Norway, Finland, Sweden, Denmark, the United Kingdom, 
and Ireland. In 2013, Netflix limited its expansion to just 
one nation, the Netherlands. Now it is heading farther 
across the Continent, with introductions in Germany and 
France, which rank fourth and sixth worldwide, respec-
tively, in the sizes of their broadband markets. The promise 
is seemingly too great for Netflix to ignore: millions of 
European households that, because of their existing ac-
cess to broadband services in Europe, already represent 
a strong potential market.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO8-1	 Describe the components of a country market assessment.
	LO8-2	 Understand the marketing opportunities in BRIC countries.
	LO8-3	 Identify the various market entry strategies.
	LO8-4	 Highlight the similarities and differences between a domestic marketing strategy and a global  
marketing strategy.
GLOBAL 
MARKETING

rights to traditional Hollywood blockbusters and 
­independent films, it needs to purchase access to local 
televised content and national movies to appeal to each 
country’s viewers. Moreover, it has to gain name recogni-
tion through national-level marketing. Due to such 
­investments, its international streaming unit already has 
been operating at an annual loss of several hundred 
­million dollars.
Yet Netflix exhibits great confidence that it will be 
able to meet these national-level challenges and emerge 
victorious. In particular, it notes that the European Union 
has committed to net neutrality, which is a distinct bene-
fit for the streaming service. Thus, it plans to expand its 
European presence to Belgium, Austria, Luxembourg, and 
Switzerland within the next year or so. Furthermore, 
Netflix CEO Reed Hastings predicts that the company 
soon will earn 80 percent of its revenue from interna-
tional units—a massive leap compared with the 27 per-
cent achieved recently.1
Yet as its staggered approach reflects, entering 
the European Union is not a simple matter of one 
­offer for everyone. Instead, each nation has its own 
rules and regulations regarding streaming content, as 
well as its own existing competitive market. In France 
for example, Netflix cannot legally stream any movie 
until at least three years after the movie’s theatrical 
release. Furthermore, Netflix already sold the rights to 
some of its most popular original programming, such 
as House of Cards, to the French pay-television pro-
vider Canal Plus, so it cannot air those episodes either. 
In Germany, the challenge is less legal and more com-
petitive. Previously established services, including 
the  Amazon-owned Lovefilm, a streaming service 
called Watchever, and the satellite television service 
Sky Deutschland, already own much of the potential 
market.
More broadly, with each new entry, Netflix must com-
mit to substantial local investments. Beyond buying the 
© Pascal Sittler/REA/Redux

236	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Increasing globalization affects not only massive U.S. corporations that actively search out 
new markets but also small and medium-sized businesses that increasingly depend on 
goods produced globally to deliver their products and services. Few people think about 
how globalization affects their daily lives, but take a minute to read the labels on the cloth-
ing you are wearing right now. Chances are that most of the items, even if they carry U.S. 
brand names, were manufactured in another part of the world.
In the United States, the market has evolved from a system of regional marketplaces to 
national markets to geographically regional markets (e.g., Canada and the United States 
together) to international markets and finally to global markets. Globalization refers to the 
processes by which goods, services, capital, people, information, and ideas flow across 
national borders. Global markets are the result of several fundamental changes such as re-
ductions or eliminations of trade barriers by country governments, the decreasing concerns 
of distance and time with regard to moving products and ideas across countries, the stan-
dardization of laws across borders, and globally integrated production processes.2
Each of these fundamental changes has paved the way for marketing to flourish in 
other countries. The elimination of trade barriers and other governmental actions, for in-
stance, allows goods and ideas to move quickly and efficiently around the world, which in 
turn facilitates the quick delivery of goods to better meet the needs of global consumers.
As a consequence, consumers have easy access to global products and services. When 
we walk into a toy store, we expect to find LEGO brand toys from Denmark. In the local 
sporting goods store we anticipate finding running shoes made in China by the German 
These 25-foot-tall replicas of the New York skyline are made completely out of Legos and have been on display at the Times 
Square Toys“R” Us in New York City. How do Legos get from their manufacturer in Denmark to toy stores in the United States?
© Dennis Van Tine/Newscom

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
237
	
	
firm adidas. In the grocery store, we demand out-of-season produce such as blueberries 
from Chile in January. Or consider how a $12 digital camera for your keychain, made in 
Taiwan, could be produced, transported halfway around the world, and sold for so little 
money at your local Target. These are the questions we will be examining in this chapter.
We begin by looking at how firms assess the potential of a given market, with partic-
ular attention to the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China). Next we examine 
how firms make decisions to go global and choose how and what they will sell globally. 
Then we explore how to build the marketing mix for global products.
ASSESSING GLOBAL MARKETS
Because of globalization, marketers are presented with a variety of opportunities, 
which means that firms must assess the viability of various potential market entries. 
As illustrated in Exhibit 8.1, we examine four sets of criteria necessary to assess a 
country’s market: economic analysis, infrastructure and technological analysis, gov-
ernment actions or inactions, and sociocultural analysis. Information about these four 
areas offers marketers a more complete picture of a country’s potential as a market for 
products and services.
Economic Analysis Using Metrics
The greater the wealth of people in a country, generally, the better the opportunity a 
firm will have in that particular country. A firm conducting an economic analysis of a 
country market must look at three major economic factors using well-established met-
rics: the general economic environment, the market size and population growth rate, 
and real income.
 LO8-1	
Describe the 
components of a 
country market 
assessment.
• Power distance
• Uncertainty avoidance
• Individualism
• Masculinity
• Time orientation
Economic
analysis
using
metrics
Infrastructure
and
technology
Government
actions
Sociocultural
analysis
• Tariﬀ
• Quota
• Exchange control
• Trade agreement
• General economic
    environment
• Market size and
    population growth
• Real income
• Transportation
• Channels
• Communication
• Commerce
E X H I B I T  8.1
Components of a Country Market Assessment

238	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Evaluating the General Economic Environment  In general, healthy economies pro-
vide better opportunities for global marketing expansions, and there are several ways a firm 
can use metrics to measure the relative health of a particular country’s economy. Each 
way offers a slightly different view, and some may be more useful for some products and 
services than for others.
To determine the market potential for its particular product or service, a firm should 
use as many metrics as it can obtain. One metric is the relative level of imports and ex-
ports. The United States, for example, suffers a trade deficit, which means that the country 
imports more goods than it exports.3 For U.S. marketers this deficit can signal the potential 
for greater competition at home from foreign producers. Firms would prefer to manu-
facture in a country that has a trade surplus, or a higher level of exports than imports, 
because it signals a greater opportunity to export products to more markets.
The most common way to gauge the size and market potential of an economy, and 
therefore the potential the country has for global marketing, is to use standardized metrics 
of output. Gross domestic product (GDP), the most widely used of these metrics, is de-
fined as the market value of the goods and services produced by a country in a year. Gross 
national income (GNI) consists of GDP plus the net income earned from investments 
abroad (minus any payments made to nonresidents who contribute to the domestic econ-
omy).4 In other words, U.S. firms that invest or maintain operations abroad count their in-
come from those operations in the GNI but not the GDP.
Another frequently used metric of an overall economy is the purchasing power parity 
(PPP), a theory that states that if the exchange rates of two countries are in equilibrium, a 
product purchased in one will cost the same in the other, if expressed in the same cur-
rency.5 A novel metric that employs PPP to assess the relative economic buying power 
among nations is The Economist’s Big Mac Index, which suggests that exchange rates 
should adjust to equalize the cost of a basket of goods and services, wherever it is bought 
around the world. Using McDonald’s Big Mac as the market basket, Exhibit 8.2 shows that 
the cheapest burger is in Venezuela, where it costs $0.66, compared with an average Amer-
ican price of $4.93. In Sweden, the same burger costs $5.23. This index thus implies that 
the Venezuelan Bolivar is 87 percent undervalued, whereas the Swedish SKr is about 6 
percent overvalued, in comparison with the U.S. dollar.6
These various metrics help marketers understand the relative wealth of a particular 
country, though they may not give a full picture of the economic health of a country be-
cause they are based solely on material output. Nor is a weak dollar always a bad thing. For 
U.S. exporters, a weak dollar means greater demand for their products in foreign countries, 
because they can sell at a lower price.7 Although an understanding of the macroeconomic 
environment is crucial for managers facing a market entry decision, of equal importance is 
the understanding of economic metrics of market size and population growth rate.
Evaluating Market Size and Population Growth 
Rate  The global population has been growing dramatically 
since the turn of the 20th century. But from a marketing per-
spective, this growth has never been equally dispersed. Today, 
many less developed nations by and large are experiencing 
rapid population growth, while many developed countries are 
experiencing either zero or negative population growth. The 
countries with the highest purchasing power today may be-
come less attractive in the future for many products and ser-
vices because of stagnated growth. And the BRIC countries 
are likely to be the source of most market growth.
In response, consumer goods companies are paying close 
attention to the strong demand in BRIC nations. Procter & 
Gamble (P&G), which enjoys a strong advantage in the 
­Chinese market, also is expanding aggressively into India 
and Brazil and encountering stiff competition. In Brazil oral 
care is a highly competitive market, with Colgate and P&G 
Procter & Gamble is expanding aggressively into India and 
encountering stiff competition.
© Sebastian D’Souza/Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
239
	
	
competing. In India, big-name Western firms are competing for market share of laundry 
products.8
Another aspect related to market size and population growth pertains to the distribu-
tion of the population within a particular region: Is the population located primarily in ru-
ral or urban areas? This distinction determines where and how products and services can 
be delivered. Long supply chains, in which goods pass through many hands, are often 
necessary to reach rural populations in less developed countries and therefore add to the 
products’ cost. India’s 1.2 billion people live overwhelmingly in rural areas, although the 
population is moving toward urban areas to meet the demands of the growing industrial 
and service centers located in major cities such as Bangalore and New Delhi. This popula-
tion shift, perhaps not surprisingly, is accompanied by rapid growth in the middle class. 
Furthermore, relatively careful banking policies and minimal dependence on exports have 
helped protect India from the global financial crisis. The business impacts of these com-
bined trends of increasing urbanization, a growing middle class, a degree of protectionism 
Big Mac index, local currency under (–)/over (+)
valuation against the dollar, %
Raw index
–100
–50
January 2014
–25
0
25
50
100
–75
75
Switzerland
Sweden
Norway
United States
Denmark
Israel
Britain 
Canada
Costa Rica
Euro area
New Zealand 
Australia
Uruguay
South Korea
UAE
Turkey
Brazil
Singapore
Saudi Arabia
Japan
Thailand
Hungary
Czech Republic
Chile
Pakistan
Mexico
Philippines
China
Vietnam
Hong Kong
Sri Lanka
Colombia
Argentina
Poland
Indonesia
Egypt 
Taiwan
India
Malaysia
South Africa
Ukraine
Russia
Venezuela
Source: © The Economist Newspaper Limited, London (Jan 2014).
E X H I B I T  8.2
Big Mac Index

240	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
by the central government, and a youthful populace make India 
an absolutely enormous market for consumer goods.
Evaluating Real Income  Firms can make adjustments to an 
existing product or change the price to meet the unique needs of 
a particular country market. Such shifts are particularly com-
mon for low-priced consumer goods. In settings in which con-
sumers earn very low wages, the market is known as the bottom 
of the pyramid. That is, there is a large, impoverished popula-
tion that still wants and needs consumer goods but cannot pay 
the prices that the fewer, wealthier consumers in developed na-
tions can. Thus P&G developed a single-use shampoo packet 
for consumers who cannot afford an entire bottle at one time. 
To increase consumption of Coca-Cola in rural India, the com-
pany lowered its price to the equivalent of about 10 cents per 
bottle; Cadbury International introduced Dairy Milk Shots 
for the equivalent of about 4 cents.9 Textbook publishers sell 
paperback versions of U.S. books for a fraction of their U.S. 
price to countries where students would not otherwise be able 
to afford a textbook.
But pricing adjustments aren’t only for inexpensive prod-
ucts. Fashion and jewelry manufacturers also make down-
ward adjustments to their prices in countries where the 
incomes of their target markets cannot support higher prices. 
Nor is price the only factor that companies adjust to appeal to 
lower income markets. Haier sells washing machines that 
also have the capacity to wash vegetables to Chinese consum-
ers who confront limited access to resources such as water 
and electricity.10
Analyzing Infrastructure and Technological Capabilities
The next component of any market assessment is an infrastructure and technological anal-
ysis. Infrastructure is defined as the basic facilities, services, and installations needed for 
a community or society to function, such as transportation and communications systems, 
water and power lines, and public institutions such as schools, post offices, and prisons.
Marketers are especially concerned with four key elements of a country’s infrastruc-
ture: transportation, distribution channels, communications, and commerce. First, there 
must be a system to transport goods throughout the various markets and to consumers in 
geographically dispersed marketplaces—trains, roads, refrigeration. Second, distribution 
channels must exist to deliver products in a timely manner and at a reasonable cost. Third, 
the communications system, particularly media access, must be sufficiently developed to 
allow consumers to find information about the products and services available in the mar-
ketplace. Fourth, the commercial infrastructure, which consists of the legal, banking, and 
regulatory systems, allows markets to function. In the next section, we focus on how issues 
pertaining to the political and legal structures of a country can affect the risk that marketers 
face in operating in a given country.
Analyzing Governmental Actions
Governmental actions, as well as the actions of nongovernmental political groups, can 
significantly influence firms’ ability to sell goods and services because they often result in 
laws or other regulations that either promote the growth of the global market or close off 
the country and inhibit growth. Some of the effects are difficult to predict in advance, as 
Ethical and Societal Dilemma 8.1 describes.
Tariffs  A tariff, also called a duty, is a tax levied on a good imported into a country. 
In most cases, tariffs are intended to make imported goods more expensive and thus less 
For the Chinese market, Haier sells washing machines that 
can wash both clothes and vegetables.
Courtesy of Haier America

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
241
	
	
How Chinese Regulations Change Car-Buying Practicesi
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 8.1
As the Scottish poet Robert Burns wrote, “The best laid 
schemes of mice and men/Go often awry.” That is, we might 
have the best intentions to produce beneficial outcomes, but 
sometimes those plans have a way of leading to the opposite 
effect. It’s a truth that consumer behavior researchers and 
marketers know only too well.
	
Consider, for example, the case of China and its latest at-
tempt to limit automobile-induced air pollution. The expansion 
of China’s middle class has created a vast new population of 
consumers who can now afford cars. The nation’s roads, 
­especially in urban centers such as Shanghai, Guangzhou, 
­Guiyang, and Beijing, have become clogged with vehicles. Pollu-
tion levels also have reached critical proportions. And China 
has moved into the top spot in terms of consumer car pur-
chases, with some estimates suggesting that Chinese consum-
ers will buy 30 million vehicles annually by 2020.
	
In response to these concerns, Chinese government offi-
cials have begun testing a licensing regulation that requires 
people to enter a lottery for a limited number of car registra-
tion tags. Without the license plate, drivers would face severe 
penalties. Thus, officials hoped to halt the growth in this sector 
and thereby limit pollution and congestion on the roads. In-
stead, consumers have taken the threat that the regulations 
would spread as a great reason to buy a new car immediately. 
If they might not be able to next year, they had better snag a 
car right now! In cities in which the regulations are already in 
place, the lucky license lottery winners also are buying bigger 
(i.e., more polluting), more expensive vehicles. As one consumer 
noted, “Would you want to put a 100,000 yuan plate on a 
50,000 yuan car?” Because these consumers already are 
spending more than they might have planned, just to have the 
chance to enter the lottery for a license, they feel more justified 
spending more on the car itself. Average prices paid per car 
thus have leapt up approximately 88 percent in just two years.
	
These trends are great news for foreign luxury carmakers 
like Audi and Mercedes-Benz, whose sales in China have 
jumped. It is not so great for Chinese carmakers, which have 
long provided the lower-end, functional vehicles that China’s 
population previously demanded. It also might not be great 
news for the environment, which was not at all what authori-
ties planned when they implemented these regulations. The 
best-laid schemes, indeed.
In an attempt to limit air pollution by reducing the number of vehicles on the road, the Chinese 
government has imposed a lottery for car buyers. The license lottery winners are buying big-
ger, more expensive vehicles like Audi and Mercedes-Benz.
© Chen Jianli Xinhua News Agency/Newscom
competitive with domestic products, which in turn protects domestic industries from for-
eign competition. In other cases, tariffs might be imposed to penalize another country for 
trade practices that the home country views as unfair. For example, when the U.S. govern-
ment determined the prices of solar panels imported from China were artificially low due 
to illegal subsidies, it imposed a tariff to help domestic firms compete.11

242	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Quotas  A quota designates a minimum or maximum quantity of a product that may be 
brought into a country during a specified time period. The United States, for instance, 
has committed to allowing at least 1.23 million tons of sugar to be imported (the quota) 
without a tariff because the country generally consumes more than it produces.12 It then 
monitors consumption closely to protect domestic sugar farmers. If demand exceeds 
supply, it increases the quota, but the level depends on annual consumption and produc-
tion rates.13
Tariffs and quotas can have fundamental and potentially devastating impacts on a 
firm’s ability to sell products in another country. Tariffs artificially raise prices and there-
fore lower demand, and quotas reduce the availability of imported merchandise. Con-
versely, tariffs and quotas benefit domestically made products because they reduce foreign 
competition.
Exchange Control  Exchange control refers to the regulation of a country’s currency 
exchange rate, the measure of how much one currency is worth in relation to another.14 A 
designated agency in each country, often the central bank, sets the rules for currency 
­exchange. In the United States, the Federal Reserve sets the currency exchange rates. In 
recent years the value of the U.S. dollar has changed significantly compared with other 
important world currencies. When the dollar falls, it has a twofold effect on U.S. firms’ 
ability to conduct global business. For firms that depend on imports of finished products, 
raw materials that they fabricate into other products, or services from other countries, the 
cost of doing business goes up dramatically. At the same time, buyers in other countries 
find the costs of U.S. goods and services to be much lower than they were before.
Prices are nearly always lower in the country of origin, because there are no customs 
or import duties to pay, and international transportation expenses are less than domestic 
ones. For many products, the price difference might not be significant. But for luxury items 
that cost thousands of euros (or tens of thousands of Chinese yuan), buying overseas thus 
has long been a habit for consumers. As the euro dropped, international shopping excur-
sions have become especially appealing for consumers from China, where the yuan re-
mains strong. As a result, for Chinese shoppers seeking Italian designer clothing or French 
handbags, it literally is worth the cost of flying to Milan and Paris and buying the items 
there rather than shopping in Shanghai. But that’s not what the luxury fashion houses want, 
so they are revising their pricing schemes. Chanel announced it would raise its retail prices 
in Europe but cut them in China, in an attempt to level the playing field, so that the same 
In the past, Chinese customers 
seeking luxury goods, such as 
Chanel, would fly to Europe to 
shop because the prices were 
lower there. But Chanel is rais-
ing its retail prices in ­Europe 
while cutting them in China to 
encourage its ­Chinese custom-
ers to buy at home, like at this 
Chanel store in Shanghai.
© Aly Song/Reuters

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
243
	
	
handbag would cost approximately the same amount wherever people buy it.15 As economies 
and currencies continue their constant rising and falling relative to one another, marketers 
must keep revising their pricing strategies to reflect the current international conditions. 
Trade Agreements  Marketers must consider the trade agreements to which a particu-
lar country is a signatory or the trading bloc to which it belongs. A trade agreement is an 
intergovernmental agreement designed to manage and promote trade activities for a spe-
cific region, and a trading bloc consists of those countries that have signed the particular 
trade agreement.16 Together, the following major trade agreements cover two-thirds of the 
world’s international trade: the European Union (EU), the North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), Mercosur, and 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).17 These trade agreements are sum-
marized in Exhibit 8.3. The EU represents the highest level of integration across individual 
nations; the other agreements vary in their integration levels.
Source: Information about EU members is from http://europa.eu/about-eu/countries/./index_en.htm.
E X H I B I T  8.3
Trade Agreements
Name
Countries
European Union
There are 28 member countries of the EU: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,  
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, 
Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. 
There are five official candidate countries to join the EU: Macedonia, Serbia, 
­Turkey, Iceland, Montenegro, and Albania. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo  
are also potential candidates.
NAFTA
United States, Canada, and Mexico.
CAFTA
United States, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,  
Honduras, and Nicaragua.
Mercosur
Full members: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
ASEAN
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, 
Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Currency fluctuations enhance 
or impede tourists.
© J. Hardy/PhotoAlto RF

244	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Analyzing Sociocultural Factors
Understanding another country’s culture is crucial to the 
success of any global marketing initiative. Culture, or the 
shared meanings, beliefs, morals, values, and customs of a 
group of people, exists on two levels: visible artifacts (e.g., 
behavior, dress, symbols, physical settings, ceremonies) and 
underlying values (thought processes, beliefs, and assump-
tions).18 Visible artifacts are easy to recognize, but busi-
nesses often find it more difficult to understand the 
underlying values of a culture and appropriately adapt their 
marketing strategies to them.19
For example, though the opening of China’s market to for-
eign brands has been a boon, it also represents a very risky 
proposition for firms that forget to take their international ex-
pansion seriously enough. For example, when Porsche filmed 
an advertisement in which its vehicles ran over the Great Wall 
of China, Chinese consumers were left more confused than in-
trigued. The ancient site had little in common with Porsche’s 
own storied history. It also had little to do with Uncle Ben’s 
Rice or FedEx, but that did not stop those brands from featur-
ing the Great Wall in their advertising either. By the same to-
ken, hiring Western spokespeople who are unfamiliar to 
Chinese audiences to introduce a brand offers few benefits. 
Marks & Spencer paid substantial sums to hire Oscar-winner Emma Thompson to appear 
in Chinese advertisements, but because few Chinese consumers knew who she was, those 
investments were likely wasted.20
To address or avoid such issues, one important cultural classification scheme that 
firms can use is Geert Hofstede’s cultural dimensions concept, which sheds more light on 
these underlying values. Hofstede initially proposed that cultures differed on four dimen-
sions, but he has added two more dimensions in recent years.21 Despite some arguments for 
using other models,22 Hofstede’s cultural dimensions offer a foundation for most research 
into culture:
1.	
Power distance: willingness to accept social inequality as natural.
2.	
Uncertainty avoidance: the extent to which the society relies on orderliness, 
­consistency, structure, and formalized procedures to address situations that arise 
in daily life.
3.	
Individualism: perceived obligation to and dependence on groups.
4.	
Masculinity: the extent to which dominant values are male oriented. A lower mascu-
linity ranking indicates that men and women are treated equally in all aspects of soci-
ety; a higher masculinity ranking suggests that men dominate in positions of power.
5.	
Time orientation: short- versus long-term orientation. A country that tends to have 
a long-term orientation values long-term commitments and is willing to accept a 
­longer time horizon for, say, the success of a new product introduction.
6.	
Indulgence: the extent to which society allows for the gratification of fun and enjoy-
ment needs or else suppresses and regulates such pursuits.23
To illustrate two of the six dimensions, consider the data and graph in Exhibit 8.4. 
Power distance is on the vertical axis and individualism is on the horizontal axis. Several 
Latin American countries, including Brazil, cluster high on power distance but low on in-
dividualism; the United States, Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom, in contrast, 
cluster high on individualism but low on power distance. Using this information, firms 
should expect that if they design a marketing campaign that stresses equality and individu-
alism, it will be well accepted in English-speaking countries, all other factors being equal, 
but not be as well received in Latin American countries.
Entering the Chinese market can be difficult. This Porsche ad 
left more Chinese consumers confused than intrigued because 
the Great Wall of China has little in common with Porsche.
Source: Porsche AG

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
245
	
	
Another means of classifying cultures distinguishes them according to the impor-
tance of verbal communication.24 In the United States and most European countries, 
business relationships are governed by what is 
said and written down, often through formal 
contracts. In countries such as China and South 
Korea, however, most relationships rely on non-
verbal cues, so that the situation or context 
means much more than mere words. For in-
stance, business relationships in China often are 
formalized by just a handshake, and trust and 
honor are often more important than legal 
­arrangements.
Overall, culture affects every aspect of con-
sumer behavior: why people buy; who is in charge 
of buying decisions; and how, when, and where 
people shop. After marketing managers have com-
pleted the four parts of the market assessment, they 
are better able to make informed decisions about 
whether a particular country possesses the neces-
sary characteristics to be considered a potential 
market for the firm’s products and services. In the 
next section, we assess the market potential in the 
BRIC countries.
Ads from Steimatzky, the oldest and largest bookstore chain in Israel, illustrate marketing along one of Hofstede’s cultural dimensions: 
one is highly feminine (left) and the other masculine (right).
Source: Agency: ACW Grey Tel-Aviv, Israel; Production Company: We Do Production; Photographer: Shai Yehezkelli.
Source: Geert Hofstede, Geert Jan Hofstede, and Michael Minkov, Cultures and Organizations, 
Software of the Mind, Third Revised Edition, McGraw-Hill 2010, ISBN: 0-07-166418-1.  
© Geert Hofstede B.V. quoted with permission.
0
100
80
60
40
20
Power Distance
0
20
40
60
80
100
Guatemala
Panama
Venezuela
Ecuador
Colombia
El Salvador
Chile
Brazil
Poland
Czech Republic
Canada
Hungary
Finland
Germany
Ireland
Sweden
Denmark
Switzerland
Norway
United States
Australia
United Kingdom
Individualism
E X H I B I T  8.4
Country Clusters

246	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
The Appeal of the BRIC Countries
Changes in technology, especially communications, have been a driving force for growth in 
global markets for decades. The telegraph, radio, television, computers, and the Internet 
have increasingly connected distant parts of the world. Today, communication is instanta-
neous. Sounds and images from across the globe are delivered to televisions, radios, and 
computers in real time, which enables receivers in all parts of the world to observe how 
others live, work, and play.
Perhaps the greatest change facing the global community in recent years has been 
the growth and expansion of four countries that together have come to be known as the 
BRIC countries: Brazil, Russia, India, and China. Some commentators suggest adding 
South Africa, to make BRICS, because of that nation’s remarkable transformation into 
a functioning democracy.25 The inspiring changes to South Africa suggest its increas-
ing promise as a market, but its relatively smaller size leads us to focus on the four 
BRIC nations, which seem to have the greatest potential for growth. Let’s examine 
each in turn.
Brazil26  Long a regional powerhouse, Brazil’s ability to weather, and even thrive, 
during economic storms has transformed it into a global contender. Currently, Brazil is 
the world’s seventh largest economy,27 but high inflation and political crises have 
prompted Brazil to project some significant economic de-
clines in the near future.28 Still, Brazil’s impressive eco-
nomic growth in the 21st century largely can be attributed to 
the expansion of its literate population and the impositions 
of social programs that have allowed more than half of the 
201 million Brazilians to enter the middle class.29 Even as 
the nation struggles with a recession, it continues to experi-
ment with innovative financial approaches in an effort to en-
sure that the Brazilian economy rebounds.30 This large South 
American democracy also welcomes foreign investors.
Russia31  The relations between the United States and 
Russia are a little more complicated than for Brazil. Since 
the fall of the former Soviet Union, Russia has undergone 
multiple upturns and downturns in its economy. However, 
its overall growth prospects appear promising, especially as 
a consumer market. Long denied access to consumer goods, 
the well-educated population of 143 million exhibits strong 
demand for U.S. products and brands. In particular, the 
­number of Russian Internet users, presently at 83 mil-
lion,32  is growing at a rate of approximately 10 percent 
­annually,33 and is already Europe’s largest Internet market.34 
The country also is negotiating to enter the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) to improve trade relations with other 
countries. In 2015 it ranked as one of the top countries in 
terms of retail growth; even though economic and political 
issues challenge its retail growth prospects, the market 
­simply is too big for most firms to disregard.35  Yet Russia 
still faces an aging population and low birthrates. If these 
trends persist, Russia’s population could decline by one-
third in the next half century. At the same time, corruption 
is widespread, creating ethical dilemmas for firms ­trying 
to market their goods and services. Furthermore, interna-
tional sanctions on Russia, in response to its occupation 
of  Ukraine and its involvement in the Middle East, and 
­fluctuations in oil prices threaten the country with a finan-
cial crisis.36
 LO8-2	
Understand the 
marketing opportunities 
in BRIC countries.
Like other countries in which McDonald’s thrives, Brazil has 
a strong and growing middle class.
© Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
247
	
	
India37  With more than 1.2 billion people, or approximately 15 percent of the world’s 
population, together with expanding middle and upper classes, India is one of the world’s 
fastest-growing markets. India also has one of the youngest populations in the world, 
with a median age of 26.7 years. Its young inhabitants increasingly are adopting global 
attitudes while living in growing urban centers and shopping at large malls. The well-­
educated, modern generation is largely fluent in English, and the highly skilled work-
force holds great attraction for firms that hope to expand using local talent, especially in 
technical fields. 
India’s retail environment is still dominated by millions of small stores and lacks 
­modern supply chain management facilities and systems.38 Recent changes by the Indian 
government, however, have the potential to significantly modernize the retail landscape. 
For example, foreign retailers that carry multiple brands, like Walmart, are now allowed to 
own up to 51 percent of joint ventures in India, and retailers that carry only their own 
In which of the BRIC countries does each of these classic structures reside?
(Top left): © McGraw-Hill Education/Barry Barker, photographer; (top right): © McGraw-Hill Education/Barry Barker, photographer; (bottom left): © Travelif/iStock Exclusive/
Getty Images; (bottom right): © Martin Child/Getty Images RF

248	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
brand, like adidas and Reebok, can now own 100 percent of 
their Indian businesses.39  India is also projected to become 
the fastest growing e-commerce market in the world, with 
e-commerce sales forecasted to reach $55 billion by 2018.40
China41  For most of the 20th century, China experienced 
foreign occupation, civil unrest, major famine, and a strict 
one-party Communist regime. However, since 1978, China’s 
leadership, while maintaining communist political ideals, has 
embraced market-oriented economic development, which has 
led to startlingly rapid gains. For many Chinese, recent devel-
opments have dramatically improved their living standards 
and their levels of personal freedom. Increasing liberalization 
in the economy has prompted a large improvement in China’s 
Global Retail Development Index (GRDI); it enjoyed the 
greatest retail growth in 2014. Even as growth in its gross do-
mestic product has slowed, China maintains a thriving retail 
market, likely to reach the $8 trillion mark soon and surpass 
the United States as the world’s largest.42
Yet the country continues to suffer from drastically un-
equal economic distribution, which has led to a significant 
migrant workforce that subsists on part-time, low-paying jobs. 
These workers were hit hard by the global financial crisis, 
which reduced demand for Chinese exports for the first time 
in years. Furthermore, actual growth of the 1.3 billion-strong 
Chinese population slowed as a result of government popula-
tion controls that limit each family to one child. Although 
China’s median age is slightly younger than that of the United States currently, at 36.3 
years, its population has been aging as a result of its one-child policy, and will likely con-
tinue to do so for many years, even though the government has recently rescinded the pol-
icy and will now allow two children per couple.43 
Even as vast numbers of U.S. companies actively target BRIC countries or explore 
options for entering them, as Social and Mobile Marketing 8.1 highlights, some challenges 
remain. In the next section, we detail the market entry decision process, beginning with a 
discussion of the various ways firms might enter a new global market.
Relaxed Indian governmental restrictions now allow foreign 
retailers that carry their own brand, like Levi’s, to own 
100 percent of their Indian businesses.
© Aijaz Rahi/AP Photo
China’s population has been 
aging as a result of its one-child 
policy, and will likely continue 
to do so for many years, even 
though the government has 
­recently rescinded the policy 
and will now allow two children 
per couple.
© Images by Tang Ming Tung/Getty 
­Images RF

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
249
	
	
The Growth of Social Networking—
Brazil’s Free Market versus China’s 
Restrictionsii
Social & Mobile Marketing 8.1
By Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg’s own admission, 
Facebook grew exponentially for years without a strategic 
plan for international growth. As the company has matured, 
however, Facebook has refocused its attention on global mar-
kets. Two countries offer a short course on how that attention 
must shift with the specific global target.
	
In Brazil, Facebook already has 65 million members, mak-
ing the South American nation its second-largest market, be-
hind the United States. It also ranks among the top markets 
for YouTube, Google, and Twitter. Part of the explanation for 
this great growth is Brazil’s status as one of the most rapidly 
developing economies in the world. As people gain economic 
security, they have more resources to spend on social net-
working gadgets, as well as more leisure time to play with 
them.
	
But it also has to do with the culture. Brazil is known for 
the open, friendly attitudes of its people. For these “hyper-­
social” consumers, new ways to connect with friends and 
loved ones represent an important form of need fulfillment. 
International companies can enter freely, function according 
to a relatively well-established legal structure, and enjoy a 
pretty strong infrastructure as well.
	
In contrast, when companies confront the inherent open-
ness of social networking with China’s strict censorship rules, 
significant challenges arise. Successful entry by social and 
mobile marketers into China requires a particular blend of tim-
ing, skill, cultural understanding, and political savvy. These fac-
tors may not be quite in alignment for Facebook. The timing 
may be wrong because China’s autocratic leaders have en-
forced greater controls on social networking and blogging re-
cently. Nor do Facebook executives appear to have a full grasp 
of the political and cultural nuances of business in China, de-
spite a good track record of respecting local cultural values, 
such as when it agreed to block content about Nazism in 
Germany or drawings of Muhammad in Pakistan. And even if 
Facebook were to navigate these challenges safely, China has 
a strong, enduring preference for companies owned and run 
by its own people.
	
Censorship issues are highly complex. For instance, how 
would Facebook respond to retaliation against users who 
criticize the government? For Google, whose mission state-
ment simply advises “Don’t Be Evil,” such questions became all 
too pertinent when hackers in China gained access to the 
e-mail accounts of prominent human rights activists. When 
Western companies have cooperated with the Chinese gov-
ernment, some operations have led to the imprisonment of 
online activists.
	
In Brazil, the question is how many users the company can 
encourage to enjoy all the fun of Facebook. In China, a post on 
Facebook can lead to jail time. Thus, it becomes a question of 
basic human rights.
CEO Mark Zuckerberg (center) claims that Facebook will employ 
diplomacy in China, but censorship issues are highly complex.
© Lao Chen/ChinaFotoPress/Zumapress/Newscom
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What metrics can help analyze the economic environment of a country?
2.	 What types of governmental actions should we be concerned about as 
we evaluate a country?
3.	 What are some important cultural dimensions?
4.	 Why are each of the BRIC countries viewed as potential candidates for 
global expansion?

250	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
CHOOSING A GLOBAL ENTRY STRATEGY
When a firm has concluded its assessment analysis of the most viable markets for its products 
and services, it must then conduct an internal assessment of its capabilities. As we discussed 
in Chapter 2, this analysis includes an assessment of the firm’s access to capital, the current 
markets it serves, its manufacturing capacity, its proprietary assets, and 
the commitment of its management to the proposed strategy. These fac-
tors ultimately contribute to the success or failure of a market expansion 
strategy, whether at home or in a foreign market. After these internal 
market assessments, it is time for the firm to choose its entry strategy.
A firm can choose from many approaches when it decides to en-
ter a new market, which vary according to the level of risk the firm is 
willing to take. Many firms actually follow a progression in which 
they begin with less risky strategies to enter their first foreign markets 
and move to increasingly risky strategies as they gain confidence in 
their abilities and more control over their operations, as illustrated in 
Exhibit 8.5. We examine these different approaches that marketers 
take when entering global markets, beginning with the least risky.
Exporting
Exporting means producing goods in one country and selling them 
in another. This entry strategy requires the least financial risk but also 
allows for only a limited return to the exporting firm. Global expan-
sion often begins when a firm receives an order for its product or 
service from another country, in which case it faces little risk because 
it has no investment in people, capital equipment, buildings, or infra-
structure.44 By the same token, it is difficult to achieve economies of 
scale when everything has to be shipped internationally. The Swiss 
watchmaker Rolex sells relatively small numbers of expensive 
watches all over the world. Because its transportation costs are rela-
tively small compared with the cost of the watches, the best way for it 
to service any market is to export from Switzerland.
 LO8-3	
Identify the various 
market entry strategies.
Risk
Control
Di
re
ct
 i
n
ve
st
m
e
nt
J
oi
nt
 v
e
nt
u
r
e
S
t
r
a
t
e
g
i
c
 
a
ll
i
a
n
c
e
F
r
a
n
c
h
i
s
i
n
g
E
x
p
o
r
t
E X H I B I T  8.5
Global Entry Strategies
Rolex exports its watches to countries all over the 
world from its factory in Switzerland.
Source: Rolex USA

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
251
	
	
Franchising
Franchising is a contractual agreement between a firm, the franchisor, and another firm 
or individual, the franchisee. A franchising contract allows the franchisee to operate a 
business—a retail product or service firm or a B2B provider—using the name and busi-
ness format developed and supported by the franchisor. Many of the best-known retailers 
in the United States are also successful global franchisors, including McDonald’s, Pizza 
Hut, Starbucks, Domino’s Pizza, KFC, and Holiday Inn, all of which have found that 
global franchising entails lower risks and requires less investment than does opening units 
owned wholly by the firm. However, when it engages in franchising, the firm has limited 
control over the market operations in the foreign country, its potential profit is reduced 
because it must be split with the franchisee, and, once the franchise is established, there is 
always the threat that the franchisee will break away and operate as a competitor under a 
different name.
Strategic Alliance
Strategic alliances refer to collaborative relationships between independent firms, though 
the partnering firms do not create an equity partnership; that is, they do not invest in one 
another. Therefore, when Cisco Systems Inc. of San Jose, California, and Tata Consultancy 
Services of Mumbai, India, entered into their strategic alliance, they both continued to de-
velop market-ready infrastructure and network solutions for customers, but they relied on 
each other to provide the training and skills that one or the other might have lacked. At the 
same time, Cisco maintains alliances with various other companies, including Microsoft, 
Nokia, IBM, and Accenture.
Joint Venture
A joint venture is formed when a firm entering a market pools its resources with those of 
a local firm. As a consequence, ownership, control, and profits are shared. In addition to 
sharing financial burdens, a local partner offers the foreign entrant greater understanding 
of the market and access to resources such as vendors and real estate.
Some countries require joint ownership of firms entering their domestic markets, as is 
the case with the new regulations affecting multi-line retailers entering India, though many 
of these restrictions have loosened as a result of WTO negotiations and ever-increasing 
KFC and Pizza Hut are successful global franchisors.
(Left): © Yang zheng/AP Photo; (right): © Zhou junxiang/AP Photo

252	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
globalization pressures. Problems with this entry approach can arise when the partners 
disagree or if the government places restrictions on the firm’s ability to move its profits out 
of the foreign country and back to its home country.
Yet joint ventures also can provide highly promising insights and benefits for all the 
partners, as Adding Value 8.1 suggests.
Direct Investment
Direct investment requires a firm to maintain 100 percent ownership of its plants, 
operation facilities, and offices in a foreign country, often through the formation 
of wholly owned subsidiaries. This entry strategy requires the highest level of invest-
ment and exposes the firm to significant risks, including the loss of its operating and/
or initial investments. A dramatic economic downturn caused by a natural disaster, 
war, political instability, or changes in the country’s laws can increase a foreign en-
trant’s risk considerably. Many firms believe that in certain markets, these potential 
risks are outweighed by the high potential returns. With this strategy, none of the 
­potential profits must be shared with other firms. In addition to the high potential 
­returns, direct investment offers the firm complete control over its operations in the 
foreign country.
Although we often tend to think of direct investment flowing from more to less 
developed economies, the dynamic international market means that sometimes it goes 
the other way. The computer maker Lenovo started in China but has since expanded 
its operations. In addition to purchasing IBM’s PC division and Motorola’s handset 
business unit, it established parallel headquarters in both Beijing and North Carolina. 
When it entered Brazil it quickly established separate manufacturing plants to keep 
its costs low.45
As we noted, each of these entry strategies entails different levels of risk and rewards 
for the foreign entrant. But even after a firm has determined how much risk it is willing to 
take, and therefore how it will enter a new global market, it still must establish its market-
ing strategy, as we discuss in the next section.
Adding Value 8.1
Tata Starbucks and the Indian Coffee Cultureiii
Starbucks traditionally has relied on a franchising model to 
expand internationally. But when it came to India, the coffee 
chain took another approach. It allied with Tata Group, an-
other huge international name, to create the Tata Starbucks 
Limited joint venture. The two conglomerates are equal part-
ners in the venture—which celebrated its first anniversary not 
with champagne but by releasing a new coffee blend: India 
Estates, made from only Indian-sourced coffee.
Since its initial launch with one store in October 2012, the 
joint venture has grown exponentially. Its store count reached 
25 within a year, with stores in Delhi, Pune, and Mumbai. It also 
promises frequent new openings, including greater spread 
throughout the nation and localized offerings. For example, 
when the first store opened in Bangalore, in southern India, it 
offered more food options containing specific local flavors.
But it remains an international joint venture, and some mar-
keting appeals span virtually every culture. Thus in autumn, 
Salted Caramel Mochas rolled out in India, just as they have 
done throughout the world for the past several years.
Starbucks has a joint venture with Tata Group to open stores 
in India.
© Sajjad Hussain/AFP/Getty Images

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
253
	
	
CHOOSING A GLOBAL MARKETING 
STRATEGY
Just like any other marketing strategy, a global marketing strategy includes two compo-
nents: determining the target markets to pursue and developing a marketing mix that will 
sustain a competitive advantage over time. In this section, we examine marketing strategy 
as it relates specifically to global markets.
Target Market: Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning
Global segmentation, targeting, and positioning (STP) are more complicated than domestic 
STP for several reasons. First, firms considering a global expansion have much more diffi-
culty understanding the cultural nuances of other countries. Second, subcultures within 
each country also must be considered. Third, consumers often view products and their role 
as consumers differently in different countries.46 A product, service, or even a retailer often 
must be positioned differently in different markets.
Even when an STP strategy appears successful, companies must continually monitor 
economic and social trends to protect their position within the market and adjust products 
and marketing strategies to meet the changing needs of global markets. In this sense, global 
marketing is no different from local or national marketing.
When any firm identifies its positioning within the market, it then must decide how to 
implement its marketing strategies using the marketing mix. Just as firms adjust their prod-
ucts and services to meet the needs of national target markets, they must alter their market-
ing mix to serve the needs of global markets.
 LO8-4	
Highlight the similarities 
and differences 
between a domestic 
marketing strategy 
and a global marketing 
strategy.
Lenovo actively promotes its 
products in Brazil.
Courtesy of Lenovo
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Which entry strategy has the least risk and why?
2.	 Which entry strategy has the most risk and why?

254	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Global Product or Service Strategies  There are three potential global product strat-
egies: (1) sell the same product or service in both the home-country market and the host 
country, referred to as glocalization; (2) sell a product or service similar to that sold in 
the home country but include minor adaptations; and (3) sell totally new products or ser-
vices. The strategy a firm chooses depends on the needs of the target market. Ford Motor 
Co., for example, envisions a world car that will sell everywhere, as we discuss in Adding 
Value 8.2. The level of economic development, as well as differences in product and tech-
nical standards, helps determine the need for and level of product adaptation. Cultural 
differences such as food preferences, language, and religion also play a role in product 
strategy planning.
Same Product or Service  The most typical method of introducing a product outside the 
home country is to sell the same product or service in other countries. However, in reverse 
innovation, companies initially develop products for niche or underdeveloped markets and 
then expand them into their original or home markets. For example, General Electric real-
ized that adapting medical diagnostic equipment that had been developed in the United 
States to sell it in India was ineffective. Few Indian medical providers had sufficient 
Adding Value 8.2
Ponying Up the Latest Ford Mustangiv
When the 2015 model of the classic American muscle car hit 
the streets, it wasn’t only on Route 66. Instead, Ford’s latest 
iteration of its iconic car was introduced simultaneously in six 
global cities spanning four continents. The worldwide move 
aims to both acknowledge the car’s 50-year history and ex-
pand its appeal to a broader market in the future.
In keeping with its tradition, the redesign retains most of 
the visual features that consumers have come to associate 
with the Mustang: blunt-nosed and stylish, with a substantial 
grille and a profile low to the ground. Despite some buzz that 
Ford would completely redesign the look (and apparently there 
was some debate about doing so inside the company), ulti-
mately it chose to keep things visually similar.
In contrast, another recent version of a storied muscle car, 
the Chevy Camaro, broke with its historical look to adopt a 
more angular profile. This change seems popular. In the head-
to-head-to-head competition among the Mustang, the Camaro, 
and the Dodge Charger, the Camaro seems to be pulling out 
ahead. Not only is the Camaro tops in sales among pony cars, 
but it also attracts a greater percentage of female drivers and 
a younger demographic than either of the other two options.
Ford’s response was to introduce the newest Mustang as a 
global car, not just an American one. Along with its simultane-
ous grand release events in far-flung places such as Shanghai, 
Barcelona, and Sydney, Ford undertook a social media blitz, 
mostly targeting Mustang fan clubs and car groups worldwide. 
Even if it predicts that international sales will be responsible 
for only about 10 percent of revenues, Ford hopes the Mustang 
will serve as a sort of “ambassador,” opening parking spaces 
and garages to other Ford models.
Chevrolet redesigned its classic Camaro (a 1969 version is pictured on the left) to have a more angular profile (right), making 
it popular with female and younger car buyers.
(Left): © Ken Babione/Getty Images RF; (right): © Imaginechina/AP Photo

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
255
	
	
­resources to pay $20,000 for the massive machinery. 
Therefore, GE undertook innovation specific to the Indian 
market to develop a battery-operated, portable EKG (elec-
trocardiogram) machine for $500. Then it realized that the 
small, affordable machines would appeal as well to U.S. 
emergency medical personnel in the field and therefore 
­globalized its offer.47
Similar Product or Service with Minor Adaptations  
Campbell Soup discovered that even though Russia and China 
are two of the largest markets for soup in the world, cooks in 
those countries have unique demands. Chinese consumers 
drink 320 billion bowls of soup each year, and Russian buyers 
consume 32 billion servings, compared with only 14 billion 
bowls of soup served in the United States. However, Chinese 
cooks generally refuse to resort to canned soup; the average 
Chinese consumer eats soup five times each week, but he or 
she also takes great pride in preparing it personally with fresh 
ingredients. In contrast, Russian consumers, though they de-
mand very high quality in their soups, had grown tired of 
spending hours preparing their homemade broths. To identify 
opportunities in these markets, Campbell sent teams of social anthropologists to study how 
Chinese and Russian cooks prepare and consume soup. When it faced further hurdles, it 
entered into a joint venture with the Swire soup company in China. But its efforts in Russia 
never panned out, forcing Campbell to withdraw after around four years. That is, even with 
extensive, devoted efforts by an industry giant, global marketing remains a challenge.48
Referred to as glocalization, some firms also standardize their products globally but 
use different promotional campaigns to sell them. The original Pringles potato chip prod-
uct remains the same globally, as do the images and themes of the promotional campaign, 
with limited language adaptations for the local markets, although English is used whenever 
possible. However, the company does change Pringles’ flavors in different countries, 
­including paprika-flavored chips sold in Italy and Germany.49
Totally New Product or Service  The level of economic development and cultural tastes 
also affects global product strategy because it relates directly to consumer behavior. For 
example, although you are likely to know Heinz for its tomato ketchup, as you traveled the 
globe you would find they sell many unique products in different countries. If you taste the 
ketchup in the Philippines, you’ll be surprised to find it’s made with bananas instead of 
tomatoes (and sold under Heinz’s Jufran label). In many East Asian countries, Heinz com-
petes by selling soy sauce. The size of the package varies by country as well. Whereas in 
the United States big bottles of condiments are sold, in poorer countries, such as Indonesia, 
condiments such as soy sauce are sold in single-serve packets for a few pennies.50
Global Pricing Strategies  Determining the selling price in the global marketplace is an 
extremely difficult task.51 Many countries still have rules governing the competitive mar-
ketplace, including those that affect pricing. For example, in parts of Europe, including 
Belgium, Italy, Spain, Greece, and France, sales are allowed only twice a year, in January 
and June or July. In most European countries retailers can’t sell below cost, and in others 
they can’t advertise reduced prices in advance of sales or discount items until they have 
been on the shelves for more than a month. For firms such as Walmart and other discount-
ers, these restrictions threaten their core competitive positioning as the lowest-cost pro-
vider in the market. Other issues, such as tariffs, quotas, antidumping laws, and currency 
exchange policies, can also affect pricing decisions.52
Competitive factors influence global pricing in the same way they do home country 
pricing, but because a firm’s products or services may not have the same positioning in the 
global marketplace as they do in their home country, market prices must be adjusted to 
reflect the local pricing structure. Spain’s fashion retailer Zara, for instance, is relatively 
Campbell’s research found that Russians eat a lot of soup, 
and they want time-saving preparation help. So it developed 
broths to enable cooks to prepare soups with their own flair.
Source: Campbell Soup Company
Pringles sometimes changes 
flavors to reflect local tastes 
and demand, for example, these 
paprika-flavored chips are sold 
in Italy and Germany.
© Whitebox Media/Mediablitzimages/
Alamy

256	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
inexpensive in the EU but is priced about 40 percent higher in the United States, putting it 
right in the middle of its moderately priced competition.53 Zara is dedicated to keeping 
production in Spain, but it also must get its fashions to the 
United States quickly, so it incurs additional transportation ex-
penses, which it passes on to its North American customers. 
Finally, as we discussed previously in this chapter, currency 
fluctuations affect global pricing strategies.
Global Distribution Strategies  Global distribution net-
works form complex value chains that involve middlemen, ex-
porters, importers, and different transportation systems. These 
additional middlemen typically add cost and ultimately in-
crease the final selling price of a product. As a result of these 
cost factors, constant pressure exists to simplify distribution 
channels wherever possible.
The number of firms with which the seller needs to deal to 
get its merchandise to the consumer determines the complexity 
of a channel. In most developing countries, manufacturers 
must go through many types of distribution channels to get 
their products to end users, who often lack adequate transpor-
tation to shop at central shopping areas or large malls. There-
fore, consumers shop near their homes at small, family-owned 
retail outlets. To reach these small retail outlets, most of which 
are located far from major rail stations or roads, marketers 
Zara is relatively inexpensive  
in its home country, Spain, but 
is more expensive in North 
America because of transpor-
tation expenses and currency 
fluctuations.
Source: Inditex
Tupperware provides an acceptable way for women in Indo-
nesia to make money, because the traditional culture dis-
courages women’s participation in the workforce.
© Lam Yik Fei/The New York Times/Redux Pictures

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
257
	
	
have devised a variety of creative solutions. For example, Tupperware parties offer an ac-
ceptable way for women in Indonesia—where the traditional culture discourages women’s 
participation in the workforce—to sell and distribute the plastic food storage containers, 
benefiting both the firm and these entrepreneurs.54
Global Communication Strategies  The major challenge in developing a global com-
munication strategy is identifying the elements that need to be adapted to be effective in 
the global marketplace. For instance, literacy levels vary dramatically across the globe. 
Consider again the BRIC nations: In India, approximately 71 percent of the adult popula-
tion is literate, compared with 86 percent in Brazil, over 90 percent in China, and over 
99 percent in Russia.55 Media availability also varies widely; some countries offer only 
state-controlled media.
Differences in language, customs, and culture also complicate marketers’ ability to 
communicate with customers in various countries. Language can be particularly vexing for 
advertisers. For example, in the United Kingdom a thong is only a sandal, whereas in the 
United States it can also be an undergarment. To avoid the potential embarrassment that 
language confusion can cause, firms spend millions of dollars to develop brand names that 
have no preexisting meaning in any known language, such as Accenture (a management 
consulting firm) or Avaya (a subsidiary of Lucent Technologies, formerly Bell Labs).
Within many countries there are multiple variants on a language or more than one 
language. For example, China has three main languages; the written forms produce mean-
ing through the characters used but the spoken forms depend on tone and pronunciation. 
Some firms choose names that sound similar to their English-language names, such as 
Nike, whose Chinese brand name is pronounced nai-ke. Others focus on the meanings of 
the characters, such that Citibank is known as hui-qi-yinhang, which means “star-spangled 
banner bank.” Still other firms, such as Mercedes-Benz, have adapted their names for each 
language: peng-zee in Cantonese for Hong Kong, peng-chi in Mandarin for Taiwan, and 
ben-chi in Mandarin for mainland China. Naming is a constant challenge in China, espe-
cially to avoid the threat that a brand name evokes unwanted connotations, such as when 
Microsoft realized that the sound of its search engine name, Bing, meant “virus” in 
China—not the best image for an online company!56
Even with all these differences, many products and services serve the same needs and 
wants globally with little or no adaptation in their form or message. Firms with global ap-
peal can run global advertising campaigns and simply translate the wording in the adver-
tisements and product labeling.
Nike’s Chinese brand name is 
pronounced “nai ke,” which is 
very similar to the English 
­pronunciation, and means 
“­Enduring and Persevering.”
© Shiho Fukada/Redux Pictures

258	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Other products require a more localized approach because of cultural and religious 
differences. In a classic advertisement for Longines watches, a woman’s bare arm and 
hand appear, with a watch on her wrist. The advertisement was considered too risqué 
for Muslim countries, where women’s bare arms are never displayed in public, but the 
company simply changed the advertisement to show a gloved arm and hand wearing the 
same watch.
Even among English speakers, there can be significant differences in the effectiveness 
of advertising campaigns. Take the popular “What Happens in Vegas Stays in ­Vegas” ad-
vertising campaign, which has been very successful and spawned numerous copycat 
­slogans in the United States. Essentially, the U.S. mass market thought the provocative 
campaign pushed the envelope, but just far enough to be entertaining. However, when the 
Las Vegas tourism group extended its advertising to the United Kingdom, it found that the 
ad campaign was not nearly as effective. After conducting focus groups, the group found 
that British consumers did not find the advertisements edgy enough for their more irrever-
ent British tastes. In response, the advertising agency began studying British slang and 
phrases to find ways to make the campaign even sexier and more provocative.57
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the components of a global marketing strategy?
2.	 What are the three global product strategies?
	
	
Describe the components of a country market 
­assessment.
	
	
First, firms must assess the general economic en-
vironment. For instance, countries with a trade 
­surplus, strong domestic and national products, 
growing populations, and income growth generally 
are relatively more favorable prospects. Second, 
firms should assess a country’s infrastructure. To be 
successful in a particular country, the firm must 
have access to adequate transportation, distribution 
channels, and communications. Third, firms must 
determine whether the proposed country has a polit-
ical and legal environment that favors business. 
Fourth, firms should be cognizant of the cultural 
and sociological differences between their home 
and host countries and adapt to those differences to 
ensure successful business relationships.
	
	
Understand the marketing opportunities in 
BRIC countries.
	
	
Technology, particularly in the communication 
field, has facilitated the growth of global markets. 
Firms can communicate with their suppliers and 
customers instantaneously, easily take advantage 
of production efficiencies in other countries, and 
bring together parts and finished goods from all over 
the globe. Four countries that provide tremendous 
LO8-1
LO8-2
marketing opportunities are the BRIC nations—
Brazil, Russia, India, and China. These countries 
have large populations that are increasingly interested 
in the latest goods and services.
	
	
Identify the various market entry strategies.
	
	
Firms have several options for entering a new coun-
try, each with a different level of risk and involve-
ment. Direct investment is the riskiest but 
potentially the most lucrative. Firms that engage in 
a joint venture with other firms already operating in 
the host country share the risk and obtain knowl-
edge about the market and how to do business 
there. A strategic alliance is similar to a joint ven-
ture, but the relationship is not as formal. A less 
risky method of entering a new market is franchis-
ing, in which, as in domestic franchise agreements, 
the franchisor allows the franchisee to operate a 
business using its name and strategy in return for a 
fee. The least risky method of entering another 
country is simply exporting.
	
	
Highlight the similarities and differences be-
tween a domestic marketing strategy and a global 
marketing strategy.
	
	
The essence of a global marketing strategy is no dif-
ferent from that of a domestic strategy. The firm 
LO8-3
LO8-4
Reviewing Learning Objectives

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
259
	
	
starts by identifying its target markets, chooses spe-
cific markets to pursue, and crafts a strategy to meet 
the needs of those markets. However, additional 
­issues make global expansion more problematic. 
For instance, should the product or service be 
­altered to fit the new market better? Does the firm 
need to change the way it prices its products in dif-
ferent countries? What is the best way to get the 
product or service to the new customers? How 
should the firm publicize its product or service 
­offering in various countries?
1.	 For many small businesses, the idea of entering a for-
eign market is intimidating. The U.S. government and 
most state governments now offer assistance designed 
specifically for small-business owners. Visit the website 
of the Massachusetts Export Center at http://www.mass 
.gov/export/ and examine the types of services it pro-
vides. Click on the Export Statistics link. To what five 
countries did Massachusetts export the most? Are you 
surprised?
2.	 Nike is a global brand, yet it alters its promotions to 
meet local tastes. Go to http://store.nike.com/gb/en_gb/ 
and explore the UK site. Now go to the U.S. site. How 
are these websites different?
Net Savvy
∙	 bottom of the pyramid,  240
∙	 direct investment,  252
∙	 duty,  240
∙	 exchange control,  242
∙	 exchange rate,  242
∙	 exporting,  250
∙	 franchisee,  251
∙	 franchising,  251
∙	 franchisor,  251
∙	 globalization,  236
∙	 glocalization,  254
∙	 gross domestic product (GDP),  238
∙	 gross national income (GNI),  238
∙	 infrastructure,  240
∙	 joint venture,  251
∙	 purchasing power parity (PPP),  238
∙	 quota,  242
∙	 reverse innovation,  254
∙	 strategic alliance,  251
∙	 tariff,  240
∙	 trade agreements,  243
∙	 trade deficit,  238
∙	 trade surplus,  238
∙	 trading bloc,  243
Key Terms
1.	 What is globalization? Why is it important for marketers 
to understand what globalization entails?
2.	 Moots is a high-end bicycle manufacturer located in 
Steamboat Springs, Colorado. Assume the company is 
considering entering the Brazilian, Chinese, and Indian 
markets. When conducting its market assessment, what 
economic factors should Moots consider to make its de-
cision? Which market do you expect will be more lucra-
tive for Moots? Why?
3.	 Now consider the political, economic, and legal systems 
of China, India, and Brazil. Explain why you think one 
country might be more hospitable to Moots than the 
others.
4.	 Colgate sells its products in many countries throughout 
the world. How would you expect its marketing strategy 
to differ in various countries, compared with that in the 
United States? Consider various areas across the globe 
in formulating your answer.
5.	 How does Coca-Cola market its products differently in 
the BRIC countries? In formulating your answer, go to: 
http://www.cocacola.com.br/; https://www.coca-cola.ru/; 
http://www.coca-cola.in/en/home/; and http://www 
.icoke.cn/. What are the benefits of being able to offer a 
globally standardized product? What types of products 
easily lend themselves to global standardization?
6.	 What are some examples of companies that use a glocal-
ization strategy?
7.	 Choose a firm that currently manufactures and sells its 
products or services only in the United States. Choose 
and defend a global entry strategy for the firm.
Marketing Applications

260	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself
1.	 The shift of population from rural to urban areas in 
countries such as India helps global marketers by:
a.  Decreasing pollution.
b.  Simplifying the supply chain needed to make goods 
and services available.
c.  Increasing the human development index.
d.  Decreasing competition for intellectual capital.
e.  Increasing nonmaterial GDP output.
2.	 Why should marketers be aware of the BRIC countries?
a.  They are a microcosm of the rest of the world.
b.  They represent almost half the world’s population.
c.  They are likely to be the source of most market 
growth.
d.  They have had the most dramatic changes in culture 
and consumer buying patterns.
e.  They have stable population growth, which makes 
them easier to study.
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answers section.)
THE GLOBALIZATION OF THE MOST UBIQUITOUS OF AMERICAN 
CUISINES—THE HAMBURGER
From the Maharaja Mac in India to the Prosperity Burger prepared especially for Chinese 
New Year celebrations, McDonald’s has built a global fast-food empire under its golden 
arches. Only 31 percent of McDonald’s revenue now comes from sales in the United States, 
and most of its international growth has come from the surging 
economies of Brazil, Russia, China, and India.58 A pioneer in 
overseas franchising, McDonald’s has spared no effort in its 
attempts to penetrate foreign markets. In China, it opened one 
new outlet a day to meet its goal of 2,000 stores.59 In Brazil, it 
created Latin America’s first environmentally certified fast-
food restaurant. A vast market defined by stark cultural differ-
ences, India has required a more modest approach that would 
allow McDonald’s to develop its real estate and supply infra-
structure, train its local workforce and management at its 
famed Hamburger University, and adjust the menu for vegetar-
ian customers.60 The McAloo Tikki Burger has been a great 
success, and the company has started opening more McCafe 
storefronts.61
But McDonald’s growth strategy relies on more than just 
added locations. In crowded cities, with real estate prices too 
high to build drive-through restaurants, the company has 
hired droves of motorbike drivers to bring Big Macs to cus-
tomers. This nimble delivery approach is now a mainstay in 
cities from Beijing to Kuwait City. Online ordering will be 
next, though the challenge will be to reduce the cost of call 
centers to support this new distribution model.62 In addition, 
McDonald’s keeps looking for new mobile innovations, such 
as mobile ordering or payment options, to keep up with con-
sumer demand.63
Fast-food restaurants enjoy some segment-specific bene-
fits as they pursue such international expansion. Unlike retail 
brands, such as Walmart or Carrefour, restaurants pose less 
bchsu_tt
Chapter Case Study
McDonald’s France has its own 
version of the “I’m lovin’ it” slogan.
© Bill Ryall/William Ryall RF

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
261
	
	
perceived competitive threats. Local eateries can exist side-
by-side with a McDonald’s in a way that a mom-and-pop gro-
cer cannot survive if an international hypermarket moves in 
next door.64
	
But even considering the massive growth in rapidly 
transitioning economies, Europe still generates the bulk of 
foreign sales for McDonald’s. In France, for example, 
“MacDo” restaurants attract crowds that line up outside for 
a bite of lunch. But lunch might mean something a little 
different in this case: French McDonald’s offer menus that 
feature Camembert cheese on the burgers, Heineken, a 
­McBaguette, and macaroons for dessert.65 Once, the secret 
to McDonald’s success was “lockstep” consistency—the fact 
that a meal in Memphis tasted the same as it did in Moscow 
or Madrid. But the novelty of the American hamburger 
stand has worn off in the new millennium, and with it 
­McDonald’s ability to export American culture as its staple 
commodity. A cheeseburger, fries, and Coke don’t register 
the same level of excitement when the café next door and the bistro down the block are 
also serving burgers. More and more, the key to McDonald’s future appears to be found 
in the DNA of the places it inhabits, like the sweet potato soft serve now available 
in Hong Kong.66 And with it, suddenly the fast-food giant that to many represents the 
globalization of taste suddenly finds itself in a very unlikely position: as a defender of 
local cuisine.67
The kosher burger has been a hit in Israel, and Indian consumers seem to appreciate 
the opening of McDonald’s first vegetarian restaurant. However, most new growth comes 
from Russia, where the company has 245 locations and controls 70 percent of the booming 
fast-food business. Even as fast-food competitors face potential market saturation in the 
United States, Russian demand for quick burgers appears to be insatiable.68 Driving this 
Russian appetite has been the growth of a newly affluent middle class with money to spend 
to dine out. Infrastructure development in Russia also has been a boon as cities open malls 
with food courts, highways are constructed with drive-through locations, and specialty 
suppliers of frozen food and packaging have appeared.
In the early years of Russian expansion, few private businesses existed to supply all 
the ingredients McDonald’s needed to produce Big Macs and fries. The company solved 
the problem by building an enormous food processing plant outside Moscow. But it also 
worked to cultivate relationships with local Russian vendors and contractors to which it 
eventually could outsource its supply chain. Today, a grower who began selling cucumbers 
to McDonald’s in 1990 has become the Pickle King of Russia, dominating the processed 
foods market.69
Even when faced with some politically sensitive challenges—such as suspicious 
­inspections by Russian agencies that alleged code violations in several McDonald’s 
stores, seemingly in response to the strained relations between the Russian and U.S. 
­governments70—McDonald’s has continued with its plans to expand in the country. 
Most recently, it signed an agreement to open 20 new restaurant locations in remote 
­Siberian regions.71 International enrollment in Hamburger University thus shows no 
signs of slowing.
Questions
1.	
Which sociocultural factors have informed McDonald’s global expansion?
2.	
Describe some of the global distribution strategies that McDonald’s uses or might 
consider using to spread throughout the world.
3.	
Explain McDonald’s global marketing strategy. Compare McDonald’s strategy in the 
United States (http://www.mcdonalds.com/us/en/home.html) to McDonald’s strategy 
in India (http://www.mcdonaldsindia.com/).
McDonald’s is successful in Israel because of its kosher 
­offerings.
© David Silverman/Getty Images

262	
Section Two  UNDERSTANDING THE MARKETPLACE
Endnotes
	 1.	 Mark Scott, “Netflix Faces Hurdles, Country by Country, in Bid 
to Expand in Europe,” The New York Times, May 21, 2014, 
http://www.nytimes.com; Amol Sharma, “Netflix to Expand to 
France, Germany Later This Year,” The Wall Street Journal, 
May 21, 2014, http://online.wsj.com.
	2.	 Pierre-Richard Agenor, Does Globalization Hurt the Poor? 
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2002); “Globalization: Threat or 
Opportunity,” International Monetary Fund, http://www.imf.org.
	3.	 http://www.census.gov.
	4.	 https://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=1176
	5.	 http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/
Resources/GNIPC.pdf; Arthur O’Sullivan, Steven Sheffrin, and 
Steve Perez, Macroeconomics: Principles and Tools, 8th ed. 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2013).
	6.	 The Economist, “The Big Mac Index,” January 7, 2016, http://
www.economist.com/content/big-mac-index.
	 7.	 Justin Dove, “Taking Advantage of Dollar Weakness,” Investor U, 
July 28, 2011, http://www.investmentu.com.
	8.	 Jack Neff, “Emerging-Market Growth War Pits Global Brand 
Giants against Scrappy Local Rivals,” Advertising Age, June 13, 
2011, http://adage.com.
	9.	 “Coca-Cola Tackles Rural Indian Market” (video), The Wall 
Street Journal, May 3, 2010.
	10.	 Melissa Ip, “Bottom of the Pyramid—a Decade of Observations,” 
Social Enterprise Buzz, January 21, 2013, http://www.socialen-
terprisebuzz.com.
	11.	 Wayne Ma, “China Levies 6.5% Tariff on U.S. Solar-Panel 
Materials,” The Wall Street Journal, September 18, 2013, http://
www.online.wsj.com.
12.	 Leslie Josephs, “U.S. Increases Sugar Quota for Second Time,” 
The Wall Street Journal, June 23, 2011, http://online.wsj.com.
	13.	 Leslie Josephs, “U.S. Unlikely to Raise Sugar-Import Quota,” The 
Wall Street Journal, February 19, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
	14.	 “Exchange Rate,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exchange_rate.
	15.	 Jason Chow and Nadya Masidlover, “Chanel Acts on Prices 
as Euro Worsens Gray Market,” The Wall Street Journal, 
March 17, 2015.
	16.	 https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements: provides information on 
US trade agreements.
	17.	 http://www.unescap.org.
	18.	 Johny Johansson, Global Marketing, 5th ed. (New York: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2008).
	19.	 Philip R. Cateora, Mary C. Gilly, and John L. Graham, 
International Marketing, 17th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2015); Danielle Medina Walker and Thomas Walker, Doing 
Business Internationally: The Guide to Cross-Cultural Success, 
2nd ed. (Princeton, NJ: Trade Management Corporation, 2003).
	20.	Angela Doland, “Six Cringeworthy Blunders Brands Make in 
China,” Advertising Age, July 8, 2014, http://adage.com.
	21.	 For a website dedicated to Hofstede’s research, see http://
www.geert-hofstede.com/.
	22.	Rosalie L. Tung and Alain Verbeke, eds., “Beyond Hofstede and 
GLOBE: Improving the Quality of Cross-Cultural Research,” 
Journal of International Business Studies 41 (Special Issue, 
2010).
	23.	Note that the time orientation and indulgence dimensions are 
relatively more recent additions to the categorization. See 
Geert Hofstede, “Dimensions of National Cultures,” http://www.
geerthofstede.eu/dimensions-of-national-cultures.
	24.	James W. Carey, Communication as Culture, rev. ed. (New 
York: Routledge, 2009).
	25.	The Economist, “Why Is South Africa Included in the BRICS?” 
March 29, 2013, http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist- 
explains/.
	26.	“Brazil,” U.S. Department of State, http://www.state.gov;  
CIA, The CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/ 
publications/the-world-factbook/.
	27.	Prableen Bajpai, “The World’s Top 10 Economies,” Investopedia, 
January 22, 2016, http://www.investopedia.com/articles/ 
investing/022415/worlds-top-10-economies.asp.
28.	“Brazil Economic Outlook,” FocusEconomics, January 19, 2016, 
http://www.focus-economics.com/countries/brazil; “Brazil 
Economic Growth,” FocusEconomics, January 19, 2016. 
29.	Asher Levine, “Brazil’s ‘New Middle Class’ Struggles as 
Economy Plunges,” Reuters, October 12, 2015, http:// 
www.reuters.com/article/us-brazil-economy-fears- 
idUSKCN0S61QF20151012.
30.	“Brazil Economic Outlook,” FocusEconomics, January 19, 2016, 
http://www.focus-economics.com/countries/brazil; “Brazil 
Economic Growth,” FocusEconomics, January 19, 2016.
	31.	 “Russia,” U.S. Department of State, http://www.state.gov; CIA, 
The CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov.
	32.	eMarketer, “Number of Internet Users in Russia from 2013 to 
2019 (in Millions),” Statista, February 4, 2016, http://www.
statista.com/statistics/251818/number-of-internet-users-in- 
russia/.
	33.	“Russia,” Internet Live Stats, http://www.internetlivestats.com/ 
internet-users/russia/.
	34.	“Internet in Europe Stats,” Internet World Stats, January 8, 
2016, http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats4.htm#europe.
	35.	Marianne Wilson, “China Is Top Emerging Retail Market,” The 
New York Times, June 1, 2015.
	36.	Paul Gregory, “A Russian Crisis with No End In Sight, Thanks to 
Low Oil Prices and Sanctions,” Forbes, May 14, 2015, http://
www.forbes.com/sites/paulroderickgregory/2015/05/14/ 
a-russian-crisis-with-no-end-in-sight-thanks-to-low-oil-prices-
and-sanctions/3/#5502e1f66d5e. 
	37.	“India,” U.S. Department of State, http://www.state.gov; CIA, The 
CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov.
38.	Megha Bahree, “India Unlocks Door for Global Retailers,” The 
Wall Street Journal, November 25, 2011.
	39.	“Retail Industry in India” India Brand Equity Foundation, 
January 2016, http://www.ibef.org/industry/retail-india.aspx. 
	40.	Ibid.
	41.	 “China,” U.S. Department of State, http://www.state.gov; CIA, 
The CIA World Factbook https://www.cia.gov.
	42.	Marianne Wilson, “China Is Top Emerging Retail Market,” The 
New York Times, June 1, 2015.
43.	Laurie Burkitt, “Tapping China’s ‘Silver Hair’ Industry,” The Wall 
Street Journal, January 19, 2015, http://www.wsj.com; Laurie 
Burkitt, “China’s Aging Future,” The Wall Street Journal, 
January 19, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/video, Steven Jiang  
and Susannah Cullinane, “China’s One-child Policy to End,”  
CNN, October 30, 2015.
	44.	Lance Eliot Brouthers et al., “Key Factors for Successful  
Export Performance for Small Firms,” Journal of International 
Marketing 17, no. 3 (2009), pp. 21–38; “Selling Overseas,” 
November 12, 2009, http://www.entrepreneur.com.

	
GLOBAL MARKETING  CHAPTER EIGHT	
263
	
	
45.	Juro Osawa and Lorraine Luk, “How Lenovo Built a Tech Giant,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 30, 2014, http://online.wsj.
com; Juro Osawa and Yun-Hee Kim, “PC Firm Lenovo Hunts for 
Brazil Acquisitions,” The Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2012, 
http://online.wsj.com.
46.	Philip R. Cateora, Mary C. Gilly, and John L. Graham, 
International Marketing, 14th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2009).
	47.	Natalie Zmuda, “P&G, Levi’s, GE Innovate by Thinking in 
Reverse,” Advertising Age, June 13, 2011, http://adage.com.
	48.	Julie Jargon, “Can M’m, M’m Good Translate?” The Wall Street 
Journal, July 9, 2007, p. A16; Brad Dorfman and Martinne 
Geller, “Campbell Soup in Joint Venture to Expand in China,” 
Reuters, January 12, 2011, http://www.reuters.com; Julie 
Jargon, “Campbell Soup to Exit Russia,” The Wall Street 
Journal, June 29, 2011, http://online.wsj.com.
	49.	http://www.pringles.it/.
	50.	Bill Johnson, “The CEO of Heinz on Powering Growth in 
Emerging Markets,” Harvard Business Review, October 2011.
	51.	 Silvia Fabiana et al., eds., Pricing Decisions in the Euro Era: 
How Firms Set Prices and Why (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2007); Cateora et al., International Marketing.
	52.	Ibid.; Amanda J. Broderick, Gordon E. Greenley, and Rene 
Dentiste Mueller, “The Behavioural Homogeneity Evaluation 
Framework: Multi-Level Evaluations of Consumer Involvement 
in International Segmentation,” Journal of International 
Business Studies 38 (2007), pp. 746–63; Terry Clark, Masaaki 
Kotabe, and Dan Rajaratnam, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through 
and International Pricing Strategy: A Conceptual Framework 
and Research Propositions,” Journal of International Business 
Studies 30, no. 2 (1999), pp. 249–68. 
	53.	Sarah Morris, “How Zara Clothes Turned Galacia into a Retail 
Hotspot,” Reuters, October 31, 2011, http://www.reuters.com.
	54.	Joe Cochrane, “Tupperware’s Sweet Spot Shifts to Indonesia,” The 
New York Times, February 28, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com.
	55.	CIA, The CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/ 
publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2103.html.
	56.	Michael Wines, “Picking Brand Names in Asia Is a Business 
Itself,” Advertising Age, November 11, 2011, http://www.nytimes.
com; Brand Channel, http://www.brandchannel.com.
	57.	Joan Voight, “How to Customize Your U.S. Branding Effort to 
Work around the World,” Adweek, September 3, 2008.
	58.	Statista, “Revenue of McDonald’s Corporation Worldwide from 
2008 to 2014, by Geographic Region (in Billion U.S. Dollars),” 
http://www.statista.com/statistics/219453/revenue-of-the- 
mcdonalds-corporation-by-geographic-region/.
	59.	“McDonald’s China Plans to Open a New Store Every Day in 
Four Years,” The Huffington Post, September 28, 2011, http://
www.huffingtonpost.com.
	60.	“McDonald’s Best Practices,” http://bestpractices.mcdonalds.
com; Annie Gasparro, “Yum Splits India into Separate Division, 
Names New International CEO,” The Wall Street Journal, 
November 23, 2011.
	61.	 Neha Thirani Bagri, “A Growing Taste for U.S. Fast Food in 
India,” The New York Times, January 8, 2014, http://india.blogs.
nytimes.com/.
	62.	Julie Jargon, “For Food Delivery, China Calls McDonald’s,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 12, 2011, http://online.wsj.com.
	63.	Nat Rudarakanchana, “McDonald’s (MCD) Going Mobile, Expanding 
in China and Three Other Takeaways from Last Scheduled 
Consumer Presentation of Uninspiring 2013,” International 
Business Times, September 11, 2013, http://www.ibtimes.com.
	64.	Neha Thirani Bagri, “A Growing Taste for U.S. Fast Food in 
India,” The New York Times, January 8, 2014, http://india.
blogs.nytimes.com/.
	65.	Hannah Fleishman, “13 Businesses With Brilliant Global 
Marketing Strategies,” HubSpot, July 29, 2015, http:// 
blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/33857/10-Businesses- 
We-Admire-for-Brilliant-Global-Marketing.aspx.
	66.	Charles Passy, “How Fast Food Chains Cook Up New Menu 
Items,” The Wall Street Journal, August 24, 2015; McDonald’s, 
“What a Twist! McDonald’s Hong Kong Launches Sweet Potato 
Sensation Ice Cream,” January 22, 2016, http://news.mcdonalds. 
com/Corporate/Feature-Stories-Articles/2016/What-a-twist-
McDonald-s-Hong-Kong-Launches.
	67.	Matt Goulding, “Why the French Secretly Love the Golden 
Arches,” Slate, August 2013, http://www.slate.com.
	68.	“McDonald’s Sees Strong Revenue on Global Demand,” 
Associated Press, December 8, 2011, http://www.msnbc.msn.
com; Ravi Krishnani, “McDonald’s in Russia: Defeated 
Communism with a ‘Happy’ Meal,” Business Today, http://www.
businesstoday-eg.com; McDonald’s Europe Virtual Press Office, 
press brief, http://www.mcdpressoffice.eu.
	69.	Andrew E. Kramer, “Russia’s Evolution, Seen through Golden 
Arches,” The New York Times, February 2, 2010, http://www.
nytimes.com.
	70.	“For First Time Ever, McDonald’s Closes a Restaurant in 
Russia,” The Moscow Times, April 14, 2015, http://www. 
themoscowtimes.com/business/article/for-first-time-ever- 
mcdonalds-closes-a-restaurant-in-russia/519066.html.
	71.	 Olga Razumovskaya, “McDonald’s Extends Reach in Russia,” 
The Wall Street Journal, August 21, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/
articles/mcdonalds-extends-reach-in-russia-1440174904.
	 i.	 Rose Yu and Colum Murphy, “In China, Air Pollution Rules Spur 
Big Car Purchases,” The Wall Street Journal, August 7, 2013, 
http://online.wsj.com.
	 ii.	 Jason Kincaid, “Mark Zuckerberg on Facebook’s Strategy for 
China (and His Wardrobe),” Tech Crunch, October 16, 2010, 
http://techcrunch.com; Loretta Chao, “Brazil: The Social Media 
Capital of the Universe,” The Wall Street Journal, February 4, 
2013, http://online.wsj.com; Normandy Madden, “What Will 
Facebook Find if It Ventures into China?” Advertising Age 
Global, June 13, 2011, http://adage.com; Chloe Albanesius, 
“Human Rights Group Slams Facebook over China Strategy,” 
PCMag.com, June 3, 2011, http://www.pcmag.com.
	iii.	 Anil Urs and K. Giriprakash, “Tata Starbucks CEO: Our Business 
in India Continues to Exceed Expectations,” Hindu Business 
Line, November 27, 2013, http://www.thehindubusinessline.
com; Starbucks, “Starbucks Celebrates Its First Year in India 
with Launch of India Estates Blend,” October 21, 2013, http://
news.starbucks.com.
	iv.	 Mike Ramsay, “Ford to Take Mustang Sports Car Global,” The 
New York Times, December 4, 2013; “With 2015 Mustang, 
Ford Puts American Icon on Global Path,” Advertising Age, 
December 5, 2013.


TARGETING THE 
MARKETPLACE
Assessing the Marketplace
Understanding the Marketplace
Targeting the Marketplace
Value Creation
Value Capture
Value Delivery: Designing the 
Channel and Supply Chain
Value Communication
SECTION 3
Section Three, Targeting the Marketplace, contains two 
chapters. Chapter 9 focuses on segmentation, targeting, 
and positioning. In this chapter, we examine how firms seg-
ment the marketplace, then pick a target market, and finally 
position their goods/services in line with their customers’ 
needs and wants. Chapter 10, on marketing research, iden-
tifies the various tools, techniques, and metrics that mar-
keters use to uncover customers’ needs and wants and to 
ensure that they create goods and services that provide 
value to their target markets.
CHAPTER 9
Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning
CHAPTER 10
Marketing Research

CHAPTER 9
SEGMENTATION, 
TARGETING, AND 
POSITIONING
T
he president of the ABC Family television net-
work summed up a recent epiphany about the 
Millennial generation, that popular target of 
vast marketing efforts, with a clear and funny 
comment: “We looked up from our research,” he ex-
plained, “and said, ‘Oh golly, they’re turning 40.' ” That is, 
the Millennials keep getting older, which means that an-
other generational cohort must be coming up behind 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	 LO9-1	 Outline the different methods of segmenting a market.
	 LO9-2	 Describe how firms determine whether a segment is attractive and therefore worth pursuing.
	 LO9-3	 Articulate the differences among targeting strategies: undifferentiated, differentiated, concentrated, 
or micromarketing.
	 LO9-4	
Determine the value proposition.
	 LO9-5	 Define positioning and describe how firms do it.

young viewers, usually defined as those born since 
1995, are unlikely to accept vast cable packages filled 
with lots of channels they do not find interesting. 
Instead, they seek “skinny” packages that contain only 
those offerings they actually want. They also are ex-
posed to content in various forms, screens, and chan-
nels that allow them to select from entertainment 
options that reflect their fluid preferences. 
In researching who these consumers are and what 
they want, ABC Family executives also derived a view of 
the cohort that highlighted the developments they would 
undergo. Rather than strictly defining the target market 
by their age, Freeform hopes to define it according to 
the experiences they will be undergoing now and in the 
future. With that view, it adopted the term becomers to 
refer to them—that is, young people who are undertak-
ing experiences and making choices that will enable 
them ready to check out the shows, and the accompa-
nying advertising, on channels that their parents let 
them watch. 
ABC Family is one of those channels, available in 
approximately 94 million households. But its name sig-
nals its appeal to parents, and that’s never a recipe for 
appealing successfully to kids. Therefore, the network 
is undergoing a rebranding effort, in which it will be-
come a network called Freeform. The new network will 
still air many of the shows that have supported the suc-
cess of ABC Family, such as Pretty Little Liars, The 
Fosters, and Switched at Birth. The network also plans 
to persist in successful marketing tactics like its 25 
Days of Christmas programming. However, the name 
and renewed vision for Freeform will reflect the more 
“fluid” approach that young viewers bring to their televi-
sion watching habits. In particular, studies suggest that 
To appeal to aging Millennials, ABC Family has rebranded itself with a new name, Freeform, but will continue to feature successful 
shows like Pretty Little Liars, starring (from left to right) Shay Mitchell, Keegan Allen, Ashley Benson, Lucy Hale, Ian Harding, and 
Troian Bellisario.
© ABC Family/Courtesy Everett Collection

268
Although much of the programming will remain ac-
ceptable to families, the family-oriented targeting will be 
less explicit and obvious. The rebranding is not a re-
sponse to falling sales or customer churn. Instead, it rep-
resents Freeform’s recognition that as its audience shifts, 
it needs to do the same. In so doing, it hopes to maintain 
its ability to attract young viewers: Millennials when they 
were younger, becomers today, and the next generational 
cohort when the time comes. Whoever those young view-
ers are, they are the same ones that advertisers will pay 
the network to be able to reach.1
them to become who they want to be. They are, as one 
executive noted, “somewhere between their first kiss 
and their first kid.”
The new name of the network reflects this  
particular target market by acknowledging both their 
freely forming identities and their freedom with vari-
ous forms of information. Freeform also seeks to 
evoke a spontaneous mood that is in line with the 
wide-open possibilities for its target audience, who 
are still figuring out who they want to be and how to 
develop that identity. 
We learned in Chapter 1 that marketing is about satisfying consumers’ wants and needs. 
Chapter 2 noted how companies analyze their markets to determine the different kinds of 
products and services people want. But it is not sufficient just to produce such an offering. 
Firms must also position their offerings in the minds of customers in their target market in 
such a way that these consumers understand why the thing the company is providing meets 
their needs better than other competitive offerings do.
This process requires a marketing plan, as we discussed in Chapter 2. You should  
recall that the third step of this plan is to identify and evaluate opportunities by performing 
an STP (segmentation, targeting, and positioning) analysis. This chapter focuses on that 
very analysis.
THE SEGMENTATION, TARGETING,  
AND POSITIONING PROCESS
In this chapter, we discuss how a firm conducts a market segmentation or STP analysis (see 
Exhibit 9.1). We first outline a firm’s overall strategy and objectives, methods of segment-
ing the market, and which segments are worth pursuing. Then we discuss how to choose a 
target market or markets by evaluating each segment’s attractiveness and, on the basis of 
this evaluation, choose which segment or segments to pursue. Finally, we describe how a 
firm develops its positioning strategy.
Although the STP process in Exhibit 9.1 implies that the decision making is linear, 
this need not be the case. For instance, a firm could start with a strategy but then modify it 
as it gathers more information about various segments’ attractiveness.
Step 1: Establish the Overall Strategy or Objectives
The first step in the segmentation process is to articulate the vision or objectives of the 
company’s marketing strategy clearly. The segmentation strategy must be consistent with 
and derived from the firm’s mission and objectives as well as its current situation—its 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT). Botticelli’s objective, for in-
stance, is to ­increase sales in a mature industry. The company, which sells olive oil, pasta, 
pasta sauces, and roasted red peppers,2 knows its strengths are its reputation for using qual-
ity ingredients.3 However, a weakness is that it may not currently have a product line that 
appeals to those who like Italian food but not the traditional options that are high in carbo-
hydrates and heavy sauces. Identifying this potentially large and profitable market seg-
ment, and doing so before many of its mainstream competitors do, offers a great 
 LO9-1	
Outline the different 
methods of segmenting 
a market.

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
269
	
	
Establish strategy
or
objectives
Use segmentation
methods
Evaluate
segment
attractiveness
Select target
market
Identify and
develop
positioning
strategy
Step 5:
Step 4:
Step 3:
Step 2:
Step 1:
Segmentation
Targeting
Positioning
E X H I B I T  9.1
The Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning (STP) Process
opportunity. However, following through on that opportunity could lead to a significant 
threat: competitive retaliation. Botticelli’s recent choice to pursue health-conscious and 
vegan customers with a vegan-friendly Bolognese sauce made with soy is consistent with 
its overall strategy and objectives.4

270	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Now let’s take a look at methods for segmenting a market.
Step 2: Use Segmentation Methods
The second step in the segmentation process is to use a particular method 
or combination of methods to segment the market. This step also devel-
ops descriptions of the different segments, which helps firms better un-
derstand the customer profiles in each segment. With this information, 
firms can distinguish customer similarities within a segment and dissim-
ilarities across segments. Marketers use geographic, demographic,  
psychographic, benefits, and behavioral segmentation methods, as 
Exhibit 9.2 details.
Food marketers, for instance, divide the traditional pasta sauce land-
scape into with or without meat, original or light/heart healthy, and mar-
inara versus something else (e.g., Alfredo, pesto). This segmentation 
method is based on the benefits that consumers derive from the products. 
Geographic Segmentation  Geographic segmentation organizes 
customers into groups on the basis of where they live. Thus, a market 
could be grouped by country, region (northeast, southeast), or areas 
within a region (state, city, neighborhoods, zip codes). Not surprisingly, 
geographic segmentation is most useful for companies whose products 
satisfy needs that vary by region.
Firms can provide the same basic goods or services to all seg-
ments even if they market globally or nationally, but better marketers 
make adjustments to meet the needs of smaller geographic groups.5 A 
national grocery store chain such as Safeway or Kroger runs similar 
stores with similar assortments in various locations across the United 
States. But within those similar stores, a significant percentage of the assortment of 
goods will vary by region, city, or even neighborhood, depending on the different 
needs of the customers who surround each location.
Demographic Segmentation  Demographic segmentation groups consumers accord-
ing to easily measured, objective characteristics such as age, gender, income, and educa-
tion. These variables represent the most common means to define segments because they 
are easy to identify, and demographically segmented markets are easy to reach. Kellogg’s 
uses age segmentation for its breakfast cereals: Cocoa Krispies and Froot Loops are for 
kids; Special K and All-Bran are for adults. It also tends to adopt a gender-based segmen-
tation; for example, marketing communications about Special K appeal almost exclusively 
to women.
Gender plays a very important role in how most firms market products and services.6 
For instance, TV viewing habits vary significantly between men and women. Men tend to 
channel surf—switching quickly from channel to channel—and watch prime-time shows 
Segmentation Method
Sample Segments
Geographic
Continent: North America, Asia, Europe, Africa  
Within the United States: Pacific, mountain, central, south,  
mid-Atlantic, northeast
Demographic
Age, gender, income, education
Psychographic
Lifestyle, self-concept, self-values
Benefits
Convenience, economy, prestige
Behavioral
Occasion, loyalty
E X H I B I T  9.2
Methods for Describing Market Segments
To thwart the competition and 
pursue the health-conscious 
market, Botticelli has introduced 
a vegan-friendly Bolognese 
sauce made with soy.
Courtesy of Borticelli

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
271
	
	
that are action oriented and feature physically attractive cast members. Women, in contrast, 
tend to view shows to which they can personally relate through the situational plot or char-
acters and those recommended by friends. Print media are similar: A company such as 
Proactiv, which seeks to appeal to men as well as women who are worried about the condi-
tion of their skin, therefore carefully considers the gender-based appeal of different maga-
zines when it purchases advertising space.
However, demographics may not be useful for defining the target segments for other 
companies. They are poor predictors of the users of activewear such as jogging suits and 
athletic shoes. At one time, firms such as Nike assumed that activewear would be purchased 
exclusively by young, active people, but the health and fitness trend has led people of all 
ages to buy such merchandise. Even relatively inactive consumers of all ages, incomes, and 
education find activewear to be more comfortable than traditional street clothes.
Rethinking some stereotypical ideas about who is buying thus has become a relatively 
common trend among firms that once thought their target market was well defined. As 
Social and Mobile Marketing 9.1 shows, even some of the most well-known companies in 
the world must continually reconsider the true identity of their prime targets.
Psychographic Segmentation  Of the various methods for segmenting, or breaking 
down, the market, psychographic segmentation is the one that delves into how con-
sumers actually describe themselves. Usually marketers determine (through demo-
graphics, buying patterns, or usage) into which segment an individual consumer falls. 
Kellogg’s uses this packaging in 
the UK for its Coco Pops cereal. 
What segmentation methods is 
Kellogg’s using?
Image Courtesy of The Advertising  
Archives

272	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Have you used WhatsApp to do real-time messaging?
Source: WhatsApp
Is Facebook Over?i
Social & Mobile Marketing 9.1
According to a recent study funded by the European Union, 
the terms that UK teens (16–18 years of age) use to describe 
Facebook include embarrassing, old, and dead and buried. 
These are not exactly the sorts of images that a company that 
revolutionized social media prefers to embrace. So what has 
led Facebook, once the social media home base of teens, to 
become the last place they want to be seen?
	
Most analyses suggest the main problem was its growing 
popularity—and more specifically, its growing popularity 
among their parents’ generation. As mom, dads, aunts, uncles, 
and even grandparents joined the network, teens quickly be-
came less willing to share quite so much. Humor sites collect 
various awkward moments when a teenager rails against an 
unfair parent on Facebook, only to have that parent respond 
with deeply embarrassing accounts of the teen’s behavior or 
the imposition of a new punishment.
	
Beyond these direct contacts, teens tend to assume that 
anything their parents like cannot also be cool for them. If 
their grandmother posts pictures of her vacation to Facebook, 
seemingly by definition the site cannot be cool anymore.
	
As challenging as these trends are for Facebook, it could 
always rebrand itself as the social media location for  
middle-aged users who want to share their thoughts about 
their children or grandchildren. The larger question is where 
teens will go next to get their social media fix. The growing 
popularity of Snapchat implies that teens might begin pre-
ferring temporary, ephemeral sharing, possibly in reaction to 
the lessons learned when Facebook posts remain accessi-
ble to employers and school administrators. They also  
appreciate sites that allow in-the-moment connectivity, such 
as Periscope and its ability to live-stream exciting events as 
they happen. Moreover, teens seemingly use various sites 
for different purposes: Twitter for wide broadcasts, 
Instagram for visual sharing, WhatsApp for more personal 
interactions.
	
Of course, many of these sites have been or are poised to 
be acquired by the social media giants. Twitter bought 
Periscope, and Facebook continues to seek ways to expand its 
functions, both through internal innovation and acquisitions of 
other popular social media apps. The big names in social me-
dia are not ready to give up their valuable target market of 
teenaged users just yet. Finally, the variety of sites that con-
tinue to emerge suggests a gap in the market, waiting for 
some innovative entrepreneur to devise the next big thing, a 
site that teens consider cool and compelling—until their par-
ents find it and ruin it too, of course.

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
273
	
	
Psychographics studies how people self-select, as it were, based on the characteristics 
of how they choose to occupy their time (behavior) and what underlying psychological 
reasons determine those choices.7 For example, a person might have a strong need for 
inclusion or belonging, which motivates him or her to seek out activities that involve 
others, which in turn influences the products he or she buys to fit in with the group. 
Determining psychographics involves knowing and understanding three components: 
self-values, self-concept, and lifestyles.
Self-values are goals for life, not just the goals one wants to accomplish in a day. They 
are the overriding desires that drive how a person lives his or her life. Examples might be 
the need for self-respect, self-fulfillment, or a specific sense of belonging. This motivation 
causes people to develop self-images of how they want to be and then images of a way of 
life that will help them arrive at these ultimate goals. From a marketing point of view, 
self-values help determine the benefits the target market may be looking for from a prod-
uct. The underlying, fundamental, personal need that pushes a person to seek out certain 
products or brands stems from his or her desire to fulfill a self-value.
People’s self-image, or self-concept, is the image people ideally have of themselves.8 
A person who has a goal to belong may see, or want to see, himself as a fun-loving, gregar-
ious type whom people wish to be around. Marketers often make use of this particular 
self-concept through communications that show their products being used by groups of 
laughing people who are having a good time. The connection emerges between the group 
fun and the product being shown and connotes a lifestyle that many consumers seek.
Such tactics need to balance the ideal with the realistic. Advertisements for women’s 
skincare products tend to feature salacious shots of extraordinarily beautiful women. As we 
know, however, few women reach this ideal, and many of those who do actually think they 
don’t. After some preliminary research in 2000, Unilever’s Dove soap brand initiated its 
Campaign for Real Beauty campaign. It first placed billboards in the United States,  
Canada, and the United Kingdom featuring photos of “real” rather than “aspirational” 
women and two tick-box options such as “flawed?” or “flawless?”; 1.5 million observers 
texted their vote, and the vote tally appeared on the billboard. Based on this initial cam-
paign, Dove recognized that it hit a raw nerve with many women. The campaign has been 
expanded to television and online videos, and is still one of the most talked about success 
stories in modern marketing.9
Lifestyles, the third component of people’s psychographic makeup, are the ways we 
live.10 If values provide an end goal, and self-concept is the way one sees oneself in the 
context of that goal, lifestyles are how we live our lives to achieve goals.
One of the most storied lifestyles in American legend is the Harley way of life: the 
open road, wind in your hair, rebelling against conventions. But the notions of freedom, 
Dove’s Campaign for Real 
Beauty features photos of 
“real” rather than “aspirationally” 
beautiful women.
Source: Dove/Unilever

274	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Using lifestyle segmentation, Harley-Davidson has four main 
target markets: On the left is its core segment consisting of 
men older than 35 years. On the right are women older than 
35 years.
(Left): © Bloomberg/Getty Images; (right): © Jeffrey Phelps/AP Photo 
rebellion, and standing out from a crowd vastly appeal to all sorts of people. In response, 
Harley-Davidson has shifted its STP methods to define four main target markets: core 
(men older than 35 years), young adults (both genders, 18–34 years), women (older than 
35 years), and diverse (men and women, African American and Hispanic, older than  
35 years).11
For women, for example, it encourages lifestyle events such as Garage Parties,  
women’s-only social gatherings hosted in the evenings at dealerships to teach women the 
basics of motorcycling. The company publication We Ride focuses solely on female Hogs, 
and the HD-1 Customization website offers a separate process for women to build their 
cycles to match their build, power preferences, and color desires.12
The most widely used tool to support such psychographic segmentation efforts is 
owned and operated by Strategic Business Insights (SBI).13 Called VALS™, it examines 
the intersection of psychology, demographics, and lifestyles. Consumers can be classified 
into the eight segments shown in Exhibit 9.3 based on their answers to the questionnaire 
(http://www.strategicbusinessinsights.com/vals/presurvey.shtml). The vertical dimension 
of the VALS framework indicates level of resources, including income, education, health, 
energy level, and degree of innovativeness. The upper segments have more resources and 
are more innovative than are those on the bottom.
The horizontal dimension shows the segments’ primary psychological motivation for 
buying. Consumers buy products and services because of their primary motivations—that 
is, how they see themselves in the world and how that self-image governs their activities. 
The three primary motivations of U.S. consumers are ideals, achievement, and self-expression. 
People who are primarily motivated by ideals are guided by knowledge and principles. 

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
275
	
	
Those who are motivated by achievement look for products and services that demonstrate 
success to their peers. Consumers who are primarily motivated by self-expression desire 
social or physical activity, variety, and risk.
VALS enables firms to identify target segments and their underlying motivations. It 
shows correlations between psychology and lifestyle choices. For instance, a European 
luxury automobile manufacturer used VALS to identify online, mobile applications that 
would appeal to affluent, early-adopter consumers within the next five years.14 The VALS 
analysis enabled the company to prioritize the most promising applications to develop. In 
another case, VALS was used to help a medical center identify customers most interested 
and able to afford cosmetic surgery. Based on the underlying motivations of its target cus-
tomers, the center and its ad agency developed an ad campaign so successful that it had to 
be pulled early to avoid overbooking at the surgical center.
Firms are finding that psychographic segmentation schemes like VALS are often more 
useful for predicting consumer behavior than are demographics. This is because people 
who share demographics often have very different psychological traits. Take, for example, 
Jack and John, both 30-year-old, married college graduates. Demographically they are the 
same, but Jack is risk-averse and John is a risk taker. Jack is socially conscious and John is 
The VALS survey places individuals into one of the eight groups. The VALS framework is the 
visualization of the consumer groups. Consumers with abundant resources—psychological, 
emotional, and material means and capabilities—are near the top of the framework and those 
with minimal resources are at the bottom. Consumer groups within a motivation can be tar-
geted together. For instance, a marketer may target Thinkers and Believers together. Do you 
want to know your VALS type? If you do, respond to the questions at http://www.strategicbusi 
nessinsights.com/vals/presurvey.shtml. Simply click on “Take the survey.” You will receive your 
primary and secondary types in real time. In order to receive an accurate VALS type, your first 
language must be American English. If you are not a resident of the United States or Canada, 
residency should be for enough time to know the culture and its idioms.
© 2015 by Strategic Business Insights. All rights reserved. www.strategicbusinessinsights.com/vals.
High Resources
US VALSTM Framework
Innovators
Ideals
Achievement
Self-Expression
Thinkers
Achievers
Experiencers
Believers
Strivers
Makers
Survivors
Low Resources
E X H I B I T  9.3
VALS Framework 

276	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
focused on himself. Lumping Jack and John together as a target does not make sense, be-
cause the ways they think and act are totally different.
There are limitations to using psychographic segmenta-
tion, however. Psychographics is more expensive as a means 
to identify potential customers. With demographics, a firm 
like Nike can easily identify its customers as, say, men or 
women and then direct its marketing strategies to each group 
differently. The problem is that not all men are alike, as we 
saw with Jack and John. Women are not all alike either! To 
identify VALS Thinkers or Makers, companies use the VALS 
questionnaire in surveys or focus groups. Then VALS pro-
vides robust segment descriptions, linkages with consumer 
product and media–use data, and communication tools to cre-
ate consistent messages that build brand awareness and cus-
tomer loyalty.15
Benefit Segmentation  Benefit segmentation groups con-
sumers on the basis of the benefits they derive from products 
or services. Because marketing is all about satisfying consum-
ers’ needs and wants, dividing the market into segments whose 
needs and wants are best satisfied by the product benefits can 
be a very powerful tool.16 It is effective and relatively easy to 
portray a product’s or service’s benefits in the firm’s commu-
nication strategies.
Hollywood in particular is a constant and effective practi-
tioner of benefit segmentation. Although all movies may seem 
to provide the same service—entertainment for a couple of 
hours—film producers know that people visit the theater or 
rent films to obtain a vast variety of benefits, and market them 
accordingly. Need a laugh? Try the latest comedy from Adam 
Sandler or Melissa McCarthy. Want to cry and then feel warm 
and fuzzy? Go see Joy starring Jennifer Lawrence, Bradley 
Cooper, and Robert De Niro, for by the time you leave the the-
ater, you are likely to feel quite happy: The lead characters will 
have faced obstacles, overcome them, and ultimately found 
success.
It is just as easy to identify Thinkers (left) as it is Makers (right). A person is given the VALS questionnaire, and the VALS program 
at SBI runs the answers through the computer for scoring to determine the VALS type.
(Left): © Sam Edwards/Getty Images RF; (right): © Huntstock/Getty Images RF
The movie industry pursues a benefit segmentation strategy. 
Want to cry and then feel warm and fuzzy? Go see Joy starring 
Jennifer Lawrence, Bradley Cooper, and Robert De Niro.
© Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation/Photofest

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
277
	
	
Behavioral Segmentation  Behavioral segmentation 
­divides customers into groups on the basis of how they use the 
product or service. Some common behavioral measures in-
clude occasion and loyalty.
Occasion  Behavioral segmentation based on when a product 
or service is purchased or consumed is called occasion 
­segmentation. Men’s Wearhouse uses this type of segmenta-
tion to develop its merchandise selection and its promotions. 
Sometimes men need a suit for their everyday work, but other 
suits are expressly for special occasions such as a prom or a 
wedding. Snack food companies such as Frito-Lay also make 
and promote snacks for various occasions—individual serv-
ings of potato chips for a snack on the run but 16-ounce bags 
for parties.
Loyalty  Firms have long known that it pays to retain loyal customers. Loyal customers 
are those who feel so strongly that the firm can meet their relevant needs best that any 
competitors are virtually excluded from their consideration; that is, these customers buy 
almost exclusively from the firm. These loyal customers are the most profitable in the 
long term.17 In light of the high cost of finding new customers and the profitability of 
loyal customers, today’s companies are using loyalty segmentation and investing in re-
tention and loyalty initiatives to retain their most profitable customers. From simple, 
“buy 10 sandwiches, get the 11th free” punchcards offered by local restaurants to the 
elaborate travel-linked programs run by hotel and airline affiliates, such loyalty segmen-
tation approaches are ubiquitous. Starbucks is using its loyalty programs and mobile 
apps to enhance value for its customers, as highlighted in Marketing Analytics 9.1.
Using Multiple Segmentation Methods  Although all segmentation methods are 
useful, each has its unique advantages and disadvantages. For example, segmenting by 
demographics and geography is easy, because information about who the customers are 
and where they are located is readily available; however, these characteristics don’t help 
marketers determine their customers’ needs. Knowing what benefits customers are 
seeking or how the product or service fits a particular lifestyle is important for design-
ing an overall marketing strategy, but such segmentation schemes present a problem for 
marketers attempting to identify specifically which customers are seeking these bene-
fits. Thus, firms often employ a combination of segmentation methods, using demo-
graphics and geography to identify and target marketing communications to their 
customers, then using benefits or lifestyles to design the product or service and the 
substance of the marketing message.
One very popular mixture of segmentation schemes is geodemographic segmentation. 
Based on the adage “birds of a feather flock together,” geodemographic segmentation 
uses a combination of geographic, demographic, and lifestyle characteristics to classify 
consumers. Consumers in the same neighborhoods tend to buy the same types of cars, 
­appliances, and apparel and shop at the same types of retailers. 
One widely used tool for geodemographic market segmentation is the Tapestry™ 
Segmentation system developed and marketed by ESRI.18 Tapestry Segmentation clas-
sifies all U.S. residential neighborhoods into 65 distinctive segments based on detailed 
demographic data and lifestyles of people who live in each U.S. block tract (zip code 
+4).19 Each block group then can be analyzed and sorted by many characteristics, 
­including income, home value, occupation, education, household type, age, and several 
key lifestyle characteristics. The information in Exhibit 9.4 describes three Tapestry 
segments.
Geodemographic segmentation can be particularly useful for retailers, because cus-
tomers typically patronize stores close to their neighborhoods. Thus, retailers can use 
geodemographic segmentation to tailor each store’s assortment to the preferences of the 
local community. If a toy store discovers that one of its stores is surrounded by Inner City 
Restaurants offer loyalty  
programs because it is less  
expensive to retain customers 
than to attract new ones.
© Eric Audras/Onoky/SuperStock RF

278	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Tenants (Exhibit 9-4), it might adjust its offering to include less expensive toys. Stores 
surrounded by Top Rung (Exhibit 9-4) would warrant a more expensive stock selection.
This kind of segmentation is also useful for finding new locations; retailers identify 
their best locations and determine what types of people live in the area surrounding those 
stores, according to the geodemographic clusters. They can then find other potential  
locations where similar segments reside.
However, such treasure troves of data introduce a host of ethical concerns, as high-
lighted in Ethical and Societal Dilemma 9.1.
A Complete Ecosystem for Coffee Drinkers:  
The Starbucks Mobile Planii
When it comes to mobile marketing, few brands are more  
successful than Starbucks. Reportedly, Starbucks customers 
make payments using a mobile device 7 million times per 
week, accounting for 20 percent of all transactions. These 
staggering numbers far exceed any of Starbucks’ competitors, 
indicating that it has overcome one of the biggest hurdles in 
mobile marketing—namely, getting customers to engage fre-
quently with it on their mobile devices. One observer attrib­
utes this level of success to Starbucks’ creation of “a digital 
ecosystem that entwines the payment platform with their  
rewards program.” 
	
The loyalty program, My Starbucks Rewards, allows mem-
bers to pay via their mobile device and earn points toward 
discounts and free offers. The integration of My Starbucks 
Rewards with the mobile app has been crucial to the app’s 
success, because the moment customers use their mobile 
payment operation, Starbucks can gather the purchase be-
havior data, appropriately segment that customer, and offer 
customers deals immediately. Previously it would have taken 
at least a week for the company to even receive the pur-
chase information. In the past year, Starbucks also intro-
duced another way for customers to engage with the loyalty 
program: When they buy packages of Starbucks coffee in 
grocery stores, they can earn rewards points toward drinks 
and snacks in Starbucks stores. This feature has helped in-
crease the My Starbucks Rewards program membership to 
over 9 million people. 
	
To integrate the mobile app even more closely with the 
in-store experience, Starbucks also introduced a mobile  
ordering feature that allows customers to place their  
orders in advance. Their personalized drink then will be 
ready when they arrive at the store, eliminating the need to 
wait in line. This behavior represents yet another piece of 
information that Starbucks gains about its customers: Who 
are the ones in the biggest hurry, unwilling to stand in line 
for a few minutes to place their order and wait for it to be 
brewed up? With all these data collected about its  
My Starbucks Rewards customers, Starbucks can shape  
its marketing tactics, promotions, and store locations in  
optimal ways.
Marketing Analytics 9.1
Starbucks is using its loyalty programs and mobile apps to 
enhance value for its customers.
© Kevin Schafer/Moment Mobile ED/Getty Images
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the various segmentation methods?

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
279
	
	
Segment 52 - 
Inner City Tenants
U4 Metro Cities II
Mixed
28.8
Lower Middle
Srvc/Prof/Mgmt/Skilled
No HS Diploma; HS; Some Coll
Multiunit Rentals
White; Black; Hispanic
Play football, basketball
Have personal education loan
Go dancing
Own/Lease Honda
Read music, baby, fashion
magazines
L8 Global Roots
Segment 18 - Cozy
and Comfortable
L2 Upscale Avenues
U8 Suburban Periphery II
Married-Couple Families
41.7
Upper Middle
Prof/Mgmt
Some College
Single Family
White
Dine out often at family
restaurants
Have personal line of credit
Shop at Kohl’s
Listen to sporting events
on radio
Own/Lease minivan
Segment 01 -
Top Rung
L1 High Society
U3 Metro Cities I
Married-Couple Families
44.6
High
Prof/Mgmt
Bach/Grad Degree
Single Family
White
Participate in public/civic
activities
Own stock worth $75,000+
Vacation overseas
Listen to classical, all-news
radio
Own/Lease luxury car
LifeMode Summary Group
Urbanization Summary Group
Household Type
Median Age
Income
Employment
Education
Residential
Race/Ethnicity
Activity
Financial
Activity
Media
Vehicle
E X H I B I T  9.4
Examples of Tapestry
Source: Esri, “Tapestry Segmentation: The Fabric of America’s Neighborhoods.”
Step 3: Evaluate Segment Attractiveness
The third step in the segmentation process involves evaluating the attractiveness of the 
various segments. To undertake this evaluation, marketers first must determine whether the 
segment is worth pursuing, using several descriptive criteria: Is the segment identifiable, 
substantial, reachable, responsive, and profitable (see Exhibit 9.5)?
Identifiable  Firms must be able to identify who is within their market to be able to design 
products or services to meet their needs. It is equally important to ensure that the segments 
are distinct from one another, because too much overlap between segments means that 
distinct marketing strategies aren’t necessary to meet segment members’ needs. As 
Superior Service 9.1 details, an effective marketing strategy to distinct segments might 
even offer similar options but with different mascots and colors, if those identifiable seg-
ments are connected with particular universities. 
Substantial  Once the firm has identified its potential target markets, it needs to measure 
their sizes. If a market is too small or its buying power insignificant, it won’t generate suf-
ficient profits or be able to support the marketing mix activities. As China’s economy 
started growing, there were not enough middle-class car buyers to push foreign automakers 
to design an entry-level vehicle. It was only after that number grew substatially that it  
became worthwhile for them to market to these identified consumers.
 LO9-2	
Describe how firms 
determine whether a 
segment is attractive 
and therefore worth 
pursuing.

280	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Responsive
Segment
attractiveness
Proﬁtable
Reachable
Identiﬁable
Substantial
E X H I B I T  9.5
Evaluation of Segment Attractiveness
Congressional Hearings and the Ethical Considerations 
for Modern Loyalty Programsiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 9.1
Loyalty programs are so widespread, spanning so many 
­industries, that they may seem unquestionable. But re-
cent hearings held by the U.S. Congress Commerce Com-
mittee created some challenging questions, especially for 
the data warehouses that help companies target their ideal 
markets.
	
Part of the impetus for this questioning is the increased 
insights that marketers gain about their customers using 
technologically advanced data-gathering methods. Espe-
cially when consumers opt in to a loyalty program, they 
grant data brokers access to vast amounts of information 
about them. These brokers, including Experian, Acxiom, 
and Epsilon, earn their revenues by gathering and ware-
housing these massive amounts of consumer data and 
then selling selected slices to companies that want to tar-
get a particular audience.
	
The chair of the hearings, Democratic senator John Rocke-
feller of West Virginia, voiced concerns that the practices of 
the data brokers were shrouded in secrecy, such that there 
was insufficient oversight of how they collected and used in-
formation about consumers. But his challenges also extended 
to some central tactics embraced by marketers.
	
By segmenting populations by gender, race, ethnicity, and 
income, Rockefeller asserted, data gatherers were inherently 
discriminatory. Predatory lenders who identify a population 
of lower-income, less educated consumers might target them 
unfairly, such as by promising loans but only at very high 
­interest rates. A list of people suffering from a genetic dis-
ease might attract the attention of unethical peddlers of “mir-
acle cures.” Because so much personal data are now 
available online, oversight of the uses of the data becomes 
even more difficult.
	
Rockefeller also objected to the defining feature of loyalty 
programs—namely, the provision of benefits to customers that 
the provider deems “better.” Using the example of airlines, the 
hearing noted that in the aftermath of a flight cancellation, air-
lines often give priority to their best customers to help them find 
another route to their destination. Such practices in turn make 
the industry more frustrating and less serviceable for occasional 
or infrequent fliers. Overall, then, the harms to the broader soci-
ety might outweigh the benefits to the individual or the firm.
	
Or perhaps the problem is merely unethical implementa-
tion, and the segmentation and targeting that Rockefeller de-
cries is merely part of doing business.

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
281
	
	
Symbiosis in Your Stay: How Hotels Leverage  
Their Proximity to Universitiesiv
Orientation. Move-in day. Parents’ day. Moving-out day. 
Commencement. Reunion. Over the spans of time that stu-
dents and their families interact with their colleges or universi-
ties, there are innumerable situations in which someone needs 
an extra room. Whether parents are dropping their first-year 
students off for their first taste of campus life, picking up their 
new graduates, or even returning as alumni, they represent a 
steady, predictable stream of potential revenue for the hotels 
located close to campus. These clearly identifiable parents 
and families are vast in number and tend to be highly respon-
sive to offers that highlight their favorite university. 
	
Recognizing the vast opportunity associated with this cap-
tive market, hotels are getting better at presenting themselves 
as virtual extensions of the school. From keeping sports mem-
orabilia in the front lobby to decorating with school colors, 
these hotels seek to make devoted fans, students, and parents 
feel connected. One hotel near Boston University has estab-
lished a dedicated room, the Terrier Suite, to honor the school’s 
mascot. On its walls hang historical photographs of the school, 
and the minibar has glassware etched with the university em-
blem. The Nashville Marriot promotes its symbiosis with 
Vanderbilt University by decorating the lobby with one wall of 
equations, balanced by another wall of Vandy football helmets. 
	
 Beyond décor, hotels also are finding ways to pitch of-
fers to parents that are valuable enough to encourage them 
to keep coming back for all four (or five or six) years that 
their students are enrolled in the school. A hotel located 
next to Bucknell University hands out cards, preprinted with 
the dates of key events for the upcoming year, such as 
homecoming or graduation, so that parents can book their 
next trips well in advance. The Revere Hotel Boston 
Common is in close proximity to several schools, such as 
Suffolk University, Tufts University, and Emerson College. For 
each guest, it determines his or her school loyalty, then 
hands out welcome packages stuffed with school merchan-
dise, museum passes, and access to other local area attrac-
tions. It even solicited help designing staff members’ 
uniforms from the design students attending the nearly 
Massachusetts College of Art and Design. 
	
These moves appear popular among independent hotel op-
erators as well as national chains. They reflect an increasing 
focus in the hotel industry to address the customer experi-
ence, in an effort to enhance customer loyalty and thereby 
buffer themselves from the dynamic demand they usually face. 
The targeted group of consumers also is strongly appealing. 
These parents already might be spending thousands to help 
pay for their children’s educations, suggesting their strong 
promise for profit for the hotels as well. And ultimately, who 
can resist a hotel room festooned with balloons and stream-
ers in their school colors?
Superior Service 9.1
To target visitors to Boston University, one hotel features the Terrier Suite, to honor the school’s  
mascot. In addition to terrier décor, on its walls hang historical photographs of the school, and the 
minibar has glassware etched with the university emblem.
Courtesy of the Hotel Commonwealth

282	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Reachable  The best product or service cannot have any impact, no matter how identi-
fiable or substantial the target market is, if that market cannot be reached (or accessed) 
through persuasive communications and product distribution. The consumer must know 
that the product or service exists, understand what it can do for him or her, and recognize 
how to buy it. If Victoria’s Secret fails to tell women that it is offering some less luxuri-
ous, more affordable options, shoppers will just walk right past the store and buy basic 
bras from the Macy’s store in the same mall.
Responsive  For a segmentation strategy to be successful, the customers in the seg-
ment must react similarly and positively to the firm’s offering. If, through the firm’s 
distinctive competencies, it cannot provide products or services to that segment, it should 
not target it. For instance, the Cadillac division of General Motors (GM) has introduced 
a line of cars to the large and very lucrative luxury car segment. People in this market 
typically purchase Porsches, BMWs, Audis, and Lexuses. In contrast, GM has been 
somewhat successful competing for the middle-priced family-oriented car and light truck 
segments. Thus, even though the luxury car segment meets all the other criteria for a 
successful segment, GM took a big risk in attempting to pursue this market.
Profitable  Marketers must also focus their assessments on the potential profitability of 
each segment, both current and future. Some key factors to keep in mind in this analysis 
include market growth (current size and expected growth rate), market competitiveness 
(number of competitors, entry barriers, product substitutes), and market access (ease of 
developing or accessing distribution channels and brand familiarity). Some straightfor-
ward calculations can help illustrate the profitability of a segment:
Segment profitability = (Segment size × Segment adoption percentage ×  
Purchase behavior × Profit margin percentage) − Fixed costs
where
	
Segment size = Number of people in the segment
	
Segment adoption percentage = Percentage of customers in the segment who are 
likely to adopt the product/service
	
Purchase behavior = Purchase price × number of times the customer would buy the 
product/service in a year
If you are looking for a luxury 
SUV, General Motors hopes 
you will choose a Cadillac.
© Patrick T. Fallon/Bloomberg/Getty  
Images

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
283
	
	
	
Profit margin percentage = (Selling price − variable costs) ÷ selling price
	
Fixed costs = Advertising expenditure, rent, utilities, insurance, and administrative 
salaries for managers
To illustrate how a business might determine a segment’s profitability, consider 
­Camillo’s start-up lawn service. He is trying to determine whether to target homeowners or 
businesses in a small midwestern town. Exhibit 9.6 estimates the profitability of the two 
segments. The homeowner segment is much larger than the business segment is, but ­several 
lawn services with established customers already exist. There is much less competition in 
the business segment. So, the segment adoption rate for the homeowner segment is only 
1 percent, compared with 20 percent for the business segment. Camillo can charge a much 
higher price to businesses, and they use lawn services more frequently. The profit margin 
for the business segment is higher as well, because Camillo can use large equipment to cut 
the grass and therefore save on variable labor costs. However, the fixed costs for purchasing 
and maintaining the large equipment are much higher for the business segment. Further-
more, he would need to spend more money obtaining and maintaining the business 
­customers, whereas he would use less expensive door-to-door flyers to reach household 
customers. On the basis of these informed predictions, Camillo decides the business seg-
ment is more profitable for his lawn service.
This analysis provides an estimate of the profitability of two segments at one point in 
time. It is also useful to evaluate the profitability of a segment over the lifetime of one of its 
typical customers. To address such issues, marketers consider factors such as how long the 
customer will remain loyal to the firm, the defection rate (percentage of customers who switch 
on a yearly basis), the costs of replacing lost customers (advertising, promotion), whether 
customers will buy more or more expensive merchandise in the future, and other such factors.
Now that we’ve evaluated each segment’s attractiveness (Step 3), we can select the 
target markets to pursue (Step 4).
Step 4: Select a Target Market
The fourth step in the STP process is to select a target market. The key factor likely to affect 
this decision is the marketer’s ability to pursue such an opportunity or target segment. Thus, as 
we mentioned in Chapter 2, a firm very carefully assesses both the attractiveness of the target 
market (opportunities and threats based on the SWOT analysis and the profitability of the 
segment) and its own competencies (strengths and weaknesses based on the SWOT analysis).
Determining how to select target markets is not always straightforward, as we discuss 
in more detail next and illustrate in Exhibit 9.7 with several targeting strategies. 
Undifferentiated Targeting Strategy, or Mass Marketing  When everyone might 
be considered a potential user of its product, a firm uses an undifferentiated targeting 
 LO9-3	
Articulate the 
differences among 
targeting strategies: 
undifferentiated, 
differentiated, 
concentrated, or 
micromarketing.
Homeowners
Businesses
Segment size
75,000
1,000
Segment adoption percentage
1%
20%
Purchase behavior 
  Purchase price 
  Frequency of purchase
$100 
12 times
$500 
20 times
Profit margin percentage
60%
80%
Fixed costs
$400,000
$1,000,000
Segment profit
$140,000
$600,000
E X H I B I T  9.6
Profitability of Two Market Segments for Camillo’s Lawn Service

284	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Targeting
strategies
Micromarketing
or
one-to-one
Undiﬀerentiated
or
mass marketing
Diﬀerentiated
Concentrated
E X H I B I T  9.7
Targeting Strategies
­strategy (mass marketing). (See Exhibit 9.7.) 
Clearly, such a targeting strategy focuses on 
the similarities in needs of the customers as 
opposed to the differences. If the product or 
service is perceived to provide similar benefits 
to most consumers, there simply is little need 
to develop separate strategies for different 
groups.
Although not a common strategy in today’s 
complex marketplace, an undifferentiated strat-
egy is used for many basic commodities such as 
salt or sugar. However, even those firms that of-
fer salt and sugar now are trying to differentiate 
their products. Similarly, ­everyone with a car 
needs gasoline. Yet gasoline companies have 
vigorously moved from an undifferentiated 
strategy to a differentiated one by targeting their 
offerings to low-, medium-, and high-octane 
gasoline users.
Differentiated Targeting Strategy  Firms 
using a differentiated targeting strategy ­target 
several market segments with a different 
Condé Nast has more than 20 niche 
magazines focused on different aspects 
of life.
© Alberto Coto/Getty Images RF

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
285
	
	
­offering for each (again see Exhibit 9.7). Condé Nast has 
more than 20 niche magazines focused on different as-
pects of life—from Vogue for fashionistas to Bon Appetit 
for foodies to GQ for fashion-conscious men to The New 
Yorker for literature lovers to Golf Digest for those who 
walk the links.
Firms embrace differentiated targeting because it 
helps them obtain a bigger share of the market and in-
crease the market for their products overall. Readers of 
Golf Digest probably are unlike readers of Architec-
tural Digest in their interests, as well as in such demo-
graphics as gender, age, and income. Providing 
products or services that appeal to multiple segments 
helps diversify the business and therefore lowers the 
company’s (in this case, Condé Nast’s) overall risk. 
Even if one magazine suffers a circulation decline, the 
impact on the firm’s profitability can be offset by rev-
enue from another publication that continues to do 
well. But a differentiated strategy is likely to be more 
costly for the firm.
Concentrated Targeting Strategy  When an organi-
zation selects a single, primary target market and fo-
cuses all its energies on providing a product to fit that 
market’s needs, it is using a concentrated targeting 
strategy. Entrepreneurial start-up ventures often benefit from using a 
concentrated strategy, which allows them to employ their limited re-
sources more efficiently. Newton Running, for instance, has concen-
trated its targeting strategy to runners—but not all runners. It focuses 
only on those who prefer to land on their forefeet while running, a 
style that has been suggested as more natural, efficient, and less 
­injury-prone than the style encouraged by more traditional running 
shoes with their heel-first construction and substantial cushioning. In 
comparison, though it also is known for its running shoes, Nike uses 
a differentiated targeting strategy. It makes shoes for segments that 
include basketball and football players and skateboarders; it also 
makes shoes for fashion-conscious white-collar workers with its sub-
sidiary brand Cole Haan.
Micromarketing20  Take a look at your collection of belts. Have you 
ever had one made to match your exact specifications? (If you’re inter-
ested, try http://www.leathergoodsconnection.com.) When a firm tai-
lors a product or service to suit an individual customer’s wants or 
needs, it is undertaking an extreme form of segmentation called micro-
marketing or one-to-one marketing.
CVS uses micromarketing to each customer by analyzing what 
they are buying and the profitability of each item purchased from 
its loyalty card data.21 If a customer shops relatively infrequently, 
for example, once a month for her prescriptions, it may provide in-
centives that expire in a week. Alternatively, if another customer 
buys frequently, but with a relatively low market basket value of 
less than $20 per visit, it provides incentives to increase each visit’s 
purchases to, say, $25. It may provide incentives to get customers 
who are purchasing only national brands to purchase more private 
label merchandise.
Which segment is Newton 
­targeting?
© Newton Running
CVS uses micromarketing to each customer by 
analyzing what they are buying and the profitabil-
ity of each item purchased from its ­loyalty card 
data.
© Sonda Dawes/The Image Works

286	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Step 5: Identify and Develop Positioning Strategy
The last step in developing a market segmentation strategy is positioning. Market posi-
tioning involves a process of defining the marketing mix variables so that target customers 
have a clear, distinctive, desirable understanding of what the product does or represents in 
comparison with competing products.
The positioning strategy can help communicate the firm’s or the product’s value 
proposition, which communicates the customer benefits to be received from a product or 
service and thereby provides reasons for wanting to purchase it.
To visualize the value proposition, examine the Circles for a Successful Value 
Proposition framework in part A of Exhibit 9.8.22 The bottom left circle in part A rep-
resents the customer needs and wants, the bottom right circle represents the company’s 
offerings (i.e., its capabilities), and the top circle represents the benefits offered by 
competitors. The best situation is if a company’s product or service offering overlaps 
with customer needs and wants but suffers no overlap with competitors’ offerings  
(Exhibit 9.8). The shaded portion reflects the value proposition, or the intersection of 
what the customer needs and wants with what the company can offer. Unfortunately, 
even if the situation depicted in part A of Exhibit 9.8 existed, and the product or ser-
vice is currently successful, that success would not be sustainable because competitors 
would attempt to copy the important product or service attributes and therefore begin 
to encroach on the firm’s value proposition. Maintaining a unique value proposition 
can be sustained in the long term only in monopoly situations or possibly monopolistic 
competition situations.
In part B of Exhibit 9.8, the intersection of customer needs, the benefits provided 
by our focal firm, and the benefits provided by a competing firm reveal seven specific 
spaces where a product or service might be located. Let’s look at each one in turn, 
­using the offerings of the airline industry as hypothetical examples to understand 
each space.
 LO9-4	
Determine the value 
proposition.
E X H I B I T  9.8
Circles for a Successful Value Proposition
Competitive
oﬀering
Customer
needs and wants
Company
oﬀering
The
value
proposition
A. No overlap with competition
Competitor
beneﬁts
#7
#5
#6
#1:  Firm’s value proposition.
#2: Customer’s unmet needs (marketing opportunity).
#3: Firm’s beneﬁts that are not required—educate customer or redesign product.
#4: Key beneﬁts that both the ﬁrm and competitor provide that customers require—
      carefully monitor performance relative to competitor on these beneﬁts.
#5: Competitor’s value proposition—monitor and imitate if needed.
#6: Beneﬁts both ﬁrms provide that customers do not appear to need.
#7: Competitor beneﬁts that are not required. 
Firm beneﬁts
#3
Customer needs
#2
#1
#4
B. Determining the value proposition

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
287
	
	
Space 1. Representing the firm’s value proposition, this space reveals which customer 
needs are effectively met by the benefits that the firm provides but not by the benefits 
provided by competitors. That is, there is no overlap between competitors. When 
­airline customers prefer a cattle-call approach to seating, which allows them to 
choose their own seats on the plane as long as they get an early check-in, they turn 
to Southwest, and Southwest alone, for their flights.
Space 2. These customer needs are unmet. It represents an important marketing 
­opportunity in that the firm could create new products or services or augment exist-
ing ones to better satisfy these needs. A direct route between two cities that currently 
are not connected by any airline represents a prime example of such a space.
Space 3. Customers express little need or desire for these company benefits. The firm 
thus has several options. It might educate customers about the importance and benefits 
that it provides with this space, to encourage customers to develop a sense of their 
need. Alternatively, it could reengineer its approach to stop providing these unwanted 
benefits, which likely would enable it to save money. For example, when airlines real-
ized that passengers cared little about the appearance of a piece of lettuce underneath 
the in-flight sandwiches they were served, they saved millions of dollars they had 
previously spent on unwanted produce.
Space 4. These needs are being met by the benefits of the firm as well as by competi-
tors. Many customers make frequent trips between major cities, like New York and 
Washington, DC, and many airlines offer multiple direct flights each day between 
these hubs. Each firm therefore works to compete effectively, such as by offering 
convenient flight times or striving to increase its on-time rates to make it easier for 
customers to compare firms on these specific features.
Space 5. This space constitutes the competitor’s value proposition: the needs of 
­customers that are met by benefits a competitor provides but not by the benefits pro-
vided by our focal firm. For example, only a few airlines host separate lounges for 
their best customers; a lower-cost airline cannot compete in this space. However, if 
more and more customers start to make demands for these benefits, the focal firm 
needs to monitor developments carefully and match some benefits if possible.
A firm’s value proposition is represented by the benefits that a firm provides but that its competitors do not. Airline customers 
who are looking for a good value and will therefore tolerate a cattle-call approach to seating, which allows them to choose their 
own seats on the plane as long as they get an early check-in, turn to Southwest for their flights (left). Alternatively, customers 
who are looking for lots of world-wide flight options will turn to American Airlines/US Airways (right).
(Left): © Buskirk Services, Inc./PhotoEdit; (right): © Ashok Saxena/Alamy

288	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Space 6. Although both the focal firm and its competitors provide these benefits, 
they somehow are not meeting customer needs. The stringent security screening 
requirements aim to increase passenger safety, but they also represent a significant 
inconvenience that many fliers associate with airlines rather than federal regulators. 
Expending significant efforts to educate customers by the focal firm about these 
needs would also benefit competitors, so they likely are lower in the priority list 
of spending.
Space 7. Finally, some competitor benefits are either undesired or unnecessary 
among customers. Similar to Space 3, the competitor could invest money to 
­educate customers about the importance of these benefits and highlight their needs 
through advertising and promotional campaigns. If so, the focal firm should recog-
nize that this need is moving to Space 5. Alternatively, the competitor could reengi-
neer its products to eliminate these benefits, in which case it requires no response 
from the focal firm.
Regardless of their existing space, firms must constantly and closely monitor their 
competitors’ offerings. If competitors offer features that the firm does not, it is important 
to determine their importance to customers. Important attributes should be considered for 
inclusion in the firm’s offering—or else they will provide a unique value proposition for 
competitors.
In Exhibit 9.9, we highlight the elements of developing and communicating a firm’s 
value proposition. The main value proposition components are:
1.	
Target market
2.	
Offering name or brand
3.	
Product/service category or concept
4.	
Unique point of difference/benefits
Let’s focus on a couple of well-known products, Gatorade and 7-Up, and their 
potential value propositions (brackets are added to separate the value proposition 
­components):
∙	
Gatorade:23 To [athletes around the world] [Gatorade] is the [sports drink] 
[representing the heart, hustle, and soul of athleticism and gives the fuel for working 
muscles, fluid for hydration, and electrolytes to help replace what is lost in sweat 
before, during, and after activity to get the most out of your body].
∙	
7UP:24 To [non-cola consumers] [7-Up] is a [non-caffeinated soft drink] that is 
[light, refreshing, lemon-lime flavored, and has a crisp, bubbly, and clean taste].
	
Gatorade	
7-Up
Target market	
Athletes around the world	
Non-cola consumers
Offering name or brand	
Gatorade	
7-Up
Product/service category 	
Sports drink	
Non-caffeinated soft 
or concept	
	
drink
Unique point of difference/	
Representing the heart, hustle,	
Light, refreshing, 
benefits	
and soul of athleticism and 	
lemon-lime flavored, and 
	
gives the fuel for working muscles, 	
has a crisp, bubbly, and 
	
fluid for hydration, and electrolytes 	
clean taste. 
	
to help replace what is lost in  
	
sweat before, during, and after  
	
activity to get the most out of  
	
your body.
E X H I B I T  9.9
Value Proposition Statement Key Elements

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
289
	
	
Positioning Methods
Firms position products and services based on different methods such as the value propo-
sition, salient attributes, symbols, and competition.
Value Proposition  Value is a popular positioning method because the relationship of 
price to quality is among the most important considerations for consumers when they 
make a purchase decision. But value is in the eyes of the beholder. Some chocolate  
lovers buy only Hershey’s. It has a made-in-the-U.S.A. heritage. It offers a wide  
assortment—something for everyone. It is perceived to be of good quality and have great 
taste. And, importantly, it is relatively inexpensive. Other chocoholics wouldn’t think of 
buying such a low-priced treat, but instead portion their disposable calorie intake to 
only higher-priced brands such as Godiva. Godiva has stores in high-end malls, offers 
some handmade items such as fresh berries dipped in chocolate, and has a loyalty 
 LO9-5	
Define positioning, 
and describe how 
firms do it.
What are the value propositions 
for Gatorade and 7-UP?
© Michael J. Hruby
Hershey’s and Godiva both offer their respective target markets a good value. Hershey’s (left) is a lower-priced option with a 
made-in-the-U.S.A heritage, as depicted by this chocolate Statue of Liberty in the Hershey’s Chocolate World store in the New 
York-New York hotel in Las Vegas. Godiva (right) offers handmade items, such as the strawberry dipped in chocolate on the 
book’s cover, and beautiful traditional stores like this one in Brussels, Belgium.
(Left): © Yaacov Dagan/Alamy; (right): © David Jones/Alamy

290	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
­program. Each market, the Hershey’s and the Godiva lovers, would argue that their 
brand is the best value, and to them, it is. Recall from our discussion in Chapter 1, value 
does not necessarily mean low priced. But both of these chocolatiers position their 
products based on value.
Salient Attributes  Another common positioning strategy focuses on the product at-
tributes that are most important to the target market. With its all-wheel drive Quattro, 
Audi has positioned itself on performance and handling. Targeting a different market, 
Subaru positions its all-wheel drive slightly differently, instead focusing on safety and 
handling.
Symbols  A well-known symbol can also be used as a posi-
tioning tool. What comes to mind when you think of Colonel 
Sanders, the Jolly Green Giant, the Gerber Baby, or Tony the 
Tiger? Or consider the Texaco star, the Nike swoosh, or the 
Ralph Lauren polo player. These symbols are so strong and 
well known that they create a position for the brand that dis-
tinguishes it from its competition. Many such symbols are 
registered trademarks that are legally protected by the com­
panies that developed them.
Competition  Firms can choose to position their products or 
services against a specific competitor or an entire product/­
service classification. For instance, although most luggage 
companies focus on building lightweight and functional de-
signs, Saddleback Leather focuses on rugged durability and a 
classic look. Offering a 100-year guarantee on its products, 
the owner Dave positions his bags as something “they’ll fight 
over when you’re dead.”25 This craftsmanship comes at a 
cost—its suitcases sell for more than $1,000.
Marketers must be careful, however, that they don’t 
­position their product too closely to their competition. If, 
for ­instance, their package or logo looks too much like a 
Audi features the all-wheel 
drive Quattro, which is posi-
tioned to appeal to those 
­wanting great performance 
and handling, particularly on 
snowy and icy roads. 
© Lexan/Shutterstock RF
How does Saddleback Leather position itself?
© Saddleback Leather Company

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
291
	
	
competitor’s, they might be opening themselves up to a trademark infringe-
ment lawsuit. Many private-label and store brands have been challenged for 
using packaging that appears ­confusingly similar to that of the national brand 
leaders in a category. Similarly, McDonald’s sues anyone who uses the  
Mc prefix, including McSleep Inns and McDental Services, even though in the 
latter case there was little possibility that consumers would believe the fast-
food restaurant company would branch out into dental services.
Positioning Using Perceptual Mapping
Now that we have identified the various methods by which firms position their 
products and services, we discuss the actual steps they go through to establish 
that position. When developing a positioning strategy, firms go through six 
important steps. But before you read about these steps, examine Exhibits 9.10A 
through 9.10D, a hypothetical perceptual map of the soft drink industry.  
A perceptual map displays, in two or more dimensions, the position of products 
or brands in the consumer’s mind. We have chosen two dimensions for 
­illustrative purposes: sweet versus light taste (vertical) and less natural versus 
healthy (horizontal). Also, though this industry is quite complex, we have  
simplified the diagram to include only a few players in the market. The position of each 
brand is denoted by a small circle, except for the focal brand, Gatorade, which is  
denoted by a star. The numbered circles denote consumers’ ideal points—where a  
particular market segment’s ideal product would lie on the map. The larger the numbered 
circle, the larger the market size.
To derive a perceptual map such as shown in Exhibits 9.10A through 9.10D, marketers 
follow six steps.
1.	 Determine consumers’ perceptions and evaluations of the product or service 
in relation to competitors’product or service. Marketers determine their brand’s 
position by asking a series of questions about their firm’s and the competitors’ 
products. For instance, they might ask how the consumer uses the existing product 
or services, what items the consumer regards as alternative sources to satisfy his 
or her needs, what the person likes or dislikes about the brand in relation to 
­competitors, and what might make that person choose one brand over another. 
Exhibit 9.10A depicts the five products using two dimensions (light taste–sweet 
taste; and less natural–healthy).
Gatorade and Powerade are positioned 
similarly and compete with each other 
for customers who seek healthy sweet 
drinks.
© Rachel Epstein/PhotoEdit
E X H I B I T  9.10A
Perceptual Map, Chart A
Sweet taste
Chart A
Light taste
Less
natural
Healthy
Pepsi
Propel Fitness
Water
Bottled water
Powerade
Gatorade

292	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
2.	
Identify the market’s ideal points and size. On a perceptual map, marketers can 
represent the size of current and potential markets. For example, Exhibit 9.10B uses 
differently sized ovals that correspond to the market size. Ideal point 1 represents the 
largest market, so if the firm does not already have a product positioned close to this 
point, it should consider an introduction. Point 3 is the smallest market, so there are 
relatively few customers who want a healthy, light-tasting drink. This is not to suggest 
that this market should be ignored; however, the company might want to consider a 
niche market rather than mass market strategy for this group of consumers.
3.	
Identify competitors’ positions. When the firm understands how its customers view 
its brand relative to competitors’, it must study how those same competitors position 
themselves. For instance, Powerade positions itself closely to Gatorade, which means 
they appear next to each other on the perceptual map and appeal to target market 2 
(see Exhibit 9.10C). They are also often found next to each other on store shelves, are 
similarly priced, and are viewed by customers as sports drinks. Gatorade also knows 
that its sports drink is perceived to be more like Powerade than like its own Propel 
Fitness Water (located near target market 3) or Coke (target market 1).
E X H I B I T  9.10C
Perceptual Map. Chart C
Coke
Propel
Fitness
Water
Bottled water
Powerade
Gatorade
Pepsi
Sweet taste
Chart C
Light taste
Less
natural
Healthy
1
2
3
4
E X H I B I T  9.10B
Perceptual Map, Chart B
Sweet taste
Chart B
Light taste
Less
natural
Healthy
1
2
Target market size indicated by size of oval
3
4

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
293
	
	
4.	
Determine consumer preferences. The firm knows what the consumer thinks of the 
products or services in the marketplace and their positions relative to one another. 
Now it must find out what the consumer really wants—that is, determine the ideal 
product or service that appeals to each market. For example, a huge market exists for 
traditional Gatorade, and that market is shared by Powerade. Gatorade also recog-
nizes a market, depicted as the ideal product for segment 4 on the perceptual map, 
of consumers who would prefer a less sweet, less calorie-laden drink that offers the 
same rejuvenating properties as Gatorade. Currently, no product is adequately 
­serving market 4.
5.	
Select the position. Continuing with the Gatorade example, the company has 
some choices to appeal to the “less sweet sports drink” target market 4. It could 
develop a new product to meet the needs of market 4 (see Exhibit 9.10D, option 1). 
Alternatively, it could adjust or reposition its marketing approach—its product and 
promotion—to sell original Gatorade to market 4 (option 2). Finally, it could ignore 
what target market 4 really wants and hope that consumers will be attracted to the 
original Gatorade because it is closer to their ideal product than anything else 
on the market.
E X H I B I T  9.10D
Perceptual Map, Chart D
Coke
Propel Fitness
Water
Bottled water
Powerade
Gatorade
Pepsi
Sweet taste
Chart D
Light taste
Less
natural
Healthy
1
2
3
4
Gatorade
#1: Gatorade
introduces new
product
#2: Gatorade
repositions itself
Gatorade uses athletes to 
­compete for target markets in 
Exhibit 9.10.
© Jed Jacobsohn/Getty Images

294	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
6.	
Monitor the positioning strategy. Markets are not stagnant. Consumers’ tastes shift, 
and competitors react to those shifts. Attempting to maintain the same position year 
after year can spell disaster for any company. Thus, firms must always view the first 
three steps of the positioning process as ongoing, with adjustments made in step four 
as necessary.
Despite the apparent simplicity of this presentation, marketers should recognize that 
changing their firm’s positioning is never an easy task.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is a perceptual map?
2.	 Identify the six positioning steps.
	
	
Outline the different methods of segmenting a 
market.
	
	
There is really no one “best” method to segment a 
market. Firms choose from various methods on the 
basis of the type of product/service they offer and 
their goals for the segmentation strategy. For in-
stance, if the firm wants to identify its customers 
easily, demographic or geographic segmentation 
likely will work best. But if it is trying to dig deeper 
into why customers might buy its offering, then psy-
chographic, geodemographic, benefits, or behav-
ioral segmentation (occasion and loyalty) work best. 
Typically, a combination of several segmentation 
methods is most effective.
	
	
Describe how firms determine whether a segment 
is attractive and therefore worth pursuing.
	
	
Marketers use several criteria to assess a seg-
ment’s attractiveness. First, the customer should 
be identifiable—companies must know what types 
of people are in the market so they can direct their 
efforts appropriately. Second, the market must be 
substantial enough to be worth pursuing. If rela-
tively few people appear in a segment, it is proba-
bly not cost effective to direct special marketing 
mix efforts toward them. Third, the market must 
be reachable—the firm must be able to reach the 
segment through effective communications and 
distribution. Fourth, the firm must be responsive 
to the needs of customers in a segment. It must be 
able to deliver a product or service that the seg-
ment will embrace. Finally, the segment must be 
profitable, both in the near term and over the life-
time of the customer.
LO9-1
LO9-2
	
	
Articulate the differences among targeting 
strategies: undifferentiated, differentiated, con-
centrated, or micromarketing.
	
	
Firms use a targeting strategy after they have identi-
fied its segments. An undifferentiated strategy uses 
no targeting at all and works only for products or 
services that most consumers consider to be com-
modities. The difference between a differentiated 
and a concentrated strategy is that the differentiated 
approach targets multiple segments, whereas the 
concentrated targets only one. Larger firms with 
multiple product/service offerings generally use a 
differentiated strategy; smaller firms or those with a 
limited product/service offering often use a concen-
trated strategy. Firms that employ a micromarket-
ing, or one-to-one, marketing strategy tailor their 
product/service offering to each customer—that is, 
it is custom-made. In the past, micromarketing was 
reserved primarily for artisans, tailors, or other 
craftspeople who would make items exactly as the 
customer wanted. Recently, however, larger manu-
facturers and retailers have begun experimenting 
with custom-made merchandise as well. Service 
providers, in contrast, are largely accustomed to 
customizing their offering.
	
	
Determine the value proposition.
	
	
A firm’s value proposition communicates the cus-
tomer benefits to be received from a product or ser-
vice and thereby provides reasons for the customer 
to want to purchase it. It consists of the attributes of 
a product or service that are desired by the target 
market but not available from competitors. Firms 
could attempt to offer attributes that are important 
LO9-3
LO9-4
Reviewing Learning Objectives

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
295
	
	
to its customers, whether or not they are offered by 
competitors. For attributes that are not important 
to its customers, it should either educate its cus-
tomers about the importance of those attributes, 
deemphasize them, or not offer those product or 
service attributes.
	
	
Define positioning, and describe how firms do it.
	
	
Positioning is the P in the STP (segmentation, tar-
geting, and positioning) process. It refers to how 
customers think about a product, service, or brand 
in the market relative to competitors’ offerings. 
Firms position their products and services accord-
ing to several criteria. Some focus on their offer-
ing’s value—customers get a lot for what the 
product or service costs. Others determine the most 
important attributes for customers and position their 
LO9-5
offering on the basis of those attributes. Symbols 
can also be used for positioning, though few prod-
ucts or services are associated with symbols that are 
compelling enough to drive people to buy. Finally, 
one of the most common positioning methods relies 
on the favorable comparison of the firm’s offering 
with the products or services marketed by competi-
tors. When developing a positioning strategy and a 
perceptual map, firms go through six steps. First, 
they determine consumers’ perceptions and evalua-
tions of the product or service in relation to compet-
itors. Second, they identify the market’s ideal points 
and market sizes for those products or services. 
Third, they identify competitors’ positions. Fourth, 
they determine consumer preferences. Fifth, they 
select the position. Finally, they monitor the posi-
tioning strategy.
∙	 behavioral segmentation,  277
∙	 benefit segmentation,  276
∙	 concentrated targeting  
strategy,  284
∙	 demographic segmentation,  270
∙	 differentiated targeting  
strategy,  284
∙	 geodemographic segmentation,  277
∙	 geographic segmentation,  270
∙	 ideal point,  291
∙	 lifestyle,  273
∙	 loyalty segmentation,  277
∙	 market positioning,  286
∙	 micromarketing,  285
∙	 occasion segmentation,  277
∙	 one-to-one marketing,  285
∙	 perceptual map,  291
∙	 psychographics,  273
∙	 psychographic segmentation,  271
∙	 self-concept,  273
∙	 self-values,  273
∙	 undifferentiated targeting strategy 
(mass marketing),  283
∙	 value,  289
∙	 Value and Lifestyle Survey 
(VALS),  274
∙	 value proposition,  286
Key Terms
1.	 Go to http://www.esri.com/library/fliers/pdfs/­
tapestry_segmentation.pdf, and identify five segments 
that you would expect to find in your zip code. Then 
go to http://www.esri.com/data/tapestry/zip-lookup, 
and type in your zip code. Compare the segments 
that are found in your zip code with your initial pre-
diction. Are they similar or different ? Discuss the 
extent to which you believe these are accurate de-
scriptions of the main segments of people who reside 
in your zip code.
2.	 Go to the VALS website (http://www.strategicbusines 
sinsights.com/vals/presurvey.shtml), and click on the 
link to complete the VALS survey. After you submit 
your responses, a screen will display your primary and 
secondary VALS types. Click on the colored names of 
each segment to get additional information about them, 
and print out your results. Assess the extent to which 
these results reflect your lifestyle, and identify which 
characteristics accurately reflect your interests and  
activities and which do not.
Marketing Digitally
1.	 What segmentation methods would you suggest for a 
small entrepreneur starting her own business selling 
gourmet chocolates? Justify why you would recommend 
those methods.
2.	 You have been asked to identify various segments in the 
market and then a potential targeting strategy. Describe 
the segments for a pet supply store, and then justify the 
best targeting strategy to use.
Marketing Applications

296	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
3.	 What types of products would you use demographic 
segmentation for? How about psychographic segmenta-
tion? Explain how these products differ.
4.	 You have been asked to evaluate the attractiveness of a 
group of identified potential market segments. What cri-
teria will you use to evaluate those segments? Why are 
these appropriate criteria?
5.	 A small-business owner is trying to evaluate the profit-
ability of different segments. What are the key factors 
you would recommend she consider? Over what period 
of time would you recommend she evaluate?
6.	 Think about the various soft drinks that you know (e.g., 
Coca-Cola, Pepsi, 7-Up, Gatorade, Powerade). How do 
those various brands position themselves in the market?
7.	 Put yourself in the position of an entrepreneur who is 
developing a new product to introduce into the market. 
Briefly describe the product. Then, develop the segmen-
tation, targeting, and positioning strategy for marketing 
the new product. Be sure to discuss (a) the overall strat-
egy, (b) characteristics of the target market, (c) why that 
target market is attractive, and (d) the positioning strat-
egy. Provide justifications for your decisions.
8.	 Think of a specific company or organization that uses 
various types of promotional material to market its 
­offerings. The web, magazine ads, newspaper ads, cata-
logs, newspaper inserts, direct-mail pieces, and flyers 
might all be sources for a variety of promotional mate-
rials. Locate two or three promotional pieces for the 
company and use them as a basis to analyze the seg-
ments being targeted. Describe the methods used for 
segmenting the market reflected in these materials, and 
describe characteristics of the target market according to 
the materials. Be sure to include a copy of all the mate-
rials used in the analysis.
9.	 You have been hired recently by a large bank in its credit 
card marketing division. The bank has relationships 
with a large number of colleges and prints a wide vari-
ety of credit cards featuring college logos, images, and 
the like. You have been asked to oversee the implemen-
tation of a new program targeting first-year college 
­students at the schools with which the bank has a rela-
tionship. The bank has already purchased the names and 
home addresses of the incoming class. You have been 
told that no credit checks will be required for these cards 
as long as the student is over 18 years of age. The bank 
plans a first-day-of-school marketing blitz that includes 
free hats, T-shirts, and book promotions, as well as free 
pizza, if the students simply fill out an application. Do 
you think it is a good idea to target this program to these 
new students?
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself
1.	 For the ______ criteria to be met when evaluating seg-
ment attractiveness, the consumer must know the prod-
uct or service exists, understand what it can do for him 
or her, and recognize how to buy it. 
a.  substantial
b.  identifiable
c.  reachable
d.  responsive
e.  profitable
2.	 Which step in the STP process develops descriptions of 
the different segments, which in turn helps firms better 
understand the customer profiles in each segment?
a.  Establish overall strategy or objectives.
b.  Select segmentation method.
c.  Develop positioning strategy.
d.  Evaluate segment attractiveness.
e.  Select target market.
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
MERCEDES-BENZ
From Janis Joplin to Jay-Z, The Eagles to Outcast, Kanye West to Mariah Carey, genera-
tions of singers and songwriters have been inspired to mention Mercedes-Benz in their 
lyrics. Whether the brand offers a dreamed-of aspiration that they hope to access some day, 
or a signal of their wealth and power, Mercedes appeals to the musicians as well as their 
audiences. When lyricists beg for a Mercedes, or brag about how many sit in their garages, 
listeners around the world know exactly what they mean. 
bchsu_tt
Chapter Case Study 

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
297
	
	
The diversity of musicians and musical styles represented in the overall list of songs 
about Mercedes reflects just how effective the car brand has been at establishing a strong 
image as a luxury vehicle. But simultaneously, Mercedes-Benz also has developed a spe-
cific and strategic segmentation, targeting, and positioning approach that allows it to ac-
cess unique and diverse markets of consumers and potential buyers. With its various 
models and strategic marketing plan, Mercedes considers ways to segment customers by 
gender, location, age, and economic strata, among other factors. Then it determines appro-
priate methods to appeal to each of those segments with dedicated communications,  
designs, and car models. Let’s consider some examples of its STP efforts.
Gender26  As a function of its “Best Customer Experience” initiative, Mercedes-Benz 
has launched a multichannel campaign targeted specifically at women. The brand owners 
expressed their desire to make sure that all customers receive precisely the car buying and 
owning experience they want. In an attempt to ensure such access and experiences for 
women, the “She’s Mercedes” campaign features a dedicated website, a print magazine, 
and sponsored events. The events are mostly networking opportunities, and the magazine 
prominently features successful women (who also own Mercedes, of course) and their ef-
forts to balance work, family, and other commitments. In addition to similar sorts of sto-
ries, the website hosts a platform for consumers to share their ideas and impressions.
But the website also features a clever tool designed to target women buyers and position 
Mercedes as a brand that is friendly to female consumers. Specifically, it gives women the 
option to use a dedicated configurator—that is, a tool that many car companies provide to 
help customers build the exact car they want, using virtual tools. On the conventional Mer-
cedes tool, a similar tool allows potential buyers to select their model, color, wheels, audio 
package, transmission, and so on. On the She’s Mercedes site, the configurator instead fo-
cuses more on lifestyle questions rather than soliciting preferred drive train sizes. For exam-
ple, a potential buyer can list her favorite music, hobbies, and travel plans. An algorithm 
then proposes several models of Mercedes cars that are likely to fit her preferences. She can 
add options to those models, or else accept the prespecified car that the company has tar-
geted especially for her—or at least segments of ­consumers like her.
Mercedes-Benz has launched a multichannel campaign targeted specifically at women that includes the “She’s 
­Mercedes” website.
Source: Mercedes

298	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Location27  Mercedes already is nearly everywhere. But it also develops distinct targeting 
and positioning strategies in the various locations in which it appears. Thus for example, it 
notes upward trends in its worldwide sales, but it also acknowledges that sales grew by 14 
percent in the United States, 3 percent in Canada, 27 percent in South Korea, 4 percent in 
Japan, and so on. It also pays particular attention to the BRIC nations (Brazil, Russia, 
India, and China; see Chapter 8). In all these countries, it has enjoyed strong, double-digit 
sales growth. Furthermore, Mercedes specifies that in these markets, the luxury car market 
itself is growing much faster than in other traditional markets. For example, while the U.S. 
market for luxury automobiles might be growing at a respectable 6 percent annually, India 
shows promise of increasing by a remarkable 24 percent. 
Noting the importance of the Indian luxury car market in particular, Mercedes has 
developed unique and specific methods to appeal to these consumers. For example, it pur-
sued local production options to avoid the high import taxes and keep the cars affordable. 
Acknowledging the high “chauffeur share,” such that many Indians have drivers to maneu-
ver their cars about, Mercedes made sure to devote attention to the backseats of the high-
end sedans it sells there. Similarly, to broaden its appeal in China, where the growing 
market demands a wider variety of options, Mercedes introduced 15 models in a single 
year, while also expanding its sales network in that country with 50 new dealerships.28
Age29  When research showed Mercedes that its average customer in the United States 
was 52 years of age, the company also adopted a more explicit age-based segmentation 
approach that would help it appeal to younger buyers. Somewhat ironically, its investiga-
tion of buyers in their 30s showed that they actually had strongly nostalgic leanings. They 
liked the idea of Mercedes as a heritage brand. Accordingly, to position the brand as nos-
talgic, advertising targeting these buyers features glamour shots of the Mercedes legacy, as 
manifested in row upon row of beautifully designed cars, from the past to the present. 
In addition, Mercedes has vastly expanded its product lines to introduce some sportier 
models and provide a clear contrast to the “boring” sedans that young consumers might 
associate with the brand. For example, its A-class is smaller but still powerful, available in 
hatchback versions, and totally equipped with the latest in smart technology. Noting 
younger consumers’ interest in environmental sustainability, Mercedes also has improved 
the emissions rate for most of its models and touts its energy-saving innovations.
Economic Strata30  For luxury carmakers, the lowest end models in their product lines often 
represent only a small portion of their sales. Yet these models are critically important when it 
comes to attracting new customers and, potentially, establishing their lifelong loyalty to the 
brand. Accordingly, Mercedes has developed some comparatively less option-laden options to 
lure first-time and unconventional buyers to their dealerships. It introduced its CLA model at a 
base price of less than $40,000. When consumers realized that they could purchase or lease a 
Mercedes-Benz for approximately the same monthly price that they would spend for a high-end 
Toyota or Honda, many of them switched happily.
For the most part, the target market for such models includes young professionals. 
These consumers earn a steady income that enables them to take on a car payment—but 
they cannot pay for a new car outright, and the monthly payments must fit their budgets. 
Mercedes accordingly has enjoyed sales increases due to the introductions of the lower-end 
models. Furthermore, these purchases are not repeat buys: Approximately 75 percent of 
CLA purchasers are new to the brand. Such statistics suggest an expanded market for the 
brands. As these buyers age, advance in their careers, and consider more expensive car 
purchases, they should be more likely to continue visiting the dealerships that provided 
them with their very first luxury automobile.
Questions
1.	
What are the main ways Mercedes-Benz segments its customers? Are there any other 
methods in this chapter that it might use? 
2.	
How can Mercedes-Benz position itself effectively to appeal to consumers who are 
(a) men, (b) younger than 30, (c) from China, or (d) very wealthy?

	
SEGMENTATION, TARGETING, AND POSITIONING  CHAPTER NINE	
299
	
	
	 1.	 Brooks Barnes, “Disney’s Family Channel Aims Younger Than 
Millennials with New Name,” The New York Times, October 6, 
2015; Dave Walker, “ABC Family to Freeform: Six Things to 
Know About the New Name of the ‘Pretty Little Liars’ Network,” 
Forbes, January 11, 2016; Eric Deggans, “ABC Family Channel 
to Change Its Name to Freeform,” NPR, January 12, 2016.
	2.	 http://www.botticelli-foods.com/index.html.
	3.	 Isaac Thompson, “Botticelli Foods Olive Oil: Sourced from Italy 
or Tunisia? Pricing Differences?” World Trade Daily, July 25, 
2012, http://worldtradedaily.com/2012/07/25/botticelli-foods- 
olive-oil-sourced-from-italy-or-tunisia-pricing-differences/.
	4.	 http://www.botticelli-foods.com/pastasauces.html.
	5.	 James Agarwal, Naresh K. Malhotra, and Ruth N. Bolton, “A 
Cross-National and Cross-Cultural Approach to Global Market 
Segmentation: An Application Using Consumers’ Perceived 
Service Quality,” Journal of International Marketing 18, no. 3 
(September 2010), pp. 18–40.
	6.	 Bill Carter, “ABC Viewers Tilt Female for a Network Light on 
Sports,” The New York Times, December 17, 2013, http://www.
nytimes.com; Alex Sood, “The Lost Boys Found: Marketing to 
Men through Games,” Fast Company, March 10, 2011, http://
www.fastcompany.com; Jeanine Poggi, “Men’s Shopping 
Shrines,” Forbes, September 30, 2008, http://www.forbes.com.
	 7.	 Michael R. Solomon, Consumer Behavior, 10th ed. (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2012).
	8.	 Rosellina Ferraro, Amna Kirmani, and Ted Matherly, “Look at 
Me! Look at Me! Conspicuous Brand Usage, Self-Brand 
Connection, and Dilution,” Journal of Marketing Research 50, 
no. 4 (2013), pp. 477–88; Keith Wilcox and Andrew T. Stephen, 
“Are Close Friends the Enemy? Online Social Networks, Self-
Esteem, and Self-Control,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, 
no. 1 (2013), pp. 90–103.
	9.	 Eric Wilson, “Less Ab, More Flab,” The New York Times,  
May 22, 2013.
10.	 Michael R. Solomon, Consumer Behavior: Buying, Having, and 
Being, 10th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2012).
	11.	 James M. Hagerty, “Harley, with Macho Intact, Tries to Court 
More Women,” The Wall Street Journal, October 31, 2011, 
http://online.wsj.com; Harley-Davidson, “Global Customer 
Focus,” http://investor.harley-davidson.com.
	12.	 Harley-Davidson, “Women Riders,” http://www.harley- 
davidson.com.
	13.	 http://www.strategicbusinessinsights.com/vals/store/
USconsumers/intro.shtml.
	14.	 http://www.strategicbusinessinsights.com/vals/applications/
apps-pos.shtml.
	15.	 “Segmentation and Targeting,” http://www.kellogg.northwestern.
edu; Carson J. Sandy, Samuel D. Gosling, and John Durant, 
“Predicting Consumer Behavior and Media Preferences: The 
Comparative Validity of Personality Traits and Demographic 
Variables,” Psychology & Marketing 30, no. 11 (2013),  
pp. 937–49.
	16.	 For an interesting take on this issue, see Joseph Jaffe, Flip the 
Funnel (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2010).
	17.	 V. Kumar, Ilaria Dalla Pozza, and Jaishankar Ganesh, “Revisiting 
the Satisfaction–Loyalty Relationship: Empirical Generalizations 
and Directions for Future Research,” Journal of Retailing 89, 
no. 3 (2013), pp. 246–62; Irit Nitzan and Barak Libai, “Social 
Effects on Customer Retention,” Journal of Marketing 75,  
no. 6 (November 2011), pp. 24–38.
	18.	 ESRI, “Tapestry Segmentation Reference Guide” and “Tapestry 
Segmentation: The Fabric of America’s Neighborhood,” www.
esri.com.
	19.	 ESRI, “Lifestyles-Esri Tapestry Segmentation,” http://www.esri.
com/data/esri_data/tapestry.
	20.	Thorsten Blecker, Mass Customization: Challenges and 
Solutions (New York: Springer, 2006).
	21.	 Personal Communication, Robert Price, CVS Caremark’s SVP 
of Marketing and Advertising, 2010.
	22.	This circular depiction of the value proposition is based on 
work by John Bers (Vanderbilt University) and adaptation and 
development of circles of success by Ronald Goodstein 
(Georgetown University).
	23.	http://www.gatorade.com/frequently_asked_questions/ 
default.aspx.
24.	http://www.drpeppersnapplegroup.com/brands/7up/.
	25.	http://www.saddlebackleather.com/.
	26.	Mercedes, “About She’s Mercedes,” September 15, 2015, 
https://www.mercedes-benz.com/en/mercedes-me/inspiration/
she/about-shes-mercedes/; “Mercedes Wants to Be the Car for 
Women,” AutoBlog, September 16, 2015, http://www.autoblog.
com/2015/09/16/mercedes-luxury-car-for-women/.
	27.	Joachim Schmidt, “Mercedes-Benz Cars: Sales and Marketing 
Strategy,” March 29, 2012, https://www.daimler.com/ 
dokumente/investoren/kapitalmarkttage/daimler-ir- 
mercedesbenzcarsdivisiondayhungaryschmidt-20120329.pdf.
	28.	Daimler Chrysler, “Annual Report 2015: Mercedes-Benz Cars,” 
http://ar2015.daimler.com/divisions/mercedes-benz-cars.
	29.	Vanessa Fuhrmans, “German Auto Makers to Shake Up Luxury 
Market,” The Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2013.
	30.	Mark Clothier, “The Downside of Low-End Luxury Cars,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, July 17, 2014, http://www. 
businessweek.com.
	 i.	 Chris Matyszczyk, “For Teens, Facebook Is ‘Dead and Buried,’ ” 
CNET, December 27, 2013, http://news.cnet.com; Jayson 
DeMers, “The Top 7 Social Media Marketing Trends that Will 
Dominate 2016,” Forbes, September 28, 2015.
	 ii.	 Sarah Halzack, “Starbucks Has Managed to Get You Addicted 
to Its Coffee—And Its App,” Washington Post, January 23, 
2015, http://www.washingtonpost.com; Kate Kaye, “At Starbucks, 
Data Pours In. But What to Do With It?” Advertising Age, 
March 22, 2013, http://adage.com; WBAL NewsRadio 1090, 
“Why Consumers Are Addicted To Starbucks App,” WBAL 
News, February 19, 2015, http://www.wbal.com/article/ 
113508/21/why-consumers-are-addicted-to-starbucks-app; 
Sarah Perez, “Starbucks’ Mobile Order & Pay Now Live 
Nationwide, Delivery Service in Testing by Year-End,” 
TechCrunch.com, September 25, 2015.
	iii.	 Kate Kaye, “Rockefeller to Marketing Data Giants: You’re on 
Notice,” Advertising Age, December 18, 2013; Kate Kaye, “7 
Reasons This Senior Senator Hates Your Loyalty Program,” 
Advertising Age, December 20, 2013.
	iv.	 Julie Weed, “Hotels Embrace the Campus Nearby,” The New 
York Times, May 19, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com.
Endnotes

CHAPTER 10
MARKETING 
RESEARCH
 A
lthough marketing researchers draw conclu-
sions from their data, those conclusions tend 
to change over time as customer preferences 
and trends are constantly changing. For years, 
researchers and marketers agreed that featuring very thin, 
very attractive models in underwear advertising was the 
best route to selling more. Indeed, research had indicated 
that even though the images of highly attractive, glamor-
ized models made people feel worse about themselves and 
their bodies, those advertisements also prompted consum-
ers to buy more bras, panties, underwear, and shapewear 
than advertising that featured more realistically ­proportioned 
or unretouched models. No wonder the women in the 
photo look angry and anxious.1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO10-1	 Identify the five steps in the marketing research process.
	LO10-2	 Describe the various secondary data sources.
	LO10-3	 Describe the various primary data collection techniques.
	LO10-4	 Summarize the differences between secondary data and primary data.
	LO10-5	 Examine the circumstances in which collecting information on consumers is ethical.

thin blond models led to the lowest response. The adver-
tisement with the plus-size brunette model provoked 
more than four times as many sales as did the “traditional” 
advertisement, and the unretouched, multiple-model 
­advertisement did even better than that.
Adore Me also conducts research to determine 
which voiceover leads people to purchase. That is, the 
research it conducts is not limited to just visual images 
but also accounts for customers’ preferences for certain 
voices and types of information provided. Furthermore, 
based on the data it collects regularly from its online cus-
tomers, it determined that they would like to interact with 
the products in person. So Adore Me decided to experi-
ment with a pop-up store—a retail space located in a tem-
porary location. The insights gained from the experimental 
shop in turn led the retailer to open its first physical loca-
tion in New York City.3
Underwear advertising is undergoing some radical 
changes at other firms as well. As we noted in Chapter 9, 
in their underwear commercials, companies like 2(x)ist 
and Mack Weldon feature handsome but slightly flabby 
men.4 In a recent edition, even that bastion of gorgeous 
but unrealistic images of beauty, the Sports Illustrated 
swimsuit edition, features three different cover models, 
However, the marketplace is changing with the rise 
of selfies, societal efforts to counteract the negative ef-
fects of damaging body images, and expanding defini-
tions of gender and gender roles. As a consequence, 
instead of preferring to buy underwear because of of 
ads featuring beautiful and stylized models, consumers 
increasingly prefer to buy their undergarments from 
companies that feature models whose body types are 
somewhat more realistic and whose beauty appears 
more achievable.
The evidence of this shift is perhaps clearest in mar-
ket research performed by Adore Me, a start-up firm that 
sells subscriptions to customers, who then receive 
monthly packages of women’s lingerie. Before it initiated 
its first national advertising campaign, Adore Me under-
took experimental research in which it ran multiple ver-
sions of a similar advertisement that varies on specific 
elements, then watched its website to determine immedi-
ate reactions. For this campaign, Adore Me ran three ad-
vertisements for lingerie: one with highly attractive, very 
thin, blond models; another with a group of brunette mod-
els without any retouching efforts applied; and a third 
with a plus-size brunette model.2 The results of their ex-
periment demonstrated that the advertisement with the 
Source: Adore Me

302
normal rather than unrealistically thin. However, firms 
need to continue to conduct marketing research as the 
needs of their customers and the associated images are 
continually changing.6
each with a distinctly different body type.5 Thus, it ap-
pears that if modern companies want to sell undergar-
ments, they should feature their products on attractive 
people with brunette hair whose bodies are perceived as 
Marketing research is a prerequisite of successful decision making. It consists of a set of 
techniques and principles for systematically collecting, recording, analyzing, and interpret-
ing data that can aid decision makers who are involved in marketing goods, services, or 
ideas. When marketing managers attempt to develop their strategies, marketing research 
can provide valuable information that will help them make segmentation, positioning, 
product, place, price, and promotion decisions.
Firms invest billions of dollars in marketing research every year. The largest U.S.-
based marketing research firm, the Nielsen Company, earns annual worldwide revenues 
of over $6 billion.7 Why do marketers find this research valuable? First, it helps reduce 
some of the uncertainty under which they currently operate. Successful managers know 
when research might help their decision making and then take appropriate steps to 
­acquire the information they need. Second, marketing research provides a crucial link 
between firms and their environments, which enables them to be customer oriented be-
cause they build their strategies by using customer input and continual feedback. Third, 
by constantly monitoring their competitors, firms can anticipate and respond quickly to 
competitive moves.
If you think market research is applicable only to corporate ventures though, think 
again. Nonprofit organizations and governments also use research to serve their constit-
uencies better. The political sector has been slicing and dicing the voting public for 
decades to determine relevant messages for different demographics. Politicians desper-
ately want to understand who makes up the voting public to determine how to reach 
them. But they do not want to know only your political views—they also want to under-
stand your media habits, such as what magazines you subscribe to, so they can target 
you more effectively.
To do so, they rely on the five-step marketing research process we outline in this chap-
ter. We also discuss some of the ethical implications of using the information that these 
databases can collect.
THE MARKETING RESEARCH PROCESS
Managers consider several factors before embarking on a marketing research project. 
First, will the research be useful; will it provide insights beyond what the managers al-
ready know and reduce uncertainty associated with the project? Second, is top manage-
ment committed to the project and willing to abide by the results of the research? Related 
to both of these questions is the value of the research. Marketing research can be very 
expensive, and if the results won’t be useful or management does not abide by the find-
ings, it represents a waste of money. Third, should the marketing research project be 
small or large? A project might involve a simple analysis of data that the firm already 
has, or it could be an in-depth assessment that costs hundreds of thousands of dollars and 
takes months to complete.
The marketing research process itself consists of five steps (see Exhibit 10.1). Although 
we present the stages of the marketing research process in a step-by-step progression, of 
course research does not always, or even usually, happen that way. Researchers go back 
and forth from one step to another as the need arises. For example, marketers may estab-
lish a specific research objective, which they follow with data collection and preliminary 

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
303
	
	
analysis. If they uncover new information during the collec-
tion step or if the findings of the analysis spotlight new re-
search needs, they might redefine their objectives and begin 
again from a new starting point. Another important require-
ment before embarking on a research project is to plan the 
entire project in advance. By planning the entire research 
process prior to starting the project, researchers can avoid 
unnecessary alterations to the research plan as they move 
through the process.
Marketing Research Process Step 1: Defining 
the Objectives and Research Needs
Because research is both expensive and time-consuming, 
it is important to establish in advance exactly what prob-
lem needs to be solved. For example, Adding Value 10.1 
details how, McDonald’s conducted careful research in its 
effort to address a critical consumer concern: breakfast 
service that used to end before noon. In general, marketers 
must clearly define the objectives of their marketing re-
search project.
Consider a scenario: McDonald’s is the global leader 
in the fast-food market, with more than 36,000 stores in 
more than 100 countries, earning close to $30 billion in 
annual revenues.8 But it wants a better understanding of its 
customers’ experience. It also needs to understand how 
customers view the experience at Wendy’s, a main com-
petitor, operating in 30 countries and earning approxi-
mately $2 billion in annual revenues, even after Wendy’s 
discontinued its breakfast menu.9 Finally, McDonald’s 
hopes to gain some insight into how it should set a price 
for and market its latest combo meal of a hamburger, fries, 
and drink. Any one of these questions could initiate a re-
search project. The complexity of the project that the com-
pany eventually undertakes depends on how much time 
and resources it has available, as well as the amount of 
­in-depth knowledge it needs.
Researchers assess the value of a project through a 
careful comparison of the benefits of answering some of 
their questions and the costs associated with conducting the 
research. When researchers have determined what informa-
tion they need in order to address a particular problem or 
issue, the next step is to design a research project to meet 
those objectives.
Marketing Research Process  
Step 2: Designing the Research
The second step in the marketing research project involves 
design. In this step, researchers identify the type of data 
needed and determine the research necessary to collect them. Recall that the objectives 
of the project drive the type of data needed, as outlined in Step 1.
Let’s look at how this second step works, using the McDonald’s customer experi-
ence. McDonald’s needs to ask its customers about their McDonald’s experience. 
However, because people don’t always tell the whole truth in surveys, the company 
also may want to observe customers to see how they actually enter the stores, interact 
E X H I B I T  10.1
The Marketing Research Process
Deﬁning the
objectives
and research
needs
Designing
the
research
Collecting
the data
Analyzing
the data and 
developing
insights
Developing and
implementing
an action plan
Step 5:
Step 4:
Step 3:
Step 2:
Step 1:
LO10-1	
Identify the five steps 
in the marketing 
research process.

304	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Adding Value 10.1
A Key Motivation for Waking Teens Early on Weekends 
Disappears: Breakfast All Day at McDonald’si
Once upon a time, McDonald’s did not offer any breakfast: no 
pancakes, no links, no nothing. Then in 1973 it introduced the 
Egg McMuffin, and today it generates almost a quarter of its 
revenues from its breakfast offerings. But since that introduc-
tion, one persistent problem had plagued night owls and morn-
ing laggards: Breakfast stopped at 10:30 a.m. sharp. After 
years of listening to complaints—and especially in the social 
media age, where consumers could communicate their desire 
for all-day breakfast directly to the company—McDonald’s 
­decided to make the dream a reality.
Following several years of research into what changes 
would be required, including test runs in limited markets, a 
“Breakfast After Midnight” initiative, and continued solicitations 
of feedback from customers, McDonald’s announced that its 
entire breakfast menu would be available all day in all of its 
locations. Following the announcement, and before the change 
even was instituted, research into consumer perceptions of 
fast-food outlets showed that McDonald’s score has in-
creased. Simply hearing that McDonald’s was going to go to a 
full-day breakfast enabled the chain to improve its perceptions 
among consumers, surpassing competitors such as Burger 
King and Taco Bell.
By the time it had finished collecting all these data, 
McDonald’s believed it had powerful evidence to support 
its latest menu expansion. Despite the strong research- 
based evidence though, some franchisees still complained 
that the move imposed significant burdens on them. Store 
operators worried that McDonald’s had paid so much at-
tention to its customer research that it forgot to research 
how stores would be able to increase their capacity to 
prep and sell hotcakes alongside burgers throughout 
the  entire day. In response, the corporate offices can 
point to research that shows the increasing presence of 
breakfast items as a percentage of total sales. That is, by 
selling breakfast foods, the local restaurants are likely to 
increase their overall sales. Thus the menu expansion has 
been valuable and beneficial pretty much across the board: 
for hungry consumers, franchisees that can sell more 
meals, and the national chain that listened to what its cus-
tomers were asking for—and as a result is enjoying an im-
proved image.
The challenge is capacity. According to one franchise 
owner, because McDonald’s continues to ask employees to 
use toasters and griddles to prepare its fast-food offerings—
rather than faster options such as microwaves—selling break-
fast and dinner items simultaneously would strain the 
preparation capabilities of stores. Furthermore, McDonald’s 
has already expanded its menu into other categories, such as 
wraps and salads. Perhaps adding another entire category of 
items would overly tax the busy employees.
After years of research, McDonald’s now offers breakfast 
all day.
© Vivien Killilea/Getty Images
with employees, and consume the product. The project’s design might begin with 
available data, such as information that shows that people with children often come into 
the restaurants at lunchtime and order Happy Meals. Then McDonald’s marketing 
­researchers can start to ask customers specific questions about their McDonald’s 
­experience.
Marketing Research Process Step 3: Collecting the Data
Data collection begins only after the research design process. Based on the design of 
the project, data can be collected from secondary or primary data sources. Secondary 
data are pieces of information that have been collected prior to the start of the focal 
research project. Secondary data include external as well as internal data sources. 
Primary data, in contrast, are those data collected to address specific research needs. 
Some common primary data collection methods include focus groups, in-depth inter-
views, and surveys.

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
305
	
	
For our hypothetical fast-food scenario, McDonald’s may decide to get relevant 
secondary data from external providers such as National Purchase Diary Panel and 
Nielsen. The data might include the prices paid for menu items, sales figures, sales 
growth or decline in the category, and advertising and promotional spending. McDonald’s 
is likely to gather pertinent data about sales from its franchisees. However, it also wants 
competitor data, overall food consumption data, and other information about the 
quick-service restaurant category, which it likely obtains from appropriate syndicated 
data providers. Based on the data, it might decide to follow up with some primary data 
using a survey.
No company can ask every customer his or her opinion or observe every customer, 
so researchers must choose a group of customers who represent the customers of 
­interest, or a sample, and then generalize their opinions to describe all customers 
with the same characteristics. They may choose the sample partici-
pants at random to represent the entire customer market. Or they 
may choose to select the sample on the basis of some characteristic, 
such as their age, so they can research how Millennials experience 
buying Value Meals.
Marketing researchers use various methods of asking ques-
tions to measure the issues they are tackling. In our hypothetical 
McDonald’s scenario, assume the research team has developed a 
questionnaire (see Exhibit 10.2), using a few different types of 
questions. Section A measures the customer’s experience 
in McDonald’s, Section B measures the customer’s 
­experience in Wendy’s, Section C measures the cus­
tomer’s habits at McDonald’s, and Section D measures 
customer demographics.10
Marketing Research Process  
Step 4: Analyzing the Data and 
Developing Insights
The next step in the marketing research process—analyzing 
and interpreting the data—should be both thorough and 
methodical. To generate meaningful information, re-
searchers analyze and make use of the collected data. 
Superior Service 10.1 details how universities leverage 
If McDonald’s were to do research to better understand its customers’ experience, it would study both the McDonald’s experience 
(left) and that of its major competitors, like Wendy’s (right).
(Left): © David Paul Morris/Getty Images; (right): © Jay Laprete/Bloomberg/Getty Images
McDonald’s assesses its customers’ market experience by examin-
ing available data and then asks customers about their experience 
with products such as Value Meals.
© Michael J. Hruby

306	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
the data they gain from students’ uses of on-campus gyms and ­facilities to discover new 
insights into both what students want and how the schools can help them succeed. In 
this context, data can be defined as raw numbers or other factual information that, on 
their own, have limited value to marketers. However, when the data are interpreted, they 
become information, which results from organizing, analyzing, and interpreting 
data and putting them into a form that is useful to marketing decision makers. For 
­example, a checkout scanner in the grocery store collects sales data about individual 
consumer purchases. Not until those data are categorized and examined do they provide 
Please Evaluate Your Experience at McDonald’s
A.  McDonald’s
Strongly  
Disagree
1
 
Disagree
2
Neither Agree  
nor Disagree
3
 
Agree
4
Strongly  
Agree
5
	
McDonald’s food tastes good
□
□
□
□
□
	
McDonald’s is clean
□
□
□
□
□
	
McDonald’s has low prices
□
□
□
□
□
B.  Wendy’s
Strongly  
Disagree 
1
 
Disagree
2
Neither Agree  
nor Disagree
3
 
Agree
4
Strongly  
Agree 
5
	
Wendy’s food tastes good
□
□
□
□
□
	
Wendy’s is clean
□
□
□
□
□
	
Wendy’s has low prices
□
□
□
□
□
C.  McDonald’s
	
In the last month, how many times 
have you been to McDonald’s? 
Never
□
1–2 times
□
3–4 times
□
More than 5 times
□
	
In the last month, how often did 
you order breakfast items at 
McDonald’s?
□
□
□
□
	
If McDonald’s offered breakfast 
items all the time, how often would 
you order them outside of normal 
breakfast times in a typical month?
□
□
□
□
	
On average, how much do you 
spend each visit at McDonald’s?
	 $ 
	
What is your favorite item at  
McDonald’s?
	 	
D.  Please tell us about yourself
	
What is your age?
Under 16
□
17–24
□
25–35
□
36+
□
	
What is your gender?
Male
□
Female
□
E X H I B I T  10.2
A Hypothetical Fast-Food Survey

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
307
	
	
Did You Hit the Weights or Swim a Lap Today? Your 
University Wants to Know—For a Good Reasonii
When universities and colleges announce the opening of a 
new sports facility or recreational center, students might feel 
reassured that their “student activity fees” have gone to good 
use. But to prove it, the schools are stepping up their efforts 
to learn exactly how and when students use these services, 
which enables them to offer the elements that students 
­demand as well as justify their capital expenditures.
	
By tracking student usage, the schools gather a wealth 
of valuable data that inform their next steps. For example, 
students at the University of Florida had begun complaining 
that their activity fee was too high. When the school re-
viewed the data showing who was using its health facilities, 
it realized that graduate students came around 7:00 a.m., 
when the gym opened, but undergraduates did not. When it 
moved the opening an hour earlier to 6:00 a.m., undergrad-
uates flooded the facility, because they still had enough 
time to get in a workout, shower, and make their early 
morning classes. In addition, complaints about the fees 
dropped off, because the students believed they were get-
ting their money’s worth.
	
For North Carolina State University in Raleigh, the usage 
data showed that far more students were taking fitness 
classes than were joining intramural sports teams. Thus, the 
rec center cut back the resources it allocated to intramurals 
and tripled the number of fitness classes, making sure that it 
offered what its students wanted, when and where they 
wanted it.
	
The GymFlow app available through the University of 
California Los Angeles shows school administrators how 
many people are using each section of its gym at different 
times. In addition, it tabulates exactly how many students and 
employees—43,734—visited the center in a year. With this in-
formation, UCLA was able to show critics that its expenditures 
were worthwhile. For students, the same app reveals when 
their favorite piece of equipment is being used by lots of others, 
as well as when the quiet times are at the facility.
	
Purdue went a step beyond tracking usage to link exercise 
with scholastic performance. When it built a $98 million facil-
ity, not everyone thought it was a good idea. But the university 
was able to demonstrate that students who swiped their ID 
cards to access the gym also earned higher grade point aver-
ages than did students who never came to work out. In a par-
allel study, a professor investigated the attitudes of participants 
in one of the gym’s kickboxing classes and found that regular 
participants indicated substantially lower stress levels. 
	
It might seem strange that a school would keep track of 
when its students are running around the track. But in truth, 
the information it gathers is valuable for justifying its re-
source allocations as well as determining future investments 
in services for students.
Superior Service 10.1
Research at North Carolina State University showed that more students were taking fitness classes 
than were joining intramural sports teams, so the university tripled the number of fitness classes offered.
© Phovoir/Shutterstock RF

308	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
information about which products and services were purchased together or how an 
­in-store promotional activity translated into sales.
For the McDonald’s example, we can summarize the results of the survey (from 
­Exhibit 10.2) in Exhibit 10.3. Both McDonald’s and Wendy’s scored the same on the 
cleanliness of their restaurants, but McDonald’s had lower prices, whereas Wendy’s food 
tasted better. McDonald’s may want to improve the taste of its food, without raising prices 
too much, to compete more effectively with Wendy’s.
Marketing Research Process Step 5: Developing  
and Implementing an Action Plan
In the final phase in the marketing research process, the analyst prepares the results and 
presents them to the appropriate decision makers, who undertake appropriate marketing 
strategies. A typical marketing research presentation includes an executive summary, 
the body of the report (which discusses the research objectives, methodology used, 
and detailed findings), the conclusions, the limitations, and appropriate supple-
mental tables, figures, and appendixes.
In the McDonald’s hypothetical scenario, according to the research 
findings, the company is doing fine in terms of cleanliness (comparable to 
its competitors) and is perceived to have lower prices, but the taste of its 
food could be improved. It also found that of those customers who purchased 
breakfast items relatively frequently (at least three times per month), 35 per-
cent would go for breakfast outside the normal breakfast times frequently. 
Also, of those who never ordered breakfast items, 25 percent would order 
breakfast items outside the normal breakfast times occasionally (at least 
once a month). Using this analysis and the related insights gained, 
­McDonald’s might consider hiring some gourmet chefs as consultants to im-
prove the menu and offerings.11 It then could highlight its efforts to improve 
the taste of the food and add desired offerings (e.g., breakfast items) through 
marketing communications and promotions. McDonald’s also should consider 
undertaking additional pricing research to determine whether its lower prices en-
hance sales and profits or whether it could increase its prices and still compete effec-
tively with Wendy’s.
Now let’s take a closer look at sources of secondary and primary data.
1
2
3
4
5
Cleanliness
Taste
Low price
Wendy’s
McDonald’s
E X H I B I T  10.3
Survey Results for McDonald’s and Wendy’s
McDonald’s marketing research 
will show how to better ­compete 
against Wendy’s.
© Michael Neelon/Alamy
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the steps in the marketing research process?
2.	 What is the difference between data and information?

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
309
	
	
SECONDARY DATA
A marketing research project often begins with a review of the relevant secondary data. 
Secondary data might come from free or very inexpensive external sources such as census 
data, information from trade associations, and reports published in magazines. Although 
readily accessible, these inexpensive sources may not be specific or timely enough to solve 
the marketer’s research needs and objectives. Firms also can purchase more specific or 
applicable secondary data from specialized research firms. Finally, secondary sources can 
be accessed through internal sources, including the com­pany’s sales invoices, customer 
lists, and other reports generated by the company itself.
In political settings, such secondary data can be critical for candidates running for of-
fice. Both major political parties thus have developed proprietary databases that contain 
vast information about voters, broken down by demographic and geographic information. 
Before a local politician, canvasser, or poll taker even knocks on doors in a neighborhood, 
he or she likely knows which houses are inhabited by retirees, who has a subscription to 
The Wall Street Journal or The New York Times, for whom the residents said they voted in 
the last election, or whether they served in the military. All these traits can give hints about 
the voters’ likely concerns, which a good politician can address immediately upon knock-
ing on the door. Such research also can dictate tactics for designing broader campaign 
materials or to zero in on very specific issues. Social media campaigns are a growing 
mechanism used to interact with potential voters in a more timely manner than is possible 
with more traditional methods. Monitoring tweets after a major address by a candidate, for 
instance, would provide instant feedback and direction for ­future communications.
Inexpensive External Secondary Data
Some sources of external secondary data can be quickly accessed at a relatively low cost. 
The U.S. Bureau of the Census (http://www.census.gov), for example, provides data 
about businesses by county and zip code. If you wanted to open a new location for a 
business you are already operating, such data might help you determine the size of your 
potential market.
Often, however, inexpensive data sources are not adequate to meet researchers’ needs. 
Because the data initially were acquired for some purpose other than the research question 
at hand, they may not be completely relevant or timely. The U.S. Census is a great source of 
demographic data about a particular market area, 
and it can be easily accessed at a low cost. How-
ever, the data are collected only at the beginning 
of every decade, so they quickly become out-
dated. If an entrepreneur wanted to open a retail 
flooring store in 2017, for ­example, the data 
would already be seven years old, and the hous-
ing market likely would be stronger than it was 
in 2010. Researchers must also pay careful atten-
tion to how other sources of inexpensive second-
ary data were collected. Despite the great deal of 
data available on the Internet, easy access does 
not ensure that the data are trustworthy.
Syndicated External  
Secondary Data
Although the secondary data described previ-
ously are either free or inexpensively obtained, 
marketers can purchase external secondary data 
called syndicated data, which are available for 
a fee from commercial research firms such as 
IRI, the National Purchase Diary Panel, and 
LO10-2	
Describe the various 
secondary data 
sources.
Secondary data are useful to politicians so they know who they are talking 
to before they knock on any doors.
© Cathleen Allison/AP Photo

310	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Nielsen. Exhibit 10.4 contains information about various firms that provide syndicated 
data.
Consumer packaged-goods firms that sell to wholesalers often lack the means to 
gather pertinent data directly from the retailers that sell their products to consumers, which 
makes syndicated data a valuable resource for them. Some syndicated data providers also 
offer information about shifting brand preferences and product usage in households, which 
they gather from scanner data, consumer panels—and several other cutting-edge methods, 
as detailed in Social and Mobile Marketing 10.1.
Scanner data are used in quantitative research obtained from scanner readings of 
Universal Product Code (UPC) labels at checkout counters. Whenever you go into your 
local grocery store, your purchases are rung up using scanner systems. The data from these 
purchases are likely to be acquired by leading marketing research firms such as IRI or 
­Nielsen, which use this information to help leading consumer packaged-goods firms (e.g., 
Kellogg’s, Pepsi, Kraft) assess what is happening in the marketplace. For example, a firm 
can use scanner data to determine what would happen to its sales if it reduced the price of 
its least popular product by 10 percent in a given month. In the test market in which it low-
ers the price, do sales increase, decrease, or stay the same?
Name	
Services Provided
Nielsen 	
With its Market Measurement Services, the company 
(http://www.nielsen.com)	
tracks the sales of consumer packaged goods, gath-
ered at the point of sale in retail stores of all types  
and sizes.
IRI 	
InfoScan store tracking provides detailed information 
(http://www.iriworldwide.com)	
about sales, share, distribution, pricing, and promotion 
across a wide variety of retail channels and accounts.
J.D. Power and Associates 	
Widely known for its automotive ratings, it produces 
(http://www.jdpower.com)	
quality and customer satisfaction research for a variety 
of industries.
Mediamark Research Inc. 	
Supplies multimedia audience research pertaining to 
(http://www.mediamark.com)	
media and marketing planning for advertised brands.
National Purchase Diary Panel 	
Based on detailed records consumers keep about their 
(http://www.npd.com)	
purchases (i.e., a diary), it provides information about 
product movement and consumer behavior in a variety 
of industries.
NOP World 	
The mKids US research study tracks mobile telephone 
(http://www.nopworld.com)	
ownership and usage, brand affinities, and entertain-
ment habits of American youth between 12 and  
19 years of age.
Research and Markets 	
Promotes itself as a one-stop shop for market research 
(http://www.researchandmarkets.com)	
and data from most leading publishers, consultants, 
and analysts.
Roper Center for Public Opinion Research 	
The General Social Survey is one of the nation’s 
(http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu)	
longest running surveys of social, cultural, and political 
indicators.
Simmons Market Research Bureau 	
Reports on the products American consumers buy, the 
(http://www.smrb.com)	
brands they prefer, and their lifestyles, attitudes, and 
media preferences.
Yankelovich 	
The MONITOR tracks consumer attitudes, values, and 
(http://thefuturescompany.com/products/	
lifestyles shaping the American marketplace. 
us-yankelovich-monitor/)
E X H I B I T  10.4
Syndicated Data Providers and Some of Their Services

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
311
	
	
Nielsen Seeks to Track Viewership, 
Regardless of the Media People Use 
to Watchiii
Social & Mobile Marketing 10.1
As television viewers have changed their practices—such that 
more and more people catch the latest shows on their tablets 
or smartphones rather than home-based television screens—
marketing researchers have unfortunately failed to keep up. 
For example, Nielsen, the most famous provider of ratings 
that reflect people’s viewing patterns, maintained two sepa-
rate measures: one for regular television and one for online 
viewing. It had no metric for views through other forms of 
streaming media.
	
That gap may be about to disappear, though. In the imme-
diate future, Nielsen plans to introduce a Twitter-based mea-
sure that will assess the number of tweets about a show as a 
measure of popularity. Its initial metric suggests that every 
tweet represents about 50 people watching the show, re-
gardless of where or how. The new system is similar to the 
collaboration that we described in Chapter 3 between 
Billboard and Twitter, which charts tweets about music and 
musicians in an effort to provide new research insights into 
trends and listeners’ preferences.
	
Nielsen also plans to introduce a mobile-linked measure-
ment system. With this proprietary method, Nielsen will enable 
the networks to issue their content through mobile applica-
tions that contain a preexisting link back to Nielsen’s data col-
lection methods. When a viewer downloads the app with the 
content, Nielsen knows it and can add that viewership to the 
show’s and its network’s ratings.
	
Such measures are critical for content providers, be-
cause ratings determine advertising sales and rates. A show 
or network with higher ratings attracts more potential adver-
tisers and can charge more. In recent months, when the 
­traditional ratings formats showed that viewership was de-
clining, advertisers grew concerned. At the same time, the 
networks protested loudly that the ratings were undercutting 
the extent of their true market by ignoring the people watch-
ing on their tablets.
	
Nielsen’s moves seek to address those complaints, but they 
also have sparked some new concerns. In particular, insuffi-
cient evidence exists to confirm whether Twitter numbers are 
really a good representation of viewership. Without strong 
support for the link between tweets and the actual popularity 
of a show, the new measure might be meaningless. In addition, 
some observers suggest that it could be blocked by security 
features in Apple operating systems that prevent metering 
software from running simultaneously with other programs.
	
Thus marketing researchers face a problem without a 
ready solution. They know that consumers are moving away 
from their televisions, but they have no perfect way to mea-
sure what they do after those viewers move.
Syndicated external secondary data are acquired from scanner data obtained from scanner readings of UPC codes at checkout 
counters (left) and from panel data collected from consumers that electronically record their purchases (right).
Left: © Glow Images/Getty Images RF; Right: © Stephen Barnes/Bowline Images/Alamy

312	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Panel data are information collected from a group of consumers, organized into 
­panels, over time. Data collected from panelists often include their records of what they 
have purchased (i.e., secondary data) as well as their responses to survey questions that the 
client gives to the panel firm to ask the panelists (i.e., primary data). Secondary panel data 
thus might show that when Diet Pepsi is offered at a deep discount, 80 percent of usual 
Diet Coke consumers switch to Diet Pepsi. Primary panel data could give insights into 
what they think of each option. We discuss further how marketing researchers use scanner 
and panel data to answer specific research questions in the primary data section.
Overall, both panel and scanner data, as well as their more advanced methods gathered 
through social media and online usage patterns, provide firms with a comprehensive pic-
ture of what consumers are buying or not buying. The key difference between scanner re-
search and panel research is how the data are aggregated. Scanner research typically 
focuses on weekly consumption of a particular product at a given unit of analysis (e.g., 
­individual store, chain, region); panel research focuses on the total weekly consumption by 
a particular person or household.
Internal Secondary Data
Internally, companies also generate a tremendous amount of secondary data from their 
day-to-day operations. One of the most valuable resources such firms have at their disposal 
is their rich cache of customer information and purchase history. However, it can be diffi-
cult to make sense of the millions and even billions of pieces 
of individual data, which are stored in large computer files 
called data warehouses. For this reason, firms find it neces-
sary to use data mining techniques to extract valuable infor-
mation from their databases.
Data mining uses a variety of statistical analysis tools to 
uncover previously unknown patterns in the data or relation-
ships among variables. Some retailers try to customize their 
product and service offerings to match the needs of their cus-
tomers. For instance, the U.K. grocer Tesco uses its loyalty 
card to collect massive amounts of information about its indi-
vidual customers. Every time a loyalty card member buys 
something, the card is scanned and the store captures key pur-
chase data specific to that member. But these specific data are 
basically useless until Tesco mines and analyzes them to iden-
tify, for instance, three income groups: upscale, middle in-
come, and less affluent. With this mined information, Tesco 
has been able to create appealing private-label product offer-
ings for each group, according to their preferences, and has 
begun targeting promotions to each customer according to his 
or her income classification.
Data mining can also enable a home improvement re-
tailer such as Lowe’s to learn that 25 percent of the time its 
customers buy a garden hose, they also purchase a sprinkler. 
With such information, the retailer may decide to put the gar-
den hoses next to the sprinklers in the store. Outside the re-
tail realm, an investment firm might use statistical techniques 
to group clients according to their income, age, type of secu-
rities purchased, and prior investment experience. This cate-
gorization identifies different segments to which the firm can 
offer valuable packages that meet their specific needs. The 
firm also can tailor separate marketing programs to each of 
these segments.
By analyzing the enormous amount of information that 
they possess about customers, companies have developed 
Marketers use data mining techniques to determine what items 
people buy at the same time so they can be promoted and 
displayed together.
© B2M Productions/Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images RF

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
313
	
	
statistical models that help identify when a customer is dissatisfied with his or her service. 
Once the company identifies an unhappy customer, it can follow up and proactively ad-
dress that customer’s issues. By mining customer data and information, the company also 
reduces its churn levels. Churn is the number of participants who discontinue use of a 
service, divided by the average number of total participants. With this knowledge, the com-
pany can focus on what it does best and improve potential problem areas. Overall, firms 
hope to use data mining to generate customer-based analytics that they can apply to their 
strategic decision making and thereby make good customers better and better customers 
their best. 
Big Data  The field of marketing research has seen enormous changes in the last few 
years because of (1) the increase in the amounts of data to which retailers, service provid-
ers, and manufacturers have access; (2) their ability to collect these data from transactions, 
customer relationship management (CRM) systems, websites, and social media platforms 
that firms increasingly use to engage with their customers;12 (3) the ease of collecting and 
storing these data; (4) the computing ability readily available to manipulate data in real 
time; and (5) access to in-house or available software to convert the data into valuable 
­decision-making insights using analytic dashboards.
To specify this explosion of data, which firms have access to but cannot handle using 
conventional data management and data mining software, the term big data has arisen in 
the popular media. Leading firms such as Amazon, Netflix, Google, Nordstrom, Kroger, 
Tesco, Macy’s, American Express, and Walmart already are converting their big data into 
customer insights—and the list of firms keeps growing.13
Amazon may be the poster child for big data. Any Amazon shopper is familiar with 
its recommendation engine, which notes what the consumer is purchasing, analyzes 
purchase patterns by similar customers, suggests other items the customer might enjoy, 
and indicates what other people who bought the focal item also added to their shopping 
carts.14 With more than 200 million active customers and billions of pieces of shopping 
data,15 Amazon certainly qualifies as a big data user; its item-to-item collaborative 
­filtering helps it determine which relevant products to suggest, generating almost one-
third of its sales.16
The U.K. grocery retailer Tesco processes its data at a rate of approximately 100 cus-
tomer baskets per second, to cover its 6 million daily transactions.17 Furthermore, each 
purchased product can feature up to 45 data attributes: Is it Tesco’s own brand, an ethnic 
recipe, exotic (e.g., star fruit) or basic (e.g., apple), and so on? On the basis of the attributes 
of the items customers purchase, Tesco filters them to define who they are, who else lives 
in their household, and what hobbies they have, then provides specific incentives that 
match these characteristics.18
To enable these efforts, firms such as SAP, Splunk, and GoodData offer a host of 
software solutions to help firms better integrate their data, visualize them, and then move 
from data to real-time insights.19 The suite of options previously were available only to the 
largest firms, but falling costs mean they are now more accessible to smaller firms.
The big data explosion also stems from the growth of online and social media. In 
response, Google, Facebook, and Twitter all provide analytic dashboards designed to 
help their customers understand their own web traffic. In particular, Google has devel-
oped tremendous marketing analytical capabilities that it makes available to partner 
firms. Google helps firms attract customer traffic to their sites through the use of more 
relevant keywords, the purchase of Google AdWords, and better conversion meth-
ods.20 Using Google Analytics, Puma has gained insights into which online content and 
products most engaged its web visitors, while also defining where these visitors lived. 
With these visitor behavioral data in hand, Puma has revised its website to be more 
dynamic (http://www.Puma.com) and has created unique identifiers for its various 
product categories (e.g., PUMA Golf), targeting them in accordance with the home 
­region of the visitor.21
As Marketing Analytics 10.1 explains, sometimes the “internal” data can be gathered 
by a partner firm too, providing deeper insights than an individual firm can derive.

314	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Google Analytics Promises Movie Studios 
the Ability to Predict Performance Weeks  
Prior to Openingiv
A lot of movie watchers searching for the trailer for a film in 
the month before the movie opens means a bigger opening 
weekend. Such a claim might seem somewhat self-evident, but 
Google has announced that it has the means to quantify this 
effect and thereby help movie studios predict their profits up 
to a month prior to the opening day.
	
More precisely, Google asserts that search volume for the 
movie title (combined with a few other metrics, such as the 
season and whether the movie is a franchise) offers a 94 per-
cent accurate prediction of box office performance.
	
Other proprietary information that Google can use to pre-
dict success is the volume of clicks on search ads. If, for exam-
ple, one movie prompted 20,000 more paid clicks than another 
film did, it will bring in approximately $7.5 million more in reve-
nues during its opening weekend. Furthermore, the search ef-
fects are not limited to Google; YouTube searches reveal similar 
predictive information. From its analysis, Google recommends 
that studios need to go beyond just a one-week window, be-
cause studying the search and click trends for a month in-
creases the accuracy and power of its predictions significantly.
	
Moving beyond the implications for opening weekend, 
­Google asserts that weekday searches in the weeks leading 
up to the release offer better predictors of continued reve-
nues. That is, if a film fan searches for a movie title on a Tuesday, 
she or he is more likely to hold off on seeing the movie rather 
than rushing out during opening weekend. On a related note, 
Google says that nearly half of all moviegoers choose the film 
they will see that night on the same day. Thus, studios need to 
maintain a marketing presence far past opening day, to be 
sure to catch the laggard customers’ attention.
	
But unless the movie is a big name, an anticipated release, or 
a franchise, most people have no idea of what is coming to their 
local cineplex. Instead, during weeks without a major movie re-
lease, Google notes that consumers undertake more generic 
searches to gather information about what new movies might 
be available. On average, these film buffs consider 13 sources of 
information before they select a specific film to watch.
Marketing Analytics 10.1
Google analytics are increasingly used to predict the success 
of movies.
© Marvel Entertainment Pictures/Zuma Press, Inc./Alamy
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is the difference between internal and external secondary 
­research?
PRIMARY DATA COLLECTION TECHNIQUES
In many cases, the information researchers need is available only through primary data or data 
collected to address specific research needs. Depending on the nature of the research problem, 
the primary data collection method can employ a qualitative or a quantitative research method.
LO10-3	
Describe the various 
primary data collection 
techniques.

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
315
	
	
As its name implies, qualitative research uses broad, open-ended questions to under-
stand the phenomenon of interest. It provides initial information that helps the researcher 
more clearly formulate the research objectives. Qualitative research is more informal than 
quantitative research methods and includes observation, following social media sites, in-
depth interviews, and focus groups (see Exhibit 10.5, left side).
Once the firm has gained insights from doing qualitative research, it is likely to 
engage in quantitative research, which are structured responses that can be statisti-
cally tested. Quantitative research provides information needed to confirm insights and 
hypotheses generated via qualitative research or secondary data. It also helps managers 
pursue appropriate courses of action. Formal studies such as specific experiments, sur-
veys, scanner and panel data, or some combination of these are quantitative in nature 
(see Exhibit 10.5, right side). We now examine each of these primary data collection 
techniques in order.
Observation
Observation entails examining purchase and consumption behaviors through personal or 
video camera scrutiny, or by tracking customers’ movements electronically as they move 
through a store. For example, researchers might observe customers while they shop or 
when they go about their daily lives, during which processes they use a variety of products. 
Observation can last for a very brief period of time (e.g., two hours watching teenagers 
shop for clothing in the mall), or it may take days or weeks (e.g., researchers live with fam-
ilies to observe their use of products). When consumers are unable to articulate their expe-
riences, observation research becomes particularly useful; how else could researchers 
determine which educational toys babies choose to play with or confirm details of the 
buying process that consumers might not be able to recall accurately?
Although traditionally firms might videotape customers’ movements, Microsoft’s 
­Kinect sensors are providing a less intrusive option. Discretely embedded in aisles of retail 
stores, the sensors provide three-dimensional spatial recognition. Thus retailers and their 
Data
collection
research
Observation
In-depth interviews
Focus groups
Social media
Qualitative research
Experiments
Survey
Scanner
Panel
Quantitative research
E X H I B I T  10.5
Qualitative versus Quantitative Data Collection
Using Microsoft Kinect sensors, 
firms like Shopperception 
­create heatmaps of shopper 
­interactions with the products 
(touches, pickups, and returns). 
The red represents the hot 
zones where shoppers touch 
the most, yellow less, and blue 
not at all.
Source: Shopperception

316	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
suppliers can unobtrusively track the amount of 
time people spend in front of a shelf, which 
products they touch or pick up, the products they 
return to shelves, and finally what they add to 
their carts and purchase.22 The data gathered can 
be used to improve store layouts because they 
can identify causes of slow-selling merchandise, 
such as poor shelf placement. By studying cus-
tomers’ movements, marketers can also learn 
where customers pause or move quickly or 
where there is congestion. This information can 
help them decide if the layout and merchandise 
placement is operating as expected, such as 
whether new or promoted merchandise is get-
ting the attention it deserves.
Observation may be the best—and some-
times the only—method to determine how cus-
tomers might use a product; therefore it is useful 
for designing and marketing products. By 
watching women wash their hair in a rural town 
in China, Procter & Gamble recognized the 
­fallacy of its assumption that the poorest con-
sumers were interested only in functionality of a 
product—how to get hair clean. One woman 
struggled to find ways to wash her long hair 
­effectively, even in the face of severe water 
shortages, rather than cut off what she considered the source of her beauty. Based on its 
research, P&G has added value by selling ­Rejoice shampoo inexpensively ($1.50) to a 
market that was using alternative options such as laundry detergent. Other observations 
pushed P&G to develop a more skin-sensitive laundry detergent after noting how many 
people in developing markets wash their clothes by hand.23 These insights might be help-
ful, both for the company that gathers them and for consumers who ultimately benefit from 
better products.
Social Media
Social media sites are a booming source of data for marketers. Marketers have realized that 
social media can provide valuable information that could aid their marketing research and 
strategy endeavors. In particular, contributors to social media sites rarely are shy about 
providing their opinions about the firm’s own products or its competitors’ offerings. If 
companies can monitor, gather, and mine these vast social media data, they can learn a lot 
about their customers’ likes, dislikes, and preferences. They then might cross-reference 
such social media commentary with consumers’ past purchases to derive a better sense of 
what they want. Customers also appear keen to submit their opinions about their friends’ 
purchases, interests, polls, and blogs.
Blogs in particular represent valuable sources of marketing research insights. Market-
ers are paying attention to online reviews about everything from restaurants to running 
shoes to recycling. The Truth About Cars blog is known for its unflinchingly objective re-
views of various makes and models as well as discussions about the industry as a whole, 
marketing tactics, and global competition, among other topics.24 Analyzing the content of 
this and similar blogs provides an excellent source of ideas and information for auto indus-
try executives. Another creative use of social media for market research involves building 
online communities for companies. When it considered the launch of its South Beach prod-
uct line, Kraft hired Communispace to create a virtual community (an online network of 
people who communicate about specific topics) of target consumers: 150 health and 
­wellness opinion leaders and 150 women who wanted to lose weight became a virtual 
By watching women in rural China wash their hair, Procter & Gamble learned 
that even their poorest customers wanted beautiful hair, but it has to be 
packaged affordably.
© Benjamin Lowy/Getty Images

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
317
	
	
­community. The participants openly shared their 
frustrations and difficulties managing their 
weight because the community environment 
prompted them to sense that everyone else on the 
site struggled with similar issues and concerns. 
By monitoring the community, Kraft learned that 
it would need to educate consumers about the 
South Beach Diet and offer products that could 
address cravings throughout the day, not just at 
mealtimes. Six months after the line’s introduc-
tion, Kraft had earned profits of $100 million.25
Noting these various opportunities and marketing research sources online, many 
companies—including Ford Motor Co., PepsiCo, Coca-Cola, and Southwest Airlines—
have added heads of social media to their management teams. These managers take respon-
sibility for scanning the web for blogs, postings, tweets, or Facebook posts in which 
customers mention their experience with a brand. By staying abreast of this continuous 
stream of information, companies can gather the most up-to-date news about their com-
pany, products, and services as well as their competitors. These social media searches 
­allow companies to learn about customers’ perceptions and resolve customer complaints 
they may never have heard about through other channels.
The data gathered through the searches also undergo careful analyses: Are customer 
sentiments generally positive, negative, or neutral? What sort of intensity or interest levels 
do they imply? How many customers are talking about the firm’s products, and how many 
focus instead on competitors’? This data analysis is understandably challenging, consider-
ing the amount of data available online. However, monitoring consumer sentiments has 
grown easier with the development of social media monitoring platforms.
Using a technique known as sentiment mining, firms collect consumer comments 
about companies and their products on social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and 
online blogs. The data are then analyzed to distill customer attitudes toward and prefer-
ences for products and advertising campaigns. Scouring millions of sites by combining 
automated online search tools with text analysis techniques, sentiment mining yields qual-
itative data that provide new insight into what consumers really think. Companies plugged 
into this real-time information can become more nimble, allowing for quick changes in a 
product rollout or a new advertising campaign.26
In‐Depth Interviews
In an in-depth interview, trained researchers ask questions and listen to and record the 
answers and then pose additional questions to clarify or expand on a particular issue. For 
instance, in addition to simply watching teenag-
ers shop for apparel, interviewers might stop 
them one at a time in the mall to ask them a few 
questions, such as: “We noticed that you went 
into and came out of Abercrombie & Fitch very 
quickly without buying anything. Why was 
that?” If the subject responds that no one had 
bothered to wait on her, the interviewer might 
ask a follow-up question like, “Oh? Has that 
happened to you before?” or “Do you expect 
more sales assistance there?”
In-depth interviews provide insights that 
help managers better understand the nature of 
their industry as well as important trends and 
consumer preferences, which can be invaluable 
for developing marketing strategies. Specifi-
cally, they can establish a historical context for 
When Kraft considered the 
launch of its South Beach 
product line, it created a ­ 
virtual community of health 
and ­wellness opinion leaders 
and women who wanted to 
lose weight.
© Michael J. Hruby
Although relatively expensive, in-
depth interviews can reveal in-
formation that would be difficult 
to obtain with other methods.
© Jeff Greenberg/agefotostock

318	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
the phenomenon of interest, particularly when they include industry experts or experienced 
consumers. They also can communicate how people really feel about a product or service 
at the individual level. Finally, marketers can use the results of in-depth interviews to 
­develop surveys.
In-depth interviews are, however, relatively expensive and time-consuming. The inter-
view cost depends on the length of the interaction and the characteristics of the people in-
cluded in the sample. If the sample must feature medical doctors, for example, the costs of 
getting sufficient interviews will be much higher than the costs associated with intercept-
ing teenagers in a mall.
Focus Group Interviews
In focus group interviews, a small group of people (usually 8 to 12) come together for an 
intensive discussion about a particular topic. Using an unstructured method of inquiry, a 
trained moderator guides the conversation according to a predetermined, general outline of 
topics of interest. Researchers usually record the interactions by videotape or audiotape so 
they can carefully comb through the interviews later to catch any patterns of verbal or non-
verbal responses. In particular, focus groups gather qualitative data about initial reactions 
to a new or existing product or service, opinions about different competitive offerings, or 
reactions to marketing stimuli, such as a new ad campaign or point-of-purchase display 
materials.27
To obtain new information to help it continue its innovative success derived from its 
introduction of low-sodium choices, Campbell Soup conducted extensive focus groups 
with female shoppers who indicated they would buy ready-to-eat soups. The groups clearly 
revealed the women’s top priorities: a nutritious soup that contained the ingredients they 
would use if they made soup. They wanted, for example, white meat chicken, fresh vegeta-
bles, and sea salt. In addition, focus group participants were equally clear about what they 
did not want, like high fructose corn syrup, MSG, and other ingredients whose names they 
could not even pronounce.28
The growth of online technology, as well as computer and video capabilities, have 
provided tremendous benefits for focus group research, which now often takes place on-
line. Online focus group firms offer a secure site as a platform for companies to listen in on 
focus groups and even interact with consumers, without anyone having to travel. The client 
company not only saves costs but also gains access to a broader range of potential custom-
ers who live in various neighborhoods, states, or even countries.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the types of qualitative research?
Survey Research
Arguably the most popular type of quantitative primary collection method is a survey—a 
systematic means of collecting information from people using a questionnaire. A ques-
tionnaire is a document that features a set of questions designed to gather information 
from respondents and thereby accomplish the researchers’ objectives. Individual questions 
on a questionnaire can be either unstructured or structured. Unstructured questions are 
open ended and allow respondents to answer in their own words. An unstructured ques-
tion like “What are the most important characteristics for choosing a brand of sham-
poo?” yields an unstructured response. However, the same question could be posed to 
respondents in a structured format by providing a fixed set of response categories, such 
as price, fragrance, ability to clean, or dandruff control, and then asking respondents to 
rate the importance of each. Structured questions are closed-ended questions for which 

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
319
	
	
a discrete set of response alternatives, or specific answers, is provided for respondents to 
evaluate (see Exhibit 10.6).
Developing a questionnaire is part art and part science. The questions must be care-
fully designed to address the specific set of research questions. Moreover, for a question-
naire to produce meaningful results, its questions cannot be misleading in any fashion (e.g., 
open to multiple interpretations), and they must address only one issue at a time. They also 
must be worded in vocabulary that will be familiar and comfortable to those being sur-
veyed. The questions should be sequenced appropriately: general questions first, more spe-
cific questions next, and demographic questions at the end. Finally, the layout and 
appearance of the questionnaire must be professional and easy to follow, with appropriate 
instructions in suitable places. For some tips on what to avoid when designing a question-
naire, see Exhibit 10.7.29
SHAMPOO STUDY
We are working for a consumer packaged-goods company and
are interested in understanding more about your shampoo usage.
1.   What are the most important characteristics for choosing
       a brand of shampoo?
2.   Please rate the importance of the following shampoo 
       attributes.
Price 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Fragrance 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Ability to clean 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Dandruﬀ control 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
a brand of shampoo?
lease rate the importance of the following shampoo 
attributes
Very unimportant
Very important
Unstructured
P
F
A
Structured
E X H I B I T  10.6
Structured versus Unstructured Response
Issue	
Good Question	
Bad Question
Avoid questions the respondent 	
When was the last time you	
How much money did you spend 
cannot easily or accurately 	
went to the grocery store?	
on groceries last month? 
answer.
Avoid sensitive questions unless 	 Do you take vitamins?	
Do you dye your gray hair? 
they are absolutely necessary.
Avoid double-barreled 	
1. Do you like to shop for clothing?	
Do you like to shop for clothing 
questions, which refer to more 	
2. Do you like to shop for food?	
and food? 
than one issue with only one  
set of responses.
Avoid leading questions, 	
Please rate how safe you believe	
BMW is the safest car on the 
which steer respondents 	
a BMW is on a scale of 1 to 10,	
road, right? 
to a particular response, 	
with 1 being not safe and 10 being 
irrespective of their true beliefs.	
very safe.
Avoid one-sided questions that 	
To what extent do you believe	
Fast food is responsible for adult 
present only one side of the 	
fast food contributes to adult	
obesity: Agree/Disagree 
issue.	
obesity using a five-point scale? 
	
1: Does not contribute  
	
5: Main cause
E X H I B I T  10.7
What to Avoid When Designing a Questionnaire

320	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Similar to focus groups, marketing surveys can be con-
ducted either online or offline, but online marketing surveys 
offer researchers the chance to develop a database quickly 
with many responses. Web surveys have steadily grown as a 
percentage of all quantitative surveys. Online surveys have  
a lot to offer marketers with tight deadlines and small 
­budgets.30
In particular, the response rates for online surveys are 
relatively high. Typical ­response rates run from 1 to 2 per-
cent for mail and 10 to 15 percent for phone surveys. For 
online surveys, in contrast, the response rate can reach 30 to 
35 percent or even higher in business-to-business research. 
It also is inexpensive. Costs likely will continue to fall as 
users become more familiar with the online survey process. 
Results are processed and received quickly. ­Reports and 
summaries can be developed in real time and delivered 
­directly to managers in simple, easy-to-digest ­reports, com-
plete with color, graphics, and charts. Traditional phone or 
mail surveys require laborious data collection, tabulation, summary, and distribution 
­before anyone can grasp their results.
Diverse online survey software, such as Qualtrics, ­SurveyMonkey, and Zoomerang, 
make it very easy to draft an online survey using questions from existing survey librar-
ies. A survey link can be sent easily in an e-mail to potential respondents or ­panelists as 
well as posted on specific sites that are likely to attract the target audience or people 
who are willing to perform online work (e.g., Amazon’s Mechanical Turk Site).
Panel‐ and Scanner‐Based Research
As noted previously, panel and scanner research can be either secondary or ­primary. An 
example of the use of a panel to collect primary data would be Walmart’s subsidiary 
Asda, which uses an 18,000-customer panel, called “Pulse of the Nation,” to help deter-
mine which products to carry. Asda sends e-mails to each ­participant with product im-
ages and descriptions of potential new products. The ­customers’ responses ­indicate 
whether they think each product should be carried in stores. As an incentive to partici-
pate, Asda enters respondents automatically in a drawing for free prizes.31
Experimental Research
Experimental research (an experiment) is a type of quanti-
tative research that systematically manipulates one or more 
variables to determine which variables have a causal effect 
on other variables. For example, in our earlier scenario, one 
thing the hypothetical McDonald’s research team was trying 
to ­determine was the most profitable price for a new menu 
combo item (hamburger, fries, and drink). Assume that the 
fixed cost of developing the item is $300,000 and the vari-
able cost, which is primarily composed of the cost of the food 
itself, is $2. McDonald’s puts the item on the menu at four 
prices in four markets. (See Exhibit 10.8.) In general, the 
more expensive the item, the less it will sell. But by running 
this experiment, the restaurant chain determines that the most 
profitable price is the second least expensive ($5). These 
findings suggest some people may have believed that the 
most expensive item ($7) was too expensive, so they refused 
to buy it. The least expensive item ($4) sold fairly well, but 
McDonald’s did not make as much money on each item sold. 
In this experiment, the changes in price likely caused the 
Survey research uses questionnaires to collect primary data. 
Questions can be either unstructured or structured.
© Kayte Deioma/PhotoEdit
Walmart’s U.K. subsidiary Asda uses an 18,000-customer 
panel, which it calls “Pulse of the Nation,” to help determine 
which products to carry.
© David Levenson/Alamy

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
321
	
	
	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5
	
	
	
	
Total Cost of	
 
	
	
	
	
Units Sold 
	
	
Market Demand	
	
($300,000 Fixed  
	
	
at Price	
Total Revenue	
Cost + $2.00 	
Total Profits 
Market	
Unit Price	
(in Units)	
(Col. 1 × Col. 2)	
Variable Cost)	
(Col. 3 − Col. 4)
	
1	
$4	
200,000	
$800,000	
$700,000	
$100,000
	
2	
5	
150,000	
750,000	
 600,000	
150,000
	
3	
6	
100,000	
600,000	
 500,000	
100,000
	
4	
7	
50,000	
350,000	
 400,000	
(50,000)
E X H I B I T  10.8
Hypothetical Pricing Experiment for McDonald’s
changes in quantities sold and therefore ­affected the 
restaurant’s profitability.
Firms are also actively using experimental 
­techniques on Facebook. Once a firm has created its 
Facebook page, it can devise advertisements and rely 
on Facebook’s targeting options to deliver those ads to 
the most appropriate customer segments. To make sure 
the communication is just right, companies can experi-
ment with alternative versions and identify which 
­advertisement is most effective, just as Adore Me has 
done, as we described in the chapter opener. State 
­Bicycle Co., a manufacturer in Arizona, similarly 
needed to determine what other interests its customers 
had and who its main competitors were. Therefore, it 
tested a range of ads targeting customers who searched 
for different bands (e.g., did more ­Arcade Fire or Pas-
sion Pit fans click their link?) and other ­bicycle manu-
facturers. With this information, it devised new contests 
and offerings on its own homepage to attract more of the visitors who were likely to 
buy.32 Facebook tries to help its corporate clients enhance their own customers’ engage-
ment and influence through a variety of options: check-ins, asking for customer comments, 
Using an experiment, McDonald’s would test the price of new menu 
items to determine which is the most profitable.
© Mary Altaffer/AP Photos
Secondary research 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary research
□  Census data
□  Sales invoices
□  Internet information
□  Books
□  Journal articles
□  Syndicated data
□  Observed consumer behavior
□  Focus group interviews
□  Surveys
□  Experiments
□  Saves time in collecting data 
because they are readily 
available
□  Free or inexpensive (except 
for syndicated data)
□  Specific to the immediate 
data needs and topic at hand
□  Offers behavioral insights 
generally not available from 
secondary research
□  May not be precisely relevant to 
information needs
□  Information may not be timely
□  Sources may not be original, and 
therefore usefulness is an issue
□  Methodologies for collecting 
data may not be appropriate
□  Data sources may be biased
□  Costly
□  Time-consuming
□  Requires more sophisticated 
training and experience to 
­design study and collect data
Type	
Examples	
Advantages	
Disadvantages
E X H I B I T  10.9
Advantages and Disadvantages of Secondary and Primary Data

322	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Facebook analytics help firms 
increase customer engagement.
Courtesy of True Digital Communications, 
www.truedigitalcom.com
LO10-4	
Summarize the 
differences between 
secondary data and 
primary data.
sharing information with friends, and so on.33 It measures all these forms of data, contrib-
uting even further to the information businesses have about their page visitors.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Primary and Secondary Research
Now that we have discussed the various secondary and primary data collection methods, 
think back over our discussion and ask yourself what seem to be the best applications of 
each and when you would want to go to secondary sources or use primary collection meth-
ods. We can see that both primary data and secondary data have certain inherent and dis-
tinct advantages and disadvantages. For a summary of the advantages and disadvantages of 
each type of research, see Exhibit 10.9.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the types of quantitative research?
2.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of primary and 
secondary research?

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
323
	
	
THE ETHICS OF USING  
CUSTOMER INFORMATION
As we noted in Chapter 4, upholding strong business ethics requires more than a token nod 
to ethics in the mission statement. A strong ethical orientation must be an integral part of a 
firm’s marketing strategy and decision making. It is particularly important for marketers to 
adhere to ethical practices when conducting marketing research. The American Marketing 
Association provides three guidelines for conducting marketing research: (1) It prohibits 
selling or fund-raising under the guise of conducting research, (2) it supports maintaining 
research integrity by avoiding misrepresentation or the omission of pertinent research data, 
and (3) it encourages the fair treatment of clients and suppliers.34 Numerous codes of con-
duct written by various marketing research societies all reinforce the duty of researchers to 
respect the rights of the subjects in the course of their research. The bottom line: Marketing 
research should be used only to produce unbiased, factual information.
As technology continues to advance, the potential threats to consumers’ personal in-
formation grow in number and intensity. Ethical and Societal Dilemma 10.1 discusses an 
interesting example of how retailers are using mannequins with hidden cameras to monitor 
shoppers. Marketing researchers must be vigilant to avoid abusing their access to these 
data. From charitable giving to medical records to Internet tracking, consumers are more 
anxious than ever about preserving their fundamental right to privacy. They also demand 
increasing control over the information that has been collected about them.
Many firms voluntarily notify their customers that any information provided to 
them will be kept confidential and not given or sold to any other firm. As more firms 
adopt advanced marketing research technology, such as facial recognition software, 
they also are working to ensure they receive permission from consumers. Facial recog-
nition software is used to detect individuals from a video frame or digital images.35 For 
example, Coca-Cola’s experiments using facial recognition software record partici-
pants’ faces as they watch advertisements or prototypes, then assess how their eyes 
moved, when they smiled or frowned, and so on—but only after those participants have 
agreed to be recorded.36
In contrast, consumers have little control over facial recognition software that allows 
companies to detect demographic information based on their appearances. For example, 
digital billboards embedded with such software can identify passersby and then display ads 
targeted to them based on their age, gender, and attention level.37 The resulting communi-
cation is precisely targeted, which should make the advertisement more interesting to the 
LO10-5	
Examine the 
circumstances in 
which collecting 
information on 
consumers is ethical.
Campbell’s redesigned its  
cans based on information 
it obtained through  
neuromarketing studies.
Source: Campbell Soup Company.

324	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Oh, Say, Can You See? The Implications of Mannequins 
That Capture Shoppers’ Demographic Datav
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 10.1
The basic elements of a new data-gathering tool for retailers 
are not in any real contention. By spending about $5,000 to 
purchase an EyeSee mannequin from a provider called Almax, 
retailers gain not only a place to display clothing but also a 
discreet recording tool that indicates the genders, ages, and 
ethnicities of the customers who walk by the display.
	
Rather more controversial are the implications of this in-
novation. On one side, consumer privacy advocates complain 
that the mannequins obtain information about shoppers 
without their permission. Because the mannequins do not 
look any different from regular mannequins, shoppers have 
no way of knowing whether someone (or something) is 
watching them as they walk through the store. Furthermore, 
consumers have no control over what retailers do with the 
aggregated data.
	
On the other side, retailers note that because the manne-
quins do not record specifics to identify any given individual, 
their use is no different from that of a closed-circuit system. 
Furthermore, some commentators argue that consumers 
should have no expectation of privacy in public spaces. Cer-
tainly, a staffer could similarly mark down people’s ages, races, 
and genders as they walk through the shop doors. The elec-
tronic form simply does this work better and more accurately.
	
In implementing the new technology, one retailer recog-
nized the predominance of Asian shoppers after about 
4:00 p.m., so it hired more Chinese-speaking staffers to put 
on the floor to assist them. Another retailer realized that a 
lot of children were walking through its stores, so it added 
an entirely new children’s clothing line to its offerings. 
Buoyed by its early successes, Almax also plans to add a 
function that would capture shoppers’ conversations as 
they pass by the mannequins.
	
Current legislation allows retailers to maintain cameras 
and record customers for security purposes as long as they 
post warnings that customers might be recorded. However, 
the use of the mannequins is clearly for marketing purposes, 
not security. And most retailers seem to prefer to keep their 
usage of the new technology under wraps. Almax has not offi-
cially released the names of any of its clients—perhaps some-
what ironically, citing their need for privacy.
	
From your perspective as a consumer, do you believe that 
mannequins that record your movements, image, and possibly 
conversations in a store invade your privacy? If so, would you 
avoid stores that use this technology?
EyeSee mannequins do not record or store any images, so 
the privacy of the customer is protected.
Courtesy of Almax S.p.A.
consumer walking by—though it also could lead to embarrassing encounters. Imagine, for 
example, a teenager with skin problems having a billboard loudly broadcast an acne prod-
uct ad as he walks by!
Going even deeper than using facial recognition software, neuromarketing is the pro-
cess of examining consumers’ brain  patterns to determine their responses to marketing 
communications, products, or services for the purpose of developing marketing tactics or 
strategies.38 Such insights would be invaluable for marketers to discover what truly appeals 
to consumers. For example, based on results of a series of neuromarketing studies, Campbell’s 
has recently changed its soup labels by shrinking the logo and emphasizing the soup to 
increase customers’ emotional responses to the cans.39 But as anyone who has ever seen a 
science fiction movie can imagine, the potential for abuses of such tools are immense. And 
a key question remains: Do any consumers want marketers reading their brain waves 

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
325
	
	
and marketing goods and services to them in a manner that bypasses their conscious 
thoughts? One firm, NeuroFocus, used neuromarketing techniques with several global 
firms to garner customer information that would be difficult, if not impossible, to obtain 
using more traditional research methods.
Several organizations, including the Center for Democracy & Technology (CDT) and 
the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), have emerged as watchdogs over data 
mining of consumer information. In addition, national and state governments in the United 
States play a part in protecting privacy. Companies are legally required to disclose their 
privacy practices to customers on an annual basis.40 As the U.S. federal government has 
failed to enact comprehensive privacy laws for the Internet, several states are starting to 
consider legislation. While this may be good for the consumer, companies will have to deal 
with adherence to a complex patchwork of different privacy regulations across the country, 
making business on the Internet harder to conduct.41
For PepsiCo’s Frito-Lay division, Neuro-
Focus tested women’s responses to Baked
Lays. The research helped shape an ad
campaign and new single-serve packaging.
PEPSICO
CBS
ESPN
INTEL
CALIFORNIA
olive ranch
ebaY
NeuroFocus measured viewers’
responses to pilots and new
shows; of course its corporate
parent, Nielsen, measures how
many people are watching.
NeuroFocus helped its PayPal
division find a more refined 
corporate identity than “safe,
simple, wow!”
Advertisers want the best on-air
display they can get; NeuroFocus
helped the cable network make 
its sponsor splashes more
noteworthy.
To analyze the tech giant’s global
image, NeuroFocus tapped Chinese
and American brains.
Which olive-oil label
appealed most to consumers?
NeuroFocus tested several
options to find one
that set brains afire.
Findings from neuromarketing 
studies by NeuroFocus.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Under what circumstances is it ethical to use consumer information in 
marketing research?
2.	 What challenges do technological advances pose for the ethics of mar-
keting research?
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Identify the five steps in the marketing research 
process.
	
	
The first step is to define objectives and research 
needs, which sounds so simple that managers often 
gloss over it. But this step is crucial to the success 
of any research project because, quite basically, 
the research must answer those questions that are 
important for making decisions. In the second step, 
designing the research project, researchers identify 
the type of data that are needed, whether primary 
or secondary, on the basis of the objectives of the 
LO10-1
project from Step 1, and then determine the type of 
research that enables them to collect those data. 
The third step involves deciding on the data collec-
tion process and then collecting the data. The pro-
cess usually starts with qualitative research 
methods such as observation, in-depth interviews, 
or focus groups. The information gleaned from the 
qualitative research is then used in quantitative re-
search, which may include a survey, an experi-
ment, or the use of scanner and panel data. The 
fourth step is to analyze and interpret the data and 

326	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
develop insights. The fifth and final step is to de-
velop and implement an action plan. Although 
these steps appear to progress linearly, researchers 
often work backward and forward throughout the 
process as they learn at each step.
	
	
Describe the various secondary data sources.
	
	
External secondary data comprise information that 
has been collected from outside sources, such as the 
U.S. census, the Internet, books, articles, trade asso-
ciations, or syndicated data services. Internal sec-
ondary data can also be derived from internal 
company records such as sales, customer lists, and 
other company reports and are analyzed using data 
mining and big data software.
	
	
Describe the various primary data collection 
techniques.
	
	
Primary data are collected to address specific re-
search needs. Techniques used for primary qualita-
tive research include observation, social media, 
in-depth interviews, and focus groups. Techniques 
used for primary quantitative research include sur-
veys (both offline and online), scanner, panel, and 
experiments.
LO10-2
LO10-3
	
	
Summarize the differences between secondary 
data and primary data.
	
	
Compared with primary research, secondary re-
search is quicker, easier, and generally less expen-
sive. However, if you are using secondary data using 
big data, then the investment in programs support-
ing secondary data can be expensive. However, be-
cause secondary research is collected for reasons 
other than those pertaining to the specific problem 
at hand, the information may be dated, biased, or 
simply not specific enough to answer the research 
questions. Primary research, in contrast, can be de-
signed to answer very specific questions, but it also 
tends to be more expensive and time-consuming.
	
	
Examine the circumstances in which collecting 
information on consumers is ethical.
	
	
Marketing researchers should gain permission to 
collect information on consumers, and it should be 
for the sole purpose of conducting marketing re-
search endeavors. Information should not be col-
lected under the guise of marketing research when 
the intent is to sell products or to fund-raise. In 
­addition, marketers must take responsibility for 
protecting any information they collect.
LO10-4
LO10-5
Key Terms 
∙	 big data,  313
∙	 churn,  313
∙	 customer lifetime value  
(CLV),  332
∙	 data,  306
∙	 data mining,  312
∙	 data warehouses,  312
∙	 experiment,  320
∙	 experimental research,  320
∙	 facial recognition software,  323
∙	 focus group interview,  318
∙	 in-depth interview,  317
∙	 information,  306
∙	 marketing research,  302
∙	 neuromarketing,  324
∙	 observation,  315
∙	 panel data,  313
∙	 primary data,  304
∙	 qualitative research,  315
∙	 quantitative research,  315
∙	 questionnaire,  318
∙	 sample,  305
∙	 scanner data,  310
∙	 secondary data,  304
∙	 sentiment mining,  317
∙	 structured questions,  318
∙	 survey,  318
∙	 syndicated data,  309
∙	 unstructured questions,  318
∙	 virtual community,  316
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Go to the website for the marketing research company 
Kantar (http://www.kantar.com). Click on “Company 
News,” and then click on one of the recent press re-
leases. What types of research does Kantar conduct, 
and what types of insights does it develop for its 
­clients?
2.	 The epinions.com website (http://www.epinions.com) is 
a clearinghouse for consumer reviews about different 
products and services. Think of a particular business 
with which you are familiar, and then review the ratings 
and comments for that business on the epinions website. 
Discuss the extent to which this site might be useful to 
a marketer for that company who needs to gather mar-
ket research about the company and its competitors. 
Identify the type of research this process involves—­
secondary or primary.

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
327
	
	
1.	 A large hardware store collects data about what its cus-
tomers buy and stores these data in a data warehouse. If 
you were the store’s buyer for lawn equipment, what 
would you want to know from the data warehouse that 
would help you be a more successful buyer?
2.	 Identify a nonprofit organization that might use market-
ing research, and describe one example of a meaningful 
research project that it might conduct. Discuss the steps 
it should undertake in this project.
3.	 Marketing researchers do not always go through the 
steps in the marketing research process in sequential order. 
Provide an example of a research project that might not 
follow this sequence.
4.	 A sunglasses retailer is trying to determine if there is a 
significant market for its merchandise in a specific mall 
location where it is considering opening a store. It has 
an active Facebook page where customers routinely visit 
to get coupons and comment on the latest sunglasses of-
fered. How can this retailer use Facebook and Facebook 
Insights to decide if it should open the new store?
5.	 A consumer packaged-goods company (e.g., Pepsi) has 
just developed a new beverage. The company needs to 
estimate the demand for such a new product. What 
sources of syndicated data could it explore?
6.	 A bank manager notices that by the time customers get 
to the teller, they seem irritated and impatient. She 
wants to investigate the problem further, so she hires 
you to design a research project to figure out what is 
bothering the customers. The bank wants three studies: 
(a) several focus groups of their customers, (b) observa-
tion using a hidden camera, and (c) an online survey of 
500 customers. Which studies are qualitative, and which 
are quantitative?
7.	 Best Buy has an extensive loyalty program, Best Buy 
Reward Zone, that allows it to track its customers’ pur-
chasing habits over time. How can Best Buy use such 
big data to improve sales?
8.	 Suppose your university wants to modify its course 
scheduling procedures to better serve students. What are 
some secondary sources of information that might be 
used to conduct research into this topic? Describe how 
these sources might be used. Describe a method you 
could use to gather primary research data about the 
topic. Would you recommend a specific order in obtain-
ing each of these types of data? Explain your answer.
9.	 Manuel is planning to launch a new gourmet taco truck 
and is trying to decide where he should park his truck 
and what features and prices would entice consumers. 
He sends a request for proposal to four marketing re-
search vendors, and three respond, as ­described in the 
table below. Which vendor should Manuel use? Explain 
your rationale for picking this vendor over the others.
Marketing Applications
Manuel’s key competitor has used 
this vendor, which claims that it 
can get the job done for $150,000 
and in one month. This vendor 
plans to do a telephone-based 
survey analysis and use secondary 
data. During a discussion pertain-
ing to its price and time estimates, 
the vendor indicates it will draw 
on insights it has learned from a 
recent report prepared for one of 
Manuel’s competitors.
This well-known vendor has recently started 
to focus on the restaurant industry. It quotes 
a price of $180,000 and a time of one month. 
The vendor plans to conduct a web-based 
survey analysis and use secondary data.
The vendor that Manuel has used in the 
past estimates it can get the job done for 
$200,000 and in two months. The vendor 
plans to do a telephone-based survey anal-
ysis and use secondary data from the U.S. 
Census.
Vendor A	
Vendor B	
Vendor C
1.	 Which of the following is not a disadvantage of using 
secondary research data?
a.  The information may not be timely.
b.  The process is costly and time-consuming.
c.  The data sources may be biased.
d.  The methodologies for collecting the data may not 
be appropriate. 
e.  The sources may not be original, and therefore 
­usefulness is an issue. 
Quiz Yourself

328	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
2.	 The key difference between scanner and panel research 
is that scanner research typically focuses on a particular 
, while panel research typically focuses on a 
particular 
.
a.  product; person or household
b.  product; service
c.  person; household
d.  person; product
e.  service; product
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
SWIM, LIFT, PLAY—BUT ALSO DONATE: USING MARKET  
RESEARCH TO REDEFINE THE YMCA
Over the years, the YMCA has come to mean different things to different people. Depend-
ing on the meanings that people embrace, the charitable organization sometimes struggles 
to achieve its mission and goals. Accordingly, a key element of its efforts, at both national 
and local levels, is to conduct ongoing and persistent research into what people perceive 
when they think of the Y. 
Founded in the mid-nineteenth century in response to the new challenges of  
an industrial society, the YMCA sought to give young men coming to the city for 
work a place where they could stay safely and for a reasonable rate. In the United 
States, local YMCAs quickly became known as sources of assistance for new immi-
grants; though segregated, they also provided meeting places for African Americans 
and eventually emerged as important rallying sites for the civil rights movement. 
Once barriers to race and gender fell, the Y embraced its role as a place that every 
member of the family could find the resources, self-fulfillment, and support that 
they needed.42
Many of those resources historically and still today have focused on exercise and 
health. Different employees of YMCA facilities have contributed to exercise culture: 
bchsu_tt
Chapter Case Study 
Based on market research, the 
YMCA has been rebranded to 
the Y, and local branches are 
encouraged to focus on its 
core values: caring, honesty, 
­respect, and responsibility.
© Kevin Wolf/AP Photo

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
329
	
	
one originated the term “body building”; others invented games that we now know as 
volleyball, racquetball, and basketball in Y gymnasiums; and its initiative to help every-
one learn to swim led to the vast expansion of public pools and swim classes throughout 
the nation.
This focus on exercise and health remains a primary element of the reputation of 
the Y in most Americans’ minds. Approximately 13 million adults and 9 million chil-
dren in the United States turn to their local Y to lift weights, shoot hoops, swim laps, 
or jog around a track.43 But the national organization also began to suspect that those 
purposes were all that members, and other stakeholders, were seeing. As the president 
of the national organization explained, even as membership numbers were climbing, 
other data related to charitable donations suggested some concerns. That is, people 
were perceiving the Y “as a gym and swim place. We’re also a charity, and that is the 
missing ingredient. We want people to realize that we’re deserving of their charitable 
donations.”44
To make that case, the Y (which rebranded in 2010 to take the single-letter moniker, 
though it also still relies on the longer YMCA acronym to maintain links to its historical 
functions) relies substantially on research. The goal is to show, with data, facts, figures, 
and graphics, how programs run by the Y and sponsored by charitable donations actually 
change lives and improve communities. 
For example, a vast survey of consumers across the nation showed that 98 percent of 
people knew of the YMCA, and 92 percent of them had favorable impressions of it. But 
only 50 percent indicated that they understood why the Y offered the programs that it did.45 
The national organization considered its mission—to give families resources that they 
needed to build self-esteem and self-confidence, and thus build communities—evident, but 
the market research showed that these notions were not widespread among people who 
might use or contribute to their local organizations. In response, it encouraged the local 
branches (each of which is run autonomously) to emphasize four core values: caring, hon-
esty, respect, and responsibility. It also recommended that local branches consider conduct-
ing their own research projects, to ensure they were providing the types of resources their 
local members wanted and needed most.46
In other, more targeted, market research projects, the national and local arms of the 
Y also have sought to determine which price points will attract the most members. For 
example, the Boston branch cited extensive market research that showed that if it cut 
membership fees by 11 percent, it could attract 10,000 new members. The research got it 
a little bit wrong though: After it reduced the fees, the membership rolls swelled by more 
than 20,000 users.47
Research also has informed which initiatives the Y has made its primary focus for 
the near future. First, noting extensive academic literature that shows that impoverished 
students retain less of the education they have received during the summer months, the 
Y is expanding a summer camp program in an effort to reduce the well-documented 
“achievement gap” between children from poor and wealthy families.48 To support this 
initiative, the Y also instituted its first national advertising campaign, in which one 
televised advertisement highlights the various after-school, summer, and meal programs 
available for children. It also ends with a clear call for contributions to support such 
programs.49
Second, the Y cites national statistics about the number of people with diabetes or 
pre-diabetes, as well as scientific evidence that shows that losing even 5 percent of their 
body weight can help at-risk people avoid becoming diabetic. Accordingly, its second 
main initiative is to expand its diabetes prevention programs, in collaboration with na-
tional health care organizations such as the Centers for Disease Control and the Let’s 
Move campaign.
Some evidence suggests its efforts are paying off. Visits to the Y’s website in-
creased in just the two months after it launched the national advertising campaigns.50 In 
addition, the new communications are attracting attention to the Y in various outlets 
and sources, including a prominent role in a documentary about a swim team for people 
with autism.51

330	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
So the Y means a lot of things to a lot of people. The national organization continues 
to find out what people think of when they think of the Y. In addition, it seeks to learn how 
it can convince them to think about the Y and its valuable programs as a destination for 
their charitable donations.
Questions
1.	
What kinds of market research has the Y conducted?
2.	
Which questions has the Y sought to answer with each different type of market research 
it has conducted? 
3.	
Who are the main stakeholders that the Y is attempting to reach with the information 
it has gained through its market research? 
4.	
Are there other types of market research that the Y could conduct in the future to 
­answer other important questions? Give some examples of both the questions it still 
faces and the research methods it could use to answer them. 
Endnotes
	 1.	 Elizabeth Olson, “A Lingerie Brand that Offers Real Women as 
(Role) Models,” The New York Times, February 21, 2016. 
	2.	 Sara Ashley O’Brien, “Plus-Size Models Sell More Bras,” CNN 
Money, May 5, 2015. 
	3.	 Teresa Novellino, “Adore Me Pop-Up Is No Tease: Lingerie 
Brand Plans N.Y.C. Store,” New York Business Journal, 
February 4, 2016. 
	4.	 Eric Wilson, “Less Ab, More Flab,” The New York Times,  
May 22, 2013. 
	5.	 “Ashley Graham, Hailey Clauson, & Rhonda Rousey Land Sports 
Illustrated Covers,” Harper’s Bazaar, February 14, 2016. 
	6.	 Sara Ashley O’Brien, “Plus-Size Models Sell More Bras,” CNN 
Money, May 5, 2015.
	 7.	 Nielsen Holding plc, “2015 10-K Annual Report,” The Nielsen 
Company, February 19, 2016.
	8.	 McDonald’s Corporation, “Our Company,” http://www. 
aboutmcdonalds.com/mcd/our_company.html; McDonald’s 
Corporation, “2014 Annual Report,” February 24, 2015. 
	9.	 The Wendy’s Company, “Corporate Profile,” https://www. 
wendys.com/en-us/about-wendys/the-wendys-company; The 
Wendy’s Company, “2014 Annual Report,” February 26, 2015.
	10.	 Detailed illustrations of scales are provided in two books: 
Gordon C. Bruner, Marketing Scales Handbook: A 
Compilation of Multi-Item Measures, vol. 7 (Carbondale, IL: 
GCBII Productions, Fort Worth, TX: 2013); William O. Bearden, 
Richard G. Netemeyer, and Kelly L. Haws, Handbook of 
Marketing Scales: Multi-Item Measures for Marketing and 
Consumer Behavior Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 2011).
	11.	 John Cloud, “McDonald’s Chef: The Most Influential Cook in 
America?” Time, February 22, 2010, http://www.time.com.
	12.	 Jeff Kelly, “Big Data: Hadoop, Business, Analytics, and Beyond,” 
Wikibon, February 5, 2014, http://wikibon.org.
	13.	 Rachel Wolfson, “Retailers Using Big Data: The Secret 
Behind Amazon and Nordstrom’s Success,” Big Data News, 
December 11, 2014, http://www.bigdatanews.com.
	14.	 “How Amazon Is Leveraging Big Data,” BigData Startups,  
http://www.bigdata-startups.com/BigData-startup/amazon-­
leveraging-big-data/.
	15.	 Amazon, http://www.amazon.com.
	16.	 Rachel Wolfson, “Retailers Using Big Data: The Secret Behind 
Amazon and Nordstrom’s Success,” Big Data News, December 
11, 2014,http://www.bigdatanews.com.
	17.	 “Tesco Doubles Customer Rewards in Further Boost to 
Clubcard,” press release, August 14, 2009.
	18.	 Jenny Davey, “Every Little Bit of Data Helps Tesco Rule Retail,” 
TimesOnline.com, October 4, 2009.
	19.	 Quentin Hardy, “Big Data Picks Up the Pace,” The New York 
Times, March 5, 2014, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com.
	20.	Google, “Analytic Guide,” http://www.google.com.
	21.	 Google, “Puma Kicks Up Order Rate 7% with Insights from 
Google Analytics and Viget,” case study, 2013.
	22.	“In Retail Stores, Research Tool Uses Kinect to Track Shoppers’ 
Behavior,” Retail, December 29, 2011, http://www.springwise.com.
	23.	Jennifer Reingold, “Can P&G Make Money in a Place Where 
People Earn $2 Per Day?” CNN Money, January 6, 2011,  
http://features.blogs.fortune.cnn.com.
	24.	http://www.thetruthaboutcars.com/.
	25.	“Client Story: Kraft,” http://www.communispace.com.
26.	Rachael King, “Sentiment Analysis Gives Companies Insight into 
Consumer Opinion,” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 1, 2011, 
http://www.businessweek.com.
27.	Richard A. Krueger and Mary Anne Casey, Focus Groups: A 
Practical Guide for Applied Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 2009).
	28.	http://www.campbellsoup.com.
	29.	Adapted from A. Parasuraman, Dhruv Grewal, and R. Krishnan, 
Marketing Research, 2nd ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2007), 
Ch. 10.
	30.	Floyd J. Fowler, Survey Research Methods (Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage, 2009); Don A. Dillman et al., “Response Rate and 
Measurement Differences in Mixed-Mode Surveys Using Mail, 
Telephone, Interactive Voice Response (IVR), and the Internet,” 
Social Science Research 38 (March 2009), pp. 1–18.
	31.	 https://pulse.asda.com; “Asda Wins Vision Critical’s European 
Insight Community Award,” press release, Research, 
September 30, 2013, http://www.research-live.com/news/.
	32.	Facebook, “State Bicycle Co.: Building a Strong Customer 
Base,” case study, https://www.facebook.com/advertising/ 
success-stories/state-bicycle.

	
MARKETING RESEARCH  CHAPTER TEN	
331
	
	
	33.	Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/business/a/online-sales.
	34.	http://www.marketingpower.com/AboutAMA/Pages/Statement% 
20of%20Ethics.aspx; http://www.helleniccomserve.com.
	35.	https://www.techopedia.com/definition/26948/facial-­
recognition-software.
	36.	Roger Dooley, “Neuromarketing: For Coke, It’s the Real Thing,” 
Forbes, March 7, 2013, http://www.forbes.com.
	37.	Natasha Singer, “Face Recognition Makes the Leap from Sci-Fi,” 
The New York Times, November 12, 2011.
	38.	http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/neuromarketing. 
39.	Ilan Brat, “The Emotional Quotient of Soup Shopping,” The  
Wall Street Journal, February 17, 2010, http://online.wsj.com.
	40.	Cecilia Kang, “Library of Congress Plan for Twitter: A Big, 
Permanent Retweet,” The Washington Post, April 16, 2010; 
http://www.cdt.org; Mark Penn, “Did Google Violate Privacy 
Laws?” http://www.politicallyillustrated.com, April 2, 2010; 
Lona M. Farr, “Whose Files Are They Anyway? Privacy Issues 
for the Fundraising Profession,” International Journal of 
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing 7, no. 4 
(November 2002), p. 361.
	41.	 Somini Sengupta, “No U.S. Action, So States Move on Privacy 
Law,” The New York Times, October 30, 2013, http://www. 
nytimes.com.
	42.	YMCA, “History,” http://www.ymca.net/history.
	43.	YMCA, “Organizational Profile,” http://www.ymca.net/ 
organizational-profile. 
	44.	Alina Tugent, “The Y Embarks on Its First National Advertising 
Campaign,” The New York Times, January 23, 2016. 
	45.	Aaron K. Olson and B. Keith Simerson, Leading with 
Strategic Thinking: Four Ways Effective Leaders Gain 
Insight, Drive Change, and Get Results (New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 2015). 
	46.	FourSquare, “What Is a FourSquare Market Research Study?” 
http://foursquareresearch.com/FourSquare%20Market%20
Study%20for%20YMCAs.pdf. 
	47.	Melissa Harris, “Kevin Washington Sets Agenda for YMCA’s 
National Organization,” Chicago Tribune, November 21, 2014. 
	48.	Ibid.
	49.	Alina Tugent, “The Y Embarks on Its First National Advertising 
Campaign,”The New York Times, January 23, 2016. 
	50.	Adrianne Pasquarelli, “Move Over Clinton and Trump: YMCA 
Backs a Toddler’s Run in New Spot,” Advertising Age, February 
25, 2016. 
	51.	 Shanna Belott, “The Best Place for Community Is the One You 
Grew Up In,” Huffington Post, February 18, 2016.
	 i.	 Martha White, “There’s Scientific Proof the All-Day McMuffin Is 
a Brilliant Idea,” Time, April 7, 2015; Trefis Team, “Is McDonald’s 
All Day Breakfast Strategy Working?” Forbes, December 16, 
2015; Hayely Peterson, “McDonald’s Franchisees Say All-Day 
Breakfast Is a Nightmare,” Business Insider, August 16, 2015; 
Ashley Lutz, “McDonald’s Comes Even Closer to Offering a  
24-Hour Breakfast,” Business Insider, June 6, 2013; Robert 
Lara, “The True Steamy Story of the Egg McMuffin Hockey 
Puck Breakfast Turns 40,” Adweek.com, August 9, 2013.
	 ii.	 Colleges Are Tracking When Students Work Out at Rec 
Centers,” The Wall Street Journal, October 28, 2014, http:// 
wsjonline.com.
	iii.	 Amol Sharma and Suzanne Vranica, “Nielsen to Add Data for 
Mobile TV Viewing,” The Wall Street Journal, September 19, 
2013; Ben Sisario, “Tweets About Music to Get a Billboard 
Chart,” The New York Times, March 27, 2014.
	iv.	 Kirsten Acuna, “Google Says It Can Predict Which Films Will Be 
Huge Box Office Hits,” Business Insider, June 6, 2013.
	 v.	 Andrew Roberts, “In Some Stores, the Mannequins Are 
Watching You,” Bloomberg Businessweek, December 6, 2012, 
http://www.businessweek.com; Amar Toor, “EyeSee Mannequin 
Silently Collects Customer Data for Overzealous Retailers,” The 
Verge, November 20, 2012, http://www.theverge.com; Joanna 
Stern, “Department Store Mannequins Are Watching You. No, 
Really,” ABC News, November 26, 2012, http://abcnews.go.com.

APPENDIX 10A
T
his appendix examines how secondary data 
from customer transactions can help determine 
the value of a customer over time. Specifically, 
customer lifetime value (CLV) refers to the 
­expected financial contribution from a particular cus-
tomer to the firm’s profits over the course of their entire 
relationship.52
To estimate CLV, firms use past behaviors to forecast 
future purchases, the gross margin from these purchases, 
and the costs associated with servicing the customers. 
Some costs associated with maintaining customer rela-
tionships include communicating with customers through 
advertising, personal selling, or other promotional vehi-
cles to acquire their business initially and then retain 
them over time.
USING SECONDARY 
DATA TO ASSESS 
CUSTOMER LIFETIME 
VALUE (CLV)
Measures of customer lifetime value typically apply to 
a group or segment of customers and use available sec-
ondary data. A basic formula for CLV, with the assump-
tion that revenues and profits arrive at the start of the 
year, is as follows:53
CLV = 
∑
t=1
T [profit at t × retention ratet−1]
(1 + i)t−1
 − 
acquisition  
costs
To implement this CLV formula, we must answer the 
following questions:
1.  How many years (t) can we expect to do business 
with a customer? The total number of years is  
denoted by T.
2.  What can we expect the annual profits to be 
from an individual customer or an average 

­customer? These profits are based on sales minus the costs of merchandise 
and the costs of serving and retaining the customer.
3.  What is the retention rate—that is, the average percentage of customers  
who continue to purchase from the firm from one time period to another?  
A 90 percent retention rate means that if we have 100 customers in the first 
year, we will have 90 at the beginning of the second year.
4.  What is the discount rate (i)? The discount rate is based on the idea that a 
­dollar is worth less in the future than it is today, so the company can use it to 
adjust future profits and determine a customer’s value today for the customer’s 
purchases in the future. For example, if the discount rate is 10 percent, $100 in 
profits at the beginning of year 2 are worth only $90.91 (100/(1 + .1)) at the be-
ginning of year 1.
Consider Gregory Missoni, a fairly new client of Very Clean Cleaners who switched 
from his other dry cleaner because Very Clean sent him $100 worth of coupons in a 
direct mailing.
Greg just picked up his $200 shirt from Very 
Clean and found that the dry cleaner had broken a 
brown button and replaced it with a white button. 
When he complained, the clerk acted as if it were 
no big deal. Greg explained to the clerk that it was 
a very expensive shirt that deserved more careful 
handling, then asked to speak with the manager. 
At this point, how important is it for the manager 
to make sure Greg is satisfied, so that he will con-
tinue to bring his dry cleaning to Very Clean 
Cleaners? To answer this question, the manager 
uses the following information:
∙	
It cost Very Clean $100 to acquire Greg as a 
customer. Thus, the acquisition cost is $100.
∙	
Very Clean expects Greg to remain a client 
for 5 years (time horizon T = 5 years).
∙	
Very Clean expects to make a $1,000 profit each year from Greg’s dry cleaning.
∙	
On average, 10 percent of customers defect to another cleaner each year. Therefore, 
the expected retention rate is 90 percent.
∙	
The discount rate is 10 percent per year (i in this illustration). For simplicity, Very 
Clean assumes all profits are accrued at the beginning of the year.
Applying the formula, such that CLV equals the profits from years 1–5, less the acqui-
sition costs, we obtain:
CLV = $1,000 × (.90)0
(1 + .1)0
+ $1,000 × (.90)1
(1 + .1)1
+ $1,000 × (.90)2
(1 + .1)2
	
Year 1	
Year 2	
Year 3
$1,000 × (.90)3
(1 + .1)3
+ $1,000 × (.90)4
(1 + .1)4
−$100
	
Year 4	
Year 5
	
	
333
Very Clean Cleaners should 
consider a customer’s lifetime 
value to determine its service 
levels.
© Don Mason/Corbis

334	
Section Three  TARGETING THE MARKETPLACE
Or
CLV = $1,000 + $818.2 + $669.4 + $547.7 + $448.1 − $100 = $3,383.40
Let’s see how the formula works. The expected profit from Greg is $1,000 per year. 
Very Clean assumes profits accrue at the beginning of the year, so the profits for the first 
year equal $1,000; they are not affected by the retention rate or the discount rate.
However, the retention and discount rates have effects on the profits for the subsequent 
time periods. In the second year, the retention rate, which Very Clean determined was 
90 percent (i.e., 90 percent of customers continue to do business with it) modifies profits, 
such that expected profits in the second year equal $1,000 × 90% = $900. Moreover, the 
discount rate is applied such that the profits received in the second year are worth less than 
if they had been received in the first year. Therefore, the $900 received at the beginning of 
the second year must be divided by 1.1, which is equivalent to $818.20.
Using similar calculations for the third year, the expected profits adjusted for retention 
are $1,000 × .9 × .9 = $810. The discount rate then reduces the profit to $810 ÷ 1.12 = 
$669.40 in today’s dollars. (Note that the discount rate is squared because it refers to two 
years in the future.) After calculating the adjusted and discounted profits for the fourth and 
fifth years in similar fashion, we realize the sum of estimated discounted profits for five 
years is $3,483.40. However, we still must subtract the $100 spent to acquire Greg, which 
provides a CLV of $3,383.40.
According to this analysis, it would be a good idea for the manager to take a long-term 
perspective when evaluating how to respond to Greg’s complaint about his button. Greg 
cannot be viewed as a $2.50 customer, as he would be if Very Clean determined his value 
based on the cost of laundering his shirt, nor should he be viewed as a $200 customer, 
based on the cost of the shirt. He actually is worth a lot more than that.
For illustrative purposes, we have simplified the CLV calculations in this example. We 
assumed that the average profits remain constant at $1,000. But firms usually expect prof-
its to grow over time or else grow, level off, and then perhaps decline. Retention costs, such 
as special promotions used to keep Greg coming back, also do not appear in our illustra-
tion, though such additional costs would reduce annual profits and CLV. Finally, we as-
sume a five-year time horizon; the CLV obviously would differ for longer or shorter 
periods. For an infinite time horizon, with first period payments upfront, the formula 
­becomes fairly simple:54
 CLV = profits × [1 +
retention rate
($1 + discount rate −retention rate) ]
	
− acquisition costs
 = $1,000 × [1 +
.9
(1 + .1 −.9) ] −$100
 = $1,000 × (1 + 4.5) −$100
 = $5,500 −$100 = $5,400
This illustration thus explains how firms can use secondary data to calculate CLV; it 
further demonstrates the importance of knowing a customer’s lifetime value when execut-
ing marketing tactics and strategies.
Endnotes
52.	V. Kumar, A. Petersen and R. P. Leone, “How Valuable Is 
Word of Mouth?” Harvard Business Review, October 2007, 
pp. 139–46; V. Kumar and M. George, “Measuring and 
Maximizing Customer Equity: A Critical Analysis,” Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science 35, no. 2 (June 2007),  
pp. 157–71; V. Kumar, D. Shah, and R. Venkatesan, “Managing 
Retailer Profitability: One Customer at a Time!” Journal of 
Retailing 82, no. 4 (October 2006), pp. 277–94; V. Kumar, 
“Profitable Relationships,” Marketing Research: A Magazine of 
Management and Applications 18, no. 3 (Fall 2006), pp. 41–46; 

	USING SECONDARY DATA TO ASSESS CUSTOMER LIFETIME VALUE (CLV)  CHAPTER TEN APPENDIX	
335
	
	
V. Kumar, “Customer Lifetime Value: A Databased Approach,” 
Journal of Relationship Marketing 5, no. 2/3 (2006), pp. 7–35; 
S. Gupta, D. Hanssens, B. Hardie, W. Kahn, V. Kumar, N. Lin,  
N. Ravishanker, and S. Sriram, “Modeling Customer Lifetime 
Value,” Journal of Service Research 9 (November 2006),  
pp. 139–55; V. Kumar, R. Venkatesan, and W. Reinartz, “Knowing 
What to Sell, When and to Whom,” Harvard Business Review, 
March, 2006, pp. 131–37; W. Reinartz, J. Thomas, and V. 
Kumar, “Balancing Acquisition and Retention Resources to 
Maximize Profitability,” Journal of Marketing 69 (January 
2005), pp. 63–79; R. Venkatesan and V. Kumar, “A Customer 
Lifetime Value Framework for Customer Selection and 
Resource Allocation Strategy,” Journal of Marketing 68 
(October 2004), pp. 106–25; V. Kumar and J. A. Petersen, 
“Maximizing ROI or Profitability: Is One Better Than the Other,” 
Marketing Research: A Magazine of Management and 
Applications 16, no. 3 (Fall 2004), pp. 28–34; V. Kumar, G. 
Ramani, and T. Bohling, “Customer Lifetime Value Approaches 
and Best Practice Applications,” Journal of Interactive 
Marketing 18, no. 3 (Summer 2004), pp. 60–72; J. Thomas, 
Werner Reinartz, and V. Kumar, “Getting the Most Out of All 
Your Customers,” Harvard Business Review (July–August 
2004), pp. 116–23; Werner Reinartz and V. Kumar, “The Impact 
of Customer Relationship Characteristics on Profitable Lifetime 
Duration,” Journal of Marketing 67 (January 2003), pp. 77–99; 
W. Reinartz and V. Kumar, “The Mismanagement of Customer 
Loyalty,” Harvard Business Review (July 2002), pp. 86–97;  
W. Reinartz and V. Kumar, “On the Profitability of Long Lifetime 
Customers: An Empirical Investigation and Implications for 
Marketing,” Journal of Marketing 64 (October 2000), pp. 17–32.
53.	We have made some minor adjustments to the formula sug-
gested by Gupta et al., “Modeling Customer Lifetime Value.”
54.	S. Gupta and D. R. Lehmann, Managing Customers as 
Investments (Philadelphia, PA: Wharton School Publishing, 
2005); Gupta et al., “Modeling Customer Lifetime Value.”


Section Four devotes three chapters to how marketing 
contributes to value creation. Chapters 11 and 12 explore 
strategies and tactics in the development and ­management 
of successful products and their brands. Although many of 
the concepts involved in developing and managing services 
are similar to those of physical brands, Chapter 13 ad-
dresses the unique challenges of the marketing of services.
SECTION 4
CHAPTER 11
Product, Branding, and Packaging Decisions
CHAPTER 12
Developing New Products
CHAPTER 13
Services: The Intangible Product
Assessing the Marketplace
Understanding the Marketplace
Targeting the Marketplace
Value Creation
Value Capture
Value Delivery: Designing the 
Channel and Supply Chain
Value Communication
VALUE CREATION

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO11-1	 Describe the components of a product.
	LO11-2	 Identify the types of consumer products.
	LO11-3	 Explain the difference between a product mix’s breadth and a product line’s depth.
	LO11-4	 Identify the advantages that brands provide firms and consumers.
	LO11-5	 Explain the various components of brand equity.
	LO11-6	 Determine the various types of branding strategies used by firms.
	LO11-7	 Distinguish between brand extension and line extension.
	LO11-8	 Indicate the advantages of a product’s packaging and labeling strategy.
PRODUCT, 
BRANDING,  
AND PACKAGING 
DECISIONS
CHAPTER 11

T
o convey its brand of unconscious cool and rad-
ical adventure, Red Bull embraces daredevil 
stunts but also seeks to avoid making it look as if 
it is trying too hard to promote itself in so doing. 
Thus its branding operations walk a delicate line: Make a 
name for the brand but without appearing to do so.
Consider the Red Bull Stratos project. Over a period of 
approximately five years, Red Bull bankrolled the experimen-
tal development of a flight suit that would enable daredevil 
and skydiver Felix Baumgartner to free fall from 24 miles up, 
break the sound barrier, and still survive his jump from space.1
A camera mounted on his helmet recorded the entire 
experience, including the early moments, when he spun 
out of control in the thin stratosphere, until nearly five 
minutes later, when he landed. Approximately 8 million 
people watched the jump live.2
The company has continually sought to reinforce its 
image as a cutting-edge, danger-seeking, boundary-pushing 
© Chris McLennan/Alamy

340
As a key element of a firm’s marketing mix (the four Ps), product strategies are central to 
the creation of value for the consumer. A product is anything that is of value to a con-
sumer and can be offered through a voluntary marketing exchange. In addition to goods, 
such as soft drinks, or services, such as a stay in a hotel, products might be places (e.g., Six 
Flags theme parks), ideas (e.g., stop smoking), organizations (e.g., MADD), people (e.g., 
Oprah Winfrey), or communities (e.g., Facebook) that create value for consumers in their 
respective competitive marketing arenas.
This chapter begins with a discussion of the complexity and types of products. We 
then examine how firms adjust their product lines to meet and respond to changing market 
conditions. Then we turn our attention to branding—why are brands valuable to the firm, 
and what are the different branding strategies firms use? We also never want to underesti-
mate the value of a product’s package and label. These elements should send a strong 
message from the shelf: Buy me! The final section of this chapter examines packaging and 
labeling issues.
COMPLEXITY AND TYPES OF PRODUCTS
Complexity of Products
There is more to a product than its physical characteristics or its basic service function. 
Marketers involved with the development, design, and sale of products think of physical 
characteristics and service functions in an interrelated fashion, as depicted in Exhibit 11.1. 
At the center is the core customer value, which defines the basic problem-solving benefits 
that consumers are seeking. When Mars manufactures M&M’s, Snickers, and other confec-
tionary products, or when Trek designs bicycles, each company’s core question is: What 
are customers looking for? With Mars, is it a sweet, great tasting snack, or is it an energy 
boost? With Trek, is the bike being used for basic green transportation (a cruiser), or is it 
for speed and excitement (a road, hybrid, or mountain bike)?
Marketers convert core customer value into an actual product. Attributes such as the 
brand name, features/design, quality level, and packaging are important, but the level of 
their importance varies, depending on the product. The Trek Madone 7 Series, for in-
stance, is positioned as “see how fastest feels.”6 It features a carbon frame that is light, 
stiff, and comfortable; an advanced shifting system; and other high-tech features. Not 
only is it beautiful to look at, but customers can choose from three fits—pro, perfor-
mance, and touring.
LO11-1	
Describe the 
components of a 
product.
entity. The data gathered through the Stratos project 
were made available to pilots and astronauts who might 
need to bail out of a disabled aircraft. The newly designed 
space suit also revealed that it could protect the human 
body against the extreme conditions in the stratosphere.3
Pushing the envelope is just what Red Bull wants its 
brand to be known for doing. Red Bull has found new 
ways to emphasize this image by diving into new areas. 
Although Red Bull continues to sponsor extreme sporting 
and events and stunts, it also has its own record label, 
which produces artists who make high-energy music.4 
Red Bull has been able to pair its music label with their 
many events and even create playlists for skydiving and 
X-fighters on their Red Bull Records YouTube channel, 
which integrates music from their artists and other popu-
lar musicians.5
By sponsoring events such as the space jump, its an-
nual Flugtag competition, and music festivals, Red Bull 
brands itself as fun, a little crazy, and ready for anything. But 
by letting the events speak largely for themselves rather 
than promoting its participation in a traditional sense, it also 
maintains an image of slightly detached cool. It hopes that 
consumers who would like to think of themselves the same 
way will find this branding deeply compelling.

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
341
	
	
The associated services in Exhibit 11.1, also referred to as the augmented prod-
uct, include the nonphysical aspects of the product, such as product warranties, financ-
ing, product support, and after-sale service. The amount of associated services also 
varies with the product. The associated services for a package of M&M’s may include 
only a customer complaint line, which means they are relatively less important than the 
associated services for a Trek bicycle. The frame of the Madone 7 Series bicycle is guar-
anteed for the lifetime of the original owner. Trek sells its bikes only in shops that have 
the expertise to service them properly. Every possible consumer question is answered on 
Trek’s comprehensive website. Trek even has a financing program that allows customers 
to purchase new bikes on credit.
When developing or changing a product, marketers start with the core customer value 
to determine what their potential customers are seeking. Then they make the actual physi-
cal product and add associated services to round out the offering.
Types of Products
Marketers consider the types of products they are designing and selling because these types 
affect how they will promote, price, and distribute their products. There are two primary 
categories of products and services that reflect who buys them: consumers or businesses. 
Chapter 7 discussed products for businesses. Here we discuss consumer products.
Consumer products are products and services used by people for their personal use. 
Marketers further classify consumer products by the way they are used and how they are 
purchased.
Specialty Products/Services  Specialty products/services are those for which cus-
tomers express such a strong preference that they will expend considerable effort to search 
for the best suppliers. Road bike enthusiasts, like those interested in the Trek Madone 
7 Series, devote lots of time and effort to selecting just the right one. Other examples might 
include luxury cars, legal or medical professionals, or designer apparel.
Shopping Products/Services  Shopping products/services are products or services 
for which consumers will spend a fair amount of time comparing alternatives, such as fur-
niture, apparel, fragrances, appliances, and travel. When people need new sneakers, for 
instance, they often go from store to store shopping—trying on shoes, comparing alterna-
tives, and chatting with salespeople.
LO11-2	
Identify the types of 
consumer products.
E X H I B I T  11.1
Product complexity
Core
customer
value
Associated services
Financing
Product warranty
Product support
Actual product
Brand name 
Packaging
Quality level 
Features/Design
Photos: Left: © Photodisc/Getty Images RF; Right: © Michael Blann/Getty Images RF

342	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Convenience Products/Services  Convenience products/services are those products 
or services for which the consumer is not willing to expend any effort to evaluate prior to 
purchase. They are frequently purchased commodity items, usually bought with very little 
thought, such as common beverages, bread, or soap.
Unsought Products/Services  Unsought products/services are products or services 
that consumers either do not normally think of buying or do not know about. Because of 
their very nature, these products/services require lots of marketing effort and various forms 
of promotion. When new-to-the-world products are first introduced, they are unsought 
products. Do you have cold hands and don’t know what to do about it? You must not have 
heard yet of HeatMax HotHands Hand Warmers, air-activated packets that provide warmth 
for up to 10 hours. Do you have an internship in a less developed country and your regular 
insurance cannot give you the coverage you may need in case of an emergency? You now 
can turn to a Medex insurance policy.
A medical professional is a specialty service. Soda is a convenience product. Insurance is an unsought service. Apparel is a 
shopping product.
Top left: © Comstock Images/SuperStock RF; Top right: © McGraw-Hill Education/Jill Braaten, photographer; Bottom left: © numbeos/E-plus/Getty Images RF;  
Bottom right: © Big Cheese Photo/SuperStock RF
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Explain the three components of a product.
2.	 What are the four types of consumer products?

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
343
	
	
PRODUCT MIX AND PRODUCT  
LINE DECISIONS
The complete set of all products and services offered by a firm is called its product mix. 
An abbreviated version of the product mix for Daimler AG, the company that owns 
Mercedes-Benz, appears in Exhibit 11.2. The product mix typically consists of various 
product lines, which are groups of associated items that consumers tend to use together or 
think of as part of a group of similar products or services. Daimler’s product lines (brands) 
for consumers include, for example, Mercedes-Benz cars, Mercedes-AMG cars, smart cars, 
and Mercedes-Benz vans and camper vans. 
The product mix reflects the breadth and depth of the company’s product lines. A 
firm’s product mix breadth represents a count of the number of product lines offered by 
the firm; the four columns in Exhibit 11.2 depict just four of the lines offered 
by Daimler AG. Product line depth, in contrast, equals the number of prod-
ucts within a product line. Daimler AG clearly maintains the most products 
under its Mercedes-Benz line of cars, and it adds more as needed to appeal 
to various consumers, as Adding Value 11.1 explains.
However, adding unlimited numbers of new products can have 
­adverse consequences. Too much breadth in the product mix becomes 
costly to maintain, and too many brands may weaken the firm’s 
­re­putation.7 If the products are too similar, sales of one brand 
may  ­cannibalize, or take away sales from the other brand, with no 
net  sales,  profit, or market share increase. As described in Adding 
Value 11.1, the Audi A3 may cannibalize sales from the A4, which is a 
more expensive model, but looks remarkably like the A3. With more 
products and product lines, the firm must keep track of trends and devel-
opments in various industries, which might tax its resources. Marketing 
Analytics 11.1 describes how Macy’s uses advanced methods to fine-
tune its ­product lines. 
So why do firms change their product mix’s breadth or depth?8
Increase Depth  Firms might add items to address changing consumer 
preferences or to preempt competitors while boosting sales (see the addition 
of product A4 in Exhibit 11.3). For Philadelphia brand cream cheese, adding 
a new jalapeno-flavored cream cheese enables it to appeal better to hot-and-
spicy-loving consumers. The product is still essentially the same (cream 
cheese), but the availability of 35 different flavors significantly increases the 
product line’s depth.9 
LO11-3	
Explain the difference 
between a product 
mix’s breadth and a 
product line’s depth.
E X H I B I T  11.2
Abbreviated List of Daimler AG Product Mix
Product Lines
Mercedes-Benz Cars	
Mercedes-AMG cars	
Smart Cars 	
Mercedes-Benz Vans
A-Class	
C 63	
Smart ForTwo 	
Sprinter Worker
B-Class	
CLS 63	
Smart ForTwo Cabrio	
Sprinter Cargo Van
C-Class	
GLE 450	
Smart ForFour	
Sprinter Crew Van
CLA	
SL Convertible	
Smart ForTwo Electric Drive	
Sprinter Passenger Van
CLS	
GT	
	
Metro Passenger Van
G-Class	
	
	
Metro Cargo Van
E-Class	
	
	
Marco Polo Camper Van
GLA	
	
	
R-Class	
	
	
S-Class	
	
	
V-Class	
	
	
Kraft has increased the depth of its Philadelphia 
brand cream cheese by introducing a new 
­jalapeño flavor.
© Danny Meldung/Photo Affairs, Inc.

344	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Adding Value 11.1
An Entryway to Luxury: The Latest Entry-Level Models  
from High-End Car Brandsi
For luxury carmakers, the lowest-end models in their product 
lines often represent only a small portion of their sales. Yet 
these models are critically important when it comes to attract-
ing new customers and, potentially, establishing their lifelong 
loyalty to the brand. Accordingly, more high-end, traditionally 
expensive brands have developed comparatively less op-
tion-laden alternatives to lure first-time and nontraditional buy-
ers to their dealerships. 
The most prominent automobile brand to adopt this strat-
egy was Mercedes-Benz, which introduced its CLA model at a 
base price of less than $40,000. When consumers realized 
that they could purchase or lease a Mercedes-Benz for ap-
proximately the same monthly price that they would spend for 
a high-end Toyota or Honda, many of them switched happily. 
For the most part, the target market for such models includes 
young professionals. These are consumers who earn a steady 
income that enables them to take on a car payment but not 
pay for a new car outright, and their monthly payments must 
fit their budgets. 
Noting the success Mercedes was enjoying, Audi added 
the A3, for a base price of less than $30,000. With a stated 
goal of appealing to young, cool, urban drivers, Audi promised 
that they could “upgrade” from their non-luxury brands, though 
the differences between the A3 and high-end versions of 
comparable Hondas or Toyotas have little to do with actual 
upgrades to the cars—that is, both likely provide leather interi-
ors and sunroofs. Rather, the key difference is the image ben-
efits that driving a luxury brand offer to consumers. 
The lack of distinction in the amenities offered by the lux-
ury brands might constitute a risk too. One test driver, after 
cruising around in a Mercedes CLA, deemed it similar to the 
experience of driving a Honda. Such attitudes could readily 
overturn the distinctive and long-standing advantages that lux-
ury brands have enjoyed. If enough people come to perceive 
that driving a luxury car is no different from driving a mid-
range car, those image-based benefits from luxury branding 
would disappear.
For Mercedes and Audi though, the risks appear subordi-
nate to the potential and realized benefits. Both brands have 
enjoyed sales increases due to the introductions of these low-
end models. Furthermore, these purchases are not repeat 
buys: Approximately 60 percent of new A3 drivers and 
75 percent of CLA purchasers are new to the brands. Such 
statistics suggest an expanded market for the brands. As 
these buyers age, advance in their careers, and consider more 
expensive car purchases, they should be more likely to con-
tinue visiting the dealerships that provided them with their 
very first luxury automobile.
Do the risks outweigh the rewards of Mercedes-Benz and Audi to introduce lower-priced models like the CLA (left) and the 
A3 (right) to lure first-time buyers?
Left: © Wing Lun Leung/Alamy; Right: © Jonathan Thurlow/Alamy
Decrease Depth  From time to time, it is also necessary to delete products within a 
product line to realign the firm’s resources (see the deletion of products B5 and B6 in 
Exhibit 11.3). The decision is never taken lightly. Generally, substantial investments have 
been made to develop and manufacture the products. Yet firms often must prune their 
product lines to eliminate unprofitable or low-margin items and refocus their marketing 
efforts on their more profitable items. When Procter & Gamble (P&G) announced that it 
would be merging, eliminating, or selling many of its brands and only keeping the top per-
forming 70–80 brand names, it may have seemed at first that the historically underper-
forming Duracell brand would be cut. However, recent merchandising efforts, such as 
signing an exclusive distribution agreement with Sam’s Club, pushed Duracell’s annual 
sales up to $2.3 billion, guaranteeing its continuation as a P&G brand. This quick shift 

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
345
	
	
How Macy’s Defines Its Assortment  
through Analyticsii
In the current marketing landscape, it is critical that retailers 
have a well-developed understanding of their customers. 
­Macy’s uses predictive analytics to gain more insight into its 
customers and improve the buying experience across all chan-
nels. Predictive analytics is the use of statistics on data to de-
termine patterns and predict future outcomes and trends. For 
years, Macy’s has been collecting data to create a customer- 
centric in-store experience. Specifically, Macy’s uses predic-
tive analytics to create its assortment. The retailer collects 
data on details such as out-of-stock rates, price promotions, 
and sell-through rates, then combines those data with stock- 
keeping unit (SKU) information from each location to segment 
customers and create personalized store assortments.
	
As sales continue to shift to digital platforms, Macy’s also 
uses predictive analytics to create an engaging online experi-
ence through Macys.com. The company analyzes visit fre-
quency, style preferences, and shopping motivations in its 
website data, then seeks to apply the insights to ensure that 
every customer has an enjoyable, effortless shopping experi-
ence. Macys.com does more than just use predictive analytics 
to create personalized purchase suggestions, though. It calcu-
lates the likelihood that each customer will spend a specific 
amount in a particular product category, then uses that infor-
mation to present the customer with personalized offers on 
the checkout page. Furthermore, analytics enable Macy’s to 
send registered users of Macys.com even more personalized 
e-mail offers. For example, it can send up to 500,000 unique 
versions of the same mailing.
	
Macy’s already has enjoyed significant success as a result 
of its implementation of advanced predictive analytics. It has 
continued to experience increases in store sales and online 
sales, at least partially due to its targeted e-mails. Looking to 
the future, Macy’s plans to improve its online and mobile shop-
ping experiences even further while enhancing the integration 
of these various shopping platforms to create a seamless ex-
perience with just the right product mix.
Marketing Analytics 11.1
Macys.com analyzes visit frequency, style preferences, and shopping motivations in 
its website data to develop promotions like the one pictured here.
Source: Macy’s

346	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
exemplifies the challenges of brand and product line choices: An underperforming brand 
today might become a superior revenue generator a year later.10 Thus, marketers need to 
think very carefully as they decrease the depth of a given product line. 
Decrease Breadth  Sometimes it is necessary to delete entire product lines to address 
changing market conditions or meet internal strategic priorities (e.g., deleting product line 
C in Exhibit 11.3). Thus, the firm drops its line of protein bars and focuses its attention on 
its energy drinks and vitamin water (product lines A and B).
Increase Breadth  Firms often add new product lines to capture new or evolving mar-
kets and increase sales (e.g., product line D in Exhibit 11.3). The firm adds a whole new 
line of yogurt.
Product Line A
A1
B1
C1
D1
D2
D3
D4
C2
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
A2
A3
A4
Added depth:
New product (A4)
Decreased depth:
Dropped B5 & B6
Decreased breadth:
Dropped product
line C (C1 & C2)
Added breadth:
New line (D1, D2,
D3, & D4)
Product Line B
Product Line C
Product Line D
PROTEIN-BAR
ENERGY
DRINK
V I TA M I N  
YOGURT
WATER
E X H I B I T  11.3
Changes to a Product Mix
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is the difference between product mix breadth and product line depth?
2.	 Why change product mix breadth?
3.	 Why change product line depth?
BRANDING
A company lives or dies based on brand awareness. Consumers cannot buy products that 
they don’t know exist. Even if the overall brand name is familiar, it won’t help sales of 
­individual products unless consumers know what products are available under that name. 
Sports fans have long been familiar with the rallying cry for Under Armour and its line of 
athletic gear: “Protect this house.” But when the company chose to refresh its tagline, it 
undertook a massive ad campaign to introduce its new slogan, “I will.” In addition to 
­extensive online and outdoor advertising, Under Armour has intensified its branding 
­efforts by signing Washington Nationals baseball star Bryce Harper to the biggest endorse-
ment deal for an MLB player.11

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
347
	
	
Branding also provides a way for a firm to differentiate its product offerings from 
those of its competitors. Both Snapple and Tropicana make and sell fruit drinks, yet con-
sumers may choose one over the other because of the associations the brands invoke. As 
we discuss in more detail subsequently, brand names, logos, symbols, characters, slogans, 
jingles, and even distinctive packages constitute the various brand elements firms 
use,12 which they usually choose to be easy for consumers to recognize and remember. 
Most consumers know the Nike swoosh and would recognize it even if the word Nike did 
not appear on the product or in an advertisement. Exhibit 11.4 summarizes some of these 
brand elements.
Value of Branding for the Customer
Brands add value to merchandise and services, for consumers as well as sellers, 
beyond physical and functional characteristics or the pure act of performing the 
service.13 Let’s examine some ways in which brands add value for customers as 
well as the firm.
Brands Facilitate Purchases  Brands are often easily recognized by consum-
ers and, because brands signify a certain quality level and contain familiar attri-
butes, they help consumers make quick decisions, especially about their 
purchases.14 The cola market is a particularly strong example of this benefit. Some 
people think cola is cola, such that one brand is not too different from another. But 
branding has made it easy for Pepsi drinkers to find the familiar logo on the store 
shelf and make it more likely that they simply buy one of Pepsi’s other products, 
should they decide to switch to a diet soda or a flavored version. From promotions, 
past purchases, or information from friends and family, they recognize the offering 
before they even read any text on the label, and they likely possess a perception of 
the brand’s level of quality, how it tastes, whether it is a good value, and, most 
important, whether they like it and want to buy it. Brands enable customers to dif-
ferentiate one firm or product from another. Without branding, how could we eas-
ily tell the difference between Coca-Cola and Pepsi before tasting them?
Brands Establish Loyalty  Over time and with continued use, consumers learn 
to trust certain brands. They know, for example, that they wouldn’t consider 
switching brands and, in some cases, feel a strong affinity to certain brands. 
LO11-4	
Identify the advantages 
that brands provide 
firms and consumers.
Under Armour has intensified 
its branding efforts by signing 
Washington Nationals baseball 
star Bryce Harper to the 
­biggest endorsement deal for 
an MLB player.
Source: Under Armour
Characters like Rice Krispies’ Snap, 
Crackle, and Pop help build a brand.
© Michael Neelon(misc)/Alamy

348	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Amazon.com has a loyal following because its reputation for service 
prompts customers to turn to it first.
Brands Protect from Competition and Price Competition  
Strong brands are somewhat protected from competition from other 
firms and price competition. Because such brands are more estab-
lished in the market and have a more loyal customer base, neither 
competitive pressures on price nor retail-level competition is as threat-
ening to the firm. Lacoste is widely known for its cotton knit shirts. 
Although many similar brands are available and some retailers offer 
their own brands, Lacoste is perceived to be of superior quality, gar-
ners a certain status among its users, and therefore can command a 
premium price.
Brands Are Assets  For firms, brands are also assets that can be le-
gally protected through trademarks and copyrights and thus constitute a 
unique form of ownership. Firms sometimes have to fight to ensure 
their brand names are not being used, directly or indirectly, by others. 
McDonald’s, for instance, has a long history of fighting trademark in-
fringements. It recently won a trademark case with a Singapore-based 
restaurant chain that wanted to use the term “MACCOFFEE.”15
Brands Affect Market Value  Having well-known brands can have 
a direct impact on the company’s bottom line. The value of a company 
is its overall monetary worth, comprising a vast number of assets. 
When the brand loses value, it also threatens other assets. RadioShack 
was once the first destination for consumers seeking a Walkman or 
boom box; however, the loss of brand value as it has struggled to 
maintain relevance as a provider of modern, cutting-edge technology 
has ultimately led to its demise in bankruptcy.
The value of a brand can be defined as the earning potential of 
that brand over the next 12 months.16 The world’s 10 most valuable 
brands for 2015 appear in Exhibit 11.5.
LO11-5	
Explain the various 
components of brand 
equity.
Brand Element	
Description
Brand name	
The spoken component of branding, it can describe the product or service 
characteristics and/or be composed of words invented or derived 
from ­colloquial or contemporary language. Examples include Comfort 
Inn ­(suggests product characteristics), Apple (no association with the 
­product), or Zillow.com (invented term).
URLs (uniform resource 	
Locations of pages on the Internet, which often substitute for the firm’s 
locators) or domain names	
name, such as Toyota (http://www.toyota.com).
Logos and symbols	
Visual branding elements that stand for corporate names or trademarks. 
Symbols are logos without words. Examples include the McDonald’s arches.
Characters	
Brand symbols that could be human, animal, or animated. Examples 
include the Energizer Bunny and Rice Krispies’ Snap, Crackle, and Pop.
Slogans	
Short phrases used to describe the brand or persuade consumers about 
some characteristics of the brand. Examples include State Farm’s “Like A 
Good Neighbor” and Dunkin’ Donuts’ “America Runs On Dunkin’.”
Jingles/Sounds	
Audio messages about the brand that are composed of words or distinctive 
music. An example is Intel’s four-note sound signature that accompanies 
the Intel Inside slogan.
Source: Adapted from Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2012).
E X H I B I T  11.4
What Makes a Brand?
Lacoste has a superior-quality image that helps pro-
tect it from competition and enables it to command 
relatively high prices.
© Bryn Colton/Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
349
	
	
Brand Equity for the Owner
The value of a brand translates into brand equity, 
or the set of assets and liabilities linked to a 
brand that add to or subtract from the value pro-
vided by the product or service.17 Like the phys-
ical possessions of a firm, brands are assets a 
firm can build, manage, and harness over time 
to increase its revenue, profitability, and overall 
value. For example, firms spend millions of dol-
lars on promotion, advertising, and other mar-
keting efforts throughout a brand’s life cycle. 
Marketing expenditures allocated carefully can 
result in greater brand recognition, awareness, 
perceived value, and consumer loyalty for the 
brand, which all enhance the brand’s overall 
­equity. Such benefits can be particularly strong 
if the brand markets itself ethically, as Ethical 
and Societal Dilemma 11.1 notes.
How do we know how good a brand is or 
how much equity it has? Experts look at four as-
pects of a brand to determine its equity: brand 
awareness, perceived value, brand associations, 
and brand loyalty.
Brand Awareness  Brand awareness mea-
sures how many consumers in a market are fa-
miliar with the brand and what it stands for and 
have an opinion about it. The more aware of or 
familiar with it they are, the easier their deci-
sion-making process is, which improves the 
chances of purchase. Familiarity matters most 
for products that are bought without much 
thought, such as soap or chewing gum, but 
brand awareness is also critical for infrequently 
	
	
	
	
	
	
Brand Value  
	 2015 Rank	
2013 Rank	
Brand	
Country	
Sector	
(in $ Billions)
	
1	
1	
Apple	
United States	
Technology	
$170.3
	
2	
2	
Google	
United States	
Technology	
$120.3
	
3	
3	
Coca-Cola	
United States	
Beverages	
$ 78.4
	
4	
5	
Microsoft	
United States	
Technology	
$ 67.7
	
5	
4	
IBM	
United States	
Business Services	
$ 65.1
	
6	
10	
Toyota	
Japan	
Automotive	
$ 49.0
	
7	
8	
Samsung	
South Korea	
Technology	
$ 45.3
	
8	
6	
GE	
United States	
Diversified 	
$ 42.3
	
9	
7	
McDonald’s	
United States	
Restaurants	
$ 39.8
	
10	
n.a.	
Amazon	
United States	
Retail	
$ 37.9
Source: From Interbrand.com, http://interbrand.com/best-brands/best-global-brands/2015/ranking/#?listFormat=ls.
E X H I B I T  11.5
The World’s 10 Most Valuable Brands
IBM is one of the world’s most valuable brands.
Image Courtesy of The Advertising Archives

350	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
purchased items or those the consumer has never purchased 
before. If the consumer recognizes the brand, it probably 
has attributes that make it valuable.18 For those who have 
never purchased a Toyota, the simple awareness that it ex-
ists can help facilitate a purchase. Marketers create brand 
awareness through repeated exposures of the various brand 
elements (brand name, logo, symbol, character, packaging, 
or slogan) in the firm’s communications to consumers 
through advertising, publicity, or other methods (see 
Chapters 17, 18, and 19).
Certain brands gain such predominance in a particular 
product market over time that they become synonymous with 
the product itself; that is, the brand name starts being used as 
the generic product category. Examples include Kleenex tis-
sues, Clorox bleach, Band-Aid adhesive bandages, and the 
Google search engine. Companies must be vigilant in pro-
tecting their brand names because if they are used so generi-
cally, over time the brand itself can lose its trademark status. 
For competitors, this trend similarly is destructive: If every-
one with an upset stomach asks for Pepto-Bismol and never 
(Not) Marketing Sugary Drinks to Kidsiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 11.1
Obesity rates are often highest in the nations and regions that 
drink the most soda. The sugary, high-calorie versions of pop-
ular carbonated beverage brands in turn have been widely 
blamed for the growing rates of obesity, especially among chil-
dren. Those complaints also are growing as brands expand 
outside the United States and potentially threaten the long-
term health of kids across the globe.
	
Even as it strongly maintains that sodas are not the main 
culprit in rising obesity rates, Coca-Cola has acknowledged its 
own limited responsibility and therefore vowed not to adver-
tise in settings in which children make up more than 35 per-
cent of the anticipated audience (previously, it set this standard 
at 50 percent). Thus Coke ads have disappeared from cartoon 
networks and youth-oriented shows, children’s magazines, and 
so forth.
	
In addition to its commitment not to advertise directly to 
children younger than 12 years of age, Coke has invested in 
initiatives to promote more physical activity and to encourage 
consumers to consider lower calorie alternatives, whether Diet 
Coke or Minute Maid juices (which Coca-Cola also owns). 
­Beyond advertising, Coke’s new product development efforts 
are largely focused on identifying and integrating natural low- 
calorie sweeteners. In some countries, its packaging also will 
feature more prominent information about calorie contents.
	
Yet critics point out that even as Coke promises to stop 
targeting children, it has confirmed that it has no plans to stop 
relying on its popular polar bear advertisements during the 
holiday season, nor will it eliminate images of children enjoying 
Coke in its ads. Thus while Coca-Cola might be working to re-
duce the amount of marketing children might see during their 
favorite programs, it certainly does not plan to stop appealing 
to young consumers altogether.
Should Coca-Cola and other consumer packaged-goods 
companies be allowed to advertise to children?
© GL Archive/Alamy
These brands are so strong that they have become 
­synonymous with the product itself.
© McGraw-Hill Education

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
351
	
	
considers any alternatives, brands such as Activia suffer 
smaller chances of making it into customers’ shopping bas-
kets. To counteract such concerns, Activia uses well-known 
­celebrities such as Columbian singer Shakira,19 retired boxer 
Laila Ali, singer and actress Reba McEntire, and TV host Dr. 
Travis Stork in its advertisements to make sure it is recogniz-
able and prominent.20
Perceived Value  The perceived value of a brand is the re-
lationship between a product’s or service’s benefits and its 
cost. Customers usually determine the offering’s value in rela-
tion to the value of its close competitors. If they believe a less 
expensive brand is about the same quality as a premium 
brand, the perceived value of that cheaper choice is high. 
Merchandise sold by Target and Kohl’s is not always per-
ceived to be the highest quality, nor is the apparel the most 
fashion-forward. But not every customer needs to show up at 
school looking like they came from a fashion show runway. At 
the same time, these retailers hire high-fashion designers to 
create reasonably priced lines to feature in their stores—as 
Target did with Adam Lippes and his “all about plaid” collec-
tion to create well-designed pieces at Target-level prices.21
Brand Associations  Brand associations reflect the men-
tal and emotional links that consumers make between a brand 
and its key product attributes, such as a logo and its color, 
slogan, or famous personality. These brand associations often 
result from a firm’s advertising and promotional efforts. 
Toyota’s hybrid car, the Prius, is known for being economical, 
a good value, stylish, and good for the environment. But firms 
also attempt to create specific associations with positive con-
sumer emotions such as fun, friendship, good feelings, family 
gatherings, and parties. Jingles can establish particularly 
strong associations, especially when they are catchy and get 
stuck in consumers’ heads. State Farm Insurance continues to 
rely on the jingle that Barry Manilow wrote for it in the 1970s: 
In modern advertisements, young customers in trouble sing 
the phrase “like a good neighbor, State Farm is there,” and an 
agent magically appears on scene.22
Because of his vast viral popularity, Grumpy Cat (real 
name: Tardar Sauce) has been approached by several brands 
that seek to be associated with him so they can benefit from 
his entertaining, satirical, and hip image. The feline’s natu-
rally unhappy looking mouth now appears across Friskies’ 
product line. Mashable featured Grumpy Cat in its tent at 
South by Southwest, and a bidding process led to the Grumpy 
Cat’s Worst Christmas Ever movie in 2014.  
Brand Loyalty  Brand loyalty occurs when a consumer buys 
the same brand’s product or service repeatedly over time rather 
than buying from multiple suppliers within the same cate-
gory.23  Therefore, brand-loyal customers are an important 
source of value for firms. First, firms such as airlines, hotels, 
long-distance telephone providers, credit card companies, and 
retailers reward loyal consumers with loyalty or customer 
­relationship management (CRM) programs, such as points cus-
tomers can redeem for extra discounts or free services, ­advance 
Target is advertising in Vogue magazine in a clear attempt to 
enhance the perceived value of its products by featuring them 
in a magazine that normally features higher-priced, very fash-
ionable products.
© Neilson Barnard/Getty Images
Friskies cat food is associated with its famous “spokesperson,” 
Grumpy Cat.
© Robin Marchant/Getty Images

352	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
notice of sale items, and invitations to special events sponsored by the company. Second, the 
marketing costs of reaching loyal consumers are much lower because the firm does not have 
to spend money on advertising and promotion campaigns to attract these customers. Loyal 
consumers simply do not need persuasion or an extra push to buy the firm’s brands. Third, 
loyal customers tend to praise the virtues of their favorite products, retailers, or services to 
others. This positive word of mouth reaches potential customers and reinforces the perceived 
value of current customers, all at no cost to the firm. Fourth, a high level of brand loyalty 
insulates the firm from competition because, as we noted in Chapter 2, brand-loyal customers 
do not switch to competitors’ brands, even when provided with a variety of incentives.
BRANDING STRATEGIES
Firms institute a variety of brand-related strategies to create and manage key brand assets. 
The decisions surrounding these strategies are: whether to use manufacturer brands or re-
tailer/store brands, how to name brands and product lines, whether or not to extend the 
brand name to other products and markets, should the brand name be used with another 
firm or licensed to another firm, and whether or not the brand be repositioned.  
Brand Ownership
Brands can be owned by any firm in the supply chain, whether manufacturers, wholesalers, 
or retailers. There are two basic brand ownership strategies: manufacturer brands and re-
tailer/store brands, as Exhibit 11.6 shows. Additionally, the brands can be marketed using 
a common/family name or as individual brands.
LO11-6	
Determine the various 
types of branding 
strategies used  
by firms.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 How do brands create value for the customer and the firm?
2.	 What are the components of brand equity?
Family Brands
Kraft’s family line
Kroger’s line
Kroger’s individual brand
Kraft’s individual brand
Manufacturer / National Brand
Retailer / Store Brand
Who Owns the Brand?
Individual Brands
Common Name or Not?
E X H I B I T  11.6
Who Owns the Brand?
Top left: © Steve Cukrov/Shutterstock RF; Top right: © McGraw-Hill Education; Bottom left: © Ian Dagnall/Alamy; Bottom right: © Food Collection/Alamy

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
353
	
	
Manufacturer Brands  Manufacturer brands, also known as national brands, are 
owned and managed by the manufacturer. Some famous manufacturer brands are Kraft, 
Nike, Coca-Cola, KitchenAid, and Sony. With these brands, the manufacturer develops the 
merchandise, produces it to ensure consistent quality, and invests in a marketing program 
to establish an appealing brand image. The majority of the brands marketed in the United 
States are manufacturer brands, and manufacturing firms spend millions of dollars each 
year to promote their brands. By owning their brands, manufacturers retain more control 
over their marketing strategy, are able to choose the appropriate market segments and po-
sitioning for the brand, and can build the brand and thereby create their own brand equity.
Retailer/Store Brands  Retailer/store brands, also called private-label brands, are 
products developed by retailers. In some cases, retailers manufacture their own products; in 
other cases they develop the design and specifications for their retailer/store brands and 
then contract with manufacturers to produce those products. Some national brand manu-
facturers work with retailers to develop a special version of their standard merchandise 
offering to be sold exclusively by the retailer.
In the past, sales of store brands were limited. But in recent years, as the size of retail 
firms has increased through growth and consolidation, more retailers have the scale econ-
omies to develop private-label merchandise and use this merchandise to establish a distinc-
tive identity. In addition, manufacturers are more willing to accommodate the needs of 
retailers and develop co-brands for them.24 At Kroger, 35 percent of sales in in its nearly 
2,500 stores come from store brand options.25 Both Costco and Trader Joe’s have based 
their brand identities around their store brands.
Naming Brands and Product Lines
Although there is no simple way to decide how to name a brand or a product line, the more 
the products vary in their usage or performance, the more likely it is that the firm should 
use individual brands. For example, General Motors uses several individual brands 
(Cadillac, Chevrolet, Buick, and GMC), each catering to very different target markets and 
meeting different needs. Hyundai, on the other hand, uses only one brand, because the us-
age and level of performance are relatively homogeneous across all its cars.
Family Brands  A firm can use its own corporate name to brand all its product lines and 
products; for example, Kraft incorporates the company name into the brand name of 
its various salad dressings (refer to Exhibit 11.6). When all products are sold under one 
family brand, the individual brands benefit from the overall brand awareness associated 
with the family name. Kraft Foods also uses its family brand name prominently on its 
Kraft uses a family branding 
strategy in which several 
­product lines are sold under 
one name.
© Michael Neelon(misc)/Alamy

354	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
cheese, pasta, and condiment brands (e.g., Kraft Macaroni & Cheese, Kraft Singles, 
Kraft Mayo).
Individual Brands  A firm can use individual brand names for each of its products. For 
example, Kraft makes good use of the family branding strategy, but it also allows other 
products, such as Philadelphia cream cheese, Cracker Barrel restaurants, A.1. steak sauce, 
and Planters nuts (Exhibit 11.6), to keep their individual identities, which are not readily 
regarded as falling under the Kraft umbrella.26
Brand and Line Extensions27
A brand extension refers to the use of the same brand name in a different product line. It 
is an increase in the product mix’s breadth.28 The dental hygiene market, for instance, is 
full of brand extensions; Colgate and Crest sell toothpaste, toothbrushes, and other dental 
LO11-7	
Distinguish between 
brand extension and 
line extension.
Kraft also uses an individual 
branding strategy since Jell-O, 
Trident, Philadelphia, Oscar 
Mayer, and others are all mar-
keted using separate names.
© Daniel Acker/Bloomberg/Getty Images
Ferrari offers apparel with its 
horse logo, which allows enthu-
siasts to show their devotion to 
the brand, even if they can’t 
­afford the automobile.
© Alessia Pierdomenico/Bloomberg/
Getty Images

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
355
	
	
hygiene products, even though their original product line 
was just toothpaste. A line extension is the use of the same 
brand name within the same product line and represents 
an increase in a product line’s depth.
There are several advantages to using the same brand 
name for new products. First, because the brand name is al-
ready well established, the firm can spend less in developing 
consumer brand awareness and brand associations for the 
new product.29 Kellogg’s has branched out from the cereal 
company it once was. Its strategy of branding the corporate 
name into the product name has allowed it to introduce new 
products quicker and more easily. ­Kellogg’s Eggo Syrup 
was a natural extension to its product line of breakfast foods.
Second, if either the original brand or the brand exten-
sion has strong consumer acceptance, that perception will 
carry over to the other product. Ferrari is well known as a brand of luxury sports cars; accord-
ingly, it has leveraged its brand name to introduce clothing offerings emblazoned with its horse 
logo, which allows enthusiasts to show their devotion to the brand through their apparel. The 
high cost of luxury cars makes them out of reach for most customers, but clothing-related line 
extensions give aspirational buyers a pathway to connect with the brand while also helping 
provide “brand awareness, brand enhancement and, sometimes, brand reinvigoration.”30
Third, when brand extensions are used for complementary products, a synergy exists 
between the two products that can increase overall sales. For example, Frito-Lay markets 
both chips and dips under its Frito-Lay and Tostitos brand names. When people buy the 
chips, they tend to buy the dips as well.
Not all brand extensions are successful, however. Some can dilute brand equity.31 
Brand dilution occurs when the brand extension adversely affects consumer perceptions 
about the attributes the core brand is believed to hold.32 Ferrari might be at risk of this ef-
fect, because it has gone far past clothing to offer brand licenses for sunglasses, perfume 
and cologne, skis, hotel suites, guitars, phones, LEGOs, leather bags, watches, jewelry 
boxes, and dice—among other things. It has licensed its logo to 68 different products, 
prompting Ferrari’s chief executive to admit that cars are “almost incidental” to the 
brand.33 Here are some examples of unsuccessful brand extensions:34
∙	
Lifesavers Soda did well in prelaunch taste tests but didn’t in subsequent sales.
∙	
Harley Davidson’s cake decorating kit tried to appeal to the brand’s unparalleled 
consumer loyalty, but it was considered too tame by their consumer base.
∙	
The Virgin Group has successfully entered many markets, from mobile phones with 
Virgin Mobile to travel with Virgin cruises, but its entry into the wedding-dress 
market with Virgin Brides is just one of the firm’s failures.
∙	
Zippo believed that its iconic lighter design would be an 
appealing design for a woman’s perfume. Although the perfume 
didn’t smell like lighter fluid, it turns out lighters aren’t 
something that many women want to associate with perfume.
∙	
Dr Pepper’s barbeque marinades hoped to utilize the brand’s 
“one of a kind” image, but it never took off with consumers.
To prevent the potentially negative consequences of brand exten-
sions, firms should consider the following:
∙	
Marketers should evaluate the fit between the product class of 
the core brand and that of the extension.35 If the fit between 
the product categories is high, consumers will consider the 
extension credible, and the brand association will be stronger 
for the extension. Thus, when Starbucks introduced its line of 
instant coffee, VIA, it made sense to its customers.
Using a brand extension strategy, Frito-Lay markets chips as well 
as dips under its Frito-Lay and Tostitos brand names.
© Michael J. Hruby
Life Savers unsuccessfully ­attempted a brand extension 
strategy with its line of soda.
© GfK Custom Research

356	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
∙	
Firms should evaluate consumer perceptions of the attributes of the core 
brand and seek out similar attributes for the extension, because brand-specific 
associations are very important for extensions.36 For example, if HP printers 
were associated with reliability, performance, and value, consumers would 
expect the same brand-specific attributes in other products that carried the 
HP brand name.
∙	
To avoid diluting the brand and damaging brand equity, firms should refrain from 
extending the brand name to too many products and product categories. At its 
founding, the Kate Spade brand offered aspirational luxury, selling nearly luxury 
handbags for $2,000 instead of $20,000. Kate Spade sought to expand its reach, 
opening a range of Kate Spade Saturday stores as well as Jack Spade shops for men 
to offer lower-priced versions of its designs. Within two years though, the company 
has decided to close all these stand-alone storefronts and integrate any remaining 
inventory into its traditional, central line stores.37
∙	
Firms should consider whether the brand extension will be distanced from the 
core brand, especially if the firm wants to use some but not all of the existing 
brand associations. Marriott has budget, midtier, and luxury hotels. Its luxury 
hotels, including the Ritz-Carlton, Edition, and Renaissance, do not use the name 
Marriott at all.38
Co‐Branding
Co-branding is the practice of marketing two or more brands together on the same 
package, promotion, or store. Co-branding can enhance consumers’ perceptions of 
product quality by signaling unobservable product quality through links between the 
firm’s brand and a well-known quality brand. For example, Yum! Brands frequently 
combines two or more of its restaurant chains, including A&W, KFC, Long John 
Silver’s, Pizza Hut, and Taco Bell, into one store space. This co-branding strategy is 
designed to appeal to ­diverse market segments and extend the hours during which each 
restaurant attracts customers. Yet co-branding also creates risks, especially when the 
customers of each of the brands turn out to be vastly different. For example, the Burger 
King and Häagen-Dazs co-branding strategy failed because the customer profiles for 
Brand extensions can be risky. 
Kate Spade opened Kate 
Spade Saturday stores to 
­offer lower-priced versions of 
its designs, but closed them 
within two years.
© Morgan Dessalles/Abacausa.com/ 
Newscom

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
357
	
	
each brand were too different.39 Co-branding 
may also fail when there are disputes or con-
flicts of interest between the co-brands.
Brand Licensing
Brand licensing is a contractual arrangement 
between firms whereby one firm allows another 
to use its brand name, logo, symbols, and/or 
characters in exchange for a negotiated fee.40 
Brand licensing is common for toys, apparel, ac-
cessories, and entertainment products such as 
video games. The firm that provides the right to 
use its brand (licensor) obtains revenues through 
royalty payments from the firm that has obtained 
the right to use the brand (licensee). These roy-
alty payments may take the form of upfront, 
lump-sum licensing fees or be based on the dol-
lar value of sales of the licensed merchandise.
One very popular form of licensing is the 
use of characters created in books and other 
media. Such entertainment licensing has generated tremendous revenues for movie stu-
dios. Disney, for instance, flooded retail stores with products based on its Frozen 
movie.41 Star Wars memorabilia has been continually successful since the first film was 
released in the 1970s, and the most recent film releases have led to a massive increase in 
sales. A long-standing staple of licensing has been major league sports teams that play in 
the MLB, NBA, NFL, or NHL as well as various collegiate sports teams.
Licensing is an effective form of attracting visibility for the brand and thereby build-
ing brand equity while also generating additional revenue. There are, however, some risks 
associated with it. For the licensor, the major risk is the dilution of its brand equity 
through overexposure of the brand, especially if the brand name and characters are used 
inappropriately.42
Brand Repositioning
Brand repositioning, or rebranding, refers to a strategy in which marketers change a 
brand’s focus to target new markets or realign the brand’s core emphasis with changing 
market preferences.43 The cereal-flavored milk Cow Wow seeks to evoke the liquid left 
The NBA’s New Orleans Pelicans (licensor) provides the right to use its 
brand to apparel manufacturers (licensee) in return for royalty payments.
© Stacy Revere/Getty Images
Cow Wow repositioned its product from appealing to children (left) to appealing to adult Millennials (right).
Source: Cow Wow Cereal Milk

358	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
over after a breakfast eater ­finishes all the grains but 
still has some milk in the bowl. It originally was tar-
geted for children between 5 and 12 years of age, but 
the company struggled to reach the parents of this tar-
get market. After an unexpected endorsement by late-
night talk show host Jimmy Kimmel, who described 
enjoying the flashback to his childhood, Millennials 
suddenly started seeking out Cow Wow, ready to pur-
chase a fun treat that reminded them of slurping milk 
from their cereal bowls after they ­finished their Froot 
Loops as kids. Thus Cow Wow decided to reposition 
and transform the product, using regular 1 percent milk 
and repackaging it in a larger carton with a screw top, 
to sell to adult Millennial consumers instead of to 
­children.44
Although repositioning can improve the brand’s fit 
with its target segment or boost the vitality of old 
brands, it is not without costs and risks. Firms often 
need to spend tremendous amounts of money to make 
tangible changes to the product and packages as well as 
intangible changes to the brand’s image through vari-
ous forms of promotion, as Adding Value 11.2 details. 
These costs may not be recovered if the repositioned 
brand and messages are not credible to consumers or if 
the firm has mistaken a fad for a long-term market 
trend. An example of a recent rebranding effort that 
provoked consumers’ disdain was the attempted reposi-
tioning of high fructose corn syrup as “corn sugar.” 
High fructose corn syrup first became popular when customers began reducing their 
sugar intake. However, in recent years, concerns surrounding the consumption of high 
fructose corn syrup have changed customers’ preferences, and they began embracing 
traditional cane sugar as a more natural option. In response to this shift, the corn indus-
try initiated an advertising campaign that featured healthy-looking people strolling 
through corn fields and asserting that human bodies process sugars produced by cane 
and sugars produced by corn in exactly the same way. Along with the tagline, “Your 
body can’t tell the difference,” the advertising campaign attempted to rebrand high fruc-
tose corn syrup as “corn sugar.” Not only did the campaign spark a series of legal suits 
between the corn and sugar industries, but it also failed to convince consumers. 
­Consumption of high fructose corn syrup has ­decreased from 6.7 billion metric tons to 
5.2 billion. This shift, together with consumers’ continued demands, has prompted 
many food manufacturers to cut corn syrup out of their products and accordingly adver-
tise them as “natural.” For example, Heinz promises that its ketchup avoids high fruc-
tose corn syrup, and both Coca-Cola and Pepsi have introduced line extensions based 
on the promise of being made with “real sugar.”45
Manufacturers of high fructose corn syrup attempted to reposi-
tion their product as high fructose corn sugar using the tagline 
“Your body can’t tell the difference,” but it didn’t work. Instead, it 
sparked a series of legal suits between the corn and sugar in-
dustries and failed to convince ­consumers.
© Big Ryan/Getty Images RF
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the differences between manufacturer and private-label 
brands?
2.	 What is co-branding?
3.	 What is the difference between brand extension and line extension?
4.	 What is brand repositioning?

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
359
	
	
PACKAGING
Packaging is an important brand element that has more tangible or physical benefits than 
other brand elements have. Packages come in different types and offer a variety of benefits 
to consumers, manufacturers, and retailers. The primary package is the one the consumer 
uses, such as the toothpaste tube. From the primary package, consumers typically seek 
convenience in terms of storage, use, and consumption.
The secondary package is the wrapper or exterior carton that contains the primary 
package and provides the UPC label used by retail scanners. Consumers can use the 
­secondary package to find additional product information that may not be available on the 
primary package. Like primary packages, secondary packages add consumer value by 
­facilitating the convenience of carrying, using, and storing the product.
Whether primary or secondary, packaging plays several key roles: It attracts the 
­consumers’ attention. It enables products to stand out from their competitors. It offers 
a promotional tool (e.g., “NEW” and “IMPROVED” promises on labels). Finally, it 
LO11-8	
Indicate the 
advantages of a 
product’s packaging 
and labeling strategy.
Adding Value 11.2
The Global Appeal and Rebranding Efforts  
of American Airlinesiv
For more than 40 years, American Airlines had used the same 
logo: a pair of capital As, one red and one blue, surrounding the 
silhouette of a diving eagle. When the airline purchased 550 
new planes, made from a new composite material, it had to 
change the look of the finish, so it decided to change its look 
altogether, including a new logo, new designs for the plane inte-
riors, a new website, and new kiosk interfaces in terminals.
The most visible element thus far is the new logo, which 
removes the double A and offers a more abstract version of 
an eagle. The abstract image is oriented more horizontally, 
rather than vertically downward. On the new planes, this eagle 
logo will appear near the front, as if pointing in the direction of 
the flight. Furthermore, the tails of each airplane will feature 
another abstract image, evocative of the U.S. flag with blue 
and red stripes (but no stars).
The abstraction of the images reflects American Airlines’ 
goals for the rebranding—namely, to emphasize the “American 
spirit” without evoking negative images of the United States in 
global markets. Futurebrand, the agency that American 
Airlines hired to assist it with its efforts, polled consumers 
around the world to identify positive traits they associated 
with the United States. The effort sought to determine not just 
how people view American products and services but also 
how they view America in a global age.
The results highlighted images of progress, technology, and 
entertainment, but they also cautioned against any implication 
of attack or aggression. Therefore the downward-diving eagle 
needed to go because it could be interpreted as attacking. A 
direct representation of the U.S. flag might have been per-
ceived as jingoistic, whereas the abstracted version simply 
provides a more neutral identifying hint.
In eliminating a widely familiar logo along with its well-
known letter typeface, American Airlines clearly is taking a risk 
that it will lose brand recognition among customers who un-
consciously seek the same look they have always seen at the 
airport. But in a global economy, a company with an American 
identity, in all senses of the term, needs to take care to empha-
size the positives while avoiding more controversial elements.
American Airlines’ new logo is an abstract version of an eagle. The tail of each plane features an abstraction of the U.S. flag.
© Kevin Clark/Alamy RF

360	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
­allows for the same product to appeal to different markets with different sizes, such that 
convenience stores stock little packages that travelers can buy at the last minute, whereas 
Costco sells extra-large versions of products.
Firms occasionally change or update their packaging as a subtle way of repositioning 
the product. A change can be used to attract a new target market and/or appear more up to 
date to its current market. For instance, to help consumers find their preferred taste among 
the vast variety of flavor options it now sells (as we discussed previously in this chapter), 
Philadelphia cream cheese has undertaken another change—namely, to the packaging of its 
products. Rather than round tubs—which can easily get spun around on store shelves, such 
that consumers have trouble seeing exactly which variety is in front of them—the brand is 
introducing an oval tub, to ensure front-facing displays. In addition to preventing spin, the 
oval shape means that more products can fit into the same shelf space.46
Changes also can make consumers feel like they are receiving something tangible in 
return for paying higher prices, even when the product itself remains untouched. Whether 
true or not, consumers see new packaging and tend to think that the “new” product may be 
worth trying. In honor of its 100th birthday, Morton has redesigned the packaging of over 
100 individual items to give a clean, modern feel.47
Some packaging changes are designed to make the product more recognizable, 
such as L’eggs pantyhose iconic egg-shaped container and Daisy Brand’s redesign of its 
Kraft’s Philadelphia cream cheese changed its packaging from  
round to oval to ensure front-facing displays that can’t spin and  
fits more into the same shelf space.
© Edible images/Alamy
Daisy Brand simplified its cottage 
cheese containers and added colored 
lids to make them more recognizable.
© Daisy Brand
L’eggs pantyhose packaging makes the 
product more recognizable with its 
iconic egg shape.
© McGraw-Hill Education
Morton Salt changed its packaging to celebrate its 
100th ­anniversary.
© Mike Mozart/Flickr/CC BY 2.0

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
361
	
	
cottage cheese containers. Known for using no more than four ingredients in any of its 
cottage cheese products, Daisy Brand redesigned its containers to present a simple, 
Spartan look and paired it with blue lids. The shade of the blue lid varies by the fat 
content of the cottage cheese. Combining a simple container and varying colored lids, 
Daisy Brand expects its new containers will grab consumers’ attention in the dairy case 
and increase sales.48
An interesting recent development in packaging is a move to “sustainable packaging.” 
Sustainable packaging is product packaging that has less of a negative impact on the en-
vironment. Leaders in this area of innovation include Coca-Cola, Microsoft, Waste Man-
agement, Aveda, and Zappos. These firms host a sustainable packaging conference that 
brings together more than 250 firms to discuss new methods to produce environmentally 
responsible packaging that is also cost effective. Ideas from this conference include return-
able packaging, use of 3D printing, and flexible packaging. They have also set up a website 
with information on future conferences and information for the industry at http://www 
.sustainability-in-packaging.com.49
Packaging can also be used in a far subtler way—namely, to help suppliers save costs. 
When the costs of producing a product rise significantly, manufacturers are faced with 
either raising prices—something customers don’t usually like—or reducing the amount 
of product sold in a package. Chobani reduced the size of its Greek yogurt containers by 
12 percent. When customers noticed the decrease, they took to Twitter and Facebook to 
complain about the change.50
Product Labeling
Labels on products and packages provide information the consumer needs for his or her 
purchase decision and consumption of the product. Because they identify the product and 
brand, labels are also an important element of branding and can be used for promotion. The 
information required on them must comply with general and industry-specific laws and 
regulations, including the constituents or ingredients contained in the product, where the 
product was made, directions for use, and/or safety precautions.
Many labeling requirements stem from various laws, including the Federal Trade 
Commission Act of 1914, the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act of 1967, and the Nutrition 
Labeling Act of 1990. Several federal agencies, industry groups, and consumer watchdogs 
carefully monitor product labels. The Food and Drug Administration is the primary federal 
agency that reviews food and package labels and ensures that the claims made by the man-
ufacturer are true.
A product label is much more than just a sticker on the package; it is a communication 
tool. Many of the elements on the label are required by laws and regulations (i.e., ingredi-
ents, fat content, sodium content, serving size, calories), but other elements remain within 
the control of the manufacturer. Ethical and Societal Dilemma 11.2 describes how some 
food companies are responding proactively to the potential of new regulations. In addition, 
the way manufacturers use labels to communicate the benefits of their products to consum-
ers varies with the product. Many products highlight specific ingredients, vitamin content 
or nutrient content (e.g., iron), and country of origin. This focus signals to consumers that 
the product offers these benefits. The importance of the label as a communication tool 
should not be underestimated.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Why do firms change packaging?
2.	 What objectives do product labels fulfill?

362	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Mars Inc., an Unlikely but Powerful Proponent  
of Sugar Labeling on Packagesv
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 11.2
When U.S. regulators recently proposed changes to the 
­nutrition labels on food, a key element was adding a 
new  line to the familiar table that would quantify how 
much  sugar had been added to the product. Although 
the  U.S. Food and Drug Administration does not have a 
set amount that it recommends, the U.S. Dietary Guidelines 
Advisory Committee calls for consumers to obtain no 
more than 10 percent of their daily calories from sugars. 
Observers predicted quick responses from food produc-
ers,  especially those that add substantial sugar to their 
products.
	
They might not have predicted exactly the response that 
Mars, Inc., offered though. The maker of M&M’s, Snickers, and 
other candies rapidly came out in favor of the recommenda-
tions, in contrast with most of its big food peers. Asserting 
that even a candymaker knows that people should not con-
sume too much sugar, a senior executive at Mars noted that 
more transparency about food ingredients was always a good 
thing for consumers, and therefore something that the com-
pany would support. 
	
The regulations would pertain only to added sugars, 
though human bodies process all sugars the same way, 
whether they derive naturally from the ingredients or are 
added during the production process. Some other well-
known companies have yet to announce their reactions to 
the regulations, but their actions suggest they are aware 
of the trend to find ways to reduce sugar intake. For exam-
ple, Nestlé says it will aim to remove all artificial coloring 
and flavors, and Mondelez plans to introduce more  
200-calorie serving sizes for its popular Oreo and Cadbury 
product lines.
	
These moves all refer to products that consumers expect 
will contain sugar—that is, few people are likely to be sur-
prised that M&M’s candies exceed the 10 percent limit, with 
30 grams of sugar in a serving that contains 240 calories. 
But if the nutrition guidelines come to pass, the requirements 
also would apply to products whose sugar content might 
seem less obvious. For example, manufacturers often add 
sugar to products such as yogurts, pasta sauces, crackers, 
and breads. If the added sugar content were evident on the 
labels, consumers might be unpleasantly surprised to realize 
how much had been added to products that they likely as-
sume are relatively healthy. 
	
But another perspective suggests that it won’t matter 
much. The past history of nutrition guidelines suggests that 
consumers rarely pay much attention to the information 
­provided on labels. In that case, requiring packaged food 
companies to change their labels might be an expensive de-
mand that feels like the right thing to do but actually has little 
benefit for society or consumer health.
When U.S. regulators proposed quantifying the amount of sugar that is added to a product 
by printing it on nutrition labels, Mars, Inc., makers of M&M’s  and other candies, supported 
the initiative, noting that transparency about food ingredients is always a good thing for 
consumers.
© Roman Samokhin/123RF.com

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
363
	
	
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Describe the components of a product.
	
	
The product itself is important, but so are its associ-
ated services, such as support or financing. Other 
elements combine to produce the core customer 
value of a product: the brand name, quality level, 
packaging, and additional features.
	
	
Identify the types of consumer products.
	
	
Consumer products tend to be classified into four 
groups: specialty, shopping, convenience, and un-
sought products. Each classification involves a dif-
ferent purchase situation and consumer goal.
	
	
Explain the difference between a product mix’s 
breadth and a product line’s depth.
	
	
Breadth, or variety, entails the number of product 
lines that a company offers. Depth involves the num-
ber of categories within one specific product line.
	
	
Identify the advantages that brands provide 
firms and consumers.
	
	
Brands play important roles in enabling people to 
make purchase decisions more easily and encourag-
ing customer loyalty. For firms specifically, they also 
constitute valuable assets and improve a company’s 
bottom line and help protect against competition.
	
	
Explain the various components of brand equity.
	
	
Brand equity summarizes the value that a brand adds 
or subtracts from the offering’s value. It comprises 
brand awareness, or how many consumers in the mar-
ket are familiar with the brand; brand associations, 
which are the links consumers make between the brand 
and its image; and brand loyalty, which occurs when a 
consumer will only buy that brand’s offer. Brand eq-
uity also encompasses the concept of perceived value, 
which is a subjective measure that consumers develop 
to assess the costs of obtaining the brand.
LO11-1
LO11-2
LO11-3
LO11-4
LO11-5
	
	
Determine the various types of branding strate-
gies used by firms.
	
	
Firms use a variety of strategies to manage their 
brands. First, they decide whether to offer manufac-
turer and/or private-label brands. Second, they have 
a choice of using an overall family brand or a collec-
tion of product line or individual brands. Third, to 
reach new markets or extend their current market, 
they can extend their current brands to new prod-
ucts. Fourth, firms can co-brand with another brand 
to create sales and profit synergies for both. Fifth, 
firms with strong brands have the opportunity to li-
cense their brands to other firms. Finally, as the 
marketplace changes, it is often necessary to reposi-
tion a brand.
	
	
Distinguish between brand extension and line 
­extension.
	
	
Whereas a brand extension uses the same brand 
name for a new product that gets introduced into 
new or the same markets, a line extension is sim-
ply an increase of an existing product line by the 
brand.
	
	
Indicate the advantages of a product’s packaging 
and labeling strategy.
	
	
Similar to brands, packaging and labels help sell the 
product and facilitate its use. The primary package 
holds the product, and its label provides product in-
formation. The secondary package provides addi-
tional consumer information on its label and 
facilitates transportation and storage for retailers as 
well as their customers. Labels have become in-
creasingly important to consumers because they 
supply important safety, nutritional, and product us-
age information.
LO11-6
LO11-7
LO11-8
∙	 actual product,  340
∙	 associated services,  341
∙	 augmented product,  341
∙	 brand association,  351
∙	 brand awareness,  349
∙	 brand dilution,  355
∙	 brand equity,  349
∙	 brand extension,  354
∙	 brand licensing,  357
∙	 brand loyalty,  351
∙	 brand repositioning  
(rebranding),  357
∙	 breadth,  343
∙	 cannibalize,  343
∙	 co-branding,  356
∙	 consumer product,  341
∙	 convenience products/services,  342
∙	 core customer value,  340
∙	 depth,  343
∙	 family brand,  353
∙	 individual brands,  354
∙	 line extension,  355
∙	 manufacturer brands (national 
brands),  353
∙	 perceived value,  351
∙	 predictive analytics,  345
∙	 primary package,  359
Key Terms

364	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
∙	 private-label brands,  353
∙	 product,  340
∙	 product lines,  343
∙	 product mix,  343
∙	 rebranding (brand  
repositioning),  357
∙	 retailer/store brands,  353
∙	 secondary package,  359
∙	 shopping products/services,  341
∙	 specialty products/services,  341
∙	 sustainable packaging,  361
∙	 unsought products/services,  342
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Visit Mac Cosmetic’s website (http://www.maccosmetics.
com). Identify and briefly describe the depth and the 
breadth of its product lines.
2.	 Go to BMW’s website (http://www.bmwusa.com) and 
identify a few recently introduced brand extensions to the 
marketplace. Discuss whether you believe the brand exten-
sion examples you provided will benefit or harm the firm.
Marketing Applications
1.	 L.L.Bean has a 100% satisfaction guaranteed policy on 
all of its products. What features of a pair of pants 
from  L.L.Bean would be part of the actual product and 
which would be part of the associated services?
2.	 Classify each of the following products into either 
­convenience, shopping, specialty, or unsought goods: 
toothpaste, life insurance, Sharp TV, Eggo waffles, let-
tuce, Coach handbag, adidas soccer cleats, furniture.
3.	 Study the following two product mixes. For Product 
Mix 1: A, B, C and D are the lines; and for Product Mix 
2: X, Y and Z are the lines.
	
A	
B	
C	
D
	
a1	
b1	
c1	
d1
	
a2	
b2	
c2	
d2
	
a3	
b3	
c3
Product Mix 1
X	
Y	
Z
x1	
y1	
z1
x2	
y2	
z2
x3	
y3	
z3
x4	
y4
Product Mix 2
	
Which mix has more breadth and why? Which mix is 
deeper and why?
4.	 Suppose you are the coffee buyer for Kroger’s. There is 
a strong corporate initiative to increase store-label mer-
chandise. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of 
offering private-label coffee.
5.	 Identify a specific brand that has developed a high level 
of brand equity. What specific aspects of that brand 
­establish its brand equity?
6.	 Are you loyal to any brands? If so, pick one and explain 
why you believe you are loyal, beyond that you simply 
like the brand. If not, pick a brand that you like and 
­explain how you would feel and act differently toward 
the brand if you were loyal to it.
7.	 Sears owns several store brands, including DieHard, 
Kenmore, and Craftsman. Each brand features many 
models that may appeal to various customer groups. 
Wouldn’t it be easier to just identify them all as Sears? 
Justify your answer.
8.	 Do you think all edible items sold in a grocery store should 
have an ingredient and nutrition label? Consider the per-
spectives of consumers, the manufacturer, and the store.
9.	 You are the brand manager for a firm that makes herbs, 
spices, and other food additives. You have had com-
plaints from some of your retail outlets that they are 
finding empty bottles of pure vanilla extract stashed 
around the store. Apparently, due to the high (35 per-
cent) alcohol content of pure vanilla extract, people are 
grabbing the cute little bottles, having a drink, and get-
ting rid of the evidence. Anecdotal evidence from store 
employees indicates that the majority of the imbibers 
are teenagers. The cost of placing a tamperproof cap on 
the extract is a relatively insignificant percentage of the 
purchase price but will make it more difficult to open, 
particularly for older customers. Also, there has been a 
significant rise in sales to retailers as a result of the 
­vanilla “addicts.” What should you do?
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself
1.	 As the size of retail firms has increased through growth and 
consolidation, more retailers have developed 
 mer-
chandise, which they use to establish a distinctive identity.
a.  generic
b.  copycat
c.  private-label
d.  manufacturer
e.  co-branded

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
365
	
	
2.	 Brand equity is determined by four aspects of a brand. 
Which of the following is not one of the four aspects?
a.  Brand awareness
b.  Perceived value 
c.  Brand associations
d.  Brand quality
e.  Brand loyalty 
(Answers to these questions can be found in the Quiz Your-
self Answer Key section.)
FROM THE COUNTERCULTURE TO THE RUNWAY:  
HOW DID BIRKENSTOCKS BECOME FASHIONABLE?
Hippies wear them. Rebels, dropouts from conventional consumerism, flower 
­children—all images traditionally associated with Birkenstocks, the clunky, cork-soled 
sandals that have been issuing forth from German factories for 240 years. Although the 
company has introduced a few variations, such as a clog or rubberized straps, the look 
of a Birkenstock is immediately recognizable and little changed from its humble 
­beginnings.51
	
All these features suggest it is a poor candidate as a fashion product. Rather than 
changing every season, the footwear has stayed largely the same. Rather than focusing 
on the appearance of the offering, the product design stems solely from considerations 
of comfort and orthopedic safety. Furthermore, they continue to be made in relatively 
expensive German factories rather than having production shipped overseas to lower 
the costs.
	
Considering these factors, it seems strange that Vogue has called Birks “sexy” 
and Glamour named it the shoe of the summer recently. Explanations for this 
newfound popularity with fashion’s elite are varied and unproven. One fashion 
blogger explained that after years of wearing only uncomfortable, tight, high-
heeled shoes, slipping on a pair of Birkenstocks was a life-changing experiment in 
comfort, so she could not imagine going back. Other fashion leaders, including 
Manolo Blahnik—known for his sky-high heels and creative shoe designs—has 
offered his endorsement, asserting that as long as the wearers have nice toes and a 
good pedicure, the sandals can look nice. 
	
The approval from these fashion leaders has led more and more famous peo-
ple to name-drop the brand. In popular magazines that feature interviews with 
trendy celebrities like Keke Palmer and Lorraine Pascale, the Birkenstock name 
pops up as the shoe of preference on set.52
	
The shift certainly did not result from a conscious effort by Birkenstock 
though. Rather, it caught the company somewhat by surprise, because it had been 
doing business the same way it had for more than two centuries. It has a virtually 
nonexistent marketing budget, does not advertise widely, and did not pursue the 
endorsements it has received from fashion trendsetters. Its CEO asserts that the 
popularity is a reaffirmation of a basic, and seemingly outdated, marketing les-
son: Build a great product, and people will seek it out on their own.
	
Still, the company is not immune to the appeal of being known as fashion-
able. Accordingly, it is happy to tout its mentions in popular media on the Birken-
stock website. It also has developed a nice collection of Instagram shots that 
emphasize its diverse assortment options. Along with fashion shots of models 
wearing its silver sandals with high-fashion dresses, it also features hikers in re-
mote locations, sporting its comfortable-looking, well-worn footwear. 
	
The combination of great product and strong branding has been highly effec-
tive. Birkenstock’s sales have grown by anywhere from 40 percent to 50 percent 
over the past year in different regions of the world, and it estimates that it will sell 
20 million pairs annually by 2020. That’s a lot of toes to show.53
Chapter Case Study 
Birkenstock has gone high fashion. Pic-
tured here is British-American actress 
Lily Collins sporting the 240-year-old 
brand on her feet.
© OPC/ZOJ/WENN/Newscom

366	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Questions
1.	
Visit the company website (https://www.birkenstockusa.com/) and identify and de-
scribe the different product lines that it markets.
2.	
Describe its product line breadth.
3.	
Review the different product categories in each of the company’s product lines. 
Which has the greatest depth? Which has the least?
4.	
How has the company positioned its brand? How does it go about communicating its 
position?
Endnotes
	 1.	 John Tierney, “24 Miles, 4 Minutes, and 834 M.P.H., All in One 
Jump,” The New York Times, October 14, 2012, http://www. 
nytimes.com.
	2.	 Catharine Smith, “Red Bull Stratos YouTube Live Stream 
Attracts Record Number Of Viewers (UPDATE),” Huffington 
Post, October 15, 2012, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ 
2012/10/14/red-bull-stratos-youtube_n_1965375.html.
	3.	 John Tierney, “24 Miles, 4 Minutes, and 834 M.P.H., All in One 
Jump,” The New York Times, October 14, 2012, http://www. 
nytimes.com.
	4.	 http://redbullrecords.com/. 
	5.	 https://www.youtube.com/channel/
UC7qn3NBI3XV7d8I3cvZeABw.
	6.	 http://www.trekbikes.com.
	 7.	 Sharon Ng, “Cultural Orientation and Brand Dilution: Impact of 
Motivation Level and Extension Typicality,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 47, no. 1 (February 2010), pp. 186–98.
	8.	 Michael A. Wiles, Neil A. Morgan, and Lopo L. Rego, “The Effect 
of Brand Acquisition and Disposal on Stock Returns,” Journal 
of Marketing 76, no. 1 (2012), pp. 38–58.
	9.	 E.J. Schultz, “Spread Some Bacon on that Bagel: Kraft’s New 
Philly Flavor,” Advertising Age, October 8, 2014, http://adage.
com. 
	10.	 Jack Neff, “As P&G Looks to Cut More Than Half Its Brands, 
Which Should Go?” Advertising Age, August 4, 2014, http:// 
adage.com. 
	11.	 Darren Rovell, “Source: Bryce Harper Signs Biggest 
Endorsement Deal for MLB Player,” ESPN, May 4, 2016.
12.	 Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management: Building, 
Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2012); David A. Aaker, Building Strong 
Brands (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012).
	13.	 This discussion of the advantages of strong brands is adapted 
from Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management: Building, 
Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2012)
	14.	 Kevin Lane Keller and Donald R. Lehmann, “Assessing Long-
Term Brand Potential,” Journal of Brand Management 17 
(2009), pp. 6–17.
	15.	 “McDonald’s Just Won a Big Trademark Turf Fight,” Reuters,  
July 5, 2016.
	16.	 http://www.interbrand.com. The net present value of the 
­earnings over the next 12 months is used to calculate the value.
	17.	 David Aaker, Brand Portfolio Strategy: Creating Relevance, 
Differentiation, Energy, Leverage, and Clarity (New York: Free 
Press, 2004); David A. Aaker, Managing Brand Equity (New 
York: Free Press, 1991).
	18.	Rong Huang and Emine Sarigöllü, “How Brand Awareness 
Relates to Market Outcome, Brand Equity, and the Marketing 
Mix,” Journal of Business Research 65, no. 1 (2012), pp. 92–99; 
Lopo L. Rego, Matthew T. Billett, and Neil A. Morgan, 
“Consumer-Based Brand Equity and Firm Risk,” Harvard 
Business Review 73, no. 6 (November 2009), pp. 47–60; 
Natalie Mizik and Robert Jacobson, “Valuing Branded 
Businesses,” Harvard Business Review 73, no. 6 
(November 2009), pp. 137–53.
	19.	David Kiefaber, “Activia Shows That Inside Shakira’s Famous 
Stomach Are . . . More Shakiras!,” Adweek, March 18, 2014, 
http://www.adweek.com.
	20.	Stuart Elliott, “New Campaign Markets Activia to Wider 
Audience,” The New York Times, January 5, 2014.
	21.	Stephanie Eckart, “Target’s Fall Collaboration Is Full of Plaid,”  
nymag.com, August 13, 2015.
	22.	Tim Nudd, “Zoinks! State Farm Saves Scooby-Doo and the 
Gang in Groovy Animated Spot,” Adweek, October 29, 2013, 
http://www.adweek.com.
	23.	http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary. 
aspx?dLetter=B.
	24.	Lien Lamey et al., “How Business Cycles Contribute to Private-
Label Success: Evidence from the United States and Europe,” 
Journal of Marketing 71 (January 2007), pp. 1–15; PLMA 
(2009), http://www.plmainternational.com.
	25.	“Kroger Cranks Up Store-Brand Manufacturing, NBCNews.
com, October 7, 2009.
	26.	http://www.kraftfoodsgroup.com/brands/index.aspx. 
	27.	The distinction between brand and line extensions is clarified 
in Barry Silverstein, “Brand Extensions: Risks and Rewards,” 
Brandchannel.com, January 5, 2009.
	28.	See Alokparna Basu Monga and Deborah Roedder John, 
“What Makes Brands Elastic? The Influence of Brand Concept 
and Styles of Thinking on Brand Extension Evaluation,” Journal 
of Marketing 74, no. 3 (May 2010), pp. 80–92; Thorsen Hennig-
Thurau, Mark B. Houson, and Torsten Heitjans, “Conceptualizing 
and Measuring the Monetary Value of Brand Extensions: The 
Case of Motion Pictures,” Journal of Marketing 73, no. 6 
(November 2009), pp. 167–83; Rajeev Batra, Peter Lenk, and 
Michel Wedel, “Brand Extension Strategy Planning: Empirical 
Estimation of Brand–Category Personality Fit and Atypicality,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 47, no. 2 (April 2010),  
pp. 335–47.
	29.	David Aaker, Aaker on Branding: 20 Principles That Drive 
Success (Morgan James, 2014); David A. Aaker, Building 
Strong Brands (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012).
	30.	Rebecca R. Ruiz, “Luxury Cars Imprint Their Brands on Goods 
from Cologne to Clothing,” The New York Times, February 20, 
2015, http://www.nytimes.com.

	
PRODUCT, BRANDING, AND PACKAGING DECISIONS  CHAPTER ELEVEN	
367
	
	
	31.	Rosellina Ferraro, Amna Kirmani, and Ted Matherly, “Look at 
Me! Look at Me! Conspicuous Brand Usage, Self-Brand 
Connection, and Dilution,” Journal of Marketing Research 50, 
no. 4 (August 2013), pp. 477–88; Sanjay Sood and Kevin Lane 
Keller, “The Effects of Brand Name Structure on Brand 
Extension Evaluations and Parent Brand Dilution,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 49, no. 3 (June 2012), pp. 373–82.
	32.	Rosellina Ferraro, Amna Kirmani, and Ted Matherly, “Look at 
Me! Look at Me! Conspicuous Brand Usage, Self-Brand 
Connection, and Dilution,” Journal of Marketing Research 50, 
no. 4 (August 2013), pp. 477–88; Sharon Ng, “Cultural 
Orientation and Brand Dilution: Impact of Motivation Level and 
Extension Typicality,” Journal of Marketing Research 47, no. 1 
(February 2010), pp. 186–98.
	33.	Rebecca R. Ruiz, “Luxury Cars Imprint Their Brands on Goods 
from Cologne to Clothing,” The New York Times, February 20, 
2015, http://www.nytimes.com.
	34.	Shané Schutte, “6 Worst Brand Extensions from Famous 
Companies,” Real Business, June 16, 2014, http://realbusiness.
co.uk/article/26961-6-worst-brand-extensions-from-famous- 
companies; Emily Marchak, “The Pros and Cons of Sub-
Branding and Brand Extension,” Brogan & Partners,  
October 13, 2015, http://brogan.com/blog/pros-and-cons- 
sub-branding-and-brand-extension. 
	35.	Susan Spiggle, Hang T. Nguyen, and Mary Caravella. “More 
Than Fit: Brand Extension Authenticity,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 49, no. 6 (2012), pp. 967–83; Franziska Völckner et 
al., “The Role of Parent Brand Quality for Service Brand 
Extension Success,” Journal of Service Research 13, no. 4 
(2010), pp. 379–96.
	36.	Guoqun Fu, Jiali Ding, and Riliang Qu, “Ownership Effects in 
Consumers’ Brand Extension Evaluations,” Journal of Brand 
Management 16 (2009), pp. 221–33; Christoph Burmann, 
Sabrina Zeplin, and Nicola Riley, “Key Determinants of Internal 
Brand Management Success: An Exploratory Empirical 
Analysis,” Journal of Brand Management 16 (2009),  
pp. 264–84.
	37.	Kim Bhasin, “For Kate Spade, a Move Downmarket Goes Bust,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 5, 2015.
	38.	http://www.marriott.com/corporateinfo/glance.mi.
	39.	David A. Aaker, Building Strong Brands (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2012).
	40.	Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management: Building, 
Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2012)
	41.	Rachel Abrams and Gregory Schmidt, “Superhero Movies 
Create Opportunity for Toymakers,” The New York Times, 
February 13, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com.
	42.	Ibid.
	43.	Mukesh Kumar Mishra and Dibyendu Choudhury, “The Effect  
of Repositioning on Brand Personality: An Empirical Study on 
BlackBerry Mobile Phones,” IUP Journal of Brand Management 
10, no. 2 (2013); Pascale G. Quester and Nathalie Fleck, “Club 
Med: Coping with Corporate Brand Evolution,” Journal of 
Product & Brand Management 19, no. 2 (2010), pp. 94–102.
	44.	John Grossman, “A Sweet Breakfast Memory that Connects 
with the Wrong Market,” The New York Times, November 12, 
2014; John Grossman, “Should Cow Wow Sell to Little Children 
or Big Children,” The New York Times, November 12, 2014; 
John Grossman, “Cow Wow Picks a Target Audience for its 
Flavored Milk,” The New York Times, November 19, 2014,  
http://www.nytimes.com. 
	45.	E.J. Schultz, “Corn and Sugar Industries Battle in Court over Ad 
Claims,” Advertising Age, November 3, 2015. 
	46.	Schultz, “Spread Some Bacon on that Bagel: Kraft’s New Philly 
Flavor.” 
	47.	“Morton Salt Girl Birthday Brings Brand Refresh,” Packaging 
World, March 12, 2014, http://www.packworld.com.
	48.	“Daisy Updates Cottage Cheese Pack,” Packaging World, 
March 13, 2014, http://www.packworld.com.
	49.	“Microsoft, Waste Management, The Coca-Cola Company and 
More at Sustainability in Packaging 2014,” Sustainability in 
Packaging, January 6, 2014.
	50.	Kate Little, “Chobani Yogurt Is Latest Victim in Shrinking 
Grocery Case,” CNBC, January 4, 2014, http://www.cnbc.com.
	51.	Rebecca Mead, “Sole Cycle,” The New Yorker, March 23, 2015. 
	52.	Birkenstock USA, “Press,” https://www.birkenstockusa.com/
press. 
	53.	Ellen Emmerentze Jervell, “Birkenstock Doesn’t Care If 
Fashionistas Stop Wearing Its Sandals,” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 11, 2015. 
	 i.	 Mark Clothier, “The Downside of Low-End Luxury Cars,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, July 17, 2014, http://www. 
businessweek.com. 
	 ii.	 Mark van Rijmenam, “Macy’s Is Changing the Shopping 
Experience with Big Data Analytics,” DataFloq, March 14,  
2014, https://datafloq.com/read/macys-changing-shopping- 
experience-big-data-analyt/286; Nicole Marie Melton, “Macy’s 
Boosts Web Sales, Email Marketing with Predictive Analytics,” 
FierceRetailT, May 14, 2014, http://www.fierceretail.com/ 
retailit/story/macys-boosts-web-sales-email-marketing-predictive- 
analytics/2014-05-14; Joe Keenan, “Customer Retention: Macy’s 
Uses Predictive Analytics to Grow Customer Spend,” Retail Online 
Integration, August 2014, http://www.retailonlineintegration.
com/article/macys-uses-predictive-analytics-grow-customer- 
spend/1.
	iii.	 Tiffany Hsu, “Coca-Cola Anti-Obesity Promises Include No 
Advertising to Kids,” Los Angeles Times, May 8, 2013, http:// 
articles.latimes.com; Mike Esterl and Paul Ziobro, “Coke to Limit 
Ads to Kids, Push Diet Drinks,” The Wall Street Journal, http://
online.wsj.com.
	iv.	 Mark Wilson, “American Airlines Rebrands Itself, and America 
Along with It,” Fast Company, January 22, 2012.
	 v.	 Annie Gasparro, “M&M Maker Wants Labels for Added Sugar,” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 8, 2015.

Y
ou may not have heard of Xiaomi yet, but that is 
likely to change soon. The company appeared on 
the scene only in 2014, and within a few years 
was already the fifth-largest smartphone maker 
in the world.1 Most of its products still sell in its home market 
of China, but it has expanded to 58 countries,2 with expecta-
tions to move into the United States, Eastern Europe, and 
Latin America.3 Though the start-up firm has adopted a 
unique path to growth that its founder has insisted is the key 
to its future success, even as critics suggest it will need to 
become far more conventional if it is to get substantially 
larger. The strategy began with its product: offer smart-
phones comparable to those produced by rivals such as 
Apple and Samsung, but at approximately half the price. 
With this introduction, Xiaomi emerged as the most valuable 
start-up in the world, with an initial valuation of $46 billion. 
But part of the strength of the brand was that its 
new product offerings have been especially popular 
DEVELOPING  
NEW PRODUCTS
CHAPTER 12
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO12-1	 Identify the reasons firms create new products.
	LO12-2	 Describe the different groups of adopters articulated by the diffusion of innovation theory.
	LO12-3	 Describe the various stages involved in developing a new product or service.
	LO12-4	 Explain the product life cycle.

among “regular” consumers and young purchasers, many 
of whom simply cannot afford the high prices demanded 
for more traditional smartphone brands. These consum-
ers appreciate various aspects of the newly introduced 
Mi phones: their equivalent functionality, their lower price, 
and their added benefits in the form of value-added social 
events and services provided to customers of the new 
company. For example, Xiaomi hosts parties every few 
weeks in different locations across China, inviting hun-
dreds of customers to each. These customers are not 
necessarily those with the most expensive plans; one 
guest arrived at a party at a high-end nightclub still in his 
work clothes, noting that he had worked 29 out of the 
previous 30 days.4
In addition to providing social events to go along with 
their products, senior executives at Xiaomi answer cus-
tomers’ online questions personally and commit a certain 
amount of time each week to meet with visitors. When 
users provide assistance to the company, such as 
­answering additional questions in fan forums, Xiaomi 
shows its appreciation by sending them gifts and honor-
ing them with VIP titles. In return, these dedicated fans 
spread the word about the company far and wide, which 
has meant that Xiaomi seemingly did not need to spend 
much on advertising to get its products to spread.
But then an interesting thing happened: Faced with 
remarkable growth and dedicated to the proposition that 
it had to make its customers feel embraced and valued, 
Xiaomi struggled to maintain its innovation pace.5 
Furthermore, with its focus on keeping prices low, Xiaomi 
did not aggressively patent its new products. Therefore, 
as it sought to expand beyond China, it struggled to avoid 
potential lawsuits or copycats in other nations. For exam-
ple, it initiated forays into the Philippines and Malaysia but 
has yet to earn any more than about 5 percent market 
share in each of these markets.6 Growth in India has 
been somewhat stronger, where fans have enjoyed and 
appreciated the product offerings.
© Bloomberg/Getty Images

370
Few three-letter words are more exciting than new. It brings forth an image of freshness, 
adventure, and excitement. Yet new also is a complex term when it comes to market offer-
ings because it might mean adding something new to an existing product, introducing a 
flavor never offered before, or relying on different packaging that provides added value. But 
the most exhilarating type of new product is something never seen before. Thousands of 
patent applications pursue this elusive prize: a successful and truly innovative new product.
To think about how once-new products have changed the world, imagine living 
200 years ago: You cook meals on a stove fueled by coal or wood; you write out homework 
by hand (if you are lucky enough to attend school) and by candlelight. To get to school, you 
hike along unpaved roads to reach a small, cold, basic classroom with just a few classmates 
who listen to a lecture from a teacher writing on a blackboard.
Today, you finish your homework on a laptop computer with word processing software 
that appears to have a mind of its own and can correct your spelling automatically. Your cli-
mate-controlled room has ample electric light. While you work on your laptop, you also talk 
with a friend using the hands-free headset of your wireless phone. As you drive to school in 
your car, you pick up fast food from a convenient drive-through window while browsing and 
listening to your personal selection of songs playing through your car speakers, connected 
wirelessly to your iPhone. Your friend calls to discuss a slight change to the homework, so 
you pull over to grab your iPhone, make the necessary change to your assignment, and e-mail 
it from your smartphone to your professor. When you arrive at school, you sit in a 200-person 
classroom, where you can plug in your laptop, take notes on your iPad, or digitally record the 
lecture. The professor adds notes on the day’s PowerPoint presentations using her tablet com-
puter. You have already downloaded the PowerPoint presentations and add similar notes 
through your own laptop. After class, to complete your planning for a last-minute party, you 
send out a Facebook invitation to your friends and ask for responses to get a head count. You 
then text your roommate, telling her to get food and drinks for the right number of people, 
which she orders through an online grocer that will deliver later in the day.
Our lives are defined by the many new products and services developed through scien-
tific and technological advances and by the added features included in products that we 
have always used. In this second chapter dealing with the first P in the marketing mix 
(product), we continue our discussion from the preceding chapter and explore how compa-
nies add value to product and service offerings through innovation. We also look at how 
firms develop new products and services on their own. We conclude the chapter with an 
examination of how new products and services get adopted by the market and how firms 
can change their marketing mix as the product or service moves through its life cycle.
In response, Xiaomi notes that a key effort is “to 
understand the fans and to make friends with them, in-
stead of talking as a brand.”7 The founder and CEO Lei 
Jun even has asserted that his goal is less to build mar-
ket share and more to introduce “thrilling” new prod-
ucts and make sure that Xiaomi earns the continued 
support of its loyal fans.8 For about a year, Xiaomi had 
not introduced any new offerings, so when it an-
nounced its Mi5 phone in early 2016, consumers got 
pretty excited. The latest version features a better cam-
era, a fingerprint sensor, a cool look, and updated pro-
cessing capabilities. Although many of these options 
already are available in Apple and Samsung products, 
the Mi5 is innovative in that it still brings these offerings 
to customers at approximately half the price of the 
other brands’ options.
 In addition, Xiaomi has filed for approximately 3,600 
patents recently, mostly in China but also in several inter-
national markets. It is determined that it can bring “the 
good life” to consumers across the developing world by 
offering them not just smartphones but also technologi-
cally advanced light bulbs and television sets at reason-
able prices.9 Lei also has made a point of encouraging 
Xiaomi researchers to renew their focus on “cool stuff,” 
from virtual reality to robotics to potentially developing a 
new and proprietary processing chip.10

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
371
	
	
WHY DO FIRMS CREATE NEW PRODUCTS?
New market offerings provide value to firms as well as to customers. But the degree to 
which they do so depends on how new they really are. When we say a “new product/­
service,” we don’t necessarily mean that the 
market offer has never existed before. 
Completely new-to-the-market products rep-
resent fewer than 10 percent of all new prod-
uct introductions each year. It is more useful 
to think of the degree of newness or innova-
tiveness on a continuum from truly new-­ 
to-the-world—as Fitbits are—to slightly re-
positioned, such as when Kraft’s Capri Sun 
brand of ready-to-drink beverages were re-
packaged in a bigger pouch to appeal to teens.
Regardless of where on the continuum a 
new product lies, firms have to innovate. 
­Innovation refers to the process by which 
ideas are transformed into new offerings, in-
cluding products, services, processes, and 
branding concepts that will help firms grow. 
Without innovation and its resulting new prod-
ucts and services, firms would have only two 
choices: continue to market current products to 
current customers or take the same product to 
another market with similar customers.
Although innovation strategies may not always work in the short run—some estimates 
indicate that only about 3 percent of new products actually succeed—various overriding 
and long-term reasons compel firms to continue introducing new products and services, as 
the following sections describe.
Changing Customer Needs
When they add products, ser-
vices, and processes to their 
offerings, firms can create 
and deliver value more effec-
tively by satisfying the chang-
ing needs of their current and 
new customers or by keeping 
customers from getting bored 
with the current product or 
service offering. Sometimes 
companies can identify prob-
lems and develop products or 
services that customers never 
knew they needed. When 
Apple first introduced its 
handheld smartphone with 
advanced camera capabilities, 
virtually no market research 
provided any hint that con-
sumers wanted one. But with 
the fervent belief that people 
would enjoy the convenience 
of snapping and reviewing a 
LO12-1	
Identify the reasons 
firms create new 
products.
Fitbits are new-to-the-world. How in the world did we ever get by without them?
© Cultura RM/Alamy
The iPhone is an easily accessi-
ble, affordable, easy-to-use tool 
that has changed the phone, 
camera, communication, and 
technology markets forever.
© Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock RF

372	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
photo or getting online at any particular moment, the company’s founder and visionary 
leader, Steve Jobs, insisted on developing the iPhone as an easily accessible, affordable, 
easy-to-use tool that consumers could enjoy11—and thus changed the phone, camera, com-
munication, and technology markets forever.
In other cases, customers enter new stages in their lives that intensify their demand for 
such innovations. For example, as life expectancy increases due to technology and health 
care advances, the senior population is increasing at unprecedented rates. The World 
Health Organization says that 2 billion people will be older than 60 years of age by 2050, 
and yet most inventors are ignoring this growing market segment. The 91-year-old inventor 
Barbara Beskind therefore has taken it upon herself to improve one of the most common 
items used by the elderly: the cane. Traditional canes require the user to lean on them, pro-
moting poor posture. Beskind’s walking sticks instead have rockers on the bottom that us-
ers can push off against, and they are made from modified ski poles. In turn, they promote 
a proper posture and a more natural walking gait.12
On the other end of the age spectrum, the market for product and services targeting 
parents of infants, seems relatively stable, in the sense that most products have been around 
for years. But Huggies recognized that parents of toddlers often struggled to get their wrig-
gly babies to stay still for diaper changes, so it introduced Little Movers Slip-Ons, to help 
make the change a fun game rather than a frustrating struggle. The per-diaper price is about 
16 cents more than a regular diaper, but Huggies knows that if it can appeal to the rela-
tively loyal parent segment (approximately 55 percent of whom nearly always buy their 
preferred brand), its innovation can help it maintain market share.13
How can a walking stick be improved? Barbara Beskind, a 91-year-old 
inventor, did it by developing walking sticks that have rockers on the 
bottom that users can push against for better posture and a more 
natual gait.
© IDEO
Huggies Little Movers Slip-On diapers 
are designed to make life easier for 
parents.
© Jemal Countess/Getty Images

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
373
	
	
Market Saturation
The longer a product exists in the marketplace, the more likely 
it is that the market will become saturated. Without new prod-
ucts or services, the value of the firm will ultimately decline.14 
Imagine, for example, if car companies simply assumed and 
expected that people would keep their cars until they stopped 
running. If that were the case, there would be no need to come 
up with new and innovative models; companies could just 
stick with the models that sell well. But few consumers actu-
ally keep the same car until it stops running. Even those who 
want to stay with the same make and model often want some-
thing new, just to add some variety to their lives. Therefore, 
car companies revamp their models every year, whether with 
new features like advanced GPS or a more powerful engine or 
by redesigning the entire look of the vehicle. The firms sustain 
their growth by getting consumers excited about the new looks and new features, prompting 
many car buyers to exchange their old vehicle years before its functional life is over. 
Saturated markets can also offer opportunities for a company that is willing to 
adopt a new process or mentality. At one point in time, mass marketers would not 
even consider entering a market that they believed would not earn at least $50 mil-
lion. But General Mills is looking to niche markets for its future growth. Whereas 
only 1 percent of the U.S. population suffers from celiac disease—a condition in 
which ingested gluten damages the digestive system—a much higher percentage of 
U.S. consumers say they want to reduce or eliminate gluten, a wheat protein, from 
their diet. As awareness increases, those percentages are growing, such that the U.S. 
market for gluten-free products could be broadly worth up to $10 billion.15 General 
Mills has created more than 600 gluten-free products, including variations on its regu-
lar offerings, like Chex cereals and Nestle Gluten Free Cornflakes, as well as Larabars 
and Betty Crocker pancake mixes.
Managing Risk through Diversity
Through innovation, firms often create a broader portfolio of products, which help them 
diversify their risk and enhance firm value better than a single product can.16 If some prod-
ucts in a portfolio perform poorly, others may do well. Firms with multiple products can 
better withstand external shocks like changes in consumer preferences or intensive compet-
itive activity. For this reason, firms such as Keebler offer many variations of its basic prod-
uct, cookies, including Animals, Chips Deluxe, E.L. Fudge, Gripz, Sandies, Vanilla 
Wafers, and Vienna Fingers. This diversification enables Keebler to enjoy more consistent 
performance than it would with just one kind of cookie.
General Mills provides a num-
ber of gluten-free options 
at www.chex.com/recipes/ 
gluten-free.
© Bruce Bisping/Zuma Press/Newscom
The Keebler line’s risk is less-
ened by offering many varia-
tions of its basic product, 
cookies.
© Michael J. Hruby

374	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Adding Value 12.1
No Fairy Godmother Needed: How Disney Is Leveraging Its 
Inventory of Animated Films to Develop New Live-Action Productsi
While its partner company Pixar continues to break new 
ground in animated movies, Walt Disney Pictures is taking a 
different path. Rather than keep making the sort of well-
known, traditional animations that essentially created the 
movie studio, it is reformulating those tales as live-action films.
One of the first examples was Cinderella, whose live-action 
version hewed closely to Disney’s 1950 animated version, from 
the coach that turns into a pumpkin to the sky blue color of 
Cinderella’s dress at the ball. The goal in making the new version 
with actors instead of animation was to pay tribute to and reso-
nate with the nostalgic original while still offering something new. 
That is, the studio’s new product strategy is strongly premised in 
the safe familiarity of well-known and beloved characters. 
The company has embraced this potentially risky strategy 
wholeheartedly, with many other titles in development or hav-
ing been recently introduced with similar cartoon-to-live action 
transformations, including The Jungle Book, Beauty and the 
Beast, Dumbo, and Pete’s Dragon. It has already introduced a 
sequel to Alice in Wonderland with its Alice Through the 
Looking Glass film.
The source material in many of these cases is both a bene-
fit and a threat to Disney. Because it made fairy tale films in the 
early days of movies, it has a strong reputation in this market. 
When people think Sleeping Beauty, they are often imagining 
the Disney version. Thus, by releasing Maleficent, Disney could 
count on people’s knowledge of its previous movie while ex-
panding its reach to more adult audiences.
However, since fairy tales are in the public domain, anyone 
can make a movie based on the story. Thus Universal Pictures 
has a new version of The Little Mermaid in development, and 
the movie it ultimately releases does not have to follow the 
Disney version of the story in any way. This risk may explain 
Disney’s choice to remake some other childhood favorites, 
such as Mary Poppins, for which it owns actual copyrights.
To maximize the profitability of the new films, Disney also 
leverages its existing access to its target demographic. Store 
displays of popular Frozen toys featured new Cinderella para-
phernalia immediately adjacent. Before the movie opened, 
Disney theme parks played up Cinderella’s re-emergence. And 
the trailers preceding Disney movies in theaters for months 
before its release encouraged viewers to consider the new 
live-action fairy tale for their future entertainment needs.
The goal is to keep audiences—especially young children 
who love fairy tales—engaged with Disney films, products, and 
theme park attractions. In this light, one Disney executive ex-
plains, “We view the fairy tale space as our arena.”
Disney creates new products out of old ones by recycling earlier movies like Alice in Wonder-
land into new ones like Alice Through the Looking Glass.
© Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures/Photofest
Fashion Cycles
In industries that rely on fashion trends and experience short product life cycles—includ-
ing apparel, arts, books, and software markets—most sales come from new products. For 
example, a motion picture generates most of its theater, DVD, and cable TV revenues 
within a year of its release. If the same selection of books were always for sale, with no 
new titles, there would be no reason to buy more. But as Adding Value 12.1 explains, new 

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
375
	
	
versions of familiar titles also can be a 
powerful means to prompt consumers to 
purchase: Having loved the cartoon ver-
sion of Cinderella as small children, 
teens and adults might find a new prod-
uct prompted by a new live-action 
movie of substantial interest. Consumers 
of computer software and video games 
demand new offers because once they 
have beaten the game, they want to be 
challenged by another game or experi-
ence the most recent version, as the re-
markable sales of successive versions of 
the Call of Duty game exemplify.17 In 
the case of apparel, fashion designers 
produce entirely new product selections 
a few times per year.
Improving Business 
Relationships
New products do not always target end consumers; sometimes they function to improve 
relationships with suppliers. For example, Kraft, the maker of Capri Sun, found that its 
lemonade flavor was selling poorly. Through a little market research, it realized that the 
reason was the placement of the packages in pallets. Because it was placed at the bottom of 
the stack in pallets, lemonade was the last flavor retailers would sell. By changing and in-
novating its pallet, Kraft offered chimney stacks for each flavor, enabling the retail stockers 
to reach whichever flavor they needed easily. Sales of Capri Sun’s lemonade improved by 
162 percent.18
Even if they succeed in innovating and creating new products, new-to-the-world 
products are not adopted by everyone at the same time. Rather, they diffuse or spread 
through a population in a process known as diffusion of innovation, which will be dis-
cussed next.
Video games like Call of Duty 
Advanced Warfare are “fash-
ionable” because consumers 
demand new versions. Once 
they “beat” the game, they want 
to be challenged with a new 
experience.
© Imeh Akpanudosen/Getty Images
DIFFUSION OF INNOVATION
The process by which the use of an innovation—whether a product, a service, or a 
­process—spreads throughout a market group, over time and across various categories of 
adopters, is referred to as diffusion of innovation.19 The theory surrounding diffusion of 
innovation helps marketers understand the rate at which consumers are likely to adopt a 
new product or service. It also gives them a means to identify potential markets for their 
new products or services and predict their potential sales, even before they introduce the 
innovations.20
Truly new product introductions—that is, new-to-the-world products that create new 
­markets—can add tremendous value to firms. These new products, also called pioneers or 
breakthroughs, establish completely new markets or radically change the rules of competition 
LO12-2	
Describe the different 
groups of adopters 
articulated by the 
diffusion of innovation 
theory.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the reasons firms innovate?

376	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
as well as consumer preferences in a market.21 The Apple iPod is a pioneer product. Not 
only did it change the way people listen to music but it also created an entirely new in-
dustry devoted to accessories such as cases, ear buds, docking stations, and speakers. 
Although Apple offers many of these accessories itself, other companies have jumped on 
the bandwagon, ensuring that you can strap your iPod to your arm while on the move or 
insert it into the base of a desk lamp equipped with speakers to get music and light from 
your desk. And don’t forget: The iPod also launched perhaps the most notable other re-
cent pioneer, the iPhone, along with the innovative iTunes service, the iPod Touch, and 
the iPad.22
Pioneers have the advantage of being first movers; as the first to create the market or 
product category, they become readily recognizable to consumers and thus establish a 
commanding and early market share lead. Studies also have found that market pioneers can 
command a greater market share over a longer time period than later entrants can.23
Yet not all pioneers succeed. In many cases, imitators capitalize on the weak-
nesses of pioneers and subsequently gain advantage in the market. Because pioneering 
products and brands face the uphill task of establishing the market alone, they pave the 
way for followers, who can spend less marketing effort creating demand for the prod-
uct line and focus directly on creating demand for their specific brand. Also, because 
the pioneer is the first product in the market, it often has a less sophisticated design 
and may be priced relatively higher, leaving room for better and lower-priced compet-
itive products.
An important question to ask is, Why is the failure rate for new products so high? One 
of the main reasons is the failure to assess the market properly by neglecting to do appro-
priate product testing, targeting the wrong segment, and/or poor positioning.24 Firms may 
also overextend their abilities or competencies by venturing into products or services that 
are inconsistent with their brand image and/or value proposition. We discuss some infa-
mous product failures in Exhibit 12.1.
As the diffusion of innovation curve in Exhibit 12.2 shows, the number of users of 
an innovative product or service spreads through the population over a period of time 
and generally follows a bell-shaped curve. A few people buy the product or service at 
first, then more buy, and finally fewer people buy as the degree of the diffusion slows. 
These purchasers can be divided into five groups according to how soon they buy the 
product after it has been introduced: innovators, early adopters, early majority, late 
­majority, and laggards.
Apple has released several pio-
neer products in recent years, 
including the iPhone.
© Stephen Lam/Reuters
Clairol’s Touch of Yogurt 
Shampoo failed because 
consumers didn’t like the 
idea of washing their 
hair with yogurt.
© GfK Custom Research, LLC.

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
377
	
	
Innovators
Innovators are those buyers who want to be the first on the block to have the new product 
or service. These buyers enjoy taking risks and are regarded as highly knowledgeable. You 
probably know someone who is an innovator—or perhaps you are one for a particular prod-
uct or service category. For example, the person who stood in line overnight to be sure to get 
a ticket for the very first showing of the latest superhero movie is an innovator in that con-
text. Those consumers who already fly drones off their back porches are likely innovators 
too, a development covered in Ethical and Societal Dilemma 12.1. Firms that invest in the 
latest technology, either to use in their products or services or to make the firm more effi-
cient, also are considered innovators. Typically, innovators keep themselves very well in-
formed about the product category by subscribing to trade and specialty magazines, talking 
to other experts, visiting product-specific blogs and forums that describe the coolest new 
products,25 and attending product-related forums, seminars, and special events. Yet innova-
tors represent only about 2.5 percent of the total market for any new product or service.
Source:  DailyFinance.com, “Top 25 Biggest Product Flops of All Time,” http://www.dailyfinance.com/photos/top-25-biggest-product-flops-of-all-time/3662621.
Product
Concept
Why It Failed
New Coke
In response to growing market pressure, Coca-Cola 
launched a reformulated version of its classic cola in 
1985.
Coke underestimated the consumers’ affinity to the origi-
nal formulation and their unwillingness to change. It was 
pulled from shelves three months after its introduction.
Sony Betamax
In 1975, Sony bet big on the Betamax, one of the first ever 
mass-produced home video recording systems.
Unfortunately, the next year, JVC launched the VHS player, 
ensuring a format war similar to the Blu-ray and HD-DVD 
format wars of 2006.
Harley-Davidson 
Perfume
After being successful with lighters and T-shirts bearing 
the Harley logo, Harley-Davidson branched out into its own 
line of perfumes associated with the motorcycle lifestyle.
Although lighters and T-shirts may resonate with the 
Harley image, customers were not as attracted to smelling 
like a motorcycle.
Bic Underwear
Bic is well known for its disposable products: pens, light-
ers, and razors. Capitalizing on its ability to cross product 
categories, Bic began producing underwear.
The concept of buying underwear from a company well 
known for disposable pens was confusing and off-putting 
to consumers.
Bottled Water  
for Pets
Trying to capitalize on the pet pampering craze, makers 
of Thirsty Cat! and Thirsty Dog! launched a line of bottled 
water for cats and dogs. No longer did owners need to 
give their pet tap water; instead they could give them a 
daily pet drink in flavors such as Crispy Beef, Tangy Fish, 
and Grilled Chicken.
Although people do indeed desire to pamper their pets, 
the idea of purchasing bottled water for them never 
caught on. The associations generated by their flavors, 
such as tangy fish-tasting water, probably did not help 
either.
Frito-Lay  
Lemonade
To Frito-Lay, lemonade seemed like a reasonable-enough 
brand extension. After all, the high salt content of corn 
chips often leads consumers to search out something to 
quench their thirst.
Associating a salty snack with a supposed thirst quencher 
did not go over well.
Kellogg’s Breakfast 
Mates
Capitalizing on the convenience market, Kellogg’s Break-
fast Mates launched a line of cereal products in 1998 that 
came with cereal, spoon, and milk.
Sometimes a good idea is poorly executed. The milk was 
usually warm because it did not require refrigeration and the 
product was not child-friendly, making its appeal very limited.
Apple Newton
Launched in 1993 with a price tag of more than $700, the 
Apple Newton was one of the first PDAs, which then led 
the way for the Palm Pilot, BlackBerry, and iPad.
The Newton concept was ahead of its time. Unfortunately,  
due to its bulky size and ridicule by comedians, the 
­Newton lasted only until 1998.
Colgate Kitchen 
Entrees
Colgate launched a line of frozen dinners. Apparently the 
idea was that consumers would enjoy eating a Colgate meal 
and then using Colgate on their toothbrush afterward.
The association of toothpaste with a chicken stir-fry was 
something customers did not find appetizing.
Clairol’s Touch of 
Yogurt Shampoo
Clairol marketed a shampoo with a touch of yogurt to 
improve hair quality.
Consumers were not enticed with the idea of washing 
their hair with yogurt, something Clairol should have 
known after its Look of Buttermilk failed in test markets a 
few years earlier.
E X H I B I T  12.1
Illustrative Product Failures

378	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
These innovators are crucial to the success of any new product or service, though, 
because they help the product gain market acceptance. Through talking about and spread-
ing positive word of mouth about the new product, they prove instrumental in bringing in 
the next adopter category, known as early adopters.26
Early Adopters
The second subgroup that begins to use a product or service innovation is early adopters. 
They generally don’t like to take as much risk as innovators do but instead wait and pur-
chase the product after careful review. Thus, this market waits for the first reviews of the 
latest movie before purchasing a ticket, though they likely still go a week or two after it 
Early adopters for Samsung 
65 Curve televisions typically 
wait for reviews before they 
purchase.
© Photo by Diane Bondareff/Invision for 
Samsung Electronics America/AP Photo
Source: Adapted from Everett M. Rodgers, Diffusion of Innovation (New York: Free Press, 1983).
Time of adoption of the innovation
Number of users
Innovators
2.5%
Early
adopters
13.5%
Early
majority
34%
Late
majority
34%
Laggards
16%
E X H I B I T  12.2
Diffusion of Innovation Curve

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
379
	
	
opens. They do not stand in line to grab the first Samsung 65 Curve televisions; only after 
reading the innovators’ complaints and praises do they decide whether the new technology 
is worth the cost. But most of them go ahead and purchase because early adopters tend to 
enjoy novelty and often are regarded as the opinion leaders for particular product categories.
This group, which represents about 13.5 percent of all buyers in the market, spreads 
the word. As a result, early adopters are crucial for bringing the other three buyer catego-
ries to the market. If the early adopter group is relatively small, the number of people who 
ultimately adopt the innovation likely will also be small.
Drones in the Sky, Questions on the Groundii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 12.1
Among the newest and hottest products on the market, per-
sonal drones are selling out worldwide, with sales numbers 
hitting more than 4 million in 2015—a 167 percent surge com-
pared with the year before. The global spread is remarkable 
too: Its biggest market is the United States, which accounts for 
35 percent of the market, followed by Europe with 30 percent 
of the market, and China with 15 percent. Furthermore, drones 
were listed as one of the best holiday gifts for 2015 by both 
The Wall Street Journal and the popular gadget retailer 
Brookstone. 
	
The uses of the brand-new consumer product have revolu-
tionized many areas, from photography and videography to Ama-
zon’s proposed plan to use drones for package delivery. However, 
their uses also have created some new privacy concerns. Al-
though drones have enabled people to take beautiful images of 
natural events such as whale migrations and glacier collapses 
with unprecedented ease, people cannot always be trusted to 
limit their image captures to nature and art. Unfortunately, drones 
also enable unethical users to capture unsolicited and unwar-
ranted images of others, intruding on the privacy and threatening 
the safety of some of their subjects. 
	
From stories of people spying on their neighbors to the 
drone that landed on the White House lawn in 2015, serious 
concerns surrounding the use of private drones continue, 
without a clear resolution. The company that made the drone 
involved in the White House event responded by remotely in-
stalling software on all its drones that prohibits them from fly-
ing within a 15.5-mile radius of downtown Washington, DC. Yet 
this move was voluntary by the company; no governmental 
policies have been passed that regulate their usage. The cur-
rent lack of legislation has implications for matters of personal 
privacy and security, but it also could be a factor when it 
comes to the use of drones by major companies. For now, for 
example, Amazon’s Prime Air drone delivery system remains 
stalled, primarily due to a lack of regulatory support and ques-
tions about airspace and privacy rights.
Drones are among the hottest new products on the market, particularly at gadget retailer 
Brookstone.
© Kimihiro Hoshino/AFP/Getty Images

380	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Early Majority
The early majority, which represents approximately 34 per-
cent of the population, is crucial because few new products 
and services can be profitable until this large group buys them. 
If the group never becomes large enough, the product or ser-
vice typically fails.
The early majority group differs in many ways from buy-
ers in the first two stages. Its members don’t like to take as 
much risk and therefore tend to wait until the bugs are worked 
out of a particular product or service. This group probably 
rents the latest Star Wars movie during the first week it comes 
out on video. Thus, early majority members experience little 
risk because all the reviews are in, and their costs are lower 
because they’re renting the movie instead of going to the the-
ater. When early majority customers enter the market, the 
number of competitors in the marketplace usually also has 
reached its peak, so these buyers have many price and quality 
choices.
Late Majority
At 34 percent of the market, the late majority is the next 
group of buyers to enter a new product market. When they do, 
the product has achieved its full market potential. Perhaps 
these movie watchers wait until the newest movie is available 
on Netflix. By the time the late majority enters the market, 
sales tend to level off or may be in decline.
Laggards
Laggards make up roughly 16 percent of the market. These 
consumers like to avoid change and rely on traditional prod-
ucts until the products are no longer available. In some 
cases, laggards may never adopt a certain product or service. 
When the sequel to Star Wars: The Force Awakens eventu-
ally shows up on their regular television networks, they 
might watch it.
Using the Diffusion of  
Innovation Theory
Using the diffusion of innovation theory, firms can 
predict which types of customers will buy their new 
product or service immediately after its introduction 
as well as later as the product is more and more ac-
cepted by the market. With this knowledge, the firm 
can develop effective promotion, pricing, and other 
marketing strategies to push acceptance among each 
customer group. Let’s consider an example of some 
everyday products that nearly all of us use at some 
point.
Although they are not as flashy as the latest 
­iPhone, cleaning supplies are used by everyone. Often 
the innovators who adopt new cleaning products are 
the ones who are the most fanatical about cleaning. 
Firms conduct in-depth research into how people clean 
their homes to identify such segments. This research 
The early majority group would probably wait to rent the latest 
Star Wars movie during the first week it comes out on video.
© Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures/Photofest
Consumers who are fixated on cleaning will spend substantial 
amounts for the most technologically advanced machines, like this 
Dyson Ball Vacuum.
© Hugh Threlfall/Alamy

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
381
	
	
finds that some people are so obsessive about cleaning that they spend nearly 20 hours 
every week doing it, while others are so reluctant that they avoid cleaning as much as they 
can; their average weekly cleaning time is about 2.5 hours.27 Their options with regard to 
the products to purchase to assist them in their cleaning tasks are vast, from scrubbers to 
sprays to vacuums to dusters. Thus, in the vacuum cleaner market, manufacturers recog-
nize that the segment of consumers who will spend substantial amounts for the most tech-
nologically advanced, powerful, easy-to-maneuver machines, such as the latest Dyson 
model, are likely to be the segment of consumers that is most fixated on cleaning.28 But 
another segment just wants some basic suction to get the grit out of their rugs.
Relative Advantage  If a product or service is perceived to be better than substitutes, 
then the diffusion will be relatively quick. As advertising for Swiffer products emphasizes, 
its mops and dusters promise to make cleaning faster, easier, and more efficient. In featur-
ing real families, it seeks to highlight the relative advantage for all types of cleaners. Older 
people who might once have gotten on their hands and knees to scrub the floor can now 
rely on the design of the cleaning pads on the end of the mop to get the job done. Their 
children, who have never been very good at cleaning, can swipe a few surfaces and get the 
house looking clean before their parents visit. And a man who has lost an arm to cancer can 
still help his family keep the house clean, because the duster does not require him to use a 
spray or climb a ladder to dust the ceiling fan.29
Compatibility  A diffusion process may be faster or slower, depending on various con-
sumer features, including international cultural differences. Electrolux’s latest bagless vac-
uums offer a key innovation and solve the age-old problem of how to empty the chamber 
without having a cloud of particles fly out: compact the dirt into a “pellet.” To make the 
product more compatible with the needs of people in different cultures, it is made in vari-
ous sizes. The U.S. version offers a carpet nozzle with a motor, to deal with the dirt accu-
mulated in Americans’ larger, often carpeted homes. Because in many Asian “megacities” 
consumers live in tiny apartments, Electrolux has introduced a smaller version that is also 
very quiet.30
Observability  When products are easily observed, their benefits or uses are easily com-
municated to others, which enhances the diffusion process. To demonstrate to consumers 
why they should spend $400 on a blender, Blendtec launched an extensive YouTube cam-
paign titled “Will It Blend?” to demonstrate the effectiveness of the blender. In each video, 
a spokesperson in a white lab coat blends a different product in the Blendtec—from iPads 
to golf balls to Justin Bieber’s autobiography—and gives visible proof to consumers of the 
quality of the product. The humor and innovativeness of this product demonstration has 
Products like the Swiffer have 
a relative advantage over the 
competition because they 
make cleaning faster, easier, 
and more efficient, especially 
for seniors and other consum-
ers with mobility issues.
Source: Swiffer

382	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
caused these videos to go viral, with over 230 million views and 700,000 subscribers.31 Yet 
some cleaning products face a serious challenge in making their innovations widely ob-
servable, because few consumers spend a lot of time talking about the products that are of 
a more personal nature, such as what they use to clean their toilets. Even a great product 
might diffuse more slowly if people feel uncomfortable talking about what they perceive to 
be involved in their personal care.
Complexity and Trialability  Products that are relatively less complex are also relatively 
easy to try. These products will generally diffuse more quickly and lead to greater and 
faster adoption than will those that are not so easy to try. In the cleaning products range, it 
is far easier to pick up a new spray cleaner at the grocery store to try at home than it is to 
assess and test a new vacuum. In response, manufacturers seek ways to help people con-
duct trials. For example, Dyson’s displays in national retailers such as Bed, Bath, & Beyond 
often include floor space that allows shoppers to run the machine to see how well the roller 
ball works and watch it pick up dirt.
Knowledge of how a product or service will diffuse is useful for developing marketing 
strategies. But even before a new product or service is introduced, firms must actually de-
velop those new offerings. In the next section, we detail the process by which most firms 
develop new products and services and how they introduce them into the market.
Products that are easily ob-
served, like this Blendtec 
blender that is pulverizing golf 
balls, enhance the diffusion 
process.
Source: Will It Blend? - Golf Balls/ 
Blendtec/YouTube
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the five groups on the diffusion of innovation curve?
2.	 What factors enhance the diffusion of a good or service?
HOW FIRMS DEVELOP NEW PRODUCTS
The new product development process begins with the generation of new product ideas and 
culminates in the launch of a new product and the evaluation of its success. The stages of 
the new product development process, along with the important objectives of each stage, 
are summarized in Exhibit 12.3.
LO12-3	
Describe the various 
stages involved in 
developing a new 
product or service.

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
383
	
	
Idea Generation
To generate ideas for new products, a firm can use its own internal research and develop-
ment (R&D) efforts, collaborate with other firms and institutions (R&D consortia), license 
technology, brainstorm, outsource, research competitors’ products and services, and/or 
conduct consumer research; see Exhibit 12.4. In many cases these practices for identifying 
new product ideas cascade into other aspects of the product development process. Firms 
that want to be pioneers rely more extensively on R&D efforts, whereas those that tend to 
adopt a follower strategy are more likely to scan the market for ideas. Let’s look at each of 
these idea sources.
Internal Research and Development  Many firms have their own R&D departments 
in which scientists and engineers work to solve complex problems and develop new ideas. 
Historically, firms such as Black and Decker in the consumer goods industry, 3M in the 
industrial goods industry, and Merck and Pfizer in the pharmaceuticals industry have relied 
on R&D development efforts for their new products. In the fast-food industry, many chains 
run vast test kitchens that experiment with various flavors, concepts, and food groups to 
create potential new offerings. Furthermore, the industry uses its common franchise mod-
els to support new product development. For example, Arby’s hosts an annual contest for 
Idea
generation
Development of
viable new product
ideas.
Concept
testing
Testing the new product
idea among a set of
potential customers.
Product
development
Development of
prototypes and/or
the product.
Market
testing
Testing the actual
products in a few
test markets.
Product
launch
Full-scale
commercialization
of the product.
Evaluation
of results
Analysis of the
performance of the
new product and
making appropriate
modiﬁcations.
E X H I B I T  12.3
The Product Development Process
E X H I B I T  12.4
Sources of New Product Ideas
Source
of ideas
Internal
R&D
R&D
consortia
Licensing
Brainstorming
Outsourcing
Competitors’
products
Customer
input

384	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
the best menu idea introduced by one of its franchise locations. 
And in perhaps the most famous example, the Egg McMuffin was 
created by a franchisee in the early 1970s.32 In other industries, 
such as software, music, and motion pictures, product develop-
ment efforts also tend to come from internal ideas and R&D 
­financial investments. According to Marketing Analytics 12.1, 
General Motors is leveraging the data it gathers from customers as 
a sort of internal research source to support its designs.
The product development costs for these firms are quite 
high, but the resulting new product or service are expected to 
have a good chance of being a technological or market break-
through. Firms expect such products to generate enough reve-
nue and profits to make the costs of R&D worthwhile. R&D 
investments generally are considered continuous investments, 
so firms may lose money on a few new products. In the long 
run, though, these firms are betting that a few extremely suc-
cessful new products, often known as blockbusters, can gener-
ate enough revenues and profits to cover the losses from other 
introductions that might not fare so well.
Some global firms also are taking an approach called reverse innovation, as we dis-
cussed in Chapter 8. They turn to subsidiaries in less developed markets for new product 
ideas. From its Shanghai research center, Coca-Cola developed Minute Maid Pulpy, a juice 
drink that the corporation has moved into 19 countries and is now worth more than 
$1 billion. Levi’s Denizen brand got its start in India and China, where the company worked 
on ideas for producing more affordable jeans. In the U.S. market, Denizen jeans sell for 
about half the cost of a pair of regular Levi’s and are available exclusively at Target.33
R&D Consortia  To develop new product ideas, more and more firms have been joining 
an R&D consortia, or groups of other firms and institutions, possibly including govern-
ment and educational institutions, to explore new ideas or obtain solutions for developing 
new products. Here, the R&D investments come from the group as a whole, and the partic-
ipating firms and institutions share the results.
In many cases, the consortia involve pharmaceutical or high-tech members, whose 
research costs can run into the millions—too much for a single company to bear. The 
­National Institutes of Health (NIH) sponsors medical foundations to conduct research to 
treat rare diseases. The research is then disseminated to the medical community, thus 
­encouraging the development of drugs and therapies more quickly and at a lower cost than 
would be possible if the research were privately funded. 
Licensing  In the search for new products, firms buy the rights to use a technology or 
ideas from other firms through a licensing agreement. This approach saves the high costs 
of in-house R&D, but it means that the firm is banking on a solution that already exists but 
has not been marketed.
Brainstorming  Firms often engage in brainstorming sessions during which a group 
works together to generate ideas. One of the key characteristics of a brainstorming session 
is that no idea can be immediately accepted or rejected. The moderator of the session may 
channel participants’ attention to specific product features and attributes, performance ex-
pectations, or packaging. Only at the end of the session do the members vote on the best 
ideas or combinations of ideas. Those ideas that receive the most votes are carried forward 
to the next stage of the product development process.
Outsourcing  When companies have trouble moving through these steps alone, they turn 
to outsourcing, a practice in which they hire an outside firm to help generate ideas and 
develop new products and services. IDEO, a design firm, does not sell ready-made product 
ideas but rather a service that helps clients generate new product and service ideas in in-
dustries such as health care, toys, and computers. IDEO employs anthropologists, graphic 
To identify new product ideas, 
many firms use their own inter-
nal R&D, like this test kitchen at 
CKE, the parent company of 
Hardee’s.
© Tom Gannam/AP Photo

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
385
	
	
Data That Help the Brand and the Customer:  
GM’s Big Data Useiii
With its famous brands, such as Chevrolet and Cadillac, General 
Motors (GM) is a staple in the U.S. car industry. It also was one of 
the companies hit the hardest by the 2008 recession, following 
which it filed for bankruptcy and received a government bailout. 
In 2012, GM announced a new business strategy, a major com-
ponent of which was more efficient and effective uses of big 
data. The importance of analytics again came to center stage in 
2013, when the company faced legal allegations regarding the 
recall of the Chevy Cobalt. After the crisis, GM stressed the im-
portance of big data even more and promised that analytics 
would be at the heart of all its future product development.
	
In particular, data analytics at GM support the development of 
new cars. Through GM’s newly centralized data warehouse, it 
can analyze trends in both production and customer behavior. 
Furthermore, GM manufacturer data can be segmented at the 
individual vehicle identification number (VIN) level and then ana-
lyzed to improve quality and safety. For example, manufacturer 
data analytics helped GM develop tools that reduce the complex-
ity associated with the mechanics of vehicle design. General 
Motors also is collecting data about its sales and dealerships and 
uses these data to create detailed customer profiles. The level of 
customer insight that these profiles provide enables GM to de-
velop new products that then grant customers sufficient value. 
For example, GM’s applied market information influenced its de-
velopment of high-efficiency products that help reduce pollution.
	
All of this is just the start. New “connected cars” are gener-
ating even more data for the car industry, and the analyses of 
these data will likely define the cars found on the roads of the 
future. Connected cars communicate with the manufacturers 
directly through 4G or LTE. Currently, there are 9 million of 
these cars on the road, with 35 million projected by 2020. 
With its subscription-based, in-car security system, OnStar, GM 
has an advantage in this effort: It already uses OnStar for re-
mote communication and diagnoses of problems. Thus it gains 
real-time information, which GM can use to improve its future 
car designs, even as the predictive diagnosis and preventive 
maintenance offer customers value by saving them money or 
preventing them from being stranded by a car that won’t start.
Marketing Analytics 12.1
General Motors uses its OnStar system for remote commu-
nication with customers and diagnoses of problems. It ana-
lyzes the data it collects from its OnStar database to 
support the development of new cars. 
© Bloomberg/Getty Images
Balance Body partnered  
with IDEO to develop a less- 
intimidating, more-user-friendly 
reformer to be used with  
Pilates.
Courtesy of Balanced Body, Inc.

386	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
designers, engineers, and psychologists whose special skills help foster creativity and inno-
vation. As exercise is becoming more and more popular, companies are looking for ways to 
capitalize on the beginner’s market. Balanced Body is a company that makes and sells re-
formers, devices that help develop good alignment, core strength, and flexibility for Pilates 
participants. When Balanced Body did research and found that people starting Pilates 
found the reformers currently on the market to be too intimidating, it partnered with IDEO 
to develop a reformer that allowed for better user experience while maintaining the high 
level of functionality its products engender.34 In an eight-week period, IDEO created a re-
designed model with fewer wheels while improving functionality and adjustability of the 
product and reducing the cost of the machine.
Competitors’ Products  A new product entry by a competitor may trigger a market oppor-
tunity for a firm, which can use reverse engineering to understand the competitor’s product 
and then bring an improved version to market. Reverse engineering involves taking apart a 
product, analyzing it, and creating an improved product that does not infringe on the compet-
itor’s patents, if any exist. This copycat approach to new product development is widespread 
and practiced by even the most research-intensive firms. Copycat consumer goods show up 
in apparel, grocery, and drugstore products as well as in technologically more complex prod-
ucts such as automobiles and computers, as Social and Mobile Marketing 12.1 notes.
Customer Input  Listening to the customer in both B2B and B2C markets is essential for suc-
cessful idea generation and throughout the product development process.35 Because customers 
When Microsoft Plays Catch-Upiv
Social & Mobile Marketing 12.1
Microsoft is one of the most innovative companies of all time. 
After revolutionizing the home computer industry, it set out to be 
a leader in the information-technology and home-entertainment 
fields. It seems like not a year goes by without something new 
from the brain of Bill Gates.
	
But one area in which Microsoft has been behind the curve 
is the search-engine market. Google, with its nearly 70 percent 
market share and massive name recognition, does not appear 
to be in any real danger from competitors, including Microsoft’s 
Bing.com. But Bing already has outpaced Yahoo.com for the 
remainder of the market, and as its market share keeps grow-
ing, it is beginning to encroach on Google’s dominance. Perhaps 
most important, it is distinguishing itself by providing more fre-
quent updates and feature additions than the other search en-
gines do. Consumers benefit overall because Bing is forcing 
competitors to improve their offering to keep pace with 
Microsoft or prevent it from stealing market share from them.
	
Its efforts have paid off somewhat: Bing now attracts an 
approximately 21 percent market share among U.S. users, 
whereas Yahoo! accounts for only about 10 percent. Google 
maintains a remarkably high share, though that level has de-
creased in recent years. Despite these seeming successes, 
the costs of its copycat efforts have meant that the division 
responsible for Bing lost $2.56 billion in one recent fiscal year.
	
To differentiate itself better, Bing is being promoted as a 
decision engine rather than a search engine. It integrates 
Foursquare, a location-based phone application, into Bing 
Maps results. Users can focus on a particular area, such as 
South Boston, which means Bing can act like an integrative 
day planner and list the best things to do in that area. It is 
working on developing a desktop application, and Bing links 
seamlessly with Facebook to show users which search out-
come their friends like best. Despite Microsoft’s problems de-
veloping search engines, Bing suggests it intends to stay 
aggressive in this market. Other new products by Microsoft, 
such as Windows 10 and the Surface line of tablets, also bode 
well for the search engine, because these products come pre-
equipped with Bing as their default search engine.
Microsoft’s Bing competes with Google in the search-engine 
market.
© M4OS Photos/Alamy

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
387
	
	
for B2B products are relatively few, firms can follow their use of 
products closely and solicit suggestions and ideas to improve 
those products either by using a formal approach, such as focus 
groups, interviews, or surveys, or through more informal discus-
sions. The firm’s design and development team then works on 
these suggestions, sometimes in consultation with the customer. 
This joint effort between the selling firm and the customer signifi-
cantly increases the probability that the customer eventually will 
buy the new product.
Customer input in B2C markets comes from a variety of 
sources, though increasingly through social media. By moni-
toring online feedback, whether requested by the firm or pro-
vided voluntarily in customer reviews, companies can get 
better ideas about new products or necessary changes to exist-
ing ones. The recent introduction of Green Giant snack chips 
provides a good example of using inputs from various types of 
partners. General Mills (which owns the Green Giant brand) 
heard a pitch for a new vegetable-based snack chip from its 
supplier, Shearer’s Chips. The chip manufacturer developed 10 
options for its business customer, General Mills. Then General 
Mills solicited input from its end consumers to find out which 
flavors they might like best. Online reviews suggested the need 
for a much zestier version of the roasted vegetable tortilla 
chips, which ultimately appeared on store shelves.36
In some cases, consumers may not expressly demand a 
new product even though their behavior demonstrates their 
desire for it. For example, when market researchers observed 
the popularity of pretzel rolls, the corporate headquarters of 
several restaurant chains introduced new buns and mandated 
that all their locations carry them. Noting the increasing num-
bers of vegetarian and vegan eaters, a few chains also have 
expanded their non-meat offerings.37
Another particularly successful customer input approach is to analyze lead users, 
those innovative product users who modify existing products according to their own ideas 
Customers are an important source of new product ideas. 
General Mills solicited input from consumers to find out 
which flavors they like best, and Green Giant Toasted  
Veggie Tortilla Chips was one of the winners.
Source: Green Giant
Innovative customers called 
lead users are especially influ-
ential in the fashion industry 
because designers frequently 
change their designs based on 
trends they see on the street.
© Big Cheese Photo/Superstock RF

388	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
to suit their specific needs.38 If lead users customize a firm’s products, other customers 
might wish to do so as well. Thus, studying lead users helps the firm understand general 
market trends that might be just on the horizon. Manufacturers and retailers of fashion 
products often spot new trends by noticing how innovative trendsetters have altered their 
clothing and shoes. Designers of high-fashion jeans distress their products in different 
ways depending on signals they pick up on the street. One season jeans appear with whis-
kers, the next season they have holes, the next, paint spots.
At the end of the idea-generation stage, the firm should have several ideas that it can 
take forward to the next stage: concept testing.
Concept Testing
An idea with potential is developed further into a concept, which in this context refers to a 
brief written description of the product; its technology, working principles, and forms; and 
what customer needs it would satisfy.39 A concept might also include visual images of what 
the product would look like.
Concept testing refers to the process in which a concept statement is presented to 
potential buyers or users to obtain their reactions. These reactions enable the developer to 
estimate the sales value of the product or service concept, possibly make changes to en-
hance its sales value, and determine whether the idea is worth further development.40 If the 
concept fails to meet customers’ expectations, it is doubtful it would succeed if it were to 
be produced and marketed. Because concept testing occurs very early in the new product 
introduction process, even before a real product has been made, it helps the firm avoid the 
costs of unnecessary product development.
The concept for an electric scooter might be written as follows:
The product is a lightweight electric scooter that can be easily folded and taken with you inside 
a building or on public transportation. The scooter weighs 25 pounds. It travels at speeds of up 
to 15 miles per hour and can go about 12 miles on a single charge. The scooter can be recharged 
in about two hours from a standard electric outlet. The scooter is easy to ride and has simple 
controls—just an accelerator button and a brake. It sells for $299.41
Concept testing progresses along the research techniques described in Chapter 10. The 
firm likely starts with qualitative research such as in-depth interviews or focus groups to 
test the concept, after which it can undertake quantitative research through Internet or 
mall-intercept surveys. Video clips on the Internet might show a virtual prototype and the 
way it works so that potential customers can evaluate the product or service. In a mall-­
intercept survey, an interviewer would provide a description of the concept to the respon-
dent and then ask several questions to obtain his or her feedback.
The most important question pertains to the respondent’s purchase intentions if the 
product or service were made available. Marketers also should ask whether the product 
would satisfy a need that other products currently are not meeting. Depending on the 
type of product or service, researchers might also ask about the expected frequency of 
purchase, how much customers would buy, whether they would buy it for themselves or 
as a gift, when they would buy, and whether the price information (if provided) indi-
cates a good value. In addition, marketers usually collect some information about the 
customers so they can analyze which consumer segments are likely to be most inter-
ested in the product.
Some concepts never make it past the concept testing stage, particularly if respondents 
seem uninterested. Those that do receive high evaluations from potential consumers, how-
ever, move on to the next step, product development.
Product Development
Product development or product design entails a process of balancing various engineer-
ing, manufacturing, marketing, and economic considerations to develop a product’s form 
and features or a service’s features. An engineering team develops a product prototype that 
is based on research findings from the previous concept testing step as well as their own 

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
389
	
	
knowledge about materials and technology. A prototype is 
the first physical form or service description of a new product, 
still in rough or tentative form, which has the same properties 
as a new product but is produced through different manufac-
turing processes—sometimes even crafted individually.42
Product prototypes are usually tested through alpha and 
beta testing. In alpha testing, the firm attempts to determine 
whether the product will perform according to its design and 
whether it satisfies the need for which it was intended.43 Rather 
than use potential consumers, alpha tests occur in the firm’s 
R&D department. For instance, Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream al-
pha tests all its proposed new flavors on its own (lucky) em-
ployees at its corporate headquarters in Vermont.
In contrast, beta testing uses potential consumers who 
examine the product prototype in a real-use setting to deter-
mine its functionality, performance, potential problems, and 
other issues specific to its use. The firm might develop several 
prototype products that it gives to users, then survey those users to determine whether the 
product worked as intended and identify any issues that need resolution.
The advent of the Internet has made recruiting beta testers easier than ever. Through 
sites such as OnlineBeta (http://www.onlinebeta.com), everyday people can sign up to 
­become beta testers for products from companies such as Dell, Kodak, and TomTom. To 
further automate the beta testing process, YouEye is developing eye tracking technology 
that works with an individual’s webcam. Instead of needing to spend thousands of dollars 
on eye tracking equipment and having customers come into labs, firms will be able to uti-
lize everyday webcams to track not only what a person attends to on a computer screen but 
also his or her emotional reactions to these products.44
Market Testing
The firm has developed its new product or service and tested the prototypes. Now it must 
test the market for the new product with a trial batch of products. These tests can take two 
forms: premarket testing and test marketing.
Premarket Tests  Firms conduct premarket tests before they actually bring a product or 
service to market to determine how many customers will try and then continue to use the 
product or service according to a small group of potential consumers. One popular propri-
etary premarket test version is called Nielsen BASES. During the test, potential customers 
are exposed to the marketing mix variables, such as advertising, then surveyed and given 
a sample of the product to try.45 After some period of time, during which the potential 
customers try the product, they are surveyed about whether they would buy or use the 
product again. This second survey provides an estimation of the probability of a consum-
er’s repeat purchase. From these data, the firm generates a sales estimate for the new prod-
uct that enables it to decide whether to introduce the product, abandon it, redesign it before 
introduction, or revise the marketing plan. An early evaluation of this sort—that is, before 
the product is introduced to the whole market—saves marketers the costs of a nationwide 
launch if the product fails.
Sometimes firms simulate a product or service introduction, in which case potential 
customers view the advertising of various currently available products or services along 
with advertising for the new product or service. They receive money to buy the product or 
service from a simulated environment, such as a mock web page or store, and respond to a 
survey after they make their purchases. This test can determine the effectiveness of a firm’s 
advertising as well as the expected trial rates for the new product.
Test Marketing  A method of determining the success potential of a new product, test 
marketing introduces the offering to a limited geographical area (usually a few cities) 
prior to a national launch. Test marketing is a strong predictor of product success, because 
Is Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream doing alpha or beta testing?
© Nick Wass/AP Photo

390	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
the firm can study actual purchase behavior, which is more reliable than a simulated test. A 
test marketing effort uses all the elements of the marketing mix: It includes promotions 
such as advertising and coupons, just as if the product were being introduced nationally, 
and the product appears in targeted retail outlets with appropriate pricing. On the basis of 
the results of the test marketing, the firm can estimate demand for the entire market. Test 
marketing is widely used by fast food chains. Many restaurants roll out new ideas first in 
Orlando, Florida, a location that attracts a vast range of diverse tourists and thus might of-
fer insights into what various consumers will like.46
Test marketing costs more and takes longer than premarket tests do, which may pro-
vide an advantage to competitors that could get a similar or better product to market first 
without test marketing. For this reason, some firms might launch new products without 
extensive consumer testing and rely instead on intuition, instincts, and guts.47
Product Launch
If the market testing returns with positive results, the firm is ready to introduce the product 
to the entire market. This most critical step in the new product introduction requires tre-
mendous financial resources and extensive coordination of all aspects of the marketing 
mix. For any firm, if the new product launch is a failure, it may be difficult for the product—
and perhaps the firm—to recover. For example, though the number of 3D movie theaters 
continues to grow, ticket sales for these offerings first leveled off and now have started to 
decline. The introduction of the new technology was popular enough that sellers invested 
heavily in building more than 15,000 3D screens, and Hollywood promised a wider range 
of 3D film options. But if—as appears to be the case—moviegoers have decided that the 
realistic, three-dimensional images are not worth the higher ticket price, such investments 
might be painful for both movie studios and movie theaters.48
So what does a product launch involve? First, on the basis of the research it has gath-
ered on consumer perceptions, the tests it has conducted, and competitive considerations, 
the firm confirms its target market (or markets) and decides how the product will be posi-
tioned. Then the firm finalizes the remaining marketing mix variables for the new product, 
including the marketing budget for the first year.49
The timing of the launch may also be important, depending on the product.50 Holly-
wood studios typically release movies targeted toward general audiences (G- or PG-rated 
movies) during the summer when children are out of school. New automobile models tra-
ditionally are released for sale during September, and fashion products are launched just 
before the season of the year for which they are intended.
Is the 3D experience worth  
the price?
© Jasper White CM/Image Source RF

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
391
	
	
Evaluation of Results
After the product has been launched, marketers must undertake a critical postlaunch review 
to determine whether the product and its launch were a success or failure and what addi-
tional resources or changes to the marketing mix are needed, if any. Many firms use panel 
data to improve the probability of success during the test marketing phase of a new product 
introduction. The consumer panel data are collected by panelists scanning in their receipts 
using a home scanning device. This information is used to measure individual household 
first-time trials and repeat purchases. Through such data, market demand can be estimated, 
so the firm can figure out how best to adjust its marketing mix. Some products never make 
it out of the introduction stage, especially those that seem almost laughable in retrospect. 
Alcohol-free beer for pets? Harley-Davidson perfume?51
For those products that do move on, firms can measure the success of a new product 
by three interrelated factors: (1) its satisfaction of technical requirements, such as perfor-
mance; (2) customer acceptance; and (3) its satisfaction of the firm’s financial require-
ments, such as sales and profits.52 If the product is not performing sufficiently well, poor 
customer acceptance will result, which in turn leads to poor financial performance.
The new product development process, when followed rationally and sequentially, 
helps avoid failures. The product life cycle, discussed in the next section, helps marketers 
manage their products’ marketing mix during and after introduction.
Some products never make it 
out of the introduction stage, 
like Kwispelbier, an alcohol-free 
beer for dogs from The  
Netherlands.
© Michel Porro/Getty Images
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the steps in the new product development process?
2.	 Identify different sources of new product ideas.
THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE
The product life cycle defines the stages that products move through as they enter, get 
established in, and ultimately leave the marketplace. It thereby offers marketers a starting 
point for their strategy planning. The stages of the life cycle often reflect marketplace 
trends, such as the healthy lifestyle trend that today places organic and green product 
LO12-4	
Explain the product 
life cycle.

392	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
­categories in their growth stages. Exhibit 12.5 illustrates a typical product life cycle, in-
cluding the industry sales and profits over time. In their life cycles, products pass through 
four stages: introduction, growth, maturity, and decline. When the product category first 
launches and innovators start buying the product, the introduction stage begins. In the 
growth stage, the product gains acceptance, demand and sales increase, and more compet-
itors emerge in the product category. In the maturity stage, industry sales reach their peak, 
so firms try to rejuvenate their products by adding new features or repositioning them. If 
these efforts succeed, the product achieves new life.53 If not, it goes into the decline stage 
and eventually exits the market.
Not every product follows the same life cycle curve. Many products, such as home 
appliances, stay in the maturity stage for a very long time. Manufacturers may add features 
to dishwashers and washing machines, but the mature product category remains essentially 
the same and seems unlikely to enter the decline stage unless some innovative, superior 
solution comes along to replace them.
The product life cycle offers a useful tool for managers to analyze the types of strate-
gies that may be required over the life of their products. Even the strategic emphasis of a 
firm and its marketing mix (the four Ps) strategies can be adapted from insights about the 
characteristics of each stage of the cycle, as we summarize in Exhibit 12.6.
Let’s look at each of these stages in depth.
Time
Introduction
Growth
Maturity
Decline
Dollars
$
Sales
$0
Proﬁt
E X H I B I T  12.5
Product Life Cycle
	
Introduction	
Growth	
Maturity	
Decline
Sales	
Low	
Rising	
Peak	
Declining
Profits	
Negative or low	
Rapidly rising	
Peak to declining	
Declining
Typical consumers	
Innovators	
Early adopters 	
Late majority	
Laggards 
	
	
and early majority
Competitors (number of 	
One or few	
Few but increasing	
High number of competitors	
Low number of competitors 
firms and products)	
	
	
and competitive products	
and products
E X H I B I T  12.6
Characteristics of Different Stages of the Product Life Cycle

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
393
	
	
Introduction Stage
The introduction stage for a new, innovative product or service usually starts with a sin-
gle firm, and innovators are the ones to try the new offering. Some new-to-the-world 
products and services that defined their own product category and industry are the tele-
phone (invented by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876), the transistor semiconductor (Bell 
Laboratories in 1947), the Walkman portable cassette player (Sony in 1979), the Internet 
browser (Netscape in 1994), the personal digital assistant (Palm in 1996), iTunes (Apple 
in 2001), Facebook (2004), Blu-ray (Sony in 2006), iPad (Apple in 2010), and smart-
watches (Pebble in 2013). Sensing the viability and commercialization possibilities of 
some market-creating new product, other firms soon enter the market with similar or 
improved products at lower prices. The same pattern holds for less innovative products 
such as apparel, music, and even a new soft drink flavor. The introduction stage is char-
acterized by initial losses to the firm due to its high start-up costs and low levels of sales 
revenue as the product begins to take off. If the product is successful, firms may start 
seeing profits toward the end of this stage.
Growth Stage
The growth stage of the product life cycle is marked by a growing number of product 
adopters, rapid growth in industry sales, and increases in both the number of competitors 
and the number of available product versions.54 The market becomes more segmented and 
consumer preferences more varied, which increases the potential for new markets or new 
uses of the product or service.55 Adding Value 12.2 outlines how a couple of entrepreneurs 
had to take a trial-and-error approach before they ultimately found the segment of the pop-
corn market that would allow their SkinnyPop brand to grow massively and quickly.
Also during the growth stage, firms attempt to reach new consumers by studying their 
preferences and producing different product variations—varied colors, styles, or features—
which enable them to segment the market more precisely. The goal of this segmentation is to 
ride the rising sales trend and firmly establish the firm’s brand so 
as not to be outdone by competitors. For example, many food 
manufacturers are working hard to become the first brand that 
consumers think of when they consider organic products. Del 
Monte was the first of the major canned vegetable sellers to go 
organic. The cans feature bold “organic” banners across the front 
and promise that no pesticides were used to produce the food 
items. Even though Del Monte products have been around for 
over 100 years, in this growth category the company is a newer 
entrant in the organic market, so it must work to establish its dis-
tinctive appeal.56
As firms ride the crest of increasing industry sales, prof-
its in the growth stage also rise because of the economies of 
scale associated with manufacturing and marketing costs, es-
pecially in promotion and advertising. At the same time, firms 
that have not yet established a stronghold in the market, even 
in narrow segments, may decide to exit, in what is referred to 
as an industry shakeout.
Maturity Stage
The maturity stage of the product life cycle is characterized by 
the adoption of the product by the late majority and intense 
competition for market share among firms. Marketing costs 
(e.g., promotion, distribution) increase as these firms vigor-
ously defend their market share against competitors. They 
also face intense competition on price as the average price of 
the product falls substantially compared with the shifts during 
Recognizing that shampoo is  
a mature product category, 
­Alterna and other manufactur-
ers have introduced antiaging 
hair products.
© Alterna Haircare
younger-looking hair...
after just one use.
Katie Holmes, Co-owner 
Anti-Aging Haircare. Powered by Caviar.
Rich in Omega-3’s and Vitamins A & D, Caviar transforms
dull, dry hair. 100% of women saw improved*:
• Shine 
• Texture
• Softness
• Manageability
.** 
Sephora • Ulta • Nordstrom • Neiman Marcus • Bergdorf Goodman
AlternaHaircare.com
*Based on a consumer perception study of CAVIAR Moisture Shampoo & Conditioner. Results after just 1 use.
 Individual results may vary. ** Offer begins 8/15/13, while supplies last. Valid only at participating salons,
 freestanding Sephora stores, Ulta, select Nordstrom & Neiman Marcus stores, Bergdorf Goodman & AlternaHaircare.com.

394	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Adding Value 12.2
Skinny on Ingredients, Thick on Promise:  
The Growth of SkinnyPop Snacksv
Anyone who has ever wandered Chicago’s streets—or flown 
through its Midway Airport for that matter—likely has at least 
a vague sense memory of the delicious scent of fresh pop-
corn, spreading out from the doors of the shops run by the 
local favorite, Garrett’s Popcorn. A tin of Garrett’s is a salty, 
buttery, guilt-inducing pleasure that can be hard to resist in the 
moment but isn’t likely to be a daily snack that health- 
conscious consumers would stock in their pantries.
Still, when Andrew Friedman and Pam Netzky started up 
their Wells Street Popcorn brand, their initial goal was to 
launch a product that could compete with Garrett’s. To differ-
entiate themselves, they planned to offer even higher-quality 
ingredients and promote a sort of luxury version of the local 
snack. Unlike Garrett’s neon-orange cheese corn, for example, 
Well Street would offer a version that was milder and less 
stain-likely. Wells Street products achieved mediocre perfor-
mance; the founders were able to convince a few high-end, lo-
cal grocers to stock the products. But the expensive ingredients 
meant that Wells Street was selling small bags of caramel corn 
for about $10 each, limiting its expansion opportunities. There 
just wasn’t that big of a market for gourmet popcorn at a high 
price point, and when another company with a similar product 
entered the New York market and failed dismally, Netzky and 
Friedman realized they needed another option.
That option presented itself in the form of customer re-
quests for healthier snacks. Customers liked the flavors of the 
fancy popcorn, but they hated the artificial ingredients, high 
levels of saturated fats, and massive amounts of sodium con-
tained in each serving. To come up with an entry into the 
emerging, “better-for-you” snack market, the founders experi-
mented for months, adjusting the precise recipes and ingredi-
ents until they achieved an offering that mimicked the taste of 
gourmet and movie theater popcorn but did so with “skinny” 
ingredients. Recognizing that this new product was vastly dis-
tinct from, and needed to be marketed separately from, the 
Wells Street line, Friedman and Netzky launched a new brand, 
SkinnyPop.
Despite the name, the products are not necessarily lower 
in calories. Rather, the “skinny” part of the name refers to 
what goes into the snacks—or perhaps more accurately, what 
doesn’t go into them. Manufactured in a dedicated facility (to 
avoid any contamination with excluded ingredients), SkinnyPop 
popcorn contains no gluten, cholesterol, dairy, genetically mod-
ified organisms, trans fat, peanuts, or preservatives.
Even once they had the right recipe though, getting 
SkinnyPop onto grocers’ shelves was a struggle. According to 
Friedman, retailers simply didn’t know what to do with the 
product. Was it a health food? A snack? A natural product?  
On a visit to one local store, Friedman took advantage of a 
store manager’s vacation, noting that while the manager was 
gone, “I moved stuff around, put them on the shelves and ran 
out of the store. Within a couple of days, they were calling to 
reorder.” If you can excuse the pun, the success of the brand 
just popped from there. Within a year, SkinnyPop had sold 
$55.7 million in snacks, and then experienced explosive 
growth of 137.6 percent to earn $132.4 million in sales just a 
year after that.
The level of growth was so massive and quick that 
Friedman and Netzky sold their brand to a national company 
in 2014. And still the brand and its products continue to grow: 
Currently found in nearly 50,000 retail stores in North 
America, with plans to double that number before also moving 
into international markets, SkinnyPop seemingly has no cause 
to stop. 
Although it took a lot of trial and error in product devel-
opment, marketing, and distribution, SkinnyPop is now 
firmly in the growth phase of the product life cycle.
© Keith Homan/Alamy RF

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
395
	
	
the previous two stages of the life cycle. Lower prices and increased marketing 
costs begin to erode the profit margins for many firms. In the later phases of the 
maturity stage, the market has become quite saturated, and practically all potential 
customers for the product have already adopted the product. Such saturated mar-
kets are prevalent in developed countries.
In the United States, most consumer packaged goods found in grocery  
and discount stores are already in the maturity stage. For example, in the well- 
established hair care products market, consumer goods companies constantly 
search for innovations to set themselves apart and extend the time in which they 
maintain their position in the maturity stage. ­Observing the popularity of new skin 
care products, hair care manufacturers have integrated similar product benefits to 
their products. These companies have introduced antiaging shampoos and condi-
tioners, prewash hair masks, serums, and multiple-step solutions that go beyond 
the old mantra of lather, rinse, and repeat.57
Firms pursue various strategies during this stage to increase their customer 
base and/or defend their market share. Other tactics include entry into new mar-
kets and market segments and developing new products. (Refer to Growth Strate-
gies in Chapter 2.)
Entry into New Markets or Market Segments  Because a market is satu-
rated, firms may attempt to enter new geographical markets, including interna-
tional markets (as we discussed in Chapter 8), that may be less saturated. For 
example, pharmaceutical companies are realizing that they need to turn to BRIC 
countries for continued growth in the coming years. While the U.S. and European 
markets are fairly saturated, the BRIC countries are expected to go from repre-
senting 5 percent of the total pharmaceutical market in 2005 to 30 percent 
in 2016.58
However, even in mature markets, firms may be able to find new market seg-
ments. Apple is well known for releasing new versions of its iPhone and iPad 
yearly, and development cycles are getting even shorter. Although people still get 
excited over these new products, they are also beginning to suffer from “device 
exhaustion,” in which they are becoming progressively less likely to continue to 
upgrade their phones and tablets. As a result, the smartphone and tablet markets 
appear nearly or completely mature.59 Although the market may be mature, for many peo-
ple these new versions are prohibitively expensive, even when signing a two-year contract. 
To expand to these lower-income market segments, Apple doesn’t get rid of its older de-
vices when a new one comes along. Instead, it reduces the price on the older versions that 
are cheaper to produce. As a result, it is able to reach customers that would never be able to 
afford the latest iPhone model.
Development of New Products  Despite market saturation, firms continually introduce 
new products with improved features or find new uses for existing products because they 
need constant innovation and product proliferation to defend market share from intense 
To reach new market segments, Apple 
reduces the price of older versions of its 
products when new ones are released.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Mark Dierker,  
photographer
Hallmark’s “Life Is a Special  
Occasion” campaign moves  
beyond the idea that cards are 
only for holidays or birthdays. It 
encourages consumers to con-
nect with loved ones all the 
time.
Source: Hallmark Cards, Inc.

396	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
competition. Firms continually introduce new products to ensure that they are able to retain 
or grow their respective market shares. Hallmark, which has been the hallmark name for 
greeting cards for a long time, is trying a variety of innovations. They include customizable 
greeting cards, plates, and interactive storybooks that can be personalized for various re-
cipients, as well as greeting applications that are available for both iPod and iPad users.60
Decline Stage
Firms with products in the decline stage either position themselves for a niche segment of 
diehard consumers or those with special needs or they completely exit the market. The few 
laggards who have not yet tried the product or service enter the market at this stage. Take 
vinyl long-playing records (LPs), for example. In an age of Internet-downloaded music 
files, it may seem surprising that vinyl records are still made and sold. Sales of vinyl LPs 
had long been declining, but they have enjoyed a resurgence in just the past few years as 
diehard music lovers demand the unique sound of a vinyl record rather than the digital 
sound of CDs and music files. Still, the 5.5 million LPs sold in the United States per year 
pales in comparison with the 1.26 billion digital downloads.61 The grooves in vinyl records 
create sound waves that are similar to those of a live performance, however, which means 
they provide a more authentic sound, which in turn means nightclub DJs, discerning music 
listeners, and collectors will always prefer them.62
Aiding this continued demand is the fact that there are simply too many albums of 
music from the predigital era that are available only on vinyl. It may take many years, 
maybe even decades, for all the music from earlier generations to be digitized. Until that 
time, turntable equipment manufacturers, small record-pressing companies such as Music 
Connection in Manhattan, and new and emerging record companies such as Premier Crue 
Music continue to have a market that demands their LPs.63
The Shape of the Product Life Cycle Curve
In theory, the product life cycle curve is bell shaped with regard to sales and profits. In 
reality, however, each product or service category has its own individual shape; some 
move more rapidly through their product life cycles than others, depending on how differ-
ent the category is from offerings currently in the market and how valuable it is to the 
consumer. New products and services that consumers accept very quickly have higher 
consumer adoption rates very early in their product life cycles and move faster across the 
various stages.
Although most would argue 
that LPs are in the declining 
stage of the product life cycle, 
there has been a resurgence in 
sales in recent years.
© Keystone/Getty Images

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
397
	
	
For example, Blu-ray players and Blu-rays moved much 
faster than DVDs across the life cycle curve and have already 
reached the maturity stage, likely because consumers who al-
ready owned DVDs were accustomed to playing prerecorded 
movies and TV shows. It also was easy to switch DVD cus-
tomers to Blu-ray technology because DVDs played on Blu-
ray players, and Blu-rays had better video and audio quality 
than DVDs had. With the advent of 4K televisions that offer 
resolutions four times higher than current 1080p HD TVs, it 
is likely we may see another fast adoption of a new video 
format, such as 4K Blu-ray.
Strategies Based on Product Life Cycle: 
Some Caveats
Although the product life cycle concept provides a starting point for managers to think 
about the strategy they want to implement during each stage of the life cycle of a product, 
this tool must be used with care. The most challenging part of applying the product life 
cycle concept is that managers do not know exactly what shape each product’s life cycle 
will take, so there is no way to know precisely what stage a product is in. If, for example, a 
product experiences several seasons of declining sales, a manager may determine that it 
has moved from the growth stage to decline and so decides to stop promoting the product. 
As a result, of course, sales decline further. The manager then believes he or she made the 
right decision because the product continues to follow a predetermined life cycle. But what 
if the original sales decline was due to a poor strategy or increased competition—issues 
that could have been addressed with positive marketing support? In this case, the product 
life cycle decision became a self-fulfilling prophecy, and a growth product was doomed to 
an unnecessary decline.64 Fortunately, new research, based on the history of dozens of 
consumer products, suggests that the product life cycle concept is indeed a valid idea, and 
new analytical tools now provide rules for detecting the key turning points in the cycle.65
DVD customers quickly 
switched to Blu-rays because 
of the enhanced picture and 
sound quality.
© Leon Neal/Alamy
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the key marketing characteristics of products or services at 
each stage of the product life cycle?
2.	 Why might placement decisions for products or services into stages of 
the product life cycle become a self-fulfilling prophecy?
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Identify the reasons firms create new products.
	
	
Firms need to innovate to respond to changing cus-
tomer needs, prevent declines in sales from market 
saturation, diversify their risk, and respond to short 
product life cycles, especially in industries such as 
fashion apparel, arts, books, and software markets, 
where most sales come from new products. Finally, 
innovations can help firms improve their business 
relationships with suppliers.
LO12-1
	
	
Describe the different groups of adopters articu-
lated by the diffusion of innovation theory.
	
	
The diffusion of innovation theory can help firms pre-
dict which types of customers will buy their products 
or services immediately upon introduction, as well as 
later as they gain more acceptance in the market. In-
novators are those buyers who want to be the first to 
have the new product or service. Early adopters do not 
take as much risk as innovators do but instead wait 
LO12-2

398	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
and purchase the product after careful review. The 
members of the early majority don’t like to take risks 
and therefore tend to wait until the bugs have been 
worked out of a particular product or service. The late 
majority are buyers who purchase the product after it 
has achieved its full market potential. Finally, laggards 
like to avoid change and rely on traditional products 
until those products are no longer available. Laggards 
may never adopt certain products or services.
	
	
Describe the various stages involved in develop-
ing a new product or service.
	
	
When firms develop new products, they go through sev-
eral steps. First, they generate ideas for the product or 
service using several alternative techniques, such as 
internal research and development, R&D consortia, 
licensing, brainstorming, tracking competitors’ prod-
ucts or services, or working with customers. Second, 
firms test their concepts by either describing the idea 
of the new product or service to potential customers or 
showing them images of what the product would look 
like. Third, the design process entails determining 
LO12-3
what the product or service will actually include and 
provide. Fourth, firms test-market their designs. Fifth, 
if everything goes well in the test market, the product 
is launched. Sixth, firms must evaluate the new prod-
uct or service to determine its success.
	
	
Explain the product life cycle.
	
	
The product life cycle helps firms make marketing 
mix decisions on the basis of the product’s stage in 
its life cycle. In the introduction stage, companies 
attempt to gain a strong foothold in the market 
quickly by appealing to innovators. During the 
growth stage, the objective is to establish the brand 
firmly. When the product reaches the maturity stage, 
firms compete intensely for market share, and many 
potential customers already own the product or use 
the service. Eventually, most products enter the de-
cline phase, during which firms withdraw marketing 
support and eventually phase out the product. 
Knowing where a product or service is in its life 
­cycle helps managers determine its specific strategy 
at any given point in time.
LO12-4
Key Terms 
∙	 alpha testing,  389
∙	 beta testing,  389
∙	 brainstorming,  384
∙	 concept,  388
∙	 concept testing,  388
∙	 decline stage,  392
∙	 diffusion of innovation,  375
∙	 early adopters,  378
∙	 early majority,  380
∙	 first movers,  376
∙	 growth stage,  392
∙	 innovation,  371
∙	 innovators,  377
∙	 introduction stage,  392
∙	 laggards,  380
∙	 late majority,  380
∙	 lead users,  387
∙	 licensing,  384
∙	 maturity stage,  392
∙	 outsourcing,  384
∙	 pioneers (breakthroughs),  375
∙	 premarket test,  389
∙	 product design,  388
∙	 product development,  388
∙	 product life cycle,  391
∙	 prototype,  389
∙	 R&D consortia,  384
∙	 reverse engineering,  386
∙	 test marketing,  389
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Go to http://www.quirky.com and read about how 
Quirky develops new products. How is this different 
from traditional new-product development?
2.	 The automotive industry is constantly adding new and 
different products and technologies to their cars—above 
as well as under the hood. Conduct an Internet or library 
database search and discuss two innovative new auto-
motive technologies that are changing the industry.
Marketing Applications
  1.  Some people think that a product should be considered 
“new” only if it is completely new to the market and 
has never existed before. Describe or give examples of 
other types of new products.
  2.  Android Wear is a new category of wearable comput-
ing devices that link to Android smartphones. How 
quickly do you think this product will diffuse among 
the U.S. population? Describe the types of people that 

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
399
	
	
you expect will be in each of the diffusion of innova-
tion stages.
  3.  What are the advantages and disadvantages for compa-
nies that are the first to introduce products that create 
new markets?
  4.  Identify and describe the ways that companies generate 
new product ideas. Which of these ways involve the 
customer? How can firms assess the value of the ideas 
that customers generate?
  5.  Describe an example of a new product or service that is tar-
geted at the college-student market. Using the concept- 
testing discussion in the chapter, describe how you 
would conduct a concept test for this product or service.
  6.  Using the same product or service you used in question 
5, use the diffusion of innovation theory to assess how 
quickly it will diffuse based on its relative advantage, 
compatibility, observability, complexity, and trialability.
  7.  How does the Internet help companies gain customer 
input on their existing and new products?
  8.  Nature’s Path is about to introduce a type of granola 
and is in the market-testing phase of the new 
­product-development process. Describe two ways that 
Nature’s Path might conduct initial market testing prior 
to launching this new product.
  9.  In what stage of the product life cycle is the PlayStation 
4 video game console? Is Sony’s marketing strategy—
its four Ps—consistent with the product’s stage in its 
life cycle? Explain.
10.  You have recently been hired by a cosmetics company 
in the product-development group. The firm’s brand is a 
top-selling, high-end line of cosmetics. The head of the 
development team has just presented research that 
shows that “tween” girls, aged 11 to 15, are very inter-
ested in cosmetics and have the money to spend. The 
decision is made to create a line of tween cosmetics 
based on the existing adult line. As the product moves 
through development you begin to notice that the team 
seems to lean toward a very edgy and sexual theme for 
the line, including naming the various lines “envy,” “de-
sire,” “prowess,” and “fatal attraction.” You begin to 
wonder, is this concept too much for girls in the targeted 
age group?
1.	 In the United States, most consumer packaged goods 
found in grocery and discount stores are already in the 
 stage, which is characterized by the adoption 
of the product by the late majority and intense competi-
tion for market share among firms.
a.  introduction
b.  growth
c.  maturity
d.  first
e.  decline
2.	 Although they enjoy novelty and are considered to be 
opinion leaders, 
 are not the first to purchase 
new product innovations. 
a.  laggards
b.  innovators
c.  early adopters
d.  the late majority
e.  the early majority 
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
IS THE GLASS HALF FULL? THE LAUNCH, DEATH STRUGGLES, AND 
POTENTIAL REEMERGENCE OF GOOGLE GLASS
From its very start, Google has embraced the idea of innovation actively. The founders began 
their company with the (at the time) totally innovative concept of an online search engine. Then 
they instituted the “20 percent” rule, according to which all employees had to spend at least one 
workday per week on creative, off-the-wall project ideas. With such a foundation, Google’s  
record of innovation is naturally impressive, from Google Maps to Street View to driverless 
cars, from the Android operating system to Chromebooks. And then came Google Glass. 
Even before the wearable technology was introduced in any form, it seemed as if everyone 
knew what it was—and had an opinion about its efficacy, appeal, and look. The wearable 
Chapter Case Study 

400	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
­product would allow users to surf the Internet and gather information simply by looking up and 
to the right. They could swipe their finger over a sensor behind their ears to pull up a Google 
map and navigate, take pictures, or initiate the embedded Bluetooth technology to make a call.66
The initial rollout of Google Glass was limited, purposefully, by a couple of factors. 
First, Google set the price very high, at around $1,500. That meant that only the most ded-
icated tech geeks, and those with plenty of disposable income, would be the ones first 
sporting the headband-like devices. Second, Google required people to register for the 
chance to receive a set.67 Even if thousands wanted to spend the money, Google allowed 
only a select few to receive them at any one time.
This slow, measured rollout was designed to provide several benefits for Google. Be-
cause it sought to minimize the supply available, Google created a perception that Glass 
was extremely popular and stirred up excitement in potential customers. The press buzz 
and word of mouth spread remarkably far and quickly. Furthermore, it identified a ready-
made segment of beta testers. By making sure that those who used the early versions of 
Google Glass were really interested in it, Google knew that the feedback they provided was 
more likely to be insightful and related to the underlying technology. Thus it did not have 
to filter out, initially, complaints about it being too hard to use from people without much 
technological savvy or other reviews that seemed less important to the developers.
But the results were not exactly as Google planned. Google assumed most comments 
would be about technology improvements. Instead, much of the information it gleaned in-
volved the look of the device and the alternative uses it could support. For example, though 
there was never any danger that Google Glass would become a high-fashion option, people 
sought to make them at least a little more attractive. The solution was an easy one: offer 
Google Glass in several colors, so that fashionable folks could coordinate with their 
phones, purses, or favorite hues.
In terms of the functions for which people actually use Google Glass, the innova-
tor’s predictions again were inaccurate. Google anticipated that Glass would resonate 
most with busy business professionals who found the act of taking their smartphones out 
of their pockets too inefficient. But it learned quickly that even these professional seg-
ments used Glass in far more casual manners. In one example, a pet lover explained that 
it was far easier to take funny cat videos when both hands were free to tempt the feline 
with a toy.68
Along with this feedback, Google noted some surprise at the diversity of people inter-
ested in Glass. As Leila Takayama, a researcher with Google, explained, “We were expect-
ing the people to be extremely tech savvy—to kind of look like us Googlers. But what we 
actually saw were people who were much more diverse. They were people who were just 
sort of curious.”69 Although diversity of users seemingly should have been a benefit, in-
stead it meant that Google Glass was not satisfying any market segment’s needs precisely. 
Casual users found it ugly and awkward; high-tech early adopters complained about its 
short battery life and expressed their disgust with the “terrible product” online, noting that 
it was plagued by defects, bugs, and poor performance. 
In the wake of this negative press, Google pulled Glass 
nearly completely from the world. Not only did it stop produc-
ing new versions of the product, but it also removed dedicated 
social media pages on Facebook and Twitter, as if to pretend 
the launch had never happened. In so doing, it prompted many 
observers to proclaim the death of Google Glass.70
But not so fast. Post-mortem accounts suggest that the 
tremendous buzz and highly touted launch of the product—
those marketing techniques that seemingly promised its 
­success—actually were exactly what Google Glass engineers 
had hoped to avoid.71 The research and development team 
knew that the initial product had lots of bugs; they never in-
tended it to be released for widespread use. Instead, they 
called for a slow, quiet rollout, in which selected users would 
beta test the prototypes and provide specific feedback and 
Google Glass is one of the lat-
est of many significant Google 
innovations.
© Michal Krakowiak/Getty Images RF

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
401
	
	
­information that would enable Google to create a more functional product for the wider 
market. Somewhere along the line though, the quiet rollout transformed into a media blitz, 
and the expectations for Google Glass rose well above any potential benefits that it was 
even designed to offer at that point in its life cycle.
Today, Google has basically no official comment to offer about the future of Google 
Glass. But a dedicated team still exists at Google,72 overseen by two managers: a former 
jewelry designer and a former Apple product developer. These hires suggest that Google 
might be focusing more on the design appeal of potential new versions. 
Moreover, the continued growth of wearable technology—from the Apple Watch to the 
Fitbit to Samsung’s Gear—reinforce the appeal of the underlying concept: Modern users 
love their personal technology, and they want a viable, effective means to use their personal 
devices in hands-free, convenient ways. Google thus might emerge as an early entrant and 
innovator in this market. It also seemingly has broken open the path for other technology 
firms that look at its example and find inspiration for entering product markets on their own. 
For example, recent reports suggest that Snapchat has been hiring hardware experts and 
engineers with vast experience working on other wearable technology projects.73 Does that 
mean Snap Glass might be the next new thing on the market? 
Questions
1.	
What kind of testing did Google perform for Google Glass? What other methods 
might it have used?
2.	
At what stage of its product life cycle is Google Glass today? 
3.	
What can later entrants into the wearable technology market learn from Google’s 
new product introduction?
	 1.	 Eva Dou, “Xiaomi: The Secret to the World’s Most Successful 
Startup,” The Wall Street Journal, April 6, 2015, http://wsj.com. 
	2.	 Roberto A. Ferdman, “Who knew That Chinese Mobile 
Company Xiaomi Has Users in 58 Countries,” QZ.com,  
January 4, 2014.
	3.	 David Gilbert, “Xiaomi Misses Sales Target, Sells 70 Million 
Smartphones in 2015,” IB Times, January 15, 2016.
	4.	 Dou, “Xiaomi: The Secret to the World’s Most Successful 
Startup.”
 	5.	 Jonathan Cheng, “Xiaomi Launches New Flagship Smartphone 
at Mobile World Congress,” The Wall Street Journal, February 
24, 2016.
	6.	 Dou, “Xiaomi: The Secret to the World’s Most Successful 
Startup.”
	 7.	 Ibid.
	8.	 Bloomberg News, “Xiaomi Unveils Mi5 Phone to Spearhead 
Sales Drive Beyond China,” Bloomberg Business, February 24, 
2016, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-24/
xiaomi-unveils-mi5-phone-to-spearhead-sales-drive-beyond-
china. 
	9.	 Dou, “Xiaomi: The Secret to the World’s Most Successful 
Startup.”
	10.	 Bloomberg News, “Xiaomi Unveils Mi5 Phone to Spearhead 
Sales Drive Beyond China.”
	11.	 Michael Beschloss, “The Polaroid Swinger: Changing the 
Market in an Instant,” The New York Times, July 2, 2015.
	12.	 Timothy Hay, “Technology Innovations That Could Help the 
Elderly,” The Wall Street Journal, June 29, 2015.
	13.	 Andrew Adam Newman, “Making the Diaper Change Easier for 
the Changer,” The New York Times, July 28, 2011, http://www.
nytimes.com; “The Huggies Brand Encourages Parents to 
Showcase Their Active Babies,” The New York Times, January 
19, 2012, http://markets.on.nytimes.com.
	14.	 Koen Pauwels, et al., “New Products, Sales Promotions, and 
Firm Value: The Case of the Automobile Industry,” Journal of 
Marketing 68, no. 4 (2008), p. 142.
	15.	 Elaine Watson, “What’s the Size of the US Gluten-Free Prize? 
$490m, $5bn, or $10bn?” Food Navigator USA, February 17, 
2014, http://www.foodnavigator-usa.com.
	16.	 Kalpesh Kaushik Desai and Kevin Lane Keller, “The Effects of 
Ingredient Branding Strategies on Host Brand Extendibility,” 
Journal of Marketing 66, no. 1 (2002), pp. 73–93.
	17.	 Erik Kain, “ ‘Madden NFL 25’ Sales Down over Last Year, First 
Week Still Tops 1M Units,” Forbes, September 5, 2013, http://
www.forbes.com.
	18.	 http://www.ideo.com/work/featured/kraft.
	19.	 http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary. 
aspx?dLetter=D.
	20.	Michael J. Barone and Robert D. Jewell, “The Innovator’s 
License: A Latitude to Deviate from Category Norms,”  
Journal of Marketing 77 (January 2013), pp. 120–34;  
Barak Libai, Eitan Muller, and Renana Peres, “The Diffusion  
of Services,” Journal of Marketing Research 46 (April 2009), 
pp. 163–75; Yvonne van Everdingen, Dennis Fok, and Stefan 
Stemersch, “Modeling Global Spillover of New Product  
Takeoff,” Journal of Marketing Research 46 (October 2009), 
pp. 637–52.
	21.	 Stanley F. Slater, Jakki J. Mohr, and Sanjit Sengupta, “Radical 
Product Innovation Capability: Literature Review, Synthesis,  
and Illustrative Research Propositions,” Journal of Product 
Innovation Management 31, no. 3 (May 2014), pp. 552–66; 
Endnotes

402	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Rosabeth Moss Kanter, SuperCorp: How Vanguard Companies 
Create Innovation, Profits, Growth, and Social Good (New 
York: Crown Business, 2009); Rajesh K. Chandy, Jaideep C. 
Prabhu, and Kersi D. Antia, “What Will the Future Bring? 
Dominance, Technology Expectations, and Radical Innovation,” 
Journal of Marketing 67, no. 3 (2003), pp. 1–18; Harald J. van 
Heerde, Carl F. Mela, and Puneet Manchanda, “The Dynamic 
Effect of Innovation on Market Structure,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 41, no. 2 (2004), pp. 166–83.
	22.	http://www.apple.com; Clayton M. Christensen and Michael E. 
Raynor, The Innovator’s Solution (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2003).
	23.	Rajan Varadarajan, Manjit S. Yadav, and Venkatesh Shankar, 
“First-Mover Advantage in the Internet-Enabled Market 
Environment,” in Handbook of Strategic e-Business 
Management (Heidelberg: Springer, 2014), pp. 157–85; James 
L. Oakley et al., “Order of Entry and the Moderating Role of 
Comparison Brands in Brand Extension Evaluation,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 34, no. 5 (2008), pp. 706–12; Fernando 
F. Suarez and Gianvito Lanzolla, “Considerations for a Stronger 
First Mover Advantage Theory,” Academy of Management 
Review 33, no. 1 (2008), pp. 269–70; Ralitza Nikolaeva, “The 
Dynamic Nature of Survival Determinants in E-commerce,” 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 35, no. 4 
(2007), pp. 560–71.
	24.	“Top 10 Reasons for New Product Failure,” The Marketing Fray, 
January 7, 2010, http://www.marketingfray.com.
	25.	http://smashinghub.com/10-coolest-upcoming-gadgets-of-2011.
htm.
	26.	Barak Libai, Eitan Muller, and Renana Peres, “Decomposing the 
Value of Word-of-Mouth Seeding Programs: Acceleration versus 
Expansion,” Journal of Marketing Research 50, no. 2 (2013), pp. 
161–76; Jacob Goldenberg, et al., “The Role of Hubs in the Adoption 
Process,” Journal of Marketing 73 (March 2009), pp. 1–13.
	27.	Ellen Byron, “The Cleanest House of All,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 20, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
	28.	Carol Matlack, “Electrolux’s Holy Trinity for Hit Products,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, October 31, 2013, http://www. 
businessweek.com.
	29.	Gabriel Beltrone, “Most Inclusive Ad Ever? Swiffer Spot Stars 
Interracial Family, and Dad’s an Amputee,” Adweek, January 21, 
2014, http://www.adweek.com.
	30.	Carol Matlack, “Electrolux’s Holy Trinity for Hit Products,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, October 31, 2013, http://www. 
businessweek.com.
	 31.	https://www.youtube.com/user/Blendtec.
	32.	Charles Passy, “How Fast Food Chains Cook Up New Menu 
Items,” The Wall Street Journal, August 24, 2015. 
	33.	Natalie Zmuda, “P&G, Levi’s, GE Innovate by Thinking in 
Reverse,” Advertising Age, June 13, 2011, http://adage.com; 
“Minute Maid Pulpy Joins Growing List of Billion Dollar Brands 
for the Coca-Cola Company,” press release, February 1, 2011, 
http://www.thecoca-colacompany.com.
	34.	“Pilates Allegra 2 Reformer for Balanced Body,” IDEO Case 
Study, 2011.
	35.	Dominik Mahr, Annouk Lievens, and Vera Blazevic, “The Value 
of Customer Cocreated Knowledge during the Innovation 
Process,” Journal of Product Innovation Management (2013); 
Pilar Carbonell, Ana I. Rodríguez-Escudero, and Devashish 
Pujari, “Customer Involvement in New Service Development:  
An Examination of Antecedents and Outcomes,” Journal of 
Product Innovation Management 26 (September 2009),  
pp. 536–50; Glen L. Urban and John R. Hauser, “ ‘Listening In’ 
to Find and Explore New Combinations of Customer Needs,” 
Journal of Marketing 68, no. 2 (2004), p. 72.
	36.	Jeff Bellairs, “Innovation and Collaboration Swiftly Launch 
Green Giant Snack Chips,” Taste of General Mills, June 19, 
2013, http://www.blog.generalmills.com.
	37.	Passy, “How Fast Food Chains Cook Up New Menu Items.”
	38.	Michael Nir, Agile Project Management (New York: 
CreateSpace, 2013); Jim Highsmith, Agile Product 
Management: Creating Innovative Products (Boston, Addison-
Wesley, 2009); http://www.betterproductdesign.net; Eric von 
Hippel, The Sources of Innovation (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1988); Eric von Hippel, “Successful Industrial 
Products from Consumers’ Ideas,” Journal of Marketing 42,  
no. 1 (1978), pp. 39–49.
	39.	Karl T. Ulrich and Steven D. Eppinger, Product Design and 
Development, 5th ed. (Boston: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2011).
	40.	http://www.marketingpower.com.
	41.	 Ulrich and Eppinger, Product Design and Development.
	42.	Min Zhao, Steven Hoeffler, and Darren W. Dahl, “The Role of 
Imagination-Focused Visualization on New Product Evaluation,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 46 (February 2009), pp. 46–55; 
http://www.marketingpower.com.
	43.	Ulrich and Eppinger, Product Design and Development.
	44.	Frederic Lardinois, “YouEye Raises $3M for Its Webcam-Based 
Usability Testing Service with Emotion Recognition,” Tech 
Crunch, May 7, 2013, http://www.techcrunch.com.
	45.	http://en-us.nielsen.com/tab/product_families/nielsen_bases.
	46.	Passy, “How Fast Food Chains Cook Up New Menu Items.”
	47.	Gernot H. Gessinger, Materials and Innovative Product 
Development: From Concept to Market (Oxford: Elsevier, 
2009).
	48.	Michael Cieply, “New Challenge for Filmmakers: Adding 
Dimension to 3-D Movies,” The New York Times, August 11, 
2013, http://www.nytimes.com.
	49.	Product Development Management Association, The PDMA 
Handbook of New Product Development, 3rd ed., Kenneth K. 
Kahn, ed. (New York: Wiley, 2012).
	50.	Jan Hendrik Fisch and Jan-Michael Ross, “Timing Product 
Replacements under Uncertainty—the Importance of Material–
Price Fluctuations for the Success of Products That Are Based 
on New Materials,” Journal of Product Innovation Management 
(2014); Yuhong Wu, Sridhar Balasubramanian, and Vijay 
Mahajan, “When Is a Preannounced New Product Likely to Be 
Delayed?” Journal of Marketing 68, no. 2 (2004), p. 101.
	51.	 http://www.walletpop.com/specials/top-25-biggest-product-
flops-of-all-time.
	52.	http://www.pdma.org/.
	53.	Theodore Levitt, Marketing Imagination (New York: Free Press, 
1986).
	54.	Donald R. Lehmann and Russell S. Winer, Analysis for 
Marketing Planning, 7th ed. (Burr Ridge IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 
2008).
	55.	Lehmann and Winer, Analysis for Marketing Planning; Glen L. 
Urban and John R. Hauser, Design and Marketing of New 
Products, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993), 
pp. 120–21.
	56.	http://www.organicearthday.org/DelMonteFoods.htm; http://
www.delmonte.com/Products/.
	57.	Euromonitor International, “A Revival in Hair Care Innovation,” 
August 12, 2013, http://blog.euromonitor.com.
	58.	“Winning in Emerging Markets to Drive Growth in the Life 
Sciences Industry,” Accenture, 2013, http://www.accenture.
com; Eric D. Beinhocker, Diana Farrell, and Adil S. Zainulbhai, 
“Tracking the Growth of India’s Middle Class,” McKinsey 
Quarterly (August 2007).

	
DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS  CHAPTER TWELVE	
403
	
	
	59.	Wallace Witkowski, “iPhones and Other Portables Suffering 
from ‘Device Exhaustion,’ Analyst Says,” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 20, 2013, http://blogs.marketwatch.com; Jon 
Gold, “Is the Smartphone Market Saturated?” Network World, 
July 30, 2015, http://www.networkworld.com/article/2954568/
smartphones/is-the-smartphone-market-saturated.html.
	60.	Natalie Zmuda and Jennifer Rooney, “Hallmark Breaks Out of 
Special Occasion Mold,” Advertising Age, July 6, 2011, http:// 
adage.com.
	61.	 Alan Kozzin, “Weaned on CDs, They’re Reaching for Vinyl,” The 
New York Times, June 9, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com; Ed 
Christman, “Digital Music Sales Decrease for First Time in 
2013,” BillboardBiz, January 3, 2014, http://www.billboard.com.
	62.	Yvonne Zipp, “As Vinyl Records Get Back in the Groove, 
Kalamazoo Record Stores See Sales Climb,” MLive, January 15, 
2012, http://www.mlive.com.
	63.	Steven Levenstein, “Sony’s New USB Turntable Sparks Vinyl 
Revival,” March 14, 2008, http://www.inventospot.com; http:// 
www.electronichouse.com; Roy Bragg, “LP Vinyl Records Are 
Making a Comeback in Audiophile Circles,” Knight Ridder 
Tribune Business News, January 3, 2004 (ProQuest Document 
ID: 521358371); Susan Adams, “You, the Record Mogul,” Forbes, 
October 27, 2003, p. 256ff.
	64.	Goutam Challagalla, R. Venkatesh, and Ajay Kohli, “Proactive 
Postsales Service: When and Why Does It Pay Off?,” Journal of 
Marketing 73 (March 2009), pp. 70–87; Kevin J. Clancy and 
Peter C. Krieg, “Product Life Cycle: A Dangerous Idea,” 
Brandweek, March 1, 2004, p. 26; Nariman K. Dhalla and 
Sonia Yuseph, “Forget the Product Life-Cycle Concept,” Harvard 
Business Review (January/February 1976), p. 102ff.
	65.	Jan R. Landwehr, Daniel Wentzel, and Andreas Herrmann, 
“Product Design for the Long Run: Consumer Responses to 
Typical and Atypical Designs at Different Stages of Exposure,” 
Journal of Marketing 77, no. 5 (2013), pp. 92–107; Peter 
Golder and Gerard Tellis, “Cascades, Diffusion, and Turning 
Points in the Product Life Cycle,” MSI Report No. 03-120, 2003.
	66.	David Pogue, “Google Glass and the Future of Technology,”  
The New York Times, September 12, 2012, http://pogue.blogs.
nytimes.com.
	67.	http://www.google.com/glass/start/how-to-get-one/.
	68.	David Zax, “Google Glass’s Unexpected Lessons in Product 
Launching,” Fast Company, February 3, 2014, http://www. 
fastcompany.com.
	69.	Ibid.
	70.	Lance Ulanoff, “Google Glass Disappears from Twitter and 
Facebook,” Mashable, January 26, 2016, http://mashable.
com/2016/01/26/google-glass-social-accounts/#q6OQsKIrIsqW. 
	71.	 Nick Bilton, “Why Google Glass Broke,” The New York Times, 
February 5, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/05/style/
why-google-glass-broke.html?_r=0.
	72.	Eric Johnson, “Google Glass Isn’t Dead—But It’s All About the 
Enterprise for Now,” Re/Code, July 30, 2015, http://recode.
net/2015/07/30/google-glass-isnt-dead-but-its-all-about-the- 
enterprise-for-now/.
	73.	Sean Hollister, “SnapGlass? HoloChat? Snapchat Is Secretly 
Hiring Wearable Technology Experts,” cnet, March 11, 2016, 
http://www.cnet.com/news/snapchat-glasses-vergence-snap-
labs-hints-wearable/. 
	 i.	 Ben Fritz, “With ‘Cinderella,’ Disney Recycles Fairy Tales, Minus 
the Cartoons,” The Wall Street Journal, March 10, 2015, 
https://www.wsj.com; Alan French, “Plenty on the Line for 
Disney’s 2016 Live-Action Releases,” Inside the Magic, February 
23, 2016, http://www.insidethemagic.net/2016/02/plenty-on-
the-line-for-disneys-2016-live-action-releases/; Drew Mackie, 
“Here Is a Complete List of All the Disney Classics Being 
Remade (So Far),” People, September 23, 2015, http://www.
people.com/article/all-disney-classics-live-action-remake; 
	 ii.	 Ryan Mac, “Bow to Your Billionaire Drone Overlord: Frank 
Wang’s Quest to Put DJI Robots into the Sky,” Forbes, May 6, 
2015; Paul Bedard, “Drone Sales Surge 167% to 4.3 Million, U.S. 
Leads but China Catching Up,” Washington Examiner, May 29, 
2015; Geoffrey Fowler and Joanna Stern, “Best Tech Gifts of 
2015: Our Favorite Gadgets,” The Wall Street Journal, 
November 24, 2015; Brookstone, http://www.brookstone.com/
best-seller-gifts?srule=highest-rating&sz=24&start=0; Amazon, 
http://www.amazon.com/b?node=8037720011.
	iii.	 Chris Murphy, “GM’s Data Strategy Pushed to Center Stage,” 
Information Week, March 27, 2014, http://www.information-
week.com/; Mark van Rijmenam, “Three Use Cases of How 
General Motors Applies Big Data to Become Profitable Again,” 
DataFloq, August 25, 2014, https://datafloq.com/; Jonathan H. 
Owen, David J. VanderVeen, and Lerinda L. Frost, “General 
Motors: Using O.R. to Meet Auto Industry Challenges and 
Provide Value to Customers and the Company,” Informs Online, 
December 2013, http://www.orms-today.org/. 
	iv.	 Jack Adams, “US Search Engine Market Share Figures Steady 
in February,” Clickthrough, March 21, 2014, http://www.click-
through-marketing.com; Steve Lohr, “Can Microsoft Make You 
‘Bing’?” The New York Times, July 30, 2011, http://www.nytimes.
com; Renay San Miguel, “Bing’s New Bells and Whistles Could 
Leave Searchers’ Heads Ringing,” TechNewsWorld, March 29, 
2010; Jared Newman, “How Microsoft Plans to Beat Google 
with Bing,” PCWorld, August 1, 2011, http://www.pcworld.com; 
Vamien McKalin, “Bing Slowly Eating Away at Google Search 
with New Market Share Gain,” TWCN Tech News, January 2, 
2016, http://news.thewindowsclub.com/bing-slowly-eating-
away-google-search-new-market-share-gain-81397/.
	 v.	 Melissa Harris, “Business Is Popping for Healthier Snack,” 
Chicago Tribute, February 8, 2012, http://articles.chicagotribune.
com/2012-02-08/business/ct-biz-0209-confidential-skinnypop- 
20120204_1_grocery-stores-garrett-popcorn-bags; Ellen 
Rogan, “SkinnyPop’s Success: Lessons I Learned,” May 21, 2014, 
http://www.ellenrogin.com/skinny-pops-success-lessons-i-
learned/; Tomi Kilgore, “5 Things to Know About SkinnyPop-
Maker Amplify Ahead of Its IPO,” Market Watch, August 4, 
2015, http://www.marketwatch.com/story/5-things-to-know-
about-skinnypop-maker-amplify-ahead-of-its-ipo-2015-08-03; 
Peter Frost, “SkinnyPop’s Parent Company Goes Public, with a 
10-Figure Valuation,” Crain’s Chicago Business, August 5, 2015, 
http://www.chicagobusiness.com/article/20150805/
NEWS07/150809926/skinnypops-parent-company-goes- 
public-with-a-10-figure-valuation.

L
ululemon’s newly opened flagship store in Manhattan 
does more than sell exercise clothing and yoga 
equipment, which make up only about two thirds of  
 their business. Part of the facility is taken up with 
concierge services, available to recommend a nearby gym or 
help shoppers book class time. On another floor, the Hub 
Seventeen space is used for yoga classes, demonstrations, 
concerts, and other community-building events. 
SERVICES:  
THE INTANGIBLE 
PRODUCT
CHAPTER 13
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO13-1	 Describe how the marketing of services differs from the marketing of products.
	LO13-2	 Discuss the four gaps in the Service Gaps Model.
	LO13-3	 Examine the five service quality dimensions.
	LO13-4	 Explain the zone of tolerance.
	LO13-5	 Identify three service recovery strategies.

Lululemon believes that it can increase the sense of 
community surrounding its stores in various areas, espe-
cially with its concierge service. Concierges on staff sug-
gest places in any local area where shoppers could take 
a jog or find a healthy meal. In invoking this sense of com-
munity, lululemon hopes to become a new “third place” for 
its consumers and fans after their home and work, such 
that they might feel comfortable stopping by to have a 
cup of tea and relax in the store, even if they are not go-
ing to make a purchase. 
Although the Hub Seventeen space may not expand 
to all stores, it does point to the company’s service-­
oriented efforts to make its stores more than just retail 
outlets. In particular, with the offer of yoga classes, lulu-
lemon gives its customers what they clearly want, namely, 
a space to practice the type of exercise for which they 
­already have purchased the gear.
In addition to responding to customer demand for ded-
icated services, such efforts might reflect the company’s 
attempt to overcome some bad press that it has suffered 
recently, including the fallout that resulted from thoughtless 
comments by a former executive who implied that over-
weight people were not the company’s target market. 
Lululemon also invoked serious customer complaints when 
it raised the price of a popular pant style, as well as when 
consumers discovered a production error that resulted in 
multiple batches of its yoga pants being embarrassingly 
transparent.1 With product and service failures like these, 
lululemon has recognized that it has some work to do if it 
hopes to keep customers centered, aligned, and happy.
© Bloomberg/Getty Images

406	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Whereas a service is any intangible offering that involves a deed, performance, or effort 
that cannot be physically possessed,2 customer service specifically refers to human or 
mechanical activities firms undertake to help satisfy their customers’ needs and wants. By 
providing good customer service, firms add value to their products. Although Amazon 
may have built its reputation on being able to provide a vast range of products, it also has 
developed capabilities that allow customers to click a link to receive quotes for services, 
such as electronic installation, home repairs, yard work, or dog walking, from local profes-
sionals. Google already provides a service, in the form of its famous search engine, but it 
also is experimenting with ways to compete in other service spaces. For example, it re-
cently invested heavily in Thumbtack, a platform that allows customers to post their service 
needs and job offers, then receive bids for those jobs from service providers that have reg-
istered with the site.3
Exhibit 13.1 illustrates the continuum from a pure service to a pure good. Most offer-
ings lie somewhere in the middle and include some service and some good (i.e., a hybrid 
of the two). Even those firms that are engaged primarily in selling a good, such as an ap-
parel store, typically view service as a method to maintain a 
sustainable competitive advantage. Although lululemon is 
working extraordinarily hard to provide community-oriented 
services, any clothing retailer needs to provide basic customer 
service to help shoppers find the items they want and com-
plete their transaction. Therefore, this chapter takes an inclu-
sive view of services as anything from pure service businesses, 
such as Twitter, to a business that uses service as a differenti-
ating tool to help it sell physical goods.
Economies of developed countries such as of the United 
States have become increasingly dependent on services. Ser-
vices account for nearly 80 percent of the U.S. gross domestic 
product (GDP), a much higher percentage than was true 50, 
20, or even 10 years ago.4 In turn, the current list of Fortune 
500 companies contains more service companies and fewer 
manufacturers than it did in previous decades.5 This depen-
dence and the growth of service-oriented economies in devel-
oped countries have emerged for several reasons.
First, it is generally less expensive for firms to manufac-
ture their products in less developed countries. Even if the 
goods are finished in the United States, some of their 
­components likely were produced elsewhere. In turn, the pro-
portion of service production to goods production in the 
United States and other similar economies has steadily in-
creased over time.
Second, people place a high value on convenience and 
leisure. For instance, household maintenance activities, which 
many people performed themselves in the past, have become 
more popular and quite specialized. Food preparation, lawn 
Google has invested in Thumb-
tack, a platform that allows 
customers to post their service 
needs and job offers, then re-
ceive bids for those jobs from 
service providers that have 
registered with the site.
Source: Thumbtack.com
Specialized services like personal training are thriving.
© John Lund/Drew Kelly/Blend Images RF

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
407
	
	
maintenance, house cleaning, pet grooming, laundry and dry cleaning, hair care, and auto-
mobile maintenance are all often performed by specialists. 
Third, as the world has become more complicated, people are demanding more spe-
cialized services—everything from plumbers to personal trainers, from massage therapists 
to tax preparation specialists, from lawyers to travel and leisure specialists, and even to 
health care providers. The aging population in particular has increased the need for health 
care specialists, including doctors, nurses, and caregivers in assisted living facilities and 
nursing homes, and many of those consumers want their specialists to provide personal-
ized, dedicated services.
SERVICES MARKETING DIFFERS FROM 
PRODUCT MARKETING
The marketing of services differs from product marketing because of the four fundamental 
differences involved in services: Services are intangible, inseparable, heterogeneous, and 
perishable.6 (See Exhibit 13.2.) This section examines these differences and discusses how 
they affect marketing strategies.
Intangible
As the title of this chapter implies, the most fundamental difference between a product and 
a service is that services are intangible—they cannot be touched, tasted, or seen like a pure 
product can. When you get a physical examination, you see and hear the doctor, but the 
service itself is intangible. This intangibility can prove highly challenging to marketers, es-
pecially if they are more accustomed to selling products, as in the example in Adding Value 
13.1. For instance, it makes it difficult to convey the benefits of services—try describing 
whether the experience of visiting your dentist was good or bad and why. Service providers 
(e.g., physicians, dentists) therefore offer cues to help their customers experience and per-
ceive their service more positively, such as a waiting room stocked with television sets, 
beverages, and comfortable chairs to create an atmosphere that appeals to the target market.
A service that cannot be shown directly to potential customers also is difficult to pro-
mote. Marketers must creatively employ symbols and images to promote and sell services, 
as Six Flags does in using its advertising to evoke images of happy families and friends 
enjoying a roller coaster ride. Professional medical services provide appropriate images of 
personnel doing their jobs in white coats surrounded by high-tech equipment. 
Some services have found excellent ways to make their offerings more tangible to their 
customers. For example, Carbonite provides simple, affordable, unlimited online backup 
for individual home computer users as well as small businesses, for which it keeps its ser-
vices, prices, and customer support well within reach. The basic yearly rate for a home 
LO13-1	
Describe how the 
marketing of services 
differs from the 
marketing of 
products.
Product dominant
Service dominant
Doctor
Hotel
Dry
cleaners
Restaurant
Apparel
specialty
store
Grocery
store
The Service–Product Continuum
E X H I B I T  13.1
(Doctor): © Dynamic Graphics/JupiterImages RF; (Hotel): © Jose Fuste Raga/Getty Images; (Dry cleaners): © McGraw-Hill Education/Andrew Resek, photographer;  
(Restaurant): © John A. Rizzo/Getty Images RF; (Apparel): © Charles Bowman/Alamy RF; (Grocery store): © Photodisc/Getty Images RF

408	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
customer is $59 per computer; a business pays $269 a year to cover all company comput-
ers. Its software runs invisibly on both Macs and PCs, performing backups automatically. 
For portable digital access, the company offers free mobile applications for BlackBerry, 
iPad, iPhone, and Android devices. In addition, it has expanded its capabilities as it has 
grown, such that it now helps clients in medical professions ensure the security of patients’ 
E X H I B I T  13.2
Core Differences between Services and Goods
Factors
diﬀerentiating
services
from goods
Perishable
Heterogeneous
Intangible
Inseparable
Because it is difficult to show a 
service, Six Flags evokes im-
ages in its advertising of happy 
families and friends enjoying a 
ride at one of its amusement 
parks.
© Ken James/Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
409
	
	
information. As for security, Carbonite’s system is compara-
ble to the safeguards used by major banks, credit card compa-
nies, and online retailers. All files are encrypted with two 
layers of technology, stored on enterprise-grade servers to 
protect against mechanical disk failure, and kept in state-of-
the-art data centers guarded 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. 
Personnel must pass through biometric scans and electronic 
pin coding to enter. Carbonite thus has firmly established its 
market position by delivering a reliable, secure, easy-to-use 
service, combined with reasonable pricing and easily accessi-
ble technical support.7
Inseparable Production and Consumption
Unlike chocolates that may have been made halfway around the 
world six months prior to their purchase, services are produced 
and consumed at the same time; that is, service and consump-
tion are inseparable. When getting a haircut, the customer is 
not only present but also may participate in the service process. 
Furthermore, the interaction with the service provider may have 
an important impact on the customer’s perception of the service 
outcome. If the hairstylist appears to be having fun while cut-
ting hair, it may affect the experience positively.
Because the service is inseparable from its consumption, 
customers rarely have the opportunity to try the service before 
they purchase it. And after the service has been performed, it 
can’t be returned. Imagine telling your hairstylist that you 
want to have the hair around your ears trimmed as a test be-
fore he or she does your entire head. Because the purchase 
risk in these scenarios can be relatively high, service firms 
Adding Value 13.1
Kola House Restaurant: Ensuring a Service Experience  
That Includes Pepsii
The terms and names that marketers use to describe their of-
ferings are often critically important. Consumers might refer 
to carbonated beverages as colas, sodas, or pop, but in a new 
experimental expansion, PepsiCo. is emphasizing the term 
“kola” in an effort to highlight the kola nut that is the source of 
the flavor and body of traditional cola drinks. It isn’t emphasiz-
ing the Pepsi name or any of the valuable brands that the com-
pany owns. And perhaps most remarkably, it isn’t selling a 
product, in the traditional sense of the word.
Instead, at Kola House, a restaurant, bar, and event space in 
New York’s trendy Chelsea neighborhood, Pepsi runs a tradi-
tional restaurant in conjunction with a product testing ground. 
The food and beverage menus revolve around the kola nut and 
related ingredients. This single space is the only Kola House 
planned so far, though Pepsi notes that if it achieves success 
here, it would consider expanding the idea to other cities. 
Pepsi hired a head “alchemist”—a position that most people 
would likely call the head bartender. It also has plans for “mod-
ular” Kola Houses (a design that most people would call a 
pop-up) to appear at major sporting events like the Super 
Bowl, as well as at Lollapalooza and similar music festivals. 
Furthermore, the entire enterprise is being run by Pepsi’s mar-
keting department, not by a product division or specialized 
restaurant arm.
With this explicit marketing orientation, Pepsi is not only 
taking care with the words it uses but also taking a unique 
perspective on the entire restaurant experience. The physical 
space is largely designed to be so compelling and interesting 
that it drives consumers to report about it through social media. 
The very essence of the planning thus was not what products 
the restaurant will serve but rather what service experience it 
can create to excite and thrill consumers. The design firm that 
helped Pepsi create the space is owned by Lenny Kravitz, and 
it includes subtle hints of the ownership without emblazoning 
the Pepsi logo everywhere. 
The initiative is thus both innovative and risky. As this arti-
cle asserts, “Essentially, Pepsi is trying to market its product 
without marketing its product.”
Carbonite backs up computer data on remote servers.
Source: Carbonite, Inc.

410	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
sometimes provide extended warranties and 100 percent satisfaction guarantees. The 
Choice Hotels chain, for instance, states: “When you choose to stay at a Comfort Inn, 
Comfort Suites, Quality, Clarion, or Sleep Inn hotel, we are committed to making you feel 
understood, welcome, and important.”8
Heterogeneous
The more humans are needed to provide a service, the more likely 
there is to be heterogeneity or variability in the service’s quality. A 
hairstylist may give bad haircuts in the morning because he or 
she went out the night before. Yet that stylist still may offer a 
better service than the undertrained stylist working in the next 
station over. A restaurant, which offers a mixture of services 
and products, generally can control its food quality but not the 
variability in food preparation or delivery. If a consumer has a 
problem with a product, it can be replaced, redone, destroyed, 
or, if it is already in the supply chain, recalled. In many cases, 
the problem can even be fixed before the product gets into con-
sumers’ hands. An inferior service can’t be recalled; by the time 
the firm recognizes a problem, the damage has been done.
Marketers also can use the variable nature of services to their 
advantage. A micromarketing segmentation strategy can customize a 
service to meet customers’ needs exactly (see Chapter 9). Exercise facili-
ties might generally provide the same weights, machines, and mats, but at 
Planet Fitness, customers know that the gym explicitly seeks to offer a laid-
back, less intense setting. Planet Fitness actively avoids targeting hardcore gym 
rats with its service offering. Instead, local storefronts offer pizza nights and bowls of free 
Tootsie Rolls, varying the details to match the needs and preferences of their local mem-
bers. Thus each gym seeks to live up to the chain’s overall promise to make going to exer-
cise a pleasant experience rather than an intimidation festival.9
In an alternative approach, some service providers tackle the variability issue by re-
placing people with machines. For simple transactions such as getting cash, using an au-
tomated teller machine (ATM) is usually quicker and more convenient—and less 
variable—than waiting in line for a bank teller. Many retailers have installed kiosks in 
their stores: In addition to offering customers the opportunity to order merchandise not 
available in the store, kiosks can provide routine customer service, freeing employees to 
deal with more demanding customer requests and problems and reducing service variabil-
ity. Kiosks can also be used to automate existing store services such as gift registry man-
agement, rain checks, credit applications, and preordering service for bakeries and 
delicatessens.
Perishable
Services are perishable in that they cannot be stored for use in the future. You can’t stock-
pile your membership at Planet Fitness like you could a six-pack of V8 juice, for instance. 
The perishability of services provides both challenges and opportunities to marketers in 
terms of the critical task of matching demand and supply. As long as the demand for and 
supply of the service match closely, there is no problem, but unfortunately this perfect 
matching rarely occurs. A ski area, for instance, can be open as long as there is snow, even 
at night, but demand peaks on weekends and holidays, so ski areas often offer less expen-
sive tickets during off-peak periods to stimulate demand. Airlines, cruise ships, movie 
theaters, and restaurants confront similar challenges and attack them in similar ways.
Certainly, providing great service is not easy, and it requires a diligent effort to 
analyze the service process piece by piece. In the next section, we examine what is 
known as the Gaps Model, which is designed to highlight those areas where customers 
believe they are getting less or poorer service than they should (the gaps) and how these 
gaps can be closed.
Planet Fitness’ service 
offerings are customized to 
their customers’ needs.
© Hand-out/Planet Fitness/Newscom

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
411
	
	
PROVIDING GREAT SERVICE:  
THE GAPS MODEL
Customers have certain expectations about how a service should be delivered. When the 
delivery of that service fails to meet those expectations, a service gap results. The Service 
Gaps Model (Exhibit 13.3) is designed to encourage the systematic examination of all as-
pects of the service delivery process and prescribes the steps needed to develop an optimal 
service strategy.10
As Exhibit 13.3 shows, there are four service gaps:
1.	
The knowledge gap reflects the difference between customers’ expectations and the 
firm’s perception of those customer expectations. Firms can close this gap by deter-
mining what customers really want by doing research using marketing metrics such 
as service quality and the zone of tolerance (discussed later).
2.	
The standards gap pertains to the difference between the firm’s perceptions of cus-
tomers’ expectations and the service standards it sets. By setting appropriate service 
standards, training employees to meet and exceed those standards, and measuring 
service performance, firms can attempt to close this gap.
3.	
The delivery gap is the difference between the firm’s service standards and the actual 
service it provides to customers. This gap can be closed by getting employees to meet 
or exceed service standards when the service is being delivered by empowering service 
providers, providing support and incentives, and using technology where appropriate.11
4.	
The communication gap refers to the difference between the actual service provided 
to customers and the service that the firm’s promotion program promises. If firms are 
more realistic about the services they can provide and at the same time manage cus-
tomer expectations effectively, they generally can close this gap.
LO13-2	
Discuss the four gaps 
in the Service Gaps 
Model.
Because services are perish-
able, service providers like ski 
areas offer less expensive  
tickets at night to stimulate  
demand.
© Buddy Mays/Corbis
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the four marketing elements that distinguish services from 
products?
2.	 Why can’t we separate firms into just service or just product sellers?

412	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
As we discuss the four gaps subsequently, we will apply 
them to the experience that Marcia Kessler had with a motel in 
Maine. She saw an ad for a package weekend that quoted a very 
reasonable daily rate and listed the free amenities available at 
Green Valley Motel: free babysitting services, a piano bar with a 
nightly singer, a free continental breakfast, a heated swimming 
pool, and newly decorated rooms. When she booked the room, 
Marcia discovered that the price advertised was not available 
during the weekend, and a three-day minimum stay was re-
quired. Because of the nice amenities, however, she went ahead. 
After checking in with a very unpleasant person at the front 
desk, Marcia and her husband found that their room appeared 
circa-1950 and had not been cleaned, so they had to wait for 
several hours before they could use their room.. When she com-
plained, all she got was attitude from the assistant manager. 
­Resigned to the fact that they were slated to spend the weekend, 
she decided to go for a swim. Unfortunately, the water was 
heated by Booth Bay and stood at around 50 degrees. No one 
was using the babysitting services because there were few young children at the resort. It turns 
out the piano bar singer was the second cousin of the owner, and he couldn’t carry a tune, let 
alone play the piano very well. The continental breakfast must have come all the way from the 
Continent, because everything was stale and tasteless. Marcia couldn’t wait to get home.
The Knowledge Gap: Understanding Customer Expectations
An important early step in providing good service is knowing what the customer wants. It 
doesn’t pay to invest in services that don’t improve customer satisfaction. To reduce the 
E X H I B I T  13.3
Service Gaps Model for Improving Retail Service Quality 
Communication
gap
Knowledge
gap
Management
perceptions
of customer
expectations
Standards
specifying
service to
be delivered
Customer
expectations
for service
quality
Retailer
communications
about service
quality
Actual
service
delivered
Delivery
gap
Standards
gap
Service Gap
Lowest Prices In Town!
Sources: Adapted from Valarie Zeithaml, A. Parasuraman, and Leonard Berry, Delivering Quality Customer Service (New York: The 
Free Press, 1990); and Valarie Zeithaml, Leonard Berry, and A. Parasuraman, “Communication and Control Processes in the Delivery of 
Service Quality,” Journal of Marketing 52, no. 2 (April 1988), pp. 35–48.
What service gaps did Marcia experience while on vacation 
at the motel in Maine?
© Sascha Burkard/Getty Images RF

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
413
	
	
knowledge gap, firms must understand customers’ expectations. To understand those ex-
pectations, firms undertake customer research and increase the interaction and communi-
cation between managers and employees.
Customers’ expectations are based on their knowledge and experiences.12 Marcia’s ex-
pectations were that her room at the motel in Maine would be ready when she got there, the 
swimming pool would be heated, the singer would be able to sing, and the breakfast would be 
fresh. Not a lot to expect, but in this extreme example, the Green Valley Motel was suffering 
a severe knowledge gap, perhaps based on its assumption that being on the ocean in Maine 
was enough. If the resort never understood her expectations, it is unlikely it would ever be 
able to meet them.
Expectations vary according to the type of service. Marcia’s expectations might have 
been higher, for instance, if she were staying at a Ritz-Carlton rather than the Green Valley 
Motel. At the Ritz, she might have expected employees to know her by name, be aware of 
her dietary preferences, and to have placed fresh fruit of her choice and fresh-cut flowers in 
her room before she arrived. At the Green Valley Motel, she expected easy check-in/checkout, 
easy access to a major highway, a clean room with a comfortable bed, and a TV, at a 
bare minimum.
People’s expectations also vary depending on the situation. If she had been traveling 
on business, the Green Valley Motel might have been fine (had the room at least been clean 
and modern), but if she were celebrating her 10th wedding anniversary, she probably 
would prefer the Ritz. Thus, the service provider needs to know and understand the expec-
tations of the customers in its target market.
Evaluating Service Quality Using Well-Established Marketing Metrics  To meet or 
exceed customers’ expectations, marketers must determine what those expectations are. Yet 
because of their intangibility, the service quality, or customers’ perceptions of how well a 
service meets or exceeds their expectations, is often difficult for customers to evalu-
ate.13 Customers generally use five distinct service dimensions to determine overall service 
quality: reliability, responsiveness, assurance, empathy, and tangibles (see Exhibit 13.4). 
The Broadmoor Hotel in Colorado Springs, Colorado, maintains its five-star rating by fo-
cusing on these five service characteristics. In operation for more than a century, the 
Broadmoor is one of the world’s premier resorts.14 It has received more than 50 consecutive 
LO13-3	
Examine the five 
service quality 
dimensions.
E X H I B I T  13.4
Building Blocks of Service Quality
Reliability:
The ability to perform the service
dependably and accurately.
Responsiveness:
The willingness to help customers and provide
prompt service.
Assurance:
The knowledge of and courtesy by employees
and their ability to convey trust and conﬁdence.
Empathy:
The caring, individualized attention provided
to customers.
Tangibles:
The appearance of physical facilities, equipment,
personnel, and communication materials.
1
2
3
4
5

414	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
years of five-star ratings from the Forbes Travel Guide—a record unmatched by any other 
hotel.15 The aspects of its stellar service quality include:
∙	
Reliability  Every new Broadmoor employee, before ever encountering a customer, 
attends a two-and-a-half-day orientation session and receives an employee handbook. 
Making and keeping promises to customers is a central part of this orientation. 
Employees are trained always to give an estimated time for service, whether it be 
room service, laundry service, or simply how long it will take to be seated at one of 
the resort’s restaurants. When an employee makes a promise, he or she keeps that 
promise. If they don’t know the answer to a question, employees are trained to never 
guess. When an employee is unable to answer a question accurately, he or she 
immediately contacts someone who can. 
∙	
Assurance  The Broadmoor conveys trust by empowering its employees. An example 
of an employee empowerment policy is the service recovery program. If a guest 
problem arises, employees are given discretionary resources to rectify the problem or 
present the customer with something special to help mollify them. For example, if a 
meal is delivered and there’s a mistake in the order or how it was prepared, a server 
can offer the guest a free item such as a dessert or, if the service was well below 
expectations, simply take care of the bill. Managers then review each situation to 
understand the nature of the problem and help prevent it from occurring again.
∙	
Tangibles  One of the greatest challenges for the Broadmoor in recent years has been 
updating rooms built in the early part of the 20th century to meet the needs of 21st-
century visitors. To accomplish this, it spent millions in improvements, renovating 
rooms, and adding a new outdoor pool complex.
∙	
Empathy  One approach used to demonstrate empathy is personalizing communications. 
Employees are instructed to always address a guest by name, if possible. To accomplish 
this, employees are trained to listen and observe carefully to determine a guest’s 
name. Subtle sources for this information include convention name tags, luggage ID 
tags, credit cards, or checks. In addition, all phones within the Broadmoor display a 
guest’s room number and name on a screen.
∙	
Responsiveness  Every employee is instructed to follow the HEART model of taking 
care of problems. First, employees must “Hear what a guest has to say.” Second, they 
must “Empathize with them” and then “Apologize for the situation.” Fourth, they 
must “Respond to the guest’s needs” by “Taking action and following up.”
The Broadmoor in Colorado 
Springs, Colorado, is known for 
exceptional service quality.
Courtesy of The Broadmoor

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
415
	
	
Marketing research (see Chapter 10) provides a means to better understand consumers’ 
service expectations and their perceptions of service quality. In Marketing Analytics 13.1, 
we describe how Kroger uses data to learn about customers’ expectations. This research 
can be extensive and expensive, or it can be integrated into a firm’s everyday interactions 
with customers. Today, most service firms have developed voice-of-customer programs 
and employ ongoing marketing research to assess how well they are meeting their custom-
ers’ expectations. A systematic voice-of-customer (VOC) program collects customer 
­inputs and integrates them into managerial decisions.
An important marketing metric to evaluate how well firms perform on the five service 
quality dimensions (again see Exhibit 13.4) is the zone of tolerance, which refers to the 
area between customers’ expectations regarding their desired service and the minimum 
level of acceptable service—that is, the difference between what the customer really wants 
and what he or she will accept before going elsewhere. To define the zone of tolerance, 
firms ask a series of questions about each service quality dimension that relate to
∙	
The desired and expected level of service for each dimension, from low to high.
∙	
Customers’ perceptions of how well the focal service performs and how well a 
competitive service performs, from low to high.
∙	
The importance of each service quality dimension.
Exhibit 13.5 illustrates the results of such an analysis for Lou’s Local Diner, a fami-
ly-owned restaurant. The rankings on the left are based on a nine-point scale, on which 1 is 
low and 9 is high. The length of each box illustrates the zone of tolerance for each service 
quality dimension. For instance, according to the short length of the reliability box, cus-
tomers expect a fairly high level of reliability (top of the box) and will accept only a fairly 
LO13-4	
Explain the zone of 
tolerance.
Using Analytics to Reduce Wait Time at Krogerii
Shopping for groceries is rarely considered a pleasant task. 
But what makes the experience so odious? As Kroger found 
out when it asked customers, the answer is often the long 
checkout lines. To help alleviate the problem, it began analyz-
ing customer data to find an answer to a simple question: 
What would happen if it could open up a lane exactly when 
needed? The answer was that it could significantly improve 
customer satisfaction. So Kroger developed QueVision.
	
QueVision combines infrared sensors over store doors and 
cash registers, predictive analytics, and real-time data feeds 
from point-of-sale systems to calculate how many registers are 
needed and what the actual wait times are, all in real time. Wait 
times appear on a screen at the front of the store. The overall 
goal of the combined system is to ensure there is never more 
than one person ahead of any shopper in the checkout line.
	
This technology has been so successful that it has cut the 
average wait time for customers from more than 4 minutes to 
less than 30 seconds. QueVision also has had some unex-
pected positive consequences, in the form of happier employ-
ees. Friendly associates are really important for defining 
customer-oriented metrics. Although the math might not have 
predicted it, the cashier friendliness metric, as measured by 
customer surveys, has improved throughout the company 
by approximately 24 percent. Shorter lines make customers 
happy, and when employees encounter happy customers, 
they’re happier too. Kroger also uses its QueVision data in more 
detailed simulations. It has correlated enough data to keep peo-
ple moving in the front of stores, including checkout lines, even 
in stores with unusual layouts. QueVision data also have helped 
Kroger evaluate new shopping systems, such as self-checkout.
Marketing Analytics 13.1
Grocery shoppers really hate long checkout lines, so Kroger 
developed a system to calculate how many registers are 
needed and what the actual wait times are, all in real time. 
© Zuma Press, Inc/Alamy

416	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
high level of reliability (bottom of the box). On the other end of the scale, customers expect 
a high level of assurance (top of the box) but will also accept a fairly low level (bottom of 
the box). This difference is to be expected because the customers also were asked to assign 
an importance score to the five service quality dimensions so that the total equals 100 per-
cent (see bottom of Exhibit 13.5). Looking at the average importance score, we conclude 
that reliability is relatively important to these customers but assurance is not. So customers 
have a fairly narrow zone of tolerance for service dimensions that are fairly important to 
them and a wider range of tolerance for those service dimensions that are less important. 
Also note that Lou’s Local Diner always rates higher than its primary competitor, Well-
Known National Chain, on each dimension.
Further note that Well-Known National Chain scores below the zone of tolerance 
on the tangibles dimension, meaning that customers are not willing to accept the way 
the restaurant looks and smells. Lou’s Local Diner, in contrast, performs above the zone 
of tolerance on the responsiveness dimension—maybe even too well. Lou’s may wish to 
conduct further research to verify which responsiveness aspects it is performing so 
well, and then consider toning those aspects down. For example, being responsive to 
customers’ desires to have a diner that serves breakfast 24 hours a day can be expensive 
and may not add any further value to Lou’s Diner, because customers would accept 
more limited times.
E X H I B I T  13.5
Customers’ Evaluation of Service Quality
9-point
scale
3
5
7
9
Reliability
Importance
scores
Assurance
Empathy
Responsiveness
Tangibles
40 points
25 points
Dimensions of service quality
Note: The scale ranges from a 9 indicating very high service quality on a given
service quality dimension, to a 1 indicating very low service quality.
20 points
10 points
5 points
Total = 100 points
Lou’s Local Diner
Competitor:
Well-Known 
National Chain
Customers’
zone of
tolerance
Lou’s Local Diner always rates 
higher than its primary compet-
itor, Well-Known National 
Chain, on each service quality 
dimension.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Gideon Kindall, 
photographer

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
417
	
	
A very straightforward and inexpensive method of collecting consumers’ percep-
tions of service quality is to gather them at the time of the sale. Service providers can ask 
customers how they liked the service—though customers often are reticent to provide 
negative feedback directly to the person who provided the service—or distribute a sim-
ple questionnaire. Regardless of how information is collected, companies must take care 
not to lose it, which can happen if there is no effective mechanism for filtering it up to 
the key decision makers. Furthermore, in some cases, customers cannot effectively eval-
uate the service until several days or weeks later. Automobile dealers, for instance, often 
call their customers a week after they perform a service such as an oil change to assess 
their service quality.
Another excellent method for assessing customers’ expectations is making effective 
use of customer complaint behavior. Even if complaints are handled effectively to solve 
customers’ problems, the essence of the complaint is too often lost on managers. For in-
stance, an airline established a policy that customer service reps could not discuss any is-
sues involving fees to travel agents with customers. So when a customer calls to complain 
about these fees, the representative just changes the subject, and management therefore 
never finds out about the complaint.16
Even firms with the best formal research mechanisms in place must put managers on 
the frontlines occasionally to interact directly with the customers. The late Sam Walton, 
founder of Walmart, participated in and advocated this strategy, which is known as “man-
agement by walking around.”17 Unless the managers who make the service quality deci-
sions know what their service providers are facing on a day-to-day basis, and unless they 
can talk directly to the customers with whom those service providers interact, any cus-
tomer service program they create will not be as good as it could be.
The Standards Gap: Setting Service Standards
Getting back to the Green Valley Motel in Maine for a mo-
ment, suppose because of a number of complaints or because 
business was falling off, it set out to determine customers’ 
service expectations and gained a pretty good idea of them. 
The next step would be to set its service standards accordingly 
and develop systems to meet the customers’ service expecta-
tions. How, for instance, can it make sure that every room is 
cleaned and ready by an optimum time of day in the eyes of 
the customers, or that the breakfast is checked for freshness 
and quality every day? To consistently deliver service that 
meets customers’ expectations, firms must set specific, mea-
surable goals. For instance, for the Green Valley Motel, the 
most efficient process might have been to start cleaning rooms 
at 8:00 a.m. and finish by 5:00 p.m. But many guests want to 
sleep late, and new arrivals want to get into their room as soon 
as they arrive, often before 5:00 p.m. So a customer-oriented 
standard would mandate that the rooms get cleaned between 
10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
Service providers generally want to do a good job as long 
as they know what is expected of them. Motel employees 
should be shown, for instance, exactly how managers expect 
them to clean a room and what specific tasks they are respon-
sible for performing. In general, more employees will buy into 
a quality-oriented process if they are involved in setting the 
goals. For instance, suppose an important employee of the 
motel objects to disposable plastic cups and suggests that ac-
tual drinking glasses in the rooms would be classier as well as 
more ecological. There might be a cost–benefit trade-off to 
consider here, but if management listens to her and makes the 
Service providers, like this 
room service delivery person 
at a hotel, generally want to do 
a good job, but they need to be 
trained to know what exactly a 
good job entails.
© Chris Ryan/OJO Images/Getty  
Images RF

418	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
change in this case, it should likely make the employee all the more committed to other 
tasks involved in cleaning and preparing rooms.
The employees must be thoroughly trained not only to complete their specific tasks 
but also how to treat guests, and the manager needs to set an example of high service stan-
dards, which will permeate throughout the organization. The kind of attitude Marcia got, 
for instance, when she registered a complaint with the assistant manager at the Green 
­Valley is not a recipe for generating repeat customers and should not be tolerated. For 
frontline service employees under stress, however, pleasant interactions with customers do 
not always come naturally. Although people can be taught specific tasks related to their 
jobs, this is not easily extended to interpersonal relations. But it is simply not enough to tell 
employees to be nice or do what customers want. A quality goal should be specific, such 
as: Greet every customer/guest you encounter with “Good morning/afternoon/evening, Sir 
or Ma’am.” Try to greet customers by name.
The Delivery Gap: Delivering Service Quality
The delivery gap is where the rubber meets the road, where the customer directly interacts 
with the service provider. Even if there are adequate standards in place, the employees are 
well trained, and management is committed to meeting or exceeding customers’ service 
expectations, there can still be delivery gaps. It could very well have been that Marcia expe-
rienced several delivery gaps at the Green Valley Motel. It could have been that the unclean 
room, the assistant manager’s attitude, the unheated swimming pool, the poor piano bar 
singer, or the stale food resulted from unforeseen or unusual circumstances. Although some 
of these issues such as an unclean room or the attitude Marcia encountered should have been 
avoided, it is possible that the motel had a power outage resulting in the unheated swimming 
pool, the regular piano bar singer was ill, and the breakfast was stale because of a missed 
delivery. The maid could not vacuum the room because of the lack of power, and the assis-
tant manager felt assaulted on all sides by these problems. But the result was a lost customer. 
Even if there are no other gaps, a delivery gap always results in a service failure.
Delivery gaps can be reduced when employees are empowered to spontaneously act in 
the customers’ and the firm’s best interests when problems or crises are experienced. Such 
empowerment might have saved the day for Marcia and the Green Valley Motel. Empow-
erment means employees are supported in their efforts to do their jobs effectively.18
Empowering Service Providers  In the service context, empowerment means allow-
ing employees to make decisions about how service is provided to customers. When front-
line employees are authorized to make decisions to help their customers, service quality 
generally improves. Empowerment becomes more important when the service is more in-
dividualized. Nordstrom provides an overall objective—satisfy customer needs—and then 
encourages employees to do whatever is necessary to achieve the objective. For example, a 
Nordstrom shoe sales associate decided to break up two pairs of shoes, one a size 10 and 
the other a size 10½, to sell a hard-to-fit customer. Although the other two shoes were un-
salable and therefore it made for an unprofitable sale, the customer purchased five other 
pairs that day and became a loyal Nordstrom customer as a result. Empowering service 
providers with only a rule like “Use your best judgment” (as Nordstrom does) might cause 
chaos. At Nordstrom, department managers avoid abuses by coaching and training sales-
people to understand what “Use your best judgment” specifically means.
Support and Incentives for Employees  To ensure that service is delivered properly, 
management needs to support the service providers in several ways and give them incen-
tives. This is basic. A service provider’s job can often be difficult, especially when custom-
ers are unpleasant or less than reasonable. But the service provider cannot be rude or 
offensive just because the customer is. The old cliché “Service with a smile” remains the 
best approach, but for this to work, employees must feel supported.
First, managers and coworkers should provide emotional support to service providers 
by demonstrating a concern for their well-being and standing behind their decisions. 
­Because it can be very disconcerting when, for instance, a server is abused by a customer 

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
419
	
	
who believes her food was improperly prepared, restaurant managers must be supportive 
and help the employee get through his or her emotional reaction to the berating experi-
enced.19 Such support can extend to empowering the server to rectify the situation by giv-
ing the customer new food and a free dessert, in which case the manager must understand 
the server’s decision, not punish him for giving away too much.
Second, service providers require instrumental support—the systems and equipment 
to deliver the service properly. Many retailers provide state-of-the-art instrumental support 
for their service providers. In-store kiosks help sales associates provide more detailed and 
complete product information and enable them to make sales of merchandise that is either 
not carried in the store or is temporarily out of stock.
Third, the support that managers provide must be consistent and coherent throughout 
the organization. Patients expect physicians to provide great patient care using state-of-the-
art procedures and medications, but because they are tied to managed-care systems (health 
maintenance organizations [HMOs]), many doctors must squeeze more people into their 
office hours and prescribe less optimal, less expensive courses of treatment. These con-
flicting goals can be very frustrating to patients.
Finally, a key part of any customer service program is providing rewards to employees 
for their excellent service. Numerous firms have developed a service reputation by ensur-
ing that their employees are themselves recognized for recognizing the value the firm 
places on customer service. Travelocity, for example, features employees who champion 
the customer service experience in a weekly e-mail. Believing that engaged employees are 
the key to customer satisfaction, it works to create an atmosphere that reinforces the com-
mitment to customers by encouraging employees to nominate colleagues who exemplify 
this commitment. Through constant feedback about who is serving the customer best, as 
well as smaller events such as monthly lunches with the CEO for selected employees, Trav-
elocity creates a business environment that recognizes and rewards customer service.20 The 
results for Travelocity have been a wealth of awards, such as a top ranking on the Customer 
Online Respect Survey and a designation as the World’s Leading Travel Internet Site for 
several consecutive years.21
Use of Technology  Technology can be employed to reduce delivery gaps, and has be-
come an increasingly important facilitator of the delivery of services. Using technology to 
facilitate service delivery can provide many benefits, such as access to a wider variety of 
services, a greater degree of control by the customer over the services, and the ability to 
obtain information. The use of technology also improves the service provider’s efficiency 
and reduces servicing costs; in some cases, it can lead to a competitive advantage over less 
service-oriented competitors.22
Technological advances that help close the delivery gap are expanding. Macy’s has 
installed Look Book displays, which act like an interactive digital catalogue in the store. 
These displays enable customers to find fashionable ideas, ways to extend their existing 
wardrobes, and images from forward-thinking fashion icons. Touching the screen allows 
them to check the availability of various colors and sizes, as well as receive more detailed 
information about items that are of interest. Macy’s has paired these larger displays with 
smaller point-of-purchase kiosks, which focus more on functionality than fashion. These 
smaller kiosks indicate which colors and styles are available, as well as identifying which 
items have prompted the most Facebook likes or customer favorite rankings.23
Panera Bread has developed a program that allows customers to order from their web-
site in advance and have their take-out meal ready when they arrive. For those who prefer 
to dine in, this technology will make it possible to order using an in-store kiosk or a dedi-
cated mobile app. Regardless of how they order, people can track the progress of their or-
ders on in-store screens. All these elements also allow people to pay readily and ensure that 
their orders are prepared correctly. 
Technological advances can also help with the delivery gap by improving supply chain 
efficiency. For example, grocery store chain Cisco is developing a shelf sensor that allows 
the retailer to determine the moment at which the supply of milk is getting low. Obviously, 
that information prompts the grocer to restock. In addition though, when the milk is moving 

420	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
quickly, it tells the store to open more checkout counters, because most customers grab this 
perishable necessity just before they leave the store.24
The technological delivery of services can cause problems though. Some custom-
ers either do not embrace the idea of replacing a human with a machine for business 
interactions or have problems using the technology, such as supermarket self-checkout 
devices that are too challenging for some customers. In other cases, the technology 
may not perform adequately, such as ATMs that run out of money or are out of order. 
The Communications Gap: Communicating the Service Promise
Poor communication between marketers and their customers can result in a mismatch be-
tween an ad campaign’s or a salesperson’s promises and the service the firm can actually 
offer. Although firms have difficulty controlling service quality because it can vary from 
day to day and provider to provider, they have nearly constant control over how they com-
municate their service package to their customers. This control involves a significant re-
sponsibility, as Ethical and Societal Dilemma 13.1 notes.
If a firm promises more than it can deliver, customers’ expectations won’t be met. 
An advertisement may lure a customer into a service situation once, but if the service 
doesn’t deliver on the promise, the customer will never return. Dissatisfied customers 
also are likely to tell others about the underperforming service using word of mouth or, 
Panera Bread has developed a 
program that allows customers 
to order from their website in 
advance and have their take-out 
meal ready when they arrive.
Source: Panera.com
Which bank has better customer service: the one with self-checkout (left), or the bank offering a face-to-face interaction with the 
customer? It depends on whom you ask.
Left: © Picturenet/Blend Images/Getty Images RF; Right: © Keith Brofsky/Photodisc/Getty Images RF

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
421
	
	
Fake Reviewsiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 13.1
Yelp, TripAdvisor, and Amazon have all made user ratings and 
reviews a familiar—and even essential—part of the online tool-
box for shoppers and other consumers. From the consumer’s 
perspective, what better preparation could there be for a ma-
jor purchase than to see what other, objective customers have 
to say about the product or service under consideration?
	
For retailers and service professionals, online reviews offer 
a huge benefit too. For some companies, especially small ser-
vice providers that cannot afford much marketing, online re-
views function as a low-cost form of advertising. A business 
seeking to meet or exceed customer expectations receives 
valuable, candid feedback from customers, which it can use to 
measure how well it is meeting customer expectations. Some 
firms even use this feedback in their formal marketing re-
search process to improve company operations.
	
From this straightforward perspective, honest reviews are 
the most valuable resource that exists in review sites. But 
such straightforwardness is not enough for companies that 
provide poor service and attract reviews befitting their abili-
ties. Rather than improving their service, many of these com-
panies engage in the unethical practice of writing fake reviews 
themselves, hiring dedicated companies to flood sites with 
positive fake reviews, or bribing customers to pad their com-
ments with positive assertions. Considering this unethical 
practice just another example—though in a modern form—of 
false advertising, state and federal regulators are taking action 
to ensure that such deceptive advertising does not pay. More-
over, as customers get wise to these moves, companies that 
fake their reviews often get caught.
	
VIP Deals, an online retailer that sells leather cases for digital 
tablets on Amazon, invited its customers to post reviews—and 
promised that if those reviews were positive, the customer 
would receive a complete refund. Within weeks, nearly all of the 
company’s 355 online reviews gave the VIP Deals leather case 
four or five stars. But Amazon guidelines prohibit compensation 
for customer reviews, and the VIP Deals page soon disappeared.
	
A leather case for your iPad is one thing. Accurate, truthful 
information takes on paramount importance for a service like 
plastic surgery. But Lifestyle Lift seemed to disregard customers’ 
expectations that they could receive truthful information. When 
unhappy customers started posting too many negative com-
ments on its website, the company launched a coverup rather 
than investigating the complaints to help its physicians and staff 
address the problems. On bogus websites, fictitious posters 
gave high praise to the company while also asserting that previ-
ously posted complaints had been phony. The state of New York 
soon filed suit and prompted a $300,000 settlement from Life-
style Lift. New York’s attorney general also has announced that 
his office will be pursuing such false advertisers more actively in 
the future, doling out stringent penalties as it finds them.
	
Online opinions of consumers have become a major source 
of information about products and services. When that informa-
tion is authentic, it serves consumers and companies both. But 
when companies manipulate online reviews, it seems as if all of 
society is harmed. What—if anything—should be done about it?
Online reviews like this one from Yelp benefit consumers, 
retailers, and service providers as long as the reviews are 
written by unbiased customers.
© Yelp.com
increasingly, social media, which has become an important channel for dissatisfied cus-
tomers to vent their frustrations.
The communications gap can be reduced by managing customer expectations and by 
promising only what you can deliver, or possibly even a little less. Suppose you need an 
operation, and the surgeon explains, “You’ll be out of the hospital in five days and back to 
your normal routine in a month.” You have the surgery and feel well enough to leave the 
hospital three days later. Two weeks after that, you’re playing tennis again. Clearly, you 
will tend to think your surgeon is a genius. However, regardless of the operation’s success, 
if you had to stay in the hospital for 10 days and it took you two months to recover, you 
would undoubtedly be upset.
A relatively easy way to manage customer expectations is to coordinate how the ex-
pectation is created and the way the service is provided. Expectations typically are created 
through promotions, advertising, or personal selling. Delivery is another function alto-
gether. If a salesperson promises a client that an order can be delivered in one day, and that 

422	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
delivery actually takes a week, the client will be disappointed. However, if the salesperson 
coordinates the order with those responsible for the service delivery, the client’s expecta-
tions likely will be met.
Customer expectations can be managed when the service is delivered. Recorded mes-
sages tell customers who have phoned a company with a query how many minutes they 
will have to wait before the next operator is available. Sellers automatically inform online 
customers of any items that are out of stock. Whether online or in a store, retailers can 
warn their customers to shop early during a sale because supplies of the sale item are lim-
ited. People are generally reasonable when they are warned that some aspect of the service 
may be below their expectations. They just don’t like surprises!
Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction and Loyalty
Good service quality leads to satisfied and loyal customers. As we discussed in Chapter 6, 
customers inevitably wind up their purchase decision process by undertaking a postpur-
chase evaluation. This evaluation after the purchase may produce three outcomes: satisfac-
tion, dissonance, and loyalty (see again Exhibit 6.3 in Chapter 6). Dissonance may just be 
a passing emotion that is overcome; we will discuss recovery from an actual service failure 
in the next section. Satisfaction, on the other hand, often leads to loyalty.
Assuming that none of the service gaps that we have discussed occur, or at least are 
not too wide, customers should be more or less satisfied. Surveys of customers that ask 
them to identify the retailer that provides the best customer service thus often show some 
consistency. A service provider that does a good job one year is likely to keep customers 
satisfied the next year too. Some of the best service providers year after year include Am-
azon, Zappos, L.L.Bean, and Nordstrom.
If a firm not only minimizes but also eliminates any service gaps, customers are likely 
to exhibit significant loyalty to it. Customers want to continue receiving such superior ser-
vice and have no desire to go elsewhere for the offerings it provides them.
Nordstrom consistently is 
ranked at the top of customer 
satisfaction surveys.
© Greg Smith/Corbis
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Explain the four service gaps identified by the Service Gaps Model.
2.	 List at least two ways to overcome each of the four service gaps.

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
423
	
	
SERVICE RECOVERY
Despite a firm’s best efforts, sometimes service providers fail to meet customer expectations. 
When this happens, the best course of action is to attempt to make amends with the customer 
and learn from the experience. Of course, it is best to avoid a service failure altogether, but 
when a failure does occur, the firm has a unique opportunity to demonstrate its customer 
commitment. Effective service recovery efforts can significantly increase customer satisfac-
tion, purchase intentions, and positive word of mouth, though customers’ postrecovery satis-
faction levels usually fall lower than their satisfaction level prior to the service failure.
Remember the Green Valley Motel in Maine? It could have made amends with Marcia 
Kessler after its service failures if it had taken some relatively simple, immediate steps: The 
assistant manager could have apologized for his bad behavior and quickly upgraded her to a 
suite and/or given her a free night’s lodging for a future stay. The motel could also have given 
her a free lunch or dinner to make up for the bad breakfast. Alternatively, the assistant manager 
could have asked Marcia how he could resolve the situation and worked with her to come up 
with an equitable solution. None of these actions would have cost the motel much money.
Had it used the customer lifetime value approach we described in Chapter 10, the motel 
would have realized that by not taking action, it lost Marcia as a customer forever. Over the 
next few years, she could have been responsible for several thousand dollars in sales. In-
stead, Marcia is now likely to spread negative word of mouth about the motel to her friends, 
family, and through online review sites, such as Yelp.com, because of its failure to recover. 
Effective service recovery thus demands (1) listening to the customers and involving them 
in the service recovery, (2) providing a fair solution, and (3) resolving the problem quickly.25
Listening to the Customers and Involving  
Them in the Service Recovery
Firms often don’t find out about service failures until a customer complains. Whether the 
firm has a formal complaint department or the complaint is offered directly to the service 
provider, the customer must have the opportunity to air the complaint completely, and the 
firm must listen carefully to what he or she is saying.
Customers can become very emotional about a service failure, whether the failure is 
serious (a botched surgical operation) or minor (the wrong change at a restaurant). In many 
cases, the customer may just want to be heard, and the service provider should give the 
customer all the time he or she needs to get it out. The very process of describing a per-
ceived wrong to a sympathetic listener or on social media is therapeutic in and of itself. 
Service providers therefore should welcome the opportunity to be that sympathetic ear, 
listen carefully, and appear (and actually be) eager to rectify the situation to ensure it 
doesn’t happen again.26
When the company and the customer work together, the outcome is often better than 
either could achieve on their own. This cocreation logic applies especially well to service 
recovery. A service failure is a negative experience, but when customers participate in its 
resolution, it results in a more positive outcome than simply listening to their complaint 
and providing a preapproved set of potential solutions that may satisfy them.
Suppose, for instance, that when you arrived at the airport in San Francisco, your 
flight had been overbooked and you were bumped. Of course, good customer service re-
quired the ticket agent to listen to your frustration and help provide a fair solution. But the 
most obvious potential solution from the airline’s perspective might not have been the best 
solution for you. It might have been inclined to put you on the next available flight, which 
would be a red-eye that left at midnight and got you to New York at 6:30 a.m. But if you 
don’t sleep well on planes and you have an important business meeting the next afternoon, 
the best solution from your perspective would be to have the airline put you up in an airport 
hotel so you can get a good night’s sleep and then put you on an early morning flight that 
would get you to New York in time for your meeting, well-rested and ready to go. Thus, by 
working closely with you to understand your needs, the ticket agent would be able to 
­cocreate a great solution to the service failure.
LO13-5	
Identify three service 
recovery strategies.

424	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Finding a Fair Solution
Most people realize that mistakes happen. But when they happen, customers want to be 
treated fairly, whether that means distributive or procedural fairness.27 Their perception of 
what “fair” means is based on their previous experience with other firms, how they have 
seen other customers treated, material they have read, and stories recounted by their friends.
Distributive Fairness  Distributive fairness pertains to a customer’s perception of the 
benefits he or she received compared with the costs (inconvenience or loss). Customers 
want to be compensated a fair amount for a perceived loss that resulted from a service fail-
ure. If, for instance, a person arrives at the airport gate and finds her flight is overbooked, 
she may believe that taking the next flight that day and receiving a travel voucher is ade-
quate compensation for the inconvenience. But if no flights are available until the next day, 
the traveler may require additional compensation, such as overnight accommodations, 
meals, and a round-trip ticket to be used at a later date.28
The key to distributive fairness, of course, is listening carefully to the customer. One cus-
tomer, traveling on vacation, may be satisfied with a travel voucher, whereas another may need 
to get to the destination on time because of a business appointment. Regardless of how the 
problem is solved, customers typically want tangible restitution—in this case, to get to their 
destination—not just an apology. If providing tangible restitution isn’t possible, the next best 
thing is to assure the customer that steps are being taken to prevent the failure from recurring.
Procedural Fairness  With regard to complaints, procedural fairness refers to the per-
ceived fairness of the process used to resolve them. Customers want efficient complaint proce-
dures over whose outcomes they have some influence. Customers tend to believe they have 
been treated fairly if the service providers follow specific company guidelines. Nevertheless, 
rigid adherence to rules can have deleterious effects. Have you ever returned an item to a store, 
even a very inexpensive item, and been told that the return needed a manager’s approval? The 
process likely took several minutes and irritated everyone in the checkout line. Furthermore, 
most managers’ cursory inspection of the item or the situation would not catch a fraudulent 
return. In a case like this, the procedure the company uses to handle a return probably over-
shadows any potential positive outcomes. Therefore, as we noted previously, service providers 
should be empowered with some procedural flexibility to solve customer complaints.
A no-questions-asked return policy has been offered as a customer service by many retail-
ers such as L.L.Bean. But because of its high cost as a result of customers abusing the policy, 
many retailers such as L.L.Bean’s competitor REI have modified their return policies.29 Some 
large retailers now limit their returns to 90 days, considered a reasonable amount of time for 
customers to return an item. Others will grant only a store credit based on the lowest selling 
price for the item if the customer doesn’t have a receipt. In addition, for some consumer elec-
tronics products that have been opened, customers must pay a 15 percent restocking fee.
Resolving Problems Quickly
The longer it takes to resolve a service failure, the more irritated the customer will become 
and the more people he or she is likely to tell about the problem. To resolve service failures 
quickly, firms need clear policies, adequate training for their employees, and empowered 
employees. Health insurance companies, for instance, have made a concerted effort in re-
cent years to avoid service failures that occur because customers’ insurance claims have 
not been handled quickly or to the customers’ satisfaction.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Why is service recovery so important to companies?
2.	 What can companies do to recover from a service failure?

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
425
	
	
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Describe how the marketing of services differs 
from the marketing of products.
	
	
Unlike products, services are intangible, insepara-
ble, variable, and perishable. They cannot be seen or 
touched, which makes it difficult to describe their 
benefits or promote them. Service providers there-
fore enhance service delivery with tangible attri-
butes, like a nice atmosphere or price benefits. 
Services get produced and consumed at the same 
time, so marketers must work quickly, and they are 
more variable than products, though service provid-
ers attempt to reduce this variability as much as pos-
sible. Finally, because consumers cannot stockpile 
perishable services, marketers often provide incen-
tives to stagger demand.
	
	
Discuss the four gaps in the Service Gaps Model.
	
	
The knowledge gap reflects the difference between 
customers’ expectations and the firm’s perception 
of those customer expectations. Firms need to match 
customer expectations with actual service through 
research. The standards gap is the difference be-
tween the firm’s perceptions of customers’ expecta-
tions and the service standards it sets. Appropriate 
service standards and measurements of service per-
formance help close this gap. The delivery gap is 
the difference between the firm’s service standards 
and the actual service it provides to customers. 
Closing this gap requires adequate training and em-
powerment of employees. The communication gap 
refers to the difference between the actual service 
provided to customers and the service that the firm’s 
promotion program promises. Firms close the com-
munications gap by managing customer expecta-
tions and promising only what they can deliver.
LO13-1
LO13-2
	
	
Examine the five service quality dimensions.
	
	
First, reliability refers to whether the provider con-
sistently provides an expected level of service. Sec-
ond, responsiveness means that the provider notes 
consumers’ desires and requests and then addresses 
them. Third, assurance reflects the service provid-
er’s own confidence in its abilities. Fourth, empathy 
entails the provider’s recognition and understanding 
of consumer needs. Finally, tangibles are the ele-
ments that go along with the service, such as the 
magazines in a doctor’s waiting room.
	
	
Explain the zone of tolerance.
	
	
The area between customers’ desired service and 
the minimum level of service they will accept is the 
zone of tolerance. It is the difference between what 
the customer really wants and what he or she will 
accept before going elsewhere. Firms can assess 
their customers’ zone of tolerance by determining 
the desired and expected level of service for each 
service dimension, their perceptions of how well the 
focal service performs and how well a competitive 
service performs, and the importance of each ser-
vice quality dimension.
	
	
Identify three service recovery strategies.
	
	
In a best-case scenario, the service never fails. But 
some failures are inevitable and require the firm to 
make amends to the customer by (1) listening care-
fully and involving the customer in the service re-
covery; (2) finding a fair solution to the problem 
that compensates the customer for the failure and 
follows procedures the customer believes are fair; 
and (3) resolving the problem quickly.
LO13-3
LO13-4
LO13-5
∙	 communication gap,  411
∙	 customer service,  406
∙	 delivery gap,  411
∙	 distributive fairness,  424
∙	 emotional support,  418
∙	 empowerment,  418
∙	 heterogeneity,  410
∙	 inseparable,  409
∙	 instrumental support,  419
∙	 intangible,  407
∙	 knowledge gap,  411
∙	 perishable,  410
∙	 procedural fairness,  424
∙	 service,  406
∙	 service gap,  411
∙	 Service Gaps Model, 411
∙	 service quality,  413
∙	 standards gap,  411
∙	 voice-of-customer (VOC)  
program,  415
∙	 zone of tolerance,  415
Key Terms

426	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
Marketing Digitally
1.	 What services does Zipcar (www.zipcar.com) offer? Go 
to Zipcar’s website and click on “for everybody.” Evalu-
ate how quick it is to reserve a car in a major city or at a 
university that has a dedicated Zipcar car pickup/dropoff 
location.
2.	 Go to Zappos’ website, http://www.zappos.com, and ex-
amine its customer service offerings. Next, go to Re-
seller Ratings, http://www.resellerratings.com, and look 
up Zappos. Based on these reviews, does Zappos have a 
service gap? If so, how can the company close it?
Marketing Applications
  1.  Those companies from which you purchase products 
and services are not pure sellers of services, nor are they 
pure sellers of products. What services does Home De-
pot provide? What goods does a health club provide?
  2.  You have been sitting in the waiting room of your me-
chanic’s shop for more than an hour. With the knowledge 
that products are different from services, develop a list of 
the things the shop manager could do to improve the 
overall service delivery. Consider how the shop might 
overcome problems associated with the tangibility, sepa-
rability, heterogeneity, and perishability of services.
  3.  You have conducted a zone of tolerance analysis for your 
local pizza restaurant. You find that the lengths of the 
reliability and responsiveness boxes are much greater 
than those of the other three service quality dimensions. 
You also find that the restaurant is positioned above the 
zone box on reliability but below the box on responsive-
ness. What should you tell the manager to do?
  4.  Assume you were hired by the local grocery store to 
help assess their service quality. How would you go 
about undertaking this project?
  5.  What should a restaurant server do who is faced with an 
irate customer who has received undercooked food after 
a long wait? How can he or she avoid a service failure 
by being empowered? What should the server do?
  6.  What types of support and incentives could your uni-
versity provide advisers to help make them more atten-
tive to students’ needs?
  7.  What mobile apps do you use that help facilitate your 
transactions with a specific retailer or service provider? 
Would you rather use the apps or engage in a face-to-
face relationship with a person? How, if at all, would 
your parents’ answer to these two questions differ?
  8.  A local health club is running a promotional campaign 
that promises you can lose an inch a month off your 
waist if you join the club and follow its program. How 
might this claim cause a communications gap? What 
should the club do to avoid a service failure?
  9.  Suppose the health club didn’t listen to your advice and 
ran the promotional campaign as is. A new member has 
come in to complain that not only did he not lose inches 
off his waist, he actually gained weight. How should 
the health club manager proceed?
10.  You are hired by a career consulting firm that promises 
to market new graduates to high-paying employers. The 
firm provides potential clients with an impressive list of 
employers. It charges the clients a fee, and then a sepa-
rate finder’s fee if the client gets a position. The firm 
aggressively markets its services and has a large client 
base. You learn that the firm simply takes submitted 
­résumés and posts them to a variety of online job search 
engines. The firm never actually contacts any firms on 
its clients’ behalf. The CEO, himself a recent college 
grad, tells you that the firm never promises to actually 
contact potential employers, only that it has access to 
employers and will distribute clients’ résumés. What do 
you think of the career consulting firm’s practices?
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself
1.	 Which of the following represents the most fundamental 
difference between a product and a service? 
a.  heterogeneity
b.  tangibility
c.  perishability 
d.  serviceability 
e.  inseparability 

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
427
	
	
2.	 The Gaps Model is designed as a diagnostic tool to 
highlight specific areas where
a.  marketers deliver better quality service compared to 
the physical goods they sell. 
b.  manufacturers are cutting costs on product quality.
c.  marketers are falling short in their service delivery.
d.  marketers can take advantage of unsuspecting  
customers.
e.  there is a gap in product quality compared to service 
quality.
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK SERVICES: UBER VS. LYFT VS. TAXIS 
America might be a car culture, but there are plenty of times that people simply don’t want 
to drive themselves. Whether they live in an urban environment that makes driving and 
parking difficult, want to avoid the costs of insurance and maintenance associated with 
owning a car, or just need rides in particular situations like after a night out on the town, 
people have long required the services of drivers. But whereas in the past their options 
were largely limited to taxi services, today the transportation industry is in the midst of a 
radical transformation, due largely to the impacts of Uber and Lyft.
	
The idea for Uber began with the frustration of a couple of tech-industry friends who 
could not get a cab on a snowy night in Paris. They developed an app for a car-sharing 
service and began introducing the option in major cities around the world. Within a year of 
establishing its New York City operations with three cars, Uber had raised tens of millions 
of dollars in financing, and it was rapidly expanding into many cities.30
	
With a presence in approximately 400 cities worldwide, Uber touts its benefits for 
riders, drivers, and communities. In particular, it highlights its ability to offer affordable, 
flexible rides to people at exactly the moment and place they need them. For drivers, Uber 
is an employment alternative that enables them to work exactly when and as much as they 
want, for a reasonable compensation. In addition, Uber asserts that its services make cities 
safer and expand transportation options.31
	
Lyft followed Uber into the market, but its expansion is not quite as extensive. Avail-
able in approximately 200 cities, Lyft seeks to differentiate itself from its bigger rival 
mainly in the friendly image it evokes.32 Drivers adorn their cars with fuzzy pink mous-
taches, and riders are encouraged to sit up front and chat during the trip.33 
	
In general though, the services are remarkably similar. Both transportation network 
companies (the formal name established for these services by the state of California, which 
was the first to start regulating the offerings) rely on app-based demand channels to link 
riders with drivers. Both of them allow drivers to work as much or as little as they want. In 
addition, both companies currently rely on surge pricing to balance out their supply and 
demand—although Uber has plans to phase out this practice because consumers dislike it 
so much.34 With surge pricing, the companies charge higher rates during busy periods. 
Doing so can discourage some riders, who might be willing to wait a little while to get a 
lower rate. It also encourages more drivers to provide additional supply, because they can 
earn what is in essence time and a half for driving during rush hour or on Saturday nights.
	
In their efforts to gain share in each market in which they compete head to head, Uber 
and Lyft rely on various marketing tactics. They have cut prices in highly competitive mar-
kets, and they continue to work to recruit new drivers to reduce riders’ wait times.35
	
Despite some attempts to regulate these services, the rules and norms remain some-
what uncertain. To address the concerns that such lack of regulation might induce, Uber 
offers a unique rating system, in which drivers have a means to rate riders, just as riders can 
rate drivers. When a driver’s rating falls below a certain level, Uber contacts that driver to 
help ensure a satisfactory level of service. But when a rider earns a low rating, he or she 
may just find that no drivers respond to requests for a pick up, leaving the passenger 
stranded. 
Chapter Case Study 

428	
Section Four  VALUE CREATION
	
However, the rating system also might have some unintended consequences.36 First, 
because there are few rules for how to establish review of customers, drivers and renters 
can issue negative reviews for virtually any reason. One Uber driver noted that he gave bad 
reviews to riders who entered the vehicle with “negative energy,” for example. Nor are 
there any protections in place to avoid negative reviews based on race, gender, or physical 
disability. Thus consumers might be unfairly discriminated against in the reviews, creating 
a powerful ethical and legal concern. Second, the two-sided review system might lead to 
rating inflation. That is, riders want to earn positive reviews from the providers so that they 
can continue using the service in the future. To encourage such positive reviews, they 
might provide positive ratings of the providers, to avoid any negative retaliation, or feel 
compelled to leave larger tips. Third, customers do not have any control over, or in some 
cases knowledge of, how their reviews get used. 
	
Across the board though, transportation network services continue to expand and grow 
in terms of both their reach in existing locales and their expansion into new markets. The 
need to grow has led to poaching efforts, such that Uber sends out “ambassadors” to try to 
lure Lyft drivers away to work for Uber. In addition, both companies try to empower driv-
ers by granting them access to updated technology for their phones, to ensure they can find 
their riders. They also have started some collaborations with car dealers, to give their driv-
ers good deals on new car purchases.37
Questions
1.	
How can Uber and Lyft apply the Service Gaps Model to identify potential service 
failures? Using the building blocks of service quality, how can Uber and Lyft ensure 
high service quality? 
2.	
If Uber or Lyft fails to pick up a customer in a timely fashion, what should they do to 
rectify the service failure?
Who will win the transporta-
tion service war: Uber, Lyft,  
or taxis?
© Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
Endnotes
	 1.	 Adrianne Pasquarelli, “Lululemon Tries New Store Concept in 
Efforts to Woo Shoppers,” Advertising Age, November 17, 2015; 
Mallory Scholossberg, “Lululemon Has Unveiled Its New Store 
of the Future,” Business Insider, November 18, 2015; Nicole 
Santos, “Grand Opening for lululemon Draws Crowds to Fig 
Garden,” Fresno Bee, July 3, 2015. 
	2.	 Valarie A. Zeithaml, Mary Jo Bitner, and Dwayne D. Gremler, 
Services Marketing: Integrating Customer Focus across the 
Firm, 6th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012).
	3.	 Hilary Stout, “Amazon, Google, and More Are Drawn to Home 
Services Market,” The New York Times, April 12, 2015.

	
SERVICES: THE INTANGIBLE PRODUCT  CHAPTER THIRTEEN	
429
	
	
	4.	 The World Bank, “Services, etc., Value Added (% of GDP),”  
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.SRV.TETC.ZS.
	5.	 Fortune, “Fortune 500: 2015,” https://www.aei.org/publication/ 
fortune-500-firms-in-1955-vs-2015-only-12-remain-thanks-to-the- 
creative-destruction-that-fuels-economic-growth/; Bureau of 
Economic Analysis, news release, January 27, 2012, http://www.bea.
gov; “Fortune 500,” CNNMoney, May 23, 2011, http://money.cnn.com.
	6.	 Zeithaml et al., Services Marketing: Integrating Customer 
Focus across the Firm.
	 7.	 Ramon Ray, “Carbonite Offers Data Peace of Mind: A Solid 
Solution for Small Biz,” Business Insider, January 24, 2012, 
http://www.businessinsider.com; “Carbonite Gains from HIPAA 
Regulations,” Zacks, March 24, 2014, http://www.zacks.com; 
“Pricing,” http://www.carbonite.com.
	8.	 Choice Hotels, “Special Guest Policies,” http://www.choicehotels.
com. 
	9.	 Andrew Adam Newman, “A Gym for People Who Don’t Like Gyms,” 
The New York Times, January 2, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com.
	10.	 The discussion of the Gaps Model and its implications draws 
heavily from Michael Levy, Barton A. Weitz, and Dhruv 
Grewal, Retailing Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/
McGraw-Hill, 2013); it is also based on the classic work of 
Zeithaml, Parasuraman, and Berry, Delivering Quality Service; 
Valarie Zeithaml, Leonard Berry, and A. Parasuraman, 
“Communication and Control Processes in the Delivery of 
Service Quality,” Journal of Marketing 52, no. 2 (April 1988), 
pp. 35–48.
	11.	 Zhen Zhu et al., “Fix It or Leave It? Customer Recovery from 
Self-Service Technology Failures,” Journal of Retailing 89, no. 1 
(2013), pp. 15–29.
	12.	 Velitchka D. Kaltcheva, Robert D. Winsor, and A. Parasuraman, “Do 
Customer Relationships Mitigate or Amplify Failure Responses?” 
Journal of Business Research 66, no. 4 (2013), pp. 525–32;  
Ruth N. Bolton, et al., “Small Details That Make Big Differences:  
A Radical Approach to Consumption Experience as a Firm’s 
Differentiating Strategy,” Journal of Service Management 25, no. 2 
(2014), pp. 253–74; Lance A. Bettencourt, Stephen W. Brown,  
and Nancy J. Sirianni, “The Secret to True Service Innovation,” 
Business Horizons 56, no. 1 (2013), pp. 13–22.
	13.	 Zeithaml et al., Services Marketing: Integrating Customer 
Focus across the Firm.
	14.	 The Broadmoor Hotel, https://www.broadmoor.com.
	15.	 Rich Laden, “Forbes Travel Guide Gives the Broadmoor Its 55th 
Consecutive Five-Star Rating” [Colorado Springs] Gazette, 
February 2, 2015, http://gazette.com/forbes-travel-guide-gives-the-
broadmoor-its-55th-consecutive-five-star-rating/article/1546162.
	16.	 Janelle Barlow, “A Complaint Is a Gift Corner,” http://www.tmius.
com.
	17.	 Michael Bergdahl, The Retail Revolution: How Wal-Mart 
Created a Brave New World of Business (New York: 
Metropolitan Books, 2009); Michael Bergdahl, The 10 Rules  
of Sam Walton: Success Secrets for Remarkable Results 
(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2006).
	18.	 Steven W. Rayburn, “Improving Service Employee Work Affect: 
The Transformative Potential of Work Design,” Journal of 
Services Marketing 28, no. 1 (2014), pp. 71–81; Zhen Zhu, et al., 
“Fix It or Leave It? Customer Recovery from Self-Service 
Technology Failures,” Journal of Retailing 89, no. 1 (2013),  
pp. 15–29; Ying Hong, et al., “Missing Link in the Service  
Profit Chain: A Meta-Analytic Review of the Antecedents, 
Consequences, and Moderators of Service Climate,” Journal  
of Applied Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013), p. 237.
	19.	 Jason Colquitt, Jeffery LePine, and Michael Wesson,  
Organizational Behavior: Improving Performance and  
Commitment in the Workplace, 3rd ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill, 
2012); Felicitas M. Morhart, Walter Herzog, and Torsten Tomczak, 
“Brand-Specific Leadership: Turning Employees into Brand 
Champions,” Journal of Marketing 73 (September 2009),  
pp. 122–42.
	20.	Daisy Wademan Dowling, “The Best Advice I Ever Got: Michelle 
Peluso, President and Chief Executive Officer, Travelocity,” The 
Harvard Business Review, October 2008, https://hbr.org
	21.	 “Travelocity,” http://www.sabre-holdings.com/ourBrands/ 
travelocity.html; “Awards,” http://svc.travelocity.com.
	22.	Suzanne C. Makarem, Susan M. Mudambi, and Jeffrey S. 
Podoshen, “Satisfaction in Technology-Enabled Service 
Encounters,” Journal of Services Marketing 23, no. 1 (2009).
	23.	Alexander Coolidge, “Hate Checkout Lines? Macy’s Can Help,” 
Cincinnati Inquirer, October 3, 2014.
	24.	M.V Greene, “Drawing a Line on Checkout,” Stores, August 11, 2015.
	25.	Zhen Zhu et al., “Fix It or Leave It? Customer Recovery from 
Self-Service Technology Failures”; María Leticia Santos-Vijande 
et al., “An Integrated Service Recovery System (ISRS): Influence 
on Knowledge-Intensive Business Services Performance,” 
European Journal of Marketing 47, no. 5/6 (2013), pp. 934–63.
	26.	Christian Grönroos and Päivi Voima, “Critical Service Logic: 
Making Sense of Value Creation and Co-creation,” Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science 41, no. 2 (2013), pp. 133–50; 
Anne L.. Roggeveen, Michael Tsiros, and Dhruv Grewal, 
“Understanding the Co-Creation Effect: When Does Collaborating 
with Customers Provide a Lift to Service Recovery?” Journal  
of the Academy of Marketing Science 40, no. 6 (2012),  
pp. 771–90.
	27.	Kaltcheva et al., “Do Customer Relationships Migrate or Amplify 
Failure Responses?”; Yany Grégoire, Thomas M. Tripp, and Renaud 
Legoux, “When Customer Love Turns into Lasting Hate: The 
Effects of Relationship Strength and Time on Customer Revenge 
and Avoidance,” Journal of Marketing 73 (November 2009),  
pp. 18–32.
	28.	Roggeveen et al., “Understanding the Co-Creation Effect: When 
Does Collaborating with Customers Provide a Lift to Service 
Recovery?”
	29.	Amy Martinez, “REI Now Limiting Returns to One Year,” Seattle 
Times, June 3, 2013.
	30.	Julian Chokkattu and Jordan Crook, “A Brief History of Uber,” 
TechCrunch, August 14, 2014, http://techcrunch.com/
gallery/a-brief-history-of-uber/slide/33/. 
	31.	 Uber, “Our Trip History,” https://www.uber.com/our-story/.
	32.	“Lyft,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lyft.
	33.	“Lyft Vs. Uber: Comparison Guide,” RideShare, February 2, 
2016, http://rideshare.services/lyft-vs-uber-comparison/.
	34.	Aarti Shahani, “Uber Plans to Kill Surge Pricing, Though  
Drivers Say It Makes Job Worth It,” NPR Morning Edition,  
May 3, 2016.
	35.	Jen Wieczner, “Lyft Is Growing at a Crazy Pace in New York 
and San Francisco,” Fortune, March 8, 2016, http://fortune.
com/2016/03/08/lyft-vs-uber-new-york/.
	36.	David Streitfeld, “Ratings Now Cut Both Ways, So Don’t  
Sass Your Uber Driver,” The New York Times, January 30, 
2015.
	37.	Aarti Shahani, “In the Battle Between Lyft and Uber, The Focus 
Is on Drivers,” All Things Considered, January 18, 2016, http://
www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2016/01/18/ 
463473462/is-uber-good-to-drivers-it-s-relative. 
	 i.	 Sydney Ember, “Pepsi Turns Restaurateur, to Serve Up Some 
Buzz,” The New York Times, January 28, 2016 
	 ii.	 “About Kroger,” http://www.thekrogerco.com/about-kroger; 
Laurianne McLaughlin, “Kroger Solves Top Customer Issue: Long 
Lines,” InformationWeek, April 2, 2014,  http://www.information-
week.com/strategic-cio/executive-insights-and-innovation/kroger-
solves-top-customer-issue-long-lines/d/d-id/1141541?page_number=1.
 	iii.	 David Streitfield, “For $2 a Star, an Online Retailer Gets 5-Star 
Product Reviews,” The New York Times, January 26, 2012, 
http://www.nytimes.com; David Streitfield, “Faking It to Make It: 
A Beautiful Try,” The New York Times, January 27, 2012, http://
bits.blogs.nytimes.com; David Streitfield, “Give Yourself 5 Stars? 
Online, It Might Cost You,” The New York Times, September 22, 
2013, http://www.nytimes.com.


Section Five contains two chapters on pricing dedicated to 
value capture. Chapter 14 examines the importance of set-
ting the right price, the relationship between price and 
quantity sold, break-even analysis, the impact of price wars, 
and how the Internet has changed the way people shop. 
Chapter 15 looks specifically at how to set prices.
SECTION 5
CHAPTER 14
Pricing Concepts for Establishing Value
CHAPTER 15
Strategic Pricing Methods
Assessing the Marketplace
Understanding the Marketplace
Targeting the Marketplace
Value Creation
Value Capture
Value Delivery: Designing the 
Channel and Supply Chain
Value Communication
VALUE CAPTURE

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO14-1	 List the four pricing orientations.
	LO14-2	 Explain the relationship between price and quantity sold.
	LO14-3	 Explain price elasticity.
	LO14-4	 Describe how to calculate a product’s break-even point.
	LO14-5	 Indicate the four types of price competitive levels.
PRICING 
CONCEPTS FOR 
ESTABLISHING 
VALUE
CHAPTER 14
the supermarket. For example, shoppers on tight budgets 
still need to buy cleaning supplies, but when they do so, 
they tend to be much more sensitive to the prices for the 
various detergents their households need.
In such price-sensitive and highly competitive mar-
kets, companies must be creative in finding ways to 
P
ricing is a key part of the value proposition for 
any purchase. After all, among the other defini-
tions we have used in this book, value reflects 
the relationship between benefits and costs. 
  When the economy sours and consumer income drops,  
  no sticker prices can escape sharp scrutiny, especially in 

­balance profits and consumers. Procter & Gamble (P&G) 
had long floated high above its competitors in the sea of 
laundry detergents, with its Tide brand enjoying a 38 per-
cent share of the laundry soap market in North America.1 
However, a wave of lower-priced competitors crashed 
into P&G when consumers began looking more actively 
for better deals. Thrifty shoppers began turning from 
their trusty Tide brand to cheaper alternatives, such as 
Arm & Hammer detergent, made by Church & Dwight, Co.
Not a company to rest on its laurels, P&G pursued sev-
eral strategic responses to the challenge. For consumers 
interested in convenience, it introduced, developed, and ex-
panded on the concept of laundry detergent pods—single- 
use packs that eliminate the mess and the need for measuring 
associated with liquids or powders. Tide’s latest Pods, 
which add in Febreze, even won product of the year in the 
newly created “Laundry Pacs” category.2 Although this op-
tion has expanded the breadth of Tide’s product lines and 
established an approximately $1 billion market for P&G, the 
pods create higher per-wash costs for consumers.3
Therefore, for consumers determined to use cheaper 
detergents, it also has developed and introduced Tide 
Simply Clean & Fresh, a liquid detergent that retails for 
about 35 percent less than the $12 price of a 100-ounce 
bottle of regular Tide.4 In an effort to reduce the risk of 
sales cannibalization of its premium higher-priced prod-
ucts, P&G makes sure that Simply Clean never appears 
for sale alongside other Tide brands, nor does it sport 
the easily recognizable orange Tide-branded container. 
In stores, Simply Clean is placed alongside its competitor 
brand on store shelves, despite its higher price point. 
The primary target markets are consumers from hard-
working households, many of whom work in tough, 
odor-generating jobs and environments. With this ap-
proach, P&G can ensure that it never turns its back on 
its flagship brand.
Although P&G’s product portfolio is broad, including 
various detergent brands such as Gain, Era, and Ace, it 
has chosen to focus where consumers are most invested, 
namely, in its Tide products. In trying to ensure Tide’s mar-
ket share advantage, P&G has shown its willingness to 
adjust its regular pricing strategies, develop new prod-
ucts with varying profit margins, and reduce bottle sizes 
while maintaining the same retail price. In essence, 
Procter & Gamble is keeping an eye on the way the tides 
are turning in the laundry detergent market.
© McGraw-Hill Education

434	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Although knowing how consumers arrive at their perceptions of value is critical to devel-
oping successful pricing strategies, sellers also must consider other factors—which is why 
developing a good pricing strategy is such a formidable challenge to all firms. Do it right, 
and the rewards to the firm will be substantial. Do it wrong, and failure will be swift and 
severe. But even if a pricing strategy is implemented well, consumers, economic condi-
tions, markets, competitors, government regulations, and even a firm’s own products 
change constantly—and that means that a good pricing strategy today may not remain an 
effective pricing strategy tomorrow.
So much rides on marketers setting the right price that we take two chapters to explain 
the role of price in the marketing mix. In this chapter we explain what “price” is as a mar-
keting concept, why it is important, how marketers set pricing objectives, and how various 
factors influence price setting. In the next chapter, we extend this foundation by focusing 
on specific pricing strategies that capitalize on capturing value.
Imagine that a consumer realizes that to save money on a particular item, she will have 
to drive an additional 20 miles. She may determine that her time and travel costs are not 
worth the savings, so even though the price tag is higher at the nearby store, she judges the 
overall cost of buying the product close by to be lower. To include aspects of price such as 
this, we may define price as the overall sacrifice a consumer is willing to make to acquire 
a specific product or service. This sacrifice necessarily includes the money that must be 
paid to the seller to acquire the item, but it also may involve other sacrifices, whether non-
monetary, like the value of the time necessary to acquire the product or service, or mone-
tary, like travel costs, taxes, shipping costs, and so forth, all of which the buyer must give 
up to take possession of the product.5 It’s useful to think of overall price in this way to see 
how the narrower sense of purchase price fits in.
Because price is the only element of the marketing mix 
that does not generate costs but instead generates revenue, it is 
important in its own right. Every other element in the market-
ing mix may be perfect, but with the wrong price, sales and 
thus revenue will not accrue. Consumers generally believe that 
price is one of the most important factors in their purchase 
decisions.
Knowing that price is so critical to success, why don’t 
managers put greater emphasis on it as a strategic decision 
variable? Price is the most challenging of the four Ps to 
manage, partly because it is often the least understood. 
Historically, managers have treated price as an after-
thought to their marketing strategy, setting prices accord-
ing to what competitors were charging or, worse yet, 
adding up their costs and tacking on a desired profit to set 
the sales price. Prices rarely changed except in response to 
radical shifts in market conditions. Even today, pricing de-
cisions are often relegated to standard rules of thumb that 
fail to reflect our current understanding of the role of price 
in the marketing mix.
Price is a particularly powerful indicator of quality 
when consumers are less knowledgeable about the product 
category—a lesson brought home by the movie (based on 
the book of the same name) Moneyball. As the character 
played by Jonah Hill argues convincingly to Brad Pitt’s 
character, baseball teams often overpay for young, untested 
talent or big-name players because they don’t know how 
else to set an accurate price.6
In summary, marketers should view pricing decisions as a 
strategic opportunity to create value rather than as an after-
thought to the rest of the marketing mix. Let us now turn to 
the five basic components of pricing strategies.
Demonstrating that price is of-
ten used to judge quality, in the 
movie Moneyball, Jonah Hill ex-
plains to Brad Pitt’s character 
that baseball teams often over-
pay for young, untested talent 
or big-name players because 
they don’t know how else to 
gauge an appropriate salary.
© Gregorio Binuya/Everett Collection/
Newscom

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
435
	
	
THE FIVE Cs OF PRICING
Successful pricing strategies are built around the five critical components (the five Cs) of 
pricing, found in Exhibit 14.1. We examine these components in some detail because each 
makes a significant contribution to formulating good pricing policies.7 To start, the first 
step is to develop the company’s pricing objectives.
Company Objectives
By now, you know that different firms embrace very different goals. These goals should 
spill down to the pricing strategy, such that the pricing of a company’s products and ser-
vices should support and allow the firm to reach its overall goals. For example, a firm with 
a primary goal of very high sales growth will likely have a different pricing strategy than 
will a firm with the goal of being a quality leader.
Each firm then embraces objectives that seem to fit with where management 
thinks the firm needs to go to be successful, in whatever way it defines success. These 
specific objectives usually reflect how the firm intends to grow. Do managers want it 
to grow by increasing profits, increasing sales, decreasing competition, or building 
customer satisfaction?
Company objectives are not as simple as they might first appear. They often can be 
expressed in slightly different forms that mean very different things. Exhibit 14.2 intro-
duces some common company objectives and corresponding examples of their implica-
tions for pricing strategies. These objectives are not always mutually exclusive, because a 
firm may embrace two or more noncompeting objectives.
Profit Orientation  Even though all company methods and objectives may ulti-
mately be oriented toward making a profit, firms implement a profit orientation 
LO14-1	
List the four pricing 
orientations.
E X H I B I T  14.1
The Five Cs of Pricing
Competition
Costs
Company
objectives
Channel
members
Customers
Value
E X H I B I T  14.2
Company Objectives and Pricing Strategy Implications
Company Objective	
Examples of Pricing Strategy Implications
Profit-oriented	
Institute a companywide policy that all products must provide for at least an  
18 percent profit margin to reach a particular profit goal for the firm.
Sales-oriented	
Set prices very low to generate new sales and take sales away from competi-
tors, even if profits suffer.
Competitor-oriented	
To discourage more competitors from entering the market, set prices very low.
Customer-oriented	
Target a market segment of consumers who highly value a particular product 
benefit and set prices relatively high (referred to as premium pricing).

436	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
specifically by focusing on target profit pricing, maximizing profits, or target return 
pricing.
∙	
Firms usually implement target profit pricing when they have a particular profit 
goal as their overriding concern. To meet this targeted profit objective, firms use 
price to stimulate a certain level of sales at a certain profit per unit.
∙	
The maximizing profits strategy relies primarily on economic theory. If a firm can 
accurately specify a mathematical model that captures all the factors required to 
explain and predict sales and profits, it should be able to identify the price at which 
its profits are maximized. Of course, the problem with this approach is that actually 
gathering the data on all these relevant factors and somehow coming up with an 
accurate mathematical model is an extremely difficult undertaking.
∙	
Other firms are less concerned with the absolute level of profits and more interested in 
the rate at which their profits are generated relative to their investments. These firms 
typically turn to target return pricing and employ pricing strategies designed to 
produce a specific return on their investment, usually expressed as a percentage of sales.
Sales Orientation  Firms using a sales orientation to set prices believe that increasing 
sales will help the firm more than will increasing profits. Tide laundry detergent might 
adopt such an orientation selectively when it introduces new products that it wants to es-
tablish in the market. A new health club might focus on unit sales, dollar sales, or market 
share and therefore be willing to set a lower membership fee and accept less profit at first 
to focus on and generate more unit sales. In contrast, a high-end jewelry store might focus 
on dollar sales and maintain higher prices. The jewelry store relies on its prestige image, as 
well as the image of its suppliers, to provoke sales. Even though it sells fewer units, it can 
still generate high dollar sales levels.
Some firms may be more concerned about their overall market share than about dollar 
sales per se (though these often go hand in hand) because they believe that market share 
better reflects their success relative to the market conditions than do sales alone. A firm 
may set low prices to discourage new firms from entering the market, encourage current 
firms to leave the market, and/or take market share away from competitors—all to gain 
overall market share. For example, as low-cost, no-frills airlines like Frontier and Spirit 
have changed travelers’ perspectives on what prices are reasonable and necessary to pay, 
the major airlines such as United, American, and Delta have had to work hard to keep in-
creasing their market share. Delta now offers a Basic Economy fare on most routes that the 
discount airlines also fly. In exchange for the lower price, passengers lose the right to make 
changes to their itinerary, and they cannot obtain seat assignments in advance. Both 
American and United have indicated that they are developing similar economy fares to 
widen the range of prices that their consumers can access. 
In addition to lowering the prices they charge consumers, 
the major carriers are seeking to increase the number of 
seats in each plane, thus increasing their revenue per flight.8
Yet adopting a market share objective does not always 
imply setting low prices. Rarely is the lowest-price offering 
the dominant brand in a given market. Heinz ketchup, Phil-
adelphia cream cheese, Crest toothpaste, and Nike athletic 
shoes have all dominated their markets, yet all are premi-
um-priced brands. On the services side, IBM claims market 
dominance in human resource outsourcing, but again, it is 
certainly not the lowest-price competitor.9 Premium pric-
ing means the firm deliberately prices a product above the 
prices set for competing products so as to capture those cus-
tomers who always shop for the best or for whom price does 
not matter. Thus, companies can gain market share by offer-
ing a high-quality product at a price that is perceived to be 
fair by its target market as long as they use effective 
P&G increases sales by intro-
ducing new Tide products.
© Rob Kim/Getty Images

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
437
	
	
­communication and distribution methods to generate high-value perceptions among con-
sumers. Although the concept of value is not overtly expressed in sales-oriented strategies, 
it is at least implicit because, for sales to increase, consumers must see greater value.
Competitor Orientation  When firms take a competitor orientation, they strategize 
according to the premise that they should measure themselves primarily against their com-
petition. Some firms focus on competitive parity, which means they set prices that are 
similar to those of their major competitors. Another competitor-oriented strategy, status 
quo pricing, changes prices only to meet those of the competition. For example, when 
Delta increases its average fares, American Airlines and United often follow with similar 
increases; if Delta rescinds that increase, its competitors tend to drop their fares too.10 
Value is only implicitly considered in competitor-oriented strategies, but in the sense that 
competitors may be using value as part of their pricing strategies, copying their strategy 
might provide value.
Customer Orientation  A firm uses customer orientation when it sets its pricing strat-
egy based on how it can add value to its products or services. When CarMax promises a 
“no-haggle” pricing structure, it exhibits a customer orientation because it provides addi-
tional value to potential used car buyers by making the process simple and easy.11
Firms may offer very high-priced, state-of-the-art products or services in full anticipa-
tion of limited sales. These offerings are designed to enhance the company’s reputation and 
image and thereby increase the company’s value in the minds of consumers. Paradigm, a 
Since Frontier and other air-
lines started offering low-cost, 
no-frills flights, other airlines 
have had to work hard to keep 
increasing market share.
© Blaine Harrington III/Alamy
Philadelphia brand cream 
cheese dominates its market 
and is a premium-priced brand. 
© Michael J. Hruby

438	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Canadian speaker manufacturer, produces what many audiophiles consider to be a 
high-value product, yet offers speakers priced as low as $320 per pair. However, 
Paradigm also offers a very high-end speaker for $8,500 per pair. Although few 
people will spend $8,500 on a pair of speakers, this “statement” speaker commu-
nicates what the company is capable of and can increase the image of the firm and 
the rest of its products—even that $320 pair of speakers. Setting prices with a 
close eye to how consumers develop their perceptions of value can often be the 
most effective pricing strategy, especially if it is supported by consistent advertis-
ing and distribution strategies.
After a company has a good grasp on its overall objectives, it must imple-
ment pricing strategies that enable it to achieve those objectives. As the second 
step in this process, the firm should look toward consumer demand to lay the 
foundation for its pricing strategy.
Can you tell the difference 
­between the $8,500 and the 
$320 speakers? 
Source: Paradigm Electronics, Inc.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the five Cs of pricing?
2.	 Identify the four types of company objectives.
Customers
When firms have developed their company objectives, they turn to understanding 
consumers’ reactions to different prices. The second C of the five Cs of pricing 
focuses on the customers. Customers want value, and as you likely recall, price is 
half of the value equation.
To determine how firms account for consumers’ preferences when they de-
velop pricing strategies, we must first lay a foundation of traditional economic 
theory that helps explain how prices are related to demand (consumers’ desire for prod-
ucts) and how managers can incorporate this knowledge into their pricing strategies. But 
first read through Adding Value 14.1, which considers how Amazon leverages its renowned 
algorithms to develop a sophisticated value-based pricing strategy.12 
Demand Curves and Pricing  A demand curve shows how many units of a product or 
service consumers will demand during a specific period of time at different prices. Although 
we call them “curves,” demand curves can be either straight or curved, as Exhibit 14.3 
LO14-2	
Explain the relationship 
between price and 
quantity sold.
2.5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
7.5
10
Q2
P1
P2
Price $
Q1
12.5
Quantity
demanded
(00,000s)
Demand increases as
price decreases
Demand
E X H I B I T  14.3
Demand Curve for Teeth-Whitening Kits

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
439
	
	
Adding Value 14.1
Changing Once, Changing Twice, Changing 3 Million Times: 
How Amazon Prices to Wini
On a recent Black Friday (i.e., 
the day after Thanksgiving, 
when many retailers make 
enough profit for the year to 
exceed their costs, known 
as getting in the black), Ama-
zon actively changed the 
prices of one-third of the 
products in its seemingly 
endless supply. Try to imag-
ine what that means. Ama-
zon, the marketplace for 
virtually everything, engaged 
in literally millions of price 
changes, on what would al-
ready be probably its busiest 
shopping day. Why? 
Here’s the thing: It isn’t all 
that unusual for Amazon. 
Every single day, it changes 
the prices of 15 to 18 per-
cent of its products. With its 
famous algorithms and re-
markable data warehouses, 
Amazon evidently believes it 
has better insights into what 
consumers will pay at any 
particular moment for a vast 
range of products. 
Some product categories 
come in for more changes 
than others. Some are sub-
ject to change every day, oth-
ers undergo price alterations 
every third day, another set 
shifts once a week, and still 
others experience changes 
only once or twice a month. 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, con-
sidering its investment in the 
Kindle, the most frequently 
changed product category is 
tablets, for which Amazon 
changes the prices of 15 
percent of its stock every 
one to two days.
But the really remark-
able transitions are the 
ones that take place around 
the holidays. Reports from 
holiday trends indicate that 
Amazon literally changed 
more than 3 million prices each and every day in November—
of course, with the previously mentioned jump in activity on 
the day after Thanksgiving. Pleased with how well these 
changes have worked, Amazon promises to continue making 
them, and perhaps even ramp up its efforts. 
Amazon changes prices of 15 percent of its stock of Kindle 
tablets every one to two days. Note, the Kindle Oasis 
ranges from $139 and $189 (top) to $289.99 (bottom).
Top: © indiaforte/Alamy; Bottom: Source: Amazon

440	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
shows. Of course, any demand curve relating demand to price assumes 
that everything else remains unchanged. For the sake of expediency, 
marketers creating a demand curve assume that the firm will not in-
crease its expenditures on advertising and that the economy will not 
change in any significant way.
Exhibit 14.3 illustrates a classic downward-sloping demand curve 
for teeth-whitening kits. As price increases, demand for a product or 
service will decrease. In the case here, consumers will buy more as the 
price decreases. We can expect a demand curve similar to this one for 
many, if not most, products and services.
The horizontal axis in Exhibit 14.3 measures the quantity de-
manded for the teeth-whitening kits in units and plots it against the 
various price possibilities indicated on the vertical axis. Each point on 
the demand curve then represents the quantity demanded at a specific 
price. So, in this instance, if the price of a kit is $10 per unit (P1), the 
demand is 1,000,000 units (Q1), but if the price were set at $15 (P2), the 
demand would be only 500,000 units (Q2). The firm will sell far more 
teeth-whitening kits at $10 each than at $15 each. Why? Because of the 
greater value this price point offers.
Knowing the demand curve for a product or service enables a firm 
to examine different prices in terms of the resulting demand and rela-
tive to its overall objective. In our preceding example, the retailer will 
generate a total of $10,000,000 in sales at the $10 price ($10 × 
1,000,000 units) and $7,500,000 in sales at the $15 price ($15 × 
500,000 units). In this case, given only the two choices of $10 or $15, 
the $10 price is preferable as long as the firm wants to maximize its 
sales in terms of dollars and units. But what about a firm that is more 
interested in profit? To calculate profit, it must consider its costs, which 
we cover in the next section.
But not all products or services follow the downward-sloping demand curve for all 
levels of price depicted in Exhibit 14.3. Consider prestige products or services, which 
consumers purchase for their status rather than for their functionality. The higher the price, 
the greater the status associated with it and the greater the exclusivity, because fewer peo-
ple can afford to purchase it. French luxury goods manufacturer and retailer Hermès is 
Based on Exhibit 14.3, what is 
the best price for WhiteLight? 
© Miami Herald/McClatchy-Tribune/
Getty Images
Hermès uses prestige pricing 
for its handbags, like this one 
that sold for more than 
$300,000 at auction, which is 
more than $20,000 above the 
standard retail price. 
© Lam Yik Fei/The New York  
Times/Redux

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
441
	
	
known for making expensive leather goods. But paying 
$300,168 for a handbag at auction, which is over the standard 
retail price of $280,000, is extraordinary, and not for the casual 
shopper.  Of course, the matte Himalayan crocodile handbag 
was finished using white-gold hardware set with 245 F-color 
diamonds.13
With prestige products or services, a higher price may 
lead to a greater quantity sold, but only up to a certain point. 
The price demonstrates just how rare, exclusive, and presti-
gious the product is. When customers value the increase in 
prestige more than the price differential between the prestige 
product and other products, the prestige product attains the 
greater value overall.
However, prestige products can also run into pricing dif-
ficulties. The Fender Telecaster and Stratocaster guitars are 
absolute necessities for any self-respecting guitar hero, but 
for hobbyists or students just learning to play, the price of 
owning a Fender “axe” was simply too much. In response, 
Fender introduced a separate, budget-priced line of similar 
guitars under a different brand name, so as not to dilute the 
prestige of the Fender name. The Squier line, made in Japan 
with automated manufacturing and less expensive parts, 
­offers a look similar to the famous Fender guitars and perfor-
mance just a notch below the originals. Today, an American- 
made Vintage Hot Rod ’57 Fender Stratocaster lists for 
$1,700, more than 14 times as much as a Squier Bullet Strat 
model, which retails for around $120.14
Exhibit 14.4 illustrates a demand curve for a hypothetical prestige service, a Club Med 
vacation. As the graph indicates, when the price increases from $1,000 (P1) to $5,000 (P2), 
the quantity demanded actually increases from 200,000 (Q1) to 500,000 (Q2) units. However, 
when the price increases to $8,000 (P3), the demand then decreases to 300,000 (Q3) units.
Although the firm likely will earn more profit selling 300,000 vacation packages at 
$8,000 each than 500,000 vacation packages at $5,000 each, we do not know for sure 
until we bring costs into the picture. However, we do know that more consumers are will-
ing to book the vacation as the price increases initially from $1,000 to $5,000 and that 
more consumers will choose an alternative vacation as the price increases further from 
$5,000 to $8,000.
Jimi Hendrix used a left-
handed Fender guitar.
© David Redfern/Getty Images
E X H I B I T  14.4
Demand Curve for a Club Med Vacation
100 200 300 400 500
Q2
Q3
P1
P2
P3
Price
$000s
Q1
Quantity
demanded
(in 000s)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Demand increases as
price increases
Demand decreases as
price increases
Demand

442	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
We must consider this notion of consumers’ sensitivity to 
price changes in greater depth.
Price Elasticity of Demand  Although we now know 
something about how consumers react to different price lev-
els, we still need to determine how consumers respond to 
actual changes in price. These responses vary depending on 
the product or service. For example, consumers are gener-
ally less sensitive to price increases for necessary items, 
such as milk, because they have to purchase the items even if 
the price climbs. When the price of milk goes up, demand 
does not fall significantly, because people still need to buy 
milk. However, if the price of T-bone steaks rises beyond a 
certain point, people will buy fewer of them because they 
can turn to the many substitutes for this cut of meat. 
Marketers need to know how consumers will respond to a 
price increase or decrease for a specific product or brand so 
they can determine whether it makes sense for them to raise 
or lower prices.
Price elasticity of demand measures how changes in a 
price affect the quantity of the product demanded. Specifi-
cally, it is the ratio of the percentage change in quantity de-
manded to the percentage change in price. We can calculate it 
with the following formula:
Price elasticity of demand =  % Change in quantity demanded
% Changes in price
The demand curve provides the information we need to calculate the price elasticity of 
demand. For instance, what is the price elasticity of demand if we increase the price of our 
teeth-whitening kit from Exhibit 14.3 from $10 to $15?
 % Change in quantity demanded = (500,000 − 1,000,000)
1,000,000
= −50%, and
 % Change in price = ($15 − $10)
10
 = 50%, so
 Price elasticity of demand = −50%
50% = −1.
Thus, the price elasticity of demand for our teeth-whitening kit is −1.
In general, the market for a product or service is price sensitive, or elastic, when the 
price elasticity is less than −1. Thus, an elasticity of –5 would indicate that a 1 percent 
decrease in price produces a 5 percent increase in the quantity sold. In an elastic sce-
nario, relatively small changes in price will generate fairly large changes in the quantity 
demanded, so if a firm is trying to increase its sales, it can do so by lowering prices. 
However, raising prices can be problematic in this context because doing so will lower 
sales. To refer back to our grocery examples, a retailer would significantly decrease its 
sales of T-bone steaks by raising its price by a relatively small amount, because T-bones 
are elastic.
The market for a product is generally viewed as price insensitive, or inelastic, 
when its price elasticity is greater than −1. For example, an elasticity of –.50 indi-
cates that a 1 percent increase in price results in one-half a percent decrease in quan-
tity sold. Generally, if a firm must raise prices, it is helpful to do so with inelastic 
products or services, because in such a market, fewer customers will stop buying or 
will reduce their purchases. However, if the products are inelastic, lowering prices 
will not appreciably increase demand; customers just don’t notice or care about the 
lower price.
LO14-3	
Explain price elasticity.
Based on Exhibit 14.4, price  
increases do not affect sales 
of the vacation significantly up 
to a certain point. But after 
that point, sales decrease  
because consumers believe it 
is no longer a good value.
Image Courtesy of The Advertising  
Archives

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
443
	
	
Consumers are generally more sensitive to 
price increases than to price decreases.15 That is, 
it is easier to lose current customers with a 
price increase than it is to gain new cus-
tomers with a price decrease. Also, 
the price elasticity of demand usu-
ally changes at different points in 
the demand curve unless the 
curve is actually a straight line, 
as in Exhibit 14.3. For instance, 
a prestige product or service, 
like our Caribbean cruise ex-
ample in Exhibit 14.4, enjoys 
a highly inelastic demand 
curve up to a certain point, 
so price increases do not af-
fect sales significantly. But 
when the price reaches that 
certain point, consumers 
start turning to other alter-
natives, because the value 
of the cruise has finally been 
reduced by the extremely 
high price.
Ideally, firms could maxi-
mize their profits if they charged 
each customer as much as the cus-
tomer was willing to pay. The travel 
industry and airlines realize 
this benefit particularly well, 
as Marketing Analytics 14.1 
explains. For instance, if a 
wealthy, price-insensitive 
customer wants to buy a 
new car, a Ford dealer might like to price a particular car at $40,000, but then price the 
same car at $35,000 to a more price-sensitive customer. Such a practice is legal when re-
tailers sell to consumers such as in an eBay auction, but it is permitted only under certain 
circumstances in B2B settings.16
Although charging different prices to different customers is legal and widely used in 
some retail sectors, such as automobile and antique dealers, it has not been very practical 
in most retail stores until recently. Retailers have increased their use of dynamic pricing 
techniques due to the information that is available from point-of-sale data collected on the 
Internet purchases and in stores (as we discussed in Adding Value 14.1). Dynamic pricing, 
also known as individualized pricing, refers to the process of charging different prices for 
goods or services based on the type of customer; time of the day, week, or even season; and 
level of demand. 
Factors Influencing Price Elasticity of Demand  We have illustrated how price elas-
ticity of demand varies across different products and at different points along a demand 
curve, as well as how it can change over time. What causes these differences in the price 
elasticity of demand? We discuss a few of the more important factors next.
Income Effect  The income effect refers to the change in the quantity of a product de-
manded by consumers due to changes in their incomes. Generally, as people’s incomes in-
crease, their spending behavior changes: They tend to shift their demand from lower-priced 
products to higher-priced alternatives. That is, consumers buy hamburger when they’re 
stretching their money but steak when they’re flush. Similarly, they may increase the 
Consumers are less sensitive to the price of milk than they are to that of steak. When the price 
of milk goes up, demand does not fall significantly, because people still need to buy milk. How-
ever, if the price of steak rises beyond a certain point, people will buy less because they can 
turn to many substitutes for steak.
Left: © McGraw-Hill Education/Bob Coyle, photographer; Right: © FoodCollection/StockFood RF

444	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Airlines Use Price Elasticities to Price Ticketsii
The airline industry has been using analytics to influence pric-
ing for decades. Early implementers of data-based pricing 
strategies, such as American Airlines, enjoyed a significant ad-
vantage over their competitors who maintained a single, flat 
rate for all tickets. By predicting demand for each particular 
flight, American Airlines could price different tickets at differ-
ent rates and ensure that it sold as many tickets as possible. 
For example, when its analytics system identified which tickets 
might not sell, American Airlines began offering those seats at 
a significant discount, but it increased the rates for seats that 
were very likely to be purchased.
	
American Airlines’ pricing strategy grew so effective that 
every other airline faced an obvious choice: Adopt it or go out 
of business. Some of the popularity of data-based pricing is 
the result of a key feature that it provides: It allows customers 
the freedom to determine the price they will pay. Travelers well 
know that they will find vast discrepancies in flight prices, de-
pending on when they travel (spring break or the off-season?), 
when they book (Tuesday nights or Saturday mornings?), and 
where they want to sit (pay a lot extra for first class, a little 
extra for the exit row, or just the base fare for a middle seat?). 
Customers can weigh the value of the convenience of these 
various factors for themselves and then select the flight that 
best fits their own individual needs.
	
Despite the great deals offered and the resultant benefits 
for firms as well as customers, the use of strategic pricing 
analytics can require time-consuming hunts for the best deal. 
To combat the hassle of searching for airline deals, many ser-
vice providers have introduced travel booking sites. Some are 
specific to a particular airline; others compile pricing informa-
tion about various flights between two locations to make the 
price comparison evident and convenient for the customer. 
Kayak.com has taken it a step further and begun implementing 
predictive pricing analytics of its own in the form of its price 
forecast feature. Kayak takes information from the billions of 
requests for travel information that it processes each day and 
then predicts whether the price for a given destination on a 
particular date is likely to go up or down over the next seven 
days. It computes the accuracy of its predictions daily in an 
effort to perfect its use of these analytics.
Marketing Analytics 14.1
Kayak.com predicts when travel prices will change based on the information it processes 
each day.
Source: kayak.com

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
445
	
	
­quantity they purchase and splurge on a five-star hotel during 
their six-day Las Vegas trip rather than three-star lodging over a 
weekend visit. Conversely, when incomes drop, consumers turn 
to less expensive alternatives or purchase less.
Substitution Effect  The substitution effect refers to con-
sumers’ ability to substitute other products for the focal brand. 
The greater the availability of substitute products, the higher 
the price elasticity of demand for any given product will be. 
For example, there are many close substitutes in the laundry 
detergent category, as we discussed in the chapter opener. If 
Tide raises its prices, many consumers will turn to competing 
brands (e.g., Arm & Hammer Detergent), because they are 
more sensitive to price increases when they can easily find 
lower-priced substitutes. Extremely brand-loyal consumers, 
however, are willing to pay a higher price, up to a point, be-
cause in their minds, Tide still offers a better value than the 
competing brands do, and they believe the other brands are not 
adequate substitutes.
Keep in mind that marketing plays a critical role in making 
consumers brand loyal. And because of this brand loyalty and 
the lack of what consumers judge to be adequate substitutes, 
the price elasticity of demand for some brands is very low. For 
example, Polo/Ralph Lauren sells millions of its classic polo 
shirts at $85, while shirts of equal quality but without the polo- 
player logo sell for much less. Getting consumers to believe 
that a particular brand is unique, different, or extraordinary in 
some way makes other brands seem less substitutable, which in 
turn increases brand loyalty and decreases the price elasticity 
of demand.
Cross-Price Elasticity  Cross-price elasticity is the per-
centage change in the quantity of Product A demanded com-
pared with the percentage change in price in Product B. If 
Product A’s price increases, Product B’s price could either increase or decrease, de-
pending on the situation and whether the products are complementary or substitutes. 
We refer to products like Blu-ray discs and Blu-ray players as complementary 
products, which are products whose demands are positively related, such that they 
rise or fall together. In other words, a percentage increase in the quantity demanded 
for Product A results in a percentage increase in the quantity demanded for Product B.17 
However, when the price for Blu-ray players dropped, the demand for DVD players 
went down, so DVD players and Blu-ray players are substitute products because 
changes in their demand are negatively related. That is, a percentage increase in the 
quantity demanded for Product A results in a percentage decrease in the quantity de-
manded for Product B.18 In addition, on the Internet, shopping bots like TheFind.com 
and Bizrate.com have made it much easier for people to shop for substitutable prod-
ucts like consumer electronics, which likely has affected the price elasticity of de-
mand for such products.19
The way a product or service is marketed to customers can have a profound effect on 
its price elasticity. Superior Service 14.1 describes how good marketing by Universal 
Theme Parks in the form of greater customer convenience can make customers less sensi-
tive to price.
Prior to this point, we have focused on how changes in prices affect how much cus-
tomers buy. Clearly, knowing how prices affect sales is important, but it cannot give us the 
whole picture. To know how profitable a pricing strategy will be, we must also consider 
the third C, costs.
ILacostena fights the price substitution effect by being one 
of the most recognized Mexican brands and a leading 
producer of canned products.
© Photodisc/Getty Images RF

446	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
The Increasing Costs of Play: New Offers and  
Pricing by Disney and Universal Theme Parksiii
As we discuss in the opening vignette for 
the next chapter, the price to get into 
Disneyland, in Anaheim, California, or 
Disney World, in Orlando, Florida, keeps in-
creasing. At Universal Studios Hollywood, a 
one-day pass is $80. But instead of just 
raising its prices to match Disney, Universal 
has introduced a new pricing plan that of-
fers greater access to those willing to pay 
more—quite a lot more.
	
The VIP service at Universal allows park 
visitors to bypass every line in the park–­
after having their car parked by a valet. They 
get free breakfast and lunch in a luxury 
lounge that features such offerings as scal-
lops and short ribs. Then they can access 
the backlots while toting their free gift bags 
that contain mints, hand sanitizer, and a 
poncho to wear on water rides–all this at a 
cost of $299 per ticket. For those who don’t 
worry about their breath or eating fancy 
meals, a $149 option offers just line-jumping 
privileges.
	
 Even as it introduced this new service, Universal noted that it 
had no plans to expand its primary offering. That is, it did not 
plan to open any new rides or attractions this year. Its parks 
pulled in approximately 20 million people in 2012, which repre-
sented a nearly 20 percent increase over the year before. And 
according to some of these visitors, they simply would not attend 
without a VIP option, because they hate dealing with the crowds.
	
Such benefits raise some questions about the economic 
stratification Universal is promoting, such that only the wealthy 
get to enjoy all the perks. For Disney, concerns about damage 
to its “magical” image have halted it from classifying different 
price points for tickets based on different levels of access. Yet 
as a recent controversy—in which wealthy families hired peo-
ple with disabilities to join their trips so that they could skip 
lines—showed, demand for such special treatment exists.
	
Even though theme parks are enjoying record attendance 
and revenue levels, they keep looking for ways to increase 
their appeal. New rides and attractions are expensive and in 
many cases can seem out of date pretty quickly. In this case, 
the magic may be in the pricing.
Superior Service 14.1
Universal Theme Parks offer premium service options at a premium price.
© Melanie Eldred Photography/Alamy
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is the difference between elastic demand and inelastic demand?
2.	 What are the factors influencing price elasticity?
Costs
To make effective pricing decisions, firms must understand their cost structures so they 
can determine the degree to which their products or services will be profitable at different 
prices. In general, prices should not be based on costs, because consumers make purchase 
decisions based on their perceived value; they care little about the firm’s costs to produce 
and sell a product or deliver a service. Although companies incur many different types of 
costs as a natural part of doing business, there are two primary cost categories: variable 
and fixed.

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
447
	
	
Variable Costs  Variable costs are those costs, primarily labor and materials, that vary 
with production volume. As a firm produces more or less of a good or service, the total 
variable costs increase or decrease at the same time. Because each unit of the product pro-
duced incurs the same cost, marketers generally express variable costs on a per-unit basis. 
Consider a bakery like Entenmann’s: The majority of the variable costs are the cost of the 
ingredients, primarily flour. Each time Entenmann’s makes a loaf of bread, it incurs the 
cost of the ingredients.
In the service industry, variable costs are far more complex. A hotel, for instance, in-
curs certain variable costs each time it rents a room, including the costs associated with the 
labor and supplies necessary to clean and restock the room. Note that the hotel does not 
incur these costs if the room is not booked. Suppose that a particular hotel calculates its 
total variable costs to be $10 per room; each time it rents a room, it incurs another $10 in 
variable costs. If the hotel rents out 100 rooms on a given night, the total variable cost is 
$1,000 ($10 per room × 100 rooms).
In either case, however, variable costs tend to change depending on the quantity pro-
duced. If Entenmann’s makes 100,000 loaves of bread in a month, it would have to pay a 
higher price for ingredients on a per pound basis than if it were producing a million loaves, 
because the more ingredients it purchases, the less expensive those ingredients become. 
Similarly, a very large hotel will be able to get a lower per unit price on most, if not all, the 
supplies it needs to service the room because it purchases such a large volume. However, 
as the hotel company continues to grow, it may be forced to add more benefits for its em-
ployees or increase wages to attract and keep long-term employees. Such changes will 
­increase its overall variable labor costs and affect the total variable cost of cleaning a room. 
Thus, though not always the case, variable costs per unit may go up or down (for all units) 
with significant changes in volume.
Fixed Costs  Fixed costs are those costs that remain essentially at the same level, regard-
less of any changes in the volume of production. Typically, these costs include items such 
as rent, utilities, insurance, administrative salaries (for executives and higher-level manag-
ers), and the depreciation of the physical plant and equipment. Across reasonable fluctua-
tions in production volume, these costs remain stable; whether Entenmann’s makes 
100,000 loaves or a million, the rent it pays for the bakery remains unchanged.
Total Cost  Finally, the total cost is simply the sum of the variable and fixed costs. For 
example, in one year, our hypothetical hotel incurred $100,000 in fixed costs. We also 
know that because the hotel booked 10,000 room nights, its total variable cost is $100,000 
(10,000 room nights × $10 per room). Thus, its total cost is $200,000.
Next, we illustrate how to use these costs in simple analyses that can inform manage-
rial decision making about setting prices.
Break‐Even Analysis and Decision Making
A useful technique that enables managers to examine the relationships among cost, price, 
revenue, and profit over different levels of production and sales is called break-even 
analysis. Central to this analysis is the determination of the break-even point, or the 
point at which the number of units sold generates just enough revenue to equal the total 
costs. At this point, profits are zero. Although profit, which represents the difference be-
tween the total cost and the total revenue (Total revenue or sales = Selling price of each 
unit sold × Number of units sold), can indicate how much money the firm is making or 
losing at a single period of time, it cannot tell managers how many units a firm must pro-
duce and sell before it stops losing money and at least breaks even, which is what the 
break-even point does.
How do we determine the break-even point? Exhibit 14.5 presents in graphic format 
the various cost and revenue information we have discussed. The graph contains three 
curves (recall that even though they are straight, we still call them curves): fixed costs, total 
costs, and total revenue. The vertical axis measures the revenue and costs in dollars, and 
the horizontal axis measures the quantity of units sold. The fixed cost curve will always 
LO14-4	
Describe how to 
calculate a product’s 
break-even point.

448	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
appear as a horizontal line straight across the graph, 
because fixed costs do not change over different levels 
of volume.
The total cost curve starts where the fixed cost 
curve intersects the vertical axis at $100,000. When 
volume is equal to zero (no units are produced or 
sold), the fixed costs of operating the business re-
main and cannot be avoided. Thus, the lowest point 
the total costs can ever reach is equal to the total 
fixed costs. Beyond that point, the total cost curve 
increases by the amount of variable costs for each 
additional unit, which we calculate by multiplying 
the variable cost per unit by the number of units, or 
quantity.
Finally, the total revenue curve increases by the 
price of each additional unit sold. To calculate it, 
we multiply the price per unit by the number of 
units sold. The formulas for these calculations are 
as follows:
Total variable costs = Variable cost per unit × Quantity
	
Total costs = Fixed costs + Total variable costs
	
Total revenue = Price × Quantity
We again use the hotel example to illustrate these relationships. Recall that the fixed 
costs are $100,000 and the variable costs are $10 per room rented. If the rooms rent for $50 
per night, how many rooms must the hotel rent over the course of a year to break even? If 
we study the graph carefully, we find the break-even point at 2,500, which means that the 
hotel must rent 2,500 rooms before its revenues equal its costs. If it rents fewer rooms, it 
loses money (the pink area); if it rents more, it makes a profit (the gold area). To determine 
the break-even point in units mathematically, we must introduce one more variable, the 
contribution per unit, which is the price less the variable cost per unit.
In this case,
Contribution per unit = $50 − $10 = $40
Therefore, the break-even point becomes
Break-even point (units) =
Fixed costs
Contributions per unit
That is,
Break-even point (units) = $100,000
$40
= 2,500 room nights
When the hotel has crossed the break-even point of 2,500 rooms, it will start earning 
profit at the same rate of the contribution per unit. So if the hotel rents 4,000 rooms—that 
is, 1,500 rooms more than the break-even point—its profit will be $60,000 (1,500 rooms × 
$40 contribution per unit).
Profit = (Contribution per unit × Quantity) − Fixed costs
	
Profit = ($40 × 4,000) − $100,000 = $60,000
Or an alternative formula would be:
Profit = (Price × Quantity) − (Fixed costs + (Variable costs × Quantity))
	
Profit = ($50 × 4,000) − ($100,000 + ($10 × 4,000))
	
Profit = $200,000 − ($100,000 + $40,000) = $60,000
E X H I B I T  14.5
Break-Even Analysis
2,500
Break-even
point
Proﬁt
Loss
Revenue &
costs
$
Units
Costs
Variable costs
($10/night)
Fixed costs
Fixed costs
($100,000)
Revenue
P
Break-even quantity
(rooms)
0
$125,000
$100,000

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
449
	
	
Let’s extend this simple break-even analysis to show how many units a firm must pro-
duce and sell to achieve a target profit. Say the hotel wanted to make $200,000 in profit 
each year. How many rooms would it have to rent at the current price? In this instance, we 
need only add the targeted profit to the fixed costs to determine that number:
 Break-even point (units) = (Fixed costs + Target profit)
Contributions per unit
or
             7,500 rooms = ($100,000 + $200,000)
$40
Although a break-even analysis cannot actually help managers set prices, it does help 
them assess their pricing strategies because it clarifies the conditions in which different 
prices may make a product or service profitable. It becomes an even more powerful tool 
when performed on a range of possible prices for comparative purposes. For example, the 
hotel management could analyze various prices, not just $50, to determine how many hotel 
rooms it would have to rent at what price to make a $200,000 profit.
Naturally, however, there are limitations to a break-even analysis. First, it is unlikely 
that a hotel has one specific price that it charges for each and every room, so the price it 
would use in its break-even analysis probably represents an “average” price that attempts to 
account for these variances. Second, prices often get reduced as quantity increases, be-
cause the costs decrease, so firms must perform several break-even analyses at different 
quantities. Third, a break-even analysis cannot indicate for sure how many rooms will be 
rented or, in the case of products, how many units will sell at a given price. It only tells the 
firm what its costs, revenues, and profitability will be, given a set price and an assumed 
quantity. To determine how many units the firm actually will sell, it must bring in the 
­demand estimates we discussed previously.
Markup and Target Return Pricing
In many situations, the manufacturer may want to achieve a standard markup—let’s say 
10 percent of cost. In our example of the teeth-whitening kit, let’s assume:
Variable costs per unit:	
$8.00
Fixed costs:	
$1,000,000.00
Expected sales:	
1,000,000 units
The teeth-whitening kit manufacturer would like to calculate the price at which it 
would make a 10 percent markup.
In a hotel, the cost of the physical structure, including the lobby, is fixed—it is incurred even if no rooms are rented. The costs of 
washing the towels and sheets are variable—the more rooms that are rented, the more the costs. 
Left: © Erik Isakson/Blend Images/Getty Images RF; Right: © Eric Audras/Onoky/SuperStock RF 

450	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
The formula for calculating a target return price based on a markup on cost is:
Target return price = (Variable costs + (Fixed costs ÷ Expected Unit sales))
	
× (1 × Target return % [expressed as a decimal])
In this example, this would result in the firm charging $9.90.
Target return price = ($8.00 + ($1,000,000.00 ÷ 1,000,000.00)) × (1 + 0.10)
	
Target return price = $9.00 × 1.1 = $9.90
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is the difference between fixed costs and variable costs?
2.	 How does one calculate the break-even point in units?
Competition
Because the fourth C, competition, has a profound impact on pricing strategies, we use this 
section to focus on its effect, as well as on how competitors react to certain pricing strate-
gies. There are four levels of competition—monopoly, oligopolistic competition, monopo-
listic competition, and pure competition—and each has its own set of pricing challenges 
and opportunities (see Exhibit 14.6).
LO14-5	
Indicate the four types 
of price competitive 
levels.
Photos (top to bottom): © Steve Cole/Getty Images RF; © Corbis RF; © Ingram Publishing/SuperStock RF; © Brand X 
­Pictures/PunchStock RF
E X H I B I T  14.6
Four Levels of Competition: Can you match each  
photo to its respective type of competition?
Fewer
ﬁrms
Many
ﬁrms
Less price competition
More price competition
Monopoly
One ﬁrm controls
the market
Oligopoly
A handful of ﬁrms 
control the market
Monopolistic competition
Many ﬁrms selling 
diﬀerentiated products
at diﬀerent prices
Pure competition
Many ﬁrms selling 
commodities for the 
same prices

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
451
	
	
In a monopoly, one firm provides the product or service in a particular industry, which 
results in less price competition. For example, there is often only one provider of cable 
television services in each region of the country: Time Warner is in New York, Comcast is 
in most of New England, and so forth. When Comcast recently proposed a plan to buy 
Time Warner, the purchase ultimately could not be completed, mostly due to concerns that 
it would have caused Comcast to become an overly large monopolist with too much power. 
That is, with the merger, Comcast would have become the primary cable company for 
more than half of the country. Comcast frequently has been challenged for allegedly seek-
ing to achieve a monopoly that restricts competition by controlling the industry. Were these 
allegations to be proven conclusively, it legally could be broken apart by the government.20
When a market is characterized by oligopolistic competition, only a few firms domi-
nate. Firms typically change their prices in reaction to competition to avoid upsetting an 
otherwise stable competitive environment. Examples of oligopolistic markets include the 
soft drink market and commercial airline travel. Sometimes reactions to prices in oligopo-
listic markets can result in a price war, which occurs when two or more firms compete 
primarily by lowering their prices. Firm A lowers its prices; Firm B responds by meeting 
or beating Firm A’s new price. Firm A then responds with another new price, and so on. In 
some cases though, these tactics result in predatory pricing, which occurs when a firm 
sets a very low price for one or more of its products with the intent of driving its competi-
tion out of business. Predatory pricing is illegal in the United States under both the Sherman 
Antitrust Act and the Federal Trade Commission Act.
Monopolistic competition occurs when there are many firms competing for custom-
ers in a given market but their products are differentiated. When so many firms compete, 
product differentiation rather than strict price competition tends to appeal to consumers. 
This is the most common form of competition. Hundreds of firms make sunglasses, thus 
the market is highly differentiated. Ray-Ban offers its iconic, thick-rimmed, black Wayfarer- 
style sunglasses. Oakley sells sunglasses that are sporty, with varied lens colors that promise 
to protect wearers’ eyes better when they are engaging in outdoor activities. For consumers 
looking for more style, fashion designers such as Prada and Gucci have their own sun-
glasses. Depending on the features, style, and quality, companies compete for very differ-
ent market segments. By differentiating their products using various attributes, prices, and 
brands, they create unique value propositions in the minds of their customers.
With pure competition, a large number of sellers offer standardized products or com-
modities that consumers perceive as substitutable, such as grains, gold, meat, spices, or 
minerals. In such markets, price usually is set according to the laws of supply and demand. 
For example, wheat is wheat, so it does not matter to a commercial bakery whose wheat it 
buys. However, the secret to pricing success in a pure competition market is not necessarily 
to offer the lowest price, because doing so might create a price war and erode profits. 
­Instead, some firms have brilliantly decommoditized their products. For example, most 
people feel that all salt purchased in a grocery is the same. But companies like Morton 
have branded their salt to move into a monopolistically competitive market.
The sunglasses market is characterized by monopolistic competition with hundreds of firms with differentiated products. 
­Ray-Ban’s Wayfarer sunglasses (left) are classic, Oakley’s sunglasses (middle) are sporty, and Gucci’s sunglasses (right) are  
very, very fashionable.
Left: © Dean Atkins/Alamy; Middle: © Chris Willson/Alamy; Right: © Stefano Rellandini/Reuters

452	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
When a commodity can be differentiated somehow, even if simply by a sticker or logo, 
there is an opportunity for consumers to identify it as distinct from the rest, and in this 
case, firms can at least partially extricate their product from a pure competitive market.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the four different types of competitive environments?
Channel Members
Channel members—manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers—
have different perspectives when it comes to pricing strategies. 
Consider a manufacturer that is focused on increasing the im-
age and reputation of its brand but working with a retailer that 
is primarily concerned with increasing its sales. The manufac-
turer may desire to keep prices higher to convey a better image, 
whereas the retailer wants lower prices and will accept lower 
profits to move the product, regardless of consumers’ impres-
sions of the brand. Unless channel members carefully commu-
nicate their pricing goals and select channel partners that agree 
with them, conflict will surely arise.
Developing a price that allows all channel members to 
earn their requisite profits requires careful planning. Imagine 
that the electric tool manufacturer DeWalt is reconsidering the 
price of its 1/2-inch, 18-volt, Heavy Duty Cordless Drill that it 
sells through Ace Hardware stores. Using several pricing ex-
periments (as described in Chapter 10), it determines that the 
profit maximizing retail price is $100 (see Exhibit 14.7). Ace 
Hardware is a retailers’ cooperative, such that it helps its members achieve economies of 
scale by buying as a group. In a sense, a retailers’ cooperative thus is similar to a wholesaler, 
How does DeWalt determine the suggested retail price so 
that all channel members make their required profit?
© S K D/Alamy 
E X H I B I T  14.7
Pricing through the Channels
Dewalt
Ace retailer
Ace cooperative
$45
$19
$64
$13
$77
$33
Cost
Proﬁt

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
453
	
	
except that in this case, the retailers have some control over, and sometimes ownership in, 
the operation of the cooperative. For Ace Hardware to sell the DeWalt drill to consumers 
for $100, each retail store must purchase it for $77 at most, to be sure it can earn a 30 per-
cent profit margin ($77 cost to retailer + [30 percent profit × $77 = $23 profit] = $100). 
The Ace Hardware cooperative in turn requires a 20 percent profit margin on its cost, so it 
must purchase the drill from DeWalt for $64 ($64 cost to Ace + [20 percent profit × $64 = 
$13 profit] = $77). The drill costs DeWalt $45 to produce, leaving DeWalt a profit of $19 
($64 − $45), or 42 percent (19/45), which is slightly above its benchmark profit of 40 per-
cent. As this relatively simple example reveals, determining prices throughout the market-
ing channel that will enable all channel members to make a reasonable profit requires 
thought, cooperation, and strong negotiating skills by everyone involved.
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
List the four pricing orientations.
	
	
A profit-oriented pricing strategy focuses on maxi-
mizing, or at least reaching, a target profit for the 
company. A sales orientation instead sets prices 
with the goal of increasing sales levels. With a 
competitor-oriented pricing strategy, a firm sets its 
prices according to what its competitors do. Finally, 
a customer-oriented strategy determines consumers’ 
perceptions of value and prices accordingly.
	
	
Explain the relationship between price and quan-
tity sold.
	
	
Generally, when prices go up, quantity sold goes 
down. Sometimes, however—particularly with pres-
tige products and services—demand actually in-
creases with price.
	
	
Explain price elasticity.
	
	
Changes in price generally affect demand; price 
elasticity measures the extent of this effect. It is 
based on the percentage change in quantity divided 
by the percentage change in price. Depending on 
the resulting value, a market offering can be identi-
fied as elastic, such that the market is very price 
LO14-1
LO14-2
LO14-3
sensitive, or inelastic, in which case the market 
cares little about the price.
	
	
Describe how to calculate a product’s break-even 
point.
	
	
Because the break-even point occurs when the units 
sold generate just enough profit to cover the total 
costs of producing those units, it requires knowl-
edge of the fixed cost, total cost, and total revenue 
curves. When these curves intersect, the marketer 
has found the break-even point.
	
	
Indicate the four types of price competitive levels.
	
	
In a monopoly setting, one firm controls the market 
and sets the price. In an oligopolistic competitive 
market, a few firms dominate and tend to set prices 
according to a competitor-oriented strategy. Monopo-
listic competition occurs when there are many firms 
competing for customers in a given market but their 
products are differentiated. Finally, pure competition 
means that consumers likely regard the products of-
fered by different companies as basic substitutes, so 
the firms must work hard to achieve the lowest price 
point, limited by the laws of supply and demand.
LO14-4
LO14-5
∙	 break-even analysis,  447
∙	 break-even point,  447
∙	 competitive parity,  437
∙	 competitor orientation,  437
∙	 complementary products,  445
∙	 contribution per unit,  448
∙	 cross-price elasticity,  445
∙	 customer orientation,  437
∙	 demand curve,  438
∙	 dynamic pricing,  443
∙	 elastic,  442
∙	 fixed costs,  447
∙	 income effect,  443
∙	 individualized pricing,  443
∙	 inelastic,  442
∙	 maximizing profits,  436
∙	 monopoly,  451
∙	 monopolistic competition,  451
∙	 oligopolistic competition,  451
∙	 predatory pricing,  451
∙	 premium pricing,  436
∙	 prestige products or services,  440
∙	 price,  434
∙	 price elasticity of demand,  442
∙	 price war,  451
∙	 profit orientation,  435
∙	 pure competition,  451
∙	 retailers’ cooperative,  452
∙	 sales orientation,  436
∙	 status quo pricing,  437
∙	 substitute products,  445
∙	 substitution effect,  445
∙	 target profit pricing,  436
∙	 target return pricing,  436
∙	 total cost,  447
∙	 variable costs,  447
Key Terms

454	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Several different pricing models can be found on the In-
ternet. Each model appeals to different customer groups. 
Go to www.eBay.com and try to buy this book. What 
pricing options and prices are available? Do you believe 
that everyone will choose the least expensive option? 
Why or why not? Now go to www.Amazon.com. Is 
there more than one price available for this book? If so, 
what are those prices? Are different versions available? 
If you had to buy another copy of this book, where 
would you buy it and why would you buy it there?
2.	 Prices can vary, depending on the market being served and 
the novelty of the products. Shapeways allows anyone to 
upload a design and get it 3D printed. The best designs 
then are available to other customers to have printed in a 
variety of materials. Go to https://www.youtube.com/v/
qJuTM0Y7U1k and learn more about Shapeways. Then 
go to its website, www.shapeways.com, and search for 
“Inception” and click on the design by the user roessna-
khan. Note the difference in prices of the item to be 
printed in plastic versus metal. Now go to Amazon (www 
.Amazon.com) and search for “Inception Totem” and note 
the prices for a similar metal totem. How does the price of 
the item vary between Shapeways and Amazon? What 
would account for these differences in price? Why would 
a consumer purchase the product from Shapeways instead 
of Amazon? How is Shapeways communicating value?
Marketing Applications
  1.  You and your two roommates are starting a pet groom-
ing service to help put yourselves through college. 
There are two other well-established pet services in 
your area. Should you set your price higher or lower 
than that of the competition? Justify your answer.
  2.  One roommate believes the most important objective in 
setting prices for your new pet grooming business is to 
generate a large profit while keeping an eye on your com-
petitors’ prices; the other roommate believes it is impor­
tant to maximize sales and set prices according to what 
your customers expect to pay. Who is right and why?
  3.  Assume you have decided to buy an advertisement in 
the local newspaper to publicize your new pet grooming 
service. The cost of the ad is $1,000. You have decided 
to charge $40 for a dog grooming, and your variable 
costs are $20 for each dog. How many dogs do you have 
to groom to break even on the cost of the ad? What is 
your break-even point if you charge $60 per dog?
  4.  The local newspaper ad for your pet grooming busi-
ness isn’t helping much, so you decide to post your 
services on an auction site, where customers can bid 
for your services. What should the starting price of the 
auction be?
  5.  Is there a difference between a $5,900 Loro Piana 
vicuña sweater and a $150 cashmere sweater from 
L.L.Bean? Have you ever purchased a higher-priced 
product or service because you thought the quality was 
better than that of a similar, lower-priced product or 
service? What was the product or service? Do you 
­believe you made a rational choice?
  6.  A soft drink manufacturer opened a new manufacturing 
plant in the Midwest. The total fixed costs are $100 
million. It plans to sell the drinks to retailers for $6.00 
for a package of 10 12-ounce cans. Its variable costs for 
the ingredients are $4.00 per package. Calculate the 
break-even volume. What would happen to the break-
even point if the fixed costs decreased to $50 million, 
or the variable costs decreased to $3.00 due to declines 
in commodity costs. What would the break-even vol-
ume be if the firm wanted to make $20 million?
  7.  On your weekly grocery shopping trip, you notice that 
the price of spaghetti has gone up 50 cents a pound. 
How will this price increase affect the demand for spa-
ghetti sauce, rice, and Parmesan cheese? Explain your 
answer in terms of the price elasticity of demand.
  8.  How do pricing strategies vary across markets that are 
characterized by monopolistic, oligopolistic, monopo-
listic competition, and pure competition?
  9.  Suppose you are in the market for a new Sharp LCD 
television. You see one advertised at a locally owned 
store for $300 less than it costs at hhgregg. The sales-
person at the local store tells you that the television 
came from another retailer in the next state that had too 
many units of that model. Explain who benefits and 
who is harmed from such a gray market transaction: 
you, Sharp, hhgregg, the local store?
10.  Has the Internet helped lower the price of some types 
of merchandise? Justify your answer.
11.  Imagine that a pharmaceutical company has just devel-
oped a cure to a major fatal disease. Because the firm is 
the only one even close to a cure for this disease, price 
is inelastic, meaning it could virtually charge any price 
and people would pay. Discuss the ethical implications 
of choosing a price.

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
455
	
	
1.	 A 
 orientation explicitly invokes the concept 
of value such as when a firm uses a “no-haggle” pric-
ing structure to make the purchase process simpler and 
easier. 
a.  profit
b.  sales
c.  competitor
d.  customer
e.  market
2.	 The most common form of competition is 
, 
where many firms compete for customers in a given 
market but with differentiated products.
a.  oligopolistic competition
b.  market saturation
c.  pure competition
d.  competitive parity 
e.  monopolistic competition
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
PLANET FITNESS: PRICING FOR SUCCESS21
How does going completely against the grain of a typical fitness club strategy lead to suc-
cess? That’s the question that Planet Fitness appears uniquely positioned to answer. Most 
health clubs provide members with vast and seemingly valuable extra amenities such as 
child care, juice bars and protein supplements, on-staff professional trainers, and a broad 
range of fitness classes.22 But many customers find the prices too high because they see 
little value in some of these amenities. Further reducing the value of traditional gym mem-
berships, many consumers regard the social aspects unpleasant and offputting—whether 
that means observing others with nearly perfect bodies posturing in the mirror or listening 
to grunting exercisers huff with every lift.
While its competitors target upscale fitness buffs working on their six-pack abs, Planet 
Fitness successfully pursues an entirely different market: those who do not really enjoy 
going to the gym but know they need to do so to stay healthy. These exercisers are unlikely 
to hit the gym five or six times a week, making conventional gym memberships, which 
demand yearly contracts and fees of $49 to $95 per month, appear more expensive on a 
per-visit basis. Planet Fitness’s formula is different: At $10 a month, the membership offers 
good value even if customers get to the club only a couple of times each week.23
In combination with its low price point, Planet Fitness promises a clean, friendly, laid-
back workout environment featuring brand-name cardiovascular and strength equipment. 
Although it does not have the high-end amenities its competitors promise (e.g., pools, juice 
bars), the clubs maintain the key elements its members want: brand-name equipment, un-
limited fitness training, flat-screen televisions, and large locker rooms. Its customers know 
from its advertising that they can expect a nonintimidating workout environment, or, as 
Planet Fitness promises, “No gymtimidation. No lunks. Just $10 a month.”24 With its foun-
dation in the idea that simple is better,25 Planet Fitness has become the fastest-growing 
full-sized fitness club in the United States. Exhibit 14.8 compares the prices of several 
major gyms.
For those who want a little more, Planet Fitness also offers a premium PF BlackCard 
membership for $19.99 a month, which promises access to nearly all the clubs in the Planet 
Fitness chain, unlimited guest privileges, use of tanning and massage chairs, and half-
priced drinks.26
In addition to these in-club benefits, Planet Fitness’s growth has been reinforced by its 
effective location strategy and marketing efforts that focus on attracting new customers. 
The low-cost monthly membership makes it easy to draw new members. Because most 
members come in only a couple of times each week, Planet Fitness also enjoys operating 
Chapter Case Study 

456	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
efficiencies and economies of scale, achieved by welcoming a high volume of members on 
any one day.27
 Planet Fitness treats customers like real people. What kind of fitness club offers mem-
bers pizza on the first Monday of every month, bagels on the first Tuesday, and Tootsie 
Rolls on a regular basis?28 The kind of gym that plans to expand to 1,000 locations, with an 
eventual goal of more than 2,000, and that attracts more than 5 million members and 
­systemwide sales approaching $700 million.29
Questions
1.	
What benefits do customers receive in return for the sacrifice they make when buying 
a membership at Planet Fitness?
2.	
How does this benefit–sacrifice ratio give Planet Fitness a competitive advantage in 
its industry?
3.	
Given its price strategy, why is it essential for Planet Fitness to continually attract 
new members? Do its high-end pricing competitors face the same need? Why or 
why not?
Gym
Monthly Cost
Up-Front Cost
24 Hour Fitness
$44.99 
$99.77
Bally Total Fitness
$29.99 
$88.98
LA Fitness
$12.95/wk
$25.90
Planet Fitness
$10.00 
$29.00
Snap Fitness
$39.99 
$  0.00
Membership Costs of Planet Fitness and Competition in 
New York City
E X H I B I T  14.8
Endnotes
	 1.	 Serena Ng, “At P&G, New Tide Comes In, Old Price  
Goes Up,” The Wall Street Journal, February 10, 2014,  
http://wsj.online.com.
	2.	 http://productoftheyearusa.com/winners-2016/.
	3.	 Dale Buss, “P&G Looks to Wring More Value out of Tide Brand 
with Lower-Priced Detergent,” BrandChannel, September 4, 
2013, http://www.brandchannel.com.
	4.	 Ng, “At P&G, New Tide Comes In, Old Price Goes Up.”
	5.	 R. Suri and M. V. Thakor, “ ‘Made in Country’ versus ‘Made in 
County’: Effects of Local Manufacturing Origins on Price 
Perceptions,” Psychology & Marketing 30, no. 2 (2013), pp. 
121–32; R. Suri, K. B. Monroe, and U. Koc, “Math Anxiety and 
Its Effects on Consumers’ Preference for Price Promotion 
Formats,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 41,  
no. 3 (2013), pp. 271–82; Kent B. Monroe, Pricing: Making 
Profitable Decisions, 3rd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003); 
Dhruv Grewal, Kent B. Monroe, and R. Krishnan, “The Effects 
of Price Comparison Advertising on Buyers’ Perceptions of 
Acquisition Value and Transaction Value,” Journal of Marketing 
62 (April 1998), pp. 46–60.
	6.	 Moneyball, directed by Bennett Miller (2011; Sony Pictures). 
See also Michael Lewis, Moneyball (New York: Norton, 2004).
	 7.	 Dhruv Grewal et al., “Evolving Pricing Practices: The Role of New 
Business Models,” Journal of Product & Brand Management 20, 
no. 7 (2011), pp. 510–13; Bang-Ning Hwang et al., “An Effective 
Pricing Framework in a Competitive Industry: Management 
Processes and Implementation Guidelines,” Journal of Revenue 
and Pricing Management (November 2009).
	8.	 Susan Carey, “Airlines Challenge Low-Cost Foes on Fares,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 29, 2015.
	9.	 “IBM Market Share Leader in Human Resources (HR) Business 
Transformation Outsourcing, Enterprise Sector,” press release. 
www.ibm.com.
	10.	 Carey, “Airlines Challenge Low-Cost Foes on Fares.”
	11.	 https://www.carmax.com/car-buying-process
	12.	 Jenn Markey, “Three Things You Need to Know About 
Amazon’s Price Strategy,” Retail Customer Experience, April 21, 
2014, http://www.retailcustomerexperience.com. 
	13.	 Desiree Au, “Who Would Pay $300,000 for a Handbag?,”  
The New York Times, June 3, 2016, http://www.nytimes.
com/2016/06/05/fashion/hermes-birkin-most-expensive- 
bag-ever-sold.html
	14.	 Fender Electric Guitars, http://www.fender.com.

	
PRICING CONCEPTS FOR ESTABLISHING VALUE  CHAPTER FOURTEEN	
457
	
	
	22.	“Planet Fitness Continues Successful Growth with Puerto Rico 
Expansion,” press release, http://www.marketwatch.com/story/.
	23.	http://www.planetfitness.com/.
	24.	Andrew Adam Newman, “A Gym for People Who Don’t Like 
Gyms,” The New York Times, January 3, 2013, http://www. 
nytimes.com.
	25.	Judith Ohikuare, “The Secret of Planet Fitness’s Success,” Inc., 
February 2013, http://www.inc.com/magazine/.
	26.	“Planet Fitness Continues Successful Growth with Puerto Rico 
Expansion,” press release, http://www.marketwatch.com/story/.
	27.	Beth Kowitt, “The Southwest Airlines of the Gym Business,” 
Fortune, November 21, 2013, http://features.blogs.fortune.cnn.com/.
	28.	Andrew Adam Newman, “A Gym for People Who Don’t Like 
Gyms,” The New York Times, January 3, 2013, http://www. 
nytimes.com.
	29.	Kowitt, “The Southwest Airlines of the Gym Business.”
	 i.	Jenn Markey, “Three Things You Need to Know About 
Amazon’s Price Strategy,” Retail Customer Experience, April 21, 
2014, http://www.retailcustomerexperience.com.
	 ii.	“A Look Back: How Predictive Analytics Transformed the Airline 
Industry,” Cusotra, https://www.custora.com/university/for- 
marketers/predictive-analytics/basic/predictive-analytics- 
and-the-airline-industry; “Price Trends & Tips Explanation,” 
Kayak, 2015, http://www.kayak.com.
	 iii.	Brooks Barnes, “At Theme Parks, a V.I.P. Ticket to Ride,” The 
New York Times, June 9, 2013; “Ticket to Disneyland: Now 
$92,” The Wall Street Journal, June 3, 2013; https://www. 
universalorlando.com/Theme-Park-Tickets/Vip-Experience.aspx.
	15.	Kent B. Monroe, Pricing: Making Profitable Decisions, 3rd ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003)
	16.	This type of B2B price discrimination is illegal under the 
Robinson-Patman Act of 1936. B2B sellers are allowed to 
charge different prices for merchandise of the same “grade 
and quality” if (1) the price difference is justified by different 
costs in manufacture, sale, or delivery (e.g., volume discounts); 
or (2) the price concession was given in good faith to meet 
a competitor’s price. See http://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/ 
competition-guidance/guide-antitrust-laws/price-discrimination- 
robinson-patman.
	 17.	http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary. 
aspx?dLetter=C.
	18.	http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary. 
aspx?dLetter=S.
	19.	Joan Lindsey-Mullikin and Dhruv Grewal, “Market Price 
Variation: The Availability of Internet Market Information,” 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 34, no. 2 
(2006), pp. 236–43.
	20.	Drew Guarini, “This Is the United States of Comcast, 
Depressing Map Shows,” The Huffington Post, March 5, 2014, 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/04/cable-company- 
map_n_4892435.html; Richard Greenfield, “How the Cable 
Industry Became a Monopoly,” Fortune, May 19, 2015,  
http://fortune.com/2015/05/19/cable-industry-becomes- 
a-monopoly/.
	21.	 This case was written by Jeanne L. Munger (University of 
Southern Maine) in conjunction with the textbook authors 
Dhruv Grewal and Michael Levy, as a basis for class  
discussion rather than to illustrate effective or ineffective 
marketing practices.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO15-1	 Identify three methods that firms use to set their prices.
	LO15-2	 Describe the difference between an everyday low pricing (EDLP) strategy and a high/low strategy.
	LO15-3	 Explain the difference between a price skimming and a market penetration pricing strategy.
	LO15-4	 Identify tactics used to reduce prices to consumers.
	LO15-5	 Identify tactics used to reduce prices to businesses.
	LO15-6	 List the pricing practices that are illegal or unethical.
STRATEGIC 
PRICING METHODS 
AND TACTICS
CHAPTER 15
and in an attempt to ensure that all these vacationers find 
the “Happiest Place on Earth” when they visit, Disney is 
implementing a demand-based pricing model to try to 
even out its supply. 
The new model creates three main tiers for admis-
sion prices to the parks. The “value” tier refers to visits on 
S
ome companies choose to raise prices to earn 
more profits. Others do so in response to in-
creased prices on their raw materials or com-
ponents. But for Walt Disney, its latest price  
 increase might not have really been the company’s choice.  
 The theme parks are bursting at the seams with visitors, 

regular work days (Monday–Thursday) during the tradi-
tional school year. “Regular” prices instead apply on week-
ends and most of the summer. And then there are the 
“peak” tickets, charged to visitors who want to visit on 
traditional spring break weeks, over Christmas, or during 
weekends in July.
The price tiers are about $10 apart, and the exact 
prices are little different for Disney World (in Orlando, 
Fla.) and Disneyland (in Anaheim, Calif.). For example, the 
peak price is $124 in Orlando but $119 in Anaheim. The 
Disney World value price of $105 is the same as the reg-
ular price at Disneyland. These variations in location re-
flect the slightly different popularity of the two parks, as 
well as their offerings. For example, the Florida location 
features four unique parks (Magic Kingdom, Epcot, Animal 
Kingdom, and Hollywood Studio), such that visitors have 
more choices.
But have no doubt: All the parks are popular. 
Attendance rates keep rising; Disney World welcomed 
approximately 20 million visitors last year. As the num-
bers climb, the parks struggle to keep the experience en-
joyable, especially during the peak times. When so many 
people visit on the same day, there is little that Disney 
can do to keep the wait times reasonable and the lines 
moving.
Therefore, its primary goal with the demand-based 
pricing tiers is to encourage price-conscious travelers 
and those with more flexible schedules to plan their trips 
during regular work weeks. If Disney can convince even 
some of them to move their visits, it can better accommo-
date travelers across all the periods and likely earn ­better 
customer satisfaction.
Furthermore, Disney believes it has plenty of room to 
raise its prices. Admission prices traditionally have in-
creased every year, and though of course some fans 
complain, prices have never jumped enough to cause de-
mand to drop—as evidenced by the continued popularity 
of these destinations.1
© Cui Hao/Getty Images

460	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Coming up with the “right” price is never easy, as this opening example shows. How can a 
firm determine what consumers are willing to pay and how much firms can charge? To 
answer such questions, we examine various pricing strategies and tactics in this chapter. 
We focus on specific considerations for setting pricing strategies, then discuss several spe-
cific pricing strategies. We also examine the implications of various pricing tactics—for 
consumers as well as businesses—and discuss some of the more important legal and 
­ethical issues associated with pricing.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR SETTING  
PRICE STRATEGIES
Firms embrace different objectives, face different market conditions, and operate in differ-
ent manners. Thus, they employ unique pricing strategies that seem best for the particular 
set of circumstances in which they find themselves. Even a single firm needs different strat-
egies across its products and services and over time as market conditions change. The choice 
of a pricing strategy thus is specific to the product/service and target market. Although 
firms tend to rely on similar strategies when they can, each product or service requires its 
own specific strategy, because no two are ever exactly the same in terms of the marketing 
mix. Three different methods that can help develop pricing strategies—cost based, compe-
tition based, and value based—are discussed in this section (see Exhibit 15.1).
Cost‐Based Methods
As their name implies, cost-based pricing methods determine the final price to charge by 
starting with the cost. Relevant costs (e.g., fixed, variable, overhead) and a profit are added. 
Then this total amount is divided by the total demand to arrive at a cost-plus price. For 
example, assume the fixed costs to produce an item are $200,000, the variable costs add up 
to $100,000, and the estimated number of units to be produced is 30,000. Then,
(100,000 + 200,000) ÷ 30,000 = $10
which is the total allocated cost per unit when 30,000 units are produced. If the desired 
markup is 20 percent, we multiply $10 by 1.20 (i.e., by 100 + 20 = 120 percent) to attain the 
cost-plus price for this item: $12. This sales price represents a cost-plus-percentage markup.
Cost-based methods do not recognize the role that consumers’ or competitors’ prices 
play in the marketplace, though. Although they are relatively simple, compared with other 
methods used to set prices, cost-based pricing requires that all costs be identified and 
LO15-1	
Identify three methods 
that firms use to set 
their prices.
E X H I B I T  15.1
Pricing Strategies
Value-
based
pricing
Cost-based pricing
Competition-
based pricing
Value
base
ba
base
i i
Com
Com
Com
C

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
461
	
	
­calculated on a per-unit basis. Moreover, the process assumes that these costs will not vary 
much for different levels of production. If they do, the price might need to be raised or 
lowered according to the production level. Thus, with cost-based pricing, prices are usually 
set on the basis of estimates of average costs.
Competition‐Based Methods
Recall from Chapter 14 that some firms set prices according to their competitors’ prices. 
But even if they do not have a strict competitor orientation, most firms still know that con-
sumers compare the prices of their products with the different product/price combinations 
that competitors offer. Thus, using a competition-based pricing method, they may set 
their prices to reflect the way they want consumers to interpret their own prices relative to 
competitors’ offerings. For example, setting a price very close to a competitor’s price sig-
nals to consumers that the product is similar, whereas setting the price much higher signals 
greater features, better quality, or some other valued benefit.
Value‐Based Methods
Value-based pricing methods are approaches to setting prices that focus on the overall 
value of the product offering as perceived by the consumer. Consumers determine value 
by comparing the benefits they expect the product to deliver with the sacrifice they will 
need to make to acquire the product. Of course, different consumers perceive value 
differently. So how does a manager use value-based pricing methods? We consider two 
key approaches here: the improvement value and the cost of ownership methods. The 
experimental approach in which different prices are introduced into the marketplace to 
determine which is the most profitable based on consumer demand was discussed in 
Chapter 10.
Improvement Value Method  With the first method, the manager must estimate the 
improvement value of a new product or service. This improvement value represents an 
estimate of how much more (or less) consumers are willing to pay for a product relative 
to other comparable products. For example, suppose a major telecommunications com-
pany has developed a new cell phone. Using any of a host of research methods—such as 
consumer surveys—the manager could get customers to assess the new product rela-
tive to an existing product and provide an estimate of how much better it is; that is, its 
improvement value.
Exhibit 15.2 illustrates how to calculate the improvement value. Consumers evaluate how 
much better (or worse) the new cell phone is than an existing product on five dimensions: 
clarity, range, security, battery life, and ease of use. According to the respondents to the sur-
vey, the new cell phone has 20 percent more clarity than the comparison phone has. These 
consumers also weight the importance of the five attributes by allocating 100 points among 
them to indicate their relative importance; for the clarity dimension, this weighting is 0.40. 
When the manager multiplies the improvement weight by the relative importance percentage, 
E X H I B I T  15.2
Improvement Value
Incremental Benefits	
Improved Value	
Benefit Weight	
Weighted Factor
Clarity	
20%	
0.40	
8%
Range	
40%	
0.20	
8%
Security	
10%	
0.10	
1%
Battery life	
5%	
0.20	
1%
Ease of use	
30%	
0.10	
3%
Overall	
	
1.00	
21%

462	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
clarity (20 × 0.40) emerges with a weighted factor of 8 percent. The marketer repeats the pro-
cess for each benefit and sums the weighted factors to arrive at an approximation of the im-
provement value of the new product from customers’ points of view. In this illustration, the 
improvement value is equal to 21 percent, so if the other cell phone costs $100, the firm should 
be able to charge customers a value-based price as high as $121 ($100 × 1.21).
Cost of Ownership Method  Another value-based method for setting prices determines 
the total cost of owning the product over its useful life. Using the cost-of-ownership 
method, consumers may be willing to pay more for a particular product because, over its 
entire lifetime, it will eventually cost less to own than will a cheaper alternative.2
Consider, for example, that an energy-efficient LED lightbulb costs $3 and is expected 
to last 6,000 hours. Alternatively, a conventional lightbulb costs $1 but its average life is 
only 1,500 hours. The LED bulb is expected to last four times longer than a conventional 
bulb, but it costs three times as much. Using the cost of ownership method, and consider-
ing the cost per hour, the LED bulb manufacturer could charge $4 for each bulb if it wanted 
to be equivalent to the cost of the conventional bulb. But research also has indicated that 
many consumers are reluctant to spend $4 for a bulb when they have been used to getting 
them for $1, so the manufacturer chose to charge only $3.
Implementing Value-Based Pricing Methods  Although value-based pricing methods 
can be quite effective, they also necessitate a great deal of consumer research to be imple-
mented successfully. Sellers must know how consumers in different market segments will 
attach value to the benefits delivered by their products, as Adding Value 15.1 describes. 
They also must account for changes in consumer attitudes, because the way customers 
perceive value today may not be the way they perceive it tomorrow.
One way to determine the 
price of a new product, like a 
new cell phone model, is to  
determine the improvement 
value from the customers’  
perspective.
© Evrim Aydin/Anadolu Agency/ 
Getty Images
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the three different considerations for setting prices?
2.	 How can you use value-based methods for setting prices?

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
463
	
	
Adding Value 15.1
Value at a Premium Price: Moving Consumers  
Away from a View of Cheap as Valuablei
Value, as we know, is the relationship of benefits to costs, or 
what consumers get for what they give. But in consumer situ-
ations, value pricing and value options often imply the cheap-
est offerings. A value menu seems to mean really low prices 
rather than referring to the benefits that the menu items pro-
vide to consumers. But this common misunderstanding may 
be changing.
As the slow economic recovery continues to plod along, 
marketers cannot simply keep their fingers crossed and 
hope that eventually buyers will be willing to pay more for 
their products. Instead, as Procter & Gamble has profitably 
learned with its Tide Pods, as discussed in the opener in 
Chapter 14, they need to offer more value, which will 
prompt consumers to pay more because they are getting 
more. The added convenience of the single-use pods, to-
gether with the detergent’s effective cleaning technology 
and the brand’s high-quality image, have convinced house-
hold laundry buyers to pay more per wash—and be happy 
about their choice.
To provide more value options to its customers, Wendy’s 
has expanded its pricing options. If fast-food patrons want a 
smaller item on a particular visit, they can purchase from the 
99¢ menu. But if they are much hungrier or in the mood for a 
fresher option, they can jump up to a $1.99 menu item. Each 
option provides value, but the value is perceived differently by 
different people and in different situations. In a sense, these 
moves mimic the trends in dollar stores, which quickly realized 
that limiting themselves to only $1 options also limited the 
depth of their offerings and made them less appealing to con-
sumers who sought a great deal, not just a way to get rid of all 
their single dollar bills.
Ford has enjoyed higher revenues from adding its Sync 
hands-free communication technology. Approximately 50 per-
cent of Ford buyers cite the technology as a primary reason 
for their purchase choice. The associated price increase for 
this feature is reportedly around $4,000—not cheap, but ap-
parently perceived to be a good value by many. Marketers 
can charge more and increase profits by providing more ben-
efits when they are perceived to add value to consumers in 
some meaningful way. For modern marketers, this lesson may 
seem basic, but it is also one that they need to be reminded of 
regularly.
Adding value doesn’t necessarily mean a low price. Ford added value with its Sync hands-free communi-
cation technology. It is not cheap, but it is perceived to be a good value by its customers.
© Chris O’Meara/AP Photo

464	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
PRICING STRATEGIES
A pricing strategy is a long-term approach to setting prices broadly in an integrative effort 
(across all the firm’s products) based on the five Cs (company objectives, costs, customers, 
competition, and channel members) of pricing discussed in Chapter 14. In this section, we 
discuss a number of commonly used price strategies: everyday low pricing, high/low pric-
ing, and new product strategies.3
Everyday Low Pricing (EDLP)
With an everyday low pricing (EDLP) strategy, companies stress the continuity of their 
retail prices at a level somewhere between the regular, nonsale price and the deep-discount 
sale prices their competitors may offer.4 By reducing consumers’ search costs, EDLP adds 
value; consumers can spend less of their valuable time comparing prices, including sale 
prices, at different stores. With its EDLP strategy, Walmart communicates to consumers 
that, for any given group of often-purchased items, its prices will tend to be lower than 
those of any other company in that market. This claim does not necessarily mean that every 
item that consumers may purchase will be priced lower at Walmart than anywhere else—in 
fact, some competitive retailers will offer lower prices on some items. However, for an av-
erage purchase, Walmart’s prices tend to be lower overall. Adding Value 15.2 describes 
Walmart’s foray into organic produce using its EDLP strategy.
LO15-2	
Describe the 
difference between 
an everyday low 
pricing (EDLP) 
strategy and a high/
low strategy.
High/Low Pricing
An alternative to EDLP is a high/low pricing strategy, which 
relies on the promotion of sales, during which prices are tem-
porarily reduced to encourage purchases. A high/low strategy 
is appealing because it attracts two distinct market segments: 
those who are not price sensitive and are willing to pay the 
“high” price and more price-sensitive customers who wait for 
the “low” sale price. High/low sellers can also create excite-
ment and attract customers through the “get them while they 
last” atmosphere that occurs during a sale.
Sellers using a high/low pricing strategy often communi-
cate their strategy through the creative use of a reference 
price, which is the price against which buyers compare the 
actual selling price of the product and that facilitates their 
evaluation process. The seller labels the reference price as the 
“regular price” or an “original price.” When consumers view 
the “sale price” and compare it with the provided reference 
price, their perceptions of the value of the deal increase.5
In the advertisement on this page, Kohl’s has provided a 
reference price, in smaller print and labeled “Reg.,” to indi-
cate that $355 is the regular price of a diamond ring. In ad-
dition, the advertisement highlights the current “sale” price 
of $69.99. Thus, the reference price suggests to consumers 
that they are getting a good deal and will save money. Thus, it is crucial that retailers and 
manufacturers provide genuine advertised reference prices in their ads and signage.
New Product Pricing Strategies
Developing pricing strategies for new products is one of the most challenging tasks a man-
ager can undertake. When the new product is similar to what already appears on the market, 
this job is somewhat easier, because the product’s approximate value has already been  
established and the value-based methods described earlier in this chapter can be employed. 
But when the new product is truly innovative, or what we call “new to the world,” determin-
ing consumers’ perceptions of its value and pricing it accordingly become far more difficult.
LO15-3	
Explain the difference 
between a price 
skimming and a 
market penetration 
pricing strategy.
A high/low pricing strategy relies on the promotion of sales, 
during which prices are temporarily reduced to encourage 
purchases.
© Jeff Greenberg/PhotoEdit

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
465
	
	
Adding Value 15.2
Walmart Offers Low-Priced Organic Foodsii
One word can strike fear into the heart of any small retailer: 
Walmart! Because it enjoys massive economies of scale, 
Walmart’s entry into a market can cause tremors for even 
other large retailers, because somehow it always manages to 
underprice everyone else with the everyday low pricing (EDLP) 
strategy for which it has become famous. Long a consumer-goods 
giant, the Arkansas-based behemoth also has turned its mas-
sively successful EDLP practices to the grocery industry, where 
it quickly became the country’s largest grocer as well.
Not satisfied with being just the largest grocer, Walmart 
aims to gain a substantial share of the lucrative organic food 
market. In true Walmart fashion, it intends to do so using its 
well-known, EDLP strategies. Organic products typically feature 
premium prices, but at Walmart, “there will be no premium for 
the customer to purchase organic products,” according to the 
executive vice president of grocery at Walmart U.S. “They will be 
able to purchase organic at non-organic prices.” In-house re-
search indicated that consumers would overwhelmingly pur-
chase organic products if they cost less, so Walmart responded.
But how can Walmart be the only retailer to offer organic 
products at nonorganic prices? It will deliver organic items 
through an atypical “bigger is better” mentality. That is, organic 
foods typically come from small farms, which send their prod-
ucts out to be processed at facilities that simultaneously process 
conventional foods. The switches from organic to conventional 
processing and back again require a great deal of labor, which 
increases costs and thus prices. Because of their economies of 
scale, Walmart can work with larger farms and processing 
plants that cater only to organic food production, saving time, 
labor, and money—by a margin of as much as 20 to 30 percent.
As is also its habit, Walmart is thinking long term and lock-
ing its suppliers into agreements that will enable it to meet the 
enormous requirements associated with its lofty organic goals.
Now you can visit your local Walmart to grab not just a 
DVD, diapers, and oil for your car, but also the ingredients for 
a gourmet organic meal. That’s one-stop shopping at its finest.
At Walmart you can buy organic produce without the typical 
premium organic food prices.
© Robert Hughes/Zuma Press/Newscom
The reference price for the 
­diamond ring (left) is $355,  
and the reference prices for 
the toys are from $39.99 to 
$59.99. They provide potential 
customers with an idea of the 
“regular price” before it was 
put on sale.
Source: Kohl’s

466	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Two distinct new product pricing strategies are discussed next: penetration pricing and 
price skimming.
Penetration Pricing  Firms using a penetration pricing strategy set the initial price 
low for the introduction of the new product or service. Their objective is to build sales, 
market share, and profits quickly and deter competition from entering the market. The 
low  penetration price is an incentive to purchase the product immediately. Firms using a 
penetration pricing strategy expect the unit cost to drop significantly as the accumulated 
volume sold increases, an effect known as the experience curve effect. With this effect, as 
sales continue to grow, the costs continue to drop.
In addition to offering the potential to build sales, market share, and profits, penetra-
tion pricing discourages competitors from entering the market because the profit margin is 
relatively low. Furthermore, if the costs to produce the product drop because of the accu-
mulated volume, competitors who enter the market later will face higher unit costs, at least 
until their volume catches up with the early entrant.
A penetration strategy has its drawbacks. First, the firm must have the capacity to sat-
isfy a rapid rise in demand—or at least be able to add that capacity quickly. Second, low 
price does not signal high quality. Of course, a price below their expectations decreases the 
risk for consumers to purchase the product and test its quality for themselves. Third, firms 
should avoid a penetration pricing strategy if some segments of the market are willing to 
pay more for the product; otherwise, the firm is just “leaving money on the table.”
Price Skimming  In many markets, and particularly for new and innovative products or 
services, innovators and early adopters (see Chapter 12) are willing to pay a higher price to 
obtain the new product or service. This strategy, known as price skimming, appeals to 
these segments of consumers who are willing to pay the premium price to have the innova-
tion first. This tactic is particularly common in technology markets, where sellers know 
that customers of the hottest and coolest products will wait in line for hours, desperate to 
be the first to own the newest version. These innovators are willing to pay the very highest 
prices to obtain brand-new examples of technology advances and exciting product en-
hancements. However, after this high-price market segment becomes saturated and sales 
begin to slow down, companies generally lower the price to capture (or skim) the next most 
price-sensitive market segment, which is willing to pay a somewhat lower price. For most 
companies, the price-dropping process can continue until the demand for the product has 
been satisfied, even at the lowest price points.
Price skimming is often used 
for high-demand video games 
like Call of Duty Black Ops III  
because fans will pay a higher 
price to be one of the first to 
own the newest version.
© Chesnot/Getty Images

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
467
	
	
The spread of new media for movies illustrates a price-skimming strategy. As with VCRs 
in the 1970s and DVD players in the 1990s, consumers were slow to embrace the new, more 
expensive Blu-ray discs. But enough early adopters purchased the Blu-ray discs that manufac-
turers continued to refine Blu-ray players to penetrate wider target markets. Consumers are 
buying the devices at a faster pace than they did the earlier movie-playing devices. One obvi-
ous reason for this sales growth is that prices for high-quality Blu-ray players have dropped 
below $80,6 down sharply from the $300-plus that retailers charged for debut models.7
For price skimming to work though, the product or service must be perceived as 
breaking new ground in some way, offering consumers new benefits currently unavailable 
in alternative products. When they believe it will work, firms use skimming strategies for a 
variety of reasons. Some may start by pricing relatively high to signal high quality to the 
market. Others may decide to price high at first to limit demand, which gives them time to 
build their production capacities. Similarly, some firms employ a skimming strategy to try 
to quickly earn back some of the high research and development investments they made for 
the new product. Finally, firms employ skimming strategies to test consumers’ price sensi-
tivity. A firm that prices too high can always lower the price, but if the price is initially set 
too low, it is almost impossible to raise it without significant consumer resistance.
Furthermore, for a skimming pricing strategy to be successful, competitors cannot be 
able to enter the market easily; otherwise, price competition will likely force lower prices 
and undermine the whole strategy. Competitors might be prevented from entering the mar-
ket through patent protections, their inability to copy the innovation (because it is complex 
to manufacture, its raw materials are hard to get, or the product relies on proprietary tech-
nology), or the high costs of entry.
Skimming strategies also face a significant potential drawback in the relatively high unit 
costs associated with producing small volumes of products. Therefore, firms must consider 
the trade-off between earning a higher price and suffering higher production costs. Finally, 
firms using a skimming strategy for new products must face the consequences of ultimately 
having to lower the price as demand wanes. Margins suffer, and customers who purchased 
the product or service at the higher initial price may become irritated when the price falls.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Explain the difference between EDLP and high/low pricing.
2.	 What pricing strategies should be considered when introducing a new 
product?
PRICING TACTICS
It is important to distinguish clearly between pricing strategies and pricing tactics. A pric-
ing strategy, as we have discussed, is a long-term approach to setting prices broadly in an 
integrative effort (across all the firm’s products) based on the five Cs (company objectives, 
costs, customers, competition, and channel members) of pricing discussed in Chapter 14. 
Pricing tactics, in contrast, offer short-term methods to focus on select components of the 
five Cs. Generally, a pricing tactic represents either a short-term response to a competitive 
threat (e.g., lowering price temporarily to meet a competitor’s price reduction) or a broadly 
accepted method of calculating a final price for the customer that is short term in nature. 
We separate our discussion of pricing tactics into those directed at end consumers and 
those aimed at intermediaries in a business-to-business (B2B) setting.
Pricing Tactics Aimed at Consumers
When firms sell their products and services directly to consumers rather than to other busi-
nesses, the pricing tactics they use naturally differ. Some of the tactics aimed directly at 
LO15-4	
Identify tactics used 
to reduce prices to 
consumers.

468	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
consumers—such as markdowns, quantity discounts, seasonal discounts, coupons, rebates, 
leasing, price bundling, leader pricing, and price lining—continue to be important factors.
Markdowns  Markdowns are the reductions retailers take on the initial selling price of 
the product or service. An integral component of the high/low pricing strategy we de-
scribed previously, markdowns enable retailers to get rid of slow-moving or obsolete mer-
chandise, sell seasonal items after the appropriate season, and match competitors’ prices 
on specific merchandise. Retailers must get rid of merchandise that isn’t selling, because 
holding on to such items hurts the retailer’s image and ties up money in inventory that 
could be used more productively elsewhere. Retailers also use markdowns to promote mer-
chandise and increase sales. Particularly when used in conjunction with promotions, mark-
downs can increase traffic into the store or onto their websites, which many retailers view 
as half the battle. Once customers are in the store or on their websites, retailers always 
hope they will purchase other products at regular prices.
Quantity Discounts for Consumers  The most com-
mon implementation of a quantity discount at the con-
sumer level is the size discount. Take, for example, three 
sizes of General Mills’ popular cereal Cheerios: 10-, 14-, 
and 18-ounce boxes are priced at approximately $2.99, 
$3.99, and $4.49, respectively. The larger the quantity, 
the less the cost per ounce, which means the manufac-
turer is providing a quantity discount. The goal of this 
tactic is to encourage consumers to purchase larger quan-
tities each time they buy. In turn, these consumers are 
less likely to switch brands and often tend to consume 
more of the product, depending on the product usage 
characteristics. Typically, buying a larger package of toi-
let tissue does not mean consumers will use it faster, but 
buying a larger box of cereal may encourage them to eat 
more of it or eat it more often.8
Seasonal Discounts  Seasonal discounts that are offered to consumers are price reduc-
tions offered on products and services to stimulate demand during off-peak seasons. You 
can find hotel rooms, ski lift tickets, snowmobiles, lawn mowers, barbeque grills, vacation 
packages, flights to certain destinations, and Christmas cards at discounts during their 
“off” seasons. Some consumers even plan their buying around these discounts, determined 
to spend the day after Christmas stocking up on discounted wrapping paper and bows for 
the following year.
Coupons  Coupons offer a discount on the price of specific items when they’re purchased. 
Coupons are issued by manufacturers and retailers in newspapers, on products, on the shelf, 
at the cash register, over the Internet, and through the mail.9 Retailers use coupons because 
they can induce customers to try products for the first time, convert those first-time users to 
regular users, encourage large purchases, increase usage, and protect market share against 
competition. However, the impact of coupons on profitability is questionable. Coupon pro-
motions, like all temporary promotions, may be stealing sales from a future period without 
any net increase in sales. Coupons also may annoy, alienate, and confuse consumers and 
therefore do little to increase store loyalty. Customers see an ad for a supermarket with a 
headline reading “Double Coupons” but don’t realize there might be conditions, such as a 
minimum purchase required, or that it may apply only to certain manufacturers.
Recognizing these problems, some retailers have reduced coupon usage and cut the 
number of days in which customers can redeem coupons. Other retailers, like CVS, are 
making coupons more attractive to loyal customers by customizing their content to be in 
line with their unique needs. For instance, if a customer typically spends a small amount 
during each shopping trip, the customer will receive coupons that encourage larger pur-
chases, such as “buy one, get one free.” Unique coupons will also encourage customers to 
Customers get a size discount for buying larger sizes. With 
Cheerios, the larger the box, the less it costs per ounce.
© Michael J. Hruby

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
469
	
	
try new brands within categories that they 
normally purchase, or products that comple-
ment their usual purchases, such as shampoo 
to customers who purchase hair color.10
Internet sites provide customers with in-
stant coupons. For instance, a customer might 
go to a Walmart and find the latest Lego video 
game for $29.99. A scan of the bar code on his 
cell phone to ShopSavvy.com might find the 
same item at a Target a mile away for $19.99. 
Another scan to MyCoupons.com provides a 
coupon for $10.00, thus saving the customer 
$20.00 in a matter of minutes.
Rebates  Rebates provide another form of 
discounts for consumers off the final selling 
price. In this case, however, the manufacturer, 
instead of the retailer, issues the refund as a 
portion of the purchase price returned to the 
buyer in the form of cash. A rebate promises savings, usually mailed to the consumer at 
some later date, only if the consumer carefully follows the rules. The “hassle factor” for re-
bates thus is higher than for coupons. The consumer must first buy the item during a speci-
fied time period, then mail in the required documentation—which usually includes the 
original sales receipt—and finally wait four to six weeks (or more!) for a check to arrive.
Manufacturers generally like rebates because as much as 90 percent of consumers 
never bother to redeem them. Manufacturers also embrace this form of price reduction 
because it lets them offer price cuts to consumers directly. With a traditional wholesale 
price cut from its vendors, retailers can keep the price on the shelf the same and pocket the 
difference. Rebates can also be rolled out and shut off quickly. That allows manufacturers 
to fine-tune inventories or respond quickly to competitors without actually cutting prices. 
Finally, because buyers are required to fill out forms with names, addresses, and other data, 
rebates become a great way for vendors to build a customer data warehouse. From the 
­retailer’s perspective, rebates are more advantageous than coupons since they increase 
­demand in the same way coupons may, but the retailer has no handling costs.
Leasing  For some products, discounts, coupons, and rebates may not be sufficient to 
bring the price to within consumers’ reach. With a lease, consumers pay a fee to purchase 
the right to use a product for a specific amount of time. They never own the product, they 
are just renting it. Leasing products opens up new, less price-sensitive target markets. Some 
consumers also like leases because they get tired of the product before its useful life is over, 
and they don’t have to worry about selling it, trading it, or throwing it away. Car companies 
have used leasing options for years to appeal to consumers who plan to keep their cars for 
only a few years and will want to trade in for a new model sooner rather than later. Other 
industries are recognizing that what works for Toyotas and Chevy trucks also works for 
gowns, handbags, art, and luxury cars.
Price Bundling  When you signed up for your high-speed Internet connection, did you 
also get cable TV and telephone? If so, you probably pay less than if you were to get the 
three services separately. This practice of selling more than one product for a single, lower 
price is called price bundling.11 Firms bundle products or services together to encourage 
customers to stock up so they won’t purchase competing brands, to encourage trial of a new 
product, or to provide an incentive to purchase a less desirable product or service to obtain 
a more desirable one in the same bundle.
Leader Pricing  Leader pricing is a tactic that attempts to build store traffic by aggres-
sively pricing and advertising a regularly purchased item, often priced at or just above the 
store’s cost. Leader pricing fuels happy hours at restaurants and bars all over the country. 
Coupons offer a discount on 
the price of specific items 
when they’re purchased.
© Michael J. Hruby

470	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
At Maison Premiere in Brooklyn New York, customers down a 
selection of 15 different kinds of oysters, most priced at $1 per 
oyster, with $15 glasses of wine.12 The rationale behind this 
tactic argues that, to get the great deal on oysters, the consumer 
will order other items that sell at a higher margin. The higher 
margins and profits on these other items then will more than 
cover the lower markup on the oysters. Leader pricing can be 
illegal under some circumstances though, as discussed subse-
quently in this chapter.
Price Lining  When marketers establish a price floor and a 
price ceiling for an entire line of similar products and then set 
a few other price points in between to represent distinct dif-
ferences in quality, the practice is called price lining. 
Imagine that you need a new dress shirt because you have an 
important job interview. You go to brooksbrothers.com and 
find similar-looking shirts for $92 (non-iron), $185 (Egyptian 
cotton), and $278 (luxury). Which are you going to buy? Are 
you going to risk the success of the interview by purchasing 
the least expensive shirt? Probably not. Will the interviewee 
be able to tell the difference between the $135 classic cotton 
and the $295 Sea Island cotton shirt? Probably not. You will probably purchase the mid-
dle-quality shirt because you don’t want to look cheap, but you really can’t afford the 
highest-priced shirt.13
Business Pricing Tactics and Discounts
The pricing tactics employed in B2B settings differ significantly from those used in con-
sumer markets. Among the most prominent are seasonal and cash discounts, allowances, 
quantity discounts, and uniform delivered versus zone pricing. (See Exhibit 15.3.)
Seasonal Discounts  Unlike seasonal discounts offered to consumers, a seasonal dis-
count to a business is an additional reduction offered as an incentive to retailers to order 
merchandise in advance of the normal buying season. For instance, Lennox may offer its 
air conditioner dealers an additional seasonal discount if they place their orders and receive 
delivery before April 1, prior to the warm months when air conditioner sales are highest. If 
it can ship earlier in the season, Lennox can plan its production schedules more easily and 
LO15-5	
Identify tactics used  
to reduce prices to 
businesses.
Maison Premiere in Brooklyn, New York, uses leader pricing 
on its oysters to build traffic, but makes a profit on other 
items customers order.
© Toss Heisler/The New York Times/Redux
Tactic	
Description
Seasonal discounts	
An additional reduction offered as an incentive to retailers to order 
merchandise in advance of the normal buying season.
Cash discounts	
An additional reduction that reduces the invoice cost if the buyer pays 
the invoice prior to the end of the discount period.
Allowances	
Advertising or slotting allowances (additional price reductions) offered 
in return for specific behaviors. Advertising allowances are offered to 
retailers if they agree to feature the manufacturer’s product in their 
advertising and promotional efforts. Slotting allowances are offered to 
get new products into stores or to gain more or better shelf space.
Quantity discounts	
Providing a reduced price according to the amount purchased.
Uniform delivered versus 	
Uniform delivered price: shipper charges one rate, no matter where the 
zone pricing	
buyer is located. Zone price: different prices depending on the geo-
graphical delivery area.
E X H I B I T  15.3
Business-to-Business Pricing Tactics

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
471
	
	
lessen its finished goods inventory. Its dealers, however, must weigh the benefits of a larger 
profit because of the discount versus the extra cost of carrying the inventory for a longer 
period of time.
Cash Discounts  A cash discount reduces the invoice cost if the buyer pays the invoice 
prior to the end of the discount period. Typically, it is expressed in the form of a percent-
age, such as “3/10, n/30,” or “3%, 10 days, net 30,” which means the buyer can take a 
3 percent discount on the total amount of the invoice if the bill is paid within 10 days of the 
invoice date; otherwise the full, or net, amount is due within 30 days. Why do B2B sellers 
offer cash discounts to customers? By encouraging early payment, they benefit from the 
time value of money. Getting money earlier rather than later enables the firm to either in-
vest the money to earn a return on it or avoid borrowing money and paying interest on it. In 
both instances, the firm is better off financially.
Allowances  Another pricing tactic that lowers the final cost to channel members is 
­allowances, such as advertising or slotting allowances, offered in return for specific 
behaviors. An advertising allowance offers a price reduction to channel members if 
they agree to feature the manufacturer’s product in their advertising and promotional 
efforts. Advertising allowances are legal as long they are available to all customers and 
not structured in such a way that they consistently and obviously favor one or a few 
buyers over others. Slotting allowances are fees paid to retailers simply to get new 
products into stores or to gain more or better shelf space for their products. Some argue 
that slotting allowances are unethical because they put small manufacturers that cannot 
readily afford allowances at a competitive disadvantage. Demanding large slotting 
­allowances could be considered a form of bribery—“paying off” the retailer to get pref-
erential treatment.
Quantity Discounts  A quantity discount provides a reduced price according to the 
amount purchased. The more the buyer purchases, the higher the discount and, of course, 
the greater the value.
A cumulative quantity discount uses the amount purchased over a specified time 
period and usually involves several transactions. This type of discount particularly 
­encourages resellers to maintain their current supplier because the cost to switch must in-
clude the loss of the discount. Recall that we noted that automobile dealers must buy the 
products they hope to sell to consumers from the manufacturer. They often attempt to meet 
a quota or a sales goal for a specific time period, such as a quarter or a year, because if they 
meet those quotas, they earn discounts on all the cars they purchased from the manufac-
turer, in the form of a cumulative quantity discount. For this very reason, you will often 
find good deals on cars at the end of a quarter or fiscal year. If the dealership can just sell 
a few more cars to meet its quota, the cumulative quantity discount earned can be substan-
tial, so taking a few hundred dollars less on those last few cars is well worth the opportu-
nity to receive a check worth many times the amount of the losses.
A noncumulative quantity discount, though still a quantity discount, is based only 
on the amount purchased in a single order. It therefore provides the buyer with an incentive 
to purchase more merchandise immediately. Such larger, less frequent orders can save 
manufacturers order processing, sales, and transportation expenses. For example, a retail 
store might get a 40 percent discount off the manufacturer’s suggested retail price for plac-
ing a $500 order, a 50 percent discount for an order of $501 to $4,999, and a 60 percent 
discount for an order of greater than $5,000.
Uniform Delivered versus Zone Pricing  These pricing tactics are specific to ship-
ping, which represents a major cost for many manufacturers. With a uniform delivered 
pricing tactic, the shipper charges one rate, no matter where the buyer is located, which 
makes things very simple for both the seller and the buyer. Zone pricing, however, sets 
different prices depending on a geographical division of the delivery areas. For example, a 
manufacturer based in New York City might divide the United States into seven different 
zones and use different shipping rates for each zone to reflect the average shipping cost for 

472	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
customers located therein. This way, each customer in a zone is charged the same cost for 
shipping. Zone pricing can be advantageous to the shipper because it reflects the actual 
shipping charges more closely than uniform delivered pricing can.
LO15-6	
List the pricing 
practices that are 
illegal or unethical.
U.K.-based Tesco wasn’t allowed to make the claim that it is 
“Britain’s Biggest Discounter” because it was considered to 
be misleading. Such a claim probably would be considered 
puffery in the United States, and therefore would be allowed.
© Alex Segre/Alamy
Is this a legitimate sale, or is the retailer using deceptive 
­reference prices?
© Jeff Greenberg/PhotoEdit
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are some consumer-oriented pricing tactics?
2.	 What are some B2B-oriented pricing tactics?
LEGAL AND ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PRICING
With so many different pricing strategies and tactics, it is no wonder that unscrupulous 
firms find ample opportunity to engage in pricing practices that can hurt consumers. We 
now take a look at some of the legal and ethical implications of pricing.
Prices tend to fluctuate naturally and respond to varying 
market conditions. Thus, though we rarely see firms at-
tempting to control the market in terms of product quality or 
advertising, they often engage in pricing practices that can 
unfairly reduce competition or harm consumers directly 
through fraud and deception. A host of laws and regulations 
at both the federal and state levels attempt to prevent unfair 
pricing practices, but some are poorly enforced, and others 
are difficult to prove.
Deceptive or Illegal Price Advertising
Although it is always illegal and unethical to lie in advertis-
ing, a certain amount of “puffery” is typically allowed (see 
Chapter 19).14 But price advertisements should never deceive 
consumers to the point of causing harm. For example, a local 
car dealer’s advertising that it had the “best deals in town” 
would likely be considered puffery. In contrast, advertising 
“the lowest prices, guaranteed” makes a very specific claim 
and, if not true, can be considered deceptive.
Deceptive Reference Prices  Previously, we introduced reference prices, which 
create reference points for the buyer against which to compare the selling price. If the 
reference price is bona fide, the advertisement is informa-
tive. If the reference price has been inflated or is just plain 
fictitious, however, the advertisement is deceptive and may 
cause harm to consumers. But it is not easy to determine 
whether a reference price is bona fide. What standard 
should be used? If an advertisement specifies a “regular 
price,” just what qualifies as regular? How many units must 
the store sell at this price for it to be a bona fide regular 
price—half the stock? A few? Just one? Finally, what if the 
store offers the item at the regular price but customers do 
not buy any? Can it still be considered a regular price? In 
general, if a seller is going to label a price as a regular 
price, the Better Business Bureau suggests that at least 
50 percent of the sales have ­occurred at that price.15
Loss-Leader Pricing  As we discussed previously, leader 
pricing is a legitimate attempt to build store traffic by pricing 
a regularly purchased item aggressively but still above the 

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
473
	
	
store’s cost. Loss-leader pricing takes this tactic one step further by lowering the price 
below the store’s cost. No doubt you have seen “buy one, get one free” offers at grocery 
and discount stores. Unless the markup for the item is 100 percent of the cost, these sales 
obviously do not generate enough revenue from the sale of one unit to cover the store’s cost 
for both units, which means it has essentially priced the total for both items below cost, 
unless the manufacturer is absorbing the cost of the promotion to generate volume. In some 
states, this form of pricing is illegal.
Bait and Switch  Another form of deceptive price advertising occurs when sellers 
­advertise items for a very low price without the intent to really sell any. This bait-and-
switch tactic is a deceptive practice because the store lures customers in with a very low 
price on an item (the bait), only to aggressively pressure these customers into purchasing 
a higher-priced model (the switch) by disparaging the low-priced item, comparing it 
unfavorably with the higher-priced model, or professing an inadequate supply of the 
lower-priced item. Again, the laws against bait-and-switch practices are difficult to en-
force because salespeople, simply as a function of their jobs, are always trying to get 
customers to trade up to a higher-priced model without necessarily deliberately baiting 
them. The key to proving deception centers on the intent of the seller, which is also 
­difficult to prove.
Predatory Pricing
When a firm sets a very low price for one or more of its products with the intent to drive its 
competition out of business, it is using predatory pricing. Predatory pricing is illegal un-
der both the Sherman Antitrust Act and the Federal Trade Commission Act because it 
constrains free trade and represents a form of unfair competition. It also tends to promote a 
concentrated market with a few dominant firms (an oligopoly).
But again, predation is difficult to prove. First, one must demonstrate intent; that is, 
that the firm intended to drive out its competition or prevent competitors from entering the 
market. Second, the complainant must prove that the firm charged prices lower than its 
average cost, an equally difficult task.
The issue of predatory pricing has arisen anew because of Google’s dominance in 
the search engine market. Advertisers on Google bid on specific keywords; if they win 
the auction, their product appears first in the paid results section on the search engine. 
However, Google also includes a “quality handicap” and charges poor-quality advertisers 
more. It claims this tactic ensures that users are more likely to find high-quality results 
from their searches. The algorithm it uses to define quality is confidential, but some 
­experts allege that Google has manipulated the paid search results in such a way that it 
undermines competitors’ offerings while promoting its own. It appears these claims may 
be true; in 2012 the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) found enough evidence for search 
results manipulation that it recommended the government sue Google, and in 2013 a 
European Commission came to similar conclusions.16 Despite significant documented 
evidence against Google, the FTC decided to close the case in 2015.17 The unresolved 
question is: Because of Google’s dominance in the search engine market, with its result-
ing ability to control prices, would its practice of charging more for its “quality handi-
cap” be predatory?
Price Discrimination
There are many forms of price discrimination, 
but only some of them are considered illegal un-
der the Clayton Act and the Robinson-Patman 
Act. When firms sell the same product to differ-
ent resellers (wholesalers, distributors, or retail-
ers) at different prices, it can be considered price 
discrimination; usually, larger firms receive 
lower prices.
Is this price discrimination illegal?
© Tom Prettyman/PhotoEdit

474	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
We have already discussed the use of quantity discounts, which is a legitimate method 
of charging different prices to different customers on the basis of the quantity they pur-
chase. The legality of this tactic stems from the assumption that it costs less to sell and 
service 1,000 units to one customer than 100 units to 10 customers. But quantity discounts 
must be available to all customers and not be structured in such a way that they consistently 
and obviously favor one or a few buyers over others.
The Robinson-Patman Act does not apply to sales to end consumers, at which 
point many forms of price discrimination occur. For example, students and seniors 
often receive discounts on food and movie tickets, which is perfectly acceptable under 
federal law. Those engaged in online auctions like eBay are also practicing a legal 
form of price discrimination, because sellers are selling the same item to different 
buyers at various prices.
Price Fixing
Price fixing is the practice of colluding with other firms to control prices. Price fixing 
might be either horizontal or vertical. Whereas horizontal price fixing is clearly illegal 
under the Sherman Antitrust Act, vertical price fixing falls into a gray area.18
Horizontal price fixing occurs when competitors who produce and sell competing 
products or services collude, or work together, to control prices, effectively taking price 
out of the decision process for consumers. This practice clearly reduces competition and is 
illegal. Six South African airlines were accused of colluding to hike the price of fares for 
flights within the country during the World Cup.19 The major tobacco companies also have 
been accused of colluding to fix the prices of cigarettes worldwide.20 As a general rule of 
thumb, competing firms should refrain from discussing prices or terms and conditions of 
sale with competitors. If firms want to know competitors’ prices, they can look at a com-
petitor’s advertisements, its websites, or its stores.
Vertical price fixing occurs when parties at different levels of the same marketing 
channel (e.g., manufacturers and retailers) agree to control the prices passed on to 
consumers. Manufacturers often encourage retailers to sell their merchandise at a spe-
cific price, known as the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP). Manufac-
turers set MSRP prices to reduce retail price competition among retailers, stimulate 
retailers to provide complementary services, and support the manufacturer’s merchan-
dise. Manufacturers enforce MSRPs by withholding benefits such as cooperative ad-
vertising or even refusing to deliver merchandise to noncomplying retailers. The 
Supreme Court has ruled that the ability of a manufacturer to require retailers to sell 
merchandise at MSRP should be decided on a case-by-case basis, depending on the 
individual circumstances.21
According to the U.S. Department of Justice, Apple and several publishing 
­agencies have engaged in vertical price fixing, as outlined in Ethical and Societal 
­Dilemma 15.1.
As these legal issues clearly demonstrate, pricing decisions involve many ethical con-
siderations. In determining their pricing strategies and their pricing tactics, marketers must 
always balance their goal of inducing customers, through price, to find value and the need 
to deal honestly and fairly with those same customers. Whether another business or an in-
dividual consumer, buyers can be influenced by a variety of pricing methods. It is up to 
marketers to determine which of these methods works best for the seller, the buyer, and the 
community. 
Gray Market Pricing  Channels can be very difficult to manage, and distribution outside 
normal channels does occur. A gray market employs irregular but not necessarily illegal 
methods; generally, it legally circumvents authorized channels of distribution to sell goods 
at prices lower than those intended by the manufacturer.22 Many manufacturers of con-
sumer electronics therefore require retailers to sign an agreement that demands certain ac-
tivities (and prohibits others) before the retailers may become authorized dealers. But if a 
retailer has too many high-definition televisions in stock, it may sell them at just above its 

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
475
	
	
The Verdict: Apple Conspired to Raise  
Prices on eBooksiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 15.1
In a long-running court case, Amazon, Apple, a group of book 
publishers, and customers fought a tough battle over the price 
of reading. 
	
Compared with Amazon, Apple was a late entrant to the 
ebook market. Amazon, with its Kindle devices and well-known 
reputation as a bookseller (which was how the online giant 
started), dominated the market of books sold to be read on 
Kindles as well as on other devices, including Apple’s phones 
and tablets. Amazon also offered great prices, with many pop-
ular titles priced at under $10. Faced with this tremendous 
dominance, Apple believed it needed to find a way to compete. 
It worked with five major book publishers to decide on a 
minimum price below which they would not sell. With the 
agreement, publishers like Simon & Schuster, Penguin, and 
Macmillan began insisting on higher prices for their titles, 
and Apple took a percentage of each sale. This pricing method 
also meant that Amazon had to raise the prices it charged 
consumers, because it was paying more for the rights to the 
electronic content. 
	
Amazon immediately brought the situation to the attention 
of the U.S. Department of Justice, alleging that the agreement 
represented price fixing and illegal conspiracy. Apple de-
fended its actions vigorously; by entering a market that had 
been essentially a monopoly, with Amazon as the only seller, 
Apple asserted that it was increasing competition, not harm-
ing it. It also alleged that the effect on the price was not the 
issue. Whether its entry led to higher or lower prices, the key 
point—according to Apple’s argument—was that, previously, 
consumers had only one source for ebooks, and now they had 
two, and that was an improvement.
	
Various levels of the U.S. court system have disagreed 
with Apple’s assertions though, and recently the U.S. 
­Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal. Thus the most 
recent decision by the lower appellate court stands. That 
decision establishes that the agreement among Apple and 
the five big publishers represented collusion. Previously 
the publishers had been forced by Amazon to sell at low 
prices. The deal with Apple benefited them by allowing them 
to charge what they wanted. It also benefited Apple, which 
received a percentage of each sale. But the Court’s interest 
is mostly in the effects on consumers, and for those stake-
holders, the conspiracy had negative effects in the form of 
higher prices.
	
As a result, Apple is liable to pay a $450 million settlement 
to ebook consumers. The publishers already had settled with 
the government.
Who will ultimately win the Apple/Amazon pricing war? 
­Currently, the court’s decision is that the agreement among 
Apple and the five big publishers represents ­collusion.
© Joby Sessions/Computer Arts Magazine/Getty Images
own cost to an unauthorized discount dealer. This move places the merchandise in the mar-
ket at prices far below what authorized dealers can charge and in the long term may tarnish 
the image of the manufacturer if the discount dealer fails to provide sufficient return poli-
cies, support, service, and so forth.
 To discourage this type of gray market distribution, many manufacturers have re-
sorted to large disclaimers on their websites, packaging, and other communications to 
warn consumers that the manufacturer’s product warranty becomes null and void unless 
the item has been purchased from an authorized dealer. Another method is to equalize 
worldwide prices so the gray market advantage evaporates, as we describe in Ethical and 
Societal Dilemma 15.2.

476	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Impeding the Gray Market for Luxury Goodsiv
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 15.2
The euro is lower than it has been in over a decade. As a re-
sult, for Asian shoppers seeking Italian designer clothing or 
French handbags, it is literally worth the cost of flying to Milan 
and Paris to buy the items there rather than shopping in 
Shanghai. Prices are nearly always lower in the country of 
origin, because there are no customs or import duties to pay, 
and transportation is relatively inexpensive. Currently, prices 
for Chanel items in China are approximately 63 percent 
higher than prices for comparable items sold in Paris. When 
the item is a €4,000 handbag, this difference is great enough 
that a shopper from Beijing could buy a ticket to Paris, fly over, 
purchase the bag, and fly home—and still save money com-
pared with buying the item in the local store.
	
An alternative to a shopping trip to Europe is to buy at 
home in the gray market. Because of the vast gap between 
their European and Asian prices, gray market players can 
readily buy up goods at the lower European cost, increase the 
price slightly—still remaining below the Asian retail level—and 
earn massive profits by selling it in China on the gray market. 
China’s well-known Taobao shopping site is a ready source for 
such gray market goods.
	
Although this gray market does move a lot of merchandise, 
it is not in the best interest of the European luxury goods 
manufacturers. Their reputation is diminished by having mer-
chandise sold at lower prices through nontraditional chan-
nels. Service is nonexistent in such markets, and warranties 
are null and void. If the gray market thrives, their traditional 
channels suffer as customers are drawn to the cheaper 
prices. Ultimately, customers might no longer find value in tra-
ditional stores. 
	
In response to these market developments, Chanel has an-
nounced it will be raising its retail prices in Europe but cutting 
them in China. In so doing, it seeks to level the playing field so 
that the same handbag costs approximately the same amount 
wherever people buy it. In the end, who benefits from the gray 
market?
In an attempt to equalize prices across global markets, Chanel is raising its retail prices in Europe 
but cutting them in China.
© David Hogsholt/Reportage/Getty Images
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What common pricing practices are considered to be illegal or  
unethical?

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
477
	
	
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Identify three methods that firms use to set their 
prices.
	
	
The various methods of setting prices have their ad-
vantages and disadvantages. The three primary 
methods are cost based, competition based, and 
value based. The cost-based techniques are quick 
and easy but fail to reflect the competitive environ-
ment or consumer demand. Although it is always 
advisable to be aware of what competitors are doing, 
using competition-based pricing should not occur in 
isolation without dealing with cost considerations 
and consumer reactions. Taking a value-based ap-
proach to pricing, whether the improvement value, 
the total cost of ownership approach, or the experi-
mental approach described in Chapter 10 in conjunc-
tion with these other methods provides a nicely 
balanced method of setting prices.
	
	
Describe the difference between an everyday low 
pricing (EDLP) strategy and a high/low strategy.
	
	
An everyday low pricing strategy is maintained 
when a product’s price stays relatively constant at a 
level that is slightly lower than the regular price 
from competitors using a high/low strategy, and is 
less frequently discounted. Customers enjoy an ev-
eryday low pricing strategy because they know that 
the price will always be the about the same and will 
be and a better price than the competition’s. High/
low pricing strategy starts out with a product at one 
(higher) price, and then discounts the product. This 
strategy first attracts a less price-sensitive customer 
who pays the regular price, and then a very price-­
sensitive customer who pays the low price.
	
	
Explain the difference between a price skimming 
and a market penetration pricing strategy.
	
	
When firms use a price skimming strategy, the product 
or service must be perceived as breaking new ground, 
or customers will not pay more than what they pay for 
other products. Firms use price skimming to signal 
high quality, limit demand, recoup their investment 
quickly, and/or test people’s price sensitivity. More-
over, it is easier to price high initially and then lower 
LO15-1
LO15-2
LO15-3
the price than vice versa. Market penetration, in con-
trast, helps firms build sales and market share quickly, 
which may discourage other firms from entering the 
market. Building demand quickly also typically results 
in lowered costs as the firm gains experience making 
the product or delivering the service.
	
	
Identify tactics used to reduce prices to consumers.
	
	
Marketers use a variety of tactics to provide lower 
prices to consumers. The tactics include markdowns, 
quantity discounts, seasonal discounts, coupons, re-
bates, leasing, price bundling, leader pricing, and 
price lining. For example, leader pricing involves re-
tailers pricing certain products or services at very 
low prices, with the hope that these same customers 
will also buy other, more profitable items.
	
	
Identify tactics used to reduce prices to businesses.
	
	
Seasonal discounts give retailers an incentive to buy 
prior to the normal selling season, cash discounts 
prompt them to pay their invoices early, and allow-
ances attempt to get retailers to advertise the manu-
facturer’s product or stock a new product. In addition, 
quantity discounts can cause retailers to purchase a 
larger quantity over a specific period of time or with 
a particular order. Finally, zone pricing bases the 
cost of shipping the merchandise on the distance be-
tween the retailer and the manufacturer—the farther 
away, the more it costs.
	
	
List the pricing practices that are illegal or 
­unethical.
	
	
There are almost as many ways to get into trouble by 
setting or changing a price as there are pricing strat-
egies and tactics. Some common legal issues pertain 
to advertising deceptive prices. Specifically, if a 
firm compares a reduced price with a “regular” or 
reference price, it must actually have sold that prod-
uct or service at the regular price. Bait and switch is 
another form of deceptive price advertising, where 
sellers advertise items for a very low price without 
the intent to really sell any at that price. Collusion 
among firms to fix prices is always illegal.
LO15-4
LO15-5
LO15-6
∙	 advertising allowance,  471
∙	 bait and switch,  473
∙	 cash discount,  471
∙	 competition-based pricing 
method,  461
∙	 cost-based pricing method,  460
∙	 cost of ownership method,  462
∙	 coupon,  468
∙	 cumulative quantity discount,  471
∙	 everyday low pricing (EDLP),  464
∙	 experience curve effect,  466
∙	 gray market,  474
∙	 high/low pricing,  465
∙	 horizontal price fixing,  474
∙	 improvement value,  461
Key Terms

478	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
∙	 leader pricing,  469
∙	 lease,  469
∙	 loss-leader pricing,  473
∙	 manufacturer’s suggested retail 
price (MSRP),  474
∙	 markdowns,  468
∙	 noncumulative quantity  
discount,  471
∙	 penetration pricing strategy,  466
∙	 predatory pricing,  473
∙	 price bundling,  469
∙	 price discrimination,  473
∙	 price fixing,  474
∙	 price lining,  470
∙	 price skimming,  466
∙	 pricing strategy,  464
∙	 pricing tactics,  467
∙	 quantity discount,  471
∙	 rebate,  469
∙	 reference price,  465
∙	 seasonal discount,  468
∙	 size discount,  468
∙	 slotting allowance,  471
∙	 uniform delivered pricing,  471
∙	 value-based pricing method,  461
∙	 vertical price fixing,  474
∙	 zone pricing,  471
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Go to www.coupons.com. In which product categories 
does this website offer coupons? Choose a product from 
each category.
∙	
How effective are coupons for selling these types of 
products? Why?
∙	
Do any sellers offer rebates through this website? 
Why or why not?
∙	 What are the benefits to the seller of using 
­Coupons.com instead of offering coupons in a 
newspaper?
∙	
How do you think Coupons.com makes money? For 
example, consider what companies are advertising 
on the site. Do the same companies who advertise on 
their site offer coupons?
2.	 Visit the website for Bag, Borrow, or Steal (www.bagbor-
roworsteal.com) and select handbags. Click on the 
“Handbags,” then choose “Gucci,” in the Designer cate-
gory on the left column, and then “Sort by” Price. What 
is the difference between Gucci’s highest and lowest 
priced bags? Notice that if a product says “Waitlist,” it 
has already been borrowed, but if it says “Borrow,” then it 
is available for you to borrow. Are the bags that are wait-
listed the highest priced or the lowest priced? How would 
you determine the price it charges to rent a bag?
Marketing Applications
  1.	 Suppose you have been hired as the pricing manager 
for a drugstore chain that typically adds a fixed per-
centage onto the cost of each product to arrive at the 
retail price. Evaluate this technique. What would you 
do differently?
  2.	 Some high-fashion retailers, notably H&M and Zara, 
sell what some call “disposable fashion”—apparel 
priced so reasonably low that it can be disposed of after 
just a few wearings. Here is your dilemma: You have an 
important job interview and need a new suit. You can 
buy the suit at one of these stores for $129 or at Brooks 
Brothers for $500. Of course, the Brooks Brothers suit 
is of higher quality and will therefore last longer. How 
would you use the two value-based approaches de-
scribed in this chapter to determine which suit to buy?
  3.	 A phone manufacturer is determining a price for its 
product, using a cost-based pricing strategy. The fixed 
costs are $100,000, and the variable costs are $50,000. 
If 1,000 units are produced and the company wants to 
have a 30 percent markup, what is the price of the phone?
  4.	 Identify two stores at which you shop, one of which 
uses everyday low pricing and another that uses a high/
low pricing strategy. Do you believe that each store’s 
chosen strategy is appropriate for the type of merchan-
dise it sells and the market of customers to whom it is 
appealing? Justify your answer.
  5.	 As the product manager for Whirlpool’s line of wash-
ing machines, you are in charge of pricing new prod-
ucts. Your product team has developed a revolutionary 
new washing machine that relies on radically new tech-
nology and requires very little water to get clothes 
clean. This technology will likely be difficult for your 
competition to copy. Should you adopt a skimming or 
a penetration pricing strategy? Justify your answer.
  6.	 What is the difference between a cumulative and a 
noncumulative quantity discount?
  7.	 If you worked for a manufacturing firm located in 
­Oregon and shipped merchandise all over the United 
States, which would be more advantageous, a zone or 
a uniform delivered pricing policy? Why? What if 
your firm were located in Kansas—would it make a 
difference?
  8.	 Coupons and rebates benefit different distribution 
channel members. Which would you prefer if you were 
a manufacturer, a retailer, and a consumer? Why?

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
479
	
	
  9.	 Suppose the president of your university got together with 
the presidents of all the universities in your athletic con-
ference for lunch. They discussed what each university 
was going to charge for tuition the following year. Are 
they in violation of federal laws? Explain your answer.
10.	 Imagine that you are the newly hired brand manager for 
a restaurant that is about to open. Both the local newspa-
per and a gourmet food magazine recently ran articles 
about your new head chef, calling her one of the best 
young chefs in the country. In response to these positive 
reviews, the company wants to position its brand as a 
premium, gourmet restaurant. Your boss asks what price 
you should charge for the chef’s signature filet mignon 
dish. Other restaurants in the area charge around $40 for 
their own filet offerings. What steps might you under-
take to determine what the new price should be?
11.	 You have been hired by a regional supermarket chain 
as the candy and snack buyer. Your shelves are domi-
nated by national firms such as Wrigley’s and ­Nabisco. 
The chain imposes a substantial slotting fee to allow 
new items to be added to their stock selection. Man-
agement reasons that it costs a lot to add and delete 
items, and besides, these slotting fees are a good source 
of revenue. A small, minority-operated, local firm pro-
duces several potentially interesting snack crackers and 
a line of gummy candy, all with natural ingredients, 
added vitamins, reduced sugar, and a competitive 
price—and they also happen to taste great. You’d love 
to give the firm a chance, but its managers claim the 
slotting fee is too high. Should your firm charge slotting 
fees? Are slotting fees fair to the relevant shareholders—
customers, stockholders, vendors?
1.	 A(n) 
 strategy is attractive because it attracts 
two distinct market segments: customers who are not 
price-sensitive customers and customers who are price 
sensitive. 
a.  cost-based pricing
b.  high/low pricing
c.  predatory pricing
d.  EDLP
e.  competitor-based pricing
2.	 When using a market penetration strategy, as sales con-
tinue to grow, the costs continue to drop, allowing even 
further reductions in the price. This is due to 
a.  markdowns.
b.  price lining.
c.  seasonal discounts.
d.  improvement value.
e.  experience curve effects.
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
PIZZA PLAYERS, PIZZA PRICES 
For most of us, “pizza wars” suggest the fight over which toppings to put on a shared pie. 
But in truth, the pizza industry is in the midst of a battle, for which the weapons of choice 
are mainly pricing tactics. In addition to the small, local pizzerias that appear in nearly 
every town, there are four major chains that pursue pizza-loving consumers in the United 
States (see Exhibit 15.4), a massive market in which approximately 1 in 8 people eat pizza 
on any particular day.23 Running the gamut from a low-price promise to a higher price and 
higher quality appeal, these four chains all seek to price their offerings in ways that prom-
ise to increase their sales and market share. 
How exactly are they doing so? Let’s consider their pricing tactics in turn, moving in 
order from the smallest of the big four (in terms of market share) to the biggest.
Papa John’s  With its well-known spokespeople, from Peyton Manning and J.J. Watt 
to the founder himself, “Papa” John Schnatter, Papa John’s is a familiar name to many 
advertising viewers, even though it accounts for only about 6 percent of the national 
market. Along with these recognizable faces, Papa John’s has established a motto and 
tagline that most consumers can repeat from memory: “Better Ingredients, Better Pizza.” 
In accordance with this focus on quality, Papa John’s rarely tries to offer the lowest price in 
Chapter Case Study 

480	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
a market. Constantly lowering prices means, according to Schnatter, that “you are either 
serving ingredients that are not high quality or you’re putting less on.”24 Arguing that it is 
not willing to make such quality-related sacrifices, Papa John’s says that it will never seek 
to reach the $5 pizza threshold that many of its national competitors offer. 
 But to gain ground, it cannot just ignore the price interests of its consumers. In re-
sponse, Papa John’s promises that if consumers order one large pizza at the regular price, 
they can get a second for just $.50.25 The combined deal still remains above that $5 thresh-
old, but it brings the overall cost to consumers more in line with competitors’ prices. Fur-
thermore, Papa John’s has introduced a quality guarantee: Any consumer dissatisfied with 
the quality of the pie he or she receives may call the store within a half-hour to complain. 
That complaint automatically gives them the option of getting another delivery immediately 
or having their account credited, such that they may receive another pie for free in the future. 
 Finally, Papa John’s seeks to introduce various innovations to get people calling for an 
order. For example, during a recent one-month promotional run, it offered the Brookie—a 
combination chocolate chip cookie and brownie—for $6 with the order of any pizza.26
Little Caesars  Little Caesars also has a well-known tagline (“Pizza! Pizza!”), but its offer is 
premised almost completely on convenience. With a different business model than any of the 
other big players in the market, the restaurant chain promises that its food is “hot and ready,” 
thus eliminating the need to place an order. At the moment a consumer walks in to a store, the 
pizza will be ready for her or him to take, for just about $5. For a little more, they can upgrade 
their pie, such as selecting the cheese-stuffed crust or bacon-wrapped deep-dish versions.
 In parallel with this relatively simple sales model, Little Caesars embraces a sort of 
absurdist image. Its advertising often features unrealistic or fantastic sequences, such as 
when two disembodied heads floated above a pie in a campaign to introduce the new 
cheese-stuffed crust.27 To promote the notion that avoiding ordering is more convenient—
even though it requires consumers to go out and pick up their food, rather than having it 
delivered to them at home—another advertising campaign shows a couple desperately try-
ing to remember the password for an online ordering site, typing in name after name of the 
hundreds of cats who appear to be living in the house with them. 
 It also likes to play with its “underdog,” overlooked status, despite its prominence.28 
In one promotion, it promised an even lower price—free—if any team that was seeded 
sixteenth in the men’s college basketball tournament won in the first round, which would 
mean that it would have unseated the top ranked team in its division.29 The risk was rela-
tively low, considering that no team has ever done so. Still, it put the idea in people’s minds 
and offered the chance of a free Hot-N-Ready lunch if the upset occurred. (It didn’t.)
Domino’s  While Papa John’s focuses on quality and Little Caesars goes for convenience, 
Domino’s is relying on its delivery reputation and its head start in terms of mobile commerce 
E X H I B I T  15.4
Top Pizza Chains by Market Share
Other
61.10%
Pizza Hut
14.80%
Dominos
9.60%
Little Caesars
8.10%
Papa John’s
6.40%
Source: Andrew Alvarez, “BISWorld Industry Report OD4320 Pizza Restaurants in the US,” IBISWorld, November 2015.

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
481
	
	
capabilities to compete more effectively for orders. In the past, Domino’s was known for its 
promise to deliver pizzas in 30 minutes or less, though it ultimately removed the guarantee 
for safety reasons. Still, it built its reach throughout the market by promising to make it easy 
for people at home to get their pizza fix. That reputation continues to inform its approach to 
growth today.
By “utilizing mobile better than their competitors,”30 Domino’s restaurants make it 
easy for tech-savvy consumers to gain access to the offerings. For example, its well-­
developed Pizza Tracker app, which is available on all the major mobile platforms, gives 
users one-touch ordering functions. Then the app keeps consumers appraised of the prog-
ress of their pie, constantly updating the expected delivery times. It also has begun experi-
menting with other mobile channels, such as Snapchat, seeking to find ways to connect 
with consumers in unexpected, entertaining, and more appealing channels and manners.31
In the course of developing these mobile capabilities, Domino’s pricing strategy has not 
changed substantively. As one spokesperson noted, in response to new promotions by Pizza 
Hut, Domino’s does not “play the price or product-of-the-month gimmick game others seem 
to. The limited-time-only tactic is something we left behind years ago.”32 Instead, since 
about 2010, Domino’s has continued to offer the same baseline: medium cheese pizzas for 
around $5.99 each. Increasing the size or adding more toppings increases the price, but the 
pricing is clearly transparent and mostly consistent over time and geographic locations. 
Pizza Hut  And finally we come to the biggest player, the world’s largest pizza chain. 
Pizza Hut started the most recent pizza war by creating a new pricing and promotion initia-
tive. As long as consumers bought at least one other item (e.g., breadsticks, wings, another 
pizza), they could get a medium, one-topping pizza for just $5.33 The promotion is part of 
the launch of a wider, $5 “flavor menu” that includes multiple options. Similar to sin-
gle-price menus in other fast food settings, this approach allows consumers to decide which 
items they prefer to purchase for their set budget. One consumer might want the variety of 
wings and pizza, another might need a couple of pizzas to feed multiple people, and yet 
another could want both a meal and a dessert.
 With its more than 15,000 stores, Pizza Hut enjoys vast reach, excellent brand awareness, 
and a market-leading position. It also asserts that it has been “serving the same great-tasting 
pizza, at a great value” for its entire history.34 Yet for several quarters, the performance of the 
chain had not met the expectations of either its investors or its corporate brand owner, Yum 
Brands. To address these concerns, Pizza Hut not only introduced its new price promotion but 
also adopted a “focused emphasis on making it easier to get a better pizza.”35
The Rest of the Market  Of course, local pizzerias also remain in play. Unlike many 
local retailers, restaurants offer greatly differentiated options. For consumers who want a 
basic meal, the large chains offer consistency at a reasonable price, but for those who want 
something unique and different on their plates, the local pizzeria generally has represented 
a more appealing option. Patxi’s is a chain operating 17 restaurants in California, Colorado, 
and Washington that is small enough that it can still be considered “local.” Unlike its na-
tional competitors vying for the five dollars per pie market, Patxi’s is a full-service sit-
down restaurant that serves gourmet Chicago-style deep dish and New York style pizzas 
made from fresh, natural ingredients with no preservatives. There is no rushing these 
­pizzas, which can take up to 40 minutes to serve. Pizzas can run up to $28. An order of 
Brussels sprouts is $14, and salads can run up to $15—a far cry from the basic $5 offering 
of the national chains.36
Besides their relatively low prices, the national chains have also increased the conve-
nience of ordering by using online and mobile systems, which is cutting into the local 
pizzeria’s market. These ordering systems are quick and easy. Consumers do not need to 
worry about having all their topping preferences ready to shout out quickly, to a harried 
and possibly rude order taker. Nor do they need to be concerned that someone will mishear 
their desire for “pepperocini” and load up their pizza with “pepperoni” instead. Once they 
plug in their credit card information, those data get stored, so ordering the next time around 
is even more convenient and quick. Faced with such efficient systems, many of the small 
restaurants simply cannot compete on price or fast service.37

482	
Section Five  VALUE CAPTURE
Most local pizzerias can’t afford to establish their own online ordering systems, 
which would require significant investments in software, technology, and new staff. As 
an alternative, some restaurants turn to intermediaries like GrubHub or Seamless, 
which link hungry customers with various food purveyors on a single platform. Such 
platforms enable online ordering, but they also charge the restaurants a percentage of 
their sales. 
The number of small pizza stores in operation has decreased by nearly 7 percent in 
recent years. Their best bet to compete with the national chains is to differentiate them-
selves with great and unusual offerings coupled with an interesting dining experience.
The Results  In recent quarters, Papa John’s announced a 5 percent growth rate.38 Little 
Caesars’ sales increased from $2.9 million to $3.4 million over a two-year period.39 
Domino’s enjoyed 13 percent revenue growth. Pizza Hut reported flat sales.40 Will the 
outcome of the pizza battle change these trends?
Questions
1.	
Which pricing tactics does each company utilize? Evaluate the effectiveness of each 
one of these tactics for the particular pizza chain.
2.	
How might the current price wars change the pricing tactics used by the major pizza 
chains? 
Patxi’s is a small pizzeria chain operating in California, Colorado, and Washington. It is a 
full-service sit-down restaurant serving gourmet pizzas made from fresh, natural ingredients 
with no preservatives. Its prices are commensurate with its quality.
Courtesy of Patxi
Endnotes
	 1.	 Brooks Barnes, “Disney Introduces Demand-Based Pricing at 
Theme Parks,” The New York Times, February 27, 2016.
	2.	 Thomas T. Nagle, John E. Hogan, and Joseph Zale,  
The Strategy and Tactics of Pricing: A Guide to Growing 
More Profitability, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:  
Pearson, 2010).
	3.	 R. Hamilton and A. Chernev, “Low Prices Are Just the 
Beginning: Price Image in Retail Management,” Journal of 
Marketing 77, no. 6 (2013), pp. 1–20; Dinesh K. Gauri, Minakshi 
Trivedi, and Dhruv Grewal, “Understanding the Determinants of 
Retail Strategy: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Retailing 84, 
no. 3 (2008), pp. 256–67.

	
STRATEGIC PRICING METHODS AND TACTICS  CHAPTER FIFTEEN	
483
	
	
	4.	 Michael Levy, Barton A. Weitz, and Dhruv Grewal, Retailing 
Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2014).
	5.	 Abhijit Biswas et al., “Consumer Evaluations of Sale Prices: Role 
of the Subtraction Principle,” Journal of Marketing 77, no. 4 
(2013), pp. 49–66.
	6.	 http://www.amazon.com.
	 7.	 Eric A. Staub, “As Prices Fall, Blu-Ray Players Are Invited Home,” 
The New York Times, December 13, 2009.
	8.	 Nailya Ordabayeva and Pierre Chandon, “Predicting and 
Managing Consumers’ Package Size Impressions,” Journal of 
Marketing 77, no. 5 (2013), pp. 123–37; Xiaoyan Deng and Raji 
Srinivasan, “When Do Transparent Packages Increase (or 
Decrease) Food Consumption?” Journal of Marketing 77, no. 4 
(2013), pp. 104–17; Sha Yang and Priya Raghubir, “Can Bottles 
Speak Volumes? The Effect of Package Shape on How Much to 
Buy,” Journal of Retailing 81, no. 4 (2005), pp. 269–81.
	9.	 This section is adapted from Michael Levy, Barton A. Weitz, 
and Dhruv Grewal, Retailing Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, 
IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2014).
	10.	 Personal communication with Rob Price, VP of Retail Marketing, 
CVS, June 16, 2009.
	11.	 Marco Bertini and Luc Wathieu, “Research Note: Attention 
Arousal through Price Partitioning,” Marketing Science 27, no. 
2 (2008), pp. 236–46; Rebecca W. Hamilton and Joydeep 
Srivastava, “When 2+2 Is Not the Same as 1+3: Variations in 
Price Sensitivity across Components of Partitioned Prices,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 45, no. 4 (2008), pp. 450–61.
	12.	 Karen Stabiner, “Loss Leaders on the Half Shell, The New York 
Times, February 22, 2014.
	13.	 http://www.brooksbrothers.com.
	14.	 Alison Jing Xu and Robert S. Wyer Jr., “Puffery in 
Advertisements: The Effects of Media Context, Communication 
Norms and Consu­mer Knowledge,” Journal of Consumer 
Research, August 2010.
	15.	 J. Lindsey-Mullikin and R. D. Petty, “Marketing Tactics 
Discouraging Price Search: Deception and Competition,” 
Journal of Business Research 64, no. 1 (2011), pp. 67–73. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbusres.2009.10.003.
	16.	 Steve Lohr, “Drafting Antitrust Case, F.T.C. Raises Pressure on 
Google,” The New York Times, October 12, 2012, http://www.
nytimes.com; Claire Cain Miller, “Europeans Reach Deal with 
Google on Searches,” The New York Times, April 14, 2013, 
http://www.nytimes.com.
	17.	 Brody Mullins, Rolfe Winkler, and Brent Kendall, “Inside the U.S. 
Antitrust Probe of Google,” The Wall Street Journal, March 19, 
2915.
	18.	 Daniel M. Garrett, Michelle Burtis, and Vandy Howell, “Economics 
of Antitrust: An Economic Analysis of Resale Price Maintenance,” 
http://www.GlobalCompetitionReview.com, 2008; Stephen 
Labaton, “Century-Old Ban Lifted on Minimum Retail Pricing,” 
The New York Times, June 29, 2007.
	19.	 “South African Airlines to Be Investigated for Alleged World 
Cup Price-Fixing, Report DialAFlight,” Business Wire, February 1, 
2010.
	20.	Tom Bawden, “Bloody Nose for OFT in Row over Tobacco 
Price-Fixing,” The Independent (London), December 13, 2011, 
http://www.independent.co.uk; “The Marlboro Cartel,”  
http://tobacco.cleartheair.org.hk/wp-content/uploads/ 
2012/01/Smokingate2.pdf. 
	21.	 Daniel M. Garrett, Michelle Burtis, and Vandy Howell, 
“Economics of Antitrust: An Economic Analysis of Resale Price 
Maintenance,” http://www.GlobalCompetitionReview.com, 
2008; Stephen Labaton, “Century-Old Ban Lifted on Minimum 
Retail Pricing,” The New York Times, June 29, 2007.
	22.	Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary of Law, 1996.
	23.	Hollis Johnson, “We Taste-Tested Pizzas from Papa John’s, 
Pizza Hut, and Domino’s—Here’s Who Does It Best,” Business 
Insider, November 13, 2015.
	24.	Aamer Madhani, “Papa John’s Tries New Tack to Challenge 
Pizza Hut, Domino’s for Pizza Supremacy,” USA Today,  
January 30, 2016.
	25.	Fast Food, “2016 Pizza Wars: Who Will Win,” February 12, 
2016, http://www.fastfoodmenuprices.com/2016-pizza- 
war-who-will-win/. 
	26.	Fast Food, “Papa John’s Rings 2016 with the Launching of its 
New Dessert,” February 12, 2016, http://www.fastfoodmenuprices.
com/2016-pizza-war-who-will-win/.
	27.	Erik Oster, “Barton F. Graf Hypes Little Caesars Stuffed Crust 
Deep! Deep! Dish with ‘Faces’,” Ad Week, March 25, 2016, 
http://www.adweek.com/agencyspy/barton-f-graf-hypes-little-
caesars-stuffed-crust-deep-deep-dish-with-faces/105328. 
	28.	Jonathan Maze, “The Most Underappreciated Growth 
Restaurant in the Country,” Nation’s Restaurant News,  
July 22, 2015, http://nrn.com/blog/most-underappreciated- 
growth-restaurant-country. 
	29.	Brian Manzullo, “Little Caesars Will Give You Free Lunch if No. 
16 Seed Scores an Upset,” Detroit Free Press, March 16, 2016. 
	30.	Rebecca Borison, “Domino’s Earns Customer Loyalty with 
Mobile at the Forefront,” Mobile Commerce Daily, October 21, 
2013, http://www.mobilecommercedaily.com/domino’s-leads-
the-mobile-way-for-pizza-chains. 
	31.	 Seb Joseph, “Domino’s Says Its Snapchat Test Led to a ‘Surprising’ 
Surge in Pizza Orders,” Business Insider, February 18, 2016. 
	32.	Chris Isidore, “Pizza War! Pizza Hut and Papa John’s Slash 
Prices,” CNN Money, January 4, 2016. 
	33.	Ibid.
	34.	Madhani, “Papa John’s Tries New Tack to Challenge Pizza Hut, 
Domino’s for Pizza Supremacy.”
	35.	Monica Watrous, “Pizza Hut’s Performance Warms Up,” Food 
Business News, February 5, 2016, http://www.foodbusinessnews.
net/articles/news_home/Financial-Performance/2016/02/
Pizza_Huts_performance_warms_u.aspx?ID=%7B406380A3-
B93E-4EAA-A162-97E225B69B2E%7D&cck=1.
	36.	Patxispizza.com.
	37.	Julie Jargon, “Big Chains Use Web Ordering to Slice Out 
Bigger Market Share,” The Wall Street Journal, February 6, 
2014, http://online.wsj.com.
	38.	Isidore, “Pizza War! Pizza Hut and Papa John’s Slash Prices.”
	39.	Jonathan Maze, “The Most Underappreciated Growth 
Restaurant in the Country,” Nation’s Restaurant News,  
July 22, 2015, http://nrn.com/blog/most-underappreciated- 
growth-restaurant-country.
	40.	Isidore, “Pizza War! Pizza Hut and Papa John’s Slash Prices.”
	 i.	 Maureen Morrison and Matthew Creamer, “How P&G, Ford, and 
Wendy’s Are Redefining Value,” Advertising Age, April 22, 2013.
	 ii.	 Elizabeth A. Harris and Stephanie Strom, “Walmart to Sell 
Organic Food, Undercutting Big Brands,” The New York Times, 
April 10, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com; Dan Charles, “Can Wal-
Mart Really Make Organic Food Cheap for Everyone?” NPR, 
April 19, 2014, http://www.wbur.org/npr/; Steven Overly, “Wal-
Mart Plans to Bring Its Compete-on-Price Approach to Organic 
Food: Here’s How,” The Washington Post, April 10, 2014, http://
www.washingtonpost.com.
	iii.	 Adam Liptak and Vindu Goel, “Supreme Court Declines to Hear 
Apple’s Appeal in E-Book Pricing Case,” The New York Times, 
March 7, 2016; Reuters, “Supreme Court Rejects Apple e-Books 
Price-Fixing Appeal,” The New York Times, March 8, 2016. 
	iv.	 Jason Chow and Nadya Masidlover, “Chanel Acts on Prices 
as Euro Worsens Gray Market,” The Wall Street Journal, 
March 17, 2015.


Section Six deals with the value delivery system. It is criti-
cal that merchandise is delivered in time to stores to meet 
customer demand. To achieve this, retailers have initiated 
many innovative programs with their vendors and have de-
veloped sophisticated transportation and warehousing sys-
tems. We devote two chapters to value delivery. Chapter 16 
takes a look at marketing channels and how to manage the 
supply chain, while Chapter 17 concentrates on retailing 
and omnichannel marketing.
SECTION 6
CHAPTER 16
Supply Chain and Channel Management
CHAPTER 17
Retailing and Omnichannel Marketing
Assessing the Marketplace
Understanding the Marketplace
Targeting the Marketplace
Value Creation
Value Capture
Value Delivery:  
Designing the Channel  
and Supply Chain
Value Communication
VALUE DELIVERY: 
DESIGNING THE CHANNEL 
AND SUPPLY CHAIN

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO16-1	 Understand the importance of marketing channels and supply chain management.
	LO16-2	 Understand the difference between direct and indirect marketing channels.
	LO16-3	 Describe how marketing channels are managed.
	LO16-4	 Describe the flow of information and merchandise in the marketing channel.
SUPPLY CHAIN 
AND CHANNEL 
MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 16
rather than as items they should purchase preassembled. 
In addition to this innovative approach to selling furni-
ture, which moves responsibility for the assembly pro-
cess further down the supply chain, to the customer, 
IKEA also embodies a modern approach to sustainabil-
ity. Thus when devising shipping policies, it pursues both 
the lowest costs and the least negative impact on the 
environment.2
 I
n its efforts to provide “affordable solutions for bet-
ter living,” the Swedish furniture retailer IKEA has rad-
ically changed the way many people furnish and 
decorate their homes. As the chain grew and spread, 
from its single-operation origins in Sweden to a global 
presence of more than 350 stores in nearly 50 coun-
tries,1 it has prompted millions of customers to regard fur-
niture as something they can put together on their own 

As a result of its innovative approaches, relatively 
­inexpensive products, and appealing assortment of 
­merchandise, IKEA is quite successful.3 It is also deter-
mined to meet ambitious growth goals of $56.2 billion by 
2020, which would require nearly 10 percent growth 
­every year until then, compared to an average of around 
5 percent in recent years.
How does an already large company literally double 
its growth rate? It starts by looking at the things it can 
control, including its supply chain practices. When the 
CEO of IKEA asserts, “We hate air,” what he means is that 
the company wants to eliminate any dead spaces any-
where in its packaging and shipping containers.4 Thus for 
example, it has redesigned a popular sofa to be sold in 
pieces instead of as a single unit. In so doing, it could fit 
all the pieces into a much smaller box, without any dead 
air in the box. The smaller boxes, in turn, allow the com-
pany to fit more units onto trucks, reducing the number of 
trips required to restock stores—a significant reduction in 
transportation costs.
Size is not the only issue though; weight also increases 
transportation costs. Therefore, IKEA engineers have re-
placed solid table legs with hollow ones, reducing both the 
weight of the tables it was shipping and the amount of raw 
materials required to make them. In turn, it passed the cost 
savings on to customers, encouraging more people to pur-
chase the lighter-weight but otherwise similar products.
The concern, according to several commentators, is 
that if IKEA pursues only the most efficient packing 
­design, its famous reputation for requiring shoppers to 
spend all night putting their furniture together will eventu-
ally alienate customers. There is only so much frustration 
customers will accept in building their inexpensive furni-
ture before they agree to pay a little more to receive an 
already completed bed or bookshelf. Accordingly, to help 
reduce this frustration, IKEA introduced the Regissör 
© Michael Nagle/Bloomberg/Getty Images

488
THE IMPORTANCE OF MARKETING 
CHANNEL/SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
So far in this book we have reviewed the methods companies use to conduct in-depth mar-
ket research, gain insights into consumer and business behaviors, segment markets, select 
the best target markets, develop new products and services, and set 
prices that provide good value. But even if firms execute these ac-
tivities flawlessly, unless they can secure the placement of products 
in appropriate outlets in sufficient quantities exactly when custom-
ers want them, they are likely to fail. Adding Value 16.1 examines 
how Goya Foods recognized it needed to do a better job at getting 
products into stores to satisfy customers’ demands and what it 
did about it.
Convincing wholesalers and retailers to carry new products 
can be more difficult than you might think. Wholesalers are firms 
that buy products from manufacturers and resell them to retailers; 
retailers sell products directly to consumers. Consider some famil-
iar examples: Walmart is a massive retailer, and many of its prod-
ucts come from massive partners such as Procter & Gamble 
(P&G). In this relationship, Walmart certainly needs P&G to sup-
ply it with toothpaste, diapers, paper towels, and other consumer 
goods marketed under P&G’s various brand names. But P&G also 
desperately needs Walmart to agree to stock its products, because 
the retailer represents its largest purchaser, accounting for about 
$12 billion in annual sales.8 When P&G introduces a totally new 
product, such as teeth-whitening strips, it has to convince Walmart 
to create space in its stores for the innovation without giving up too 
much space for its other products.9
LO16-1	
Understand the 
importance of 
marketing channels 
and supply chain 
management.
­series, in which the products require very simple assem-
bly, such as screwing legs into a table.5
Efficiency is not the only route to growth that IKEA is 
pursuing. It also plans to expand into new regions, such as 
India, and increase online sales and click-and-collect options 
that allow people to order online and pick up items in the 
stores. Furthermore, it strongly believes that its supply 
chain efficiency efforts ultimately lead to better products at 
better prices. Thus it hopes to put the right products in the 
right place with the lowest cost and the least damage to the 
environment. That’s a nearly irresistible recipe for growth. 
Accordingly, in this chapter, we discuss the third P in the 
marketing mix, place, which includes all activities required to 
get the right product to the right customer when that 
­customer wants it.6 As we noted in Chapter 1, ­marketing 
channel management, which also has been called supply 
chain management, refers to a set of approaches and tech-
niques firms employ to efficiently and effectively integrate 
their suppliers, manufacturers, warehouses, stores, and 
transportation intermediaries into a seamless operation in 
which merchandise is produced and distributed in the right 
quantities, to the right locations, and at the right time, as well 
as to minimize systemwide costs while satisfying the service 
levels their customers require.7 Students of marketing often 
overlook or underestimate the importance of place in the 
marketing mix simply because it happens behind the scenes. 
Yet marketing channel management adds value because it 
gets products to customers efficiently, quickly, and at low cost.
When P&G introduces a totally new product, such as teeth-whitening 
strips, it has to convince Walmart to create space in its stores for the 
innovation without giving up too much space for its other products.
© Tom Uhlman/AP Photo

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
489
	
	
Adding Value 16.1
The Beans May Be Slow Cooked, but the Delivery Is Quicki
As Goya Foods celebrated its 75th year in business, its top 
managers were dealing with some very serious growing pains. 
Selling a wide variety of Hispanic and Latin foods, the com-
pany had achieved a dominant market share, was the largest 
Hispanic-owned company in the United States, and had annual 
sales of around $1 billion. In specific local and regional markets, 
demand for its products was substantial—a great success that 
also came with a notable challenge.
That is, many of the markets that loved Goya products had 
slightly different preferences, reflecting the diversity 
of  Hispanic consumers in the United States. People of  
Cuban heritage wanted items made somewhat differently 
than consumers whose families originated in Mexico, and so 
on. Thus, the number of unique inventory items or stock keep-
ing units (SKUs) that Goya provided reached over 1,600. The 
supply chain network grew more complex. And in all the con-
fusion, service levels, as measured by its in-stock availability, 
dropped. Quite simply, with all the complexity, buyers were 
spending too much time manually calculating and determining 
shipments and inventory levels, leaving them insufficient time 
or energy to think strategically. Making decisions without 
­sophisticated analytics was not something that Goya could 
sustain anymore.
For Goya, the solution was to automate the transporta-
tion and inventory planning processes, using software that 
enabled it to keep track of demand, order fulfillment, and re-
plenishment with minimal effort. By automating its ordering 
processes, Goya’s buyers could work smarter. For example, 
To satisfy its diverse market of Hispanic consumers, Goya 
expanded the number of unique inventory items it carried 
to 1,600. To keep service levels high, Goya implemented an 
automated transportation and inventory planning system.
© Goya Foods Inc
making sure delivery trucks were more efficiently used re-
sulted in millions of dollars in transportation savings. The new 
system also improved its in-stock availability to 98 percent, 
which resulted in a proportional increase in sales.
For other wholesalers and manufacturers, the effort to convince Walmart to stock 
their products might be even more challenging, because they lack the leverage and power 
of P&G. For example, PenAgain, a small California-based manufacturer of ergonomic 
pens and other writing instruments, wanted to put its offerings in Walmart stores, but first 
it had to get Walmart to buy what it was selling.10 After a tough selling session, Walmart 
agreed to give PenAgain a one-month trial in 500 stores, but only if it lowered its costs. 
Walmart also provided no marketing support, and PenAgain was too small to afford tradi-
tional print or television advertising, so it developed a viral marketing program and pro-
duced displays to use in the stores. A viral marketing program is one that encourages 
people to pass along a marketing message to other potential consumers. To keep track of 
sales, it relied on Walmart’s Internet-based Retail Link system, though it also hired a firm 
that sends representatives into stores to check out display placement and customer traffic. 
Finally, PenAgain agreed to adhere to strict packaging, labeling, and shipping require-
ments. And remember, for all this effort, its entry in stores was only a test, and a very 
expensive gamble! But if it could succeed in Walmart stores, PenAgain would be well on 
its way to prosperity.
In the simplified supply chain in Exhibit 16.1, manufacturers make products and sell 
them to retailers or wholesalers. The exhibit would be much more complicated if we had 
included the suppliers of materials to manufacturers; all the various manufacturers, whole-
salers, and stores in a typical marketing channel; and digital channels through which cus-
tomers order products and receive them directly with the assistance of delivery providers 
such as UPS, FedEx, or the U.S. Postal Service.

490	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Exhibit 16.1 represents a typical flow of manufactured goods: Manufacturers ship to a 
wholesaler or to a retailer’s distribution center (e.g., Manufacturer one and Manufacturer 
three) or directly to stores (Manufacturer two). In addition, many variations on this supply 
chain exist. Some retail chains, such as Home Depot or Costco, function as both retailers 
and wholesalers. They act as retailers when they sell to consumers directly and as whole-
salers when they sell to other businesses such as building contractors or restaurant owners. 
When manufacturers such as Avon sell directly to consumers, they perform production as 
well as retailing activities. When Lenovo sells computers to a university or business, it 
engages in a business-to-business (B2B) transaction, but when it sells to students or 
­employees individually, it is a B2C (business-to-consumer) operation.
Marketing Channels Add Value
Why do manufacturers use wholesalers or retailers? Don’t these added channel members 
just cut into their profits? Wouldn’t it be cheaper for consumers to buy directly from man-
ufacturers? In a simple agrarian economy, the best supply chain likely does follow a direct 
route from manufacturer to consumer: The consumer goes to the farm and buys food di-
rectly from the farmer. Modern eat-local environmental campaigns suggest just such a 
process. But before the consumer can eat a fresh steak procured from a local farm, she 
needs to cook it. Assuming the consumer doesn’t know how to make a stove and lacks the 
materials to do so, she must rely on a stove maker. The stove maker, which has the neces-
sary knowledge, must buy raw materials and components from various suppliers, make 
the stove, and then make it available to the consumer. If the stove maker isn’t located near 
the consumer, the stove must be transported to where the consumer has access to it. To 
make matters even more complicated, the consumer may want to view a choice of stoves, 
hear about all their features, and have the stove delivered and installed.
E X H I B I T  16.1
Simplified Supply Chain
Store one
Store two
Store three
Store four
Store ﬁve
Manufacturer
one
Manufacturer
two
Manufacturer
three
Retail distribution
center
How many companies are  
involved in making and get-
ting a stove to your kitchen?
© Thinkstock/Alamy RF

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
491
	
	
Each participant in the channel adds value.11 The components manufacturer helps the 
stove manufacturer by supplying parts and materials. The stove maker turns the compo-
nents into the stove. The transportation company gets the stove to the retailer. The retailer 
stores the stove until the customer wants it, educates the customer about product features, 
and delivers and installs the stove. At each step, the stove becomes more costly but also 
more valuable to the consumer.
Marketing Channel Management Affects Other  
Aspects of Marketing
Every marketing decision is affected by and has an effect on marketing channels. When 
products are designed and manufactured, how and when the critical components reach the 
factory must be coordinated with production. The sales department must coordinate its 
delivery promises with the factory or distribution or fulfillment centers. A distribution 
center, a facility for the receipt, storage, and redistribution of goods to company stores, 
may be operated by retailers, manufacturers, or distribution specialists.12 Similar to a dis-
tribution center, instead of shipping to stores, fulfillment centers are used to ship directly 
to customers. Furthermore, advertising and promotion must be coordinated with those de-
partments that control inventory and transportation. There is no faster way to lose credibil-
ity with customers than to promise deliveries or run a promotion and then not have the 
merchandise when the customer expects it.
DESIGNING MARKETING CHANNELS
When a firm is just starting out or entering a new market, it doesn’t typically have the option 
of designing the best marketing channel structure—that is, choosing from whom it buys or 
to whom it sells. A new sporting goods retailer may not have the option of carrying all the 
manufacturer lines it wants, because other competing retailers in its market area might carry 
the same products. On the other side, a small specialty sporting goods apparel manufacturer 
may not be able to place its products in major stores like Sports Authority because its line is 
unproven, and the products might duplicate lines that the retailer already carries. Chapter 17 
discusses in more depth how manufacturers choose their retailer partners.
Although there are thus various constraints on marketing channel partners with regard 
to the design of the best channel structure, all marketing channels take the form of a direct 
channel, an indirect channel, or some combination thereof.
LO16-2	
Understand the 
difference between 
direct and indirect 
marketing channels.
Unlike distribution centers, ful-
fillment centers accumulate 
items one at a time and get 
them ready to ship to individual 
customers.
© Brian Kersey/UPI/Newscom

492	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Direct Marketing Channel
As shown on the left side of Exhibit 16.2, there are no 
intermediaries between the buyer and seller in a direct 
marketing channel. Typically, the seller is a manufac-
turer, such as when a carpentry business sells bookcases 
through its own store and online to individual consum-
ers. The seller also can be an individual, such as when a 
knitter sells blankets and scarves at craft fairs, on Etsy, and 
through eBay. (Recall our discussion of consumer-to-­
consumer [C2C] transactions in Chapter 1.) When the 
buyer is another business, such as when Boeing sells 
planes to JetBlue, the marketing channel still is direct, 
but in this case, the transaction is a business-to-business 
one (see Chapter 7).
Noting that people increasingly use online channels 
to purchase the consumer goods that it manufactures 
(e.g., diapers, detergent, paper towels), P&G seeks to 
enhance its direct-to-consumer online sales. Rather than 
adding shampoo to a repeat purchase list on Amazon or 
Walmart.com, P&G hopes consumers might buy it di-
rectly from it, the manufacturer. In so doing, it might 
increase its own margins, because it would not need to 
share the revenue with the retailer. In addition, it likely 
could undercut any retailer on price, because it would 
not need to maintain retail stores. Considering the 
long-standing, close relationship between P&G and 
Walmart though, such moves might make for some awk-
ward strategy meetings between the two companies in 
the near future. It also requires P&G to build some new 
infrastructure, including an $89 million distribution 
center, that it needs to staff and operate so that it can be 
sure to get the products into customers’ homes as 
quickly as Amazon or Walmart.com promises to do.13
Indirect Marketing Channel
In indirect marketing channels, one or more intermediaries work with manufacturers to 
provide goods and services to customers. In some cases, only one intermediary might be 
involved. Automobile manufacturers such as Ford and General Motors often use indirect 
distribution, such that dealers act as retailers, as shown in the middle of Exhibit 16.2. The 
right side of Exhibit 16.2 reveals how wholesalers are more common when the company 
does not buy in sufficient quantities to make it cost effective for the manufacturer to deal 
directly with them—independent book sellers, wine merchants, or independent drug stores, 
for example. Wholesalers are also prevalent in less developed economies, in which large 
retailers are rare.
MANAGING THE MARKETING  
CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Marketing channels and supply chains comprise various buying entities such as retailers 
and wholesalers, sellers such as manufacturers or wholesalers, and facilitators of the ex-
change such as transportation companies. Similar to interpersonal interactions, their rela-
tionships can range from close working partnerships to one-time arrangements. Marketing 
Analytics 16.1 details how Amazon is attempting to combine all these roles by leveraging 
its access to massive amounts of customer data. In most cases though, interactions occur 
LO16-3	
Describe how 
marketing channels 
are managed.
Direct Channel
Direct Channel
One Intermediary
Direct Channel
Two Intermediaries
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Customer
Customer
Customer
Wholesaler
Retailer
Retailer
E X H I B I T  16.2
Direct and Indirect Channel Strategies

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
493
	
	
Analytics in Support of Anticipatory  
Shipping by Amazonii
Already well established as an efficient shipper of orders, 
Amazon continues to seek to do even better.  Currently, 
Amazon receives an order, labels and packages it, loads it onto 
a delivery truck (run by UPS or the U.S. Postal Service, depend-
ing on the day and delivery details), and waits for confirmation 
that this third-party logistics provider has delivered the prod-
uct directly to the customer’s door. In this traditional process, 
the online retail giant seeks to improve by adding more ware-
houses that can provide more customers with overnight or 
same-day delivery.
	
But recently, a striking innovation instead aims to reinvent 
the supply chain completely, to benefit customers as well as 
itself. That is, Amazon recently applied for and received a pat-
ent for its “anticipatory shipping” system, which starts ready-
ing packages for delivery before the customer even adds the 
item to his or her virtual cart. With anticipatory shipping, 
Amazon boxes and ships out products that it expects custom-
ers will want, according to their previous purchases, in the 
belief that they are likely to order them soon. To determine 
what to ship, Amazon uses information from customers’ previ-
ous orders, product searches, shopping cart contents, and 
previous returns.
	
This innovation promises to be particularly beneficial for 
popular books, movies, and games, which people clearly have 
announced their desire to have in hand the very day they are 
released. If Amazon can get it to their homes on that same 
day, it might discourage customers from visiting physical retail 
locations, because their wait times would be even shorter 
than brick-and-mortar stores can offer. In this sense, Amazon 
is using big data to predict demand and thus edge out its ri-
vals. However, critics caution that when Amazon’s algorithms 
are incorrect, the necessary returns could grow rapidly to be-
come quite costly. In response, Amazon has suggested that it 
might simply convert any unwanted deliveries into gifts, thus 
building goodwill among customers who receive a desirable 
new order for no cost.
Marketing Analytics 16.1
With Amazon’s “anticipatory shipping” system, packages are shipped before the customer 
even adds the item to his or her virtual cart.
© Geoffrey Robinson/Alamy
across the supply chain because the parties want something from each other: Home Depot 
wants hammers from Stanley Tool Company; Stanley wants an opportunity to sell its tools 
to the general public; both companies want UPS to deliver the merchandise.
Each member of the marketing channel also performs a specialized role. If one mem-
ber believes that another has failed to do its job correctly or efficiently, it can replace that 
member. So, if Stanley isn’t getting good service from UPS, it can switch to FedEx. If 
Home Depot believes its customers do not perceive Stanley tools as a good value, it may 

494	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
buy from another tool company. Home Depot even could decide to make its own tools or 
use its own trucks to pick up tools from Stanley. However, any time a marketing channel 
member is replaced, the function it has performed remains, so someone needs to complete 
it.14 As noted in the opening vignette, if IKEA does not build the bookcase or table, it 
means the consumer has more work to do. 
If a marketing channel is to run efficiently, the participating members must cooperate. 
Often, however, supply chain members have conflicting goals, and this may result in chan-
nel conflict (Exhibit 16.3). For instance, Stanley wants Home Depot to carry all its tools 
but not the tools of its competitors so that Stanley can maximize its sales. But Home Depot 
carries a mix of tool brands so it can maximize the sales in its tool category. When supply 
chain members that buy and sell to one another are not in agreement about their goals, 
roles, or rewards, vertical channel conflict or discord results.
Horizontal channel conflict can also occur when there is disagreement or discord 
among members at the same level in a marketing channel, such as two competing retailers 
or two competing manufacturers. Another recent innovation by Amazon, the Vendor Flex 
program, seeks to lower overall transportation costs but also creates new forms of channel 
conflict with competitors.15 As a partner in the Vendor Flex program, P&G agreed to allow 
Amazon to build fulfillment centers within P&G’s own warehouses. The new system thus 
helped eliminate some of the costs of transporting P&G’s products to Amazon’s fulfillment 
centers. But companies such as Target and Walmart, which have enjoyed long-term rela-
tionships with P&G, found the move frustrating. Believing that the program was giving its 
competitor Amazon an unfair advantage, Target reacted vigorously, moving all P&G prod-
ucts from prominent end-cap positions in its stores to less prestigious and less visible 
The Home Depot and Stanley Tool Company have a mutually beneficial partnership. Home Depot buys tools from Stanley 
­because its customers find value in Stanley products. Stanley sells tools to Home Depot because Home Depot has established 
an excellent market for its products.
Source: The Stanley Works
E X H I B I T  16.3
Vertical versus Horizontal Channel Conflict
Manufacturer
Retailer 1
Retailer 2
Horizontal conﬂict
Vertical conﬂict
Retailer 3

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
495
	
	
­locations. Target also stopped using P&G as its primary 
source of advice for planning merchandising strategies within 
each category.16
Avoiding vertical channel conflicts demands open, hon-
est communication. Buyers and vendors all must understand 
what drives the other party’s business, their roles in the rela-
tionship, each firm’s strategies, and any problems that might 
arise over the course of the relationship. Amazon and P&G 
recognize that it is in their common interest to remain profit-
able business partners. Amazon’s customers demand and 
­expect to find P&G products on its website; P&G needs the 
sales generated through Amazon. Amazon cannot demand 
prices so low that P&G cannot make money, and P&G must 
be flexible enough to accommodate the needs of this impor­
tant customer. With a common goal, both firms have the in-
centive to cooperate because they know that by doing so, each 
will boost its sales.17
Common goals also help sustain the relationship when expected benefits fail to arise. 
If one P&G shipment fails to reach the Amazon section of one of its fulfilment centers due 
to an uncontrollable event such as a demand forecasting miscalculation, Amazon does not 
suddenly call off the whole arrangement. Instead, it recognizes the incident as a simple, 
isolated mistake and maintains the good working relationship, because Amazon knows that 
both it and P&G are committed to the same goals in the long run.
In this sense, their partnership exhibits both of the nonmutually exclusive ways that 
exist to manage a marketing channel or supply chain: Coordinate the channel using a verti-
cal marketing system and develop strong relationships with marketing channel partners—
topics we now examine.
Managing the Marketing Channel and Supply Chain  
through Vertical Marketing Systems
Although conflict is likely in any marketing channel, it is generally more pronounced when 
the channel members are independent entities. Marketing channels that are more closely 
aligned, whether by contract or ownership, share common goals and therefore are less 
prone to conflict.
In an independent (conventional) marketing channel, several independent members—a 
manufacturer, a wholesaler, and a retailer—attempt to satisfy their own objectives and maximize 
their profits, often at the expense of the other members, as we portray in Exhibit 16.4 (left). None 
Amazon and Procter & Gamble 
recognize that it is in their 
common interest to remain 
profitable business partners.
© Daniel Mihailescu/AFP/Getty Images
E X H I B I T  16.4
Independent versus Vertical Marketing Channels
Consumer
Retailer
Wholesaler
Manufacturer
Independent marketing
channel
Consumer
Retailer
Wholesaler
Manufacturer
Vertical marketing
channel

496	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
of the participants have any control over the others. Before any sort of relationship develops, or 
in one-time interactions, both parties likely try to extract as much profit from the deal as possible. 
After the deal is consummated, neither party feels any responsibility to the other.
Over time though, many parties develop relationships marked by routinized, automatic 
transactions, such as those that take place between Walmart and P&G. Walmart’s customers 
thus come to expect to find P&G products in stores, and P&G depends on Walmart to pur-
chase a good portion of its output to sell to its own customers. This scenario represents the 
first phase of a vertical marketing system, a marketing channel in which the members act 
as a unified system, as in Exhibit 16.4 (right). Three types of vertical marketing systems—
administered, contractual, and corporate—reflect increasing phases of formalization and 
control. The more formal the vertical marketing system, the less likely conflict is to ensue.
Administered Vertical Marketing System  Walmart’s various marketing channel rela-
tionships offer examples of different forms of an  administered vertical marketing 
­system: There is no common ownership or contractual relationships, but the dominant 
channel member controls or holds the balance of power. Because of its size and relative 
power, Walmart can easily impose controls on small manufacturers, such as PenAgain, but 
with large, powerful suppliers such as P&G, the control is more balanced between par-
ties. Power in a marketing channel exists when one firm has the means or ability to dictate 
the actions of another member at a different level of distribution (Exhibit 16.5). A retailer 
like Walmart exercises its power over suppliers in several ways. 
∙	
With its reward power, Walmart offers rewards, often a monetary incentive, if the 
wholesalers or manufacturers do what Walmart wants them to do. For example, it might 
promise to purchase larger quantities if a manufacturer will lower its wholesale price. 
∙	
Coercive power arises when Walmart threatens to punish or punishes the other 
channel member for not undertaking certain tasks, such as if it were to delay payment 
for a late delivery. 
∙	
Walmart may also have referent power if a supplier desperately wants to be 
associated with Walmart, because being known as an important Walmart supplier 
enables that supplier to attract other retailers’ business. In this sense, P&G might be 
playing its retailer partners against one another to enhance its own performance. 
∙	
If Walmart exerts expertise power, it relies on its vast experience and knowledge to 
decide how to market a particular supplier’s products, without giving the supplier 
much of a say.
∙	
Because Walmart has vast information about the consumer goods market, it might 
exert information power over P&G by providing or withholding important market 
information. At the same time, P&G might have its own information power that it 
could exert over Walmart, depending on which company has the most or most 
updated data.
∙	
Legitimate power is based on getting a channel member to behave in a certain way 
because of a contractual agreement between the two firms. As Walmart deals with its 
suppliers, it likely exerts multiple types of power to influence their behaviors. If either 
party dislikes the way the relationship is going, though, it can simply walk away.
Reward
Coercive
Referent
POWER
Expertise
Information
Legitimate
E X H I B I T  16.5
Bases of Power

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
497
	
	
Contractual Vertical Marketing System  Over time, members of the supply chain 
often formalize their relationship by entering into contracts that dictate various 
terms,18 such as how much Walmart will buy from P&G each month and at what price, as 
well as the penalties for late deliveries. In contractual vertical marketing systems like 
this, independent firms at different levels of the marketing channel join through contracts 
to obtain economies of scale and coordination and to reduce conflict.19
Franchising is the most common type of contractual vertical marketing system. 
­Franchising is a contractual agreement between a franchisor and a franchisee that allows 
the franchisee to operate a retail outlet using a name and format developed and supported by 
the franchisor. Exhibit 16.6 lists the United States’ top franchise opportunities. These rank-
ings, determined by Entrepreneur magazine, are created using a number of objective mea-
sures such as financial strength, stability, growth rate, and size of the franchise system.20
In a franchise contract, the franchisee pays a lump sum plus a royalty on all sales in 
return for the right to operate a business in a specific location. The franchisee also agrees 
to operate the outlet in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the franchisor. The 
franchisor typically provides assistance in locating and building the business, developing 
the products or services sold, management training, and advertising. To maintain the fran-
chisee’s reputation, the franchisor also makes sure that all outlets provide the same quality 
of services and products.
A franchise system combines the entrepreneurial advantages of owning a business 
with the efficiencies of vertical marketing systems that function under single ownership 
(i.e., a corporate system, as we discuss next). Franchisees are motivated to make their 
stores successful because they receive the profits after they pay the royalty to the fran-
chisor. The franchisor is motivated to develop new products, services, and systems and 
to promote the franchise because it receives royalties on all sales. Advertising, product 
Rank
Franchise Name
Number of U.S. Outlets
Start-Up Costs
   1
Jimmy John’s Gourmet Sandwiches 
Sandwiches
  2,238
$326K–555K
 2
Hampton Hotels  
Mid-price hotels
    1,939
$3.8M–14.1M
 3
Supercuts  
Hair salon
     1,474
$144K–294K
 4
Servpro  
Insurance/disaster restoration  
and cleaning
    1,683
$156K–210K
 5
Subway  
Subs, salads
 26,972
$117K–263K
 6
McDonald’s  
Burgers, chicken, salads, beverages
  12,899
$989K–2.2M
 7
7-Eleven  
Convenience stores
    8,109
$38K–1.1M
 8
Dunkin’ Donuts  
Coffee shop
   8,308
$217K–1.6M
 9
Denny’s Inc.  
Family restaurant 
     1,428
$1.2M–2.1M
10
Anytime Fitness  
Fitness centers
    2,139
$63K–418K
E X H I B I T  16.6
Top 10 Franchises for 2014
Source: Entrepreneur’s 2016 Franchise 500, https://www.entrepreneur.com/franchise500.

498	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
development, and system development are all done efficiently by the franchisor, with 
costs shared by all franchisees.
Corporate Vertical Marketing System  In a corporate vertical marketing system, 
the parent company has complete control and can dictate the priorities and objectives of 
the marketing channel because it owns multiple segments of the channel, such as manufac-
turing plants, warehouse facilities, and retail outlets. By virtue of its ownership and resulting 
control, potential conflict among segments of the channel is lessened.
Tesla Motors, manufacturer of luxury electric automobiles, represents a corporate ver-
tical marketing system because it manufactures its own cars in Fremont, California, and it 
operates its own retail stores in high foot-traffic locations like malls and shopping 
Jimmy John’s Gourmet Sand-
wiches is the top franchise op-
portunity in the United States, 
according to Entrepreneur 
magazine.
© Zuma Press Inc/Alamy
Tesla represents a corporate 
vertical marketing system 
­because it manufactures its 
own cars and it operates its 
own retail stores.
© Bill Pugliano/Getty Images

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
499
	
	
streets.21 The Tesla Product Specialists that work in these stores are trained to answer ques-
tions, not sell cars per se. They could not even sell a car on the spot if they wanted to, be-
cause there is no inventory on hand. They would, of course, be happy to take an order 
though. Tesla also owns and operates its own service centers. With this corporate owner-
ship structure, it is able to maintain control of every aspect of Tesla ownership, thus ensur-
ing satisfied and loyal customers.
Managing Marketing Channels and Supply Chains  
through Strategic Relationships
There is more to managing marketing channels and supply chains than simply exercising 
power over other members in an administered system or establishing a contractual or cor-
porate vertical marketing system. There is also a human side.
In a conventional marketing channel, relationships between members reflect their ar-
guments over the split of the profit pie: If one party gets ahead, the other party falls behind. 
Sometimes this type of transaction is acceptable if the parties have no interest in a long-
term relationship. But as Ethical and Societal Dilemma 16.1 highlights, such attitudes can 
limit the success of the supply chain as a whole. 
Therefore, firms frequently seek a strategic relationship, also called a partnering 
relationship, in which the marketing channel members are committed to maintaining the 
relationship over the long term and investing in opportunities that are mutually beneficial. 
In a conventional or administered marketing channel, there are significant incentives to 
establish a strategic relationship, even without contracts or ownership relationships. Both 
parties benefit because the size of the profit pie has increased, so both the buyer and the 
seller increase their sales and profits. These strategic relationships are created explicitly to 
uncover and exploit joint opportunities, so members depend on and trust each other heav-
ily; share goals and agree on how to accomplish those goals; and are willing to take risks, 
share confidential information, and make significant investments for the sake of the rela-
tionship. Successful strategic relationships require mutual trust, open communication, 
common goals, interdependence, and credible commitments.
Mutual Trust  Mutual trust holds a strategic relationship together. Trust is the belief that 
a partner is honest (i.e., reliable, stands by its word, sincere, fulfills obligations) and benev-
olent (i.e., concerned about the other party’s welfare). When vendors and buyers trust each 
other, they are more willing to share relevant ideas, clarify goals and problems, and com-
municate efficiently. Information shared between the parties, such as inventory positions in 
stores, thus becomes increasingly comprehensive, accurate, and timely.
With trust, there’s also less need for the supply chain members to constantly monitor 
and check up on each other’s actions, because each believes the other won’t take advantage, 
even if given the opportunity. Although it is important in all relationships, monitoring sup-
ply chain members becomes particularly pertinent when suppliers are located in less devel-
oped countries, where issues such as the use of child labor, poor working conditions, and 
below-subsistence wages have become a shared responsibility. 
Open Communication  To share information, develop sales forecasts together, and coor-
dinate deliveries, Walmart and its suppliers maintain open and honest communication. 
This maintenance may sound easy in principle, but some businesses don’t tend to share 
information with their business partners. But open, honest communication is a key to de-
veloping successful relationships because supply chain members need to understand what 
is driving each other’s business, their roles in the relationship, each firm’s strategies, and 
any problems that arise over the course of the relationship.
Common Goals  Supply chain members must have common goals for a successful rela-
tionship to develop. Shared goals give both members of the relationship an incentive to 
pool their strengths and abilities and exploit potential opportunities together. Such com-
monality also offers an assurance that the other partner won’t do anything to hinder the 
achievement of those goals within the relationship.

500	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Walmart and P&G recognize that it is in their common interest to be strategic 
partners. Walmart needs P&G to satisfy its customers, and P&G recognizes that if it 
can keep Walmart happy, it will have more than enough business for years to come. 
With common goals, both firms have an incentive to cooperate, because they know 
that by doing so, both can boost sales. If Walmart needs a special production run of 
detergent to meet demand following a natural disaster for example, P&G will work to 
meet the challenge. If P&G is determined to introduce radically new products, it is in 
Walmart’s best interest to help it, because they are committed to the same goals in the 
long run.
Shrinking the Supply Chain to Supply  
Organic Demandiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 16.1
The consumer market for organic products—fruit, vegetables, 
eggs, animal products, broth, and so forth—continues to ex-
pand at an amazing rate. Between 2000 and 2013, consump-
tion of organic products tripled in the United States. 
Consumers, worried about their health and food quality, ac-
tively seek more supply chains that are willing to guarantee 
that the food they eat does not contain adulterants such as 
synthetic hormones, genetically modified organisms, or pesti-
cides. But these supply chains are struggling to meet this 
­demand, even as it continues to grow.
	
That creates a problem for organic brands: If they cannot 
source enough organic raw materials to make their products, 
they cannot get their products to consumers. For example, the 
Garden of Eatin’ brand underwent nearly constant stockouts 
on store shelves when it could not procure enough organic 
blue corn to make its popular tortilla chips. To find organic 
sources, some companies look to farms overseas. But such 
purchases increase costs and logistics concerns and do not 
align with the company’s fresh images.
	
In response to this challenge, manufacturers are reimagin-
ing their supply chains in several ways. The most dramatic re-
sponse is by manufacturers that literally “buy the farm.” 
Nature’s Path recently purchased 2,800 acres of farmland in 
Montana, for $2 million, so that it could control the cultivation 
of organic wheat and oats for its cereal products. It also plans 
to dedicate an additional $2 million each year to the purchase 
of cropland so that it can ensure the continued supply of 
­organic resources to its supply chain.
	
Similarly, Pacific Foods decided to build its own henhouses 
to be able to source organic chicken to make into broth. Its 
organic chicken broth accounts for about half of the manufac-
turer’s sales. However, its own production was insufficient, so 
Pacific Foods also offered incentives to local chicken farmers 
who agreed to adopt organic practices. Specifically, Pacific 
Foods pays for the feed and supplies, and then it guarantees 
that it will cover any losses if the production fails.
	
For Chipotle, buying a lot of farmland seemed too far be-
yond its core competencies, so it instead has entered into ben-
eficial agreements with farmers who agree to transform their 
conventional farms into organic ones. For example, for a black-
bean farmer who was undergoing the transition to organic 
methods, Chipotle paid a 10 percent premium for the beans 
even though it could not market those beans as fully organic. 
Instead, its goal was to encourage this farm to continue its 
organic efforts, which should ensure a more stable supply in 
the future. In a similar trend, egg farmers can charge more for 
their organic eggs, and the brand Pete and Gerry’s promises 
to provide them with blueprints and guarantees for bank loans 
if they agree to build organic-friendly chicken coops.
	
Such forms of assistance appear especially necessary for 
the organic food supply chain, because, unlike conventional 
agriculture, the crops and products are not traded on futures 
markets. In addition, bank loans continue to be more difficult 
for organic farmers to obtain, because of their substantially 
higher production costs, compared with conventional farmers. 
But if demand continues to grow as it has—and it shows few 
signs of stopping—these financial players might find that they 
have some catching up to do. If organic brands can control 
their entire supply chains, why would they need outsiders?
To encourage egg farmers to sell organic eggs, Pete and 
Gerry’s promises to provide them with blueprints and 
­guarantees for bank loans.
© Gary Cameron/Reuters

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
501
	
	
Interdependence  When supply chain members view their goals and ultimate success as 
intricately linked, they develop deeper long-term relationships. Interdependence between 
supply chain members that is based on mutual benefits is key to developing and sustaining 
the relationship.22 Walmart’s suppliers recognize that without Walmart, their sales would 
be significantly less. Although it is the more powerful member of most of its supply chains, 
Walmart also recognizes that it can depend on these suppliers to be a dependable source of 
supply, thus enabling it to have a very efficient marketing channel.
Credible Commitments  Successful relationships develop because both parties make 
credible commitments to, or tangible investments in, the relationship. These commitments 
go beyond just making the hollow statement, “I want to be your partner”; they involve 
spending money to improve the products or services provided to the customer and on infor-
mation technology to improve supply chain efficiency.23 As we described previously, 
Amazon and P&G have worked closely to set up their Vendor Flex program, enabling 
Amazon to operate fulfillment centers within P&G’s own warehouses and thereby lower 
transportation expenses.
Similar to many other elements of marketing, managing the marketing channel can 
seem like an easy task at first glance: Put the right merchandise in the right place at the 
right time. But the various elements and actors involved in a marketing channel create its 
unique and compelling complexities and require firms to work carefully to ensure they are 
achieving the most efficient and effective chain possible. 
We now turn our attention to how information and merchandise flow through market-
ing channels.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What is the difference between an indirect and a direct marketing  
channel?
2.	 What are the differences among the three types of vertical marketing 
systems?
3.	 How do firms develop strong strategic partnerships with their marketing 
channel partners?
MAKING INFORMATION FLOW THROUGH 
MARKETING CHANNELS
Information flows from the customer to stores, to and from distribution centers, possibly to 
and from wholesalers, to and from product manufacturers, and then on to the producers of 
any components and the suppliers of raw materials. To simplify our discussion—and be-
cause information flows are similar in other marketing channel links, such as through the 
Internet and catalogs, as well as in B2B channels—we shorten the supply chain in this 
section to exclude wholesalers as well as the link from suppliers to manufacturers. Exhibit 16.7 
illustrates the flow of information that starts when a customer buys a Sony HDTV at Best 
Buy. The flow follows these steps:
Flow 1 (Customer to Store): The sales associate at Best Buy scans the Universal 
Product Code (UPC) tag on the HDTV packaging, and the customer receives a re-
ceipt. The UPC tag is the black-and-white bar code found on most merchandise. It 
contains a 13-digit code that indicates the manufacturer of the item, a description of 
the item, information about special packaging, and special promotions.24 In the 
­future, RFID tags, discussed later in this chapter, may replace UPC tags.
LO16-4	
Describe the flow of 
information and 
merchandise in the 
marketing channel.

502	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Flow 2 (Store to Buyer): The point-of-sale (POS) terminal 
records the purchase information and electronically sends it 
to the buyer at Best Buy’s corporate office. The sales infor-
mation is incorporated into an inventory management system 
and used to monitor and analyze sales and ­decide to reorder 
more HDTVs, change a price, or plan a promotion. Buyers 
also send information to stores about overall sales for the 
chain, ways to display the merchandise, upcoming promo-
tions, and so on.
Flow 3 (Buyer to Manufacturer): The purchase information 
from each Best Buy store is typically aggregated by the re-
tailer as a whole, which creates an order for new merchandise 
and sends it to Sony. The buyer at Best Buy may also com-
municate directly with Sony to get information and negotiate 
prices, shipping dates, promotional events, or other merchan-
dise-related issues.
Flow 4 (Store to Manufacturer): In some situations, the 
sales transaction data are sent directly from the store to the 
manufacturer, and the manufacturer decides when to ship 
more merchandise to the distribution centers and the stores. 
In other situations, especially when merchandise is reordered 
frequently, the ordering process is done automatically, by-
passing the buyers. By working together, the retailer and 
manufacturer can better satisfy customer needs.
Flow 5 (Store to Distribution Center): Stores also communi-
cate with the Best Buy distribution center to coordinate deliveries 
and check inventory status. When the store inventory drops to a 
specified level, more HDTVs are shipped to the store, and the 
shipment information is sent to the Best Buy computer system.
E X H I B I T  16.7
Information Flows
5
3
6
1
6
4
Manufacturers
Distribution
center
Customer
Stores
Buyer
2
The flow of information starts when the UPC tag is scanned 
at the point of purchase.
© Digital Vision/Getty Images RF

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
503
	
	
Flow 6 (Manufacturer to Distribution Center and Buyer): When the manufac-
turer ships the HDTVs to the Best Buy distribution center, it sends an advanced ship-
ping notice to the distribution centers. An advanced shipping notice (ASN) is an 
electronic document that the supplier sends the retailer in advance of a shipment to 
tell the retailer exactly what to expect in the shipment. The center then makes ap-
pointments for trucks to make the delivery at a specific time, date, and loading dock. 
When the shipment is received at the distribution center, the buyer is notified and au-
thorizes payment to the vendor.
Data Warehouse
Purchase data collected at the point of sale (information flow 2 in Exhibit 16.7) goes into a 
huge database known as a data warehouse, similar to those described in Chapter 10. Using 
the data warehouse, the CEO not only can learn how the corporation is generally doing but 
also can look at the data aggregated by quarter for a merchandise division, a region of the 
country, or the total corporation. A buyer may be more interested in a particular manufac-
turer in a certain store on a particular day. Analysts from various levels of the retail opera-
tion extract information from the data warehouse to make a plethora of marketing decisions 
about developing and replenishing merchandise assortments.
In some cases, manufacturers also have access to this data warehouse. They communi-
cate with retailers by using electronic data interchange (EDI) and supply chain systems 
known as vendor-managed inventory.
In information flows 3, 4, and 6 in Exhibit 16.7, the retailer and manufacturer ex-
change business documents through EDI. Electronic data interchange (EDI) is the com-
puter-to-computer exchange of business documents from a retailer to a vendor and back. In 
addition to sales data, purchase orders, invoices, and data about returned merchandise can 
be transmitted back and forth. With EDI, vendors can transmit information about on-hand 
inventory status, vendor promotions, and cost changes to the retailer, as well as information 
about purchase order changes, order status, retail prices, and transportation routings. Thus 
EDI enables channel members to communicate more quickly and with fewer errors than in 
the past, ensuring that merchandise moves from vendors to retailers more quickly.
Vendor-managed inventory (VMI) is an approach for improving marketing channel 
efficiency in which the manufacturer is responsible for maintaining the retailer’s inventory 
levels in each of its stores.25 By sharing the data in the retailer’s data warehouse and com-
municating that information via EDI, the manufacturer automatically sends merchandise to 
the retailer’s store or distribution or fulfillment center when the inventory at the store 
reaches a prespecified level.26
In ideal conditions, the manufacturer replenishes inventories in quantities that meet 
the retailer’s immediate demand, which reduces stockouts with minimal inventory. In addi-
tion to providing a better match between retail demand and supply, VMI can reduce the 
vendor’s and the retailer’s costs. Manufacturer salespeople no longer need to spend time 
generating orders on items that are already in the stores, and their role shifts to selling new 
items and maintaining relationships. Retail buyers and planners no longer need to monitor 
inventory levels and place orders.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the marketing channel links associated with each information 
flow?
2.	 How do marketing channel members use data warehouses to make 
­decisions?
3.	 What is EDI and how is it used?
4.	 Why do some marketing channels use VMI and others do not?

504	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
MAKING MERCHANDISE FLOW THROUGH 
MARKETING CHANNELS
Exhibit 16.8 illustrates the merchandise flow steps for a large retailer, such as Best Buy, 
that relies largely on its physical store operations. The flow of merchandise and pertinent 
decision variables in an Internet channel are similar, except that orders arrive from custom-
ers one at a time and go out in relatively small quantities, so the facility used to store and 
process these orders—that is, the fulfillment center—works a little differently. In general 
though, the merchandise flow steps are:
1.	
Sony to Best Buy’s distribution centers, or
2.	
Sony directly to stores.
3.	
If the merchandise goes through distribution centers, it is then shipped to stores,
4.	
and then to the customer.
Making merchandise flow involves first deciding whether the merchandise will go 
from the manufacturer to a retailer’s distribution center or directly on to stores. Once in a 
distribution center, multiple activities take place before it is shipped on to a store. Adding 
Value 16.2 describes how merchandise flows in India are inherently more complicated than 
they are in the United States.
Distribution Centers versus Direct Store Delivery
As indicated in Exhibit 16.8, manufacturers can ship merchandise directly to a retailer’s 
stores—direct store delivery (flow 2)—or to their distribution centers (flow 1). Although 
manufacturers and retailers may collaborate, the ultimate decision is usually up to the re-
tailer and depends on the characteristics of the merchandise and the nature of demand. To 
determine which distribution system—distribution centers or direct store delivery—is bet-
ter, retailers consider the total cost associated with each alternative and the customer service 
criterion of having the right merchandise at the store when the customer wants to buy it.
There are several advantages to using a distribution center:
∙	
More accurate sales forecasts are possible when retailers combine forecasts for many 
stores serviced by one distribution center rather than doing a forecast for each store. 
Consider a set of 50 Target stores, serviced by a single distribution center that each 
carries Dualit toasters. Each store normally stocks 5 units, for a total of 250 units in 
E X H I B I T  16.8
Merchandise Flows
1
3
4
2
Manufacturing
Distribution
centers
Store
Customer

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
505
	
	
the system. By carrying the item at each store, the retailer must develop individual 
forecasts, each with the possibility of errors that could result in either too much or 
too little merchandise. Alternatively, by delivering most of the inventory to a 
distribution center and feeding the stores merchandise as they need it, the effects of 
forecast errors for the individual stores are minimized, and less backup inventory is 
needed to prevent stockouts.
Adding Value 16.2
E-Tailing in the United States versus Indiaiv
In the expanding e-commerce universe, India appears poised 
to be the next China—that is, a developing economy with mil-
lions of consumers seeking access to varied products to pur-
chase. But India is not China, and neither nation is following 
the path cut by U.S. e-commerce retailers, so the next steps 
remain uncertain, both literally and figuratively.
The literal next steps are getting purchases packed and 
shipped from retailers to customers. Such steps are particu-
larly difficult in India. The nation’s infrastructure is notably un-
derdeveloped, featuring poor roads, outdated trucking fleets, 
insufficient air transport capacity, and insufficient legal protec-
tions for shippers. The threat of every monsoon season also 
means that logistics providers have trouble keeping delivery 
promises, especially if the buyer expects rapid delivery. As a 
result, many e-commerce companies spend the equivalent of a 
whopping 30 percent of their sales on logistics, approximately 
three times as much as Amazon does in the United States.
Figuratively, e-commerce in India also is uncertain be-
cause of the structure adopted by the existing start-ups. Most 
of them still rely heavily on venture capital; virtually none of 
them are profitable on their own. Although nationwide 
e-tailers such as Flipkart and Snapdeal assert that they plan 
to be profitable within two to three years, they have not re-
leased their plans for doing so. But as these competitors 
seek to become the first site that shoppers visit, they are of-
fering great deals and discounts, along with free shipping to 
buyers across the country. In many cases, they thus take a 
loss on each sale, especially if a buyer purchases a single, 
inexpensive item.
The consumer base also remains something of a question 
mark. Web penetration is still comparatively slight in India. 
Whereas China’s e-commerce market has exploded in the 
past decade, growing in value from $7 million to $458 million, 
India’s e-commerce is worth only about $4 million today. Part 
of this difference stems from the individual level. The average 
Indian consumer’s online order is worth the equivalent of 
about $20. In the United States, each order instead averages 
around $100.
E-commerce is difficult in India due to poor roads, outdated trucking fleets, insufficient air 
transport capacity, and insufficient legal protections for shippers.
© Hemis/Alamy

506	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Should Target stock Dualit 
toasters in distribution ­centers 
or keep all its backup stock in 
stores?
© Lee Hacker/Alamy
∙	 Distribution centers enable the retailer to carry less merchandise in the 
individual stores, which results in lower inventory investments systemwide. 
If the stores get frequent deliveries from the distribution center, they 
need to carry relatively less extra merchandise as backup stock.
∙	
It is easier to avoid running out of stock or having too much 
stock in any particular store because merchandise is ordered 
from the distribution center as needed.
∙	 Retail store space is typically much more expensive than is 
space at a distribution center, and distribution centers are 
better equipped than stores to prepare merchandise for sale. 
As a result, many retailers find it cost effective to store 
merchandise and get it ready for sale at a distribution center 
rather than in individual stores.
But distribution centers aren’t appropriate for all retailers. If a 
retailer has only a few outlets, the expense of a distribution center is 
probably unwarranted. Also, if many outlets are concentrated in metro-
politan areas, merchandise can be consolidated and delivered by the vendor 
directly to all the stores in one area economically. Direct store delivery gets 
merchandise to the stores faster and thus is used for perishable goods (meat and pro-
duce), items that help create the retailer’s image of being the first to sell the latest product 
(e.g., video games), or fads. Superior Service 16.1 explores how the two retail giants Am-
azon and Walmart are vying to win the same-day grocery delivery battle. Finally, some 
manufacturers provide direct store delivery for retailers to ensure that their products are on 
the store’s shelves, properly displayed, and fresh. For example, employees delivering 
­Frito-Lay snacks directly to supermarkets replace products that have been on the shelf too 
long and are stale, replenish products that have been sold, and arrange products so they are 
neatly displayed.
The Distribution (or Fulfillment) Center
The distribution center performs the following activities: managing inbound transporta-
tion; receiving and checking; storing and cross-docking; getting merchandise floor-ready; 
ticketing and marking; preparing to ship merchandise to stores; and shipping merchandise 
to stores. Fulfillment centers perform the same functions, but because they deliver directly 
to customers rather than to stores, they do not have to get merchandise floor ready. To illus-
trate these activities being undertaken in a distribution center, we’ll continue our example 
of Sony HDTVs being shipped to a Best Buy distribution center.
Managing Inbound Transportation  Traditionally, when working with vendors, buyers 
focused their efforts on developing merchandise assortments, negotiating prices, and ar-
ranging joint promotions. Now, buyers and planners are much more involved in coordinat-
ing the physical flow of merchandise to stores. Planners are 
employees responsible for the financial planning and analysis 
of merchandise and its allocation to stores. The TV buyer has 
arranged for a truckload of HDTVs to be delivered to its 
Houston, Texas, distribution center on Monday between 1:00 
and 3:00 p.m. The buyer also specifies how the merchandise 
should be placed on pallets for easy unloading.
The truck must arrive within the specified time because the 
distribution center has all of its 100 receiving docks allocated 
throughout the day, and much of the merchandise on this particular 
truck is going to be shipped to stores that evening. Unfortunately, 
the truck was delayed in a snowstorm. The dispatcher—the 
person who coordinates deliveries to the distribution center—
reassigns the truck delivering the HDTVs to a Wednesday 
morning delivery slot and charges the firm several hundred 
Walmart speeds merchandise 
from its distribution centers to 
stores.
Source: Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
507
	
	
Who Will Win the Same-Day Grocery Delivery War?v
Amazon has more than 89 
fulfillment centers, with 
more to come. The com-
plex machinery and supply 
chain mechanisms allow 
Amazon to ship out prod-
ucts in less than 2.5 hours 
from the time a customer 
clicks “Place Your Order.” 
Yet, fulfillment center teams 
are always working to de-
velop innovative ways to 
cut the time down even fur-
ther. In addition to ware-
house speed, these centers 
excel in proximity. Amazon 
has spent billions building 
centers closer and closer 
to customers.
	
Now Amazon is expand-
ing its grocery delivery 
business, AmazonFresh. 
Previously available only in 
Seattle, Amazon sees 
AmazonFresh as the future 
of shopping. Customers 
can get whatever they want, whenever they want, wherever 
they want, and as fast as they demand it. During a recent 
launch in Los Angeles, customers enjoyed free trials of 
PrimeFresh, the upgraded version of Amazon Prime, including 
free shipping of products and free delivery of groceries for 
orders over $35. In both Los Angeles and Seattle, Amazon 
maintains a fleet of Fresh trucks that deliver everything from 
full-course meals to chocolate from local merchants. As 
Amazon evolves into a same-day delivery service, its fleet 
could become yet another competitive advantage. 
	
Yet AmazonFresh remains a challenge, mainly because of 
the differences associated with grocery products: It cannot ship 
milk the same way it ships diapers. Despite the tremendous lo-
gistical and economic hurdles to creating a same-day delivery 
service, Amazon hopes to expand its grocery customers and 
turn monthly customers to weekly or even twice-weekly buyers.
	
In Mexico, Walmart has achieved the goal of same-day gro-
cery delivery, where Superama, its high-end grocery chain, 
delivers groceries in as little as three hours. When Superama 
first began home delivery in 1993, managers would take or-
ders by telephone or fax. As volume increased, it created a 
web page and then a mobile application that today accounts 
for approximately 20 percent of Superama’s online orders. 
	
Much of this delivery success in Mexico is a result of the 
nation’s densely populated urban areas. Demand is highest in 
Mexico City, which also accounts for much of Mexico’s wealth. 
Due to traffic congestion and more dual-income families, de-
mand for grocery deliveries is high; most of the deliveries are 
made by freelance drivers who get $1.50 per delivery, using 
their own transportation rather than relying on a fleet of 
Walmart-owned trucks. 
	
Walmart is betting big on the Mexican market as a “detona-
tor for growth” and seeks to triple the number of stores offer-
ing grocery delivery in Mexico within a year. Superama’s 
target market is households with incomes of $3,000 a month, 
or 35 percent of the nation’s population. As one of Walmart’s 
largest foreign markets, Mexico contributes $27 billion (or 
6 percent) to the retailer’s annual sales. Superama also has 
helped Walmart dominate the market (92 percent share) for 
online grocery shopping in Mexico.
	
Thus two retail giants have staked their claims, relying on 
their distinct capabilities. Other competitors in selected re-
gional markets include eBay Now (offering one-hour delivery 
by couriers for about $5 per delivery), Peapod and FreshDirect 
(dedicated grocery delivery services), and Google Shopping 
Express (offering Bay Area deliveries from Staples, Walgreens, 
Target, Whole Foods, and American Eagle). But considering 
the delivery cost advantages in Mexico and Amazon’s head 
start in the United States, can Walmart or any of these other 
competitors catch up with their Internet-only rival in the U.S. 
same-day grocery delivery market? And just as important, how 
much do they need to do so?
Superior Service 16.1
AmazonFresh is expanding its grocery delivery business to several U.S. cities.
© Silicon Valley Stock/Alamy

508	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
­dollars for missing its delivery time. Although many manufacturers pay transportation 
expenses, some retailers negotiate with their vendors to absorb this expense. These 
­retailers believe they can lower their net merchandise cost and better control merchan-
dise flow if they negotiate directly with trucking companies and consolidate shipments 
from many vendors.
Receiving and Checking Using UPC or RFID  Receiving is the process of recording 
the receipt of merchandise as it arrives at a distribution center. Checking is the process of 
going through the goods upon receipt to make sure they arrived undamaged and that the 
merchandise ordered was the merchandise received.
In the past, checking merchandise was a very labor-intensive and time-consuming pro-
cess. Today, however, many distribution systems using EDI are designed to minimize, if 
not eliminate, these processes. The advance shipping notice (ASN) tells the distribution 
center what should be in each carton. A UPC label or radio frequency identification (RFID) 
tag on the shipping carton that identifies the carton’s contents is scanned and automatically 
counted as it is being received and checked. Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags 
are tiny computer chips that automatically transmit to a special scanner all the information 
about a container’s contents or individual products. Approximately as large as a pinhead, 
these RFID tags consist of an antenna and a chip that contains an electronic product code 
that stores far more information about a product than bar (UPC) codes can. The tags also 
act as passive tracking devices, signaling their presence over a radio frequency when they 
pass within a few yards of a special scanner. The tags have long been used in high-cost 
applications such as automated highway toll systems and security identification badges. As 
the cost of the tags and implementation technology has decreased, their uses have become 
more prevalent in retail supply chain applications.
Storing and Cross-Docking  After the merchandise is received and checked, it is either 
stored or cross-docked. When merchandise is stored, the cartons are transported by a con-
veyor system and forklift trucks to racks that go from the distribution center’s floor to its 
ceiling. Then, when the merchandise is needed in the stores, a forklift driver or a robot 
goes to the rack, picks up the carton, and places it on a conveyor system that routes the 
carton to the loading dock of a truck going to the store.
Using a cross-docking distribution center, merchandise cartons are prepackaged by 
the vendor for a specific store. The UPC or RFID labels on the carton indicate the store to 
which it is to be sent. The vendor also may affix price tags to each item in the carton. 
­Because the merchandise is ready for sale, it is placed on a conveyor system that routes it 
from the unloading dock at which it was received to the loading dock for the truck going to 
the specific store—hence the name cross-docked. The cartons are routed on the conveyor 
system automatically by sensors that read the UPC or RFID label on the cartons. Cross-
docked merchandise is in the distribution center only for a few hours before it is shipped to 
the stores.
Merchandise sales rate and degree of perishability or fashionability typically deter-
mine whether cartons are cross-docked or stored. For instance, because Sony’s HDTVs sell 
so quickly, it is in Best Buy’s interest not to store them in a distribution center. Similarly, 
cross-docking is preferable for fashion apparel or perishable meat or ­produce.
Getting Merchandise Floor-Ready  For some merchandise, additional tasks are under-
taken in the distribution ­center to make the merchandise floor-ready. Floor-ready mer-
chandise is merchandise that is ready to be placed on the selling floor. Getting merchandise 
floor-ready entails ticketing, marking, and, in the case of some apparel, placing garments 
on hangers (or maybe attaching RFID chips). For the UK-based grocery chain Tesco, it is 
essential that products ship in ready-to-sell units so that there is little manipulation or sort-
ing to do at the distribution center or in the stores. To move the store-ready merchandise it 
receives from suppliers quickly into the store, Tesco demands that products sit on roll 
cages rather than pallets. Then, store employees can easily wheel them onto the retail floor. 
The stores’ backrooms only have two or three days’ worth of backup inventory, and it is 
important to keep inventory levels low and receive lots of small, accurate deliveries from 
its suppliers—which also helps cut costs.27

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
509
	
	
Ticketing and Marking  Ticketing and 
marking refers to affixing price and identifi-
cation labels to the merchandise. It is more 
efficient for a retailer to perform these activi-
ties at a distribution center than in its stores. In 
a distribution center, an area can be set aside 
and a process implemented to efficiently add 
labels and put apparel on hangers. Conversely, 
getting merchandise floor-ready in stores can 
block aisles and divert sales people’s attention 
from their customers. An even better approach 
from the retailer’s perspective is to get vendors 
to ship floor-ready merchandise, thus totally 
eliminating the expensive, time-consuming 
ticketing and marking process.
Preparing to Ship Merchandise to a 
Store  At the beginning of the day, the com-
puter system in the distribution center gener-
ates a list of items to be shipped to each store 
on that day. For each item, a pick ticket and 
shipping label is generated. The pick ticket is a document or display on a screen in a fork-
lift truck indicating how much of each item to get from specific storage areas. The forklift 
driver goes to the storage area, picks up the number of cartons indicated on the pick ticket, 
places UPC shipping labels on the cartons that indicate the stores to which the items are to 
be shipped, and puts the cartons on the conveyor system, where they are automatically 
routed to the loading dock for the truck going to the stores. In some distribution and fulfill-
ment centers, these functions are performed by robots.
Shipping Merchandise to Stores  Shipping merchandise to stores from a distribution 
center has become increasingly complex. Most distribution centers run 50 to 100 outbound 
truck routes in one day. To handle this complex transportation problem, the centers use 
sophisticated routing and scheduling computer systems that consider the locations of the 
stores, road conditions, and transportation operating constraints to develop the most effi-
cient routes possible. As a result, stores are provided with an accurate estimated time of 
arrival, and vehicle usage is maximized.
Customer Store Pickup
Technology advances have changed consumers’ expectations of their shopping experience. 
They want the option of making the purchase online and then picking up in store. Retailers 
that can offer this option drive additional sales, as customers who come into the store to 
pick up online orders are more likely to make additional purchases while in store. For re-
tailers to be successful with the buy-online-and-pick-up-in-store option, they need to invest 
in technology that enables order allocation systems to locate every item in stock so as to 
fulfill the order in a timely manner.
Consumers have been spoiled by technology that allows them to shop for anything, 
anywhere, anytime, and they want it delivered now. Multichannel retailers that offer the 
buy-online-and-pick-up-in-store option will be appealing to these spoiled customers. For 
this option to be successful, retailers need to ensure that the products that show up as being 
available online will actually be available in stock and ready for pick up. This requires a 
high level of accuracy inherent in the retailer’s inventory management system.
The notification of sales to stores quickly and accurately is crucial for retailers to dif-
ferentiate themselves. Retailers need to equip themselves with mobile task management 
technology to deliver outstanding customer experience. Mobile task management tech-
nology is a wireless network and a mobile device that receives demand notification and 
enables a speedy response. This solution allows the associate closest to the ordered item to 
physically pull it and verify its availability.
Robots are often used to help 
prepare merchandise to be 
shipped to stores.
© Quiet Logistics

510	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
For the buy-online-and-pick-up-in-store option to be successful, the retailer must be 
able to move the product along its supply chain smoothly, effectively, and efficiently with 
the intention of delivering a single order to an individual customer. That is what enables 
the retailer to deliver an outstanding in-store pick-up experience, and in return, brings the 
customer back to the store in the future.28
Inventory Management through  
Just‐in‐Time Inventory Systems
Marketing channel management offers the 21st century’s answer to a host of distri-
bution problems faced by firms. As recently as the early 1990s, even the most inno-
vative firms needed 15 to 30 days—or even more—to fulfill an order from the 
warehouse to the customer. The typical order-to-delivery process had several steps: 
order creation, usually using a telephone, fax, or mail; order processing, using a 
manual system for credit authorization and assignment to a warehouse; and physical 
delivery. Things could, and often did, go wrong. Ordered goods were not available. 
Orders were lost or misplaced. Shipments were misdirected. These mistakes length-
ened the time it took to get merchandise to customers and potentially made the entire 
process more expensive.
Faced with such predicaments, firms began stockpiling inventory at each level of the 
supply chain (retailers, wholesalers, and manufacturers), but keeping inventory where it is 
not needed becomes a huge and wasteful expense. If a manufacturer has a huge stock of 
items stuck in a warehouse, it not only is not earning profits by selling those items but also 
must pay to maintain and guard that warehouse.
Therefore many firms, such as H&M, Zara, Mango, and Forever 21, have adopted 
a practice developed by Toyota in the 1950s. Just-in-time (JIT) inventory systems, 
also known as quick response (QR) inventory systems in retailing, are inventory 
management systems that deliver less merchandise on a more frequent basis than in 
traditional inventory systems. The firm gets the merchandise just in time for it to be 
used in the manufacture of another product or for sale when the customer wants it. 
The benefits of a JIT system include reduced lead time (the amount of time between 
the recognition that an order needs to be placed and the arrival of the needed mer-
chandise at the seller’s store, available for sale), increased product availability, and 
lower inventory investment.29
Walmart offers customer  
store pickup.
© Danny Johnston/AP Photo

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
511
	
	
Reduced Lead Time  By eliminating the need for paper transactions, the EDI in the JIT 
systems reduces lead time. Even better, the shorter lead times further reduce the need for 
inventory, because the shorter the lead time, the easier it is for the retailer to forecast its 
demand.
Increased Product Availability and Lower Inventory Investment  In general, as a 
firm’s ability to satisfy customer demand by having stock on hand increases, so does its 
inventory investment; that is, it needs to keep more backup inventory in stock. But with 
JIT, the ability to satisfy demand can actually increase while inventory decreases. Because 
a firm like H&M can make purchase commitments or produce merchandise closer to the 
time of sale, its own inventory investment is reduced. H&M needs less inventory because 
it’s getting less merchandise in each order but receiving those shipments more often. 
Because firms using JIT order merchandise to cover shorter-term demand, their inventory 
is reduced even further.
The ability to satisfy customer demand by keeping merchandise in stock also increases 
in JIT systems as a result of the more frequent shipments. For instance, if an H&M store 
runs low on a medium-sized red T-shirt, its JIT system ensures a shorter lead time than for 
those of more traditional retailers. As a result, it is less likely that the H&M store will be 
out of stock for its customers before the next T-shirt shipment arrives.
Costs of a JIT System  Although firms achieve great benefits from a JIT system, it is 
not without its costs. The distribution function becomes much more complicated with 
more frequent deliveries. With greater order frequency also come smaller orders, which 
are more expensive to transport and more difficult to coordinate. Therefore, JIT systems 
require a strong commitment by the firm and its vendors to cooperate, share data, and 
develop systems.
Firms such as H&M have 
­adopted a just-in-time (JIT) or 
quick response inventory 
­system.
© Victor J. Blue/Bloomberg/Getty  
Images
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 How does merchandise flow through a typical marketing channel?
2.	 Why have just-in-time inventory systems become so popular?

512	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
	
	
Describe how marketing channels are managed.
	
	
The more closely aligned the marketing channel 
members are with each other, the less likely there 
will be significant conflict. An administered mar-
keting channel occurs when a dominant and power-
ful marketing channel member has control over the 
other members. In a contractual marketing channel 
(e.g., franchising), coordination and control are dic-
tated by contractual relationships between members. 
Corporate marketing channels can operate relatively 
smoothly because one firm owns the various levels 
of the chains. Marketing channels also can be effec-
tively managed through strong relationships devel-
oped with marketing channel partners. To create 
such relationships, the partners must trust each 
other, communicate openly, have compatible goals, 
realize there is benefit in being interdependent, and 
be willing to invest in each other’s success.
	
	
Describe the flow of information and merchan-
dise in the marketing channel.
	
	
Information flow involves: flow 1 (customer to 
store), flow 2 (store to buyer), flow 3 (buyer to man-
ufacturer), flow 4 (store to manufacturer), flow 5 
(store to distribution center), and flow 6 (manufac-
turer to distribution center and buyer). Merchandise 
flow involves flow 1 (manufacturer to retailer distri-
bution centers), flow 2 (manufacturer directly to 
stores), flow 3 (distribution centers to stores, when 
shipped first to distribution centers), and flow 4 
­(retailer to customer).
LO16-3
LO16-4
bchsu_tt
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Understand the importance of marketing chan-
nels and supply chain management.
	
	
Marketing channels allow companies to get their 
products in the appropriate outlets in sufficient quan-
tities to meet consumer demand. To anticipate this 
demand, advertising and promotions must be coordi-
nated with the departments that control inventory and 
transportation. Otherwise, customers would come in 
seeking a promotion and not find the product.
	
	
Without the members in a marketing channel, con-
sumers would be forced to find raw materials, manu-
facture products, and somehow get them to where 
they could be used all on their own. Thus, each mar-
keting channel member adds value to the product by 
performing one or more of these functions. Marketing 
channel management also creates value for each firm 
in the chain and helps bind together many company 
functions, including manufacturing, inventory man-
agement, transportation, advertising, and marketing.
	
	
Understand the difference between direct and  
indirect marketing channels.
	
	
There are ways by which businesses get their goods to 
consumers. Using a direct marketing channel, a cus-
tomer can purchase goods from the manufacturer with-
out needing to go through a retailer or intermediary, 
generally online (e.g., Ascend speakers) or at company 
stores (e.g., Apple). More commonly, manufacturers 
choose to offer their goods to consumers through an 
intermediary, such as a retailer (e.g., Walmart), imple-
menting an indirect marketing channel strategy.
LO16-1
LO16-2
Key Terms 
∙	 administered vertical marketing 
system,  496
∙	 advanced shipping notice 
(ASN),  503
∙	 checking,  508
∙	 coercive power,  496
∙	 contractual vertical marketing  
system,  497
∙	 corporate vertical marketing  
system,  498
∙	 cross-docking distribution  
center,  508
∙	 direct marketing channel,  492
∙	 dispatcher,  506
∙	 distribution center,  491
∙	 electronic data interchange 
(EDI),  503
∙	 expertise power,  496
∙	 floor-ready merchandise,  508
∙	 franchising,  497
∙	 fulfillment center,  491
∙	 horizontal channel conflict,  494
∙	 independent or conventional  
marketing channel,  495
∙	 indirect marketing channel,  492
∙	 information power,  496
∙	 just-in-time (JIT) inventory  
system,  510
∙	 lead time,  510
∙	 legitimate power,  496
∙	 marketing channel management,  488
∙	 mobile task management,  509
∙	 pick ticket,  509
∙	 planner,  506
∙	 power,  496
∙	 quick response (QR) inventory  
system,  510
∙	 radio frequency identification 
(RFID) tag,  508
∙	 receiving,  508
∙	 referent power,  496
∙	 reward power,  496
∙	 strategic or partnering  
relationship,  499
∙	 supply chain management,  488

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
513
	
	
∙	 ticketing and marking,  509
∙	 Universal Product Code (UPC),  501
∙	 vendor-managed inventory 
(VMI),  503
∙	 vertical channel conflict,  494
∙	 vertical marketing system,  496
∙	 viral marketing program,  489
∙	 wholesaler,  488
1.	 Zappos.com, an online shoe seller, has received praise 
for its stellar supply chain management. Go to http://
about.zappos.com/zappos-story/fulfillment-facility, 
read the “In the Beginning,” “Looking Ahead,” and 
“Customer Testimonial” sections, and see how a shoe 
ultimately reaches the customer. How does its fulfill-
ment center enable Zappos to adhere to its marketing 
communications message and provide excellent cus-
tomer service?
2.	 The case study for this chapter examines how Zara Inter-
national, a division of Inditex, successfully manages its 
supply chain. Visit Inditex’s website (http://www.inditex 
.com) and go to “Sustainability,” then review the compa-
ny’s commitment to sustainable management, particu-
larly the section that pertains to its suppliers and the code 
of conduct for its suppliers. Considering the discussion 
in this chapter about strategic relationships, how does 
­Inditex address the factors necessary for mutually bene-
ficial partnerships, according to its code of conduct?
Marketing Digitally
  1.  Describe marketing channel management by identify-
ing the major activities that it involves. Identify several 
ways that marketing channel management adds value to 
a company’s offerings, with regard to consumers as 
well as business partners.
  2.  In what ways can the flow of information be managed 
in the supply chain? How can the ready flow of infor-
mation increase a firm’s operating efficiencies?
  3.  Describe how B2B transactions might employ EDI to 
process purchase information. Considering the informa-
tion discussed in Chapter 7 about B2B buying situations, 
determine which buying situation (new task, modified 
rebuy, or straight rebuy) would most likely align with the 
use of EDI technology. Justify your answer.
  4.  What are the differences between the use of a traditional 
distribution center and one that relies on cross-docking? 
Discuss the extent to which one is more efficient than 
the other, being sure to detail your reasoning.
  5.  Discuss the advantages to a retailer like Macy’s of ex-
pending the time and effort to get merchandise floor-
ready at either the point of manufacture or in the 
distribution center rather than having retail store staff 
members do it in the stores. Provide the logic behind 
your answer.
  6.  A just-in-time (JIT) inventory system appears to be an 
important success factor for retailers like H&M and 
Forever 21. Choose a local retailer and examine the 
­advantages and disadvantages of its use of a JIT sys-
tem. Do you believe it should use JIT? Why?
  7.  Give an example of a retailer that participates in an 
­independent (conventional) supply chain and one 
­involved in a vertical marketing system. Discuss the 
­advantages and disadvantages of each.
  8.  For each of the following consumer products, identify 
the type of vertical marketing system used, and justify 
your answer: (a) Bertolli pasta sold through grocery 
stores, (b) Krispy Kreme donuts sold through fran-
chises, and (c) www.polo.com by Ralph Lauren.
  9.  Why might a big company like Lenovo want to develop 
strategic partnerships with locally owned computer 
stores? Describe what Lenovo would have to do to 
maintain such relationships.
10.  You are hired as an assistant brand manager for a pop-
ular consumer product. One day in an emergency meet-
ing, the brand manager informs the group that there is a 
problem with one of the suppliers and that he has de-
cided to send you over to the manufacturing facilities to 
investigate the problem. When you arrive at the plant, 
you learn that a key supplier has become increasingly 
unreliable in terms of quality and delivery. You ask the 
plant manager why the plant doesn’t switch suppliers, 
because it is becoming a major problem for your brand. 
He informs you that the troubled supplier is his cousin, 
whose wife has been very ill, and he just can’t switch 
right now. What course of action should you take?
Marketing Applications

514	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
bchsu_tt
Quiz Yourself
1.	 All of the following are examples of the value provided 
by a supply chain in the production of kitchen stoves 
except
a.  the transportation company gets the stove to the 
retailer. 
b.  the retailer educates the customer about product 
­features, and delivers and installs the stove.
c.  the product design team develops initial drawings 
for a new product offering.
d.  the stove maker turns the components into the stove.
e.  the components manufacturer helps the stove manu-
facturer by supplying parts and materials.
2.	 When supply chain members that buy and sell to one 
another are not in agreement about their goals, _____ 
channel conflict can occur. 
a.  vertical
b.  independent
c.  competitive
d.  horizontal
e.  administered 
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
ZARA DELIVERS FAST FASHION30
In the fast fashion retail business strategy, supply chain management processes serve to 
introduce fashionable merchandise rapidly so that stores can respond immediately to cus-
tomer demand for merchandise. This was pioneered by Zara, a global specialty apparel 
chain located in La Coruna, Spain, but it also has been adopted by other retailers, including 
H&M (headquartered in Sweden), TopShop (UK), and Forever 21 (United States).
	
The approach is particularly effective for specialty apparel retailers that target fash-
ion-conscious consumers who simply must have the latest looks—but they want to do so 
on a very limited budget. These shoppers load up on new fast fashions every few weeks 
instead of purchasing a few higher-priced basics every few months.
	
To fit with such short cycles and meet customers’ demands, the fast fashion process 
starts with the receipt of timely information from store managers. At Zara, store managers 
always have their reporting devices literally in hand. These handheld devices, which are 
linked directly to the company’s corporate office in Spain, enable daily reports on what 
customers are buying (or not) and what they are asking for but not finding.
	
For example, customers might want a purple version of a pink shirt that they see on the 
shop floor. Managers immediately pass the information on to the designers in Spain. Those 
designers then communicate electronically with the factory that produces fabric for shirts. 
This factory starts up its automated equipment, which is run by assemblers who live in 
close proximity to the factory. (The undyed fabric comes from Asia, where Zara finds in-
expensive sources, and then bulk fabric ships to Spain and Portugal to be manufactured 
into apparel.) The robots in the company’s 23 highly automated factories start cutting out 
shirts and mixing purple dye. For final construction, a network of 300 or so small assem-
blers, located near the factories in Galicia, Spain, and northern Portugal, takes responsibil-
ity for making the final product. Finally, to ensure timely delivery, the shirts get shipped by 
truck to stores in Europe and by air express to stores in the rest of the world.
The Benefits of Fast Fashion for Zara  Zara’s main advantage over its competitors, 
such as The Gap, Abercrombie & Fitch, and American Eagle Outfitters, has resulted from 
its highly responsive and tightly organized supply chain. Unlike these competitors, Zara 
selects factory locations that are in close geographic proximity to the company’s headquar-
ters in Spain. Although this approach increases labor costs, compared with outsourced 
production in lower-cost countries in Asia, it also improves communication, reduces ship-
ping costs and time, and reduces the time before new fashions appear in stores. It also gives 
bchsu_tt
Chapter Case Study 

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
515
	
	
Zara the flexibility to modify its operations in one supply chain function to expedite pro-
cesses in another, such as pricing or tagging. It might hang merchandise on racks in the 
warehouse so that store employees can move apparel directly from delivery to the sales 
floor. And it can do all this because it maintains complete control over the entire process.
	
Furthermore, instead of shipping new products a few times a season, as many of its 
competitors do, Zara makes deliveries to every one of its stores every few days. The purple 
shirts would be in stores in two weeks—compared with the several months it would take 
for most department stores and other specialty apparel stores to accomplish the same feat. 
Because its fast fashion system also ensures shorter lead times, it’s less likely that any Zara 
store will be out of stock before the next sweater shipment arrives. Limiting the stock in 
stores even can create a sense of scarcity among its customers. If they don’t buy now, the 
item might not be available next time they visit the store. By producing and shipping in 
these small quantities, Zara can quickly recover from its (rare) fashion faux pas.
	
Finally, the efficiency of its supply chain means Zara rarely has to discount merchan-
dise that is not selling. At Zara, the number of items that end up marked down is about half 
the industry average. Even with these results, Zara still manages to introduce around 
10,000 new designs and 40,000 new SKUs each year.
Moving Too Fast? The Negative Effects of Fast Fashion  Despite some strong sig-
nals of success—including annual growth rates of approximately 20 percent in terms of 
sales and number of stores—Zara started to outgrow its own strategy. By their very nature, 
fashion trends change rapidly and constantly, and so must the merchandise on Zara’s shop 
floors. Faced with disappointed customers, some sales managers ordered extra quantities 
of hot items so as to avoid stockouts. Even with this attempt to circumvent the replenish-
ment system, some stores still suffered from stockouts, because they received fewer units 
than they had ordered when overall demand exceeded inventory levels. For some items, 
Zara even confronted perhaps the most frustrating scenario in a supply chain: Inventory sat 
unused, eating up storage costs at one location even as another store desperately pleaded 
for the same inventory to meet its customers’ demand.
Zara’s competitive advantage in 
specialty apparel retailing is 
based on its efficient supply 
chain that delivers fashionable 
merchandise to its stores 
­frequently.
© Denis Doyle/AP Photo

516	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
	
As noted among the benefits, the company launches as many as 10,000 new styles 
annually, with a range of colors and sizes, resulting in hundreds of thousands of SKUs in 
the system. If we add in replenishment orders, which are received twice weekly, Zara’s 
average shipping total reached nearly 2.5 million items per week, all coming from the com-
pany’s distribution center. Its legendary supply chain efficiency thus was in danger of a 
clogged artery.
	
In response, Zara has adopted some new mathematical processes that turn human ex-
perience and mountains of data into actionable information. These models factor in store 
managers’ unique requests for merchandise replenishments, together with historical trends 
in the sales of the same item. Merchandise display practices have been altered, such as re-
moving all sizes of a garment from the sales floor if a popular size is not available. This 
practice helps reduce customer frustration, in that they never see an item that might not be 
available in their size. It also diminishes shipping; if the medium size is unavailable, the 
small and large sizes do not get shipped either. Instead, these remaining sizes head toward 
the stores that still have all sizes in stock so they can be available to customers there.
	
Furthermore, Zara is making more effective uses of RFID technology. Because Zara 
manufacturers its own clothing, it can insert RFID tags into the security tags that already 
appear on each piece of clothing. Thus the very act of inserting the tags becomes viable as a 
parallel step to the attachment of the security tags. In contrast, retailers that previously tried 
to insert RFID tags struggled to find efficient methods and had trouble deciding exactly when 
in the supply chain they should be inserted. Walmart, for example, demanded that suppliers 
add them, but suppliers balked at the added expense associated with the additional step.31
	
In addition, by including the RFID elements within the security tags, Zara has found a 
way to reuse the still relatively expensive RFID technology. In previous experiments, the 
tags left the store with customers who purchased the related item. At Zara, employees re-
move the security tag as they check out customers, so the RFID chips also stay in the store, 
available for reuse.
	
These methods give Zara a distinct advantage. The task of taking inventory has be-
come so much faster and easier—rather than actively scanning each item’s barcode, inven-
tory takers simply walk through the store with an RFID device that passively gathers 
information from each rack—that Zara can perform it every six weeks instead of twice a 
year, as is common in the industry. In turn, its inventory tracking is drastically more accu-
rate, and it knows exactly what styles and items are selling best (or worst).
	
Growth, costs, market demand, and technology advances all can push retail executives 
to rethink their business processes. But truly savvy managers search for ways to optimize 
operations, even when business is running smoothly. As Zara learned, current approaches 
will not necessarily work tomorrow. As the founder of Zara’s corporate owner, Inditex, told 
the company’s first deputy chair and CEO, “Once a month, come here thinking that we are 
near bankruptcy. You will find a lot of things to change.”32
Questions
1.	
How does an individual firm like Zara manage a supply chain? How does it get new 
products from design to store so quickly?
2.	
What are some of the ways that Zara’s supply chain management system has helped 
create value for its customers? Provide specific examples.
3.	
What challenges did Zara’s focus on supply chain efficiency create? Are all such sys-
tems destined to suffer such growing pains?
Endnotes
	 1.	 “IKEA,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IKEA.
	2.	 IKEA, “Flat Packs, Stacks and How We Ship Them,” http://www.
ikea.com/ms/en_US/the_ikea_story/working_at_ikea/work_ 
areas_logistics.html.
	3.	 Matt McCue, “Ikea: For Delighting Customers at Each and 
Every Turn,” Fast Company, February 9, 2015, http:// 
www.fastcompany.com/3039598/most-innovative- 
companies-2015/ikea.

	
SUPPLY CHAIN AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER SIXTEEN	
517
	
	
	4.	 Saabira Chaudhuri, “IKEA’s Favorite Design Idea: Shrink the 
Box,” The Wall Street Journal, June 18, 2015.
	5.	 McCue, “Ikea: For Delighting Customers at Each and Every 
Turn.”
	6.	 This chapter draws from Michael Levy, Barton A. Weitz, and 
Dhruv Grewal, Retailing Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012).
	 7.	 This chapter draws from Levy et al., Retailing Management, 
9th ed. See also the special issue, “Past, Present, and  
Future of Marketing Channels,” Journal of Retailing 91  
(December 2015), for insightful summaries of ­research  
into related topics.
	8.	 Alexander Coolidge, “Walmart’s Strategy May Squeeze  
P&G, Other Suppliers,” Cincinnati Enquirer, April 13, 2015, 
http://www.cincinnati.com/story/money/2015/04/11/ 
walmarts-back-basics-strategy-may-squeeze-pg-suppliers/ 
25632645/.
	9.	 Procter & Gamble, “Recent Innovations,” http://us.pg.com/who_
we_are/our_approach/our_approach_innovation/recent_ 
innovations.
	10.	 Based on Barton A. Weitz, “PenAgain Sells to Walmart,” in 
Michael Levy and Barton A. Weitz, Retailing Management, 8th ed. 
(Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012), pp. 564–65; http://
www.Penagain.com; Gwendolyn Bounds, “The Long Road to 
Walmart,” The Wall Street Journal, September 19, 2005, p. R1; 
Gwendolyn Bounds, “One Mount to Make It,” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 30, 2006, p. B1.
	11.	 Terry L. Esper et al., “Demand and Supply Integration: A 
Conceptual Framework of Value Creation through Knowledge 
Management,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 
38, no. 1 (2010), pp. 5–18.
	12.	 http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary.aspx.
	13.	 Andrew Elliot, “Does P&G Need Retailers Anymore?” Retail 
Wire, November 3, 2014. 
	14.	 George E. Stigler, “The Division of Labor Is Limited by the 
Extent of the Market,” Journal of Political Economy 59, no. 3 
(1951), pp. 185–93.
	15.	 Dan Berthiaume, “Three Reasons Amazon Is Everyone’s 
Competitor” Chain Store Age, November 9, 2015.
	16.	 Greg Besinger, “Amazon Wants to Ship Your Package Before 
You Buy It,” The Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2014, http://
wsjonline.com. 
	17.	 Angus Loten and Adam Janofsky, “Sellers Need Amazon,  
But at What Cost?” The Wall Street Journal, January 15,  
2015.
	18.	 Tereza Dean, David A. Griffith, and Roger J. Calantone, “New 
Product Creativity: Understanding Contract Specificity in New 
Product Introductions,” Journal of Marketing 80 (March 2016), 
pp. 39–58.
	19.	 http://www.marketingpower.com/live/mg-dictionary.
	20.	“2016 Top Franchises from Entrepreneur’s Franchise 500 List,” 
https://www.entrepreneur.com/franchise500.
	21.	 https://www.teslamotors.com/blog/tesla-approach-distributing- 
and-servicing-cars.
	22.	Lisa Scheer, Fred Miao, and Jason Garrett, “The Effects of 
Supplier Capabilities on Industrial Customers’ Loyalty: The 
Role of Dependence,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science 38, no. 1 (2010), pp. 90–104; Robert W. Palmatier, Rajiv 
Dant, and Dhruv Grewal, “A Longitudinal Analysis of Theoretical 
Perspectives of Interorganizational Relationship Performance,” 
Journal of Marketing 71 (October 2007), pp. 172–94; Robert 
W. Palmatier et al., “A Meta-Analysis on the Antecedents and 
Consequences of Relationship Marketing Mediators: Insight 
into Key Moderators,” Journal of Marketing 70 (October 
2006), pp. 136–53.
	23.	Donna Davis and Susan Golicic, “Gaining Comparative 
Advantage in Supply Chain Relationships: The Mediating Role 
of Market-Oriented IT Competence,” Journal of the Academy  
of Marketing Science 38, no. 1 (2010), pp. 56–70; Beth Davis-
Sramek, Richard Germain, and Karthik Iyer, “Supply Chain 
Technology: The Role of Environment in Predicting 
Performance,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 
38, no. 1 (2010), pp. 42–55; Erin Anderson and Barton Weitz, 
“The Use of Pledges to Build and Sustain Commitment in 
Distribution Channels,” Journal of Marketing Research 29 
(February 1992), pp. 18–34.
	24.	http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary.aspx.
	25.	http://www.vendormanagedinventory.com.
	26.	G. P. Kiesmüller and R. A. C. M. Broekmeulen, “The Benefit 
of VMI Strategies in a Stochastic Multi-Product Serial Two 
Echelon System,” Computers and Operations Research 37,  
no. 2 (2010), pp. 406–16; Dong-Ping Song and John Dinwoodie, 
“Quantifying the Effectiveness of VMI and Integrated Inventory 
Management in a Supply Chain with Uncertain Lead-Times and 
Uncertain Demands,” Production Planning & Control 19, no. 6 
(2008), pp. 590–600.
	27.	J. Lindsey-Mullikin and R. D. Petty, “Marketing Tactics 
Discouraging Price Search: Deception and Competition,” 
Journal of Business Research 64, no. 1 (2011), pp. 67–73.  
doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2009.10.003.
	28.	Jen Mosscrop, “The Fulfillment Option That Brings Customers 
Back in Store,” Chain Store Age, March 25, 2014. 
	29.	Steve Lohr, “Drafting Antitrust Case, F.T.C. Raises Pressure on 
Google,” The New York Times, October 12, 2012, http://www.
nytimes.com; Claire Cain Miller, “Europeans Reach Deal with 
Google on Searches,” The New York Times, April 14, 2013, 
http://www.nytimes.com.
	30.	Ben Latham, “How Retailers Can Learn from Fast Fashion to Beat 
the Weather,” Retail Week, April 20, 2016; Vertica Bhardwaj and 
Ann Fairhurst, “Fast Fashion: Response to Changes in the Fashion 
Industry,” International Review of Retail, Distribution and 
Consumer Research 20 (February 2010), pp. 165–73; Felipe 
Caro et al., “Zara Uses Operations Research to Reengineer Its 
Global Distribution Process,” Interfaces 40 (2010), pp. 71–84; 
Carmen Lopez and Ying Fan, “Case Study: Internationalisation of 
the Spanish Fashion Brand Zara,” Journal of Fashion Marketing 
and Management 13, no. 2 (2009), pp. 279–96.
	31.	 Christopher Bjork, “Zara Builds Its Business Around RFID,” The 
Wall Street Journal, September 17, 2014.
	32.	Zeynep Ton, Elena Corsi, and Vincent Dessain, “Zara: Managing 
Stores for Fast Fashion,” Harvard Business School Case, 
March 2011.
	 i.	 SCDigest, “Supply Chain News: Goya Foods Shows Path to 
Success for Mid-Market Companies from New Supply Chain 
Planning Tools,” July 13, 2011, http://www.scdigest.com.
	 ii.	 Taylor Soper, “Amazon’s Dominance of Online Shopping Starts 
with Product Searches, Study Shows,” Geek Wire, October 6, 
2015; Greg Besinger, “Amazon Wants to Ship Your Package 
Before You Buy It,” The Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2014, 
http://wsjonline.com.
	iii.	 Ilan Brat, “Hunger for Organic Foods Stretches the Supply 
Chain,” The Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2015.
	iv.	 Sean McLain and Newley Purnell, “Indian Startups View to Win 
E-Commerce Battle,” The Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2015.
	 v.	 Todd Sherman, “Which Same-Day Service Will Deliver the Goods 
for Retailers?” RetailWire, January 28, 2014; J.J. McCorvey, 
“AmazonFresh is Jeff Bezos’ Last Mile Quest for Total Retail 
Domination,” Fast Company, August 5, 2013; Amy Guthrie and 
Shely Banjo, “Mexico Delivers for Walmart,” The Wall Street 
Journal, February 15, 2014; James B. Stewart, “Walmart Plays 
Catch Up with Amazon,” The New York Times, October 22, 2015.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO17-1	 Discuss the four factors manufacturers should consider as they develop their strategies for 
­working with retailers.
	LO17-2	 Outline the considerations associated with choosing retail partners.
	LO17-3	 List the three levels of distribution intensity.
	LO17-4	 Describe the various types of retailers.
	LO17-5	 Describe the components of a retail strategy.
	LO17-6	 Identify the benefits and challenges of omnichannel retailing.
RETAILING AND 
OMNICHANNEL 
MARKETING
CHAPTER 17

W
hen it comes to competition among retail-
ers, pretty much everyone competes with 
Amazon. From small sellers of personal-
ized gifts to service retailers to massive 
consumer goods providers, the retail market must recognize 
that Amazon is a dominant actor, specialized in getting the 
products that customers want to them quickly, efficiently, 
and exactly when and where they want those items. In par-
ticular, Amazon offers three key benefits to retail customers. 
First, Amazon is incredibly convenient, available to meet 
shoppers’ every product need, at any time. Second, it is in-
creasing its remarkable availability even further, such as with 
its expansion into services and its introduction of new tools 
and channels to help customers interact with it more often. 
Third, just in case people want to interact personally, Amazon 
is gaining steam as a brick-and-mortar retailer as well.
Let’s consider these benefits in turn. Not only is 
Amazon’s inventory unsurpassed, but it makes ordering easy 
with checkout tools such as one-click and automatically 
­repeated purchases on frequently bought items. Then it gets 
the ordered products to customers quickly and conveniently. 
For a fee, many customers even can get the products on the 
same day. But with its expanding roster of fulfillment cen-
ters, Amazon ensures that even its free, standard shipping 
service is pretty fast.
So why does it need physical stores? It recognizes 
that some customers like to shop in an actual environ-
ment rather than a virtual one. Accordingly, Amazon plans 
to apply its remarkable facility with integrating and lever-
aging customer data to make recommendations to its 
brick-and-mortar stores. In so doing, it appears poised to 
make a successful transition from a mainly online pres-
ence to a truly omnichannel source. 
It also is making its presence felt in other ways, espe-
cially in customers’ homes. With its Echo service, Amazon 
customers who pay for Prime Now service can place or-
ders by calling out their grocery list to an artificial intelli-
gence device installed in their homes. With records of 
prior purchases, Echo can also suggest alternative op-
tions and apply previously set shipping preferences. The 
© Elaine Thompson/AP Photo

520
Retailing sits at the end of the supply chain, where marketing meets the consumer.3 But 
there is far more to retailing than just manufacturing a product and making it available to 
customers. It is primarily the retailer’s responsibility to make sure that customers’ expecta-
tions are fulfilled.
Retailing is defined as the set of business activities that add value to products and 
services sold to consumers for their personal or family use. Our definition includes prod-
ucts bought at stores, through catalogs, and over the Internet, as well as services such as 
fast-food restaurants, airlines, and hotels. Some retailers claim they sell at wholesale prices, 
but if they sell to customers for their personal use, they are still retailers, regardless of their 
prices. Wholesalers (see Chapter 16) buy products from manufacturers and resell them to 
retailers or industrial or business users.
Retailing today is changing, both in the United States and around the world. Manu-
facturers no longer rule many supply chains as they once did. Retailers such as Walmart 
(U.S. superstore), Costco (U.S. warehouse club), Kroger (U.S. grocery chain), Schwarz 
(German conglomerate), Tesco (U.K.-based food retailer), Carrefour (French hypermar-
ket), Aldi Enkauf (German discount food retailer), Metro (German retail conglomerate), 
Home Depot (U.S. home improvement), Walgreens (U.S. 
drugstore), Target (U.S. discount retailer), and Amazon (U.S. 
e-tailer)4—the largest retailers in the world—dictate to their 
suppliers what should be made, how it should be configured, 
when it should be delivered, and, to some extent, what it 
should cost. These retailers are clearly in the driver’s seat.
This chapter extends Chapter 16’s discussion of supply 
chain management by examining why and how manufacturers 
use retailers. The manufacturer’s strategy depends on its overall 
market power and how consistent a new product or product line 
is with current offerings. Consider the following scenarios:
∙    Scenario 1: Cosmetics conglomerate Estée Lauder’s 
subsidiary brand M-A-C is introducing a new line of 
mascara.
∙    Scenario 2: Coach, well known for its women’s 
handbags, has introduced a line of men’s leather goods, 
apparel, gifts, shoes, and other accessories—products 
not previously in its assortment.
LO17-1	
Discuss the four 
factors manufacturers 
should consider as 
they develop their 
strategies for working 
with retailers.
Dash device is another means for retail consumers to 
reorder various items with literally a push of a button.
And in terms of services, Amazon already functions as 
some users’ primary search engine. Among 2000 respon-
dents, 44 percent indicated that when they begin a prod-
uct search, they start on Amazon rather than on traditional 
search engines such as Google or on specific retailers’ 
own websites. If a shopper starts the purchase process 
with a search on Amazon, he or she is highly likely to re-
main with Amazon through the final steps of the process—
namely, making the purchase and even reviewing it 
thereafter. Furthermore, when asked why they chose 
Amazon, most of these respondents noted that the retailer 
offered great personalization. When they enter a search 
term, Amazon knows how to suggest related and pertinent 
products that help them make good purchase decisions.1
As consumers invite Amazon in and solicit further 
services from it, the effect the retail giant has on the mar-
ket appears destined to increase. For retailers seeking to 
compete with it—and by definition, that means pretty 
much every retailer in the world—paying attention to 
what Amazon is doing now is a necessary task. That is, 
because Amazon competes with literally every retailer, 
every retailer needs to understand what makes Amazon 
work so well if they are going to remain competitive and 
hold on to at least some of their market share.2
M-A-C will use different criteria than will either Coach for 
Men or Eva’s green cosmetics for placing products in retail 
stores.
© Linda Matlow/Alamy

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
521
	
	
∙    Scenario 3: Eva, a young entrepreneur, is launching a new line of environmentally 
friendly (green) cosmetics.
Each of these scenarios is different and requires the manufacturer to consider alternatives 
for reaching its target markets through retailers.
Exhibit 17.1 illustrates four factors manufacturers consider to establish their strategies 
for working with retailers. In choosing retail partners, the first factor, manufacturers assess 
how likely it is for certain retailers to carry their products. Manufacturers also consider where 
their target customers expect to find the products, because those are exactly the stores in 
which they want to place their products. The overall size and level of sophistication of the 
manufacturer will determine how many of the marketing channel functions it performs and 
how many it will hand off to other channel members. Another aspect in choosing retail part-
ners: The type and availability of the product and the image the manufacturer wishes to por-
tray will determine how many retailers within a geographic region will carry the products.
For the second factor, manufacturers identify the types of retailers that would be appro-
priate to carry their products. Although the choice is often obvious—such as a supermarket 
for fresh produce—manufacturers may have a choice of retailer types for some products.
As we discussed in Chapter 16, a hallmark of a strong marketing channel is one in 
which manufacturers and retailers coordinate their efforts. In the third factor, manufactur-
ers and retailers therefore develop their strategy by implementing the four Ps.
Many retailers and some manufacturers use an omnichannel or multichannel strategy, 
which involves selling in more than one channel (e.g., store, catalog, and Internet). The 
fourth factor therefore consists of examining the circumstances in which sellers may prefer 
to adopt a particular strategy. 
Although these factors for establishing a relationship with retailers are listed consecu-
tively, manufacturers may consider them all simultaneously or in a different order.
CHOOSING RETAILING PARTNERS
Imagine, as a consumer, trying to buy a new leather jacket 
without being able to visit a retailer or buy online. You would 
have to figure out exactly what size, color, and style of jacket 
you wanted. Then you would need to contact various manu-
facturers, whether in person, by phone, or over the Internet, 
and order the jacket. If the jacket fit you reasonably well but 
not perfectly, you still might need to take it to a tailor to have 
the sleeves shortened. You wouldn’t find this approach to 
shopping very convenient. However, as Superior Service 17.1 
explains, consumers are asking for other benefits from fashion 
brands that represent challenges to traditional retail channel 
structures.
Most manufacturers like Coach use retailers such as 
­Macy’s to undertake partnerships that create value by pulling to-
gether all the actions necessary for the greatest possible customer 
convenience and satisfaction. The store offers a broad selec-
tion of purses, leather jackets, scarves, and other accessories 
that its buyers have carefully chosen in advance. Customers 
LO17-2	
Outline the 
considerations 
associated with 
choosing retail 
partners.
E X H I B I T  17.1
Factors for Establishing a Relationship with Retailers
3. Developing
a retail
strategy
4. Managing an
omnichannel
strategy
1. Choosing
retailing
partners
2. Identifying
types of
retailers
Coach partners with retailers to help conveniently deliver its 
products to satisfied customers.
© MaximImages/Alamy 

522	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Removing the Retailer, Burberry Seeks to Access 
Consumers Directlyi
The catwalks at the big fashion shows have long been exciting, 
experiential events. Celebrities and fashion mavens stake out 
seats in the front rows, and critics and fashion photographers 
weigh in on the looks that are destined to catch on, as well as 
the radically creative designs that are unlikely to ever be 
re-created in the real world.
	
But the modern state of the world means that nearly anyone 
can join in on these sorts of experiences, at least virtually and at 
some level, by live streaming the events or following social me-
dia updates by attendees, posted in real time. As a result, the 
fashion houses are confronting a new and vexing problem: They 
can no longer “talk to a customer and say, ‘We’re really excited, 
we’re going to stimulate you and inspire you, but you can’t touch 
it or feel it for another six months.’” That is, the excitement cre-
ated by fashion shows is now so widespread and encompass-
ing that consumers are demanding immediate access to the 
looks that appear on the models striding down the runway.
	
In response, Burberry is giving it to them. In a radical depar-
ture from its traditional mode of operation—in which it would 
feature the season’s looks at a fashion show, receive orders 
from retailers, produce the goods, and then make them available 
to consumers about six months after the show—the fashion 
house has promised a “wear-now” option. Shoppers can see an 
outfit or piece in the fashion show, order it immediately, and 
have it in hand within a few weeks. For the privilege of doing so, 
wear-now customers will pay full price. Burberry hopes that this 
option will help mitigate the trend in which customers have got-
ten so accustomed to end-of-season sales that they simply wait 
to buy products until they are available at a discounted price.
	
The move implies major changes for other members of the 
fashion world too. For example, fashion magazines have long 
been the arbiters of what is or is not great fashion. But if con-
sumers can order the pieces on their own, will those maga-
zines continue to play their powerful role? If consumers can 
make their own choices from the runway, will they even need 
to keep buying the magazines? 
	
The other key player is the retailers that traditionally stock 
fashion brands. Although Burberry largely sells through its 
own stores, if other fashion brands adopt a similar direct run-
way-to-consumer approach, retailers might struggle to find 
customers who are willing to wait for the longer production 
process required before they can gain access to the latest 
fashions in stores.
Superior Service 17.1
Burberry’s customers can now order fashion show 
items and have them within a few weeks.
© Catwalking/Getty Images
can see, touch, feel, and try on any item while in the store. They can buy one scarf or 
leather jacket at a time or buy an outfit that works together. Finally, the store provides a 
salesperson to help customers coordinate their outfits and a tailor to make the whole thing 
fit perfectly.
When choosing retail partners, manufacturers look at the basic channel structure, 
where their target customers expect to find the products, channel member characteristics, 
and distribution intensity.
Channel Structure
The level of difficulty a manufacturer experiences in getting retailers to purchase its prod-
ucts is determined by the degree to which the channel is vertically integrated, as described 
in Chapter 16; the degree to which the manufacturer has a strong brand or is otherwise 
desirable in the market; and the relative power of the manufacturer and retailer.

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
523
	
	
Scenario 1 represents a corporate vertical marketing system. Because M-A-C is made 
by Estée Lauder and operates its own stores, when the new mascara line is introduced, the 
stores receive the new line automatically with no decision on the part of the retailer. In 
contrast, Revlon would have a much more difficult time getting CVS to buy a new mascara 
line, because these supply chain partners are not vertically integrated.
When an established firm such as Coach enters a new market with men’s leather 
goods, apparel, gifts, shoes, and other accessories, as is the case in Scenario 2, it must de-
termine where its customers would expect to find these products and then use its estab-
lished relationships with women’s handbag buyers, the power of its brand, and its overall 
reputation to leverage its position in this new product area.
Eva (Scenario 3) would have an even more difficult time convincing a retailer to buy 
and sell her green cosmetics line because she lacks power in the marketplace—she is small, 
and her brand is unknown. She would have trouble getting buyers to see her, let alone con-
sider her line. She might face relatively high slotting allowances just to get space on retail-
ers’ shelves. But like Coach in Scenario 2, Eva should consider where the end customer 
expects to find her products, as well as some important retailer characteristics.
Customer Expectations
Retailers should also know customer preferences regarding manufacturers. Manufacturers, 
in contrast, need to know where their target market customers expect to find their products 
and those of their competitors. As we see in the hypothetical example in Exhibit 17.2, 
Coach currently sells handbags at stores such as Dillard’s, Neiman Marcus, and Marshalls 
as well as in its own stores (red arrows). Its competitor Cole Haan sells at Dillard’s and 
Neiman Marcus (teal arrows). A survey of male Coach customers shows that they would 
expect to find its products at Saks Fifth Avenue, Dillard’s, Neiman Marcus, and its own 
Coach stores (all of the stores in the light blue box). On the basis of this information, 
Coach decides to try selling at Saks Fifth Avenue but to stop selling at Marshalls to better 
meet customers’ expectations.
Customers generally expect to find certain products at some stores but not at others. 
For example, Estée Lauder would not choose to sell to CVS or Dollar General because its 
customers would not expect to shop at those stores for high-end cosmetics such as Estée 
Lauder’s. Less expensive cosmetic brands such as Revlon and Maybelline, on the other 
hand are sold at CVS and probably even appear as bargain closeouts at Dollar General. But 
male Coach customers definitely expect to find the brand’s clothing offerings at major de-
partment stores and at Coach stores.
Saks Fifth Avenue
Dillard’s
Customer expectations of where
they would ﬁnd the product
Neiman Marcus
Coach
Coach stores
Cole Haan
Marshalls
E X H I B I T  17.2
Coach and Cole Haan Distribution

524	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Channel Member Characteristics
Several factors pertaining to the channel members themselves help determine 
the channel structure. Generally, the larger and more sophisticated the channel 
member, the less likely that it will use supply chain intermediaries. Eva will 
probably use a group of independent salespeople to help sell her line of green 
cosmetics, whereas a large manufacturer such as Estée Lauder will use its own 
sales force that already has existing relationships in the industry. In the same 
way, an independent grocery store might buy merchandise from a wholesaler, 
but Walmart, the world’s largest grocer, only buys directly from the manufac-
turer. Larger firms often find that by performing the channel functions them-
selves, they can gain more control, be more efficient, and save money.
Distribution Intensity
When setting up distribution for the first time, as is the case with Eva’s green 
cosmetics (Scenario 3), or introducing a new product line, as is the case with 
Coach for men (Scenario 2), firms decide the appropriate level of distribu-
tion intensity—the number of channel members to use at each level of the 
marketing channel. Distribution intensity commonly is divided into three lev-
els: intensive, exclusive, and selective.
Intensive Distribution  An intensive distribution strategy is designed to 
place products in as many outlets as possible. Most consumer packaged-goods 
companies, such as Pepsi, Procter & Gamble, Kraft, and other nationally 
branded products found in grocery and discount stores, strive for and often 
achieve intensive distribution. Pepsi wants its product available everywhere—
grocery stores, convenience stores, restaurants, and vending machines. The 
more exposure the products get, the more they sell.
Exclusive Distribution  Manufacturers also might use an exclusive distri-
bution policy by granting exclusive geographic territories to one or very few 
retail customers so that no other retailers in the territory can sell a particular 
brand. Exclusive distribution can benefit manufacturers by assuring them 
that the most appropriate retailers represent their products. Luxury goods 
firms such as Coach limit distribution to a few select, higher-end retailers in 
each region. The company believes that selling its products to full-line dis-
count stores or off-price retailers would weaken its image.
When supply is limited or a firm is just starting out, providing an exclu-
sive territory to one retailer or retail chain helps ensure enough inventory to 
provide the buying public an adequate selection. By granting exclusive terri-
tories, Eva guarantees her retailers will have an adequate supply of her green 
cosmetics. This guarantee gives these retailers a strong incentive to market 
her products. The retailers that Eva uses know there will be no competing 
retailers to cut prices, so their profit margins are protected. This knowledge 
gives them an incentive to carry more inventory and use extra advertising, 
personal selling, and sales promotions.
Selective Distribution  Between the intensive and exclusive distribution 
strategies lies selective distribution, which relies on a few selected retail cus-
tomers in a territory to sell products. Like exclusive distribution, selective 
distribution helps a seller maintain a particular image and control the flow of 
merchandise into an area. These advantages make this approach attractive to 
many shopping goods manufacturers. Recall that shopping goods are those 
products for which consumers are willing to spend time comparing alterna-
tives, such as most apparel items, home items like branded pots and pans or sheets and 
towels, branded hardware and tools, and consumer electronics. Retailers still have a strong 
incentive to sell the products, but not to the same extent as if they had an exclusive territory.
LO17-3	
List the three levels of 
distribution intensity.
Most consumer packaged-goods companies, 
such as Pepsi (top), strive for intensive distri-
bution—they want to be everywhere. But  
cosmetics firms such as Estée Lauder  
(bottom) use an exclusive distribution strategy 
by limiting their distribution to a few select 
higher-end retailers in each region.
(Top): © Kristoffer Tripplaar/Alamy; (Bottom): © Susan Van 
Etten/PhotoEdit

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
525
	
	
As we noted in Chapter 16, like any large, complicated system, a marketing channel is 
difficult to manage. Whether the balance of power rests with large retailers such as 
Walmart or with large manufacturers such as Procter & Gamble, channel members benefit 
by working together to develop and implement their channel strategy. In the next section, 
we explore the different types of retailers with an eye toward which would be most appro-
priate for each of our scenarios: M-A-C Cosmetics, Coach’s products for men, and Eva’s 
new line of environmentally friendly cosmetics.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What issues should manufacturers consider when choosing retail  
partners?
2.	 What are the differences among intensive, exclusive, and selective levels 
of distribution intensity?
IDENTIFY TYPES OF RETAILERS
At first glance, identifying the types of retailers that Coach and Eva may wish to pursue 
when attempting to place their new lines seems straightforward. But the choice is not al-
ways easy. Manufacturers need to understand the general characteristics of different types 
of retailers to determine the best channels for their product. The characteristics of a retailer 
that are important to a food manufacturer may be quite different from those considered 
valuable by a cosmetics manufacturer. In the next few sections, we examine the various 
types of retailers, identify some major players, and discuss some of the issues facing each 
type (Exhibit 17.3).
Food Retailers
The food retailing landscape is changing dramatically. Twenty years ago, consumers pur-
chased food primarily at conventional supermarkets. Now conventional supermarkets ac-
count for only slightly more than 60 percent of food sales (not including restaurants).5 Not 
only do full-line discount stores like Walmart and Target offer a full assortment of grocery 
items in their superstores, but traditional supermarkets also are carrying more nonfood 
items. Many supermarkets offer pharmacies, health care clinics, banks, and cafés.
The world’s largest food retailer, Walmart, attains more than $485 billion in sales of 
supermarket-type merchandise.6 On this measure, it is followed by Costco (United States), 
LO17-4	
Describe the various 
types of retailers.
E X H I B I T  17.3
Types of Retailers
Supermarket
Supercenter
Convenience
Food
General merchandise
Warehouse club
Auto rental
Health spa
Vision center
Service
Bank
Full-line discount
Category specialist
Drug
Specialty
Department
Oﬀ-price
Extreme value

526	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Carrefour (France), Kroger (United States), Tesco (United Kingdom), Seven & I (Japan), 
and Schwartz Group (Germany).7 In North America specifically, the largest supermarket 
chains in order are Walmart, Kroger, Costco, Loblaw, Safeway, Publix, Ahold US, C&S 
Wholesale Grocers, Albertsons, and H-E-B.8
Supermarkets  A conventional supermarket is a large, self-service retail food store 
offering groceries, meat, and produce, as well as some nonfood items such as health and 
beauty aids and general merchandise.9 Perishables including meat, produce, baked goods, 
and dairy products account for almost 54 percent of supermarket sales and typically have 
higher margins than packaged goods do.10
Whereas conventional supermarkets carry about 30,000 SKUs, limited-assortment 
supermarkets, or extreme-value food retailers, stock only about 1,500 SKUs.11 The two 
largest limited-assortment supermarket chains in the United States are Save-A-Lot and 
ALDI. Rather than carrying 20 brands of laundry detergent, limited-assortment supermar-
kets offer one or two brands and sizes, one of which is a store brand. By trimming costs, 
limited-assortment supermarkets can offer merchandise at prices 40 percent lower than 
those at conventional supermarkets.12
Although conventional supermarkets still sell the majority of food merchandise, they 
are under substantial competitive pressure on multiple sides: from supercenters, warehouse 
clubs, extreme-value retailers, convenience stores, and even drug stores.13 All these types 
of retailers have increased the amount of space they devote to consumables.
To compete successfully against intrusions by other food retailing formats, conven-
tional supermarkets are differentiating their offerings by (1) emphasizing fresh perishables; 
(2) targeting green, ethnic, and Millennial consumers; (3) providing better value with 
­private-label merchandise; (4) adding new value-added services such as online ordering 
and delivery options; and (5) providing a better shopping experience, such as by adding 
restaurant options or hosting social events.14 One excellent example of some of these 
­efforts comes in the form of a stellar grocer, Trader Joe’s, as Adding Value 17.1 explains.
Supercenters  Supercenters are large stores (185,000 square feet) that combine a super-
market with a full-line discount store. Walmart operates almost 3,500 supercenters in the 
United States,15 accounting for the vast majority of total supercenter sales—far outpacing its 
competitors Meijer, SuperTarget (Target), Fred Meyer (Kroger Co.), and Super Kmart Center 
(Sears Holding). By offering broad assortments of grocery and general merchandise products 
under one roof, supercenters provide a one-stop shopping convenience to customers.
Warehouse Clubs  Warehouse clubs are large retailers (100,000 to 150,000 square 
feet) that offer a limited and irregular assortment of food and general merchandise, little 
service, and low prices to the general public and small businesses. The largest warehouse 
club chains are Costco, Sam’s Club (Walmart), and BJ’s Wholesale Club (operating only 
on the U.S. East Coast). Customers are attracted to these stores 
because they can stock up on large packs of basics (e.g., paper 
towels), mega-sized packaged groceries (e.g., a quart of 
ketchup), best-selling books and CDs, fresh meat and produce, 
and an unpredictable assortment of upscale merchandise and 
services (e.g., jewelry, electronics, and home decor) at lower 
prices than are available at other retail stores. Typically, mem-
bers pay an annual fee of around $50, which amounts to signif-
icant additional income for the chains.
Warehouse clubs also have had substantial influences on 
retailing and its structure. For example, the four biggest ware-
house retailers accounted for approximately 8 percent of 2012 
retail sales. That’s nearly twice as much as e-commerce repre-
sented. E-commerce grew from $35 billion to $348 billion in 
sales between 1992 and 2013; in the same period, warehouse 
club sales increased from $40 billion to $420 billion. The 
growth of warehouse clubs appears largely dependent on 
Warehouse clubs have ex-
panded their assortment of 
products in the electronics 
­category and are known for 
great prices.
© Bloomberg/Contributor/Getty Images

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
527
	
	
Adding Value 17.1
Meet the Captain and Visit the Islandii
The employees are wearing tropical shirts, the product labels 
feature puns and silly rhymes, and the manager goes by “Cap-
tain.” But dismissing Trader Joe’s as a joke is a bad idea, espe-
cially if you’re another grocery store chain that wants to 
appeal to discerning shoppers. Just ask Whole Foods. The 
roots of its success are as diverse as the customers Trader 
Joe’s attracts. For example, its product lines offer organic, 
gourmet, and multicultural options (and sometimes combina-
tions of all three) rather than focusing on any one type of 
product appeal. Furthermore, those options rarely are avail-
able anywhere else, because 80 percent of Trader Joe’s prod-
uct assortment consists of its own private labels. The plentiful, 
unique options also tend to be relatively low priced—likely an 
artifact of Trader Joe’s ownership by the same family that runs 
the low-priced ALDI chain.
With these product and price offerings, rather than being 
all things to everyone, Trader Joe’s is a little something for any-
one. Full, stock-up shopping trips still require another grocer, 
but for a little something special and tasty, Trader Joe’s pro-
vides a compelling alternative. Accordingly, it attracts a diverse 
fan base, approximately equally split between households that 
earn more than $100,000 annually and those that average 
closer to $25,000. Still, many of the customers at Trader Joe’s 
exhibit some appealing similarities for retailers, including high 
levels of education, a health emphasis, and a high level of com-
fort with technological innovations.
In these traits, Trader Joe’s customers are remarkably sim-
ilar to those who shop at Whole Foods, despite the vast differ-
ences in the price positions the two chains take. Whole Foods’ 
CEO even has admitted that the company views Trader Joe’s 
as its primary competitor and that its own “365” private label 
represents a direct response to the offerings on hand at 
Trader Joe’s. Yet its unique positioning sets Trader Joe’s apart 
from other grocers in consumers’ minds; it also helps it stand 
alone when it comes to some pertinent measures of ­success—
namely, in the grocery industry, the average rate of sales per 
square foot is $521. Whole Foods, with its high-end, pricey, 
trendy image, nearly doubles that rate, with sales per square 
foot of $973. And Trader Joe’s, with its small, island-themed 
stores? It achieves an utterly astounding $1,723 per square 
foot on average.
If you don’t think shopping for groceries is fun, try Trader 
Joe’s.
© Zuma Press, Inc/Alamy
­demand in more heavily populated areas, as the store locations move from distant suburbs 
into more city centers.16
Although both Coach for Men and Eva’s products could 
be sold in warehouse clubs, these retailers probably are not 
the best choices. Both product lines will have an upscale im-
age, which is inconsistent with any warehouse club. If, how-
ever, either firm has overstock merchandise as a result of 
overestimating demand or underestimating returned merchan-
dise from retailers, warehouse clubs are a potential outlet.
Convenience Stores  Convenience stores provide a lim-
ited variety and assortment of merchandise at a convenient 
location in 3,000- to 5,000-square-foot stores with speedy 
checkout. 7-Eleven is the largest convenience store chain in 
North America, with more than 8,000 locations.17 This type 
of retailer is the modern version of the neighborhood mom-
and-pop grocery or general store. Convenience stores enable 
consumers to make purchases quickly without having to search 
through a large store and wait in a lengthy checkout line. 
Convenience store assortments are limited in terms of depth 
and breadth, and they charge higher prices than supermarkets 
In addition to convenience, 7-Eleven is a trendy place for 
young consumers in Indonesia to hang out.
© Francis Dean/Corbis 

528	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
do. Milk, eggs, and bread once represented the majority of their sales, but now most sales 
come from gasoline and cigarettes.
Convenience stores also face increased competition from other retail formats. In re-
sponse to these competitive pressures, convenience stores are taking steps to decrease their 
dependency on gasoline sales by offering fresh food and healthy fast food, tailoring assort-
ments to local markets, and making their stores even more convenient to shop. Finally, 
convenience stores are adding new services, such as financial service kiosks that give cus-
tomers the opportunity to cash checks, pay bills, and buy prepaid telephone minutes, the-
ater tickets, and gift cards.
Online Grocery Retailers  Time-strapped customers are willing to pay more to access 
options for ordering groceries online and having them delivered (e.g., for a gallon of or-
ganic milk, Safeway charges $5.99, and the delivery service Instacart charges $7.39). As a 
result, online sales of groceries have grown by 14.1 percent annually for the past five 
years.18 The set of retailers providing online capabilities continues to expand, with Amazon 
and Walmart joining the long-standing, online-only retailers such as Peapod and Fresh 
Direct.19 Furthermore, these retailers are joined by companies seeking to add value to the 
grocery channel by providing delivery services. That is, companies such as Instacart, Shipt, 
Postmates, and Google’s delivery arm promise to allow customers to place online orders 
for items from their preferred grocers.20
Still, approximately 30 percent of the online orders placed with grocery retailers in-
volve non-food items such as paper products or cleaning items. In contrast, sales in stores 
generally feature only around 14 percent nonfood items. Consumers thus rely on online 
grocers for lower profit margin nonperishable items rather than higher margin fresh fruit or 
meats. As a result, slim margins continue to be a problem for retailers as well as delivery 
services. For example, Instacart earns a profit only if the order is for more than around $68. 
Finally, even as customers call for grocery delivery services—and the industry has grown 
from 1.9 percent to 2.9 percent of total grocery sales—online grocery remains much 
smaller than other online retailing. Part of the reason may be the limited availability of 
grocery delivery services, which thus far remain accessible mainly in large cities. Delivery 
costs are also a factor even as the task is outsourced to relatively low-cost individual pri-
vate contractors. This factor also might reflect a barrier to the industry’s growth: Deliver-
ing perishable groceries to many customers is a lot easier and more feasible in dense, urban 
settings than across vast, rural distances. The expansion of this type of food retailing has 
prompted various other innovations as well, as Marketing Analytics 17.1 describes. 
Instacart enables customers to 
place online grocery orders to 
be delivered to their homes.
© Peter Dasilva/The New York Times/
Redux Pictures

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
529
	
	
How FreshDirect Figures Out How and When 
Customers Orderiii
For consumers who do their grocery shopping through elec-
tronic channels, such as those maintained by FreshDirect, the 
device they use may make big differences in the items they 
order. Accordingly, FreshDirect acknowledges its need to un-
derstand where, when, and through which channels its cus-
tomers are shopping during each interaction with the 
company.
	
As a simple example, the grocery delivery service has de-
termined that when people place orders on Saturdays or 
Sundays, they are usually doing so on their mobile devices. 
During the work week though, they largely use computers, 
suggesting that they are ordering from their desks, during 
their lunch breaks or in the midst of their work day. This differ-
ence means that the mobile site could promote more products 
that appeal to lazy weekend activities. But the traditional web-
site likely needs to be quick, so that consumers can place their 
orders before their supervisors notice that they are on a 
shopping site during work hours.
	
The company’s chief consumer officer offers a range of 
scenarios in which multichannel and multi-device capabilities 
are critical for the retailer. In particular, she highlights ques-
tions about when and where consumers prefer to find reci-
pes, as well as how they react to potential weather hazards, 
noting “Let’s say snow is coming. We don’t know exactly which 
day. We need to figure out when’s the last time we can fulfill 
orders this week. Are we going to need to shut down? We 
know people are panicked and they want their food. So we 
have to figure out where they are at that moment. Do we need 
to give a snow message on their mobile devices? And then 
coordinate it with what’s on the desktop?”
	
As people’s time spent interacting with online and mobile 
content increases, trends suggest that, conversely, their inter-
actions with each individual seller are getting shorter. Retailers 
have just a moment to appeal to these quick-moving shoppers, 
and a key element of that appeal is understanding how they 
use their various devices in specific ways.
Marketing Analytics 17.1
FreshDirect uses sophisticated analytics to understand its customers’ buying behavior so that 
it can serve them better.
Source: Fresh Direct
General Merchandise Retailers
The major types of general merchandise retailers are department stores, full-line discount 
stores, specialty stores, category specialists, home improvement centers, off-price retailers, 
and extreme-value retailers.

530	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Department Stores  Department stores are retailers that carry a broad variety and deep 
assortment of merchandise, offer customer services, and organize their stores into distinct 
departments for displaying merchandise. The list of the largest department store chains in 
the United States includes Macy’s, Kohl’s, JCPenney, and Nordstrom.21 Department stores 
would be an excellent retail channel for Coach for Men and Eva’s new lines.
Even as some observers argue that the era of the department store has come to an end, 
several retailers have introduced innovative ideas to appeal better to their existing target 
markets, as well as attract young consumers who tend to show preferences for smaller spe-
cialty stores. For example, Nordstrom has transformed its image as a high-end destination 
for only the wealthiest of shoppers by integrating an online flash sale site, Haute Look. 
There, shoppers can find famous name brands for substantially discounted prices. To make 
the varied, discounted merchandise available for hands-on buyers too, Nordstrom maintains 
its Rack stores, as an off-price arm of its retail empire. The number of Nordstrom Rack 
stores continues to grow. Furthermore, Nordstrom has created strong links between these 
two “alternative” channels, such that consumers who order the wrong size on Haute Look 
can return the products to Nordstrom Rack without having to worry about shipping it back.22
Full-Line Discount Stores  Full-line discount stores are retailers that offer a broad 
variety of merchandise, limited service, and low prices. The largest full-line discount store 
chains are Walmart, Target, and Kmart (Sears Holding).
Although full-line discount stores typically might carry men’s leather goods, accesso-
ries, and cosmetics, they are not good options for Coach for Men or Eva’s new green cos-
metics line. Customers do not expect higher-end products in full-line discount stores. Rather, 
they are looking for value prices and are willing to compromise on quality or cachet.
Walmart accounts for approximately two-thirds of full-line discount store retail sales in 
the United States.23 Target has experienced considerable growth because its stores offer fash-
ionable merchandise at low prices in a pleasant shopping environment. The retailer has devel-
oped an image of cheap chic by offering limited-edition exclusive apparel and cosmetic lines.
Specialty Stores  Specialty stores concentrate on a limited number of complementary 
merchandise categories targeted toward very specific market segments by offering deep but 
narrow assortments and sales associate expertise. Although such shops are familiar in brick-
and-mortar forms, more retailers also are expanding their online specialty profile as well.
Estée Lauder’s M-A-C line of cosmetics sells in the company’s own retail specialty 
stores as well as in some department stores. Certain specialty stores would be excellent 
outlets for the new lines by Coach for Men and Eva. Customers likely expect to find Coach 
for Men leather goods and accessories in men’s apparel or leather stores. Eva’s line of 
green cosmetics would fit nicely in a cosmetics specialty store such as Sephora.
Nordstrom’s online flash sale 
site, HauteLook, appeals to its 
existing customers and at-
tracts younger consumers by 
offering national brands at sub-
stantially discounted prices.
Source: Nordstrom

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
531
	
	
Drugstores  Drugstores are specialty stores that concentrate 
on pharmaceuticals and health and personal grooming mer-
chandise. Prescription pharmaceuticals represent almost 70 
percent of drugstore sales. The largest drugstore chains in the 
United States are CVS and Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc.24
Drugstores face competition from pharmacies in discount 
stores and some food retailers and from pressure to reduce health 
care costs. In response, the major drugstore chains are offering a 
wider assortment of merchandise such as frequently purchased 
food items. They also offer services such as convenient drive-
through windows and curbside pick-up for prescriptions, in-store 
medical clinics, and even makeovers and spa treatments.25
Although Estée Lauder’s new line would not be consis-
tent with the merchandise found in drugstores, Eva’s green 
cosmetics may be a welcome addition. Some drugstores have 
recognized consumer demand for green products, although Eva’s cosmetics may be priced 
higher than its competitors. Eva must decide whether her high-end products will suffer a 
tarnished image if she sells them in drugstores or whether drugstores could be a good 
channel for increasing her brand awareness.
Category Specialists  Category specialists are big-box retailers or category killers 
that offer a narrow but deep assortment of merchandise. Most category specialists use a 
predominantly self-service approach, but they offer assistance to customers in some areas 
of the stores. For example, the office supply store Staples has a warehouse atmosphere 
with cartons of copy paper stacked on pallets, plus equipment in boxes on shelves. But in 
some departments, such as computers, electronics, and other high-tech products, salespeople 
staff the display area to answer questions and make suggestions. Other prominent category 
specialists are: Men’s Warehouse, Best Buy, IKEA, Home Depot, and Bass Pro Shops.
By offering a complete assortment in a category at somewhat lower prices than their 
competition offers, category specialists can kill a category of merchandise for other retail-
ers, which is why they are frequently called category killers. Using their category domi-
nance, these retailers exploit their buying power to negotiate low prices.
Extreme-Value Retailers  Extreme-value retailers are small, full-line discount stores 
that offer a limited merchandise assortment at very low prices. The largest extreme-value 
retailers are Dollar General and Dollar Tree (which purchased the Family Stores chain).26
Estée Lauder’s M-A-C cosmetic 
lines sell in specialty stores 
such as Sephora.
© Rachel Murray/WireImage/Getty 
­Images
Dollar General is one of the 
United States’ largest extreme- 
value retailers. It has small full-
line discount stores that offer a 
limited assortment at very low 
prices.
© Mark Humphrey/AP Photo

532	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Like limited assortment food retailers, extreme-value re-
tailers reduce costs and maintain low prices by buying oppor-
tunistically from manufacturers with excess merchandise, 
offering a limited assortment, and operating in low-rent loca-
tions. They offer a broad but shallow assortment of household 
goods, health and beauty aids, and groceries.
Many extreme-value retailers target low-income consum-
ers, whose shopping behavior differs from that of typical dis-
count store or warehouse club customers. Although these 
consumers might demand well-known national brands, they 
often cannot afford to buy large-sized packages. So vendors 
such as Procter & Gamble often create special, smaller pack-
ages for extreme-value retailers, often using the reverse inno-
vation approaches we discussed in Chapter 8. Also, higher-income 
consumers are increasingly patronizing these stores for the thrill 
of the hunt. Some shoppers regard the extreme-value retailers 
as an opportunity to find some hidden treasure among the 
­household staples.
Extreme-value retailers would not be an obvious con-
sumer choice for Coach for Men or Eva’s new lines, because 
these stores are not consistent with the brands’ image. But if these manufacturers find 
themselves in an overstock situation, they could use these retailers to reduce inventory. For 
the same reason, they might use off-price retailers.
Off-Price Retailers  Off-price retailers offer an inconsistent assortment of brand-name 
merchandise at a significant discount from the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP). 
In today’s market, these off-price retailers may be brick-and-mortar stores, online outlets, or 
a combination of both. America’s largest off-price retail chains are TJX Companies (which 
operates TJMaxx, Marshalls, Winners [Canada], HomeGoods, HomeSense [Canada]), Ross 
Stores, Burlington Coat Factory, Big Lots Inc., and Overstock.com.
To be able to sell at prices 20 to 60 percent lower than the MSRP,27 most merchandise 
is bought opportunistically from manufacturers or other retailers with excess inventory at 
the end of the season. Therefore, customers cannot be confident that the same merchandise 
or even type of merchandise will be available each time they visit a store or website. The 
discounts off-price retailers receive from manufacturers reflect what they do not do as 
well: They do not ask suppliers to help them pay for advertising, make them take back 
unsold merchandise, charge them for markdowns, or ask them to delay payments.
Service Retailers
The retail firms discussed in the previous sections sell products to consumers.28 However, 
service retailers, or firms that primarily sell services rather than merchandise, are a large 
and growing part of the retail industry. Consider a typical Saturday: After a bagel and cup 
of coffee at a nearby Peet’s Coffee and Tea, you go to the Laundromat to wash and dry your 
clothes, drop off a suit at a dry cleaner, have a prescription filled at a CVS drugstore, and 
make your way to Jiffy Lube to have your car’s oil changed. In a hurry, you drive through 
a Burger King so you can eat lunch quickly and be on time for your haircut at Supercuts. 
By midafternoon, you’re ready for a workout at your health club. After stopping at home to 
change your clothes and meet the cleaning service that you hired through Amazon’s online 
referral site to spiffy up your apartment, you’re off to dinner, a movie, and dancing with a 
friend. Finally, you end your day with a café latte at Starbucks, having interacted with a 
dozen service retailers during the day.
There are a wide variety of service retailers, along with some national companies 
that provide these services. These companies are retailers because they sell goods and 
services to consumers. However, some are not just retailers. For example, airlines, banks, 
hotels, and insurance and express mail companies sell their services to businesses as well 
as consumers.
Off-price retailers like Big Lots offer an inconsistent assort-
ment of brand-name merchandise at a significant discount 
from the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP).
© Chris Lee/MCT/Newscom

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
533
	
	
Several trends suggest considerable future growth in services retailing. For example, 
the aging population will increase demand for health care services. Younger people are 
also spending more time and money on health and fitness. Busy parents in two-income 
families are willing to pay to have their homes cleaned, lawns maintained, clothes washed 
and pressed, and meals prepared so they can spend more time with their families.
Now that we’ve explored the types of stores, we can examine how manufacturers and 
retailers coordinate their retail strategy using the four Ps.
Service retailers, like this night-
club, sell services rather than 
merchandise.
© Lane Oatey/Blue Jean Images/Getty 
Images RF
DEVELOPING A RETAIL STRATEGY  
USING THE FOUR Ps
Like other marketers, retailers perform important functions that increase the value of the 
products and services they sell to consumers. We now examine these functions, classified 
into the four Ps: product, price, promotion, and place.
Product
A typical grocery store carries 30,000 to 40,000 items; a regional department store might 
carry as many as 100,000. Providing the right mix of merchandise and services that satisfies 
the needs of the target market is one of retailers’ most fundamental activities. Offering assort-
ments gives customers a choice. To reduce transportation costs and handling, manufacturers 
LO17-5	
Describe the 
components of a 
retail strategy.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What strategies distinguish the different types of food retailers?
2.	 What strategies distinguish the different types of general merchandise 
retailers?
3.	 Are organizations that provide services to consumers retailers?

534	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
typically ship cases of merchandise, such as cartons of mascara or boxes of leather jackets, 
to retailers. Because customers generally do not want or need to buy more than one of the 
same item, retailers break up the cases and sell customers the smaller quantities they de-
sire. Adding Value 17.2 highlights how Home Depot is providing customers better access 
to more products both in the store and online.
Manufacturers don’t like to store inventory because their factories and warehouses are 
typically not available or attractive shopping venues. Consumers don’t want to purchase 
more than they need because storage consumes space. Neither group likes keeping inven-
tory that isn’t being used, because doing so ties up money that could be used for something 
else. Thus, in addition to other values to manufacturers and customers, retailers provide a 
Adding Value 17.2
Home Depot—Providing Customers  
Better Access to Productsiv
By paying attention to what shoppers actually are buying in 
their stores, many big-box retailers that previously sought to 
stock a focused product assortment are shifting their invento-
ries to feature more seemingly mismatched items. Shoppers 
at Home Depot wanted charcoal to go along with the new 
grills they had just bought, and laundry detergent to use with 
their new washer–dryer combos, so the home improvement 
store has expanded its offerings of such consumer goods. 
Other examples may seem even less convergent though. Sta-
ples now stocks coffee pods, because office employees and 
home-based workers rely on their single-serving machines for 
a caffeine boost. But it also provides personal deodorant and 
shaving cream. By stocking such items, Staples hopes that 
people popping in for toner will also appreciate the conve-
nience of purchasing some basic necessities in the same 
store rather than visiting another retailer to gather such items.
Additionally, as customers continue to grow more comfort-
able with online buying, Home Depot is increasing its invest-
ment in its e-commerce operations. This provides customers 
access to more than 600,000 items, whereas the largest 
store can carry only 35,000 products. It also allows custom-
ers to enjoy in-home delivery of bulky products such as sinks 
or patio sets, rather than having to find a way to lug the heavy 
items home on their own. It also has set predictions for what 
it believes will be the fastest movers online: quick purchases 
such as lightbulbs and extension cords, combined with big, 
heavy items such as appliances.
With its online efforts, Home Depot also hopes to appeal to 
its business customers. Online ordering would enable a con-
tractor to put together an e-commerce order for the project it 
has scheduled for the next day and then stop by the store to 
pick up the entire supply on the way to the project site.
Why does Home Depot’s Internet site carry more than 600,000 items, while its largest 
stores carry only 35,000?
© Scott Olson/Getty Images

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
535
	
	
storage function, though many retailers are beginning to push 
their suppliers to hold the inventory until they need it. (Recall 
our discussion of JIT inventory systems in Chapter 16.)
It is difficult for retailers to distinguish themselves from 
their competitors through the merchandise they carry, because 
competitors can purchase and sell many of the same popular 
brands. Thus, many retailers have developed private-label 
brands (also called store brands), which are products devel-
oped and marketed by a retailer and available only from that 
retailer. For example, if you want a Giani Bernini leather hand-
bag, you have to go to Macy’s. 
Price
Price helps define the value of both the merchandise and the 
service, and the general price range of a particular store helps 
define its image. Although both Saks Fifth Avenue and 
JCPenney are department stores, their images could not be 
more different. Thus, when Coach considers which of these 
firms is most appropriate for its new line for men, it must keep 
in mind customers’ perceived images of these retailers’ price–
quality relationship. The company does not, for instance, want 
to attempt to sell its new line at JCPenney if it is positioning the 
line with a relatively high price.
Price must always be aligned with the other elements of a 
retailer’s strategy—that is, product, promotion, and place. A 
customer would not expect to pay $600 for a Coach for Men 
briefcase at a JCPenney store, but she might question the brief-
case’s quality if its price is significantly less than $600 at 
­Neiman Marcus. As we discovered in Chapter 14, there is much 
more to pricing than simply adding a markup onto a product’s 
cost. Manufacturers must consider at what price they will sell 
the product to retailers so that both the manufacturer and the 
retailer can make a reasonable profit. At the same time, both 
the manufacturer and the retailer are concerned about what the 
customer is willing and expecting to pay.
Promotion
Retailers and manufacturers know that good promotion, both within the retail environ-
ments and in the media, can mean the difference between flat sales and a growing con-
sumer base. Advertising in traditional media such as newspapers, magazines, and television 
continues to be important to get customers into stores. Increasingly, electronic communica-
tions are being used for promotions as well. Some traditional approaches, such as direct 
mail, are being reevaluated by retailers, but many are still finding value in sending catalogs 
to customers and selected mailing lists. Companies also offer real-time promotions on their 
websites. For example, CVS.com contains in-store and online coupons that customers can 
use immediately on the website or print to use in the store. Coupons.com offers coupons 
that customers can use immediately for many grocery store items. Retailers are also invest-
ing heavily in mobile commerce (M-commerce)—product and service purchases through 
mobile devices. 
A coordinated effort between the manufacturer and retailer helps guarantee that the 
customer receives a cohesive message and that both entities maintain their images. For 
example, Coach for Men might work with its most important retailers to develop advertis-
ing and point-of-sale signs. It may even help defray the costs of advertising by paying all 
or a portion of the advertising’s production and media costs, an agreement called cooper-
ative (co-op) advertising.
Given the price of a Coach bag, would you expect to find it 
in Saks Fifth Avenue or JCPenney?
© Peter Horree/Alamy

536	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Store credit cards and gift cards are subtler forms of promotion that 
also facilitate shopping. Retailers might offer pricing promotions—such as 
coupons, rebates, and in-store or online discounts, or perhaps buy-one-get-
one-free offers—to attract consumers and stimulate sales. These promo-
tions play a very important role in driving traffic to retail locations, 
increasing average purchase size, and creating opportunities for repeat pur-
chases. But retail promotions also are valuable to customers; they inform 
customers about what is new and available and how much it costs.
Another type of promotion occurs inside the store, where retailers use 
displays and signs placed at the point of purchase (POP) or in strategic ar-
eas such as the ends of aisles to inform customers and stimulate purchases 
of the featured products.
In addition to traditional forms of promotion, many retailers are devot-
ing more resources to their overall retail environment as a means to promote 
and showcase what the store has to offer. These promotions may take the 
form of recognizable approaches, such as in-store and window displays, or 
they may be entirely new experiences designed to help retailers draw cus-
tomers and add value to the shopping experience. Bass Pro Shops Outdoor 
World in Lawrenceville, Georgia, offers a 30,000-gallon aquarium stocked 
with fish for casting demonstrations, an indoor archery range, and a 43-foot 
climbing wall. These features enhance customers’ visual experiences, pro-
vide them with educational information, and enhance the store’s sales po-
tential by enabling customers to try before they buy. In addition to adding 
fun to the shopping experience, these activities help offset the current drop 
in brick-and-mortar customers engendered by online shopping.
A variety of factors influence whether customers will actually buy once 
they are in the store. Some of these factors are quite subtle. Consumers’ percep-
tions of value and their subsequent patronage are heavily influenced by their 
perceptions of the store’s look and feel. Music, color, scent, aisle size, lighting, 
the availability of seating, and crowding can also significantly affect the overall 
shopping experience.29 Therefore, the extent to which stores offer a more pleas-
ant shopping experience fosters a better mood, resulting in greater spending.
Consider the funky C. Wonder emporium for example. This 
7,000-square-foot store is divided into various nooks, each with its own 
Customers receive promotions from CVS on 
their mobile devices that can be used immedi-
ately in the store. 
Source: CVS
The customer experience is 
enhanced at C. Wonder by dis-
playing merchandise in a vari-
ety of nooks with different 
personalities, having electroni-
cally enhanced fitting rooms, 
and using microchips embed-
ded in the sales tags so cus-
tomers can check out 
anywhere in the store.
Courtesy of C. Wonder

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
537
	
	
personality or feel, including English Town House, Vail Cabin, Palm Springs Modern, and 
Hollywood Regency. The separate sectors help customers navigate through the vast amount 
of merchandise available. To grant them control over their experience, C. Wonder’s fitting 
rooms also come equipped with control panels that allow people trying on items to adjust 
the lighting as well as the type and volume of music played to suit their preferences.30
Personal selling and customer service representatives are also part of the overall pro-
motional package. Retailers must provide services that make it easier to buy and use prod-
ucts, and retail associates—whether in the store, on the phone, or on the Internet—provide 
customers with information about product characteristics and availability. These individu-
als can also facilitate the sale of products or services that consumers perceive as compli-
cated, risky, or expensive, such as an air conditioning unit, a computer, or a diamond ring. 
Manufacturers can play an important role in preparing retail sales and service associates to 
sell their products. Eva thus could conduct seminars or webinars about how to use and sell 
her new line of green cosmetics and supply printed educational materials to sales associ-
ates. Last but not least, sales reps handle the sales transactions.
Traditionally, retailers treated all their customers the same. Today, the most successful 
retailers concentrate on providing more value to their best customers. The knowledge re-
tailers gain from their store personnel, the Internet browsing and buying activities of cus-
tomers, and the data they collect on customer shopping habits can be used in customer 
relationship management (CRM). Using this information, retailers may modify product, 
price, and/or promotion to attempt to increase their share of wallet—the percentage of the 
customer’s purchases made from that particular retailer. For instance, omnichannel retail-
ers use consumer information collected from the customers’ Internet browsing and buying 
behavior to send dedicated e-mails to customers promoting specific products or services. 
Retailers also may offer special discounts to good customers to help them become even 
more loyal.
Place
Retailers already have realized that convenience is a key in-
gredient to success, and an important aspect of this success is 
convenient locations.31 As the old cliché claims, the three 
most important things in retailing are location, location, loca-
tion. Many customers choose stores on the basis of where they 
are located, which makes great locations a competitive advan-
tage that few rivals can duplicate. For instance, once Starbucks 
saturates a market by opening in the best locations, Peet’s will 
have difficulty breaking into that same market—where would 
it put its stores?
In pursuit of better and better locations, retailers are ex-
perimenting with different options to reach their target mar-
kets. Walgreens has free-standing stores, unconnected to other 
retailers, so the stores can offer drive-up windows for custom-
ers to pick up their prescriptions. Walmart, Staples, and others 
are opening smaller stores in urban locations to serve those 
markets better.
THE INTERNET AND OMNICHANNEL 
RETAILING
The addition of the Internet channel to traditional store-based retailers has improved 
their ability to serve their customers and build a competitive advantage in several 
ways. According to Social and Mobile Marketing 17.1, IKEA effectively exemplifies 
these benefits.
LO17-6	
Identify the benefits 
and challenges of 
omnichannel retailing.
To make their locations more convenient, Walgreens has 
some freestanding stores not connected to other retailers so 
the stores can offer a drive-up window for customers to pick 
up their prescriptions.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Andrew Resek, photographer

538	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
First, the addition of an Internet channel has the potential to offer a greater selection of 
products. Second, an Internet channel enables retailers to provide customers with more 
personalized information about products and services. Third, it offers sellers the unique 
opportunity to collect information about consumer shopping behavior—information that 
they can use to improve the shopping experience across all channels. Fourth, the Internet 
channel allows sellers to enter new markets economically.
Deeper and Broader Selection
One benefit of adding the Internet channel is the vast number of alternatives retailers can 
make available to consumers without crowding their aisles or increasing their square foot-
age. Stores and catalogs are limited by their size. By shopping on the Internet, consumers 
can easily visit and select merchandise from a broader array of retailers. Individual retail-
ers’ websites typically offer deeper assortments of merchandise (more colors, brands, and 
sizes) than are available in stores or catalogs. This expanded offering enables them to sat-
isfy consumer demand for less popular styles, colors, or sizes. Many retailers also offer a 
broader assortment (more categories) on their websites. Staples.com, for instance, offers 
soft drinks and cleaning supplies, which are not available in stores, so that its business 
customers will view it as a one-stop shop.
Personalization
Another benefit of adding the Internet channel is the ability to personalize promotions and 
services economically, including heightened service or individualized offerings.
Personalized Customer Service  Traditional Internet channel approaches for respond-
ing to customer questions—such as FAQ (frequently asked question) pages and offering an 
In-Store and Online Analytics at IKEAv
Social & Mobile Marketing 17.1
IKEA’s affordable, ready-to-assemble product line has made it 
the go-to place for furnishing a new home, apartment, or 
room. Much of its success stems from its unique store layouts, 
which force shoppers to walk past virtually every product of-
fered, as displayed in sample rooms that have been modeled 
to inspire their design ideas. The layout also helps IKEA recog-
nize which sorts of displays of what types of products invoke 
purchases—a sort of elemental analytics that benefits its strat-
egy. Thus, when IKEA first decided to launch its website, it al-
ready recognized the importance of analytics as vital 
information that would enable it to serve its customers better.
	
Initially, IKEA’s analytics-oriented focus was on website devel-
opment. With its massive product range, the retailer had to find 
ways to discover pertinent patterns in consumers’ product nav-
igation and selection approaches. As it gathered such informa-
tion, IKEA could begin to revise its site and successfully design a 
web page that encouraged customers to slow down during 
their online browsing, which would lead them to be inspired by 
new products, design ideas, and other services the company of-
fers, but without ever sacrificing the convenience they demanded.
	
Having achieved that goal, IKEA turned its focus to increas-
ing its online presence. For this feat, it needed to do more than 
analyze data that it had gathered from its own site. It needed 
data from social networking sites. These social media-derived 
insights suggest channels and routes for improving consum-
ers’ perceptions of the brand. The influences of these analyt-
ics on many of IKEA’s online actions are evident. For example, 
when “The Dress” became a vastly and inexplicably trending 
topic (is it white and gold or black and blue? and why could no 
one agree?), IKEA rapidly leveraged the social media sensation 
to plug its products by using the hashtag #TheDress. 
IKEA’s analytics are used for website development and to 
improve its social media presence.
© Sergio Dionisio/Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
539
	
	
800 number or e-mail address to ask questions—often do not provide the timely informa-
tion customers are seeking. To improve customer service from an electronic channel, many 
firms offer live online chats, so that customers can click a button at any time and partici-
pate in an instant messaging conversation with a customer service representative. This 
technology also enables firms to send a proactive chat invitation at specific times to visitors 
to the site. Verizon Wireless programs its chat windows to appear at the moment a customer 
chooses a product, because its goal is to upsell these willing buyers to a more expensive 
plan.32 Other online retailers use metrics such as the amount of time spent on the site or 
number of repeat visits to determine which customers will receive an invitation to chat.
Personalized Offering  The interactive nature of the Internet also provides an opportu-
nity for retailers to personalize their offerings for each of their customers, based on cus-
tomers’ behavior. Just as a well-trained salesperson would make recommendations to 
customers prior to checkout, an interactive web page can make suggestions to the shopper 
about items that he or she might like to see based on previous purchases, what other cus-
tomers who purchased the same item purchased, or common web viewing behavior.
Some omnichannel retailers are able to personalize promotions and Internet home 
pages on the basis of several attributes tied to the shopper’s current or previous web ses-
sions, such as the time of day, time zone as determined by a computer’s Internet address, 
and assumed gender.33 However, some consumers worry about this ability to collect infor-
mation about purchase histories, personal information, and search behavior on the Internet. 
How will this information be used in the future? Will it be sold to other firms?  Will the 
consumer receive unwanted promotional materials online or in the mail?
Expanded Market Presence
The market for customers who shop in stores is typically limited to consumers living in 
close proximity to those stores. The market for catalogs is limited by the high cost of print-
ing and mailing them and increasing consumer interest in environmentally friendly prac-
tices. By adding the Internet channel, retailers can expand their market without having to 
build new stores or incur the high cost of additional catalogs. Adding an Internet channel is 
particularly attractive to retailers that have strong brand names but limited locations and 
distribution. For example, retailers such as Nordstrom, REI, IKEA, and L.L.Bean are widely 
known for offering unique, high-quality merchandise. If these retailers had only a few stores, 
customers would have to travel vast distances to buy the merchandise they carry.
To ensure effective omnichannel retailing practices, modern retailers need to acknowl-
edge modern consumers’ preferences. That is, consumers desire a seamless experience 
when interacting with omnichannel retailers. They want to be recognized by a retailer, 
whether they interact with a sales associate, the retailer’s website, or the retailer’s call cen-
ter by telephone. Customers want to buy a product through the retailer’s Internet or catalog 
channels and pick it up or return it to a local store; find out if a product offered on the In-
ternet channel is available at a local store; and, when unable to find a product in a store, 
determine if it is available for home delivery through the retailer’s Internet channel.
However, providing this seamless experience for customers is not easy for retailers. 
Because each of the channels is somewhat different, a critical decision facing omnichannel 
retailers is the degree to which they should or are able to integrate the operations of the 
channels.34 To determine how much integration is best, each retailer must address issues 
such as integrated CRM, brand image, pricing, and the supply chain.
Integrated CRM
Effective omnichannel operations require an integrated CRM (customer relationship manage-
ment) system with a centralized customer data warehouse that houses a complete history of 
each customer’s interaction with the retailer, regardless of whether the sale occurred in a 
store, on the Internet, or on the telephone.35 This information storehouse allows retailers to 
efficiently handle complaints, expedite returns, target future promotions, and provide a seam-
less experience for customers when they interact with the retailer through multiple channels.

540	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
Brand Image
Retailers need to provide a consistent brand image across all 
channels. For example, Patagonia reinforces its image of sell-
ing high-quality, environmentally friendly sports equipment in 
its stores, catalogs, and website. Each of these channels em-
phasizes function, not fashion, in the descriptions of 
Patagonia’s products. Patagonia’s position about taking care 
of the environment is communicated by carefully lighting its 
stores and using recycled polyester and organic rather than 
pesticide-intensive cotton in many of its clothes.
Pricing
Pricing represents another difficult decision for omnichannel 
retailers. Customers expect pricing consistency for the same 
SKU across channels (excluding shipping charges and sales tax). However, in some cases, 
retailers need to adjust their pricing strategy because of the competition they face in differ-
ent channels. For example, to compete effectively against Amazon.com, Barnes & Noble 
offers lower prices through its Internet channel (www.bn.com) than it offers in its stores.
Retailers with stores in multiple markets often set different prices for the same mer-
chandise to compete better with local stores. Customers generally are not aware of these 
price differences because they are exposed to the prices only in their local markets. How-
ever, omnichannel retailers may have difficulties sustaining these regional price differ-
ences when customers can easily check prices on the Internet.
Supply Chain
Omnichannel retailers struggle to provide an integrated shopping experience across all 
their channels, because unique skills and resources are needed to manage each channel.36 
For example, store-based retail chains operate and manage many stores, each requiring the 
management of inventory and people. With Internet and catalog operations, inventory and 
telephone salespeople instead are typically centralized in one or two locations. Also, retail 
distribution centers (DCs) supporting a store channel are designed to ship many cartons of 
Multichannel retailers like Pata-
gonia sell on the Internet, in 
catalogs, and in stores.
Source: Patagonia, Inc.
2011
winter

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
541
	
	
merchandise to stores. In contrast, the DCs supporting a catalog and Internet channel are 
designed to ship a few items at a time to many individual customers. The difference in 
shipping orientation for the two types of operations requires a completely different type of 
distribution center.
Due to these operational differences, many store-based retailers have a separate orga-
nization to manage their Internet and catalog operations. But as the omnichannel operation 
matures, retailers tend to integrate all operations under one organization. Both Walmart 
and JCPenney initially had separate organizations for their Internet channel but subse-
quently integrated them with stores and catalogs.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the components of a retail strategy?
2.	 What are the advantages of traditional stores versus Internet-only 
stores?
3.	 What challenges do retailers face when marketing their products 
through multiple channels?
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Discuss the four factors manufacturers should 
consider as they develop their strategy for work-
ing with retailers.
	
	
When they initiate the decision process for choosing 
retail partners, manufacturers determine how likely 
it is that certain retailers would carry their products 
and whether target customers expect to find their 
products for sale at those retail locations. Next, 
manufacturers need to identify types of retailers that 
would be appropriate locations for their products. 
After identifying likely and appropriate retailers, 
manufacturers work with their retailer partners to 
develop a strategy that comprises the four Ps. Fi-
nally, manufacturers, again with their retail partners, 
must determine which elements of an omnichannel 
strategy will be effective.
	
	
Outline the considerations associated with choos-
ing retail partners.
	
	
Manufacturers often start by noting the basic channel 
structure, which includes the level of vertical inte-
gration, the relative strength of the retailer and the 
manufacturer, and the strength of the brand. They 
also consider where their target customers expect to 
find products, which depends largely on the retailer’s 
image. Channel member characteristics also are im-
portant inputs, as is the level of distribution intensity.
	
	
List the three levels of distribution intensity.
	
	
Intensive distribution intensity means the product is 
available virtually everywhere, in as many places as 
LO17-1
LO17-2
LO17-3
will agree to carry it. In an exclusive distribution in-
tensity strategy, the manufacturer allows only one re-
tailer (or retail chain) in each area to sell its products. 
Selective distribution is the middle ground option; 
several retailers carry the products, but not all of them.
	
	
Describe the various types of retailers.
	
	
Retailers generally fall into one of three categories: 
food retailers, general merchandise retailers, or ser-
vice retailers. Each of the categories consists of var-
ious formats, including supermarkets, supercenters, 
warehouse clubs, convenience stores, department 
stores, discount stores, specialty retailers, drug-
stores, category specialists, extreme-value retailers, 
and off-price stores. Although service retailers pri-
marily sell services, if they sell to consumers, they 
are still retailers. Service retailers span the gambit 
from universities to automobile oil change shops.
	
	
Describe the components of a retail strategy.
	
	
To develop a coordinated strategy—which rep-
resents a key goal for an effective channel partner-
ship between retailers and manufacturers—retailers 
as well as manufacturers need to consider all of the 
four Ps in conjunction: product, place, promotion, 
and price.
	
	
Identify the benefits and challenges of omnichan-
nel retailing.  
	
	
The various types of retail channels—stores, cata-
logs, and the Internet—all offer their own benefits 
LO17-4
LO17-5
LO17-6

542	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
and limitations, including those related to availabil-
ity, convenience, and safety, among others. If a re-
tailer adopts an omnichannel strategy, it can exploit 
the benefits and mitigate the limitations of each 
channel and help expand its overall market presence. 
Furthermore, an omnichannel strategy offers the 
chance to gain a greater share of customers’ wallets 
and more insight into their buying behaviors.
	
	
To function in multiple channels, retailers must or-
ganize their operations carefully to ensure an inte-
grated customer experience. In particular, they have 
to have an integrated CRM system, determine how 
to maintain a consistent brand image across the var-
ious channels, whether to charge the same or differ-
ent prices, and how best to deliver merchandise to 
multiple channels.
Key Terms
∙	 big-box retailer,  531
∙	 category killer,  531
∙	 category specialist,  531
∙	 convenience store,  527
∙	 conventional supermarket,  526
∙	 cooperative (co-op) advertising,  535
∙	 department store,  530
∙	 distribution intensity,  524
∙	 drugstore,  531
∙	 exclusive distribution,  524
∙	 extreme-value food retailer,  526
∙	 extreme-value retailer,  531
∙	 full-line discount store,  530
∙	 intensive distribution,  524
∙	 limited-assortment supermarket,  526
∙	 mobile commerce  
(M-commerce),  535
∙	 off-price retailer,  532
∙	 omnichannel or multichannel  
strategy,  521
∙	 online chat,  539
∙	 private-label brand,  535
∙	 retailing,  520
∙	 selective distribution,  524
∙	 service retailer,  532
∙	 share of wallet,  537
∙	 store brand,  535
∙	 specialty store,  530
∙	 supercenter,  526
∙	 warehouse club,  526
Marketing Digitally
1.	 How do JCrew.com and Gap.com provide value to their 
customers beyond the physical products they sell? Why 
would a customer purchase online instead of going to 
the store? Under what circumstances would the cus-
tomer prefer a store-based experience?
2.	 Select a familiar omnichannel retailer. Evaluate its web-
site in terms of how well it provides value to its custom-
ers. Do you believe that offering multiple selling channels 
to customers enhances their shopping experience? How 
does it help the retailer? Explain your answer.
Marketing Applications
1.	 Does Reebok pursue an intensive, an exclusive, or a se-
lective distribution intensity strategy? Would you sug-
gest any changes to this strategy?
2.	 Assume that AG, the designer jeans company, has de-
cided to sell expensive wristwatches for men and 
women. What factors should it consider when develop-
ing its strategy for choosing retail partners?
3.	 Some argue that retailers can be eliminated from the 
distribution channel because they only add costs to the 
final product without creating any value-added services 
in the process. Do you agree with this perspective? Are 
consumers likely to make most purchases directly from 
manufacturers in the near future? Provide justification 
for your answers.
4.	 Assume you have been given some money but told that 
it must be invested in a retailer’s stock. In which type of 
retailer would you choose to invest? Which specific re-
tailer? Provide a rationale for your answers.
5.	 Provide examples of how manufacturers work with re-
tailers to jointly plan and implement the four Ps.
6.	 Why have so many brick-and-mortar retailers adopted 
an omnichannel strategy?
7.	 You can purchase apparel at a discount store, specialty 
store, category specialist, off-price retailer, department 
store, or Internet-only store. From which of these types 
of stores do you shop? Explain why you prefer one type 
store over another.

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
543
	
	
8.	 Should Tana, a young entrepreneur who is launching 
a new line of environmentally friendly (green) cos-
metics, sell through a physical store, catalog, or Inter-
net? Explain two key benefits of each channel for her 
business.
9.	 Name a retailer from which you have received personal-
ized service, product, or promotion offerings online. 
What form of personalization did you receive? Did the 
personalization influence your purchase decision? Ex-
plain why or why not.
1.	
 reduce costs and maintain low prices by buy-
ing opportunistically from manufacturers with excess 
inventory, offering limited assortments of household 
goods and groceries, as well as health and beauty aids.
a.  Category killers
b.  Specialty stores
c.  Factory outlets
d.  Extreme-vlaue retailers
e.  Convenience stores
2.	 Jordan directs her salespeople to increase the company’s 
share of wallet. Jordan is directing her salespeople to 
a.  focus on increasing sales to their best customers. 
b.  focus on male consumers and not female consumers.
c.  sell more store brands and fewer private-label products.
d.  become omnichannel salespeople.
e.  expand retailing elasticity. 
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
MAKING MACY’S MEANINGFUL: MOVES BY THE RETAIL CHAIN  
TO MAINTAIN ITS COMPETITIVENESS 
Faced with some surprising sales declines and threats to its status as the leading depart-
ment store brand, Macy’s has developed a multipronged strategy, seeking to leverage its 
existing advantages as well as some new retail options. Three key efforts reflect its expan-
sion as an omnichannel retailer, its pursuit of relevant target customers, and its partnerships 
with other retail sources. 
	
First, Macy’s has a great online presence, and it simultaneously has adopted in-store 
technologies that help customers find the items they want, design fashionable outfits, make 
payments more easily, receive discounts, and even have their purchases delivered if they so 
choose. For example, with large Look Book displays, consumers interact with a sort of 
digital catalog in the store, finding fashionable ideas, ways to extend their existing ward-
robes, and images from forward-thinking fashion icons. Touching the screen enables them 
to check the availability of various colors and sizes as well as receive more detailed infor-
mation about items that are of interest. The POP (point-of-purchase) terminals in Macy’s 
stores similarly are touchscreens that provide extensive inventory information, though they 
are more functional than fashionable. These smaller kiosks indicate which colors and styles 
are available and also identify which items have prompted the most Facebook likes or cus-
tomer favorite rankings.
	
When it comes time to pay, Macy’s is working to make the process easier and quicker by 
installing Apple Pay capabilities throughout its network of stores. As one of the earliest adopt-
ers of this new technology, Macy’s is seeking to appeal to Apple fans who love to use their 
iPhones for nearly everything. With Macy’s Wallet and the Shopkick app, customers have two 
methods to receive coupons and special offers. Once downloaded, the Shopkick app requires 
people to opt in, and then, as they enter a Macy’s store, reminds them to open it so that they 
can receive personalized notifications. It tracks their movements through the store, so that a 
shopper in the outerwear department receives a discount offer on gloves rather than cosmetics, 
for example. The Macy’s Wallet program is similar, except that it is unique to this retailer and 
links to consumers’ loyalty cards. A shopper who has earned a percentage-off offer, on the 
Chapter Case Study 

544	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
basis of her or his prior purchases, thus no longer needs to worry about forgetting and leaving 
the paper coupon at home rather than bringing it on the current shopping trip. 
	
Finally, using a crowdsourced delivery service called Deliv, Macy’s offers customers 
the option of making their purchases in the store, then having them delivered to their 
homes, such that they no longer have to lug heavy packages through the mall.37
	
However, according to one analyst, the inventory in Macy’s stores is often messy and 
seemingly overstocked, without sufficient on-duty personnel to keep the experience mov-
ing along nicely. Thus it might need to reorient its focus more on people and less on tech-
nology to maintain its high level of customer experience. As we discussed in the opening 
vignette to this chapter, to compete with Amazon, which continues to wow customers with 
its innovations, rapid delivery options, successful appeal to consumers, insurmountable 
product and service selection, and effective pricing, it needs to leverage its multiple chan-
nels and exploit its omnichannel potential to its full extent.38
	
Second, Macy’s had determined that it needs to pursue those elusive young shoppers 
known as Millennials. Accordingly, it has implemented a $400 million renovation effort 
for its flagship New York City store, testing out various options that might attract more of 
the market of shoppers between the ages of 18 and 35 years. The basement level is newly 
designated “One Below,” and it offers a notably different shopping experience. In addition 
to merchandise designed to appeal to Millennials, it provides services such as blow-drying 
stations, jean embroidering, and watch engraving. Shoppers can use a 3D printer to create 
their own custom jewelry, and a touchscreen wall allows them to take high-quality selfies.39 
These tests, if successful, are likely to spread to other locations as well. In the meantime, 
Macy’s is opening more off-price stores, seemingly following the successful lead of Nord-
strom with its Nordstrom Rack stores. 
	
These moves reflect the conventional wisdom about what Millennials want. In partic-
ular, studies show that these young consumers tend to devote their spending more to per-
sonal or digital services than to apparel. They also suffer higher levels of debt, mostly due 
to student loans, and earn less on average than previous generations have. As a result, they 
generally seek lower-priced options for their fashion choices. This preference puts them in 
direct contrast with the previous big cohort of shoppers—namely, the Baby Boomers. The 
consumers in this age group, as they start to retire from the work force, exhibit strong 
spending patterns and have enviable levels of discretionary income and time. From this 
perspective, some observers suggest Macy’s might be going after the wrong age 
­demographic—unless Baby Boomers like selfie walls too.
At Macy’s flagship New York 
City store, the newly designated 
“One Below” in the basement  
offers merchandise designed to 
appeal to Millennials, as well as 
services like this brow bar.
© Chris Goodney/Bloomberg/ 
Getty Images

	
RETAILING AND OMNICHANNEL MARKETING  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN	
545
	
	
	
Third, noting the success enjoyed by Best Buy when it opened dedicated stores within 
the stores, which reflect its strong relationships with vendors and ability to offer the kind 
of variety its customers demand, Macy’s entered into a partnership with Best Buy but 
flipped their roles. That is, as the host location, Macy’s opened several Best Buy opera-
tions within about a dozen of its department stores. The mini-Best Buys take up about 300 
square feet of space and offer tablets, smartphones, smartwatches, audio devices, and ac-
cessories. As in traditional Best Buy stores, Samsung has a strong presence. Staffing the 
in-store stores will be Best Buy personnel, ready to answer shoppers’ questions about high-
tech devices. Best Buy’s recent resurgence, as well as Macy’s willingness to innovate, have 
contributed to the new initiative. In addition, Macy’s notes that customers are seeking 
more variety in the items available to them, whether to purchase for themselves or as gifts. 
By adding the latest and coolest electronics gadgets—whether as tools to help people shop 
or as an expanded variety for consumers to purchase—Macy’s seeks to ensure that it is a 
shopping destination for virtually anyone.40
Questions
1.	
In which channels is Macy’s attempting to appeal to consumers? 
2.	
What is Macy’s plan to attract Millennials?
3.	
Do you shop at Macy’s? Why or why not? 
4.	
Using the factors for choosing retail partners outlined in the chapter, do you believe 
that Eva’s line of green cosmetics should attempt to get placement in Macy’s? 
5.	
Develop a strategy for Macy’s to promote Eva’s line of green cosmetics.
	 1.	 Taylor Soper, “Amazon’s Dominance of Online Shopping Starts 
with Product Searches, Study Shows,” Geek Wire, October 6, 
2015.
	2.	 Dan Berthiaume, “Three Reasons Amazon Is Everyone’s 
Competitor,” Chain Store Age, November 9, 2015. 
	3.	 This chapter draws heavily from Michael Levy, Barton A. Weitz, 
and Dhruv Grewal, Retailing Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, 
IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2015). 
	4.	 “Top 250 Global Retailers, 2016,” Store Magazine, January 
2016, https://nrf.com/2016/global250-table. 
	5.	 “Sales of Food at Home by Type of Outlet Table,” USDA 
Economic Research Service, 2016, http://www.ers.usda.gov/
datafiles/Food_Expenditures/Food_Expenditures/table14.xls.
	6.	 “2016 Top 250 Global Powers of Retailing,” Stores, January 
2016, https://nrf.com/news/2016-top-250-global-powers-of- 
retailing#top10.
	 7.	 “Top 25 Global Food Retailers 2015,” Supermarket News, 
2015, http://supermarketnews.com/top-25-global-food- 
retailers-2015.
	8.	 “2015 Top 75 U.S. & Canadian Food Retailers & Wholesalers,” 
Supermarket News, 2015, http://supermarketnews.
com/2015-top-75-us-canadian-food-retailers-wholesalers. 
	9.	 “Conventional Supermarket,” TermWiki, http://en.termwiki.com/
EN:conventional_supermarket (accessed April 27, 2016).
	10.	 Progressive Grocer. “Share of Supermarket Sales in the United 
States in 2014, by Department,” Statista, The Statistics Portal, 
July 2015,  http://www.statista.com/statistics/240580/ 
breakdown-of-us-supermarket-sales-by-department/.
	11.	 Ashley Lutz, “Aldi’s Secrets for Selling Cheaper Crockeries than 
Wal-Mart or Trader Joe’s,” Business Insider, April 8, 2015, 
http://www.businessinsider.com/why-aldi-is-so-cheap-2015-4.
	12.	 Ibid.
	13.	 George Anderson, “Supermarkets Continue to Give Ground to 
Other Channels,” Retail Wire, February 19, 2014, http://www. 
retailwire.com/discussion/17340/supermarkets-contin-
ue-to-give-ground-to-other-channels.
	14.	 Eliza Barclay, “Grocery Stores Are Losing You. Here’s  
How They Plan to Win You Back,” NPR, March 30, 2015,  
http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2015/03/30/395774725/
grocery-stores-are-losing-you-heres-how-they-plan-to-win- 
you-back. 
	15.	 http://corporate.walmart.com/our-story/locations/united- 
states#/united-states.
	16.	 Sarah Halzack, “A Case for Costco and Other Warehouse 
Clubs Having Transformed Retail More than Amazon,” 
Washington Post, September 2, 2015.
	17.	 “2016 Top 101 Convenience Stores,” CPS, http://www.cspdailynews. 
com/industry-news-analysis/top-convenience-stores. 
	18.	 Sarah Halzack, “The Staggering Challenges of the Online 
Grocery Business,” Washington Post, January 20, 2015. 
	19.	 Tom Ryan, “Is Online Grocery Finally Ready for Launch?” Retail 
Wire, January 23, 2014. 
	20.	Joseph Pisani, “What’s Better for Grocery Delivery: Google, 
Instacart, or Postmates?” Mercury News Business,  
June 19, 2014. 
	21.	 “Fortune 500,” Fortune, http://fortune.com/fortune500/.
	22.	Kelly Tackett, “An Evolutionary Tale from Nordstrom,” Retail 
Wire, May 8, 2014.
	23.	Forbes, “Sales of the Leading Discount Store Companies 
Worldwide in 2014 (in Billion U.S. Dollars),” Statista, May 2015,  
http://www.statista.com/statistics/257983/sales-of-the-leading-
discount-store-companies-worldwide/.
Endnotes

546	
Section Six  VALUE DELIVERY: DESIGNING THE CHANNEL AND SUPPLY CHAIN
	24.	Corey Stern, “CVS and Walgreens Are Completely Dominating 
the US Drugstore Industry,” Business Insider, July 29, 2015, 
http://www.businessinsider.com/cvs-and-walgreens-us-drug-
store-market-share-2015-7.
	25.	Kate Taylor, “CVS Is Making an Unprecedented Move to Hook 
Millennial Moms,” Business Insider, April 19, 2016, http://www.
businessinsider.com/cvs-adds-curbside-pickup-service-2016-4; 
“12 New In-Store, Online, and Mobile Drugstore Services that 
Save You Time and Money,” Consumer Reports, August 2014, 
http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/2014/08/new-pharmacy- 
services/index.htm.
	26.	Jenna Martin, “Top 10 Stories of 2015: Family Dollar Completes 
Merger with Dollar Tree,” Charlotte Business Journal, December 15,  
2015, http://www.bizjournals.com/charlotte/news/2015/12/15/
top-10-stories-of-2015-family-dollar-completes.html.
	27.	http://www.wikinvest.com/industry/Off-price_Retail.
	28.	This section draws from Levy et al., Retailing Management, 
Chapter 2.
	29.	Nancy M. Pucinelli et al., “The Value of Knowing What 
Customers Really Want: Interpersonal Accuracy as an 
Environmental Cue,” working paper (2012); Nancy Puccinelli et 
al., “Customer Experience Management in Retailing: 
Understanding the Buying Process,” Journal of Retailing 85 
(2009), pp. 15–30.
	30.	Patricia Marx, “C. Wonder,” The New Yorker, November 21, 
2011, p. 34.
	31.	 Kathleen Seiders et al., “SERVCON: A Multidimensional Scale 
for Measuring Perceptions of Service Convenience,” Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science 35, no. 1 (2007), pp. 144–56; 
Leonard Berry, Kathleen Seiders, and Dhruv Grewal, 
“Understanding Service Convenience,” Journal of Marketing 
66, no. 3 (July 2002).
	32.	http://www.verizonwireless.com/smartphones/.
	33.	“Sponsored Supplement: Expanding the Reach of 
Personalization,” Internet Retailer, March 2010.
	34.	Christian Homburg, Josef Vollmayr, and Alexander Hahn, “Firm 
Value Creation through Major Channel Expansions: Evidence 
from an Event Study in the United States, Germany, and China,” 
Journal of Marketing, 2014, http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jm.12.0179.
	35.	Hongshuang (Alice) Li and P. K. Kannan, “Attributing 
Conversions in a Multichannel Online Marketing Environment: 
An Empirical Model and a Field Experiment,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 51 (February 2014), pp. 40–56.
	36.	Jie Zhang et al., “Crafting Integrated Multichannel Retailing 
Strategies,” Journal of Interactive Marketing, 2010.
	37.	Alexander Coolidge, “Hate Checkout Lines? Macy’s Can Help,” 
Cincinnati Inquirer, October 3, 2014. 
	38.	Ken Lonyai, “Rivals Need to Up Customer Experiences to 
Compete with Amazon,” Retail Wire, January 12, 2016. 
	39.	Marina Nazario, “Macy’s Has a Master Plan to Capture the 
Most Difficult Customers,” Business Insider, October 3, 2015. 
	40.	George Anderson, “Best Buy to Open Shops Inside Macy’s 
Stores,” Retail Wire, September 9, 2015. 
	 i.	 Tom Ryan, “Burberry Shocks the Industry, Going Direct from 
Runway to Consumer,” Retail Wire, February 10, 2016.
	 ii.	 Elaine Watson, “Quirky, Cult-Like, Aspirational, but Affordable: 
The Rise and Rise of Trader Joe’s,” The Packaged Facts, April 
15, 2014.
	iii.	 David Orgel, “FreshDirect Targets Multi-Device Strategies,” 
Supermarket News, January 20, 2016.
	iv.	 Shelly Banjo and Serena Ng, “Home Depot: The Place to Go for 
Toilet Paper?” The Wall Street Journal, June 6, 2014; Shelly 
Banjo, “Home Depot Lumbers into E-Commerce,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 16, 2014.
	 v.	 Huge Inc., “Master Plan: IKEA,” Huge Inc., 2012, http://hbs.hugeinc.
com/casestudies/ikea; Case Studies, “IKEA and Brandwatch: 
Embedding Social across the Enterprise,” PerformanceIN, 
March 9, 2015, http://performancein.com/news/2015/03/09/
ikea-and-brandwatch-embedding-social-across-enterprise/; 
“IKEA: A Data Matching Love Story,” Cream Global, 2012, 
https://www.creamglobal.com/case-studies/latest/ 
17798/33834/ikea-a-data-matching-love-story/; Matt Kwong, 
“Building Your Career in Hashtags,” Toronto Star, March 16, 
2015,http://www.thestar.com/; James Ainsworth, “IKEA Speaks 
the Language of Emoticons,” SmartData Collective, February 12, 
2015,http://smartdatacollective.com/mike-longfellow/298876/
ikea-speaks-language-emoticons-flat-packswords-mobile.  

In Section Seven we explore value communication. Today, 
value communication methods are more complex because 
of new technologies that have added e-mail, blogs, Internet, 
and podcasts to the advertising mix that once utilized only 
radio, television, newspapers, and magazines to relay mes-
sages to consumers. Chapter 18 introduces the breadth of 
integrated marketing communications. Chapter 19 dis-
cusses advertising, public relations, and sales promotions. 
The text concludes with a discussion of personal selling in 
Chapter 20.
SECTION 7
CHAPTER 18
Integrated Marketing Communications
CHAPTER 19
Advertising, Public Relations, and Sales 
Promotions
CHAPTER 20
Personal Selling and Sales Management
Assessing the Marketplace
Understanding the Marketplace
Targeting the Marketplace
Value Creation
Value Capture
Value Delivery:  
Designing the Channel  
and Supply Chain
Value Communication
VALUE COMMUNICATION

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO18-1	 Identify the components of the communication process.
	LO18-2	 Explain the four steps in the AIDA model.
	LO18-3	 Describe the various integrative communication channels.
	LO18-4	 Explain the methods used to allocate the integrated marketing communications (IMC) budget.
	LO18-5	 Identify marketing metrics used to measure IMC success.
INTEGRATED 
MARKETING 
COMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 18
e-mail, Internet, and so on. To really stand out, then, a 
company may need to go further than ever.
To achieve success in a market, companies invariably 
must communicate the value of their offerings in diverse, 
well-rounded ways. When companies promote their 
T
he incredible expansion of the Internet and on-
line tools has radically changed the manner in 
which marketers communicate with customers. 
More and more, companies spread their mes-
sages over all sorts of media—television, print, radio, 

so successful in Canada that Pepsi rapidly geared it up 
globally.3 Pepsi has supported this campaign with digital 
and traditional advertising as well as the communications 
created by its packaging. 
Furthermore, Pepsi has tailored the campaign to each 
specific market. For example, in European markets, the 
“Say It With Pepsi” campaign includes soccer-inspired 
emojis and television ads featuring well-known players 
such as James Rodriguez and Davis de Gea.4 The 
­soccer-themed emojis are specific to this campaign, but 
they also reflect Pepsi’s long tradition of featuring promi-
nent celebrities and athletes in its advertising. Furthermore, 
Pepsi has created emojis for specific markets, such as one 
featuring a character dressed in a traditional Thai outfit.
In turn, the global campaign has extended emojis be-
yond bottles and cans, relying on collaborations with de-
signers to create emoji-inspired fashion.5 To remain 
consistent with Pepsi’s overall marketing strategies, all of 
the emojis and fashion innovations use design elements 
from the traditional look of Pepsi, such as the shape of a 
globe and predominant colors of blue, red, and white.6
Pepsi’s emoji-centered integrated marketing campaign 
thus is unique in several ways. Although widely popular, 
emojis have been restricted to the digital space. Yet stud-
ies show that more than 2 billion people send approxi-
mately 6 billion emojis every single day. By adding these 
popular visual communication tools to its products’ labels, 
brands through multiple channels, they stand a better 
chance of reaching their customers. Coordination across 
these platforms is the key to effective omnichannel (or 
multichannel) marketing communications. But it is difficult 
to ensure brand consistency when radio, television, online, 
and print ads each require different types of elements, 
unique voices, and varying styles. In addition, firms need to 
integrate their marketing communications even further by 
incorporating new opportunities to reach ­customers 
through social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter.
Even well-known brands need to consider these is-
sues. As sales in the North American soft drink market 
have stagnated in recent years,1 it has become ever more 
important for companies to create effective campaigns, 
seamlessly integrated across a wide variety of platforms. 
Therefore, Pepsi declared a “World Emoji Day,” combined 
with a “Say It With Pepsi” campaign that ran in Canada. In 
one of the most successful integrated marketing cam-
paigns of the year, Pepsi released cans and bottles of its 
Pepsi-branded soft drinks with emojis printed directly on 
them. The company also created its own emoji keyboard, 
with 35 new characters, and a PepsiMoji hashtag for cus-
tomers to use on social media. 
To integrate this campaign with its television advertis-
ing, Pepsi simultaneously released a television spot that 
featured a man proposing to his future spouse, using 
placards imprinted only with emojis.2 The campaign was 
Source: Pepsico.com

550
Each element of an integrated marketing communications (IMC) strategy must have 
a well-defined purpose and support and extend the message delivered by all the 
other elements.
Throughout this book, we have focused our attention on how firms create value by 
developing products and services. However, consumers are not likely to come flocking to 
new products and services unless they are aware of them. Therefore, marketers must con-
sider how to communicate the value of a product and/or service—or more specifically, the 
value proposition—to the target market. A firm must develop a communication strategy to 
demonstrate the value of its product. We begin our discussion by examining what IMC is, 
how it has developed, and how it contributes to value creation.
Integrated marketing communications (IMC) represents the promotion dimension 
of the four Ps. It encompasses a variety of communication disciplines—advertising, per-
sonal selling, sales promotion, public relations, direct marketing, and online marketing in-
cluding social media—in combination to provide clarity, consistency, and maximum 
communicative impact.8 Instead of consisting of separated marketing communications 
channels with no unified control, IMC programs regard each of the firm’s marketing com-
munications channels as part of a whole, each of which offers a different means to connect 
with the target audience. This integration of channels provides the firm with the best means 
to reach the target audience with the desired message, and it enhances the value story by 
offering a clear and consistent message.
There are three elements in any IMC strategy: the consumer, the channels through 
which the message is communicated, and the evaluation of the results of the communica-
tion. This chapter is organized around these three elements. In the first section, the focus is 
on consumers, so we examine how consumers receive communications, whether via media 
or other methods, as well as how the delivery of that communication affects a message’s 
form and contents. The second section examines the various communication channels that 
make up the IMC arsenal and how each is used in an overall IMC strategy. The third sec-
tion considers how the level of complexity in IMC strategies leads marketers to design new 
ways to measure the results of IMC campaigns.
COMMUNICATING WITH CONSUMERS
As the number of communication media have increased, the task of understanding how 
best to reach target consumers has become far more complex. In this section, we examine 
a model that describes how communications go from the firm to the consumer and the 
factors that affect the way the consumer perceives the message. Then we look at how mar-
keting communications influence consumers—from making them aware that a product or 
service exists to moving them to buy.
The Communication Process
Exhibit 18.1 illustrates the communication process. Let’s first define each component and 
then discuss how they interact.
The Sender  The message originates from the sender, who must be clearly identified to 
the intended audience. As our opening vignette revealed, Pepsi seeks to communicate in 
LO18-1	
Identify the components 
of the communication 
process.
Pepsi connects its retail efforts with digital marketing. 
Furthermore, emojis can act as a universal language. In 
Canada, a country with more than one official language, 
the campaign has showed just how effectively emojis have 
been able to break through language barriers.7 In particu-
lar, emojis allow Pepsi to portray its message across na-
tions and across promotion channels with far greater 
consistency. 

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
551
	
	
new ways with customers, mainly through its packaging and promotional programs. With 
its emoji campaign and specialized emoji keyboard, for example, Pepsi establishes itself as 
a source of fun and different emojis that people can use in their daily activities. The Pepsi 
identity remains clear even with these innovative communications, because they consis-
tently highlight its familiar blue, red, and white color scheme and logo images—and also 
portray happy consumers. Thus people who see and use the newly available emojis know 
precisely which company made them available. Similarly, when Pepsi introduces new 
­versions—such as the stevia-sweetened True line or the 1893 brand with real sugar—it 
uses the same color- and shape-based visual reminders that they are Pepsi products, so the 
sender of the message remains clear and obvious at all times.
The Transmitter  The sender works with a creative department, whether in-house or 
from a marketing (or advertising) agency, to develop marketing communications to 
highlight the new beverage. With the assistance of its marketing department, Pepsi has 
developed new mobile and social media tools, together with websites, mobile apps, 
flyers, in-store displays, and televised commercials, to tout its brands and what they 
E X H I B I T  18.1
The Communication Process
Sender
(Firm)
Communications
channel
(Media)
Transmitter
encodes
message
Receiver
(Consumer)
decodes message
Noise from the environment
News
News
It's the Real
Thing. Pepsi!
It's the Real
Thing. Pepsi!
Feedback
Pepsi emojis encode the 
­message that the iconic drink 
is associated with fun times 
and activities when people 
might likely drink carbonated 
beverages.
Source: PepsiMoji/Pepsico/YouTube

552	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
offer. The marketing department or external agency receives 
the information and transforms it for use in its role as the 
transmitter.
Encoding  Encoding means converting the sender’s ideas 
into a message, which could be verbal, visual, or both. Thus 
the Pepsi emojis signal fun times and activities during 
which people might be likely to drink carbonated bever-
ages; the grinning face wearing sunglasses and headphones, 
as if it is ready to head to the beach, is one such emoji.9 
Although a picture can be worth a thousand words, the most 
important facet of encoding is not what is sent but rather 
what is received. Consumers must receive information that 
makes them want to try the new emojis, use Pepsi-linked 
symbols to communicate with their friends, and continue to purchase new versions of 
the beverages. 
The Communication Channel  The communication ­channel is the medium—print, 
broadcast, the Internet, and so forth—that carries the message. Pepsi could transmit through 
television, radio, and various print advertisements, but for its emoji campaign, it also made 
vast and clearly understandable use of social media. The media chosen must be appropriate 
to connect the sender with the desired recipients. Because the company believes its target 
market is broad, Pepsi has placed its products in mainstream, popular movies such as 
Tomorrowland, San Andreas, Jurassic World, and The Perfect Guy, as well as in the midst 
of a showdown of terminators in Terminator: Genesis. Social and Mobile Marketing 18.1 
depicts how Snapchat offers another recently adopted communication channel. 
The Receiver  The receiver is the person who reads, hears, or sees and processes the 
information contained in the message and/or advertisement. The sender, of course, hopes 
that the person receiving it will be the one for whom it was originally intended. Pepsi wants 
its message received and decoded properly by a broad population that includes teens, 
young adults, and families. Decoding refers to the process by which the receiver interprets 
the sender’s message.
Noise  Noise is any interference that stems from competing messages, a lack of clarity in 
the message, or a flaw in the medium. It poses a problem for all communication channels. 
Pepsi may choose to advertise in newspapers that its target market doesn’t read, which 
means the rate at which the message is received by those to whom it has relevance has been 
slowed considerably. As we have already defined, encoding is what the sender intends to 
say, and decoding is what the receiver hears. If there is a difference between them, it is 
probably due to noise.
Feedback Loop  The feedback loop allows the receiver to communicate with the sender 
and thereby informs the sender whether the message was received and decoded properly. 
Feedback can take many forms: a customer’s purchase of the item, the use of a Pepsi emoji, 
a complaint or compliment, the redemption of a coupon or rebate, a tweet about the prod-
uct on Twitter, and so forth.
How Consumers Perceive Communication
The actual communication process is not as simple as the model in Exhibit 18.1 implies. 
Each receiver may interpret the sender’s message differently, and senders often adjust their 
message according to the medium used and the receivers’ level of knowledge about the 
product or service.
Receivers Decode Messages Differently  Each receiver decodes a message in his or 
her own way, which is not necessarily the way the sender intended. Different people shown 
the same message will often take radically different meanings from it. For example, what 
does the image on page 554 to you?
Pepsi has placed its products 
in mainstream, popular movies 
such as San Andreas starring 
Paul Giamatti.
Source: San Andreas/Warner Bros. 
­Entertainment Inc

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
553
	
	
If you are a user of this brand, it may convey satisfaction. If you recently went on a diet 
and gave up your soda, it may convey dismay or a sense of loss. If you have chosen to be a 
nonuser, it may convey some disgust. If you are a recently terminated employee, it may 
convey anger. The sender has little, if any, control over what meaning any individual re-
ceiver will take from the message.
Analyzing the Unmeasured: A 
Snapchat Experiment by Domino’s to 
Test the Channel’s Effectivenessi
Social & Mobile Marketing 18.1
Most marketing communications and advertising campaigns 
start with an idea, and then the appropriate channel to share 
it is chosen. In a recent Snapchat campaign by the UK arm of 
Domino’s Pizza though, the pattern was reversed: Domino’s 
wanted to experiment with using Snapchat, so it chose the 
channel first and then developed an idea that would enable it 
to test the success of the campaign.
	
The unique approach was necessary because Snapchat—as 
a primarily creative, rather than informative, messaging channel—
lacks the analytical tools available in most other sources. Unlike 
other social media sites for example, it does not provide users 
with measures of reach or consumer responses. Yet it is an or-
ganic and popular social media application with great promise for 
reaching and appealing to young and savvy consumers.
	
Therefore, Domino’s decided to undertake an experimental 
test, in which it posted a series of videos. The storyline fea-
tured a delivery driver beset by an alien invasion over multiple 
video uploads. Each entry in the series gave viewers a portion 
of a code; once they had the entire code, they could use it to 
receive a purchase voucher. Thus, the number of vouchers 
redeemed offered a good estimate of reach, because it sig-
naled how many people were willing to watch the entire video 
series. After the 24-hour experiment, Domino’s was pleasantly 
surprised by how many additional orders it received. As an-
other measure of the campaign’s success, Domino’s also de-
termined how far the video spread among various consumers.
	
Noting the gaps in its analytical capabilities, Snapchat is 
rumored to be working on developing better measurement 
and assessment tools. Some reports also suggest it might be-
gin offering e-commerce capabilities and group messaging. Yet 
part of the appeal of Snapchat is the creativity it invokes. 
Other competitors already offer group messaging services, so 
expanding the services it offers could move Snapchat into 
more direct competition with new rivals and also disrupt its 
reputation as a fun site, not a commercial one.
	
The Domino’s test thus remains just that; the pizza chain 
has not determined exactly how it will continue to use 
Snapchat in its marketing communications. But the promising 
results give it a good reason to continue experimenting. As 
Domino’s head of digital marketing suggested, using Snapchat 
alongside other social media and traditional communications 
channels seemed like the way to go: “Our anticipation is that 
Snapchat will become a tool we add to our toolkit, rather than 
being the one that we use for everything.”
Domino’s is experimenting in the UK with Snapchat to test the effectiveness of its campaign 
“From Dough to Door.”
Source: Domino’s/Snapchat

554	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Senders Adjust Messages According to the Medium 
and Receivers’ Traits  Different media communicate in var-
ied ways, so marketers make adjustments to their messages and 
media depending on whether they want to communicate with 
suppliers, shareholders, customers, the general public, or even 
specific segments of those groups.10
For example, the high-technology firm Analtech sells thin 
layer chromatography plates to companies that need equipment 
to determine the ingredients of samples of virtually anything. 
It is not an easy product to explain and sell to laypeople, partic-
ularly when some purchasers might not have a science degree. 
Therefore, in addition to traditional marketing through trade 
shows and scientific conferences, Analtech developed a Monty 
Python–inspired YouTube video (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=06gRhDMnPp8) that features a witch who over-
comes threats to drown her by proving that the ink in the king’s 
decree is actually from the sheriff’s pen. It also highlights 
points in CSI episodes when the television detectives rely on 
its products. With these more broadly popular appeals, Anal-
tech ensures its messages reach and can be received accurately 
by a wider audience, with less noise than might occur through 
more scientific appeals. 
Pepsi has often solicited the talents of celebrities who are 
likely to appeal to various customer segments, such as those 
featured in the hit show Empire. Adding Value 18.1 describes 
this creative adjustment approach by Pepsi. 
The AIDA Model
Clearly, IMC is not a straightforward process. After being ex-
posed to marketing communications, consumers go through 
several steps before actually buying or taking some other ac-
tion. There is not always a direct link between a particular form 
of marketing communications and a consumer’s purchase.
To create effective IMC programs, marketers must under-
stand how marketing communications work. Generally, mar-
keting communications move consumers stepwise through a 
series of mental stages, for which there are several models. The 
most common is the AIDA model (Exhibit 18.2),11 which sug-
gests that Awareness leads to Interest, which leads to Desire, 
which leads to Action. At each stage, the consumer makes 
judgments about whether to take the next step in the process. Customers actually have 
three types of responses, so the AIDA model is also known as the think, feel, do model. In 
making a purchase decision, consumers go through each of the AIDA steps to some de-
gree, but the steps may not always follow the AIDA order. For instance, during an impulse 
purchase, a consumer may feel and do before he or she thinks.
Awareness  Even the best marketing communications can be wasted if the sender doesn’t 
gain the attention of the consumer first. Brand awareness refers to a potential customer’s 
ability to recognize or recall that the brand name is a particular type of retailer or product/
service. Thus, brand awareness is the strength of the link between the brand name and the 
type of merchandise or service in the minds of customers.
There are several awareness metrics, including aided recall and top-of-mind aware-
ness. Aided recall is when consumers indicate they know the brand when the name is 
presented to them. Top-of-mind awareness, the highest level of awareness, occurs when 
consumers mention a specific brand name first when they are asked about a product or 
service. For example, Harley-Davidson has top-of-mind awareness if a consumer responds 
LO18-2	
Explain the four steps in 
the AIDA model.
Consumers will perceive this 
giant billboard differently 
­depending on their level of 
knowledge and attitude toward 
the brand.
© imago stock&people/Newscom

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
555
	
	
Adding Value 18.1
Landing an Endorsement Contract on Empire:  
Fiction, Reality, and Pepsiii
Product placements in popular films and television shows are 
a well-proven and relatively effective marketing tactic. But 
when it comes to Empire, everything is a little larger than life, 
leading Pepsi to recognize it needed to go big with its latest 
marketing innovation. That is, it would not be enough just to 
have Cookie drinking a Pepsi. The brand wanted to become 
part of the story, thus ensuring that fans of the Lyon family 
would be exposed to its products throughout the show, when-
ever they get around to watching it.
This potential market is huge: Empire attracts an estimated 
13.5 million viewers when each new episode airs, and then 
another 9.2 million viewers who watch at their leisure through 
different on-demand services (e.g., DVRs, Hulu). These latter 
viewers constitute an ongoing challenge for marketers though, 
because in many cases, they do not see the same commer-
cials, and with some services, they even can fast-forward or 
avoid the advertising altogether.
What they cannot miss though is a three-episode storyline in 
which Jamal, the young Empire character played by Jussie 
Smollett, earns himself an endorsement contract with Pepsi, 
shoots the commercial, and then presents it to other musicians 
during an industry event. Throughout these three episodes, Pepsi 
is a constant and aspirational presence; the fictional endorse-
ment is a signal of success for Jamal’s emerging music career. 
Furthermore, the pitch that the fictional Pepsi executives make to 
Jamal, to convince him that the endorsement is in his best inter-
est, includes the assertion that Pepsi has a long and storied his-
tory of working with cutting-edge musicians and artists. The line 
serves to “sell” Jamal on the idea of the endorsement, even as it 
sells viewers on the image of Pepsi as cool and iconic.
Moving beyond these fictional elements, the commercial 
that Jamal shoots in the show then appears during the actual 
commercial breaks of the show. The advertisement itself was 
directed by the show’s creator, Lee Daniels, which helped en-
sure consistency in the tone and image between the show 
and the marketing communication. Calling it gritty and raw, 
Daniels promises that the ad, appearing both in the show and 
during its commercial breaks, would not be “an experience 
that’s been experienced by the regular Pepsi commercial 
viewer before.” This thematic consistency is part of what Pepsi 
is counting on, to make sure that consumers do not regard the 
endorsement storyline and associated marketing as a sell-out 
by their beloved show or its creators.
The deal actually required several agreements. First, Pepsi 
paid Fox, the network that airs Empire, a reported $20 million for 
the right to enter the show and advertise in and through it. 
Second, Pepsi entered into separate contracts with Smollett, the 
actor who plays Jamal and is thus endorsing the company indi-
rectly, and with Daniels, the director creating the vision for the 
marketing plan by directing both the show and the advertisement.
The experiment thus has required substantial resources 
from Pepsi. But the company considers the innovative market-
ing a risk worth taking, especially in response to information 
from Nielsen about advertising retention. Recent Nielsen data 
reveal that when a product appears both in the show’s con-
tent and during a commercial broadcast during the show, 
viewers remember that product 18 percent more than they 
would if it is solely advertised in a traditional way.
Moreover, Empire’s primary audience is exactly the con-
sumers that Pepsi hopes to attract. Young and hip, these view-
ers also seem fine with watching a family whose moral 
compass is a bit off center at times. Still, Pepsi chose Jamal, 
among the least controversial or violent of the members of the 
Lyon family, as its linked character, likely to avoid any brand 
damage that might result if Lucious were seen holding a Pepsi 
bottle while threatening to murder his uncle.
Pepsi’s product placement 
on Empire has been a huge 
success. Over three 
­episodes, Jamal, played by 
Jussie Smollett, earns 
­himself an endorsement 
contract with Pepsi, shoots 
the commercial, and then 
presents it to other musi-
cians during an industry 
event.
© Fox Network/Photofest

556	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
“Harley” when asked about American-made motorcycles. High top-of-mind awareness 
means that the brand probably enters the evoked set of brands (see Chapter 6) when cus-
tomers decide to shop for that particular product or service. Manufacturers, retailers, and 
service providers build top-of-mind awareness by having memorable names; repeatedly 
exposing their name to customers through advertising, locations, and sponsorships; and 
using memorable symbols.
As an excellent example of the last method, imagine two smaller circles, sitting on 
opposite sides atop a larger circle. Did you see Mickey Mouse ears? Did you think of Dis-
ney? In addition, the company has moved on to images brighter than circles to ensure that 
its name comes easily to the front of young consumers’ minds. Whether individual acts—
such as Austin Mahone, Selena Gomez, and Demi Lovato—or groups—such as R5, Lem-
onade Mouth, and Allstar Weekend—Disney starts off its stars with Disney Channel 
shows, records them on the Disney-owned Hollywood Record label, plays the songs in 
heavy rotation on Radio Disney and Disney movie soundtracks, organizes concert tours 
with Disney-owned Buena Vista Concerts, and sells tie-in merchandise throughout Disney 
stores. Each of these marketing elements reminds the various segments of the target market 
about both the brand (e.g., One Direction) and its owner, Disney. With this omnichannel 
approach, Disney gets the same product into more markets than would be possible with a 
more conservative approach, which further builds top-of-mind awareness for both Disney 
and its stars.12
Interest  Once the consumer is aware that the company or product exists, communica-
tion must work to increase the consumer’s interest level. It isn’t enough to let people 
know that the product exists; consumers must be persuaded that it is a product worth in-
vestigating. Because Stouffer’s was suffering from a reputation of offering poor-quality 
meal options, it reoriented its marketing campaigns to focus on its “real food” ingredi-
ents that lead to meals good enough to make even a teenager put down her phone to join 
her family at dinnertime.13 Thus, the ads’ messages include attributes that are of interest 
to the target audience—in this case, parents who want to sit down to a nice dinner with 
their children. Disney increases interest in an upcoming tour or record by including a 
mention, whether casual or not, in the stars’ television shows. Because the primary target 
market for the tour is also probably watching the show, the message is received by the 
correct recipient. As Ethical and Societal Dilemma 18.1 proposes, interest also can be 
sparked by a little controversy.
E X H I B I T  18.2
The AIDA Model
Awareness
Think
Interest
Feel
Desire
Action
Do

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
557
	
	
Desire  After the firm has piqued the interest of its target market, the goal of subse-
quent IMC messages should move the consumer from “I like it” to “I want it.” If Lucy 
Hale (star of Pretty Little Liars) appears on Good Morning America (on ABC, which is 
owned by Disney) and talks about her upcoming album and how great it is going to be, 
the viewing audience is all the more likely to demand access—in this case, probably 
parents who hope to score points with their adolescent children by buying the latest sin-
gle or reserving seats to an upcoming tour. Stouffer’s aims to enhance consumers’ desire 
through its food truck initiatives, which offer free samples of various frozen entrees, 
dressed up with extra ingredients, to show families how delicious a frozen dinner can be 
with just a few extra steps.14
The Need to Take Risks in IMCiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 18.1
According to recommendations from a panel of marketing ex-
perts, if companies want their communications to resonate 
and stick with modern customers, they need to run the risk of 
angering or alienating them too. When marketing campaigns 
are just regular, “up the middle,” or boring, they have little 
chance of prompting the sorts of behaviors advertisers seek, 
whether that means getting people to talk or actual sales.
	
Instead, the goal needs to be to spark interest in the cam-
paign, which then will spark ­interest in the product or service. 
Interest might result from an unusual or unexpected 
­presentation—or even a seemingly conventional approach 
with just a little difference. A key example comes from Honey 
Maid crackers, which ran a traditional advertising campaign 
that featured families to communicate a message of whole-
someness. What made the campaign different was the type of 
families being featured, which included gay parents, single par-
ents, and a multiracial family. For many viewers, the difference 
was appealing; for those who objected, Honey Maid trans-
formed their often hateful comments into an art piece it could 
use to further its brand image as wholesome and welcoming.
	
Rather than challenging biases, other examples are just a 
little weird, such as a General Electric campaign to intro-
duce an innovation it developed with the social network 
Quirty, in which an executive gives a foot massage to the 
inventor of their newly introduced Aros air conditioners. 
Then there are the fake infomercials directed by the comedy 
duo behind Tim & Eric’s Bedtime Stories, which feature the 
famously distinctive actor Jeff Goldblum, hawking GE’s new 
Link LED light bulbs.
	
Weird does not work for everybody, but according to these 
marketing experts, everybody needs to try it. If a marketing 
communication is not interesting enough to get consumers 
talking about it, warns one expert, then it is not interesting 
enough to run.
Honey Maid crackers ran an advertising campaign that featured multiracial and other 
nontraditional families to communicate a message of wholesomeness.
Source: Little Brother/Honey Maid/YouTube

558	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Action  The ultimate goal of any form of marketing communica-
tions is to drive the receiver to action. Thus Stouffer’s likely hands 
out coupons for its products from its food trucks, to help push cus-
tomers to make the purchase during their next trip to the grocery 
store. As long as the message has caught consumers’ attention and 
made them interested enough to consider the product as a means to 
satisfy a specific desire of theirs, they likely will act on that interest 
by either searching for the product or making a purchase. If consum-
ers watch Fox’s Empire or visit Fox’s website to see what Cookie 
wore on the show, they might in turn actually purchase the Empire 
original soundtrack on iTunes.
The Lagged Effect  Sometimes consumers don’t act immediately af-
ter receiving a form of marketing communications because of the 
lagged effect—a delayed response to a marketing communications 
campaign. It generally takes several exposures to a campaign before a 
consumer fully processes its message.15 In turn, measuring the effect 
of a current campaign becomes more difficult because of the possible 
lagged response to a previous one. The recurrent presence of De 
Beers’ advertising campaign for diamond jewelry resonates with con-
sumers over time. So when the occasion arises to buy jewelry for one-
self or for a loved one, the consumer will think of diamonds. But De 
Beers doesn’t know if any particular marketing communication will 
lead consumers to check out or purchase a new diamond.
Now that we’ve examined various aspects of the communica-
tion process, let’s look at how specific media are used in an IMC 
program.
If consumers watch Fox’s  
Empire or visit Fox’s website to 
see what Cookie wore on the 
show, they might in turn  
actually purchase the Empire 
original soundtrack on iTunes
© Fox Network/Photofest
The recurrent presence of De Beers’ advertising campaign for 
diamond jewelry resonates with consumers over time. So, when 
the occasion arises to buy jewelry for oneself or for a loved one, 
the consumer will think of diamonds.
Source: De Beers
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the different steps in the communication process?
2.	 What is the AIDA model?

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
559
	
	
CHANNELS USED IN AN INTEGRATED 
MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS STRATEGY
For any communications campaign to succeed, the firm must deliver the right message to the 
right audience through the right media, with the ultimate goal of profiting from long-term 
customer relationships rather than just short-term transactions. Reaching the right audience is 
becoming more difficult, however, as the media environment grows more complicated.
No single channel is necessarily better than another channel; the goal of IMC is to use 
the channels in conjunction so that the sum exceeds the total of the individual channels. 
However, advances in technology have led to a variety of new and traditional media chan-
nel options for consumers, all of which vie for consumers’ attention. Print media have also 
grown and become more specialized. This proliferation of media has led many firms to 
shift their promotional dollars from advertising to direct marketing, website development, 
product placements, and other forms of promotion, all in search of the best way to deliver 
messages to their target audiences.
We now examine the individual channels of IMC and the way each contributes to a 
successful IMC campaign (see Exhibit 18.3). The channels can be viewed on two axes: 
passive and interactive (from the consumer’s perspective) and offline and online. Some 
channels (e.g., advertising, sales promotion, public relations, personal selling, direct and 
online marketing) are discussed in far more detail in subsequent chapters, so we discuss 
them here only briefly.
Note that as the marketer’s repertoire of IMC channels has expanded, so too have the 
ways in which marketers can communicate with their customers. So, for instance, direct 
marketing appears in all four boxes. Firms have expanded their use of these traditional 
media (e.g., advertising, public relations, and sales promotions) from pure offline ap-
proaches to a combination of offline and online.
Advertising
Perhaps the most visible of the IMC channels, advertising entails the placement of an-
nouncements and persuasive messages in time or space purchased in any of the mass media 
by business firms, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, and individuals who seek 
to inform and/or persuade members of a particular target market or audience about their 
products, services, organizations, or ideas.16 In Chapter 19, we discuss the purpose of ad-
vertising and its various types but, for now, note that advertising is extremely effective for 
LO18-3	
Describe the various 
integrative 
communication channels.
• Direct marketing
       (e.g., mobile marketing)
• Online marketing
       (e.g., blogs, social media)
• Personal selling
• Sales promotions
      (e.g., contests)
• Direct marketing
      (e.g., telemarketing)
• Advertising
• Sales promotions
      (e.g., coupons)
• Public relations
• Direct marketing
      (e.g., catalogs)
Oﬄine
Online
Interactive
Passive
• Direct marketing
      (e.g., e-mail marketing)
E X H I B I T  18.3
Channels of an IMC Strategy

560	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
creating awareness of a product or service and generating interest. Mass advertising can 
entice consumers into a conversation with marketers, though it does not necessarily require 
much action by consumers, which places it on the passive end of the spectrum. 
Traditionally, advertising has been passive and offline (e.g., television, magazines, news-
papers; see Exhibit 18.3), though recently there has been a growth in online advertising 
and interactive features. Advertising thus must break through the clutter of other messages 
to reach its intended audience. 
Public Relations
Public relations (PR) is the organizational function that manages the firm’s communica-
tions to achieve a variety of objectives, including building and maintaining a positive im-
age, handling or heading off unfavorable stories or events, and maintaining positive 
relationships with the media. Like advertising, this tactic is relatively passive in that cus-
tomers do not have to take any action to receive it. Public relations activities support the 
other promotional efforts by the firm by generating free media attention, as we discuss 
further in Chapter 19.
Sales Promotions
Sales promotions are special incentives or excitement-building programs, such as cou-
pons, rebates, contests, free samples, and point-of-purchase (POP) displays, that encourage 
the purchase of a product or service. Marketers typically design these incentives for use in 
conjunction with other advertising or personal selling programs. Many sales promotions, 
such as free samples or POP displays, are designed to build short-term sales. Others, such 
as contests and sweepstakes, have become integral tactics of some firms’ CRM programs 
as a means to build customer loyalty. We discuss such sales promotions in more detail in 
Chapter 19.
Personal Selling
Personal selling is the two-way flow of communication between a buyer and a seller that 
is designed to influence the buyer’s purchase decision. Personal selling can take place in 
various settings: face-to-face, video teleconferencing, on the telephone, or over the Internet. 
Although consumers don’t often interact with professional salespeople, personal selling 
represents an important channel in many IMC programs, especially in business-to-business 
(B2B) settings.
The cost of communicating directly with a potential customer is quite high compared 
with other forms of promotion, but it is simply the best and most efficient way to sell cer-
tain products and services. Customers can buy many products and services without the 
help of a salesperson, but salespeople simplify the buying process by providing informa-
tion and services that save customers time and effort. In many cases, sales representatives 
add significant value, which makes the added expense of employing them worthwhile. We 
devote Chapter 20 to personal selling and sales management.
Direct Marketing
The IMC channel that has received the greatest increase in aggregate spending recently is 
direct marketing, or marketing that communicates directly with target customers to generate 
a response or transaction.17 Direct marketing contains a variety of traditional and new forms 
of marketing communications initiatives. Traditional direct marketing includes mail and cat-
alogs sent through the mail; direct marketing also includes e-mail and mobile marketing.
Internet-based technologies have had a profound effect on direct marketing initiatives. 
E-mail, for instance, can be directed to a specific consumer. Firms use e-mail to inform 
customers of new merchandise and special promotions, confirm the receipt of an order, and 
indicate when an order has been shipped. Currently available technologies also mean mo-
bile devices can function as a payment medium: Just tap your cell phone, and the transac-
tion occurs in much the same way it occurs with a credit card.18

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
561
	
	
The increased use of customer databases has enabled market-
ers to identify and track consumers over time and across purchase 
situations, which has contributed to the rapid growth of direct mar-
keting. Marketers have been able to build these databases, thanks 
to consumers’ increased use of credit and debit cards, store-specific 
credit and loyalty cards, and online shopping, all of which require 
the buyer to give the seller personal information that becomes part 
of its database. Because firms understand customers’ purchases 
better when they possess such information, they can more easily 
focus their direct marketing ­efforts appropriately. 
Direct marketing retailers try to target their customers care-
fully so they will be more receptive to their messages. Omaha 
Steaks, for example, sends e-mail coupons for items that cus-
tomers have purchased previously, mails slick pictures of gour-
met steaks and meal packages to addresses that have received 
orders in the past, and calls customers personally during likely 
gift-giving occasions, such as the holidays, to offer to repeat a 
previous gift order. These different forms of direct marketing 
demonstrate how this IMC format can vary on both the interac-
tivity and online–offline dimensions of the matrix.
Mobile marketing is marketing through wireless handheld 
devices such as cellular telephones.19 Smartphones have become 
far more than tools to place calls; they offer a kind of mobile com-
puter with the ability to obtain sports scores, weather, music, vid-
eos, and text messages as well as purchase merchandise. Marketing 
success rests on integrating marketing communications with fun, 
useful apps that are consistent with these consumer ­attitudes to-
ward mobile devices. In response, firms are steadily improving 
customers’ potential experience with their mobile interface. Ex-
hibit 18.4 highlights five successful mobile marketing campaigns.
E X H I B I T  18.4
Illustrative Mobile Marketing Campaigns
Company
Campaign
Calvin Klein  
“Raw texts, real stories”
When Calvin Klein launched its new line of jeans in 2015, it became the 
first company to advertise on the dating app Tinder. The ads were designed 
to keep in line with the feel of the app’s culture by including suggestive 
images and text-messaging conversations.
Hard Rock  
“World Burger Tour”
To promote its World Burger Tour, the Hard Rock Café used geo-targeted  
rich mobile ads directed at customers within a specific radius of the 
­restaurant. The Hard Rock was also able to access customer information that 
helped identify vacationers, who would be more likely to be eating out. The 
campaign was a huge success, leading to a 220 percent increase in traffic.
Maytag  
ESPN
In November 2015, the appliance brand took over ESPN’s mobile site 
for a day. On that day, visitors of the site viewed an ad that showed the 
Maytag repairman and famous spokesmen working on an assembly line. 
Maytag also went beyond the typical mobile ad by creating an experience 
that enabled customers to feel the physical movements felt by the Maytag 
repairman in the factory.
T-Mobile  
Social mobile ads
The Super Bowl is generally the biggest opportunity for television ads, so 
why didn’t T-Mobile run its Super Bowl ad on TV? Instead, T-Mobile opted to 
run its ad on NBC’s mobile and tablet apps, as well as on its website.  
T-Mobile made this decision after reviewing data that showed that  
Millennials prefer to stream television programs on other devices.
Source: Adapted from Brielle Jaekel, “Top 10 Mobile Advertising Campaigns of 2015,” Mobile Marketer, January 5, 2016, 
http://www.mobilemarketer.com.
Calvin Klein’s “Raw texts, real stories” mobile campaign 
was designed to keep in line with the feel of the app’s 
culture by including suggestive images and text messag-
ing conversations.
Source: Calvin Klein Jeans

562	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Online Marketing
We now examine several electronic media vehicles: websites, blogs, and social media.
Websites  Firms have increased their emphasis on communicating with customers 
through their websites. They use their websites to build their brand image and educate 
customers about their products or services as well as where they can be purchased. Retailers 
and some manufacturers sell merchandise directly to consumers over the Internet. For ex-
ample, in addition to selling merchandise, Office Depot’s website hosts a Business 
Resource Center for its business customers that provides advice, product knowledge, and 
connections to networking contacts in other businesses. It also provides forms that busi-
nesses can use to comply with Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) requirements, 
check job applicant records, estimate cash flow, and develop a sexual harassment policy; 
posts workshops for running a business; and summarizes local and national business news. 
By providing this information, Office Depot reinforces its image as an essential source of 
products, services, and information for small businesses.
Many firms operate websites devoted to community building. These sites offer an 
opportunity for customers with similar interests to learn about products and services that 
support their hobbies and share information with others. Visitors can also post questions 
seeking information and/or comments about issues, products, and services. Many firms, 
especially retailers (e.g., Amazon), encourage customers to post reviews of products they 
have bought or used and even have visitors to their websites rate the quality of the reviews. 
Research has shown that these online product reviews increase customer loyalty and pro-
vide a competitive advantage for sites that offer them.20
Blogs  A blog (weblog) contains periodic posts on a common web page. A well-received 
blog can communicate trends, announce special events, create positive word of mouth, 
To increase customer loyalty 
and provide a competitive 
­advantage, firms like Amazon 
encourage customers to post 
reviews of products or ser-
vices they have bought or 
used.
Source: Amazon.com, Inc.

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
563
	
	
connect customers by forming a community, allow the company to respond directly to 
customers’ comments, and develop a long-term relationship with the company. By its very 
nature, a blog is supposed to be transparent and contain authors’ honest observations, 
which can help customers determine their trust and loyalty levels. Nowadays, blogs are 
becoming more interactive as the communication between bloggers and customers has 
­increased. In addition, blogs can be linked to other social media such as the microblog 
Twitter. See Chapter 3 for further discussion.
Social Media  The term social media refers to online and mobile technologies that distrib-
ute content to facilitate interpersonal interactions (see Chapter 3). The three most popular 
facilitators of social media are YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter. In these online sites, con-
sumers review, communicate about, and aggregate information about products, prices, and 
promotions. These social media also allow users to interact among themselves (e.g., form a 
community) as well as provide other like-minded consumers (i.e., members of their commu-
nity) and marketers their thoughts and evaluations about a firm’s products or services. Thus, 
social media help facilitate the consumer decision process (Chapter 6) by encouraging need 
recognition, information search, alternative evaluation, purchase, and postpurchase reviews.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the different elements of an IMC program?
PLANNING FOR AND  
MEASURING IMC SUCCESS
We begin this section by examining how marketers set strategic goals before they imple-
ment any IMC campaign. After they have established those goals, marketers can set the 
budget for the campaign and choose the marketing metrics they will use to evaluate 
whether it has achieved its strategic objectives.
Goals
As with any strategic undertaking, firms need to understand the outcome they hope to achieve 
before they begin. These goals can be short term, such as generating inquiries, increasing 
awareness, and prompting trial. Or they can be long term in nature, such as increasing sales, 
market share, and customer loyalty. Some other goals are outlined in Exhibit 18.5.
Running-shoe manufacturer 
ASICS devised the “It’s a big 
world. Go run it” campaign to 
branch out beyond serious run-
ners and to target casual 
­runners.
Source: ASICS

564	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
E X H I B I T  18.5
Illustrative Marketing Goals and Related Campaigns
Source: “ASICS Launches New Global Advertising Campaign, Inspiring People Everywhere to Run with ‘It’s a big world. Go 
run it,” PR Newswire, February 19, 2015; ASICS, 2015 Annual Report, ASICS, February 12, 2016; Karl Greenberg, “Columbia’s 
New Global Campaign Is ‘Tested Tough’,” Marketing Daily, October 7, 2015; Columbia Sportswear, 2015 Annual Report, 
­Columbia SportSwear, 2016; David Gianatasio, “Southwest Airlines Is Completely, Hopelessly, Head over Heels in Love in 
New Ads,” Ad Week, July 8, 2014; Southwest Airlines, 2014 Annual Report, March 15, 2015; “BMW’s Instagram Influencer 
Marketing Campaign,” Media Kix, http://mediakix.com/2015/12/instagram-influencer-marketing-bmw-campaign/.
Company and 
Campaign
 
Goal
 
Target Market
 
Media Used
 
Outcome
ASICS  
“It’s a big world. 
Go run it.”
Branch out 
beyond serious 
runner market 
segment and 
target casual 
runners.
Even split males 
and females,  
aged 30–49
Television and 
print ads, online 
advertising
17% increase  
in sales
Columbia  
Sportswear 
Company  
“Tested Tough”
Showcase Co-
lumbia’s technical 
innovation ability.
60% males, aged 
20–59
Print ads, mobile 
media, social me-
dia, videos, online 
advertising
11% increase  
in sales
Southwest 
Airlines  
“Nonstop Love”
To show that 
Southwest is 
“an airline with a 
heart.”
Even split males 
and females, all 
ages
Television, radio, 
print, billboard, 
and in-airport ads
4% increase in 
revenue
BMW  
“#DrivingLuxury”
To highlight the 
new technology 
of the redesigned 
7 series sedan.
Mostly men, ages 
35 and up
Social media, blog 
posts, videos
Posts reached up 
to 13,500 likes on 
Instagram
Setting and Allocating the IMC Budget
Firms use a variety of methods to plan their marketing communications budgets. Because 
all the methods of setting a promotional budget have advantages as well as disadvantages, 
no one method should be used in isolation.21
LO18-4	
Explain the methods 
used to allocate the 
integrated marketing 
communications (IMC) 
budget.
Columbia Sportswear  
Company’s “Tested Tough” 
­campaign’s goal is to showcase 
Columbia’s technical innovation 
ability, here featuring its 
93-year-old chairwoman Gert 
Boyle. 
Source: Columbia
Such goals, both short and long term, should be explicitly defined and measured. Re-
gardless of their measure or changes, though, goals constitute part of the overall promo-
tional plan, which is usually a subsection of the firm’s marketing plan. Another part of the 
promotional plan is the budget.

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
565
	
	
The objective-and-task method determines the budget required to undertake specific 
tasks to accomplish communication objectives. To use this method, marketers first estab-
lish a set of communication objectives, then determine which media best reach the target 
market and how much it will cost to run the number and types of communications neces-
sary to achieve the objectives. This process—set objectives, choose media, and determine 
costs—must be repeated for each product or service. The sum of all the individual commu-
nication plan budgets becomes the firm’s total marketing communications budget. In addi-
tion to the objective-and-task method, various rule-of-thumb methods can be used to set 
budgets (see Exhibit 18.6).
These rule-of-thumb methods use prior sales and communication activities to deter-
mine the present communication budget. Although they are easy to implement, they have 
various limitations, as noted in Exhibit 18.6. Clearly, budgeting—not a simple process—
may take several rounds of negotiations among the various managers, who are each com-
peting for resources for their own areas of responsibility, to devise a final IMC budget.
Measuring Success Using Marketing Metrics
Once a firm has decided how to set its budget for marketing communications and its cam-
paigns have been developed and implemented, it reaches the point that it must measure the 
success of the campaigns, using various marketing metrics.22 Each step in the IMC process 
can be measured to determine how effective it has been in motivating consumers to move to 
the next step in the buying process. Such measures become particularly challenging when 
marketing efforts include creative and new forms of communication, as Adding Value 18.2 
describes. Furthermore, recall that the lagged effect influences and complicates marketers’ 
evaluations of a promotion’s effectiveness as well as the best way to allocate marketing 
communications budgets. Because of the cumulative effect of marketing communications, it 
may take several exposures before consumers are moved to buy, so firms cannot expect too 
much too soon. They must invest in the marketing communications campaign with the idea 
that it may not reach its full potential for some time. In the same way, if firms cut marketing 
communications expenditures, it may take time before they experience a decrease in sales.
LO18-5	
Identify marketing 
metrics used to measure 
IMC success.
E X H I B I T  18.6
Rule-of-Thumb Methods
Method
Definition
Limitations
Competitive parity
The communication budget is  
set so that the firm’s share of 
communication expenses equals 
its share of the market.
Does not allow firms to exploit the 
unique opportunities or problems they 
confront in a market. If all competitors 
use this method to set communication 
budgets, their market shares will stay 
approximately the same over time.
Percentage-of-sales
The communication budget is a 
fixed percentage of forecasted 
sales.
Assumes the same percentage used 
in the past, or by competitors, is still 
appropriate for the firm. Does not 
take into account new plans (e.g., to 
introduce a new line of products in the 
current year).
Available budget
Marketers forecast their sales 
and expenses, excluding com-
munication, during the budgeting 
period. The difference between 
the forecast sales and expenses 
plus desired profit is reserved for 
the communication budget. That 
is, the communication budget is 
the money available after operat-
ing costs and profits have been 
budgeted.
Assumes communication expenses do 
not stimulate sales and profit.

566	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Adding Value 18.2
America’s Dream Team, Brought to You by Kiaiv
In North America, spectator sports represent a nearly $64 bil-
lion market. Some of that revenue comes from ticket sales to 
fans who cannot get close enough to the action. But the right 
to broadcast those sports accounts for an ever-increasing 
portion of the market’s revenue, and as those interests grow, 
some key priorities are changing too. In particular, the National 
Basketball Association (NBA) is breaking away from some of 
its traditional peers by taking a page from soccer and racing 
leagues: They are considering new sponsorship agreements 
that place company logos right on the players’ uniforms.
Thus far, the new agreement applies only to the uniforms 
for the 2016 and 2017 All-Star Games, for which the NBA play-
ers’ uniforms will feature a small, 3.25″ × 1.6″ patch with the 
name and logo of the automotive brand Kia. Individual teams 
do not have the league’s permission to alter their jerseys simi-
larly, and as of now there are no plans to add advertising 
patches to regular-season uniforms.
But even in this limited form, the move is still a dramatic 
change, considering that the NBA—along with its peers, the 
National Football League, Major League Baseball, and the 
National Hockey League—has never used them in the past. 
The uniforms in all these leagues feature logos for the manu-
facturer of the uniforms, and they often sport commemorative 
patches to honor important people and personalities who 
have recently died.
But advertising for other brands has not existed, for sev-
eral reasons. The uniform manufacturers have resisted it in 
particular, worried that other ads on the jerseys would 
­compete for consumers’ attention. There is also the difficulty 
of finding an external sponsor that is acceptable to all the 
teams in the league. In addition, leagues have struggled to de-
fine a profit-sharing plan that would be fair. That is, how much 
of the revenue created by such advertising would go to the 
league, to the team, or to the players themselves?
For the NBA, Kia’s All-Star jersey sponsorship actually was 
the result of negotiations between the league and Turner 
Sports, which is the network that owns the broadcast rights for 
games. When the two parties entered into their most recent 
contract, Turner asked for the right to negotiate with sponsors 
and sell advertising space on the players’ uniforms. In turn, it 
entered into the two-year marketing agreement with Kia.
Although the NBA and other major sports leagues have little 
experience with this form of marketing communication, others 
are far more familiar with it. Drivers as well as their cars are 
festooned with sponsorship logos in most car-racing leagues. 
European soccer players also often display logos on their 
­jerseys. One professional—and entrepreneurial—marathon 
­runner sells space on his race kits and bibs to advertisers 
when he enters big races like the New York Marathon.
Moreover, it isn’t as if sponsorships are anything new in 
sports—on virtually all levels. Another car company, Nissan, re-
cently announced that it had entered into “the widest-reaching 
sponsorship in the history of collegiate sports.” This agreement 
gives Nissan the rights to place its name and logos in the stadi-
ums of 100 different universities throughout the United States, 
as well as to use those schools’ names in its own advertising. 
In an unusual partnership between KIA and the 
NBA, a small KIA logo will appear on players’ 
­uniforms.
Source: Kia K900 LeBron James Commercial/Kia Motors America/
YouTube
Traditional Media  When measuring IMC success, the firm should examine when and 
how often consumers have been exposed to various marketing communications. 
Specifically, the firm uses measures of frequency and reach to gauge consumers’ exposure 
to marketing communications. For most products and situations, a single exposure to a 
communication is hardly enough to generate the desired response. Therefore, marketers 
measure the frequency of exposure—how often the audience is exposed to a communica-
tion within a specified period of time. The other measure used to measure consumers’ ex-
posure to marketing communications is reach, which describes the percentage of the target 
population exposed to a specific marketing communication, such as an advertisement, at 
least once.23 Marketing communications managers usually state their media objectives in 
terms of gross rating points (GRP), which represent reach multiplied by frequency 
(GRP = Reach × Frequency).
This GRP measure can refer to print, radio, or television, but any comparisons require a 
single medium. Suppose that Kenneth Cole places seven advertisements in Vogue magazine, 
which reaches 50 percent of the fashion-forward target segment. The total GRP generated 

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
567
	
	
by these seven magazine advertisements is 50 reach × 7 advertisements = 350 GRP. Now 
suppose Kenneth Cole includes 15 television ads as part of the same campaign, run during 
the program America’s Next Top Model, which has a rating (reach) of 9.2. The total GRP 
generated by these 15 advertisements is 138 (9.2 × 15 = 138). However, advertisements 
typically appear in more than one television program. So, if Kenneth Cole also advertises 
12 times during The Voice, which earns a rating of 1.8, its GRP would be 1.8 × 12 = 21.6, 
and the total GRP for both programs would be 138 + 21.6 = 159.6.
Web-Based Media  Taken together, firms are spending close to $160 billion annually on 
online advertising, which includes paid search, display ads, e-mail, and sponsorships.24 As 
shown in Exhibit 18.7, while the percentage increase of digital ad spending to total spending 
When calculating the gross 
rating points (GRP) of The 
Voice, the advertiser would 
multiply the reach times the 
frequency.
© NBC/Photofest
E X H I B I T  18.7
Digital Ad Spending Worldwide, 2010–2016 (billions, % change 
and % of total media ad spending)
17.5%
$72.37
$87.27
$102.83
$118.40
$134.65
$149.18
$163.04
2010
2011
Digital ad spending
% change
% share
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
15.2%
17.7%
Note: Includes advertising that appears on desktop and laptop computers as well as mobile phones
and tablets, and includes all the various formats of advertising on those platforms; excludes SMS,
MMS, and P2P messaging-based advertising.
17.8%
15.1%
13.7%
10.8%
9.3%
20.6%
19.8%
21.7%
23.4%
24.8%
25.9%
Source: eMarketer.com, December 2012

568	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
is slowing somewhat (yellow line), the absolute level of spending (bar chart) and relative 
share of digital ad spending to total spending continues to increase (red line). Although 
GRP is an adequate measure for television and radio advertisements, assessing the effec-
tiveness of any web-based communication efforts in an IMC campaign generally requires 
web-tracking software, which measures how much time viewers spend on particular web 
pages, the number of pages they view, how many times users click banner ads, which web-
site they came from, and so on. All these performance metrics can be easily measured and 
assessed using a variety of software, including Google Analytics. Marketing Analytics 
18.1 describes how Puma makes use of Google Analytics.
Facebook also helps companies see who has been visiting their fan pages, what those 
people are doing on the fan pages, and who is clicking their advertisements.25 By keeping 
track of who is visiting their fan pages, marketers can better customize the material on their 
pages by getting to know the people visiting.
Planning, Implementing, and Evaluating IMC Programs—An 
Illustration of Google Advertising
Imagine a hypothetical upscale sneaker store in New York City, called Transit, that is mod-
eled after vintage New York City subway trains. Transit’s target market is young, well-­
educated, hip men and women aged 17 to 34 years. The owner’s experience indicates the 
importance of personal selling for this market because these consumers (1) make large 
Puma’s Use of Google Analyticsv
The international sports brand Puma offers clothing and ac-
cessories alongside its iconic shoes. It enjoys continued suc-
cess mainly because it has turned to analytics to define its 
integrated marketing strategies and develop its advertising. 
When Puma first partnered with Google Analytics, its primary 
goals were to showcase the breadth of its products online 
and centralize its online presence. But to compete in the mod-
ern age among customers who are accustomed to shopping 
anywhere at any time, it needed to do more than update its 
website. Thus, Puma integrated its advertising with its online 
marketing strategy to devise an overall branded content online 
strategy.
	
The insights gained from Google Analytics drive these new 
advertising and online strategies. For example, Puma launched 
a new photo-driven site with multiple profiles of famous ath-
letes such as Olympian Usain Bolt and soccer star Mario 
Balotelli. Instead of traditional web formats, the site weaves 
the featured apparel together with buy buttons that appear 
interspersed throughout the content. The new site also was 
integrated with the brand’s “Forever Faster” campaign—a cam-
paign that also featured the same athletes in television com-
mercials and social media campaigns. Although Puma.com is 
still a relatively small player in the online world, it saw a signif-
icant increase in engagement and the number of site visits as 
a result of these efforts.
	
Google Analytics also helped Puma develop another aspect 
of its marketing strategy: By analyzing each product line indi-
vidually, Puma came to recognize exactly which products and 
lines were most popular. This analysis in turn revealed the 
need to improve the visibility of its women’s lines. To address 
this need, Puma decided to add inspirational women to its list 
of celebrity endorsements, alongside the mostly male athletes 
it had been featuring. In the hope of reaching more young fe-
male customers for example, Puma named Rihanna as a brand 
ambassador and creative director of its women’s line.
Marketing Analytics 18.1
The insights gained from Google Analytics were used to 
launch a photo-driven site with profiles of famous athletes 
such as Olympian Usain Bolt and introduce the brand’s 
“­Forever Faster” campaign used in television commercials 
and social media campaigns.
© Jamie McCarthy/Getty Images

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
569
	
	
purchases and (2) seek considerable information before making a decision. Thus, Jay 
Oliver, the owner, spends part of his communication budget on training his sales associ-
ates. Oliver has realized his communication budget is considerably less than that of other 
sneaker stores in the area. He has therefore decided to concentrate his limited budget on a 
specific segment and use electronic media exclusively in his IMC program.
The IMC program Oliver has developed emphasizes his store’s distinctive image 
and uses his website, social shopping, and some interesting community-building tech-
niques. Social shopping is the use of the Internet to communicate about product prefer-
ences with other shoppers. For instance, he has an extensive customer database as part of 
his CRM system, from which he draws information for matching new merchandise with 
his customers’ past purchase behaviors. He also has little personal nuggets of informa-
tion that he or other sales associates have collected on the customers. He then e-mails 
specific customers information about new products that he believes will be of interest to 
them. He also encourages customers to use blogs hosted on his website. Customers chat 
about the hot new sneakers, club events, and races. He does everything with a strong 
sense of style. 
To reach new customers, he is using search engine marketing (SEM). In particular, 
he is using Google AdWords, a search engine marketing tool offered by Google that allows 
advertisers to show up in the Sponsored Links section of the search results page based on 
the keywords potential customers use (see the sponsored link section in the right-hand 
column of the Google screen grab above). 
Oliver must determine the best keywords to use for his sponsored link advertising 
program. Some potential customers might search using the keywords “sneakers,” “sneakers 
in New York City,” “athletic shoes,” or other such versions. Using Google AdWords, 
­Oliver can assess the effectiveness of his advertising expenditures by measuring the reach, 
relevance, and return on investment for each of the keywords that potential customers used 
during their Internet searches.
To estimate reach, Oliver uses the number of impressions (the number of times 
the ad appears in front of the user) and the click-through rate (CTR). To calculate 
CTR, he divides the number of times a user clicks an ad by the number of impres-
sions.26 For example, if a sponsored link was delivered 100 times and 10 people clicked 
on it, then the number of impressions is 100, the number of clicks is 10, and the CTR 
would be 10 percent.
The relevance of the ad describes how useful an ad message is to the consumer 
doing the search. Google provides a measure of relevance through its AdWords system 
Advertisers pay Google to be listed in the Sponsored Links section in the right-hand column of this 
screen grab, based on the keywords customers use in their searches.
Source: Google, Inc.

570	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
using a quality score. The quality score looks at a variety of factors to measure how 
relevant a keyword is to an ad’s text and to a user’s search query. In general, a high-quality 
score means that a keyword will trigger ads in a higher position and at a lower 
­cost-per-click.27 In a search for “sneaker store,” the Transit ad showed up fourth, 
­suggesting high relevance.
Using the following formula, Oliver also can determine an ad’s return on marketing 
investment (ROMI):
ROMI =  Gross Margin −Marketing Expenditure
Marketing Expenditure
 × 100
For the two keyword searches in Exhibit 18.8, Oliver finds how much the advertis-
ing cost him (Column 3), the sales produced as a result (Column 4), the gross margin 
in dollars (Column 5), and the ROMI (Column 7). For “sneaker store,” the Transit 
website had a lot more clicks (110) than the clicks received from “New York City 
sneakers” (40) (see Column 2, Exhibit 18.8). Even though the sales were lower for the 
keywords “sneaker store” at $35/day, versus $40/day for the keywords “New York City 
sneakers,” the ROMI was much greater for the “sneaker store” keyword combination. 
In the future, Oliver should continue this keyword combination, in addition to produc-
ing others that are similar to it, in the hope that he will attain an even greater return on 
investment.
To evaluate his IMC program, Oliver compares the results of the program with his ob-
jectives (Exhibit 18.9). To measure his program’s effectiveness, he conducted an inexpen-
sive online survey using the questions in Exhibit 18.9, which shows the survey results for 
one year.
The results show a steady increase in awareness, knowledge of the store, and choice of 
the store as a primary source of sneakers. This research provides evidence that the IMC 
program was conveying the intended message to the target audience.
E X H I B I T  18.8
ROMI Assessment
 
 
(1) Keyword
 
 
(2) Clicks
 
(3) Marketing 
Expenditure
 
(4) 
Sales
(5) Gross Margin = 
Sales × Gross Margin% 
= Sales × 50%
(6) Gross Margin ($) 
(Col. 5) − Marketing 
Expenditure (Col. 3)
 
(7) ROMI = (Col. 
6/Col. 3) × 100
Sneaker store
110
$10/day
$70/day
$35/day
$25
250%
New York City 
sneakers
40
$25/day
$80/day
$40/day
$15
  60%
Note: The cost of the sneakers is 50 percent of the sale price.
E X H I B I T  18.9
Program Effectiveness Results
Communication Objective
Question
Before Campaign
Six Months After
One Year After
Awareness (% mentioning store)
What stores sell sneakers?
38%
46%
52%
Knowledge (% giving outstanding 
rating for sales assistance)
Which stores would you rate 
outstanding on the following 
characteristics?
9
17
24
Attitude (% first choice)
On your next shopping trip for 
sneakers, which store would you 
visit first?
13
15
19
Visit (% visited store)
Which of the following stores 
have you been to?
8
15
19

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
571
	
	
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Why is the objective-and-task method of setting an IMC budget better 
than the rule-of-thumb methods?
2.	 How do firms use GRP to evaluate the effectiveness of traditional  
media?
3.	 How would a firm evaluate the effectiveness of its Google advertising?
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Identify the components of the communication 
process.
	
	
The communication process begins with a sender, 
which provides the message to a transmitter, which 
develops or encodes the message for transmission 
through a communication channel. When a recipient 
receives the message, it may have been altered by 
noise in the environment. To find out, the sender 
needs to receive some form of feedback from the 
recipient.
	
	
Explain the four steps in the AIDA model.
	
	
Awareness is the first “thinking” step, during which 
the consumer simply recognizes a brand or product. 
During the Interest step, the consumer starts to 
“feel” and become intrigued enough to explore the 
product or brand. This interest then leads to another 
feeling, namely, Desire for the marketed item. Fi-
nally, to be successful, marketing communication 
must prompt an Action: a purchase, a commitment, 
a recommendation, or whatever else the company is 
trying to get consumers to do.
	
	
Describe the various integrative communication 
channels.
	
	
Advertising has long been the primary channel for 
marketing communication and is still a constant 
presence, but other media channels have become 
more and more prominent. For example, direct mar-
keting media options, particularly online options, 
have increased in recent years. Outbound direct 
marketing telephone calls have declined, but Inter-
net-based technologies like e-mail and m-commerce 
have increased. Public relations also has become in-
creasingly important as other media forms become 
LO18-1
LO18-2
LO18-3
more expensive and as consumers grow more skep-
tical of commercial messages. With regard to new 
and electronic media, the wealth of recent options 
includes websites, corporate blogs, and social media 
such as YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter.
	
	
Explain the methods used to allocate the inte-
grated marketing communications (IMC) budget.
	
	
Various rule-of-thumb methods rely on prior sales 
and communication activities to determine the best 
allocation. For example, the competitive parity 
method sets the budget so that the share of communi-
cation expenses equals the firm’s share of the market. 
The percentage-of-sales method, just as it sounds, 
uses a fixed percentage of sales as the amount of the 
budget. In contrast, the objective-and-task method es-
tablishes specific communication objectives, identi-
fies which media can best attain those objectives, and 
then determines the related costs to expend.
	
	
Identify marketing metrics used to measure IMC 
success.
	
	
Marketers rely on a mix of traditional and nontradi-
tional measures to determine IMC success. Because 
potential customers generally need to be exposed to 
IMC messages several times before they will buy, 
firms estimate the degree to which customers are ex-
posed to a message by multiplying frequency (the 
number of times an audience is exposed to a mes-
sage) by reach (the percentage of the target popula-
tion exposed to a specific marketing communication). 
Measuring Internet IMC effectiveness requires dif-
ferent measures, such as click-through tracking that 
measures how many times users click on banner ad-
vertising on websites.
LO18-4
LO18-5
∙	 advertising,  559
∙	 AIDA model,  554
∙	 aided recall,  554
∙	 blog (weblog),  562
∙	 brand awareness,  554
∙	 click-through rate (CTR),  569
Key Terms

572	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
∙	 communication channel,  552
∙	 decoding,  552
∙	 direct marketing,  560
∙	 encoding,  552
∙	 feedback loop,  552
∙	 frequency,  566
∙	 gross rating points (GRP),  566
∙	 impressions,  569
∙	 integrated marketing communica-
tions (IMC),  550
∙	 lagged effect,  558
∙	 mobile marketing,  561
∙	 noise,  552
∙	 objective-and-task method,  565
∙	 personal selling,  560
∙	 public relations (PR),  560
∙	 reach,  566
∙	 receiver,  552
∙	 relevance,  569
∙	 return on marketing investment 
(ROMI),  570
∙	 rule-of-thumb methods,  565
∙	 sales promotion,  560
∙	 search engine marketing  
(SEM),  569
∙	 sender,  550
∙	 social media,  563
∙	 social shopping,  569
∙	 top-of-mind awareness,  554
∙	 transmitter,  552
∙	 web tracking software,  568
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Visit http://phelpsagency.com/ and click on the “Work” 
tab at the top. Compare the IMC for the different compa-
nies. What were the goals of the integrated marketing 
campaign? Which IMC channels were used in that partic-
ular campaign? How do those channels contribute to the 
success of the IMC campaign in achieving its stated goals?
Marketing Applications
1.	 Assume that the contemporary apparel company rag & 
bone has embarked on a new IMC strategy. It has cho-
sen to advertise on TV during NBC Nightly News and in 
print in Time magazine. The message is designed to an-
nounce new styles for the season and uses a 17-year-old 
woman as the model. Evaluate this strategy and, if 
­appropriate, propose an alternative.
2.	 Using the steps in the AIDA model, explain why a po-
tential consumer in question 1 who views rag & bone’s 
advertising may not be ready to go out and purchase a 
new pair of jeans.
3.	 Suppose a snack company introduces a new product 
called SumSeeds—sunflower seeds with energy boost-
ers like caffeine, taurine, lysine, and ginseng. How 
would you expect this product’s IMC program to differ 
from that for regular sunflower seeds sold as snacks?
4.	 Procter & Gamble sends new parents home from the 
hospital with a sample of Pampers diapers, and it has 
started sending Fusion ProGlide razors to each young 
man in America on his 18th birthday. What are the 
likely goals of such marketing tactics? How could 
Procter & Gamble measure how well it has achieved 
these goals with its free giveaways? 
5.	 Suppose you saw your instructor for this course being 
interviewed on TV about the impact of a big storm on 
an upcoming holiday’s sales. Is this interview part of 
your college’s IMC program? If so, do you believe it 
benefits the college? How?
6.	 A hotel runs several advertisements in the student news-
paper of a local university, promoting its Sunday brunch 
menu. The ads increase the number of people visiting its 
restaurant, but only slightly. Is the campaign necessarily 
a failure? What other goals might the hotel have for this 
advertising campaign?
7.	 As an intern for Pepsi, you have been asked to help with 
developing an IMC budget. The objective of the IMC 
strategy is to raise Diet Pepsi’s market share by 2 per-
cent in the United States in the next 18 months. Your 
manager explains, “It’s real simple; just increase the 
budget 2 percent over last year’s.” Evaluate your manag-
er’s strategy.
8.	 You were sitting in the school cafeteria yesterday, and a 
young man from your marketing class, whom you don’t 
know well, asked if he could sit down. He then started 
telling you about this very cool new Google app, “Word-
Lens,” that allows you to translate signs into different 
languages in real time using the camera on your smart-
phone. Although you recognize the merit in the product, 
you later find out that he works for Google. Do you be-
lieve his action constitutes an ethical IMC strategy? 
How will it affect your attitude toward Google and the 
potential that you will purchase the product?

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
573
	
	
1.	 Home Depot hired an advertising agency to develop 
television ads for its grand opening in southern Maine. 
The advertising agency represents which of the follow-
ing components of the communication process?
a.  sender
b.  transmitter
c.  communication channel
d.  receiver
e.  feedback
2.	 Which of the following formulas is accurate for calcu-
lating gross rating points (GRP)? 
a.  Impressions multiplied by frequency 
b.  Reach multiplied by impressions 
c.  Reach multiplied by frequency
d.  Reach divided by impressions
e.  Reach divided by frequency 
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
TAKING IMC TO THE MAX: PEPSI MAX AND MODERN 
COMMUNICATIONS 
As we explained in the opener to this chapter, Pepsi has embraced the communication 
­capabilities of emojis in a big way—you might even say, in a maximal way. Actually, 
­PepsiCo would love it if you used that description, because for its Pepsi Max line of bever-
ages, it actively seeks to establish a consistently cool, cutting-edge perception among con-
sumers, mainly by using integrated marketing campaigns that revolve around the notion of 
living life “to the max.” Let’s consider a few of the ways it presents consistent messages 
across a range of channels.
The very name of the product line provides the foundation for the consistent message. 
By referring to the carbonated beverage as Pepsi Max, PepsiCo signals that this brand will 
offer more, greater, and bigger things to consumers. Thus every communication needs to 
be “to the max” as well—grander, louder, more exciting, more thrilling. In this effort, 
­PepsiCo uses the tagline “Maximum Taste, No Sugar” in combination with hashtags such 
as #LiveforNow and #Unbelievable on social media.
On its dedicated YouTube channel, Pepsi Max posts videos of people living up to the 
philosophies embedded in the hashtags, including the “Human Loop the Loop” Damien 
Walters—a man who seemingly defies gravity (and offers an excellent lesson in centripetal 
force) in his unbelievable physical feat of running all the way around a vertical loop-the-
loop.28 Other videos on the channel highlight “Amazing Trampoline Tricks” and cool 
JumpCam shots of remarkable feats. The efforts have vastly increased the number of fol-
lowers and views earned by adrenaline junkies, as well as those who simply find enjoyment 
in watching seemingly normal people be unbelievable.29
Rather than amazing feats by regular people, Pepsi Max’s #Maxfootball campaign re-
lies on some of the biggest names in men’s soccer, including Sergio Agüero from Man 
City, James Rodríguez of Real Madrid, Arsenal’s Alexis Sánchez, and the goalkeeper 
­David de Gea for Manchester United. In televised advertisements, the players are flashed 
blue cards (rather than the yellow and red cards that stop play in the game), prompting 
adventures and fun for the regular people holding them up. One television spot, for exam-
ple, tells the story of two regular delivery drivers who raise their blue cards and thereby 
gain magical access to a shooting session with the all-star players, who show off their 
­acrobatic moves and enviable ball-handling skills.30
With a linked app, Pepsi Max allows users to enter contests to win similar “Blue Card 
Experiences,” including tickets to the championship game. To increase the coordination 
across campaigns, the app also features a function that lets users scan the Pepsi emojis on 
Pepsi Max cans to win other prizes and contest entries.
Chapter Case Study 

574	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
As if those innovations were not “max” enough, PepsiCo is entering some of the new-
est channels in unusual ways. Whereas outdoor advertising traditionally has been static and 
relatively straightforward, Pepsi Max is changing the relationship between this marketing 
channel and social media. On digital billboards, Pepsi Max posts videos submitted by users 
to the entertainment network Vine that detail how they #LiveForNow (remember that 
hashtag?).31 Drivers passing the billboards thus get to see a quick and exciting video, which 
they can access again when they get home and log in to their Vine accounts.
With another example of marrying traditional communication forms with modern 
technology, Pepsi Max also transformed bus stops into adventure zones. Using augmented 
reality techniques, it has created a system to allow remarkably realistic videos to play in the 
windows surrounding bus stops. Thus when a rider sits down to wait for the next bus and 
glances to the right, it appears as though a tiger were literally walking down the street, 
headed right toward the bus stop. Other videos show a massive meteor ready to obliterate 
the city street or an alien-looking tentacle grabbing pedestrians nearby.32 The videos are 
very short, to avoid truly scaring people, but in those brief moments, more than a few peo-
ple have experienced some thrilling terror. Of course, Pepsi Max also tapes their reactions 
and posts those videos to its YouTube channel. 
Questions
1.	
Which channels is Pepsi Max using to communicate its marketing messages? Rank 
order your impression of how effective they are and justify your answer.
2.	
How are those various channels integrated? 
3.	
Which IMC channels do these campaigns by Pepsi Max make use of? 
Pepsi Max’s bus stops allow 
­remarkably realistic videos to 
play in the windows surround-
ing the structures. Pepsi Max 
tapes peoples’ reactions and 
posts those videos to its  
YouTube channel.
Source: Unbelievable Bus Shelter/Pepsi 
Max/YouTube
Endnotes
	 1.	 Mike Esterl, “Coke Sticks to Its Strategy While Soda Sales Slide,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2014, http://online.wsj.com.
	2.	 Alan Cassinelli, “The 15 Best Social Media Campaigns of 2015,” 
Business to Community, December 31, 2015, http://www. 
business2community.com/social-media/15-best-social-media- 
campaigns-2015-01415014#klBUQ1dYj8W3mQkG.97.
	3.	 Tim Nudd, “Pepsi Is About to Unleash Emojis on Its Bottles and 
Cans Globally This Summer,” Ad Week, February 19, 2016,  
http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/ 
pepsi-about-unleash-emojis-its-bottles-and-cans-globally- 
summer-169782.
	4.	 E.J. Schultz and Jessica Wohl, “Pepsi Preps Global Emojiu Can 
and Bottle Campaign,” Advertising Age, February 19, 2016, 
http://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/pepsi-preps-global-emoji- 
bottle-campaign/302748/.

	
INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS  CHAPTER EIGHTEEN	
575
	
	
	5.	 Ibid.
	6.	 Cassinelli, “The 15 Best Social Media Campaigns of 2015.” 
	 7.	 Schultz and Wohl, “Pepsi Preps Global Emojiu Can and Bottle 
Campaign.”
	8.	 Terence Shimp and J. Craig Andrews, Advertising Promotion 
and Other Aspects of Integrated Marketing Communications 
(Boston: Cengage Learning, 2013).
	9.	 PepsiCo, “Universal Language,” http://design.pepsico.com/ 
pepsimoji.php?v=20#section5.
	10.	 Shimp and Andrews, Advertising Promotion and Other 
Aspects of Integrated Marketing Communications. 
	11.	 E. K. Strong, The Psychology of Selling (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1925).
	12.	 Disney, “Music,” http://music.disney.com; Phil Gallo, “Disney 
Music Tops Interscope in Album Market Share, Enters the EDM 
Fray,” Billboard, May 10, 2014, http://www.billboard.com.
	13.	 Andrew Adam Newman, “Trying to Bolster the Image of Frozen 
Meals as Sales Lag,” The New York Times, April 23, 2014, 
http://www.nytimes.com.
	14.	 Ibid.
	15.	 John Philip Jones, “What Makes Advertising Work?” The 
Economic Times, July 24, 2002.
	16.	 American Marketing Association, “Advertising,” Dictionary of 
Marketing Terms, https://www.ama.org/resources/Pages/
Dictionary.aspx.
	17.	 Teri Evans, “Firms Hold Fast to Snail Mail Marketing,” The Wall 
Street Journal, January 12, 2010, http://online.wsj.com; George 
E. Belch and Michael A. Belch, Advertising and Promotion: An 
Integrated Marketing Communications Perspective (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2007).
	18.	 Rebecca Lieb, “Q&A: Cindy Krum Cuts through the Mobile 
Marketing Alphabet Soup of NFC and RFID,” http:// 
econsultancy.com, March 16, 2010.
	19.	 Akihisa Fujita, “Mobile Marketing in Japan: The Acceleration of 
Integrated Marketing Communications,” Journal of Integrated 
Marketing Communications (2008), pp. 41–46; Mobile update, 
http://www.businessinsider.com; http://www.informationweek.
com; http://www.nearbynow.com (accessed May 26, 2010).
	20.	Yubo Chen, Scott Fay, and Qi Wang, “The Role of Marketing in 
Social Media: How Online Consumer Reviews Evolve,” Journal 
of Interactive Marketing 25, no. 2 (May 2011), pp. 85–94.
	21.	 This section draws from Michael Levy, Barton A. Weitz, and 
Dhruv Grewal, Retailing Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: 
McGraw-Hill /Irwin, 2015).
	22.	Megan Halscheid, Micheline Sabatté, and Sejal Sura, “Beyond 
the Last Click: Measuring ROI and Consumer Engagement with 
Clickstream Analysis,” Journal of Integrated Marketing 
Communications, 2009, pp. 43–50; Vikram Mahidhar and 
Christine Cutten, “Navigating the Marketing Measurement 
Maze,” Journal of Integrated Marketing Communications, 
2007, pp. 41–46.
	23.	http://www.riger.com.
	24.	Sydney Ember, “Digital Ad Spending Expected to Soon Surpass 
TV,” The New York Times, December 7, 2015.
	25.	“Facebook Pages: Insights for Your Facebook Page,” http://www.
facebook.com.
	26.	“Marketing and Advertising Using Google,” Google 2007.
	27.	http://publishing2.com.
	28.	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OTcdutIcEJ4.
	29.	“How Pepsi Max’s ‘Unbelievable’ YouTube Channel Helped 
Increase Market Share,” Think with Google, November 2014, 
https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/intl/en-gb/case-studies/
how-pepsi-maxs-unbelievable-youtube-channel-helped-increase- 
market-share.html.
	30.	Tony Connelly, “Pepsi Max Launches Star-Studded Football  
Ad Campaign to Coincide with Its Emoji Marketing,” The  
Drum, February 23, 2016,  http://www.thedrum.com/news/ 
2016/02/23/pepsi-max-launches-star-studded-football-ad- 
campaign-coincide-its-emoji-marketing.
	31.	 Emma Hall, “Pepsi Max Puts Vine Videos on U.K. Billboards,” 
Advertising Age, February 20, 2014.
	32.	Jessica Gioglio, “Pepsi Max Shocks and Delights Londoners with 
Augmented Reality Stunt,” Convince and Convert, n.d., http://www.
convinceandconvert.com/social-media-case-studies/pepsi- 
max-shocks-and-delights-londoners-with-augmented-reality-stunt/.
	 i.	 Seb Joseph, “Domino’s Says Its Snapchat Test Led to a ‘Surprising’ 
Surge in Pizza Orders,” Business Insider, February 18, 2016.
	 ii.	 Joe Flint, “Pepsi Gets Taste of ‘Empire’ Drama,” The Wall Street 
Journal, November 19, 2015, http://adage.com/article/media/ 
pepsi-s-meta-integration-fox-s-empire/301420/.
	iii.	 Stuart Elliot, “Marketers Are Urged to Become Fearless,” The New 
York Times, September 30, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com.
	iv.	 Sarah Germano, “NBA to Put Kia Logo on Front of All-Star 
Jerseys,” The Wall Street Journal, October 28, 2015; E.J. 
Schultz, “Nissan Goes Big with College Sports in New 
Sponsorship Deal,” Advertising Age, November 6, 2015.
	 v.	 Google Analytics, “Case Study: Puma Kicks Up Order Rate 7% 
with Insights from Google Analytics and Viget,” Google, 2013,  
https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/www.google.com/
en/us/analytics/customers/pdfs/puma.pdf; Caitlin Carter, 
“Rihanna Signs on as Puma’s New Creative Director,” Music 
Times, December 16, 2014,  http://www.musictimes.com/ 
articles/20450/20141216/rihanna-pumas-new-creative-director- 
new-album-global-ambassador-fashion-icon.htm; Puma, 
“Rihanna: Gamechanger,”  Puma.com,http://us.puma.com/en_US/
sports/ambassadors/rihanna; Lucia Moses, “Inside Puma’s 
Branded Content Strategy,” Digiday, December 15, 2014,  
http://digiday.com/brands/nielsenes-puma-branded-content/; 
Aaron Ricadela, “Puma’s Marketing Strategy Is a Whole New 
Ball Game,” Business World, September 19, 2014,  http://www.
independent.ie/business/world/pumas-marketing-strategy-is-a-
whole-new-ball-game-30598229.html; Larissa Faw, “Puma 
Adds New Channels to Its ‘Forever Faster’ Campaign,” Media 
Post, August 26, 2014,  http://www.mediapost.com/publications/ 
article/232889/puma-adds-new-channels-to-its-forever-faster-
cam.html.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO19-1	 Describe the steps in designing and executing an advertising campaign.
	LO19-2	 Identify three objectives of advertising.
	LO19-3	 Describe the different ways that advertisers appeal to consumers.
	LO19-4	 Identify the various types of media.
	LO19-5	 Identify agencies that regulate advertising.
	LO19-6	 Describe the elements of a public relations toolkit.
	LO19-7	 Identify the various types of sales promotions.
ADVERTISING, 
PUBLIC RELATIONS, 
AND SALES 
PROMOTIONS
CHAPTER 19

 L
ots of companies say that they listen to their cus-
tomers. To prove its claim, McDonald’s has initi-
ated a marketing campaign in which it created 
channels for consumers to ask questions, then 
made the answers readily available. The risk in the strat-
egy was that they would lack control over what kinds of 
questions people asked, but as the company’s senior di-
rector of U.S. marketing explained recently, the campaign 
is about more than advertising; it is “fundamentally about 
an ongoing two-way communication with our customers.”
The “Our Food. Your Questions” campaign places kiosks 
in major cities, where passersby can ask challenging ques-
tions, such as “What’s really in your hamburgers?” or “Do you 
use dye in your shakes?” McDonald’s then issues immediate 
responses to the individual questioners, and also posts the 
questions and answers online. At the same time, it broad-
casts recordings of these interactions as television commer-
cials and on YouTube, seeking to expand the reach of its 
truth-telling campaigns. In just a few months, McDonald’s has 
posted responses to more than 25,000 questions through 
various social media, and it announced that 19 million people 
watched question videos through YouTube.
Furthermore, it relies on the insights it gains from this 
two-way conversation to refocus its ongoing communica-
tions on clearing up some misconceptions. For example, fol-
lowing up on a frequently asked question, McDonald’s began 
running television ads depicting eggs being freshly cracked 
for Egg McMuffins. The recipe for the breakfast favorite had 
always required McDonald’s kitchen staff to break fresh 
eggs, but when consumers asked, “What is in an Egg 
McMuffin?” McDonald’s knew that it had not communicated 
that benefit sufficiently in its previous advertising. 
Along with advertising what it already does, McDonald’s 
is presenting itself as responsive to customers by announc-
ing that it is revising the recipe for Chicken McNuggets. The 
question-and-answer session that ­focused on “What is re-
ally in Chicken McNuggets?” was the second most widely 
watched answer session on its U.S. YouTube site.1 In 
Source: YourQuestions.McDonalds.ca

578
Advertising is a paid form of communication delivered through media from an identifiable 
source about an organization, product, service, or idea designed to persuade the receiver to 
take some action now or in the future.4 This definition provides some important distinctions 
between advertising and other forms of promotion, which we discussed in the previous chap-
ter. First, advertising is not free; someone has paid, with money, trade, or other means, to get 
the message shown. Second, advertising must be carried by some medium—television, radio, 
print, the web, T-shirts, sidewalks, and so on. Third, legally, the source of the message must 
be known or knowable. Fourth, advertising represents a persuasive form of communication, 
designed to get the consumer to take some action. That desired action can range from “ask us 
questions” to “perceive us as responsive” to “buy more McNuggets for your kids.”
Advertising encompasses an enormous industry and clearly is the most visible form of 
marketing communications—so much so that many people think of marketing and adver-
tising as synonymous. Global advertising expenditures are approximately $570 billion, and 
almost half that amount is spent in North America. Although expenditures dropped some-
what during the global downturn, advertising remains virtually everywhere, and predic-
tions are that it will continue to grow.5
­addition, related questions signaled that consumers were 
worried about antibiotics and the healthfulness of the 
Happy Meal favorites. Therefore, the revised McNuggets 
will contain fewer ingredients, exclude artificial preserva-
tives, and come from sources that do not add antibiotics to 
their poultry meal. In advertisements introducing the new 
McNuggets, McDonald’s makes the “cleaner label” a key ele-
ment.2 The advertising thus has a lot of work to do, and 
McDonald’s seeks to ensure that it covers all the bases. 
Building on the notion of the “Your Questions” cam-
paign, McDonald’s announced that it has a new brand 
vision. Rather than highlighting the billions of custom-
ers it has served—long a standard on the brightly lit 
signs for the restaurant—it wants to focus on the bil-
lions of customers it heard. The new brand vision is de-
signed to fit with its existing advertising tagline, “I’m 
lovin’ it,” to ensure consistency and flow across all its 
brand communications.3
This billboard will get your 
­attention. Produced by the 
­nonprofit organization 
­Women’s Aid, this interactive 
billboard for battered women 
changes as people walk by and 
notice. The bruises heal.
Source: WomensAid.org

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
579
	
	
Yet how many of the advertisements you were exposed to yesterday do you remember 
today? Probably not more than three or four. As you learned in Chapter 6, perception is a 
highly selective process. Consumers simply screen out messages that are not relevant to 
them, and young consumers appear particularly good at doing so. For example, an astound-
ing 92 percent of Millennial consumers indicated that while they watch television, they 
simultaneously and constantly check their mobile devices.6 Thus, televised ads are unlikely 
to capture their attention for long, if at all. Then, if you do notice an advertisement, you 
may not react to it. Even if you react to it, you may not remember it later. Even if you re-
member the ad, you may not remember the brand or sponsor—or worse yet from the adver-
tiser’s point of view, you may remember it as an advertisement for another brand.7
To get you to remember their ad and the brand, advertisers must first get your attention. As 
we discussed in Chapter 18, the increasing number of communication channels and changes in 
consumers’ media usage have made the job of advertisers far more difficult.8 Advertisers continu-
ally endeavor to use creativity and various media to reach their target markets. In a public service 
campaign against domestic violence, the nonprofit organization Women’s Aid raised interactive 
billboards, picturing a battered woman’s face and the words “Look At Me.” When people walking 
by stopped to look, ­facial recognition software embedded in the billboard recognized their actions, 
and the picture changed, such that the bruises healed. The creative approach not only attracted 
people’s attention but also resonated with the underlying message—namely, that attention to a 
societal problem can be meaningful for solving the problem.9
As a consumer, you are exposed only to the end product—the finished advertisement, but 
many actions must take place before you actually get to see an ad. In this chapter, we examine 
the ingredients of a successful advertising campaign from identifying a target audience to 
creating the actual ad to assessing performance. Although our discussion is generally confined 
to advertising, much of the process for developing an advertising campaign is applicable to the 
IMC media vehicles discussed in Chapter 18. We conclude with some regulatory and ethical 
issues for advertising, then move on to public relations and sales promotions and their use.
Designing and carrying out a successful advertising program requires much planning 
and effort. Exhibit 19.1 shows the key steps in the process, each of which helps ensure that 
the intended message reaches the right audience and has the desired effect. We examine 
these steps in the sections that follow.
STEP 1: IDENTIFY TARGET AUDIENCE
The success of an advertising program depends on how well the advertiser can identify its 
target audience. Firms conduct research to identify their target audience, then use the infor-
mation they gain to set the tone for the advertising program and help them select the media 
they will use to deliver the message to that audience.
During this research, firms must keep in mind that their target audience may or may not 
be the same as current users of the product. For example, adidas knows that FIFA fans likely 
are at least familiar with its offerings, even if they do not currently purchase sports gear from 
adidas. Thus some advertisements feature the international football (or soccer) stars Jozy 
­Altidore and Lionel Messi to encourage them to buy more of the brand’s products.10 But teen-
aged pop music fans might be less likely to pay attention to sporting goods. So adidas also 
brought in Selena Gomez to put her name on its Neo line and appear in related advertising.11
LO19-1	
Describe the steps in 
designing and 
executing an 
advertising campaign.
E X H I B I T  19.1
Steps in Planning and Executing an Ad Campaign
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Assess
impact
Create
advertisements
Evaluate
and select
media
Convey
the
message
Determine
the
advertising
budget
Identify
target
audience
Set
advertising
objectives

580	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
STEP 2: SET ADVERTISING OBJECTIVES
The objectives of an advertising campaign are derived from the overall objectives of the 
marketing program and clarify the specific goals that the ads are designed to accomplish. 
Generally, these objectives appear in the advertising plan, a subsection of the firm’s over-
all marketing plan that explicitly analyzes the marketing and advertising situation, identi-
fies the objectives of the advertising campaign, clarifies a specific strategy for 
accomplishing those objectives, and indicates how the firm can determine whether the 
campaign was successful.12 An advertising plan is crucial because it will later serve as the 
yardstick against which advertising success or failure is measured.
Generally, in advertising to consumers, the objective is a pull strategy, in which the 
goal is to get consumers to pull the product into the marketing channel by demanding it. 
Push strategies also exist and are designed to increase demand by focusing on wholesal-
ers, retailers, or salespeople. These campaigns attempt to motivate the seller to highlight 
the product, rather than the products of competitors, and thereby push the product to con-
sumers. In this chapter, we focus on pull strategies. Push strategies are examined in Chap-
ters 15, 16, and 20.
All advertising campaigns aim to achieve certain objectives: to inform, persuade, 
and remind customers. Another way of looking at advertising objectives is to examine 
an ad’s focus. Is the ad designed to stimulate demand for a particular product or ser-
vice or more broadly for the institution in general? Also, ads can be used to stimulate 
demand for a product category or an entire industry or for a specific brand, firm, or 
item. We first look at the broad overall objectives: to inform, persuade, and remind. 
Then we examine advertising objectives based on the focus of the ad: product versus 
institutional.
adidas uses different ads to 
appeal to different target mar-
kets. Jozy Altidore (left) appeals 
to soccer fans, while Selena 
Gomez (right) attracts teen-
aged pop music fans.
Source: adidas
LO19-2	
Identify three 
objectives of 
advertising.

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
581
	
	
Informative Advertising
Informative advertising is a communication used to create and build brand awareness, 
with the ultimate goal of moving the consumer through the buying cycle to a purchase. 
Such advertising helps determine some important early stages of a product’s life cycle (see 
Chapter 12), particularly when consumers have little information about the specific prod-
uct or type of product. Retailers often use informative advertising to tell their customers 
about an upcoming sales event or the arrival of new merchandise.
Persuasive Advertising
When a product has gained a certain level of brand awareness, firms use persuasive adver-
tising to motivate consumers to take action. Persuasive advertising generally occurs in the 
growth and early maturity stages of the product life cycle, when competition is most intense, 
and attempts to accelerate the market’s acceptance of the product. In later stages of the prod-
uct life cycle, persuasive advertising may be used to reposition an established brand by per-
suading consumers to change their existing perceptions of the advertised product. Consumer 
goods firms such as Lancôme often use persuasive advertising to convince consumers to take 
action—switch brands,13 try a new product, or even continue to buy the advertised product.
Reminder Advertising
Finally, reminder advertising is a communication used to remind or prompt repurchases, 
especially for products that have gained market acceptance and are in the maturity stage of 
their life cycles. Such advertising certainly appears in traditional media, such as television 
or print commercials, but it also encompasses other forms of advertising. For example, if 
Lancôme’s persuasive ads attempt to motivate consumers to take  
action: Try the product, switch brands, or continue to buy the product.
© Bill Aron/PhotoEdit 
Is this product-focused ­advertisement designed to ­inform, 
persuade, or remind ­consumers about Pepsi Max?
Source: Pepsi-Cola Company

582	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
you decide to buy facial tissue, do you carefully consider all 
the options, comparing their sizes, prices, and performance, 
or do you just grab the first thing you see on the shelf? When 
your grocery store places a display of Kleenex facial tissues 
on the end of the paper products aisle, it relies on your top-of-
the-mind awareness of the Kleenex brand, which the manu-
facturer has achieved through advertising. That is, Kleenex 
tissue maintains a prominent place in people’s memories and 
triggers their response without them having to put any thought 
into it. The advertising and the end cap display thus prompt 
you and many other consumers to respond by buying a pack-
age, just the response Kleenex hoped to attain.
Focus of Advertisements
An ad campaign’s objectives determine each specific ad’s fo-
cus. The ad can be product focused, might have an institu-
tional focus, or could have a public service focus. 
Product-focused advertisements inform, persuade, or re-
mind consumers about a specific product or service. The 
Kleenex ad shown here is designed to generate sales for 
Kleenex.
An institutional advertisement is a type of advertising 
that promotes a company, corporation, business, institution, or 
organization. Unlike product-focused advertisements, it is not 
intended to sell a particular product or service. An ongoing 
and well-known institutional advertising campaign promotes 
GE’s Ecomagination.14 In the past, GE was thought to be one 
of the world’s least “green” companies. Since 2005 GE, 
through its Ecomagination program, has devoted millions of 
dollars toward cleaner technologies including water purification technology and lower 
emission aircraft engines, and the development of cleaner energy like wind and solar 
power. The program has been so successful that Fortune named it as one of the world’s top 
global green brands.15
A specific category of institutional advertising is public service advertising (PSA). 
PSAs focus on public welfare; generally they are sponsored by nonprofit institutions, civic 
groups, religious organizations, trade associations, or political groups.16 Like product and 
institutionally focused advertising, PSAs also inform, persuade, or remind consumers, but the 
focus is for the betterment of society. As such, PSAs represent a form of social marketing, 
This ad is designed to remind 
consumers that when you 
need tissues, don’t think too 
hard. Just pick up a box of 
Kleenex.
Image Courtesy of The Advertising 
­Archives
The GE Ecomagination  
program is institutional  
advertising in that it promotes 
the company and its “green” 
programs, not specific  
products.
Source: GE.com/about-us/ 
ecomagination.com

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
583
	
	
defined as the application of marketing principles to a social is-
sue to bring about attitudinal and behavioral change among the 
general public or a specific population segment.
Entertainer Reba McEntire is the spokesperson for a PSA 
for Outnumber Hunger, which was designed to raise awareness 
of the hunger problem in America. Sponsored by General 
Mills, Big Machine Label Group, and Feeding America, 
McEntire has appeared in special concert events and has been 
featured on more than 60 million General Mills packages, in-
cluding Cheerios. For each General Mills product code entered 
by its customers at OutnumberHunger.com, five meals are ac-
quired for local Feeding America food banks.17
Because PSAs are a special class of advertising that falls 
under Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules, 
broadcasters must devote a specific amount of free airtime to 
them. Also, since they often are designed by top advertising 
agencies for nonprofit clients, PSAs usually are quite creative 
and stylistically appealing. 
Regardless of whether the advertising campaign’s objective is to inform, persuade, or 
remind, with a focus on a particular product or the institution in general, each campaign’s 
objectives must be specific and measurable. For a brand awareness campaign, for example, 
the objective might be to increase brand awareness among the target market by 50 percent 
within six months. Another campaign’s goal may be to persuade 10 percent of a competi-
tor’s customers to switch to the advertised brand. Once the advertising campaign’s objec-
tives are set, the firm sets the advertising budget.
STEP 3: DETERMINE THE  
ADVERTISING BUDGET
The various budgeting methods for marketing communications (Chapter 18) also apply to 
budgeting for advertising. First, firms must consider the role that advertising plays in their 
attempt to meet their overall promotional objectives. Second, advertising expenditures vary 
over the course of the product life cycle. Third, the nature of the market and the product in-
fluence the size of advertising budgets. The nature of the market also determines the amount 
of money spent on advertising. For instance, less money is spent on advertising in B2B 
(business-to-business) marketing contexts than in B2C (business-to-consumer) markets. 
Personal selling, as we discuss in Chapter 20, likely is more important in B2B markets.
STEP 4: CONVEY THE MESSAGE
In this step, marketers determine what they want to convey about the product or service. 
First, the firm determines the key message it wants to communicate to the target audience. 
Second, the firm decides what appeal would most effectively convey the message. We 
present these decisions sequentially, but in reality they must be considered simultaneously.
The Message
The message provides the target audience with reasons to respond in the desired way. A 
logical starting point for deciding on the advertising message is to tout the key benefits of 
the product or service. The message should communicate its problem-solving ability 
clearly and in a compelling fashion. In this context, advertisers must remember that prod-
ucts and services solve problems, whether real or perceived. That is, people are not looking 
for 1/4-inch drill bits; they are looking for 1/4-inch holes to hang a picture on the wall.18 
Because there are many ways to make a 1/4-inch hole, a firm like Black & Decker must 
convey to consumers that its drill bit is the best way to get that hole.
Entertainer Reba McEntire is 
the spokesperson for a PSA 
called Outnumber Hunger, 
­designed to raise awareness 
of the hunger problem in  
America.
© Rick Diamond/WireImage/ 
Getty Images

584	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Another common strategy differentiates a product by establishing its unique benefits. 
This distinction forms the basis for the unique selling proposition (USP) or the value 
proposition (as discussed in Chapter 9), which is often the common theme or slogan in an 
advertising campaign. A good USP communicates the unique attributes of the product and 
thereby becomes a snapshot of the entire campaign. Some of the most famous USPs in-
clude the following:
Red Bull . . . Gives You Wings
Ford . . . Built Tough
Oreo . . . Milk’s Favorite Cookie
TNT . . . We Know Drama
Kellogg’s Corn Flakes Is The Original and Best Cereal
The New York Times . . . All The News That’s Fit to Print
Trek . . . We Believe in Bikes
Vail . . . Like Nothing On Earth
YouTube . . . Broadcast Yourself
Wrangler . . . Long Live Cowboys
The selling proposition communicated by the advertising must be not only unique to 
the brand but also meaningful to the consumer. It furthermore must be sustainable over 
time, even with repetition.
The Appeal
Advertisers use different appeals to portray their products or services and persuade con-
sumers to purchase them, though advertising tends to combine the types of appeals into 
two categories: informational and emotional.
Informational Appeals  Informational appeals help consumers make purchase deci-
sions by offering factual information that encourages consumers to evaluate the brand fa-
vorably on the basis of the key benefits it provides.19 Thus, ads for the Sexy Green Car 
Show in Cornwall, UK, espouse multiple ways in which consumers can educate themselves 
and act in a more environmentally conscious manner when it comes to their automobiles. 
This appeal is well suited to this type of product: By informing consumers about a poten-
tial source of its competitive advantage, including tangible features and images of science, 
the advertising copy directly delivers an informational, persuasive message.
Emotional Appeals  An emotional appeal aims to satisfy consumers’ emotional desires 
rather than their utilitarian needs. These appeals therefore focus on feelings about the 
self.20 The key to a successful emotional appeal is the use of emotion to create a bond 
LO19-3	
Describe the different 
ways that advertisers 
appeal to consumers.
Unique selling propositions like these by YouTube and Wrangler send powerful messages about the benefits of their offerings.
(Left): © Realimage/Alamy; (Right): © Tom Donoghue/Polaris/Newscom

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
585
	
	
­between the consumer and the brand. In its advertising, the UK insurance agency John 
Lewis highlights what really makes homeowner’s insurance important, like the daughter in 
a family who simply must dance to “Tiny Dancer” but whose embellished twirls and leaps 
put everything in the home at risk of being broken. With both humor and tenderness 
(see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YqgoUWPx4eE), the advertising gives an emo-
tional appeal to a service that many consumers regard as boring and unappealing.21 Exhibit 
19.2 shows firms and examples of the most common types of emotional appeals: fear/
safety, humor, happiness, love (or sex),22 comfort, and nostalgia.23
Ads for the Sexy Green Car 
Show in Cornwall, UK, espouse 
multiple ways in which 
­consumers can educate 
­themselves and act in a more 
environmentally conscious 
manner when it comes to their 
automobiles.
© Global Warming Images/Alamy
The UK insurance agency John 
Lewis uses a tender emotional 
appeal in an ad featuring a little 
girl dancing to “Tiny Dancer” 
while almost breaking every-
thing in the room.
Source: Tiny Dancer/John Lewis Home 
Insurance/YouTube
E X H I B I T  19.2
Emotional Appeals in Advertising
Emotional Appeal
Company
Example
Fear/safety
Wandsworth
“Partied too hard? Do you know who you’re leaving with?
Humor
Ocean Spray
“10 hours of cleansing and purifying . . . in one glass.”
Happiness
Tropicana
“Awake to Alive”
Love/sex
Axe Body Spray
“Unleash the Chaos”
Comfort
Kleenex
“Softness Worth Sharing”
Nostalgia
Chevrolet
“Find New Roads”

586	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
STEP 5: EVALUATE AND SELECT MEDIA
The content of an advertisement is tied closely to the characteristics of the media that firms 
select to carry the message, and vice versa. Media planning refers to the process of evalu-
ating and selecting the media mix—the combination of the media used and the frequency 
of advertising in each medium—that will deliver a clear, consistent, compelling message to 
the intended audience.24 For example, Macy’s may determine that a heavy dose of televi-
sion, radio, print, and billboards is appropriate for the holiday selling season between 
Thanksgiving and the end of the year.
Because the media buy, the actual purchase of airtime or print pages, is generally the 
largest expense in the advertising budget, marketers must make their decisions carefully. 
Television advertising is by far the most expensive. To characterize these various types of 
media, we use a dichotomy: mass and niche media.
Mass and Niche Media
Mass media channels include outdoor/billboards, newspapers, magazines, radio, and tele-
vision and are ideal for reaching large numbers of anonymous audience members. Niche 
media channels are more focused and generally used to reach narrower segments, often 
with unique demographic characteristics or interests. Specialty television channels (e.g., 
Home and Garden TV) and specialty magazines (e.g., Skateboarder or Cosmo Girl) all 
provide examples of niche media. The Internet provides an opportunity to appeal to the 
masses through ads on the home page of Internet sites such as www.comcast.net or www 
.yahoo.com or more niched opportunities such as an American Express business card on 
the Wall Street Journal site (wsjonline.com).
Choosing the Right Medium
For each class of media, each alternative has specific characteristics that make it suitable 
for meeting specific objectives (see Exhibit 19.3).25 For example, consumers use different 
media for different purposes, to which advertisers should match their messages. Television 
is used primarily for escapism and entertainment, so most television advertising relies on a 
mix of visual and auditory techniques.
LO19-4	
Identify the various 
types of media.
Which emotional appeals are these ads using?
(Left): Source Axe Body Spray by Unilever; (Middle, right): Image Courtesy of The Advertising Archives

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
587
	
	
Communication media also vary in their ability to reach the desired audience. For in-
stance, radio is a good medium for products such as grocery purchases or fast food because 
many consumers decide what to purchase either on the way to the store or while in the 
store. Because many people listen to the radio in their cars, it becomes a highly effective 
means to reach consumers at a crucial point in their decision process. Mobile advertising 
also is becoming more important, as Social and Mobile Marketing 19.1 explains. As we 
discussed in Chapter 18, each medium also varies in its reach and frequency. Advertisers 
can determine how effective their media mix has been in reaching their target audience by 
calculating the total GRP (Reach × Frequency) of the advertising schedule, which we dis-
cuss next.
Determining the Advertising Schedule
Another important decision for the media planner is the advertising schedule, which spec-
ifies the timing and duration of advertising. There are three types of schedules:
∙	
A continuous schedule runs steadily throughout the year and therefore is suited to 
products and services that are consumed continually at relatively steady rates and 
that require a steady level of persuasive and/or reminder advertising. For example, 
Procter & Gamble advertises its Tide brand of laundry detergent continuously.
∙	
Flighting refers to an advertising schedule implemented in spurts, with periods of 
heavy advertising followed by periods of no advertising. This pattern generally 
functions for products whose demand fluctuates, such as suntan lotion, which 
manufacturers may advertise heavily in the months leading up to and during the 
summer.
∙	
Pulsing combines the continuous and flighting schedules by maintaining a base level 
of advertising but increasing advertising intensity during certain periods. For 
example, airlines, hotels, and car rental companies might continuously advertise to 
ensure brand awareness but might increase the advertising in spikes during certain 
low-demand periods.
E X H I B I T  19.3
Types of Media Available for Advertising
Medium
Advantages
Disadvantages
Television
Wide reach; incorporates sound 
and video.
High cost; several channel and program 
options; may increase awareness of 
­competitors’ products.
Radio
Relatively inexpensive; can be 
selectively targeted; wide reach.
No video, which limits presentation; con-
sumers give less focused attention than TV; 
exposure periods are short.
Magazines
Very targeted; subscribers pass 
along to others.
Relatively inflexible; takes some time for the 
magazine to be available.
Newspapers
Flexible; timely; able to localize.
Can be expensive in some markets; adver-
tisements have short life span.
Internet/mobile
Can be linked to detailed content; 
highly flexible and interactive; 
allows for specific targeting.
Becoming cluttered; the ad may be blocked 
by software on the computer.
Outdoor/billboard
Relatively inexpensive; offers 
­opportunities for repeat exposure.
Is not easily targeted; has placement 
problems in some markets; exposure time is 
very short.
Direct marketing
Highly targeted; allows for  
personalization.
Cost can vary depending on type of direct 
marketing used; traditional media, like mail, 
will be more expensive than newer media.

588	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
STEP 6: CREATE ADVERTISEMENTS
After the advertiser has decided on the message, type of ad, and appeal, its attention shifts 
to the actual creation of the advertisement. During this step, the message and appeal are 
translated creatively into words, pictures, colors, and/or music. (Adding Value 19.1 high-
lights the pro and cons of using popular music in television advertising campaigns.) Often, 
the execution style for the ad will dictate the type of medium 
used to deliver the message. To demonstrate an image, adver-
tisers can use television and magazines. To promote price, they 
can use newspapers and radio. To appeal to specific target 
markets, they can use some of the electronic media vehicles 
described in Chapter 18. When using multiple media to deliver 
the same message, however, they must maintain consistency 
across styles—that is, integrated marketing—so that the differ-
ent executions deliver a consistent and compelling message to 
the target audience.
How do advertisers go about creating advertisements? 
They simultaneously consider the objectives of the ad, the tar-
geted customer segment(s), the product or service’s value 
proposition or the unique selling proposition, and how the ad 
will be coordinated with other IMC elements.
They then go about creating an ad or the ad campaign. 
Using the print ad for the Ila DUSK Personal Alarm shown 
here as an example, the first component that the reader gener-
ally notices is the visual, and as such it should be eye- 
catching. The picture of the personal alarm on a chain is at-
tractive and feminine. Although it is not always possible to 
meet all possible objectives with the visual, other important 
purposes are to identify the subject of the ad, show the prod-
uct being used and its unique features, create a favorable im-
pression of the product or advertiser, and arouse the readers’ 
interest in the headline, which is generally noticed second.26
What Comes Around: Just as Digital 
Has Pushed Out Traditional, Mobile 
Is Pushing Out Digital Advertisingi
Social & Mobile Marketing 19.1
The signs of the growth of mobile advertising, at the expense 
of digital forms, have long been evident. But the speed with 
which this shift is occurring seemingly is taking many market-
ers by surprise, because it is virtually unprecedented.
	
Consider some of the numbers: In 2015, spending on mo-
bile advertising increased by more than half of its 2014 rate. 
At the same time, spending on digital advertising dropped ap-
proximately 5 percent. Within just a couple of years, mobile 
advertising will be a bigger market than digital advertising.
	
Both forms are similar, in the sense that they are clearly 
distinct from traditional advertising and seek to reach techno-
logically savvy shoppers. But they require unique approaches 
and marketing plans, because a campaign that works well on 
a user’s desktop computer might not function effectively on a 
tablet or smartphone. Furthermore, mobile advertising offers 
functionalities and advertising tactics that digital ads cannot 
provide. Mobile advertising also allows brands and marketers 
to send timely, location-based communications to consumers 
at the moment they enter a store or begin a search for a 
nearby restaurant on their phones.
	
Another trend occurring apace with this shift is the rise of 
ad-blocking technology. Apple now allows users to install soft-
ware to block banner ads in digital channels. Although consum-
ers indicate that they would like the ability to block advertising 
in mobile settings as well, marketing messages contained 
within apps continue to be prevalent. In this sense, advertisers 
might seek to expand their mobile marketing so as to avoid the 
barriers that consumers can implement on their desktops.
	
In the longer term though, the shift to more mobile advertis-
ing likely implies the need for new forms of marketing communi-
cation, including game-oriented, social content, and informational 
advertising that does not really look like advertising at all.
Image Courtesy of The Advertising  
Archives

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
589
	
	
The headline is the large type in an ad that is designed to draw attention. In the Ila 
DUSK Personal Alarm ad, the headline “ILA PERSONAL ALARM” simply identifies the 
product. But the subhead, a smaller headline, provides more information about the alarm 
it is selling; specifically, “it screams for your safety.” Headlines and subheads should be 
short and use simple words and include the primary product or service benefits, the name 
of the brand, and an interest-provoking idea. They should ideally contain an action verb 
and give enough information for learning even if only the headline is read.
Adding Value 19.1
Selling Out or Selling Well? The Use and Choice of Popular 
Music in Advertising Campaignsii
What’s your reaction when one of your favorite songs by one 
of your favorite brands pops up in a commercial for a brand 
you might or might not love? Do you groan, annoyed that some 
hard-rocking rebel or cutting-edge artist has sold the rights to 
the song for advertising purposes? Or do you smile, pleased to 
hear your preferred song, and thus feel more affection for the 
brand being advertised? Obviously, marketers hope that your 
reaction is the latter one, but in many cases, consumers ex-
press attitudes more in line with the former.
The hits keep coming though. During the most recent 
Super Bowl, Acura relied on Van Halen’s “Runnin’ with the 
Devil” to introduce the latest model of its NSX sports car. 
Other advertisers use cover versions of popular songs or 
seek out relatively unknown artists with a cool sound to add 
an appropriate vibe to their marketing communications. The 
various options come with different costs: Licensing a popu-
lar song by a well-known musician can cost hundreds of 
thousands of dollars for a single use with a massive audi-
ence, like a Super Bowl commercial. If the brand chooses to 
use the song in an extended campaign, the licensing costs 
can easily reach millions. Cover versions of popular songs 
generally are more affordable, though the song writer still 
earns licensing fees. Most affordable of all is new music by 
unfamiliar artists, because many of these musicians are 
happy mainly for the exposure that the advertising campaign 
offers them. As it becomes increasingly challenging to suc-
ceed in the music industry , such benefits, together with the 
promise of long-term residual income, make the licensing of 
music a popular and compelling option for struggling (or not-
so-struggling) artists.
But choosing the right song for a marketing campaign in-
volves more than considering the price. If the tone of the song 
does not match the marketing context, it can create cognitive 
dissonance. Thus for example, using “Cat’s in the Cradle,” the 
melancholy Jim Croce song about fathers and sons that 
makes virtually every listener cry, might not have been the best 
choice for a Nissan advertisement. Furthermore, reactions to 
songs are intensely personal, which makes it difficult for mar-
keters to predict consumers’ reactions. Many people obviously 
love Van Halen, but there are those for whom the sound of 
David Lee Roth’s voice is deeply annoying. A song might re-
mind an individual listener of a particularly good or particularly 
bad time in his or her life, with parallel effects on the consum-
er’s perception of the product being advertised with that song. 
So will the effect be wonderful, or will it be terrible, and how 
are marketers to predict the answer in advance?
Was Van Halen’s “Runnin’ with the Devil” a good song to accompany a Super Bowl ad to 
introduce a new model of its NSX sports car?
Source: Acura NSX-What He Said/Acura/YouTube

590	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
The body copy represents the main text portion of the ad. It is used to build on the 
interest generated by the visual and headlines, explains in more depth what the headline 
and subheads introduced, arouses desire for the product, and provides enough information 
to move the target consumer to action. In this case, the body copy, “Protect yourself this 
party season with the Ila DUSK personal alarm. As well as looking pretty, it emits a high 
decibel human scream for help. The only fashion accessory you need to be seen out with 
this Christmas,” tells the story of this product and its use. This particular body copy is 
necessarily longer than for other products because it requires some explanation—the other 
ad elements are insufficient to explain and sell the product.
Finally, the ad typically has a number of brand elements that identify the sponsor of 
the ad, typically through a logo (M&S, which is the logo for Marks & Spencer department 
store in the United Kingdom) and a unique selling proposition (not found in this ad). Thus 
the advertiser must convey its message using compelling visuals, headlines, body copy, 
and identifying brand elements.
Although creativity plays a major role in the execution stage, advertisers must remain 
careful not to let their creativity overshadow the message. Whatever the execution style, 
the advertisement must be able to attract the audience’s attention, provide a reason for the 
audience to spend its time viewing the advertisement, and accomplish what it set out to do. 
In the end, the execution style must match the medium and objectives.
Automobile manufacturers and dealers are among the most active advertisers and use 
very different messages in their advertising campaigns. Consider, for instance, two well-
known car companies that have popular four-door sedan models, each with very different 
advertising campaigns.
∙	
Chevrolet Malibu. Another entry into the hybrid market, the Malibu employs a 
battery pack and offers good gas mileage. It is also positioned as a family sedan, 
though the most recent revamping reduced the size of the backseat. Likely 
advertising outlets include family-oriented magazines and television spots.
∙	
Ford Fusion. With a focus on fuel economy, ads for the Fusion promise its 
availability with both a hybrid and a conventional engine. Furthermore, it emphasizes 
Ford’s SYNC technology, which uses voice recognition to make phone calls, find and 
play music, and get directions. With these appeals, Ford is focusing largely on social 
media to get young consumers, who tend to care about technology and environmental 
concerns, attached to the new model.27
At times, though, even when advertisers think they have done their best to appeal to 
consumers, their actions can backfire, as Ethical and Societal Dilemma 19.1 describes.
Although the Chevy Malibu offers a fuel-efficient hybrid 
model, it is positioned as a family sedan.
Source: General Motors 
Ads for the new Ford Fusion emphasize fuel economy as well 
as interesting technology that it hopes will appeal to young 
consumers.
© Ford Motor Company

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
591
	
	
When Makeup Companies Really  
Do Make Up Models’ Facesiii
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 19.1
Is Julia Roberts really that good looking? Of course, she’s 
beautiful, but the portrayal of her face in advertising has, 
more likely than not, been given a Photoshop fix. Airbrush-
ing may be as old as advertising, but improved technology 
makes the changes nearly imperceptible—it is difficult to tell 
the difference between the normal thickness of an eyelash 
and the version that Taylor Swift sported in a CoverGirl 
­NatureLuxe Mousse Mascara ad. Ultimately, the National 
Advertising Division of the Council of Better Business 
­Bureaus ruled the ad was misleading, prompting the brand 
to pull the ad.
	
But in other cases, cosmetics and fashion companies 
claim that fixing elements of appearance is both ubiquitous 
and expected by consumers. They assert they are not mis-
leading anyone but rather creating a perfect image for 
their brand. For example, advertising for toothpaste fea-
tures models with bright, white teeth. That’s just a given. 
But if the advertising reveals unnaturally white teeth, be-
yond what could possibly be achieved by a toothpaste, is 
that false advertising? Is it wrong for cosmetic companies 
to retouch ads, brushing away wrinkles and skin imperfec-
tions digitally?
	
The UK Advertising Standards Agency considers touching 
up photos in ads to be wrong. That oversight agency banned 
two ads by L’Oréal, charging that they were misleading. One ad 
featured Julia Roberts promoting Teint Miracle, a new 
Lancôme skin product that, according to the company, pro-
vides “luminosity to the skin.” The other featured the model 
Christy Turlington promoting a cosmetic concealer called 
Eraser that promises to hide wrinkles and skin discoloration. 
Although the company protested that the ads did not exagger-
ate their product effectiveness, the UK Advertising Standards 
Agency was not convinced.
	
In China, whose expanding consumer market has become 
an increasingly appealing target for advertisers, the central 
government is working to crack down on what it considers 
misleading advertising that overpromises what the featured 
products can do. Thus it fined Crest, the toothpaste brand 
owned by Procter & Gamble, close to one million dollars for 
using digital tools to retouch photos and make the models’ 
teeth look whiter than they actually were.
	
Crest is not the only company to come under fire in China, 
which also has critiqued Nikon, Apple, and Volkswagen for fail-
ing to meet its standards. Thus for global brands, the question 
of international standardization has shifted a little. In addition to 
adjusting their products to appeal to the consumers of each 
nation, do they also need to adjust their marketing and advertis-
ing strategies to align with each country’s distinct rules and 
standards for truth in advertising?
	
Do consumers want realistic images and measured prom-
ises, or do they accept and even prefer exaggerated claims 
and unrealistic images of beauty?
	
And ultimately, when selling cosmetics, is it ethical to touch 
up photos of models and celebrities like Julia Roberts to make 
them even more beautiful? 
When selling cosmetics, is it ethical to touch up photos of 
models and celebrities like ­Julia Roberts to make them even 
more beautiful?
© Gregg DeGuire/FilmMagic/Getty Images
STEP 7: ASSESS IMPACT USING  
MARKETING METRICS
The effectiveness of an advertising campaign must be assessed before, during, and after the 
campaign has run. Pretesting refers to assessments performed before an ad campaign is 
implemented to ensure that the various elements are working in an integrated fashion and 
doing what they are intended to do.28 Tracking includes monitoring key indicators such as 
daily or weekly sales volume while the advertisement is running to shed light on any prob-
lems with the message or the medium. Posttesting is the evaluation of the campaign’s 
­impact after it has been implemented. At this last stage, advertisers assess the sales and/or 
communication impact of the advertisement or campaign.

592	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Measuring sales impact can be especially challenging because of the many in-
fluences other than advertising on consumers’ choices, purchase behavior, and at-
titudes. These influences include the level of competitors’ advertising, economic 
conditions in the target market, sociocultural changes, in-store merchandise 
availability, and even the weather—all of which can influence consumer pur-
chasing behavior. For instance, the sales resulting from even the best ads can be 
foiled by a lack of merchandise in the stores or a blizzard. Advertisers must try to 
identify these influences and isolate those of the particular advertising campaign.
For frequently purchased consumer goods in the maturity stage of the prod-
uct life cycle, such as soda, sales volume offers a good indicator of advertising 
effectiveness. Because their sales are relatively stable, and if we assume that the 
other elements of the marketing mix and the environment have not changed, we 
can attribute changes in sales volume to changes in advertising. Exhibit 19.4 illus-
trates a hypothetical sales history for Red Bull in a grocery store chain. Using a 
statistical technique called time-series analysis, sales data from the past is used to 
forecast the future. The data in Exhibit 19.4 can be decomposed into its basic trend 
(red), the seasonal influences (orange), and the lift or additional sales caused by the 
advertising (yellow). In this case, the lift caused by the advertising campaign is sub-
stantial.
For other types of goods in other stages of the product life cycle, sales data offer only 
one of the many indicators that marketers need to examine to determine advertising effective-
ness. For instance, in high-growth markets, sales growth alone can be misleading because the 
market as a whole is growing. In such a situation, marketers measure sales relative to those of 
competitors to determine their relative market share. Firms find creative ways to identify ad-
vertising effectiveness. For example, digital cable allows firms to present a specific advertise-
ment to certain neighborhoods and then track sales by local or regional retailers.
Sales volume is a good indica-
tor of advertising effectiveness 
for frequently purchased con-
sumer goods in the maturity 
stage of the product life cycle, 
such as Red Bull energy drink.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Jill Braaten, 
photographer
1,200
1,400
1,000
800
Unit sales
Weeks
600
400
200
0
8/29
9/5
9/12
9/19
9/26
10/3
10/10
10/17
10/24
10/31
11/7
11/14
11/21
Promotion
Seasonality
Natural demand
E X H I B I T  19.4
Hypothetical Sales History for Red Bull in a Grocery Store Chain
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are the steps involved in planning an ad campaign?
2.	 What is the difference between informational, persuasive, and reminder 
advertising?
3.	 What are the pros and cons of the different media types?
4.	 How can the effectiveness of advertising be evaluated?

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
593
	
	
REGULATORY AND ETHICAL  
ISSUES IN ADVERTISING
In the United States, the regulation of advertising involves a complex mix of formal laws 
and informal restrictions designed to protect consumers from deceptive ­practices.29 
Many federal and state laws, as well as a wide range of self-regulatory agencies and 
agreements, affect advertising (Exhibit 19.5). The primary federal agencies that regulate 
advertising activities are the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In 
addition to these agencies, others such as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and 
Explosives and the U.S. Postal Service regulate advertising to some degree.
The FTC is the primary enforcement agency for most mass media advertising, al-
though occasionally it cooperates with other agencies to investigate and enforce regula-
tions on particular advertising practices. In one recent case, the FTC charged Pure Green 
Coffee, a Florida company, with false advertising and misrepresentation in its efforts to sell 
green coffee beans as a weight-loss aid. The company not only promised more benefits of 
the coffee beans than have been proven but also created fake websites designed to look like 
news outlets. They also used logos from The Dr. Oz Show to imply that the popular televi-
sion personality endorsed the product.30
Many product categories fall under self-regulatory restrictions or guidelines. For ex-
ample, advertising to children is regulated primarily through self-regulatory mechanisms 
designed by the National Association of Broadcasters and the Better Business Bureau’s 
Children’s Advertising Review Unit. The only formal regulation of children’s advertising 
appears in the Children’s Television Act of 1990, which limits the amount of advertising 
broadcast during children’s viewing hours.31
Recently, to make matters even more complicated for advertisers, state attorney 
general offices have begun to inquire into various advertising practices and assert their 
authority to regulate advertising in their states. The European Union also has increased 
its regulation of advertising for member nations. Many of these state and European 
regulations are more restrictive than existing U.S. federal requirements.
The line between what is legal and illegal is more difficult to discern when it comes to 
puffery, which is the legal exaggeration of praise, stopping just short of deception, ­lavished 
on a product. When Match.com claims that it leads to “better first dates,” it’s puffery be-
cause better is a subjective measure. But if it claims it produces “more second dates,” it 
LO19-5	
Identify agencies that 
regulate advertising.
Federal Agency
General Purpose
Specific Jurisdiction
Federal Trade  
Commission (FTC) (1914)
Enforces federal consumer 
protection laws.
Enforces truth in advertising laws;  
defines deceptive and unfair  
advertising practices.
Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) (1934)
Regulates interstate and  
international communications by 
radio, television, wire,  
satellite, and cable.
Enforces restrictions on broadcast-
ing material that promotes lotteries 
(with some exceptions); cigarettes, 
little cigars, or smokeless tobacco 
products; or that perpetuates a fraud. 
Also enforces laws that prohibit or 
limit obscene, indecent, or profane 
language.
Food and Drug  
Administration (1930)
Regulates food, dietary sup-
plements, drugs, cosmetics, 
medical devices (including radi-
ation-emitting devices such as 
cell phones), biologics (biological 
issues), and blood products.
Regulates package labeling and 
­inserts, definition of terms such 
as light and organic, and required 
disclosure statements (warning labels, 
dosage requirements, etc.).
E X H I B I T  19.5
Federal Agencies That Regulate Advertising

594	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
must be able to back up its numerical, quantita-
tive assertion. Even cartoon bears must follow 
the rules: Charmin’s animated ­spokescharacters 
need to be drawn with a few pieces of toilet pa-
per on their rears, instead of none, to ensure that 
Charmin’s claims extend only to leaving less toi-
let paper behind than other brands (puffery), not 
eliminating the problem altogether (deception).32
How do the courts determine what makes 
an ad deceptive rather than simply puffery? The 
FTC’s position is that it “will not pursue cases 
involving obviously exaggerated or puffing rep-
resentations, i.e., those that ordinary consumers 
do not take seriously.”33 In general, the less spe-
cific the claim, the less likely it is considered to 
be deceptive. In the end, puffery is acceptable as 
long as consumers know that the firm is stretch-
ing the truth through exaggeration.34
PUBLIC RELATIONS
As you may recall from Chapter 18, public rela-
tions (PR) involves managing communications 
and relationships to achieve various objectives 
such as building and maintaining a positive im-
age of the firm, handling or heading off unfavor-
able stories or events, and maintaining positive 
relationships with the media. In many cases, 
public relations activities support other promo-
tional efforts by generating free media attention 
and general goodwill.
Designers, for example, vie to have celebrities, especially those 
nominated for awards, wear their fashions on the red carpet. Their 
brands offer intangible benefits, not just functional benefits. Events 
such as the Oscars, with its 35 million annual viewers, provide an 
unparalleled opportunity to showcase the emotional benefits of the 
brand and make others want to be a part of it. Thus, the celebrities 
whom designers pursue and offer their items to are those who will 
sell the most or provide the best iconic images. Lupita Nyong’o’s 
great popularity meant that she could wear Ralph Lauren to the 
Golden Globes, then switch to Prada for the Academy Awards, and 
garner press for both design firms.35 The placement of designer ap-
parel at media events benefits both the designer and the celebrity. 
And neither happens by accident. Public relations people on both 
sides help orchestrate the events to get the maximum benefit for 
both parties.
Good PR has always been an important success factor. Yet in 
recent years, the importance of PR has grown as the costs of other 
forms of marketing communications have increased. At the same 
time, the influence of PR has become more powerful as consumers 
have become increasingly skeptical of marketing claims made in 
other media.36 In many instances, consumers view media coverage 
generated through PR as more credible and objective than any other 
aspects of an IMC program because the firm does not buy the space 
in print media or time on radio or television.
Is this ad an example of puffery or deception?
Image Courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Prada garnered positive public relations when Lupita 
Nyong’o wore its gown to the Academy Awards.
© Jason LaVeris/Getty Images

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
595
	
	
Certainly the Chili’s restaurant chain conducts plenty of media buys in traditional ad-
vertising spaces. But it also has partnered with St. Jude’s Children’s Research Hospital in 
one of the most successful examples of cause-related marketing (i.e., commercial activity 
in which businesses and charities form a partnership to market an image, product, or service 
for their mutual benefit)37 in history. For several years, the restaurant has offered customers 
the opportunity to purchase a paper icon—in the shape of a chili pepper, natch—that they 
may color and hang on restaurant walls. The cause marketing campaign runs in September, 
which is also National Childhood Cancer Awareness Month. On the last Monday of the 
month, the restaurant puts its money where its mouth is and donates all its profits on sales 
during the day to St. Jude. Starting in 2016, Chili’s took part in a Super Bowl Give Back 
event and the St. Jude Thanks and Giving® campaign. Chili’s has raised more than  
$54 million for St. Jude.38
Another very popular PR tool is event sponsorship. Event sponsorship occurs when 
corporations support various activities (financially or otherwise), usually in the cultural or 
sports and entertainment sectors. Red Bull is a frequent sponsor of various kinds of sports 
events, such as Red Bull Air Race and numerous extreme sports events (e.g., cliff diving). 
Some of them are big-name events; the titles of 
most college football playoff games now include 
the name of their sponsors (e.g., the Allstate 
Sugar Bowl). Others are slightly less famous; for 
example, Rollerblade USA, the maker of Roller-
blade in-line skates, sponsors Skate-In-School, a 
program it developed with the National Associ-
ation for Sport and Physical Education (NASPE) 
to promote the inclusion of rollerblading in 
physical education curricula.
Firms often distribute PR toolkits to com-
municate with various audiences. Some tool-
kit elements are designed to inform specific 
groups directly, whereas others are created to 
generate media attention and disseminate 
­information. We describe the various ele-
ments of a PR toolkit in Exhibit 19.6.
LO19-6	
Describe the elements 
of a public relations 
toolkit.
Eight-year-old Neftali and 
singer Yunel Cruz (right) hold 
up colored-in peppers as they 
support Chili’s “Create-A- 
Pepper to Fight Childhood  
Cancer” for St Jude Children’s 
Research Hospital.
© Taylor Hill/Getty Images
Part of Red Bull’s PR toolkit is 
its event sponsorship of a 
cliff-diving event.
© James Davies/Alamy

596	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
SALES PROMOTION
Advertising rarely provides the only means to communicate with target customers. As we 
discussed in Chapter 18, a natural link appears between advertising and sales promotion. Sales 
promotions are special incentives or excitement-building programs that encourage consumers 
to purchase a particular product or service, typically used in conjunction with other advertising 
or personal selling programs. Many sales promotions, like free samples or point-of-purchase 
(POP) displays, attempt to build short-term sales; others, such as loyalty programs, contests, 
and sweepstakes, have become integral components of firms’ long-term customer relationship 
management (CRM) programs, which they use to build customer loyalty.
We present these sales promotion tools next. The tools of any sales promotion can be 
focused on any channel member—wholesalers, retailers, or end-user consumers. Just as we 
delineated for advertising, when sales promotions are targeted at channel members, the 
marketer is employing a push strategy; when it targets consumers themselves, it is using a 
pull strategy. Some sales promotion tools can be used with either a push or pull strategy. 
We now consider each of the tools and how they are used.
Types of Sales Promotion
Coupons  Coupons offer a discount on the price of specific items when the items are pur-
chased. Coupons are used to stimulate demand and are issued by manufacturers and retailers 
in newspapers, on products, on the shelf, at in-store kiosks, at the cash register, over the 
Internet, through the mail, and on mobile devices even when customers are in the store. Some 
retailers have linked their coupons directly to their loyalty programs. As Marketing Analytics 
19.1 describes, the drugstore chain CVS tracks customers’ purchases when they use their 
ExtraCare loyalty card and gives them coupons that are tailored just for them and their unique 
needs.39 If a customer typically spends a small amount during each shopping trip, he or she 
might receive coupons to encourage larger purchases, such as buy one, get one free.
LO19-7	
Identify the various 
types of sales 
promotions.
PR Element
Function
Publications: brochures, special-purpose  
single-issue publications such as books
Inform various constituencies about the activities 
of the organization and highlight specific areas of 
expertise.
Video and audio: programs, public service  
announcements
Highlight the organization or support cause-related 
marketing efforts.
Annual reports
Give required financial performance data and 
inform investors and others about the unique 
activities of the organization.
Media relations: press kits, news releases,  
speeches, event sponsorships
Generate news coverage of the organization’s 
activities or products/services.
Electronic media: websites, e-mail campaigns
Websites can contain all the previously mentioned 
toolbox elements; e-mail directs PR efforts to 
specific target groups.
E X H I B I T  19.6
Elements of a Public Relations Toolkit
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Why do companies use public relations as part of their IMC strategy?
2.	 What are the elements of a public relations toolkit?

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
597
	
	
Internet sites also provide customers with instant coupons of their choosing. Imagine 
a customer who visits her local Walmart and finds a Hot Wheels video game for $29.99. 
By scanning the bar code using her cell phone, she connects to ShopSavvy.com and finds 
that the same item at a Target store a mile away is only $19.99. Another scan and a connec-
tion to MyCoupons.com provides her with a $10 coupon—which means she’s saved $20 in 
a matter of minutes and just a few clicks.
Some coupons, whether printed from the Internet or sent to mobile phones, also con-
tain information about the customer who uses it.40 The bar code may identify the customer, 
his or her Internet address, Facebook page information, and even the search terms the cus-
tomer used to find the coupon in the first place. These new breeds of coupons may look 
standard, but they offer up a startling amount of data, which promises benefits for advertis-
ers who want to target their marketing more closely. Traditionally, coupons had low 
How CVS Uses Loyalty Data to Define Couponsiv
In general, loyalty programs offer an effective means to pro-
vide more value to customers. In particular, the CVS ExtraCare 
program represents a flagship loyalty program—it is one of the 
oldest and largest in the United States. The program has been 
running for nearly 20 years; one in every three people in the 
United States has an ExtraCare card. Thus, more than 90 mil-
lion households use it in a typical year.
	
The primary focus of the ExtraCare program has been to 
provide personalized offers that are relevant to and appreci-
ated by customers while also encouraging their consistent 
shopping behavior. In recent developments, the program has 
spread across multiple channels, allowing customers to con-
nect with offers in print, online, or through a mobile app. For 
example, customers can access the newly launched, omni-
channel MyWeeklyAd program online or from a mobile device, 
or they can visit coupon kiosks in stores to scan their loyalty 
program cards and print coupons on the spot.
	
To support a unique, relevant, and well-appreciated shopping 
experience that encourages these customers to interact with 
the program and undertake additional sales, CVS relies heavily 
on customer data analytics. It collects vast amounts of data on 
the purchases that each ExtraCare member makes, and then it 
analyzes those data to uncover interesting or unexpected rela-
tionships among the items purchased. For example, customers 
who buy skin and hair products also purchase cosmetics, 
though not always at CVS. Furthermore, CVS discovered nota-
ble and helpful purchase timing patterns, such as its recognition 
that people typically buy toothpaste every five weeks.
	
By using the established relationships among the items that 
appear together in market baskets, CVS can obtain valuable 
insights, which in turn inform the personalized offers it sends 
to customers in an effort to adjust their behaviors. Thus, if an 
ExtraCare member buys face wash or conditioner, she might 
receive a coupon for lipstick. If another customer hasn’t bought 
toothpaste in four and a half weeks, he will receive a coupon 
that provides him with a special incentive to purchase a high-
end brand of toothpaste. CVS also uses these analytics to en-
courage customers to buy more each trip, such that a customer 
who typically spends $20 may receive a special ­offer if she 
spends $30 the next time she shops. Finally, the data analytics 
give CVS important insights into which types of loyalty program 
offers are most successful—as well as which ones are not. For 
example, it determined that brand-specific coupons (e.g., for 
Pantene shampoo) were less effective than promotions geared 
toward the whole category (i.e., shampoos of various brands).
Marketing Analytics 19.1
Marketing analytics are used to analyze data on the 
­purchases of each ExtraCare customer, uncover interesting 
or unexpected relationships among items purchased, and 
use the information to provide personalized offers that are 
relevant to and appreciated by customers.
© McGraw-Hill Education/Mark Dierker, photographer

598	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
­redemption rates and were therefore a relatively inexpensive sales 
promotion tool, but using customer data to create more targeted 
­promotions has resulted in higher redemption rates, increasing 
their expense.
Deals  A deal refers generally to a type of short-term price reduc-
tion that can take several forms, such as a featured price, a price 
lower than the regular price; a certain percentage more free offer 
contained in larger packaging; or a buy one, get one half off offer as 
shown in the nearby Payless ad. Another form of a deal involves a 
special financing arrangement such as reduced percentage interest 
rates or extended repayment terms. Deals encourage customers to 
try a product because they lower the risk for consumers by reducing 
the cost of the good.
But deals can also alter perceptions of value—a short-term 
price reduction may signal a different price–quality relationship 
than would be ideal from the manufacturer’s perspective. In addi-
tion, as Old Spice learned, offering too many deals can offset likely 
gains. Its popular Old Spice Guy campaign attracted consumer at-
tention through funny television commercials and interactive online 
campaigns, and sales of Old Spice jumped. But the company offered 
so many buy one, get one free deals at the same time that the poten-
tial profit impact of the great ads was essentially eliminated by the 
costs of the deals.41
Premiums  A premium offers an item for free or at a bargain price to reward some type 
of behavior, such as buying, sampling, or testing. These rewards build goodwill among 
consumers, who often perceive high value in them. Premiums can be distributed in a vari-
ety of ways: They can be included in the product packaging, such as the toys inside cereal 
boxes; placed visibly on the package, such as a coupon for free milk on a box of Cheerios; 
handed out in the store; or delivered in the mail, such as the free perfume offers Victoria’s 
Secret mails to customers. Furthermore, premiums can be very effective if they are consis-
tent with the brand’s message and image and highly desirable to the target market. 
However, finding a premium that meets these criteria at a reasonable cost can be a 
­serious challenge.
Contests  A contest refers to a brand-sponsored competition that requires some form of 
skill or effort. McGraw-Hill Education, the publisher of this textbook, held a “Get 
Connected and Win” contest and a “LearnSmart and Win” contest. Students were asked to 
This sales promotion deal for 
Payless ShoeSource is a short-
term price promotion that 
­encourages customers to buy 
a second pair of shoes at 
­one-half off.
Source: Payless Shoe Source, Inc.
Although the Old Spice Guy 
IMC campaign generated sales, 
its “buy one, get one free” deals 
were too costly and therefore 
diminished the profit impact of 
the ads.
Source: Old Spice Questions/Old Spice/
YouTube

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
599
	
	
share their Connect and LearnSmart learning experiences via videos. The winners received 
scholarships, iPads, and other prizes.
Sweepstakes  A form of sales promotion that offers prizes based on a chance drawing of 
entrants’ names, sweepstakes do not require the entrant to complete a task other than buy-
ing a ticket or filling out a form. Often the key benefit of sweepstakes is that they encour-
age current consumers to consume more if the sweepstakes form appears inside the 
packaging or with the product. Many states, however, specify that no purchase can be re-
quired to enter sweepstakes.
Samples  Sampling offers potential customers the opportunity to try a product or service 
before they make a buying decision. Distributing samples is one of the most costly sales 
promotion tools but also one of the most effective. Quick-service restaurants and grocery 
stores frequently use sampling. For instance, Starbucks provides samples of new products 
to customers. Costco uses so many samples that customers can have an entire meal. 
Sometimes trial-sized samples come in the mail or are distributed in stores.
Loyalty Programs  As part of a sales promotion program, loyalty programs are specifi-
cally designed to retain customers by offering premiums or other incentives to customers 
who make multiple purchases over time. Well-designed loyalty programs encourage con-
sumers to increase their engagement and purchases from a given firm. Such sales promo-
tions are growing increasingly popular and are tied to long-term CRM systems. (Loyalty 
programs are examined in Chapters 2 and 3.) These programs need to be carefully man-
aged because they can be quite costly.
Source: CreateWP.Customer. 
MHEducation.com

600	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Point-of-Purchase Displays  Point-of-purchase (POP) displays are merchandise dis-
plays located at the point of purchase, such as at the checkout counter in a supermarket. 
Retailers have long recognized that the most valuable real estate in the store is at the POP 
since they increase product visibility and encourage trial. Customers see products such as 
a magazine or a candy bar while they are waiting to pay for their purchases and impulsively 
purchase them. In the Internet version of a POP display, shoppers are stimulated by special 
merchandise, price reductions, or complementary products that Internet retailers feature on 
the checkout screen.
Rebates  Rebates are a particular type of price reduction in which a portion of the 
purchase price is returned by the seller to the buyer in the form of cash. Many products, 
such as consumer electronics, offer significant mail-in rebates that may lower the price 
of the item significantly. Some companies enjoy the added exposure when they appear 
on consumer websites like PriceGrabber.com and Nextag.com, where products are 
sorted by the price, with links to the retailer’s website. The firms garner considerable 
value from rebates because they attract consumers and therefore stimulate sales, but 
they may not have to pay off all the rebates offered because consumers don’t bother to 
redeem them.
Product Placement  When marketers use product placement, they pay to have their 
product included in nontraditional situations, such as in a scene in a movie or television 
program.42 By doing so, they increase the visibility of their products. Product placement 
may be subtle, such as when American Idol judges are seen drinking Coca-Cola. On 
CBS’s The Big Bang Theory, not only do scenes regularly show the characters working 
and eating there, but Sheldon also asserts his need to get “access to the Cheesecake 
Factory walk-in freezer.” Although many firms would embrace product placement in hit 
shows and movies and are willing to pay for it, for Apple, the challenge is a little less 
stringent. U.S. film and television directors seem to love its sleek white laptops, ear- 
budded iPods, and ubiquitous iPhones. Thus more than one-third of all top-grossing 
films at the U.S. box office—129 of 374 movies—have included Apple-branded prod-
ucts in the past decade. Recent appearances include popular offerings as well as criti-
cally acclaimed broadcasts, from Phil’s desperate efforts to score an iPad on Modern 
Family to more nefarious uses depicted in House of Cards.43 Apple is also unique in that 
it claims it does not pay for product placement, nor does it comment on film appear-
ances. An analytics firm that estimates the dollar value of product placements has re-
ported that Apple’s five-minute screen time in Mission Impossible alone was worth more 
than $23 million.44 Apple seemingly can earn those returns without paying for the place-
ments, but not all companies are so lucky.
It is not an accident that this 
Apple iPad is the center of 
­attention on this episode of 
Modern Family. It is product 
placement. Even better, Apple 
does not pay for the  
placement!
Source: Modern Family/ABC Television 
Network

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
601
	
	
Using Sales Promotion Tools
Marketers must be careful in their use of sales promotions, especially those that focus on 
lowering prices. Depending on the item, consumers may stock up when items are offered 
at a lower price, which simply shifts sales from the future to now and thereby leads to 
short-run benefits at the expense of long-term sales stability. For instance, using sales pro-
motions such as coupons to stimulate sales of household cleaning supplies may cause con-
sumers to stockpile the products and decrease demand for those products in the future. But 
a similar promotion used with a perishable product such as Dannon yogurt should increase 
its demand at the expense of competitors like Yoplait.
Many firms are also realizing the value of cross-promoting, when two or more firms join 
to reach a specific target market. To achieve a successful cross-promotion, the two products 
must appeal to the same target market and together create value for consumers. J.Crew has 
teamed up with several famous brands, including Lacoste, Barbour, Timex, New Balance, 
Ray-Ban, and Saint James, to offer well-known brands in the J.Crew stores and website.45
The goal of any sales promotion is to create value for both the consumers and the firm. By 
understanding the needs of its customers, as well as how best to entice them to purchase or 
consume a particular product or service, a firm can develop promotional messages and events 
that are of interest to and achieve the desired response from those customers. Traditionally, the 
role of sales promotion has been to generate short-term results, whereas the goal of advertising 
was to generate long-term results. As this chapter demonstrates, though, sales promotion as 
well as advertising can generate both long- and short-term effects. The effective combination 
of both types of activities leads to impressive results for the firm and the consumers.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are various forms of sales promotions?
2.	 What factors should a firm consider when evaluating a sales promotion?
Reviewing Learning Objectives
	
	
Describe the steps in designing and executing an 
advertising campaign.
	
	
Firms (1) identify their target market, (2) set adver-
tising objectives, (3) set the advertising budget, (4) 
depict their product or service, (5) evaluate and se-
lect the media, (6) create the ad, and (7) assess the 
impact of the ad.
	
	
Identify three objectives of advertising.
	
	
All advertising campaigns are designed to inform, 
persuade, or remind customers. Informative adver-
tising is communication used to create and build 
brand awareness. Persuasive advertising is commu-
nication used to motivate consumers to take action. 
Finally, reminder advertising is communication 
used to remind or prompt repurchases.
	
	
Describe the different ways that advertisers 
­appeal to consumers.
	
	
Advertising appeals are either informational or 
emotional. Informational appeals influence pur-
LO19-1
LO19-2
LO19-3
chase decisions with factual information and strong 
arguments built around relevant key benefits that 
encourage consumers to evaluate the brand favor-
ably. Emotional appeals indicate how the product 
satisfies emotional desires rather than utilitarian 
needs.
	
	
Identify the various types of media.
	
	
Firms can use mass media channels like newspapers 
or television to reach large numbers of anonymous 
audience members. Niche media, such as cable tele-
vision and specialty magazines, are generally used 
to reach narrower segments that have unique demo-
graphic characteristics or interests. When choosing 
media, firms must match their objectives to that 
channel. Also, certain media are better at reaching a 
particular target audience than are others.
	
	
Identify agencies that regulate advertising.
	
	
Advertising is regulated by a plethora of federal and 
state agencies. The most important federal agencies 
LO19-4
LO19-5

602	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
are the FTC, which protects consumers against gen-
eral deceptive advertising; the FCC, which has ju-
risdiction over radio, television, wire, satellite, and 
cable and covers issues regarding the use of tobacco 
products and objectionable language; and the FDA, 
which regulates food, dietary supplements, drugs, 
cosmetics, and medical devices.
	
	
Describe the elements of a public relations toolkit.
	
	
A variety of elements compose a firm’s public rela-
tions toolkit. They include publications, video and 
audio programs, public service announcements, 
LO19-6
­annual reports, media kits (e.g., press kits), news re-
leases, and electronic media (e.g., websites).
	
	
Identify the various types of sales promotions.
	
	
Sales promotions are special incentives or excite-
ment-building programs that encourage purchase 
and include coupons, deals, premiums, contests, 
sweepstakes, samples, POP displays, rebates, and 
product placement. They either push sales through 
the channel, as is the case with contests directed to-
ward retail salespeople, or pull sales through the 
channel, as coupons and rebates do.
LO19-7
Key Terms
∙	 advertising,  578
∙	 advertising plan,  580
∙	 advertising schedule,  587
∙	 body copy,  590
∙	 brand elements,  590
∙	 cause-related marketing,  595
∙	 contest,  598
∙	 continuous schedule,  587
∙	 coupon,  596
∙	 cross-promoting,  601
∙	 deal,  598
∙	 emotional appeal,  584
∙	 event sponsorship,  595
∙	 flighting,  587
∙	 headline,  589
∙	 informational appeal,  584
∙	 informative advertising,  581
∙	 institutional advertisement,  582
∙	 lift,  592
∙	 loyalty program,  599
∙	 mass media,  586
∙	 media buy,  586
∙	 media mix,  586
∙	 media planning,  586
∙	 niche media,  586
∙	 persuasive advertising,  581
∙	 point-of-purchase (POP)  
display,  600
∙	 posttesting,  591
∙	 premium,  598
∙	 pretesting,  591
∙	 product placement,  600
∙	 product-focused advertisement,  582
∙	 public relations (PR),  594
∙	 public service advertising 
(PSA),  582
∙	 puffery,  593
∙	 pull strategy,  580
∙	 pulsing,  587
∙	 push strategy,  580
∙	 rebate,  600
∙	 reminder advertising,  581
∙	 sales promotion,  596
∙	 sampling,  599
∙	 social marketing,  582
∙	 subhead,  589
∙	 sweepstakes,  599
∙	 tracking,  591
∙	 unique selling proposition 
(USP),  584
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Go to the website for the Children’s Advertising Re-
view Unit (CARU), one of the major self-regulatory 
bodies for children’s advertising, at http://www 
.­asrcreviews.org. Click on “CARU” and then “About 
Us—CARU” and examine the activities of CARU. How 
does this form of regulation complement the more for-
mal regulation of federal and state agencies? Now look 
under the “Press Releases” link. Choose one of the 
press releases and  discuss what action CARU took 
against the identified company or group. What was the 
main issue in the case?
2.	 PR Newswire attempts to provide information for “pro-
fessional communicators.” Visit its website at http://
www.prnewswire.com and click on the “PR Newswire 
Services” link to explore the services it has to offer. 
What would you consider this organization’s primary 
purpose to be? To whom does PR Newswire address the 
advertising appeals on its website?
Marketing Applications
  1.  What are the objectives of the McDonald’s ad in the 
chapter opener? Does the ad have more than one objec-
tive? Explain your answer.
  2.  Using the same ad, explain what kind of appeal it uses.
  3.  Verizon spends millions of dollars each year on adver-
tising for many different purposes. Provide an example 

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
603
	
	
of how it might design an informative ad, a persuasive 
ad, and a reminder ad.
  4.  Name a current advertising slogan you believe is 
­particularly effective for developing a unique selling 
proposition.
  5.  Bernard’s, a local furniture company, target markets to 
college students with apartments and households of 
young people purchasing their first furniture items. 
If you worked for Bernard’s, what type of media would 
you use for your advertising campaign? Justify your 
­answer.
  6.  Should Bernard’s use continuous, pulsing, or flighting 
for its advertising schedule? Why?
  7.  Suppose Porsche is introducing a new line of light 
trucks and has already created the advertising cam-
paign. How would you assess the effectiveness of the 
campaign?
  8.  Suppose now that Porsche is planning a sales promo-
tion campaign to augment its advertising campaign for 
the new line of light trucks. Which push and pull sales 
promotion tools do you believe would be most effec-
tive? Why?
  9.  Consider all the diet products that are currently adver-
tised on television today, including weight-loss supple-
ments, weight-loss programs, and fitness equipment. 
Do you believe that some of these ads overstate what 
the product or service can actually do? Do you think 
any of these ads are actually deceptive or puffery?
10.  You are invited to your 6-year-old niece’s birthday 
party and bring her the new superhero doll being ad-
vertised on television. She’s thrilled when she unwraps 
the gift but is in tears a short time later because her new 
doll is broken. She explains that on TV, the doll flies 
and does karate kicks, but when she tried to play with 
the doll this way, it broke. You decide to call the manu-
facturer, and a representative tells you he is sorry your 
niece is so upset but that the ad clearly states the doll 
does not fly. The next time you see the televised ad, 
you notice very small print at the bottom stating that 
the doll does not fly. You decide to write a letter to the 
FTC about this practice. What information should you 
include in your letter?
1.	 Firms often use 
 advertising to convince 
consumers to take action such as switching brands, try-
ing a new product, or even continuing to buy the adver-
tised product. 
a.  pull
b.  push
c.  reminder
d.  persuasive
e.  informative 
2.	
 is a tool used to communicate the distinct 
attributes of a product; it can be used as a slogan or a 
theme and often becomes a snapshot of the entire adver-
tising campaign.
a.  The media mix
b.  A unique selling proposition
c.  An informational appeal
d.  Puffery
e.  A headline
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself
MAKING MASTERCARD PRICELESS
How do you pay for books, clothing, groceries, or travel? For many consumers, the answer 
is MasterCard, which has more than 200 million cards in circulation.46 Yet despite the 
credit card’s popularity, it lags behind its major competitor, Visa, by nearly 100 million 
cards. It is also outstripped by American Express for both monthly and annual purchases 
and spending volume. Because MasterCard’s primary function is to process transactions 
between each customer’s bank and each merchant’s bank, the company must appeal to two 
customer bases to build market share: the merchants who accept MasterCard for payment 
and the purchasers who use the card. These audiences are closely related, which implies 
that a single campaign can target both, likely even for an extended period. However, even 
the most successful campaigns can grow stale.
Chapter Case Study 

604	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
	
In 1997, MasterCard International and the advertising agency McCann Erickson 
Worldwide launched the emotion-based “Priceless” campaign, which celebrated life’s most 
precious moments with the tagline, “There are some things money can’t buy. For every-
thing else, there’s MasterCard.”47 The campaign was hugely successful, saving MasterCard 
from disaster, even in direct competition with the more widely accepted Visa card.48 How-
ever, as consumer values and needs changed and the marketplace evolved, MasterCard 
faced a new challenge: how to retain customer loyalty and brand identification while rein-
vigorating its advertising. 
Expanding Services to Meet Market Demand  In 1966, a group of California banks 
created a member-owned association called the Interbank Card Association. This associa-
tion grew its services, changing its name to MasterCard in 1979 to reflect a commitment to 
international growth.49 As it reached new markets across the globe, MasterCard also fo-
cused on technology innovation to help make economic transactions faster, more conve-
nient, and more secure. The company acquired interest in the international credit card 
EuroCard (known today as Europay International), as well as Cirrus, a worldwide inter-
bank network that links MasterCard, Maestro, and Diner’s Club credit, debit, and prepaid 
cards to an international network of ATMs. The company also added fraud/risk manage-
ment providers to its network of services.
	
Today MasterCard’s technology platform can handle more than 160 million transac-
tions every hour with a 99.9 percent reliability rate,50 and the company has issued a con-
tactless, or smart, card that communicates with terminals via radio waves. This payment 
method does not require a signature and can be a card or key fob that is tapped rather than 
swiped; it also appears as a smartphone app. To provide even more value to customers, the 
company has added sophisticated consulting and information services that help merchants 
gain insight into consumer spending, according to their transaction data and in-depth anal-
yses.51 These efforts have dovetailed with changes in consumer behavior as shoppers have 
begun relying more on electronic payment options and less on paper-based currency. In 
2006, the company transitioned to a new corporate governance and ownership structure 
and began trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
“Priceless” Revisited  MasterCard began its “Priceless” campaign by identifying its tar-
get audience, which in this case focused on consumers. Hoping to persuade shoppers to 
keep their MasterCard at the top of their wallets, the campaign stressed the relationship 
between the card and experiences, as opposed to possessions. In early television ads, the 
narration linked the price of beauty parlor visits and new outfits to the “priceless” expres-
sion on an ex-boyfriend’s face at a reunion, to create positive self-assessment feelings.52 In 
another, the cost of tickets, refreshments, and souvenirs at a game was tied to the “price-
less” opportunity for meaningful conversation between father and son, to invoke both hap-
piness and love.53 The “Priceless” campaign included various promotions and competitions 
in addition to these television spots.
	
In 2004, “Priceless” print ads took a new tack, weaving well-known retailers into the 
ads, together with MasterCard’s theme. These retailers—which represented another of 
MasterCard’s target audiences—received value from the prominent placement of their 
names and product images in the ads. Messaging moved from the general to the specific; 
an ad showing a teenaged rock band playing in a garage that might once have said, “ex-
tra-long extension cord, $11; moving them out of the living room: priceless,” was modified 
to indicate that the extension cord was from Radio Shack. The result was a form of symbi-
otic marketing in which well-known brand names helped attract consumer attention to 
MasterCard ads, and each brand appeared to be endorsing the other.54
Magic Moments  In July 2011, MasterCard launched an expanded campaign, called 
“Priceless Cities.” This campaign, kicked off initially in New York, offers cardholders 
special experiences in major cities that can be shared with family and friends.55 Designed 
to provide busy consumers with memorable opportunities in the realms of sports, music, 
entertainment, shopping, travel, arts, culture, and dining out, the campaign touted early 
opening times at the toy store FAO Schwartz, a safari sleepover at the Bronx Zoo, prime 

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
605
	
	
tickets to a Yankees game with an ex-Yankee, and VIP dining 
experiences designed by a famed chef.56 The idea, says 
MasterCard’s chief marketing officer, is to transform consum-
ers’ perceptions of the card from simply part of a priceless 
moment to being the force that enables such experiences. In 
competitive markets, when most competitors focus on deals 
and discounts, the MasterCard campaign attracts attention by 
appealing to emotions rather than to wallets and stressing un-
forgettable experiences rather than cost savings. The cam-
paign forges an additional bond with card users, because 
it places MasterCard at the center of these memorable 
social activities.
	
The ads ran in more than 100 countries and aired in more 
than 50 languages, and the overall campaign uses print, radio, 
transit, outdoor advertising, and television. It also includes 
digital platforms to drive home its message, including a new 
section of the MasterCard website created specifically for the 
campaign, as well as social media channels such as Facebook 
and Twitter. Cardholders register at the site to access special 
offers; World Elite MasterCard holders get special offers as 
well as preferred access to the events.
	
With its continued efforts to keep the campaign fresh and 
interesting, MasterCard followed up on the Cities function 
with “Priceless Surprises,” an initiative in which famous com-
pany endorsers surprise their fans. The resulting advertising, 
especially a spot in which Justin Timberlake knocked on the 
door of a woman who claimed to be his biggest fan, led others 
to believe that using MasterCard could someday lead to a sim-
ilar surprise.57 
	
Marketers must continuously evaluate their advertising 
campaigns and update them to ensure they are effectively 
communicating with their customers. New channels like social marketing can change 
shopping behaviors, creating opportunities that must be considered as part of any market-
ing strategy. In announcing plans for the future, MasterCard notes the potential of virtual 
reality platforms and interactions as a way to keep its promises “Priceless.”58 Thus, as 
MasterCard continues to demonstrate, even the best ideas need new infusions and innova-
tions to keep appealing to their targets.
Questions
1.	
What is the primary objective of the “Priceless” campaign?
2.	
Does the “Priceless”campaign use an informational or an emotional appeal?
3.	
Given its various target markets, which media are most appropriate for each market? 
4.	
How can MasterCard integrate the “Priceless” campaign into a public relations 
­program?
5.	
Which sales promotion tactics could MasterCard employ? 
The MasterCard “Priceless” 
IMC campaign has been going 
strong for more than 20 years, 
continuously adjusting to appeal 
to different target markets 
through multiple ­media channels.
Source: Mastercard
	 1.	 Greg Jarboe, “McDonald’s ‘Our Food Your Questions’ Video 
Campaign Is Changing Hearts, Minds, and Actions,” ReelSEO, 
March 16, 2015, http://www.reelseo.com/mcdonalds-our-food-
your-questions-video-campaign/. 
	2.	 Peter Frost, “McDonald’s Plans to Launch ‘Cleaner’ Chicken 
McNuggets,” Crain’s Chicago Business, April 27, 2016,  
http://www.chicagobusiness.com/article/20160427/
NEWS07/160429854/mcdonalds-plans-to-launch-cleaner-
chicken-mcnuggets. 
Endnotes

606	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
	3.	 Christine Birkner, “McDonald’s Moves from ‘Billions Served’ to 
‘Billions Heard’,” Marketing News Weekly, January 20, 2015, 
https://www.ama.org/publications/eNewsletters/Marketing-
News-Weekly. 
	4.	 George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch, Advertising and 
Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communications 
Perspective (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007); Jef I. Richards and 
Catherine M. Curran, “Oracles on ‘Advertising’: Searching for a 
Definition,” Journal of Advertising 31, no. 2 (Summer 2002),  
pp. 63–77.
	5.	 “Total Media Ad Spending Growth Slows Worldwide,”  
eMarketer, September 15, 2015, http://www.emarketer.com/
Article/Total-Media-Ad-Spending-Growth-Slows-Worldwide/1012981.
	6.	 Christine Birkner, “Millennials’ Attention Divided Across Devices 
More than Any Other Age Group, Study Finds,” Marketing 
News Weekly, March 17, 2015, http://www.ama.org.
	 7.	 Dan Zigmond et al., “Measuring Advertising Quality on 
Television: Deriving Meaningful Metrics from Audience 
Retention Data,” Journal of Advertising Research 49, no. 4 
(December 2009), pp. 419–28; Robert G. Heath, Agnes C. 
Nairn, and Paul A. Bottomley, “How Effective Is Creativity? 
Emotive Content in TV Advertising Does Not Increase 
Attention,” Journal of Advertising Research 49, no. 4 
(December 2009), pp. 450–63; Raymond R. Burke and 
Thomas K. Srull, “Competitive Interference and Consumer 
Memory for Advertising,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 
(June 1988), pp. 55–68; Kevin Lane Keller, “Memory Factors in 
Advertising: The Effect of Advertising Retrieval Cues on Brand 
Evaluation,” Journal of Consumer Research 14 (December 1987),  
pp. 316–33.
	8.	 Markus Pfeiffer and Markus Zinnbauer, “Can Old Media 
Enhance New Media? How Traditional Advertising Pays Off for 
an Online Social Network,” Journal of Advertising Research 
50, no. 1 (2010), pp. 42–49; Terry Daugherty, Matthew Eastin, 
and Laura Bright, “Exploring Consumer Motivations for 
Creating User-Generated Content,” Journal of Interactive 
Advertising 8, no. 2 (2008); Anthony Bianco, “The Vanishing 
Mass Market,” BusinessWeek, July 12, 2004, pp. 61–68.
	9.	 Leonie Roderick, “The Marketing Year: The Top Campaigns of 
2015,” Marketing Week, December 4, 2015, https://www. 
marketingweek.com/2015/12/04/the-marketing-year-the-top-
campaigns-of-2015/; Adam Davidi, “The Best Ads of 2015: The 
Professionals Pick Their Favourites,” The Guardian, December 
4, 2015, http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/
dec/04/best-ads-advertising-2015-favourite. 
	10.	 Brendan Greeley, “World Cup Shootout: Can Nike Beat adidas 
at Soccer?” Bloomberg Businessweek, May 15, 2014,  
http://www.businessweek.com.
	11.	 adidas, “Neo,” http://www.adidas.com/us/content/selenagomez.
	12.	 William F. Arens, Michael F. Weigold, and Christian Arens, 
Contemporary Advertising, 12th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2008).
	13.	 Tulin Erdem, Michael Keane, and Baohong Sun, “The Impact of 
Advertising on Consumer Price Sensitivity in Experience Goods 
Markets,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 6 (June 
2008), pp. 139–76; Xiaojing Yang and Robert E. Smith, “Beyond 
Attention Effects: Modeling the Persuasive and Emotional 
Effects of Advertising Creativity,” Marketing Science 28 
(September/October 2009), pp. 935–49; Matthew Shum, 
“Does Advertising Overcome Brand Loyalty? Evidence from the 
Breakfast Cereal Market,” Journal of Economics and 
Management Strategy 13, no. 2 (2004), pp. 77–85.
	14.	 Alexander Haldermann, “GE’s Ecomagination Turns 10: How a 
Brand Can Be a Driver for Change,” Huffpost Business, 
September 16, 2015. 
	15.	 Brian Dumaine, “Is Apple ‘Greener’ Than Starbucks?” Fortune, 
June 24, 2014. 
	16.	 http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/Dictionary. 
aspx?dLetter=P.
	17.	 https://www.outnumberhunger.com/
	18.	 Theodore Levitt, The Marketing Imagination (New York: Free 
Press, 1986).
	19.	 Belch and Belch, Advertising and Promotion.
	20.	Katherine White and John Peloza, “Self-Benefit versus Other-
Benefit Marketing Appeals: Their Effectiveness in Generating 
Charitable Support,” Journal of Marketing 73 (July 2009),  
pp. 109–24.
	21.	 Davidi, “The Best Ads of 2015.”
	22.	Darren W. Dahl, Jaideep Sengupta, and Kathleen D. Vohs, “Sex 
in Advertising: Gender Differences and the Role of Relationship 
Commitment,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 2 
(2009), pp. 215–31; Jaideep Sengupta and Darren W. Dahl, 
“Gender-Related Reactions to Gratuitous Sex Appeals in 
Advertising,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 18, no. 1 (2008), 
pp. 62–78.
	23.	Jack Loftus, “ADT Ad Campaign Scares Homeowners into 
Buying ADT Security,” Gizmodo, http://gizmodo.com; Jack Neff, 
“What the Stylish Garbage Can Is Wearing,” Advertising Age, 
November 3, 2011, http://adage.com; Natalie Zmuda, “Best Buy 
Ups Holiday Spending, Introduces ‘Game On, Santa’ Campaign,” 
Advertising Age, November 17, 2011, http://adage.com;  
Andrew Adam Newman, “Axe Adds Fragrance for Women  
to Its Lineup,” The New York Times, January 8, 2012,  
http://www.nytimes.com.
	24.	AMA Dictionary, http://www.marketingpower.com/_layouts/
Dictionary.aspx?dLetter=M.
	25.	Some illustrative articles look at the effectiveness of given me-
dia: H. Risselada, P. C. Verhoef, and T. H. Bijmolt, “Dynamic 
Effects of Social Influence and Direct Marketing on the 
Adoption of High-Technology Products,” Journal of Marketing 
78, no. 4 (2014); Robert Heath, “Emotional Engagement: How 
Television Builds Big Brands at Low Attention,” Journal of 
Advertising Research 49, no. 1 (March 2009), pp. 62–73; Lex 
van Meurs and Mandy Aristoff, “Split-Second Recognition: 
What Makes Outdoor Advertising Work?” Journal  
of Advertising Research 49, no. 1 (March 2009),  
pp. 82–92.
	26.	William F. Arens, David H. Schaefer, and Michael F.  
Weigold, Advertising, M-Series (Burr Ridge: Irwin/ 
McGraw-Hill, 2012).
	27.	Stephen Williams, “New Sedans Aim to Break Out of the Pack,” 
Advertising Age, February 20, 2012, http://adage.com.
	28.	Dean M. Krugman et al., Advertising: Its Role in Modern 
Marketing (New York: Dryden Press, 1994), pp. 221–26.
	29.	Herbert Jack Rotfeld and Charles R. Taylor, “The Need for 
Interdisciplinary Research of Advertising Regulation: A 
Roadmap for Avoiding Confusion and Errors,” Journal of 
Advertising, Winter 2009.
	30.	“FTC Charges Green Coffee Bean Sellers with Deceiving 
Consumers through Fake News Sites and Bogus Weight Loss 
Claims,” May 19, 2014, http://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-­
releases.
	31.	 Debra Harker, Michael Harker, and Robert Burns, “Tackling 
Obesity: Developing a Research Agenda for Advertising 
Researchers,” Journal of Current Issues & Research in 
Advertising 29, no. 2 (2007), pp. 39–51; N. Kapoor and D. P. S. 
Verma, “Children’s Understanding of TV Advertisements: 
Influence of Age, Sex and Parents,” Vision 9, no. 1 (2005),  
pp. 21–36; Catharine M. Curran and Jef I. Richards, “The 
Regulation of Children’s Advertising in the U.S.,” International 
Journal of Advertising and Marketing to Children 2, no. 2 
(2002).

	
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS, AND SALES PROMOTIONS  CHAPTER NINETEEN	
607
	
	
	32.	Irina Slutsky, “Nine Things You Can’t Do in Advertising If You 
Want to Stay on the Right Side of the Law,” Advertising Age, 
March 7, 2011, http://adage.com.
	33.	Bob Hunt, “Truth in Your Advertising: Avoid Puffery?” Realty 
Times, June 20, 2007.
	34.	Ibid.
	35.	Blue Carreon, “The 2014 Oscars Best Dressed List,” Forbes, 
March 2, 2014, http://www.forbes.com.
	36.	Diego Rinallo and Suman Basuroy, “Does Advertising Spending 
Influence Media Coverage of the Advertiser?” Journal of 
Marketing 73 (November 2009), pp. 33–46; Carl Obermiller 
and Eric R. Spangenberg, “On the Origin and Distinctness of 
Skepticism toward Advertising,” Marketing Letters 11, no. 4 
(2000), p. 311.
	37.	Jackie Huba, “A Just Cause Creating Emotional Connections 
with Customers,” http://www.inc.com.
	38.	https://www.stjude.org/get-involved/other-ways/partner-with-st-
jude/corporate-partners/chili-s-grill-bar.html.
	39.	Personal communication with Rob Price, VP of Retail Marketing, 
CVS, June 16, 2009; Carol Angrisani, “CVS Moves to 
Personalization,” SN: Supermarket News 56, no. 2 (March 24, 
2008), p. 29.
	40.	Stephanie Clifford, “Web Coupons Know Lots about You, and 
They Tell,” The New York Times, April 16, 2010.
	41.	 Jack Neff, “Old Spice Is Killing It on YouTube Again, but Sales 
Are Down Double-Digits,” Advertising Age, August 4, 2011, 
http://adage.com.
	42.	Eva A. van Reijmersdal, Peter C. Neijens, and Edith G. Smit, “A 
New Branch of Advertising: Reviewing Factors That Influence 
Reactions to Product Placement,” Journal of Advertising 
Research 49, no. 4 (December 2009), pp. 429–49; Pamela 
Mills Homer, “Product Placement: The Impact of Placement 
Type and Repetition on Attitude,” Journal of Advertising,  
Fall 2009.
	43.	Abe Sauer, “Beats and Apple: A Match Made in Product 
Placement Heaven,” Brandchannel.com, May 28, 2014, http://
www.brandchannel.com; Abe Sauer, “The Envelope, Please: The 
2014 Brandcameo Product Placement Awards,” Brandchannel.
com, February 27, 2014, http://www.brandchannel.com; Abe 
Sauer, “Announcing the 2012 Brandcameo Product Placement 
Award Winners,” Brandchannel.com, February 13, 2012,  
http://www.brandchannel.com.
	44.	Sauer, “The Envelope, Please.”
	45.	http://www.jcrew.com.
	46.	http://www.cardhub.com/edu/market-share-by-credit-card- 
network/.
	47.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3dcxQ2dvqmc.
	48.	http://marketingpractice.blogspot.com/2006/11/mastercard- 
priceless.html.
	49.	http://www.mastercard.com/us/company/en/docs/
CorporateOverview_FINAL.pdf.
	50.	Ibid.
	51.	 http://www.mastercardadvisors.com/.
	52.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3dcxQ2dvqmc.
	53.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q_6stXKGuHo.
	54.	Stuart Elliott, “MasterCard Revamps Print Ads,” The New York 
Times, August 11, 2004.
	55.	Stuart Elliott, “MasterCard Brings ‘Priceless’ to a Pricey  
Place,” The New York Times, July 7, 2011; http://www. 
creditcardeducation.com/news/mastercard-offers- 
priceless-city-experiences.html.
	56.	http://newsroom.mastercard.com/press-releases/priceless- 
new-york-gives-mastercard-cardholders-privileged-access- 
to-the-citys-preeminent-experiences/.
	57.	Beth Snyder Bulik, “MasterCard CMO: How We Keep ‘Priceless’ 
Fresh After 17 Years,” Advertising Age, February 4, 2014. 
	58.	Dale Buss, “‘Priceless’ Evolution: 5 Questions with MasterCard 
CMO Raja Rajamannar,” Brand Channel, January 4, 2016, 
http://www.brandchannel.com/2016/01/04/5-questions- 
mastercard-010416/. 
	 i.	 Miriam Gottfried, “Publishers Face Moving Target in Mobile,” 
The Wall Street Journal, July 7, 2015.
	 ii.	 Michael McCarthy, “Acura Taps Van Halen for a Hard-Driving 
Super Bowl Commercial,” The New York Times, January 28, 
2016.
	iii.	 “Crest Is Fined Nearly $1 Million in China,” The New York Times, 
March 10, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com; David Kiefaber, 
“Taylor Swift’s CoverGirl Ad Is Pulled over Bogus Eyelashes,” 
Adweek, December 23, 2011, http://www.adweek.com; David 
Gianastasio, “Turlington Ads: So Photoshopped They’re 
Misleading?” Adweek, July 28, 2011, http://www.adweek.com; 
Tanzina Vega, “British Authority Bans Two Ads by L’Oréal,” The 
New York Times, July 27, 2011, http://mediadecoder.blogs.­
nytimes.com.
	iv.	 Elyse Dupré, “CVS/Pharmacy Devotes Extracare to Its Loyalty 
Program,” DM News 36, no. 8 (2014), pp. 19–22; Stephanie 
Clifford, “Using Data to Stage-Manage Paths to the Prescription 
Counter,” The New York Times, June 19, 2013, http://bits.blogs.
nytimes.com.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
	LO20-1	 Describe the value added of personal selling.
	LO20-2	 Define the steps in the personal selling process.
	LO20-3	 Describe the key functions involved in managing a sales force.
	LO20-4	 Describe the ethical and legal issues in personal selling.
PERSONAL SELLING 
AND SALES 
MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 20
 E
veryone sells something, sometime. But selling 
well, efficiently, effectively, and with the ability to 
add value requires thoughtful considerations 
combined with insights based on experience and 
perhaps a natural sales ability that gives sellers a good 
feel for buyers. Personal selling is always and inevitably 
personal.
But it also can be greatly improved by advanced ana-
lytical technologies. In this sense, IBM’s Watson offers 
one of the best sales tools available today to sellers in 
virtually any setting.
Watson can do much more than beat all comers at 
Jeopardy.1 In IBM’s Watson unit, more than 2,000 em-
ployees collaborate on providing software, hardware, and 

services related to the advanced technology service. 
With a budget of approximately $100 million, the unit also 
can fund venture projects to develop apps based on 
Watson’s technology platform.2
With this dedicated support system, Watson gives cli-
ents of IBM access to some of the most powerful computing 
capabilities in the world, all available in the cloud. For exam-
ple, the Singaporean bank DBS Group Holdings uses Watson 
to provide up-to-date insights and lessons to its financial plan-
ners and salespeople, who share that information with high 
net worth clients. As Watson analyzes massive amounts of 
financial data available in nearly real time, DBS provides 
more customized advising services to wealthy clients, who 
then may agree to do more of their investing with the bank. 
To gain this access, DBS pays around $12 million over three 
years. It also shares its own data with IBM, contributing and 
updating Watson’s knowledge stores constantly.3
Supported by these updates and cloud accessibility, 
Watson lessens the challenges associated with selling by 
providing more in-depth and actionable information that 
salespeople and their managers can use. As an example 
of the benefits and value that Watson provides, IBM 
­offers its own use of the tool as a prime example.4
When IBM analyzes sales of its software offerings 
across industries, customers, or regions, it relies on 
Watson to inform salespeople about whether customers 
in the banking or retail sector are more likely to buy a 
particular software solution, for example. With a few 
clicks, salespeople in the field also can learn how much of 
a particular customer’s overall budget is devoted to IT 
software and how much IBM accounts for in that total. 
With the cloud capabilities, all members of a sales team 
can access immediately updated information at any time. 
Then the analytical capabilities that are inherent to 
Watson help IBM develop and design new sales initia-
tives, promotions, and sales plans. For example, by com-
bining historical sales data, budget details, and industry 
trends, Watson can reveal patterns to sales teams that 
© Ben Hider/Getty Images

610
Just like advertising, which we discussed in Chapter 19, personal selling is so important to 
integrated marketing communications that it deserves its own chapter. Almost everyone is 
engaged in some form of selling. On a personal level, you sell your ideas or opinions to 
your friends, family, employers, and professors. Even if you have no interest in personal 
selling as a career, a strong grounding in the topic will help you in numerous career choices. 
Consider, for instance, Harry Turk, a very successful labor attorney. He worked his way 
through college selling sweaters to fraternities across the country. Although he loved his 
part-time job, Harry decided to become an attorney. When asked whether he misses sell-
ing, he said, “I use my selling skills every day. I have to sell new clients on the idea that I’m 
the best attorney for the job. I have to sell my partners on my legal point of view. I even use 
selling skills when I’m talking to a judge or jury.”
THE SCOPE AND NATURE  
OF PERSONAL SELLING
Personal selling is the two-way flow of communication between a buyer or buyers and a seller, 
designed to influence the buyer’s purchase decision. Personal selling can take place in various 
situations: face-to-face, via video teleconferencing, on the telephone, or over the Internet, for 
example. More than 11 million people are employed in sales positions in the United States,6 
including those involved in business-to-business (B2B) transactions, such as manufacturer’s 
representatives selling to retailers or other businesses, and those completing business-to- 
consumer (B2C) transactions, such as retail salespeople, real estate agents, and insurance agents. 
Salespeople are referred to in many ways: sales representatives or reps, account executives, 
agents. And as Harry Turk found, most professions rely on personal selling to some degree.
Salespeople don’t always get the best coverage in popular media. In Arthur Miller’s 
famous play Death of a Salesman, the main character, Willie Loman, leads a pathetic exis-
tence and suffers from the loneliness inherent in being a traveling salesman.7 The charac-
ters in David Mamet’s play Glengarry Glen Ross portray salespeople as crude, ruthless, 
and of questionable character. Unfortunately, these powerful Pulitzer Prize–winning pieces 
of literature weigh heavily on our collective consciousness and often overshadow the mil-
lions of hardworking professional salespeople who have fulfilling and rewarding careers 
and who add value to their firm and provide value for their customers.
Personal Selling as a Career
Personal or professional selling can be a satisfying career for several reasons. First, many 
people love the lifestyle. Salespeople are typically out on their own. Although they occa-
sionally work with their managers and other colleagues, salespeople tend to be responsible 
for planning their own days. This flexibility translates into an easier balance between work 
and family than many office-bound jobs can offer. Many salespeople now can rely on 
­virtual offices, which enable them to communicate from anywhere and at any time with 
LO20-1	
Describe the value 
added of personal 
selling.
signal which customers are most likely to respond to 
which sales campaigns. With this “pattern selling” ap-
proach, “The sales patterns can be easily customized 
for each sales team or for each individual sales rep to 
help them focus on the customers with the best poten-
tial for their specific product lines, for new engage-
ments or for cross-selling and up-selling to existing 
accounts.”5
Watson’s output is strongly graphical as well, making 
it easy for salespeople to gain a sense of patterns and 
trends quickly and easily, without having to perform intri-
cate calculations or analyses on their own. The Watson 
unit is dedicated to expanding its abilities even further by, 
for example, providing sales opportunities with new cus-
tomers and prescriptions for how to sell to new and ex-
isting customers in dynamic markets. 

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
611
	
	
their colleagues and customers. Because salespeople are eval-
uated primarily on the results they produce, as long as they 
meet and exceed their goals, they experience little day-to-day 
supervision. You might find a salesperson at the gym in the 
middle of the day, when few other people are there, because 
no one keeps track of the length of his or her lunch break.
Second, the variety in the job often attracts people to 
sales. Every day is different, bringing different clients and 
customers, often in a variety of places. Their issues and prob-
lems and the solutions to those problems all differ and require 
creativity.8 Third, professional selling and sales management 
can be a very lucrative career. Sales is among the highest-­
paying careers for college graduates, and compensation often 
includes perks such as the use of a company car or bonuses for 
high performance. A top performer can have a total compen-
sation package of over $150,000; even starting salespeople 
can make well over $50,000. Although the monetary compen-
sation can be significant, the satisfaction of being involved in 
interesting, challenging, and creative work is rewarding in and 
of itself.
Fourth, because salespeople are the frontline emissaries for their firms, they are very 
visible to management. Furthermore, their performance is fairly straightforward to mea-
sure, which means that high-performing salespeople who aspire to management positions 
are in a good position to be promoted.
The Value Added by Personal Selling
The benefits for salespeople mean that they are expensive for 
firms. Experts estimate that the average cost of a single B2B 
sales call is about $600.9 So why include them in the market-
ing channel at all? In response to this question, some firms 
have turned to the Internet and technology to lower the costs of 
personal selling. Other firms, especially retailers, have made 
the decision not to use a sales force and thus require customers 
to perform the sales function on their own. But firms that con-
tinue to use personal selling as part of their integrated market-
ing communications program recognize the value it adds to 
their product or service mix. That is, personal selling is worth 
more than it costs. Personal selling adds value by educating 
customers and providing advice, saving the customer time, 
making things easier for customers, and building long-term 
strategic relationships with customers.10
Salespeople Provide Information and Advice  Imagine 
how difficult it would be to buy a custom suit, a house, or a car 
without the help of a salesperson. UPS wouldn’t dream of invest-
ing in a new fleet of airplanes without the benefit of Boeing’s 
selling team. Boeing’s sales team can provide UPS with the tech-
nical aspects of the aircraft as well as the economic justification 
for the purchase. If you need formalwear for your friend’s up-
coming wedding or a school dance, you might find it helpful to 
solicit the input of a retail sales associate who can tell you what 
colors are hot this season, how to tie a bowtie, how each garment 
tends to fit, what the latest fashions are in formalwear, and how 
long your dress should be for a function that starts at 6:00 p.m. 
Certainly you could figure out most of this information on your 
Many salespeople now can rely on virtual offices, which 
­enable them to communicate via the Internet with colleagues 
and customers.
© perfectlab/Shutterstock RF
Salespeople provide information and advice.
© Mark Edward Atkinson/Getty Images RF

612	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
own, but many customers find value in and are willing to pay for the education and advice that 
salespeople provide.
Salespeople Save Time and Simplify Buying  Time is money! Customers perceive 
value in time and labor savings. In many grocery and drugstore chains, salespeople em-
ployed by the vendor that supplies the merchandise straighten stock, set up displays, assess 
inventory levels, and write orders. In some cases, such as bakeries or soft drink sales, 
salespeople and truck drivers even bring in the merchandise and stock the shelves. These 
are all tasks that retail employees would otherwise have to do. To appeal to end customers, 
manufacturers might send salespeople into stores to provide cooking demonstrations or 
free samples in the case of grocery stores, or trunk or made-to-measure shows in the case 
of apparel or shoe retailers. In this case, the vendor increases convenience for both its im-
mediate customer (the retailer) and the end consumer.
Salespeople Build Relationships  As we discussed in Chapter 16, building strong mar-
keting channel relationships is a critical success factor. Who in the organization is better 
equipped to manage this relationship than the salesperson, the frontline emissary for the 
firm? The most successful salespeople are those who build strong relationships with their 
customers—a rule that holds across all sorts of sales. That is, whether you are selling your-
self as a job candidate, a product produced by your company, or a concept to a client, your 
sale is not successful if it leads to just a one-time transaction. Instead, good salespeople of 
all stripes consistently take a long-term perspective. This long-term perspective in turn 
demands effective customer relationship management, a goal that is being transformed 
with mobile approaches to what has long been a dreaded responsibility of salespeople, as 
described in Social and Mobile Marketing 20.1.
Building on the relationship concept introduced in Chapter 16, relationship selling 
refers to a sales philosophy and process that emphasizes a commitment to maintaining the 
relationship over the long term and investing in opportunities that are mutually beneficial 
to all parties.11 Relationship-oriented salespeople work with their customers to find mutu-
ally beneficial solutions to their wants and needs. As we described in Chapter 7, colleges 
often negotiate long-term agreements with apparel companies to supply their sports teams. 
Similarly, a Lenovo sales team might be working with your university to provide you with 
the computer support and security you need during the years you spend working on the 
school’s network.
A salesperson’s product 
knowledge and ability to 
­facilitate the sale can make 
buying a car easy and 
­possibly even enjoyable.
© Barry Austin Photography/Photodisc/
Getty Images RF

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
613
	
	
THE PERSONAL SELLING PROCESS
Although selling may appear to be a rather straightforward process, successful salespeople 
must follow several steps. Depending on the sales situation and the buyer’s readiness to 
purchase, the salesperson might not use every step, and the time required for each step 
varies with the situation. For example, if a customer goes into The Gap already prepared to 
purchase some chinos, the selling process will be fairly quick. But if Lenovo is attempting 
to sell personal computers for the first time to your university, the process may take several 
months. With this in mind, let’s examine each step of the selling process (Exhibit 20.1).
Step 1: Generate and Qualify Leads
The first step in the selling process is to generate a list of poten-
tial customers (leads) and assess their potential (qualify). 
Salespeople who already have an established relationship with a 
customer will skip this step, and it is not used extensively in re-
tail settings. In B2B situations, however, it is important to work 
continually to find new and potentially profitable customers.
Salespeople can generate and qualify leads in a variety of 
ways.12 They might discover potential leads by talking to cur-
rent customers, doing research on the Internet, or networking 
at events such as trade shows, industry conferences, or cham-
ber of commerce meetings. Salespeople can also generate 
leads through cold calls and social media.
The Internet, and sites like LinkedIn and Twitter in partic-
ular, have been a boon for generating and qualifying leads. 
LO20-2	
Define the steps in the 
personal selling process.
Managing Relationships While 
Mobile: Sales Reports from the Fieldi
Social & Mobile Marketing 20.1
Effective sales demand in-depth, extensive knowledge about 
customers, which suggests the need for customer relationship 
marketing (CRM), a topic we have covered throughout this 
book. In turn, CRM demands data, because these systems can-
not work without information being put in to them, for sales-
people to take out later, as they need it. But convincing 
salespeople to take time out of their schedules to file CRM re-
ports (rather than engaging in more lucrative sales efforts) has 
long been a challenge for managers and companies.
	
The challenge has been particularly acute for sales reps in 
the field. Because these sales reps rarely come into the office, 
the firms cannot support them as well in their efforts to make 
informed pitches to customers, and sales managers have little 
insight into what the sales reps are doing, when, how, and with 
whom. Not only does this leave the firm unable to monitor its 
employees, but it also makes the calculation of incentives or 
bonuses more difficult and less accurate, which ultimately 
could diminish sales performance overall. 
	
In an effort to address these persistent issues, sales com-
panies increasingly are relying on mobile technologies to make 
the reporting task and updates to the CRM system easy and 
nearly automatic. Rather than waiting until the end of the 
day—when they might have forgotten some of the details of an 
interaction with a client, or might forget to file their report 
­altogether—mobile access to the firm’s CRM system means 
that sales reps can input information immediately, possibly 
even before they leave the client site. 
	
Some of the best mobile CRM offerings even gather data 
automatically. For example, mobile apps can gather immediate 
data about phone calls and e-mails between the sales rep and 
each client. These data then get catalogued and entered into 
the CRM system, without the salesperson needing to do any-
thing further. Voice recognition technology also enables them 
to dictate a summary of their meetings and interactions, with-
out having to fill in forms or write a formal report. All of these 
technologies in turn help sales managers keep tabs on what 
sales reps are doing, provide immediate feedback on their suc-
cessful and unsuccessful efforts, and offer suggestions or 
training as needed.
	
With geolocaters, the mobile CRM systems also can make 
recommendations to salespeople in the field, such as when 
they happen to be in proximity to a customer whose purchase 
history suggests that this customer might be ready to buy 
again. Accordingly, the sales reps likely achieve better sales, 
which benefits them in the form of increased commissions or 
bonuses. Then they may be more likely to rely on and contrib-
ute to the CRM system in other ways. And finally, the increase 
in sales benefits the firm, which gains not only more sales in 
the short term but also greatly enhanced data to improve its 
sales performance in the long term. 
Trade shows like the Consumer 
Electronics Show in Las ­Vegas 
are an excellent way to gener-
ate and qualify leads.
© Paul Sakuma/AP Photo

614	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Prior to the explosion of Internet use, it was cumbersome to per-
form research on products, customers, or competitors. Salespeo-
ple would rely on a research staff for this information, and it 
could take weeks for the research to be completed and sent 
through the mail. Today, salespeople connect with potential cus-
tomers through Twitter and LinkedIn. Salespeople curate blogs 
to draw in customers and generate leads, a process known as 
­inbound marketing. While these are all important tools, they are 
unlikely to replace cold calling anytime soon, as many customers 
still cannot be reached via social media.13
Trade shows also offer an excellent forum for finding leads. 
These major events are attended by buyers who choose to be ex-
posed to products and services offered by potential suppliers in 
an industry. Consumer electronics buyers always make sure that 
they attend the annual Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las 
Vegas, the world’s largest trade show for consumer technology 
(http://www.cesweb.org). The most recent show was attended by 
165,000 people (representing more than 150 countries) such as 
vendors; developers; and suppliers of consumer-technology hard-
ware, content, technology delivery systems, and related products 
and services.14 Nearly 3,700 vendor exhibits took up close to 
2 million net square feet of exhibit space, spread over three sepa-
rate Las Vegas locations, showcasing the very latest products and 
services. Vendors often use CES to introduce new products, in-
cluding the first camcorder (1981), high-definition television 
(HDTV, 1998), Internet protocol television (IP TV, 2005), and 
3D printers (2014).15 In addition to providing an opportunity for 
retail buyers to see the latest products, the CES conference pro-
gram features prominent speakers from the technology sector.
Cold calls are a method of prospecting in which salespeople 
telephone or go to see potential customers without appoint-
ments.16 Telemarketing is similar to a cold call, but it always 
occurs over the telephone. Sometimes professional telemarketing firms rather than the 
firm’s salespeople make such calls. Adding Value 20.1 examines how colleges use it to 
boost attendance at sports events.
However, cold calls and telemarketing have become less popular over time, primarily 
because their success rate is fairly low. During cold calls, the salesperson is not able to es-
tablish the potential customer’s specific needs because the receiver of the call is not expect-
ing it and therefore may not be willing to participate in it. Accordingly, these methods can 
be very expensive. Second, federal as well as state governments are regulating the activities 
of telemarketers. Federal rules prohibit telemarketing 
to consumers whose names appear on the national 
­Do-Not-Call list, which is maintained by the Federal 
Trade Commission. Even for those consumers whose 
names are not on the list, the rules prohibit calling be-
fore 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. (in the consumer’s 
time zone) or after the consumer has told the tele­
marketer not to call. Federal rules also prohibit unso-
licited fax messages, calls, or messages to cell phones.
After salespeople generate leads, they must qual-
ify those leads by determining whether it is worth-
while to pursue them and attempt to turn them into 
customers. In B2B settings, the costs of preparing and 
making a presentation are so substantial that the seller 
must assess a lead’s potential. Salespeople consider, 
for example, whether the potential customer’s needs 
Generate and
qualify leads
Preapproach
Sales
presentation
and overcoming
reservations
Closing the sale
Follow-up
E X H I B I T  20.1
The Personal Selling Process
Telemarketing is a type of cold 
call in which salespeople 
­generate or qualify leads on 
the telephone.
© Guillermo Legaria/Getty Images

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
615
	
	
Adding Value 20.1
College Athletics Turn to the Pros for Sales Helpii
Not that long ago, a few billboards and word of mouth were 
enough to sell out tickets for a college game. Demand for tick-
ets to college basketball and football games was so high that 
many schools added seats as fast as they could and still had to 
turn fans away. But a dip in the economy, increased demands 
on leisure time, rising gas prices, and better television technol-
ogy have combined to diminish ticket sales, leaving colleges 
with empty seats and a diminishing revenue stream, even as 
they face other budget constraints. In response, some athletic 
programs are outsourcing ticket sales to commission-driven 
experts in the hopes of bringing fans back to the bleachers.
Ticket marketing companies catering to colleges use the 
model adopted by professional sports organizations: Sales 
staff work for commissions and make as many as 100 calls a 
day to students, alumni, faculty, and anyone else connected to 
the university. As these callers chat about the team, the school, 
or college athletics, they listen for clues to customers’ person-
alities and needs, then adjust their sales strategy accordingly. 
The commission structure ensures the strong motivation of 
the sales force, which benefits the schools, because every 
ticket sold promises additional potential income in the form of 
concessions. Furthermore, filled stadiums significantly improve 
the public perception of the team, team spirit, and the likeli-
hood of national publicity.
Some ticketing companies also provide related services to 
help generate revenue. Callers versed in the specifics of the 
college’s athletics program might request donations for ath-
letic scholarships or sport-related programming. Sport market-
ers with contacts in the world of professional athletics can 
help schools pull together appropriate fundraising events. 
They provide research and insights, coordinate print produc-
tion for programs and signage, assist with challenging media 
situations, help build sales of apparel and merchandise, and 
even rent seat cushions for homecoming games. Sophisticated 
software programs link ticketing, fundraising, and marketing 
functions to help track interactions, increase ticket sales, and 
improve the college’s brand.
Other athletic departments prefer to hire and manage their 
own ticket sales staff. This approach gives the school greater 
control over its brand. It also avoids privacy concerns about 
sharing university databases with an external seller, which 
may be too aggressive for the school’s educational environ-
ment, or running afoul of complex NCAA rules. However, inter-
nal sales might not be as effective, considering the competing 
priorities that confront the athletic department, the limited ex-
perience of the sales staff, the prohibitions on commission-based 
incentives for university employees, and ineffective channels 
of communication.
To fill football stadiums like this one at the University of Iowa, some universities have hired 
professional sales companies to call prospective ticket buyers.
Source: Phil Roeder/University of Iowa/Flickr/CC BY 2.0

616	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
pertain to a product or a service. They should assess whether the lead has the financial re-
sources to pay for the product or service.17 Clients looking to sell multimillion-dollar prop-
erties want real estate agents to qualify potential buyers first. Therefore, the sales agents 
might create a password-protected website that features floor plans and inside views for the 
shopping convenience of interested buyers. But to obtain the password, the customer must 
be prequalified as someone who could actually afford to buy the property. Such qualifica-
tions save both the agent and the seller the trouble of showing properties to curious people 
who could never actually afford to buy.
In a retail setting, though, qualifying potential customers is both dangerous and poten-
tially illegal. Retail salespeople should never judge a book by its cover and assume that a 
person in the store doesn’t fit the store’s image or cannot afford to purchase there. Such 
actions can quickly rise to the level of unethical and illegal discrimination, as recently al-
leged by several African American shoppers against such well-known retail names as Ma-
cy’s and Barneys.18 Although not illegal, imagine the frustration you might feel if you visit 
an upscale jewelry store to purchase an engagement ring, only to be snubbed because you 
are dressed in your everyday, casual school clothes.
Step 2: Preapproach and the Use of CRM Systems
The preapproach occurs prior to meeting the customer for the first time and extends the 
qualification of leads procedure described in Step 1. Although the salesperson has 
learned about the customer during the qualification stage, in this step he or she must 
conduct additional research and develop plans for meeting with the customer. Suppose, 
for example, a management consulting firm wants to sell a bank a new system for finding 
checking account errors. The consulting firm’s salesperson should first find out every-
thing possible about the bank: How many checks does it process? What system is the 
bank using now? What are the benefits of the consultant’s proposed system compared 
with the competition? The answers to these questions provide the basis for establishing 
value for the customer.
When Vonage decided to increase its sales of its voice over Internet protocol (VoIP) 
services to business customers rather than focusing only on consumers, it recognized that 
it needed information about how these buyers differed from its existing clients. Therefore, 
it purchased three firms that already function in business markets: Simple Signal, which 
provides unified communications-as-a-service solutions to small businesses; Telesphere 
Networks, which offers similar solutions to larger companies; and Vocalocity, which offers 
cloud-based communication services. Not only do those acquisitions provide it with cus-
tomer data it can use in its preapproach planning, but they also provide introductions to 
potential business customers, leading Vonage to predict that it would be able to increase its 
B2B revenue by 40 percent.19
In the past, this customer information, if it was available 
at all, was typically included in a manual system that each in-
dividual salesperson kept, using a notebook or a series of 
cards. Today, salespeople often can access all this information 
immediately and conveniently from their firm’s customer re-
lationship management (CRM) system.
In most cases, these CRM systems have several com-
ponents. There is a customer database or data warehouse. 
Whether the salesperson is working for a retail store or 
manages a selling team for an aerospace contractor, he or 
she can record transaction information, customer contact 
information, customer preferences, and market segment 
information about the customer. Once the data have been 
analyzed and CRM programs developed, salespeople can 
help implement the programs. Adding Value 20.2 
­describes the success of the most popular CRM system 
­today, Salesforce.com.
Salespeople input customer 
­information into their tablets to 
develop a customer database 
for CRM systems.
© JGI/Jamie Grill/Getty Images RF

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
617
	
	
Adding Value 20.2
Selling in the Cloud: The Growth and Success  
of Salesforce.comiii
At one time, CRM systems were the exclusive domain of 
wealthy companies. With costs running into hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, CRM systems represented a massive 
investment in both money and the time required to estab-
lish them. Each system needed its own servers and sup-
port from vendors to ensure its maintenance and 
consistent functioning.
This scenario clearly represented an opportunity for a 
company that could offer easier, less expensive, leaner ser-
vices. Enter Salesforce.com. Instead of complete, onsite 
CRM solutions, it promised to host all computing and data 
storage on its own servers, in the cloud. Clients did not 
need to find massive funds to purchase the system, be-
cause Salesforce.com initiated the first CRM-related soft-
ware-as-a-service (SaaS) model. That is, client firms did not 
buy any software but instead paid Salesforce.com a sub-
scription fee that varied according to the number of li-
censes they needed. Each user license cost approximately 
$75 a month, representing a substantial cost savings com-
pared with full CRM systems. Moreover, because the soft-
ware was in the cloud, salespeople could access their 
customer data anywhere, through their smartphones or 
tablets, rather than having to return to the office to link into 
an in-house system.
And Salesforce.com didn’t stop there. To build the most com-
prehensive service possible, the company created an entire sec-
tion on its website that enabled clients to build and trade apps 
that would integrate with and extend the functionality of its sys-
tem. To add value to its platform, it also has acquired dozens of 
firms that have developed innovative CRM technology. In recog-
nition of its innovative, aggressive efforts, Forbes named 
Salesforce.com as one of the most innovative companies in 
practice today.
The move to an SaaS cloud-based CRM model in turn 
opened doors for vast segments of companies that never 
would have been able to purchase a full system. For several 
years, Salesforce.com thus has enjoyed a leading position 
in the CRM service market in terms of total revenue, reve-
nue growth, and market share growth, and these growth 
rates continue to range in the 30 percent range across the 
board. As Salesforce.com’s president and vice chair Keith 
Block asserts, “Salesforce.com’s CRM market share leader-
ship is a reflection of the consistent innovation we deliver 
to our customers.”
Salesforce.com offers its clients CRM solutions at a price most businesses can afford.
© Studio 101/Alamy

618	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Having done the additional research, the salesperson establishes goals for meeting 
with the customer. It is important that the salesperson knows ahead of time exactly 
what should be accomplished. For instance, the consulting firm’s salesperson cannot 
expect to get a purchase commitment from the bank after just the first visit. But a 
demonstration of the system and a short presentation about how the system would ben-
efit the customer would be appropriate. It is often a good idea to practice the presenta-
tion prior to the meeting, using a technique known as role playing, in which the 
salesperson acts out a simulated buying situation while a colleague or manager acts as 
the buyer. Afterward, the practice sales presentation can be critiqued and adjustments 
can be made.
Step 3: Sales Presentation and Overcoming Reservations
The Presentation  Once all the background information has been obtained and the ob-
jectives for the meeting are set, the salesperson is ready for a person-to-person meeting. 
Let’s continue with our bank example. During the first part of the meeting, the salesperson 
needs to get to know the customer, get the customer’s attention, and create interest in the 
presentation to follow. The beginning of the presentation may be the most important part 
of the entire selling process, because it is when the salesperson establishes exactly where 
the customer is in the buying process (Exhibit 20.2). (For a refresher on the B2B buying 
process, see Chapter 7.)
Suppose, for instance, that the bank is in the first stage of the buying process: need 
recognition. It would not be prudent for the salesperson to discuss the pros and cons of 
different potential suppliers, because doing so would assume that the customer already had 
reached Step 4 (of the B2B buying process), proposal analysis and customer selection. By 
asking a series of questions though, the salesperson can assess the bank’s need for the 
product or service and adapt or customize the presentation to match the customer’s need 
and stage in the decision process.20
Asking questions is only half the battle; carefully listening to the answers is equally im-
portant. Some salespeople, particularly inexperienced ones, believe that to be in control, they 
must do all the talking. Yet it is impossible to really understand where the customer stands 
without listening carefully. What if the chief operating officer (COO) says, “It seems kind of 
expensive”? If the salesperson isn’t listening carefully, he or she won’t pick up on the subtle 
nuances of what the customer is really thinking. In this case, it probably means the COO 
doesn’t see the value in the offering.
When the salesperson has gotten a good feel for where the 
customer stands, he or she can apply that knowledge to help 
the customer solve its problem or satisfy its need. The sales-
person might begin by explaining the features or characteris-
tics of the system that will reduce checking account errors. It 
may not be obvious, solely on the basis of these features, that 
the system adds value beyond the bank’s current practices. Us-
ing the answers to some of the questions the salesperson posed 
earlier in the meeting, the salesperson can clarify the product’s 
advantages over current or past practices, as well as the overall 
benefits of adopting the new system. The salesperson might 
explain, for instance, that the bank can expect a 20 percent im-
provement in checking account errors and that, because of the 
size of the bank and number of checks it processes per year, 
this improvement would represent $2 million in annual sav-
ings. Because the system costs $150,000 per year and will take 
only three weeks to integrate into the current system, it will 
add significant and almost immediate value.
As this hypothetical example hints, personal selling often 
relies on an old-fashioned skill: storytelling. Even if they use 
advanced technologies and Internet-based communication 
It is important to ask questions 
at the beginning of a sales 
­presentation to establish 
where the customer is in the 
buying process.
© Chris Ryan/OJO Images/ 
agefotostock RF

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
619
	
	
media, salespeople must communicate their messages and sales pitches in ways that reso-
nate with their audience of potential customers. As research in neuroscience continues to 
affirm, virtually everyone uses at least some level of emotional reaction in determining 
their choices. To appeal to customers, salespeople thus need to tell a story that engages 
people’s imaginations.21
Handling Reservations  An integral part of the sales presentation is handling reserva-
tions or objections that the buyer might have about the product or service. Although reser-
vations can arise during each stage of the selling process, they are very likely to occur 
during the sales presentation. Customers may raise reservations pertaining to a variety of 
issues, but they usually relate in some way to value, such as that the price is too high for the 
level of quality or service.
Good salespeople know the types of reservations buyers are likely to raise. They may 
know, for instance, that their service is slower than competitors’ or that their selection is 
limited. Although not all reservations can be forestalled, effective salespeople can antici-
pate and handle some. For example, when the bank COO said the check service seemed 
Personal selling process
Generate and
qualify leads
Preapproach
Sales
presentation
and overcoming
reservations
Closing the sale
Follow-up
B2B buying process
Need recognition
Product
speciﬁcation
RFP process
Proposal analysis
and supplier
selection
Order speciﬁcation
Performance
assessment
E X H I B I T  20.2
Aligning the Personal Selling Process with the B2B Buying 
Process

620	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
expensive, the salesperson was ready with information about how quickly the investment 
would be recouped.
As in other aspects of the selling process, the best way to handle reservations is to relax and 
listen, then ask questions to clarify any reservations.22 For example, the salesperson could re-
spond to the COO’s reservation by asking, “How much do you think the bank is losing through 
checking account errors?” Her answer might open up a conversation about the positive trends in 
a cost–benefit analysis. Such questions are usually more effective than trying to prove the cus-
tomer’s reservation is not valid, because the latter approach implies the salesperson isn’t really 
listening and could lead to an argument—the last thing a customer usually wants.
Step 4: Closing the Sale
Closing the sale means obtaining a commitment from the customer to make a purchase. 
Without a successful close, the salesperson goes away empty-handed, so many salespeople 
find this part of the sales process very stressful. Although losing a sale is never pleasant, 
salespeople who are involved in a relationship with their customers must view any specific 
sales presentation as part of the progression toward ultimately making the sale or building 
the relationship. An unsuccessful close on one day may just be a means of laying the 
groundwork for a successful close during the next meeting.
Although we have presented the selling process as a series of steps, closing the sale 
rarely follows so neatly. However, good salespeople listen carefully to what potential cus-
tomers say and pay attention to their body language. By reading these signals, they can 
achieve an earlier close. Suppose that our hypothetical bank, instead of being in the first 
step of the buying process, were in the final step of negotiation and selection. An astute 
salesperson would pick up on these signals and ask for the sale.
Step 5: Follow‐Up
“It ain’t over till it’s over.”
	
—Yogi Berra23
With relationship selling, it is never really over, even after the sale is closed. The attitudes 
customers develop after the sale become the basis for how they purchase in the future. The 
follow-up therefore offers a prime opportunity for a salesperson to solidify the customer 
relationship through great service quality. Let’s apply the five service quality dimensions 
we discussed in Chapter 13 to understand the follow-up:24
∙	
Reliability. The salesperson and the supporting organization must deliver the right 
product or service on time.
∙	
Responsiveness. The salesperson and support group must be ready to deal quickly 
with any issue, question, or problem that may arise.
∙	
Assurance. Customers must be assured through adequate guarantees that their 
purchase will perform as expected.
∙	
Empathy. The salesperson and support group must have a good understanding of the 
problems and issues faced by their customers. Otherwise, they cannot give them what 
they want.
∙	
Tangibles. Because tangibles reflect the physical characteristics of the seller’s business, 
such as its website, marketing communications, and delivery materials, their influence is 
subtler than that of the other four service quality dimensions. That doesn’t mean it is any 
less important. Retail customers are generally more pleased with a purchase if it is 
carefully wrapped in nice paper instead of being haphazardly thrown into a crumpled 
plastic bag. The tangibles offer a signal that the product is of high quality, even though 
the packaging has nothing to do with the product’s actual performance.
When customers’ expectations are not met, they often complain—about deliveries, the 
billing amount or process, the product’s performance, or after-sale services such as instal-
lation or training (recall the Gaps Model from Chapter 13). Effectively handling ­complaints 

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
621
	
	
is critical to the future of the relationship. As we noted in Chapter 13, the best way to han-
dle complaints is to listen to the customer, provide a fair solution to the problem, and re-
solve the problem quickly.
The best way to nip a postsale problem in the bud is to check with the customer right 
after he or she takes possession of the product or immediately after the service has been 
completed. This speed demonstrates responsiveness and empathy. It also shows the cus-
tomer that the salesperson and the firm care about customer satisfaction. Finally, a postsale 
follow-up call, e-mail, or letter takes the salesperson back to the first step in the sales pro-
cess for initiating a new order and sustaining the relationship.
Such efforts are critical, no matter the size of the selling firm. From the moment 
­Barbara Merrill first started her company SukhaMat, to sell the innovative knee pads she had 
invented along with other yoga products, she recognized the need for personal attention and 
follow-up efforts. Therefore, she hand wrote appreciative notes to each buyer from her home 
office, assuring them that she would be happy to hear from them with any questions or is-
sues. As her company grew, with an expanding web presence and sales through Amazon, 
writing the full notes for each purchase became oppressively time consuming. Yet she was 
unwilling to give up the personal link to her customers, so she moved to a printed card, fea-
turing the company’s web address (www.sukhamat.com), as well as a personalized address 
line and signature. Such effort does not go unnoticed by customers; one Amazon review 
even explains a five-star rating by noting not just that “The SukhaMat is absolutely wonder-
ful. It’s just the right thickness and has just the right softness,” but also that “P.S. The hand-
written thank-you note from the seller was unexpected and very much appreciated touch.”25
SukhaMat’s owner, Barbara 
Merrill, sends handwritten 
thank-you notes to each of  
her customers.
Source: SukhaMat.com
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 Why is personal selling important to an IMC strategy?
2.	 What are the steps in the personal selling process?
MANAGING THE SALES FORCE
Like any business activity involving people, the sales force requires management. Sales 
management involves the planning, direction, and control of personal selling activities, 
including recruiting, selecting, training, motivating, compensating, and evaluating, as they 
apply to the sales force.
LO20-3	
Describe the key 
functions involved in 
managing a sales force.

622	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
Managing a sales force is a rewarding yet complicated undertaking. In this section, we 
examine how sales forces can be structured, some of the most important issues in recruit-
ing and selecting salespeople, sales training issues, ways to compensate salespeople, and 
finally how to supervise and evaluate salespeople.
Sales Force Structure
Imagine the daunting task of putting together a sales force from scratch. Will you hire your 
own salespeople, or should they be manufacturer’s representatives? What will each sales-
person’s primary duties be: order takers, order getters, sales support? Finally, will they 
work together in teams? In this section, we examine each of these issues.
Company Sales Force or Manufacturer’s Representative  A company sales force 
comprises people who are employees of the selling company. Independent agents, also 
known as manufacturer’s representatives, or reps, are salespeople who sell a manufac-
turer’s products on an extended contract basis but are not employees of the manufacturer. 
They are compensated by commissions and do not take ownership or physical possession 
of the merchandise.
Manufacturer’s representatives are useful for smaller firms or firms expanding into 
new markets, because such companies can achieve instant and extensive sales coverage 
without having to pay full-time personnel. Good sales representatives have many estab-
lished contacts and can sell multiple products from noncompeting manufacturers during 
the same sales call. Also, the use of manufacturer’s reps facilitates flexibility; it is much 
easier to replace a rep than an employee and much easier to expand or contract coverage in 
a market with a sales rep than with a company sales force.
Company sales forces are more typically used for established product lines. Because 
the salespeople are company employees, the manufacturer has more control over what they 
do. If, for example, the manufacturer’s strategy is to provide extensive customer service, 
the sales manager can specify exactly what actions a company sales force must take. In 
contrast, because manufacturer’s reps are paid on a commission basis, it is difficult to per-
suade them to take any action that doesn’t directly lead to sales.
Salesperson Duties  Although the life of a professional salesperson is highly varied, sales-
people generally play three important roles: order getting, order taking, and sales support.
Order Getting  An order getter is a salesperson whose primary responsibilities are iden-
tifying potential customers and engaging those customers in discussions to attempt to make 
a sale. An order getter is also responsible for following up to ensure that the customer is 
satisfied and to build the relationship. In B2B settings, order getters are primarily involved 
in new buy and modified new buy situations (see Chapter 7). As a result, they require ex-
tensive sales and product knowledge training. The Pepsi salesperson who goes to Safeway’s 
headquarters to sell a special promotion of Pepsi emojis is an order getter.
Order Taking  An order taker is a salesperson whose primary responsibil-
ity is to process routine orders, reorders, or rebuys for products. Colgate em-
ploys order takers around the globe who go into stores and distribution 
centers that already carry Colgate products to check inventory, set up dis-
plays, write new orders, and make sure everything is going smoothly.
Sales Support  Sales support personnel enhance and help with the overall 
selling effort. For example, if a Best Buy customer begins to experience 
computer problems, the company has a Geek Squad door-to-door service as 
well as support in the store. Those employees who respond to the custom-
er’s technical questions and repair the computer serve to support the overall 
sales process.
Combination Duties  Although some salespeople’s primary function may be 
order getting, order taking, or sales support, others fill a combination of roles. 
For instance, a computer salesperson at Staples may spend an hour with a 
Order takers process routine 
orders, reorders, or rebuys for 
products.
© Mark Tuschman Photography

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
623
	
	
customer educating him or her about the pros and cons of various systems and then make 
the sale. The next customer might simply need a specific printer cartridge. A third cus-
tomer might bring in a computer and seek advice about an operating system problem. The 
salesperson was first an order getter, next an order taker, and finally a sales support person.
Some firms use selling teams that combine sales specialists whose primary duties are 
order getting, order taking, or sales support but who work together to service important 
accounts. As companies become larger and products more complicated, it is nearly impos-
sible for one person to perform all the necessary sales functions.
Recruiting and Selecting Salespeople
When the firm has determined how the sales force will be structured, it must find and hire 
salespeople. Although superficially this task may sound as easy as posting the job opening 
on the Internet or running an ad in a newspaper, it must be performed carefully, because 
firms don’t want to hire the wrong person. Salespeople are very expensive to train. Among 
other creative hiring tactics, Zappos’ famously considers finding the right people so im-
portant that it will pay them to leave after a few weeks if they are not a good fit.26
In their critical efforts to find the right person for the job though, companies must take 
care to avoid biased practices such as hiring on the basis of stereotypes instead of qualifi-
cations. For most people, the picture of someone selling Avon products likely involves a 
middle-aged woman—namely, the “Avon Lady.” But sales revenues for these products con-
tinue to provide salespeople a successful living, prompting plenty of women and men to try 
their hand at selling Avon.27 Hiring based on misplaced assumptions about gender or other 
categories can be damaging to the company, as well as discriminatory.
The most important activity in the recruiting process is to determine exactly what the 
salesperson will be doing and what personal traits and abilities a person should have to do 
the job well. For instance, the Pepsi order getter who goes to Safeway to pitch a new prod-
uct will typically need significant sales experience, coupled with great communication and 
analytical skills. Pepsi’s order takers need to be reliable and able to get along with lots of 
different types of people in the stores, from managers to customers.
Many firms give candidates personality tests, but they stress different personality at-
tributes, depending on the requisite traits for the position and the personality characteris-
tics of their most successful salespeople.28 For instance, impatience is often a positive 
Customers like centenarian Ivy 
Bean can rely on sales support 
from Best Buy’s Geek Squad.
© Bob Collier/PA Wire/AP Photo

624	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
characteristic for sales because it creates a sense of urgency to close the sale. But for very 
large, complicated sales targeting large institutions, like the bank in our previous example, 
an impatient salesperson may irritate the decision makers and kill the deal.
When recruiting salespeople, it helps to possess certain personal traits. What are those 
personal traits? Managers and sales experts generally agree on the following:29
∙	
Personality. Good salespeople are friendly, sociable, and, in general, like being 
around people. Customers won’t buy from someone they don’t like.
∙	
Optimism. Good salespeople tend to look at the bright side of things. Optimism also 
may help them be resilient—the third trait.
∙	
Resilience. Good salespeople don’t easily take no for an answer. They keep coming 
back until they get a yes.
∙	
Self-motivation. As we have already mentioned, salespeople have lots of freedom to 
spend their days the way they believe will be most productive. But if the salespeople 
are not self-motivated to get the job done, it probably won’t get done.
∙	
Empathy. Empathy is one of the five dimensions of service quality discussed 
previously in this chapter and in Chapter 13. Good salespeople must care about their 
customers, their issues, and their problems.
Sales Training
Even people who possess all these personal traits need training. All salespeople benefit 
from training about selling and negotiation techniques, product and service knowledge, 
technologies used in the selling process, time and territory management, and company 
policies and procedures.
Firms use varied delivery methods to train their salespeople, depending on the topic of 
the training, what type of salesperson is being trained, and the cost versus the value of the 
training. For instance, an on-the-job training program is excellent for communicating sell-
ing and negotiation skills, because managers can observe the sales trainees in real selling 
situations and provide instant feedback. They can also engage in role-playing exercises in 
which the salesperson acts out a simulated buying situation and the manager critiques the 
salesperson’s performance.
A much less expensive, but for some purposes equally valuable, training method is the 
Internet. Online training programs have revolutionized the way training happens in many 
firms. Firms can provide new product and service knowledge, spread the word about 
changes in company policies and procedures, and share selling tips in a user-friendly envi-
ronment that salespeople can access anytime and anywhere. Distance learning sales train-
ing programs through teleconferencing enable a group of salespeople to participate with 
their instructor or manager in a virtual classroom. And testing 
can occur online as well. Online sales training may never re-
place the one-on-one interaction of on-the-job training for ad-
vanced selling skills, but it is quite effective and efficient for 
many other aspects of the sales training task.30
Motivating and Compensating Salespeople
An important goal for any effective sales manager is to get to 
know his or her salespeople and determine what motivates 
them to be effective. Some salespeople prize their freedom and 
like to be left alone; others want attention and are more pro-
ductive when they receive accolades for a job well done. Still 
others are motivated primarily by monetary compensation. As 
Adding Value 20.3 reveals, these motives vary according to the 
selling context. Great sales managers determine how best to 
motivate each of their salespeople according to what is most 
important to each individual. Although sales managers can 
Technology has changed the 
lives of salespeople and the 
­delivery methods of sales 
­training. Companies can 
­conduct distance learning  
and training through  
videoconferencing.
© Blend Images/Ariel Skelley/Getty  
Images RF

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
625
	
	
Adding Value 20.3
When Tupperware Does More Than Store Food: Sales as 
Empowerment among Indonesian Womeniv
Tupperware may have started as an American company, but its 
primary sales markets have been overseas for years. Germany 
took top place for a while; today though, the biggest market for 
the plastic food container systems is Indonesia, where the 
company earned approximately $200 million in sales last year. 
The reasons for its growth in Asia include some familiar 
notions but also some relatively notable distinctions. For exam-
ple, a growing middle class leads consumers of virtually every 
country to look for ways to use their disposable income. 
Tupperware offers a target that is both fun and practical. In 
addition, as economies grow and consumers gain access to 
modern conveniences such as refrigerators, food storage 
products become a newly discovered need.
But Indonesia is unique in that it has strongly mandated 
and legally established roles for women that requires them to 
serve as caretakers in their families, while their husbands take 
the position of head of the household. Required to remain at 
home to care for their families, many middle-class women 
seek approved social interactions such as those created by 
Tupperware parties. Friends can come together to shop and 
chat, allowing the women a break from their daily routines.
This combination also makes Tupperware an ideal means 
for women to enter the workforce. Despite conservative 
social attitudes against women working, the at-home opera-
tions enable many of them to make a career out of selling 
Tupperware and convincing others to do the same. Thus 
the sales force in Indonesia currently includes about 
250,000 women.
The social networks that enable the sales of Tupperware 
also resonate well in Indonesia, which has a long tradition 
of arisans, or gatherings in which women pool their money, 
then award the pot to a different member at each meeting. 
When the arisans include a Tupperware component, the 
pot of money usually helps the winner purchase a full set of 
products, which she would not have been able to afford 
otherwise. 
Finally, the career prospects offered by Tupperware repre-
sent a viable means for women to escape poverty. One woman 
reports earning approximately US$2400 per month, six times 
what she and her husband combined earned previously. Thus, 
whereas “Initially, my husband refused to let me sell 
Tupperware even part-time. . . . Now he works for me.”
Why is Indonesia Tupperwear’s biggest market?
Source: Tupperware

626	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
emphasize different motivating factors, except in the smallest companies, the methods used 
to compensate salespeople must be fairly standardized and can be divided into two catego-
ries: financial and nonfinancial.
Financial Rewards  Salespeople’s compensation usually has several components. Most 
salespeople receive at least part of their compensation as a salary, a fixed sum of money 
paid at regular intervals. Another common financial incentive is a commission, which is 
money paid as a percentage of the sales volume or profitability. A bonus is a payment 
made at management’s discretion when the salesperson attains certain goals. Bonuses usu-
ally are given only periodically, such as at the end of the year. A sales contest is a short-
term incentive designed to elicit a specific response from the sales force. Prizes might be 
cash or other types of financial incentives. For instance, Volkswagen may give a free trip 
to Germany for the salesperson who sells the most Touaregs.
The bulk of any compensation package is made up of salary, commission, or a combi-
nation of the two. The advantage of a salary plan is that salespeople know exactly what 
they will be paid, and sales managers have more control. Salaried salespeople can be di-
rected to spend a certain percentage of their time handling customer service issues. Under 
a commission system, however, salespeople have only one objective—make the sale! Thus, 
a commission system provides the most incentive for the sales force to sell.
Nonfinancial Rewards  As we have noted, good salespeo-
ple are self-motivated. They want to do a good job and make 
the sale because it makes them feel good. But this good feel-
ing also can be accentuated by recognition from peers and 
management. For instance, the internal monthly magazine and 
blog at the cosmetics firm Mary Kay provides an outlet for 
not only selling advice but also companywide recognition of 
individual salespeople’s accomplishments.31
Nonfinancial rewards should have high symbolic value, 
as plaques, pens, or rings do. Free trips or days off are also 
effective rewards. More important than what the reward is, 
however, is the way it is operationalized. For instance, an 
award should be given at a sales meeting and publicized in the 
company newsletter. It should also be done in good taste, be-
cause if the award is perceived as tacky, no one will take it 
seriously.32 Mary Kay recognizes salespeople’s success with 
unusually large rewards that have both high symbolic and 
Volkswagen may give a free 
trip to Germany for the 
­salesperson who sells the  
most Touaregs.
© Stock4B-RF/Getty Images RF
Mary Kay gives high- 
performing salespeople an 
award that has both high  
symbolic value and material 
value—a pink Cadillac.
Source: Mary Kay, Inc.

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
627
	
	
high material value. More than 130,000 independent beauty consultants and sales directors 
have earned the use of one of the famous pink Cadillacs, but it is also possible to gain re-
wards and recognition such as a set of faux pearl earrings within the first week of becom-
ing a consultant.33
Evaluating Salespeople by Using Marketing Metrics  Salespeople’s evaluation process 
must be tied to their reward structure. If salespeople do well, they should receive their rewards 
the way you do if you do well on your exams and assignments in a class: you earn good grades. 
However, salespeople should be evaluated and rewarded for only those activities and outcomes 
that fall under their control. If Nordstrom makes a unilateral decision to put Diesel jeans in all 
its stores after a negotiation with Diesel’s corporate headquarters in Italy, the Diesel sales rep-
resentatives responsible for individual Nordstrom stores should not receive credit for making 
the sale, nor should they get all the windfall commission that would ensue from the added sales.
Considering this guiding principle—evaluate and reward salespeople for what they do 
and not for what they don’t do—how should sales managers evaluate salespeople? The answer 
is never easy because measures must be tied to performance, and there are many ways to mea-
sure performance in a complex job such as selling. For example, evaluating performance on 
the basis of monthly sales alone fails to consider how profitable the sales were, whether any 
progress was made to build new business that will be realized sometime in the future, or the 
level of customer service the salesperson provided. Because the sales job is multifaceted with 
many contributing success factors, sales managers should use multiple measures.34
In business practice, salesperson evaluation measures can be objective or subjective. 
Sales, profits, and the number of orders represent examples of objective measures. Al-
though each is somewhat useful to managers, such measures do not provide an adequate 
perspective for a thorough evaluation, because there is no means of comparison with other 
salespeople. For instance, suppose salesperson A generated $1 million last year, but sales-
person B generated $1.5 million. Should salesperson B automatically receive a signifi-
cantly higher evaluation? Now consider that salesperson B’s territory has twice as much 
potential as salesperson A’s. Knowing this, we might suppose that salesperson A has actu-
ally done a better job. For this reason, firms use ratios such as profit per customer, orders 
per call, sales per hour, or expenses compared to sales as their objective measures.
Whereas objective measures are quantitative, subjective measures seek to assess salespeo-
ple’s behavior: what they do and how well they do it. By their very nature, subjective measures 
reflect one person’s opinion about another’s performance. Thus, subjective evaluations can be 
biased and should be used cautiously and only in conjunction with multiple objective measures.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL ISSUES  
IN PERSONAL SELLING
Although ethical and legal issues permeate all aspects of marketing, they are particularly 
important for personal selling. Unlike advertising and other communications with custom-
ers, which are planned and executed on a corporate level, personal selling involves a 
­one-to-one, and often face-to-face, encounter with the customer. Therefore, sellers’ actions 
are not only highly visible to customers but also to other stakeholders, such as the commu-
nities in which they work.
Ethical and legal issues arise in three main areas. First, there is the relationship be-
tween the sales manager and the sales force. Second, in some situations, an inconsistency 
LO20-4	
Describe the ethical 
and legal issues in 
personal selling.
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What do sales managers need to do to manage their sales force  
successfully?
2.	 What is the difference between monetary and nonmonetary incentives?

628	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
might exist between corporate policy and the salesperson’s 
ethical comfort zone. Third, ethical as well as legal issues can 
arise when the salesperson interacts with the customer, espe-
cially if that salesperson or the selling firm collects significant 
information about the customer. To maintain trustworthy cus-
tomer relationships, companies must take care that they re-
spect customer privacy and respect the information comfort 
zone—that is, the amount of information a customer feels 
comfortable providing.35
The Sales Manager and the Sales Force
Like any manager, a sales manager must treat people fairly and 
equally in everything he or she does. With regard to the sales 
force, this fairness must apply to hiring, promotion, supervi-
sion, training, assigning duties and quotas, compensation and 
incentives, and firing.36 Federal laws cover many of these is-
sues. For instance, equal employment opportunity laws make it 
unlawful to discriminate against a person in hiring, promotion, 
or firing because of race, religion, nationality, sex, or age.
The Sales Force and Corporate Policy
Sometimes salespeople face a conflict between what they believe represents ethical selling 
and what their company asks them to do to make a sale. Suppose an insurance agent whose 
compensation is based on commission sells a homeowner’s policy to a family that has just 
moved to New Orleans, an area prone to flooding as a result of hurricanes. Even though the 
policy covers hurricane damage, it does not cover water damage from hurricanes. If the 
salesperson discloses the inadequate coverage, the sale might be lost because additional 
flood insurance is very expensive. What should the salesperson do? Salespeople must live 
within their own ethical comfort zone. If this or any other situation is morally repugnant to 
the salesperson, he or she must question the choice to be associated with such a company.37
Salespeople also can be held accountable for illegal actions sanctioned by the em-
ployer. If the homeowner asks if the home is above the floodplain or whether water damage 
from flooding is covered by the policy, and it is company policy to intentionally mislead 
potential customers, both the salesperson and the insurance dealership could be susceptible 
to legal action.
The Salesperson and the Customer
As the frontline emissaries for a firm, salespeople have a duty to be ethically and legally 
correct in all their dealings with their customers. Not only is it the right thing to do, it simply 
means good business. Long-term relationships can deteriorate quickly if customers believe 
that they have not been treated in an ethically proper manner. Unfortunately, salespeople 
sometimes get mixed signals from their managers or simply do not know when their behav-
iors might be considered unethical or illegal. Formal guidelines can help, but it is also im-
portant to integrate these guidelines into training programs in which salespeople can discuss 
various issues that arise in the field with their peers and managers.38 Most important, how-
ever, is for sales managers to lead by example. If managers are known to cut ethical corners 
in their dealings with customers, it shouldn’t surprise them when their salespeople do the 
same. Ethical and Societal Dilemma 20.1 considers the ethical issues that realtors face.
Salespeople must live within 
their own ethical comfort zone. 
Should insurance salespeople 
disclose inadequate hurricane 
coverage and risk not making 
the sale?
© Charlie Riedel/AP Photo
PROGRESS CHECK
1.	 What are three areas of personal selling in which ethical and legal issues 
are more likely to arise?

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
629
	
	
When Realtors Become Reality Starsv
Ethical & Societal Dilemma 20.1
Reality television has spread to nearly every facet of life, and real 
estate is no exception. On shows such as Million Dollar Listing, 
House Hunters, Designed to Sell, and Property Brothers, view-
ers can watch as homeowners try to sell their properties and 
potential buyers search for their perfect home. Helping them ev-
ery step of the way are real estate professionals, some of whom 
have gained notoriety as reality television stars themselves.
	
The Million Dollar Listing series, with versions in New York 
and Los Angeles, has made household names out of agents 
such as Ryan Serhant and Josh Altman. The handsome young 
realtors not only broker massive real estate deals but also 
share stories about their personal lives and even allow cam-
eras to catch them in the shower, in at least one memorable 
episode. As Altman recognized, “Nobody wants to see the guy 
who just sells houses every week. They want to see that drama 
between the realtors.” As a result, some of the featured real-
tors have developed such an extensive fan base that they have 
hired publicists, managers, and drivers, as well as assistants 
whose sole job is to respond to contacts from fans.
	
The depictions of real estate transactions clearly make for 
great television. Consumers enjoy the voyeuristic glimpse into 
other people’s financial affairs and living conditions, especially 
when those conditions include multimillion-dollar homes. The 
Million Dollar Listing episodes each average around 1.25 mil-
lion viewers, leading networks such as Bravo and HGTV to 
keep adding new versions and twists to their lineups of real 
estate reality television shows.
	
But according to some observers, the shows create a de-
structive and potentially dangerous impression of what real 
estate transactions involve and what the responsibilities of 
professional realtors are. The agents often are presented in a 
less-than-flattering light, which could be damaging for their 
reputation. For example, one cast member on The Real House-
wives of Orange County who was a real estate agent left the 
show mainly because she believed that participating in bicker-
ing and being subjected to wine thrown on her ultimately 
would be too professionally embarrassing to be healthy for 
her business.
	
Agencies that prohibit their brokers from appearing on 
such shows also note that discretion and clients’ privacy are 
central goals for realtors—aspects that rarely are prioritized 
on reality television. Furthermore, if the agent becomes the 
star, the broker might come to overshadow the agency’s brand 
as well as the sale itself.
	
The shows also present a condensed, highly edited version 
of the real estate process, naturally. Sales of big properties—
and even smaller ones—can take months to complete, and 
much of the activity involves paperwork, e-mailing, and re-
search. None of these elements are particularly compelling in 
video, so the shows tend to exclude them and focus more on 
loud negotiations, flashy open houses, or snarky interactions.
	
Yet for many of the star realtors, these potentially negative 
effects fade away in the face of the massive marketing bump 
they receive from their notoriety. Bravo asserts that every 
­broker who has appeared on one of its shows has enjoyed 
increased business through the association. The well-known 
agents agree: One indicated that his business had jumped by 
20 percent, and another noted that he moved from selling 
midrange condos to dealing in luxury estates, which earned 
him $200 million in commissions in a single recent year.
Do reality shows like Property Brothers, starring Jonathan Silver Scott (left) and Drew Scott 
(right), portray the real estate industry and its salespeople in an ethically responsible manner?
© HGTV/Photofest

630	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
	
	
Describe the value added of personal selling.
	
	
Although the cost of an average B2B sales call is 
expensive, many firms believe they couldn’t do 
business without their sales forces. Customers can 
buy many products and services without the help of 
a salesperson, but in many other cases, it is worth 
the extra cost built into the price of a product to be 
educated about the product or get valuable advice. 
Salespeople can also simplify the buying process 
and therefore save the customer time and hassle.
	
	
Define the steps in the personal selling ­process.
	
	
Although we discuss selling in terms of steps, it 
truly represents a process, and the time spent in each 
step varies according to the situation. In the first 
step, the salesperson generates a list of viable cus-
tomers. During the second step, the preapproach, 
the salesperson gathers information about the cus-
tomer and prepares for the presentation. The third 
step, the sales presentation, consists of a personal 
meeting between the salesperson and the customer. 
Through discussion and by asking questions, the 
salesperson learns where the customer is in the buy-
ing process and tailors the discussion around what 
the firm’s product or service can do to meet that 
customer’s needs. During the fourth step, the close, 
the salesperson asks for the order. Finally, during 
the follow-up, the salesperson and support staff so-
lidify the long-term relationship by making sure the 
customer is satisfied with the purchase and address-
ing any complaints. The follow-up therefore sets the 
stage for the next purchase.
LO20-1
LO20-2
	
	
Describe the key functions involved in managing 
a sales force.
	
	
The first task of a sales manager, assuming a firm is 
starting a sales force from scratch, is to determine 
whether to use a company sales force or manufac-
turer’s representatives. Then sales managers must 
determine what the primary selling responsibilities 
will be—order getter, order taker, or sales support. 
The sales manager recruits and selects salespeople, 
but because there are all sorts of sales jobs, the sales 
manager must determine what it takes to be success-
ful and then go after people with those attributes. In 
the next step, training, firms can choose between 
on-the-job and online training. Sales managers are 
also responsible for motivating and compensating 
salespeople. Most salespeople appreciate a balance 
of financial and nonfinancial rewards for doing a 
good job. Finally, sales managers are responsible for 
evaluating their salespeople. Normally, salespeople 
should be evaluated on a combination of objective 
measures, such as sales per hour, and subjective mea-
sures, such as how friendly they appear to customers.
	
	
Describe the ethical and legal issues in personal 
selling.
	
	
Ethical and legal issues arise in three areas in per-
sonal selling. First, ethical and legal issues could 
arise based on how the sales manager interacts with 
the sales force. Second, there might be inconsisten-
cies between corporate policy and the salesperson’s 
ethical comfort zone. Finally, ethical and legal issues 
can arise as the salesperson interacts with customers.
LO20-3
LO20-4
bchsu_tt
Reviewing Learning Objectives
Key Terms
∙	 bonus,  626
∙	 closing the sale,  620
∙	 cold calls,  614
∙	 commission,  626
∙	 company sales force,  622
∙	 inbound marketing,  614
∙	 independent agents,  622
∙	 leads,  613
∙	 manufacturer’s representatives 
(reps),  622
∙	 order getter,  622
∙	 order taker,  622
∙	 personal selling,  610
∙	 preapproach,  616
∙	 qualify,  613
∙	 relationship selling,  612
∙	 role playing,  618
∙	 salary,  626
∙	 sales contest,  626
∙	 sales management,  621
∙	 sales support personnel,  622
∙	 selling teams,  623
∙	 telemarketing,  614
∙	 trade shows,  614
Marketing Digitally
1.	 Go to Salesforce.com’s YouTube channel at http://www 
.youtube.com/user/salesforce. Watch a few of the short 
videos and discuss how the tools ­described would help 
you as a salesperson.

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
631
	
	
2.	 To learn more about careers in sales, go to http://www.bls 
.gov/oco/, the website for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
This site contains a wealth of information about careers in 
all fields. Click on “Sales.” Choose any of the sales fields 
listed, and explore that career field. What experience is 
necessary to be hired for that job? What is the median sal-
ary? What do earners in the highest 10 percent of perfor-
mance earn? Is job growth anticipated in that field?
  1.  How has your perception of what it would be like to have 
a career in sales changed since you read this chapter?
  2.  “Salespeople just make products cost more.” Do you 
agree or disagree with this statement? Discuss why 
you’ve taken that position.
  3.  Choose an industry or a specific company that you 
would like to work for as a salesperson. How would 
you generate and qualify leads?
  4.  Why is it important for salespeople to be good listen-
ers? To be good at asking questions?
  5.  Suppose you are a salesperson at a high-end jewelry 
store. What can you do to ensure that your customers are 
satisfied? Now imagine you are the store manager of the 
same store; what can you do in your position to guarantee 
customers remain happy with the service they receive?
  6.  Imagine that a time machine has transported you back 
to 1961. How was a day in the life of a salesperson sell-
ing appliances such as washing machines different in 
1961 than it is now?
  7.  What are some of the potentially ethically troubling 
and illegal situations facing professional salespeople, 
and how should they deal with them?
  8.  Why would Gillette use a company sales force, while a 
small independent manufacturer of organic shaving 
cream uses manufacturer’s representatives?
  9.  Similar to the way a sales manager evaluates a salesper-
son, your instructors evaluate your performance to as-
sign you a grade. Choose one of your classes and analyze 
the advantages and disadvantages of the objective and 
subjective bases used to evaluate your performance.
  10.  A customer has the following reservations. How do 
you respond?
	
	 a.  “I really like all the things this copier does, but I 
don’t think it’s going to be very reliable. With all 
those features, something’s got to go wrong.”
	
	 b.  “Your price for this printer is higher than the price 
I saw advertised on the Internet.”
  11.  Imagine that you have just been hired by the school 
newspaper to sell ad space. You are asked what you 
think would be a “fair” compensation package for you. 
Using the information from the chapter, make a list of 
all the elements that should be included in your com-
pensation package. How would this compensation 
package change over time and with continued strong 
performance?
  12.  You have taken a summer job in the windows and 
doors department of a large home improvement store. 
During sales training, you learn about the products, 
how to best address customers’ needs, and how to sell 
the customer the best product to fit their needs regard-
less of price point. One day your manager informs you 
that you are to recommend Smith Windows to every 
window customer. Smith Windows are more expensive 
and don’t really provide superior benefit except in lim-
ited circumstances. The manager is insistent that you 
recommend Smith. Not knowing what else to do, you 
recommend Smith Windows to customers who would 
have been better served by lower-cost windows. The 
manager rewards you with a sales award. Later the 
manager tells you that he received an all-­expenses-
paid cruise for his family from Smith Windows. What, 
if anything, should you do with this information?
Marketing Applications
1.	 One of the advantages of personal selling over other 
types of marketing communication is that 
a.  salespeople can build strong relationships with 
customers.
b.  personal selling almost always costs less than other 
marketing communication alternatives.
c.  personal selling has greater reach than advertising.
d.  cold calling is easier than direct mail advertising.
e.  personal selling requires less training than other 
types of selling.
2.	 All of the following are service quality dimensions re-
lated to follow-up except 
a.  ethics
b.  reliability
c.  tangibles 
d.  responsiveness
e.  empathy
(Answers to these two questions can be found in the Quiz 
Yourself Answer Key section.)
Quiz Yourself

632	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
ALTA DATA SOLUTIONS: MAKING THE SALE39
When Vicki Nguyen reached her office, she had a message from Mike Smith, the regional 
sales manager, to meet him in his office regarding the Burtell Inc. order. Vicki Nguyen is a 
senior sales associate for Alta Data Solutions Inc., a firm that markets software and hard-
ware designed for data storage. The Burtell order represents a multimillion-dollar contract 
for Alta Data Solutions and would help Burtell boost its productivity levels and revenue for 
the region. To prepare for the meeting, Nguyen reviews her sales call report notes on the 
Burtell account.
Alta Data Solutions  Alta Data Solutions provides software and hardware solutions to 
large firms and has an established track record for delivering an exceptional standard of qual-
ity and high levels of customer service. This excellent reputation allows Alta Data Solutions 
to charge a substantial premium, ranging from 10 to 20 percent above the market leader.
	
The data storage software services market has been dominated for two decades by this 
market leader. Alta Data Solutions holds the second position in the marketplace, with a 
considerably lower but growing market share. Only one other competitor, an aggressive, 
small, low-price player, holds a significant market share; this provider has made inroads 
into the market in the past several years through its aggressive sales tactics.
	
Alta Data Solutions has just built a new facility and hired 50 new software program-
mers. Therefore, the company must generate new business to meet its higher financial 
goals; even more important in the short run, it must keep the new programmers working on 
interesting projects to retain them.
Burtell Inc.  Burtell Inc. is a division of a major U.S.-based consumer products firm. Its 
purchasing department negotiates contracts for software services and coordinates the inter-
face among a variety of members from different departments. The business environment 
for consumer products has become highly competitive in recent years, leading to tight 
budgets and higher levels of scrutiny of the value added by vendors. Competition is fierce, 
as large numbers of end-user customers are considering vendors that provide the most data 
analysis with their products.
	
Burtell Inc. has been consistently buying software development services from the mar-
ket leader since 1991 and is generally satisfied with its service. A recent change in corpo-
rate leadership, however, has increased concerns about its overreliance on one vendor for a 
particular service. Also, because of the difficult economic climate, the company is con-
cerned about the cost of software services and whether it is necessary to provide such a 
high service level.
Vicki Nguyen’s Call Report  A call report is like a diary of sales calls made to a partic-
ular client. The  notes in Vicki Nguyen’s Burtell file pertaining to the current negotiations 
began on June 4 read as follows:
June 4: I contacted Bethany O’Meara, chief purchasing officer at Burtell, to intro-
duce myself to her and get a sense of what their future software needs might be. She 
told me that the slowed business climate had caused Burtell to institute a program for 
increased efficiency in operations and that they would be looking to negotiate a new 
contract for software ­solutions. She gave me some insights into the technological 
­aspects of their needs.
June 18: Met with Jon Aaronson, head of R&D, to explain our productivity-­
enhancing solutions. Went into considerable depth explaining how Alta could 
­service their needs and learned what they were ­looking for in a provider. I went over 
some specific product specification issues, but Jon did not seem impressed. But he 
did ask for a price and told me that the final decision rested with Brad Alexander, 
the chief financial officer.
bchsu_tt
Chapter Case Study 

	
PERSONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT  CHAPTER TWENTY	
633
	
	
July 2: Presented to Bethany O’Meara and Jon Aaronson. 
They first asked about the price. I gave them a quote of 
$10 million. They suggested that other services were 
much cheaper. I explained that our price reflected the 
­latest technology and that the price differential was an 
­investment that could pay for itself several times over 
through faster communication speeds. I also emphasized 
our reputation for high-quality customer service. While 
the presentation appeared to meet their software needs, 
they did not seem impressed with the overall value. I also 
sent a copy of the ­presentation in report form to Brad 
­Alexander and attempted to get an ­appointment to see him.
July 9: Contacted Jon Aaronson by phone. He told me that 
we were in ­contention with three other firms and the 
­debate was heated. He stated that the other firms were 
also touting their state-of-the-art technology. Discussed a 
lower price of $7 million. Also ­encouraged him to visit 
Alta Data Solutions headquarters to meet with the product 
manager who oversaw the product development efforts 
and would manage the implementation of the product. He wasn’t interested in 
­making the two-day trip even though it would spotlight our core competencies.
July 15: Received a conference call from Brad ­Alexander and Jon Aaronson to 
­discuss the price. Brad said the price was still too high and that he could not 
­depreciate that amount over the life of the software and meet target ­levels of 
­efficiency. He wanted a final quote by August 6.
The Final Pitch  Vicki Nguyen prepared for her meeting with Mike Smith, Alta’s 
regional sales manager, by going over her notes and market data about the competi-
tors. Smith’s voicemail had said they’d be meeting to put together their best possible 
proposal.
Questions
Help Vicki Nguyen prepare her sales presentation.
1.	
Who should be at the presentation?
2.	
How should she start the meeting?
3.	
What are the key points she should make in her presentation?
4.	
What reservations should she expect? How should she handle them?
What are the key points Vicki 
Nguyen should make in her 
presentation?
© Lane Oatey/blue jean images/ 
Getty Images RF
	 1.	Alex Barinka, “IBM’s Watson to Help Rich DBS Clients with 
‘Jeopardy’ Smarts,” Bloomberg Technology, January 8, 2014, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/.
	 2.	Quentin Harvey, “IBM Plans Big Spending for the Cloud,” The 
New York Times, January 17, 2014.
	 3.	Barinka, “IBM’s Watson to Help Rich DBS Clients with 
‘Jeopardy’ Smarts.” 
	 4.	Debra Pesek, “How IBM Uses Watson Analytics for Pattern 
Selling,” Watson Analytics blog, November 17, 2015, https://­
community.watsonanalytics.com/watson-analytics-blog/
how-ibm-uses-watson-analytics-for-pattern-selling/.
	 5.	Ibid.
	 6.	Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://www.bls.gov.
	 7.	This section draws from Mark W. Johnston and Greg W. 
Marshall, Relationship Selling, 3rd ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/
McGraw-Hill, 2009); Mark W. Johnston and Greg W. Marshall, 
Relationship Selling and Sales Management, 2nd ed. (Burr 
Ridge, IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2007).
	 8.	Geoffrey James, “Selling Gets Complex,” Strategy+Business, 
August 27, 2009; Dale Carnegie, How to Win Friends and 
Influence People (New York: Pocket, 1990); Neil Rackham, SPIN 
Selling (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988).
Endnotes

634	
Section Seven  VALUE COMMUNICATION
	 9.	http://4dsales.com/the-cost-of-a-sales-call/.
	10.	Bill Stinnett, Think Like Your Customer (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-
Hill, 2004).
	 11.	Pam Baker, “Best Sales Practices: Build Lasting Relationships,” 
CRM Buyer, January 27, 2009.
	12.	Mark W. Johnston and Greg W. Marshall, Relationship Selling, 
2nd ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2008).
	13.	S. Anthony Iannarino, “The Last Word on Cold Calling versus 
Social Media,” The Sales Blog, April 21, 2014, http://www.­
thesalesblog.com; Justin Fishaw, “Has LinkedIn Replaced Cold 
Calling?” SocialMediaToday, August 21, 2013, http://www. 
socialmediatoday.com; Ken Krogue, “Cold Calling Is Dead, Thanks 
to LinkedIn,” Forbes, August 9, 2013, http://www.forbes.com.
	14.	Andrew Mach, “10 Cutting Edge Gadgets from the 2016 
Consumer Electronics Show,” PBS NewsHour, January 9, 
2016.
	15.	“CES 2016 Fact Sheet,” CESweb.org.
	16.	Christine Comaford, “Sales Stuck? Try Sticking to a Script,” 
BusinessWeek, April 4, 2008.
	 17.	Christine Comaford-Lynch, “A Bad Lead Is Worse Than No 
Lead at All,” BusinessWeek, March 26, 2008.
	18.	J. David Goodman, “Profiling Complaints by Black Shoppers 
Followed Changes to Stores’ Security Policies,” The New York 
Times, October 29, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com.
	19.	Kate Maddox, “New CMO at Vonage Will Make ‘Aggressive’ 
B-to-B Push,” Advertising Age, April 28, 2015, http://www. 
adage.com.
	20.	Barton A. Weitz, Harish Sujan, and Mita Sujan, “Knowledge, 
Motivation, and Adaptive Behavior: A Framework for Improving 
Selling Effectiveness,” Journal of Marketing, October 1986,  
pp. 174–91.
	21.	Dennis Nishi, “To Persuade People, Tell Them a Story,” The Wall 
Street Journal, November 9, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
	22.	Robert Keller, “Handling Objections in Today’s Tough 
Environment,” SMM, March 30, 2009.
	23.	http://www.quotedb.com/quotes/1303.
	24.	Mark W. Johnston and Greg W. Marshall, Churchill/Ford/
Walker’s Sales Force Management, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2009).
	25.	“Oh, What a Relief,” review, May 28, 2015, http://www. 
amazon.com/SukhaMat-practice-Cushions-Complements- 
full-size/dp/B00O055GRI?ie=UTF8&keywords= 
sukhamat&qid=1463250532&ref_=sr_1_1&sr=8-1. 
	26.	Benjamin Snyder, “14% of Zappos Staff Left After Being 
Offered Exit Pay,” Fortune, May 8, 2015.
	27.	Lynn Huber, “Can Men Sell Avon?” Online Beauty Biz, May 25, 
2014, http://www.onlinebeautybiz.com; Sadie Whitelocks, “I’m 
an Avon Laddie! Salesman, 21, Is Part of the New Breed of Men 
Muscling in on Door-to-Door Trade,” DailyMail, December 14, 
2011, http://www.dailymail.co.uk.
	28.	Susan Greco, “Personality Testing for Sales Recruits,” INC., 
March 1, 2009.
	29.	Ned Smith, “10 Traits of Successful Salespeople,” Business 
News Daily, March 20, 2013, http://www.businessnewsdaily.
com; Steven W. Martin, “Seven Personality Traits of Top 
Salespeople,” Harvard Business Review, June 27, 2011, http://
blogs.hbr.org; Julie Chang, “Born to Sell?” Sales and Marketing 
Management, July 2003, p. 36.
	30.	Felicia G. Lassk et al., “The Future of Sales Training: Challenges 
and Related Research Questions,” Journal of Personal Selling 
and Sales Management 32, no. 1 (2012), pp. 141–54.
	31.	http://blog.marykay.com/; https://www.shanisoffice.com/ 
uploads/5/0/9/8/5098161/march_applause_en.pdf.
	32.	Johnston and Marshall, Relationship Selling and Sales 
Management, 2nd ed. 
	33.	http://www.marykay.com/en-US/beabeautyconsultant/Pages/
money-rewards.aspx.
	34.	For a discussion of common measures used to evaluate 
­salespeople, see Mark W. Johnston and Greg W. Marshall, 
Churchill/Ford/Walker’s Sales Force Management, 9th ed. 
(Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2009).
	35.	David H. Holtzman, “Big Business Knows Us Too Well,” 
BusinessWeek, June 22, 2007.
	36.	Johnston and Marshall, Churchill/Ford/Walker’s Sales Force 
Management, 9th ed.
	37.	Nicolas McClaren, “The Personal Selling and Sales 
Management Ethics Research: Managerial Implications and 
Research Directions from a Comprehensive Review of the 
Empirical Literature,” Journal of Business Ethics 112, no. 1 
(January 2013), pp. 101–25; Sean R. Valentine and Connie R. 
Bateman, “The Impact of Ethical Ideologies, Moral Intensity, and 
Social Context on Sales-Based Ethical Reasoning,” Journal of 
Business Ethics 102, no. 1 (August 2011), pp. 155–68.
	38.	Casey Donoho and Timothy Heinze, “The Personal Selling 
Ethics Scale: Revisions and Expansions for Teaching Sales 
Ethics,” Journal of Marketing Education 33, no. 1 (April 2011), 
pp. 107–22.
	39.	This case was written by Jeanne Munger in conjunction with 
the textbook authors Dhruv Grewal and Michael Levy as the 
basis of class discussion rather than to illustrate either effec-
tive or ineffective marketing practice. For a discussion of 
­common measures used to evaluate salespeople, see Johnston 
and Marshall, Churchill/Ford/Walker’s Sales Force 
Management, 9th ed.
	 i.	Oscar Macia, “How Mobile Is Driving the Future of Field Sales,” 
Sales and Marketing, March 11, 2016, https://salesandmarketing. 
com/content/how-mobile-driving-future-field-sales.
	 ii.	Steve Berkowitz, “Marketers Reshape How College Teams Sell 
Tickets,” USA Today, August 5, 2011, http://www.usatoday.com; 
“Accelerating the Trend toward Outsourcing Athletic Event 
Ticket Sales, Two More Universities Partner with IMG College,” 
press release, May 31, 2011, http://www.imgworld.com; IMG 
College, http://www.imgcollege.com.
	 iii.	“Salesforce Announces Fiscal 2015 Fourth Quarter and Full 
Year Results,” Salesforce.com, February 25, 2016, http:// 
investor.salesforce.com/about-us/investor/investor-news/ 
investor-news-details/2015/Salesforce-Announces-Fiscal-2015- 
Fourth-Quarter-and-Full-Year-Results/default.aspx; Trefis Team, 
“Here Is the Reason Behind Salesforce.com’s Unabated 
Growth,” Forbes, November 25, 2015; “Salesforce.com Named 
#1 CRM Software Provider in Gartner’s Worldwide CRM 
Market Share Report for Second Consecutive Year,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 29, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Victoria 
Barret, “Why Salesforce.com Ranks #1 on Forbes’ Most 
Innovative List,” Forbes, September 5, 2012, http://www.forbes.
com; Mi Ji et al., “Salesforce.com: Creating a Blue Ocean in the 
B2B Space,” INSEAD Case# INS255, 2013.
	 iv.	Joe Cochrane, “Tupperware’s Sweet Spot Shifts to Indonesia,” 
The New York Times, February 28, 2015, http://www.nytimes.
com.
	 v.	Candace Jackson, “A Real Estate Star Is Born,” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 1, 2013.

actual product  The physical attributes of a product including 
the brand name, features/design, quality level, and packaging.
ad-supported app  Apps that are free to download, but  
place ads on the screen when using the program to generate 
revenue.
administered vertical marketing system  A supply chain sys-
tem in which there is no common ownership and no contractual 
relationships, but the dominant channel member controls the 
channel relationship.
advanced shipping notice (ASN)  An electronic document that 
the supplier sends the retailer in advance of a shipment to tell 
the retailer exactly what to expect in the shipment.
advertising  A paid form of communication from an identifiable 
source, delivered through a communication channel, and  
designed to persuade the receiver to take some action now or in 
the future.
advertising allowance  Tactic of offering a price reduction to 
channel members if they agree to feature the manufacturer’s 
product in their advertising and promotional efforts.
advertising plan  A section of the firm’s overall marketing plan 
that explicitly outlines the objectives of the advertising campaign, 
how the campaign might accomplish those objectives, and how 
the firm can determine whether the campaign was successful.
advertising schedule  The specification of the timing and dura-
tion of advertising.
affective component  A component of attitude that reflects 
what a person feels about the issue at hand—his or her like or 
dislike of something.
AIDA model  A common model of the series of mental stages 
through which consumers move as a result of marketing com-
munications: Awareness leads to Interests, which lead to Desire, 
which leads to Action.
aided recall  An awareness metric that occurs when consum-
ers recognize a name (e.g., of a brand) that has been presented 
to them.
alpha testing  An attempt by the firm to determine whether a 
product will perform according to its design and whether it sat-
isfies the need for which it was intended; occurs in the firm’s 
research and development (R&D) department.
associated services  (also called augmented product) The non-
physical attributes of the product including product warranties, 
financing, product support, and after-sale service. Also called 
augmented product.
attitude  A person’s enduring evaluation of his or her feelings 
about and behavioral tendencies toward an object or idea; con-
sists of three components: cognitive, affective, and behavioral.
augmented product  See associated services.
autocratic buying center  A buying center in which one person 
makes the decision alone, though there may be multiple participants.
Baby Boomers  Generational cohort of people born after World 
War II, between 1946 and 1964.
bait and switch  A deceptive practice of luring customers into 
the store with a very low advertised price on an item (the bait), 
only to aggressively pressure them into purchasing a higher- 
priced model (the switch) by disparaging the lower-priced item, 
comparing it unfavorably with the higher-priced model, or pro-
fessing an inadequate supply of the lower-priced item.
behavioral component  A component of attitude that comprises 
the actions a person takes with regard to the issue at hand.
behavioral segmentation  A segmentation method that divides 
customers into groups based on how they use the product or 
service. Some common behavioral measures include occasion 
and loyalty.
benefit segmentation  The grouping of consumers on the basis 
of the benefits they derive from products or services.
beta testing  Having potential consumers examine a product pro-
totype in a real-use setting to determine its functionality, perfor-
mance, potential problems, and other issues specific to its use.
big box retailer  Discount stores that offer a narrow but deep 
assortment of merchandise; see also category killer.
big data  Data sets that are too large and complex to analyze 
with conventional data management and data mining software.
blog (weblog)  An online diary with periodic posts; corporate 
blogs are a new form of marketing communications.
body copy  The main text portion of an ad.
bonus  A payment made at management’s discretion when the 
salesperson attains certain goals; usually given only periodically, 
such as at the end of the year.
bottom of the pyramid  A term used for economic settings in 
which consumers earn very low wages.
bounce rate  The percentage of times a visitor leaves the web-
site almost immediately, such as after viewing only one page.
boycott  A group’s refusal to deal commercially with some orga-
nization to protest against its policies.
brainstorming  A group activity used to generate ideas.
brand association  The mental links that consumers make be-
tween a brand and its key product attributes; can involve a logo, 
slogan, or famous personality.
brand awareness  Measures how many consumers in a market 
are familiar with the brand and what it stands for; created 
through repeated exposures of the various brand elements 
(brand name, logo, symbol, character, packaging, or slogan) in 
the firm’s communications to consumers.
brand dilution  Occurs when a brand extension adversely af-
fects consumer perceptions about the attributes the core brand 
is believed to hold.
brand elements  Characteristics that identify the sponsor of a 
specific ad.
brand equity  The set of assets and liabilities linked to a brand 
that add to or subtract from the value provided by the product 
or service.
brand extension  The use of the same brand name for new 
products being introduced to the same or new markets.
brand licensing  A contractual arrangement between firms, 
whereby one firm allows another to use its brand name, logo, 
symbols, or characters in exchange for a negotiated fee.
glossary
	
	
635

636	
glossary
co-branding  The practice of marketing two or more brands 
together, on the same package or promotion.
coercive power  A type of marketing channel power that oc-
curs when a member uses threats or punishment of the other 
channel member for not undertaking certain tasks. Delaying 
payment for late delivery would be an example.
cognitive component  A component of attitude that reflects 
what a person believes to be true.
cold calls  A method of prospecting in which salespeople tele-
phone or go to see potential customers without appointments.
commission  Compensation or financial incentive for salespeople 
based on a fixed percentage of their sales.
communication channel  The medium—print, broadcast, the 
Internet—that carries the message.
communication gap  A type of service gap; refers to the differ-
ence between the actual service provided to customers and the 
service that the firm’s promotion program promises.
company sales force  The people who are employees of the 
selling company and are engaged in the selling process.
compensatory decision rule  At work when the consumer is eval-
uating alternatives and trades off one characteristic against an-
other such that good characteristics compensate for bad ones.
competition-based pricing method  An approach that at-
tempts to reflect how the firm wants consumers to interpret its 
products relative to the competitors’ offerings; for example, set-
ting a price close to a competitor’s price signals to consumers 
that the product is similar, whereas setting the price much 
higher signals greater features, better quality, or some other 
valued benefit.
competitive parity  A firm’s strategy of setting prices that are 
similar to those of major competitors.
competitor orientation  A company objective based on the 
premise that the firm should measure itself primarily against its 
competition.
complementary products  Products whose demand curves are 
positively related, such that they rise or fall together; a percent-
age increase in demand for one results in a percentage in-
crease in demand for the other.
concentrated targeting strategy  A marketing strategy of se-
lecting a single, primary target market and focusing all energies 
on providing a product to fit that market’s needs.
concept  Brief written description of a product or service; its 
technology, working principles, and forms; and what customer 
needs it would satisfy.
concept testing  The process in which a concept statement 
that describes a product or a service is presented to potential 
buyers or users to obtain their reactions.
connected effect  With regard to the Wheel of Social Media 
Engagement, the connected effect is an outcome of social me-
dia that satisfies humans’ innate need to connect with other 
people.
conscious marketing  An approach to marketing that acknowl-
edges four key principles: a higher purpose, stakeholders, con-
scious leadership, and a conscious culture
consensus buying center  A buying center in which all mem-
bers of the team must reach a collective agreement that they 
can support a particular purchase.
consultative buying center  A buying center in which one per-
son makes the decision but he or she solicits input from others 
before doing so.
brand loyalty  Occurs when a consumer buys the same brand’s 
product or service repeatedly over time rather than buying from 
multiple suppliers within the same category.
brand repositioning (rebranding)  A strategy in which market-
ers change a brand’s focus to target new markets or realign the 
brand’s core emphasis with changing market preferences.
breadth  Number of product lines offered by a firm; also known 
as variety.
break-even analysis  Technique used to examine the relation-
ships among cost, price, revenue, and profit over different levels 
of production and sales to determine the break-even point.
break-even point  The point at which the number of units sold 
generates just enough revenue to equal the total costs; at this 
point, profits are zero.
breakthroughs  See pioneers.
business ethics  Refers to a branch of ethical study that exam-
ines ethical rules and principles within a commercial context, 
the various moral or ethical problems that might arise in a busi-
ness setting, and any special duties or obligations that apply to 
persons engaged in commerce.
business-to-business (B2B) marketing  The process of buying 
and selling goods or services to be used in the production of 
other goods and services, for consumption by the buying orga-
nization, or for resale by wholesalers and retailers.
business-to-consumer (B2C) marketing  The process in which 
businesses sell to consumers.
buyer  The buying center participant who handles the paper-
work of the actual purchase.
buying center  The group of people typically responsible for the 
buying decisions in large organizations.
cannibalize  From a marketing perspective, it is the negative im-
pact on a firm’s sales, profits, or market share when one prod-
uct competes closely with a similar product offered by the same 
company.
cash discount  Tactic of offering a reduction in the invoice cost if 
the buyer pays the invoice prior to the end of the discount period.
category killer  A specialist that offers an extensive assortment 
in a particular category so overwhelming the category that 
other retailers have difficulty competing.
category specialist  A retailer that offers a narrow variety but a 
deep assortment of merchandise.
cause-related marketing  Commercial activity in which busi-
nesses and charities form a partnership to market an image, a 
product, or a service for their mutual benefit; a type of promo-
tional campaign.
checking  The process of going through the goods upon receipt 
to ensure they arrived undamaged and that the merchandise 
ordered was the merchandise received.
churn  The number of consumers who stop using a product or 
service, divided by the average number of consumers of that 
product or service.
click path  Shows how users proceed through the information 
on a website—not unlike how grocery stores try to track the 
way shoppers move through their aisles.
click-through rate (CTR)  The number of times a user clicks on 
an online ad divided by the number of impressions.
closing the sale  Obtaining a commitment from the customer to 
make a purchase.

	
glossary	
637
and food preferences, and subtler aspects, which are trickier to 
identify.
coupon  Provides a stated discount to consumers on the final 
selling price of a specific item; the retailer handles the discount.
cross-docking distribution center  A distribution center to 
which vendors ship merchandise prepackaged and ready for 
sale. The merchandise goes to a staging area rather than into 
storage. When all the merchandise going to a particular store 
has arrived in the staging area, it is loaded onto a truck, and 
away it goes. Thus, merchandise goes from the receiving dock 
to the shipping dock—cross dock.
cross-price elasticity  The percentage change in demand for 
product A that occurs in response to a percentage change in 
price of product B; see also complementary products.
cross-promoting  Efforts of two or more firms joining together 
to reach a specific target market.
culture  The shared meanings, beliefs, morals, values, and cus-
toms of a group of people. It is transmitted by words, literature, 
and institutions and is passed down from generation to genera-
tion and learned over time.
cumulative quantity discount  Pricing tactic that offers a dis-
count based on the amount purchased over a specified period 
and usually involves several transactions; encourages resellers 
to maintain their current supplier because the cost to switch 
must include the loss of the discount.
customer excellence  Involves a focus on retaining loyal cus-
tomers and excellent customer service.
customer lifetime value  The expected financial contribution 
from a particular customer to the firm’s profits over the course 
of their entire relationship.
customer orientation  A company objective based on the prem-
ise that the firm should measure itself primarily according to 
whether it meets its customers’ needs.
customer relationship management (CRM)  A business philos-
ophy and set of strategies, programs, and systems that focus on 
identifying and building loyalty among the firm’s most valued 
customers.
customer service  Specifically refers to human or mechanical 
activities firms undertake to help satisfy their customers’ needs 
and wants.
data  Raw numbers or facts.
data mining  The use of a variety of statistical analysis tools to 
uncover previously unknown patterns in the data stored in data-
bases or relationships among variables.
data warehouses  Large computer files that store millions and 
even billions of pieces of individual data.
deal  A type of short-term price reduction that can take several 
forms, such as a “featured price,” a price lower than the regular 
price; a “buy one, get one free” offer; or a certain percentage 
“more free” offer contained in larger packaging; can involve a 
special financing arrangement, such as reduced percentage in-
terest rates or extended repayment terms.
decider  The buying center participant who ultimately deter-
mines any part of or the entire buying decision—whether to buy, 
what to buy, how to buy, or where to buy.
decline stage  Stage of the product life cycle when sales de-
cline and the product eventually exits the market.
decoding  The process by which the receiver interprets the 
sender’s message.
consumer decision rules  The set of criteria that consumers 
use consciously or subconsciously to quickly and efficiently se-
lect from among several alternatives.
consumer product  Products and services used by people for 
their personal use.
consumer-to-consumer (C2C) marketing  The process in which 
consumers sell to other consumers.
contest  A brand-sponsored competition that requires some 
form of skill or effort.
continuous advertising schedule  An advertising schedule that 
runs steadily throughout the year and therefore is suited to 
products and services that are consumed continually at rela-
tively steady rates and that require a steady level of persuasive 
or reminder advertising.
contractual vertical marketing system  A system in which inde-
pendent firms at different levels of the supply chain join to-
gether through contracts to obtain economies of scale and 
coordination and to reduce conflict.
contribution per unit  The price less the variable cost per unit. 
Variable used to determine the break-even point in units.
control phase  The part of the strategic marketing planning pro-
cess when managers evaluate the performance of the market-
ing strategy and take any necessary corrective actions.
convenience products/services  Those for which the consumer 
is not willing to spend any effort to evaluate prior to purchase.
convenience store  Type of retailer that provides a limited num-
ber of items at a convenient location in a small store with 
speedy checkout.
conventional supermarket  Type of retailer that offers grocer-
ies, meat, and produce with limited sales of nonfood items, such 
as health and beauty aids and general merchandise, in a 
self-service format.
conversion rate  Percentage of consumers who buy a product 
after viewing it.
cooperative (co-op) advertising  An agreement between a 
manufacturer and retailer in which the manufacturer agrees to 
defray some advertising costs.
core customer value  The basic problem-solving benefits that 
consumers are seeking.
corporate blog  A website created by a company and often 
used to educate customers.
corporate social responsibility (CSR)  Refers to the voluntary 
actions taken by a company to address the ethical, social, and 
environmental impacts of its business operations and the con-
cerns of its stakeholders.
corporate vertical marketing system  A system in which the 
parent company has complete control and can dictate the prior-
ities and objectives of the supply chain; it may own facilities 
such as manufacturing plants, warehouse facilities, retail outlets, 
and design studios.
cost-based pricing method  An approach that determines the final 
price to charge by starting with the cost, without recognizing the 
role that consumers or competitors’ prices play in the marketplace.
cost-of-ownership method  A value-based method for setting 
prices that determines the total cost of owning the product over 
its useful life.
country culture  Similar to culture in general, but at a country 
level. Entails easy-to-spot visible nuances that are particular to a 
country, such as dress, symbols, ceremonies, language, colors, 

638	
glossary
drugstore  A specialty store that concentrates on health and 
personal grooming merchandise, though pharmaceuticals may 
represent almost 70 percent of its sales.
duty  See tariff.
dynamic effect  With regard to the Wheel of Social Media 
Engagement, the dynamic effect describes the way in which 
information is exchanged to network participants through back-
and-forth communications in an active and effective manner. It 
also expands the impact of the network effect by examining 
how people flow in and out of networked communities as their 
interests change (see network effect.)
dynamic pricing  Refers to the process of charging different 
prices for goods or services based on the type of customer, 
time of the day, week, or even season, and level of demand. Also 
called individualized pricing.
early adopters  The second group of consumers in the diffu-
sion of innovation model, after innovators, to use a product or 
service innovation represent about 13.5 percent of the popula-
tion. They generally don’t like to take as much risk as innova-
tors but instead wait and purchase the product after careful 
review.
early majority  A group of consumers in the diffusion of innova-
tion model that represents approximately 34 percent of the 
population; members don’t like to take much risk and therefore 
tend to wait until bugs are worked out of a particular product or 
service; few new products and services can be profitable until 
this large group buys them.
economic situation  Macroeconomic factor that affects the 
way consumers buy merchandise and spend money, both in a 
marketer’s home country and abroad; see also inflation, foreign 
currency fluctuations, and interest rates.
elastic  Refers to a market for a product or service that is price 
sensitive; that is, relatively small changes in price will generate 
fairly large changes in the quantity demanded.
electronic data interchange (EDI)  The computer-to-computer 
exchange of business documents from a retailer to a vendor 
and back.
emotional appeal  An appeal that aims to satisfy consumers’ 
emotional desires rather than their utilitarian needs.
emotional support  Concern for others’ well-being and support 
of their decisions in a job setting.
empowerment  In context of service delivery, means allowing 
employees to make decisions about how service is provided to 
customers.
encoding  The process of converting the sender’s ideas into a 
message, which could be verbal, visual, or both.
entrepreneur  A person who organizes, operates, and assumes 
the risk of a new business venture.
esteem needs  Part of Maslow's hierarchy, these are needs that 
enable people to fulfill inner desires.
evaluative criteria  Consist of a set of salient, or important, at-
tributes about a particular product.
event sponsorship  Popular PR tool that occurs when corpora-
tions support various activities (financially or otherwise), usually 
in the cultural or sports and entertainment sectors.
everyday low pricing (EDLP)  A strategy companies use to em-
phasize the continuity of their retail prices at a level somewhere 
between the regular, nonsale price and the deep-discount sale 
prices their competitors may offer.
delivery gap  A type of service gap; the difference between the 
firm’s service standards and the actual service it provides to 
customers.
demand curve  Shows how many units of a product or service 
consumers will demand during a specific period at different prices.
democratic buying center  A buying center in which the majority 
rules in making decisions.
demographic segmentation  The grouping of consumers ac-
cording to easily measured, objective characteristics such as 
age, gender, income, and education.
demographics  Information about the characteristics of human 
populations and segments, especially those used to identify con-
sumer markets such as by age, gender, income, and education.
department store  A retailer that carries many different types of 
merchandise (broad variety) and lots of items within each type 
(deep assortment); offers some customer services; and is orga-
nized into separate departments to display its merchandise.
depth  The number of categories within a product line.
derived demand  The linkage between consumers’ demand for 
a company’s output and its purchase of necessary inputs to 
manufacture or assemble that particular output.
determinant attributes  Product or service features that are 
important to the buyer and on which competing brands or 
stores are perceived to differ.
differentiated targeting strategy  A strategy through which a 
firm targets several market segments with a different offering 
for each.
diffusion of innovation  The process by which the use of an 
innovation, whether a product or a service, spreads through-
out a market group over time and over various categories of 
adopters.
Digital Natives  See Generation Z.
direct investment  When a firm maintains 100 percent own-
ership of its plants, operation facilities, and offices in a for-
eign country, often through the formation of wholly owned 
subsidiaries.
direct marketing  Sales and promotional techniques that com-
municate directly with target customers to generate a response 
or transaction
direct marketing channel  A marketing channel in which there 
are no intermediaries; the manufacturer sells directly to the 
buyer.
dispatcher  The person who coordinates deliveries to distribu-
tion centers.
distribution center  A facility for the receipt, storage, and redis-
tribution of goods to company stores or customers; may be op-
erated by retailers, manufacturers, or distribution specialists.
distribution intensity  The number of supply chain members to 
use at each level of the supply chain.
distributive fairness  Pertains to a customer’s perception of 
the benefits he or she received compared with the costs (incon-
venience or loss) that resulted from a service failure.
distributor  A type of reseller or marketing intermediary that 
resells manufactured products without significantly altering 
their form. Distributors often buy from manufacturers and sell 
to other businesses like retailers in a B2B transaction.
diversification strategy  A growth strategy whereby a firm in-
troduces a new product or service to a market segment that it 
does not currently serve.

	
glossary	
639
focus group interview  A research technique in which a small 
group of persons (usually 8 to 12) comes together for an intensive 
discussion about a particular topic, with the conversation guided 
by a trained moderator using an unstructured method of inquiry.
foreign currency fluctuations  Changes in the value of a coun-
try’s currency relative to the currency of another country; can 
influence consumer spending.
franchisee  See franchising.
franchising  A contractual agreement between a franchisor 
and a franchisee that allows the franchisee to operate a busi-
ness using a name and format developed and supported by the 
franchisor.
franchisor  See franchising.
freemium app  Apps that are free to download, but include in-
app purchases (see also in-app purchase).
frequency  Measure of how often the audience is exposed to a 
communication within a specified period of time.
fulfillment center  Warehouse facilities used to ship merchan-
dise directly to customers.
full-line discount stores  Retailers that offer low prices, limited 
service, and a broad variety of merchandise.
functional needs  Pertain to the performance of a product or 
service.
gatekeeper  The buying center participant who controls infor-
mation or access to decision makers and influencers.
Generation X (Gen X)  Generational cohort of people born  
between 1965 and 1976.
Generation Y (Gen Y)  Generational cohort of people born  
between 1977 and 2000; biggest cohort since the original post-
war baby boom. Also called Millennials.
Generation Z (Gen Z)  Generational cohort of people born  
between 2001 and 2014. Also known as Digital Natives be-
cause people in this group were born into a world that already 
was full of electronic gadgets and digital technologies, such as 
the Internet and social networks.
generational cohort  A group of people of the same generation—
typically have similar purchase behaviors because they have 
shared experiences and are in the same stage of life.
geodemographic segmentation  The grouping of consumers on 
the basis of a combination of geographic, demographic, and life-
style characteristics.
geographic segmentation  The grouping of consumers on the 
basis of where they live.
globalization  The processes by which goods, services, capital, 
people, information, and ideas flow across national borders.
glocalization  The process of firms standardizing their products 
globally, but using different promotional campaigns to sell them.
goods  Items that can be physically touched.
gray market  Employs irregular but not necessarily illegal 
methods; generally, it legally circumvents authorized channels 
of distribution to sell goods at prices lower than those intended 
by the manufacturer.
green marketing  A strategic effort by firms to supply custom-
ers with environmentally friendly merchandise.
greenwashing  Exploiting consumers by disingenuously market-
ing products or services as environmentally friendly, with the 
goal of gaining public approval and sales.
evoked set  Comprises the alternative brands or stores that the 
consumer states he or she would consider when making a pur-
chase decision.
exchange  The trade of things of value between the buyer and 
the seller so that each is better off as a result.
exchange control  The regulation of a country’s currency ex-
change rate.
exchange rate  The measure of how much one currency is 
worth in relation to another.
exclusive distribution  Strategy in which only selected retailers 
can sell a manufacturer’s brand.
experience curve effect  The drop in unit cost as the accumu-
lated volume sold increases; as sales continue to grow, the costs 
continue to drop, allowing even further reductions in the price.
experiment  See experimental research.
experimental research (experiment)  A type of conclusive and 
quantitative research that systematically manipulates one or 
more variables to determine which variables have a causal ef-
fect on another variable.
expertise power  A type of marketing channel power that oc-
curs when a channel member uses its expertise as leverage to 
influence the actions of another channel member.
exporting  Producing goods in one country and selling them in 
another.
extended problem solving  A purchase decision process during 
which the consumer devotes considerable time and effort to 
analyzing alternatives; often occurs when the consumer per-
ceives that the purchase decision entails a lot of risk.
external locus of control  Refers to when consumers believe 
that fate or other external factors control all outcomes.
external search for information  Occurs when the buyer seeks 
information outside his or her personal knowledge base to help 
make the buying decision.
extreme-value food retailer  See limited-assortment supermarkets.
extreme-value retailer  A general merchandise discount store 
found in lower-income urban or rural areas.
facial recognition software  Software that can automatically 
identify or verify individuals from video or digital images.  
family brand  A firm’s own corporate name used to brand its 
product lines and products.
feedback loop  Allows the receiver to communicate with the 
sender and thereby informs the sender whether the message 
was received and decoded properly.
financial risk  Risk associated with a monetary outlay; includes 
the initial cost of the purchase as well as the costs of using the 
item or service.
first movers  Product pioneers that are the first to create a 
market or product category, making them readily recognizable 
to consumers and thus establishing a commanding and early 
market share lead.
fixed costs  Those costs that remain essentially at the same 
level, regardless of any changes in the volume of production.
flighting (advertising schedule)  An advertising schedule imple-
mented in spurts, with periods of heavy advertising followed by 
periods of no advertising.
floor-ready merchandise  Merchandise that is ready to be 
placed on the selling floor immediately.

640	
glossary
inbound marketing  Marketing activities that draw the attention 
of customers through blogs, Twitter, LinkedIn, and other online 
sources, rather than using more traditional activities that  
require having to go out to get customers’ attention, such as 
making a sales call.
income effect  The change in the quantity of a product de-
manded by consumers due to a change in their income.
independent agents  Salespeople who sell a manufacturer’s 
products on an extended contract basis but are not employees 
of the manufacturer; also known as manufacturer’s representa-
tives or reps.
independent (conventional) marketing channel  A marketing 
channel in which several independent members—a manufac-
turer, a wholesaler, and a retailer—each attempts to satisfy its 
own objectives and maximize its profits, often at the expense of 
the other members.
indirect marketing channel  When one or more intermediaries 
work with manufacturers to provide goods and services to  
customers.
individual brands  The use of individual brand names for each 
of a firm’s products.
individualized pricing  See dynamic pricing.
inelastic  Refers to a market for a product or service that is 
price insensitive; that is, relatively small changes in price will not 
generate large changes in the quantity demanded.
inflation  Refers to the persistent increase in the prices of 
goods and services.
influencer  The buying center participant whose views influ-
ence other members of the buying center in making the final 
decision.
information  Organized, analyzed, interpreted data that offer 
value to marketers.
information effect  With regard to the Wheel of Social Media 
Engagement, the information effect is the outcome of social  
media in which relevant information is spread by firms or indi-
viduals to other members of its social network.
information power  A type of marketing channel power 
within an administered vertical marketing system in which 
one party (e.g., the manufacturer) provides or withholds  
important information to influence the actions of another 
party (e.g., the retailer).
informational appeal  Used in a promotion to help consumers 
make purchase decisions by offering factual information and 
strong arguments built around relevant issues that encourage 
them to evaluate the brand favorably on the basis of the key 
benefits it provides.
informative advertising  Communication used to create and 
build brand awareness, with the ultimate goal of moving the 
consumer through the buying cycle to a purchase.
infrastructure  The basic facilities, services, and installations 
needed for a community or society to function, such as trans-
portation and communications systems, water and power lines, 
and public institutions like schools, post offices, and prisons.
initiator  The buying center participant who first suggests buy-
ing the particular product or service.
innovation  The process by which ideas are transformed into 
new products and services that will help firms grow.
innovators  Those buyers, representing approximately 2.5 per-
cent of the population, who want to be the first to have the new 
product or service.
gross domestic product (GDP)  Defined as the market value of 
the goods and services produced by a country in a year; the 
most widely used standardized measure of output.
gross national income (GNI)  Consists of GDP plus the net 
income earned from investments abroad (minus any pay-
ments made to nonresidents who contribute to the domestic 
economy).
gross rating points (GRP)  Measure used for various media  
advertising—print, radio, or television; GRP = Reach × Frequency.
growth stage  Stage of the product life cycle when the product 
gains acceptance, demand and sales increase, and competitors 
emerge in the product category.
habitual decision making  A purchase decision process in 
which consumers engage with little conscious effort.
headline  In an advertisement, large type designed to draw  
attention.
heterogeneity  As it refers to the differences between the mar-
keting of products and services, the delivery of services is more 
variable.
high/low pricing  A pricing strategy that relies on the promo-
tion of sales, during which prices are temporarily reduced to 
encourage purchases.
hit  A request for a file made by web browsers and search en-
gines. Hits are commonly misinterpreted as a metric for website 
success; however, the number of hits typically is much larger 
than the number of people visiting a website.
horizontal channel conflict  A type of channel conflict in 
which members at the same level of a marketing channel, for 
example, two competing retailers or two competing manufac-
turers, are in disagreement or discord, such as when they are 
in a price war.
horizontal price fixing  Occurs when competitors that produce 
and sell competing products collude, or work together, to con-
trol prices, effectively taking price out of the decision process 
for consumers.
ideal point  The position at which a particular market segment’s 
ideal product would lie on a perceptual map.
ideas  Intellectual concepts—thoughts, opinions, and philosophies.
implementation phase  The part of the strategic marketing plan-
ning process when marketing managers (1) identify and evaluate 
different opportunities by engaging in segmentation, targeting, 
and positioning (see also segmentation, targeting, and positioning) 
and (2) implement the marketing mix using the four Ps.
impressions  The number of times an advertisement appears in 
front of the user.
improvement value  Represents an estimate of how much more 
(or less) consumers are willing to pay for a product relative to 
other comparable products.
impulse buying  A buying decision made by customers on the 
spot when they see the merchandise.
in-app purchase   A purchase made on a freemium app that 
enables the user to enhance the app or game.
in-depth interview  An exploratory research technique in which 
trained researchers ask questions, listen to and record the 
­answers, and then pose additional questions to clarify or  
expand on a particular issue.

	
glossary	
641
lead time  The amount of time between the recognition that an 
order needs to be placed and the arrival of the needed mer-
chandise at the seller’s store, ready for sale.
lead users  Innovative product users who modify existing prod-
ucts according to their own ideas to suit their specific needs.
leader pricing  Consumer pricing tactic that attempts to build 
store traffic by aggressively pricing and advertising a regularly 
purchased item, often priced at or just above the store’s cost.
leads  A list of potential customers.
learning  A person’s thought process or behavior that arises 
from experience and takes place throughout the consumer  
decision process.
lease  A written agreement under which the owner of an item 
or property allows its use for a specified period of time in  
exchange for a fee.
legitimate power  A type of marketing channel power that oc-
curs if the channel member exerting the power has a contrac-
tual agreement with the other channel member that requires 
the other channel member to behave in a certain way. This type 
of power occurs in an administered vertical marketing system.
licensing  A method used in developing new products in which a 
firm buys the rights to use a technology or idea from another firm.
lifestyles  The way a person lives his or her life to achieve 
goals.
lift  Additional sales caused by advertising.
limited problem solving  Occurs during a purchase decision 
that calls for, at most, a moderate amount of effort and time.
limited-assortment supermarkets  Retailers that offer only one 
or two brands or sizes of most products (usually including a 
store brand) and attempt to achieve great efficiency to lower 
costs and prices. See also extreme-value food retailer.
line extension  The use of the same brand name within the same 
product line and represents an increase in a product line’s depth.
locational excellence  A method of achieving excellence by 
having a strong physical location and/or Internet presence.
loss-leader pricing  Loss leader pricing takes the tactic of 
leader pricing one step further by lowering the price below the 
store’s cost.
love needs  Part of Maslow's hierarchy, needs are expressed 
through interactions with others.
loyalty program  Specifically designed to retain customers by 
offering premiums or other incentives to customers who make 
multiple purchases over time.
loyalty segmentation  Strategy of investing in loyalty initiatives 
to retain the firm’s most profitable customers.
macroenvironmental factors  Aspects of the external environ-
ment that affect a company’s business, such as the culture, de-
mographics, social trends, technological advances, economic 
situation, and political/regulatory environment (CDSTEP).
manufacturer brands (national brands)  Brands owned and 
managed by the manufacturer.
manufacturer’s representatives (reps)  See independent 
agents.
manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP)  The price that 
manufacturers suggest retailers use to sell their merchandise.
markdowns  Reductions retailers take on the initial selling price 
of the product or service.
inseparable  A characteristic of a service: it is produced and 
consumed at the same time; that is, service and consumption 
are inseparable.
institutional advertisement  A type of advertising that pro-
motes a company, corporation, business, institution, or organiza-
tion. Unlike product-focused advertisements, it is not intended to 
sell a particular product or service
instrumental support  Providing the equipment or systems 
needed to perform a task in a job setting.
intangible  A characteristic of a service; it cannot be touched, 
tasted, or seen like a pure product can.
integrated marketing communications (IMC)  Represents the 
promotion dimension of the four Ps; encompasses a variety of 
communication disciplines—general advertising, personal selling, 
sales promotion, public relations, direct marketing, and elec-
tronic media—in combination to provide clarity, consistency, and 
maximum communicative impact.
intensive distribution  A strategy designed to get products into 
as many outlets as possible.
interest rates  The cost of borrowing money; the cost to the 
customer or the fee the bank charges those customers for bor-
rowing the money.
internal locus of control  Refers to when consumers believe 
they have some control over the outcomes of their actions, in 
which case they generally engage in more search activities.
internal search for information  Occurs when the buyer exam-
ines his or her own memory and knowledge about the product 
or service, gathered through past experiences.
introduction stage  Stage of the product life cycle when innova-
tors start buying the product.
involvement  Consumer’s interest in a product or service.
joint venture  Formed when a firm entering a new market pools 
its resources with those of a local firm to form a new company 
in which ownership, control, and profits are shared.
just-in-time (JIT) inventory system  Inventory management 
system designed to deliver less merchandise on a more fre-
quent basis than traditional inventory systems; the firm gets the 
merchandise “just in time” for it to be used in the manufacture 
of another product, in the case of parts or components, or for 
sale when the customer wants it, in the case of consumer 
goods; also known as quick response (QR) inventory system in 
retailing.
keyword analysis  An evaluation of what keywords people use 
to search on the Internet for their products and services.
knowledge gap  A type of service gap; reflects the difference 
between customers’ expectations and the firm’s perception of 
those expectations.
laggards  Consumers, representing approximately 16 percent of 
the population, who like to avoid change and rely on traditional 
products until they are no longer available. Sometimes laggards 
never adopt a product or service.
lagged effect  A delayed response to a marketing communica-
tion campaign.
late majority  The last group of buyers to enter a new product 
market, representing approximately 34% of the population; 
when they do, the product has achieved its full market potential.

642	
glossary
media buy  The actual purchase of airtime or print pages.
media mix  The combination of the media used and the fre-
quency of advertising in each medium.
media planning  The process of evaluating and selecting the 
media mix that will deliver a clear, consistent, compelling mes-
sage to the intended audience.
metric  A measuring system that quantifies a trend, dynamic, or 
characteristic.
microblog  Differs from a traditional blog in size. Consists of 
short sentences, short videos, or individual images. Twitter is an 
example of a microblog.
micromarketing  An extreme form of segmentation that tailors 
a product or service to suit an individual customer’s wants or 
needs; also called one-to-one marketing.
Millennials  See Generation Y.
mission statement  A broad description of a firm’s objectives 
and the scope of activities it plans to undertake; attempts to 
answer two main questions: What type of business is it? What 
does it need to do to accomplish its goals and objectives?
mobile commerce (M-commerce)  Communicating with or sell-
ing to consumers through wireless handheld devices such as 
cellular phones.
mobile marketing  Marketing through wireless handheld devices.
mobile task management  Mobile task management technology 
is a wireless network and a mobile device that receives  
demand notification and enables a speedy response.
modified rebuy  In a B2B setting, refers to when the buyer has 
purchased a similar product in the past but has decided to 
change some specifications, such as the desired price, quality 
level, customer service level, options, and so forth.
monopolistic competition  Competition that occurs when there 
are many firms that sell closely related but not homogeneous 
products; these products may be viewed as substitutes but are 
not perfect substitutes.
monopoly  One firm provides the product or service in a partic-
ular industry.
motive  A need or want that is strong enough to cause the per-
son to seek satisfaction.
multi-attribute model  A compensatory model of customer deci-
sion making based on the notion that customers see a product 
as a collection of attributes or characteristics. The model uses 
a weighted average score based on the importance of various 
attributes and performance on those issues.
need recognition  The beginning of the consumer decision pro-
cess; occurs when consumers recognize they have an unsatis-
fied need and want to go from their actual, needy state to a 
different, desired state.
negative word of mouth  Occurs when consumers spread neg-
ative information about a product, service, or store to others.
network effect  With regard to the Wheel of Social Media 
Engagement, the network effect is the outcome of social media 
engagement in which every time a firm or person posts informa-
tion, it is transferred to the poster’s vast connections across 
social media, causing the information to spread instantaneously.
neuromarketing  the process of examining consumers’ brain 
patterns to determine their responses to marketing communi-
cations, products, or services for the purpose of developing 
marketing tactics or strategies
market development strategy  A growth strategy that employs 
the existing marketing offering to reach new market segments, 
whether domestic or international.
market growth rate  The annual rate of growth of the specific 
market in which the product competes.
market positioning  The process of defining the marketing mix 
variables so that target customers have a clear, distinctive, de-
sirable understanding of what the product does or represents 
in comparison with competing products.
market segment  A group of consumers who respond similarly 
to a firm’s marketing efforts.
market segmentation  The process of dividing the market into 
groups of customers with different needs, wants, or characteristics—
who therefore might appreciate products or services geared 
especially for them.
market share  Percentage of a market accounted for by a spe-
cific entity.
marketing  An organizational function and a set of processes 
for creating, capturing, communicating, and delivering value to 
customers and for managing customer relationships in ways 
that benefit the organization and its stakeholders.
marketing channel  The set of institutions that transfer the 
ownership of and move goods from the point of production to 
the point of consumption; consists of all the institutions and 
marketing activities in the marketing process.
marketing channel management  Also called supply chain man-
agement; refers to a set of approaches and techniques firms 
employ to efficiently and effectively integrate their suppliers.
marketing ethics  Refers to those ethical problems that are 
specific to the domain of marketing.
marketing mix (four Ps)  Product, price, place, and promotion—
the controllable set of activities that a firm uses to respond to 
the wants of its target markets.
marketing plan  A written document composed of an analysis 
of the current marketing situation, opportunities and threats for 
the firm, marketing objectives and strategy specified in terms of 
the four Ps, action programs, and projected or pro forma in-
come (and other financial) statements.
marketing research  A set of techniques and principles for sys-
tematically collecting, recording, analyzing, and interpreting data 
that can aid decision makers involved in marketing goods, ser-
vices, or ideas.
marketing strategy  A firm’s target market, marketing mix, and 
method of obtaining a sustainable competitive advantage.
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs  A paradigm for classifying peo-
ple’s motives. It argues that when lower-level, more basic needs 
(physiological and safety) are fulfilled, people turn to satisfying 
their higher-level human needs (social and personal); see also 
physiological, safety, love, and personal needs.
mass media  Channels that are ideal for reaching large num-
bers of anonymous audience members; include national news-
papers, magazines, radio, and television.
maturity stage  Stage of the product life cycle when industry 
sales reach their peak, so firms try to rejuvenate their products 
by adding new features or repositioning them.
maximizing profits  A profit strategy that relies primarily on 
economic theory. If a firm can accurately specify a mathemati-
cal model that captures all the factors required to explain and 
predict sales and profits, it should be able to identify the price at 
which its profits are maximized.

	
glossary	
643
panel data  Information collected from a group of consumers.
partnering (strategic) relationship  A supply chain relationship 
that the members are committed to maintaining long term, 
­investing in opportunities that are mutually beneficial; requires 
mutual trust, open communication, common goals, and credible 
commitments. See strategic relationships.
penetration pricing strategy  A new product or service pricing 
strategy in which the initial price is set relatively low with the 
objective of building sales, market share, and profits quickly and 
to deter competition from entering the market.
perceived value  The relationship between a product’s or ser-
vice’s benefits and its cost.
perception  The process by which people select, organize, and 
interpret information to form a meaningful picture of the world.
perceptual map  Displays, in two or more dimensions, the posi-
tion of products or brands in the consumer’s mind.
performance risk  The perceived danger inherent in a poorly 
performing product or service.
perishability  A characteristic of a service: it cannot be stored 
for use in the future.
personal blog  Website written by a person who receives no 
products or remuneration for his or her efforts.
personal selling  The two-way flow of communication between 
a buyer and a seller that is designed to influence the buyer’s 
purchase decision.
persuasive advertising  Communication used to motivate con-
sumers to take action.
physiological needs  Those relating to the basic biological ne-
cessities of life: food, drink, rest, and shelter. This is part of 
Maslow’s hierarchy.
physiological risk  The fear of an actual harm should a product 
not perform properly.
pick ticket  A document or display on a screen in a forklift truck 
indicating how much of each item to get from specific storage 
areas.
pioneers  New product introductions that establish a com-
pletely new market or radically change both the rules of compe-
tition and consumer preferences in a market; also called 
breakthroughs.
planner  In a retailing context, an employee who is responsible 
for the financial planning and analysis of merchandise, and its 
allocation to stores.
planning phase  The part of the strategic marketing planning 
process when marketing executives, in conjunction with other 
top managers (1) define the mission or vision of the business 
and (2) evaluate the situation by assessing how various players, 
both in and outside the organization, affect the firm’s potential 
for success.
point-of-purchase (POP) display  A merchandise display lo-
cated at the point of purchase, such as at the checkout counter 
in a grocery store.
political/regulatory environment  Comprises political parties, 
government organizations, and legislation and laws.
postpurchase cognitive dissonance  The psychologically un-
comfortable state produced by an inconsistency between be-
liefs and behaviors that in turn evokes a motivation to reduce 
the dissonance; buyers’ remorse.
posttesting  The evaluation of an IMC campaign’s impact after it 
has been implemented.
new buy  In a B2B setting, a purchase of a good or service for 
the first time; the buying decision is likely to be quite involved 
because the buyer or the buying organization does not have 
any experience with the item.
niche media  Channels that are focused and generally used to 
reach narrow segments, often with unique demographic char-
acteristics or interests.
noise  Any interference that stems from competing messages, a 
lack of clarity in the message, or a flaw in the medium; a prob-
lem for all communication channels.
noncompensatory decision rule  At work when consumers 
choose a product or service on the basis of a subset of its char-
acteristics, regardless of the values of its other attributes.
noncumulative quantity discount  Pricing tactic that offers a 
discount based on only the amount purchased in a single order; 
provides the buyer with an incentive to purchase more mer-
chandise immediately.
objective-and-task method  An IMC budgeting method that de-
termines the cost required to undertake specific tasks to ac-
complish communication objectives; process entails setting 
objectives, choosing media, and determining costs.
observation  An exploratory research method that entails ex-
amining purchase and consumption behaviors through personal 
or video camera scrutiny.
occasion segmentation  A type of behavioral segmentation 
based on when a product or service is purchased or consumed.
off-price retailer  A type of retailer that offers an inconsistent 
assortment of merchandise at relatively low prices.
oligopolistic competition  Competition that occurs when only a 
few firms dominate a market.
omnichannel (multichannel) strategy  Selling in more than one 
channel (e.g., stores, Internet, catalog).
one-to-one marketing  See micromarketing.
online chat  Instant messaging or voice conversation with an 
online sales representative.
operational excellence  Involves a firm’s focus on efficient  
operations, excellent supply chain management, and strong rela-
tionships with its suppliers.
order getter  A salesperson whose primary responsibilities are 
identifying potential customers and engaging those customers 
in discussions to attempt to make a sale.
order taker  A salesperson whose primary responsibility is to 
process routine orders or reorders or rebuys for products.
organizational culture  Reflects the set of values, traditions, 
and customs that guide a firm’s employees’ behavior.
outsourcing  A practice in which the client firm hires an outside 
firm to facilitate some aspect of their business. In the context of 
new product development, the outsourced firm helps their client 
develop new products or services.
page view  The number of times an Internet page gets viewed 
by any visitor.
paid app  Apps that charge the customer an upfront price to 
download the app ($0.99 is the most common), but offer full 
functionality once downloaded.
paid apps with in-app purchase  Apps that require the con-
sumer to pay initially to download the app and then offer the 
ability to buy additional functionality.

644	
glossary
pricing strategy  A long-term approach to setting prices for the 
firms’ products.
pricing tactics  Short-term methods, in contrast to long-term 
pricing strategies, used to focus on company objectives, costs, 
customers, competition, or channel members; can be responses 
to competitive threats (e.g., lowering price temporarily to meet a 
competitor’s price reduction) or broadly accepted methods of 
calculating a final price for the customer that is short term in 
nature.
primary data  Data collected to address specific research 
needs.
primary package  The packaging the consumer uses, such as 
the toothpaste tube, from which he or she typically seeks conve-
nience in terms of storage, use, and consumption.
private-label brands  Brands developed and marketed by a re-
tailer and available only from that retailer; also called store 
brands.
procedural fairness  Refers to the customer’s perception of  
the fairness of the process used to resolve complaints about 
service.
product  Anything that is of value to a consumer and can be 
offered through a voluntary marketing exchange.
product design  See product development.
product development  Also called product design; entails a pro-
cess of balancing various engineering, manufacturing, market-
ing, and economic considerations to develop a product’s form 
and features or a service’s features.
product development strategy  A growth strategy that offers a 
new product or service to a firm’s current target market.
product excellence  Involves a focus on achieving high-quality 
products; effective branding and positioning is key.
product life cycle  Defines the stages that new products move 
through as they enter, get established in, and ultimately leave 
the marketplace and thereby offers marketers a starting point 
for their strategy planning.
product lines  Groups of associated items, such as those that 
consumers use together or think of as part of a group of similar 
products.
product mix  The complete set of all products offered by a firm.
product placement  Inclusion of a product in nontraditional sit-
uations, such as in a scene in a movie or television program.
product-focused advertisements  Advertisements used to in-
form, persuade, or remind consumers about a specific product 
or service.
professional blog  Website written by a person who reviews 
and gives recommendations on products and services.
profit orientation  A company objective that can be imple-
mented by focusing on target profit pricing, maximizing profits, 
or target return pricing.
prototype  The first physical form or service description of a 
new product, still in rough or tentative form, that has the same 
properties as a new product but is produced through different 
manufacturing processes, sometimes even crafted individually.
psychographic segmentation  A method of segmenting custom-
ers based on how they spend their time and money, what activ-
ities they pursue, and their attitudes and opinions about the 
world in which they live.
psychographics  Used in segmentation; delves into how consum-
ers describe themselves; allows people to describe themselves 
power  A situation that occurs in a marketing channel in which 
one member has the means or ability to have control over the 
actions of another member in a channel at a different level of 
distribution, such as if a retailer has power or control over a 
supplier.
preapproach  In the personal selling process, occurs prior to 
meeting the customer for the first time and extends the qualifi-
cation of leads procedure; in this step, the salesperson con-
ducts additional research and develops plans for meeting with 
the customer.
predatory pricing  A firm’s practice of setting a very low price 
for one or more of its products with the intent to drive its com-
petition out of business; illegal under both the Sherman Antitrust 
Act and the Federal Trade Commission Act.
predictive analytics  The use of statistics on data to determine 
patterns and predict future outcomes and trends.
premarket test  Conducted before a product or service is 
brought to market to determine how many customers will try 
and then continue to use it.
premium  An item offered for free or at a bargain price to re-
ward some type of behavior, such as buying, sampling, or testing.
premium pricing  A competitor-based pricing method by which 
the firm deliberately prices a product above the prices set for 
competing products to capture those consumers who always 
shop for the best or for whom price does not matter.
prestige products or services  Products and services that con-
sumers purchase for status rather than functionality.
pretesting  Assessments performed before an ad campaign is 
implemented to ensure that the various elements are working in 
an integrated fashion and doing what they are intended to do.
price  The overall sacrifice a consumer is willing to make—
money, time, energy—to acquire a specific product or service.
price bundling  Consumer pricing tactic of selling more than 
one product for a single, lower price than what the items would 
cost sold separately; can be used to sell slow-moving items, to 
encourage customers to stock up so they won’t purchase com-
peting brands, to encourage trial of a new product, or to provide 
an incentive to purchase a less desirable product or service to 
obtain a more desirable one in the same bundle.
price discrimination  The practice of selling the same product 
to different resellers (wholesalers, distributors, or retailers) or to 
the ultimate consumer at different prices; some, but not all, 
forms of price discrimination are illegal.
price elasticity of demand  Measures how changes in a price 
affect the quantity of the product demanded; specifically, the ratio 
of the percentage change in quantity demanded to the percentage 
change in price.
price fixing  The practice of colluding with other firms to con-
trol prices.
price lining  Consumer market pricing tactic of establishing a 
price floor and a price ceiling for an entire line of similar prod-
ucts and then setting a few other price points in between to 
represent distinct differences in quality.
price skimming  A strategy of selling a new product or service 
at a high price that innovators and early adopters are willing to 
pay in order to obtain it; after the high-price market segment 
becomes saturated and sales begin to slow down, the firm gen-
erally lowers the price to capture (or skim) the next most 
price-sensitive segment.
price war  A situation [or competition] that occurs when two or 
more firms compete primarily by lowering their prices.

	
glossary	
645
R&D consortia  A group of firms and institutions, possibly in-
cluding government and educational institutions, that explore 
new ideas or obtain solutions for developing new products.
radio frequency identification (RFID) tag  Tiny computer chip 
that automatically transmits to a special scanner all the informa-
tion about a container’s contents or individual products.
reach  Measure of consumers’ exposure to marketing communi-
cations; the percentage of the target population exposed to a 
specific marketing communication, such as an advertisement, at 
least once.
rebate  A consumer discount in which a portion of the pur-
chase price is returned to the buyer in cash; the manufacturer, 
not the retailer, issues the refund.
receiver  The person who reads, hears, or sees and processes 
the information contained in the message or advertisement.
receiving  The process of recording the receipt of merchandise 
as it arrives at a distribution center or store.
reference group  One or more persons whom an individual 
uses as a basis for comparison regarding beliefs, feelings, and 
behaviors.
reference price  The price against which buyers compare the 
actual selling price of the product and that facilitates their eval-
uation process.
referent power  A type of marketing channel power that occurs 
if one channel member wants to be associated with another 
channel member. The channel member with whom the others 
wish to be associated has the power and can get them to do 
what they want.
regional culture  Similar to culture in general, but at a regional 
level. The influence of the area within a country in which people live. 
related diversification  A growth strategy whereby the current 
target market and/or marketing mix shares something in com-
mon with the new opportunity.
relational orientation  A method of building a relationship with 
customers based on the philosophy that buyers and sellers 
should develop a long-term relationship.
relationship selling  A sales philosophy and process that em-
phasizes a commitment to maintaining the relationship over the 
long term and investing in opportunities that are mutually bene-
ficial to all parties.
relative market share  A measure of the product’s strength in a 
particular market, defined as the sales of the focal product di-
vided by the sales achieved by the largest firm in the industry.
relevance  In the context of search engine marketing (SEM), it is 
a metric used to determine how useful an advertisement is to 
the consumer.
reminder advertising  Communication used to remind consum-
ers of a product or to prompt repurchases, especially for prod-
ucts that have gained market acceptance and are in the maturity 
stage of their life cycle.
request for proposals (RFP)  A process through which buying 
organizations invite alternative suppliers to bid on supplying 
their required components.
reseller  Marketing intermediary that resells manufactured 
products without significantly altering their form.
retailer/store brands  Products developed by retailers. Also 
called private-label brands.
retailers’ cooperative  A marketing channel intermediary that 
buys collectively for a group of retailers to achieve price and 
using those characteristics that help them choose how they  
occupy their time (behavior) and what underlying psychological 
reasons determine those choices.
psychological needs  Pertain to the personal gratification con-
sumers associate with a product or service.
psychological risk  Associated with the way people will feel if 
the product or service does not convey the right image.
public relations (PR)  The organizational function that manages 
the firm’s communications to achieve a variety of objectives, in-
cluding building and maintaining a positive image, handling or 
heading off unfavorable stories or events, and maintaining posi-
tive relationships with the media.
public service advertising (PSA)  Advertising that focuses on 
public welfare and generally is sponsored by nonprofit institu-
tions, civic groups, religious organizations, trade associations, or 
political groups; a form of social marketing.
puffery  The legal exaggeration of praise, stopping just short of 
deception, lavished on a product.
pull strategy  A strategy in which the goal is to get consum-
ers to pull the product through the marketing channel by de-
manding it.
pulsing (advertising schedule)  An advertising schedule that 
combines the continuous and flighting schedules by maintaining 
a base level of advertising but increasing advertising intensity 
during certain periods.
purchasing power parity (PPP)  A theory that states that if the 
exchange rates of two countries are in equilibrium, a product 
purchased in one will cost the same in the other, expressed in 
the same currency.
pure competition  Competition that occurs when different com-
panies sell commodity products that consumers perceive as 
substitutable; price usually is set according to the laws of supply 
and demand.
push strategy  A strategy designed to increase demand by mo-
tivating sellers—wholesalers, distributors, or salespeople—to 
highlight the product, rather than the products of competitors, 
and thereby push the product onto consumers.
qualify  The process of assessing the potential of sales leads.
qualitative research  Informal research methods, including ob-
servation, following social media sites, in-depth interviews, focus 
groups, and projective techniques.
quantitative research  Structured responses that can be statis-
tically tested to confirm insights and hypotheses generated via 
qualitative research or secondary data.
quantity discount  Pricing tactic of offering a reduced price ac-
cording to the amount purchased; the more the buyer pur-
chases, the higher the discount and, of course, the greater the 
value.
questionnaire  A form that features a set of questions designed 
to gather information from respondents and thereby accom-
plish the researchers’ objectives; questions can be either un-
structured or structured.
quick response (QR) inventory system  An inventory manage-
ment system used in retailing; merchandise is received just in 
time for sale when the customer wants it; see also just-in-time 
(JIT) inventory system.
quota  Designates the maximum quantity of a product that may 
be brought into a country during a specified time period.

646	
glossary
scanner data  A type of syndicated external secondary data 
used in quantitative research that is obtained from scanner 
readings of UPC codes at check-out counters.
search engine marketing (SEM)  A type of web advertising 
whereby companies pay for keywords that are used to catch 
consumers’ attention while browsing a search engine.
seasonal discount  Seasonal discounts that are offered to con-
sumers are price reductions offered on products and services 
to stimulate demand during off-peak seasons; whereas a sea-
sonal discount in B2B settings is a pricing tactic that offers an 
additional reduction as an incentive to retailers to order mer-
chandise in advance of the normal buying season.
secondary data  Pieces of information that have already been 
collected from other sources and usually are readily available.
secondary package  The wrapper or exterior carton that con-
tains the primary package and provides the UPC label used by 
retail scanners; can contain additional product information that 
may not be available on the primary package.
segmentation, targeting, and positioning (STP)  Firms use 
these processes to identify and evaluate opportunities for in-
creasing sales and profits.
selective distribution  Lies between the intensive and exclu-
sive distribution strategies; uses a few selected customers in a 
territory.
self-actualization  When a person is completely satisfied with 
his or her life.
self-concept  The image a person has of himself or herself; a 
component of psychographics.
self-values  Goals for life, not just the goals one wants to ac-
complish in a day; a component of psychographics that refers 
to overriding desires that drive how a person lives his or her 
life.
selling teams  Combinations of sales specialists whose primary 
duties are order getting, order taking, or sales support but who 
work together to service important accounts.
sender  The firm from which an IMC message originates; the 
sender must be clearly identified to the intended audience.
sentiment analysis  A technique that allows marketers to ana-
lyze data from social media sites to collect consumer comments 
about companies and their products.
sentiment mining  Data gathered by evaluating customer com-
ments posted through social media sites such as Facebook and 
Twitter.
service  Any intangible offering that involves a deed, perfor-
mance, or effort that cannot be physically possessed; intangible 
customer benefits that are produced by people or machines 
and cannot be separated from the producer.
service gap  Results when a service fails to meet the expecta-
tions that customers have about how it should be delivered.
Service Gaps Model  A managerial tool designed to encourage 
the systematic examination of all aspects of the service delivery 
process and prescribes the steps needed to develop an optimal 
service strategy.
service quality  Customers’ perceptions of how well a service 
meets or exceeds their expectations.
service retailer  A firm that primarily sells services rather than 
merchandise.
share of wallet  The percentage of the customer’s purchases 
made from a particular retailer.
promotion economies of scale. It is similar to a wholesaler, ex-
cept that the retailer members have some control over, and 
sometimes ownership of, the cooperative’s operations.
retailing  The set of business activities that add value to prod-
ucts and services sold to consumers for their personal or family 
use; includes products bought at stores, through catalogs, and 
over the Internet, as well as services like fast-food restaurants, 
airlines, and hotels.
retrieval set  Those brands or stores that the consumer can 
readily bring forth from memory.
return on marketing investment (ROMI)  The amount of profit 
divided by the value of the investment. In the case of an adver-
tisement, the ROI is (Sales revenue generated by ad − Ad’s cost) 
÷ Ad’s cost.
reverse engineering  Taking apart a competitor’s product, ana-
lyzing it, and creating an improved product that does not in-
fringe on the competitor’s patents, if any exist.
reverse innovation  When companies initially develop products 
for niche or underdeveloped markets, and then expand them 
into their original or home markets.
reward power  A type of marketing channel power that occurs 
when the channel member exerting the power offers rewards 
to gain power, often a monetary incentive, for getting another 
channel member to do what it wants it to do.
role playing  A good technique for practicing the sales presen-
tation prior to meeting with a customer; the salesperson acts 
out a simulated buying situation while a colleague or manager 
acts as the buyer.
rule-of-thumb methods  Budgeting methods that base the IMC 
budget on either the firm’s share of the market in relation to 
competition, a fixed percentage of forecasted sales, or what is 
left after other operating costs and forecasted sales have been 
budgeted.
safety needs  One of the needs in Maslow’s hierarchy of needs; 
pertain to protection and physical well-being.
safety risk  See physiological risk.
salary  Compensation in the form of a fixed sum of money paid 
at regular intervals.
sales contest  A short-term incentive designed to elicit a spe-
cific response from the sales force.
sales management  The planning, direction, and control of per-
sonal selling activities, including recruiting, selecting, training, 
motivating, compensating, and evaluating, as they apply to the 
sales force.
sales orientation  A company objective based on the belief that 
increasing sales will help the firm more than will increasing 
profits.
sales promotions  Special incentives or excitement-building 
programs that encourage the purchase of a product or service, 
such as coupons, rebates, contests, free samples, and point-of-
purchase displays.
sales support personnel  Employees who enhance and help 
with a firm’s overall selling effort, such as by responding to the 
customer’s technical questions or facilitating repairs.
sample  A group of customers who represent the customers of 
interest in a research study.
sampling  Offers potential customers the opportunity to try a 
product or service before they make a buying decision.

	
glossary	
647
strategic (partnering) relationship  A supply chain rela-
tionship that the members are committed to maintaining 
long term, investing in opportunities that are mutually bene-
ficial; requires mutual trust, open communication, common 
goals, and credible commitments. Also called partnering 
­relationship.
structured questions  Closed-ended questions for which a dis-
crete set of response alternatives, or specific answers, is pro-
vided for respondents to evaluate.
subhead  An additional smaller headline in an ad that provides a 
great deal of information through the use of short and simple 
words.
substitute products  Products for which changes in demand 
are negatively related; that is, a percentage increase in the 
quantity demanded for product A results in a percentage de-
crease in the quantity demanded for product B.
substitution effect  Consumers’ ability to substitute other prod-
ucts for the focal brand, thus increasing the price elasticity of 
demand for the focal brand.
supercenter  Large stores combining full-line discount stores 
with supermarkets in one place.
supply chain  The group of firms that make and deliver a given 
set of goods and services.
supply chain management  A set of approaches and techniques 
firms employ to efficiently and effectively integrate their suppli-
ers, manufacturers, warehouses, stores, and transportation in-
termediaries into a seamless value chain in which merchandise 
is produced and distributed in the right quantities, to the right 
locations, and at the right time, as well as to minimize system-
wide costs while satisfying the service levels their customers 
require. Also called marketing channel management.
survey  A systematic means of collecting information from peo-
ple that generally uses a questionnaire.
sustainable competitive advantage  Something the firm can 
persistently do better than its competitors.
sustainable packaging  Product packaging that has less of a 
negative impact on the environment.
sweepstakes  A form of sales promotion that offers prizes 
based on a chance drawing of entrants’ names.
SWOT analysis  A method of conducting a situation analysis within 
a marketing plan in which both the internal environment with re-
gard to its Strengths and Weaknesses and the external environ-
ment in terms of its Opportunities and Threats are examined.
syndicated data  Data available for a fee from commercial re-
search firms such as Information Resources Inc. (IRI), National 
Purchase Diary Panel, and Nielsen.
target marketing or targeting  The process of evaluating the 
attractiveness of various segments and then deciding which to 
pursue as a market.
target profit pricing  A pricing strategy implemented by firms 
when they have a particular profit goal as their overriding con-
cern; uses price to stimulate a certain level of sales at a certain 
profit per unit.
target return pricing  A pricing strategy implemented by firms 
less concerned with the absolute level of profits and more inter-
ested in the rate at which their profits are generated relative to 
their investments; designed to produce a specific return on in-
vestment, usually expressed as a percentage of sales.
shopping products/services  Those for which consumers will 
spend time comparing alternatives, such as apparel, fragrances, 
and appliances.
showrooming  Customers visit a store to touch, feel, and 
even discuss a product’s features with a sales associate, 
and then purchase it online from another retailer at a lower 
price.
situation analysis  Second step in a marketing plan; uses a 
SWOT analysis that assesses both the internal environment 
with regard to its Strengths and Weaknesses and the external 
environment in terms of its Opportunities and Threats.
situational factors  Factors affecting the consumer decision 
process; those that are specific to the situation that may over-
ride, or at least influence, psychological and social issues.
size discount  The most common implementation of a quantity 
discount at the consumer level; the larger the quantity bought, 
the less the cost per unit (e.g., per ounce).
slotting allowances  Fees firms pay to retailers simply to get 
new products into stores or to gain more or better shelf space 
for their products.
social marketing  The content distributed through online and 
mobile technologies to facilitate interpersonal interactions.
social media  The online and mobile technologies that distribute 
content to facilitate interpersonal interactions.
social risk  The fears that consumers suffer when they worry 
others might not regard their purchases positively.
social shopping  Using the Internet to communicate about 
product preferences with other shoppers.
specialty products/services  Products or services toward 
which the customer shows a strong preference and for which 
he or she will expend considerable effort to search for the best 
suppliers.
specialty store  A type of retailer that concentrates on a limited 
number of complementary merchandise categories in a rela-
tively small store.
stakeholders  The broad set of people who might be affected 
by a firm’s actions, including not just corporate shareholders 
and customers but also employees (past, current, and prospec-
tive) and their families, supply chain partners, government  
agencies, the physical environment, and members of the  
communities in which the firm operates (defined either locally 
or on a global scale).
standards gap  A type of service gap; pertains to the difference 
between the firm’s perceptions of customers’ expectations and 
the service standards it sets.
status quo pricing  A competitor-oriented strategy in which a 
firm changes prices only to meet those of competition.
store brand  Brands developed and marketed by a retailer 
and available only from that retailer; also called private-label 
brands.
straight rebuy  In a B2B setting, refers to when the buyer or 
buying organization simply buys additional units of products that 
have previously been purchased.
strategic alliance  A collaborative relationship between inde-
pendent firms, though the partnering firms do not create an eq-
uity partnership; that is, they do not invest in one another.
strategic business unit (SBU)  A division of the firm itself that 
can be managed and operated somewhat independently from 
other divisions and may have a different mission or objectives.

648	
glossary
unrelated diversification  A growth strategy whereby a new 
business lacks any common elements with the present busi-
ness.
unsought products/services  Products or services consumers 
either do not normally think of buying or do not know about.
unstructured questions  Open-ended questions that allow re-
spondents to answer in their own words.
user  The person who consumes or uses the product or service 
purchased by the buying center.
value  Reflects the relationship of benefits to costs, or what the 
consumer gets for what he or she gives.
Value and Lifestyle Survey (VALS)  A psychographic tool devel-
oped by SRI Consulting Business Intelligence; classifies consum-
ers into eight segments: innovators, thinkers, believers, 
achievers, strivers, experiencers, makers, or survivors.
value cocreation  Customers act as collaborators with a manu-
facturer or retailer to create the product or service.
value proposition  The unique value that a product or service 
provides to its customers and how it is better than and different 
from those of competitors.
value-based pricing method  An approach that focuses on the 
overall value of the product offering as perceived by consumers, 
who determine value by comparing the benefits they expect the 
product to deliver with the sacrifice they will need to make to 
acquire the product.
variable costs  Those costs, primarily labor and materials, that 
vary with production volume.
vendor-managed inventory (VMI)  An approach for improving 
supply chain efficiency in which the manufacturer is responsible 
for maintaining the retailer’s inventory levels in each of its 
stores.
vertical channel conflict  A type of channel conflict in which 
members of the same marketing channel, for example, manufac-
turers, wholesalers, and retailers, are in disagreement or discord.
vertical marketing system  A supply chain in which the mem-
bers act as a unified system; there are three types: adminis-
tered, contractual, and corporate.
vertical price fixing  Occurs when parties at different levels of 
the same marketing channel (e.g., manufacturers and retailers) 
collude to control the prices passed on to consumers.
viral marketing program  A promotional strategy that encour-
ages people to pass along a marketing message to other poten-
tial consumers.
virtual community  Online networks of people who communi-
cate about specific topics.
voice-of-customer (VOC) program  An ongoing marketing  
research system that collects customer inputs and integrates 
them into managerial decisions.
warehouse clubs  Large retailers with an irregular assortment, 
low service levels, and low prices that often require member-
ship for shoppers.
web portal  An Internet site whose purpose is to be a major 
starting point for users when they connect to the web.
web-tracking software  Software used to assess how much 
time viewers spend on particular web pages and the number of 
pages they view.
tariff  A tax levied on a good imported into a country; also called 
a duty.
technological advances  Macroenvironmental factor that has 
greatly contributed to the improvement of the value of both 
products and services in the past few decades.
telemarketing  A method of prospecting in which salespeople 
telephone potential customers.
test marketing  A method of determining the success potential 
of a new product; it introduces the offering to a limited geo-
graphical area prior to a national launch.
ticketing and marking  Creating price and identification labels 
and placing them on the merchandise.
timeliness effect  With regard to the Wheel of Social Media 
Engagement, the timeliness effect of social media engagement 
is concerned with the firm being able to engage with the cus-
tomer at the right place/time—their ability to do so 24/7 from 
any location.
top-of-mind awareness  A prominent place in people’s memo-
ries that triggers a response without them having to put any 
thought into it.
total cost  The sum of the variable and fixed costs.
tracking  Assessments that monitor key indicators, such as 
daily or weekly sales volume, while the advertisement is run-
ning to shed light on any problems with the message or the 
medium.
trade agreement  Intergovernmental agreement designed to 
manage and promote trade activities for specific regions.
trade deficit  Results when a country imports more goods than 
it exports.
trade shows  Major events attended by buyers who choose to 
be exposed to products and services offered by potential suppli-
ers in an industry.
trade surplus  Occurs when a country has a higher level of ex-
ports than imports.
trading bloc  Consists of those countries that have signed a 
particular trade agreement.
transmitter  An agent or intermediary with which the sender 
works to develop the marketing communications; for example, a 
firm’s creative department or an advertising agency.
triple bottom line  A means to measure performance according 
to economic, environmental, and societal criteria.
undifferentiated targeting strategy (mass marketing)  A mar-
keting strategy a firm can use if the product or service is per-
ceived to provide the same benefits to everyone, with no need 
to develop separate strategies for different groups.
uniform delivered pricing  The shipper charges one rate, no 
matter where the buyer is located.
unique selling proposition (USP)  A strategy of differentiating 
a product by communicating its unique attributes; often be-
comes the common theme or slogan in the entire advertising 
campaign.
Universal Product Code (UPC)  The black-and-white bar 
code found on most merchandise. It contains a 13-digit code 
that indicates the manufacturer of the item, a description of 
the item, information about special packaging, and special 
promotions.
universal set  All possible choices for a product category.

	
glossary	
649
zone of tolerance  The area between customers’ expectations 
regarding their desired service and the minimum level of ac-
ceptable service—that is, the difference between what the cus-
tomer really wants and what he or she will accept before going 
elsewhere.
zone pricing  The shipper sets different prices depending on a 
geographic division of the delivery areas.
white papers  In a B2B context, white papers are a promotional 
technique used by B2B sellers to provide information about a 
product or service in an educational context, thereby not ap-
pearing like a promotion or propaganda.
wholesaler  Firm engaged in buying, taking title to, often storing, 
and physically handling goods in large quantities, then reselling 
the goods (usually in smaller quantities) to retailers or industrial 
or business users.

Chapter 1
1.	
Which of the following illustrates marketing’s direct impact on 
consumers?
	
Answer: (d) Marketing helps consumers learn about new  
products and services.
2.	 The ______ consists of the product, price, place, and promotion 
of an offering.
	
Answer: (b) marketing mix
Chapter 2
1.	
After a firm has conducted a SWOT analysis, it would typically 
progress to the next step of marketing planning, which is 
_______ and involves using STP (segmentation, targeting, and 
positioning).
	
Answer: (c) identifying and evaluating opportunities
2.	 Which of the following is a marketing metric that might be 
used to evaluate the performance of a company’s implementation 
of its marketing plan?
	
Answer: (d) GM (gross margin)
Chapter 3
1.	
Through its Facebook page, a major restaurant chain is offering 
its customers a Groupon coupon for 50 percent off the  
purchase of a meal. In doing so, the restaurant is focusing on 
which aspect of the 4E framework?
	
Answer: (e) exciting
2.	 To get customers excited about a social media–related offer, 
the offer must be:
	
Answer: (c) relevant and aimed at a target audience.
Chapter 4
1.	
As noted in your text, which of the following ranks as the top 
unethical behavior by employees as reported by chief marketing 
officers?
	
Answer: (c) Participating in misleading or deceptive sales  
tactics.
2.	 A firm makes generous donations to charities, but its employees 
are always being scrutinized for engaging in questionable 
sales practices. This firm would be considered:
	
Answer: (c) unethical but socially responsible.
Chapter 5
1.	
ABC Company knew that its customers were interested in  
environmentally friendly business practices, so it began marking 
all of its products as environmentally friendly because they 
were made with all-natural ingredients, even though ABC’s 
plant was one of the worst polluters in town. The new term for 
this practice is
	
Answer: (b) greenwashing.
2.	 One of the goals of value-based marketing is
	
Answer: (c) to offer greater value than competitors offer.
Chapter 6
1.	
The salient or important attributes about a particular  
product that consumers use to make product evaluations  
are called
	
Answer: (c) evaluative criteria
2.	 Because not all purchase intentions result in an actual pur-
chase, marketers calculate the _______ to measure how 
­effectively a decision to purchase a specific product results in 
a completed purchase.
	
Answer: (e) conversion rate
Chapter 7
1.	
Which of the following statements regarding the B2B buying 
process is true?
	
Answer: (e) In the B2B buying process, the search for  
information and evaluation of alternatives is more formal  
and structured.
2.	 In a _____ situation, the buying center is likely to proceed 
through all six steps in the buying process and involve many 
people in the buying decision.
	
Answer: (d) new buy
Chapter 8
1.	
The shift of population from rural to urban areas in countries 
such as India helps global marketers by:
	
Answer: (b) simplifying the supply chain needed to make goods 
and services available.
2.	 Why should marketers be aware of the BRIC countries?
	
Answer: (c) They are likely to be the source of most market 
growth.
Chapter 9
1.	
For the ______ criteria to be met when evaluating segment  
attractiveness, the consumer must know the product or service 
exists, understand what it can do for him or her, and recognize 
how to buy it.
	
Answer: (c) reachable
2.	 Which step in the STP process develops descriptions of the 
different segments, which helps firms better understand the 
customer profiles in each segment?
	
Answer: (b) Select segmentation method
Chapter 10
1.	
Which of the following is not a disadvantage of using secondary 
research data?
	
Answer: (b) The process is costly and time-consuming.
2.	 The key difference between scanner and panel research is 
that scanner research typically focuses on a particular _____, 
while panel research typically focuses on a particular _____.
	
Answer: (a) product; person or household
Chapter 11
1.	
As the size of retail firms has increased through growth and 
consolidation, more retailers have developed _____ merchan-
dise, which they use to establish a distinctive identity.
	
Answer: (c) private-label
2.	 Brand equity is determined by four aspects of a brand. Which 
of the following is not one of the four aspects?
	
Answer: (d) brand quality
Chapter 12
1.	
In the United States, most consumer packaged goods found in 
grocery and discount stores are already in the _____ stage, 
which is characterized by the adoption of the product by the late 
majority and intense competition for market share among firms.
	
Answer: (c) maturity
Quiz Yourself Answer Key

	
	
2.	 Although they enjoy novelty and are considered to be opinion 
leaders, _____ are not the first to purchase new product  
innovations.
	
Answer: (c) early adopters
Chapter 13
1.	
Which of the following represents the most fundamental differ-
ence between a product and a service?
	
Answer: (b) tangibility
2.	 The Gaps Model is designed as a diagnostic tool to highlight 
specific areas where
	
Answer: (c) marketers are falling short in their service delivery.
Chapter 14
1.	
A _____ orientation explicitly invokes the concept of value 
such as when a firm uses a “no-haggle” pricing structure to 
make the purchase process simpler and easier.
	
Answer: (d) customer
2.	 The most common form of competition is _____, where many 
firms compete for customers in a given market but with  
differentiated products.
	
Answer: (e) monopolistic competition
Chapter 15
1.	
A(n) _____ strategy is attractive because it attracts two dis-
tinct market segments: customers who are not price-sensitive 
customers and customers who are price sensitive.
	
Answer: (b) high/low pricing
2.	 When using a market penetration strategy, as sales continue 
to grow, the costs continue to drop, allowing even further  
reductions in the price. This is due to
	
Answer: (e) experience curve effects.
Chapter 16
1.	
All of the following are examples of the value provided by a 
supply chain in the production of kitchen stoves except
	
Answer: (c) the product design team develops initial drawings 
for a new product offering.
2.	 When supply chain members that buy and sell to one another 
are not in agreement about their goals, _____ channel conflict 
can occur.
	
Answer: (a) vertical
Chapter 17
1.	
________ reduce costs and maintain low prices by buying  
opportunistically from manufacturers with excess inventory,  
offering limited assortments of household goods and groceries, 
as well as health and beauty aids.
	
Answer: (d) Extreme value retailers
2.	 Jordan directs her salespeople to increase the company’s 
share of wallet. Jordan is directing her salespeople to
	
Answer: (a) focus on increasing sales to their best customers.
Chapter 18
1.	
Home Depot hired an advertising agency to develop television 
ads for its grand opening in southern Maine. The advertising 
agency represents which of the following components of the 
communication process?
	
Answer: (b) transmitter
2.	 Which of the following formulas is accurate for calculating 
gross rating points (GRP)?
	
Answer: (c) Reach multiplied by frequency
Chapter 19
1.	
Firms often use _____ advertising to convince consumers to 
take action such as switching brands, trying a new product, or 
even continuing to buy the advertised product.
	
Answer: (d) persuasive
2.	 ______ is a tool used to communicate the distinct attributes  
of a product; it can be used as a slogan or a theme and often 
becomes a snapshot of the entire advertising campaign.
	
Answer: (b) A unique selling proposition
Chapter 20
1.	
One of the advantages of personal selling over other types of 
marketing communication is that
	
Answer: (a) salespeople can build strong relationships with 
customers.
2.	 All of the following are service quality dimensions related to 
follow-up except
	
Answer: (a) ethics
	
Quiz Yourself Answer Key	
651

name index
Note: A page number with an e 
indicates an exhibit.
A
Aaker, David A., 366n12, 
366n17, 366n29, 
367n39
Abrams, Rachel, 206n36, 
367n41, 367n42
Acker, Daniel, 14n, 354n
Acuna, Kirsten, 58n37, 331niv
Adams, Jack, 403niv
Adams, Susan, 403n63
Adele, 96
Agarwal, James, 299n5
Agenor, Pierre-Richard, 262n2
Agüero, Sergio, 573
Aguinis, H., 140n17
Aguirre, Elizabeth M., 113n22
Ailawadi, Kusum, 207n47
Ainsworth, James, 546nv
Ajmera, Harsh, 26n25
Akpanudosen, Imeh, 375n
Albanesius, Chloe, 263nii
Albinsky, Oleg, 86n
Alexander, Sergi, 10n
Ali, Laila, 351
Allen, Keegan, 267
Alley, Kirstie, 152
Allison, Cathleen, 309n
Alpert, Mark, 206n16
Altaffer, Mary, 321n
Altidore, Jozy, 579, 580
Altman, Josh, 629
Alvarez, Andrew, 480n
Alvarez, Stephen, 7n
Amir, On, 206n29
Anderson, Erin, 517n23
Anderson, George, 140n7, 
545n13, 546n40
Anderson, Meghan Keaney, 
232n20
Andrei, Kyle, 114n63
Andrews, J. Craig, 575n8, 
575n10
Angrisani, Carol, 606n39
Antia, Kersi D., 402n21
Arens, Christian, 605n12
Arens, William F., 605n12, 
605n26
Argo, Jennifer J., 205n2
Ariely, Dan, 206n29
Aristoff, Mandy, 605n25
Arnould, Eric J., 57n9
Aron, Bill, 581n
Arthur, Rachel, 59nii
Atkins, Dean, 451n
Atkinson, Mark Edward, 611n
Au, Desiree, 456n13
Audras, Eric, 277n, 449n
Aydin, Evrim, 462n
B
Babin, Barry, 205n5
Babione, Ken, 254n
Bagri, Neha Thirani, 263n61, 
263n64
Bahree, Megha, 262n38
Bajarin, Tim, 206n42
Bajpai, Prableen, 262n27
Baker, Pam, 634n11
Balasubramanian, Sridhar, 
402n50
Balotelli, Mario, 568
Banjo, Shelly, 517nv, 546niv
Banker, Steve, 232n9
Banova, Bianca, 207nii
Barboza, David, 114n55
Barclay, Eliza, 545n14
Barinka, Alex, 232ni, 633n1, 
633n3
Bariso, Justin, 59n56
Barlow, Janelle, 429n16
Barna, Hayley, 21
Barnado, Katy, 27n39
Barnard, Neilson, 351n
Barnes, Brooks, 57n11, 299n1, 
457niii, 482n1
Barnes, Stephen, 311n
Barone, Michael J., 401n20
Barrera, Ralph, 123n
Barret, Victoria, 634niii
Barritt, Craig, 29n
Barry, Chris, 113n16
Bart, Yakov, 113n22
Bartok, Bill, 146
Basuroy, Suman, 606n36
Bateman, Connie R., 634n37
Batra, Rajeev, 366n28
Baumgartner, Felix, 111
Bawden, Tom, 483n20
Bearden, William O., 330n10
Beauchamp, Katia, 21
Beckham, David, 37
Bedard, Paul, 403nii
Bedgood, Larisa, 141ni
Beil, Jack, 114n73
Beinhocker, Eric D., 403n58
Belch, George E., 575n17, 
605n4, 605n19
Belch, Michael A., 575n17, 
605n4, 605n19
Bell, Alexander Graham, 393
Bellairs, Jeff, 402n36
Bellisario, Troian, 267
Belott, Shanna, 331n51
Beltrone, Gabriel, 402n29
Bennett, Shea, 113n31
Benson, Ashley, 267
Bergdahl, Michael, 429n17
Berkowitz, Steve, 634nii
Berra, Yogi, 620
Berry, Leonard, 412n, 429n10, 
546n31
Bers, John, 299n22
Bersebach, Paul, 185n
Berthiaume, Dan, 233ni, 
517n15, 545n2
Bertini, Marco, 483n11
Bertoncelj, Dean, 7n
Beschloss, Michael, 401n11
Besinger, Greg, 517n16, 517nii
Beskind, Barbara, 372
Bettencourt, Lance A., 429n12
Beyoncé, 30, 37
Bezos, Jeff, 21
Bhardwaj, Vertica, 517n30
Bhasin, Kim, 367n37
Bianco, Anthony, 605n8
Bieber, Justin, 381
Bielak, D. B., 140n28
Bijmolt, T. H., 605n25
Billeter, Darron M., 206n37
Billett, Matthew T., 366n18
Bilton, Nick, 403n71
Binuya, Gregorio, 434n
Birkner, Christine, 207n48, 
605n3, 605n6
Bisping, Bruce, 158n, 373n
Biswas, Abhijit, 483n5
Bitner, Mary Jo, 57n10, 
428n2, 429n6, 429n13
Bjork, Christopher, 517n31
Blahnik, Manolo, 365
Blann, Michael, 341n
Blazevic, Vera, 402n35
Blecker, Thorsten, 299n20
Bleier, Karen, 164n
Block, Keith, 617
Blue, Victor J., 163n, 194n, 
197n, 511n
Blum, Ross, 113n37
Bohling, T., 335n52
Bolt, Usain, 568
Bolton, Ruth N., 299n5, 
429n12
Bondareff, Diane, 378n
Bonini, S., 140n28
Borison, Rebecca, 483n30
Boston, William, 59niv
Bottomley, Paul A., 605n7
Boud, John, 96n
Boudette, Neal E., 171nv
Boulton, Clint, 114n75
Bounds, Gwendolyn, 517n10
Bouys, Gabriel, 99n
Bowman, Charles, 407n
Boyle, Gert, 564
Braaten, Jill, 342n, 592n
Bradham, Caleb, 30
Bragg, Roy, 403n63
Brat, Ilan, 58n30, 331n39, 
517niii
Bright, Laura, 605n8
Broderick, Amanda J., 
263n52
Broekmeulen, R. A. C. M., 
517n26
Brofsky, Keith, 419n
Brouthers, Lance Eliot, 
262n44
Brown, Stephen W., 429n12
Bruner, Gordon C., 330n10
Brunskill, Clive, 37n
Bryant, Carol, 206n35
Bryant, Paul, 61
Buckner, Michael, 194n
Bulik, Beth Snyder, 606n57
Burdick, David, 146–147
Burkard, Sascha, 412n
Burke, Raymond R., 605n7
Burkitt, Laurie, 262n43
Burmann, Christoph, 367n36
Burns, Robert, 241, 605n31
Burtis, Michelle, 483n18, 
483n21
Buss, Dale, 456n3, 606n57
Bussey, John, 171n39
Bustillo, Miguel, 171n25
Byron, Ellen, 402n27
C
Calantone, Roger J., 517n18
Cameron, Gary, 500n
Cameron, Nadia, 115niv
Campbell, Andrew, 58n18
Caravella, Mary, 367n35
Carbonell, Pilar, 402n35
Carey, James W., 262n24
Carey, Mariah, 296
Carey, Susan, 456n8, 456n10
Carnegie, Dale, 633n8
Caro, Felipe, 517n30
Carreon, Blue, 606n35
652	

	
name index	
653
Carroll, Matt, 59n53
Carter, Bill, 299n6
Carter, Caitlin, 575nv
Casey, Mary Anne, 330n27
Cassinelli, Alan, 574n2, 575n6
Castleberry, Stephen B., 
232n27
Caswell, Elisabeth Nevins, 65n1
Cateora, Philip R., 170n8, 
262n19, 263n46
Cavanaugh, Patrick, 58n50
Caywood, C., 58n34
Challagalla, Goutam, 206n22, 
403n64
Champagne, Christine, 59n54, 
59n58
Chan, Kimmy Wa, 26n21
Chandon, Pierre, 207n46, 
483n8
Chandy, Rajesh K., 402n21
Chang, Alvin, 59n53
Chang, Chingching, 171ni
Chang, Julie, 634n29
Chao, Loretta, 263nii
Charles, Dan, 483nii
Chaudhuri, Saabira, 517n4
Chebat, Jean-Charles, 
206n40
Chen, B. X., 59nv
Chen, Yubo, 575n20
Chen, Yuyu, 113n7, 113n9
Cheng, Jonathan, 401n5
Chernev, A., 482n3
Chernev, Alexander, 206n44
Chevalier, Tom, 65n1, 66
Cho, SeongJoon, 91n
Chokkattu, Julian, 429n30
Choo, Felix, 155n
Choudhury, Dibyendu, 367n43
Chow, Jason, 262n14, 483niv
Chowdhury, Deshakalyan, 125n
Christensen, Clayton M., 
402n22
Christman, Ed, 403n61
Cieply, Michael, 402n48
Clancy, Kevin J., 403n64
Clark, Dorie, 113n36
Clark, Kevin, 359n
Clark, Terry, 263n52
Clifford, Catherine, 171n35
Clifford, Stephanie, 606n40, 
606niv
Clothier, Mark, 299n30, 367ni
Cloud, John, 330n11
Clow, Rachel Denny, 195n
Cobb, Kayla, 233nii
Cochrane, Joe, 263n54, 
634niv
Coffrini, Fabrice, 211n
Cohen, Ben, 21
Cohen, Heidi, 233nv
Cohn, D’Vera, 171n26
Cole, Steve, 450n
Collier, Bob, 623n
Collins, Kathy, 207ni
Collins, Katie, 58n45
Collins, Lily, 365
Colquitt, Jason, 429n19
Colton, Bryn, 348n
Comaford, Christine,  
634n16
Comaford-Lynch, Christine, 
634n17
Comstock, Jonah, 171nii
Connelly, Tony, 575n30
Connelly, Trang, 26n17
Connor, Michael,  
140n–141n, 147n
Constantine, Tanya, 16n
Cook, William, 207nii
Coolidge, Alexander, 429n23, 
517n8, 546n37
Cooper, Bradley, 276
Correll, Perry, 204n
Corsi, Elena, 517n32
Coskuner-Balli, Gokcen, 
206n34
Coto, Alberto, 284n
Countess, Jemal, 372n
Coyle, Bob, 443n
Creamer, Matthew, 483ni
Croce, Jim, 589
Crook, Jordan, 429n30
Cruz, Yunel, 595
Cukrov, Steve, 352n
Cullinane, Susannah, 262n43
Cummins, Ronnie, 207niii
Cunningham, Harold, 94n
Curie, Marie, 222
Curran, Catherine M., 605n4, 
605n31
Currim, Imran S., 58n36
Curry, Stephan, 81–82
Cutten, Christine, 575n22
D
Dagan, Yaacov, 289n
Dagger, Tracey S., 206n38
Dagnall, Ian, 352n
Dahl, Darren W., 205n2, 
402n42, 605n22
Dalla Pozza, Ilaria, 299n17
D’Ambrosio, Dan, 171n48
Danaher, Peter J., 206n38
Daniels, Lee, 555
Dannen, Chris, 170n7
D’Annunzio, Matthew, 152n
Dant, Rajiv, 517n22
Dant, Rajiv P., 26n23
Darden, William, 205n5
Dasilva, Peter, 528n
Daugherty, Terry, 605n8
Davey, Jenny, 330n18
Davidi, Adam, 605n9, 605n21
Davies, James, 595n
Davis, Alex, 59niv
Davis, Donna, 517n23
Davis-Sramek, Beth, 517n23
Dawes, Sonda, 285n
Day, George S., 26n20
De Gea, David, 549, 573
De Niro, Robert, 276
Dean, Francis, 527n
Dean, Tereza, 517n18
Deans, David H., 114n50
Deggans, Eric, 299n1
Deioma, Kayte, 38n, 320n
Del Ray, Lana, 96–97
Delimont, Danita, 157n
DeMers, Jayson, 299ni
Demery, Paul, 232n33
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, 
170n18
Deng, Xiaoyan, 483n8
Desai, Kalpesh Kaushik, 
401n16
Dessain, Vincent, 517n32
Dessalles, Morgan, 356n
Dewitte, Siegfried, 206n19
Dhalla, Nariman K., 403n64
Diamond, Rick, 583n
Dierker, Mark, 12n, 217n, 597n
Dillingham, Tim, 48n
Dillman, Don A., 330n30
Ding, Jiali, 367n36
Dinwoodie, John, 517n26
Dlott, Nancy, 65n5
Doland, Angela, 262n20
Donoghue, Tom, 584n
Donoho, Casey, 634n38
Dooley, Roger, 207nv,  
331n36
Dorfman, Brad, 263n48
Dou, Eva, 401n1, 401n4, 401n6, 
401n7, 401n9
Dove, Justin, 262n7
Dowling, Daisy Wademan, 
429n20
Downey, Robert, Jr., 190, 191
Doyle, Denis, 515n
Dr. Dre, 96
Draps, Joseph, 2
Draps, Pierre, 2
Dredge, Stuart, 114n59
Drucker, Peter F., 170n2
D’Souza, Sebastian, 238n
Dubé, Laurette, 206n40
Dubois, David, 206n14
Duke, Duncan, 171n21
Dumaine, Brian, 58n29, 
605n15
Dumenco, Simon, 26n18
Duncan, T., 58n34
Dunn, Katherine, 27n43
Dupré, Elyse, 606niv
Durant, John, 299n15
E
Eastin, Matthew, 605n8
Eckart, Stephanie, 366n21
Eckerle, Courtney, 233nii
Edelstein, Stephen, 59niv
Edison, Thomas, 151
Edwards, Sam, 276n
Eldred, Melanie, 446n
Ellard, John H., 27n35
Elliot, Andrew, 517n13
Elliot, Stuart, 26n16, 27niii, 
114ni, 575niii
Elliott, Stuart, 366n20, 
606n54, 606n55
Ellis, Jackie, 117n
Ember, Sydney, 205n1, 429ni, 
575n24
Eminem, 96
Eppinger, Steven D., 402n39, 
402n41, 402n43
Epstein, Rachel, 291n
Erdem, Tulin, 605n13
Eridon, Corey, 232n11
Esper, Terry L., 517n11
Esterl, Mike, 58n30, 367niii, 
574n1
Evans, Teri, 575n17
Everdingen, Yvonne van, 
401n20
F
Fabiana, Silvia, 263n51, 
263n52
Fairhurst, Ann, 517n30
Fallon, Jimmy, 83, 84
Fallon, Patrick T., 120n, 282n
Fan, Ying, 517n30
Farr, Lona M., 331n40
Farrell, Diana, 403n58
Farris, P., 58n40, 58n41
Faw, Larissa, 575nv
Fay, Scott, 575n20
Fei, Lam Yik, 256n, 440n
Feinberg, Ashley, 114n58
Felberbaum, Michael, 147n
Fendley, Seth, 113n18
Ferdman, Roberto A., 401n2
Ferraro, Rosellina, 299n8, 
367n31, 367n32
Ferreira, Fabiana, 232n26, 
232n27
Ferrey, Jonathan, 11n
Finkelstein, Stacey R., 207niii
Fisch, Jan Hendrik, 402n50
Fishaw, Justin, 634n13
Fishbach, Ayelet, 207niii
Fitzgerald, Michael, 171nii

654	
name index
Fleck, Nathalie, 367n43
Fleishman, Hannah, 263n65
Flint, Joe, 575nii
Florida, Rana, 140n24
Fok, Dennis, 401n20
Ford, Henry, 12
Fowler, Floyd J., 330n30
Fowler, Geoffrey, 403nii
French, Alan, 403ni
Friday, Mim, 44n
Friedman, Andrew, 394
Friedman, Milton, 140n15
Fritz, Ben, 403ni
Frohlich, Thomas C., 140n19
Frost, Lerinda L., 403niii
Frost, Peter, 403nv, 605n2
Fu, Guoqun, 367n36
Fuhrmans, Vanessa, 299n29
Fujita, Akihisa, 575n19
Fukada, Shiho, 257n
Fuller, Bonnie, 171ni
Fulton, Scott M. III, 171niv
Fung, Brian, 171n42
G
Gagliardi, Nancy, 170n1
Galbraith, Dan, 171n33
Galinsky, Adam D., 206n14
Gallay, Charley, 3n
Gallo, Carmine, 57n12, 
206n43
Gallo, Phil, 575n12
Gallup, Sean, 34n
Gandhi, Mahatma, 135
Ganesh, Jaishankar, 299n17
Gannam, Tom, 384n
Garrett, Daniel M., 483n18, 
483n21
Garrett, Jason, 517n22
Gasparro, Annie, 263n60, 
367nv
Gates, Bill, 386
Gauri, Dinesh K., 482n3
Geller, Martinne, 263n48
George, M., 334n52
Germain, Richard, 517n23
Germano, Sarah, 112n1, 112n2, 
575niv
Gessinger, Gernot H., 402n47
Giamatti, Paul, 552n
Gianastasio, David, 564n, 
606niii
Gibs, Samuel, 232n10
Gilbert, David, 401n3
Gilly, Mary C., 262n19, 
263n46
Gilson, Dave, 170n20
Gingerich, Mike, 113n34
Gioglio, Jessica, 575n32
Giriprakash, K., 263niii
Goel, Vindu, 483niii
Gold, Jon, 403n59
Goldblum, Jeff, 557
Goldenberg, Jacob, 402n26
Golder, Peter, 403n65
Golicic, Susan, 517n23
Gomez, Selena, 556, 579, 580
Goode, Lauren, 233ni
Goodman, J. David, 634n18
Goodney, Chris, 544n
Goodstein, Ronald, 299n22
Gosling, Samuel D., 299n15
Gottfried, Miriam, 27niv, 606ni
Goukens, Caroline, 206n19
Goulding, Matt, 263n67
Graham, John L., 170n8, 
262n19, 263n46
Graham, Luke, 27n39
Greco, Susan, 634n28
Greeley, Brendan, 171n41, 
605n10
Greenberg, Jeff, 317n,  
465n, 472n
Greenberg, Karl, 564n
Greene, M. V., 429n24
Greenfield, Jerry, 21
Greenfield, Richard, 457n20
Greengard, Samuel, 115nv
Greenley, Gordon E., 263n52
Greenough, John, 171nv
Greenspan, Nick, 206n44
Grégoire, Yany, 429n27
Gregory, Paul, 262n36
Greifeneder, Rainer, 206n15
Gremler, Dwayne D., 57n10, 
428n2, 429n6, 429n13
Gress, John, 19n
Gretler, Corinne, 27n45
Grewal, Dhruv, 26n21, 65n1, 
113n20, 113n22, 206n31, 
207n52, 330n29, 
429n10, 429n26, 
429n28, 456n5, 456n7, 
457n19, 457n22, 482n3, 
483n4, 483n9, 517n6, 
517n7, 517n22, 545n3, 
546n31, 575n21, 634n39
Griffin, Mitch, 205n5
Griffith, David A., 517n18
Grönroos, Christian, 429n26
Gross, Rachel, 207niii
Grossman, John, 367n44
Guarini, Drew, 457n20
Gundlach, Gregory T., 26n10, 
57n13
Gupta, S., 335n52, 335n54
Guthrie, Amy, 517nv
H
Hacker, Lee, 506n
Hackett, Robert, 232n31
Hackmann, Britt, 65n1
Hagerty, James M., 299n11
Hahn, Alexander, 546n34
Haldermann, Alexander, 
605n14
Hale, Lucy, 267, 557
Hale, Todd, 206n33
Hall, Emma, 575n31
Halscheid, Megan, 575n22
Halzack, Sarah, 299nii, 
545n16, 545n18
Hamilton, R., 482n3
Hamilton, Rebecca W., 483n11
Hamilton, Ryan, 206n44
Hanssens, D., 335n52
Hao, Cui, 459n
Hardie, B., 335n52
Harding, Ian, 267
Hardt, Oliver, 212n
Hardy, J., 243n
Hardy, Quentin, 330n19
Hargrave, Marshall, 232n5
Harker, Debra, 605n31
Harker, Michael, 605n31
Harmon, Amy, 140n23
Harper, Bryce, 346, 347
Harrington, Blaine III, 437n
Harris, Derrick, 171niv
Harris, Elizabeth A., 140n35, 
206n36, 483nii
Harris, Melissa, 331n47, 
331n48, 403nv
Hartley, Steven W.,  
58n39, 65n3
Harvey, Quentin, 232ni, 
633n2
Harvey, Steve, 159
Hastings, Reed, 21, 235
Hauser, John R., 402n35
Hawkins, Del I., 170n8
Haws, Kelly L., 330n10
Hay, Timothy, 401n12
Heath, Alex, 26n30
Heath, Robert G., 605n7, 
605n25
Heerde, Harald J. van, 402n21
Heinze, Timothy, 634n38
Heisler, Toss, 470n
Heitjans, Torsten, 366n28
Henderson, Kirk, 207n47
Henderson, Mike, 146
Hendrix, Jimi, 441
Hennig-Thurau, Thorsen, 
366n28
Henry, Thierry, 112
Herrmann, Andreas, 403n65
Herzog, Walter, 429n19
Hider, Ben, 609n
Highsmith, Jim, 402n38
Hill, Jonah, 434
Hill, Ronald Paul, 206n26
Hippel, Eric von, 402n38
Hoeffler, Steven, 402n42
Hofstede, Geert, 244, 245n, 
262n23
Hofstede, Geert Jan, 245n
Hogan, John E., 482n2
Hogg, Erin, 232n23
Hogsholt, David, 476n
Hollister, Sean, 403n73
Holtzman, David H., 634n35
Homburg, Christian, 546n34
Homer, Pamela Mills, 606n42
Hong, Jae C., 122n
Horree, Peter, 535n
Hoshino, Kimihiro, 379n
Hotten, Russell, 59niv
Houson, Mark B., 366n28
Howell, Vandy, 483n18, 
483n21
Hruby, Michael J., 184e, 184n, 
289n, 305n, 317n, 355n, 
373n, 437n, 469n
Hsu, Tiffany, 367niii
Huang, Rong, 366n18
Huba, Jackie, 606n37
Huber, Lynn, 634n27
Hughes, Robert, 464n
Humphrey, Mark, 531n
Hunt, Bob, 606n33, 606n34
Hussain, Sajjad, 252n
Hwang, Bang-Ning, 456n7
I
Iannarino, S. Anthony, 634n13
Iezzi, Teressa, 59n54, 59n58
Inman, J. Jeffrey, 207n51
Ip, Melissa, 262n10
Irwin, Julie R., 206n18
Isakson, Erik, 17n, 449n
Isidore, Chris, 483n32, 
483n33, 483n38, 
483n40
Iyer, Karthik, 517n23
Izquierdo, Ignacio, 91n
J
Jackson, Candace, 634nv
Jacobsohn, Jed, 293n
Jacobson, Robert, 366n18
Jaekel, Brielle, 561n
Jae-Won, Lee, 15n
Jaffe, Joseph, 299n16
James, Geoffrey, 633n8
James, Ken, 408n
James, LeBron, 82, 566n
Janiszewski, Chris, 207n49
Janofsky, Adam, 517n17
Jansen, Myra, 134–135, 136
Jarboe, Greg, 605n1
Jargon, Julie, 171n28, 263n48, 
263n62, 483n37
Jayson, Sharon, 170n17

	
name index	
655
Jay-Z, 296
Jennings, Steve, 86n
Jepson, Carly Rae, 84
Jervell, Ellen Emmerentze, 
367n53
Jewell, Robert D., 401n20
Ji, Mi, 634niii
Jiang, Steven, 262n43
Jie Zhang, 546n36
Jing Xu, 205n6
Jobs, Steve, 372
Johansson, Johny, 262n18
John, Deborah Roedder, 
366n28
John, Elton, 30
Johnson, Bill, 263n50
Johnson, Eric, 403n72
Johnson, Hollis, 483n23
Johnson, Lauren, 207nv
Johnson, Tashauna, 89n
Johnston, Danny, 510n
Johnston, Mark W., 232n27, 
633n7, 634n12, 634n24, 
634n32, 634n34, 
634n36, 634n39
Jones, Ashby, 207niii
Jones, Chuck, 58n46
Jones, David, 289n
Jones, John Philip, 575n15
Jones, Salim, 135–136
Joplin, Janis, 296
Jordan, Michael, 37
Joseph, Seb, 59nii, 113n30, 
483n31, 575ni
Josephs, Leslie, 262n12, 
262n13
Joyner, Tom, 159
Ju, Shirley, 114n44
K
Kahn, Kenneth K., 402n49
Kahn, W., 335n52
Kahney, Leander, 233niii
Kain, Erik, 401n17
Kaltcheva, Velitchka D., 
429n12, 429n27
Kamel, Marc-Andre, 206n44
Kang, Cecilia, 141n43, 141n46, 
331n40
Kannan, P. K., 546n35
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 
402n21
Kapoor, N., 605n31
Kardashian, Kim, 96
Karlovich, Janice, 170n15
Katersky, Aaron, 140n25
Kaufman, Leslie, 232n28
Kawamoto, Dawn, 233niii
Kaye, Kate, 115nv, 299nii, 
299niii
Keane, Michael, 605n13
Keenan, Joe, 367nii
Kell, John, 207n54,  
207n58
Keller, Kevin Lane, 348n, 
366n12, 366n13, 366n14, 
367n31, 367n40, 401n16, 
605n7
Keller, Robert, 634n22
Kelly, Jeff, 330n12
Kendall, Brent, 483n17
Kerin, Roger, 58n47, 65n3
Kerin, Roger A., 58n39
Kerr, James M., 206n20
Kersey, Brian, 491n
Kessler, Aaron M., 59nv
Kessler, Marcia, 412, 423
Khouri, Andrew, 140n14
Kiefaber, David, 366n19, 
606niii
Kiesmüller, G. P., 517n26
Kilgore, Tomi, 403nv
Killilea, Vivien, 304n
Kim, Rob, 436n
Kim, Susannah, 140n25
Kim, Yun-Hee, 263n45
Kimmel, Jimmy, 358
Kincaid, Jason, 263nii
Kindall, Gideon, 416n
King, Dan, 207n49
King, Rachael, 330n26
King, Rachel, 233niii
Kirmani, Amna, 299n8, 
367n31, 367n32
Klara, Robert, 26n4, 26n7, 
57n5, 58n23
Koc, U., 456n5
Kohli, Ajay, 206n22, 403n64
Kollewe, Julia, 233niv
Kotabe, Masaaki, 263n52
Kotkin, Joel, 171n27
Kotler, Philip, 26n35,  
206n39
Kowitt, Beth, 57n6, 170n1, 
457n26, 457n28
Kozzin, Alan, 403n61
Krakowiak, Michal, 400n
Kramer, Andrew E., 263n69
Krause, Michael, 232n26
Krieg, Peter C., 403n64
Krishnamurthy, Parthasarathy, 
206n29
Krishnan, R., 26n21, 330n29, 
456n5
Krishnani, Ravi, 263n68
Krogue, Ken, 634n13
Krueger, Richard A., 330n27
Krugman, Dean M., 605n28
Kumar, V., 26n23, 26n24, 
57n8, 299n17, 334n52
Kunz, Ben, 171niv
Kwong, Matt, 546nv
L
Labarre, Polly, 170n7
Labaton, Stephen, 483n18, 
483n21
Lachapelle, Tara, 207n57, 
207n60, 207n62
Laczniak, Gene R., 58n19, 
140n12
Laden, Rich, 429n15
Lam, Simon S. K., 26n21
Lam, Stephen, 376n
Lambrecht, Anja, 26n15
Lamey, Lien, 366n24
Lan Luo, 205n11
Landwehr, Jan R., 403n65
Lanzolla, Gianvito, 402n23
Lao Chen, 249n
Laprete, Jay, 305n
Lara, Robert, 331ni
Laran, Juliano, 206n32
Lardinois, Frederic, 402n44
Larracilla, Carlos, 66
Larson, Jeffrey S., 206n37
Lassk, Felicia G., 634n30
Latham, Ben, 517n30
Lauder, Estee, 54
Laurita, Andrea, 159n
Lauritz, James, 221n
Lautman, Martin R., 205n4
LaVeris, Jason, 594n
Lawrence, Jennifer, 276
Lee, Chris, 532n
Lee, Leonard, 206n29
Legaria, Guillermo, 614n
Legoux, Renaud, 429n27
Lehman, Donald, 57n17
Lehmann, D. R., 335n54
Lehmann, Donald R., 366n14, 
402n54, 402n55
Lenk, Peter, 366n28
Lennihan, Mark, 186n
Leonard, Devin, 58n48
Leone, R. P., 334n52
LePine, Jeffery, 429n19
Leung, Wing Lun, 344n
Levenson, David, 320n
Levenstein, Steven, 403n63
Levine, Asher, 262n29
Levitt, Theodore, 140n9, 
402n53, 605n18
Levy, Michael, 65n1, 206n31, 
207n52, 429n10, 
457n22, 483n4, 483n9, 
517n6, 517n7, 517n10, 
545n3, 575n21, 634n39
Lewis, Michael, 456n6
Li, Bingbing, 177
Li, Hongshuang (Alice),  
546n35
Libai, Barak, 299n17, 401n20, 
402n26
Lieb, Rebecca, 575n18
Lievens, Annouk, 402n35
Lilien, Gary L., 26n32
Lin, N., 335n52
Lindsey-Mullikin, J., 517n26
Lindsey-Mullikin, Joan, 457n19, 
483n15, 517n27
Lippes, Adam, 351
Liptak, Adam, 483niii
Lister-Kaye, Warwick, 162n
Little, Kate, 170n9, 170n11, 
367n50
Liu-Thompkins, Yuping, 57n8, 
207n51
Lloyd, Mary Ellen, 171n25
Loftus, Jack, 605n23
Lohr, Steve, 403niv, 483n16, 
517n29
Lonyai, Ken, 546n38
Lopez, Carmen, 517n30
Lorenzetti, Laura, 59ni
Loten, Angus, 517n17
Lovato, Demi, 556
Lowy, Benjamin, 316n
Luk, Lorraine, 263n45
Lund, John, 406n
Luo, Anita, 26n23, 26n24
Lurie, Nicholas H., 205n8
Lutz, Ashley, 331ni, 545n11, 
545n12
Lutz, Richard, 206n18
Lyell, Jake, 129n
Lynch, Jerry, 171niii
M
Ma, Wayne, 262n11
Mac, Ryan, 403nii
Macale, Sherilynn, 58n43
MacDonald, Dennis, 131n
MacDonnell, Rhiannon, 27n35
MacDougall, John, 45n
Mach, Andrew, 634n14
Macia, Oscar, 634ni
Mackey, John, 140n10
Mackie, Drew, 403ni
Madden, Normandy, 263nii
Maddox, Kate, 634n19
Madhani, Aamer, 483n24, 
483n34
Madonna, 30
Maeng, Ahreum, 206n44
Mahajan, Vijay, 58n47, 
402n50
Mahidhar, Vikram, 575n22
Mahone, Austin, 556
Mahr, Dominik, 402n35
Makarem, Suzanne C., 429n22
Malhotra, Naresh K., 299n5
Mamet, David, 610
Manchanda, Puneet, 402n21
Mangan, Dan, 171n38

656	
name index
Mangold, John, 146
Manilow, Barry, 351
Manzullo, Brian, 483n29
Marchak, Emily, 367n34
Marchant, Robin, 351n
Markey, Jenn, 456n12, 457ni
Markus, Craig, 48n
Markus, Hazel Rose, 206n26
Mars, Bruno, 8
Marshall, Greg W., 232n27, 
633n7, 634n12, 634n24, 
634n32, 634n34, 
634n36, 634n39
Martin, Diane M., 57n13
Martin, Jenna, 546n26
Martin, Kelly D., 206n26
Martin, Steven W., 634n29
Martinez, Amy, 429n29
Marx, Patricia, 546n30
Masidlover, Nadya, 262n14, 
483niv
Maslow, Abraham, 188, 
206n25
Masunaga, Samantha, 140n14, 
171nv
Matherly, Ted, 299n8, 367n31, 
367n32
Matlack, Carol, 402n28, 
402n30
Matlow, Linda, 520n
Matyszczyk, Chris, 299ni
Maycotte, H. O., 113n29
Mays, Buddy, 411n
Maze, Jonathan, 483n28, 
483n39
McCarthy, E. Jerome, 26n11
McCarthy, Justin, 207n53
McCarthy, Melissa, 276
McCarthy, Michael, 606nii
McClaren, Nicolas, 634n37
McCluskey, Megan, 207n59
McCorvey, J. J., 517nv
McCue, Matt, 516n3, 517n5
McEntire, Reba, 351, 583
McKalin, Vamien, 403niv
McLain, Sean, 517niv
McLaughlin, Laurianne, 429nii
McLennan, Chris, 339n
McMillan, Robert, 232ni
McVay, Ryan, 12n
Mead, Rebecca, 367n51
Mela, Carl F., 402n21
Meldung, Danny, 343n
Melton, Nicole Marie, 367nii
Menkes, Suzy, 170n17
Mentzer, John T., 57n13
Meredith, Geoffrey E., 170n15
Merrill, Barbara, 621
Messi, Lionel, 580
Metz, Brooke, 59nii
Miao, Fred, 517n22
Mihailescu, Daniel, 495n
Miller, Arthur, 610
Miller, Bennett, 456n6
Miller, Claire Cain, 483n16, 
517n29
Miller, Ethan, 177n
Min Zhao, 402n42
Minkov, Michael, 245n
Mintz, Ofer, 58n36
Mirren, Helen, 177
Mishra, Mukesh Kumar, 
367n43
Mislinski, Phil, 155n
Mitchell, Pierre, 232n2
Mitchell, Shay, 267
Mitra, Sabyasachi, 205n8
Mittal, Banwari, 206n24, 
206n31, 207n50
Mizik, Natalie, 366n18
Mohr, Jakki J., 401n21
Monga, Alokparna Basu, 
366n28
Monroe, Kent B., 26n21, 
456n5, 457n15
Moore, J., 58n34
Morales, Andrea C., 205n2
Morgan, Neil A., 366n8, 
366n18
Morhart, Felicitas M., 429n19
Morin, Sylvie, 206n40
Morris, David Paul, 305n
Morris, Sarah, 263n53
Morrison, Maureen, 483ni
Moses, Lucia, 575nv
Mosscrop, Jen, 517n28
Moth, David, 114n77
Mothersbaugh, David L., 170n8
Mozart, Mike, 360n
Mudambi, Susan M., 58n47, 
429n22
Mueller, Rene Dentiste, 
263n52
Muller, Eitan, 401n20,  
402n26
Mullins, Brody, 483n17
Mulready, Rick, 114n70
Munger, Jeanne, 634n39
Munger, Jeanne L., 457n22
Murphy, Chris, 403niii
Murphy, Colum, 263ni
Murphy, Patrick E., 58n19, 
140n12
Murray, Rachel, 531n
Musk, Elon, 120
Mycoskie, Blake, 117–118
Myers, James, 206n16
N
Nagle, Michael, 152n,  
204n, 487n
Nagle, Thomas T., 482n2
Nagpal, Anish, 206n29
Nairn, Agnes C., 605n7
Naylor, Rebecca Walker, 
206n18
Nazario, Marina, 546n39
Neal, Leon, 397n
Neelon, Michael, 308n,  
347, 353n
Neff, Jack, 262n8, 366n10, 
605n23, 606n41
Neijens, Peter C., 606n42
Netemeyer, Richard G., 
330n10
Netzky, Pam, 394
Newcomb, Alyssa, 171nv
Newman, Andrew Adam, 
114niii, 171n47, 401n13, 
429n9, 457n23, 457n27, 
575n13, 575n14, 
605n23
Newman, Jared, 403niv
Newman, Paul, 128
Ng, Serena, 171n44, 456n1, 
456n4, 546niv
Ng, Sharon, 366n7, 367n32
Nguyen, Hang T., 367n35
Nikolaeva, Ralitza, 402n23
Nir, Michael, 402n38
Nishi, Dennis, 634n21
Nitzan, Irit, 299n17
Nixon, Ron, 26n34, 232n4
Nouvelage, Elijah, 47n
Novellino, Teresa, 330n3
Nudd, Tim, 26n1, 26n3, 
27n44, 366n22, 574n3
Nyong’o, Lupita, 594
O
Oakley, James L., 402n23
Oatey, Lane, 533n, 633n
Obama, Barack, 84
Obermiller, Carl, 606n36
O’Brien, Sara Ashley, 330n2, 
330n6
O’Connor, Clare, 232n3
O’Hagan, Patrick, 9
Ohikuare, Judith, 457n24
O’Kane, B., 149n
O’Laughlin, Frank, 59n62
Olson, Aaron K., 331n45
Olson, Elizabeth, 330n1
Olson, Jerry C., 206n24, 
206n31, 206n37, 
207n50
Olson, Scott, 534n
O’Meara, Chris, 463n
Oppenheim, J. M., 140n28
Ordabayeva, Nailya, 483n8
Orgel, David, 546niii
Osawa, Juro, 263n45
Oster, Erik, 483n27
O’Sullivan, Arthur, 262n5
Ottman, Jacquelyn A., 171n36
Overly, Steven, 483nii
Owen, Jonathan H., 403niii
P
Palmatier, Robert W., 26n23, 
517n22
Palmer, Keke, 365
Parasuraman, A., 330n29, 
412n, 429n10, 429n12, 
429n27
Parker, Laura, 140n23
Pascale, Lorraine, 365
Pasquarelli, Adrianne, 331n50, 
428n1
Passel, Jeffrey S., 171n26
Passy, Charles, 263n66, 
402n32, 402n37, 
402n46
Paul, Pamela, 170n17
Pauwels, Koen, 205n4, 401n14
Peden, Tracey, 232n25
Peloza, John, 605n20
Peng Huang, 205n8
Penn, Mark, 331n40
Peres, Renana, 401n20, 
402n26
Perez, Sarah, 299nii
Perez, Steve, 262n5
Perlroth, Nicole, 113n41, 
140n35
Perot, Carolyn, 170n20
Perry, Chris, 114ni
Perry, Katy, 90
Pesek, Debra, 633n4, 633n5
Peter, J. Paul, 206n24, 
206n31, 206n37
Petersen, J. A., 335n52
Peterson, A., 334n52
Peterson, Hayely, 331ni
Peterson, Tim, 59niii, 114n67
Petty, R. D., 483n15, 517n27
Pfeiffer, Markus, 605n8
Phelps, Jeffrey, 274n
Pierdomenico, Alessia, 354n
Pisani, Joseph, 545n20
Pitt, Brad, 434
Pizzello, Chris, 21n
Platt, Spencer, 15n
Podoshen, Jeffrey S., 429n22
Poggi, Jeanine, 299n6
Poggi, Jeanne, 114ni
Pogue, David, 403n66
Polk, Rich, 8n
Pollack, Andrew, 140n23
Pomares, Alberto, 157n
Popper, Nathaniel, 140n35
Porro, Michel, 391n
Porterfield, Amy, 114n66
Pozza, Ilaria Dalla, 299n17

	
name index	
657
Prabhu, Jaideep C., 402n21
Pratt, Suzi, 124n
Press, Melea, 57n9
Prettyman, Tom, 473n
Price, Rob, 483n10, 606n39
Pritzl, Rudolf, 206n44
Proctor, Bernadette D., 170n18
Pucinelli, Nancy M., 546n29
Pugliano, Bill, 498n
Pujari, Devashish, 402n35
Purnell, Newley, 517niv
Q
Qu, Riliang, 367n36
Quester, Pascale G., 367n43
Quinn, Laura S., 114n63
R
Raedle, Joe, 46n
Raga, Jose Fuste, 407n
Raghubir, Priya, 483n8
Rajaratnam, Dan, 263n52
Ramani, G., 335n52
Ramsay, Mike, 263niv
Rappaport, Alfred, 58n19
Ratchford, Brian T., 205n11
Ravishanker, N., 335n52
Ray, Ramon, 429n7
Rayburn, Steven W., 429n18
Raynor, Michael E., 402n22
Razumovskaya, Olga, 263n71
Redfern, David, 441n
Reed, Jason, 18n
Regan, Kadie, 26n26
Rego, Lopo L., 366n8, 366n18
Reinartz, Werner, 26n14, 
335n52
Reingold, Jennifer, 330n23
Reitz, Stephanie, 233niii
Rellandini, Stefano, 451n
Resek, Andrew, 18n, 407n, 
537n
Revere, Stacy, 357n
Ricadela, Aaron, 575nv
Richards, Jef I., 605n4, 
605n31
Richwine, Lisa, 115niv
Riedel, Charlie, 628n
Rijmenam, Mark van, 367nii, 
403niii
Riley, Nicola, 367n36
Rinallo, Diego, 606n36
Risselada, H., 605n25
Rizzo, John A., 407n
Roberts, Andrew, 331nv
Roberts, Julia, 591
Robinson, Geoffrey, 493n
The Rock, 96
Rockefeller, John, 280
Roderick, Leonie, 605n9
Rodgers, Everett M., 378n
Rodriguez, Ashley, 207ni
Rodriguez, James, 549, 573
Rodriguez, Mia, 146
Rodríguez-Escudero, Ana I., 
402n35
Roeder, Phil, 615n
Rogan, Ellen, 403nv
Roggeveen, Anne L., 26n22, 
113n20, 429n26, 
429n28
Roman, Ernan, 115niv
Ronquillo, Mark, 48n
Rooney, Jennifer, 141ni, 
403n60
Rosato, Bob, 226n
Rosenbloom, Stephanie, 
113n25
Ross, Genevieve, 85n
Ross, Jan-Michael, 402n50
Rotfeld, Herbert Jack, 
605n29
Roth, David Lee, 589
Rourke, Matt, 39n
Rovell, Darren, 366n11
Rucker, Derek D., 206n14
Rudarakanchana, Nat, 
263n63
Rudelius, William, 58n39, 
65n3
Ruiz, Rebecca R., 366n30, 
367n33
Ryall, Bill, 260n
Ryan, Chris, 618n
Ryan, Don, 119n
Ryan, Kevin, 114n65
Ryan, Tom, 27nv, 545n19, 
546ni
S
Sabatté, Micheline, 575n22
Sakuma, Paul, 178n, 224n, 
613n
Samaha, Stephen A., 26n23
Samokhin, Roman, 362n
San Miguel, Renay, 403niv
Sánchez, Alexis, 573
Sanda, Stanca, 49n
Sandler, Adam, 276
Sandy, Carson J., 299n15
Santos, Nicole, 428n1
Santos-Vijande, María Leticia, 
429n25
Sarigöllü, Emine, 366n18
Sauer, Abe, 606n43, 606n44
Sauter, Michael B., 140n19
Saxena, Ashok, 287n
Schaefer, David H., 605n26
Schafer, Kevin, 278n
Scheer, Lisa, 517n22
Scheibehenne, Benjamin, 
206n15
Schewe, Charles D., 170n15
Schlossberg, Mallory, 170n4
Schmidt, Gregory, 367n41, 
367n42
Schmidt, Joachim, 299n27
Schnatter, John, 479
Schoger, Christel, 101n
Scholossberg, Mallory, 428n1
Schouten, John W., 57n13
Schrank, Peter, 113n21
Schultz, David, 232n1
Schultz, E. J., 57n1, 57n2, 
141ni, 232n19, 366n9, 
367n45, 367n46, 574n4, 
575n5, 575n7, 575niv
Schutte, Shané, 367n34
Schwartz, Barry, 206n26
Schwartz, John, 207niv
Schwarz, Norbert, 205n6
Scipioni, Jade, 207n62
Scott, Drew, 629
Scott, Jonathan Silver, 629
Scott, Mark, 262n1
Segre, Alex, 472n
Seiders, Kathleen, 546n31
Sengupta, Jaideep, 605n22
Sengupta, Sanjit, 401n21
Sengupta, Somini, 113n41, 
331n41
Senne, Steven, 31n
Serhant, Ryan, 629
Shaffer, Leslie, 141niii
Shaffer, Tim, 5n
Shah, Denish, 26n23, 
334n52
Shahani, Aarti, 429n34, 
429n37
Shakira, 351
Shankar, Venkatesh, 402n23
Sharma, Amol, 171niv, 331niii
Sharma, Monty, 151
Shaw, Andy, 114n68
Sheffrin, Steven, 262n5
Sherman, Todd, 517nv
Sherwood, Chris, 207n67
Shimp, Terence, 58n34, 
575n8, 575n10
Shum, Matthew, 605n13
Silverman, David, 261n
Silverstein, Barry, 366n27
Silverthorne, Sean, 233niv
Simanis, Erik, 171n21
Simerson, B. Keith, 331n45
Simon, Phil, 171niv
Singer, Natasha, 331n37
Sirianni, Nancy J., 58n18, 
429n12
Sisario, Ben, 115nvi, 331niii
Sisodia, Raj, 140n10
Sisodia, Rajendra, 140n11, 
140n21
Sittler, Pascal, 235n
Siwicki, Bill, 114n51
Skelley, Ariel, 18n, 215n, 624n
Slater, Stanley F., 401n21
Sloat, Sarah, 59niv
Slutsky, Irina, 606n32
Smit, Edith G., 606n42
Smith, Catharine, 366n2
Smith, Chris, 58n43
Smith, Greg, 422n
Smith, Ned, 634n29
Smith, Robert E., 605n13
Smollett, Jussie, 555
Snyder, Benjamin, 634n26
Solomon, Michael R., 205n3, 
299n7, 299n10
Soman, Dilip, 206n44
Song, Aly, 242n
Song, Dong-Ping, 517n26
Sood, Alex, 299n6
Sood, Sanjay, 367n31
Soper, Taylor, 517nii, 545n1
Spangenberg, Eric R., 606n36
Spangler, Todd, 58n50
Spann, Martin, 113n22
Spear, Andrew, 213n
Spiggle, Susan, 367n35
Sridhar, Shrihari, 26n32
Srinivasan, Raji, 26n32, 
483n8
Sriram, S., 335n52
Sriskandan, Kumar, 196n
Srivastava, Joydeep, 483n11
Srull, Thomas K., 605n7
Stabiner, Karen, 483n12
Staub, Eric A., 483n7
Stebbins, Sam, 140n19
Steel, Emily, 147n, 171niii
Stemersch, Stefan, 401n20
Stengel, Richard, 141n39
Stephen, Andrew T., 299n8
Stephens, Barb, 145
Stern, Corey, 546n24
Stern, Joanna, 331nv, 403nii
Stern, Matthew, 113n19
Stevens, Tim, 59nv
Stewart, James B., 517nv
Stigler, George E., 517n14
Stilley, Karen M., 207n51
Stinnett, Bill, 634n10
Stork, Travis, 351
Stout, Hilary, 57n14, 59ni, 
428n3
Streitfield, David, 429n36, 
429niii
Strom, Stephanie, 27niii, 
58n31, 140n13, 140n23, 
483nii
Strong, E. K., 575n11
Stross, Randall, 206n23
Suarez, Fernando F., 402n23

658	
name index
Sujan, Harish, 634n20
Sujan, Mita, 634n20
Sullivan, Justin, 14n, 428n
Sun, Baohong, 605n13
Supphellen, Magne, 26n22
Sura, Sejal, 575n22
Suri, R., 456n5
Swift, Taylor, 591
Sykes, Charles, 152n
T
Tabaka, Maria, 233nv
Tackett, Kelly, 545n22
Tadena, Nathalie, 58n35
Takayama, Leila, 400
Talukdar, Debabrata, 206n13
Tam, Leona, 57n8, 207n51
Tan, Sang, 182n
Tanner, John F., 232n27
Tanner, Robin J., 206n44
Taylor, Charles R., 605n29
Taylor, Kate, 546n25
Team, Trefis, 331ni, 634niii
Tellis, Gerard, 403n65
Thakor, M. V., 456n5
Thaler, Richard, 171n24
Thau, Barbara, 27nii
Theron, Charlize, 177
Thomas, J., 335n52
Thompson, A. A., 58n51
Thompson, Craig J., 206n34
Thompson, Elaine, 519n
Thompson, Emma, 244
Thompson, Isaac, 299n3
Thorson, E., 58n34
Threlfall, Hugh, 380n
Thurlow, Jonathan, 344n
Tierney, John, 366n1, 366n3
Timberlake, Justin, 84, 605
Todd, Peter M., 206n15
Tomczak, Torsten, 429n19
Ton, Zeynep, 517n32
Toor, Amar, 331nv
Trachtenberg, Jeffrey, 206n45
Treacy, Michael, 57n7
Tregear, Hannah, 141ni
Tripp, Thomas M., 429n27
Tripplaar, Kristoffer, 524n
Trivedi, Minakshi, 482n3
Troy, Mike, 232n32
Troye, Sigurd, 26n22
Tsiros, Michael, 26n22, 
429n26, 429n28
Tucker, Catherine, 26n15
Tugent, Alina, 331n44, 331n49
Tung, Rosalie L., 262n22
Tung, Tang Ming, 248n
Turk, Harry, 610
Turlington, Christy, 591
Tuschman, Mark, 622n
Tyler, Sue, 146
U
Uhlman, Tom, 488n
Ulaga, Wolfgang, 26n14
Ulanoff, Lance, 403n70
Ulrich, Karl T., 402n39, 
402n41, 402n43
Unger, Stephen H., 233niv
Urban, Glen L., 402n35
Urs, Anil, 263niii
V
Valentine, Sean R., 634n37
Van Domelin, Katie, 114n61
Van Etten, Susan, 524n
van Meurs, Lex, 605n25
van Reijmersdal, Eva A., 
606n42
van Rijmenam, Mark, 170n14
Van Tine, Dennis, 236n
VanderVeen, David J., 403niii
Varadarajan, P. Rajan, 58n47
Varadarajan, Rajan, 402n23
Varnhot, Hendrink, 59niv
Vaughan, Pamela, 113n11, 
113n27, 113n28
Vega, Tanzina, 606niii
Venkatesan, Rajkumar, 26n24, 
334n52
Venkatesh, R., 206n22, 
403n64
Verbeke, Alain, 262n22
Verhoef, Peter C., 26n19, 
605n25
Verma, D. P. S., 605n31
Vidler, Steve, 6n
Viviani, Fabio, 195
Vlasic, Bill, 171nv
Vogt, Heidi, 141niii
Vohs, Kathleen D., 605n22
Voight, Joan, 263n57
Voima, Päivi, 429n26
Völckner, Franziska, 367n35
Vollmayr, Josef, 546n34
Von D, Kat, 86
Vranica, Suzanne, 331niii
W
Wagner, Meg, 113n17
Wakefield, Kirk L., 207n51
Walker, Danielle Medina, 
262n19
Walker, Dave, 299n1
Walker, Thomas, 262n19
Walter, Phil, 199n
Walters, Damien, 573
Walton, Sam, 417
Wang, Liz C., 205n5
Wang, Qi, 575n20
Wargo, Theo, 84n
Warlop, Luk, 206n19
Warren, Christina, 114n64
Wass, Nick, 389n
Wasserman, Todd, 171n29
Wathieu, Luc, 483n11
Watrous, Monica, 483n35
Watson, Elaine, 401n15, 546nii
Wedel, Michel, 366n28
Weed, Julie, 299niv
Weigold, Michael F., 605n12, 
605n26
Weitz, Barton A., 206n31, 
232n27, 429n10, 483n4, 
483n9, 517n6, 517n7, 
517n10, 517n23, 545n3, 
575n21, 634n20
Weng lei, 93n
Wentzel, Daniel, 403n65
Wesson, Michael, 429n19
West, Kanye, 296
Westing, David, 37n
Westmoreland, Graham, 48n
Wetzels, Martin, 113n22
Wheal, Kevin, 7n
Wheatley, Malcolm, 27nii
White, Jasper, 390n
White, Katherine, 27n35, 
605n20
White, Martha, 331ni
White, Martha C., 27ni
White, Shaun, 112
Whitelocks, Sadie, 634n27
Wieczner, Jen, 429n35
Wiersema, Fred, 57n7
Wilcox, Keith, 299n8
Wiles, Michael A., 366n8
Wilkie, William L., 26n10
Williams, Stephen, 605n27
Willson, Chris, 451n
Wilson, Eric, 299n9, 330n4
Wilson, Marianne, 262n35, 
262n42
Wilson, Mark, 367niv
Wilson, Ross, 140n34
Winer, Russell S., 57n17, 
402n54, 402n55
Wines, Michael, 263n56
Winfrey, Oprah, 21–22,  
152, 340
Wingfield, Nick, 233niii
Winkler, Rolfe, 483n17
Winsor, Robert D., 429n12, 
429n27
Witherspoon, Reese, 179, 182
Witkowski, Wallace, 403n59
Wohl, Jessica, 141nii, 170n5, 
170n6, 574n4, 575n5, 
575n7
Wolfson, Rachel, 330n13, 
330n16
Wolonick, Josh, 114n60
Wolvovitz, Ethel, 158n
Wortham, Jenna, 113n41
Wu, Yuhong, 402n50
Wyer, Robert S., Jr., 483n14
X
Xu, Alison Jing, 483n14
Y
Yadav, Manjit S., 402n23
Yang, Botao, 205n11
Yang, Sha, 483n8
Yang, Xiaojing, 605n13
Yang zheng, 251n
Yasin, Mahathir Mohd, 197n
Yehezkelli, Shai, 245n
Yeung, Ken, 58n43
Yim, Chi Kin (Bennett), 26n21
Ying Hong, 429n18
Ying Zhang, 206n12
Young, Heike, 114n43, 114n47, 
114n48
Yu, Rose, 263ni
Yuseph, Sonia, 403n64
Z
Zainulbhai, Adil S., 403n58
Zale, Joseph, 482n2
Zax, David, 403n68,  
403n69
Zeithaml, Valarie, 57n10, 412n, 
428n2, 429n6, 429n10, 
429n13
Zeplin, Sabrina, 367n36
Zhen Zhu, 429n11, 429n18, 
429n25
Zigmond, Dan, 605n7
Zinnbauer, Markus, 605n8
Ziobro, Paul, 367niii
Zipp, Yvonne, 403n62
Zmuda, Natalie, 263n47, 
402n33, 403n60, 
605n23
Zubcsek, Peter Pal, 113n22
Zuckerberg, Mark, 249
Zumberge, Marianne, 171niv

	
	
659
company index
A
A&W, 356
A.1 steak sauce, 354
ABC, 557
ABC Beverage, 145–146
ABC Family, 267
Abercrombie & Fitch, 194,  
317, 514
Accenture, 210, 251, 257
Ace, 433
Ace Hardware, 452–453
ACME Bubblegum, 146–147
Activia, 350, 351
Acura, 589
Acxiom, 280
Adidas, 226, 237, 248,  
579, 580
AG, 542
Ahold, 19
Ahold US, 526
Albertsons, 196, 526
ALDI, 526, 527
Aldi Enkauf, 520
All-Bran, 270
Allstate, 595
Almax, 324
Amazon, 6, 14, 19, 21, 33, 34, 
43, 52, 100, 104, 121f, 138, 
208–210, 234, 313, 349, 
379, 406, 421, 422, 438, 
439, 454, 475, 492, 493, 
494–495, 506, 507, 
519–520, 520, 528, 
532, 544, 562
Amazon Prime, 209, 507
AmazonFresh, 507
American Academy of 
Pediatrics, 139
American Airlines, 287, 359, 
436, 437, 444
American Apparel, 87
American Diabetic 
Association, 127
American Eagle, 507
American Eagle Outfitters, 
194, 514
American Express,  
313, 586
American Marketing 
Association, 4, 131, 323
Analtech, 554
Android, 223, 399, 408
Animal Kingdom, 459
Anthropologie, 96
Anytime Fitness, 497
AOL, 72
Apple, 15, 34, 47, 49–50, 101, 
164, 196, 202, 211, 213, 
215, 223, 348, 349, 370, 
371, 376, 393, 395, 401, 
475, 512, 591, 600
Apple Newton, 377
Apple Pay, 543
Aquafina, 31f, 38, 39
Arby’s, 383
Architectural Digest, 284
Arm & Hammer, 433, 445
Ascend speakers, 512
Asda, 320
ASICS, 102, 563
AT&T, 166
Audi, 45, 211, 241, 282,  
290, 344
Avaya, 257
Aveda, 361
Avon, 623
Axe Body Spray, 585
B
Bagbarroworsteal.com, 478
Balanced Body, 385, 386
Ballymaloe, 229
Banana Republic, 176, 181–182
Band-Aid, 350
Barbour, 601
Barnes & Noble, 540
Barneys, 616
Bartok Manufacturing, 146
Bass Pro Shops, 353, 531
Beats, 96
Beautyrest, 189
Bed, Bath, & Beyond,  
43, 382
Bell Laboratories, 257, 393
BellSouth, 72
Ben & Jerry’s, 21, 389
Bentley, 211
Bertolli pasta, 513
Best Buy, 158, 186, 327,  
502–504, 506, 508, 
531, 545, 622
Betty Crocker, 373
Bic, 377
Big Lots, 532
Big Machine Label  
Group, 583
Big Macs, 238, 260
Billboard, 107, 108, 311
Bing, 179, 257, 386
Bing Maps, 386
Birchbox, 21
Birkenstock, 193, 194, 365
BJ’s Wholesale Club, 526
Black and Decker, 54,  
383, 583
BlackBerry, 408
Blendtec, 381–382
BMW, 89, 121f, 177, 282,  
364, 564
BMW K1600, 177
Boeing, 492, 611
Bon Appetit, 284
Bosch, 164
Boston Consulting Group,  
48, 49f
Botticelli’s, 268–270
Bravo, 629
Broadmoor Hotel, 413–414
Brooks Brothers, 470, 478
Brookstone, 379
Bubba Nubb’s Lunch  
Wagon, 231
Buena Vista Concerts, 556
Buffalo Wild Wings, 17
Bugaboo International, 158
Bugatti, 211
Buick, 353
Burberry, 522
Burger King, 356, 532
Burlington Coat Factory, 532
BurnMed, 180
Burton, 93
Burt’s Bees, 128
C
C. Wonder emporium,  
536–537
C&S Wholesale Grocers, 526
Cadbury, 240, 362
Cadillac, 40, 282, 353,  
385, 626
Calvin Klein, 561, 562
Camaro, 254
Campaign for a Commercial-
Free Childhood, 139
Campbell Soup, 255, 318, 
323, 324
Canal Plus, 234
Capri Sun, 371, 375
Car and Driver, 202
Carbonite, 407, 410
CareerBuilder, 71, 72
CarMax, 437
CarPlay, 211
Carrefour, 260, 520, 526
Chanel, 242, 476
Charger, 254
Charmin, 594
Cheerios, 183, 183–184, 468, 
583, 598
The Cheesecake Factory, 178, 
195, 195–196
Chevrolet, 40, 254, 353, 385, 
469, 585
Chevrolet Camaro, 254
Chevrolet Cobalt, 385
Chevrolet Malibu, 590
Chex, 373
Chicken McNuggets, 577
Chili’s, 595
Chipotle, 500
Chobani, 361
Choice Hotels, 410
Chromebooks, 399
Church & Dwight, Co., 433
Cisco, 251, 420
CKE, 384
Clairol, 376
Clairol’s Touch of Yogurt 
Shampoo, 377
Clarion, 410
Clorox, 350
CNN, 72
Coach, 520, 521, 523, 524, 
525, 535
Coach for Men, 520, 524, 
527, 532, 535
Coca-Cola, 18, 32, 34, 36, 38, 
39, 41, 46, 47f, 54, 91f, 
92, 109, 121f, 181, 240, 
259, 291–293, 296, 317, 
323, 349, 350, 353, 
358, 361, 377, 384, 600
Coco Pops, 271
Cocoa Krispies, 270
Cole Haan, 285
Colgate, 238, 259, 354, 622
College Humor, 105
Columbia, 564
Comcast, 167, 451, 586
Comfort Inn, 348, 410
Comfort Suites, 410
Condé Nast, 284
Constant Contact, 211
Consumer Reports, 179, 193
Cool Hunter, 168
Corning, 151
Corporate Social 
Responsibility Newswire 
Service, 137
Costco, 353, 360, 490, 520, 
525, 526, 598, 599
Coupons.com, 478, 535
CoverGirl, 90

660	
company index
Cow Wow, 357–358
Cracker Barrel restaurants, 
354
Craftsman, 364
Crest, 354, 436, 591
CTA Digital, 139
CVS, 14, 160, 161, 285, 468, 
523, 531, 532, 535,  
596, 597
D
Daimler AG, 343
Dairy Milk Shots, 240
Daisy Brand, 360–361
DBS Group Holdings, 213
De Beers, 558
Del Monte, 393
Deliv, 544
Dell, 389
Delta Airlines, 436, 437
Denizen, 384
Denny’s Inc., 497
DeWalt, 54, 452–453
Diehard, 364
Diesel jeans, 627
Diet Coke, 200, 312
Diet Pepsi, 188, 312
Dillard’s, 523
Diner’s Club, 604
Direct Marketing  
Association, 137
Disney, 32–33, 34, 97, 98, 
124–125, 154, 357,  
374, 556
Disney World, 446, 459
Disneyland, 446, 459
Doctor Mole, 180
Dodge, 254
Dodge Charger, 254
Dollar General, 523, 531
Dollar Tree, 531
Domino’s Pizza, 251,  
480–482, 553
Doublemint Gum, 197
Dove, 273
Dr Pepper, 200, 355
Driscoll Strawberry 
Associates, 183
Dualit toasters, 506
Dunkin’ Donuts, 55–57,  
348, 497
Duracell, 344
Dyson, 42–43, 54, 380,  
381, 382
E
Earthlink, 72
eBay, 4, 10, 443, 474, 492
eBay Now, 507
eBooks, 475
Echo service, 519
Egg McMuffins, 577
Eggo Syrup, 355
Eggo waffles, 364
eHarmony, 103, 104
1893 Pepsi, 551
Entenmann’s, 447
Epcot, 459
epinions.com, 326
Epsilon, 280
Era, 433
ESPN, 561
Esri, 9
Estée Lauder, 54, 523, 524, 
530, 531
Etsy, 10, 492
Expedia, 16
Experian, 280
EyeSee mannequin, 324
F
Facebook, 12, 16, 17f, 56, 82, 
83, 84, 86, 87, 88–89, 
90, 92–93, 94, 95, 96, 
99, 102, 103, 105–107, 
109, 110, 112, 128, 130, 
156, 163, 249, 272, 313, 
317, 321, 322, 327, 340, 
361, 370, 386, 393, 400, 
543, 563, 571, 597, 605
Family Stores, 531
Febreze, 433
FedEx, 19, 121f, 244, 489, 493
Fender, 441
Ferrari, 211, 355
Fiberlink, 223
TheFind.com, 445
Finlandia Vodka, 143
Fisher-Price, 139
Fitbit, 100, 162, 203, 371, 401
Flickr, 95, 130
Flipboard, 100
Flipkart, 505
Foodspotting, 16
Ford Fusion, 590
Ford Motor Co., 12, 40, 164, 
210, 254, 317, 443, 463, 
584, 590
Forever 21, 93, 510, 514
Forrester Research, 156
4K Blu-ray, 397
Foursquare, 16, 386
Fox, 179, 555, 558
Freeform, 268
FreshDirect, 507, 529
Friskies, 351
Frito-Lay, 160, 277, 355,  
377, 506
Frito-Lay Lemonade, 377
Frontier Airlines, 436, 437
Froot Loops, 270, 358
Funny or Die, 105
Fusion ProGlide razors, 572
Futurebrand, 359
G
Gain, 433
The Gap, 181–182, 514, 613
Gap.com, 542
Garden of Eatin,’ 500
Garrett’s Popcorn, 394
Gatorade, 31f, 288, 289,  
291–293, 296
Geek Squad, 622
General Electric, 34, 103, 121f, 
125, 128, 186, 210, 220, 
222, 254–255, 349, 
557, 582
General Mills, 46, 123, 162, 
373, 387, 468, 583
General Motors, 211, 282, 
353, 384, 385, 492
Giani Bernini leather hand-
bag, 535
Giant, 19
Gillette, 631
Give Kids the World, 125
Glade, 157
Glamour, 365
GMC, 353
Godiva, 2–4, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13, 
25, 289, 290
Golf Digest, 284
Goodyear, 48
Google, 33, 34, 46, 47, 72, 83, 
94–95, 104, 105, 121f, 
156, 164, 179, 211, 249, 
313, 314, 349, 350, 386, 
399–401, 406, 473, 520, 
528, 569, 572
Google AdWords, 313, 569
Google Analytics, 313,  
314, 568
Google Glass, 399–401
Google Maps, 399
Google Shopping  
Express, 507
Google Steet View, 399
Gorilla Glass, 151
Goya Foods, 488, 489
GQ, 284
Green Giant, 387
Grey Poupon, 128
Groupon, 43, 110
GrubHub, 100, 481
Gucci, 451, 478
Guru.com, 217
GymFlow, 307
H
H&M, 478, 510–511, 513, 514
H&R Block, 177, 178
Häagen-Dazs, 162, 356
Haier, 240
Hallmark, 395, 396
Hampton Hotels, 497
Happy Meals, 304, 578
HappyCow, 16, 17
Hard Rock, 561
Hardee’s, 384
Harley-Davidson, 54, 273, 
274, 355, 377, 554
Harley-Davidson Perfume,  
377, 391
Harpo Films, 21
HauteLook, 530
HD-1 Customization, 274
HeatMax HotHands Hand 
Warmers, 342
H-E-B, 195, 526
Heineken, 261
Heinz, 255, 358, 436
Hermès, 440–441
Hershey’s, 5, 7, 15, 25,  
289, 290
Hershey’s Chocolate  
World, 289
Hertz, 40–41, 54
HGTV, 629
Hitt Medical Writing, 231
Holiday Inn, 251
Hollywood Record label, 556
Hollywood Studio, 459
Home and Garden TV, 586
Home Depot, 159, 184–185, 
490, 493–494, 520,  
531, 534
Home Shopping Network, 95
HomeGoods, 532
HomeSense, 532
Honda, 211, 296–298, 344
Honey Maid crackers, 557
Hot Rod ’57 Fender 
Stratocaster, 441
Hot Wheels, 597
HubSpot, 85, 86, 109,  
226, 227
Huggies, 372
Hulu, 12, 52, 555
Hy-Line Cruises, 86
Hyperloop, 120
Hyundai, 211
I
IBM, 34, 105, 210, 212, 213, 
251, 252, 349, 436, 
608–610
IDEO, 384, 386
iHealth, 100
IKEA, 486–488, 494, 531, 
537, 538, 539
Ila DUSK Personal Alarm, 
588–590
Imgur, 96

	
company index	
661
Inditex, 513
Innocent, 96
In-N-Out Burger, 200
Instagram, 87, 90, 95, 96,  
98, 222
Intel, 34, 348
Interbank Card  
Association, 604
iPad, 215, 230, 377, 381,  
393, 395, 396, 408, 
599, 600
iPhone, 370, 372, 376, 380, 
395, 408
iPhone, 371
iPod, 376, 396, 600
iPod Touch, 376
IRI, 309, 310
iTunes, 393, 558
J
Jack Daniels, 143
Jawbone, 100
JCPenney, 530, 535, 541
J.Crew, 542, 601
J.D. Power and Associates, 310
Jello, 354
Jenny Craig, 151–152,  
203–205
JetBlue, 7, 8, 9, 492
Jiffy Lube, 532
Jimmy John’s Gourmet 
Sandwiches, 497
Jobster, 72
John Lewis, 585
Johnson & Johnson, 213
Jufran, 255
K
Kantar, 326
Kashi, 124, 184
Kate Spade, 356
Kayak, 16, 444
Keebler, 373
Keebler Animals, 373
Keebler Chips Deluxe, 373
Keebler E.L. Fudge, 373
Keebler Gripz, 373
Keebler Sandies, 373
Keebler Vanilla Wafers, 373
Keebler Vienna Fingers, 373
Kellogg’s, 124, 270, 271,  
310, 355
Kellogg’s Corn Flakes, 584
Kenmore, 364
Keurig, 10
KFC, 251, 356
KIA, 566
Kindle, 475
Kindle Oasis, 439
Kinect, 315
KitchenAid, 187, 353
Kleenex, 350, 582, 585
Kmart, 192, 193, 530
Knowthis.com, 63
Kodak, 103, 389
Kohl’s, 351, 465, 530
Kola House, 409
Kraft, 7, 310, 317, 343, 352, 
353, 371, 375, 524
Kraft Macaroni & Cheese,  
197, 354
Kraft Mayo, 354
Kraft Singles, 354
Krave cereal, 124
Krispy Kreme donuts, 513
Kroger, 14, 270, 313, 352, 
353, 415, 520, 526
Kwispelbier, 391
L
Lacoste, 348, 601
Lacostena, 445
Lamborghini, 211
Lana Marks, 177, 194
Lancôme, 581
Larabars, 373
Lays, 31
LeapFrog, 138
L’eggs pantyhose, 360
LEGO, 236, 469
Lendio, 231–232
Lenovo, 252, 253, 489, 490, 
513, 612, 613
Levi Strauss & Co., 18, 210, 
248, 384
Lexus, 84, 211, 282
Lifesavers Soda, 355
Lindt, 25
LinkedIn, 72, 75, 90, 92,  
93–94, 109, 224, 613–614
Little Caesars, 480–482
Little Movers Slip-Ons, 372
L.L.Bean, 364, 422, 424,  
454, 539
Loblaw, 526
Long John Silver’s, 356
Longines, 258
Look Book, 543
L’Oréal, 591
Lovefilm, 234
Lowe’s, 184
LSTN, 118
Lucent Technologies, 257
Lululemon, 404–405
Lyft, 427–428
M
M&M’s, 340–341, 362
M-A-C, 364, 520, 523, 525, 
530, 531
Mack Weldon, 301
Macmillan, 475
Macy’s, 3, 176, 181–182, 186, 
192, 193, 195, 199, 282, 
313, 345, 420, 513, 521, 
530, 535, 543–545, 
586, 616
Macy’s I·N·C, 199
Maestro, 604
Magic Kingdom, 459
Maharaja Mac, 260
Maison Premiere, 470
Mango, 510
Marketing Metrix, 146
Marketresearch.com, 64
Marks & Spencer, 244, 590
Marriott, 189, 281, 356
Marriott Edition, 356
Marriott Renaissance, 356
Marriott Ritz-Carlton, 356
Mars, 7, 25, 340, 362
Marshalls, 523, 532
Martha Stewart, 185
Marvel, 51–52
Mary Kay, 626
Massachusetts Export  
Center, 259
MasterCard, 164, 603–605
Mattel, 139
Mayo Clinic, 139
Maytag, 187, 561
Mazda, 230
McAloo Tikki Burger, 260
McBaguette, 261
McCafe, 260
McDental Services, 291
McDonald’s, 34, 57, 87, 121f, 
154–155, 158, 238, 246, 
251, 260–261, 291,  
303–305, 306, 308, 
320, 321, 348, 349, 497, 
577–578, 602
McDonald’s France, 260
McGraw-Hill Education,  
598–599
McKinsey & Co., 126
McSleep Inns, 291
Medex, 342
Mediamark, 64, 310
Men’s Wearhouse, 277, 531
Mercedes-AMG, 343
Mercedes-Benz, 94, 164, 211, 
241, 257, 296–298,  
343, 344
Merck, 383
Metro, 520
Microsoft, 34, 103, 202, 251, 
257, 315, 349, 361, 386
Mintel, 64
Minute Maid Pulpy, 384
MinuteClinic, 161
MLB, 357
Mondelez, 23, 362
Monster, 71, 72, 109
Morton, 360, 451
Motorola, 252
MSN, 72
MTV, 18
Music Connection, 396
Mustang, 254
My Starbucks Rewards, 278
MyCoupons.com, 469, 597
mySugr, 180
N
nabi, 138
Nabisco, 478
Naked, 31
National Basketball 
Association, 357, 566
National Football League,  
102, 566
National Geographic, 118
National Hockey League, 566
National Purchase Diary 
Panel, 305, 309
NatureLuxe Mousse  
Mascara, 591
Nature’s Path, 399
Nau, 152–153
NBC, 561
Neiman Marcus, 523, 535
Nestlé, 362, 373
Netflix, 14, 21, 52, 99, 139, 163, 
234–235, 313, 380
Netscape, 393
NeuroFocus, 325
New Balance, 225–226, 601
New Coke, 377
The New York Times,  
309, 584
The New Yorker, 284
Newman’s Own, 128
Newton, 377
Newton Running, 284
Nextag.com, 600
NFL, 357
Nielsen, 305, 310, 311, 555
Nieman Marcus, 130
Nike, 7, 82, 152, 174–175, 225, 
226, 257, 271, 285, 290, 
347, 353, 436
Nikon, 591
Nissan, 164, 589
Nokia, 251
NOP World, 310
Nordstrom, 313, 418, 422, 
530, 539, 544, 627
Nordstrom Rack, 530, 544
North Face, 192
O
Oakley, 451
Ocean Spray, 585

662	
company index
Office Depot, 562
Oh My Disney, 105
Old Spice, 598
Omaha Steaks, 561
One Direction, 556
The Onion, 105
OnlineBeta, 389
OnStar system, 385
Open Automotive Alliance, 211
OpenTable, 16
Oprah Winfrey Foundation, 21
Oprah.com, 21
Oprah’s Angel Network, 21
Oprah’s Book Club, 21
Oracle, 210
Orange County Chopper, 229
Orbitz, 16
Oreo, 362, 584
Oscar Mayer, 354
Outback Steakhouse, 195
Outnumber Hunger, 583
Overstock.com, 532
OWN, 21
Oxygen network, 21
P
Pacific Foods, 500
Palm Pilot, 393
Pampers, 572
Panera Bread, 148–150, 420
Papa John’s, 479–482
Paradigm, 437–438
Patagonia, 152, 540
Patxi’s, 481
Payless ShoeSource, 598
Peapod, 19, 507, 528
Peavy’s Bridal, 144
Pebble, 393
Peet’s Coffee and Tea,  
532, 537
PenAgain, 489, 496
Penguin, 475
PeopleAhead, 66–79
Pepsi, 180, 194, 292–293, 
296, 310, 327, 347, 358, 
409, 524, 549–552, 
554, 555, 573, 622, 623
Pepsi Max, 573–574,  
580, 582
PepsiCo, 7, 29–31, 32, 34, 35, 
36, 38, 39–40, 46, 47f, 
54, 103, 317, 409, 573
Pepto-Bismol, 350
Periscope, 272
Pete and Gerry’s, 500
Pfizer, 383
Philadelphia, 343, 354, 360, 
436, 437
Philips, 133f
Photobucket, 96
Picasa, 96
Pink Ribbon International, 36
Pinterest, 83, 87, 95
Pixar, 374
Pizza Hut, 251, 356, 481–482
Pizza Tracker, 481
Planet Fitness, 410, 455–456
Planetfeedback.com, 202
Planters, 354
PlayStation, 399
Polo.com, 513
Polo/Ralph Lauren, 445
Porsche, 244, 603
Post, 184
Postmates, 528
Powerade, 291–293, 296
PR Newswire, 602
Prada, 451
Premier Crue Music, 396
PriceGrabber.com, 600
Priceline, 16
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 105
PrimeFresh, 507
Pringles, 197, 255
Prius, 351, 558
Proactiv, 271
Procter & Gamble, 43, 44, 121f, 
238, 240, 316, 344, 433, 
436, 463, 488, 489, 492, 
494–495, 496–497, 
500–501, 524, 525, 
532, 572, 587, 591
Propel Fitness Water,  
291–293
Prosperity Burger, 260
Publix, 526
Puma, 313, 568
Pure Green Coffee, 593
Q
Quaker, 31
Quality, 410
Quattro, 290
Quick Wins, 231
Quirty, 557
R
Radio Disney, 556
Radio Shack, 348, 604
Raid, 157
Ralph Lauren, 11, 513, 594
Rand McNally, 64
Ray-Ban, 451, 601
Red Bull, 110–112, 339–340, 
584, 592, 595
Reebok, 225, 248, 542
REI, 123–124, 424, 539
Rejoice shampoo, 316
Research and Markets, 310
Revere Hotel Boston 
Common, 281
Revlon, 523
Rice Krispies, 347, 348
R.J. Reynolds, 143–144
Rolex, 250
Roost, 85
Roper Center for Public 
Opinion Research, 310
Ross Stores, 532
S
Safeway, 270, 526, 528,  
622, 623
Saint James, 601
Saks Fifth Avenue, 523, 535
Salesforce.com, 103, 616, 617
Sam’s Club, 344
Samsung, 34, 138, 349, 370, 
378, 379, 401, 545
Samsung Gear, 401
SAP, 313
SAS, 105
Save-A-Lot, 526
SC Johnson, 157
Scania, 211
Scarborough Arbitron, 64
Schedulicity, 85
Schwartz Group, 526
Seamless, 16, 481
Sears, 364, 526, 530
SEAT, 45, 211
Sephora, 86, 196, 197, 530
Servpro, 497
Seven & I, 526
7-Eleven, 7, 497, 527
7 For All Mankind, 179, 182
Seventh Generation, 168,  
169–170
7-Up, 288, 289, 296
Shapeways, 454
Sharp, 364, 454
Shearer’s Chips, 387
Shipt, 528
Shop & Stop, 19
Shopkick, 202, 543
Shopperception, 315
ShopSavvy.com, 469, 597
Siemens, 210, 229
Siemens Energy, 215
Simmons, 64
Simmons Market Research 
Bureau, 310
Simon & Schuster, 475
Simple Signal, 616
Singapore Airlines, 35
Six Flags, 340, 407, 408
65 Curve televisions,  
378, 379
SkinnyPop, 393, 394
Skoda, 45, 211
Sky Deutschland, 234
Sleep Inn, 410
Slim-Fast, 203–205
Snap Glass, 401
Snapchat, 43, 44, 272, 553
Snapdeal, 505
Snapple, 183, 347
Snickers, 340
Softcard, 164
SoftLayer, 213
Sol Wave House, 91
Solar City, 120
Sony, 202, 353, 377,  
393, 399, 502–504, 
506, 508
Sony Betamax, 377
South Beach, 317
Southern Comfort, 143
Southwest Airlines, 35, 121f, 
287, 317, 564
SpaceX, 120
Sparkle Gem Jewelers, 145
Special K, 270
Spirit Airlines, 436
Splunk, 313
Sports Illustrated, 301
Sports Nostalgia  
Emporium, 146
Squier, 441
St. Jude’s Children’s Research 
Hospital, 595
Standard & Poor, 63
Stanley Tool Company,  
493–494
Staples, 83, 85f, 231–232, 
507, 534, 537
Staples Advantage, 231
Starbucks, 9, 14, 34, 41,  
55–57, 110, 121f, 190,  
251, 252, 277, 278,  
355, 537, 599
State Bicycle Co., 322
State Farm, 348, 351
Steimatzky, 245
Stone + Cloth, 118
Stouffer’s, 558
Strategic Business Insights 
(SBI), 274, 276
Subaru, 290
Subway, 159, 497
SukhaMat, 621
Super Kmart Center, 526
Superama, 507
Supercuts, 497, 532
SuperTarget, 526
Sweet Tomatoes, 178
Swiffer, 381
Sync hands-free 
communication 
technology, 463
T
Taco Bell, 57, 189, 356
Tapestry, 277

	
company index	
663
Target, 130, 161, 192, 193, 237, 
351, 384, 469, 494–495, 
506, 507, 520, 525, 
530, 597
Tastemade, 105
Tata Consultancy  
Services, 251
Tata Group, 252
Tata Starbucks, 252
Tazo, 202
Telesphere Networks, 616
Tesco, 155–156, 312, 313, 472, 
509, 520, 526
Tesla Motors, 120, 164,  
498–499
Texaco, 290
Thirsty Cat! 377
Thirsty Dog! 377
Thomson One, 64
3M, 383
Thumbtack, 406
Tide, 7, 433, 436, 587
Tide Pods, 433, 463
Tide Simply Clean &  
Fresh, 433
Tiffany & Co., 194, 195, 198
Time, 572
Time Warner, 451
Timex, 601
Tinder, 561
TJMaxx, 532
TJX Companies, 11
T-Mobile, 561
TNT, 584
TOMS Shoes, 117–118, 119
TomTom, 389
Tootsie Rolls, 456
TopShop, 514
Torpicana, 347
Tostitos, 355
Touaregs, 626
Touch of Yogurt shampoo, 376
Toyota, 40, 164, 296–298, 
344, 348, 349, 350, 351, 
469, 510, 558
Toys“R”Us, 236
Trader Joe’s, 195, 353,  
526, 527
Travelocity, 16, 419
Trek, 340–341, 584
Trident, 354
TripAdvisor, 421
Tropicana, 585
True Pepsi, 551
TrueFit.com, 179
Tumblr, 44, 84, 87, 96–97
Tupperware, 256,  
257, 625
TwitPic, 96
Twitter, 56, 81, 84, 85, 86, 91, 
95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 102, 
103, 105, 107, 108, 109, 
111, 130, 163, 204, 213, 
249, 272, 311, 313, 361, 
400, 406, 552, 563, 571, 
605, 613–614
2(x)ist, 301
U
Uber, 427–428
Ultra, 44
Uncle Ben’s Rice, 244
Under Armour, 80–82, 213, 
346, 347
Unilever, 273
United Airlines, 436, 437
United Way, 138
Universal, 446
UPS, 19, 210, 489, 493, 611
US Airways, 287
U.S. Postal Service, 19,  
489, 493
USA Today, 72
V
V8, 410
Vail, 584
Value Meals, 305
vCath, 180
Verizon, 202, 539, 602
VIA, 355
Vice, 105
Victoria’s Secret,  
282, 598
VIP Deals, 421
Virgin Group, 355
Vocalocity, 616
Vogue, 284, 351, 566
Volkswagen, 45, 164, 211, 212, 
591, 626
Volvo, 211
Vonage, 616
Vox Media, 105
VW Commercial Vehicles 
brands, 211
VWSupplyGroup.com, 212
W
Walgreens, 507, 520,  
531, 537
Walkman, 348, 393
The Wall Street Journal, 309, 
379, 586
Wallet, 543
Walmart, 119f, 120, 122, 126, 
192, 193, 247, 255, 260, 
313, 320, 417, 464, 469, 
488, 489, 492, 494, 
496–497, 500–501, 506, 
507, 510, 512, 516, 520, 
524, 525, 526, 528, 
530, 537, 541, 597
Walt Disney Company,  
374, 458
Wandsworth, 585
Waste Management, 361
Water Is LIfe, 97–98
Watson, 608–610
Weather Channel,  
174–175
The Weather Company, 213
Wegmans, 196
Weight Watchers, 151–152, 
203–205
Weixin, 99, 100f
Wells Fargo Bank, 215
Wells Street Popcorn, 394
Wendy’s, 200, 303, 305, 306, 
308, 463
WhatsApp, 272
Whirlpool, 187, 478
WhiteLight, 440
Whole Foods, 14, 123, 193, 
195, 196, 507, 527
Windex, 157
Windows, 223, 386
Winners, 532
WordPress, 85
World Elite MasterCard, 605
WornOnTv.net, 179
Wrangler, 584
Wrigley, 478
X
Xerox, 213, 214
Xiaomi, 368–370
Y
Yahoo!, 72, 386, 586
Yankelovich, 310
Yelp, 16, 421, 423
YMCA, 328–330
YouTube, 84, 85, 90, 95, 96, 
97, 105, 108, 109, 111, 249, 
314, 381, 563, 571, 573, 
577, 584, 630
Yum! Brands, 356
Z
Zappos, 361, 422, 426,  
513, 623
Zara, 255, 256, 478, 510, 
514–516
Zara International, 513
Ziggs, 75
Zillow.com, 348
Zipcar, 426
Ziploc, 157
Zippo, 355

subject index
Note: A page number with an e 
indicates an exhibit.
A
A3 model Audi, 344
ABC Family network,  
266–268
Achievement motivation, 275
A-class Mercedes, 298
Action, in AIDA model, 558
Action plans, marketing 
research, 303e, 308
Active voice, in marketing 
plans, 64
Activewear, 271
Actual products, 340, 341e
Actual risk of purchase 
decisions, 180–181. See 
also Risk
Ad Manager (Facebook), 107
Ad-blocking technology,  
16, 588
Administered vertical 
marketing systems, 496
Admired Observer Test, 134e
Adrenaline Collection  
(Hertz), 40
Ad-supported apps, 100
Advance shipping notices, 
503, 508
Advertising
on athletes’ uniforms, 566
body image issues,  
300–302
budgets, 583
case study, 603–605
to children, 159, 593
to Chinese consumers, 244
to consumer needs,  
174–175
cooperative, 535
creation process,  
588–590
deceptive, 166, 472–473
health concerns in, 159
live, 84
measuring results, 591–592
media selection, 586–588
message and appeal,  
583–585
overview, 578–579
print versus online, 156
regulatory and ethical 
issues, 593–594
role in marketing strategy, 
559–560
setting objectives,  
580–583
social media, 16, 93, 94
target market selection, 
579–580
tracking online ad 
effectiveness, 567–568
Advertising allowances, 471
Advertising schedules, 587
Affective components of 
attitude, 190
African American  
consumers, 159
Age, segmentation by,  
270, 298
Age groups, 156–157
Agriculture, organic/ 
natural, 183
AIDA model, 554–558
Aided recall, 554
Air pollution, 241
Airbrushing, 591
Airlines
competitive pricing,  
436, 437
value proposition example, 
287–288
WiFi offerings, 8
Albums, 396
Alcohol, 143, 145–146
Alice Through the Looking 
Glass (movie), 374
Allowances, 470e, 471
Alpargatas, 117
Alpha testing, 389
Alternative evaluation, 181–184
AmazonFresh service, 507
Amazonian deforestation, 162
American Idol (TV show), 600
American Marketing 
Association code of 
ethics, 131
American Marketing 
Association research 
guidelines, 323
America’s Next Top Model (TV 
show), 567
Analysis. See Data analytics
Analysts, social media 
marketing to, 224
Android software, 47
Android Wear devices, 398
Animal Initiative, 118
Animated films, 374
Anthology program, 105, 106f
Anticipatory shipping, 493
Apparel. See Clothing
Appeals, in advertising,  
584–585, 586
Appendixes in marketing 
plans, 63
Apple Pay, 543
Apps
ad-blocking, 175
for children, 138–139
customer-created, 617
health and wellness, 160, 
161, 180
for small business 
operations, 231
variety and pricing, 99–101
Aquafina water, 38
Arisans, 625
Artificial sweeteners,  
126–127
ASEAN, 243, 243e
Asian American  
consumers, 159
Assets, brands as, 348, 349
Associated services, 341
Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations, 243, 243e
Assurance of service quality, 
413e, 414, 416, 620
Athletic equipment 
sponsorships, 225–228
Atmosphere in stores,  
195–196
ATMs, 420
Attention to advertising, 578
Attitudes, impact on consumer 
behavior, 190–191
Attribute sets, 181–182
Augmented products, 341
Augmented reality  
techniques, 574
Authorized channels,  
474–475
Autocratic buying  
centers, 222
Automation, supply chain, 489
Automobile manufacturers
advertising, 590
big data use, 385
brand strategies, 344
ethical scenarios, 144
need to innovate, 373
pursuit of smartphone 
connectivity, 211
vertical marketing systems, 
498–499
Automobile sales in China, 241
Available budget method, 
565e
Avengers movies, 51, 190
Awards for salespeople,  
626–627
Awareness of brands, 346, 
349–351, 554–556
B
Babar books, 10
Baby Boomers, 156, 157, 544
Back to the Future (movie), 30
Backpacks, TOMS sales,  
117–118
Bait and switch, 473
BASES, 389
Beacon technology, 92
Becomers, 267–268
Behavioral components of 
attitude, 190
Behavioral segmentation, 277
Benefit segmentation, 276
Benefit-cost balances, 14–15
Beta testing, 389
Betamax players, 377e
Better Business Bureau, 593
Bicycle safety, 8
The Big Bang Theory (TV 
show), 600
Big Cat Collection, 118
Big data, 313, 385
Big Mac Index, 238, 239e
Big-box retailers, 531, 534
Billboard charts, 108
Billboards, digital, 574, 578
Bing search engine, 386
Binge watching, 52
Black Friday, 124
Blockbusters, 384
Blogs. See also Social media
anonymous, 146–147
as B2B marketing tools, 
223–224
common approaches,  
96–97
data gathering with,  
316–317
as IMC channel, 562–563
influence on consumer 
decisions, 193
using to generate leads, 614
Blue jeans, 18
Blu-ray players, 393, 397, 
445, 467
“Body by Milk” campaign,  
11–12, 11f
664	

	
subject index	
665
Body copy, 590
Body image, 300–302
Bonuses, 626
Boston Consulting Group 
matrix, 48–50, 49f
Bots, 445
Bottled water for pets, 355
Bottom of the pyramid, 240
Bounce rate, 103
Boycotts, 222
Brad’s Drink, 30
Brainstorming, 132–133, 384
Brand associations, 351
Brand dilution, 355, 356
Brand elements in ads, 590
Brand equity, 349–352
Brand extension, 354–356
Brand licensing, 357
Brand loyalty, 351–352, 445. 
See also Loyalty
Brand repositioning,  
357–358, 359
Branding case study, 365
Brands
awareness, 346, 349–351, 
554–556
consistent image across 
channels, 540
differentiating, 347
diluting, 355, 356, 357
eliminating, 344–346
equity in, 349–352
excellence in, 34
for global markets, 257
as product lines, 343
showing in ads, 590
strategies for, 352–358
symbols of, 348e
value of, 347–352
Brazil
economic strength, 246
fast-food marketing, 260
oral care product 
marketing, 238–239
social networking in, 249
Breadth of product mix, 343, 
346, 373
Break-even analysis, 447–449
Breakfast cereals, 162
Breakthroughs, 375–376
Bribe Payers Index, 222
Bribery, 144, 221–222
BRIC countries, 237, 238, 
246–248, 260, 395
Brick-and-mortar stores 
(Amazon), 519
Bridal shops, 144
Broccoli cheddar soup, 149
Browser software, 393
Budgeting, 107, 564–565, 583
Bullying prevention, 117–118
Bundling, 469
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco 
and Firearms, 593
BurnMed app, 180
Bus stops, 574
Business Calendar app, 100
Business climates, 131
Business ethics, 120. See also 
Ethics; Marketing ethics; 
Social responsibilities of 
firms
Business Resource Center 
(Office Depot), 562
Business summary, in 
marketing plans, 67
Business-to-business (B2B) 
marketing
by Amazon, 209–210
buying centers, 219–225
buying situations, 225–228
case study, 231–232
defined, 10, 210
distinctive features, 210–211
major markets, 211–215
personal selling in, 619e
pricing tactics, 470–472
product ideas from 
customers, 386–387
qualifying leads, 614–616
stages of buying process, 
216–218, 619e
by Staples, 231–232
Business-to-consumer (B2C) 
marketing, 10, 210–211
Buyers, in buying centers,  
219, 220
Buyers’ remorse, 186
Buying centers, 219–225
Buying process. See 
Purchasing process
C
Cable TV companies, 451
CAFTA, 243, 243e
Caleb’s Kola, 30
Calendar apps, 100
Call of Duty game, 375, 466
Call reports, 632–633
Cameras, 324
Campaign for Real  
Beauty, 273
Candy Crush Saga, 99, 100
Candy labeling, 362
Cannibalization, 39, 343, 344
CAN-SPAM Act, 166e
Cape Cod, 86
Carbohydrates, 46
Carbonated beverages,  
29–30, 32, 39
Careers in marketing, 19
Careers in sales, 610–611
Caribbean cruises, 441, 443
Carmakers. See Automobile 
manufacturers
Cash cows, 48
Cash discounts, 470e, 471
Categories of products,  
341–342
Category killers, 531
Category specialists, 531
“Cat’s in the Cradle”  
(song), 589
Cause-related marketing, 595
Celebrities
endorsements, 37–38
as fashion models, 594
retouched images of, 591
social media posts, 90
Celiac disease, 373
Cell phones, 129, 461–462, 
597. See also Mobile 
devices
Censorship, 249
Census data, 309
Center for Democracy & 
Technology, 325
Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA),  
243, 243e
Cereal industry, 46
Cereal manufacturers, 162
CES, 614
Channel conflict,  
494–495
Channel members’ influence 
on pricing, 452–453
Characters (symbolic),  
348e, 357
Charitable campaigns,  
12, 21–22, 117–118, 128
Checking merchandise, 508
Checkout lines, 415
Chicken McNuggets,  
577–578
Child Protection Act, 166e
Children
marketing to, 20, 159, 593
role in family purchase 
decisions, 193
technology products’ effect 
on, 138–139
Children’s Advertising Review 
Unit, 602
Children’s Television Act,  
166e, 593
China
e-commerce in, 505
economic strength, 248
false advertising penalties, 
591
fast-food marketing, 260
languages in, 257
marketing challenges  
in, 244
marketing research in, 316
new smartphone maker, 
368–370
social networking in, 249
trade barriers, 241
China Mobile Labs  
(Walmart), 126
Chocolate
market segments, 5
marketing case study,  
24–25
perceived value, 289–290
premium brands, 2–4
product variety, 7
Churn, 313
Cigarette marketing, 143–144, 
166e
Cinderella (movie), 374
Circles for a Successful Value 
Proposition framework, 
286e
Cirrus network, 604
Civic responsibilities of firms. 
See Social 
responsibilities of firms
CLA model Mercedes,  
298, 344
Clayton Act, 165, 473
Cleaning products
environmentally friendly, 
169–170
innovative, 380–381
pricing, 432–433, 463
Cleopatra purses, 177
Click paths, 103
Click-through rate, 569
Climates, ethical, 131
Closed-ended questions,  
318–319
Closing the sale, 620
Clothing
advertising, 174–175
B2B buying situations, 
225–228
manufacturers,  
152–153, 236
Cloud services, 213, 617
Clubcard loyalty program, 
155–156
CLV analysis, 332–334
Co-branding, 356–357
Cocoa beans, 24–25
Codes of ethics, 131
Coercive power, 496
Coffee, TOMS sales, 117
Coffeehouses, 55–57,  
252, 278
Cognitive components of 
attitude, 190

666	
subject index
Cognitive dissonance, 186, 
190–191
Cola marketing, 29–30,  
32, 39
Cold calls, 614
College athletics, 615
College logo apparel, 225
College students, researching, 
307
Collusion on prices, 474
Comfort, appeals to, 585e
Commercial infrastructures in 
overseas markets, 240
Commercial Van/Truck 
Collection (Hertz), 41
Commissions, 615, 622, 626
Commitments to supply chain 
partners, 501
Commodities, marketing, 283, 
451–452
Common goals with supply 
chain partners, 499–500
Communication channels, 552
Communication gaps, 411, 
420–422
Communications. See also 
Integrated marketing 
communications
AIDA model, 554–558
consistency across 
channels, 549, 573–574
empathy in, 414
marketing channels,  
559–563
overseas infrastructures, 
240
perceptions in, 552–554
process components,  
550–552
with supply chain  
partners, 499
Communities (Google+), 95
Communities, virtual, 316–317
Community building, 562, 563
Company overviews, 62, 66
Company policies, 628
Company sales forces, 622. 
See also Personal selling; 
Salespeople
Compatibility of products, 381
Compensating salespeople, 
624–627
Compensatory decision rules, 
182–184
Competition. See also 
Competitors
brands’ role in, 348
laws protecting, 165–166
pricing decisions based on, 
450–452, 461
value and, 13
Competitive advantage,  
30–35, 67–68
Competitive parity,  
437, 565e
Competitors
comparing marketing 
performance to, 46
describing in marketing 
plans, 72
gathering information 
about, 151–152, 303, 
305, 317
impact on pricing decisions, 
450–452, 461
positioning against,  
286–288, 290–291, 292
pricing decisions based on, 
255–256, 437
reverse engineering 
products of, 386
Complaints, 187, 417, 423, 
620–621
Complementary products, 445
Complexity of products,  
340–341, 382
Computer security services, 
407–409
Concentrated targeting 
strategies, 284–285
Concept testing, 388
Conflicts between channel 
members, 494–495
Connected cars, 385
Connected effect, 89–90
Conscious marketing
corporate social 
responsibility in, 120,  
121–122
elements of, 119–120
ethical principles, 130–136
integration by firms,  
127–130
stakeholders, 122–127
Consensus buying  
centers, 222
Consortia, 384
Consultative buying  
centers, 222
Consumer decision process
case study, 203–205
evaluation of alternatives, 
181–184
information gathering,  
178–181
levels of involvement in, 
198–200
major influences, 188–198
need recognition,  
176–177, 216
purchase and 
postpurchase, 184–187
Consumer decision rules, 
182–184
Consumer Electronics  
Show, 614
Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau, 166e
Consumer Product Safety  
Act, 166e
Consumer products  
defined, 341
Consumer protection 
legislation, 166e
Consumer-to-consumer (B2C) 
marketing, 10
Contests, 94, 598–599, 626
Continuous advertising, 587
Contractual vertical marketing 
systems, 497–498
Contribution per unit, 448
Control phase in marketing 
plans, 35, 43–50, 63, 79, 
129–130
Convenience products/
services, 342
Convenience stores,  
527–528
Conventional marketing 
channels, 495–496
Conventional supermarkets, 
525, 526
Conversion rates, 103,  
184–185
Cookies (online), 162
Cooperative advertising, 535
Cooperatives, retailer,  
452–453
Copycat goods, 386
Core competencies, 151
Core customer value,  
340, 341e
Corn sugar campaign, 358.
Corporate blogs, 96–97
Corporate cultures. See 
Cultures (corporate); 
Organizational cultures
Corporate partners,  
152–153
Corporate policies, 628
Corporate social 
responsibility. See also 
Ethics; Marketing ethics; 
Social responsibilities of 
firms
case study, 138–139
in conscious marketing,  
119–122
defined, 121
examples of dilemmas,  
118–119
integration by firms,  
127–130
marketing ethics versus, 
131–132
in shoe marketing, 117–118
Corporate Social 
Responsibility Newswire 
Service, 137
Corporate vertical marketing 
systems, 498–499
Corruption, 222
Cosmetics advertising, 591
Cost-based pricing, 460–461
Cost-benefit balances, 14–15
Cost-of-ownership method, 
462
Costs, relation to pricing, 
446–450
Cottage cheese  
containers, 361
Country cultures, 154
Coupons
as common pricing tactic, 
468–469
increasing convenience, 197
online, 535, 597
sales promotions based on, 
596–598, 601
Cozy and Comfortable 
segment (Tapestry), 279e
Cream cheese, 343, 360
Creativity in advertising, 590
Credibility of public  
relations, 594
Credit cards, 536, 603–605
Credit policy ethics, 144–145
Cross-docked merchandise, 
508
Cross-price elasticity, 445
Cross-promotion, 601
Crowding, 196
Cruise services, 86
Cultural dimensions model, 
244, 245e
Cultures (corporate)
ethical, 131
impact on B2B buying 
decisions, 220–222, 
223e
socially responsible, 120
Cultures (ethnic), 153–155, 
244–245, 258
Cultures (social), 194
Cumulative quantity  
discounts, 471
Currency valuations, 165, 238, 
242–243
Customer analysis, 73
Customer data, 323–325, 
561, 569. See also 
Customer relationship 
management; Loyalty 
programs

	
subject index	
667
Customer excellence,  
31, 32–33
Customer expectations
impact on retailer-
manufacturer 
partnerships, 523
managing, 421–422
understanding, 412–417
zones of tolerance,  
415–416
Customer feedback,  
577–578
Customer forums, 56
Customer lifetime value,  
332–334
Customer loyalty, 32, 56–57, 
186–187. See also Loyalty
Customer needs
continually changing,  
371–372
Maslow’s hierarchy,  
188–190, 189e
monitoring changes, 150
recognizing, 176–177, 216
in value equation, 13
Customer orientation to 
pricing, 437–438
Customer relationship 
management. See also 
Loyalty programs
defined, 15
integration with online 
retailing, 539
loyalty programs, 32, 278, 
312
Salesforce.com service, 617
salespeople’s role in 
building, 612, 613, 616
targeted promotions with, 
537, 569
use in personal selling,  
616–618
Customer relationships, 15–17
Customer retention, 32,  
278, 599
Customer satisfaction,  
185–186, 420–421, 422
Customer service. See also 
Services
communication gaps,  
420–422
defined, 406
delivering quality, 32–33, 
418–420
identifying problems, 313
Lululemon, 404–405
measuring, 413–417
to prevent negative word of 
mouth, 187
social media links to, 82, 86
standards for, 417–418
Customer store pickup,  
509–510
Customers
core value, 340, 341e
face-to-face interaction 
with, 417
involvement in service 
recovery, 423
involvement in value 
creation, 13
pricing based on demand, 
438–445
product ideas from,  
386–388, 417
as stakeholders, 124–125
Cybersecurity, 215
D
Dairy industry, 11–12
Dash device, 520
Dashboards, 313
Data analysis, 305–308
Data analytics. See also 
Marketing research
anticipatory shipping, 493
in B2B marketing, 227
cloud services, 213
to create targeted 
messages, 83
eHarmony’s use, 104
H&R Block’s use, 178
IKEA’s use, 538
impact on services,  
163, 345
importance, 14
new car development  
using, 385
to predict marketing 
success, 46, 47
predicting movie success 
with, 314
Puma’s use, 568
with social media data, 44, 
103–105, 105f, 124, 313, 
316–317
use by CVS, 597
use in location decisions, 9
use with loyalty  
programs, 32
using to reduce wait  
times, 415
Data brokers, 280
Data collection
as marketing research 
process, 304–305
primary data, 314–322, 
322e
secondary data, 309–313, 
322e
Data collection methods. See 
Marketing research
Data defined, 306
Data mining, 312–313
Data storage software sales, 
632–633
Data warehouses, 280, 312, 
503, 616
Databases, 561, 569, 616. See 
also Customer 
relationship management
Dating services, 104
DD Perks, 57
Deals, 598
Death of a Salesman  
(play), 610
Deceptive price advertising, 
472–473
Deciders, 219, 220
Decision engines, 386
Decision making
B2B purchasing,  
219–225
ethical, 120, 130–131,  
132–136, 134e
evaluation of alternatives, 
181–184
information gathering,  
178–181
levels of involvement in, 
198–200
major influences, 188–198
need recognition,  
176–177, 216
purchase and 
postpurchase, 184–187
Decision rules, 182–184
Decline stage (product life 
cycle), 392, 396
Decoding, 552
Deficits, trade, 238
Deforestation, 162
Deliveries
challenges in India, 505
crowdsourced, 544
direct to store or 
distribution center,  
504–506
distribution center 
functions, 506–508, 509
same-day grocery orders, 
507, 528
Delivery gaps, 411, 418–420
Delivery services, Amazon’s 
relationships with, 210
Demand
derived, 210–211
price elasticity, 442–445
pricing based on,  
438–445
Demand curves, 438–445
Democratic buying  
centers, 222
Demographic segmentation, 
270–271, 277. See also 
Segmentation
Demographics, 155–159,  
309, 319
Demonstrations, 196
Department stores, 530, 
543–545
Depth of product mix,  
343–346
Derived demand, 210–211
Design of products, 388–389
Desire, arousing, 557
Detergents, 169–170,  
432–433, 463
Determinant attributes, 182
Diabetes, 159
Diapers, 372
Diesel cars, 45
Diet programs, 151–152,  
203–205
Diet sodas, 127
Differentiated targeting 
strategies, 284, 285
Differentiation, 347, 451, 526
Diffusion of innovation,  
375–382
Digital advertising, 588
Digital Natives, 156–157
Dilution of brands, 355, 356
Direct investment, 252
Direct marketing
advantages and 
disadvantages, 587e
channels, 492, 560–561
ethics, 137
Direct store delivery,  
504–506
Discount rates, 333–334
Discount stores, 530,  
531–532
Discounts, 468, 470–471
Discrimination by loyalty 
programs, 280
Disney Social Media  
Moms, 98
Disney World, 459
Disneyland, 459
Dispatchers, 506
Displays, promotional, 536
Dissonance, 186, 190–191
Distance learning, 624
Distribution centers
advantages, 504–506
basic functions, 491
for different retail channels, 
540–541
information sharing with, 
502–503
major functions,  
506–509

668	
subject index
Distribution channels. See 
also Supply chain 
management
intensity, 524–525
in overseas markets, 240, 
256–257
retailer-manufacturer 
partnerships, 521–525
Distributive fairness, 424
Distributors, 213
Diversification strategies, 52
Do Not Call Registry,  
166e, 614
Do Not Spam law, 166e
Doctor Mole app, 180
Doctors, 419
Dogs, 49
Dollar stores, 463
Domestic violence  
campaign, 578
Domo platform, 178
DoorDash, 56
Dr. Oz Show (TV show), 593
“Drinks on Us” campaign, 143
“Driven to Perform”  
contest, 94
Driver distractions,  
avoiding, 47
Driverless cars, 164
Drones, 210, 379
Drug sales, 191, 222
Drugstores, 531
Duties, 240–241
DVD players, 397
Dynamic effect, 90–91
Dynamic pricing, 443
E
Early adopters, 378–379
Early majority, 380
Ebooks, 475
Ebullism, 111
Echo service, 519
“Ecomagination” campaign 
(GE), 125–126, 582
E-commerce. See also 
Internet; Online retailing
advantages as retail 
channel, 537–541
big-box stores’ use, 534
business-to-business,  
211–212, 217, 227
direct marketing, 492
in flight, 8
groceries, 507, 528, 529
growth rate, 526
in India, 505
Macy’s strategies, 543–544
with store pickup, 509–510
Economic analysis in global 
marketing, 237–240
Economic situations, 165–166
Economy fares (airline), 436
Educating customers, 84–85
Education, technological 
advances, 370
Education levels, 157–158
Efficiency in operations, 34
Egg McMuffins, 577
Elastic markets, 442
Electric guitars, 441
Electric scooter concept, 388
Electronic data interchanges, 
503, 508, 511
Electronic media channels, 
561–563. See also 
Internet; Social media
Electronic observation tools, 
315–316, 324
Electronic Privacy Information 
Center, 325
E-mail marketing, 560
Emissions scandal, 45
Emojis, 549–550, 551,  
552, 573
Emotional appeals, 584–585, 
586, 605
Emotional support for service 
providers, 418–419
Empathy, 413e, 414, 620, 624
Empire (TV show), 555, 558
Employees
empowerment, 414, 418
ethical behavior, 131–132
involvement in goal setting, 
417–418
management support for, 
418–419
rewarding for customer 
service, 419
as stakeholders, 123–124
training, 414, 418, 624, 628
Employment in marketing, 19
Employment in sales, 610–611
Empowerment, 414, 418
Encoding, 552
Energy companies, 125–126
Engaging customers, 86–87
Entrepreneurs, 21–22
Environment as  
stakeholder, 127
Environmental awareness. 
See Green business 
practices
Environmental Protection 
Agency (U.S.), 45
Environments, retail, 544
Environments for marketing. 
See Marketing 
environments
Esteem needs, 189, 190
Ethical climates, 131
Ethics. See also Marketing 
ethics; Social 
responsibilities of firms
in advertising, 593–594
blogging, 98
bribery and, 144, 221–222
of drone use, 379
drug sales, 191
examples of dilemmas,  
118–119
food labeling, 362
healthy school lunch 
example, 134–136
in personal selling,  
627–629
pricing, 472–476
scenarios, 143–147
in shoe marketing, 117–118
use of customer data,  
323–325
Ethnicity, 158–159
Euro, 165
EuroCard, 604
Europe, Netflix expansion to, 
234–235
European Union, 243, 593
Evaluation of salespeople, 627
Evaluative criteria, 182
Event sponsorship, 595
Everyday low pricing, 464
Evoked sets, 181
Excellence, 31–34
Exchange controls, 242–243
Exchange rates, 242
Exchanges, 4, 5–6
Exciting customers, 83
Exclusive distribution, 524
Executive summaries, 62, 66
Expectations. See Customer 
expectations
Experience curve effect, 466
Experiencing products, 85–86
Experimental research,  
320–322
Expertise power, 496
Exports, 238, 250
Extended problem solving, 199
Extension of brands,  
354–356
External locus of control,  
179–180
External searches for 
information, 178–179
ExtraCare program  
(CVS), 597
Extreme sporting events, 
339–340
Extreme-value retailers, 526, 
531–532
Eye tracking, 389
EyeSee mannequins, 324
F
Facebook, 92–93, 393. See 
also Social media
Facebook marketing 
campaigns, 105–107, 106f
Facial recognition software, 
323–324
Failure rates for new 
products, 376, 377e
Fair Packaging and Labeling 
Act, 166e, 361
Fair Trade products, 24–25
Fairness with customers, 424
Fairy tale movies, 374
False advertising, 593
Family brands, 353–354
Family purchase decisions, 
192–193
Fashion cycles, 374–375
Fashion merchandise, 365, 
514–516, 594
Fashion shows, 214, 226, 522
Fast fashion strategy,  
514–516
Fast-food restaurants, 260–261, 
304, 463, 577–578
Fear appeals, 585e
Federal Cigarette Labeling 
and Advertising Act, 166e
Federal Communications 
Commission, 593
Federal Food and Drug  
Act, 166e
Federal Reserve, 242
Federal Trade Commission, 
593, 594
Federal Trade Commission 
Act, 166e, 361, 451, 473
Feedback loops, 552
Feeding America, 12
Ferry services, 86
Financial compensation for 
salespeople, 626
Financial performance, 
measuring, 44–45, 46
Financial projections, 64,  
76–77
Financial reform law, 166e
Financial risk, 180–181
Financial service kiosks, 527
Financial Services Oversight 
Council, 166e
Fire Kids Edition, 138
First movers, 376
First world problems, 98
Fitness centers, 307, 410, 
455–456
Fitness products, 386
Five Cs of pricing
channel members,  
452–453

	
subject index	
669
company objectives,  
435–438
competition, 450–452
costs, 446–450
customer demand,  
438–445
Fixed costs, 447–448
Flighting advertising 
schedules, 587
Floor-ready merchandise, 
508–509
Focus group interviews, 318
Focus of advertisements, 
582–583
Follow-up in sales, 620–621
Fonts, in marketing plans, 65
Food and Drug Administration, 
143–144, 166e, 361, 593
Food labeling ethics, 362
Food retailing
conscious marketing,  
122–123
e-commerce in, 507,  
528, 529
globalization, 19
marketing to children, 20
purpose-based  
marketing, 14
store atmospheres,  
195–196
types, 525–529
Foods
genetically modified,  
122–123, 124
gluten-free, 373
healthy eating trends,  
148–150, 159–160, 394
healthy school lunch ethical 
example, 134–136
marketing to children, 20
natural and organic, 183, 
393, 464, 500
socially responsible 
marketing, 162
Foreign Corrupt Practices  
Act, 144
Foreign currency  
fluctuations, 165
“Forever Faster”  
campaign, 568
Four Ps of marketing
building competitive 
advantage with, 30–31
implementing in marketing 
plans, 41–43
overview, 6–10
retailing strategies using, 
533–537
4E framework for social 
media, 82–87
Franchisees, 251
Franchising, 251, 260,  
497–498
Franchisors, 251
Free gifts, 197
Freeform network, 267–268
Freelancers, 217
Freemium apps, 100
Frequency of exposure, 566
Frozen (movie), 357
Fruit for children, 20
Fulfillment centers, 491, 506
Full-line discount stores, 530
Functional needs, 177
Furniture makers, 486–488
G
Galaxy Tab 3 Kids Edition, 138
Game of Phones, 223
Gaps Model
communication, 411,  
420–422
delivery, 411, 418–420
knowledge, 411, 412–417
overview, 411–412
standards, 411, 417–418
Garage Parties, 274
Gasoline marketing, 527
Gatekeepers, 219, 220
Geeks, 220–222
Gender, 158, 270, 297
General merchandise 
retailers, 529–532
Generation X, 157
Generation Y, 156, 157
Generation Z, 156–157
Generational cohorts,  
156–157
Generic use of brand names, 
350–351
Genetically modified 
organisms, 123, 124
Geodemographic 
segmentation, 277–278
Geographic information 
systems, 9
Geographic segmentation, 270
“Get Connected and Win” 
contest, 598–599
Ghana, marketing in, 157
Gift cards, 536
Glengarry Glen Ross  
(play), 610
Global Citizenship Initiatives 
(PepsiCo), 38
Global marketing
bribery and, 144, 221–222
BRIC countries, 246–248
case study, 260–261
economic analysis,  
237–240
entry methods, 250–252
infrastructure analysis, 240
by Netflix, 234–235
overview, 236–237
political analysis, 240–243
sociocultural analysis,  
244–245
strategy selection,  
253–258
Global Retail Development 
Index, 248
Globalization
defined, 236
growth of, 18–19,  
236–237
market assessment,  
237–248
Glocalization, 254, 255
Glucose monitoring app, 180
Gluten-free products, 373
Goals
for advertising, 580–583
employee involvement in 
setting, 417–418
for IMC results, 563–564
in marketing plans, 62,  
67–68
pricing strategies and, 
435–438
research, 303
segmentation, 268–269
social media, 82–87, 106
with supply chain partners, 
494–495, 499–500
Golden Rule Test, 134e
Goods, 7. See also Products
Google AdWords, 569–570
Google Analytics, 47, 568
Google Glass, 399–401
Google+, 94–95
Gourmet popcorn, 394
Governments. See also 
Regulatory environments
actions in overseas 
markets, 240–243
in B2B markets, 214–215
joint venture restrictions, 
251–252
marketing research by, 302
Graphics, in marketing  
plans, 64
Gray markets, 474–476
Great Wall of China, 244
Green business practices. See 
also Environmental 
awareness
cleaning products,  
169–170
GE “Ecomagination” 
campaign, 125–126, 582
General Mills’ sustainability 
efforts, 162
growing demand for, 160
products from renewable 
materials, 152
Green Collection (Hertz), 40–41
Green marketing, 160, 162. 
See also Environmental 
awareness
Greenwashing, 160
Grocery industry. See Food 
retailing
Gross domestic product, 238
Gross national income, 238
Gross rating points, 566–567
Group profiling, 74
Growth rate of markets, 48
Growth stage (product life 
cycle), 392, 393
Growth strategies, 51–52
Grumpy Cat, 351
Guitars, 441
GymFlow app, 307
H
Habitual decision making, 200
Hackers, 161–162
Hair care products, 395
Haiti earthquake, 97–98
Hand warmers, 342
Happiness, appeals to, 585e
“Hashtag Killer” campaign, 
97–98
Hashtags, 124
Haute Look site, 530
HD printers, 214
Headlines, 589
Health concerns, 148–150, 
159–160, 394, 578
Healthy eating example,  
134–136
HEART model, 414
Herbicides, 183
Heterogeneity of services, 410
High-end products. See 
Premium brands
High-fructose corn syrup,  
183, 358
High/low pricing, 465
Hispanic consumers, 158–159
Hits, 103
Home services, 33
Horizontal channel conflict, 
494–495
Horizontal pricing fixing, 474
Hotels, 16, 281
House brands, 353
House of Cards (TV show), 
163, 600
HubSpot, 227
Human resource 
management, 34
Humorous appeals, 585e

670	
subject index
iPad
B2B applications, 231
in BCG matrix, 50
children’s apps, 139
classroom and workplace 
applications, 215
as innovative product, 393
seeking new markets, 395
iPhone
in BCG matrix, 49
current uses, 370
innovative features, 372
Macy’s appeal for users  
of, 543
as pioneer product, 376
seeking new markets for, 
395
iPod, 49–50, 376
Issue identification in decision 
making, 132
“It’s Your Move After Dark” 
campaign, 84
iTunes, 393
J
Jewelry distributor ethics 
scenario, 145
Jingles, 348e, 351
Jobs in marketing, 19
Joint ventures, 251–252
Joy (movie), 276
Just-in-time inventory systems, 
510–511
K
Kashi sales, 124
Kat Von D playlist, 86
Keywords, 104–105, 227, 
569–570
Kindle tablets, 439
Kiosks, 410, 419, 420, 527
Kitchen Entrees (Colgate), 377e
Kiva robots, 210
Knowledge gaps, 411,  
412–417
Kola House, 409
Krave cereal, 124
L
Labeling, 361, 362
Laggards, 380
Lagged effect, 558, 565
Language differences, 257
Las Vegas tourism  
slogan, 258
Late majority, 380
Late Night with Jimmy Fallon 
(TV series), 84
Launching products, 390
Laundry detergents, 169–170, 
432–433, 463
measuring results,  
563–570
Intellectual property, 78
Intensive distribution, 524
Interbank Card  
Association, 604
Interdependence with supply 
chain partners, 501
Interest levels, 556
Interest rates, 165
Internal locus of control,  
179–180
Internal searches for 
information, 178
Internal secondary data,  
312–313
International markets, 51, 395. 
See also Global 
marketing
Internet. See also Blogs; 
E-commerce; Websites
advantages as retail 
channel, 537–541
advertising channels,  
586, 587e
business-to-business 
transactions on, 211–212, 
217, 227
as consumer information 
source, 179
growth in Russia, 246
IMC channels, 561–563
impact on direct marketing, 
560–561
impact on personal  
selling, 624
impact on privacy, 160–162
impact on service  
delivery, 420
lead generation on, 613–614
marketing research via,  
318, 320
recruiting product testers 
via, 389
Internet access limitations, 16
Interviews, 317–318
Introduction stage (product 
life cycle), 392, 393
Inventories. See also Supply 
chain management
costs, 510
just-in-time, 510–511
management by retailers, 
534–535
management by suppliers, 
19, 503, 510–511
Inventory management 
systems, 502
Investors, social media 
marketing to, 224
Involvement levels, 198–200
Infant products, 146, 372
Inflation, 165
Influencers, 219, 220
Information defined,  
306–308
Information effect, 88–89
Information flow, 501–503
Information gathering. See 
also Marketing research
about competitors, 151–152
in consumer decision 
process, 178–181
for customer relationship 
management, 15
for ethical decision  
making, 132
keyword analysis, 104–105
for marketing plans, 63
from social media,  
102–105, 187
Information power, 496
Informational appeals, 584
Informative advertising, 580
Infrastructure analysis, 240
Ingredients list scenario,  
145–146
Initiators, 219–220
Inner City Tenants segment 
(Tapestry), 277–278, 279e
Innovation. See also 
Technological advances
continuing need for,  
371–375
diffusion of, 375–382
at Google, 399–401
pricing challenges of,  
465–467
in product life cycle, 393, 
395–396
reverse, 254–255, 384
Innovators, 377–378, 466
Inseparable production and 
consumption, 409–410
Instant coupons, 469
Institutional advertisements, 
582
Institutions, in B2B  
markets, 214
In-store demonstrations, 196
Instrumental support for 
service providers, 419
Intangibility of services,  
407–409
Integrated marketing 
communications
case study, 573–574
communication channels, 
559–563
communication process, 
550–558
elements of, 43, 550
I
Idea generation, 383–388
Ideal points, 291, 292
Ideals, motivation by, 274
Ideas as products, 8
Identifiable segments, 279
iMacs, 50
Images, 407, 408
Imitation, 376
Immigration, 158
Impatience in sales,  
623–624
Implementation phase
in marketing plans, 35,  
40–43, 63, 77–79,  
128–129
in marketing research 
process, 308
Imports, 238, 240–241
Impressions, in online 
advertising, 569
Improvement value, 461–462
Impulse buying, 199–200
In-app purchases, 100, 101
Inbound marketing, 227, 614
Inbound merchandise 
management, 506–508
Income (national), 238
Income (personal), 157, 240
Income distribution, 157
Income effect, 443–445
Income statements, 76
Independent beauty 
consultants, 627
Independent marketing 
channels, 495–496
Independent sales  
agents, 622
In-depth interviews, 317–318
India
e-commerce in, 505
economic environment, 
239–240, 247–248
fast-food marketing, 260
global retail expansion in, 
247–248
joint venture restrictions, 
251–252
luxury car market, 298
Indirect marketing  
channels, 492
Individual brands, 354
Individualism, 244, 245e
Individualized pricing, 443
Indonesia, Tupperware in,  
257, 625
Indulgence, 244
Industries, marketing by, 11–12
Industry analyses, 68–71
Industry shakeouts, 393
Inelastic markets, 442

	
subject index	
671
Marketing communications. 
See Communications; 
Integrated marketing 
communications
Marketing environments. See 
also Demographics
case study, 169–170
cultural, 153–155
demographic, 155–159
economic, 165–166
framework for analyzing, 
150–151
immediate, 151–153
impact on consumer 
behavior, 195–197
in retail stores, 536–537
social trends, 159–162
technological advances in, 
162–164
Marketing ethics. See also 
Conscious marketing; 
Ethics; Social 
responsibilities of firms
applied to decision making, 
130–131, 132–136
blogging, 98
bribery and, 144,  
221–222
business ethics versus, 120
case study, 138–139
examples of dilemmas,  
118–119
marketing to children, 20
pharmaceutical sales, 222
scenarios, 143–147
scope, 120
in shoe marketing, 117–118
social responsibility versus, 
131–132
use of customer data,  
323–325
Marketing mix
in global marketing,  
253–258
implementation, 41–43
in marketing plans, 74–75
overview, 6–10
Marketing plans
follow-up evaluation, 35, 
43–50, 63, 79, 129–130
implementing, 35, 40–43, 
63, 77–79, 128–129
overview, 35
PeopleAhead example,  
66–79
planning steps, 35, 36–40, 
127–128
role in marketing process, 4
social media, 106–107,  
110–112
writing, 61–65
Management commitment to 
service quality, 417,  
418–419
Management of salespeople, 
621–627, 628
Mannequins, 324
Manufacturer brands, 353
Manufacturers, 211–212, 502
Manufacturer’s 
representatives, 622
Manufacturer’s suggested 
retail price, 474
Manufacturing globalization, 
236
Markdowns, 468
Market development 
strategies, 51
Market growth rate, 48
Market orientation, 13
Market penetration  
strategies, 51
Market positioning. See 
Positioning
Market presence, as online 
retailing benefit, 539
Market research. See 
Marketing research
Market segments, 40–41. See 
also Segmentation
Market share, 48, 48–50, 436
Market testing, 389–390
Market value of brands, 348
Marketing
to children, 20, 159, 593
evolution of, 12–13
four Ps, 6–10, 533–537
major benefits, 17–22
major categories, 10–11
major elements, 4–6
stakeholder impacts, 11–12
value-based concepts,  
13, 14–17
Marketing channel 
management
case study, 514–516
defined, 488
information flow,  
501–503
main challenges, 488–490, 
492–495
product flow, 504–511
strategic relationships in, 
499–501
vertical systems for,  
495–499
Marketing channels
defined, 19
designing, 491–492
information flow in,  
501–503, 549
product flow in, 504–511
Locus of control, 179–180
Logos
in advertising, 590
on athletes’ uniforms, 566
defined, 348e
licensing, 355
with rebranding, 359
Long-term perspective in 
sales, 612
“Look at Me” campaign, 578
Look Book displays, 420
Loss-leader pricing, 472–473
Lotteries, 241
Love, appeals to, 585e
Love needs, 189, 190
Loyalty
customer, 32, 186–187
price elasticity of demand 
and, 445
segmentation by, 277, 278
value of brands for creating, 
347–348, 351–352
Loyalty programs
coupons with, 596, 597
customer data from, 280, 
285, 312
as customer retention tool, 
32, 277, 278, 599
demographic data from, 
155–156
Loyalty segmentation, 277
LP albums, 396
Luxury brands. See also 
Premium brands
buying overseas,  
242–243
exclusive distribution, 524
gray markets, 476
positioning strategies,  
296–298, 344
pricing, 440–441
psychological need for, 177
social media marketing, 94
M
M-A-C cosmetics, 530, 531
Mac Desktop, 50
Macroenvironmental factors. 
See also Marketing 
environments
culture, 153–155
demographics, 155–159
economic, 165–166
social trends, 159–162
technological advances, 
162–164
Macy’s Wallet program,  
543–544
Magazine advertising, 587e
Mail-in rebates, 600
Mailing lists, 146
Lead conversion tools, 227
Lead times, 510, 511
Lead users, 387–388
Leader pricing, 469–470, 
472–473
Leads, generating and 
qualifying, 613–616
LeapPad3 Power Learning 
Tablet, 138
Learning, impact on consumer 
behavior, 192
“LearnSmart and Win” 
contest, 598–599
Leasing, 469
LED bulbs, 462
Legal environment
of advertising, 593–594
overview, 165–166
of personal selling,  
627–628
of pricing, 472–474
Legitimate power, 496
Lendio service, 231
Licensed brands, 357
Licensing music, 589
Licensing products, 384
Life cycle for products,  
391–397
Lifestyles, 192, 273–274, 277
Lifetime value of a customer, 
32, 332–334
Lift, 592
Limited problem solving,  
199–200
Limited-assortment 
supermarkets, 526
Line extension, 355
LinkedIn, 93–94
Listening
in sales presentations, 618
to service complaints,  
423, 424
to social media networks, 
102–103, 187
Listening software, 187
Literacy levels, 257
The Little Mermaid  
(movie), 374
Live advertising, 84
Locating stores, 9
Location. See Place
Locational excellence, 31, 34
Location-based marketing
with Bing search  
engine, 386
growth of, 16, 588
privacy concerns, 130
Red Bull’s use, 112
Staples use, 83
to support personal  
selling, 613

672	
subject index
National Association of 
Broadcasters, 593
National brands, 353
National Childhood Cancer 
Awareness Month, 595
National Geographic, 118
National Instititutes of  
Health, 384
National Institute for Fitness 
and Sport, 227
National Organic  
Program, 183
Natural foods, 183, 464
Near-field communication 
technology, 164
Need recognition, 176–177, 
216. See also Customer 
needs
Negative word of mouth, 187
Negotiation with  
suppliers, 217
Network effect, 90
Neuromarketing, 324–325
New buy situations, 226
New Coke, 377e
New product development, 
370–375. See also 
Product development
Newborn-to-Toddler Apptivity 
Seat (Fisher-Price), 139
News apps, 100
Newspaper advertising, 587e
Newton PDA, 377e
Niche media, 586
No-haggle pricing, 437
Noise, 552
Noncompensatory decision 
rules, 184
Noncumulative quantity 
discounts, 471
Nonfinancial rewards for 
salespeople, 626–627
No-No List (Panera), 148–149
Nonprofit organizations, 37, 
302, 328–330
Nonverbal cues, 245
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA),  
243, 243e
Nostalgia, appeals to, 585e
Nutrition Labeling and 
Education Act, 166e, 361
O
Obesity, 20, 159
Objections, responding to, 
619–620
Objective performance 
evaluation, 627
Objective-and-task budgeting 
method, 565
payment systems, 129,  
164, 560
promoting purchases with, 
528, 535
as shopping aids, 597
tracking TV viewership  
on, 311
use with loyalty  
programs, 278
using while flying, 8
Mobile marketing, 561
Mobile task management, 509
Modern Family (TV  
show), 600
Modified rebuys, 226, 228
Moneyball (movie), 434
Monitoring social media,  
102–103, 187
Monopolies, 165, 450e, 451
Monopolistic competition, 
450e, 451
Moods, 198
Moral Mentor Test, 134e
Motivating salespeople,  
624–627
Motives for consumer 
behavior, 188–192,  
274–275
Motorcyclists, 273–274
Movie studios, 357, 374
Movies
consumer benefits, 276
market growth strategies, 
51–52
predicting success,  
46, 314
product placement,  
552, 600
3D, 390
timing of release, 390
Multi-attribute model,  
183–184, 184e
Multichannel retailing 
strategies, 521
Muscle cars, 254
Music in advertising, 589
Music marketing, 108
Mustang car, 254
My Magic system (Disney), 32
My Starbucks Idea site, 56
MyFitnessPal app, 100
mySugr app, 180
MyWeeklyAd program, 597
N
nabi 2, 138
NAFTA, 243, 243e
Naming brands, 353–354
National Association for  
Sport and Physical 
Education, 595
Merchandise flows. See 
Inventories; Supply chain 
management
Mercosur, 243, 243e
Message creation in 
advertising, 583–584
Methyl bromide, 183
Metrics
for advertising results,  
591–592
defined, 43
for ethical decision making, 
133–136, 134e
global economic analysis, 
237–240
for IMC results, 565–570
for marketing plan 
evaluation, 46–50
for personal sales 
performance, 627
service quality, 413–417
vendor performance, 218
Mexico, same-day grocery 
delivery, 507
Mi5 smartphone, 370
Microblogs, 97–98
Micromarketing, 285
Middle class growth in  
India, 239
Migrant workers in  
China, 248
Milk advertising, 11–12, 11f
Milk Drive, 12
“Milk Life” campaign, 11–12, 11f
Millennials, 156, 157, 266–267, 
544, 578
Million Dollar Listing (TV 
show), 629
Minnesota Timberwolves,  
83, 85f
Minority groups, 158–159
MinuteClinic mobile app, 161
Misleading ads, 591
Mission Impossible  
(movie), 600
Mission statements,  
36–37, 67
Mobile commerce, 535
Mobile devices
advertising growth, 16, 588
app variety and pricing,  
99–101
classroom and workplace 
applications, 215
as customer relationship 
tools, 15–17, 613
health apps, 160, 161, 180
impact on services,  
162–164
ordering and delivery 
services, 56
Marketing research. See also 
Information gathering
case study, 328–330
on demographic segments, 
155–156
ethical issues, 323–325
overview, 302
primary data collection, 
314–322
secondary data sources, 
309–313
steps in process, 302–308
on underwear advertising, 
301–302
voice-of-customer 
programs, 415
Marketing strategies
case study, 55–57
growth focused, 51–52
major elements, 30–35
in marketing plans,  
63, 74
social media, 106, 124
Market-oriented era, 13
Marketplace as stakeholder, 
125–126
Marketplace segmentation. 
See Segmentation
Markets, describing, 68–71
Markups, 449–450
Marty McFly Day, 30
Masculinity, 244
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 
188–190, 189e
Mass marketing, 283
Mass media, 586
Matchmaking sites, 104
Maturity stage (product life 
cycle), 392, 393–396
Maximizing profits  
strategy, 436
McAloo Tikki Burger, 260
M-commerce, 535
Me time, 99
Meats, sustainably  
sourced, 150
Media
advertising channels,  
586–588
age group differences in 
usage, 156
marketing channels,  
559–563, 566–568
Media buys, 586
Media mix, 586
Media planning, 586
Media-sharing sites, 95–96
Medical services, 419
Men, marketing to, 204–205, 
270–271
Menthol cigarettes, 144

	
subject index	
673
Political/regulatory 
environments, 165–166
Politics, marketing research in, 
302, 309
Pollution, 241
Popcorn, 394
Population growth, 238, 248
Portals, 217
Portfolio analysis, 48–50
Positioning
changing, 294
in global marketing,  
253–258
in marketing plans, 41
methods, 289–291
strategy selection,  
286–288
using perceptual maps, 
291–294
Postpurchase behavior,  
185–187, 422
Postpurchase cognitive 
dissonance, 186
Posttesting, 591
Potty seats, 139
Poverty, 129
Power distance, 244, 245e
Power in marketing  
channels, 496
PR Newswire, 602
Preapproach, 616–618
Predatory pricing, 451, 473
Predictive analytics, 163, 345
Preferred vendors, 217
Premarket tests, 389
Premium brands. See also 
Luxury brands
for colas, 29–30
Godiva example, 2–4
positioning strategies,  
296–298, 344
psychological need for, 177
social media marketing, 94
Premium pricing, 436–437
Premiums, 598
Prescription drug apps, 161
Presentations, sales, 618–620
Preservatives, 149
Prestige Collection (Hertz), 40
Prestige products or services, 
440–441, 443. See also 
Luxury brands
Pretesting, 591
Pretty Little Liars (TV show), 
267
Pretzel rolls, 387
Price bundling, 469
Price discrimination, 165–166, 
473–474
Price elasticity of demand, 
442–445
Person in the Mirror  
Test, 134e
Personal alarms, 588, 590
Personal blogs, 97
Personal digital assistants, 393
Personal selling. See also 
Sales; Salespeople
case study, 632–633
as communication  
channel, 560
customer relationships, 612
elements of, 610–612
legal and ethical issues, 
627–629
management,  
621–627, 628
steps in process, 613–621
technology’s impact,  
608–610, 624
value added, 611–612
Personal traits for sales,  
623–624
Personality of salesperson, 
623–624
Personalizing communications, 
414, 538–539
Persuasive advertising,  
580–581
Pesticides, 183
Pharmaceutical firms, 191, 395
Pharmaceutical sales,  
222, 531
Philanthropic organizations, 
21–22, 38
Photo sites, 96
Photoshopping images, 591
Physicians, 419
Physiological needs,  
189, 190
Physiological risks, 181
Pick tickets, 509
Pilates exercises, 386
Pink Ribbon campaign, 37
Pioneers, 375–376
Pizza Tracker app, 481
Pizzerias, 479–482
Place
in marketing mix, 9–10, 43
retail strategies based  
on, 537
segmentation by, 298
Planners, in supply chain, 506
Planning phase in marketing 
plans, 35, 36–40,  
127–128
Pods, detergent, 433, 463
Point-of-purchase displays, 
536, 600
Point-of-sale terminals,  
502, 543
Policies, 628
Orlando (FL) test  
marketing, 390
Oscars ceremony, 594
“Our Food. Your Questions” 
campaign (McDonald’s), 
577–578
Out of the Blue platform,  
37–38
Outdoor advertising, 587e
Outdoor clothing, 152–153
“Outnumber Hunger” 
campaign, 583
Outsourcing for new product 
development, 384–386
Ownership of brands,  
352–353
P
Packaging
as brand element, 359–361
IKEA’s efficiency, 487
influence on consumer 
decisions, 197
required labeling, 361, 362
small cola cans, 39
Page views, 103
Paid apps, 101
Painkillers, 191
Palm oil, 162
Panel data, 312, 320, 391
Parents, marketing to, 281
Parity, competitive, 437
Partnering relationships, 499
Passive consumers, 187
“Pattern selling” approach, 610
Payment systems, 129,  
164, 560
Peer marketing, 98
Penetration strategies, 51, 466
Pepsi Perfect, 30
Percentage-of-sales  
method, 565e
Perceptions
benefits and costs of 
search, 179
brand value, 351
in communication process, 
552–554
purchase risk, 180–181. See 
also Risk
role in consumer decisions, 
191–192
Perceptual maps, 291–294
Performance evaluations
marketing campaigns,  
43–50
salespeople, 627
suppliers, 218
Performance risk, 180
Perfumes, 355, 377e
Perishability of services, 410
Objectives. See Goals
Observability of products, 
381–382
Observation in marketing 
research, 315–316
Occasion segmentation, 277
Office supply retailers,  
231–232, 531
Off-price retailers, 532
Ohio State University, 226
Oligopolistic competition, 
450e, 451
Omnichannel retailing 
strategies, 521, 537–541. 
See also E-commerce
Onboard, online retailing, 8
One for One philosophy,  
117–118
One-to-one marketing, 285
Online chats, 539
Online dating services, 104
Online focus groups, 318
Online marketing, privacy 
concerns, 162
Online ordering systems,  
481, 482
Online retailing. See also 
E-commerce
advantages, 537–541
Amazon’s services,  
208–210
linked to home services, 33
Macy’s strategies, 543–544
operational excellence, 34
privacy concerns, 162
use of predictive analytics 
with, 345
Online surveys, 320
Online training, 624
OnlineBeta site, 389
OnStar system, 385
On-the-job training, 624
Open-ended questions,  
315, 318
Operational excellence, 31, 34
Opinion leaders, 379
Opioid drugs, 191
Opportunistic buying, 532
Opportunities, analyzing, 39, 
40–41
Oprah Winfrey Foundation, 21
Oprah’s Angel Network, 21
Optimism, 624
Oral care, 238–239
Order getters, 622
Order specification, 217–218
Order takers, 622
Organic foods, 183, 393,  
464, 500
Organizational cultures, 131, 
220–222, 223e

674	
subject index
Pulse of the Nation  
panel, 320
Pulsing advertising schedules, 
587
Purchase situations, 194–195
Purchasing power parity, 238
Purchasing process. See also 
Consumer decision 
process
B2B buying centers,  
219–225
B2B buying situations, 
225–228
B2B stages, 216–218, 619e
in consumer decision 
process, 184–185
involvement levels,  
198–200
Pure competition, 450e, 451
Purses, 177
Push strategies, 580, 596
Q
Qualifying leads, 613–616
Qualitative research methods, 
314–318
Quality
associated with brands, 
347, 348
competitive advantage 
from, 34
guarantees, 480
of services, 413–417,  
620–621
Quality handicap (Google), 473
Quality scores, 570
Quantitative research 
methods, 314–315,  
318–322
Quantity discounts, 468, 470e, 
471, 474
Question marks, 48–49
Questioning, in sales 
presentations, 618, 620
Questionnaires, 305, 306e, 
318–319, 319e
QueVision, 415
Quick response systems,  
510–511
Quick Wins app, 231
Quotas, 242, 471
R
R&D consortia, 384
Radio advertising,  
587, 587e
Radio frequency identification 
devices, 164, 508, 516
Rain forest destruction, 162
Rating systems, transportation 
services, 427–428
packaging options,  
359–361
portfolio analysis, 48–50
presale experience with, 
85–86
retail strategies based on, 
533–535
salient attributes, 290
specification in B2B 
markets, 216
types, 6–8, 341–342
variable costs, 447
Professional blogs, 97
Professional networking,  
93–94
Profitable segments,  
282–283
Profits
of channel members,  
452–453
as company objectives, 
435–436
corporate social 
responsibility and,  
121, 122
in customer lifetime value 
analyses, 333–334
measuring, 46, 47f
during product life  
cycle, 393
Project design, marketing 
research, 303–304
Promotion. See also Sales 
promotions
as communication  
channel, 560
describing in marketing 
plans, 75
in marketing mix, 10, 43
retail strategies, 196–197, 
535–537
Proofreading marketing  
plans, 64
Proposals, in B2B buying 
process, 216, 217
Prototypes, 388–389
Psychographic segmentation, 
271–276
Psychographics, 273
Psychological factors in 
consumer behavior,  
188–192
Psychological needs, 177
Psychological risks, 181
Public relations, 560,  
594–595, 596e
Public service advertising, 
582–583
Publicity Test, 134e
Puffery, 472, 593–594
Pull strategies, 580, 596
Privacy concerns. See also 
Marketing ethics
with drones, 379
growing importance,  
160–162
of personal selling, 628
use of customer data,  
323–325, 539
Private-label brands
exclusivity with, 535
growth of, 353
perceived value, 351,  
526, 527
targeted offerings, 312
Problem solving, 198–200
Procedural fairness, 424
Processed foods, 122–123, 
148–149
Producers, in B2B markets, 
211–212
Product assortment,  
343–346
Product development. See 
also Products
case study, 399–401
diffusion of innovation, 
375–382
innovation’s importance, 
370–375
process overview, 382–391
strategies, 42, 51–52
Product excellence, 31, 34
Product life cycle, 391–397
Product lines
defined, 48, 343
expansion and contraction, 
346, 373
naming, 353–356
Product mix, 343–346
Product placement, 552,  
555, 600
Product-focused 
advertisements, 582
Production, globalization of, 
236
Production-oriented era, 12
Products. See also Brands; 
Product development
complexity, 340–341
continuing need for 
innovation, 371–375
decisions about assortment, 
343–346
defined, 340
demonstrations, 196
designing, 388–389
excellence in, 34
global strategies, 254–255
labeling, 361, 362
life cycle stages, 391–397
online reviews, 562
Price fixing, 474, 475
Price lining, 470
Price skimming, 466–467
Price wars, 451
“Priceless” campaign 
(MasterCard), 604
“Priceless Cities” campaign 
(MasterCard),  
604–605
“Priceless Surprises” campaign 
(MasterCard), 605
Prices defined, 434
Pricing
Amazon’s frequent  
changes, 439
based on competition, 
450–452, 461
basic concepts, 9
case studies, 455–456, 
479–482
channel members’ influence, 
452–453
common strategies,  
464–467
common tactics, 467–472
company objectives and, 
435–438
consistency across 
channels, 540
cost-based, 460–461
costs’ impact on, 446–450
critical challenges, 42, 434
customers’ role in,  
438–445
in global markets, 240, 
255–256
legal and ethical aspects, 
472–476
in marketing plans, 75
mobile apps, 100–101
product life cycle effects, 
393–395
researching, 320–321
retail strategies based  
on, 535
sales promotions based on, 
596–598, 600, 601
transportation  
services, 427
value-based, 461–462
Primary data
advantages and 
disadvantages, 322e
collection methods, 305, 
314–322
defined, 304
Primary packages, 359
Prime Air service, 210
PrimeFresh, 507
“Prius Goes Plural”  
campaign, 558

	
subject index	
675
Sales. See also Personal 
selling
advertising’s impact, 592
as communication  
channel, 560
intermediaries, 524
measuring, 46, 47f
pricing decisions based on, 
436–437
in-store demonstrations, 196
technological advances, 
608–610
tracking in supply chain 
management, 502, 503
Sales contests, 626
Sales forecasts, 504–505
Sales management,  
621–627, 628
Sales presentations, 618–620
Sales promotions, 196–197, 
560, 596–601
Sales support personnel, 622
Sales taxes, 209
Sales-oriented era, 12–13
Salespeople. See also 
Personal selling
in big-box stores, 531
business-to-business,  
220, 231
impact on consumer 
behavior, 196
legal and ethical issues for, 
627–629
managing, 621–627, 628
pharmaceutical, 222
role in retail promotion, 537
training, 624, 628
value added by, 611–612
working conditions,  
610–611
Salient product attributes, 290
Salted Caramel Mochas, 252
Same-day delivery, 210
Samples, in opinion  
polling, 305
Sampling products, 389, 599
Sandals, 365
Saturation of markets,  
373, 395
“Say It with Pepsi” campaign, 
549–550
Scanner data, 310, 320
Scheduling ads, 587
School lunch example,  
134–136
Schools, 215, 370
Scooters, 388
Search engine marketing, 82, 
386, 473, 520, 569
Searches for information. See 
Information gathering
Retouched photos, 591
Retrieval sets, 181
Return on investment,  
104–105, 570
Return on marketing 
investment, 570
Return policies, 424
Revenues, measuring, 46
Reverse engineering, 386
Reverse innovation,  
254–255, 384
Reviews of products, 562
Reward power, 496
Rewards for customer 
service, 419
RFID tags, 501, 508, 516
Ride services, 427–428
Risk
cannibalization, 433
in co-branding, 356–357
of diluting brand image, 
344, 355, 356, 357
diversifying, 284, 373
in global marketing, 244, 
250–252
individual tolerance,  
275–276, 377
in market segments,  
144–145
in marketing 
communications,  
557, 577
protecting consumers  
from, 166
of purchase decisions,  
33, 178, 180–181, 199
in service purchases,  
409–410
in unrelated  
diversification, 52
Robinson-Patman Act,  
165–166, 473, 474
Robots, Amazon’s use, 210
Role playing, 618, 624
Royalties, 357, 497
Rule-of-thumb budgeting 
methods, 565
Runners, marketing to,  
284–285
“Runnin’ with the Devil”  
(song), 589
Runway shows, 226
Rural customers in India, 
239–240
Russia, 246, 261
S
Safety appeals, 585e
Safety needs, 189, 190
Safety risks, 181
Salaries of salespeople, 626
Reminder advertising,  
581–582
Renewable resources. See 
Environmental 
awareness
Reorder points, 502
Repositioning, 294
Reputation for customer 
service, 33
Request for proposals, 217
Research. See Marketing 
research
Research and development, 
383–384
Resellers, 213
Reservations, responding to, 
619–620
Resilience, 624
Resource allocation, 41–43
Response rates, 320
Responsibly Grown ratings, 14
Responsive segments, 282
Responsiveness of services, 
413e, 414, 416, 620
Restaurants
buying process, 228
co-branding, 356
global marketing, 260–261
mobile media use, 16
pizzeria competition,  
479–482
product testing in, 409
public relations  
campaigns, 595
responses to healthy eating 
trends, 148–150
technological advances, 420
test marketing by, 390
Retailer brands, 353
Retailers as wholesalers, 490
Retailers’ cooperatives,  
452–453
Retailing
attempts to qualify 
customers, 616
case study, 543–545
in China, 248
common pricing tactics, 
468–470
in India, 247–248
information sharing with 
manufacturers, 502
manufacturer choice of 
approaches, 521–525
multichannel, 521
strategies, 520–521,  
533–537, 543–545
types, 525–533
Retention of customers, 32, 
278, 599
Retention rates, 333–334
Reach of marketing 
communications, 566
Reachable segments, 282
The Real Housewives of 
Orange County (TV 
show), 629
Real income, 240
Reality TV, 629
Realtors, 629
Rebates, 469, 600
Rebranding, 357–358, 359
Recalls, 146
Receivers, in communication 
process, 552, 554
Receiving, 508
Recommendation engine 
(Amazon), 313
Recovering from service 
failures, 423–424
Recruiting salespeople,  
623–624
Recycling, 160
Red Bull Stratos project,  
111, 339–340
Redemption rates for 
coupons, 598
Reference groups, 193–194
Reference prices,  
465, 472
Referent power, 496
Reformers, 385, 386
Regional cultures, 154–155
Regissör series (IKEA),  
487–488
Regulatory environments. See 
also Governments
of advertising, 143–144, 
593–594
car buying in Chinia, 241
overview, 165–166, 166e
of pricing, 472–474
Related diversification, 52
Relational orientation, 15
Relationship building. See also 
Customer relationship 
management
with customers, 15–17,  
56, 612
with retailers by 
manufacturers, 521e
with suppliers, 34,  
223–225, 375, 499–501
Relationship selling, 612
Relative advantage, 381
Relative market share, 48
Relevance of online ads,  
569–570
Relevance of social media 
messages, 83
Reliability of services, 413e, 
414, 415–416, 620

676	
subject index
using to generate leads, 614
wheel of engagement,  
88–92
Social Media Moms, 98
Social network sites, 92–95
Social responsibilities of firms. 
See also Ethics; 
Marketing ethics
in conscious marketing,  
119–122
examples of dilemmas,  
118–119
integration by firms,  
127–130
marketing ethics versus, 
131–132
marketing’s role, 19–21
in shoe marketing, 117–118
Social risks, 181
Social shopping, 569
Social trends, 159–162
Society as stakeholder,  
126–127
Socioeconomic level, 298
Sodium phosphate, 149
Software-as-a-service  
model, 617
Sol Wave House hotel, 91
Songs in advertising, 589
Soups, 149, 255
South Africa, 246
South Beach promotion,  
316–317
Space jump, 111
Speakers (audio), 438
Specialization, 406–407
Specialty products/ 
services, 341
Specialty stores, 530, 531
“The Spirit and the Letter” 
booklet (GE), 128
Sponsored Links  
(Google), 569
Sponsorships
Red Bull Stratos  
project, 339–340
sports, 56–57, 112,  
566, 595
sports apparel, 225–228
Sports Illustrated swimsuit 
issue, 301–302
Sports teams, 57, 112
St. Jude “Thanks and Giving” 
campaign, 595
Stakeholders
conflicting goals, 118–119
in conscious marketing 
model, 122–127, 132
interdependence, 119–120
marketing’s effects on, 11–12
Standards gaps, 411, 417–418
Situational factors in B2B 
purchasing, 225–228
Situational factors in 
consumer decisions, 
194–198
Size discounts, 468
Skate-In-School, 595
Ski areas, 410, 411
Skin cancer, 180
Slogans, 348e
Slotting allowances, 471, 523
Small businesses, 93–94, 211, 
231–232
Small cola cans, 39
Smart cards, 604
Smart Chopper, 229
S.M.A.R.T. program, 38f
Smartphones, 47, 92, 99–101, 
368–370, 561. See also 
Mobile devices
Smartwatches, 393
Snack foods, 394
Snapchat app, 44
“Snow Day” campaign  
(Nike), 175
Social factors in consumer 
decisions, 192–194
Social marketing, 582–583
Social media
advertising growth, 16, 588
Under Armour’s use, 80–82
B2B transactions on, 222, 
223–224
in Brazil versus China, 249
case study, 110–112
categories, 92–98
customer forums, 56
as customer relationship 
tool, 15–17, 101–108, 187
data analysis tools, 105, 313
data gathering with, 44, 
103–105, 124, 187,  
316–317
experimental research 
using, 321–322
generational interests, 272
as IMC channel, 563
major objectives, 82–87
marketing campaigns,  
105–107, 106f,  
110–112, 124
McDonald’s questions 
campaign, 577–578
potential pitfalls, 87
product ideas from 
customers, 387–388
small business services, 211
smartphone apps,  
99–101, 99f
testing new platforms, 553
use in politics, 309
Service quality, 413–417,  
620–621
Service recovery program 
(Broadmoor), 414
Services. See also Products
associated with  
products, 341
basic features, 7–8, 406
business-to-business,  
212, 213
case study, 427–428
coupled with online 
retailing, 33
development strategies, 42
Gaps Model, 411–422
major types, 341–342
recovering from failures, 
423–424
retailing, 532–533
role in developed 
economies, 406–407
unique marketing needs, 
407–410
variable costs, 447
Sex appeal, 585e
Share of wallet, 537
Shared goals with supply 
chain partners, 499–500
Shareholders, 121, 122
Sherman Antitrust Act, 165, 
451, 473, 474
“She’s Mercedes”  
campaign, 297
Shipping
challenges in India, 505
for different retail channels, 
540–541
direct to store vs. 
distribution center,  
504–506
distribution center 
functions, 506–508, 509
IKEA’s efficiency, 487
same-day grocery  
orders, 507
Shipping services, excellence 
in, 34
Shoe marketing, 117–118, 365
Shopping bots, 445
Shopping products/services, 
341, 524
Shopping situations, 195–197
Shopping with smartphone 
apps, 100. See also 
E-commerce; Mobile 
devices
Showrooming, 100
Simulated products or 
services, 389
Situation analyses, 37–40, 62, 
68–73
Seasonal discounts, 468, 
470–471
Secondary data
advantages and 
disadvantages, 322e
CLV analysis using,  
332–334
collection methods, 305, 
309–313
defined, 304
Secondary packages, 359
Security tags, 516
Segmentation
in B2B markets, 211–215
basic concepts, 5
case study, 296–298
data gathering for,  
312, 321
evaluation of alternatives, 
279–283
in global marketing,  
253–258
in marketing plans, 40–41
methods, 270–278
positioning strategies,  
286–294
for premium brands,  
297–298
during product growth 
stage, 393
during product maturity 
stage, 395
strategy selection,  
268–269
target market selection, 
283–285
Segmentation, targeting, and 
positioning. See STP 
process
Selection, as online retailing 
benefit, 538
Selective distribution,  
524–525
Self-actualization, 189
Self-checkout lanes, 420
Self-concept, 273
Self-driving cars, 164
Self-expression, motivation  
by, 275
Selfies, 180
Self-marketing, 11
Self-motivation, 624
Self-regulation, 593, 602
Self-values, 273
Selling teams, 623
Senders, 550–551, 554
Sentiment analysis,  
102–103, 187
Sentiment mining, 317
Service gaps, 411. See also 
Gaps Model

	
subject index	
677
Test marketing, 389–390
Testing, 389
Third-party vendors, 209–210
Thought-sharing sites, 96–98
Threats, analyzing, 39–40
3D movies, 390
Thumbtack platform, 406
Ticket marketing, 615
Ticketing and marking, 509
Tiered pricing, 458–459
Time orientation, 244
Timeliness effect, 91–92
Time-series analysis, 592
Tobacco marketing,  
143–144, 166e
Tonight Show (TV series), 84
Toolkits, public relations,  
595, 596e
Top Rung segment (Tapestry), 
279e
Top-of-mind awareness,  
554–556
Total costs, 447
Total revenues, 448
Touch of Yogurt shampoo, 
377e
Tracking advertising results, 
591–592
Trade agreements, 243, 243e
Trade barriers, 240–243
Trade deficits, 238
Trade shows, 614
Trade surpluses, 238
Trademarks, 348
Trading blocs, 243
Traditional media, 566–567
Traffic, analyzing, 103
Training
for quality service,  
414, 418
salespeople, 624, 628
Traits of good salespeople, 
623–624
Transactional orientation, 15
Transistors, 393
Transmitters, 551–552
Transparency Test, 134e
Transportation network 
services, 427–428
Transportation systems in 
overseas markets, 240
Travel sites, 16
Trialability of products, 382
Trip planning apps, 100
Triple bottom line, 121
TrueMatch® technology, 66, 
67, 72, 78
Trust for supply chain 
partners, 499
The Truth About Cars  
blog, 316
Sweeteners, 126–127
SWOT analyses, 37–40, 38f, 
62, 71–72, 283
Symbols, 290, 348e, 407
Sync communication  
system, 463
Syndicated data, 305,  
309–312
T
Tangibles, 413e, 414, 416, 620
Tapatalk app, 100
Tapestry tool, 277, 279e
Target markets
competitive advantage  
and, 30
cross-promotion to, 601
demographics, 155–159
in global marketing,  
253–258
for Harley-Davidson, 274
in marketing plans, 41, 74
reaching via social media, 
92–93, 94, 106–107
selection, 283–285,  
579–580
Target profit pricing, 436
Target return pricing,  
436, 450
Targeting, 41
Tariffs, 240–241
Tax collection services, 209
Tax preparation services, 178
Team selling, 623
Technological advances. See 
also Innovation
impact on dieting  
programs, 205
impact on education, 370
impact on marketing 
environments, 162–164
impact on personal  
selling, 624
in overseas markets, 240
in service delivery, 419–420
in supply chain 
management, 501–503
Teenagers’ social media 
preferences, 272
Teeth-whitening kits, 440
Teleconferencing, 624
Telemarketing, 614, 615
Telemarketing Sales  
Rule, 166e
Telephone invention, 393
Television advertising,  
586, 587e
Television programming,  
234–235, 555, 600
Television viewership, 311
Temporal state, 197–198
Supermarkets, 525–526
Suppliers. See also Business-
to-business (B2B) 
marketing
for Amazon, 209
buying process in B2B 
markets, 211–212,  
216–218, 619e
impact on marketing 
environments, 152–153
salespeople for, 612
strong relationships with, 
34, 375
sustainability  
requirements, 126
Supply chain management
case study, 514–516
defined, 10, 488
for different retail channels, 
540–541
excellence in, 34
IKEA’s efficiency, 486–488
information flow, 501–503
main challenges, 488–490, 
492–495
product flow, 504–511
strategic relationships in, 
499–501
technological advances, 
210, 420, 510–511
vertical systems for,  
495–499
Supply chain partners, 11, 19
Supply chains
defined, 19
designing, 491–492
information flow in,  
501–503
marketing interface with, 18
for organic products, 500
processed foods, 122–123
product flow in, 504–511
Surge pricing, 427
Surpluses, trade, 238
Survey research, 318–320
Surveys, 305, 306e
Sustainability
evaluating vendors by, 126
General Mills’ efforts, 162
importance to conscious 
marketing, 127
organic/natural foods, 183, 
393, 464, 500
in packaging, 361
value based on, 14
Sustainable competitive 
advantage, 30–35,  
67–68
Sweden, currency  
valuation, 238
Sweepstakes, 599
Staples Advantage program, 
231–232
Star Wars memorabilia, 357
Star Wars movies, 44, 380
Stars, 48
State regulation of  
advertising, 593
Status quo pricing, 437
Stereotypes, avoiding in  
hiring, 623
Stevia, 127
Stock-keeping units  
(SKUs), 526
Store atmospheres, 195–196
Store brands, 353
Store credit cards, 536
Store pickup, 509–510
Stores within stores, 545
Storytelling, 618–619
STP process. See also 
Segmentation
in global markets, 253
of Mercedes-Benz,  
296–298
objectives, 268–269
overview, 40–41, 62, 269e
positioning, 286–294
segment evaluation,  
279–283
segmentation methods, 
270–278
target market selection, 
283–285
Straight rebuys, 228
Strategic alliances, 75, 251
Strategic business units, 48
Strategic relationships,  
499–501
Strategies. See Marketing 
strategies
Stratocaster guitars, 441
Stratos project, 111, 339–340
Streaming content, 234–235
Strengths of firms, analyzing, 
37–38
Structured questions,  
318–319
Stubborn Sodas, 30
Students, researching, 307
Stunts, 111
Subheads, 589
Subjective performance 
evaluation, 627
Substantial segments, 279
Substitute products, 442, 445
Substitution effect, 445
Sugar labeling, 362
Sunday deliveries, 19
Sunglasses, 451
Supercenters, 526
Superhero movies, 51

678	
subject index
Web portals, 217
Web surveys, 320
Webcams, 389
Webinars, 223
Websites. See also Internet
of brands, 348e
marketing communications 
through, 561–562
print versus, 156
restaurant, 420
use of predictive analytics 
with, 345
Web-tracking software, 568
Weight loss industry, 151–152, 
203–205, 316–317
Weird communications, 557
Weixin app, 99
Wellness concerns, 148–150, 
159–160
Wheel of Social Media 
Engagement, 88–92
White papers, 224–225
Wholesalers, 213, 488,  
490, 520
Wholly owned  
subsidiaries, 252
WiFi access, 8
Wireless devices. See Mobile 
devices
Wireless payment  
systems, 164
Women, marketing to, 158, 
271, 297
Word of mouth, 187
Workplace climates, 131
World cars, 254
World Emoji Day, 549–550
Y
Yoga, 160
YouTube videos, 84, 95–96, 111
Z
Zone pricing, 470e, 471–472
Zones of tolerance, 415–416
Vendor-managed  
inventories, 503
Vendors. See Suppliers
Venezuela, currency  
valuation, 238
Verbal communications, 245
Versant 2100 printer, 214
Vertical channel conflict,  
494, 495
Vertical marketing systems, 
495–499, 523
Vertical price fixing, 474
Video sites, 105–107
Videoconferencing, 624
Vinyl LPs, 396
VIP service (Universal), 446
Viral marketing, 489
Virtual communities, 316–317
Virtual offices, 610–611
The Voice (TV show), 567
Voice, in marketing plans, 64
Voice recognition  
technology, 613
Voice-of-customer  
programs, 415
VoIP services, 616
VoluntEAR program, 125
W
Wait times, 415
Walking sticks, 372
Walkman players, 393
Wants, needs versus, 177
Warehouse clubs, 526–527
Water Is Life microblog,  
97–98
Watson computer, 213,  
608–610
Weaknesses of firms, 38
Wealth, target markets based 
on, 157, 237
Wear-now option  
(Burberry), 522
Weather, 174–175, 213
Web browsers, 393
V
Vacuum cleaners, 381
VALS tool, 274–276
Value. See also Pricing
of brands, 347–352, 349e
buying decisions based  
on, 176
defined, 13
importance of innovation to, 
375–376
perceived, 351
of personal selling for firms, 
611–612
positioning based on,  
286–290, 436–437
prices versus, 42, 434, 
461–462, 463
Value cocreation, 13
Value creation
as basic marketing function, 
6–8, 12–13
by channel members,  
490–491
importance of innovation to, 
375–376
by retailers, 521–522
Value proposition
defined, 43, 286
positioning based on,  
286–290
unique, 584
Value-based marketing 
concepts, 13,  
14–17, 150
Value-based marketing  
era, 13
Value-based pricing,  
461–462, 463
Values, individual, 273
Vanilla farmers, 162
Variability of services, 410
Variable costs, 447, 448
vCath training tool, 180
Vendor Flex program 
(Amazon), 494, 501
TV viewership, 311
Twitter music marketing, 108
2-in-1 iPotty, 139
U
Uncertainty avoidance, 244
Underwear advertising,  
300–302
Undifferentiated targeting 
strategies, 283
Unethical behavior. See Ethics; 
Marketing ethics
Unethical decision making, 
130–131
Uniform delivered pricing, 
470e, 471
Uniforms, 566
Unique selling propositions, 
584
Universal product codes,  
310, 501, 508
Universal sets, 181
Universities, student  
surveys, 307
University logo apparel,  
225–228
University of Alabama,  
225, 226
University of Michigan, 226
University of Southern 
California, 225
Unrelated diversification, 52
Unsought products/ 
services, 342
Unstructured questions, 318
UPC codes, 310, 501, 508
URLs, 348e. See also 
Websites
U.S. Census data, 309
U.S. Food Waste  
Challenge, 162
U.S. Postal Service, 593
Users, in buying centers,  
219, 220
USPs, 584


