 A solve-it-fast guide for home, car and more. Because--sometimes--duct tape just 
isn't enough. 
 
 
 
 
 
The world is populated by two kinds of guys: the ones who 
know what to do when something goes bust, and the ones 
who are always asking the first guys for help. Here's your 
secret manual for staying on the right side of the divide. It's 
filled with experts' shameless shortcuts for dealing with 
 
 
and water will get rid of ants," says Amy Devers, 
ng out of hiding." 
AR FACTOR: A weed-ridden asparagus 
as you about ready to give up on your 
crop. 
THE QUICK FIX: Add salt. "Asparagus is the only 
everything from flooded basements to mysterious oil leaks 
to flat mountain bike tires. These down-and-dirty repairs 
won't all last a lifetime, but they can certainly save the day.
 
INVADING ARMY: Ants are having a feeding 
frenzy in your kitchen, and you don't want to use 
a toxic brew to defeat them. 
HE QUICK FIX: "A 50/50 mix of peppermint oil 
 
 
T
co-host of the DIY Network's "DIY To The 
Rescue" show. "Fill a spray bottle, and spray 
wherever you see them comi
  
 
 
 
SPE
patch h
favorite 
vegetable that can withstand salt," says Penny 

Griggs, an organic farmer in Vermont. "Spread
salt around your plants will kill the weeds but 
leave your asp
ptop is 
cted. 
are a little-
ing 
aragus unharmed." 
r la
xpe
ns 
known drain on laptop batteries. "If you can 
 SPILLED JUICE: The battery in you
losing its charge much faster than e
THE QUICK FIX: Wireless operatio
disable your wireless networking and still get your 
work done, do it," says Andy Hooper, owner of 
Intelligent Systems, an IT security company. 
"Some wireless cards can eat up half of your 
laptop's power." 
Photo by HP 
 
 
 
FROZEN OUT: Cold weather has stiffened the 
mechanism of your garage door opener, causing 
it to lose powe
THE QUICK FIX:
k 
oothly. 
 SCREW LOOSE: You're trying to replace a 
woodscrew, but the hole is stripped and the screw 
won't grab. 
HE QUICK FIX: Insert two short lengths of thin, 
 
 
 The water in the trap of your 
ement floor
r. 
 Most garage door openers 
made in the past 15 years have pressure 
adjustments for both raising and lowering. Chec
and adjust these settings seasonally to keep 
things running sm
T
insulated wire in the hole before adding the 
screw. They'll allow the screw to bite. 
  
 
 
 
TRAPPED BELOW:
bas
 drain dried up-and now your cellar 
smells vaguely of nasty, nasty things. 
THE QUICK FIX: Pour nontoxic plumbing 
 
antifreeze down the drain to fill the trap. You can 
use water in a pinch, but it evaporates faster than 
antifreeze, so you'll need to repeat the process 
more often. 
 

HOT WHEELS: The temperature gauge on 
car is headed for the danger zone, but you'v
no time (or place) to park and cool your jets
THE QUICK FIX: Turn the heater on full bla
pening the windows so you don't fry). The extra 
your 
e got 
. 
t 
s
(o
volume of the heater core and its hoses, as well 
as the airflow of the heater fan blowing across the 
core, may dissipate enough heat to get you 
home--or to the garage--without a meltdown. 
 
Illustration by David J. Pullman 
 
  
 
 
 
ICE RAGE: Your car doors freeze shut in cold 
weather. 
THE QUIC
ipping 
around the door frames with 
s Al 
 
 cold weather. "It keeps moisture from 
 POWER INTERRUPTION: You need t
your car's battery, but don't want to los
settings on the car's radio, alarm, GPS
computer. 
 
K FIX: "Spray the weathers
silicone," advise
tr
Toutant, a technician at Heath Auto Service in 
Greenwood, Maine, where they know a thing or
two about
collecting and freezing your doors shut in the 
winter, and it keeps it from drying out and 
cracking in the summer." 
o remove 
e the 
 and 
Illustration by George Retseck 
 
THE QUICK FIX: A 9-volt battery adapter can 
plug into your cigarette lighter to keep those chips
powered up. Result: No more auto amnesia. 

 
Illustration by George Retseck 
 
DAMPNESS AT NOON: Your clothes dryer 
seems to have lost its zip. 
THE QUICK FIX: Clear the vent duct by removing 
the vent pipe and pulling out any accumulated 
debris from the pipe and duct. It's a 3-minute fix 
that can save you a $75 visit from a technician. 
 UNPLANNED POOL: A big rain has flooded your 
basement. And, since it knocked out the power 
too, your usually reliable sump pump won't pump.
THE QUICK FIX: If you live on a slope, try 
making a siphon. First, fill a garden hose with 
water from the outside spigot. Seal one end with 
your thumb and have a friend seal the other. 
Place one end through the cellar window and into 
the standing water. Then, have your friend carry 
the other end as far downhill as possible (the 
outlet has to be below the intake). Release your 
thumbs and let gravity do the rest. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
SHAGGY LAWN: You need to cut the grass 
before the in-laws show up but your mower won't 
start. 
THE QUICK FIX: Before you give up and take it 
to the repair shop, try this. First, take out the 
spark plug and empty the gas. Then, get a new 
plug, add some fresh gas to the tank and, more 
ften than not, the mower will start right up. 
o 
 
CRACKED TEETH: Someone--not you, surely--
has broken a key off in a door lock, which is now 
jammed shut. 
THE QUICK FIX: Use a grinding wheel to shape 
an old hacksaw blade into a harpoon-like point. 
Then, slip the point into the lock over one of the 
key nubs and use the hook to fish it out. 
Illustration by George Retseck 

 
 
Illustration by George Retseck 
 
BLURRED VISION: The zoom shots from your 
fancy new digital camera are fuzzy. 
THE QUICK FIX: Only use your optical zoom. 
Most digital cameras have both optical zoom, in 
which the lens moves (just like a zoom on a film 
camera), and digital zoom, which manipulates the 
image electronically. The digital zoom can 
compromise the quality of the image. If you want 
more magnification than the optical zoom can 
handle, it's better to achieve it on a computer after 
the fact. 
 RISING WATERS: The toilet is about to overflow, 
and you know that your usual tactic of slamming 
the lid and crossing your fingers won't work. 
THE QUICK FIX: As soon as the water level in 
the bowl starts rising, reach into the tank and prop 
up the fill valve (the ball or cylinder that floats on 
top of the water). That will stop the flow to the 
toilet, thwarting an overflow. The plunger, 
however, still awaits. 
 
Illustration by David J. 
Pullman 
 
 
Illustration by George Retseck 
 
IMMOVABLE OBJECT: A stubborn nut on an old 
lawnmower or pickup truck refuses to budge. 
THE QUICK FIX: The standard tactic since the 
dawn of the acetylene torch has been to heat the 
nut until it glows red. When heat alone won't cut 
it, touch a candle to the glowing nut. The wax will 
melt and flow into the threads, acting as a 
lubricant. 

 SNEAK LEAK: You can't find the source of oil 
leaking from your engine. 
THE QUICK FIX: First, spray the area with Easy 
Off kitchen cleaner. (It's cheaper than automotive 
cleaners.) Then, hose the area down, let it dry 
and spray on aerosol foot powder. The oil will 
stain a path in the powder, which you can follow 
back to its source. 
Editor's Note: We've already received mail on this 
one. Yes, Easy Off can corrode aluminum, but the 
damage isn't instantaneous. Make sure to rinse it 
off with a hose both promptly and thoroughly. 
Illustration by George Retseck 
 
  
 
 
 
SUN-DRIED TOMATOES: You need a way to 
water sensitive tomato plants during your summer 
vacation, without asking your neighbor to take 
care of them (again). 
THE QUICK FIX: Collect some liter-size plastic 
soda bottles and punch a few small holes in each 
one. Then, bury a bottle up to its neck next to 
each of the plants. Before you leave, simply fill 
the bottles; they'll slowly release the water over 
the next four or five days and keep your plants 
rom wilting. 
f 
 
STRUCTURAL COLLAPSE: A broken tent pole 
is threatening to ruin your annual family camping 
trip. 
THE QUICK FIX: "As long as you don't need it to 
hold up to serious weather, you can splint a tent 
pole with a branch," says Michael Hodgson, 
author of Camping For Dummies. (Use medical 
tape, dental floss--or, yes, duct tape.) "Heck, you 
can even pitch a tent entirely with branches if you 
need to." 
 
 
 
Illustration by George Retseck 
 
POLTERGEIST DOOR: Every house has one, a 
door that slowly drifts shut every time you try to 
leave it open. 
THE QUICK FIX: Rather than resetting the hinges
or propping it open with a potted plant, remove 
one of the hinge pins, lay it over a nail atop a hard 
surface, and strike it lightly with a hammer until 
the hinge pin has a slight bend. Tap the pin back 
in place. The increased friction will keep the door 
where you want it. 

 TRASHED SINK: The kitchen garbage disposal is 
frozen. 
THE QUICK FIX: "Ninety-five percent of garbage 
disposals have a reset button on the motor," says 
Chris Hall, a former appliance repairman and 
founder of Repairclinic.com. "No other appliance 
has this, so people assume they need to call a 
technician. I've answered literally dozens of calls 
that just needed someone to hit the reset." 
 
 
 
Photo by HP 
 
BLANK SLATE: You've lost the stylus to your 
PDA. 
THE QUICK FIX: Use a toothpick. It works as a 
replacement--and does double duty after dinner. 
 CHILLY DEPTHS: There's a puddle of water 
under your refrigerator, and it's growing. 
THE QUICK FIX: "I see this all the time," says 
Jeff McKinney, owner of JEM Plumbing and a 
member of ServiceMagic.com. "Usually, it's 
because the icemaker line has sprung a leak. 
People don't realize that there's a shutoff valve. 
Typically, it's under the sink. If not, look in the 
basement, beneath the fridge." 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CRACK HABIT: You've always used Spackle to 
patch cracks in plaster walls, just like your father 
did. But the pesky fissures keep opening up. 
THE QUICK FIX: "Use a clear latex acrylic caulk, 
rather than traditional patching compounds," says 
John Stauffer, technical director at the Paint 
Quality Institute. "The caulk has some flexibility, 
o it won't open up if your house moves a bit." 
s 
 
DRIP SERVICE: A toilet tank is dripping and you 
can't tell if the water is coming from harmless 
seasonal sweating or a bad seal. 
THE QUICK FIX: Dump some food coloring into 
the tank and see if the color reaches the floor. If it 
 
 

does, check the tank for cracks and the piping for 
loose connections. 
 
 
Illustration by George Retseck 
 
SPARELESS MISTAKE: You've got a flat tire on 
your mountain bike, and you don't have a spare 
inner tube. 
THE QUICK FIX: Create a makeshift inner tube 
out of leaves and grass. "It sounds absurd, but it 
really works," says Scott Kaier, a mechanic at 
Onion River Sports in Montpelier, Vt. "Leave one 
side of the tire bead hooked on the rim, and cram 
the opening with as much soft stuff as you can 
find. Install the other bead, and away you go." At 
least it will get you home. 
 CHIMNEY SEEP: No matter what you do, the 
paint on your masonry chimney keeps peeling. 
THE QUICK FIX: Install a galvanized (good), 
stainless (better) or copper (best) rain cap. These 
start at about $30 and are available in most home 
repair and building supply outlets. "Peeling 
chimney paint is almost always caused by water 
working its way from the inside, out," explains 
John Stauffer, technical director at the Paint 
Quality Institute. "A rain cap will keep the bulk of 
the water out of the flue." 
 
Illustration by David J. 
Pullman 
 
 
Photo by Tom Klenck 
A TWO-WEEKEND PAINT JOB: You want to put 
away your paint-laden rollers and brushes without 
cleaning them. 
THE QUICK FIX: Wrap the painting utensils 
tightly in a plastic bag and stick them in the 
freezer. Once thawed, they'll be ready to use. 
Caveat: Paint is for painting, not eating. Be sure 
to seal the bag tightly to eliminate any chance of 
food contamination. 

 
 FLUID LOSS: Your radiator is leaking, you're in 
the middle of nowhere, and there's no repair shop 
in sight. 
THE QUICK FIX: Dump in a small container of 
ground black pepper. The pepper won't dissolve, 
but instead will remain in suspension. This allows 
it to temporarily plug minor leaks, buying you 
enough time to get to the shop. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CROSSED SIGNALS: You're constantly getting 
kicked off the wireless link on your home 
computer network. 
THE QUICK FIX: Other devices are probably 
interfering. If you have a 2.4-GHz cordless phone, 
switch to a 900-MHz, or a newer 5.8-GHz, model. 
These phones operate on different frequencies 
than your wireless router. (Some 2.4-GHz phones 
allow you to change frequencies--check your 
owner's manual.) Microwave ovens can also 
isrupt your wireless signal. 
d 
 

