A Brief History of
Ancient Greece:
Politics, Society, and
Culture
Sarah B. Pomeroy, et al.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

A BRIEF HISTORY OF
ANCIENT GREECE

This page intentionally left blank 

TITLE PAGE
A BRIEF HISTORY OF
ANCIENT GREECE
Politics, Society, and Culture
Sarah B. Pomeroy
Stanley M. Burstein
Hunter College and
California State University,
the City University of New York
Los Angeles
Graduate Center
Walter Donlan
Jennifer Tolbert Roberts
University of
City College and
California, Irvine
the City University of New York
Graduate Center
New York
•
Oxford
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
2004

Oxford University Press
Oxford
New York
Auckland
Bangkok
Buenos Aires
Cape Town
Chennai
Dar es Salaam
Delhi
Hong Kong
Istanbul
Karachi
Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur
Madrid
Melbourne
Mexico City
Mumbai
Nairobi
São Paulo
Singapore
Taipei
Tokyo
Toronto
Copyright © 2004 by Sarah B. Pomeroy, Stanley M. Burstein, Walter Donlan, 
and Jennifer Tolbert Roberts
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A brief history of ancient Greece : politics, society, and culture / by Sarah B. Pomeroy . . .
[et al.].
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-19-515680-3 — ISBN 0-19-515681-1 (pbk.)
1. Greece—History—To 146 B.C.    I. Pomeroy, Sarah B.
DF214.B74 2004
938’.09—dc22
2003060873
Printing (last digit): 9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

For Our Children and Grandchildren

This page intentionally left blank 

List of Maps   xi
Acknowledgments   xii
Preface   xiii
Time Line   xv
Introduction   1
I Early Greece and the Bronze Age   12
Greece in the Stone Ages   12
Greece in the Early and Middle Bronze Ages
(c. 3000–1600 BC)   13
Greece and the Aegean in the Late Bronze Age
(c. 1600–1150 BC)   22
II The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century
“Renaissance” (c. 1150–700 BC)   36
Decline and Recovery (c. 1150–900 BC)   36
Revival (c. 900–750 BC)   41
Homeric Society   44
The End of the Dark Age   53
III Archaic Greece (c. 700–500 BC)   61
The Formation of the City-State (Polis)   61
Government in the Early City-States   63
The Colonizing Movement   65
CONTENTS
vii

Contents
Economic and Social Divisions in the Archaic Poleis   68
Hesiod: A View from Below   71
The Hoplite Army   73
The Archaic Age Tyrants   75
The Arts and Sciences    76
Panhellenic Institutions   87
Relations Among States   88
IV Sparta   91
The Dark Age and the Archaic Period   91
The Spartan System   95
Demography and the Spartan Economy   100
Spartan Government   103
The Peloponnesian League   105
Historical Change in Sparta   106
The Spartan Mirage   107
V The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars   110
Athens from the Bronze Age to the Early Archaic Age   110
The Reforms of Solon   113
Peisistratus and His Sons   116
The Reforms of Cleisthenes   122
The Rise of Persia   122
The Wars Between Greece and Persia   127
VI The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the
Growth of Athenian Democracy   138
The Aftermath of the Persian Wars and the
Foundation of a New League   139
New Developments in Athens and Sparta   142
The “First” (Undeclared) Peloponnesian War (460–445 BC)   143
Pericles and the Growth of Athenian Democracy   145
Literature and Art   148
Oikos and Polis   157
The Greek Economy   161
viii

Contents
VII Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War   166
Greece After the Thirty Years’ Peace   166
The Physical Space of the Polis: Athens in the Fifth Century   169
Intellectual Life in Fifth-Century Greece   177
Historical and Dramatic Literature of the Fifth Century   179
Currents in Greek Thought and Education   189
The Breakdown of the Peace   193
Resources for War   198
VIII The Peloponnesian War   200
The Archidamian War (431–421 BC)   200
Between Peace and War   211
The Invasion of Sicily (415–413 BC)   213
The War in the Aegean and the Oligarchic Coup
at Athens (413–411 BC)   217
The Last Years of War (407–404 BC)   220
IX The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies   225
Oligarchy at Athens: The Thirty Tyrants   226
The Trial of Socrates (399 BC)   227
The Fourth Century: Changing Ideas, Continuing Warfare   230
Law and Democracy in Athens   235
The Fourth-Century Polis   238
Philosophy and the Polis   241
X Phillip II and the Rise of Macedon   254
Early Macedon   254
Macedonian Society and Kingship   255
The Reign of Philip II   258
Philip’s Plans for Greece   265
XI Alexander the Great   270
Consolidating Power   271
From Issus to Egypt: Conquest of the Eastern Mediterranean
(332–331 BC)   278
ix

Contents
From Alexandria to Persepolis: The King of Asia (331–330 BC)   281
The High Road to India: Alexander in Central Asia   283
India and the End of the Dream   287
Return to the West   290
The Achievements of Alexander   292
XII The New World of the Hellenistic Period   294
The Struggle for the Succession   294
The Regency of Perdiccas   296
The Primacy of Antigonus the One-Eyed   298
Birth Pangs of the New Order (301–276 BC)   299
The Polis in the Hellenistic World   302
The Macedonian Kingdoms   306
Hellenistic Society   308
Alexandria and Hellenistic Culture   310
Social Relations in the Hellenistic World   319
Epilogue   326
Glossary   331
Art and Illustration Credits   341
Index   347
x

Greece and the Aegean world   xxii
Mycenaean sites in the thirteenth century BC
26
Greek colonization: 750–500 BC
67
Peloponnesus   92
Attica   123
The Persian Empire in the reign of Darius   126
The Persian wars   134
The Athenian Empire at its height   141
Sicily and southern Italy   167
Alliances at the outset of the Peloponnesian War   196
Theaters of operation during the Peloponnesian War   201
Pylos and Sphacteria   207
Macedonia and its neighbors   257
Alexander’s campaign   274
The Greek view of the inhabited world   287
The Hellenistic world   300
xi
LIST OF MAPS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge the following publishers for their kind per-
mission to reprint material from their publications:
Cambridge University Press:
The Hellenistic Age from the Battle of Ipsos to the Death of Kleopatra VII, edited and
translated by Stanley M. Burstein. Copyright © 1996. Reprinted with the per-
mission of Cambridge University Press.
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.: 
Homer: Iliad, translated by Stanley Lombardo. Copyright © 1997. Reprinted by
permission of Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. All rights reserved.
Johns Hopkins University Press: 
Hesiod: Theogony, Works and Days, Shield, translated by Apostolos N.Athanas-
sakis, p. 73. Copyright © 1983. Reprinted with permission of The Johns Hop-
kins University Press. 
Pindar’s Victory Songs, translated by Frank Nisetich, pp. 256–257. Copyright ©
1980. Reprinted with permission of The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Oxford University Press: 
The Republic of Plato, translated by Francis MacDonald Cornford. Copyright ©
1945.
Xenophon: Oeconomicus: A Social and Historical Commentary, edited and trans-
lated by Sarah B. Pomeroy. Copyright © 1994.
Schocken Books: 
Sappho and the Greek Lyric Poets, translated by Willis Barnstone. Copyright ©
1962, 1967, 1988. Reprinted by permission of Schocken Books, distributed by
Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, Inc.
University of California Press: 
Sappho’s Lyre: Archaic Lyric and Women Poets of Ancient Greece, translated by Di-
ane J. Rayor. Copyright © 1991.
University of Chicago Press: 
Aeschylus: The Persians, translated by S. Bernardete, and Aeschylus: Agamemnon,
translated by R. Lattimore, in The Complete Greek Tragedies: Aeschylus, edited by
David Grene and Richmond Lattimore. Copyright © 1992.
Sophocles: Antigone, translated by E. Wyckoff, in The Complete Greek Tragedies:
Sophocles, edited by David Grene and Richmond Lattimore. Copyright © 1992.
W.W. Norton and Company, Inc.: 
Herodotus: The Histories, edited by Walter Blanco and Jennifer Tolbert Roberts,
translated by Walter Blanco. Copyright © 1992. 
Thucydides: The Peloponnesian War, edited by Walter Blanco and Jennifer Tol-
bert Roberts, translated by Walter Blanco. Copyright © 1998.
xii

The history of the ancient Greeks is one of most improbable success stories in
world history. A small people inhabiting a country poor in resources and divided
into hundreds of squabbling mini-states created one of the world’s most remark-
able cultures. Located on the periphery of the Bronze Age civilizations of Egypt
and Mesopotamia, the Greeks absorbed key technical skills such as metallurgy
and writing in the process of developing a culture marked by astonishing cre-
ativity, versatility, and resilience. Finally, having spread from Spain to the bor-
ders of India, Greek culture gradually transformed as it became an integral part
of other civilizations: Latin, Iranian, Arabic, and Byzantine. In the process, how-
ever, the Greeks left a rich legacy in every area of the arts and sciences that is still
alive in Western and Islamic civilizations.
Almost ten years ago the authors of this book set out to write a new history of
the country the English poet Byron called “the land of lost gods.” We hoped that
our work, Ancient Greece: A Political, Social, and Cultural History, would flesh out
the romantic images of Greece with the new understanding of the realities of
Greek history gained from the patient scholarship of a half-century of talented
Greek historians. Thanks to their achievements, we were able to give full recog-
nition to the significance of the Dark Age in the formation of Greek civilization
and incorporate into the story of Greece the experiences of those who did not be-
long to the “scribbling class,” such as women and slaves. 
A Brief History of Ancient Greece is not merely an abridgement of our previous
work, but a new book in which greater emphasis is given to social and cultural
history. At the same time we have tried to retain all those qualities that made our
first book such a success. Every paragraph and sentence has been carefully re-
viewed. The suggested readings have been updated, and suggestions and correc-
tions sent to us by our readers have been incorporated into the text. The maps
have been completely redesigned and new translations selected or prepared wher-
ever necessary. An old saw has it that the purpose of studying Greek history is to
PREFACE
xiii

Preface
understand Greek art and literature. We hope that the result of our efforts is a
book that will prove a valuable guide for those people who wish to follow that
recommendation and enable them to better appreciate the remarkable legacy of
the ancient Greeks. 
All works of historical synthesis depend on the contributions of innumerable
scholars whose names do not appear in the text. We would like to thank them and
our generous readers and students, from whose comments and suggestions we
have greatly benefited. We again are indebted to Robert Miller and his talented
staff at Oxford University Press, who have been generous with their support and
assistance throughout the long gestation of this project. Beth Cohen and H. Alan
Shapiro have again given our illustration program their careful attention but are
not responsible for any lapses in judgment on the part of the authors. We would
also like to express our gratitude to Professor Walter Blanco of the Department of
English at Lehman College of the City University of New York for the excellent
new translations of Herodotus that he prepared for our book and to Professor
Miriam E. Burstein of the Department of English at the State University of New
York at Brockport for again taking charge of the difficult tasks of acquiring per-
missions from various publishers and reminding us that our prose was intended
for the elusive “general reader” and not specialists in Greek history.
We would also like to thank the various publishers who have granted us permis-
sion to reprint translations. Unattributed translations in the text are by the authors. 
Jennifer T. Roberts, New York City
Walter Donlan, Irvine, California
Stanley M. Burstein, Los Alamitos,
Sarah B. Pomeroy, New York City
California
xiv

6500–3000
Permanent farming 
Domestication of plants
Neolithic
villages
and animals; pottery
3000–2100 Early
Social ranking emerges; 
Bronze Age
villages and districts 
(Early Helladic 2800–1900)
ruled by hereditary chiefs
2500 Widespread use of
bronze and other metals
in the Aegean
2100–1600
2100–1900 Lerna and
2100–1900 Incursions of 
2100–1900 Indo-
Middle Bronze Age
other sites destroyed
Indo-European speakers
European gods intro-
(Middle Helladic
into Greece
duced into Greece
1900–1580)
2000 First palaces in 
Crete
1900 Mainland contacts
with Crete and the Near
East
1800 Cretans develop
Linear A writing
1600–1150 Late Bronze
1600 Mycenae and other 
1600 Shaft graves
Age (Late Helladic 
sites become power 
1580–1150)
centers; small kingdoms 
emerge
TIME LINE
xv
Political/
Cultural
Period
Military Events
Social Events
Development
continued

Time Line
1500–1450 Mycen-
1500 Tholos tombs
aeans take over
Crete
1450 Linear B writing
1375 Knossos
1400–1200 Height of 
1400 New palaces in 
destroyed
Mycenaean power 
Greece
and prosperity
1250–1225 “The
Trojan War” (?)
1200 Invaders loot
1200–1100 Palace- 
1200 Cultural decline
and burn the palace
system collapses
centers
1150–900 Early Dark Age
1050 Small chiefdoms
1050 Iron technology
(Submycenaean 1125–1050)
established; migrations
(Protogeometric 1050–900)
of mainland Greeks to
Ionia
1000 Dorian Greeks 
950 Monumental build-
settle in the mainland 
ing at Lefkandi
and the islands
900–750/700 Late Dark Age
900 Population 
(Early Geometric 900–850)
increases; new settle-
(Middle Geometric 850–750)
ments established; 
trade and manufacture
expand
800 Rapid population 
800 Greeks develop an 
growth
alphabet; earliest 
temples built
776 Traditional date 
of first Olympian 
games
750/700–490 Archaic Period
730–700 First
750–700 City-states
750–675 Iliad and
(Late Geometric 750–700
Messenian War
emerge
Odyssey composed
750 Overseas coloniza-
720 “Orientalizing period”
tion to the West begins
in art begins
700–650 Evolution of
700 Hesiod; period of 
hoplite armor and 
lyric poetry begins
tactics
669 Battle of Hysiae
670–500 Tyrants rule 
in many city-states
xvi
Political/
Cultural
Period
Military Events
Social Events
Development
continued

Time Line
650 Second Messenian
650 Colonization of Black 
650 Temples built of 
War
Sea area begins; earliest
stone and marble;
known stone inscription
Corinthian black-figure
of a law; “Lycurgan”
technique 
Reforms at Sparta; the
“Great Rhetra” (?)
632 Cylon fails in attempt 
at tyranny in Athens
620 Law code of Draco in 
Athens
600 Lydians begin to 
600 Beginnings of science
mint coins
and philosophy 
(the “Presocratics”)
582–573 Pythian, Isth-
mian, Nemean games 
inaugurated
560–514 Peisistratus and
Peisistratus expands
his sons tyrants of Athens
religious festivals at
Athens
550 Sparta dominant in the
530 Athenian red-figure
Peloponnesus
technique
507 Cleisthenes institutes
political reforms in
Athens
499 Ionian Greeks rebel
from Persian Empire
5th-century rationalists
and scientists; Hippo-
crates; advances in 
medicine; increase in 
literacy
490–323 Classical Period
490 Battle of Marathon
Classical style in sculpture
486 Decision to choose 
Athenian archons by lot
482 Ostracism of Aristides
480–479 Persian
Invasion of Greece
xvii
Political/
Cultural
Period
Military Events
Social Events
Development
continued

Time Line
477 Foundation of Delian
League
470–456 Construction of
temple of Zeus at 
Olympia
Growth of democracy in 
Athens
463 Helot rebellion in 
Sparta
461 Reforms of Ephialtes at
Athens
460–445 “First”
Peloponnesian War
458 Aeschylus’ Oresteia
454 Athenians move 
treasury from Delos to 
Athens
Flourishing of Greek trade 
451 Pericles carries law 
and manufacture
limiting citizenship at 
Athens
445 Thirty Years’ Peace
Herodotus at work on 
his Histories
447–432 Construction of
Parthenon at Athens
Sophists active in 
Athens
431–404 Peloponnesian
Thucydides begins his 
War
History
429 Death of Pericles
428 Sophocles’ Oedipus
Tyrannus
425 Aristophanes’ 
Acharnians
423 Thucydides exiled 
from Athens
421 Peace of Nicias
xviii
Political/
Cultural
Period
Military Events
Social Events
Development
continued

Time Line
415–413 Sicilian
415 Euripides’ Trojan
campaign
Women
411–410 Oligarchic coup in 
411 Aristophanes’
Athens; establishment of 
Lysistrata
Council of 400; regime of 
the 5000
403–377 Sparta the
404–403 Regime of the Thirty
most powerful state
Tyrants in Athens
in Greece
399 Trial and execution of 
399–347 Dialogues of 
Socrates
Plato; foundation of the 
Academy
395–387 Corinthian
Fourth century: Rise of
War
class of rhetores at Athens;
economic inequalities and
social stasis throughout
Greece
377–371 Athens the most 
powerful state in Greece
371–362 Thebes the most 
powerful state in Greece
Serious population decline 
in Sparta; impoverished 
class of “Inferiors” at Sparta;
increasing amount of property
in hands of Spartan women
359 Defeat of 
359 Accession of Philip II
Perdiccas III
357 Marriage of Philip II to
Olympias
356 Birth of Alexander the
356 Philip II’s Olympic 
Great 
victory
355 Demosthenes’ first 
speech
347 Death of Plato
356–346  Third Sacred 
346 Isocrates’ Philippus
War; Peace of Philocrates
xix
Political/
Cultural
Period
Military Events
Social Events
Development
continued

Time Line
338 Battle of
338 Assassination of 
338 Death of Isocrates
Chaeronea
Artaxerxes III; foundation 
of Corinthian League; 
marriage of Philip II and 
Cleopatra
336 Invasion of Asia
336 Accession of Darius III;
by Philip II
assassination of Philip II; 
accession of Alexander III
335 Revolt of Thebes
335 Destruction of Thebes
335 Aristotle returns to 
Athens; founding of 
Lyceum
334 Battle of Granicus
333 Battle of Issus
333 Alexander at Gordium
331 Battle of 
331 Foundation of 
331 Visit to Siwah
Gaugamela
Alexandria
by Alexander
330–327 War in Bactria 330 Destruction of 
and Sogdiana
Persepolis; death of Philotas
329 Assassination of 
Darius III
328 Murder of Clitus
327–325 Alexander’s 
327 Marriage of Alexander 
invasion of India
and Roxane
326 Battle of the 
Hydaspes
323–30 Hellenistic Period
323 Death of Alexander III;
accession of Philip III and 
Alexander IV
323–322 Lamian War
322 Dissolution of the 
322 Deaths of Aristotle 
Corinthian League
and Demosthenes
321 Invasion of Egypt
321 Death of Perdiccas; 
321–292 Career of 
Antipater becomes regent
Menander
318–316 Revolt against 
Polyperchon
315–311 Four-year war 315 Freedom of Greeks 
against Antigonus
proclaimed by Antigonus 
the One-Eyed
xx
Political/
Cultural
Period
Military Events
Social Events
Development
continued

Time Line
311 Peace between 
Antigonus and his rivals
307 Demetrius invades
307–283 Foundation of 
Greece
the Museum
306 Battle of Salamis
306 Antigonus and 
306 Epicurus founds 
Demetrius acclaimed kings
Garden
305 Ptolemy, Seleucus,
Lysimachus, and Cassander
declare themselves kings
301 Battle of Ipsus
301 Death of Antigonus; 
301 Zeno founds Stoa
division of his empire
300–246 Construction 
of the Pharos
283 Death of Ptolemy I; 
accession of Ptolemy II
281 Battle of 
281 Deaths of Lysimachus 
Corupedium
and Seleucus
279 Invasion of Gauls
235–222 Reign of 
Cleomenes III at Sparta
222 Battle of Sellasia
222 Exile of Cleomenes III; 
end of his reforms at Sparta
200–197 Second
Macedonian War
196 Romans  proclaim 
freedom of the Greeks at
Isthmian games
171–168 Third
Macedonian War
167 End of the Macedonian
167 Polybius comes to
monarchy
Rome
31 Battle of Actium
30 Suicide of Cleopatra VII; 
Rome annexes Egypt
xxi
Political/
Cultural
Period
Military Events
Social Events
Development

S
t
r
y
m
o
n
R
.
A
R
C
A
D
I
A
Mt
. P
in
d
u
s
0
0
40
80
120
160 km
20
40
60
80
100 miles
Zacynthus
Cephallenia
Leucas
Corcyra
Ithaca
Cythera
Melos
Crete
Siphnos
Salamis
Seriphos
Cythnos
Ceos
Paros
Delos
Aegina
C
y
c
l
a
d
e
s
Tenos
Andros
Scyros
Lemnos
Thasos
Abdera
Philippi
Amphipolis
Pella
Derveni
Therme
(Salonica)
Pydna
Aegae
(Vergina)
Levkadia
Dium
Potidaea
Olynthus
Stageira
Torone
Mende
Pagasae
Pherae
Pharsalus
Larissa
Tricca
Dodona
Ambracia
Nicopolis
Actium
Stratus
Thermum
Delphi
Patrae
Elis
Olympia
Bassae
Lycosura
Messene
Megalopolis
Pylos
Methone
Gythium
Cydonia
Phaistos
Knossos
Sparta
Tegea
Argos
Mantinea
Tiryns
Troezen
Calauria
Epidaurus
Nemea
Mycenae
Cleonae
Sunium
Laurium
Aegira
Sicyon
Corinth
Isthmia
Megara
Athens
Piraeus
Marathon
Tanagra
Delium
Eretria
Chalcis
Lefkandi
Thebes
Plataea
Leuctra
Thermopylae
Kalapodi
Orchomenus
Chaeronea
C. Artemisium
Mt. Pelium
Mt. Taygetus
Mt. Helicon
Mt.
Parnassus
Mt. Pentelicum
Mt. Ossa
Mt. Athos
Mt. Pangaeus
Mt. Olympus
P
H
O
C
I
S
E P I R U S
ACARNANIA
A
E
T
O
LI
A
AC
HA
E
A
E L
I
S
LACONIA
M
ES
SE
NI
A
AR
G
O
LI
S
BOEOTIA
Euboea
T H E S S A L Y
M A C E D O N I A
CHALCIDI
CE
T H R A C E
AEGEAN
SEA
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
L. Copais
xxii
Greece and the Aegean world.

Samothrace
Imbros
Psara
Chios
Lesbos
Icaria
Myconos
Samos
Naxos
Amorgos
Thera
Rhodes
PROPONTIS
Hellespont
Cos
S
a
n
g
a
r
i
u
s
R
.
Cai
cu
s
R
.
H
er
m
us
R.
C
a
y
s
t
e
r
R
.
Maeande
r R
.
S
a
n
g
a
r
i
u
s
R
.
Cai
cu
s
R
.
H
er
m
us
R.
C
a
y
s
t
e
r
R
.
Maeande
r R
.
BLACK  SEA
Byzantium
Chalcedon
Nicomedia
Perinthus
Cyzicus
Lampsacus
Abydus
Sestus
Elaeus
Troy
Sigeum
Assus
Gargara
Eresus
Mytilene
Pergamum
Pitane
Cyme
Phocaea
Smyrna
Sardis
Clazomenae
Chios
Erythrae
Teos
Colophon
Lebedus
Ephesus
Tralles
Magnesia
Aphrodisias
Miletus
Priene
Samos
Didyma
Halicarnassus
Myndus
Cnidus
Rhodes
Ialysus
Mallia
Zakro
Camirus
Lindus
Xanthus
Elmali
P H R Y G I A
M Y S I A
L Y D I A
C A R I A
L Y C I A
ANATOLIA
C
H
ER
SO
NE
SE
xxiii

This page intentionally left blank 

1
INTRODUCTION
Historians who study ancient civilizations have the daunting task of follow-
ing the path of societies and cultures on the basis of scant sources. Actually, as
past civilizations go, ancient Greece has left us a comparatively rich record. Even
so, we possess only a tiny fraction of what was originally there. Inevitably, then,
many aspects of society and culture, even in the most well-documented periods
of Greek antiquity, cannot be viewed in bold relief. Yet there is good news, too.
Every year new discoveries are made that continue to enlarge our fund of infor-
mation, while, at the same time, new ways of looking at the old sources have
broadened our perspectives.
SOURCES: HOW WE KNOW
ABOUT THE ANCIENT GREEKS
Sources are the raw material of history out of which historians weave their sto-
ries. Just about everything preserved from antiquity is a potential source for the
history of antiquity. Our sources fall into two broad categories: the physical re-
mains, which include anything material, from bones to buildings, and the writ-
ten remains, which include the words of the Greeks themselves or of others who
wrote about them in antiquity. Of course, the line between the material and the
written is often blurred, as in the case of words scratched on a piece of pottery,
or an inscription carved on a stone pillar.
Given that our primary sources are at least two thousand years old, and in
many cases much older, it is not surprising that most of them require rehabilita-
tion or reconstruction even before they can be of substantial use. But, fortunately,
historians do not have to examine them from scratch. They rely on archaeologists
to excavate, classify, and interpret most of the material evidence; paleographers
to decipher and elucidate the texts written on papyrus and parchment; epigraphists
and numismatists to interpret inscriptions on stones and coins. Without the ex-
pertise of those specialists who process the raw sources, the work of historians
would not be possible.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Archaeologists study past societies primarily through the material remains—
buildings, tools, and other artifacts. They create a history of the material culture
on the basis of the changing patterns that they discern in the physical record. His-
torians, on the other hand, primarily use documents, inscriptions, and literary
texts to construct a narrative of events and the people who were involved in
them: what they did, why they did it, and the changes brought on by their ac-
tions. Nevertheless, both disciplines are engaged in a single collaborative project,
the reconstruction of the lifeways of the Greek peoples over time.
RETRIEVING THE PAST: THE MATERIAL RECORD
Ancient Greece lies underground. Except for a few stone buildings, mostly temples,
which have survived above ground, everything we have has been dug up from be-
neath, very often from dozens of feet below the present surface. Materials decay,
and the soil of Greece is not good for preserving things. Accordingly, artifacts made
of wood, cloth, and leather are rarely found. Metals fare better: gold and silver last
almost forever; bronze is fairly durable; while iron is more subject to corrosion. An-
other material, which is virtually indestructible, is terra-cotta, clay baked at very
high temperatures. Clay was used in antiquity for many different objects, includ-
ing figurines and votive plaques, but most of our clay objects are vessels that have
been found by the thousands in graves and other sites. It was mainly on the basis
of pots that archaeologists were able to construct a chronology for prehistoric and
early historic Greece that could be translated into actual dates.
Clay pots were made wide-bellied or slender-bodied, long-necked or wide-
mouthed, footed or footless, with one, two, or no handles. Some pots, such as the
perfume flasks called aryballoi, stood only two or three inches high; others, like
the pithoi used for storing olive oil and grain, were often as big as a human be-
ing. In the ancient world, clay vessels had to be made in all sizes and shapes, be-
cause they served virtually every purpose that a container can serve. They were
our bags, cartons, and shipping crates, our cooking pots, bottles, and glasses, as
well as our fine stemware and “good” china bowls. Because their basic shapes re-
mained much the same, yet they underwent gradual changes in style and deco-
ration, pots could be placed in relative chronological sequences. Earthenware
from one site is cross-dated with examples from other sites, thus confirming that
site A is older or younger than sites B and C. But the big breakthrough for es-
tablishing “absolute” or calendar dates comes about when a datable object from
an outside culture is found amidst the Greek material. Such an object might be a
scarab inscribed with the name of an Egyptian king. Since the actual dates of his
reign are known independently from the Egyptian king-lists, it follows that the
Greek objects found with it in that deposit belonged to approximately the same
time. Through the repeated process of establishing key cross-dates, a workable
chronology emerges that allows us to place an object, or grave, or building in real
time: “late fourteenth century BC” or “around 720 BC.” Today’s archaeologists also
have at their disposal more scientific techniques for dating objects and sites, such
as measuring the radioactive decay of organic materials (carbon-14 dating).
2

Introduction
Yet, notwithstanding the considerable success that modern archaeology has had
in bringing the ancient past to light, the fact is that wordless objects can tell us only
so much about how people lived, what they experienced, or what they thought.
RETRIEVING THE PAST: THE WRITTEN RECORD
Ancient writings were inscribed upon many different materials including clay,
stone, metal, and papyrus (and from the second century BC on, parchment). Most
of the written sources that have come down to us were composed in the Greek
alphabet, which was introduced in the eighth century BC; but we also have clay
tablets from a very brief time in the second millennium BC that were written in a
syllabic script called Linear B. (We shall discuss Linear B writing in Chapter One
and the Greek alphabet in Chapter Two.)
With the rapid spread of the alphabet came a torrent of written texts that
would continue unabated throughout the rest of antiquity. Unfortunately, most
of this has been lost; yet that so much has survived is something of a miracle in
itself. We may lament that of the more than 120 plays written by Sophocles, one
of the most famous of the fifth century BC dramatists, only seven have come
down to us whole. We are grateful, however, to have as much as we have. After
all, 20,000,000 words are stored in the electronic database of Greek literary texts
written down from the late eighth century BC to the second century AD.
The most common medium for writing in the ancient Mediterranean was pa-
pyrus (the paper of antiquity), which had been used in Egypt since the third mil-
lennium. Papyrus sheets were made by bonding together layered strips sliced from
the papyrus reed; these were then glued together to form a long roll, 20 or more
feet long. Words were written horizontally to form columns, which the reader iso-
lated by scrolling back and forth along the roll. A papyrus roll could hold, on av-
erage, a play of about 1,500 lines or two to three “books” of Homer’s Iliad or Odyssey.
Every text had to be copied by hand (usually by slaves), a time-consuming and ex-
pensive proposition. The ancient Greeks were fairly assiduous in preserving the au-
thors from their past. A reader visiting the great library at Alexandria during the
first century BC would have had access to about 500,000 book-rolls, while the col-
lection at Pergamum is said to have exceeded 200,000 rolls.
But already by this time the process of selection had begun. The Alexandrian
scholars themselves appear to have used the term “those included” to denote a
list of authors who were deemed most worthy of being studied in schools. Natu-
rally the “included” writers had the best chances for survival. And as literary
tastes continued to change during later antiquity, many manuscripts ceased to be
copied and crumbled into dust. Fortunately, papyrus endures well in a hot, dry
environment, as in the desert sands of Egypt, where many thousands of Greek pa-
pyri, dating from the fourth century BC onward, have been found. Most of these
are contemporary documents; however, papyri rescued from desert dumps have
also preserved major literary works from all periods of Greek antiquity that oth-
erwise would have been lost completely. In addition to texts originally written on
papyrus, hundreds of inscriptions on stone and metal, including coins, survive
3

Figure i. Part of a papyrus roll from the second century AD, showing how the text is divided into columns.
This and other papyri are our only sources for the speeches of Hyperides, one of the leading Athenian politi-
cians of the fourth century BC.
Figure ii. A school-room scene from Athens (c. 490–480 BC). In the center, a pupil is recit-
ing his lesson before a teacher who is holding a papyrus roll.
4

Introduction
that range in subject matter from private funerary epitaphs and dedications to
public decrees, treaties, and laws. The latter are especially valuable, because they
preserve information about public life that is seldom recorded elsewhere.
Our sources vary in both quantity and quality according to time and place. For
the Mycenaean Age (c. 1600–1200 BC), we have a wealth of material evidence (in-
cluding the Linear B tablets) that permits a fairly detailed picture of the society.
For the subsequent period, the Dark Age, down to the eighth century BC, mater-
ial remains are very sparse and there are no written records. After the seventh
century BC, however, when both material and literary remains start to proliferate,
we begin to have a dynamic picture of change and continuity. The picture will
show how the Greeks responded to environmental pressures with ideas and tech-
nological innovations, how they interacted as individuals within communities
and as communities within communities, and how they developed a distinctive
culture while preserving individual distinction.
Our literary sources are a diverse group, written in many different genres, that
is, categories of composition defined by form and content. These include various
types of poetry such as epic, lyric, tragedy, and comedy, as well as the prose gen-
res of history, biography, oratory, and philosophy. Naturally, modern historians
rely especially on the writings of ancient historians and biographers, but the
other genres, both of poetry and of prose, are no less essential as sources.
Of course, there is a big distinction between mythical and historical narratives of
the past. We don’t expect historical veracity from Homer’s account of the Trojan
War. At the same time, not even an historian who strives for veracity can give us a
truly objective and unbiased account of the past. The ancient historians, no differ-
ent from us really, aimed to convey only what they deemed historically significant.
Because they selected some facts to the exclusion of others, even two roughly con-
temporary historians—the fifth-century Herodotus and Thucydides, for example—
would necessarily produce different accounts of the same past events. Another lim-
itation of our written sources is that, with very few exceptions, they are all produced
by a privileged group: urban males, mostly from the upper class. In order to illu-
minate the lives of women, the very poor, and slaves, who do not generally speak
for themselves, historians employ a variety of strategies, often drawing upon femi-
nism, Marxism, cultural studies, and other interdisciplinary approaches.
A SYNOPSIS OF WRITTEN SOURCES BY PERIODS
3000–700 BC
As we have seen, the Greeks of the Bronze Age (c. 3000–1150 BC) left no written
records except for the Linear B tablets near the end of the Late Bronze Age. The
long silence which followed baffled the efforts of even ancient Greek historians to
describe the centuries before the reappearance of writing in the eighth century.
Their source material was a body of orally transmitted myths and legends, some
of which probably went back to the second millennium. The Greeks of the histori-
cal period generally regarded these stories as their ancient history. The central
5

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
event of their distant past was the Trojan War, which, if it really happened, would
have taken place in the thirteenth century BC. The Trojan War and its immediate
aftermath are the setting for the earliest texts that we have, Homer’s Iliad and Odys-
sey, which are believed to be the end product of a tradition of oral poetry going
back many centuries. It is currently thought that they were committed to writing
in the later eighth century or early in the seventh. The use of these two very long
epic poems as historical sources has been debated since the end of antiquity and is
still a matter of controversy. Do they reflect a real society? If so, when? Or do they
reveal, rather, the values and norms of later ancient Greeks who contrasted their
own time with a former “age of heroes”?
700–490 BC
Hesiod (c. 700) stands at the beginning of the Archaic Age. The two texts that
have come down under Hesiod’s name, the Theogony and the Works and Days, are,
like the Iliad and the Odyssey, lengthy poems composed in the epic meter. In con-
tent, however, they differ not only from Homer but also from each other. While
the Theogony reaches back in time to tell the origins of the Greek gods and the
creation of the universe, the Works and Days is set in the poet’s own day and is
our earliest source that directly addresses contemporary social concerns.
The Archaic Age poets—who composed in the variety of forms we lump together
under the rubric of lyric—abuse their enemies, praise the gods, argue politics, and
pine over unrequited love in their verses. Even in the fragmentary shape in which
we have them, the poems let us glimpse the political, social, and intellectual move-
ments that distinguished the seventh and sixth centuries BC.
Yet, in a sense the Archaic Age is still prehistory, for there are no historical writ-
ings from this period. The fifth-century historians, Herodotus (c. 484–425) and
Thucydides (c. 460–400), however, provide us with much valuable information
about the development of the early city-states, especially Athens and Sparta.
Sources for early Athens, though meager, are not quite as sparse as they are for
Sparta. By good fortune, a papyrus from Egypt has preserved part of The Athen-
ian Constitution, written by the philosopher Aristotle (384–322) or one of his stu-
dents. This document, as well as Plutarch’s Life of Solon, quotes fragments of the
poetry of the lawgiver Solon (c. 600), who is our earliest source for Athenian so-
ciety. The bulk of what we know about early Sparta and its institutions, however,
comes primarily from later writers, particularly the fourth-century BC historian
Xenophon and the biographer Plutarch (46–120 AD). Since the Spartans them-
selves left almost no written records, and the accounts of later writers tended to
idealize or criticize their culture, it is particularly challenging for historians to
separate the real Sparta from the fictional Sparta.
490–323 BC
What modern historians call the Classical period of Greece begins in 490 with the
victory of the Greeks over the Persians in the Battle of Marathon and ends with the
6

Introduction
death of Alexander the Great. The sources for this period are fuller than for any
other period of ancient Greece and are drawn from all over the eastern Mediter-
ranean world, not from Greece alone. The wars of these two centuries formed the
themes of our first extant Greek historians. The Histories of Herodotus (c. 485–420
BC) ask the question “why did Greeks and non-Greeks go to war?” and respond
with a chain of mutual wrongful acts and cultural misunderstandings reaching far
back in time and space. Herodotus is our primary source for the Persian wars from
the Greek perspective, and provides much information about relations among
Greek city-states in the sixth and early fifth centuries, especially Athens and Sparta.
The principal source for the actions that led to the Peloponnesian War between
Athens and Sparta and their allies and for the war itself is the History of Thucydides
(c. 460–395 BC). Thucydides aimed for accuracy; his account is informed by con-
temporary documents as well as by interviews with witnesses on both sides. But,
as we have noted, no historian is ever truly impartial. As an interpreter of events,
he couldn’t help making judgments with every selection or arrangement of his
“facts.” Xenophon (c. 428–354 BC), who began his Hellenica almost exactly where
Thucydides left off and continued his history down to 362 BC, seems to have made
an effort to practice what he understood as “Thucydidean historiography.” Sev-
eral other fourth-century historians who wrote about the Peloponnesian War and
its aftermath survive in the biographies of Plutarch and the historical books of
Diodorus (first century BC).
During these two centuries of alternating war and uneasy peace, poetry, phi-
losophy, and the visual arts flourished, and the extant works reflect changing
ideas, tastes, concerns, and lifestyles, particularly in Athens where most of our
evidence comes from. Of the hundreds of dramas that were produced during this
period, only the tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides and the come-
dies of Aristophanes and Menander have survived (and even their works are
mostly lost). With exception of Menander’s comedies, the plays do not attempt
to mirror society; nor, like today’s “docu-dramas,” can they be seen as “history
with the boring parts taken out.” Yet, social historians can extrapolate from them
evidence about many aspects of Athenian life. The tragedians Aeschylus, Sopho-
cles, and Euripides use plots and characters from ancient myths, but their dra-
mas often offer insights into the contemporary concerns of the citizenry. Unlike
the characters in the tragedies, those of the comic playwright Aristophanes are
represented as contemporary Athenians. Some of them are well-known public
figures whom he makes the butt of parody and abusive satire. While it is diffi-
cult for us to tell how Aristophanes really felt about the people he attacked in
verse, his comedies do show us what made male audiences in a democracy laugh.
Philosophers were among the numerous intellectuals in the fourth century who
were voicing their dissatisfaction with traditional democracy and suggesting new
models of government. The surviving works of Plato (428–348 BC) and Aristotle
(384–322 BC) not only fault the fundamental ideals of democracy, liberty, and equal-
ity, but even undertake to redefine them. Yet philosophical writings, no less than
drama, defy our attempts to fasten down their viewpoints. Plato, for example, con-
veniently detaches himself from his arguments by expressing them in the form of
7

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
dialogues in which he does not appear himself. Nevertheless, their theories about
statecraft are evidence for the debate among the intellectual elite over the viability
of democracy as they knew it in their day.
Varied aspects of Athenian public and private life in the fourth century are
made vivid to us by the dozens of extant speeches. Lysias, Andocides, Isocrates,
and Demosthenes were among the influential politician-orators (rhe¯tores) who
composed speeches for delivery in the law courts and the popular assembly. Be-
cause they were constructed to dazzle their audiences and persuade them with
clever rhetoric, the “facts” brought forth in their arguments (e.g., the wording of
a particular law) must be regarded with some skepticism. Demosthenes (384–322
BC) was most famous for his “Philippics,” orations against the ruler of Macedon,
Philip II, who was then threatening to become the master of all the Greek states.
323–30 BC
The conquests of Philip’s son, Alexander III (the “Great”) extended as far as the
borders of India. Curiously, the huge number of books written about Alexander
after his death in 323, survive only in fragments. We are left with five ancient bi-
ographies—Plutarch’s Life of Alexander is one—written three to five hundred years
later and thus subject to the biases of their own times. The sources for Alexander’s
successors, who ruled over the various parts of the huge empire, are equally
scanty. Except for Diodorus’ account (first century BC) of the final decades of the
fourth century and scraps of other later writings that yield some information
about the two generations after Alexander, little else remains to tell their story.
Fortunately, ample sources exist that illuminate everyday life and the admin-
istrative, military, and economic apparatus of the various Hellenistic kingdoms.
In Egypt, for example, numerous inscriptions and thousands of public and pri-
vate documents preserved on papyrus record all aspects of urban and village life.
Among the papyri we find private letters, marriage contracts, wills, tax assess-
ments and records of legal proceedings.
New philosophies such as Stoicism and Epicureanism (whose precepts are pre-
served in later sources) offered advice on how to cope with the sense of dislocation
produced by this vastly enlarged, culturally diverse universe. Not surprisingly,
the surviving works of the Hellenistic poets, Callimachus, Theocritus, and Apol-
lonius Rhodius, expressed a double urge: to recreate the past so that it conformed
to the needs of a complex world and at the same time to preserve the past exactly
as it was.
THE PHYSICAL CONTEXT: THE LAND OF GREECE
The material and written sources are only part of the story, however. History
does not occur in a vacuum but in particular places. Greek historians, therefore,
must also consider the character of the land of Greece itself, for the natural
8

Introduction
environment of a people—the landscape, the climate, and the natural resources—
is a major factor in determining the way they live and how they develop socially.
Hellas, the homeland of the Greeks, ancient and modern, covers the southern por-
tion of the Balkan peninsula and the islands that lie to the west and east of the
mainland. The Greek islands to the east, in the Aegean Sea, are numerous; some
are closer to the coast of Anatolia (modern Turkey) than to the mainland. The
largest Greek island, Crete, lies to the south, about midway between the Greek
mainland and North Africa. A place of myth and legend, Crete will have a promi-
nent role in the early part of our narrative.
In terms of square miles, Greece is about the size of England in Great Britain
or the state of Alabama in the United States. The landscape is very rugged, with
mountains covering almost 75 percent of the land. Only about 30 percent of the
land can be cultivated at all, and only about 20 percent is classified as good agri-
cultural land. Except in the northern mainland, where there are extensive plain-
lands, the mountains and lower hills cut the land into many narrow coastal
plains, and upland plains and valleys. Except for Mt. Olympus in Thessaly (nearly
10,000 feet), the mountain ranges are not terribly high (3,000–8,000 feet), but they
are quite steep and craggy, which made overland travel in antiquity difficult and
somewhat isolated the small valleys and their people from one another.
By far the easiest way to travel was by sea, especially in the islands and the
southern mainland, where the coast is never more than 40 miles away. The chains
of islands in the Aegean Sea facilitated sea voyages. Although the coastlines of
the mainland and the islands are generally quite rugged, sailors could usually
find a safe landfall where they could beach their boats for the night or wait out
a threatening storm. The few locations that offered a good harbor became ports
early on, destinations for the exchange of trade goods. Throughout antiquity, the
narrow Aegean tied the Greeks to the Near East and Egypt, commercially, cul-
turally, politically, and militarily. The commercial contacts were vital; for, with
the exception of building stone and clay, Greece is not well endowed with raw
materials. The necessity to trade overseas for raw materials, especially for bronze,
destined the Greeks very early in their history to take to the sea and mingle with
people from the other, older civilizations to the east and south.
The Mediterranean climate is semiarid, with long, hot, dry summers and short,
cool, moist winters, when most of the rain falls. This general pattern varies from
region to region in Greece. Northern Greece has a more continental climate, with
much colder and wetter winters than the south. More rain falls on the western
side of the Greek mainland than on the eastern side, while the Aegean islands re-
ceive even less. The generally mild weather permitted outdoor activity for most
of the year. The soil in Greece, though rocky, is fairly rich, the most fertile plow-
land being in the small plains where, over the ages, earth washed down from the
hills has formed deep deposits. The lower hillsides, which are rockier, can be cul-
tivated through terracing, which prevents the soil from washing farther down the
slope and captures soil from above. The mountains, with their jagged limestone
peaks and steep cliffs, support only wild vegetation, but some enclose mountain
valleys suitable for farming and for grazing animals. Wood, essential for fuel and
9

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
construction, especially shipbuilding, was originally abundant in the highland ar-
eas. As time went on, however, forests became depleted and by the fifth century
BC the more populous regions were forced to import timber. Water, the most pre-
cious natural resource, is scarce in Greece, because there are very few rivers that
flow year-round and few lakes, ponds, and springs. Unlike in the huge river val-
leys of Egypt and Mesopotamia, irrigation on a large scale was not possible; farm-
ing depended on the limited annual rainfall.
It should be emphasized that this description of the land and resources of
Greece is a generalized one. Though small in area, Greece has a variety of local
landscapes and micro-climates in which the rainfall, the quantity and quality of
farmland, pastureland, and raw materials are decidedly different. On the whole,
however, the land, which the Greeks called Gaia (“Mother Earth”), allowed the
majority of the farmers a decent though modest living. But she offered no guar-
antees. Drought, especially in the more arid regions, was a constant and dreaded
threat. A dry winter meant a lean year, and a prolonged drought meant hunger
and poverty for entire villages and districts. Torrential rainstorms, on the other
hand, could send water rushing down the hillsides and through the dry gullies,
suddenly wiping out the terraces, flooding the fields, and destroying the crops.
Life on the sea was equally unpredictable. The Aegean, though often calm with
favoring winds, could just as suddenly boil up into ferocious storms sending
ships, cargo, and sailors to the bottom. (Drowning at sea, unburied, was a hate-
ful death for the Greeks.) It is no wonder, considering the extent to which the
Greeks were at the mercy of the land, sky, and sea, that the gods they worshiped
included personifications of the elements and forces of nature.
Food and Livestock
In general, the soil and climate amply supported the “Mediterranean triad” of
grain, grapes, and olives. Bread, wine, and olive oil were the staples of the Greek
diet throughout antiquity and for long afterward. Grains—wheat, barley, and
oats—grow well in Greek soil, having been cultivated from native wild grasses.
Olive trees and grapevines, also indigenous to Greece, flourished in their culti-
vated state. Legumes (peas and beans) and several kinds of vegetables, fruits (es-
pecially figs), and nuts, rounded out and varied the basic components of bread,
porridges, and olive oil. Cheese, meat, and fish, which are rich in proteins and
fat, supplemented the diet. Meat, however, provided a very small part of the av-
erage family’s daily food intake, and was usually consumed at feasts and festi-
vals. The Greeks did not care for butter and drank little milk. Their beverages
were water or wine (usually diluted with water). Honey was used for sweeten-
ing, and various spices enhanced the flavor of food. Though it might appear mo-
notonous to modern tastes, the Greek diet was healthful and nourishing.
The pasturing of small animals did not interfere with agriculture. Flocks of
sheep and goats grazed on hilly land that could not be farmed and on the fallow
fields, providing manure in return. As suppliers of wool, cheese, meat, and skins,
they had great economic importance. The Greeks also kept pigs, relished for their
10

Introduction
meat, and fowl. The two largest domesticated animals, horses and cattle, occupied
a special niche in the economy and the society. Oxen (castrated bulls) or mules
(hybrids of the horse and donkey) were necessary for plowing and for drawing
heavy loads. A farmer without ready access to a yoke of oxen or a pair of mules
would be classified as poor. Herds of cattle and horses did compete with agricul-
ture, since the stretches of good grazing land they required were also prime farm-
land. Practically speaking, there could be large-scale ranching of cattle and horses
(except in the northern plains) only in times of low population density. Because
they require so much in the way of resources, only the wealthy could afford the
luxury of keeping cattle and horses in large numbers. As the most prestigious an-
imals for sacrifices and feasts, cattle were a status symbol for the rich. Horses,
though, were the prime markers of high rank: beautiful creatures, very expensive
to maintain, and useful only for riding and for pulling light chariots.
This agricultural and pastoral way of life remained essentially unchanged
throughout antiquity. The fundamental economic fact that ancient Greece was es-
sentially a land of small-scale farmers (most of whom lived in farming villages
and small towns) governed every aspect of Greek society, from politics to war to
religion. It has been estimated that even in the fifth to third centuries BC, the peak
population periods, possibly as many as 80 to 90 percent of the male citizens of
a city-state were engaged in agriculture in some degree, while their wives worked
inside the house. One of the major unifying forces within the Greek city-states
was the citizen-farmers’ devotion to their small agricultural plain and its sur-
rounding hillsides, and their willingness to die defending their “ancestral earth,”
as the poet Homer called it. And the primary disunifying force throughout Greek
history was the perpetual tension between those citizens who had much land and
those who had little or none.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Easterling, P. E. and E. J. Kenney, eds. 1985. The Cambridge History of Classical Literature.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Separate chapters on individual au-
thors and genres by distinguished critics cover the entirety of ancient Greek litera-
ture, from Homer to the period of the Roman Empire.
Renfrew, Colin and Paul Bahn. 1991. Archaeology: Theories, Methods, and Practice. New York:
Thames and Hudson. Comprehensive introduction to the discipline of archaeology
today: what it is, what it does, and how it is done.
Runnels, Curtis and Priscilla M. Murray. 2001. Greece Before History: An Archaeological Com-
panion and Guide. Stanford: Stanford University Press. A brief history of the archae-
ology of Greece from the Old Stone Age to the end of the Bronze Age, written by
experts for the general reader.
van Andel, Tjerd and Curtis Runnels. 1987. Beyond the Acropolis: A Rural Greek Past. Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press. A description of the topography, flora, fauna, and
subsistence strategies of ancient Greek farming life.
11

12
1
EARLY GREECE AND
THE BRONZE AGE
The most charismatic cultural hero of the ancient Greeks was Odysseus, a man
who “saw the towns of many men and learned their minds, and suffered in his
heart many griefs upon the sea . . .” (Odyssey 1.3–4). Like their legendary hero,
the Greeks were irresistibly drawn to distant shores. From early in their history
and continually throughout antiquity, they ventured over the seas to foreign
lands seeking their fortunes as traders, colonizers, and mercenary soldiers. Their
limited natural resources forced the Greeks to look outward, and they were for-
tunate in being within easy reach of the Mediterranean shores of Asia, Africa,
and Europe. By the fifth century BC, they had planted colonies from Spain to the
west coast of Asia and from north Africa to the Black Sea. The philosopher Plato
(c. 429–347 BC) likened the hundreds of Greek cities and towns that ringed the
coasts of the Mediterranean and Black seas to “frogs around a pond” (Phaedo
109b). The story of those far-flung Greeks is a long and fascinating one.
GREECE IN THE STONE AGES
Humans entered Greece about 40,000 years ago, during the Middle Paleolithic
(Old Stone) Age. These early inhabitants lived mainly by hunting and some gath-
ering of wild plants, using finely crafted tools and weapons of stone, wood, and
bone. At the end of the Ice Age, when the glaciers that had covered much of Eu-
rope were receding (c. 12,000 BC), the climate of Greece warmed considerably; in
the process the landscape and its plants and animals evolved into their present
forms. Evidence from a cave at Franchthi in the Peloponnesus shows that the in-
habitants at the end of the Ice Age hunted deer and smaller game, caught fish in
the coastal waters, and gathered wild cereals, wild peas and beans, and nuts.
Early in the Neolithic (New Stone) Age (c. 6500 BC) the inhabitants began to
cultivate the wild cereals and other plants, to domesticate animals, and to weave
cloth on a loom. Agriculture forces people to settle down permanently. Small

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
farming villages sprang up, made up of one-room mud-brick houses similar to
those of the Near East. Under the favorable conditions of the warm New Stone
Age, villages grew larger and new village communities were formed.
The society of the small Stone Age villages was probably egalitarian, with no
inequality outside of sex, age, and skill. Families cooperated and shared with
their neighbors, most of whom were kinfolk. Leadership was probably tempo-
rary, assumed now by this man, now by another, as the need for a decisive voice
arose. With the growth of population, however, a more lasting leadership role
emerged. Anthropologists call such a leader the “big man” or the “head man,”
the one who is better at “getting things done.” His wisdom, courage, skill in solv-
ing disputes, and similar qualities propel him to the front and keep him there. In
time, this position becomes a sort of “office” into which a new man, having
demonstrated that he is better suited than other would-be leaders, steps when the
old head man retires or dies (or is pushed out). Henceforth, the division into two
status groups, the very small group of leaders and the large group of the led,
would be a permanent feature of Greek political life.
GREECE IN THE EARLY AND MIDDLE
BRONZE AGES (c. 3000–1600 BC)
Nearly four thousand years after the adoption of agriculture, another fundamental
technological innovation was introduced into the villages of Greece: bronze. Ne-
olithic craftsmen in southeastern Europe and western Asia were already skilled at
smelting and casting copper, but because it is a soft metal, its usefulness was lim-
ited. The pivotal step of adding 10 percent of tin to copper to produce bronze, a
much harder metal, was taken in the Near East during the fourth millennium and
arrived in Greece about 3000 BC. This was a momentous technical advance, for tools
and weapons of bronze were considerably more efficient than those made of stone,
bone, or copper. By 2500, metalworkers in Greece and the Balkans had mastered
not only the use of bronze but also other metals such as lead, silver, and gold. The
high-ranked families, those with greater surpluses of wealth, would have had the
greatest access to scarce metals and metal products. Possession of these and other
prestige items further distinguished them from the mass of the population. Their
increasing demand for metal goods created a need for more specialists and work-
shops and accelerated trade for copper, tin, and other metals, throughout the
Mediterranean region. And as the economy expanded and the settlements grew
larger, so did the wealth, power, and authority of their leaders, now established as
hereditary chiefs ruling for life and accorded exceptional honors and privileges.
The Civilizations of the Near East
In contrast to Greece and the Balkans in the Early Bronze Age (c. 3000–2100 BC),
the Near East had already progressed to that higher level of organization of the
natural and social environment termed “civilization.” The Aegean civilizations of
13

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Crete and Greece, as we shall see, owe their rise in the second millennium to their
close contact with the palace-kingdoms of the East.
Around 3500 BC in the wide fertile plain the Greeks named Mesopotamia, “the
land between the rivers” Tigris and Euphrates (in what is now southern Iraq),
there appeared, for the first time in history, the markers of advanced civilization:
large-scale irrigation, cities with thousands of inhabitants, bureaucratic govern-
ment, wide trade networks, written documents, legal systems, and science. Egyp-
tian civilization, which arose around 3200 BC along the long, narrow valley of the
Nile, followed the same trajectory as that of Mesopotamia, except that very early
on it became a united kingdom under a single ruler, the pharaoh.
In Mesopotamia, however, and in the rest of western Asia, societies evolved in
the form of discrete polities, centered around great cities which drew the sur-
rounding towns and villages into a single political unit—the city-state—adminis-
tered from the capital. During the third millennium the more powerful city-states
conquered their weaker neighbors, giving rise to territorial kingdoms which were
ascendant for a time only to be conquered in turn by rival kingdoms.
Within individual kingdoms society was highly stratified; the masses were
heavily dependent on and completely subject to an elite ruling class, headed by
a hereditary monarch. The kings and the high nobles, deploying a huge amount
of surplus wealth from agriculture, manufacture, and trade, and millions of hours
of human labor, built massive defensive walls and temples, as well as luxurious
palaces and elaborate tombs for themselves and their families. Architecture es-
pecially served religion, which became the most important means of control, for
it identified the will of the ruler with the will of the gods. Vast wealth and in-
creased population allowed the frequent wars of conquest and retribution to be
fought on a huge scale by well-organized armies.
These early civilizations would have an enormous influence on the cultural de-
velopment of the Greeks, and increasingly, as time went on, the histories of the
Near Eastern and Aegean peoples became more and more entwined.
The First Greek-Speakers
Though far less advanced politically and technologically than the Near East,
Greece attained a fairly high level of social complexity during its Early Bronze
Age (c. 3000–2100 BC). The remains of Lerna in Argolis, for example, show that it
was a large town with stone fortification walls and monumental buildings, the
largest of which may have been the house of the ruling chief. At the end of this
period, Lerna and similar sites in southern and central Greece were destroyed.
Historians have traditionally associated the destructions and the cultural stagna-
tion that followed during the Middle Bronze Age (c. 2100–1600 BC) with the in-
cursion of a new people, who spoke an early form of Greek. That dating is by no
means certain, however, and the questions of when the first Greek-speakers ar-
rived and the route they took remain open today.
More certain is that the newcomers were part of a great and lengthy ancient mi-
gration of peoples, known collectively as the Indo-Europeans. In the late eighteenth
century AD linguists observed that ancient Greek bears many similarities to other
14

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
dead languages, such as Latin and Sanskrit (the language of ancient India), as
well as to entire families of spoken languages, such as the Germanic and Slavic.
Take for example our word “mother”: Greek me¯te¯r, Latin mater, Sanskrit ma¯tar,
Anglo-Saxon mo¯dor, Old Irish mathir, Lithuanian mote, Russian mat’.
The close likenesses in vocabulary and grammar among these ancient languages
and their descendants led scholars to conclude that they had all sprung from a com-
mon linguistic ancestor, which they termed “Proto-Indo-European.” A current hy-
pothesis is that Greek and the other Indo-European languages evolved during the
long waves of emigrations from an original Indo-European homeland, located per-
haps in the vast steppes north of the Black and Caspian seas. Over the course of
many centuries (beginning perhaps in the fourth millennium BC) the Indo-European
languages spread across Europe and Asia, from Ireland to Chinese Turkestan.
The Greeks
Eventually, the Greek language completely submerged the non-Indo-European
“Aegean” languages. The relatively few words that survived from the old language
were chiefly names of places (e.g., Korinthos, Parnassos) and of native plants and
animals, such as hyakinthos (“hyacinth”) and melissa (“bee”). During the nineteenth
century of our era, there was considerable conjecture about the social organization
and culture of the Indo-Europeans. Many assumed that they were a superior race
of horse-riding “Aryan” warriors, who swept into southern Europe and obliterated
the cultures of the weak, unwarlike, agrarian natives. Such suppositions were the
products of a racially biased Eurocentrism. No scholar today accepts this myth of
Aryan superiority which was the pretext for so many crimes against humanity in
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, culminating in the horrors perpetrated by
the Nazis and Fascists in the 1930s and 1940s.The imposition of their language does
suggest that the Greek-speakers came in as conquerors and initially dominated the
indigenous populations. It is likely, however, that by the end of the Middle Bronze
Age (c. 2100–1600 BC), the two peoples had merged into a single people and their
two cultures had fused into a single Hellenic culture that contained elements of
both. Indeed, their cultures were similar in many respects. The newcomers were
not wild horse-riding nomads, fresh out of the steppes, as they were once por-
trayed to be (although they may have introduced horses to Greece). Like the in-
digenous peoples, they subsisted as herders and farmers and practiced metallurgy
and other crafts, such as pottery and clothmaking. Indo-European society was pa-
trilineal (descent is reckoned from the father, pate¯r in Greek) and patriarchal (the
father is the supreme authority figure). There is no reason, however, to accept the
once prevalent notion that this system was imposed by the newcomers on a ma-
trilineal and matriarchal form of social organization.
The Discovery of the Aegean Civilizations
Around the time when Greek-speakers entered the Aegean (c. 2000 BC), the first
palaces appear on the island of Crete, signaling that the Cretans had joined the
company of complex state societies. Four hundred years later, the Greeks would
15

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
also reach that level of development, under the general influence of the Near
East, but especially through their relationship with the Cretans (who were not
Greek-speakers).
That there had been advanced civilizations in the Bronze Age Aegean became
demonstrated only in the late nineteenth century when archaeologists unearthed
three cities, which up to that time were known only from the legends about the
Trojan War, the central event of the Greeks’ mythical “age of heroes.” First, in
1870 Heinrich Schliemann discovered the ruins of Troy in northwest Anatolia
(modern Turkey). In Schliemann’s day most historians regarded the Greeks’ re-
membrance of an ancient war against Troy as just another fable. Four years later,
Schliemann turned to the site of Mycenae in southern Greece, which tradition
held to be the city of King Agamemnon, the leader of the Greek invasion of Troy.
To everyone’s surprise, Schliemann’s excavations of the Bronze Age level uncov-
ered a large fortified palace-complex, worthy of a mighty warrior king.
Although Schliemann’s discoveries are not conclusive evidence of a large-scale
war between Trojans and Greeks, the impressive ruins unearthed at both sites,
with their immense quantities of gold and other costly things, do confirm the
Greeks’ remembrance of their heroic age (i.e., the Late Bronze Age) as a time of
fabulous wealth and splendor. Because of the importance of Mycenae in fact and
myth, the Late Bronze Age in Greece (c. 1600–1150 BC) is commonly referred to
as the “Mycenaean period.”
Equally spectacular was Sir Arthur Evans’ discovery in 1899 of the palace com-
plex of Knossos on Crete, whose magnificence gave credence to the legends that
in ancient times Knossos had been the center of a powerful naval state. Evans
named this first Aegean civilization “Minoan,” after the mythical King Minos of
Knossos, who lived, according to Homer, three generations before the Trojan War.
The Minoans
First settled around 7000 BC by Neolithic farmers and stock-raisers of unknown
origin and language, Crete followed the regional path of slow growth helped
along by technological innovation. During the fourth millennium, some of the
small farming villages had grown into large towns. Eventually, the chiefs of these
early centers emerged as monarchs over other chiefs and people in their districts.
Thus Crete became a land of small city-kingdoms.
The earliest large, multiroom complex (which Evans named the “Palace of Mi-
nos”) was built about 2000 BC at Knossos, by then a town with several thousand
inhabitants. Other major palaces, not as grand as Knossos, followed at Phaistos,
Mallia, Zakro, and elsewhere, each center controlling an area of a few hundred
square miles. The political and cultural flowering in Crete (and on other Aegean
islands as well) probably can be attributed to their inclusion in the international
trade. The island’s location and natural harbors made it an important crossroad
in the trade routes across the Mediterranean Sea. The palace-centered economies
16

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
17
Figure 1.1a. Plan of the Minoan palace at Knossos, Crete (c. 1400 BC).
a

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
18
Figure 1.1c. (Facing page) View of the ruins of the Minoan palace at Phaistos, Crete.
Figure 1.1b. Plan of the Mycenaean palace at Pylos (c. 1200 BC). Note the distinctive
megaron in the center of the complex, in contrast to the open central court at Knossos.

c
19

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
that emerged in Crete were replicas, on a much smaller scale, of the economies
of the Near Eastern states. It has not been established, however, whether Knos-
sos ever became the center of a unified island-wide kingdom or was the largest
and most powerful among a number of self-ruling states.
The Knossos we see today was begun around 1700 BC, after the first palace was
destroyed by an earthquake. Knossos and the other smaller Cretan palaces con-
sisted of a maze of rooms—residential quarters, workshops, and storerooms—
clustered around a large central courtyard. This impressive residence of the ruler
and a few high-ranking subordinates was the political, economic, and adminis-
trative center and indeed the focal point of state ceremony and religious ritual for
the entire kingdom.
The palace economies were based on storage and redistribution. Food and
other products from the palace’s lands and from private farms and herds, paid
as taxes, were collected and stored in the palace. The income both sustained the
palace and its crafts workers and was redistributed back to the villagers as ra-
tions and wages. The palace’s reserves of grain and olive oil could also be dis-
tributed to the population during famines. The main use of the royal surplus,
however, was for trade. Produce and goods manufactured in the palace went out
on ships along the wide Mediterranean trade network in exchange for goods
from foreign lands, especially metal and luxury items.
To administer their complicated economies the Cretans developed a writing
system (in a script Evans named “Linear A”) comprised of specific signs that
stood for the sounds of spoken syllables. Linear A writing, preserved on small
clay tablets found not only on Crete but in other Aegean islands, remains largely
untranslated. It is clear, however, that its main purpose was for keeping eco-
nomic and administrative records.
As in the Near East, there was an enormous gulf between the ruling class and
the people. The multitude of ordinary Cretan farmers and crafts workers paid for
the opulent lifestyles of the few with their labor and taxes, while they themselves
lived very modestly, in small mud-brick houses clustered together in the towns
and villages. To be sure, the people received benefits in the form of protection
from famine and from outside aggressors, but their compliance with the rigid hi-
erarchy suggests something more—a positive identification with the center, that
is, the king. In Crete, as in all ancient kingdoms, the king was a symbol as well as
the actual ruler. He was the embodiment of the state: supreme war leader, law-
giver and judge, and, most important, the intermediary between gods and the
land and people. Indeed, some Mediterranean scholars describe the Minoan kings
as priest-kings like their counterparts in Egypt and Mesopotamia, whose legiti-
macy derived from the official equation of royal power with the will of the gods.
Minoan Art and Architecture
Minoan art and architecture owe a large debt to the civilizations of the Near East,
and especially Egypt. Yet, even as they borrowed extensively from the techniques
and styles of the older civilizations, the Cretans developed their own distinctive
20

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
style and spirit. Visitors to the ruins of Knossos are dazzled by its size and com-
plexity (it covered 3.2 acres with perhaps three hundred rooms) and the elegance
of its architecture.
The palace was constructed of stone and mud brick and stood two and three
stories high with basements beneath. Numerous porticoes, balconies, and loggias,
all brightly painted, gave the exterior a theatrical look. Light wells brought day-
light and fresh air into the interior of the palace. A system of conduits and drains
provided many of the rooms with running water and waste disposal. On the
walls and passageways there were brilliantly colored depictions of plant and an-
imal life and scenes of human activity, often religious processions or rituals. Sim-
ilar subjects and motifs are found not only at other Cretan palaces, but also in
wealthy private homes in the towns and villages.
Minoan art is much admired today for its sophistication, vitality, and exuber-
ance. The frescoes, vase paintings, and small sculptures give us a glimpse into
how the inhabitants of the palaces and villas saw themselves. Men and women
21
Figure 1.2. Fresco of a fisherman from
Thera.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
both are represented as youthful, slender, and graceful. The men are smooth
shaven and wear only a short kilt, similar to the Egyptian male dress. The women
are shown wearing elaborate flounced skirts and a tight, sleeved bodice that ex-
poses their breasts. Both men and women have long hair, stylishly curled, and
wear gold bracelets and necklaces.
A remarkable example of Minoan cultural influence was discovered in 1967 at
Akrotiri on the small island of Thera (modern Santorini), north of Crete. A pros-
perous city of several thousand inhabitants, Akrotiri was destroyed by a power-
ful volcanic eruption around 1630 BC, which preserved it, nearly intact, under a
deep layer of volcanic ash. Its remains show how extensively the Therans ab-
sorbed Cretan art, architecture, religion, dress, and lifestyles into their own island
culture. Nevertheless, the distinctly “local” features on Thera and the other Cy-
cladic islands suggest that they were independent societies, trading partners, not
colonial outposts of a Cretan empire.
GREECE AND THE AEGEAN IN THE
LATE BRONZE AGE (c. 1600–1150 BC)
Cretan influence also extended to southern and central Greece by way of trading
contacts, which began as early as 2000 BC. That relationship played a major role
in the development of the Mycenaean Greek civilization. The Greeks did not just
borrow individual elements from the Minoan cultural repertoire; they even
adopted wholesale the model of the Cretan state right down to the writing sys-
tem. But when they had become powerful in their own right, the Mycenaeans re-
paid their teachers by invading Crete and taking over the Cretan palace-centers.
And then, their civilization, too, came crashing down at the end of the Late
Bronze Age.
The Early Mycenaeans (c. 1600–1400 BC)
During the course of the Middle Bronze Age (c. 2100–1600 BC) Greece was grad-
ually transformed. In the Peloponnesus and other areas of mainland Greece, pop-
ulation rose, productivity increased, and trade with the outside expanded, all of
which led to a further strengthening of the economic and political power of the
leaders. Warrior-chiefs were now evolving into monarchs.
Hundreds of Bronze Age settlements have been found in mainland and island
Greece, many of which can be identified by name from the ancient legends. Ar-
chaeology has confirmed that the famous mainland cities of epic poetry, such as
Mycenae, Tiryns, Pylos, Thebes, and Athens, were in fact the major Bronze Age
centers. Their grand palaces, however, were not built until the fourteenth and
thirteenth centuries, over the remains of the older, less imposing structures. Ac-
cordingly, what we know of the early stage of the Mycenaean civilization (roughly
1600–1400 BC) is revealed chiefly through graves and the offerings interred with
the bodies of the deceased men, women, and children.
22

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
23
Figure 1.3a. A bronze dagger inlaid
with a scene of a lion hunt, from a
later shaft grave at Mycenae.
Figure 1.3b. Plan and cross section
of a Mycenaean tholos tomb.
Figure 1.3c. Interior vault of a tholos
tomb at Mycenae (the so-called
Treasury of Atreus).
Figure 1.3d. Gold mask from an
early shaft grave at Mycenae.
a
b
d
c

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
In Mycenae, these “shaft” graves—deep rectangular pits into which the bodies
were lowered—cover more than a century of burials, from a little before 1600 to a
little after 1500. The earlier graves yielded many bronze weapons (swords, daggers,
spearheads, and knives) and quantities of local pottery, but little gold or jewelry.
By comparison, a single later grave, containing the bodies of three men and two
women, held an arsenal of weapons (43 swords, for example), and hundreds of
other expensive objects, including gold jewelry adorning the corpses of the women.
The increase in luxury imports during this period—from Crete, Cyprus, Egypt,
Mesopotamia, Syria, Anatolia, and western Europe—attests both to the growth of
Mycenaean trade and to greater control by the ruling class over the economy and
the society. Around 1500 BC the noble families began to inter their dead in the more
impressive tholos tomb, a very large stone chamber, shaped like a beehive. With
their high vaulted interiors and long stone entranceways the tholoi (plural) were
conspicuous signs of the ever increasing power and resources of the leaders.
Shortly after the tholos tombs came into fashion, Greeks from the mainland in-
vaded and defeated the Cretans, destroying a number of palace-centers but leav-
ing Knossos mostly intact. Wealthy Crete was a juicy prize and the Mycenaeans
had come to stay. This takeover, however, which occurred around 1450 BC, prob-
ably did not bring great changes in Cretan society and culture. Life under the in-
vaders, who were already accustomed to Minoans, went on as before, except that
now they paid their taxes to kings who spoke Greek. And the new kings ruled
and lived in the manner of Cretan kings, although they did keep to certain main-
land ways, as in their burial rites, for example.
Their prosperity, however, was short-lived. Around 1375, Knossos was burned
and looted; and although the ruined palace continued to be occupied, Mycenaean
Crete sank in importance as Mycenae and the other mainland centers reached the
zenith of their prosperity and influence in the Aegean. It is not known who de-
stroyed Knossos and set off the irreversible decline of the Cretan economy and
culture. The most likely suspects are other mainland Mycenaeans lured by the
riches of the Cretan palaces and perhaps eager to get rid of their biggest rival in
the Mediterranean trade.
The Linear B Tablets
We do know that it was Greeks who took over Crete in 1450 BC because of the work
of Michael Ventris, an amateur linguist and cryptographer, in the 1950s. As we saw
earlier, the Minoans had devised a writing system made up of linear signs incised
on clay tablets, which they used to keep palace records. The archaeologist Evans
had discovered a few tablets with this script at Knossos, but he also found 3,000
clay tablets inscribed with a more elaborate version of the linear script, which he
named “Linear B” to differentiate it from the earlier “Linear A” script. He assumed
without question that the language of both was Cretan. The discovery in 1939 of
an archive room full of Linear B tablets in the Mycenaean palace of Pylos on the
Greek mainland seemed to strengthen Evans’ theory that mainland Greece had
been controlled by the Minoans throughout the Late Bronze Age.
24

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
Ventris, however, demonstrated that the language of the Linear B tablets was
not in fact Cretan, but an early form of Greek. Having more than four thousand
tablets to work with, he and other linguists were able gradually to obtain the pho-
netic values of the signs. For example, a combination of three signs— ti-ri-po—
yields the syllabic equivalent of the Greek word tripous, “tripod.” Today, the Lin-
ear B inscriptions have given up most of their secrets. Despite some successes,
however, Linear A, the script of the unknown Cretan language, has not yet been
deciphered. The decoding of Linear B has illuminated not only the historical re-
lationship between Greece and Crete, but also the workings of the Mycenaean
palace system.
The Later Mycenaeans (c. 1400–1200 BC)
The palace-complexes whose ruins we see today were built in the fourteenth and
thirteenth centuries, during the final phase of Mycenaean wealth and power.
Their architecture and decoration closely imitated the Minoan style, with some
notable differences. They were much smaller and, unlike the largely unfortified
Cretan palaces, they were usually located on a commanding hill, encircled by
high, thick walls. We may infer that protection from invasion by rival kingdoms
was a primary concern of Mycenaean rulers. The walled citadels served also as a
refuge for the inhabitants of the unfortified towns below. Later Greeks called
them Cyclopean walls, as though they had been built by the mythical race of gi-
ant Cyclopes. Indeed, such massive works were probably as much a boast of the
king’s wealth and power as they were a defense for his palace and people.
The Mycenaeans also utilized space within their palaces differently from the
Minoans. In place of the open paved courtyard of the Cretan complexes they
made the focus of their palaces the megaron, a large rectangular hall. The megaron
was the ceremonial center, used for feasts, councils, and receptions of visitors.
One entered it through a courtyard, which led into a portico and a small ante-
room. In the middle of the great hall stood a large, raised circular hearth, flanked
by four columns that supported an open balcony. The megaron room would sur-
vive in the form of a chieftain’s house during the long Dark Age that followed,
and as the essential plan of the Greek temple from the eighth century onward.
Although Mycenaean palaces had fewer rooms and lacked some of the architec-
tural embellishments of their Cretan counterparts, they offered such Minoan
amenities as indoor plumbing and beautiful wall paintings. The frescoes are com-
pletely Minoan in style, though they show a preference for martial themes, such
as personal combats, sieges, and hunting scenes.
Despite their cultural similarities, the Mycenaeans were not unified politically,
but were divided into separate small kingdoms. Moreover, they were relatively
few in number compared to the vast populations of the Hittite empire, which
covered Anatolia and Syria, and of Egypt during its brilliant and aggressive
“New Kingdom” period (c. 1575–1087 BC). Yet despite their political fragmenta-
tion, the Mycenaeans appear to have been a formidable presence in the Mediter-
ranean world and to have had diplomatic relations with these great powers.
25

ANATOLIA
0
0
40
80
120
160 km
20
40
60
80
100 miles
ANATOLIA
AEGEAN
SEA
Gulf Of
Argos
Gulf of 
               Corinth
Crete
Cephallenia
Ithaca
Cythera
Melos
Thera
Naxos
Cos
Rhodes
Lesbos
Chios
Samos
Delos
Salamis
Iolcus
Parga
Pleuron
Delphi
Dyme
Kallithea Vrachneika
Rhion
Patras
Olympia
Mouriatada
Pylos
Tragana
Rizomylo
Amyclae
Koukounara
Monemvasia
Hagios Ioannis
Lerna
Asine
Iria
Argos
Prosymna
Mycenae
Zygouries
Corinth
Isthmus
Berbati
Dendra
Tiryns
Nauplion
Epidaurus
Orchomenus
Haliartus
Gla
Thebes
Eutresis
Aulis
Dramesi
Marathon
Menidi
Eleusis
AthensSpata
Hagios Kosmas
Perati
Thoricus
Troy
Smyrna
Colophon
Ephesus
Miletus
Heraion
Didyma
Müskebi
Ialysus
Knossos
Amnisus
Karphi
Episkopi
Hagia Triada
Phaistos
a

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
27
Figure 1.4a. (Facing page) Mycenaean sites in the thirteenth century BC.
Figure 1.4b. View of the ruins of the megaron of the Mycenaean palace at Pylos.
Figure 1.4c. The “Lion Gate” entrance to the citadel of Mycenae.
b
c

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
The Hittite archives of the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries record exchanges
of letters and of gifts and favors between the Hittite kings and kings of a people
they called “Ahhiyawan,” who are plausibly identified as Mycenaean “Akhai-
woi,” that is, “Achaeans,” the name given to the Greeks in the Iliad and Odyssey.
Such mentions of Greeks in the Hittite archives (and possibly also in Egyptian
records) suggest that the Mycenaeans held a prominent position in the region.
Finds of Mycenaean pottery and metalwork show up all across the Mediter-
ranean Sea, from southern Italy and Sicily to the Asian coast, Egypt and the
Aegean islands. It is quite possible, too, that a good portion of the immense
wealth found in the graves and tombs of these warrior kings and nobles came
not only from peaceful trade but also from the Mycenaeans’ prowess as seaborne
marauders.
The Administration of a Mycenaean Kingdom
A memorable figure for readers of the Iliad and the Odyssey is the aged warrior
Nestor, who, Homer tells us, lived in a magnificent many-roomed house in a
town called Pylos, from which he ruled over a large area of Messenia. The dis-
covery of the “palace of Nestor” by the American archaeologist Carl Blegen in
1939 confirmed that the Pylos of the legends had been an actual Bronze Age cen-
ter. Even more important was Blegen’s find of large numbers of Linear B tablets.
Clay tablets were not intended to be permanent records; they were preserved
only because they were baked hard in the fires that destroyed the palace. What
we have, in fact, are just scribes’ temporary records from the final year of Pylos’
existence. Yet these terse lists (supplemented by the Linear B tablets from Knos-
sos and other centers) tell us much about the economy and society of Mycenaean
Greece.
Like other regional centers, Pylos (written Pu-ro in the Linear B script) reached
its zenith between 1400 and 1200. Nestor’s palace, which lay undisturbed since
its destruction around 1200, had been built around 1300 over the ruins of an ear-
lier, smaller complex of buildings. The kingdom of Pylos was large and highly
organized. It contained around two hundred villages and towns, spread out over
an area of about 1400 square miles, and was divided into two “provinces,” each
subdivided into several “districts.” The clay tablets give us some idea of Myce-
naean social structures. At the apex of the pyramid stood the king (wanax). Next
in rank, apparently, was the lawagetas, whose title may be loosely translated as
“leader of the army.” Below them was a large bureaucracy of military and ad-
ministrative officers and minor officials who oversaw the functioning of the
palace and the outlying areas.
The centralized production and distribution system ensured a luxurious stan-
dard of living for the highest officials, and perhaps some portion of the minor
ones. But the majority of people, the ones who produced the wealth—the farmers,
herders, artisans, and laborers—lived modestly, in small one- or two-room houses,
with few luxuries. Many families farmed as tenants on land belonging to the
nobles; others held plots of land in their own names. Craftsmen, herders, and
28

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
priestesses, for example, are listed as “owners” of private land. Just as in later times,
most agricultural producers lived in rural villages, while the majority of the crafts
specialists were concentrated in the regional centers and the larger settlements.
The palace strictly supervised production. Officials were sent out into the
countryside for regular assessments, and the taxes in produce and animals levied
on individuals and villages were meticulously recorded. One tablet from Myce-
naean Knossos reports: “Men of Lyktos 246.7 units of wheat; men of Tylisos 261
units of wheat; men of Lato 30.5 units of wheat.” Yet, the evidence of the tablets
does not support the once common view that the free masses were oppressed
peasants toiling in misery on the estates of the rich. The men of the village farmed
their plots and tended to their trees, vines, and livestock; they paid their taxes,
contributed some labor to the palace, and served in the army. The women per-
formed the domestic tasks of spinning and weaving, food preparation, and child-
care. A number of the village women were also engaged as textile workers for
the palace, for which they received rations of wool and flax.
The truly oppressed were the slaves. References to “captives” and “bought”
show that the Mycenaean warrior-aristocrats were active in the slavery business.
Tablets from Pylos, for example, record over six hundred slave women, who la-
bored as grinders of grain, bath attendants, flax workers, weavers, and so on.
Most of the women listed were attached to the palace; some lived in other towns
in the kingdom and received rations of food from the palace. High-ranking indi-
viduals also owned slaves, though in far fewer numbers than the wanax. It is also
possible that some of the lowest-status workers on the tablets were not true
29
Figure 1.5a. A Linear B tablet from Pylos (c. 1200 BC). Note the ideogram for cauldrons on
the top line.
Figure 1.5b. A Linear B tablet from Mycenaean-ruled Knossos. On this tablet we can see
the numbering system: Circles stand for hundreds, horizontal lines for tens, and vertical
lines for units.
a
b

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
slaves, that is, foreigners captured or bought, but native individuals or families
who, for whatever reasons, were reduced to a state of permanent dependence on
the palace.
The palace-complex was the hub of the kingdom’s economy, employing large
numbers of workers who turned raw materials into finished products for both
domestic consumption and export. Tasks were highly specialized; women were
engaged mostly in the textile sector, making cloth goods of wool and linen, while
men are listed as carpenters, potters, metal smiths, leather workers, perfume
makers, and more. The wanax kept a close eye on the workshops and the storage
areas, and his scribes scrupulously wrote down how much raw material the crafts
specialists were given, the objects they produced, and the rations of food they re-
ceived in return. Nothing escaped their attention. Dozens of entries go like this:
“one ebony footstool inlaid with figures of men and a lion in ivory.” Even char-
iot wheels are listed individually, and a note is made of their condition: “ser-
viceable,” or “unfit for use.”
The leading exports were textiles and metalwork, to which we may add olive
oil (both plain and perfumed), wine, hides, leather, and leather products. Fine
pottery, jewelry, and other costly items also competed well in the international
luxury trade. In return, the palaces imported things lacking in Greece, such as
copper, tin, gold, ivory, amber, dyes, and spices, as well as foreign varieties of
items that they did have, such as wine and jewelry. Needless to say, few luxury
goods made their way into the houses and graves of the common people.
Religion
The belief in supernatural forces and beings that control the natural world is
probably as old as humankind. Nearly as old are cult and ritual—the acts of de-
votion to the gods—and religious myths, the suppositions about the gods told in
story form as part of ritual activity. Among agrarian peoples, the relationship of
mortals to immortals revolves around the continuation of the fertility of the land
and animals. To appease the gods, who can bestow or remove the blessings of
nature at will, the people make communal displays of respect, including sacri-
fices of food and animals and even humans at times. The Minoans and Myce-
naeans were no exception; they honored their gods with processions, music, and
dance, and propitiated them with gifts and sacrifices. The slaughter and butcher-
ing of animals on outdoor altars was the most solemn ritual. There may even
have been human sacrifice among the early Minoans.
In Minoan art the principal recipient of worship is a goddess, dressed in the
Cretan style and placed in outdoor settings that feature trees and other vegeta-
tion, and animals. Similar scenes appear on Mycenaean frescoes, vases, and gold
and silver rings. The ubiquitous goddess figures depicted in Minoan-Mycenaean
art are thought to be representations of an ancient Aegean mother goddess, who
presided over nature and fertility. In that case, we must infer that the fertility god-
desses brought in by the Indo-European speakers were assimilated into the artis-
tic form of the Aegean nature mother.
30

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
Figure 1.6a. Statuette of a goddess or human attendant from Knossos, Crete.
Figure 1.6b. Gold ring from Minoan Knossos showing women worshiping a goddess.
Figure 1.6c. A similar scene on a gold ring from Late Bronze Age Mycenae, indicating Mi-
noan influence on Mycenaean religious rituals.
31
a
b
c

There are, however, notable differences between Minoan and Mycenaean reli-
gious practices. For example, the Minoans frequently performed their rituals in
caves and in sanctuaries built on mountain peaks, while the Mycenaean shrines
are mainly confined to the palace-centers. The Linear B tablets also reveal that the
Mycenaeans worshipped many of the gods of later Greek religion, including
Zeus, Hera, Poseidon, Hermes, Athena, Artemis, and possibly Apollo, Ares, and
Dionysus. Zeus, the supreme god of the later Greeks, is plainly the ancient Indo-
European “sky-father,” and was brought in by the earliest Greek-speakers. Zeus
pate¯r “Zeus the father,” is the same deity as the Sanskrit Dyaus pitar and Roman
Iuppiter. The names of Hera, Poseidon, and Ares are also formed from Indo-
European roots.
The palace was the center of religious activity. The gods, their sanctuaries, and
their priests and priestesses received gifts of land, animals, precious objects, as
A Brief History of Ancient Greece
32
Figure 1.7a. (Left) Bronze plate armor and boar’s tusk helmet
from Dendra in Argolis, c. 1400 BC.
Figure 1.7b. (Above) A vase from thirteenth-century Mycenae,
showing a line of ordinary soldiers on the march, armed with
helmets, shields, and long spears, and a mourning woman who
watches their departure.
a
b

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
well as human labor, which were requisitioned by the wanax from the people. A
ruler with such coercive powers as the wanax could claim that his sovereignty
was divinely sanctioned and that he was the special representative of the com-
munity to the gods. There is no evidence, however, to suggest that a wanax was
considered divine either in his lifetime or after death, or that he functioned as a
priest-king over a theocratic state, as in Egypt and Mesopotamia.
Warfare
The wanax was, above all, a warrior-king, who took part in the fighting along
with his military commander (lawagetas) and subordinate commanders. In fact,
throughout ancient Greek history, most political leaders would also be the
commanders-in-chief and many would meet death on the battlefield or on the
sea. Mycenaean warriors were heavily armored. Officers wore helmets of bronze
or of boars’ tusks, corselets of bronze plates, and bronze greaves (knee and shin
protectors). The soldiers were equipped with leather and padded linen versions
of these. All combatants carried large shields made of ox hide stretched over a
wooden frame. Their weapons were bronze swords and daggers, heavy thrust-
ing spears and light throwing spears, and bows and arrows. The Mycenaeans’
most impressive weapon was the chariot, adopted from the Near East around
1600 BC. A lightweight platform set atop two high, spoked wheels, and pulled by
two horses, the chariot could carry two men at a pace previously unknown in
land travel. Throughout the Near East, the chariot corps was the primary mili-
tary arm, used for massed chariot charges against an enemy’s chariots and in-
fantry, one man driving and the other shooting arrows. But because the rough
terrain of Greece is unsuited for such tactics, many believe that the Mycenaeans
employed chariots only to convey heavily armored elite warriors to and from the
fighting. On the other hand, it is conceivable that mini-versions of eastern char-
iot warfare took place on the plains that lay below the Mycenaean fortresses. In
any case, the significance of the chariot was probably not so much its use in bat-
tle, but rather its prestige value.
Like other material borrowings, such as the grand palaces and the tholos
tombs, chariotry proclaimed the Mycenaean rulers to be the equals of the great
kings of Asia and Egypt. Mycenaean art depicts the elite employing chariots also
for hunting, racing, and ceremonial processions, as upper-class Greeks would for
many centuries after the chariot had ceased to have any military function.
The Fall of the Mycenaean Civilization
At the apparent height of its prosperity, Mycenaean civilization suffered a fatal
blow. Beginning around 1200 BC almost all the palace-centers and many of their
outlying towns and villages were attacked and destroyed or else abandoned. Or-
der gave way to turbulence and restless wanderings. Many centers, Pylos among
them, were never reoccupied after the initial devastation, while others recovered
and even enjoyed a brief resurgence, but soon succumbed to further attacks. A
33

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
few, like Mycenae and Tiryns, lived on as small villages huddled below the ru-
ined fortifications of their once mighty palaces. By 1100, the Mycenaean king-
doms and the complex systems that had supported them no longer existed.
It was not just Mycenaean civilization that suffered: The entire eastern Mediter-
ranean region was overwhelmed by catastrophe at this time. The mighty Hittite
empire, which encompassed Anatolia and Syria, fell apart around 1200 BC, crushed
by invaders from the north. Egypt was attacked several times by an assortment
of warrior bands from all around the Mediterranean. Quite possibly Mycenaeans
were among these marauders, who are referred to as the “sea peoples” in Egypt-
ian records. It was also during this period that the fall of Troy occurred
(c. 1250–1200). There is no way of knowing whether those who besieged and burned
the city were really the Mycenaean Greeks, as the legend of the Trojan War tells.
Until fairly recently it was thought that the Dorians were responsible for de-
stroying and looting the Mycenaean palaces. The modern “Dorian invasion” hy-
pothesis is largely based on the legends of later Doric speakers. Doric was one of
the three main dialects of ancient Greek, spoken in the Peloponnesus, Crete and
other Aegean islands, and parts of the Anatolian coast. Dorians claimed ancestry
from the mythical hero Heracles (Hercules), whose sons, so the story went, were
expelled from the Peloponnesus after his death. Several generations after the Tro-
jan War, Heracles’ descendants returned south to reclaim by force their rightful
ownership of their ancient homeland. The invasion hypothesis was popular be-
cause it accounted well for both the initial destructions and the dominant pres-
ence of Doric speakers in the Peloponnesus during historical times. Moreover, it
was corroborated by the words of the ancient Greeks themselves. Against the the-
ory, however, certain practices, such as cremation of the dead, and objects like
the handmade pottery called “Barbarian Ware,” supposedly introduced by the in-
vaders, were already present in Mycenaean Greece well before 1200 BC.
Because no single cause could have had such widespread and profound effects,
a more plausible explanation for the breakdown of the old order is that the Myce-
naeans experienced a massive “systems collapse”; that is to say, the entire “system”
(the Mycenaean civilization) suffered a cascading series of negative consequences
brought on by disequilibrium between its “subsystems” (its various spheres of ac-
tivity, such as trade, agricultural production, metallurgy, and the crafting of artifacts).
Marauding bands of “sea peoples” could have provided one catalyst, by obstruct-
ing sea-trade in the Aegean, which in turn would have cut off the supply of tin
and copper for bronze production. If external trade ceased, not only goods but so-
cial contacts too would be lost; ideas as well as objects could not be exchanged. At
the same time, natural disasters, like prolonged drought, soil exhaustion, and
earthquakes, could have put pressure on the food-distribution subsystem, which
may have already been undermined by the inefficiency of the top-heavy palace
bureaucracies. As food and other crucial resources became scarce, the people
might have turned against one another. At this point, when the system had al-
ready become weak and vulnerable, internecine warfare, uprisings of the people,
or slave revolts might have precipitated the final collapse.
34

Early Greece and the Bronze Age
Along with the destruction of the palaces, the centralized, rigidly hierarchical
states disappeared forever from Greece. Underneath the veneer of great wealth
and stability the Mycenaean economy and government were shallowly rooted,
essentially fragile systems. With the end of this stage of Greek history would
come the beginning of a new era, so different that when the Greeks looked back
upon their own Bronze Age past they could only imagine it as a kind of mythi-
cal dreamworld, a time when gods and humans mingled together.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Barber, Elizabeth Wayland. 1994. Women’s Work: The First 20,000 Years. Women, Cloth, and So-
ciety in Early Times. New York and London: Norton. The history of textile manufac-
ture as women’s work and art from the Paleolithic through the Iron Age, including
weaving techniques and myths about weaving. A major study of women’s principal
contribution to the ancient economy.
Castleden, Rodney. 1993. Minoans: Life in Bronze Age Crete. London: Routledge. Written for
the nonspecialist, the book recreates the society and culture of the Cretan civiliza-
tion.
Chadwick, John. 1967. The Decipherment of Linear B. 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press. The story of how the Linear B tablets were deciphered told by one
of the principal investigators.
Chadwick, John. 1976. The Mycenaean World. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
A lavishly illustrated description of the workings of the palace societies of Myce-
naean Greece, with emphasis on the kingdom of Pylos.
Chadwick, John. 1987. Linear B and Related Scripts. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press. This little monograph describes the relationship between the Lin-
ear A script and Linear B, and tells how Linear B was used by the Mycenaeans.
Drews, Robert. 1993. The End of the Bronze Age: Changes in Warfare and the Catastrophe ca.
1200 B.C. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. An overview and detailed analy-
sis of the latest theories of the fall of the great civilizations of the Late Bronze Age.
Fitton, J. Lesley. 1996. The Discovery of the Greek Bronze Age. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press. A sparkling survey of the pioneering excavators, their excavations,
and the controversies that swirled around their discoveries of Bronze Age Aegean
cultures.
Preziosi, Donald and Louise A. Hitchcock. 1999. Aegean Art and Architecture (Oxford His-
tory of Art). Oxford: Oxford University Press. A comprehensive introduction to the
art and architecture of Greece, Crete, and the Cycladic islands from 3300 to 1000 BC.
35

36
2
THE “DARK AGE” OF
GREECE AND THE EIGHTH-
CENTURY “RENAISSANCE”
(C. 1150–700 BC)
In the middle of the twelfth century BC there were still a few places in Greece
where the palaces survived. But these signs of economic and cultural vitality
soon fade from the archaeological record. By the early eleventh century, the
Greek world had settled into its “Dark Age,” a period of steep decline and slow
recovery that lasted until the eighth century. During those obscure centuries,
new social and political patterns were formed, out of which would emerge, in
the eighth century, a new type of political organization, the city-state (polis).
DECLINE AND RECOVERY
(C. 1150–900 BC)
There were no more kings, officials, scribes, palace staffs, or state armies; gone
was the elaborate redistributive system. Monumental stone buildings were no
longer erected, elaborate frescoes and fine furniture were no longer commis-
sioned, and even the art of writing was lost. Bronze, gold, and other luxury im-
ports dwindled to a trickle, as vital trade links were broken. All across the Greek
world, towns and village were left abandoned, their inhabitants either dead or
gone to other places, some as close as Achaea and Arcadia, some as far away as
Palestine and Cyprus. It is true that movements and dislocations of people can
exaggerate an impression of overall depopulation; yet it is safe to say that in the
two centuries following 1200 Greece emptied out far more than it filled up. By
1000 BC its population was probably the lowest in a thousand years.
For the early twentieth-century historians who coined the phrase “Greek Dark
Age,” the four centuries that lay hidden between the fall of Mycenae and the

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
birth of the city-state were a period of total obscurity coupled with utter poverty
and stagnation. Recent archaeological findings, however, indicate that some re-
gions within Greece recovered much sooner than others and that recovery took
different forms. Areas bordering on the Aegean Sea appear to have suffered a
briefer period of decline and to have bounced back sooner than regions in west-
ern Greece. In fact, at several major centers, including Athens, occupation con-
tinued without interruption; many were reoccupied within a generation or two
after their destruction.
What survived from the world of the thirteenth century into the world of the
eleventh, and what was lost? For those who remained in Greece, life was a lot
simpler than it had been during the palace period. But that does not mean that
Greece lapsed into a primitive state. Farmers continued to farm, growing the
same crops they had always grown; herders tended their flocks as before; women
spun and wove their wool and flax. Potters, metalworkers, and carpenters still
practiced their crafts (though at a lower level of skill and refinement), and the
people kept worshiping their gods and performing religious rituals. In short, the
timeless rhythm and activities of the agricultural year and the farming village re-
mained unchanged, and would remain constant over the following centuries.
Even when the material culture appears to have been at its nadir, important
technological innovations appeared. Around 1050 the combination of several new
techniques and small inventions produced a superior pottery that was well pro-
portioned and finely decorated. A faster potter’s wheel improved the shape of the
vases. For the first time, potters were using a compass, to which several brushes
were attached, to draw perfect arcs, half-circles, and concentric circles. Lines were
drawn with a ruler instead of free-hand. New shapes and designs emerged, en-
hanced by more lustrous glaze achieved by firing at a higher temperature. This
new style, called Protogeometric (c. 1050–900), seems to have originated in Attica
and spread to other regions.
It was also about this time that Greek metal workers mastered the difficult
process of smelting and working iron. Iron weapons and tools were harder than
bronze and kept their edge better. Iron technology was long known in the East,
but the Mycenaeans had not exploited the sources of iron ore available in Greece.
But when the disruption of trade largely cut off access to copper and tin, neces-
sity proved the mother of invention. From 1050 on, small local iron industries
sprang up all across the mainland and the islands. By 950, almost every weapon
and tool found in graves is made of iron, not bronze.
Beginning around 1050 there was an accelerated movement from the Greek
mainland across the Aegean Sea to the Anatolian coast. During this time a num-
ber of settlements were established, among them Miletus (the earliest), Ephesus,
and Colophon, that would become thriving cities. These population shifts created
what the Mycenaeans had not—a large permanent presence in the East—and en-
sured that the Aegean Sea would one day be known as the “Greek Sea.” On the
mainland during this time, some major settlements, like Athens and Corinth,
might have had populations in the low thousands; however, most sites held no
more than a few dozen to a few hundred people.
37

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
38
Figure 2.1a. A Submycenaean vase (c. 1125–1050 BC) from the Kerameikos cemetery in
Athens. Note the barely recognizable octopus, which had been a standard motif on
Minoan-Mycenaean vases.
Figure 2.1b. A Late Protogeometric amphora (c. 950–900 BC) from the same cemetery, with
compass-drawn concentric circles, foreshadowing the Geometric style.
b
Society in the Early Dark Age
With the dissolution of the intricate ties that had bound the outlying settlements
to the palace-complexes and to one another, the former centers and peripheral
villages found themselves largely on their own, politically and economically.
Some think that the Greeks reverted to government by local “big men”—similar
to the leaders who presumably had managed the affairs of villages in the pre-
Mycenaean period, before the consolidation of power by a single chief. A local
“big man” may have presided over the Dark Age village of Nichoria in south-
western Peloponnesus, which was excavated in the 1970s. Originally a large sub-
sidiary town of the kingdom of Pylos, Nichoria was abandoned around 1200, and
came back to life about 1075 as a much smaller village-cluster, with a peak pop-
ulation of about two hundred in the early ninth century BC. Dark Age Nichoria
was fairly prosperous in a humble way. The forty or fifty families dwelt on a

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
ridge overlooking a plain. There was an abundance of good farmland and plenty
of open pasture for animals, notably cattle.
At the center of the ridge top excavators uncovered a large tenth-century
building, consisting of a spacious megaron and a small porch (room 2), which they
identified as the “village chieftain’s house.” A remodeling in the ninth century
added another room at the rear (room 3) and a bigger courtyard in front, enlarg-
ing the house to an impressive 52 feet by 23 feet wide. It is suggested that the
chieftain’s house also functioned as the religious center, and perhaps as a com-
munal storehouse. This was the place where the elders would gather to feast and
talk about local affairs. Although much better constructed than the surrounding
houses, it had the same shape and was made of the same materials; its floor was
packed earth and its walls were of mud brick, supporting a steep thatched roof.
Clearly, the family that lived there enjoyed very high status in Nichoria itself and
in the surrounding countryside. Yet they lived in a style that was not much dif-
ferent from that of their neighbors.
At the opposite end of Greece from Nichoria—at Lefkandi on the island of Eu-
boea—stood a much wealthier settlement that is still yielding up its secrets today.
Like Nichoria, Lefkandi had been a bustling Mycenaean town that revived after
the collapse of the palace system and prospered during the Dark Age. In 1981,
excavators were examining burial grounds in this area when they uncovered the
largest Dark Age building yet found. Dated to about 950 BC, the long narrow
structure (150 by 30 feet) covered more than twice the area of that of any con-
temporary building. But the biggest surprise of all was the discovery of two bur-
ial shafts sunk into the building’s central room.
In one of the shafts lay two pairs of horses, one on top of the other—reminiscent
of the grave offerings given to exceptional warriors during the Late Bronze Age,
centuries earlier. The other compartment held the remains of two humans: a cre-
mated man (the warrior) and an inhumed woman, apparently his wife. The man’s
ashes were well preserved in a large bronze amphora that had been made in
Cyprus about a century before the funeral. Next to it lay an iron sword, a spear-
head, a razor, and also a whetstone for sharpening the weapons: the toolkit of a
fighting man. The horse sacrifices and the costly imports deposited in the couple’s
grave suggest to some scholars that this man had been a wealthy, hereditary chief
with Eastern contacts. Others posit that he belonged to an elite “warrior class.”
The woman whose skeleton was found beside the warrior has aroused at least
as much curiosity as her spouse. Gold-plated coils flanked her head, broad gold
rings decorated her fingers, and her breasts were covered with large disks made
of fine gold foil. Around her neck, the excavators found the gold beads and cen-
tral pendant of an elaborate necklace believed to have been fashioned in the Near
East at least 650 years before the time of the burial. This necklace might have been
a family heirloom, or it might have been purchased from Near Eastern traders
roaming the Aegean Sea. All her adornments reveal that the woman’s social sta-
tus was equal to the man’s. But how can we explain the ivory-handled dagger
that had been positioned beside her head? Was this woman offered as a sacrifice
to the man along with the horses?
39

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
40
Figure 2.2b. Plan of the ninth-century “village chieftain’s house” at Nichoria.
Figure 2.2a. Axonometric reconstruction of the “chief’s house” at Lefkandi, showing the
grave of the basileus of Lefkandi and his consort (c. 950 BC). This is the largest Dark Age
building yet discovered.

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
41
Figure 2.2d. Artist’s conception of an “ordinary” Dark Age house.
Soon after the funeral the whole building was demolished and covered over
with a mound of earth and stones so huge that its construction must have required
the labor of the entire community. Even the function of the building continues to
be a subject of debate: Was it the couple’s house or was it erected to be a mau-
soleum for the chief? In any case, Lefkandi has shown that we cannot presuppose
that Protogeometric Greece was uniformly impoverished and isolated.
REVIVAL (C. 900–750 BC)
Around 900 BC, as the conservative Protogeometric style evolves into the Geo-
metric style (c. 900–700), a new artistic and aesthetic spirit becomes evident. There
is no dramatic break with tradition, and in some regions the old style continues
for some time. Nevertheless, new shapes and new decorative features mark the
Figure 2.2c. Artist’s rendition of Figure 2.2b.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
42
Figure 2.3b. From the same grave, a large terra-cotta chest, surmounted by a lid with five
model granaries, as well as a separate granary model, all attesting to the agricultural
wealth of her family.
Figure 2.3a. Gold jewelry from the cremation grave of a wealthy Athenian woman, c. 850
BC. In addition, she was buried with a number of fine vases, bronze and iron pins, ivory
seals, and a faience necklace.

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
Geometric as a distinctly new period. Circles and semicircles give way to linear
angular motifs, such as the famous “meander pattern” (see Figures 2.5a and b).
Eventually painters would fill up the entire surface of a vase with zones of me-
anders, zigzags, triangles, and crosshatches, alternating them with solid bands
and lines. Ninth-century craftsmen were now producing costly luxury items like
fine gold jewelry, ivory carvings, and bronze vessels, both for domestic con-
sumption and long-distance trade. This development attests to the renewed avail-
ability of raw materials from abroad, including bronze, which now begins to ap-
pear in larger quantities.
Homer and Oral Poetry
An oral poet was a skilled storyteller who sang or chanted in verse before an au-
dience, to the accompaniment of a stringed instrument called the kitharis. Later
Greeks revered Homer, the composer of the Iliad and the Odyssey, as their great-
est poet, although they knew nothing about his life aside from the tradition that
he was blind and from Ionia.
The two poems are generally dated to between the later eighth and early sev-
enth century BC, about the time when writing reappeared in Greece. It is possible
that Homer, an illiterate bard, dictated his long epics to persons who could write.
To us it seems impossible that works of such artistry and length—the Iliad is
around 16,000 lines and the Odyssey 12,000—could have been created without
writing. Yet modern comparative studies of traditional oral poetry have shown
that bards can in fact compose long, complex narratives as they perform.
Homer and other Greek oral poets would have had at their disposal a store of
traditional plots, characters, and themes that they had learned from previous gen-
erations of singers, who in turn had learned them from their elders, and so on
back in time. In retelling the ancient stories that were familiar to their audiences,
poets could also draw on an inherited stock of “formulas” (fixed phrases, lines,
and blocks of text), which they had memorized and could vary as the occasion
demanded. Over a lifetime of private rehearsals, “writing” and “rewriting” the
poetry in his mind, a skilled poet like Homer would have crafted and perfected
the poems that bore his personal signature. At the same time, the traditional nar-
rative framework was flexible enough to permit the changing and varied con-
cerns of his audiences to be incorporated into the bard’s performances; each per-
formance would be fresh and “updated.” When the epics were finally committed
to writing—probably within the poet’s lifetime—they were fossilized, so to speak,
and thus lost this ability to be continuously recreated, yet they gained the ad-
vantage of some degree of protection from further modification.
The epics are set in the age of heroes, which encompass a generation or two
before, and one generation after, the legendary Trojan War. The tale of the Tro-
jan War is a classically simple folk saga. Paris, the son of King Priam of Troy, se-
duced and brought back to Troy the beautiful Helen, the wife of Menelaus, ruler
of the Spartans. To avenge the insult, Menelaus and his brother, Agamemnon,
wanax of Mycenae, gathered a huge army of Achaean warriors. The Achaeans
43

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
sailed to Troy, destroyed the city after a ten-year siege, and then dispersed, each
contingent to its own homeland.
Whether or not a Trojan War actually occurred will probably never be known.
For the Greeks, however, it was the pivotal event of their early history. Yet the
epics, though set in this distant past, are not really about history nor are they
about the Trojan War. History and war are the background for the enactment of
social dramas, whose protagonists are caught up in the kinds of dilemmas that
every generation experiences and must deal with.
The nagging question for historians is this: Do the epics tell us anything about
actual Greek society, whether of Homer’s own day (late eighth or perhaps early
seventh century) or of some earlier date? Or are they pure fictions, which have
only symbolic meaning? The answer, of course, is somewhere in the middle. The
Homeric world was a past world that was in every way bigger, better, and more
fantastic than the environment of the contemporary audiences. For instance, Hec-
tor, the Trojan leader, picks up a stone to use as a weapon, “which two men, the
best in the land, could not easily lift from the ground onto a wagon, men such as
mortals are today” (Iliad 12.445–449). Such a scene serves the purpose of “epic
distancing,” which gives the aura of a long-ago heroic society. The poet deliber-
ately leaves out innovations that were known to him, such as the reintroduction
of writing. Nevertheless, aspects of that imaginary world—its interests, passions,
ideologies, and to some degree its social institutions—must have conformed to
audience’s real-life experiences. The norms and values of Homeric society are in-
ternally consistent and coherent enough to be given a place in the not-so-long-
ago past, which we may assign roughly to the end of the Greek Dark Age.
HOMERIC SOCIETY
Homer’s Greece is divided geographically into independent regions of various
sizes, each one constituting a de¯mos, a word that denotes both the territory itself
and the “people” who inhabit it. A typical demos would contain several settle-
ments—towns and villages—along with their adjoining farmlands and pastures.
For example, in the catalogue of the contingents that make up the Greek army at
Troy there is this entry for the large region of Aetolia.
Thoas, son of Andraemon led the Aetolians,
those who dwelled in Pleuron and Olenos and Pylene
and Chalcis by-the-sea, and rocky Calydon, . . . .
and with him followed forty black ships.
(Iliad 2.638–644)
The official title borne by warrior-leaders like Thoas is basileus. Interestingly, the
word occurs in the Linear B tablets (in the form qa-si-re-u) where it denotes a mi-
nor official, apparently a sort of mayor or headman of a town or village within a
Mycenaean kingdom. In Greek, basileus is usually translated as “king.” This is
44

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
somewhat misleading, however, for clearly basileis (plural) in the Iliad and the
Odyssey are not kings in the sense of monarchs who hold absolute sway over their
subjects. A Homeric basileus more closely approximates a “chief,” the word that
anthropologists use to describe a leader with great authority and stature, yet lim-
ited in his power to coerce others into obeying him.
A good-sized demos will often contain other chiefs, lower in rank, but called
by the same title of basileus. When Odysseus enters the magnificent house of Al-
cinous, ruler of the island of Scheria, he finds the basileus and his wife Arete, the
basileia, entertaining the other basileis. In Alcinous’ own words,
Twelve renowned basileis hold sway as leaders
in the demos, and I myself am the thirteenth.
(Odyssey 8.390–391)
There is no question that Alcinous is supreme among them—the “paramount
chief”—yet he must also take counsel with them, for they are not merely subor-
dinates, but men of power in their own local districts. It is against this back-
ground of loosely centralized territorial units that we may envisage social life in
the Homeric epics.
Community and Household
Social and economic life at the end of the ninth century was centered in the local
communities, most of which were still quite small. The Greeks did not live in iso-
lated farmsteads, but clustered together in small settlements. Farmers would
walk out each morning to their plots and return to the village at dusk. Commu-
nities were closely knit through generations of intermarrying with other families
within the village and in other villages of the same demos. Law was customary
law; public disapproval would have sufficed to deter antisocial behavior. Many
disputes could be resolved by the local chief and the simple court of the village
elders. Homicide, interestingly, was mostly a private matter, to be settled by the
families involved, either through material compensation or the exile of the of-
fender. The alternative would be a continuing blood feud, which, if allowed,
would disrupt communal solidarity.
The separate settlements were likewise bound together to ensure the survival
of the territorial demos. Individual villages within the demos might quarrel with
one another but they united against threat from outside. Inside the boundaries of
the demos all who shared the demos-name—the “Ithacans,” or the “Megari-
ans”—could live and move safely. Once outside the homeland one was “in the
demos of others,” in an alien country, so to speak, where the protection of tribal
ties ended, and one was a stranger, without rights. In Homer, when a stranger
appears in an alien demos he is asked to identify himself by naming his “demos
and polis.” By polis, the questioner means the main town of the demos, the most
populous settlement, the place where the paramount basileus lived, and where
the assembly of the demos met.
45

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
From Homer we may infer that the smallest unit of Dark Age society was the
household (oikos). The oikos was the center of a person’s existence; and every
member was preoccupied with its preservation, its economic well-being, and so-
cial standing. The word oikos signified not only the house itself but also the fam-
ily, the land, livestock, and all other property and goods, including slaves. Greek
society was patrilineal and patriarchal. The father was supreme in the household
by custom and later by law. Descent was through the father, and on his death the
property was divided equally among his sons. Although daughters did not in-
herit directly they received a share of their parents’ wealth as a dowry. Because
daughters in Homer are prized, suitors customarily give hedna (wooing gifts) to
the bride’s father as part of the marriage contract. The new bride took up resi-
dence in the house of her husband; thus their children belonged to the husband’s
oikos, not to hers.
Among chieftain families—which are the only ones described in Homer—mar-
ried sons continue to reside in the paternal oikos with their wives and children.
Not infrequently, though, the custom is reversed. A powerful chief brings his
daughter’s new husband into his own household instead. In this way, he gets to
keep his daughter and acquires a new man to fight and work for the oikos. An-
other means of increasing the oikos is for the father to beget additional children
by slave women. But that could cause friction in the family. Odysseus’ father did
not sleep with a newly bought slave woman and so “avoided his wife’s anger.”
Although the male children of slaves are inferior to the legitimate sons in respect
to inheritance rights, they are otherwise full members of the family and part of
its fighting force and workforce. Illegitimate daughters seem to have the same
status as their legitimate half-sisters.
All members of a basileus’ oikos do a share of the work. Odysseus, Homer tells
us, built a bedroom and bed for him and his wife Penelope all by “himself and
no one else.” The sons of basileis tend the flocks and herds, the main wealth of
the family. Homeric wives work alongside the women slaves in the tasks of spin-
ning and weaving, while young daughters do other tasks, such as fetching water
from the communal fountain, or washing clothes by the river. Most of the labor
of a wealthy household, however, was provided by female and male slaves (ei-
ther bought or captured), and by the¯tes (sing. the¯s), poor free men who worked
as hired hands.
The main economic resource for each of the families in a village or town was
its ancestral plot of farmland called a kle¯ros (literally an “allotment”). Without a
kleros a man could not marry. A lotless man (akle¯ros) had two options: He could
eke out a precarious existence on a poor patch of unclaimed marginal land, or
worse, hire on as a thes. The latter was a galling life, not only because it was hard
work for very little pay (essentially his keep), but also because working for an-
other man’s family was felt to be an indignity.
The economies of ordinary and elite households in the Dark Age differed pri-
marily in scale. An ordinary farmer would probably have owned a yoke of oxen
for plowing, and perhaps a mule. No doubt he pastured enough sheep and goats
for the family’s consumption of wool, cheese, and meat. The rich man had more
46

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
of everything, particularly animals, but also more farmland and workers. Even
with many more mouths to feed, a wealthy oikos produced a large surplus, while
the average family, if it was a good year, would have had just a little extra to
spend on its wish list, another ox, for example, or a pair of gold earrings. A
wealthy oikos, though, could exchange its surplus production of woolen goods
and leather for slaves, metal, and expensive ornaments of the sort that increas-
ingly show up in the ninth-century graves. By this time, we observe such signs
of increasing stratification in more and more places. In the ninth century socioe-
conomic divisions into an elite group and a commoner mass become quite clear.
Chiefs and People
In Homer, the office and title of basileus passes from father to son as in chiefdom
societies everywhere. But inheritance alone is not enough to secure the title. In
accordance with the aristocratic ethos that permeates the poems, a basileus must
be competent to fulfill his role as leader of the people in war and peace. He
should be both a good warrior and a persuasive speaker. When Peleus, basileus
of the Myrmidons, sends his son Achilles off to the Trojan War, his advice is, “Be
both a speaker of words and a doer of deeds.” Above all, it is the deeds, “the
works of war,” that make a leader. In Homer, a chief’s status is measured by how
many warriors follow him, and few will go fight with a leader who is not a good
warrior.
In Homer’s world, raiding is a way of life. Any chief may raise his own fol-
lowing of hetairoi (“companions”) and go on raids against the villages of another
demos, either to even the score in some ongoing quarrel, or just to steal or plun-
der their livestock, valuables, and women.
In recruiting men for a raid, a warlord draws on his large surplus of animals to
provide them feasts, thereby showing himself to be a generous leader. Odysseus,
for example, describes how he outfitted ships and gathered a following,
and for six days my trusty companions (hetairoi)
feasted, and I gave them many animal victims
both to sacrifice to the gods and to make a feast for themselves,
and on the seventh we got on board and set sail . . .
(Odyssey 14.247–252)
Going on a raid tests manliness and brings honor and glory. Whether on a raid
or in a war, the basileus is the one most severely tested, for he is literally the
leader, stationing himself “among the front-fighters.” Because the leader risks his
life fighting in the thick of battle, his people are obligated to repay him with hon-
ors and gifts.
Reciprocity—mutual and fair exchange—governs all social relationships in the
Homeric world. Accordingly, fairness rules the distribution of the spoils of war.
Following a raid, the booty is gathered together. First the chief takes his share,
47

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
including something extra as his special “prize”; only then is the rest given to the
men “to divide up, so that no one may go cheated of an equal share.”
A leader who keeps more than his due risks losing the respect of his follow-
ers. He cannot afford not to appear generous and openhanded. Similarly, in their
relations with one another, chiefs constantly exchange gifts and feasts. In this
way basileis show off their wealth, cement alliances, win new friends, and collect
obligations that will have to be paid back later.
Despite the authority that comes with his status, a basileus has limited ability
to coerce others to do his bidding. He is a chief, not a king. Once, when Odysseus’
followers decide to do exactly the opposite of what he has ordered them, he re-
sponds that as “one man alone” he must abide by the will of the many.
In a society in which performance is more important than descent, a weak suc-
cessor will be challenged by rivals eager to replace him as head chief. That is the
situation confronting Odysseus’ son Telemachus in his father’s twenty-year-long
absence from Ithaca. Telemachus is barely twenty years old, with no experience
of leadership, and he has only a few supporters, since his father’s hetairoi have
gone to Troy with him. Meanwhile, a group of young chiefs and sons of chiefs
have permanently camped out in his courtyard, feasting on his livestock, seduc-
ing the slave girls, and wooing his mother, Penelope, now presumed a widow.
The suitors assume that the one who succeeds in marrying Penelope will take
over as basileus, even though they admit that the office belongs to Telemachus
by his “paternal birthright.” In the end, Odysseus returns, kills the suitors, and
assumes his rightful place as the basileus of Ithaca and the nearby islands. In
most instances, however, weakened ruling dynasties would not have fared as
well as the house and lineage of Odysseus.
Government and Diplomacy
Governmental institutions in Homeric society were few and simple. A council,
the boule¯, made up of chiefs and other influential men, met in the great hall
(megaron) of the ruling chief to feast and to discuss policy for the demos. The
leader has the decisive voice, but usually heeds the advice and counsel of the “el-
ders,” as the boule-members were called (though many were actually younger
men). Their deliberations were presented to an assembly of the people, held out-
doors in the agora or “place of gathering.” The attendees were all the men of fight-
ing age and older. Women did not attend. In the Homeric assembly, only men of
high rank bring up a matter for discussion, and although it is permissible for any
member of the demos to respond, only rarely does an ordinary man step out of
the mass to speak out. Rather, the demos makes its will known collectively, in a
chorus of shouting or muttering, or by total silence. The council and the assem-
bly would remain the essential organs of government in the later city-states.
Besides being the military and political leader, the top basileus played a reli-
gious role in the life of the community. He was not a priest, nor did he claim to
have prophetic powers. But his position was divinely sanctioned; Homer firmly
emphasizes that Zeus upholds the ruling authority of the office of basileus. When
48

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
the basileus prayed to the gods at public sacrifices, he was the spokesman for the
people, similar to a father sacrificing on behalf of his family.
Foreign relations among epic heroes are often conducted personally through
the institution of xenia (“guest-friendship”). Appearing first in Homer, xenia oc-
curs frequently in Greek authors from all periods of antiquity. Xenia was a mu-
tual bond of friendship and trust between individuals who belonged to separate
de¯moi (plural), often very far apart. Xenoi (“guest-friends”) would provide each
other entertainment, lodging, and valuable parting-gifts whenever they received
one another into their demoi and homes. But xenia was more than just hospital-
ity; its duties extended to protection, diplomatic aid, and even intervention to
save a guest-friend’s life. In some ways, the obligations of xenia are more like
those of kinship than friendship. Once the bond was established, it was assumed
to be perpetual, and the relationship was passed down from generation to gen-
eration through the male line.
In the Iliad, Diomedes, a Greek, and Glaucus, a Lycian ally of the Trojans, en-
counter one another in battle. Hostility, however, turns into amity when Diomedes
recalls to Glaucus that his grandfather Oeneus had hosted Glaucus’ grandfather
Bellerophon for twenty days, and that to cement the xenia-bond Oeneus gave a
scarlet belt, and Bellerophon a two-handled golden cup. Now, two generations
later, Diomedes proposes that they renew the old ties, saying “Let us exchange
armor with each other so that these men [i.e., the Greeks and Trojans] may know
that we declare that we are ancestral guest-friends” (Iliad 6.231–232).
Social Values and Ethics
The code of behavior followed by Homeric males is typical of warrior societies.
A man is called “good” (agathos) when he exhibits bravery and skill in fighting
and athletic contests. He is “bad” (kakos) if he is a coward or useless in battle. A
“good man” should honor the gods, keep promises and oaths, and be loyal to
friends and fellow warriors. He should exhibit self-control, be hospitable, and re-
spect women and elders. Pity should be shown to suppliant strangers and beg-
gars, who are sacred to Zeus. But these gentler qualities, though they are desir-
able, are not required; a man may be merciless and cruel and still be agathos.
A warrior society must breed into its future warriors a love of the grim “works
of Ares.” Thus Hector, the leader of the Trojans, prays to the gods that his infant
son may grow up to be a better warrior than his father and “bring back the
bloody spoils of a dead enemy and make his mother’s heart glad” (Iliad 6.479–481).
Likewise, when Homer’s “good men” capture an enemy village, they are apt to
slaughter the male survivors, even including children, and rape and enslave the
women and girls.
Being good at slaughtering and pillaging brings honor and glory, as well as
wealth, and so warriors compete with one another in the art of killing. The pur-
pose of this excessive striving is to enhance and preserve one’s time¯, one’s value
and worth, respect and honor. The spirit of competition permeates every facet of
life and is not bounded by class or gender. The highest good is to win and be
49

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
called “best” (aristos), whether in spear-throwing, running, playing ball, or chariot-
racing; in speaking or in displays of cunning; or in weaving or crafting pots. A
poor farmer is roused to work hard when he sees his neighbor getting rich, says
Hesiod (c. 700) and “potter resents potter and carpenter resents carpenter, and
beggar is jealous of beggar and singer of singer” (Works and Days 21–26).
Elite males especially insist that their value be recognized publicly, whether by
a seat of honor at a feast, or a choice piece of the booty. Not to be honored when
honor is due, or worse, to be dishonored, are unbearable insults. In the Iliad, when
Agamemnon takes back Achilles’ “prize of honor,” the captive girl Briseis, Achilles
is so keenly stung by the assault against his worth that he refuses to fight.
It is more difficult to access the feelings of Homeric women, because their be-
havior and motives are revealed to us through a male lens. What the poems do
accurately describe is a male-dominated society in which women’s roles and the
range of behaviors deemed socially acceptable are constructed for them by men.
Needless to say, their assigned roles as housewives and mothers dictated a dif-
ferent set of expectations. Like men, women also compete, though only within
the few arenas of excellence allowed them; for example, this one or that one, “sur-
passed her age-mates in beauty and work [e.g., weaving] and intelligence.” They
are expected to act modestly in public and in the company of men, and above all
to be chaste. Although males are permitted to have concubines, adulterous fe-
males bring great disgrace and dishonor upon themselves and their families.
Document 2.1. Andromache mourns over the body of her husband Hector, slain
by Achilles. Her lament centers on the fate of the helpless women and children.
White-armed Andromache led the lamentation
As she cradled the head of her man-slaying Hector:
“You have died young, husband, and left me
A widow in the halls. Our son is still an infant,
Doomed when we bore him. I do not think
He will ever reach manhood. No, this city
Will topple and fall first. You were its savior,
And now you are lost. All the solemn wives
And children you guarded will go off soon
In the hollow ships, and I will go with them.
And you, my son, you will either come with me
And do menial work for a cruel master,
Or some Greek will lead you by the hand
And throw you from the tower, a hideous death,
Angry because Hector killed his brother,
Or his father, or son.
Iliad 24.723–737; translated by Stanley Lombardo, Homer Iliad.
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1997, pp. 489–490.
50

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
Despite the severe limitations placed on them by male society, Homeric women
are included in the public space. They go freely about the village and country-
side, participate in festive and religious events, and serve as priestesses. Nor are
they without power. Strong women abound in Homer. Clytemnestra puts a dag-
ger through her husband Agamemnon; Arete, the wife of the Phaeacian basileus,
shares some of his authority; and Penelope is as cunning and resourceful as her
husband, Odysseus. Nevertheless, in the Dark Age, as in later Greece, women
from birth to death were dependent on and under the control of males: fathers
and brothers, and then their husbands and grown sons. However much Greek
women may have contributed to public opinion, they possessed no political
rights of their own.
Gods and Mortals
By the eighth century, the Greek pantheon had attained much the same form it
was to have throughout the rest of pagan antiquity. According to the fifth-century
historian Herodotus, Homer and Hesiod
are the ones who created a theogony for the Greeks. They gave names to the
gods, decided what their special skills were and what honors they should be
given, and described their appearance.
(The Histories 3.38; Blanco 1998)
Hesiod’s Theogony gives a genealogical “history” of the gods. From ancient
Mesopotamian narratives Hesiod derives the idea that creation was essentially
the separation of an originally undifferentiated mass into its component forces,
conceived as deities. This division provoked a series of generational wars among
the primordial gods, until the last generation gained control and brought order
to the universe.
In the Greek version, Uranus (Sky) is defeated by his son Cronus with the help
of his mother Gaia (Earth). Cronus in turn is overthrown by the third generation
of gods, after a ten-year war that shook the universe to its foundations. Their
leader, Zeus, the youngest child, would rule forever as the unchallenged patri-
arch of gods and humans, wielding his lightning bolt from cloud-covered Mount
Olympus. After their victory, Homer tells us, the brothers divided up the cosmos
by lottery, Zeus receiving rule of the sky, Poseidon the sea, and Hades the un-
derworld, where the souls of humans go when they die. Earth is assigned to no
particular god, but forever remains the charge of them all, especially of Demeter,
the nourisher of the crops.
Unlike in Genesis, the Olympian gods had no hand in creating the physical
world, but as descendants of mother Earth and father Sky, were part of it, and they
were identified with the particular spheres of nature that they controlled. So, for
example, one could say “Zeus rains,” or “Demeter smiles.” Likewise, Ares, the
god of war, is the spirit of blood lust that enters a warrior and makes him eager
to kill, and Aphrodite, the goddess of love, is the irresistible force of sexual desire.
51

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
As in the Near East, the Greeks anthropomorphized their gods. Greek gods
look, think, and act like humans. Zeus and Hera, for example, are notorious for
their marital bickering. At one family dinner on Olympus, Zeus accuses Hera of
being a suspicious and meddlesome wife, and the other gods become so troubled
that the couple’s son Hephaestus is forced to intervene, begging his mother to hu-
mor his father (Iliad 1.536–604).
What sets the gods unbridgeably apart from humans is that they are immortal,
ageless, and not subject to disease, and they have the power to manipulate the
mortal world. In Homer, humans are the playthings of the gods, who vie with one
another to aid their own favorites and to thwart those whom other gods favor.
Did the Greeks believe in their myths? At any given time, many different and
often contradictory local versions of the traditional stories would be in circula-
tion around the Greek world. Thus no one version could be taken as literal truth.
The myths that exaggerated the gods’ “human” flaws were especially entertain-
ing. Yet these same Olympians—as well as countless lesser divinities like nymphs,
dryads, and rivers—inspired awe and even dread because of their power to do
humans good or harm. Every community had its own protecting god or gods,
and the people spared no expense or effort to honor and placate them with elab-
orate shrines, precious gifts, and animal sacrifices.
In Homer, the gods insist on their proper honors, but not much else. Acts that
are condemned as sins by many religions, such as homicide, stealing, or adultery,
do not arouse the wrath of the Homeric gods. They do, however, condemn oath-
breaking and mistreating strangers, suppliants, and beggars. In both Homer and
Hesiod, humans look to Zeus to keep order and justice in the community at large.
Thus, Zeus is said to send severe wind and rain storms against those “who make
crooked decrees, using force, in the assembly, and drive out justice, heedless of
watchfulness of the gods” (Iliad 16.384–388).
In many religions, earthly sorrow and suffering are eased by the promise of a
paradise after death for those who have lived righteously. Homer’s Greeks did
not have this consolation: Existence in any meaningful sense ended when the soul
(psyche¯) left the body. Most souls carry on a shadowy afterlife in Hades’ realm.
For a few sorry souls, however—primarily those who had tried to deceive the
gods or dared to rival them—Hades was a place of eternal punishment. A hand-
ful of fortunate souls were assigned to the Elysian Fields—a place of lush mead-
ows and cool waters in a remote corner of the world—“where life is easiest for
men.” They were rewarded not because they had led moral lives, or for their
achievements, but because they had divine family connections. In the Odyssey,
the sea-god Proteus prophesizes to Menelaus: “The immortal gods will send you
to the Elysian Fields . . . because you have Helen and you are the son-in-law of
Zeus” (Odyssey 4.563–569).
The prayers, rituals, and sacred objects associated with the cult of a god were
in the care of priests and priestesses. While there existed no priestly caste as in
the Near East and Egypt, Homeric priests and priestesses were not ordinary
members of the community, but were drawn from the noble families. Their offi-
cial duties generally took up very little time, and required little in the way of
preparation and training.
52

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
THE END OF THE DARK AGE
For many parts of Greece, the eighth century was a period of population growth,
technological innovations, and increasing political centralization. The eighth cen-
tury was dubbed by modern historians the “Greek Renaissance” because it ap-
peared to be a revival of the glories of the Mycenaean Age. During this period
trade links multiplied, communication with the East intensified, writing was rein-
troduced into Greece, and prosperous new communities were established in the
West. As the Mediterranean world became increasingly more interlinked, even
the more isolated areas of Greece were drawn into networks of cultural exchange.
People of neighboring areas were meeting together more regularly to celebrate
religious rituals, which included competitions among athletes and bards. Com-
munities also vied with one another in the production of luxury items, such as
finely decorated pottery and bronze tripods, and in building monumental tem-
ples. Still, we should not view the eighth century as a radical break from the past,
but rather as an acceleration of trends visible already in the tenth century.
The Rise of a Landowning Aristocracy
Population growth put pressure on the land. Although pasture land was nomi-
nally open to all, in reality the elite families had long before appropriated the best
for themselves, in particular the lush grassy meadows where they grazed their
large herds of cattle and horses. They converted more and more of this fertile soil
to growing grain and other crops, a much more productive use of land. In this
way, the already land-rich oikoi (households) were able to acquire more arable
land until, in the course of a few generations, they came to own a dispropor-
tionate amount of the total land. No doubt prior occupancy enabled some oikoi
to claim some legal right to plow and plant the traditional pasturelands, but quite
possibly chicanery and even use of force were involved in this land grab. In any
case, by the early seventh century the elite minority had transformed themselves
into an aristocracy of large landowners, while the majority continued to live off
small-to-medium farm plots and a few animals.
We should, however, be careful to put scarcity of land into perspective. Nowhere
in eighth-century Greece did the population approach the carrying capacity of the
land. In fact, the countryside continued to be filled in throughout the seventh and
into the sixth century. The problem was not that there was no land, but rather that
the most productive land was concentrated in the hands of a minority of the fam-
ilies. Sons whose inherited share of their paternal kleros was insufficient for their
growing families would be compelled to seek marginal land in the outskirts of the
demos (where they had to work harder for less return). For the ambitious, there
was another solution to the problem of land hunger: relocation abroad.
Colonization and the Growth of Trade
In the second half of the eighth century substantial numbers of people left Greece
to establish new farming communities in southern Italy and Sicily. These colonizers
53

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
followed the trail blazed by earlier adventurers, who sailed west, not to farm but to
trade. Overseas trade with foreigners, which had been increasing gradually since the
tenth century, expanded considerably in the eighth. Shortly before 800, Greeks from
Euboea joined the international trading post of Al Mina in northern Syria, and not
long after that other Euboeans founded a trading colony at Pithecusae in southern
Italy. Once again, Greek ships in significant numbers were plying the trade routes
across the Mediterranean, and were even competing with the Phoenicians, who had
long been the leading sea merchants in the Mediterranean. The new Greek colonies
that sprang up in the West offered the settlers not only a good-sized kleros on good
soil but also opportunities to trade their own products and those of old Greece for
raw materials, especially metal, with the inhabitants of southern Europe.
Colonization and the expansion of trade and commerce had broad economic
effects throughout the towns and villages of the Greek world. There was more
work for craftsmen, sailors, shipbuilders and outfitters, and haulers. Even small
farmers took advantage of the economic opportunities offered by this expanded
world. Hesiod (c. 700 BC) takes it for granted that a farmer will put part of his
surplus production in a boat and sail a fair distance for “profit.” The big land-
holders benefited most, however, because they could produce large surpluses for
the market and could subsidize the costs and bear the losses of long sea voyages.
The Alphabet and Writing
The increased contacts with the East led to the most significant cultural achieve-
ment of the late Dark Age, the Greek alphabet. Somewhere—most likely in the
eastern Mediterranean—Greeks borrowed letters from the Phoenician alphabet,
which consisted primarily of signs for consonants. They adapted certain of the
Phoenician characters to represent the sounds of the Greek consonants, and
changed the value of other consonant signs, making them into vowels. Thus was
born an alphabet that was largely phonetic. It is generally believed that this oc-
curred around 800 BC. To judge from the evidence, which is very meager, it ap-
pears that one of the earliest uses for the alphabet was to write down verses of
poetry. Two of the earliest examples of connected Greek words are, in fact, bits
of epic-like verse scratched on vases dated to the second half of the eighth cen-
tury. While these graffiti do show that the Homeric epics could have been writ-
ten down at least by the later eighth century, they do not prove, as some propose,
that the alphabet was devised in order to preserve orally composed poems in
written form. On the other hand, supporters of this theory point out that the in-
vention of signs for vowels was essential to reproduce in writing the metrical
rhythms of Greek poetry. Another early function of writing was to record own-
ership of personal property and, probably not much later, to keep commercial ac-
counts. Whatever the initial motive, once writing was established it was put to
many different uses. The earliest specimen of a civic use of writing is a stone in-
scription of laws from Dreros in Crete, carved around 650.
Writing spread quickly throughout the Greek-speaking world, though not as
one standard alphabet, but rather as numerous local scripts, with variations in
54

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
55
Figure 2.4a. Examples of graffiti on eighth-
century vases. The readable portion of in-
scription (a) says: “He who, of all the
dancers, now dances most gracefully” [? will
win this pot?]. Inscription (b) identifies the
owner: “I am the cup of Qoraqos.” Inscrip-
tion (c) reads: “I am the drinking cup of
Nestor, good to drink from. Whoever drinks
this cup, immediately the desire will seize
him of beautiful-crowned Aphrodite.”
Figure 2.4b. Late Geometric jug, c. 740 BC,
from Athens, on which graffito (a) was in-
scribed.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
the forms and numbers of characters and in the sounds they represented. The al-
phabetical script of about twenty-five letters was a huge advance over the cum-
bersome Linear B syllabic system of eighty-seven signs. Because most of the al-
phabetical characters stood for a single spoken sound, it was fairly easy to learn
to read and even to write Greek. And yet, although the numbers of people who
could read and write increased over time, mass literacy was never achieved in
ancient Greece. Indeed, through the eighth and most of the seventh century,
Greece was almost as completely oral-aural as it had been in the Dark Age. Even
in the Classical and Hellenistic periods, when literacy was most widespread,
most information passed from mouth to ear.
Art and Architecture
A new direction in artistic representation becomes apparent in the pottery of the
Late Geometric period (c. 750–700). Except for an occasional horse or a bird, or,
even rarer, a human figure, Greek vases had been essentially without images
from the eleventh to the eighth century, when suddenly depictions of animals
and humans became frequent. Then, around mid-century artists began to paint
action scenes, such as battles, shipwrecks, funerals, and chariot processions. On
massive Late Geometric amphorae from Athens that were commissioned as fu-
neral monuments for the wealthy, these pictorial narratives occupy a prominent
position among the abstract geometric motifs. Eventually the geometric designs
become mere decorative frames for the figure scenes. Vase painters add new pic-
torial elements, and the figures become increasingly more naturalistic. Other me-
dia, such as small bronze sculptures and engraved metalwork, also feature dy-
namic action. Distinct regional and local styles emerged, as craftsmen
experimented with, adapted, and discarded homegrown and imported trends
and techniques. Around 720 BC, Greek art begins to feature a variety of orna-
mental motifs such as rosettes, griffins, and sirens, that are associated with the
“orientalizing style.” This phase, during which Greeks deliberately used elements
of Near Eastern and Egyptian art, sculpture, and architecture, would continue for
the next hundred years or so.
The monumental temple, the “signature” Greek architectural form, also
emerged in the eighth century. The first temples were small one-room structures
that resembled ordinary houses. Early in the century the people of the island of
56
Facing page
Figure 2.5a. Middle Geometric krater from Athens (c. 800 BC) with meander, zigzag, and
other geometric patterns. Note the flanking horses, which enliven the severe geometric
decoration, and the jug-shaped knob on the lid.
Figure 2.5b. Large Late Geometric grave amphora (c. 750 BC) from the Dipylon cemetery
at Athens.
Figure 2.5c. Detail from the same vase, showing the dead woman lying on her funeral bier
surrounded by mourners.

a
b
c
57

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Samos built a sanctuary for Hera that was a hundred feet long. A little later, ar-
chitects added a wooden colonnade or peristyle around it, and the Greek temple
as we know it was born. By 700, there were dozens of them, built along similar
lines, in all parts of the Greek world. Plainly, people wanted and were able to ex-
pend their wealth and labor on projects that brought prestige to the whole com-
munity. In Athens at this time, votive offerings placed in the temples of the
gods—most notably bronze tripods and cauldrons, figurines, and bronze dress
pins—greatly exceed the amount of metal objects found in upper-class burials. In
this way the elite could give to the community and flaunt their wealth at the same
time—a pattern that was to hold throughout the life of the Greek city-state.
Thick brick and stone defensive walls, another architectural feature, first ap-
pear in Ionia and the Aegean islands. Smyrna in Anatolia had an impressive cir-
cuit wall by around 850, and a number of Cycladic island sites were also fortified
in the ninth century. On the mainland, however, the earliest circuit walls date to
the later eighth century. The construction of massive defensive walls may mean
that actual warfare between communities, as opposed to raiding expeditions, was
growing more frequent; they also attest to the growing wealth and communal
pride of the communities.
Panhellenism and the Heroic Revival
The eighth century also saw the rise of religious sanctuaries and festivals that
were “Panhellenic” (pan = “all”), attracting worshippers from all over the Greek
58
Figure 2.6. A small bronze stat-
uette from the mid-eighth cen-
tury BC, depicting a hero and a
centaur fighting; the preserved
part of the man’s weapon has
pierced the centaur’s side.

The “Dark Age” of Greece and the Eighth-Century “Renaissance”
world. The most famous of the early shrines were those of Zeus and Hera at
Olympia in western Peloponnesus, of Apollo and Artemis at Delos, and the ora-
cles (places of divine prophecy) of Zeus at Dodona and of Apollo at Delphi. Tra-
dition has it that in 776 BC, athletic contests became part of the festival of Zeus at
Olympia. Held every four years, the Olympian games at first attracted contes-
tants and visitors only from the vicinity, but by century’s end their fame had
spread widely, and by the sixth century contestants and spectators would be
drawn from all over the Greek world. Panhellenic festivals fostered a sense of
Greek identity, reinforcing a feeling that Greeks everywhere shared a common
heritage, language, and religion.
The eighth century also saw a new interest in the Bronze Age “ancestors.”
Quite suddenly, around 750, numerous ancient tombs (mostly Mycenaean) which
had been largely ignored throughout the Dark Age began to receive votive of-
ferings, and their anonymous inhabitants were now worshiped as “heroes.”
Some cult heroes were identified with legendary figures and honored not at
graves, but at special shrines set up to them, such as the precincts sacred to
Agamemnon at Mycenae and to Menelaus and Helen near Sparta. The reasons
for the surge of hero cults at this time are not well understood. Like gods, they
were honored with animal sacrifices and other offerings.
We have already seen that in the tenth century at Lefkandi a wealthy man was
given a lavish warrior’s burial. This practice seems to have been rare throughout
the Dark Age until the mid-eighth century, when in some parts of Greece war-
rior burials become quite common. Like the warrior of Lefkandi, the corpse was
cremated and the bones put in an urn; weapons were placed in the grave, and
occasionally sacrificed horses. Also around this time vases depicting events from
the heroic age begin to turn up in the graves. These practices suggest that the
leading families were proclaiming descent from the heroes of old.
The archaeological discoveries of the past thirty years and new interpretive tech-
niques have brought a fresh evaluation of the period called the “Dark Age.” We
know now that this was not a time of inertia and stagnation as was once thought.
Because it was continually fed by new cultural streams, Greece remained vital
and vibrant throughout the eleventh, tenth, and ninth centuries. It appears now
that the institutions and practices of the city-state society that was to follow were
slowly taking shape in the diverse communities of the Dark Age. The rise of the
city-states (poleis) and their turbulent early history are the subjects of the next
chapter.
TRANSLATION
Blanco, Walter. 1998. The Histories, from Herodotus: The Histories, Walter Blanco and Jen-
nifer Roberts, eds. New York: W.W. Norton.
59

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
SUGGESTED READINGS
Burkert, Walter. 1985. Greek Religion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. A classic
history of ancient Greek religion from the Minoan-Mycenaean Age to the Hellenis-
tic period.
Edwards, Mark W. 1987. Homer, Poet of the Iliad. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins
University Press. A reliable, up-to-date general treatment of Homeric poetry and the
epic style, with commentaries on selected books of the Iliad.
Finley, Moses I. 1978. The World of Odysseus. 2nd ed. New York: Viking Press. First pub-
lished in 1954, this book revolutionized the study of Dark Age society and institu-
tions.
Griffin, Jasper. 1980. Homer on Life and Death. New York: Oxford University Press. An in-
sightful literary exploration of the Homeric characterization of the epic hero.
Hurwit, Jeffrey M. 1985. The Art and Culture of Early Greece, 1100–480 B.C. Ithaca, NY: Cor-
nell Univerity Press, chaps. 1–3. A keen analysis of Dark Age art in relation to the
changing social scene. Chapters 4 to 6 are also recommended reading for art and cul-
ture in the Archaic period.
Morris, Ian and Barry Powell, eds. 1997. A New Companion to Homer. Leiden: Brill. A valu-
able collection of thirty new articles, covering all areas of Homeric studies, literary
and historical, written by specialists for a nonspecialist audience.
Snodgrass, A. M. 1971 (reprinted in 2000, with new Foreword). The Dark Age of Greece: An
Archaeological Survey of the Eleventh to the Eighth Centuries. Edinburgh: University of
Edinburgh Press. Remains the standard treatment of the archaeological evidence for
the whole of the Dark Age.
Thomas, Carol G. and Craig Conant. 1999. Citadel to City-State: The Transformation of Greece,
1200–700 B.C.E. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. Written
with the general reader in mind, this book traces the processes of change that led
from the destruction of Bronze Age civilization to the emergence of the city-states.
Each chapter is devoted to a specific site, among which are Nichoria and Lefkandi.
60

61
3
ARCHAIC GREECE
(C. 700–500 BC)
The forces of change that had swept over Greece in the eighth century con-
tinued at an accelerated pace in the seventh and sixth. Population continued to
rise, and in response Greeks founded more colonies, spreading all across the
shores of the Mediterranean and Black Seas. Trade, helped by colonization, dis-
persed Greek goods far beyond the limits known to the Bronze Age traders. The
Panhellenic shrines, festivals, and oracles grew in number and importance, fur-
ther fostering the sense of a common Greek identity. The Archaic period also saw
new forms of literary, artistic, and intellectual expression.
The Archaic period did have its dark side. Wars among Greeks became more
frequent, and warfare itself became more lethal. Worse, strife within a demos be-
came commonplace, as the leaders wrangled among themselves over power-
sharing and the poorer citizens fought for economic relief and their civic rights.
All this movement for good or for bad took place within a new social and polit-
ical framework, the city-state, which by 700 had replaced the old chieftain sys-
tem in many parts of the Greek world.
THE FORMATION OF THE
CITY-STATE (POLIS)
The term “city-state” is a modern coinage, yet city-states themselves are ancient
political formations, going back to the Early Bronze Age in Mesopotamia. Basi-
cally, a city-state is a defined geographical area comprising a central city and its
adjacent territory, which together make up a single, self-governing political unit.
The Greeks called this arrangement a polis, which gives us “political,” “politics”
and “policy.”
As we saw in Chapter Two, the essential elements of the Greek city-states
were already in place during the later Dark Age. The capital cities of what be-
came city-states existed all through the Dark Age, and most of them had been

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
the major centers of their regions during the Mycenaean period. The territorial
community, the de¯mos in its joint sense as “the land” and “the people” appears
fully evolved in the Homeric epics, as are the two primary governmental organs
of the Greek city-state, the assembly of men of fighting age and the council of “el-
ders.” All that was lacking to make the demos-communities of 800 BC into the
polis-states of 700 BC were certain necessary formalities: formal political unifica-
tion of the demos and the creation of a central government.
Political Unification (Synoecism)
In all city-states, from ancient Mesopotamia to Renaissance Europe, the capital
city is the focal point of the state. And it is often the case that those who live out-
side the city have a lower civic or social status than the city dwellers. Among the
Greeks, however, all members of the demos, whether they lived in the capital or
the countryside, were called politai (members of the polis) as if they all lived to-
gether in the polis (city). So, for example, the inhabitants of the several settle-
ments in the plain around the main town of Megara called themselves (and were
called by others) “the Megarians.”
The process by which a demos became unified is called “synoecism,” from
sun-oik-ismos (“uniting the oikoi”). The vast majority of new city-states were quite
small (25 to 150 square miles in area) often consisting of a single main town and
its adjacent plain, holding a couple of outlying villages. In such cases, political
unification was a simple matter. Polis (the state) and polis (the town) were nearly
identical entities. Everyone lived within a few miles of everyone else, and many
of the few hundred families in the demos would have been interrelated. Draw-
ing them together into a single political unit was merely a matter of making for-
mal the ancient ties of kinship and neighborliness.
Political unification of regional territories that contained several important
towns and villages besides the central polis was more complex and is not well
understood. It seems likely that synoecism in these regions was a drawn-out
process, beginning possibly in the late ninth century BC and crystallizing between
about 750 and 700. Regional unification appears for the most part to have been
voluntary and peaceful. For some places, however, there is evidence that intimi-
dation and even force were used to integrate reluctant towns and villages into a
political union. Such was the case in the region of Laconia, where the four origi-
nal villages of Sparta absorbed the village of Amyclae, 3 miles south, into the
Spartan polis against its will. Synoecism was also incomplete in some regions. Ar-
gos, for example, never fully succeeded in unifying the whole of the large region
of Argolis. Several small, independent city-states continued to exist outside the
plain of Argos, and even in the plain itself some villages retained a good deal of
local autonomy.
By the early seventh century, dozens of independent city-states had been es-
tablished all across the Mediterranean, from Ionia in the east to Sicily and southern
Italy in the west, and many more would be added as the Greeks further ex-
panded their geographical horizons. Not all Greeks lived in city-states, however.
62

Archaic Greece
In a number of large regions of the Peloponnesus and central and northern Greece
the inhabitants opted for a different form of political organization. The ethnos, as
the city-state Greeks called it, consisted of a people and its territory (a demos) but
without a capital polis, or a central government, or formal political union. The
separate towns and villages of an ethnos were independent and autonomous, yet
they also had a strong sense of common identity: “the Aetolians” as distinct from
“the Phocians” to their east, and so on. They were united in religious cult, and
they had institutions for reaching common decisions and unified action when
necessary, as in the case of attack from outsiders, for example.
GOVERNMENT IN THE EARLY CITY-STATES
Political union could not have occurred unless the local basileis, the leaders of the
districts, towns, and villages of the demos, wished it. These men, the new
landowning aristocracy, were the planners and architects of the new centralized
government of the emerging city-states. The key decision was to eliminate the po-
sition of the paramount basileus and rule collectively, a relatively easy matter,
since the paramount chief had little power over the other chiefs to begin with.
The governmental structures of the early poleis differed in specifics, yet all fol-
lowed a similar pattern: (1) The office of paramount basileus was either abolished
completely or was greatly reduced in power. (2) The various leadership roles of
the basileus were distributed among several officials drawn from the elite. (3) The
importance of the council of aristocratic “elders” increased, while that of the as-
sembly of the people decreased. Of course, these decisions were not arrived at in
a single year or even a single generation. Yet it is likely that once the process of
city-state formation had begun, determining which villages and districts were to
be included in the polis and what system of government it would have taken no
more than two or three generations.
The new, more complex systems of organization and social control that arose
in the city-states were a necessary response to changing conditions: sustained
population growth, increasing productivity and trade, and more complicated re-
lationships with neighboring states. Especially pressing was the need for ways to
mobilize manpower and resources efficiently for warfare, for as population in-
creased and land became scarcer, poleis fought each other over territory, a more
serious business than the raids and counterraids for animals and booty that char-
acterized war in the Dark Age. The new system of governance was thus good for
the polis as a whole, but it was especially good for the large landowners who
made up the government and, like all dominant groups in human history, were
highly motivated to preserve their economic and political power.
The basileus did not disappear completely. In a few poleis, a type of the tradi-
tional hereditary chiefdom, with severe limits on the paramount leader’s power,
appears to have continued on through the Archaic period. The Spartans retained
the chieftain system the longest, though in a unique form, with two hereditary, life-
long basileis ruling as equals. In this “dual kingship” the Spartan basileis exercised
63

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
considerable authority, especially in the military sphere, but their powers were
curbed by five annually elected magistrates, called ephoroi (“overseers”). Their job
was to make sure that the basileis ruled lawfully and to prosecute them if they
did not.
In most poleis, however, the title “basileus” became just the name for one of a
number of officials who made up the collective leadership of a city-state. The
powerful families divided up the spheres of authority—administrative, military,
religious, and judicial—among themselves, creating magistracies and boards.
Later Greeks called this form of government oligarchy or “rule by the few” (oligoi
= few). Unlike in the previous system, positions of authority could not be inher-
ited, and their tenure was brief. In most states, by the middle of the seventh cen-
tury, term of office was limited to a single year and could not be held again until
a stipulated number of years had passed. In this way, the power of any single mag-
istrate was checked, and honors were shared among the whole of the aristocratic
community. Each city-state developed its own system of magistracies according to
its own needs and circumstances. Obviously, small poleis needed fewer officials
than the large ones.
In general there was no hierarchy among the major offices, although many
states did have a principal official who was regarded as the chief administrator.
The most common titles for the chief officer were archo¯n (e.g., at Athens and else-
where in central Greece) and prytanis (e.g., at Corinth and poleis in Ionia). The
chief magistrate sometimes retained the old title of basileus. In some poleis, (e.g.,
at Athens and Megara) an officer called the polemarchos (“war leader”) was in
charge of military operations. Supervision of religious activities fell to another
magistrate or, more often, a board of magistrates, which also judged crimes hav-
ing to do with religion, such as homicides (which polluted the community). The
common use of the title basileis to designate these officials speaks to the rever-
ence that is still attached to the name.
The real center of power in the early city-states, however, resided not in the
officials and boards but in the council of elders. The boule¯ in the Archaic poleis
had even more power than the boule in Homeric society. It met more frequently
than in the pre-state period and assumed for itself the task of making policies and
drafting laws for the polis. The members were normally recruited from the high-
est magistrates, who entered the council after their terms of office. Membership
in the council was usually for a long term or even for life. The archons and other
magistrates, by contrast, had limited terms and would hesitate to oppose the au-
gust body of prominent men whose ranks they wished some day to join.
As the authority of the council increased, the limited power of the old assem-
bly of adult male citizens to influence policy was further reduced in the oligarchic
city-state. Some states excluded the poorest citizens from membership in the as-
sembly by imposing a property qualification. Some restricted the number of as-
sembly meetings and the business to be brought before it, or they curtailed free
discussion of the issues. The sovereignty of the aristocratic council, however,
would be relatively short-lived; as time passed, the authority of the assembly to
decide policy would increase.
64

Archaic Greece
THE COLONIZING MOVEMENT
The widespread emigration of Greeks from their Aegean homelands that had be-
gun in the mid-eighth century continued for more than two centuries. When it
ended around 500 BC the Greek world extended from Spain in the west to Colchis
in the east. As we saw in Chapter Two, this remarkable expansion was driven by two
needs: to satisfy the Greeks’ growing appetite for imported goods, especially scarce
metals, and to provide citizens of the motherland enough fertile land to live a good
life in their new poleis. Founding a colony required careful preparation. The “mother”
polis (me¯tropolis) had to choose a site for the colony, obtain divine approval for it,
plan out the new settlement, and choose its oikiste¯s (founder), always, of course, a
man of high status. As the foundation oath for Cyrene (see Document 3.1) reveals,
the decision of the Theraeans to establish the colony involved the whole commu-
nity and was backed by communal sanctions.
65
Document 3.1 Foundation Oath of Cyrene, Libya (late seventh
century BC). A fourth-century inscription from Cyrene purporting to be a copy
of the oath sworn by the Theraeans and the colonists of Cyrene.
Resolved by the Assembly. Since Apollo spontaneously told Battus and the
Theraeans to found a colony in Cyrene, the Theraeans decided to dispatch
Battus as the founder of the colony and basileus. The Theraeans shall sail as
his comrades. They shall sail on equal terms; and one son shall be enrolled
from each family. Those who sail shall be adults, and any free man from the
Theraeans who wishes, may also sail.
If the colonists secure the settlement, any colonist who sails later to Libya
shall have a share in the citizenship and honors. He also shall receive a lot
from the unassigned land. But if they do not make the settlement secure,
and the Theraeans cannot come to their aid and they suffer troubles for five
years, the colonists may return without fear to Thera. They may return to
their own property and become citizens of Thera.
If anyone is unwilling to sail when sent by the city, let him be subject to
the death penalty and let his property be confiscated. Whoever receives or
protects such a person—whether a father his son or a brother his brother—
shall suffer the same punishment as the person who refused to sail. On
these terms oaths were sworn by those remaining at Thera and those sail-
ing to found the colony. They also cursed those who transgressed these con-
ditions and did not abide by them, both those settling in Libya and those
staying here.
Supplementum Epigraphicum Graecum 9.3;
translated by Stanley M. Burstein.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
It was the oikist who was responsible for leading out the colonists, laying out
the city’s defenses, establishing the sanctuaries of the gods, and assigning the kleroi
to the settlers. If his leadership proved successful, the oikist would become the
guardian hero of the new polis after his death. The colony itself would remain
linked to its metropolis by bonds of kinship and cult, symbolized by the fire the
oikist brought from the metropolis’ hearth to kindle the hearth of the new polis.
The Greek word for colony was apoikia, literally a “home away [from our old home].”
Otherwise, however, the colony was a new and completely independent polis, since
those who joined a colony gave up their citizenship in the mother-polis.
The colonizing movement had two phases, each lasting a little over a century.
The first, beginning in the mid-eighth century, was directed to Italy and the west-
ern Mediterranean; the second began about a century later and was concentrated
on the north Aegean and the Black Sea. The pioneers in the colonization of Italy
were Euboeans, who in the early eighth century established a trading colony on
the island of Pithecusae (modern Ischia) in the Bay of Naples. It was a huge suc-
cess, attracting not only other Greeks but also Phoenicians, who made up 15 per-
cent of the more than 10,000 inhabitants that eventually occupied this tiny island.
With its good harbor, Pithecusae was well situated to exploit the iron deposits on
the nearby island of Elba and to trade with the Italic populations of the mainland.
The Euboeans followed up their success at Pithecusae with additional poleis:
Cumae (757) on the Italian mainland near modern Naples, and four in Sicily be-
tween 734 and 712. Poleis in the Peloponnesus, plagued by problems caused by
unequal distribution of land at home, also sent out colonists to the fertile areas of
Italy and Sicily. The Corinthians, for example, settled the Adriatic island of Cor-
cyra (modern Corfu; c. 734) and a year later founded Syracuse, which would be-
come the major city-state in Sicily and a famous center of culture in the Greek
world. Towards the very end of the century, the Spartans established their one
and only overseas colony, Taras in southern Italy, settled by exiled dissidents.
Colonization of the West continued into the seventh century as the early
colonies spun off daughter settlements and newcomers from other parts of old
Greece came looking for farmland and trading opportunities. For example, about
600 BC, colonists from Phocaea on the coast of Anatolia founded Massilia (mod-
ern Marseilles) on the coast of southern France. Its location at the mouth of the
Rhone River afforded the Massilians easy access to the lucrative trade with the
Celtic inhabitants of the upper Rhone Valley. By then, however, opportunities for
further Greek expansion in the West were disappearing. Besides, the western
Greeks had rivals; Phoenicians from their colony of Carthage (in modern Tunisia)
were establishing their own colonial empire in western Sicily, southern Spain,
and the islands of Corsica and Sardinia.
There were other places to go, however. For example, the people of the tiny is-
land of Thera, feeling the pinch of land shortage, founded Cyrene in Libya (c. 630).
But it was the areas around the Hellespont and the Black Sea, with their good fish-
ing grounds, rich soil, mineral wealth, and trading possibilities that lured the
Greeks the most. And they went at it with gusto: Miletus alone is credited in the
66

0
0
200
400
600
800 km
100
200
300
400
500 miles
Lipari Is.
Rh
on
e
R
.
D
a
n
u
b
e
R
.
Mainace
Hemeroscopium
Emporiae
Agathe
Massilia
Nicaea
Olbia
Aleria
Spina
Gravisca
Selinus
Acragas
Gela
Syracuse
Rhegium
Locri
Croton
Sybaris
Himera
Zancle
Posidonia
Pithecusae
Cyme Neapolis
Metapontum
Tarentum
Epidamnus
Apollonia
Corcyra
Ambracia
Potidaea
Abydus
Sestus
Cyzicus
Phaselis
Al Mina
Naucratis
Apollonia
Cyrene
Barca
Euesperides
Leptis
Abdera
Chalcedon
Heraclea
Amisus
Trapezus
Phasis
Dioscurias
Sinope
Byzantium
Mesembria
Odessus
Callatis
Istrus
Tyras
Olbia
Tanais
Theodosia
Panticapaeum
Phanagoria
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
BLACK SEA
Figure 3.1. Greek colonization: 750–500 BC.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
ancient sources with having founded ninety colonies. Having no rivals in this area
(unlike in the Mediterranean basin), the Greeks were able to establish new colonies
throughout the Archaic and Classical periods until the Black Sea was almost en-
tirely ringed by Greek poleis. Many colonies became rich and powerful, among
them Byzantium, which a thousand years later, under its new name, Constantino-
ple, would become the capital of the Roman Empire. The transplanted city-states
proudly proclaimed their Greekness, building monumental temples, patronizing
Panhellenic institutions such as the Delphic oracle and the Olympic games, and ea-
gerly staying abreast of cultural developments in the Aegean. (The earliest exam-
ples of the Greek alphabet and hexameter verse in fact come from Pithecusae.)
Relations with the people into whose lands the colonists came were complex. On
the one hand, the colonies were gateways through which various peoples of south-
ern Europe and the Black Sea areas obtained access to the products and culture of
the Greeks and other Mediterranean societies. The Etruscans in Italy, for example,
adapted the Greek alphabet and avidly embraced Greek art and even religious cult.
On the other hand, the Greeks were intruders, and conflict with the native inhabi-
tants occurred frequently. For the most part, however, the minority colonists made
accommodations with their non-Greek neighbors, trading and intermarrying with
them, and sometimes even sharing their territory. Nor indeed was the cultural ex-
change all in one direction. For instance, cults such as those of the Thracian goddess
Bendis and the divine musician Orpheus spread throughout the Aegean and beyond.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DIVISIONS
IN THE ARCHAIC POLEIS
The colonizing movement was only a partial remedy for the disparity in land
ownership. Not every family could emigrate, and as population at home contin-
ued to grow, each new generation of oikoi found it increasingly difficult to gain
access to land. The result was a widening of the existing economic and social gulf
between the small group at the top—comprising perhaps no more than 20 per-
cent of the families—and all the rest.
The economic power of the aristocratic houses rested on their inherited land-
holdings. As a group they controlled a disproportionate share of the total agri-
cultural land in the demos and an even greater share of the good land, including
lush meadows for grazing their horses and cattle. They became even richer by
concentrating on cash crops, such as wine and olive oil. Most significant for their
profits was their ability to exploit the plight of the poorest farmers, who made up
possibly a third or more of the demos. Some of them mortgaged their kleroi to
the rich, paying off the debt with a portion of their crops; others became share-
croppers on rich men’s lands. Many were reduced to the status of the¯tes, hired
hands who worked for mere subsistence. The majority of citizens in a polis, how-
ever—perhaps 40 or even 50 percent of households—though far from wealthy,
were economically self-sufficient and therefore not economically dependant on
the rich. The fourth-century philosopher Aristotle in his Politics called this group,
“the middle,” the portion of the polis between “the very rich and the very poor.”
68

Archaic Greece
These three divisions of rich, middling, and poor were not monolithic, of course;
within each there were gradations of wealth and social rank. The small upper
class was dominated by a smaller number of families that were preeminent be-
cause of their nobler bloodlines and greater wealth: an aristocracy within an aris-
tocracy. Moreover, the hierarchy was subject to shifts; one family might rise into
the ranks of the upper nobility while another might drop down into the lesser no-
bilty. Nevertheless, the propertied class as a whole remained clearly marked off
from the groups below them. They protected their economic and social exclu-
siveness by marrying only among themselves. Moreover, they cultivated an im-
age of group superiority, calling themselves “the good” (hoi agathoi) on the basis
of their wealth and ancestry, while lumping together those outside the landed no-
bility as “the bad” (hoi kakoi) and “the many” (hoi polloi).
Within the middle group there was greater economic and social gradation. Some
nonnoble oikoi shared in the increasing prosperity of the Archaic Age and were
fairly well off; at the other end of the scale were those barely keeping out of debt.
The differences in economic status—and therefore in social status—among the in-
dependent farmers and craftsmen prevented them from perceiving themselves as
a class with their own interests, like the rich landowners. Upward mobility, even
for the top of this group, was not easy. Yet, if a commoner family became wealthy
enough, it could marry into the nobility. The sixth-century aristocratic poet Theog-
nis complains that although men take pains to make their animals “well-born” by
careful breeding, a “good man” (agathos) will not hesitate to marry the daughter
of a “bad man” (kakos) if she brings with her a good dowry. “Wealth,” he laments,
“corrupts a lineage” (Theognidea 183–192). Downward mobility, on the other hand,
was more common; a couple of bad years could easily push a precarious farmer
into insoluble debt, and even into the condition of a thete.
The gradations of the bottom group would have been only in the degree of ab-
jectness, since the chances for economic betterment for the very poor were slight.
It was not just poverty that made the lives of thetes miserable; they also had to
endure the stigma of working for others, which for the Greeks meant loss of free-
dom. From a number of poleis come various slang terms denoting persons of in-
ferior status: “the naked ones” (Argos), “dusty-feet” (Epidaurus), “wearers of
sheepskins” (Sicyon), “wearers of dog-skin helmets” (Corinth). In addition to the
thetes, there existed in some areas of Greece another category of laborers, char-
acterized as “between free persons and slaves.” Among those who endured this
sort of semi-slavery are the Spartan “helots.” These were the original inhabitants
of parts of Laconia and most of Messenia who were conquered by the Spartans
in war and made to work for the Spartan citizens as serfs on what had been their
own land. The helots were given some human rights—they could marry and raise
a family and keep a portion of their production—but in all other respects they
were chattel, as we shall see in the next chapter.
The only persons of lower status than these were, of course, the actual slaves,
males and females acquired from the outside by capture or purchase who had no
freedom whatever and no human rights and were legally classed as property. It was
not until the sixth century that slaves began to pour into the poleis in large num-
bers. Some have argued that the increased use of slaves was the result of political
69

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
reforms abolishing debt bondage within the polis, which forced the rich, who had
found it more profitable to exploit the labor of impoverished citizens, to turn to
slave labor.
Citizenship
While all free-born members of the polis were citizens (politai), they were far from
equal in their citizen rights. Aside from their roles in the religious worship of the
community, women citizens were denied any participation in public affairs. This
was the exclusive domain of adult (over age 18) male citizens. But their share of
civic responsibilities and rights—to vote and speak in the assembly, hold office,
serve as judges, fight in the army—was divided unequally along economic and
social lines. In the early city-states, as we have seen, only the rich and wellborn
possessed the full range of citizen privileges. Nonnoble citizens of moderate
means were barred from holding office, and in many cases the poorest citizens
had no vote in the assembly. The struggle for full participation by all citizens in
the governance of their poleis would be achieved only at the end of the Archaic
period and then only in the democratic states; in oligarchic states the poorest
members would continue to be second-class citizens. Even in the most democra-
tic poleis, citizenship would be denied to ex-slaves and resident aliens.
Resentment from Below and the
Beginnings of Social Change
There was strong popular resentment against the wealth, power, and arrogance
of the self-styled agathoi in the seventh century. Among the exploited have-nots
in many Archaic poleis the rallying cry was “redistribution of the land.” The mid-
dling oikoi—those that produced enough to live on or enough and some extra—
also had cause for resentment. Because the aristocratic households were successful
in holding on to most of the fertile soil, these independent farmers had few op-
portunities to acquire good land. They could choose to emigrate abroad, which
many did, or else acquire marginal land far from their villages, which yielded
poorer return for extra labor and increased their travel time. The middle group
also chafed at the oligarchy’s hold on the magistracies, boards, and particularly
the council, where the political decisions were formulated. The well-off farmers
were just as liable as the poorer ones to be cheated in the law courts and just as
helpless against “crooked decisions.” In the assembly, the one organ of govern-
ment to which they were admitted, the people’s voice carried little weight against
the concentrated power of the rich.
Yet, despite the strength of the ruling oligarchs and the apparent impotence of
the rest of the demos, total domination by the former was destined to be short-
lived. By the early sixth century, the oligarchical hold was weakening and more
inclusive forms of government were emerging that would eventually give polit-
ical power to the mass of people, including the poor. The spearhead of the protest
against aristocratic excess was the middle group of independent farmers, over
70

Archaic Greece
whom the oligarchs had the least control. We are fortunate to have a very early
voice for this group: Hesiod.
HESIOD: A VIEW FROM BELOW
Unlike the Iliad and the Odyssey, which are about the glories and the sufferings of
the mighty Trojan War heroes, Hesiod’s Works and Days (c. 700 BC) is down-to-earth.
Hesiod’s world is a rural village in Boeotia, Ascra, which was part of the polis of
Thespiae, three miles away. The poem is ostensibly a long lecture (828 lines) to
Hesiod’s errant brother, Perses. But the advice to Perses to mend his ways and
be a good farmer and neighbor is also a way for Hesiod to preach to his audi-
ences the virtues and values that all people should honor.
Perses had apparently defrauded Hesiod of a portion of their inheritance by
bribing the judges (basileis) who heard the case. Hesiod addresses the basileis
very sternly, not at all deferentially, calling them “gift-swallowing basileis.” He
accuses them of habitually rendering their verdicts “with crooked judgments,”
and warns that Zeus himself protects his daughter, Dike, “Justice,” and avenges
unjust acts against her committed by those in power.
71
Document 3.2 Hesiod Lectures the Aristocrats.
Basileis, give this verdict no little thought,
for the immortals are ever present among men,
and they see those who with crooked verdicts
spurn divine retribution and grind down one another’s lives.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Justice is a maiden and a daughter of Zeus;
the gods of Olympos respect her noble title,
and whenever men mistreat her through false charges
she rushes to sit at the feet of Zeus Kronion
and she denounces the designs of men who are not just,
so that the people pay for the reckless deeds and evil plans
of basileis whose slanted words twist her straight path.
Keep her commands, O gift-devouring basileis, and let
verdicts be straight; yes, lay your crooked ways aside!
Works and Days 248–264; translated by
Apostolos N. Athanassakis, Hesiod. Baltimore and London:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983, p. 73, adapted.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
The tone of the entire poem is moralistic. Hesiod has a litany of proverbial dos
and don’ts that we might find in any peasant society. For example, he counsels a
strict reciprocity in all dealings. When you borrow from a neighbor, he says, “pay
back fairly, the same amount, or more if you can, so that when you need some-
thing later you can count on him” (349–351).
At the core of Hesiod’s moral program is the virtue of arduous manual labor:
Through work men grow wealthy and rich in flocks,
and by working they become much dearer to the gods.
Work is no disgrace; idleness is the disgrace.
And if you work, the idle man will soon envy you
as you grow rich, because fame and renown follow wealth.
(Works and Days 308–313)
Only through “work upon work,” Hesiod says, can the ordinary farmer win the
three prizes of wealth, divine favor, and glory, which in the Homeric epics only
heroes could attain. The prizes of work, of course, are just the humble rewards
that rural villagers might hope for. For Hesiod and his neighbors wealth meant
not golden goblets, but “having their granaries full of the sustenance of life” at
harvest time and not having to borrow; renown was being admired and re-
spected by all the folk in the village.
As a social document, the Works and Days also provides evidence of class dif-
ferences in outlook toward institutions such as marriage. Among the upper class,
marriage was primarily a means of establishing political alliances and enhancing
family prestige; the elite often sought advantageous marriages outside the polis.
Hesiod’s vantage point, rather, is that of a village farmer. It is not a wife who will
bring him political connections that he seeks, but a local girl who will not sully
his reputation if she should turn out to be a glutton or lazy or unfaithful.
Marry a virgin so that you can teach her proper habits,
and especially marry one who lives near you;
and check all around so that your marriage will not be a joke
to your neighbors, for nothing is better for a man than a good wife
and nothing more horrible than a bad one. . . .
(Works and Days 699–703)
That women are weak but dangerous is a common theme in Greek literature.
In Hesiod this male attitude is validated in the myth of the first woman, Pandora,
told both in the Theogony (571–612) and the Works and Days (60–105). Pandora, the
“beautiful evil,” was created as a punishment for the crime of Prometheus of
stealing fire from the gods and giving it to humans. It was she who opened the
lid of a jar containing all the plagues and diseases of the world and let them out.
Thenceforth, all womankind inherited Pandora’s “shameless mind and deceitful
nature,” her “lies and coaxing words.” Women live off men like the drones
among the bees. “Do not let a woman wiggling her behind deceive you with her
72

Archaic Greece
wheedling words. She is after your granary. The man who trusts a woman trusts
thieves” (Works and Days 373–375).
Hesiod’s class of middling farmers resembled the wealthy class in one impor-
tant respect: They exploited the labor of others. Hesiod takes for granted that the
farmers he addresses can afford to own at least one slave woman or man, or take
on a regular hired hand (thes). The good farmer keeps his eye on the bottom line;
the day’s food for a hired plowman is to be carefully measured out. He advises
hiring a thes who has no oikos (he will work for less) and a childless female (“a
worker with a child at her breast is a bother”).
However much he railed against the wealthy and powerful, Hesiod, then, was
not a “champion of the oppressed,” as some have dubbed him. Rather his was
the indignant voice of the middle: Zeus will look favorably on those who are pi-
ous, hard working, and just and in the end will punish those who are not.
THE HOPLITE ARMY
Battles between poleis were fought by men like Hesiod and his neighbors, aver-
age farmers and craftsmen. Developments in military equipment and organiza-
tion altered the nature of warfare in the early city-states. It is in this new type of
military organization that we most clearly observe the polis ideology that the cit-
izen is the slave of the common good. By 650 BC polis armies were made up of
heavily armored foot soldiers called hoplites, arranged in a tightly packed for-
mation—the phalanx—which apparently evolved from the looser type of mass
73
Figure 3.2. A rare depiction of hoplite battle; from a Corinthian vase, c. 640 BC.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
formation depicted in the Iliad. In the developed phalanx the soldiers lined up al-
most shoulder to shoulder with each rank almost treading on the heels of the one
in front of it.
Battle tactics were quite simple: Opposing phalanxes formed up (normally eight
rows deep), charged at one another, and collided. The hoplite’s weapons were a
long heavy spear, used for thrusting and jabbing, and a short slashing sword for
close in fighting. For protection he wore a helmet, breastplate, and greaves (shin-
and-knee protectors), all made of bronze and covering as much of the body as pos-
sible. The most important piece of equipment was a new type of shield called the
hoplon, which was quite different from the shields carried by the Homeric war-
riors. It was round, made of wood covered with a thin sheet of bronze, and was
held by inserting the left arm through a central band and gripping a strap at the
rim, which gave it maneuverability. Its large size (about 3 feet in diameter) gave
cover to the man on the left, allowing hoplites to fight close together with half of
their bodies protected by the adjacent man’s shield. Seen from the front, a phalanx
presented nearly a solid wall of shields, helmeted heads, and spears.
A hoplite battle was a ferocious affair. When the opposing front lines collided,
the ranks behind shoved against those in front—the maneuver was called “the
pushing”—using their weight to break the enemy’s ranks. It took enormous
courage to keep place in the ranks when all around you was the sight, sound, and
smell of iron piercing into flesh and bone. Most did stand fast, “biting their lip
with their teeth,” as the Spartan poet Tyrtaeus (c. 650 BC) says, out of personal
pride and sense of duty as a citizen.
This is the common good, for the polis and the whole de¯mos,
when a man stands firm in the front ranks
without flinching and puts disgraceful flight completely from his mind.
(Tyrtaeus fr. 9.15–17 Diehl)
Although the fighting was savage, hoplite battles were usually brief, seldom last-
ing more than an hour, and casualties were relatively light for both losers and
victors, seldom over 15 percent. Once the enemy broke ranks and fled, there was
not much pursuit, so that massacres were rare. Campaigns, too, were brief; usu-
ally, a single set battle ended the fighting for the summer. Farmer-warriors could
not stay long away from their fields and animals.
Not all citizens fought in the phalanx, however. Because hoplites had to furnish
their own arms and armor, which were fairly expensive, the poorest men were ex-
cluded and served instead as light-armed troops. The proportion of the non-hoplite
oikoi in the Archaic period would have varied from polis to polis: perhaps 20 or
30 percent of all citizen families. Although disparities in wealth and social status
separated phalanx fighters from light-armed skirmishers, there were no such dis-
tinctions within the phalanx itself. In the ranks, where highborn nobles and men
from the middle fought side by side, strict equality prevailed. Under these condi-
tions it would become increasingly difficult for the former to claim that they alone
were competent to wield political power and formulate policy for their poleis.
74

Archaic Greece
THE ARCHAIC AGE TYRANTS
The first serious challenge to oligarchic rule came not from below, but from
within the elite group itself, in the form of a new political phenomenon the
Greeks called tyranny (tyrannis). The “age of tyrants” lasted from about 670–500
BC, affecting a great many of the Greek states. The Archaic Age tyrant (tyrannos)
was what we call today a dictator or strongman, a single ruler who, however,
lacked the legitimacy of the old paramount basileus. Indeed, the Greeks had no
name for such a figure; the title tyrannos was likely borrowed from the Lydians,
an Anatolian people. Tyrants were only later regarded as evil despots. Their sub-
sequent ill-repute stemmed partly from propaganda spread by the aristocrats
themselves, who naturally resented the domination of a single man, and partly
from the popular sentiment that dictatorial rule posed a threat to the freedom of
all. Yet the early tyrants were probably viewed more favorably by their nonaris-
tocratic contemporaries.
Very few of the dozens of tyrants who grabbed power in their poleis are known
in any detail, but we can discern a general pattern. Firstly, most tyrants arose from
the elite group, though not necessarily from the top-ranked families. Cypselus of
Corinth (c. 657–627), for instance, was marginalized within the prominent “clan”
of the Bacchiads, because his mother, a Bacchiad, had married outside the clan. In
addition to noble birth, would-be tyrants were distinguished in their poleis for their
personal achievements. Cypselus, prior to seizing control, had held the post of
polemarch (military commander) in Corinth, as had another famous tyrant, Or-
thagoras of Sicyon (mid-seventh century). Cylon of Athens, whose attempted coup
in 632 failed, had won fame as a victor in the Olympic games. Finally, despite at-
tempts to form dynasties by passing on their rule to their sons, few tyrannies lasted
more than three generations and most collapsed after one or two.
Continual feuding among the major aristocratic factions certainly contributed to
the emergence of the tyrants. Each faction was associated with a preeminent lin-
eage (genos) that extended an umbrella of fictive kinship over less prestigious fam-
ilies, who supported the leader-family in its political ambitions. The frequent bouts
of violence and bloodshed among what were basically rival gangs of hotheaded
young aristocrats were politically disruptive. The intervention of a strongman who
could keep them in check would be welcome to the people, if not to the aristocrats.
The would-be tyrant also needed armed followers. These might be disaffected
aristocrats within the polis who were frozen out of the ruling circle, or a mercenary
force from outside the polis. Such aid was sometimes supplied by a friendly tyrant
(for his abortive coup, the Athenian Cylon received troops from his father-in-law
Theagenes, tyrant of Megara). Peisistratus of Athens had a variety of resources in
his three attempts to seize power, including local bodyguards, mercenaries, and
troops donated by powerful outsiders. His story will be told in Chapter Five.
Yet, no tyrant, however great his resources, could have overthrown the oli-
garchs without the tacit support of the citizens themselves, particularly the heav-
ily armed farmer-hoplites. These need not have actively helped him; they could
just stand aside and refuse to defend the nobles. Those at the bottom of the social
75

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
pyramid would naturally have supported a coup against the group that was ex-
ploiting them. Indeed, the tyrants seem to have presented themselves as champions
of the demos against the oligarchs. Aristotle in the fourth century put it concisely:
A tyrant is set up from among the de¯mos and the multitude to oppose the nota-
bles so that the people may suffer no injustice from them. This is clear from the
facts of history. For almost all the tyrants have arisen from being leaders of the
people [de¯mago¯goi; hence “demagogue”], so to speak, having gained their confi-
dence by slandering the notables.
(Politics 1310b 12–17; Rackham 1977, adapted)
By and large, the tyrants did favor the poor over the rich, sometimes confiscat-
ing the land of the wealthy and redistributing it to the poor, and making laws
that limited aristocratic privilege. They initiated the construction of temples, har-
bors, and fortifications, as well as improvements in the water supply, drainage sys-
tems, and the like, all of which provided work for poor citizens. Moreover, they
encouraged trade and commerce. For example, Periander, the son of Cypselus,
built a stone trackway across the Isthmus of Corinth (where a canal runs today),
allowing ships and cargoes to be hauled between the Saronic and Corinthian
gulfs. Under tyranny, cultural activities also thrived: New religious cults and fes-
tivals were established, and tyrants made special effort to attract the best artists,
architects, poets, and thinkers in Greece to their poleis.
The founding tyrants had won popular support because of their charisma and
achievements. Their sons, however, as heirs to a nonexistent office, were quite vul-
nerable to opposition. Although some succeeded on their own merits, most resorted
to increasingly “tyrannical” measures, which only exacerbated resentment against
them. So, the second or third generation tyrants were overthrown, and their exiled
opponents returned, usually to reestablish oligarchic rule. Rarely, however, were the
poleis the same after a tyranny. The farmer-hoplites were no longer willing to vote
for leaders whom they could not hold accountable, nor could the nobles easily take
back from the poor the benefits that the tyrants had bestowed on them.
THE ARTS AND SCIENCES
The poleis of the Archaic Age and later competed with one another for eminence
in art and architecture, poetry, philosophy, and science. These were arenas in
which even small poleis could gain glory. With contributions from all parts of the
Greek world, the arts and sciences reached new heights of excellence in the sev-
enth and sixth centuries.
Art and Architecture
In the Archaic period the various poleis developed their own distinct artistic
styles, especially in pottery. During Cypselus’ reign as tyrant Corinth emerged as
76

Archaic Greece
the leading commercial center of Greece. Corinthian potters dominated the trade
in finely painted pottery, exporting huge quantities of their specialty item, tiny
perfume flasks—exquisitely decorated in the fashionable “orientalizing” style—
filled with scented olive oil. The enterprising Corinthians also invented a widely
imitated technique called “black figure,” which permitted the rendition of minute
details. The artist first painted a silhouette (that turned black during firing) on
77
Figure 3.3a. Two views of a special
Athenian amphora (c. 525–520 BC)
decorated in the red-figure technique
on one side and black figure on the
other. The warriors are playing a
board game.
Figure 3.3b. A symposion (“drinking
party”) scene on an Athenian red-
figure calyx krater (mixing bowl for
wine and water), showing a man and
a youth reclining on a couch, as a
girl plays the pipes for them.
a
b

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
the clay ground; then with a sharp point he incised the anatomical and decora-
tive details, sometimes filling these in with red or white paint. Corinthian black
figure was enormously popular, but as often happens, success led to mass pro-
duction and a consequent decline in quality.
By 550, Athenian black-figure pottery, featuring differently shaped and larger
vessels, had driven Corinthian vases from the export market. Around 530 the
Athenians, in turn, invented a new style called “red figure,” which reversed the
black-figure technique. The artist drew outlines first and then painted the back-
ground with a gloss (clay slip) that fired black, leaving the outlined figures in the
orange color of the clay itself. Afterwards he painted on the details with a fine
brush. This allowed a more subtle and refined rendering of detail than the incised
black-figure technique. Portraits of contemporary daily life were added to the stan-
dard mythological and heroic scenes; athletics, horsemanship, and rowdy drinking
parties are favorite themes. On some vases erotic acts, both heterosexual and ho-
mosexual, are represented graphically. In such scenes, the men are citizens, but the
women are all prostitutes (slaves or foreigners). Citizen women appear in domes-
tic settings, often accompanied by their female slaves.
Unfortunately, little is left of the large-scale paintings of mythological and pa-
triotic subjects that adorned temples and other public buildings. Some of these
must have been “tourist attractions,” since the artists who painted them were
mentioned centuries later. On the other hand, some monumental (life-size or
larger) stone and bronze statues have survived. It was from the Egyptians that
the Archaic Greeks learned the techniques of making large freestanding sculp-
tures. Most Greek Archaic statues are in the form of either a naked “young
male”(kouros) or a clothed “young maiden” (kore¯). Gradually, sculptors departed
from the rigidly stylized, static Egyptian model towards a more naturalistic rep-
resentation of the human body.
The architecture of the Archaic period still centered on religious buildings, the
monumental temple and (beginning in the sixth century) smaller edifices, such as
the “treasuries,” which housed dedications to the gods. A big advance in temple
architecture occurred around the middle of the seventh century, when limestone
and marble replaced mud brick and wood. Here again, the Greeks were indebted
to the Egyptians from whom they learned the engineering skills necessary for
handling huge stone blocks. By the early sixth century Greek temples were be-
ginning to look much as they would for the next five hundred years. As other
stone buildings were added in the sixth century, all the capital poleis (except
Sparta) began to resemble true urban centers. Most construction was in and
around the agora, “the gathering place,” a large open space at or near the center
of the city. The agora became the marketplace and public space of the city and
therefore of the whole polis. It was the place where male citizens congregated to
do business, gossip, and make political deals. Market stalls were sheltered in
shaded colonnades called stoas. Official buildings, such as the council house, dis-
tinguished the agora as the state center; sanctuaries, fountain houses, and public
monuments gave it grace and dignity.
78

Archaic Greece
79
Figure 3.5. Marble kouros from Attica
(c. 600 BC). The statue imitates the
stylized stance of Egyptian sculpture.
Figure 3.4. Statue of an Egyptian no-
bleman (early seventh century BC).

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
80
Figure 3.7. Late Archaic kore from the acropolis of Athens
(c. 490 BC), dedicated by Euthydikos.
Figure 3.6. This marble kouros (c.
510–500 BC), was set atop the grave
of Aristodikos in Attica; it shows the
growth of naturalism in sculpture.

Archaic Greece
81
Figure 3.8. Relief sculpture from the Siphnian Treasury at Delphi (c. 530–525 BC) depicting
the Battle of the Gods and the Giants. Apollo and Artemis equipped as archers are strid-
ing into battle (left) against the Giants (equipped as contemporary hoplites).
Lyric Poetry
Although heroic epics continued to be produced during the Archaic period, most
talented poets preferred to express themselves in other genres, which we lump
together under the rubric of “lyric poetry.” Indeed the seventh and sixth cen-
turies BC are often referred to as the “lyric age” of Greece. Only a tiny fraction of
all the verses composed then are extant today, much of them in fragmentary
form, yet what we have provides an ample enough doorway into the thought and
concerns of the Archaic Greeks.
The roots of lyric poetry extend far back in time to folk songs created orally
for special occasions, such as harvests, weddings, funerals, and religious celebra-
tions. With the advent of writing, songs could now be preserved and circulated.
Some kinds of poems were performed to the accompaniment of a lyre (lyra; hence
the name “lyric”), others to a flutelike instrument (aulos). The main division
within the genre of lyric, however, was between poems performed by an indi-
vidual (solo song) and choral poetry, performed by a chorus of young men or

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
women, who sang as they danced to the music of the aulos or a stringed instru-
ment. Solo poetry could be presented before large public audiences or small pri-
vate gatherings of upper-class males at a drinking party (symposion). Choral odes
might run to several hundred lines, solo poems were usually much shorter, some-
times just a few lines.
Choral poetry was civic and integrative; the chorus retold the old myths of the
polis, paid homage to its gods, and expressed patriotic pride. Most solo poetry,
on the other hand, was very personal in both attitude and tone. Solo poets sang
about friendship and betrayal, sexual love, old age and death, politics, war, and
morality. The tone could be serious or lighthearted, bitter or contemplative; the
language elevated or obscene. Much solo lyric was what we would call social
commentary. Almost all the lyric poets were of the upper class; their stance, how-
ever, was often critical of the aristocrats’ elitist ideology. Although we have frag-
ments from about two dozen lyric poets of this period, we can sample only a few
of them here. Other Archaic poets such as the Spartan Alcman, the Athenian
Solon, and Simonides of Ceos we shall meet in later chapters.
Some Lyric Poets
Archilochus of Paros (early seventh century), represents himself as both a soldier of
fortune and an inspired poet. He writes of drinking bouts, his sex life, his comrades
and enemies, battles and shipwrecks. He delights in skewering pretentiousness.
I don’t like a general who is big and walks with a swagger,
or who glories in his curly hair and shaves off his moustache.
Give me a man who’s little, bandy-legged,
feet firm on the ground, full of heart.
(fr. 114 West)
The Spartans found these next couplets—which mock the ideal of heroic self-
sacrifice—so outrageous that they forbade the recitation of Archilochus’ poetry at
Sparta.
Well, some Thracian is enjoying the shield which I left—I
didn’t want to, and it was a perfectly good one—beside a bush.
But I saved myself. What do I care about that shield?
To hell with it; I’ll get another one just as good.
(fr. 5 West)
Some lyric poets also derided aristocratic display of luxury. For example, the
philosopher-poet Xenophanes (c. 550 BC) censured the elite of his native Colophon
who went to the assembly in their all-purple cloaks, “glorying in their well-
dressed long hair, drenched with the perfume of elaborate scents” (fr. 3 West).
Hipponax of Ephesus (late sixth century) took a more cynical approach toward
wealth. He adopted the persona of an urban hustler, always broke and engaging
in drunken brawls and escapades. He revels in the low life of the city and even
makes fun of his poverty. “Ploutos (the god of wealth),” he says, “never came to
82

Archaic Greece
my house—for he’s quite blind—and said to me, ‘Hipponax, I’m giving you
thirty minas of silver, and lots else besides.’ No, he’s too feeble-witted” (fr. 36
West). There are also voices that sound Hesiodic, promoting the commonsense
values held by ordinary citizens of moderate means. A collection of homespun
maxims, attributed to Phocylides of Miletus, is made up of sayings such as,
“Many things are best in the middle; I want to be middle (mesos) in the polis”; and
“What good is noble birth for those who lack grace in words and counsel?”
Most of the surviving poetry, however, appeals more openly to an audience
that has wealth and leisure. Much of it was composed specifically for recitation at
drinking parties. Partisan politics was naturally a favorite topic. But just as often
symposiastic poetry celebrates the pleasures of wine and love (both heterosexual
and homosexual) and laments the sad necessity that these joys must fade with old
age. This poem by the seventh-century Ionian poet Mimnermus is typical:
What life is there apart from Golden Aphrodite?
What joy can there be? May I die when I
No longer care for secret love and tender gifts
and bed, the alluring blossoms of youth for men
and women too. And when miserable old age
comes on that makes a man both ugly and useless,
then troublesome worries forever wear and tear at his wits,
nor can he enjoy the sight of the sun’s rays.
Boys find him hateful, women contemptible.
So sorrowful a thing has the god made old age.
(fr. 1 West; Fowler 1992, adapted)
Similar in style and tone is Ibycus (mid-sixth century) from Rhegium in Italy,
who spent some years in Samos under the patronage of the tyrant Polycrates. Iby-
cus wrote long choral narratives on traditional epic and mythological themes, but
he was most famous in antiquity for his homoerotic poetry, full of sensuous im-
agery. In one poem, Eros (“Love”) comes like the north wind from Thrace, and
with “parching madness, dark and fearless, shakes me to the bottom of my heart
with his might” (fr. 286 Page). In another poem, on falling in love late in life, he
compares himself to an old champion racehorse that unwillingly drags his char-
iot to the contest (fr. 386 Page).
Sappho (late seventh century) is the only known woman poet from the Archaic
period, in fact, one of the few in all of ancient Greek literature (women were not
encouraged to write). Born into a prominent aristocratic family from Mytilene on
the island of Lesbos, Sappho was greatly admired throughout antiquity; later crit-
ics listed her among the top nine lyric poets, and hailed her as the “tenth Muse.”
Sappho appears to have been the leader of a close-knit circle of young upper-class
women in Lesbos (hence the modern term “lesbian”), who shared their lives for
a brief period before marriage. The little that has survived of her poetry is mostly
solo song, highly personal in tone, whose main theme is erotic love between
women. In addition to solo poetry, Sappho wrote weddings songs (epithalamia) to
be performed by choruses of young girls.
83

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
One of Sappho’s fellow aristocrats, Alcaeus, also achieved lasting fame as a
poet. Like the other symposiastic poets, he wrote of love and wine and the myths
of old, but he was most famous for his political poems. Alcaeus puts us in the
center of the complicated power relations among the aristocratic factions in Myti-
lene: the political deals and betrayals, the partisan hatreds and violence, which
were wracking the polis.
The largest chunk of symposiastic poetry that we have is a compilation of four-
teen hundred lines of poetry all attributed to Theognis of Megara (mid-sixth cen-
tury), but actually containing poems written by a number of different authors,
from the late seventh to the early fifth century. In a stridently elitist tone Theog-
nis vilifies the base-born kakoi while singing the praises of the high-born agathoi.
The poet’s contempt for nonnoble citizens—whom he deems innately incapable
of achieving excellence—reflects the frustration of the minority elite as they
watched their power and privilege being eroded while the non-elite were mak-
ing political and economic gains. Aristocratic resentment over their reversal of
84
Document 3.3. Nine “books” (i.e., papyrus rolls) of Sappho’s poetry were
collected in the Alexandrian period, of which only one complete poem survives,
along with portions of poems. Here is a selection of shorter fragments.
“I simply wish to die.”
Weeping she left me
and said this too:
“We’ve suffered terribly,
Sappho, I leave you against my will.”
I answered, go happily
and remember me,
you know how we cared for you,
if not, let me remind you
. . . the lovely times we shared . . . (fr. 94 L-P)
I have a beautiful child, her form
like a golden flower, beloved Kleis,
whom I would not trade for all of Lydia
or lovely. . . . (fr. 132 L-P)
Evening Star who gathers everything
shining dawn scattered—
you bring the sheep and the goats,
you bring the child back to its mother. (fr. 104 L-P)
Translated by Diane J. Rayor, Sappho’s Lyre.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991, pp. 60, 72, 74.

Archaic Greece
fortune comes through in verses such as these (addressed to the young lover of
Theognis):
Cyrnus, those who were agathoi once are now kakoi, and those who
were kakoi before are now agathoi. Who could bear seeing this, the
agathoi dishonored and the kakoi getting honor?
(Theognidea 1109–1112)
Although aristocrats would continue to proclaim their natural right to rule the
state, in the end they would find themselves helpless to halt the movement to-
ward political equality.
Philosophy and Science
The sixth century saw the beginning of philosophy (literally “the love of wis-
dom”). The early Greek philosophers—who may have been the first to write in
prose—are called the Presocratics, that is, the thinkers who lived before Socrates
(c. 469–399 BC) and his disciple, Plato. Plato (c. 429–347) set the course that West-
ern philosophical thought would follow up to today; the Presocratics were pri-
marily concerned with the structure and development of the physical universe,
the cosmos (kosmos).
The study of astronomy and mathematics had flourished in Mesopotamia
since the early second millennium, and the earliest Presocratics, who were from
Miletus in Ionia, built upon the achievements of their eastern neighbors. Greeks
had always studied the night sky, of course. They named the planets, stars, and
star groups after their gods and characters in their myths, like Orion the hunter
and the girls he pursued and never caught, the Pleiades. Basic knowledge of the
celestial motions had always been essential in daily life: In Hesiod’s Works and
Days, the rising and setting of the constellations tell the farmer the proper time
to begin his various seasonal chores. Sailors, too, navigated by the stars and plan-
ets. What the Presocratics introduced to the Greeks was “scientific” astronomy.
Thales of Miletus, for example, was said to have predicted the solar eclipse of 585
BC, and his fellow Milesian, Anaximander, was credited with drawing a plan of
the heavens (as well as the first geographical map).
The Milesians were also the first to abandon mythical-religious explanations
for the origins of the universe and instead to seek purely physical causes. Thales
theorized that the origin of all matter was water (for it could be transformed into
both gas and solid forms), and that the earth was flat and floated on water. In
contrast, Anaximander called the original principle “The Boundless,” or “The In-
definite,” a limitless entity that governs the material world, harmonizing such op-
posites as wet and dry and cold and hot. He postulated that the earliest creatures
arose out of the sea from slime warmed by the sun’s heat. Another Milesian,
Anaximenes, thought that everything had evolved from air: It became fire when
it was rarefied, could change to wind and cloud, and when condensed was trans-
formed into solid substances. Like Thales, Anaximenes believed that the earth
was flat, but he thought that it floated on air.
85

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Pythagoras, one of the most influential cosmologists, is familiar to us from the
geometric theorem that still bears his name. Around 531 BC he left his birthplace
Samos because of the tyranny of Polycrates and settled in southern Italy with a
group of disciples, both male and female. The doctrines of the Pythagoreans com-
bined mysticism (they believed in the transmigration of the soul), political the-
ory, cosmology, and mathematics. Pythagoras taught that arithmetic was the key
to understanding the universe. He postulated that the earth was a sphere in the
center of a series of hollow spheres. The stars were fixed on the outer spherical
shell, and the planets on smaller shells within. The movements of the celestial
spheres, dictated by strict arithmetical ratios, gave the universe a musical har-
mony (which, it was said, he alone could hear).
The ideas of Xenophanes of Colophon (c. 550 BC) about the development of the
cosmos were based more on personal observation. For example, when he noticed
fossil imprints of marine life and seaweed in three different locations inland, he
theorized that they were produced when the earth was covered with the mud cre-
ated by the primal mixture of seawater and earth. We have fragments of his po-
ems in which he attacks conventional religious and ethical beliefs.
86
Document 3.4.
Mortals made their gods, and furnished them
with their own body, voice, and garments.
If a horse or lion or a slow ox
had agile hands for paint and sculpture,
the horse would make his god a horse,
the ox would sculpt an ox.
Our gods have flat noses and black skins
say the Ethiopians. The Thracians say
our gods have red hair and hazel eyes.
Xenophanes fr. 12–14 Diehl; translated by Willis Barnstone,
Greek Lyric Poetry. New York: Schocken, 1972, p. 131, adapted.
The writings of the early Greek scientists were circulated all around the Greek
world and they freely criticized each other’s theories. Heraclitus of Ephesus (late
sixth century), for example, rejected Pythagoras’ notion of an orderly and regulated
cosmos, maintaining instead that everything was constantly changing like a river:
You can not step into the same river twice. To reach understanding of this process
of change, we must learn the hidden principle, which he calls “logos.” For the
world is not what it appears to be. The same idea was at the core of Parmenides’
(early fifth century) attempt to analyze what it means to say that something is or

Archaic Greece
exists. According to Parmenides, all you can say and think is that “being” exists
but that “nonbeing” does not exist. Change is logically impossible because if
something changes it is no longer the same and does not exist. Such questions as
these, first posed by the Presocratics, would preoccupy philosophers for the rest
of antiquity: What do we mean when we say that something exists, and what is
the relationship between the world as we perceive it through our senses and
what it “really” is?
PANHELLENIC INSTITUTIONS
The ease with which poets, thinkers, artists, and ideas moved from city to city
shows how culturally unified the Greek world was even as it remained politically
divided. The gatherings at Panhellenic sanctuaries played a prominent part in
forging a common Hellenic identity, as ever greater numbers came to worship,
consult oracles, and attend musical and athletic competitions.
The oracle of Apollo at Delphi drew Greeks and non-Greeks alike from all over
the Mediterranean. For a fairly hefty fee individuals could consult Apollo for
prophetic advice on marriage, careers, voyages, etc. Poleis too sought the god’s
guidance and sanction on serious matters of state, such as colonizing, religion,
and laws. Apollo responded through a priestess, called the Pythia, who, in a self-
induced trance, divulged his messages. The Pythia’s incoherent utterances were
turned into verses (often ambiguous in meaning) by “interpreters” (prophe¯tai). Be-
cause so many tyrants, foreign kings, and aristocratic leaders consulted the ora-
cle, the sanctuary at Delphi became a storehouse of information about political
conditions across the Mediterranean world.
The greatest attraction, however, was the sanctuary of Zeus at Olympia. By the
end of the seventh century the quadrennial games in Zeus’ honor—inaugurated,
according to tradition, in 776 BC—were drawing spectators and contestants from
the entire Greek world. The success of the Olympics (the games held at Olympia)
soon spawned three new Panhellenic athletic festivals: in honor of Apollo at Del-
phi (582 BC), for Poseidon at Isthmia near Corinth (581), and for Zeus at Nemea
in Argolis (573). These festivals were integrated into the four-year Olympiad to
form an athletic “circuit,” staggered so that there would be one major game each
year, two in alternate years, with the Olympics remaining the premier event.
Other Panhellenic festivals modeled on the Olympic games were inaugurated at
Athens, Thebes, and elsewhere during the sixth century.
The Panhellenic contests and rituals brought Greeks together in peaceful cele-
bration. For the month in which the Olympic games were held, poleis observed
a sacred truce banning warfare and channeled their rivalries instead into the ath-
letic contests, much as states do today. The sacred precincts themselves became
places for poleis to flaunt their wealth and achievements with costly dedications
of statuary and marble “treasuries,” commemorating both athletic and military
victories. Yet the games featured no team events, just matches among individu-
als. The contestants showed off their speed, strength, dexterity, and endurance,
87

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
the very same qualities required of Homer’s heroes, whether on the battlefield or
in athletic contests.
The main events at the Olympic games were the foot races, the most presti-
gious of which was the short sprint, called the stade (stadion, hence stadium) a
distance of about 210 yards. In this contest alone—at a separate festival honoring
Hera—maidens participated; their course was one-sixth shorter than the men’s
stade. The young women did not race completely nude, as the males did, but
their tunics barely reached the knees and covered only one side of the chest.
Male athletes vied in a variety of events, including wrestling, boxing, and the
pankration, a vicious combination of boxing and wrestling with no holds barred
except biting and eye gouging. In the pentathlon opponents competed in five
events: the stade, javelin and discus throws, the long jump, and wrestling. In
these events the contestants competed in the nude. Most spectacular of all was
the four-horse chariot race, a contest dating back to the Late Bronze Age. (The
wealthy owner of the horses and chariot, not the charioteer, was declared the
winner.) A number of festivals also featured competitions in choral and solo po-
etry and in instrumental performances.
At the four principal games the prizes were just honorific tokens, wreaths of
foliage: at Olympia olive leaves, at Delphi laurel, at Nemea wild celery, and at
Isthmia pine. (The rewards at the less notable festivals were more substantial.)
On their return home from a major festival, however, victors could expect tri-
umphal processions, statues in the agora, and even prizes of money.
RELATIONS AMONG STATES
With the emergence of the city-states, the external problem of coexistence became
much more complicated. What had been raids among neighboring communities
turned into serous warfare. There were several reasons for the heightened ten-
sions. As states began to run out of land, they attempted to extend their bound-
aries, and disputes often erupted over borderlands that had not required strict
definition when populations were still small. Moreover, quarrels of mother-poleis
were often taken up by their colonies, with new enmities arising among poleis
hundreds of miles away. On the mainland territorial wars between poleis began
as early as the late eighth century, when Chalcis and Eretria in Euboea fought
over possession of the rich Lelantos River plain that lay between them. In this
conflict (known as the Lelantine War), both sides were said to have had distant
allies from much farther away—possibly indicating the involvement of rival colo-
nial networks.
Interstate tensions were especially high in the Peloponnesus, which contained
three of the major Greek city-states—Sparta, Argos, and Corinth. After their con-
quest of Messenia in the late eighth century, the Spartans warred against their ri-
vals, the Argives, with some success, though they were badly beaten by them in
669 BC in a battle at Hysiae in Argolis. The Argives in the meantime were trying
to expand their own land holdings and influence within the Peloponnesus,
88

Archaic Greece
particularly around Corinth; the Corinthians themselves were fighting over ter-
ritory with their smaller neighbors, Megara and Sicyon. Such costly and deadly
squabbles over land continued in the Peloponnesus until the middle of the sixth
century, when the Spartans began using diplomacy and forming alliances to main-
tain their supremacy in southern Greece.
In the sixth century the Greek states began in earnest to establish formal mech-
anisms for avoiding war. Most of these cooperative institutions had their genesis
in the prestate period, but it was not until the later Archaic Age that they were re-
fined and regularized. At the same time that formal means were being instituted,
diplomatic relations were still being conducted much as they had been in the Dark
Age. The tyrants especially conducted foreign policy this way, making pacts of
friendship or marriage alliances with other tyrants or with the top aristocrats. For
example, Periander (c. 627–587), who succeeded his father Cypselus as tyrant of
Corinth, developed a political friendship with Thrasybulus, tyrant of Miletus, end-
ing an old enmity between the two poleis going back to the Lelantine War. The pact
aided both Corinthian traders in Egypt and the Black Sea and Milesian traders in
the West. Periander also arbitrated a dispute between Athens and Mytilene over
control of Sigeum, an important way station on the route to the Black Sea.
Temporary military alliances are as old as war. In the Archaic period they be-
came more formal and longer lasting. States began to make written treaties,
pledging friendship and cessation of aggression for a stipulated time. The earli-
est formal pact we know of comes from the polis of Sybaris in southern Italy (c.
550 BC). An inscription reads: “The Sybarites and their allies and the Serdaioi
made an agreement for friendship, faithful and without guile, for ever. Guaran-
tors: Zeus, Apollo, and the other gods, and the polis of Poseidonia” (Meiggs and
Lewis, 1989, p. 10). There were also multistate alliances or leagues. One such was
the amphictyony or “association of neighbors,” whereby several poleis were
bound together by a common religious cult. Although an amphictyony could not
prevent its members from going to war, the cooperating states might pledge not
to destroy each other’s cities or cut off their water supply.
In the Archaic period, the ethne¯ too began to form loose unions among their
separate towns and villages. The vast ethnos of Thessaly, a region rich in land
and people, formed one of the most successful federations. Its unity made Thes-
saly the major power of northern Greece for a period of time in the sixth century,
until the confederacy was weakened by quarrels among the local chiefs. Under
pressure from the Thessalian confederacy, the ethnos of the Phocians developed
a federal union of their own, complete with their own federation coinage and
army. And under the pressure from both the Thessalians and the Athenians, the
rival poleis of Boeotia formed a league under the leadership of Thebes, which too
proved fractious and unstable, because of opposition to Theban hegemony.
It would be an overstatement to say that the polis-system was responsible for the
many advances and achievements of the Archaic Age, but it certainly spurred
them along. Greeks, no matter where they lived in the wide Mediterranean world,
shared in a common culture, what the historian Herodotus called to helle¯nikon,
89

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
“the Greek thing.” Still, they would never be a single nation, but rather hundreds
of independent city-states, unfettered by an overarching government. By the end
of the Archaic Age the two most powerful states were Sparta and Athens. It is to
Sparta that we now turn.
TRANSLATIONS
Fowler, Barbara Hughes. 1992. Archaic Greek Poetry. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Rackham, H. 1977. Aristotle: Politics. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, MA and London:
Harvard University Press.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Andrewes, A. 1956. The Greek Tyrants. New York: Harper & Row. Although written almost
a half century ago, it remains a standard introduction to the tyrannoi.
Boardman, John. 1973. The Greeks Overseas: Their Early Colonies and Trade. Baltimore: Pen-
guin. An excellent introduction, with many illustrations, to Greek colonization and
the economic and cultural interactions between the Greeks and their neighbors in
other lands.
Hanson, Victor Davis. 1995. The Other Greeks: The Family Farm and the Agrarian Roots of West-
ern Civilization. New York: The Free Press. A wide-ranging, meticulously detailed
study of the “yeoman” farmer-hoplite and his role in the formation of the city-state.
Murray, Oswyn. 1993. Early Greece. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
An important contribution to the understanding of Greek society and culture in the
early polis from the end of the Dark Age to the Persian Wars.
Osborne, Robin. 1996. Greece in the Making 1200–479 BC. London and New York: Routledge.
This book, well illustrated, is a valuable compendium of new information and the lat-
est scholarly research covering the periods from the early Dark Age to the Classical.
Osborne, Robin. 1998. Archaic and Classical Greek Art. (Oxford History of Art). New York:
Oxford University Press. Splendidly illustrated and engagingly written, this volume
places Archaic and Classical art in their social and cultural contexts.
Snodgrass, Anthony. 1980. Archaic Greece. The Age of Experiment. Berkeley and Los Ange-
les: University of California Press. The first major book on Archaic Greece written
by an archaeologist, and an important reappraisal of the importance of the Archaic
period to Greek history.
Starr, Chester G. 1986. Individual and Community: The Rise of the Polis 800–500 B.C. A brief,
but thorough, analysis of the emergence of the city-state form of polity.
Tandy, David W. and Walter C. Neale (eds.). 1996. Hesiod’s Works and Days. A Translation
and Commentary for the Social Sciences. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cal-
ifornia Press. A very useful commentary that looks at Hesiod’s world through the
perspectives of sociologists, anthropologists, and social economists.
90

91
4
SPARTA
Admired in peace and dreaded in war, for much of the Archaic and Classical
periods Sparta was the most powerful city in the Greek world. It was also dif-
ferent from other poleis. To be sure, the Spartans shared many basic institutions
with other Greeks: their society was patriarchal and polytheistic, servile labor
played a key role, agriculture formed the basis of the economy, law was revered
and martial valor prized. Nonetheless, Sparta was unique in many important
ways. No other Greek state ever defined its goals as clearly as Sparta or ex-
pended so much effort in trying to attain them. While the intrusion of the state
into the lives of individuals was substantial in all Greek states, no state surpassed
Sparta in the invasive role it played in daily life. Spartans took enormous pride
in their polis, and other Greeks were impressed by the patriotism and selflessness
the Spartan system entailed. The Spartans’ denial of individuality fostered a
powerful sense of belonging that other Greeks envied, and Sparta continues to
cast a spell over historians, philosophers, feminists, and political scientists.
Despite the interest the Spartans sparked in Greek intellectuals, it is difficult
to write about Sparta and its surrounding territory, Laconia. The problem is not
lack of sources; the volume of ancient writing on Sparta is large. The difficulty
lies in the fact that many of our sources are tainted by their acceptance of an ide-
alized image of Sparta that historians call the “Spartan mirage.” This idea of
Sparta was a vision of an egalitarian and orderly society characterized by patri-
otism, courage in battle, and tolerance for deprivation.
THE DARK AGE AND THE ARCHAIC PERIOD
Laconia was an important center in the Bronze Age. Like much of the rest of
Greece, Laconia experienced a sharp drop in population at the end of the Myce-
naean period. Sometime in the tenth century BC Dorian newcomers entered the
territory. By the eighth century BC trends similar to those documented elsewhere
in Greece had begun to appear in Laconia as well. New villages were founded
as population gradually increased, and four of those villages near the Eurotas

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
92
Figure 4.1. Peloponnesus.
L A C E D A E M O N
B O E O T I A
A T T I C A
A C
H A
E
A
E L I S
A R C A D I A
A R G O L I D
L A
C O
N
I
A
M E
S S
E
N
I
A
M E G A R I D
PISATIS
SCIRITIS
CYNURIA
Sphacteria
HER
MI
O
N
E
HER
MI
O
N
E
Pene
us
R.
A
s
o
p
u
s
R
E
u
r
o
t
a
s
R
.
Alph
eus
R.
Heraea
Mantinea
Salamis
Aegina
Mt.
Ithome
Mt. T
ayg
et
us
Mt. Eryman
thus
Mt. Partheniu
s (Par
non
)
Mt. Cyllene
I
st
h
m
us
L A C E D A E M O N
B O E O T I A
A T T I C A
A C
H A
E
A
E L I S
A R C A D I A
A R G O L I D
L A
C O
N
I
A
M E
S S
E
N
I
A
M E G A R I D
CORINTHIAN
GULF
PISATIS
SCIRITIS
CYNURIA
Pene
us
R.
A
s
o
p
u
s
R
E
u
r
o
t
a
s
R
.
Alph
eus
R.
Heraea
Mantinea
Cape Malea
Taenarum
Mt.
Ithome
Mt. T
ayg
et
us
Mt. Eryman
thus
Mt. Partheniu
s (Par
non
)
Mt. Cyllene
I
st
h
m
us
0
0
20
40
60 km
10
20
30
40 miles
Naupactus
Thebes
Patrae
Aegion
Elis
Bassae
Olympia
Megalopolis
Tegea
Messene
Pylos
Gythium
Amyclae
Sparta
Therapne
Thyrea
Hysiae
Tiryns
Argos
Mycenae
Cleonae
Cenchreae
Megara
Nisaea
Eleusis
Pegae
Pellene
Sicyon
Corinth
Phlius
Nemea
Lechaeum
Stymphalus
Orchomenus
Troezen
Hermione
Epidaurus

Sparta
River in the center of the Laconian plain united to form the city of Sparta. Early
in the eighth century the town of Amyclae, 3 miles from the original four villages,
was added to the city. Thus the Spartan polis was the city center plus the terri-
tory of the plain. Increased contacts with the rest of Greece were reflected in the
emergence of a distinctive Spartan version of geometric art.
Like other early Greek poleis, Sparta (or Lacedaemon, as it was often called in
antiquity) began to experience difficulties in satisfying its needs from its own ter-
ritory. Sparta was located inland, with the nearest port, Gythium, 27 miles to the
south. This atypical location encouraged the city to seek a novel solution to the need
for land to feed a growing population, a solution that would determine the course
of Spartan development. Unlike other Greek cities, which repeatedly founded
colonies overseas in an effort to alleviate the pressure on resources caused by pop-
ulation expansion, the Spartans founded only one colony, Taras in southern Italy.
Instead of looking abroad for a solution to their difficulties, the Spartans sought
a military answer to their problem through conquest of their neighbors, and by
the end of the eighth century, they had gained control of the plain of Laconia.
Helots and the Social Hierarchy
To ensure control of the Laconian plain, its inhabitants were reduced to the sta-
tus of helots, hereditary subjects of the Spartan state. The rest of the inhabitants
of Laconia, who occupied the area surrounding the city of Sparta, became peri-
oikoi (“those who dwell around [Sparta],” or “neighbors”). Unlike the helots, who
were in essence slaves, the perioikoi remained free. Although they were obligated
to serve in the army, they were not permitted to participate in the government.
They did enjoy some local autonomy, however, and in many ways lived like the
majority of Greeks who were not Spartans, working as homemakers, farmers,
craftsmen, and merchants. Thus they constituted an essential part of the Spartan
economic system.
The Spartans also coveted the fertile Messenian lowlands, and at some time in
the third quarter of the eighth century they invaded Messenia, beginning what
modern historians call the First Messenian War. According to tradition the war
lasted twenty years and ended about 720 BC. Messenia became subject to Sparta,
and like the Laconians, some of the Messenians became perioikoi, but most be-
came helots, bound to their land and obliged to work it for their Spartan masters
with no consolation but the promise that they would not be sold out of Messe-
nia. The Spartan poet Tyrtaeus gloatingly described them as “burdened like
asses, bringing to their masters under harsh compulsion one half . . . of the fruits
of the land” (fr. 6 West).
The conquest of Laconia and Messenia made Sparta one of the largest of Greek
states, controlling a territory of over 3000 square miles (about three times the size
of the Athenian state). Sparta was also one of the richest states. Spartan pottery and
metalwork were among the finest in Greece. The beauty of Spartan women was
widely celebrated, and Sparta’s female choruses were famous. A vivid impression
93

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
of the wealth and elegance of Spartan life is provided by a few surviving frag-
ments of the works of the seventh-century BC poet Alcman, whose hymns, written
for choruses of unmarried Spartan girls to sing on ceremonial occasions, mention
luxury items including racehorses, purple textiles, and gold jewelry in the shape
of serpents.
There is no abundance of purple sufficient to protect us, nor our
speckled serpent bracelet of solid gold, nor our Lydian cap, adorn-
ment for tender-eyed girls, nor Nanno’s hair, (70) nor Areta who
looks like a goddess, nor Thylacis and Cleesithera. Nor will you go
to Ainesimbrota’s and say “I wish Astaphis were mine,” and (75) “I
wish Philylla would look at me, and Demareta, and lovely
Vianthemis”—no, it is Hagesichora who exhausts me with love.
(fr. 1.65–78 Alcman; Pomeroy 2002)
Spartan prosperity, however, rested on insecure foundations. Civil unrest in
the late eighth and early seventh centuries was avoided by exiling dissidents,
who founded Sparta’s only colony, Taras. The growing desperation of the Messe-
nians was a more serious threat. Greek political theorists considered it a mistake
to enslave people in their own home territory, especially when the enslaved sig-
nificantly outnumbered their masters, as the Messenians did the Spartans. Not
surprisingly, the Messenians rebelled in the wake of a major Spartan military de-
feat by the Argives at the Battle of Hysiae in 669 BC.
As is true of the First Messenian War, little is known of the details of the Sec-
ond Messenian War. The poems Tyrtaeus wrote celebrating Spartan courage in
the war became Sparta’s classics. The following excerpt is from the same poem
that is quoted in Chapter Three:
Here is a man who proves himself to be valiant in war.
With a sudden rush he turns to fight the rugged battalions
of the enemy, and sustains the beating waves of assault.
And he who so falls among the champions and loses his sweet life,
so blessing with honor his city, his father, and all his people,
with wounds in his chest, where the spear that he was facing has
transfixed
that massive guard of his shield, and gone through his breastplate
as well,
why, such a man is lamented alike by the young and the elders,
and all his city goes into mourning and grieves for his loss.
(Tyrtaeus fr. 9 Diehl; Lattimore 1960)
In the end Sparta prevailed and the Messenians had no choice but to resign
themselves to the rigors of their former helot status.
The Second Messenian War had been a terrifying revelation of the potential
risks of the helot system. As a result of the conquest of neighboring regions the
94

Sparta
helots outnumbered Spartan citizens by a ratio that may have been seven to one or
even higher. The Spartans were forced to find a way to preserve their domination
over their helots. The solution they found was drastic, and its implementation
gradually transformed Sparta and eventually created the unique regimented soci-
ety known to us from the Classical sources. Simply stated, the Spartans realized
that if all potential hoplites could be trained to the highest degree of skill possi-
ble, Sparta would enjoy an overwhelming military advantage over its helots and
other enemies. Therefore the Spartans reformed their institutions with a view to-
ward achieving two goals: freeing male citizens from all but military obligations,
and socializing them to accept the regimentation and discipline required of a
Spartan soldier. Until the fourth century and the Hellenistic period, the Spartans
were the only real professional soldiers. In effect they waged a perpetual war
against the helots and were consequently always prepared to deploy their mili-
tary force when necessary.
THE SPARTAN SYSTEM
Little is known about the actual development of the Spartan system. Greek his-
torians followed Spartan tradition and ascribed its creation to Lycurgus, a shad-
owy figure who may or may not really have lived. Scholars today are agreed that
many of the institutions whose creation Greeks ascribed to Lycurgus, such as
men’s dining groups, organization of the population by age cohorts, and the use
of iron money, had, in fact, once existed in other Greek communities. These prac-
tices survived at Sparta because their place in Spartan life had been redefined to
aid in the production of the ideal Spartan hoplite.
However this evolution occurred, the evidence indicates that the main features
of the Spartan system were in place by the end of the seventh or the early sixth
century BC. The Spartan regime may be called totalitarian, for it touched on al-
most every aspect of life, including those we in modern Western society consider
private: how to wear our hair, the choice of whether and when to marry, the con-
ditions of conjugal intercourse, and the decision whether to rear a child.
The Education and Upbringing of Boys
As the poetry of Tyrtaeus made plain, the Spartan ideal for a man was to be skilled
and courageous in battle, neither to run away nor surrender but to stand his
ground and give up his life for his city. Training was designed to produce men
who conformed to this pattern alone. The Spartan was liable for military service
to the age of sixty and needed to stay fit; hence he never was trained for any other
profession or way of life. The educational system, like much else that was unique
to Sparta, received legitimacy from the insistence that it was created by Lycurgus.
The process of creating invincible warriors began at birth, for the state took
upon itself the right to determine a new baby’s viability. Whereas other Greek
poleis left the choice to the father, at Sparta officials appointed by the government
95

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
examined the newborns. The vitality of male infants and their potential as sol-
diers determined whether they would be raised, or abandoned. (Female babies,
apparently, were not subjected to official scrutiny, for their physical prowess did
not directly affect the outcome of battles.) Fathers did not decide how to raise
their children. Rather, all children received the same education under state su-
pervision. Education in Sparta, as elsewhere, was organized by age groups: chil-
dren, boys, youths (ephebes), young men, and adults. From the age of seven,
boys left home to be trained in groups called “herds” according to principles de-
signed to encourage conformity, obedience, group solidarity, and military skills.
The emphasis in the boys’ education was not on reading and writing, but
rather on practicing to endure hardships and to fend for themselves as would be
necessary when they became hoplite soldiers. To toughen their feet, they went
barefoot, and they often went naked as well. When they were twelve, their hair
was cut short. They never wore a tunic and were each allocated only one cloak
yearly to wear in all kinds of weather. Unlike the rest of the Greeks, who made
war only in the summer, the Spartans were perpetually at war with the helots
and therefore needed to be prepared to fight year round. Magistrates called
ephors (“overseers”) inspected the boys daily and examined them in the nude
every ten days. The boys slept in groups on rough mats that they had made them-
selves. To develop cunning and self-reliance, they were encouraged to supple-
ment their food rations by stealing. Whipping awaited anyone who revealed his
lack of skill by getting caught.
From the ages of fourteen to twenty the ephebes performed their preliminary
military service. At twenty they grew their hair long (unlike men in other parts of
the Greek world) and shaved themselves in the distinctive Spartan style—a long
beard and no mustache. Between ages twenty and thirty they were permitted to
marry but had to continue to live with their army groups until the age of thirty.
Acceptance into a syssition (“dining group,” “mess”) was an essential stage in
reaching adulthood. The Spartan man ate his meals with about fifteen members
of his army group, an experience that fostered the loyalty and cooperativeness
essential to successful hoplite warfare. Each member of the syssition was obliged
to contribute a fixed quantity of food and drink. The syssitia (plural) were in some
ways analogous to the symposia (“drinking parties”) enjoyed by Greeks elsewhere,
but the fact that the Spartan was purposely schooled to drink in moderation points
to an important difference. Greeks usually mixed their wine with water. Helots, how-
ever, were forced to consume undiluted wine and to perform vulgar and ridicu-
lous songs and dances to exemplify the consequences of lack of control. Young
Spartans, who were invited to the syssitia as part of their education, were en-
couraged to laugh at the spectacle of the drunken helots. The lesson was a dou-
ble one: From this experience youths were expected to learn both to be wary of
drinking to excess—for inebriation could lead to death in conditions of perpetual
warfare—and to view the helots as pathetic creatures, patently inferior to the
Spartan soldiery.
Inevitably, the success rate in forging soldiers according to the prescribed
mold was less than 100 percent. Though the harsh treatment of those perceived
96

Sparta
as cowards discouraged failure, some boys failed to develop as expected. Since
martial valor offered the sole path to the honor and respect of one’s peers, life
was wretched for boys who were unable to cope with the rigors of military life.
When cowards were identified, they were stigmatized and called “tremblers.”
Their ridiculous appearance announced their disgrace: They were obliged to
wear cloaks with colored patches and to only partially shave their beards. Hu-
miliated in public, they were despised even by their own kinsmen, whom they
were believed to have dishonored. They could not hold public office, nor was it
likely that anyone would marry them or their sisters, with the consequence that
their family would die out and the eugenic goals of the state be well served.
Becoming a Spartan Woman
Sparta’s military ethos had implications for females as well as males. Just as boys
were brought up to become brave fighters, girls were raised to bear stalwart
soldiers-to-be. Spartans were the only Greek women whose upbringing was pre-
scribed by the state and who were educated at state expense. For example, unlike
other Greek women, who spent most of their time indoors and were regularly
given less food than men and no wine, Spartan females exercised outside, were
well nourished, and drank wine as part of their daily diet. Childbearing was their
only social obligation. Though, like all Greek women, they did know how to
weave, they were free from the obligation to engage in any other form of do-
mestic labor.
Specific lines of development were prescribed for Spartan girls much as they
were for boys. The educational system for girls was also organized according to
97
Figure 4.2. Bronze statuette of a Spartan
girl running, wearing a racing dress that
exposes her right breast.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
age classes. Girls were divided into the categories of children, young girls, maid-
ens who had reached puberty, and married women. Hairstyles announced a
woman’s passage through the life cycle. As a maiden, she wore her hair long and
loose; as a bride, her hair was cropped; as a married woman, her hair was cov-
ered. As with so much else in their way of life, Spartans ascribed the customary
upbringing of Spartan girls to Lycurgus.
As is the case in many warlike societies, the perpetual absence of men on mil-
itary duty created a division of labor in which women managed domestic affairs.
Aristotle, writing in the fourth century BC and considering some four hundred
years of Spartan history, complained that for this reason Spartan women enjoyed
altogether too much freedom, power, and prestige. The constitution of Lycurgus,
he believed, was flawed from the start because only men conformed to it, while
women escaped its regulations. He was convinced that Spartan women indulged
in “every kind of luxury and intemperance,” promoting greed and an attendant
degeneration of the Spartan ideal of equality among male citizens. He also main-
tained that the Spartans’ freedom to bequeath their land as they wished and the
size of dowries led to two-fifths of the land in his own time having fallen into the
hands of women. Spartan daughters received as dowries one-half the amount of
their parents’ property that their brothers received as inheritance. (In contrast, at
Athens daughters received approximately one-sixth the amount that their broth-
ers inherited.) Yet Aristotle no doubt exaggerates when he complains that Sparta
was ruled by women, for they had no share in the government. Clearly, however,
their ownership and control of property gave Spartan women far more authority
than their counterparts in the rest of Greece.
Sex and Marriage
As elsewhere in Greece, marriages in Sparta might or might not entail a close
emotional attachment between husband and wife. The Spartan requirement that
married men continue to live in barracks until the age of thirty meant that young
couples did not live together even in peacetime.
According to Plutarch, Spartan marriages often took on a strikingly clandes-
tine character that struck the ancients as worthy of comment.
They used to marry by capture, not when the women were small or immature,
but when they were in their prime and fully ripe for it. The so-called “brides-
maid” took the captured girl. She shaved her head to the scalp, then dressed her
in a man’s cloak and sandals, and laid her down alone on a mattress in the dark.
The bridegroom, who was not drunk and thus not impotent, but was sober as al-
ways, having dined with his mess group, then would slip in, untie her belt, lift
her, and carry her to the bed. After spending only a short time with her, he would
depart discreetly so as to sleep wherever he usually did with the other young
men. And he continued to do this thereafter. While spending the days with his
contemporaries, and going to sleep with them, he would cautiously visit his bride
in secret, embarrassed and fearful in case someone in the house might notice him.
His bride at the same time was scheming and helping to plan how they might
98

Sparta
meet each other unobserved at a suitable time. They did this not just for a short pe-
riod, but for long enough that some might even have children before they saw their
own wives in the day. Such intercourse was not only an exercise in self-control and
moderation, but also meant that partners were fertile physically, always fresh for
love, and ready for intercourse rather than being satiated and impotent from un-
limited sexual activity. Moreover some lingering spark of desire and affection al-
ways remained in both.
(Plutarch, Life of Lycurgus 15.3–5; trans. Pomeroy 2002)
In addition to the secret marriage, other reported customs include the random
selection of spouses by cohorts of potential brides and bridegrooms groping in a
dark room. In a system of aristocratic endogamy (i.e., marriage within the group),
the haphazard selection of spouses is a symptom of equality, for one spouse is as
good as the next. Since the sole purpose of marriage is reproduction, the secret,
or trial, marriage permits the couple to find other spouses if their union proves
to be infertile. If these customs were ever practiced, they apparently had died out
by the Classical period. The absence of adultery at Sparta, however, continued to
evoke comment among non-Spartans. Xenophon also mentions a combination of
practices that satisfied both the private desires of individual women and men as
well as the state’s eugenic goals and insatiable need for citizens:
If, however, it happened that an old man had a young wife—seeing that men of
that age guard their wives—he [Lycurgus] thought the opposite. He required the
elderly husband to bring in some man whose body and spirit he admired, in or-
der to beget children. On the other hand, in case a man did not want to have in-
tercourse with his wife but wanted children of whom he could be proud, he made
it legal for him to choose a woman who was the mother of a fine family and well-
born, and if he persuaded her husband, he produced children with her. Many
such arrangements developed. For the wives want to get possession of two oikoi,
and the husbands want to get brothers for their sons who will share their lineage
and power, but claim no part of the property.
(Xenophon, Spartan Constitution 1.7–10; Pomeroy 2002)
Homosexuality and Pederasty
Like other ancient Greeks, Spartans lacked the binary division modern society
tends to impose between people who are considered homosexual and those who
are viewed as heterosexual, and same-sex erotic relationships did not preclude
their participants entering into heterosexual marriages, with which the homosex-
ual relationship might exist simultaneously. Ancient homosexuality differs from
the modern version in several respects. The origins of many same-sex relationships
lay in the educational system. Erotic relationships between members of the same
sex were considered potentially educational for both women and men as long as
the element of physical attraction was not primary. Single-sex education was the
norm in the Greek world, and older men and women often functioned as “teach-
ers” or informal guides to younger members of society. The disapproval that at-
taches today to romantic connections between teachers and students or between
99

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
old and young would have puzzled the ancient Greeks, who viewed the erotic
element in the teacher-pupil relationship as a constructive building block in the
education of the young. The attraction of teachers to their youthful pupils was
considered to have social utility, encouraging the enamored teacher to work hard
at educating the student, who in turn was offered an inspiring role model in an
older, wiser, more accomplished suitor. The pupils in question were generally in
early adolescence. This pattern of same-sex relationships was evident not only in
the context of education but in life as a whole. How much physical sexual activity
actually was involved is unclear, since many Greek intellectuals who left written
records of social customs tended to be embarrassed about sex and were eager to
stress the cerebral element in same-sex romantic connections. We know less
about the homoerotic bonds between women, but Plutarch in his Life of Lycurgus
reported that “sexual relationships of this type were so highly valued that re-
spectable women would in fact have love affairs with unmarried girls,” and the
erotic element in the songs of female choruses (like the poem of Alcman quoted
previously) is not hidden.
For males and females alike, liaisons with members of the same sex provided
much of the companionship, sexual pleasure, and sense of spiritual well-being that
many people in modern Western society nowadays associate with marriage. Ho-
mosexuality was integrated into the system. The idealized model of the same-sex
relationship involved an older person and an adolescent and consequently was
time-limited. With boys it was considered inappropriate to continue the relation-
ship after the teenager’s beard began to grow. Nevertheless, some relationships did
develop between companions of the same age and endured throughout life.
DEMOGRAPHY AND THE SPARTAN ECONOMY
By their conquests of Laconia and Messenia, the Spartans created a situation
where they never constituted more than a small fraction—perhaps a twentieth—
of the total population of their territory. Hence, as is often the case with ruling
aristocracies, their numbers were never deemed to be sufficient. Furthermore, un-
like other Greek states, at the very start the lack of trade and colonization limited
the growth of Sparta’s population, for it had no colonies to which it might some-
time in the future export a population that could no longer be supported at home.
Xenophobia also restricted Sparta’s numbers. Unlike the Athenians, for example,
at no time did Spartans marry foreigners, nor did they recruit large numbers of
new citizens of non-Spartan origin, though the desperation occasioned by the
long war with Athens during the fifth century known as the Peloponnesian War
did move them to take some exceptional measures. In this emergency, they al-
lowed some non-Spartiate boys living in Sparta to be trained for service in the
Spartan army, freed some helots for military service, and appointed perioikoi to
some positions of command. Some of these practices continued after the end of
the war and into the Hellenistic period when the population problem was even
more acute.
100

Sparta
Sparta’s Shrinking Population
The Spartan lifestyle exacerbated the population decline. Sparta was the only
Greek state in which male infanticide was institutionalized. Moreover, many
deaths can be explained by the Spartan soldier’s obligation to stand his ground
and give his life for his country, rather than surrender. This ideal was reinforced
by peer pressure, epitomized by statements attributed to Spartan women such as
that of the mother who told her son as she handed him his shield to come home
“either with this or on this.” (Spartan soldiers who were not buried on the bat-
tlefield were carried home on their shields.)
The reduction in the number of Spartans was gradual. In addition to the high
rate of infant and juvenile mortality found throughout the ancient world, the Spar-
tan problem was aggravated by their unusual marriage practices. Women married
only several years after they became fertile; opportunities for conjugal intercourse
were limited; husbands were continuously absent at war or sleeping with their
army groups when wives were in their peak childbearing years; and both sexes
engaged in a certain amount of homosexual, nonprocreative sex. As if these obsta-
cles to maintaining the population were not sufficient, some women also declined
to bear children. The risks of maternity were considered equal to those soldiers
faced on the battlefield: The only Spartans who earned the distinction of having
their names inscribed on tombstones were those who had died in childbirth or in
battle. Spartans, like other Greek women, probably had access to contraceptives
including the use of herbs, douches of vinegar or water, and mechanical barriers
made of wads of wool soaked in honey or olive oil. Control over fertility is often
indicative of high status for women, and Aristotle may have been correct in con-
tending that Spartan women controlled domestic matters, managing households
that constituted a significant portion of the family’s fortune.
Sparta’s population problem was also accelerated at times by natural disaster,
economic problems, and the emigration of men. There were nine thousand male
Spartans in the Archaic period. In 479 there were eight thousand male citizens,
five thousand of whom served at the battle of Plataea. There, according to
Herodotus, each Spartan hoplite was accompanied by seven helots who served
as light armed forces and performed the menial jobs. Though these figures are
probably not exact, they do give an idea of the proportion of Spartans to helots
in the army. In 330 Aristotle reckoned the number of Spartans at one thousand.
By 244 there were no more than seven hundred. By Roman times very few Spar-
tans were left to perform their hoary rituals and tests of endurance for tourists.
We have no exact information either on the absolute number of female Spartans
or on their numbers relative to the number of males.
Helots and the Spartan System
The Spartan economic system was designed to enable citizens to devote all their
time and energy to the defense and welfare of the polis. The state saw to it that they
had everything they needed as measured by a standard of austerity, not luxury.
101

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Though the perioikoi, who conducted business with the rest of the Greek world,
used silver and gold coins, Spartans themselves were permitted to use only iron
money: These flat bars or cakes made of iron had originally been used through-
out Greece before the invention of coinage. The Spartans used iron until the end
of the fifth century, when there was a vast influx of gold and silver after their vic-
tory in the Peloponnesian War, though they did not mint their own coins until
the Hellenistic period.
The goal for men was economic equality, which was, in reality, a minimum in-
come for all that would allow them to follow the Spartan way of life. The Spar-
tans referred to themselves as homoioi ( “peers,” or “men of equal status”). As we
shall see below, however, economic equality was an illusory ideal. When Messe-
nia was conquered, the territory was divided up into nine thousand equal kle¯roi.
At birth, each boy was allocated a share of this land by the state, and a family of
helots came with the land. The institution of helotry was inextricably tied up with
the Spartan system, essential as it was to releasing Spartan men and women from
the need to produce or purchase their food.
The owner of each kle¯ros was entitled to receive a specified amount of produce
annually from the helots who worked it. The helots’ burden seems to have var-
ied over the centuries. Tyrtaeus describes them as sharecroppers, forced to give
their masters half their yield, but Plutarch mentions a fixed rent of 70 bushels of
barley for each Spartan man and 12 for his wife, in addition to oil and wine.
Though they were not free, helots were not the same as slaves elsewhere in
Greece. They belonged to the state, not to individuals. They lived in stable fam-
ily groups on a farm assigned to them, and could not be sold abroad. Aside from
the obligation to provide sustenance for the owner of the plot of land, to serve as
auxiliaries in the army, and to mourn at the death of kings and magistrates, the
helots had no specific obligations to their masters. They were permitted to sell ex-
cess crops in the market and to accumulate some money in that way.
So that they should never forget that they were enslaved, the helots were sub-
jected to an annual beating. They were also obliged to wear a primitive and hu-
miliating costume that identified them immediately, including animal skins and
a leather cap. Submitting to the rule of others but living in their own territory,
the helots did not lose their desire for freedom. The service they performed in the
Spartan army, moreover, provided them with useful knowledge in their ongoing
struggle against their masters. In 464 some of them took advantage of the earth-
quake that had devastated Sparta and staged a rebellion at Ithome that lasted ten
years. In 455 the Spartans agreed to let the rebels depart on condition that they
should never return to the Peloponnesus. The Athenians settled many of them at
Naupactus, on the northern side of the Corinthian Gulf. Finally, in 369, Messenia
regained its independence with the aid of Thebes and other Boeotian enemies of
Sparta.
The system of helotry distinguished Sparta sharply from other Greek states,
making it the only polis with an economic system totally dependent upon geo-
graphical and social distance between landowners and workers on the land. De-
spite the prevalence of slavery in the Greek world, nowhere else was the labor of
102

Sparta
the lowest class so essential to survival. Furthermore, though agriculture re-
mained the basis of the domestic economy throughout the Greek world, other
sources of gaining a livelihood were customarily developed; at Sparta alone
among major states, agriculture remained the sole basis of the citizens’ economy.
The Spartan system was a remarkably successful experiment in what is now
called social engineering. To be sure, despite the ideology of equality among cit-
izens that was associated with their polis, disparities of wealth did not disappear.
Except for the members of the royal family and the tiny group elected to the
Council of Elders, however, the role played by differential wealth in determining
status and power was far smaller in Sparta than in other Greek poleis. The Spar-
tans called themselves the “Men of Equal Status” for good reason. Rich or poor,
they all had survived the same judgment at birth, they had endured the same
training, and they wore the same uniform and fought side by side with the same
weapons in the phalanx.
SPARTAN GOVERNMENT
Like Sparta’s social and educational system, its government was much admired
by contemporaries. It consisted of monarchical, oligarchical, and democratic ele-
ments: These constituted the kind of system political theorists like Aristotle called
a mixed constitution. Spartan conservatism made for a reluctance to abandon tra-
ditional institutions like monarchy and the council of elders when other Greek
poleis had either abolished or redefined the functions of these institutions and
had decreased the importance of hereditary power in government. The various
organs of government and shared offices were designed to serve as checks and
balances to one another, minimizing the danger that the government would take
too rapid, radical action.
Dual Kingship
The executive office was divided between two men. Two kings (basileis) served
as the head of government. The succession was hereditary. The two kings, who
were both cooperative and competitive with one another, and who were equal in
authority, served as a mutual check on the power of the monarchy. Sparta, more-
over, was never without a leader, and thus avoided what the Greeks called “an-
archy” (absence of leadership or of government).
The kings exercised military, religious, and judicial powers. One king served
as commander-in-chief of the armed forces, while the other supervised domestic
matters at home and took charge if his co-king was killed in action. The kings
functioned as the chief priests and conducted all the public sacrifices. They were
also expected to serve as moral exemplars. Thus, the courage and self-sacrifice of
King Leonidas and his troops, who obeyed the command of the Spartans to fight
at Thermopylae in 480 BC against all odds in the war against the Persians, became
legendary, although many other Greeks fought bravely at the same battle.
103

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Gerousia
The kings shared their judicial functions with the other members of the gerousia,
the Council of Gerontes (“Elders”). In addition to the two kings, the gerousia was
composed of twenty-eight men over the age of sixty who served for the rest of
their lives. Election to the gerousia was the highest honor to which a Spartan
could aspire. Candidates appeared in an order determined by lot. The winners
were chosen by acclamation in the assembly. Those who received the loudest
shouts were considered elected, a procedure Aristotle later criticized as “child-
ish.” No bill could be brought before the assembly until it had first been dis-
cussed by the gerousia, and the gerousia could decline to accept a decision of the
assembly by summarily declaring an adjournment. It also served as a criminal
court for cases of homicide, treason, and other serious offenses that carried the
penalty of disenfranchisement, exile, or death.
Ephors
Every year the Spartans elected five ephors by acclamation from candidates over
the age of thirty. The ephors (“overseers”) supervised the kings and represented
the principle of law, precious to the Spartans as it was to many Greeks. The
ephors took a monthly oath to uphold the office of the kings as long as they be-
haved in accordance with the laws, and they shared some of the kings’ executive
powers; but they were also empowered to depose them. Ephors monitored the
kings in Sparta, and two of them always accompanied a king who was on cam-
paign. The ephors presided over the gerousia and assembly, and dealt with for-
eign embassies. They also exercised judicial powers in civic matters and in cases
involving perioikoi.
One ephor was always “eponymous,” that is, his name was used at Sparta to
signify the year. For example, Thucydides dates a treaty of 421 as follows: “The
treaty is effective from the 27th day of the month of Artemisium at Sparta, when
Pleistolas is an ephor; and at Athens from the 25th day of the month of Elaphe-
bolium, when Alcaeus is an archon” (5.19). As a check on the ephors’ power, they
served for only one year, could not be reelected, and were subject to an audit by
their successors. Thus, they were both a democratic and an oligarchic constituent
of government.
The ephors exercised total control over the education of the young and en-
forced the iron discipline of Sparta. They were in charge of the krypteia (“secret
police”), a force designed to control the helots. This feature of government was
unique to Sparta among Greek cities. Young men were sent out for a year to spy
on the helots and were encouraged to kill any helots they caught, especially the
best of them who might be most prone to rebel. The ephors declared war against
the helots annually, thus making it possible for the Spartans to kill them without
incurring the religious pollution that usually accompanied acts of homicide.
104

Sparta
Assembly
In terms of its membership, the assembly was the most democratic organ of Spar-
tan government, for it included all adult male citizens. It met once a month at full
moon, outdoors. Unlike the Athenian assembly, however, the Spartan assembly
did not debate; citizens listened to a proposal made by the gerousia and simply
voted to accept or reject it, without discussion. The Spartan was trained to obey
and to conform, not to take sides in public debate. Lycurgus was said to have out-
lawed rhetoric teachers. This ethos gave rise to the English word “laconic” (de-
rived from Laconia), which is used to describe a spare style of speech or someone
who talks very little.
The Mixed Constitution of Ancient Sparta
Since antiquity, many political theorists have admired Sparta’s government, be-
lieving it to confirm the basic principle that the best guarantee of stability lies in
a blend of monarchic, oligarchic, and democratic elements. Certainly Sparta had
kings, and the ideology of economic equality among male citizens fostered an
egalitarian spirit. In reality, however, the oligarchic element considerably out-
weighed the other two. Power lay predominantly with the gerousia. As time went
by, moreover, the five ephors also gained increasing power over the kings and fre-
quently took the lead in framing foreign policy. Even if we discount the 95 per-
cent or so of disenfranchised residents of Laconia—perioikoi, helots, and Spartan
women—the truth is that even within the subgroup of male citizens, participation
in government was limited to a very small group of men, most of them rich.
THE PELOPONNESIAN LEAGUE
Until the Roman conquest of Greece, Sparta itself was never subject to the ongo-
ing rule of non-Spartans. After the defeat of Argos in 546 BC, Sparta had become
the most powerful state not only in the Peloponnesus, but in all Greece. With
Peloponnesian states other than Messenia, Sparta adopted a policy of alliance,
rather than conquest, and gradually assumed a position of leadership. Eventu-
ally, around 510–500, “Sparta and its allies,” or “the Peloponnesian League” as
historians today call the Spartan alliance, was organized. The League included all
the states in the Peloponnesus except Argos and Achaea, as well as key poleis
that lay outside the Peloponnesus, such as Thebes. The purpose of the League
was mutual protection. Each state pledged to contribute forces in case of war and
swore an oath “to have the same friends and enemies, and to follow the Spartans
wherever they lead.” The League was not an empire, but an alliance; no tribute
was paid except in wartime, and Sparta did not dictate the policy of the League.
The government of the League was bicameral, consisting of the assembly of
Spartans and the congress of allies in which each state had one vote. Only Sparta
105

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
could convene a meeting of the League and only Spartans served as commanders
of its armed forces. Sparta’s own reputation for distinction in military matters
along with the existence of the League made Sparta the natural leader of the
Greeks in their war against the Persians. The League remained in existence until
the 360s, when Corinth and other member states were obliged to quit it after
Sparta’s defeat by Thebes.
HISTORICAL CHANGE IN SPARTA
Since there are no witnesses to the full operation of the Spartan community as
described by Plutarch, and Xenophon states that the laws of Lycurgus were no
longer enforced in his own time, we must admit the possibility that some features
of the Lycurgan legislation were observed only briefly, or partially, or not at all.
There are twentieth-century parallels for the failure of similar totalitarian
dystopias or utopias. Modern historians follow the general model traced by Aris-
totle of drastic change over time in Spartan society, dating the “normalization,”
or loss of distinctiveness, to the later fifth century. Such a change may be ob-
served in the public behavior of male Spartiates, but it is not at all clear that
women’s lives had been fundamentally altered, for, as Aristotle pointed out,
women had never completely submitted to the Lycurgan system.
Some change, however, is plainly discernible. One area in which development
is apparent is that of land tenure. Land was the most valuable commodity in the
ancient world. Two systems of land tenure, a public one and a private one, ex-
isted in Sparta. When a man died, his kleros reverted to the state and then was
allocated to another Spartan baby, who was not necessarily related to the previ-
ous owner. At the end of the fifth century or early in the fourth, the Lycurgan
system regulating public property was abandoned. Thenceforth a man could give
his kleros and his house to anyone he wished, or bequeath them by testament.
This change undermined the ideal of economic equality and eventually led to the
concentration of great wealth in the hands of a minority. This shift created an im-
poverished underclass who failed to meet the economic requirements for full cit-
izenship, for they could not make the necessary contribution to a syssition. They
were no longer “Men of Equal Status” but known as “Inferiors.”
By the Classical period (if not earlier), in addition to the land designated for
distribution as kleroi, some land was held as private property. Though women
had probably been excluded from the distribution of kleroi, they owned a larger
portion of the private land than women in any other Greek city. Land came into
women’s possession as dowry and inheritance. It seems likely that before the free
bequest of land was introduced, daughters automatically inherited half as much
as sons. Some families, of course, had daughters but no sons. Sparta was always
plagued by a lack of men, for men were continually lost in battle, left Sparta for
mercenary service, or failed to meet the census requirements for full citizenship.
Moreover, though male infanticide was systematically practiced, it seems un-
likely that female babies were eliminated in this way. Plutarch, who supplies
106

Sparta
details about the official elimination of male infants, says nothing about girls,
though his interest in the rearing of girls is noteworthy. If this inference is cor-
rect, then these factors probably created a substantial imbalance in the sex ratio.
A woman could inherit all her father’s land, and many women became extremely
wealthy by this means. Thus Aristotle’s statement that in his day women owned
two-fifths of the land of Sparta is credible.
THE SPARTAN MIRAGE
The admiration writers like Xenophon and Plutarch felt for Spartan society led
them to exaggerate its monolithic nature, minimizing departures from ideals of
equality and obscuring patterns of historical change. This perspective in turn made
Sparta very attractive to subsequent thinkers, for whom a static society seemed to
offer the stability lacking in a more dynamic state (such as democratic Athens).
107
Figure 4.3. Hilaire Germain Edgar Degas, “Young Spartans Exercising,” 1860. London, Na-
tional Gallery. In Degas’ painting of “Young Spartans Exercising,” Lycurgus stands among
the mothers in the group of adults in back. Degas stated that the source for his inspiration
was Plutarch. Thus the painting reveals the power of the utopian, naturalistic view of
Sparta that was perpetuated in the modern era. Compare the costume of the girls in this
painting to the dress on the Greek bronze statuette in Figure 4.2.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
The idealization of Sparta in modern political thought also owes much to
Plato. Already in antiquity Sparta served as “the other” vis-à-vis Athens and its
democracy, as intellectuals unsympathetic to Athens exaggerated the differences
between the two societies. In their writings Sparta became a virtual utopia, a par-
adise of eunomia—a word meaning “governed by good laws.” The most dramatic
instance of this concept is probably found in the blueprint for the utopian state
in Plato’s Republic, where many features of this idealized Sparta appear. They are
evident, for example, in Plato’s description of the life of his philosopher-rulers,
the “guardians.” Central to both social systems are commonality and totalitarian
control. Women and men of the top class are given the same education, including
physical training. The private family, with its emphasis on women’s monogamy
and the transmission of property to legitimate male heirs, is eliminated among
Plato’s guardians. Sexual intercourse is guided by eugenic considerations. Female
guardians do not have to perform domestic labor, for members of the lower
classes perform the work usually accomplished by Greek women. Their only
gender-related task is that of giving birth to children. Marriage is dispensed with,
since the state educates all children. Private property and money are likewise out-
lawed to minimize the envy and class conflict that perpetually threatened to dis-
solve the fabric of Greek society.
The controversy about Sparta and its critics, both ancient and modern, continues
to the present day. For the past 2400 years, historians and philosophers have put
forward views that vary radically, though they are based on readings of precisely
the same texts. Readers have widely differing reactions to the veritable fountain
of anecdotes that has survived from antiquity embodying the underpinnings of
the Spartan ethos. Many of these are collected in Plutarch’s Sayings of Spartan
Women. Plutarch reports that a Spartan mother burying her son received condo-
lences from an old woman who commented on her bad luck. “No, by the heav-
ens,” the mother replied, “but rather good luck, for I bore him so that he could
die for Sparta, and this is precisely what has happened.” Another woman, seeing
her son coming toward her after a battle and hearing from him that everyone else
had died, picked up a tile and, hurling it at him, struck him dead, saying “And
so they sent you to tell us the bad news?”
The notion of a people whose response to stimuli is the very opposite of what
human nature would seem to dictate has exercised a hold on the human imagi-
nation. As late as the twentieth century, critics of Western capitalist society have
idealized the Spartans as highly virtuous, patriotic people produced by a stable
noncapitalistic society. In recent years, however, those who cherish individual
freedom and social mobility have come to see in Sparta a forerunner of totalitar-
ian regimes such as Nazi Germany. Furthermore, the blueprint for twentieth-
century Communism had many affinities with the Spartan utopia. Even today,
however, the old idealization of Sparta has reappeared in the works of some fem-
inist theorists, who have noted that the lives of women in aristocratic Sparta ap-
pear to have been more enjoyable and in many ways preferable to those of
women in democratic Athens.
108

Sparta
Although Athens was no more a typical Greek polis than was Sparta, examin-
ing Athens and Sparta together is a useful way of understanding the ancient
Greek view of life. It is to Athens that we now turn.
TRANSLATIONS
Lattimore, Richmond. 1960. Greek Lyrics. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pomeroy, Sarah B. 2002. Spartan Women. New York: Oxford University Press.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Cartledge, P. A. and Antony Spawforth. 1989. Hellenistic and Roman Sparta. A Tale of Two
Cities. London and New York: Routledge. Detailed description of the social, politi-
cal, and economic conditions of postclassical Sparta.
Fitzhardinge, L. F. 1980. The Spartans. London and New York: Thames and Hudson. Ex-
tensively illustrated cultural and social history of Sparta.
Forrest, W. G. 1968. A History of Sparta: 950–192 B.C. New York: Norton. Brief, but infor-
mative history of Sparta.
Pomeroy, Sarah B. 2002. Spartan Women. New York: Oxford University Press. Clearly written
comprehensive account of the life of Spartan women.
Powell, A., ed. 1989. Classical Sparta. Techniques Behind Her Success. London and Norman,
OK: University of Oklahoma Press. A collection of essays including Ephraim David,
“Laughter in Spartan Society,” and Stephen Hodkinson, “Inheritance, Marriage and
Demography: Perspectives upon the Success and Decline of Classical Sparta.”
Rawson, Elizabeth. 1969. The Spartan Tradition in European Thought. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. Reprint 1991 with a new introduction by Keith Thomas. The history
of the idea of Sparta from Classical Greece through the Renaissance, Whig England,
and Nazi Germany, with a short note on the United States.
109

110
5
THE GROWTH OF ATHENS
AND THE PERSIAN WARS
During the Archaic period, numerous Greek city-states struggled with a vari-
ety of problems—factional quarrels between aristocratic families, tension be-
tween aristocrats and the people, and tyranny. Sparta found a unique solution to
the Archaic crisis and so did Athens. By 500 BC Athens’ problems had been
largely resolved. The last tyrant had been expelled, Athens had a democratic
government, and aristocratic stasis was largely confined to competing for office
and persuading the assembly. Because of their relative harmony, wealth, and
great numbers, the Athenians had become the second most powerful Greek polis,
they were poised to play a major role in the great war that was about to begin.
For while the Greek city-states were evolving, the Persian Empire was growing
into an ambitious power that would threaten to engulf the Hellenic world. A
strong Athens would be vital to the defense of Greece against invasions by the
Persian kings Darius I and Xerxes.
ATHENS FROM THE BRONZE AGE
TO THE EARLY ARCHAIC AGE
Literary evidence and physical remains show that during the Late Bronze Age
Athens was the largest and most important settlement on the Attic peninsula and
a major Mycenaean palace-center that exercised a loose control over the other
fortified palace-centers in the region. These remained, however, independent of
the Athenian wanax. Archaeology also confirms the tradition that the invasions
of the late thirteenth century BC bypassed Athens. Still, if the story about the
Achaeans taking refuge at Athens is true, they would have found in Attica the
same collapse of the centralized ruling structure, drastic depopulation, and dis-
persal into small village communities as in the regions from which they had fled.
The first sign of Athenian recovery from the post-invasion slump is the ap-
pearance of Protogeometric pottery around 1050 BC. Although reduced to a cluster

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
of villages around the Acropolis, Athens continued without interruption as the
central place of Attica. It is likely that by 900 BC, if not earlier, the basileus of
Athens was preeminent within Attica. A series of rich ninth-century graves re-
veals significant growth in wealth and overseas trade during the later Dark Age.
The population around Athens rose sharply during the eighth century, and new
settlements appeared throughout Attica, perhaps through “internal colonization”
from the plain of Athens.
Significantly, Athens did not colonize overseas during the late eighth century.
The synoecism or “joining together” of the towns and villages of Attica into a po-
litical unity under the leadership of Athens was probably gradual, only being
completed around the middle of the eighth century. The Athenians ascribed the
unification to Theseus, whom myth linked with his companion, the Dorian hero
Heracles. Theseus’ exploits, such as defeating the Minotaur in Crete and the
Amazons in Athens, were enshrined in Athenian art and literature. In making
Theseus the founder of Athens and its democracy, the Athenians followed the
common Greek practice of attributing important events of the preliterate period
to some great figure from the legendary past.
More important than the details of the process of unification is the fact that af-
ter the Dark Ages every settlement in Attica considered itself “Athenian,” and
none attempted to declare its independence as happened elsewhere, nor were
there subordinate populations such as the Spartan helots or perioikoi. The unifi-
cation of Attica, however, created unique problems. Although all Athenian citi-
zens could participate in the government of Athens, in reality people who lived
in or near Athens would find it easier to vote than those who lived farther away.
Thus, for example, a visit to Athens by a farmer who lived 15 or 20 miles away
would probably require three days. The importance of this fact for understand-
ing Athenian history cannot be underestimated since until the outbreak of the
Peloponnesian War in 431 BC most people still lived in the countryside.
The early government of Athens was aristocratic. Probably during the later
eighth century the chiefs of Attica replaced the paramount basileus with three
civic officials called collectively archons—that is, “the leaders”—who divided the
leadership roles among themselves. One of the archons, called the basileus, ad-
ministered the city’s cults of the polis and judged lawsuits pertaining to cult
property and other religious matters. The polemarch (war archon) commanded the
army and judged disputes involving noncitizens. The most prestigious office was
that of the archo¯n, who had overall supervision of public affairs, including pre-
siding over the council and the assembly and judging nonreligious cases. He was
known as the eponymous archon, because he gave his name to the year. Six ju-
dicial officials called thesmothetai (“layers down of the rules”) were added later,
making up the governing body of the “nine archons.” The nine archons were
elected annually from candidates drawn from the small circle of aristocratic fam-
ilies known as the Eupatrids (“people with good fathers”).
The archons governed Athens in concert with the council that met on the hill
(pagos) sacred to the war god Ares and was called for that reason the Council of the
Areopagus. Because archons joined the council after the end of their term, sitting
111

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
archons would probably think twice before flouting its wishes. Citizen males also
participated in the assembly, but its precise role in the government and the part
that the ordinary citizens played in it are unknown, although Aristotle claimed
that it elected the archons (Politics 2.1274a 1–2 and 15–17).
Alongside these official state institutions were other forms of social organiza-
tion that directed the lives of the citizens. In Attica, as in the rest of Greece, the
basic social units—the individual households (oikoi)—were grouped into larger
but poorly understood kin-like associations: tribes, phratries, and clans. Every cit-
izen family belonged to one of four phylai (“tribes”) and to another smaller group
within their tribe, called a phratry (“brotherhood”). Since all the Ionian peoples
had the same four tribes, these probably originated early in the Dark Age. They
probably served as political and military divisions—each tribe furnishing a con-
tingent to the army. The phratry may originally have designated a “brotherhood
of warriors,” like the warrior bands led by Dark Age chieftains that we see in
Homer. By the seventh century, however, the phratries were concerned with mat-
ters of family and of descent. Proof of citizenship, for example, was provided by
membership in a phratry, and in cases of unintentional homicide, the members
of the victim’s phratry were obligated to support his family, or, if the victim had
no family, to pursue the case on his behalf. The “clans” (gene¯) were associations
of aristocratic households dominated by a top oikos and claiming descent from a
common ancestor. It was within this framework that the events of seventh and
sixth century Athens unfolded.
The Conspiracy of Cylon
Only two events of Athenian history are known from the seventh century, both
plainly connected with unrest of some kind. About 632 BC, an Olympic victor named
Cylon took advantage of his marriage connection with Theagenes, the tyrant of
nearby Megara, to seize the Acropolis and attempt to become tyrant of Athens, only
to find himself and his supporters besieged by the Athenians. Cylon and his brother
escaped, but his supporters, who had taken refuge at the altar of Athena, surren-
dered to the nine archons on condition that their lives would be spared. The con-
spirators even tied a thread to the statue of Athena, and descended while holding
onto it, hoping the goddess would protect them. When the thread snapped, how-
ever, the archon Megacles and his supporters killed them. People believed that
Megacles had committed sacrilege, and soon his family was exiled, including dead
relatives whose bodies were exhumed and cast beyond the Attic frontier.
Although Cylon’s coup failed, it played an interesting role in future Athenian
history because of the prominent family to which Megacles belonged. The Alc-
maeonid genos would contribute important politicians to Athens, including Cleis-
thenes and Pericles, two of the most prominent Athenian statesmen of the sixth
and fifth centuries. Politically motivated demands for the expulsion of the “ac-
cursed” repeatedly sent shock waves through the body politic because people be-
lieved that the family’s shared responsibility for its members’ impious actions
might call the wrath of the gods down on the state.
112

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
Draco and Early Athenian Law
More is known about the codification of Athenian law by a mysterious man
named Draco around 620 BC. Because drako¯n is Greek for “snake” and the Athe-
nians worshiped a sacred snake on the Acropolis, some scholars have suggested
that priests published the laws of “Draco” on the supposed authority of the sa-
cred snake. It is more likely, however, that Draco was a real person.
The best known of Draco’s laws is that concerning homicide, which replaced
the family and kin with the state as the arbiter of justice in cases of both inten-
tional and unintentional killings. Before Draco’s homicide law, bereaved family
members were entitled and obliged to avenge the deaths of their slain relatives,
unless the kin could be persuaded to accept compensation. Draco transformed
such disputes into trials in which the next of kin, backed by his phratry, prose-
cuted the accused killer before magistrates who determined the appropriate
penalty: death for murder or exile for unintentional homicide.
Little is known about Draco’s other laws except that they were severe, naming
death as the penalty even for minor offenses. The fourth-century Athenian ora-
tor Demades quipped that Draco’s laws were written not in ink but in blood.
What was significant about Draco’s laws was their role in the process of devel-
oping the authority of the state at the expense of that of the family, and, it should
be noted, of the magistrates also. The establishment of fixed principles of justice
limited the magistrates’ ability to shape their decisions in accord with their social
and professional ties to particular litigants. The problems that were causing un-
rest in Athens, however, were both economic and political; purely legal reforms
could not soothe the tensions that seemed to be inviting tyranny, such as en-
slavement for debt, which was becoming a principal grievance of the poor.
THE REFORMS OF SOLON
Solon’s legislation in the 590s provides the best evidence for the nature of these
problems. Solon tried to strengthen the fragile agricultural base of the Athenian
economy by grafting onto it a thriving commerce. Because of the poor soil of At-
tica, the Athenians could not raise enough grain to feed their increasing popula-
tion. Consequently, they bartered crops suited to their land—olives, vines, figs,
and barley—abroad for wheat. High quality olive oil packaged in vases made
from the excellent clay of Attica was their most significant export, much of it go-
ing to the Black Sea, which came to supply a great deal of the wheat consumed
in Attica. Athens fought fiercely to defend the routes that led to the Black Sea,
even seizing the strategic city of Sigeum near the entrance to the Hellespont
about 600 BC. Besides oil, wine, and pottery the Athenians had at their disposal
silver produced in the mines at Laurium in southeast Attica.
Although the Athens of 600 had great potential for economic development,
many poor sharecroppers were losing the struggle to survive. For a second time
the Athenians turned to a respected individual to resolve the crisis. Probably in
113

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
594 they empowered Solon, an aristocratic war hero and moralizing poet, to draw
up a new law code that would ease the sufferings of the poor and avoid a tyranny.
The poor wanted the abolition of their debts and redistribution of land; what they
got was the abolition of debt slavery. Over time, Solon’s reforms mitigated the
risk of Attica’s being divided into haves and have-nots by creating a sliding scale
of privilege that contained something for everyone.
Solon defended his work in poetry, fragments of which still survive. Decrying
both the selfishness of the rich and the revolutionary demands of the poor, he
identified wealth as an unstable and problematic force in human affairs: “There
are many bad rich men,” he wrote, “while many good men are poor”; but, he
went on, he would not exchange his virtue (arete¯) for the riches of the wealthy,
“for virtue endures, while wealth belongs now to one man, now to another”
(cited in Plutarch, Solon 3). Although Solon urged justice for the people, he was
also committed to defending the rights of the elite both to their land and to a pre-
eminent role in government:
I gave the demos such privilege as is sufficient to them, neither adding nor taking
away; and as for those who had power and were admired for their wealth, I also
provided that they should not suffer undue wrong. I stood with a stout shield
thrown over both parties, not allowing either one to prevail unjustly over the other.
(Cited in Plutarch, Solon 18.4; Scott-Kilvert 1960,
and in The Athenian Constitution, 12)
“In large things,” Solon wrote about his endeavors, “it is hard to please every-
body.” His rueful lament that in trying to please everyone he pleased no one is
ironic in view of the cult that developed after his death, when he would become
the beloved “founding father” of Classical Athens. Democrats and antidemocrats
alike claimed him as their ideological ancestor and invoked his support for their
programs. Although the earliest surviving sources for Solon’s reforms—aside
from his own poems—were written centuries after his death, the outlines of his
thoughtful and original programs can be reconstructed.
Solon’s first act was to address the sufferings of the poor. These included share-
croppers who were called hekte¯moroi (“sixth-parters”), presumably because they
paid a rent equal to a sixth of their produce to a wealthy landowner, and also
failed debtors, who had become the slaves of their creditors. Solon not only made
it illegal for loans to be secured by anyone’s property or person; he also freed
those who had been enslaved for debt and canceled the obligations of the hekte-
moroi. This bold measure was known as the seisachtheia, the “shaking off of bur-
dens,” and for many generations was commemorated by a festival of the same
name. Solon also redeemed and brought home Athenians who had been sold as
slaves outside Attica. None of this should be construed as an attack on slavery
per se. Solon had no problem with Athenians enslaving non-Athenians.
Solon’s other economic measures were less dramatic but equally important. He
revised Athenian weights and measures to facilitate trade with other states. He
also encouraged live cultivation and prohibited the export of grain, because it
was needed at home. Solon encouraged the immigration of artisans to Athens,
114

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
moreover, by offering them citizenship if they would settle there permanently
with their families. Solon was also credited with a law that sons who had not
been taught a trade were not required to support their mothers and fathers in old
age. He was even said to have empowered the Council of the Areopagus to in-
quire into every man’s means of supporting himself and to punish those who
could show none, a dramatic contrast to the Spartan ethos that soldiering was the
only appropriate work for a citizen.
By establishing a constitution in which political privilege was allotted in accord
with income Solon also tried to deal with the grievances of the hoplite middle class,
which resented the Eupatrid monopoly on privilege. He revised the traditional
system of property classes by adding a fourth class at the top. In the new system
citizens were ranked according to agricultural wealth. The new class, the pen-
takosiomedimnoi, or “500-measure men,” consisted of those whose estates pro-
duced at least 500 medimnoi (“bushels”) of produce; any combination of oil, wine,
or grain would do. Below them came the hippeis (“horsemen,” since they were the
men who could afford to keep a horse for the cavalry). Their income was between
300 and 499 medimnoi. The zeugitai, men who could afford to own a team of oxen,
with 200 to 299 medimnoi, were next, and finally the the¯tes, poor farmers and
landless workers, who produced fewer than 200 medimnoi. Although the chief
magistracies were limited to members of the first two classes, zeugitai could hold
lower state offices; while the thetes could attend the assembly (the ekkle¯sia), which
was to meet regularly. Slaves and resident aliens called metics were excluded
from the system, as were women, who formed about a third of the citizenbody,
since their life expectancy was about ten years shorter than men’s. Citizen men
from all classes could serve in the heliaia, a body of prospective jurors. These peo-
ple would serve in courts set up to receive appeals from the judicial decisions of
the archons and try the cases of magistrates whom someone wished to accuse of
misconduct in office. Solon’s most revolutionary contribution to the Athenian po-
litical system probably was his insistence that any male citizen whatever his
rank—not just the victim or the victim’s relatives—could bring an indictment if
he believed a crime had been committed and serve as a juror in a trial. Once the
concern of families, justice was now the business of the community of male citi-
zens as a whole.
Solon did not alter Draco’s homicide laws, but he reduced the penalties for
other crimes and decreed an amnesty for persons exiled for crimes other than
homicide or attempted tyranny. It was probably this amnesty that allowed the
Alcmaeonid family to return to Athens. Like Draco, Solon feared the concentra-
tion of power in the hands of a few great families. It was probably for this rea-
son that he allowed childless men (like himself) to adopt an heir by means of a
will, thereby abrogating the traditional rule that such property passed automati-
cally to the nearest male kin.
Solon’s laws regarding sex and marriage reflect the traditional Greek view that
a state was a conglomeration of oikoi. Although some of these laws seem intended
to extend governmental power to cover women’s private life, Solon’s concerns
about the excessive power of aristocratic families suggest that his more intrusive
provisions, such as restrictions on women’s dress, reflect his apprehension about
115

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
conspicuous consumption by rich families rather than a desire to control women’s
activities. Several of Solon’s policies, however, had a significant impact on
women’s lives. For example, the nearest male relative of a man who died with-
out a son was required to marry the dead man’s daughter in order to produce a
male heir and thus keep the property in the family. A similar concern for main-
taining the purity of family lines probably accounts for the fact that, although
Solon had abolished debt slavery and had forbidden fathers as a rule to sell their
children into slavery, he made an exception for a man who discovered his un-
married daughter was not a virgin.
Solon’s legislation is remarkable for its creativity and scope. Solon had been
given an unusual opportunity to think long and hard about the nature of a com-
munity. His laws established the principle that the Athenian citizen body as a
whole would guide the Athenian state. Indeed, he virtually established the no-
tion of citizenship itself. His law that neutrality was unacceptable in a time of
civil strife demonstrates his determination that all male citizens take part in civic
affairs, essentially defining a citizen as a person involved in public concerns. His
laws also made clear that, while the regulation of women’s behavior was essen-
tial to a well ordered society, their role was limited to the private sphere; thus he
excluded them effectively from the body politic.
Solon’s laws were inscribed on wooden tablets called axones that were set up in
the agora, where everyone could see them even though most could not read them.
After the Athenians swore to keep his laws in effect for a hundred years and each
archon had been compelled to swear that he would dedicate a gold statue at Del-
phi if ever he violated any of them, Solon left Attica, partly to see the world and
partly to escape pressure to alter his legislation. Solon was neither a democrat nor
a revolutionary. There is, nevertheless, some justice in the claim that he was the fa-
ther of the democracy, for by abolishing the hectemorage (sixth-part) system and
debt slavery, Solon not only helped create the free peasantry that formed the basis
of the democracy; he also established the distinction between freedom and slavery
that was to be central to the Athenian concept of citizenship.
PEISISTRATUS AND HIS SONS
Solon’s reforms eased social tensions in Attica. By intensifying the competition for
political office, however, they probably indirectly fostered the civil strife that led to
the tyranny of Peisistratus. The inhabitants of sixth-century Attica were loosely di-
vided into three factions known as the Men of the Plain, the Men of the Coast, and
the Men of the Hill. Historians still debate the composition of each group. The men
of the plain were probably large landowners while the men of the coast were fish-
ermen and craftsmen and the poorer inhabitants of the Attic highlands made up
the men of the hill; perhaps the city-dwellers were in this last group as well.
Peisistratus’ Seizure of Power
Around 560, a distant relative of Solon from northern Attica named Peisistratus
successfully carried out a coup. Peisistratus’ backers included not only the Men
116

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
of the Hill but also some of the city dwellers. According to Herodotus, Peisistra-
tus wounded himself and his mules and then appeared in the agora demanding
a bodyguard to protect himself from his alleged enemies. Although Solon sup-
posedly warned the Athenians against his kinsman’s duplicity, the assembly
voted Peisistratus a bodyguard, whereupon Peisistratus seized the Acropolis and
with it the reins of government.
After about five years, the parties of the plain and the coast united against Pei-
sistratus and drove him out, but when Megacles, the leader of the coastal party,
quarreled not only with the party of the plain but also with his own faction, he
decided to ally with Peisistratus and agreed to reestablish him in Athens pro-
vided he married his daughter. A century later Herodotus marveled at the story
that Peisistratus effected his return to Athens by dressing a beautiful tall woman
in armor and putting out the rumor that Athena was escorting him to Athens, al-
though “from the very earliest times the Greeks have been distinguished from the
barbarians by their intelligence and freedom from simpleminded foolishness . . .”
and “the Athenians . . . are said to be the foremost of the Greeks when it comes
to brains” (The Histories 1.61: Blanco 1992).
Whatever the truth of the tale, Peisistratus’ alliance with his father-in-law Mega-
cles did not endure. Peisistratus already had two grown sons whose position he
did not wish to undermine by fathering any children with Megacles’ daughter, so,
according to Herodotus, he had intercourse with his wife ou kata nomon—“not ac-
cording to the accepted norm.” (Herodotus adds that Megacles found out from the
bride’s mother, who had asked her some pointed questions.) Outraged, Megacles
joined with Peisistratus’ enemies, and they drove him out a second time.
During his exile, which lasted from about 555 to 546 BC, Peisistratus gathered a
force of mercenary soldiers with wealth drawn from the gold and silver mines of
Mount Pangaeus in northern Greece. Supported by Lygdamis of Naxos and the
cavalry of Eretria, he landed at Marathon and defeated the opposition in a battle
at Pallene. He then governed Athens for over ten years until he died of natural
causes in 527. Peisistratus gave his tyranny legitimacy by maintaining Solon’s sys-
tem in force but manipulating the laws so that his friends and relatives were elected
archons, while mercenaries held in check potential opponents, whose children he
used as hostages. When the last of Peisistratus’ sons was expelled in 510, the way
lay open for the development of the democratic institutions that are still associated
with the city of Athens. Although it might seem that a tyranny would roll back
Draco’s and Solon’s efforts to undermine the influence of powerful families, the re-
ality was that after the fall of the Peisistratids the development of democracy prof-
ited from the tyranny’s equalizing effect: Under the rule of the tyrants, all Atheni-
ans—rich and poor—found themselves surprisingly in similar circumstances.
Peisistratus’ Policies
Strengthening the economy was a major focus of Peisistratus’ program. Like
Solon, he was concerned about both agriculture and commerce. He offered land
and loans to the needy. He encouraged the cultivation of the olive, and Athenian
trade expanded greatly under his regime. During the first half of the sixth century,
117

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Athenian exports had begun appearing throughout the Mediterranean and
Aegean, and it is difficult to believe that this explosion was not due at least in
part to Solon. Under Peisistratus fine Attic pottery traveled still farther—to Ionia,
Cyprus, and Syria in the east and as far west as Spain. Black-figure painting
reached its apogee shortly after the middle of the century, and around 530 pot-
ters began to experiment with the more versatile red-figure style. Peisistratus or
his sons also issued the first “owls”—silver coins stamped with the image of
Athena’s sacred god—that quickly became the soundest currency in the Aegean.
The growth of commerce was accompanied by an ambitious foreign policy.
Peisistratus installed his friend Lygdamis as tyrant at Naxos, conveniently making
118
Figure 5.1. Water jar (c. 520 BC) from Athens showing women getting water at a fountain
house.

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
Naxos available as a residence for Peisistratus’ hostages. Peisistratus also placed
Sigeum under the control of one of his sons and established a foothold across
the Hellespont in the Thracian Chersonese (the Gallipoli peninsula), by sending
Miltiades, a member of the Philaid clan and a potential rival, to rule the Dolonci,
a Thracian tribe that lived there.
In Athens, Peisistratus’ building projects provided jobs to the poor while fo-
cusing attention on Athens as the cultural center of Attica. Replacing the private
wells guarded by aristocrats with public fountain houses not only meant con-
struction jobs but also a shift from private to public patronage. With expanded
opportunities for jobs and housing in the city, Athens’ population grew; and the
people who lived in the urban area found it easier to vote. Peisistratus also re-
built the temple of Athena on the Acropolis and began a temple to Olympian
Zeus so large that it was completed only seven centuries later by the Roman em-
peror Hadrian.
Peisistratus’ support of the gods and the arts enhanced both his own reputa-
tion and that of the city of Athens. He established two new festivals, the greater
and lesser Dionysia, and instituted around 534 BC competition in tragic drama as
part of the Dionysia. The worship of Dionysus flourished in Peisistratid Athens,
and Dionysiac scenes of drinking and unrestrained merrymaking were popular
subjects of vase painting. At the Dionysia, choirs of “satyrs” wearing goat skins
honored Dionysus by conversing with their leader in a “goat song” or trag-o¯dia
that evolved into the Attic “tragedies” of the fifth century. Peisistratus also com-
missioned the first editions of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey and made Homeric
recitations a regular part of the great Panathenaic festival, which was celebrated
at Athens every four years. The Panathenaea culminated in a great procession
carrying to Athena’s temple the robe woven for her by young Athenian women.
Ironically the procession up the Acropolis at the Panathenaea would serve as the
occasion for the murder of Peisistratus’ son Hipparchus in 514.
119
Figure 5.2. This silver coin worth four drachmas, and thus known as the tetradrachm, was
minted at Athens shortly after Peisistratus’ death. The letters alpha, theta, and epsilon in-
dicate that the coin was minted by the Athenians.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
The Collapse of the Tyranny
Patronage of the arts became still more conspicuous after Peisistratus’ death in
527. Thucydides believed that Peisistratus’ son Hippias ruled alone, although
others including Aristotle claimed that Hippias’ brother Hipparchus was co-
tyrant. In any event, Hippias and Hipparchus adorned their court with celebrated
writers—Simonides of Ceos, whose choral odes were famous; the love poet Anacreon
of Teos; and Lasus of Hermione, known for composing novel “hissless hymns,” that
is, poems in which the sound “s” was never heard. Cultural prestige, however,
could not keep the hereditary tyrants secure. In 514, Hipparchus, spurned by a
young man named Harmodius, insulted Harmodius’ sister by forbidding her to
carry a basket in the Panathenaic procession. Outraged at the suggestion that his sis-
ter was not a virgin, Harmodius and his lover Aristogiton plotted to assassinate the
tyrants at the procession. When one of the conspirators was observed chatting with
Hippias, the others panicked and immediately killed Hipparchus. The results were
devastating for Athens: the paranoid autocracy of Hippias replaced the benign gov-
ernment of two aristocrats.
Hippias’ tyranny lasted another four years until 510, when he was driven into
exile thanks to the efforts of the exiled Alcmaeonids. The key to their success was
good relations with Delphi. Taking advantage of the Delphians’ failure to rebuild
the temple of Apollo, which had burned down, the Alcmaeonids subsidized its
reconstruction, even providing a frontage of first-class Parian marble instead of
ordinary stone. In return, the priests made sure that whenever the Spartans went
to Delphi for advice about future projects they always received the response:
120
Figure 5.3. Attic red-figure psykt
_
er (“wine
cooler”) attributed to Oltos, Armed Warriors Rid-
ing on Dolphins, c. 520–510 BC. This vessel prob-
ably represents the chorus of an early theatrical
production. It was made for use at the drinking
party known as a symposion (see Fig. 3.3b) and,
therefore, also depicts other wine vases as de-
vices on the warriors’ shields.

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
“First free Athens.” Inasmuch as the Spartans enjoyed their reputation as the en-
emy of tyranny, they were receptive to this suggestion, and in 510 King Cleomenes
blockaded Hippias on the Acropolis. When Hippias’ children were captured, the
tyrant capitulated and departed with his family to Sigeum.
The Athenians understandably, however, chose to remember the heroism of
Harmodius and Aristogiton rather than the Spartan intervention, as illustrated,
for example, by drinking songs like the following:
I will carry my sword in a bough of myrtle
The way Harmodius and Aristogiton did
When they killed the tyrants
And restored equal laws to Athens.
121
Figure 5.4. The tyrannicides Har-
modius and Aristogiton were com-
memorated in a lost bronze statue
group of c. 477–476 BCthat replaced
an earlier group, which was taken
during the Persian Wars. This Ro-
man marble copy reflects the re-
placement group.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
THE REFORMS OF CLEISTHENES
Predictably, renewed factional strife followed the exile of Hippias. An aristocrat
named Isagoras was elected archon in 508 BC on a platform of disenfranchising
persons given citizenship by the tyrants. His rival Cleisthenes, the leader of the
Alcmaeonid family, opposed the plan and won popular support. Isagoras re-
sponded by using the old curse to force Cleisthenes into exile, but despite the
support of the Spartan king Cleomenes he failed in his plan to set up an oli-
garchy. Instead of capitulating, the indignant Athenians blockaded the Spartans
on the Acropolis, forced the surrender of Cleomenes and Isagoras, and invited
Cleisthenes and his followers back to Athens.
Recognizing the danger to the state posed by family rivalries, Cleisthenes car-
ried in the assembly a package of far-reaching reforms intended to break the
power of rich families (other than his own). His methods were ingenious. He
transferred the civic functions of the four ancient Ionian tribes to ten new tribes
established on a new basis. First he divided Attica into three broad geographical
areas: the city, the coast, and the plain. Each area was subdivided into ten trit-
tyes, or “thirds” composed of residential units called demes (villages or town-
ships). As the demes (which had been in existence for a long time) varied in size,
the number in each trittys also varied, but each tribe in the new system contained
one trittys from each geographical area. The requirement that citizens identify
themselves by their demotic, that is, the name of their deme, instead of their fa-
ther’s name, undermined family loyalty. Tradition was not so easily cast aside,
however, so we still think of Pericles as the son of Xanthippus and the historian
Thucydides as the son of Olorus.
The ten new tribes also formed the basis for the creation of a new council, the
Council (boule¯) of Five Hundred, with each tribe annually providing fifty mem-
bers chosen by lot. The use of the lot in determining the composition of each
year’s boule was a key democratic feature of the Cleisthenic system. The boule’s
chief functions were to prepare business for the ekklesia (the assembly) and to
manage financial and foreign affairs. Because five hundred was an unwieldy num-
ber, each tribe represented the whole boule for a tenth of the year. During a tribe’s
period of service its members were called prytaneis, and the term prytany was
used to designate a period of time, rather like a “month.” The chair and secretary
each changed every day by lot. The army also was reorganized on the basis of the
ten tribes, with each tribe electing its officers including a strate¯gos, or chief general.
Unlike archons, strate¯goi could be reelected repeatedly, so that in time the board
of ten strategoi became the most prestigious executive body in Athens.
THE RISE OF PERSIA
The political transformation of Greek poleis occurred at the same time as the
emergence of the Persian Empire, the largest of all Ancient Near Eastern empires.
The sources for Persian history are, unfortunately, limited. Although the Persians
122

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
Figure 5.5. Attica.
123
Thebes
Oenoe
Eleutherae
Panactum
Thria
Eleusis
Megara
Phalerum
Athens
Pallene
Paeania
Acharnae
Phyle
Decelea
Marathon
THRIASIAN
PLAIN
Mt. Par
nes
Mt.
Pe
nt
eli
cu
s
Mt. H
ym
et
t
u
s
Mt. Par
nes
Mt.
Pe
nt
eli
cu
s
Mt. H
ym
et
t
u
s
S A R O N I C
G U L F
Aegina
Salamis
LAURIUM
Aegina
Salamis
LAURIUM
Temple of
Poseidon
THRIASIAN
PLAIN
0
0
4
8
12
16 km
2
4
6
8
10 miles
Thebes
Oenoe
Eleutherae
Panactum
Thria
Eleusis
Megara
Salamis
Piraeus
Phalerum
Athens
Pallene
Paeania
Acharnae
Phyle
Decelea
Marathon

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
developed a cuneiform-based alphabetic script to write their language, no Old
Persian literature survives except for inscriptions primarily devoted to recording
the building activities of the Persian kings. Persian history necessarily depends,
therefore, on non-Persian sources, Babylonian, Aramaic, Hebrew, and especially
Greek historians for whom, however, the Persians, despite their achievements,
were merely barbarians, that is, people who spoke “barbar, barbar,” gibberish.
Despite these limitations, historians working with archaeologists have succeeded
in reconstructing the story of the rise of the Persian Empire.
Persia Before Darius
The Persians were one of several Indo-European peoples, who had settled in Iran
by the early first millennium BC. It was not the Persians, however, but the Medes,
who built the first Iranian empire by joining with the Babylonians to overthrow
the mighty Assyrian empire in 612 BC. In the mid-sixth century BC, Cyrus II, who
governed Persia (ruled 559–530 BC), revolted and made Media the first of the
satrapies (provinces) of the Persian Empire. During his long reign Cyrus ex-
tended Persia to include all Western Asia, but it was his conquest in 546 of the
Lydian king Croesus that brought the Greeks of Asia Minor into the empire and
led ultimately to the confrontation between the Persians and the European Greeks
that would redefine the course of Greek history. Events within the Persian Em-
pire, however, delayed the confrontation for over half a century. First, Cyrus’ son
Cambyses (530–522 BC) conquered Egypt; and then, Darius I (522–486 BC), the
founder of the dynasty that ruled the empire until its conquest by Alexander the
Great, seized power and reorganized the empire.
The Achievements of Darius
Cyrus was praised by Greek and Asian sources alike as a benevolent and talented
ruler, who avoided the Assyrian and Babylonian practice of deporting rebellious
populations and supported local religions and cultures. Because Cyrus allowed
the Jews to return from exile in Mesopotamia, Jewish enthusiasm for him was so
great that the prophet Isaiah proclaimed him as one of God’s messiahs:
Thus says Yahweh to his anointed, to Cyrus whom he grasps by his
right hand,
That he might subdue nations before him, and ungird the loins of kings,
To open doors before him, that gates shall not be closed:
“I will go before you, and I will level the roads;
I will shatter gates of bronze, and I will hew bars of iron to pieces.
I will deliver buried treasures to you, and hidden riches. . . .”
(Isaiah II, 45:1–3)
Nevertheless, it was Darius I’s reorganization of the empire that ensured its sur-
vival for almost two hundred years. He centralized the government and moved the
124

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
Figure 5.6. Delegations bringing tribute to Persepolis. The Persian king received a wide
variety of goods from throughout the Near East in the form of tribute.
125

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Figure 5.7. The Persian Empire in the reign of Darius.
126







SOGDIANA
BACTRIA
PARTHIA
MEDIA
SUSIANA
P
E
R
SI
S
BABYLONIA
ASSYRIA
ARMENIA
CAPPADOCIA
SCYTHIA
THRACE
LYDIA
CARIA
LIBYA
EGYPT
PHOENICIA
ARABIA
SOGDIANA
BACTRIA
PARTHIA
MEDIA
SUSIANA
P
E
R
SI
S
BABYLONIA
ASSYRIA
ARMENIA
CAPPADOCIA
SCYTHIA
THRACE
LYDIA
CARIA
LIBYA
EGYPT
PHOENICIA
ARABIA
AEGEAN
SEA
R
oyal Ro
ad
Tigris
R.
E
u
p
h
ra
te
s
R.
N
il
e
R
.
Elephantine
Thebes
Memphis
Naucratis
Jerusalem
Nineveh
Arbela
Sardis
Ecbatana
Pasargadae
Persepolis
Susa
Babylon
R
oyal Ro
ad
Tigris
R.
E
u
p
h
ra
te
s
R.
N
il
e
R
.
Elephantine
Thebes
Memphis
Naucratis
Sais
Jerusalem
Tyre
Sidon
Nineveh
Arbela
Sardis
Ecbatana
Pasargadae
Persepolis
Susa
Babylon
Cyrene
P
ERSIAN
GUL
F
R
ED SE
A
BLACK SEA
ARABIAN SEA
CASPIAN
SEA
ARAL
SEA
MEDITERRANEAN
SEA
AEGEAN
SEA
capital to Persepolis. Building inscriptions record that Greeks were among the
workforce of men and women drawn from all corners of the empire who built the
royal buildings. Darius facilitated travel for commercial purposes in many ways,
even building a canal linking the Nile and the Red Sea. This canal made the newly
conquered territory of Egypt more prosperous than it had been under native
Egyptian rule. Darius was also the first Persian king to mint his own coins of sil-
ver and gold. The gold coins, Daric staters or “darics,” demonstrated the king’s
talent at archery, a skill highly prized by the Persians, who, Herodotus reported,
learned three skills—to ride, to shoot straight, and to tell the truth. Finally, Darius
divided the empire into twenty provinces or satrapies governed by royal ap-
pointees and paying an annual tribute to the king. Spies known as the “Eyes and
Ears of the King” discouraged rebellions. Supreme political power was unified
only in the person of the king, who ruled as the designee of the Zoroastrian god
of light and truth Ahuramazda and defended his subjects against the supporters
of Ahriman, god of darkness and falsehood. In accordance with his exalted status
the king exercised absolute authority over his subjects, who prostrated themselves
in obeisance before him and performed at his command forced labor and military
service. But unlike the Jews, who were grateful for their liberation, the Greeks
pitied the subjects of the Persian king, considering them his slaves.

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
THE WARS BETWEEN GREECE AND PERSIA
Darius campaigned against the European Scyths and thus became the first Per-
sian king to enter Europe. Although he failed to conquer Scythia, he subdued
Thrace and reduced it to a satrapy. Darius’ westward expeditions piqued his cu-
riosity about the mainland Greeks, and a rebellion in his empire brought him into
direct contact with them.
The Ionian Rebellion
In 499 BC the Ionian Greeks revolted. Discontent in Ionia was considerable. Taxes
had risen under Persian rule, and the Greeks resented the puppet tyrants the Per-
sians had imposed. Violence might not have erupted, however, except for the am-
bitions of Aristagoras, the tyrant of Miletus. Hoping to add Naxos to his domain,
Aristagoras had persuaded the Persians to join him in an unsuccessful effort to
subdue the Cyclades islands and perhaps to invade mainland Greece. When the
plan failed, Aristagoras, noticing the restlessness of the Ionians, decided to re-
coup his failing fortunes by uniting them in revolt.
Aristagoras resigned his tyranny and then set about overthrowing tyrants in
the other Ionian cities. Most fell without bloodshed, but the tyrant of Mytilene
was so unpopular that he was stoned to death. The Ionians showed their unity
by issuing coinage on a common standard. Herodotus’ account of Aristagoras’ at-
tempts to gain support from King Cleomenes sought to illustrate the Spartan
character as most Greeks imagined it—cautious, conservative, and leery of for-
eign adventures; it also highlighted the assertiveness of Spartan women and the
respect due them. Aristagoras, Herodotus maintains, carried with him a bronze
map of the world to show Cleomenes the wealthy peoples the Greeks would con-
quer if they chose to liberate the Ionians. Capitalizing on the Spartans’ dislike of
foreign customs, he suggested that they could easily defeat men who fought in
trousers and wore peaked caps on their heads. But when Aristagoras told
Cleomenes that the Great King lived three months’ march from the sea, “Cleo-
menes cut short the rest of the account Aristagoras planned to give about the
journey by saying, ‘Get out of Sparta before sundown, Milesian stranger, for you
have no speech eloquent enough to induce the Lacedemonians to march for three
months inland from the sea’” (The Histories 5.50; Blanco).
Not yet willing to abandon his quest, Aristagoras followed Cleomenes to his
house, carrying with him the customary sign of supplication—an olive branch,
covered with wool—and as he sat in Cleomenes’ home as a suppliant he noticed
young Gorgo, who was eight or nine years old, standing by her father. He asked
that Cleomenes send his daughter away, but Cleomenes told him to say what-
ever he liked and not to hold back on account of the child; whereupon Aristago-
ras began by promising ten talents if Cleomenes would do what he wanted.
When Cleomenes rejected this, Aristagoras kept upping the amount until he was
offering fifty talents. At this point, the child cried out, “Father, if you don’t get
up and leave, this stranger will corrupt you with a bribe!” Cleomenes, delighted
127

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
with the child’s advice, withdrew into another room and Aristagoras abandoned
Sparta without being able to give any more details about the journey inland to
the Great King (The Histories 5.51; Blanco).
The Athenians were more receptive. More daring than the Spartans, they were
not constrained by fear of a slave rebellion in their absence. They also feared that
the Persians might try to restore Hippias to power in Athens. As a result, they
agreed to send twenty ships to aid the Ionians; the Eretrians to the north were
willing to send five.
Six years after it began the Ionian Revolt ended in a major naval defeat off the
island of Lade near Miletus in 494 BC. Greek morale had fallen; the tyrants whom
Aristagoras had expelled were spreading pro-Persian propaganda; and before the
battle was over the Samians and Lesbians had deserted. Miletus was defeated, its
women and children enslaved, and the men relocated to the mouth of the Tigris.
In addition, Sardis, the capital of the satrapy of Lydia, was burned, whether ac-
cidentally or on purpose.
Darius would not forget the destruction of Sardis, nor would the Greeks for-
get the annihilation of Miletus. Home of the philosophers Thales, Anaximander,
and Anaximenes, and the geographer Hecataeus (who had warned Aristagoras of
Persia’s overwhelming superiority), Miletus had been one of the most cultured
cities in the Greek world. When the poet Phrynichus produced a tragedy on its
128
Figure 5.8. Herm of Themistocles. This Roman
marble copy was probably modeled after the
head of a bronze statue of Themistocles erected
about 460 BC. With its thick neck and coarse fea-
tures, the head may reflect the earliest known
example of individual portraiture in Greek art.
We should perhaps associate the unusual phys-
iognomy with the tradition that Themistocles’
mother was not Greek.

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
fall entitled The Capture of Miletus, the Athenians fined him one thousand drach-
mas for reminding them of their misfortune. Although the Athenians had with-
drawn from the rebellion after the burning of Sardis, their outrage reveals their
sympathy with Miletus in its final hour and a growing sense of identity among
the Ionians.
Not surprisingly, they also feared that the mainland Greeks might suffer the
fate of Miletus. In this situation, a rising politician named Themistocles, who had
just been elected archon, persuaded the Athenians to convert the three rocky har-
bors of Piraeus into a fortified naval and commercial base. Since Themistocles,
unlike most Athenian politicians, lacked strong family connections and the sup-
port of the leisured landowning class, he sought the backing of those who made
their living by trade. Acutely sensitive to the Persian threat—Thucydides praised
him for his ability to foresee what the future held (1.138)—Themistocles served
Greece well at this critical time.
Darius’ Invasion of Greece
The desire to avenge the burning of Sardis strengthened Darius’s interest in
Greece. In 492 BC an expedition led by his son-in-law Mardonius failed when the
fleet was wrecked rounding the Chalcidic peninsula, although it did restore Per-
sian prestige in northern Greece, conquering Thrace, Thasos, and Macedonia.
Two years later Darius sent another expedition straight across the Aegean. Mind-
ful of the fate of Miletus, many Greek cities offered earth and water, the prover-
bial tokens of submission that signaled recognition of the king’s supremacy. On
the mainland Argos and Thebes went over to the Persians. Sparta and Athens,
however, remained steadfast in their opposition.
Darius’ primary goal was to punish Athens and Eretria for their role in the Ion-
ian rebellion. In the summer of 490 his fleet arrived in Greece, commanded by his
nephew Artaphernes and Datis, a Mede, who brought with them the aging former
Athenian tyrant Hippias. Eretria quickly fell, its temples being burned in revenge
for the sack of Sardis and its people exiled to central Asia, where the peripatetic
prophet of the Roman Empire, Apollonius of Tyana, reported finding their de-
scendants still speaking their native Greek several centuries later. From Eretria, the
Persians sailed to the old Peisistratid stronghold of Marathon in northern Attica.
The Athenian assembly immediately voted to dispatch their forces to Marathon,
and a runner, Philippides, was sent to Sparta, supposedly covering fully 140
miles by the next day. The Spartans, however, claimed that they could not march
before the new moon because they were celebrating a festival of Apollo, the
Carnea. As the Spartans were deeply religious and no cowards in war, their ex-
planation may have been sincere.
The Battle of Marathon
The Athenians were outnumbered, perhaps by a factor of two to one. Although
the Persian force included cavalry, archers, and skirmishing troops, the Athenian
129

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
hoplites were more heavily armed. The most serious problem faced by the Athe-
nians was disunity among the ten strategoi; some wanted to wait for the Spartan
reinforcements and others thought delay risky. When the Athenians learned
however, that the Persian cavalry was missing and suspected that the Persian
forces were heading for Phaleron, the general Miltiades (nephew of the Miltiades
whom Peisistratus had dispatched to protect Athenian interests in the Cherson-
ese) persuaded his colleagues to attack immediately. His stirring words appear
in Herodotus’ Histories:
Callimachus, it is up to you, right now, to enslave Athens or to make it free, and
to leave for all future generations of humanity a memorial to yourself such as not
even Harmodius and Aristogiton have left. Right now, Athens is in the most per-
ilous moment of its history. Hippias has already shown what we will suffer if we
bow down to the Medes, but if this city survives, it can become the foremost city
in all Greece. Now, I’ll tell you just how this is possible, and how it is up to you—
and only you—to determine the course of events. We ten generals are split right
in two, with half saying fight and the other half not. If we don’t fight now, I am
afraid that a storm of civil strife will so shake the timber of the Athenian people
that they will go over to the Medes. But if we fight now, before the cracks can
show in some of the Athenians, and provided that the gods take no sides, why
then we can survive this battle. All this depends on you. It hangs on your deci-
sion—now. If you vote with me, your country will be free and your city will be
first in all of Hellas, but if you choose the side of those who urge us not to fight,
then the opposite of all the good I’ve spoken of will fall to you.
(The Histories 6.109; Blanco 1992)
And so, early one morning in late September of 490, the Athenians and their
Plataean allies attacked, shouting, covering the mile or so dividing them from the
Persians at double speed despite their heavy hoplite armor. Knowing they were
outnumbered, they concentrated their forces, even though it meant leaving the cen-
ter thin. The Persians, who were caught by surprise, broke under the attack of the
determined hoplites fighting in defense of their freedom and fled in confusion to
their ships.
Arriving too late to participate in the fighting, the Spartans visited the battle-
field and surveyed the Persian corpses. Herodotus maintained that the Athenians
lost 192 men, the Persians 6400. The number of Greek dead is probably correct,
for the names were inscribed on the battlefield; they included Callimachus. The
dead were cremated where they had fallen, and a monument was subsequently
erected on the site. Some Plataeans and some Athenian slaves also died, but their
numbers are unknown. The playwright Aeschylus, who fought at Marathon, later
mentioned only his service at Marathon in his epitaph, writing that: “The glori-
ous grove of Marathon can tell of his valor—as can the long-haired Persian, who
well remembers it.” For the next two generations, the Marathonomachoi—the vet-
erans of Marathon—enjoyed singular prestige in Athens as exemplars of tradi-
tional Athenian values in an increasingly luxurious and complex society. Not all
Athenians, however, rejoiced in their victory. Herodotus reports that a shield sig-
130

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
nal was flashed from Athens after the battle urging the Persians to hurry to
Athens. (Gossip ascribed this act of treachery to the Alcmaeonids, but Herodotus
denied indignantly that the Alcmaeonids had been to blame.) For years accusa-
tions of Persian sympathies would dog aspiring Athenian politicians as a conve-
nient device to damage a rival’s reputation.
Athens After Marathon
Political leadership in Athens changed after the Battle of Marathon in a very spe-
cific manner. The need for capable military commanders resulted in a new method
of selecting archons, who, as primarily judicial officials, now seemed less impor-
tant than the strategoi. Beginning in 487, therefore, archons were chosen by lot
from candidates drawn from the demes as was the Council of Five Hundred. As
a result, ambitious men shifted their interest from the archonship to the strate¯gia
(generalship), leading ultimately to the decline in influence of the venerable
Council of the Areopagus, which was composed of former archons.
Themistocles, who was hostile to the aristocratic ethos that granted special
power and prestige to the Areopagites, may have inspired this reform, but he
cannot have foreseen its long-term effects on Athenian politics. Selection by lot
was a procedure associated with democracy in Greece that tended to discourage
the machinations of special interest groups. It also ensured that a significant pro-
portion of the men eligible for each office would participate in politics, and gave
legitimacy to the process by enlisting the gods in the choice of officials. The Athe-
nians were no fools, however. All would-be officeholders underwent an interro-
gation known as dokimasia, and the lot was not used to select strategoi, leading to
the ten strategoi becoming the most prestigious of all Athenian officials.
At the same time, the Athenians first successfully employed one of Cleisthenes’
most remarkable innovations, ostracism, a procedure thought to have been in-
tended to prevent the emergence of a new tyrant. Every spring the Athenians had
the option of voting to send one of their fellow citizens into exile for ten years. The
process took its name from the ostraka—broken pieces of pottery—on which vot-
ers scratched the name of the man they wanted to banish. Ostracized Athenians
131
Figure 5.9. Numerous ostraka have been discovered in the Athenian agora. These bear the
names of Aristides, son of Lysimachus, and Themistocles, son of Neocles, of the deme
Phrearrhioi.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
stood accused of no crime and remained citizens, but they had to live in exile for
ten years simply because they had received a plurality of six thousand votes cast
by their fellow citizens.
Inevitably historians have wondered if Cleisthenes really created this proce-
dure, since the first man so exiled—a Peisistratid named Hipparchus—was not
ostracized until 487. The answer may lie in the requirement for six thousand
votes to be cast for an ostracism to be valid, so that Hipparchus’ ostracism may
not have been the first attempted ostracism but merely the first successful one. In
any event, it is probably no coincidence that the first man ostracized was related
to former tyrant Hippias, and that all but one of the other men ostracized in the
480s—Themistocles’ great rival Aristides—were members of the Alcmaeonid
family that had been accused of trying to betray Athens to the Persians in 490.
Themistocles’ role in the first three ostracisms is unclear, but his dispute with
Aristides over how best to face a renewed Persian threat was the central issue in
the ostracism of 482. Darius, in fact, began preparations for a new invasion of
Greece soon after the Persian defeat at Marathon, but revolts in Babylon and
Egypt and Darius’ death in the fall of 486 delayed it for almost six years. Mean-
while, the Athenians had made a spectacular silver strike at Laurium in south-
eastern Attica that yielded over two tons in the first year. In the bitter debate over
its use Aristides advocated sharing it among the citizens, while Themistocles ar-
gued for building two hundred triremes (light, fast, maneuverable warships with
three banks of oars). They were allegedly to be used against Athens’ old enemy,
Aegina, but were really for defense against the Persians. The ostracism of 482 de-
cided the issue; Aristides left Athens, and the fleet that would save Greece was
built. It is difficult to imagine how history might have turned out had the vote in
that ostracism been different.
The Invasion of Xerxes
Darius’ son and successor, Xerxes (Cyrus’ grandson on his mother’s side) was at
first ambivalent about carrying out the invasion, but by 484 BC he had made his
decision, and the Greeks learned that ships were being built in large numbers
throughout the ports of the extensive Persian Empire from Egypt to the Black Sea.
Engineers and laborers were dispatched to the Hellespont, where they bridged
the crossing with boats, and to northern Greece where they cut a canal across
Athos so that the shipwreck Mardonius had suffered in 492 could be avoided.
While the Athenians were still constructing warships, Xerxes’ heralds arrived
in Greece seeking earth and water, and many states including Thessaly and
Thebes, complied. At a congress held at Corinth in 481 BC thirty-one states lim-
ited mainly to Athens and the Peloponnesian League formed an alliance that his-
torians call the Hellenic League. Even Aegina and Athens reconciled in the crisis,
and Aristides and the other exiles were recalled. Sparta received supreme com-
mand on land and sea. After an unsuccessful attempt to find a defensible posi-
tion in northern Greece, the Hellenic League decided to make a stand in central
Greece, placing a land force at the pass of Thermopylae on the Malian Gulf while
132

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
the fleet settled in at nearby Artemisium off northern Euboea. At the instigation
of Themistocles, the Athenians probably voted to evacuate Attica and wait out
the war on the island of Salamis and in nearby Troezen in the Peloponnesus. A
third-century copy of the decree discovered on Troezen in 1959 probably pre-
serves the substance of Themistocles’ motion:
The Gods
Resolved by the Council and People
Themistocles, son of Neocles, of Phrearrhioi, made the motion
To entrust the city to Athena the Mistress of Athens and to all the other Gods to
guard and to defend against the Barbarian on behalf of the land. The Athenians
themselves and the foreigners who live in Athens are to send their children and
women to safety in Troezen, their protector being Pittheus, the founding hero of
the land. They are to send the old men and their movable possessions to safety
on Salamis. The treasurers and priestesses are to remain on the Acropolis guard-
ing the property of the gods.
All the other Athenians and foreigners of military age are to embark on the
200 ships that are ready and defend against the Barbarian for the sake of their
own freedom and that of the rest of the Greeks along with the Lacedaemonians,
the Corinthians, the Aeginetans, and all others who wish to share the danger.
(Jameson 1970, p. 98 adapted)
The odds facing the Hellenic League were great, so great that the Delphic or-
acle issued a stream of oracles discouraging resistance to the Persians. The Spar-
tans were told that their only hope lay in the death of a king and the Athenians
133
Figure 5.10. Photograph of a trireme at sea. Working in England and Greece, twentieth-
century scholars and naval architects reconstructed an Athenian trireme of the Classical period.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Figure 5.11. The Persian Wars.
134






Persian Empire
Persian vassal-state in 480
Persian allies in 480
PELOPONNESUS
BOEOTIA
PH
O
C
I
S
PELOPONNESUS
BOEOTIA
PH
O
C
I
S
Hellespo
nt
Mycale
0
0
40
80
120 160 km
20
40
60
80 100 miles
MACEDONIA
THESSALY
THRACE
I O
N I
A
MACEDONIA
THESSALY
THRACE
I O
N I
A
AEGEAN
SEA
Hellespo
nt
Mycale
Euboea
Salamis
Aegina
Paros
Artemisium
Thermopylae
Delphi
Eretria
Plataea
Corinth
Marathon
Athens
Troezen
Sparta
Sardis
Miletus
that salvation was to be found in the “wooden walls,” which Themistocles ar-
gued was the new navy. While the oracle may partly explain King Leonidas’
tenacity in holding Thermopylae, hard calculation also called for a land opera-
tion, however unpromising, to buy time for Greece while the fleet off Artemisium
could cripple the Persian navy. As luck would have it, a storm fortuitously in-
tervened so that even before the indecisive fighting at Artemisium the Persians
had lost many ships.
The Battle of Thermopylae
Leonidas marched into Thermopylae with about seven thousand men, a fairly
small force. But for their dependence on the Athenian fleet, the Peloponnesians
would have preferred to focus their defense on the Peloponnesus. Local Phocian

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
forces were assigned to defend a secret path over the mountains leading to the
rear of the Greek forces. Unfortunately, a Greek traitor betrayed the secret and
guided Xerxes’ personal guard, the so-called Immortals, over it. On learning the
Persians were in his rear, Leonidas dismissed the bulk of his forces, and with only
the Thebans, Thespians, and three hundred Spartans, fiercely defended the pass,
killing many “Immortals” including two brothers of Xerxes before being killed
themselves. On Xerxes’ orders the body of Leonidas was decapitated and im-
paled. Throughout antiquity Greeks took inspiration from the epitaph composed
for the Thermopylae dead attributed to Simonides:
Go tell the Spartans, stranger passing by,
That here, obeying their commands, we lie.
The Battle of Salamis
Their victory at Thermopylae opened the road to Athens and central Greece to
the Persians. From their refuge on Salamis the Athenians soon saw the smoke of
the burning Acropolis. While the Peloponnesians urged withdrawal of the fleet
to the Peloponnesus, Themistocles, fearing that the Greeks might indeed pull
back from the Isthmus, sent a messenger to Xerxes urging him to occupy the nar-
rows and block the escape of the Greeks. Herodotus, who came from Halicar-
nassus in Ionia, took delight in telling how Xerxes’ prudent adviser Artemisia,
queen of Halicarnassus, in vain advised him against fighting a needless battle.
Xerxes quickly learned the wisdom of Artemisia’s advice as he watched from his
throne the Persian fleet, unable to maneuver in the straits of Salamis, suffer a
massive defeat, losing over two hundred ships. Rather than confronting the fool-
ishness of his decision to fight, Xerxes reacted to the defeat by furiously execut-
ing his Phoenician captains for alleged cowardice in the battle and retreated to
Asia with the remainder of his fleet. Less than a year later, in the spring of 479,
Xerxes’ forces were led by Mardonius was totally destroyed at Plataea by the largest
Greek army ever mobilized. Almost at the same time the Greek fleet that had pur-
sued the Persians eastward defeated their navy at the Battle of Mycale near Miletus,
finally liberating the Ionians and ending the Persian threat to Greece forever.
The War Through Greek Eyes
Victors celebrate the history of their triumphs; the vanquished try to forget or triv-
ialize them. Until recently, Greek historical sources and scholars who caricatured
the Persian Empire as merely an “Oriental despotism” largely shaped our views of
the Persian Empire. Modern historians have been overwhelmingly “Hellenocen-
tric,” following the lead of fifth-century Greek authors such as the playwright
Aeschylus, who believed that Xerxes had incurred the wrath of the gods and was
responsible for his own defeat and the death of many noble Persians because of his
folly. In 472 BC he produced a tragedy, The Persians, celebrating the Athenian role
in the Persian defeat and the values for which they had fought—liberty as opposed
135

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
to slavery, responsible democratic government as opposed to capricious autoc-
racy and monarchy. It was the historian Herodotus, however, who gave defini-
tive form to the Hellenocentric view of the Persian Wars. He highlighted in his
Histories the unexpectedness of the Greek victory and sought its causes in the fun-
damental institutions of Greek and Persian society and government. Herodotus
depicted Xerxes, in contrast to Cyrus, as an impious madman who was respon-
sible for initiating the decline of Persia. Xerxes’ chief character flaw, in Herodotus’
view, was hybris (“arrogance”). Imagining himself to be on the same level as the
gods, he dared to bridge the Hellespont, thereby setting in motion a process that
led to his own defeat.
136
Document 5.1. The chorus from Aeschylus’s Persians (472 BC).
Aeschylus took the occasion of his drama about Salamis to stress the differences
between eastern despotism and what he conceived as Greek freedom. Here the
chorus of Persian elders laments Persia’s defeat by Greece:
They throughout the Asian land
No longer Persian laws obey,
No longer lordly tribute yield,
Exacted by necessity;
Nor suffer rule as suppliants,
To earth obeisance never make:
Lost is the kingly power.—
Nay, no longer is the tongue
Imprisoned kept, but loose are men,
When loose the yoke of power’s bound,
To bawl their liberty.
But Ajax’ isle, spilled with blood
Its earth, and washed round by sea,
Holds the remains of Persia.
The Persians 584–596; translated by Seth Benardete, in
David Grene and Richmond Lattimore, eds.,
The Complete Greek Tragedies, vol. 1, Aeschylus.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959.
Although Greek historical sources tend to depict Persian history as the grad-
ual degeneration of the mighty empire established by Cyrus the Great, the Per-
sians were not decisively defeated until their conquest by Alexander the Great
(from 334–323 BC). They continued to play an influential role in Greek politics,
both in civic disputes and in rivalries between Greek states, favoring now one

The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars
side, now another. They were instrumental in the Spartan victory in the Pelo-
ponnesian War, and fourth-century Greek history cannot be understood without
constant concern for Persian involvement in Greek affairs.
The unanticipated success of the little city-states over the monolithic empire
had little impact in Persia, but in Greece it would give birth to a civilization of
extraordinary brilliance and originality. The unity the Persian Empire had
sparked, however, would prove short-lived, and its fragility would place limits
on how long Greek civilization could endure.
TRANSLATIONS
Blanco, Walter. 1992. The Histories, from Herodotus: The Histories, Walter Blanco and Jen-
nifer Roberts, eds. New York: W. W. Norton.
Jameson M., “A Decree of Themistocles from Troizen,” Hesperia 29 (1960) 200–201, modi-
fied by P. Green. 1996. The Greco-Persian Wars. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.
Scott-Kilvert, Ian. 1960. The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch. Har-
mondsworth, UK: Penguin.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Cook, J. M. 1983. The Persian Empire. London: J.M. Dent. A history that provides vital back-
ground in understanding fifth-century Persia.
Forrest, W. G. 1966. The Emergence of Greek Democracy. New York and Toronto: McGraw-
Hill. A lively and readable analysis of the governments of the Greek city-states.
Green, Peter. 1996. The Greco-Persian Wars. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-
fornia Press (revised edition of Xerxes at Salamis). A dramatic account of Xerxes’ in-
vasion of Greece.
Lenardon, Robert. 1978. The Saga of Themistocles. London: Thames and Hudson. The life of
the innovative and irreverent politician.
Romm, James. 1998. Herodotus. New Haven: Yale University Press. A lucid introduction to
Herodotus and his place in Greek literature.
Stanton, G. R. 1990. Athenian Politics c. 800–500 BC: A Sourcebook. London and New York:
Routledge. A very useful collection of sources that traces the evolution of the Athen-
ian state.
137

138
6
THE RIVALRIES OF
THE GREEK CITY-STATES
AND THE GROWTH OF
ATHENIAN DEMOCRACY
In the struggle to prevent a Persian takeover of Greece, a powerful sense of Hel-
lenic identity was forged. Eager to prevent a third invasion, a number of Greek
states entered into an alliance led by the Athenians, whose naval strength had been
instrumental in winning the war. Tribute from this league enabled Athens to offer
state pay for public service such as jury duty, thus expanding the number of men
who could afford to participate in government. The fact that the lower-class citizens
who rowed the triremes were becoming increasingly pivotal to the city’s well-being
also made it difficult for the rich and wellborn to maintain their traditional mo-
nopoly on political power. Democratic reforms consequently undermined the edge
wealthy aristocrats enjoyed in politics, though nothing whatever was done to re-
move the civic disabilities of women or to abolish slavery. Indeed, Athens’ imper-
ial ventures probably increased the number of slaves in Attica, and the status of
women seems to have declined with the growth of equality among citizen males.
During the decades that followed Xerxes’ defeat, moreover, Athens became a ma-
jor cultural center. Tourists came from all over Greece to watch the tragedies per-
formed in honor of the god Dionysus, and some of the money Athens received to
police the seas was diverted to the celebration of religious festivals and to the erec-
tion of magnificent public buildings such as the temple to Athena called the Parthe-
non; for the Greeks’ deliverance from Persian autocracy the gods received ample
thanks. The tragedians Aeschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles were all born in Athens,
as were the comic dramatist Aristophanes, the sculptor Phidias, and the historian
Thucydides. Many Greek thinkers like the historian Herodotus and the philosopher
Anaxagoras came from elsewhere to enjoy—and enhance—what Athens had to offer.
Although it exerted a magnetic force on many of the artists and intellectuals
of Greece, Athens was far from the only site that could boast major attractions.

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
At Delphi, for example, donors grateful for deliverance from Persia set up splen-
did monuments and commissioned superb works of art. Olympia remained a vi-
tal religious center as well; the games were extended to five days, and after its
completion in 456 BC visitors could admire the imposing temple of Zeus. Democ-
racies similar to that evolving at Athens developed in a number of places, most
prominently Syracuse in Sicily, and throughout the Greek world intellectuals
could be found bringing new ideas to birth. While Socrates was asking questions
about justice and the human community in the streets of Athens, on the island of
Cos, Hippocrates was discussing medicine and the human body.
THE AFTERMATH OF THE PERSIAN WARS
AND THE FOUNDATION OF A NEW LEAGUE
The Delian League—so called by modern historians because its treasury came to
be located on the island of Delos—had not always been under Athenian leader-
ship. While the League’s fleet was at Byzantium in 478 seeking to consolidate
Greek power in the east, the Greeks began to complain bitterly about their com-
mander Pausanias, regent for Leonidas’ underage son Pleistarchus. He conducted
himself, they alleged, like an eastern potentate, dressing like a Persian and forti-
fying his position with a bodyguard of Medes and Egyptians. Sparta’s attempts
to hold onto its position of primacy by sending out another commander were not
successful. It was only then that Athens was offered the chance to lead the League,
an opportunity the Athenians were all too happy to seize. In 477 BC representa-
tives from Athens and dozens of other states met at Delos and took oaths binding
themselves into an organization designed to fight the Persians. Some members of
the old Hellenic League joined; others did not. In exchange for annual contribu-
tions in ships or money Athens agreed to lead the League in military operations
against Persia while simultaneously respecting the internal autonomy of each po-
lis in the alliance. Though policy was to be established by a League assembly, it
would be executed by an Athenian high command that would also control the
treasury. Thus from the beginning power in the League was concentrated in
Athenian hands. The small size of Greek states is reflected in the number of poleis
who enrolled in the alliance—probably about 150. Whereas the goals of the Pelo-
ponnesian League had never been defined, those of the Delian League were fairly
clear—containment of Persia, the gathering of booty as compensation for dam-
ages done to Greece during the war, and simple revenge.
In view of the personality problems that had brought down Pausanias (and
with him Spartan naval leadership), it was particularly fortunate for the Atheni-
ans that they had at their disposal a man as famous for his probity and affability
as Aristides. It was he who was charged with assessing each state’s appropriate
contribution to the League treasury. Some of the larger states such as Lesbos,
Samos, Chios, Naxos, and Thasos chose to make their contributions in ships; most
preferred to pay cash. Although records of the tribute paid in the League’s first
years are lacking, it is possible to track the history of payments beginning in 454
139

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
BC through the compendium that survives today called the Athenian Tribute Lists,
actually lists of the one-sixtieth of each contribution that was dedicated to the
goddess Athena Polias; these figures multiplied by sixty give the size of each
state’s contribution in a given year.
From Delian League to Athenian Empire
For over a quarter century the League fought against Persia and, led by Milti-
ades’ son Cimon, the Athenians and their allies expelled the Persians from Eu-
rope and made it impossible for them to establish naval bases in Ionia. In 476, Ci-
mon set out with the League’s navy for the northeast. The fortress of Eion on the
Strymon River in Chalcidice was taken with little difficulty. The Athenians then
moved against Scyros, a rocky island east of Euboea inhabited by pirates. En-
slaving the pirates and their families, they established on the island the kind of
colony that was known as a cleruchy. Unlike most Greek colonies, which were
fully autonomous and independent of the mother city, cleruchies were in effect
part of Athenian territory, and all their inhabitants (called cleruchs) retained their
Athenian citizenship. Generally chosen by the government from among poor
Athenians, each cleruch was granted a parcel of land (a kle¯ros, hence the word
“cleruch”). Cleruchies filled a double function: They provided an outlet for the
disaffected and potentially contentious poor, and they operated as garrisons in
the empire to discourage rebellion from Athens.
Shortly afterward, the Athenians and their allies sailed against Carystus in
southwestern Euboea, compelling the city to join the Delian League, and when
the island of Naxos decided to leave the League, the Athenians forcibly pre-
vented its withdrawal and in fact confiscated its fleet, ordering the Naxians
thenceforth to pay their tribute in money rather than ships. These two develop-
ments highlight the problematic nature of the Delian League. A strong case could
be made—and was made—that since all Greek states benefited from the existence
of the League, all should pay tribute and support its fleet. Against this argument,
140
Figure 6.1. Section of Athenian Tribute List
inscription showing payments for 433–432
BC. The citizens of Mykonos, Andros, Siph-
nos, Syros, Styra, Eretria, Grynches, and
Rheneia are listed here.

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
however, resentful poleis adduced their right to make their own determinations
about the extent of the Persian peril. Because the League’s existence was justified
only by the need for continued protection of Greece from the Persians, moreover,
a problem would be created for the Athenians if Cimon and his navy did too
good a job of squelching any designs Persia might have on Greece. This is pre-
cisely what happened around 467 when the Persian forces were badly beaten by
those of Cimon at the mouth of the Eurymedon River in southern Asia Minor. Ci-
mon’s success probably played a role in the revolt in 465 of the important island
of Thasos, located just off Thrace. When the Thasians were finally overcome by
Athenian might, they were compelled, like the Naxians, to yield their ships and
switch to cash payments into the League treasury, an obligation that would be all
the more onerous since the Athenians also confiscated the Thracian mines that
had previously been in Thasian hands.
The Athenians’ refusal to permit states to remain aloof from the League, combined
with the gradual conversion of tribute payments from ships (which had been com-
manded by admirals from their native poleis) to money, sent an increasingly clear
141
Figure 6.2. The Athenian Empire at its height.
                                                 THESSALY
Argos
Argos
Imbros
Ithome
Tegea
Halieis
Tanagra
Oenophyta
Halicarnassus
Miletus
Colophon
Cyme
Phocaea
Assos
Sigeum
Methone
Eion
Amphipolis
Abdera
Manonea
Abydos
Cyzicus
Bisanthe
Perinthus
Selymbria
Byzantium
Chalcedon
Epidamnus
 Friends and allies of
Athens
Temporary mainland
dependencies or Allies
of Athens 456–447 b.c.
Spartan League
Area of Athenian
domination
Original members of
the Confederacy of 
Delos
Probable or possible
original members of the
Confederacy of Delos
Members added to the
Confederacy of Delos
after 477 b.c.
   LOCRIS
PH
O
C
I
S
AC
H
A
E
A
LOCRIS
PH
O
C
I
S
AC
H
A
E
A
THESSALY
Athens
Friends of Athens also
in Italy and Sicily
Treasury moved to
Athens 454
0
40
80
120 160 km
20
40
60
80 100 miles
Euboe
a
Ithome
Tegea
Halieis
Tanagra
Oenophyta
Halicarnassus
Miletus
Colophon
Cyme
Phocaea
Assos
Sigeum
Elaeus
Sestos
Torone
Scione
Mende
Methone
Potidaea
Eion
Amphipolis
Abdera
Manonea
Abydos
Cyzicus
Bisanthe
Perinthus
Selymbria
Byzantium
Chalcedon
Epidamnus
Chalcis
Eretria
Corcyra
Carpathos
Rhodes
Naxos
Amorgos
Paros
Ceos
Delos
Tenos
Andros
Cecryphalea
Leros
Icaria
Samos
Chios
Lesbos
Somothrace
Lemnos
Thasos
0

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
message that Athens ruled the sea and was converting the naval alliance into an em-
pire. Although Athenian leaders seem to have been largely of one mind about the
merits of naval imperialism, however, they were divided about Athens’ proper rela-
tionship to Sparta. These conflicts, moreover, were tied to disagreements about the
further democratization of Athenian political life. Although sources for Athenian pol-
itics during these decades are sparse, some underlying fault lines are discernible:
Themistocles encouraged competition with Sparta and the development of democ-
racy, whereas Cimon favored Sparta and opposed any further democratization.
The forces in Athens favoring warm relations with Sparta and opposing the
increasingly democratic trend in the government were strong. So was Themisto-
cles’ personality: His sharp tongue and quickness to claim credit for his achieve-
ments played into the hands of his enemies, and it seems that he was ostracized
around 471 BC. In the 460s the Athenians and the Spartans united against him,
claiming that he and Pausanias were engaged in treasonable correspondence
with the Persian king. Themistocles fled to Persia, and Pausanias was starved to
death by the Spartans in a temple where he had sought asylum.
NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN ATHENS AND SPARTA
Having rid themselves of a keen and colorful politician in Themistocles, the Athe-
nians were left with the genial and gentlemanly Cimon. Themistocles and Cimon
were opposites in every way. Slow where Themistocles had been quick, and cour-
teous where Themistocles had been insolent, Cimon was no intellectual, but he
had a flair for generalship. Because of his military reputation, he continued to
command a good deal of respect in the Athenian assembly even after the devel-
opment of a calculating and determined coalition led by Ephialtes, whose pur-
pose was to break with Sparta and further the growth of democracy.
For some years Ephialtes and his associates had been making attacks on indi-
vidual members of the venerable and aristocratic Council of the Areopagus. Mat-
ters came to a head in 462, not long after Cimon’s return from Thasos. Two years
earlier, when an earthquake in Sparta killed thousands of people and destroyed
most houses, the helots had seized the moment and revolted. Unable to dislodge
the rebels from their stronghold on Mount Ithome, the Spartans appealed for aid
to the cities with which they were still technically allied by the terms of the Hel-
lenic League formed in 481 for the defense of Greece during the Persian wars.
The Fall of Cimon and the Reforms of Ephialtes
Sparta’s request touched off a vigorous debate in the Athenian assembly. Cimon,
it seems, defended the time-honored alliance between Athens and Sparta, im-
ploring the Athenians “not to allow Greece to go lame, or their own city be de-
prived of its yoke-fellow,” while Ephialtes exhorted his fellow citizens to “let
Sparta’s pride be trampled underfoot” (Plutarch’s Cimon 16.8; Scott-Kilvert 1960).
Cimon carried the day, and he marched off to Sparta backed by four thousand
hoplites. But something about the way the Athenian soldiers conducted themselves
142

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
in Sparta sparked panic in the conservative and fundamentally xenophobic peo-
ple they had come to help. Alone among the allies, the Athenians were sent
home. Their abrupt dismissal imperiled what harmony had been achieved among
the Greek states. Athens now made an alliance with Sparta’s enemy Argos; Ci-
mon, moreover, was ostracized for his miscalculation, leaving an open highway
for Ephialtes and his associates. If the Spartans were alarmed by the Athenians’
innovative and forward-looking ways of construing the world, they did a bad job
of squelching these. Cimon’s ostracism marked the beginning in Athens of full-
blown democracy, taking democracy in the Greek sense of diffusing political
power throughout the male citizen body, with no votes for women, no citizen-
ship for immigrants, and slaves in abundance. Ironically, moreover, the naval as-
cendancy that Cimon had done so much to create played a large role in fostering
the democratic reforms he opposed. Cimon seems to have supported a moderate
hoplite democracy, that is, government by those who could afford to provide
their own weapons and armor. The success of his naval operations, however, un-
derlined the increasing importance to the state of the men who rowed the triremes
(some moderately poor, some indigent), a development that served to undermine
the old-fashioned system associating power with property and contributed to its
replacement by a more broadly based form of government.
Ephialtes was able to seize on the discrediting of Cimon’s policies by passing
some significant democratic reforms. Though the details remain obscure, we know
in a general sense that he substantially diminished the power and prestige of the an-
cient Council of the Areopagus. (Time had already done some of Ephialtes’ work
for him: Since the Areopagus consisted of ex-archons, it had been growing less and
less aristocratic with each year that had passed since 486, when the Athenians had
begun selecting archons by lot.) At the instigation of Ephialtes, the assembly passed
measures constricting the jurisdiction of this body, transferring many of its functions
to the boule¯, the ekkle¯sia, and the body of prospective jurors known as the he¯liaia.
Ephialtes was careful, however, to show respect for its venerable history and long
traditions by leaving it with jurisdiction over homicide and some religious matters.
Shortly after these reforms were enacted, men who presumably disliked the
turn the government was taking arranged for Ephialtes’ assassination. Upon
Ephialtes’ death the leadership of the loosely organized political group to which
we give the somewhat misleading term “party” devolved upon his dynamic as-
sociate Pericles, who remained the most prominent politician in Athens from
roughly 461 to his death in 429.
THE “FIRST” (UNDECLARED) PELOPONNESIAN
WAR (460–445 BC)
Pericles took the lead in shaping Athenian policy throughout the decade during
which Athens chose to wage war with both the Persian Empire and the Pelopon-
nesian League. Hostilities with Persia survived Cimon’s ostracism, while tensions
with Sparta and its allies escalated. The period from 460 to 445 BC is sometimes
called the first Peloponnesian War, an undeclared war between the Athenian and
143

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Spartan leagues that really consisted of a series of battles often punctuated by
considerable intervals of peace. (The famous Peloponnesian War, which was
fought fairly steadily for twenty-seven years from 431 to 404, was really the sec-
ond Peloponnesian War.)
Athens’ Conflicts with Its Neighbors
Sitting between Corinth and Attica, the commercial state of Megara played an im-
portant role in the outbreak of both Peloponnesian wars. Around the time of
Ephialtes’ death it decided to bolt from the Peloponnesian League and ally itself
with Athens to obtain protection from the designs of Corinth. Not surprisingly, the
Corinthians were alarmed by the Athenians’ possession of the Megarian port of Pe-
gae on the Corinthian Gulf, from which it was easy to sail to the west. They be-
came more agitated still at the upshot of the helot rebellion that had followed the
earthquake in the Peloponnesus, for when the helots on Mount Ithome finally sur-
rendered on condition that they be permitted to leave the Peloponnesus, the Athe-
nians settled them at Naupactus near the mouth of the Gulf, on the northern shore.
This bold action drove an additional wedge into the Corinthians’ sphere of influ-
ence. With the two states locked in trade rivalry, moves that promised to expand
the territory easily accessible to Athenian shipping were bound to spark hostility
in Corinth, and it was predictable that the tension between Athens and Corinth
would play a large role in determining the diplomatic relations of the Greek states.
In 459, Corinth and Aegina combined against Athens. The Athenians not only
repelled a Corinthian invasion of Megara but also built formidable walls, the so-
called Long Walls, linking Athens to the port of Piraeus. This prudent strategy
had the effect of making the whole town complex impossible to besiege by land,
since supplies could always be brought in by boat. Around the same time they
engaged Hippodamus, a native of Miletus who wrote a treatise on town plan-
ning, to design the port area, which he laid out on a grid pattern similar to that
of his home state in Ionia.
The Spartans’ decision to enter the war against Athens in 457 did more harm to
them than to their designated enemy. Fighting the Athenians in Boeotia, what the
Spartans chiefly accomplished was to draw Athens into Boeotian affairs. By 456, the
Athenians had come to control the whole region with the exception of Thebes, and
Athenian influence (or pressure) had made democratic governments the norm in the
Boeotian poleis. West of Boeotia, Phocis and Locris joined the Delian League, as did
the vanquished island of Aegina, and Athens also gained two states in the Pelo-
ponnesus itself, Troezen on the east coast and Achaea on the Corinthian Gulf.
Disaster in Egypt and the Transfer of
the League Treasury to Athens
Athens’ land empire now stood at its maximum extent. Determined to continue
operations against Persia, Pericles persuaded the Athenians to send ships both to
144

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
Cyprus, where they hoped to inflict damage on the Phoenician fleet, and to
Egypt, which had rebelled from King Artaxerxes. The Egyptian campaign, how-
ever, ended in disaster; Thucydides reports losses of some two hundred Athen-
ian and allied ships with their crews, a total of 40,000 men. It was at this juncture
that the Athenians decided to proclaim their ongoing supremacy by transferring
the League treasury from Delos, vulnerable to pirates and Persians alike, to
Athens itself. Historians consequently have taken 454 as a convenient date to stop
referring to the Delian League and begin speaking of the Athenian Empire, though
in reality of course the transformation had been going on for some time.
A Brief Hiatus: Athens at Peace
with Persia and Sparta
Returning from his ten years’ exile in 451, Cimon negotiated a truce of five years
between Athens and Sparta and abandoned Athens’ alliance with Argos. Argos
in turn signed a thirty-year treaty with Sparta; the expiration of this treaty in 420,
eleven years after the beginning of the (second) Peloponnesian War, would cre-
ate a volatile situation in mainland Greece. When Cimon died campaigning in
Cyprus in 450, the Athenians apparently made peace with Persia.
Peace with Sparta followed in 445 when the Athenian land empire collapsed
virtually overnight as a revolt in Euboea was followed by the defection of Megara.
After sixteen years of imperialism within mainland Greece, the Athenians had
lost thousands of lives and had no more territory than they had possessed in 461
when fighting had begun. King Pleistoanax of Sparta invaded. Through delicate
diplomacy and probably outright bribery as well, Pericles persuaded Pleistoanax
to return home, but terror had been struck in the Athenians’ hearts. Though in
time Pericles himself subdued Euboea, Megara reverted to the Peloponnesian
League, and Athenian influence in Boeotia crashed to a close as Thebes assumed
leadership of an antidemocratic Boeotian League.
The peace of 445 was optimistically named the Thirty Years’ Peace, though it
would not last even half that long. The key provisions of the peace were five: Nei-
ther state was to interfere with the allies of the other; neutrals were free to join
either side; disagreements were to be settled by arbitration; no allies were per-
mitted to switch sides; and each hegemon was free to use force to resolve con-
flicts within its own alliance.
PERICLES AND THE GROWTH OF
ATHENIAN DEMOCRACY
The guiding spirit of Athenian imperialism was Pericles, who owed his position
at Athens in part to his repeated election to the post of strategos and in part to
the high regard in which the Athenians held him. Though he always served con-
currently with nine other strategoi, none of the other generals exercised a paral-
lel influence in the ekklesia.
145

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
The Athenian Assembly
The ekklesia met in the open air on the hill known as the Pnyx. In the early decades
of the fifth century it convened only about a dozen times a year, but the number
of meetings soon expanded, and in Pericles’ time ten days rarely went by without
at least one meeting. Rain or shine, assemblies that promised discussion of serious
problems were likely to be attended by about six thousand—the quorum for cer-
tain important actions such as ostracism. This number was probably an eighth or
so of all adult citizen males in Attica during Pericles’ career, when the city’s pop-
ulation was at its height. During the first half of the fifth century, boys with at least
one Athenian parent would be enrolled in their demes as citizens at the age of eigh-
teen, but in 451, for reasons that are uncertain, Pericles persuaded the Athenians to
limit citizenship to those whose parents were both Athenians. Citizenship was im-
portant for girls as well as boys: Though Athenian women could not vote or hold
offices, they were now the only women who could bear Athenian children.
The consequences of this legislation were both wide and deep. Throughout
Greece, the discouragement of marriage between citizens and aliens increased the
jingoistic tendencies of the polis. The insistence that people marry citizens of their
own state eliminated a powerful source of connectedness among poleis and fos-
tered a sense of separateness that frequently led to war. Social problems were
also created within the polis. Limited in their choice of marriage partners to
Athenian women, married Athenian men frequently opened the door to domes-
tic tensions by maintaining sexual relationships with the exotic “foreign” women
whom they could not marry if they wanted their descendants to be citizens.
Those who attended the assembly might be lifelong advocates of certain poli-
cies and could well be followers of a popular politician, but they were not mem-
bers of political parties as we know them today, for there was no such thing in
Athens. Classical Greek even lacks a word for a political party; writers used ex-
pressions like “those around So-and-So” to identify political groups. Even among
men who elected to attend meetings of the assembly, the degree to which citizens
chose to participate varied widely. As at gatherings of academic faculties today
(or town meetings in New England), some never spoke, some spoke occasionally,
a hard core of engaged citizens spoke frequently—and no doubt there were a few
who seemed to speak incessantly. Some people spoke extemporaneously; others
brought notes or even a text. Speakers had to be prepared for their remarks to be
interrupted periodically by laughter, applause, or heckling of various sorts. Once
the debate was concluded—assembly meetings rarely went past early afternoon,
for some time had to be reserved before supper for the daily meeting of the
boule—voting was conducted by show of hands.
Who attended the meetings of the assembly? Common sense would suggest
that those who lived in the city were more likely to turn up than those who lived
far away, and no doubt the walk in from distant villages discouraged some citi-
zens, especially on rainy days. Nonetheless it seems that people did take the trou-
ble to make the trip when vital matters (like whether or not to go to war) were
slated for discussion.
146

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
Athenian Officials
Athens had no president or prime minister; the generals exercised power in poli-
tics only by virtue of the esteem in which they were held. Until Pericles’ death, men
who lacked military reputations did not generally become distinguished politi-
cians. The converse tended to be true as well—military heroes expected to be re-
warded with political careers. All this changed after Pericles’ death, when politics
and the military began to diverge as careers and it became less unusual for a man
to be just a general or just a politician; concomitantly the government ceased to be
dominated entirely by the scions of famous clans. Throughout Athenian history,
however, wealth and lineage remained important factors, and generals continued
to involve themselves in politics more than they do in many countries today.
The board of ten generals on which Pericles served was only one of many bod-
ies the Athenians established. Including jobs entailed by the administration of the
empire, there may have been as many as seven hundred official positions in Clas-
sical Athens, and most offices were held, like the strategia, by boards of several
men, all serving one-year terms. Many, like the archons, were selected by lot.
Most citizen males by the time they died had held some public office at one time
or another, and a good number had held several. By diluting power in this way,
Athenian voters believed they could inhibit the growth of an identifiable class of
permanent officials (what we might call bureaucrats) with interests different from
those of the populace at large.
The Judicial System and State Pay for State Service
By the time of Pericles, the Athenians had come to call their form of government
de¯mokratia, a government in which the kratos (“power”) was in the hands of the
de¯mos (“the people”), by which they meant the male citizens in their capacity as
voters in the assembly—and as jurors in the courts. The large size of Athenian ju-
ries—several hundred, occasionally as many as 1501—facilitated the legal fiction
that a decision of a jury was a decision of the demos, and consequently there
could be no appeal from a verdict in an Athenian courtroom. The Athenians were
a notoriously litigious people. In Aristophanes’ Clouds, a lively comedy whose
depiction of Socrates contributed substantially to the hostility against the philoso-
pher, one of Socrates’ pupils points out Athens on a map to the crotchety Strep-
siades, but Strepsiades is not persuaded. “What’s that you’re saying?” he asks;
“I’m not convinced, since I don’t see any courts in session” (208).
To ensure that the privilege of serving on juries would be spread as widely
throughout the citizen body as possible, not long after Ephialtes’ death Pericles
introduced a measure providing pay for jury service. It was a small amount, less
than a day’s wages for an average laborer, but not trivial, and no doubt this leg-
islation bolstered Pericles’ popularity at the polls. In time, Athenians came to be
paid for serving on the boule and even for attending the assembly; for many
years during the fifth century magistrates were also paid for their time. Today it
seems natural to compensate people for the time spent serving the community,
147

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
and state pay for state service is now the norm. But many Athenians—mostly af-
fluent men who could afford to serve without remuneration—viewed this system
as a discreditable attempt on the part of democratic politicians to buy popularity
and votes. In the aristocratic value system, it was acceptable for Cimon to court
popularity by inviting passersby to pick fruit from his orchards and by holding
banquets for the hungry at his home, but it was manipulative and underhanded
of Pericles to introduce measures in the assembly providing for compensation to
those who served the state.
Despite a variety of constitutional reforms and creative innovations designed
to maximize popular participation in civic life, rich Athenians continued to enjoy
substantial prestige. Democratic politicians, moreover, cleverly harnessed the
wealth of the elite into the service of the state by establishing a network of pub-
lic services known as liturgies. These included major outlays such as maintaining
a trireme and training its crew (the liturgy known as the trierarchy), leading and
financing a delegation to a religious festival in another Greek state, paying and
training a team of runners for the intertribal torch races at festivals within Athens,
or offering a banquet to all members of one’s tribe on the occasion of a religious
festival. Some of the most elaborate (though not as expensive as the trierarchy,
which remained the costliest liturgy) involved training choruses for performances
at Attic festivals in honor of Athena or Dionysus. About a hundred civilian litur-
gies were performed each year. Everyone profited from this system. Those who
lacked the means to offer such services benefited from the generosity of those
who provided them, and the rich could reaffirm their status while simultane-
ously performing vital military, cultural, religious, and civic functions for the
community. A competitive element also fostered excellence, for prizes at contests
went to the victorious choregist as well as to the successful poet.
LITERATURE AND ART
A word commonly attached to the art and literature of the earlier fifth century is
“grandeur.” During this vigorous era of transition, talented poets, painters, archi-
tects, and sculptors carried the traditions of the sixth century throughout the wider
Greek world, while in Athens the defeat of Persia was marked by innovations in
tragic drama (see Chapter Seven) so striking as to constitute a new art form.
Lyric Poetry
Lyric was a necessary precursor of tragedy, and its practitioners were among the
most distinguished writers of the fifth century. Simonides (c. 556–468 BC) is re-
membered chiefly as the unofficial poet laureate of the Persian wars. He was
probably in Athens when the Persians invaded Greece, and his epitaphs for the
war dead (such as the one cited in Chapter Five) became to Greek literature what
the Declaration of Independence and the Gettysburg Address are to Americans
(only easier to remember, since they were in verse).
148

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
Sicilian tyrants were well known for their interest in culture, and both Si-
monides and his nephew Bacchylides benefited from their patronage. Though
both were famed for their success in the genre known as the epinician ode, that
is, poems written epi-nike¯ (“upon [an athletic] victory”), the verdict of posterity
went rather to Pindar. At the courts of Sicilian tyrants as well as elsewhere in
Greece, Pindar enjoyed the favor of the rich and powerful. His world view was
diametrically opposed to that of democrats in Athens and elsewhere. Like Theog-
nis, Pindar took it as axiomatic that merit was inherited. His many odes, rich in
allusion and soaring in language, share a deeply held belief in an old-fashioned
heroism—an excellence that takes as its starting point the assumption that men of
worth spring from illustrious families that can trace their origins ultimately to di-
vine ancestors. Writing numerous epinician odes, he was also disposed to associ-
ate physical prowess with all-around virtue. By connecting recent achievements
with divine blood and tracing the ancestry of his subjects, he was able to elabo-
rate his poems with powerful myths about gods and ancient heroes. His concern
with the notion of excellence lent a lofty and inspirational quality to his verse.
Document 6.1 Excerpt from Pindar’s sixth Nemean ode. The occasion
of this poem was the victory of Alcimidas of Aegina in the boys’ wrestling contest
at Nemea, perhaps in 465 BC. The poet recalls the Olympic victory of Alcidamas’
grandfather and sings of the immortality conferred by poetry.
There is one race of men,
one race of gods.
Yet from one mother
we both take our breath.
The difference
is in the allotment
of all power,
for the one is nothing
while the bronze sky exists forever,
a sure abode.
And yet, somehow,
we resemble the immortals,
whether in greatness of mind
or nature, though we know not
to what measure
day by day and in the watches of the night
fate has written that we should run.
And now Alkimidas
gives clear proof
that the power
born in the blood
is like
149

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
the fruit-bearing fields
that now, in alternation,
yield mankind
yearly sustenance from the ground
and now, again, resting
withhold their strength
. . .
treading in the footprints of his father’s father,
Praxidamas—
for he, victorious at Olympia,
first brought the Aiakidai garlands from Alpheos;
. . .
come, Muse, direct
upon this clan
the glorious breath of song—
for when men have passed out of our midst
poems and legends
convey their noble deeds. . . .
1–25; translated by Frank Nisetich, Pindar’s Victory Songs.
Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980.
The Visual Arts
Greek painters and sculptors shared a fascination with both the human and the
divine. Throughout the decades of change and growth that mark the fifth cen-
tury, the plastic arts reveal a powerful drive to organize the world in accord with
harmony, balance, and proportion. During the fourth century, Plato, in the blue-
print for the ideal society he described in his dialogue The Republic, would iden-
tify justice as the condition that is obtained when all parts of the soul and state
are in balance. The connections Plato posited between beauty and truth underlay
much of the Greek view of the world throughout the Classical period.
Greek painting and sculpture achieved what they did within the constraints
posed by a variety of conventions. Bronze and marble, the customary materials for
sculpture, were difficult to work with and did not lend themselves to naturalism.
The two generations or so that followed the Persian wars mark a period of transi-
tion during which Greek artists begin to emancipate themselves from the canons
of the Archaic period, as a spare austerity comes to distinguish Classical styles from
those that had gone before. Some of the changes may have had to do with a rejec-
tion of eastern influences in the wake of the bitter conflict with Persia; the ties with
the Near East that were so conspicuous in Archaic styles now seem more tenuous.
The visual arts also become less static during these decades, and action becomes
important. Conveying a strong sense of movement in a still medium is no small
achievement. Some of the most outstanding artists of these decades managed de-
spite the constraints of their craft to build a sense of anticipation and excitement.
150

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
To be sure, the tranquility of Archaic sculpture persists in some of the work of
this period. It is evident, for example, in the bronze charioteer dedicated at Del-
phi in the 470s by Hiero’s brother Polyzalus after his victory in the chariot races
at the Pythian games. The eerie stillness of the body and the garment that falls
from it in perfect folds show precisely the discipline and self-control that Pindar
celebrated in the aristocrats who carried off prizes in these events.
151
Figure 6.3. This bronze chario-
teer from the Sanctuary of Apollo
at Delphi (c. 475 BC) originally
stood in the car of a four-horse
chariot; it has survived because
an earthquake cast it into an an-
cient drain.
Figure 6.4. Roman copy of the diskobolos or “discus
thrower” by Myron. Scholars recognized Myron’s
statue as the model for the Roman copies because of
a passage by the second-century AD author Lucian
that describes the original work in detail.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Probably the free-standing sculpture that conveys the most dramatic sense of
movement to come was the so-called diskobolos (“discus thrower”) of the Athen-
ian sculptor Myron, who was known for his striking realism: Admirers com-
mented that a bronze cow of his on the Acropolis could easily be mistaken for
the real thing. Though the bronze diskobolos Myron made around 460 does not
survive, a variety of Roman copies enable us to appreciate the pent-up energy the
athlete is about to unleash as he hurls his arm forward leaning into the throw.
The relief sculpture with which Greeks adorned their temples offered still
greater opportunities for storytelling. One key example is the temple of Zeus at
Olympia, completed between 470 and 456 BC just when the dramas of Aeschylus
were defining the Attic stage. Excavations have brought to light remarkable
sculptural groups on the portions of the temple known as the pediments—the
elongated triangular spaces under the roof that sat atop the columns and cried
out for decoration. In the temple of Zeus, each pediment extended for over 80 feet
from left to right and rose in the center to a height of 10 feet. The west pediment
celebrated the triumph of order and civilization over the animal-like barbarism
represented by the Centaurs, who in their characteristic drunkenness had sought
to disrupt the wedding of the hero Peirithoos to Deidameia only to find them-
selves worsted in the melee by Peirithoos and his friend Theseus. In the center of
the relief stands a figure whom most scholars identify as Apollo upholding the
principles of civility.
The east pediment portrayed a more complicated story—an episode in the life
of Agamemnon’s ancestor Pelops, who won his bride Hippodameia in a chariot
race arranged by her father Oenomaus, an event associated with the beginning
of the Olympic games. Numerous figures in the scene depicted on the temple
have survived, including one of the most remarkable individuals depicted in re-
lief sculpture, a pensive seer who even before the race has begun knows what is
going to happen (Figure 6.5b). (Although the race was fixed, Pelops managed to
defeat the duplicitous Oenomaus, who was killed, and marry Hippodameia.)
Grave stelai also provided an important venue for relief sculpture. Although
most commemorated the deaths of men, women and girls were depicted on their
tombstones as well. One of the best preserved funerary reliefs of the fifth century
offers a tender portrayal of a little girl holding her pet doves. This poignant re-
flection of the dead child makes clear that for all their preoccupation with war
and civic engagement the Greeks could also feel private losses deeply.
Thousands of vases survive from the Classical period. Neither vases nor works
of sculpture are easy to ascribe to any particular artist; by convention, painters
are often known simply by the subject matter of their most memorable works or
the places where they were or can be found (e. g., the Berlin painter, the Pan
painter). Like sculpture, vase painting of the earlier fifth century was focused on
the human figure, to which the curving surfaces of the vessels lent a sense of
movement and grace. Even more than in drama, in which actors’ faces were cov-
ered by masks, the possibilities of facial expression are limited by the medium,
and character portrayal is weak; we are often given a clear sense of what the
dramatis personae of the vase are experiencing at the moment in time the artist
152

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
Figure 6.5b. This marble statue of an elderly seer is the third figure from the right in the
recontruction of the east pediment. It represents a dramatic blend of naturalistic and styl-
ized elements.
153
Figure 6.5a. The pediments of the temple of Zeus at Olympia (c. 460 BC) show scenes from
Greek mythology. The east pediment (a) tells the story of the chariot race between Pelops
and Oenomaus, king of Pisa. The west pediment (b) depicts the melee that ensued when
Peirothoos made the mistake of inviting the barbarous centaurs to his wedding.
a
b

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
has chosen to capture, but little understanding of who they have been over their
lifetimes, what their driving anxieties or concerns were. The figures on Greek
vases are portrayed in action, not contemplation—they almost never appear to be
posing for the artist—and we ask ourselves not only, “What are they thinking?
What are they feeling?,” but also frequently, “What has just happened, and what
will happen next?” As in the Archaic period, classical vases frequently took their
subject matter from mythology, as in the fine vase in the Museum of Fine Arts in
Boston depicting on one side the murder of Agamemnon and on the other that
of his murderer Aegisthus.
Unlike sculpture, however, painting was as likely to treat mundane scenes of
daily activities as it was to portray deeds of epic proportion. Vases have provided
social historians with a wealth of information about how people spent their time
at work and at play, showing women and men in a variety of activities; shoe-
makers, blacksmiths, agricultural workers, and other laborers are portrayed go-
ing about their tasks. We are indebted to vases for images of domestic space and
154
Figure 6.6. This marble grave relief, from
Paros, dates from about 450 BC and stands
today in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy 155
Figure 6.7. This Attic vase was
probably painted around 470 BC,
shortly before the production of
Aeschylus’ Oresteia.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Figure 6.8. Some vases depicted crafts-
people at work, such as this Attic black-
figure neck amphora showing shoes
being made and a blacksmith forging.
156

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
the depictions of women from all social groups. Vases that were used at drink-
ing parties for mixing and drinking wine frequently show prostitutes entertain-
ing men. Some women are shown playing pipes, others are engaged in various
stages of flirtation, and some scenes are frankly pornographic. Common prosti-
tutes were often slaves. A woman of higher status who nevertheless mingled
with men and received pay for her services was known as a hetaira. Such women
were likely to be metics (see pp. 163–164) , either ex-slaves or freeborn, who—like
male metics—gravitated to Athens because it was a commercial center. A few of
these women, like Aspasia, the common-law wife of Pericles and the most fa-
mous hetaira of all, participated actively in the intellectual life of their male as-
sociates. In contrast, many paintings on vases used by respectable women depict
wedding scenes, or women visiting tombs or sitting at home spinning wool or
adorning themselves, often in the company of other women.
OIKOS AND POLIS
The Greek polis comprised oikoi (“families,” “estates,” or “households,” each
with a male head). The oikos was the primary unit of production, consumption,
and reproduction. Citizens became members of the polis not directly as individ-
uals, as they do in most modern states; rather, they first had to be accepted as
members of an oikos.
Family Membership
When a baby was born in Attica the father decided whether to raise or expose it.
He doubtless evaluated the newborn’s health as well as the financial impact of
raising another child. Most sons were raised, because male heirs were the normal
means of perpetuating the lineage, and it was of great importance that families
not die out. The offspring of a daughter was considered to belong to her hus-
band’s family, not her father’s. As boys grew up, their labor was considered valu-
able. Moreover, they were expected to support their aged parents, bury them,
and look after their tombs. Parents placed less value on girls, who lacked earn-
ing power and whose children would belong to a different family. Though the
eldest child was normally raised regardless of its sex, some historians have con-
jectured that as many as 20 percent of newborn Athenian girls were abandoned
in places like the local garbage dump. Slave dealers collected a few of the exposed
infants and turned them over to wet nurses to be raised and sold as slaves. Most
exposed infants, however, died, and exposure quickly became infanticide.
In Athens, after a baby boy was accepted as a member of his father’s family,
he needed to be approved by his father’s quasi- or pseudofamily: A boy inher-
ited membership in his phratry (“brotherhood”) and deme (“city ward or coun-
try village”) from his father. The father introduced and enrolled his baby in his
phratry and vouched for him as being his own and born of an Athenian mother.
157

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Demography and the Life Cycle
The average age at death in Classical Athens for adult females was about 36 years
and for adult males 45 years. The average woman probably bore about 4.3 chil-
dren, perhaps 2.7 of whom survived infancy. The death ratio for infants was 500
per 1000 adults. Athenian men married at approximately the age of thirty and
women around the age of fifteen. Women were often widowed as a consequence
of war, and the age difference heightened the likelihood of widowhood overtak-
ing a woman before old age; men lost young wives in childbirth. Marriages could
also be ended by divorce, which was not stigmatized unless some scandal was
involved. Widowed and divorced people often remarried, and children of di-
vorced parents generally lived with their fathers, to whose oikos they belonged.
Marriage
Greeks could be married only to one spouse at a time, although there was a dou-
ble standard for sexual conduct and husbands might have additional sexual part-
ners of either gender. Marriage was the social institution that sustained the oikos,
158
Figure 6.9. Detail of Attic red-figure leb
_
es gamikos (“wedding bowl”) by the Washing
Painter, last quarter of the fifth century. A bride displays a baby boy, the hoped for result
of her marriage. A standing woman toward the right is holding a loutrophoros, a wedding
vase used for transporting water for the prenuptial bath. The flying Nike (winged Victory)
on the far right holds a vase for perfumed oil.

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
and its principal purpose was reproduction. At the time of betrothal the bride’s fa-
ther or other guardian declared in the presence of witnesses, “I give you my daugh-
ter to sow for the purpose of producing legitimate children.” After the bridegroom
agreed, “I take her,” he and his fiancée’s father agreed to the size of her dowry. For
respectable girls there was no alternative to marriage, and the obligation to dower
each daughter doubtless was a prime motivator in female infanticide.
The wife’s dowry plus the husband’s contribution constituted the economic
foundation of the oikos at the start of a marriage. The ideal, at least for those who
farmed their own land, was to furnish most of the basic necessities of life with-
out needing to depend on purchasing supplies at the market. The division of labor
was by gender: Women’s work was indoors and men’s outdoors. The husband
brought into the house agricultural products such as fruit, vegetables, grain, and
raw wool, and the wife and domestic slaves transformed these products into tex-
tiles and edible food. Wives were also responsible for storing the household con-
tents safely, so that there would always be enough to eat and wear, and even to
sell if the family fell on hard times.
Document 6.2. The customary division of labor in the oikos is spelled out in
Xenophon’s Socratic dialogue the Oeconomicus, in which Socrates’ friend
Ischomachus explains to him how he taught his fourteen-year-old bride to manage
the household.
He told me he said to her: “Wife, the gods seem to have shown much dis-
cernment in yoking together female and male, as we call them, so that the cou-
ple might constitute a partnership that is most beneficial to each of them. . . .”
“Those who intend to obtain produce to bring into the shelter need
someone to work at the outdoor jobs. For plowing, sowing, planting, and
herding is all work that is performed outdoors, and it is from these that our
essential provisions are obtained. As soon as these are brought into the shel-
ter, then someone else is needed to look after them and to perform the work
that requires shelters. The nursing of newborn children requires shelters, and
so does the preparation of bread from grain, and likewise, making clothing
out of wool. Because both the indoor and the outdoor tasks require work and
concern,” he said, “I think the god, from the very beginning, designed the na-
ture of women for the indoor work and concerns and the nature of man for
the outdoor work. . . .
For the woman it is more honorable to remain indoors than to be out-
side; for the man it is more disgraceful to remain indoors than to attend to
business outside.
. . .
“And how did you arrange things for her, Ischomachus?”
“Well, I thought it was best to show her the possibilities of our house
first. It is not elaborately decorated, Socrates, but the rooms are constructed
159

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
in such a way that they will serve as the most convenient places to contain
the things that will be kept in them. So the rooms themselves invited what
was suitable for each of them. Thus the bedroom, because it was in the
safest possible place, invited the most valuable bedding and furniture. The
dry store rooms called for grain, the cool ones for wine, and the bright ones
for those products and utensils which need light. I continued by showing
her living rooms for the occupants, decorated so as to be cool in summer
and warm in winter. I pointed out to her that the entire house has its facade
facing south, so that it was obviously sunny in winter and shady in sum-
mer. I also showed her the women’s quarters, separated from the men’s
quarters by a bolted door, so that nothing might be removed from them that
should not be, and so that the slaves would not breed without our permis-
sion. For, generally, honest slaves become more loyal when they have pro-
duced children, but when bad ones mate, they become more troublesome.”
Xenophon, Oeconomicus 7.18, 20–22, 30, 9.2–5; translated by Sarah B.
Pomeroy, Xenophon Oeconomicus, a Social and Historical Commentary. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1994, pp. 141, 143, 155.
160
Figure 6.10. Attic black-figure lekythos,
sixth century, attributed to the Amasis
Painter, showing textile production. Left:
Woman spinning. Center: Woman weav-
ing at a vertical loom. Right: The winged
goddess Nike weighing wool.

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
The fundamental division of domestic space was between men and women.
Even in a small house with only two rooms, one upstairs and one on the ground
floor, the upper room was normally the women’s quarters and the lower room
the men’s. Entertainment took place in the men’s quarters, and so a visitor to the
Greek home would meet only male members of the family; when strangers were
in the house women and girls would withdraw to the secluded parts of the home
and not even be mentioned by name. The females in the household, both free and
slave, slept in the women’s quarters. They also produced textiles there, though in
warm weather they might move their looms into an interior courtyard and work
outdoors, protected by the surrounding walls.
Citizen women whom poverty did not compel to work outside rarely ventured
far from the house except for festivals and funerals. In this way they avoided en-
counters with men who were not their relatives and who might compromise their
respectability either by actual sexual contact or by the rumor of it. Wherever pos-
sible, slaves and husbands did the marketing and other errands that required
leaving the immediate environs of the home. The availability of slaves even for
families of fairly modest means was vital in perpetuating the social ideal of the
virtuous woman who never left the house. Women in straitened circumstances,
however, would shop for groceries or household items themselves.
THE GREEK ECONOMY
Like women, slaves were a “muted group.” Though they are ubiquitous in litera-
ture and the visual arts, their names and thoughts were not recorded, and few have
left their mark on the historical record. We do know that the work of slaves did not
always take place in the oikos. Large numbers of slaves were employed in the craft
industries, some working for their owners and others rented out by them. Their
jobs tended to be gender specific. Men worked in factories making swords, shields,
furniture, pottery, and other items, while women often worked in textile-related in-
dustries. Inscriptions recording expenses incurred in construction on the Athenian
Acropolis show that slaves were paid the same as free workers. Of course, the
wages of slaves who were rented out were paid to their masters.
By no means were all craftspeople slaves; Aristotle in fact contended that most
craftsmen were rich. Greeks whose social and economic status allowed them some
choice, however, shunned work that made them subject to the commands of an-
other person, and this included most craft fields. Such a life, they believed, was de-
meaning to a free male citizen. Unlike farming, to which a certain nobility was al-
ways attached, manual work performed indoors was despised by many wealthier
Greeks and known by the name “banausic” labor, which means literally work per-
formed over a hot furnace, and distinctions between skilled and unskilled labor
were often ignored. It may be that the leisured classes disdained indoor work be-
cause of its connection with slaves and women. Litigants in Athenian courtrooms
enjoyed making snide remarks about their opponents (or their opponents’ relatives)
161

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
ever having held any kind of job or even having run a business, and political
theorists—who always came from the upper classes—contended often that stren-
uous indoor work ought to disqualify people from voting on the grounds that it
damaged the mind as surely as it compromised the body. Most Greeks, however,
had limited choices about how to support themselves and their families, and
there is no reason to believe that those who worked for others or performed in-
door manual labor were embarrassed about their professions. Tombstones fre-
quently boasted of craft skills; surviving examples include epitaphs of a wood-
cutter and a miner. As elsewhere, the ideology of literate elites was at odds with
the daily practice of ordinary people.
The disdain with which some Greeks regarded paid labor did not prevent a
great deal of work from getting done or a good bit of money from being made.
Sometimes, however, revenue was the product of imperialism and other forms of
exploitation. Without the tribute from subject allies it would have been difficult
for the Athenians to initiate the system of state pay for state service and thus sig-
nificantly expand the proportion of citizens able to participate in the business of
government. Democracy was not entirely dependent on empire; the Athenians
lost their empire in 404 BC but continued to have democratic government for sev-
eral generations until their conquest by Philip of Macedon in 338 (and in many
respects democracy persisted even after that). But it certainly seems to have re-
ceived its impetus from the surplus funds generated by imperial tribute. The
splendid buildings with which the Athenians began adorning the Acropolis
shortly after relocating the treasury in Athens certainly owed their existence to
imperial revenues; no empire, no Parthenon. In addition, the empire’s maritime
nature meant that it served as the organizing principle of Greek trade. The cen-
trality of the Athenian Empire to commercial life became abundantly plain in the
late 430s when the Athenians banned Megarian merchants from trading in im-
perial ports, claiming they were simply making rules for their own sphere of in-
fluence as stipulated by the Thirty Years’ Peace. The consequences of this move
were fatal to Megarian trade, and outrage over this prohibition was one cause of
the long Peloponnesian War of 431–404.
Agriculture and Trade
Before the nineteenth century AD most people in the world made their living by
agriculture, and fifth-century Greeks were no exception. It was trade, however,
that united the far-flung states that ringed the seas, and the routes over which
material goods traveled also served as vital conduits for the exchange of ideas.
Most trade went by boat, land traffic being a slow and expensive business over
rocky roads; the cost of carting heavy goods by land might well exceed the price
of the goods themselves.
The diversity of natural resources in the ancient world made trade a necessity;
no polis had everything, and some poleis had very little indeed. Athenian com-
merce especially was driven largely by the need for grain to feed a large popula-
tion. Athens was by far the most populous of the Greek cities, with a population
162

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
that normally varied between 200,000 and 300,000. Grain might come from north
or south. One crucial source was the Black Sea region, which also provided hides,
cattle, fish, hemp, wax, chestnuts, iron, and slaves. For this the Athenians ex-
changed wine and oil, sometimes in decorated vases. These exports were them-
selves often resold elsewhere; the Phoenicians often sent Attic vases to Egypt, and
a good deal of secondhand pottery from Athens has been discovered in Etruria
in Italy. Italians also bought a good deal of Attic pottery firsthand. Another key
granary lay in Egypt, where Attic olive oil was also traded for papyrus, ivory,
glasswork, slaves, and exotic animals. Carthage provided textiles; Etruria fine
bronzework and boots; Sicily pigs, cheese, and grain; Phoenicia purple dye and
dates. Corinth exported its own wares as well as serving as an intermediary be-
tween east and west, sending out tiles and metalwork. Already in the fifth cen-
tury it seems that some silks from China made their way to Greece via Scythian
intermediaries. Arabia exported perfumes, and Persia carpets. Important sources
of metals were identified early: Cyprus for copper, Spain for tin, Laconia as well
as the Black Sea for iron, Thasos and Mount Pangaeus in northern Greece for
gold. All these goods flowed throughout the Greek world, but most of all they
flowed into Piraeus.
Metics in Fifth-Century Athens
Many rich residents of Athens, however, did not own land, since it was illegal
for them to do so without special dispensation. These were the resident aliens
known as metics, and they played a key role in the economy. Craftspeople and
entrepreneurs who had come from all over the Greek world to conduct business
in Athens, metics accounted for a significant proportion of the Athenian popula-
tion. They could not vote or hold office; neither could their children or their chil-
dren’s children. They were forced to live in rented homes. But rented homes can
be quite lovely, and metic families mingled comfortably with citizen families and
suffered no social disabilities. A number of the central characters in Plato’s works
were metics, and the most famous Platonic dialogue, The Republic, was set at the
home of the rich metic Cephalus, whom Pericles had invited to Athens from Syra-
cuse. Citizens, metics, and slaves often worked side by side, sometimes for the
same pay; a list of workers at one construction site included eighty-six laborers
whose status can be determined—twenty-four citizens, forty-two metics, and
twenty slaves. In a crisis, metics could be drafted into the armed forces.
Many of Athens’ most distinguished intellectuals were metics, such as the
philosopher Aristotle. Pericles’ common-law wife Aspasia belonged to the metic
class, and it was for this reason that he required a decree of the assembly to grant
citizenship to their children. The inability of metic women to produce children
who could enjoy Athenian citizenship played a large role in shaping the contours
of Athenian society, creating two classes of women available as long-term part-
ners to citizen men—metic mistresses and citizen wives. (In addition, a variety of
prostitutes, both slave and free, were available for briefer encounters, and own-
ers enjoyed the privilege of sexual access to their slaves.) Most metic women, of
163

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
course, were housewives married to metic men. Slaves who were granted their
freedom became metics rather than citizens. There were metics in some other
poleis, but almost nothing is known of metics outside Athens.
The cultural achievements of sixth- and early fifth-century Greece were substantial,
but the difficulties the city-states experienced in getting along with one another
(and their aversion to uniting into a single political unit) would have a profound
impact on the direction Greek civilization would take. The Thirty Years’ Peace held
a great deal of promise, but it was problematic in many ways. Dividing the Greek
world openly into two spheres of influence—a Spartan land empire in mainland
Greece and an Athenian naval one in the Aegean—was a dubious enterprise.
From one standpoint, by drawing lines clearly the agreement seemed to hold out
the hope of peace; but it also fostered a potentially dangerous bipolarity. The no-
tion of submitting disputes to arbitration was all very civilized in the abstract, but
with every state of any reputation allied with one side or the other, just who was
going to act as mediator? No treaty, moreover, could change the fact that Megara
still sat uneasily on the Attic border, or could diminish the commercial rivalry be-
tween Athens and Corinth. In 445 it was impossible to predict whether the peace
would last.
TRANSLATIONS
Pomeroy, Sarah B. 1994. Xenophon Oeconomicus, a Social and Historical Commentary. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Scott-Kilvert, Ian. 1960. The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch. Har-
mondsworth, UK: Penguin.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Cohen, David. 1991. Law, Sexuality, and Society: The Enforcement of Morals in Classical Athens.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. What the framing and application of
law reveal about sexual values and practices.
Ehrenberg, Victor. 1973. From Solon to Socrates. 2nd ed. London: Methuen. This remains a
sensitive and thoughtful study of the evolution of Greek culture during the sixth and
fifth centuries.
Fantham, Elaine, Helene Foley, Natalie Kampen, Sarah B. Pomeroy, and H. A. Shapiro.
1994. Women in the Classical World: Image and Text. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press. An examination of the written and visual evidence for the lives of
ancient women, placed within their historical and cultural context.
Hanson, Victor. 1989. The Western Way of War: Infantry Battle in Classical Greece. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. A gripping account of the experience of hoplite battle.
164

The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of Athenian Democracy
Just, Roger. 1989. Women in Athenian Law and Life. London and New York: Routledge. A
study of how Athenian men sought to define and locate women.
Meiggs, Russell. 1972. The Athenian Empire. Oxford: Oxford University Press. A richly de-
tailed examination of Athenian imperialism and the world that came under its sway.
Pollitt, Jerome J. 1972. Art and Experience in Classical Greece. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press. A sensitive survey of Greek art that grounds it firmly in its his-
torical context.
Pomeroy, Sarah B. 1998. Families in Classical and Hellenistic Greece: Representations and Real-
ities. Oxford: Clarendon Press. An account of the Greek family as a productive, re-
productive, and social unit.
165

166
7
GREECE ON THE EVE OF
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
Avoiding war was particularly important when the Greeks had such precious
achievements to protect in so many areas. From Sicily to Anatolia, remarkable
temples to the gods proclaimed the grandeur of Hellenic civilization under the
open sky. Greek ships plied the seas in all directions, enabling men and women
hundreds of miles away to exchange their wares and profit from a wide variety
of resources and skills. Novel experiments in government were in progress. The
same diversity that fostered the dynamic creativity of the Greeks, however, also
fragmented their world. The world of the polis, moreover, was in many ways a
narrow one. Despite the growth of what the Greeks called democracy, ultimately
each polis was grounded in the rule of an elite of free men over everyone else;
and the inability of the poleis to get along boded ill for the future of Greece. In-
evitably, prospects for the future were clouded by intermittent suspicions that
the peace between the Athenian and Spartan camps might not endure.
GREECE AFTER THE
THIRTY YEARS’ PEACE
After the signing of the peace in 445 BC, many Greeks were optimistic. The fact
that their optimism was misplaced makes it easy to view the years before the out-
break of the Peloponnesian War in 431 as only a prelude to hostilities. Though it
is important to try to understand events in their historical context instead of in
terms of their consequences, hindsight also has some value. Viewed from the
perspective of the war that followed, certain events of the 440s and 430s take on
particular significance.
During this period the Athenians showed a marked interest in the west and
in the northeast. Athens had multiple motives for accepting Megara into its al-
liance in 460, but access to the port of Pegae on the Corinthian Gulf had certainly
been one factor, and the settlement of the Messenians at Naupactus several years

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
Figure 7.1. Sicily and southern Italy.
167
0
0
50
100
150 km
50
100 miles
GREE
KS
CARTHAGINIANS
SICE
LS
Mt. Aetna
T Y R R H E N I A N
S E A
M E D I T E R R A N E A N
S E A
I O N I A N
S E A
GREE
KS
CARTHAGINIANS
SICE
LS
Mt. Aetna
A
n
a
p
u
s
R
.
Catana
Messana
Thurii
Rhegium
Naxos
Aetna
Leontini
Palici
Syracuse
Anapus
Camarina
Gela
Acragas
Selinus
Carthage
Motya
Egesta
Panormus
Solus
Himera
later provided a convenient stopping place for ships heading west. Probably also
in the 450s Athens had contracted alliances with several Sicilian cities including
Leontini, a city with a history of tense relations with Syracuse, a colony and ally
of Athens’ trade rival Corinth. Commerce with the western Greeks played a key
role in the Athenian economy, and gradually the Greek cities of Sicily adopted
Athenian currency.
Athens’ growing interest in the rich lands to the west is confirmed by Pericles’
decision to found a colony in the instep of Italy in 443. Thurii, however, was not
an ordinary foundation, for the Athenians invited the other Greek states to share
in founding a Panhellenic colony. Although the constitution of Thurii was de-
mocratic and the local coins were stamped with the head of Athena, the city
adopted the laws of the Locrian lawgiver Zaleucus, and when a disagreement
later led the colonists to ask the Pythia to whom they belonged, the Delphic ora-
cle claimed them for Apollo, not Athens. Whatever Pericles’ intentions for Thurii

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
may have been, the Attic element in the population declined greatly over time,
and the Corinthians do not appear to have taken offense.
Athens’ immediate interest, however, lay in the area around Thrace and the
Black Sea region. From here the Athenians imported hides, dyes, and, more im-
portantly, grain and the timber they needed for their fleet. Around 445 the Athe-
nians founded the Thracian colony of Brea, and a decade later Pericles led an
Athenian squadron into the Black Sea.
Meanwhile, an alarming revolt broke out in the east. In 440, first Samos and
then Byzantium rebelled, raising fears for the very survival of Athens’ Aegean
empire. Years later, according to Thucydides, some Greeks claimed that Samos
“had almost managed to wrest from the Athenians their control of the sea”
(8.76.4). When Samos’ oligarchic government quarreled with the new democratic
regime in neighboring Miletus, the Milesians together with some Samian exiles
complained to Athens. One of three privileged allies (along with Lesbos and
Chios) who contributed ships instead of paying tribute, Samos rebelled at Athens’
order to submit the matter to arbitration, leading the Athenians to send forty
ships to replace the oligarchy with a democracy.
Samos thereupon revolted from Athens with the aid of the satrap of Sardis.
The subsequent revolt of Byzantium raised the specter of an empire-wide up-
heaval. The determined campaign that followed involved all ten of the Athenian
strategoi and over 200 ships—160 from Athens and 55 from the remaining allies
in the navy, Lesbos and Chios. When Samos fell after a long siege, the Athenians
confiscated the Samian navy and established a democracy. A heavy indemnity
was imposed and hostages taken. About the subjugation of Byzantium we know
nothing except that the Byzantines agreed to return to the empire.
At the same time, Athens kept a hand in the northeast, planting the colony of
Amphipolis on a strategic point on the Strymon River by the border of Macedo-
nia and Thrace in 437. In addition to protecting Athens’ access to grain, timber,
and minerals, Amphipolis helped the Athenians monitor activities in the recently
organized kingdom of the Thracian Odrysians to the north and east as well as in
Macedonia to the west. But the fact that the town drew much of its population
from neighboring towns undermined its loyalty to Athens, and in 424 it surren-
dered to Sparta.
Virtually nothing is known about how Spartans viewed the world between the
Thirty Years’ Peace in 445 BC and their declaration of war on Athens in 432. A
hint is provided, however, by Thucydides’ remark that the Corinthians claimed
that they dissuaded the Spartans from attacking Athens at the time of the Samian
rebellion: “We did not cast the deciding vote against you,” they reported, “when
Samos revolted from you, and when the Peloponnesians were evenly divided
over whether to help them. We openly opposed it, saying that any city could
punish its own allies” (1.40). If the story is true, then some members of the Pelo-
ponnesian League, including possibly Sparta, saw merit in attacking Athens in
440. Still, a war between Athens and Sparta was far from certain. At the same
time that the fate of peace hung in the balance, moreover, Greece experienced a
remarkable burst of cultural creativity.
168

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
THE PHYSICAL SPACE OF THE POLIS:
ATHENS IN THE FIFTH CENTURY
The Greek world was both one and many: Though common features tied the city-
states together, each polis was unique in culture. As so often in attempts to re-
cover the world of Classical Greece, however, the bulk of our knowledge about
the development of the polis during the later decades of the fifth century comes
from Athens. Even during the war, Athenian dramatists continued to produce as-
tonishing masterpieces. Some of our best evidence about fifth-century Athens is
physical in nature, for the revenues of empire helped to adorn the imperial city
with splendid buildings, many of which still impress and intrigue visitors today.
The Acropolis
A hill was a distinct advantage to a city-state. Though most people today associ-
ate the word “acropolis” with the Acropolis of Athens, in fact it was a feature
common to many poleis, which relied for protection on a fortified citadel from
which one could see far into the distance. In Athens, the Acropolis was the spir-
itual focus of the polis. Because of its height and steeply sloped sides, this natu-
rally fortified area had been the residence of early rulers and had always been
home to the chief gods of the Athenians. The sixth-century tyrant Peisistratus,
like Pericles later, initiated an ambitious building project on the Acropolis, for he
understood not only that such work would provide steady employment to the
restless urban poor, but also that a beautiful city would create still more jobs, fos-
ter patriotism among all citizens, and attract wealthy, talented metics. It would
be, as Pericles would later say in the pages of Thucydides, “the school of Greece.”
The Persian invasion of 480 BC destroyed the monuments and statues of Peisis-
tratus’s time. This rubble, in turn, was used as the foundation of the buildings
constructed in Pericles’ day on the Acropolis, largely financed by funds from the
Delian League.
In the Classical period, the two principal architectural styles or orders were the
Doric and Ionic. (The ornate Corinthian capital, invented in classical times, did
not become popular until the Hellenistic period.) Though both orders were used
for the same building purposes, they differed in details such as the shape of the
columns and of their bases and capitals and in the features of the entablature, or
structure that supported the roof. Architects strove to design buildings according
to the principles of each order, rather than to invent new or highly individual-
ized styles. The pleasure they took in their work was not the sort of delight one
might take today in striking out in original and startling directions. Rather, Greek
architects took from their work that special kind of satisfaction that comes from
exercising creativity within the limits posed by an elaborate code of restraints. In
this they resembled the tragedians.
The temple of Athena Parthenos (“the virgin”) known as the Parthenon was a
blend of Doric and Ionic elements. The rectangular structure with a ratio of eight
169

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
columns on the front and back ends to seventeen on the sides was both aesthetically
pleasing and appropriate to its commanding site on the acropolis. Greek architects
knew that from a distance the eye would perceive straight vertical elements as thin
in the middle and appearing to fall outward, and a horizontal foundation (stylo-
bate) would appear to droop toward the center. As the Roman architect Vitruvius,
who worked in the second half of the first century BC, explains, architects coun-
tered these illusions by subtle swelling (entasis) of the midportion of the columns,
by tilting the columns and interior walls toward the interior lest they seem to be
falling outward, and by increasing the height of the floor and steps toward the
center. These refinements increase the impressions of solidity and height and
some add strength to the building. Although, with the exception of the roof, the
Parthenon was built of marble, like other Doric temples it preserves elements of
earlier wooden construction, especially in the frieze where the triglyphs imitate
the ends of three planks standing on their sides and follow the rule that all the
corners of the frieze must end with a triglyph (see Figure 7.3).
Sculpture was an important feature of Greek architecture. The sculpture of the
Parthenon depicted myths and history of Athena and Athens. The east pediment
showed the birth of Athena while the west pediment illustrated the contest be-
tween Athena and Poseidon over primacy in Athens. A sculpted frieze running
170
Figure 7.2. This model of the classical Acropolis shows the Panathenaic procession through
the western gates (Propylaea), which are flanked on the right (south) by the temple of
Athena Nike (Victory). The largest building is the Parthenon. The Erectheion is on the left
(north) of the Parthenon.

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
around the top of the exterior wall of the cella or “inner shrine” showed human
figures, horses, sacrificial animals, and the twelve Olympian gods. Probably the
array of human figures and animals depicts the procession at the Greater Pana-
thenaic festival that was held every four years and the presentation of a new
dress for the goddess by young girls who had helped to weave it.
The temple was not a place where worshipers congregated, but rather the pri-
vate home of a divinity whose image was placed inside and a storehouse for the
cult’s belongings. Thus, within the cella of the Parthenon was a tall figure of
Athena constructed by fitting sheets of ivory and gold over a wooden scaffold.
Locked in a back room were the goddess’ possessions, among which were the
treasury of the city of Athens and, after the middle of the fifth century, that of
171
Figure 7.3. The Doric and Ionic orders. The Doric order (left) may be a direct translation
into stone of building elements that were originally made of wood. The more complex cap-
ital of the Ionic order is in a spiraled form known as a volute.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Figure 7.5. The Parthenon, built 447–438 BC, photographed in the twentieth century, seen
from the east.
172
Figure 7.4. Plan of Parthenon showing exterior colonnade and cella (main room) within. The
cult statue of Athena was kept in the cella and the state treasury was stored in the back room.

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
the Delian League as well. In front of the Parthenon on the west stood a huge
bronze statue of Athena Promachos (“Athena the Warrior who fights in the
front”). The goddess was portrayed standing, with her left hand holding her
shield and her right arm holding her spear. The statue was nearly 30 feet tall:
sailors rounding Cape Sounion could see the welcome glint of sunlight off the tip
of the spear. Like the statue inside the temple, it was the work of the sculptor
Phidias. Viewed by his contemporaries as the greatest sculptor of gods, Phidias
also created a huge gold and ivory statue of Zeus at Olympia that was consid-
ered to be one of the seven wonders of the ancient world.
In contrast to the Doric, which was massive, solid, and plain, the Ionic order
gave a slender, graceful, ornate impression. The Erechtheion, sacred to Poseidon
Erechtheus, was the chief purely Ionic monument on the Acropolis. The building
consisted of three Ionic porches. To support the roof, the south porch that faced
the Parthenon employed six figures of maidens, called Caryatids (instead of
columns). The building was begun in 421 BC, and because of the Peloponnesian
173
Figure 7.6. Parthenon east frieze, slab V, probably showing the presentation of the dress
known as the peplos for the statue of Athena Polias at the Panathenaea. A section of the
continuous frieze running along the top of the exterior cella wall. Other portions show a
cavalcade of horsemen, religious officials, sacrificial animals, and the Olympian gods.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Figure 7.7. Plan of Erectheion (421–406 BC). This graceful temple was sacred to Athena, Po-
seidon, and the legendary Athenian king Erechtheus. The complicated shape was the re-
sult of needing to skirt Athena’s sacred olive tree to enclose Poseidon’s trident mark and
perhaps the tomb of Erechtheus.
174

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
War the decorations may never have been completed. Many other buildings, tem-
ples, statues, and votive offerings adorned the Acropolis. Though little remains
of these monuments nowadays except the bare marble framework of the major
ones, in antiquity they were much more colorful: Some of the architectural and
sculptural features were painted red and blue and were covered with gold leaf.
Below the Acropolis, dramas were staged in honor of the god Dionysus. Specta-
tors sat in the open air in a semicircle on the bare hillside watching the perfor-
mances that took place below in the orchestra (“dancing place”).
The structures that comprised Pericles’ building program confirmed most
Athenians in their support for the empire, for without the tribute pouring in from
175
Figure 7.8. The Erechtheion, built 421–406 BC, photographed in the twentieth century,
showing the Porch of the Maidens (Caryatids) that faces the Parthenon. Since this photo-
graph was taken, the statues have been moved indoors to protect them from pollution and
replaced with copies.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
subject states such lavish public monuments would have been difficult to finance.
They also enhanced Pericles’ popularity, providing jobs as well as beautifying the
city. At the same time, they provided an opening for Pericles’ enemies—personal
rivals or those who disliked the march of democracy—to undermine him by call-
ing into question the propriety of diverting League funds to the aesthetic im-
provement of the hegemonic city.
The Agora
The part of a Greek city known as the agora was principally a center for secular
human activity, though the gods, who were never excluded from human activi-
ties, also had their place. The agora served as a market, as a meeting place for the
exchange of goods and of news, and as a focus of social, political, and judicial ac-
tivities. Daily life for women was ideally indoors and for men outdoors. Men who
stayed indoors were suspected of being effeminate and antisocial, and women
who ventured outdoors were likely to have their chastity questioned. In the Laws
Plato noted that the greatest good in the polis is that the citizens be known to
each other, as the men (certainly not the women) would be if they saw one an-
other every day in the agora. Aristotle distinguished human beings from other
living creatures by their use of speech (though, again, women were placed in a
different category and are characterized as ideally silent). Speaking was essential
for the activities that took place in the agora.
The Athenian agora was a large level space at the foot of the Acropolis on the
road from the main city gate. The area was cluttered with public buildings of
which the most easily identified is the round structure called the Tholos, which
housed the boule¯ and where official weights and measures were stored. The agora
was also the site of law courts, altars, shrines, statues, inscriptions, fountains,
drains, and trophies of war. On the western border stood a Doric temple that was
dedicated either to Hephaestus, the god of crafts, or to Theseus, a legendary hero
and king of Athens. It has withstood the ravages of time far better than the
Parthenon and is still in remarkably good condition. Roofed, multipurpose colon-
nades called stoas flanked the agora. Sandwiched between the permanent struc-
tures and within the stoas as well were shops, bankers’ tables, booksellers, whole-
sale merchants, schools, and people buying and selling the necessities of life.
One important place in Athenian life was not a building: The hillside of the
Pnyx where the assembly met towered above the city. Throughout the fifth cen-
tury, citizens sat either on cushions or directly on the rocky ground that sloped
from south to north, filling an area of 15,000 square feet. Around 400 BC the meet-
ing place was evened out and enlarged, and benches seem to have been added.
The adult male citizens of Attica gathered in all kinds of weather to listen to
speeches and debates, to make motions, and to hold high officials to account. In
voting (which was by show of hands) they not only took into consideration what
they had heard on the Pnyx but also made use of all the information they had
garnered in the agora.
176

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
Rural Life in Attica
The growth of the urban center was not at the expense of rural areas. Public
buildings were also located away from the city center. Gymnasiums and stadi-
ums that required plenty of level space were often found in the suburbs, which
were cooler and shadier and closer to plentiful supplies of water than could be
found in central Athens. Cult centers and rural agoras, as well as fortresses and
other structures for defense, were scattered throughout Attica. It was an easy
walk, moreover, from city to country.
In the fifth century probably three-quarters of the citizens owned some rural
property. Farming could be a part-time occupation that produced enough food to
provide sustenance for a family. Many people still lived in villages, were loyal to
their rural demes, and depended upon their family farms. Except for the spaces
set aside for public activities, Athens was neither a beautiful city nor a comfort-
able one, and many propertied citizens were happy to leave it to artisans, to the
urban poor, and to metics, who were not permitted to own land in Attica. The city
had merely grown up in the Archaic and Classical periods without conforming to
a town plan. Streets were irregular and narrow; housing in the city center was
flimsy and sanitation poor. These problems were exacerbated when the entire
population withdrew inside the city walls during the Peloponnesian War.
INTELLECTUAL LIFE IN FIFTH-CENTURY GREECE
Looking at the vibrant civilization of Greece in the middle of the fifth century, it
would have been hard for anyone alive at the time to believe the horrors that lay
ahead. Magnificent temples to the gods dotted the landscape, decked out with
friezes that celebrated human and divine accomplishment. And throughout the
Greek cities people had begun to explore new ideas about the universe and hu-
manity’s place in it.
Speculating About the Natural World
Greeks of Hesiod’s day had viewed the earliest state of the universe as a formless
void they called chaos. Out of chaos, they believed, the order of their own world had
emerged—kosmos, a Greek word meaning both “order” and “beauty,” hence the
English word “cosmetics” for makeup, or “cosmetic surgery” to improve ap-
pearance. Mythology served the important function of grounding the growth of
cosmos from chaos in various actions taken by the gods. The great contribution
of the sixth-century Greek thinkers of Ionia had lain in their determination to
abandon this mythological and religious framework and attempt instead to ex-
plain the world by material processes alone.
As we have seen in Chapter Three, the Ionian rationalists had focused on the nat-
ural world rather than on the values of the human community. Their speculations,
177

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
however, raised inevitable questions about relations between gods and mortals,
for they sought to enthrone human reason as the tool for understanding the uni-
verse and to replace divine plan (or caprice) with material forces. Anaxagoras
from Clazomenae in Asia Minor (c. 500–428 BC) was one of many intellectuals
who was drawn to the glittering city of Athens. Anaxagoras viewed material objects
as composed of infinitely divisible particles and conceived of their organization as
the work of a force he called Nous (“intellect”); from this came his nickname Nous
(“the Brain”). The sun, he claimed, was not a deity but rather a white-hot stone
a little larger than the Peloponnesus.
The workings of the universe also intrigued other fifth-century thinkers
throughout the Greek world. Empedocles (c. 493–c. 433 BC), who lived in Acra-
gas in Sicily, propounded a cosmogony based on the idea of four primary ele-
ments—earth, air, fire, and water. Physical substances, he argued, were produced
when the twin forces of attraction and repulsion that he called “love” and “strife”
acted upon these elements, combining them in various proportions. Maintaining
that these combinations were randomly produced, Empedocles conjectured that
monstrous forms had probably been created early in history but had perished
through their failure to adapt.
An alternative view of how the world is made was put forward by Leucippus
and Democritus. Like Anaxagoras, Leucippus, who seems to have been active
around the middle of the fifth century, believed that matter was created of tiny
particles, and his ideas were further developed by his pupil Democritus from Ab-
dera in Thrace (c. 460–370 BC). In their view, moreover, the tiny particles were
atoma (“uncuttable”). Ironically, then, the word for “atom,” which was split in the
twentieth century with such devastating consequences, originally meant “that
which cannot be divided.” In addition to atoms, so the theory had it, there was
“void”; falling through void, atoms collided in a variety of ways to form visible
matter. The theory did not encompass the influence of a divine being. What de-
termined the manner of these collisions was a little uncertain—Leucippus in-
sisted it was necessity and not chance, though other atomists disagreed—but the
atomic theorists agreed on one thing: whatever was active in shaping the form of
matter was a natural force and no divine being.
Though they certainly looked around them for models and paradigms, thinkers
like Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Leucippus, and Democritus were essentially
philosophers, not scientists. A mix of observation and systematic thinking, how-
ever, formed the basis of Greek medicine. Though prayer probably remained the
most common Greek response to illness in antiquity, during the sixth century BC
Greeks in Asia Minor began learning about anatomy from the observations
Mesopotamians had made on animal entrails used in divination. By 500 BC, med-
ical centers had been established on the island of Cos off the coast of Asia Minor
and on the nearby peninsula of Cnidos. Some instruction also took place within
the family; often the medical profession was passed down from father to son.
Women were prohibited from practicing as doctors, but they frequently func-
tioned as midwives.
178

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
Case studies formed the basis of the doctrines of Hippocrates of Cos (c. 460–
c. 377 BC). The writings associated with Hippocrates’ school included over a hun-
dred works composed over a long period, and there is no way to know which of
these might have been written by Hippocrates himself. Greeks did not develop
many cures for diseases. The principal contribution of the Hippocratics lay not in
any specific discoveries about medicine but rather in their commitment to seek-
ing rational explanations of natural phenomena. Epilepsy, for example, had been
labeled “the sacred disease” by the Greeks; in their treatise On the Sacred Disease,
the Hippocratics took a different view, claiming that this notion was put forward
by charlatans who, “having no idea what to do and having nothing to offer the
sick . . . labelled the disease sacred in order to conceal their ignorance.” (On the
Sacred Disease 2) Another treatise, Airs, Waters, Places, examined the impact of cli-
mate on health, laying the foundations for epidemiology.
The largest corpus of Hippocratic texts deals with gynecology. Along with the
general devaluation of women in Greek culture, women’s reticence about speak-
ing to male physicians sometimes cut doctors off from information vital to under-
standing female reproductive processes. In the absence of real data concerning
symptoms and sexual practices, where women were concerned, speculation of-
ten substituted for the careful observation on which the Hippocratics prided
themselves:
If suffocation occurs suddenly, it will happen especially to women who do not
have intercourse and to older women rather than to young ones, for their wombs
are lighter. It usually occurs because of the following: when a woman is empty
and works harder than in her previous experience, her womb, becoming heated
from the hard work, turns because it is empty and light. There is, in fact, empty
space for it to turn in because the belly is empty. Now when the womb turns, it
hits the liver and they go together and strike against the abdomen—for the womb
rushes and goes upwards towards the moisture, because it has been dried out by
hard work, and the liver is, after all, moist. When the womb hits the liver, it pro-
duces sudden suffocation as it occupies the breathing passages around the belly.
(Diseases of Women 1.7; Hanson 1975)
HISTORICAL AND DRAMATIC
LITERATURE OF THE FIFTH CENTURY
In the verbal realm, the principal achievements of the Athenians during this pe-
riod lay in history and in tragedy. Dozens of tragedians were active in fifth-century
Athens, though only the works of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides have sur-
vived, and of these only a fraction of their output—seven each of Aeschylus and
Sophocles, and nineteen of Euripides. History was the less common genre, but the
two works that survived in their entirety—Herodotus’ history of the Persian wars
and Thucydides’ history of the Peloponnesian War—enshrined in historical writ-
ing the model of the war monograph that has remained popular to this day.
179

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Herodotus
Born in Halicarnassus in Ionia, Herodotus was heir to the traditions of Ionian ra-
tionalism and had a passionate curiosity about causes and origins. Why the Per-
sians and the Greeks fought, what accounted for the Greek victory, how Darius
came to rule Persia, where the Nile began, how the priestesses at Dodona came
to be thought of as birds with human voices, where the Greeks got their gods—
Herodotus used the Greek word historia (“inquiry”) to describe his quest for un-
derstanding, and this word has given English and numerous romance languages
their word for the investigation and analysis of the past: “history.” He has set
forth the results of his inquiry, he reports in the opening sentence of his work,
“so that the actions of people shall not fade with time” and “so that the great and
admirable monuments produced by both Greeks and barbarians shall not go un-
renowned” (The Histories 1.1; Blanco, 1992).
Born probably shortly before Xerxes’ invasion of Greece in 480, Herodotus was
not old enough to remember the Persian wars, but he was able to interrogate his
parents’ generation. His interests were not confined to a particular series of his-
torical events; like his somewhat younger contemporary Thucydides, he was fas-
cinated by what history revealed about human nature and the way the world
works. What he learned from his study of history was that power goes to peo-
ple’s heads, and that the mighty rarely meditate on their condition with sufficient
judiciousness and reflection—that rulers hear what they want to hear, and rush
headlong to their own destruction.
This paradigm appears early in his history in his imaginative reconstruction of
a conversation between Solon, the Athenian lawgiver, and Croesus, the fabu-
lously wealthy king of Lydia. During his travels, Herodotus maintains, Solon
came to Croesus’ palace, where the king made a point of having attendants give
Solon a tour that would highlight Croesus’ prosperity. Afterward, Croesus asked
Solon if there was anyone in the world who struck him as particularly fortunate.
Feigning innocence of Croesus’ purpose in asking this question, Solon named a
little-known Greek man who had died fighting for his city, leaving children be-
hind him, and who was buried with honors. When Croesus was dissatisfied with
this response, Solon offered an alternative example. Two young Argives, he re-
lated, when their mother needed to attend a feast of Hera and the oxen had not
yet returned from the field, yoked themselves to the family wagon and pulled it
several miles to the temple. Amid the great words of praise lavished upon the
young men and on her for having such fine sons, their mother prayed to the god-
dess to bestow on her children whatever was best for humankind. Lying down
to sleep in the temple, the youths never awoke, and the Argives dedicated stat-
ues to them at Delphi in commemoration of their excellence.
Resentful at not being named the most fortunate of men, Croesus spoke harshly
to Solon, voicing his indignation at the notion that the Athenian should consider
ordinary citizens more fortunate than a wealthy king like him. Solon in turn coun-
seled him to think harder about what it means to be truly fortunate, cautioning
180

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
him not to make facile judgments without waiting to see how things turn out in
the end. “To me,” he tells Croesus,
it is obvious that you have great wealth and that you rule over many people, but
it will be impossible for me to answer your question until I learn that you have
happily ended your allotted life. After all, the rich man is not really happier than
the man who lives from day to day unless good fortune stays with him and he
dies painlessly, and in possession of all the good things life has to offer. . . . You
have to consider how everything ends—how it turns out. For god gives many a
glimpse of happiness and then withers them at their very roots.
(The Histories 1.32; Blanco)
Croesus, however, does not listen. By carelessly misinterpreting a series of ora-
cles, he loses his empire and comes to recognize Solon’s wisdom.
It is not likely that Solon and Croesus really met. Solon’s travels evidently pre-
ceded Croesus’ accession to the throne around 560 BC. Herodotus has crafted this
vignette to demonstrate the superiority of Greek over Persian ways of thinking—
of the western dependence on the solid citizen over the eastern reverence for the
powerful autocrat. Similar points are scored in Herodotus’ characterization of the
overconfident Xerxes. The implications of this are plain enough: For all their
virtues, the Persians, like other eastern peoples, were dragged down by their
habit of according immense power to a single individual, the king. Encouraging
him in his childish self-confidence, they became slaves to someone who exagger-
ated his own importance not only vis-à-vis other mortals but, more dangerously
still, in relation to the gods. In comparison, Greek civilization held all the promise
that inhered in free institutions, in the rule of law, in respect for gods and the ac-
ceptance of human limitations.
In all this, Herodotus was a typical Greek, but in other respects he sought to
undermine assumptions he saw in the world around him—assumptions about
the inferiority of non-Greek cultures and the low intellect of women. Greek men,
in Herodotus’ view, needed to think harder and longer about their place in the
world. To assist them in this project, he included in his history many stories about
the intelligence of clever queens (such as Queen Artemisia of his native Halicar-
nassus) and a detailed account of the accomplishments of the Egyptians, stress-
ing the greater antiquity of Egyptian culture in relation to Greek and suggesting
Egyptian origins for the Greek gods.
Thucydides
Many intellectual currents of the fifth century flowed through Athens as Thucy-
dides was coming to maturity and during the years when he composed his history
of the long war in which he served. Clever speaking, careful observation, ratio-
nal deduction, and a tragic view of the world can all be discerned in his work;
unlike that of Herodotus, and the dramatic poets, however, his writing shows no
interest in women. Whereas Herodotus, born a generation earlier, had conceived
181

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
history as an interaction of divine and human forces, both vitally important,
Thucydides saw the actions of people as pretty much exclusively responsible for
how things turn out. A similar progression can be seen in the extant tragedians:
Sophocles was somewhat more concerned with the human factor than Aeschy-
lus, who was more drawn to the role and nature of the gods, and Euripides in
turn—despite considerable interest in religion—gave human nature center stage.
Since Thucydides served as a general in 424, he must have been at least thirty
in that year, and historians conjecture he was born around 460. He came from an
aristocratic family with kinship ties to some of Pericles’ rivals, but had enormous
admiration for Pericles. His opportunities for research took an unexpected turn
when he was exiled after failing to keep the Spartans from taking Amphipolis.
From then on, he was able to gather a great deal of information from non-
Athenian sources but could no longer attend meetings of the Athenian assembly.
All we can be certain of concerning his life in exile is that he lived long enough
to see Athens lose the war, which we know because he refers to Athens’ defeat
in his work.
Thucydides himself discusses his methodology at the outset of his history,
stressing the lengths to which he went in his quest to determine the truth—and
expressing impatience with those less committed to the search for knowledge.
Most people, he complains, “expend very little effort on the search for truth, and
prefer to turn to ready-made answers.” His own approach will be different.
Document 7.1. Thucydides explains his methodology in his history of the
Peloponnesian War, contrasting himself with less reliable reporters—including,
it seems, Herodotus as well as rhetoricians given to virtuoso public displays.
One will not go wrong if he accepts the inferences I have drawn from the
facts as I have related them, and not as they are sung by the poets—who
embellish and exaggerate them—or as they are strung together by popular
historians with a view to making them not more truthful, but more attrac-
tive to their audiences; and considering that we are dealing with ancient his-
tory, whose unverified events have, over the course of time, made their way
into the incredible realms of mythology, one will find that my conclusions,
derived as they are from the best available evidence, are accurate enough.
Even though people always think that the war they are fighting is the
greatest there ever was, and then return to marveling at ancient wars once
theirs has ended, it will be clear, after we examine the events themselves,
that this war between Athens and Sparta actually was the greatest war there
has ever been.
As to the speeches of the participants, either when they were about to
enter the war or after they were already in it, it has been difficult for me and
for those who reported to me to remember exactly what was said. I have,
therefore, written what I thought the speakers must have said given the sit-
uation they were in, while keeping as close as possible to the gist of what
182

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
was actually said. As to the events of the war, I have not written them down
as I heard them from just anybody, nor as I thought they must have oc-
curred, but have consistently described what I myself saw or have been able
to learn from others after going over each event in as much detail as possi-
ble. I have found this task to be extremely arduous, since those who were
present at these actions gave varying reports on the same event, depending
on their sympathies and their memories.
My narrative, perhaps, will seem less pleasing to some listeners be-
cause it lacks an element of fiction. Those, however, who want to see things
clearly as they were and, given human nature, as they will one day be again,
more or less, may find this book a useful basis for judgment. My work was
composed not as a prizewinning exercise in elocution, to be heard and then
forgotten, but as a work of permanent value.
The Peloponnesian War 1.21–22; translated by
Walter Blanco, in Walter Blanco and Jennifer Roberts, eds.,
Thucydides: The Peloponnesian War. New York: W.W. Norton, 1998.
Thucydides has often been described as the world’s first scientific historian, and
his work has been cited for its objectivity. This characterization rests on a misun-
derstanding of what the writing of history really involves. History is not a science,
and it cannot be objective, because it entails humans writing about other humans.
Every omission, every connection, requires judgment. There is no limit to the
number of decisions that confront historians. Herodotus was more disposed to put
everything in and let his readers sort it out, but one consequence of this decision
is that he has been criticized for being less analytical than Thucydides.
The Birth of Tragedy
Tragedy performed a central role in the spiritual and intellectual life of the polis.
Wealthy citizens vied for honor and acclaim by undertaking the expense of train-
ing choruses, and during the festival of Dionysus in March actors and audience
alike needed enormous stamina. Groups of actors performed four dramas in a
day, and spectators had not only to follow the intricate poetry of the choruses but
to turn up the next day and the day after that to compare the work of each play-
wright, to help determine who should receive the prize. A significant proportion
of men—and perhaps women as well, though this is uncertain—attended the
plays and no doubt continued among themselves a lively dialogue about the
painful issues the dramas had raised. Even in eras of comparatively high literacy,
ancient cultures remained oral to a considerable degree, and absorbing the com-
plex imagery of Greek tragic choruses was not so difficult for people trained to
listen and remember as it would be for most people today. Nonetheless, the pop-
ularity of performances that demanded serious intellectual work on the part of
183

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
the audience tells us something about the richness of Greek culture. Over thirty
tragedies have survived; what is missing, however, is any record (beyond the jokes
in Aristophanes) of the discussions the performances must have inspired among
friends and neighbors who had enjoyed this shared treasure of the community.
All parts in tragedy were played by men; masks facilitated the deception. They
were shaped at the mouth rather like megaphones and so made for good acoustics.
To be sure, they discouraged the nuanced portrayal of personality. This was not,
however, considered a great loss, for Greek tragedy was never intended to be nat-
uralistic. Characters in Greek tragedy were not like characters in modern films or
novels, whom one might expect to recognize walking down the street, or whose
subtler traits might appear in one’s friends or neighbors. They represented hu-
mankind in all its aspiration—and frailty. They are not easy to like or dislike, for
they were not intended to be lifelike, flesh-and-blood individuals.
Nor was the material of tragedy anything one could call a slice of life. Tragedy
was meant to be heroic and grand, far removed from the trivial and the mun-
dane. Plots were generally taken from the rich myths of the heroic age, but ex-
ceptions could be made for major events such as the Persian wars. (Even here,
though, Aeschylus achieved a certain remoteness by setting the action of his Per-
sians in faraway Asia, where people dressed exotically.) Formalities of several
kinds limited the dramatist in his choice of material. No violence was permitted
on stage, and all action had to take place within a twenty-four-hour period. Fi-
nally, the author had to contend with the challenge posed by the intricate meters
of tragic verse.
Aeschylus
Aeschylus (525–456 BC) was the first of the famous tragedians of fifth-century
Athens. He died in Sicily after a long life, during which he wrote perhaps seventy
plays. Unfortunately only a handful of these survive. After his death the Atheni-
ans paid homage to the greatness of his work by decreeing that the archon should
grant a chorus to anyone who wanted to produce one of his plays. Already in the
time of Peisistratus, Thespis had expanded the range of the choruses honoring
Dionysus by adding an actor who could carry on a dialogue with the chorus; now
Aeschylus added a second actor. This innovation made possible real conflict and
moved tragedy beyond tableau into the realm of drama. At the same time, drama
remained firmly grounded in poetry, and verse remained the vehicle for both
tragedy and comedy throughout antiquity.
Aeschylus’ greatest surviving achievement is the trilogy known as the Oresteia,
which treats the supreme difficulty of understanding and obtaining a just social
and religious order. Apparently the sets of four dramas that playwrights entered
in the competition generally involved three tragedies followed by a lighter work
known as a satyr play, but the three tragedies did not need to treat the same
theme, and frequently they didn’t. In the case of the Oresteia, however, the three
plays comprise one grand and complex drama, and this work is the only Attic
trilogy that escaped destruction to be enjoyed today.
184

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
The Oresteia
The point of departure for the Oresteia was evidently Ephialtes’ curtailment of the
powers of the Areopagite Council, for the trilogy culminates in precisely the sort
of trial that remained within the Council’s purview—a murder trial. It seems
likely that Aeschylus supported the reforms and chose this august drama as a ve-
hicle by which to reassure conservative Athenians that the trying of homicide
cases, the privilege with which Ephialtes had conspicuously not tampered, was
in fact the ancient mission of this venerable body. In this way he could draw at-
tention away from the significant limitations that had been placed on its juris-
diction. The material with which Aeschylus chose to convey his message was the
familiar tale of the cursed house of the ancient hero Pelops and his descendant
Agamemnon, commander-in-chief of the legendary expedition against Troy.
The first play, Agamemnon, portrays the Greek general’s murder upon his vic-
torious return from the Trojan War in a plot hatched by his faithless wife Cly-
temnestra and his cousin Aegisthus, who has become Clytemnestra’s lover.
Agamemnon’s murder poses an agonizing dilemma for his children Orestes and
Electra, for they are faced with a choice between killing their mother and allow-
ing their father’s death to go unavenged. Their pain and Orestes’ eventual mur-
der of Clytemnestra and Aegisthus form the subject matter of the second play,
The Libation Bearers. As the play closes, Orestes finds himself pursued by the
avenging earth goddesses known as the Furies. His suffering ends in the final
play, The Eumenides. This play is set in Athens, where Orestes has taken refuge,
hoping that a responsible government will afford him a fair trial. Athena’s charge
to the jury proclaims the glories of the Areopagus, the importance of justice, and
the centrality of law.
Athena breaks the deadlocked jury’s tie, and her grounds are revealing. Fol-
lowing Apollo’s proclamation that it is the male and not the female who is the
true parent, and bearing in mind her own birth (fully developed from the head
of her father Zeus), she decides that the claims of the father trump those of the
mother, justifying Clytemnestra’s death. Now tamed, the Furies are given a new
name, the Eumenides (Kindly Ones). Plainly Aeschylus conceives the creation of
responsible government in Athens as the antithesis not only of tyranny but also
of a disordered chaotic universe in which emotional and female forces of
vengeance were paramount. The new world will be governed by orderly, ratio-
nal institutions planned and staffed by men, with vengeance replaced by justice.
The choruses celebrated the awesome power of the gods while also exploring
the nature of the human condition. “Sing sorrow, sorrow,” the chorus chants to-
ward the opening of his play Agamemnon, “but good win out in the end”:
Zeus: whatever he may be, if this name
pleases him in invocation,
thus I call upon him.
I have pondered everything
yet I cannot find a way,
185

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
only Zeus, to cast this dead weight of ignorance
finally from out my brain.
. . .
Zeus, who guided men to think,
who has laid it down that wisdom
comes alone through suffering.
Still there drips in sleep against the heart
grief of memory; against
our pleasure we are temperate.
From the gods who sit in grandeur
grace comes somehow violent.
(Agamemnon 160–166, 176–183; Lattimore 1959)
The genre established by Aeschylus would become one of the defining art forms
of Greek civilization. Tragic drama, as it evolved throughout Aeschylus’ career and
in the hands of his successors Sophocles and Euripides, was in many ways the hall-
mark of Athenian greatness. Through Shakespeare and other great tragedians of
Europe, this remarkable testament to the heroic struggle against human limitations
forms an important part of a legacy that has endured to our own time.
Sophocles
Herodotus’ warnings about the vicissitudes of fortune and the impossibility of
judging a man’s life until it is over are echoed in Oedipus Tyrannus, the most fa-
mous play of antiquity. Here the poet Sophocles (c. 496–406 BC) presents the
seeming good fortune of Oedipus, the highly intelligent and respected ruler of
Thebes in the Heroic Age—only to show us his life disintegrating as the drama
unfolds. Sophocles wrote over a hundred plays. Like Aeschylus and other tragic
poets, Sophocles reworked the familiar plots of Greek mythology, with their em-
phasis on agonizing family discord, to express his view of the world. Just after
Herodotus’ departure for Thurii Sophocles produced the first of three surviving
dramas about the unfortunate house of Oedipus, the legendary ruler of Thebes
who was fated to kill his father and marry his mother.
In the earliest of Sophocles’ Theban plays, Antigone, the playwright asks us to
contemplate the painful tensions that arise in Oedipus’ family after his death. One
of his sons, Polynices, has died fighting to take the throne of Thebes from his
brother; naturally Polynices’ sister Antigone wishes to fulfill her religious obliga-
tion and bury his body. But their uncle Creon, now king of Thebes, forbids anyone
to take up this project on the grounds that Polynices was a traitor. Like many char-
acters in Greek tragedy, Antigone now finds herself confronted with a painful
choice. She must decide whether to honor her obligation to her brother and to the
gods, which means facing death herself, or to obey the laws of the state and keep
herself safe. She is headstrong and defiant; Creon is rigid and insensitive.
Though Sophocles is a conventional Athenian in his respect for the gods and
their power to guide human life, in other regards he challenged conventional
186

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
mores. Antigone’s situation paralleled that of the Athenian girl known as an
epikle¯ros, a girl with no surviving brothers, and it is hard to doubt that Sophocles’
sympathies lie with the fatherless, brotherless girl who experiences all the help-
lessness that fell upon Athenian women who lacked male protectors. Sophocles,
as his other plays confirm, sympathized with the plight of Greek women. Creon,
however, makes a good case for the importance of a law that makes no excep-
tions for family members, and as an Athenian democrat Sophocles certainly saw
the need to uphold the rule of law. But is the decree of an autocrat really law, es-
pecially when the populace is on Antigone’s side? Sophocles fully recognizes the
complexity of the tortuous choices Antigone and Creon must make, and he sees
in their confrontation proof of the wondrous complexity of humankind and the
communities humans have struggled to develop.
Document 7.2. The soaring poetry of the chorus celebrates the achievements
of the human race in a memorable passage.
Many the wonders but nothing walks stranger than man.
This thing crosses the sea in the winter’s storm,
making his path through the roaring waves.
And she, the greatest of gods, the earth—
ageless she is, and unwearied—he wears her away
as the plows go up and down from year to year
and his mules turn up the soil.
Gay nations of birds he snares and leads,
wild beast tribes and the salty brood of the sea,
with the twisted mesh of his nets, this clever man.
He controls with craft the beasts of the open air,
walkers on hills. The horse with his shaggy mane
he holds and harnesses, yoked about the neck,
and the strong bull of the mountain.
Language, and thought like the wind
and the feelings that make the town,
he has taught himself, and shelter against the cold,
refuge from rain. He can always help himself.
He faces no future helpless. There’s only death
that he cannot find an escape from. He has contrived
refuge from illnesses once beyond all cure.
Clever beyond all dreams
the inventive craft that he has
which may drive him one time or another to well or ill.
Sophocles’ Antigone. Antigone 11.332–368, Wyckoff, 1960.
187

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Like Herodotus, Sophocles combined profound reverence for the gods with a
compelling interest in the human dimension of life. In his plays, dialogue—the
talking back and forth of humans—was expanded at the expense of the chorus;
he also added a third actor where Aeschylus had used only two (not counting
silent actors, who appeared on the stage but did not speak).
Euripides
In the spring of 431 Athenians and foreign visitors gathered in the theater of
Dionysus to see Euripides’ Medea. Plays by Euripides (c. 485–c. 406 BC) had been
produced before, so the playwright was already known to the audience, but the
subject matter for this drama was singularly shocking. Although the plots of
Greek tragedy derived from familiar myths, Euripides enjoyed innovation, and
there is some reason to believe that the ending of the play came as a surprise to
the spellbound onlookers.
In Medea Euripides used the tale of Jason, the celebrated leader of the Arg-
onauts in their quest for the Golden Fleece, to undermine conventional views of
what makes a hero. In his adventures Jason had acquired a wife—Medea, a sor-
ceress from Colchis, at the far end of the Black Sea. He has such confidence in the
excellence of the Greek way of life that even when he has decided to abandon
Medea to marry a Corinthian princess, he boasts of the benefits he has conferred
on her by rescuing her from a barbarian land and transplanting her to Greece.
Predictably, these arguments do not sit well with a highly intelligent witch who
has the advantage of a non-Greek perspective. The bitter laments of Medea en-
able the audience to see things differently as she details the constraints on her life
as a woman in a Greek city:
We women are the most unfortunate creatures.
First, with an excess of wealth it is required
For us to buy a husband, and take for our bodies
A master; for not to take one is even worse.
And now the question is serious whether we take
A good or bad one; for there is no easy escape
For a woman, nor can she say no to her marriage.
(Medea 231–238; Warner 1959)
Jason’s shameful excuses for his actions, moreover, raise serious questions about
a society that makes heroes of the kind of man who would rationalize his course
of action on the grounds that his new marriage will give these children royal
step-siblings. Medea was only one of the plays in which Euripides explored the
dynamics of the conflict between reason and passion—reason, which could jus-
tify Jason in deserting the wife who had risked her life for him in her youth, and
passion, which could move a mother to kill her offspring. Inevitably the agoniz-
ing conflict that marked plays like Antigone struck a particularly resonant chord
with the audience in Medea, which was produced just as war was breaking out
between two very different states with opposing views of the world.
188

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
CURRENTS IN GREEK THOUGHT AND EDUCATION
The convoluted arguments that help politicians who appear in Thucydides’ nar-
rative cloak ambition in fair-sounding words and the verses in which Euripides’
Jason defends his action as calculated to improve his children’s lives show the in-
fluence of the itinerant intellectuals who gravitated to Athens during the second
half of the fifth century, the men who came to be known as the sophists, from the
Greek word sophiste¯s, which means something like “practitioner of wisdom.” Un-
like the philosophers who sought to understand the world, the sophists con-
tented themselves with teaching eager, paying pupils how to get by in it. Though
their works do not survive except in fragments, it seems clear that they rejected
facile assumptions concerning such topics as the connections between noble birth
and true merit, the obligations owed to the gods, and the nature of law. Because
of this, and because they enabled ambitious young men to speak effectively for
or against any issue, they aroused suspicion in Athens.
Formal and Informal Education
The origins of the sophistic movement lie in the informal nature of Greek educa-
tion, in its literary and aristocratic bias, and in its superficial nature. Since Homer’s
day, Greek children had learned primarily by watching the world around them
and imitating respected elders. Few people in antiquity knew how to read, and
most formal education involved listening and reciting from memory. Girls were
rarely sent to school. Neither were most boys. The problem was not simply that
poverty usually compelled children to stay home and work on the farm; the fact
is that, with the exception of Sparta, Greek states did not provide public school-
ing. Parents of the upper classes, however, paid for their sons to be instructed in
what was called mousike¯, a subject that included the memorization of poetry.
Since ancient poems were sung, mousike also involved learning to play the lyre.
Beginning in the sixth century, more and more children also learned to read and
write. Parents sometimes had daughters instructed in basic reading and writing
skills in case they needed this knowledge to supervise household accounts or to
manage temple properties if they became priestesses. Some instruction in math was
also offered to children by private tutors and in schools, though not much was of-
fered in the way of natural science or what we would call social studies. By the
time boys progressed to the age at which adolescents today would enter college,
moreover, they had ceased to be students and had become soldiers and citizens.
Most education went on in less formal settings, however, and this sort of ed-
ucation would continue throughout life. In childhood, girls would absorb the
norms of appropriate social behavior from their mothers and aunts, boys from
their fathers and uncles. As in many societies, the upbringing of the two sexes
was designed to cultivate very different skill sets for males and females. These
differences were most pronounced in the upper classes, for poor children of both
sexes were likely to learn farming and craft skills from parents. Among the elite,
however, a sharp differentiation occurred in adolescence, for at this juncture girls
married and reproduced. Their education in home management continued at the
189

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
hands of older relatives, and probably older slaves as well, who had considerable
experience of child rearing. In addition, husbands sometimes took it upon them-
selves to give their wives vocational training in household management. In the
Oeconomicus, written in the fourth century in the form of a Socratic dialogue,
Xenophon describes how a husband, Ischomachus, trained his young wife to be
a successful estate manager:
[Socrates] said, “I would very much like you to tell me, Ischomachus, whether
you yourself trained your wife to become the sort of woman that she ought to be,
or whether she already knew how to carry out her duties when you took her as
your wife from her father and mother.”
“What could she have known when I took her as my wife, Socrates? She was not
yet fifteen when she came to me, and had spent her previous years under careful
supervision so that she might see and hear and speak as little as possible. Don’t
you think it was adequate if she came to me knowing only how to take wool and
produce a cloak, and had seen how spinning tasks are allocated to the slaves? And
besides, she had been very well trained to control her appetites, Socrates,” he said,
“and I think that sort of training is most important for man and woman alike.”
(Oeconomicus 7.4–5; Pomeroy 1994)
While teenage girls might receive such instruction from their husbands, ado-
lescent males were exposed to important influences of another kind. Books were
expensive, and though literacy increased throughout the sixth and particularly the
fifth century, learning still went on primarily in the interaction between two or
more human beings, not in the interaction of a person with a written text. Rela-
tionships with somewhat older mentors formed a key element in the education of
teenage boys. Just as younger teachers today often serve as role models for ado-
lescents, so young men in Greece offered examples of manhood to those who were
just developing into men. The one-on-one nature of these friendships, however—
untrammeled by any need for a teacher to be evenhanded with an entire class of
students—combined with different attitudes to sexuality to produce a significantly
different dynamic. As we have seen in Chapter Four, the bond between a Greek
male teenager and his adult mentor was often profoundly erotic. What we know
about these relationships is somewhat compromised by a reticence about sex in
the written sources and by the need many Greeks felt to stress the intellectual and
spiritual bond at the expense of the sexual one. In his dialogue on love, the Sym-
posium, Plato praises this bond for its value in the moral improvement of both the
individual and society as a whole. “I would maintain,” he writes,
that there can be no greater benefit for a boy than to have a worthy lover from his
earlier youth, nor for a lover than to have a worthy object for his affection. The prin-
ciple which ought to guide the whole life of those who intend to live nobly cannot
be implanted either by family or by position or by wealth or by anything else so
effectively as by love. What principle? you ask. I mean the principle which inspires
shame at what is disgraceful and ambition for what is noble; without these feelings
neither a state nor an individual can accomplish anything great or fine.
(Symposium 178b; Hamilton 1951)
190

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
The bond between the older lover (the eraste¯s) and the younger beloved (the
ero¯menos) shored up the stability of society by encouraging each generation (or
half generation) to imitate the one that had gone before.
Erotic bonds, of course, that had begun in school might also be strong between
men of a similar age. Xenophon portrays Socrates describing the passion of Crito-
bulus for Cleinias:
This hot flame of his was kindled in the days when they used to go to school to-
gether. It was the discovery of this that caused his father to put him into my
hands, in the hope that I might do him some good. And without question he is
already much improved. For a while ago he was like those who look at the Gor-
gons—he would gaze at Cleinias with a fixed and stony stare and would never
leave his presence. . . . It does look to me as if he had also kissed Cleinias; and
there is nothing more terribly potent than this at kindling the fires of passion. For
it is insatiable and holds out seductive hopes. For this reason I maintain that one
who intends to possess the power of self-control must refrain from kissing those
in the bloom of beauty.
(Xenophon, Symposium 4.23–24; Todd p. 577)
Finally, participation in the life of the city as a whole afforded an ongoing educa-
tion to growing men, and to some extent to women as well, particularly those who
served as priestesses. The poet Simonides put it well: Polis andra didaskei (“the po-
lis teaches a man”). Only in mature life, however—by attendance, for example, at
tragic dramas and the thoughtful discussions that no doubt followed in private
gatherings—did this education entail any real questioning of conventional wisdom.
In general, the purpose of Greek education was a blend of indoctrination and so-
cialization calculated to foster the perpetuation of traditional values.
191
Figure 7.9. This vase depicts a
mature bearded man courting
a very young, barely adoles-
cent boy.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
All this changed when the sophists burst on the scene during the second half of
the fifth century, sparking powerful tensions between the generations. Athens
acted as a magnet for the philosophers and teachers of rhetoric who had sprung
up throughout the Greek world as speculation about both the natural universe and
the human community became increasingly popular among intellectuals. Democ-
racy was grounded in skill in speaking and reasoning—in the ability to dissect and
demolish the arguments of political opponents. The sophists offered to teach these
skills. Sophists filled other needs as well, for they delighted in exploring tricky
questions about the workings of the world. No common belief system marked the
thinking of the various sophists, but they shared an enthusiasm for the kind of ex-
ercises in argumentation that are central to a great deal of higher education today.
The Sophists
Like much of the education that had gone before, the instruction offered by
sophists benefited only a fairly small class of affluent students who could afford
to pay. What the sophists had to offer, however, differed sharply from earlier ed-
ucation, for the sophists questioned conventional beliefs. One object of their ex-
plorations was the notion of nomos.
Herodotus had shown in his history the centrality of nomos to society. The
Greek word meant both “law” and “custom”; there were state-sanctioned nomoi
forbidding burglary, but there were also social nomoi regarding what to wear at
your wedding and religious nomoi about how to worship Apollo. In a society
that had existed for centuries without written law, only a blurry line divided a
legal nomos and a conventional nomos based on tradition. The two, however, be-
gan to diverge the harder people thought about the problem. Herodotus’ Histo-
ries demonstrated two different sides of nomos. On the one hand, the Greeks had
fought the Persians in order to live by nomos rather than at the whim of a despot.
On the other hand, the multiplicity of nomoi in different cultures reveals a di-
versity that suggests that local customs are the product of tradition rather than
of abstract, unchanging principles of right and wrong. To demonstrate the force
of nomos, Herodotus tells the following tale:
During his reign, Darius called together the Greeks who were at his court and
asked them how much money it would take to get them to eat the dead bodies
of their fathers. They said they would not do it for any sum. Then he summoned
a group of Indians known as the Callatiae, who eat the corpses of their parents.
In the presence of the Greeks, and through a translator, he asked them how much
money it would take for them to permit the burning of their parents on a funeral
pyre. They gave a horrified gasp and demanded that he be silent.
(The Histories 3.38; Blanco)
Each society, he concludes, considers its own customs to be best.
When this idea was assimilated to the speculations of the natural philosophers,
an opposition evolved in many minds between the concept of physis (“nature”),
and nomos (“convention”). The relationship between physis and nomos became
192

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
central to Greek thought around Herodotus’ time, for it carried powerful impli-
cations for the legitimacy of authority. If nomos was not the natural outgrowth
of physis but actually existed in opposition to it, then the laws of the community
were not necessarily to be obeyed, for they might have grown up randomly, en-
dorsed by generations of unthinking traditionalists who had given no thought to
their grounding in physis.
This concept of law varied conspicuously from the usual view that law ulti-
mately came from the gods, and in fact the new ways of looking at the world had
serious implications for relations between gods and mortals. One of the most
renowned of the sophists who came to teach in Athens was Protagoras (c. 490–420
BC) of Abdera in northern Greece, who moved to Athens around 450 and spent
most of the rest of his life there. He is best known for two sayings with religious
implications. “Each individual person is the measure of all things—of things that
are, that they are, and of things that are not, that they are not.” Nobody, in other
words, can tell you what is real or true—no state official, no parent, and no god.
Another contention was still more provocative: it is impossible to know, Pro-
tagoras is said to have observed, “whether the gods exist, or how they might look
if they do. Numerous obstacles stand in the way, such as the shortness of life and
the difficulty of the subject matter.”
There was an answer, however, to the question, “Just what do these people
teach, anyway?” and that answer was rhetoric. Many Greeks believed there was
no limit to what sophists would use rhetoric to defend. The anonymous treatise
known as Dissoi Logoi (Double Arguments) reveals the moral relativism that
many associated with sophists. Can sickness ever be good? Certainly, if you are
a doctor. But what about death? Death is good for undertakers and gravediggers.
The author goes on to enumerate the many examples of cultural difference found
in Herodotus in order to demonstrate that no act is intrinsically good or bad. A
mental universe in which nothing was purely good or patently evil was not one
in which all Greeks wished to dwell.
For these reasons, the sophists drew to themselves a considerable amount of
odium. They found themselves under attack not only in conversation but on the
stage. In 423 Aristophanes produced the Clouds, in which the intellectuals of
Athens—the “eggheads”—are derided as teaching a corrosive rhetoric that made
a mockery of decent, sensible values. The man Aristophanes identifies as running
the “think shop” was not, however, a sophist. Like some of Aristophanes’ other
characters, he was a real person, but not one who taught rhetoric or accepted fees.
He was Socrates, and the disposition to identify him with the sophists contributed
in no small measure to his execution just after the end of the war which broke
out between Athens and Sparta in 431.
THE BREAKDOWN OF THE PEACE
The terms of the Thirty Years’ Peace contained within them the seeds of war. Ar-
bitration was meaningless when all the major states were lined up on one side or
193

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
another; rules made in one sphere of influence might well have an impact on the
other; and some states enjoyed an ambiguous status, with one foot in each camp.
The full extent of the vulnerability of the peace was revealed by events that be-
gan in western Greece in 435.
A Provocative Alliance: Athens and Corcyra
In that year a civil war between the democrats and the oligarchs in the Cor-
cyraean colony of Epidamnus moved the democrats to seek assistance from Cor-
cyra. When their mother city turned them down for reasons we do not know,
they were encouraged by Delphi to hand themselves over to their “grandmother”
Corinth instead. Despite their own oligarchic leanings, the Corinthians welcomed
the opportunity to make life hard for the Corcyraeans, with whom they had a
long-standing feud, and agreed to assist the democrats. The Corinthians and Cor-
cyraeans were soon fighting at sea.
This conflict set into motion a chain of events that had dramatic consequences
for the Greek world. Needing an ally but unable to approach Sparta because of
Corinth’s membership in the Peloponnesian League, the Corcyraeans went to
Athens instead. An alliance between Corcyra and Athens would not violate the
terms of the Thirty Years’ Peace, since the treaty permitted neutrals to join either
side. The Athenians were nervous about offending Corinth by such an alliance,
but they were even more apprehensive about the prospect of Corinth’s defeating
Corcyra in battle and obtaining for themselves Corcyra’s substantial fleet. To gain
those ships for Athens, therefore, they voted to make an alliance. They made a
point of terming it a “defensive alliance” only, but this technicality fooled no-
body; it was fairly clear that the Corinthians would indeed attack the Corcyraeans,
and when they did, Athens would find itself at war with Corinth, one of the most
powerful members of the Peloponnesian League.
This is precisely what happened. In the late summer of 433 a Peloponnesian
fleet of 150 ships, 90 of them Corinthian, attacked the Corcyraeans off the island
chain known as Sybota. With Athenian help, the Corcyraeans were ultimately
victorious, and the Corinthians were furious. Prospects for peace between Athens
and Sparta were receding.
The Problem of Potidaea
With chances of war now greatly increased, Athens issued problematic decrees
against two members of the Peloponnesian League. The city of Potidaea on the
Chalcidic peninsula was both a Corinthian colony and a member of the Athen-
ian alliance. In the tense political climate, Potidaea’s anomalous situation in-
evitably attracted Athens’ attention, especially in view of the exceptionally close
relations between Corinth and Potidaea, which even took its annual magistrates
from Corinth. (Corinth’s markedly contrasting relationships with its two colonies
Corcyra and Potidaea are an important reminder of the many different possibil-
ities for metropolis/colony ties.) During the winter of 433–432, the Athenians
194

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
ordered the Potidaeans to dismiss their Corinthian magistrates, reject any future
officials from Corinth, tear down their seaward defenses, and give hostages.
When Potidaea refused these demands, Athens found itself involved in an ex-
pensive two-year-long siege in which Potidaea was aided by Corinth and the
Macedonian king Perdiccas, whom the Athenians had alienated by supporting
two rival claimants to his throne.
Athenian Decrees Against Megara
Around the same time, the Athenians took action against Megara. Because Thucy-
dides considered the Megarian decrees only a pretext and not a major cause of
the war, much is unclear about this third crisis. The Athenians apparently ac-
cused the Megarians of harboring escaped slaves and of cultivating some sacred
and undefined land that lay between Eleusis in Attica and Megara and passed a
decree against Megara, probably in 432, excluding Megarian merchants from all
ports of the Athenian empire. This decree enabled the Athenians to inflict con-
siderable harm on a member of the Peloponnesian League without technically in-
fringing the terms of the Thirty Years’ Peace, since there were few significant
Greek ports outside the Athenian empire.
Even more than the other actions taken by the Athenian assembly during the
430s, the sanctions against Megara and the refusal to revoke them are associated
with the name of Pericles. The plays of Aristophanes and Plutarch’s biography of
Pericles make it plain that some people considered the friction with Megara piv-
otal in bringing on the war and blamed Pericles for the outbreak of hostilities.
Scattered references in Thucydides confirm this. In the autumn of 432 BC the
Corinthians denounced the Athenians before the Spartan assembly. Although the
Spartan king Archidamus urged caution, the Spartans voted that the Athenians
had violated the Thirty Years’ Peace. They then summoned delegates from the
Peloponnesian League who duly voted to go to war with Athens.
Last-Ditch Attempts to Avert War
Hostilities did not immediately follow, but rather several months of diplomacy in
which each side tried to portray the other as responsible for the impending war.
Thus, the Spartans insisted that peace could be preserved if Athens would only
“free the Greeks” (in other words, abandon their empire), expel any “cursed” Alc-
maeonids in the city (Pericles was an Alcmaeonid on his mother’s side), and re-
scind the Megarian decree; the Athenians demanded that the Spartans purify “the
curse of the goddess of the Brass House,” a reference to the impieties involved in
the death by starvation decades earlier of Pausanias, who had taken refuge in the
goddess’ temple. In the end, after several months of fruitless negotiations, the im-
patient Thebans forced ambivalent Sparta’s hand by attacking Athens’ ally Plataea.
Because Plataea enjoyed a special position in Greece as the site of a great victory
against Persia in 479, this assault was considered particularly heinous. Afterward
nobody could question that the Peloponnesians and the Athenians were at war.
195

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
196





























Athens and its independent allies
Dependent allies required to provide
tribute or ships
Sparta and its allies
Neutral

Corcyra
Leucas
Aegina
Sciathos
Peparethus
Zacynthus
Cythera
M A C E D O N I A
LYNCESTIS
THESSALY
ACARNANIA
A E T O L I A
A
C
H
A
E
A
E L I S
A R C A D I A
MESSENIA
LACONIA
ARGOLIS
ATTICA
BOEOTIA
PHOCIS
DORIS
W.
LOCRIS
LYNCESTIS
THESSALY
ACARNANIA
A E T O L I A
A
C
H
A
E
A
E L I S
A R C A D I A
MESSENIA
LACONIA
ARGOLIS
ATTICA
BOEOTIA
PHOCIS
DORIS
W.
LOCRIS
E. LO
CR
IS
M A C E D O N I A
E. LO
CR
IS
0
0
40
80
120
160 km
20
40
60
80
100 miles


Sybota
Ambracia
Olpae
Argos
Idomene
Naupactus
Aegition
Heraclea
Thermopylae
Oreus
Histiaea
Elatea
Delphi
Plataea
Delium
Thebes
Marathon
Eleusis
Athens
Piraeus
Megara
Sicyon
Corinth
Pellene
Rhion
Elis
Olympia
Gythium
Tegea
Thyrea
Mantinea
Orchomenus
Mycenae
Argos
Hermione
Troezen
Epidaurus
Pharsalus
Pherae
Pagasae
Larisa
Pydna
Methone
Pella
Therma
Euboea
Sybota
Cassope
Ambracia
Olpae
Argos
Idomene
Oeniadae
Naupactus
Aegition
Heraclea
Thermopylae
Oreus
Histiaea
Elatea
Delphi
Plataea
Delium
Thebes
Chalcis
Eretria
Marathon
Eleusis
Athens
Piraeus
Megara
Sicyon
Corinth
Pellene
Rhion
Cyllene
Elis
Olympia
Lepreum
Pylos
Methone
Gythium
Tegea
Thyrea
Mantinea
Orchomenus
Mycenae
Argos
Halieis
Hermione
Troezen
Epidaurus
Pharsalus
Pherae
Pagasae
Larisa
 Mt. Olympus
Pydna
Methone
Pella
Therma
Spartolus
Potidaea
Mende
Scione
Olynthus
Acanthus
Argilus
Amphipolis
Eion
Figure 7.10. Alliances at the outset of the Peloponnesian War.

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
197






































Melos
Siphnos
Paros
Naxos
Thera
Delos
Myconos
Tenos
Andros
Scyros
Lemnos
Thasos
Samothrace
Imbros
Tenedos
Chios
Samos
Cos
Rhodes
C A R I A
L Y D I A
M Y S I A
P H R Y G I A
T
H
R
A
C
E
ODRYSIAN KINGDOM
PROPONTIS
C A R I A
L Y D I A
M Y S I A
P H R Y G I A
T
H
R
A
C
E
ODRYSIAN KINGDOM
Neapolis
Abdera
Maronea
Abydus
Troy
Antandrus
Adramyttium
Phocaea
Erythrae Clazomenae
Teos
Colophon
Sardis
Notium
Iasus
Halicarnassus
Caunus
Byzantium
Selymbria
Neapolis
Thasos
Abdera
Maronea
Aenus
Cardia
Lampsacus
Abydus
Sigeum
Troy
Antandrus
Adramyttium
Methymna
Cyme
Phocaea
Erythrae Clazomenae
Teos
Colophon
Sardis
Notium
Ephesus
Priene
Miletus
Iasus
Halicarnassus
Cos
Cnidus
Camirus
Lindus
Ialysus
Rhodes
Caunus
Cyzicus
Dascylium
Byzantium
Chalcedon
Selymbria
Perinthus
Lesbos
Mytilene
Carystus
Sestos
A E G E A N
S E A

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
RESOURCES FOR WAR
Thus ended the period of a half century between the Persian and Peloponnesian
wars to which Thucydides gave the name the Pentakontaetia (“the Fifty Years”) (ac-
tually forty-seven years). In the jockeying for position that went on during the
months leading up to the Theban attack on Plataea, the Spartans seem to have come
out ahead. Though it was they who had declared war, the Greek world was inclined
to see imperialist Athens as the aggressor. When war broke out, Thucydides writes,
Popular opinion shaped up in favor of the Spartans by far, especially since they
had proclaimed that they were going to liberate Greece. Everywhere, city and cit-
izen alike were eager, if at all possible, to join with them in word and deed, and
everyone felt that any plan would come to a standstill if he himself could not take
part in it. That is how angry most people were at Athens—some because they
wanted to rid themselves of Athenian rule, and others because they were fright-
ened lest they fall under that rule.
(The Peloponnesian War 2.8; Blanco 1998)
The belligerents differed not only in temperament but also in the nature of
their military strengths. The Athenians had far greater financial resources than
the Peloponnesians, and an incomparably superior navy that included over four
hundred Athenian and allied ships. Accordingly, Athens hoped to conduct as
much of the war as possible at sea, while the Spartans would focus on the land.
The Athenians were fighting essentially a defensive war, whose goal was to pre-
serve the empire the Spartans sought to destroy. For Athens a stalemate would
amount to victory. Sparta needed something more.
TRANSLATIONS
Blanco, Walter. 1992. The Histories, from Herodotus: The Histories, Walter Blanco and Jen-
nifer Roberts, eds. New York: W. W. Norton.
Blanco, Walter. 1998. The Peloponnesian War, from Thucydides: The Peloponnesian War, Wal-
ter Blanco and Jennifer Roberts, eds. New York: W.W. Norton.
Hamilton, Walter. 1951. Plato: The Symposium. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Hanson, Ann. 1975. Hippocrates: Diseases of Women, in Signs 1.
Marchant, E. C. and O. J. Todd. 1968. Xenophon in Seven Volumes. IV. New York and Lon-
don: Loeb Classical Library.
Pomeroy, Sarah B. 1994. Xenophon: Oeconomicus, A Social and Historical Commentary. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press.
Warner, Rex. 1959. Medea, from The Complete Greek Tragedies, Euripides I: Four Tragedies,
David Grene and Richmond Lattimore, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wyckoff, Elizabeth. 1960. Antigone, from The Complete Greek Tragedies, David Grene and
Richmond Lattimore, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
198

Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War
SUGGESTED READINGS
Beard, Mary. 2003. The Parthenon. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. The history of
the building from temple to medieval Cathedral to mosque and armory, the transfer
of the Elgin Marbles to Britain in the nineteenth century, and the twentieth-century
restoration.
Camp, John M. 2001. The Archaeology of Athens. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. A
thorough discussion of this important subject by a scholar who has spent many
years in Athens.
Guthrie, W. K. C. 1971. The Sophists. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. A bril-
liant study of the issues regarding the sophistic movement, excerpted from the au-
thor’s six-volume History of Greek Philosophy.
Harris, William V. 1989. Ancient Literacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. A
survey of the evidence for literacy and the lack of it in ancient Greece and Rome.
Hill, Ida Thallon. 1953. The Ancient City of Athens: Its Topography and Monuments. London:
Methuen. A clearly written description with illustrations and plans of the architec-
tural and sculpted antiquities at Athens, before the restorations that are now in
progress began masking many of the major monuments.
Hurwit, Jeffrey M. 1999. The Athenian Acropolis: History, Mythology, and Archaeology from the
Neolithic Era to the Present. New York: Cambridge University Press. An eminently
readable history of the most famous hill in the Greek world.
Kagan, Donald. 1969. The Outbreak of the Peloponnesian War. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press. The first installment in Kagan’s monumental four-volume history of the war.
Osborne, Robin. 1987. Classical Landscape with Figures: The Ancient Greek City and Its Coun-
tryside. London: G. Philip. An illustrated discussion of life in rural Greece, natural
flora and agriculture, written by an author who plainly loves his subject.
Ste. Croix, G. E. M. de. 1972. The Origins of the Peloponnesian War. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press. An analysis of the available sources and an intensive study of the data
concerning the Megarian decrees.
Vlastos, Gregory. 1991. Socrates: Ironist and Moral Philosopher. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
sity Press. An attempt to capture the essence of the philosopher, by one of the fore-
most students of the Platonic dialogues.
199

200
8
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
When war broke out between Athens and Sparta, few Greeks foresaw that it
would be different from any war they had ever experienced or even imagined.
The twenty-seven-year conflict cost thousands upon thousands of lives and
proved a stern teacher. It enhanced many of the worst features of Greek society—
competitiveness, jingoism, lack of compassion, and gross disregard for human
life. At the same time, a number of extraordinary thinkers sought to focus atten-
tion on the problems people face in their attempts to live together: The writings
of Thucydides, Sophocles, and Euripides showed vigor and spirit throughout the
war years, and the comic dramatist Aristophanes continued to produce plays of
irrepressible wit through three decades of fighting and for a generation after-
ward. The Peloponnesian War would alter the world the Greeks knew in many
respects. Comfortable assumptions about the citizen-fighter and women’s role in
the polis would break down, and conventional morality and piety would face
many challenges. Much, however, would stay the same—the polis as a political
unit, the primacy of agriculture, the rivalries of the city-states, and the worship
of the Olympian gods. The trauma occasioned by the war and its aftermath was
also strikingly fertile, for the war supplied the impetus for many of the social,
political, and intellectual changes we identify with the fourth century and the pe-
riod after the death of Alexander in 323 BC that we call the Hellenistic Age.
THE ARCHIDAMIAN WAR (431–421 BC)
To many Greeks alive at the time, the decade of fighting that stretched from 431
to 421 seemed like a discrete entity in itself, and in fact this war has been given
its own name—the Archidamian War, after the Spartan king and commander
Archidamus. We owe the concept of a single Peloponnesian War extending from
431 to 404 to Thucydides. Another historian might have seen a continuous war
extending from 460 to 404, or three wars—one from 460 to 446, one from 431 to
421, and another beginning somewhere between 418 and 415 and continuing
to 404. Students of historiography (the writing of history) use the expression

The Peloponnesian War
“colligation,” that is, “tying together,” to describe the way historians “create” an
event or a process by linking together separate events in such a way that they
form a coherent whole. Joining what others might construe differently, Thucy-
dides, the earliest and most important source for this period, has by colligation
successfully enshrined in history the concept of what is today commonly known
as “the” Peloponnesian War, the war of 431–404.
The Periclean Strategy and the Plague
Pericles devised an ingenious strategy for winning a war he conceived as essen-
tially defensive, and it is a measure of his influence and eloquence that he was
201
Figure 8.1. Theaters of operation during the Peloponnesian War.
AEGEAN
SEA
Arginusae Islands
0
0
40
80
120 160 km
20
40
60
80 100 miles
S
t
r
y
m
o
n
R
.
L
Y
D
I
A
A
E
T
O
L
I
A
A
R
C
A
D
I
A
E
L
I
S
Eub
oe
a
S
t
r
y
m
o
n
R
.
Crete
Cythera
Melos
Delos
Rhodes
Samos
Icaria
Aegina
Chios
Lesbos
Thasos
Zacynthus
Corcyra
Ambracia
Anactorium
Sollium
Delphi
Olympia
Naupactus
Pylos
Messene
Sparta
Argos
Epidaurus
Corinth
Megara
Athens
Piraeus
Laureum
Thebes Delium
Oropus
Plataea Decelea
Potidaea
Scione
Eion
Stagira
Acanthus
Amphipolis
Epidamnus
Troy
Lampsacus Cyzicus Dascylium
Byzantium
Mytilene
Aegospotami
Cynossema
Sardes
Notium
Ephesus
Erythrae
Miletus
Halicarnassus
Chios
Gulf of
Corinth
CHALCIDICE
M
AC
ED
O
N
I
A
T H R A C E
PROPONTIS
M Y S I A
IONIA
AEOLIS
ACAR-
NANIA
ACHAEA
LACONIA
MESSENIA
ATTICA
T
H
E
S
S
A
L
Y

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
able to persuade his fellow Athenians to do something so conspicuously at odds
with human nature. Harassing Peloponnesian territory with their navy, the Athe-
nians declined to participate in hoplite battle with the Spartans. At Pericles’ in-
stigation, the Athenian farmers abandoned their land, taking with them what few
household goods could be loaded on wagons, and huddled with the city-dwellers
inside the Long Walls that linked Athens to Piraeus. These walls, Pericles rightly
perceived, made Athens in essence an island. Food and other necessary goods
would continue to be imported by ship from throughout the empire. The enemy,
Pericles calculated, would tire of ravaging the land when nobody came out to
fight. Seeing that the superior training and numbers of their infantry would do
them no good, they would soon sue for peace. The Spartans, meanwhile, conjec-
tured that the Athenians would grow restive cooped up in the overcrowded city
throughout the campaigning season and, seeing their land being ravaged, would
be unable to tolerate the frustration. They foresaw one of two consequences: ei-
ther the Athenians would seek peace or they would overrule Pericles and come
out to fight. In foreseeing that the enemy would give up after a couple of years,
both sides miscalculated badly, but there was nothing intrinsically foolish in their
thinking.
It was with reluctance and apprehension that the Athenians abandoned their
homes and the familiar temples nearby, and when the farmers arrived in Athens
only a few were able to find shelter with friends or relatives. Most had to seek
out empty space in the city or bunk down in temples and shrines. Some wound
up spending the summer campaigning season in the towers along the walls. For-
tunately, the Athenians thought, the war would not last too long; but of course
the Spartans knew this was just what they were thinking.
Though the first year of the war saw few casualties, by tradition the Atheni-
ans held a public funeral for those who had been killed. This much we know: Per-
icles was chosen to offer the eulogy. How closely the stirring paean to Athens
that appears in Thucydides’ history approximates what Pericles actually said is
another question. We have no other versions of this speech. It could represent
Thucydides’ accurate recollection of what was said, or a faulty recollection, or a
composition of his own; and even if Pericles said these things, his speech could
have been written by someone else. In any event, the speech we have focuses not
on the dead themselves but on the city of Athens and the way of life it repre-
sents—a way of life that is defined as the antithesis of everything Spartan.
It would be a mistake, Pericles suggested, to think that an easygoing polis such
as Athens, with its love of words, of ideas, and of beauty, could not compete suc-
cessfully in war with a highly regulated, militarized society like Sparta, where
words are despised as a hindrance to action, people have little choice about how
they live their lives, and anxious secrecy is the order of the day. “We love nobil-
ity without ostentation,” Pericles says,
and we have a virile love of knowledge. Furthermore, wealth is for us something
to use, not something to brag about. And as to poverty, there is no shame in ad-
mitting to it—the real shame is in not taking action to escape from it. Finally,
202

The Peloponnesian War
while there are those who manage both the city and their own private affairs,
there are others who, though wrapped up in their work, nevertheless have a thor-
ough knowledge of public affairs. For we are the only people who regard a man
who takes no interest in politics to be leading not a quiet life but a useless one.
We are also the only ones who either make governmental decisions or at least
frame the issues correctly, because we do not think that action is hampered by
public discourse, but by not learning enough in advance, through discourse,
about what action we need to take.
* * *
To sum up, I tell you that this city, taken all in all, is the school of Greece, and
as far as I am concerned, any man among us will exhibit a more fully developed
personality than men elsewhere and will be able to take care of himself more
gracefully and with the quickest of wit.
(The Peloponnesian War 2.40–41; Blanco 1998)
Pericles’ concluding charge to the women of Athens sat oddly on the lips of a
man who lived with a companion far more visible and renowned than many of
his fellow politicians:
And since I must also make some mention of womanly virtue to those who
will now be widows, I will define it in this brief admonition: your greatest fame
consists in being no worse than your natures, and in having the least possible rep-
utation among males for good or ill.
(2.45; Blanco 1998)
This is certainly striking advice in a society as loquacious as the one Thucydides de-
picts in Athens. It is posited on a notion of woman as in every way the opposite of
political man, in whose mind reputation counted for practically everything.
The next year brought a horrific surprise: a ghastly plague that attacked the
population of Athens. Its origin is unknown, as is its precise nature—typhus,
probably, or perhaps smallpox or measles—but it spread rapidly in the crowded,
unsanitary environment of a city packed to capacity and beyond. Probably about
a third of the populace died. Thucydides, who himself fell ill but recovered, took
pains to record everything he could about the course and symptoms of the illness
so that it would be possible for readers to recognize the disorder should it ever
reappear: he reports the oral bleeding, the bad breath, the painful vomiting, the
burning skin, the insomnia, the memory loss, the often fatal diarrhea and goes on
to describe the way in which people reacted to the disease. A nihilistic lawless-
ness began to characterize life in the city:
Fear of the gods? The laws of man? No one held back, concluding that as to the
gods, it made no difference whether people worshiped or not since they saw that
all alike were dying; and as to breaking the law, no one expected to live long
enough to go to court and pay his penalty. The far more terrible verdict that had
already been delivered against them was hanging over their heads—so it was
only natural to enjoy life a little before it came down.
(The Peloponnesian War 2.53; Blanco 1998)
203

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Demoralized by the plague and frustrated by being forbidden to march out
and offer battle, some Athenians tried to open negotiations for peace with the
Spartans, ignoring Pericles’ cautions against this and in fact voting to depose him
from the strategia (bringing forward some charge against him, as was common
in Athens when politicians had ceased to please their constituency). Nothing
much happened when Pericles was out of office except the long-awaited surren-
der of Potidaea. Finding that other leaders conducted the war no better, the Athe-
nians returned Pericles to office at the next elections. Then he caught the plague
and died.
Cleon and Diodotus: The Revolt
of Mytilene (428–427 BC)
No one man replaced Pericles as the unquestioned leader of the Athenian peo-
ple, but one of the most popular of the new politicians was Cleon (d. 422 BC),
a brash and outspoken tannery owner who cultivated a flamboyantly anti-
aristocratic persona.
Hated by Thucydides and pilloried by Aristophanes, Cleon has come before
the tribunal of history at a desperate disadvantage. The 420s saw a change in the
character of Athenian government. Though no formal distinctions divided rich
204
Figure 8.2. This image of Pericles survives in
a Roman copy of the head of a lost Greek
bronze. Pericles was rumored to have worn a
helmet in order to conceal the deformed
shape of his head, which made him resemble
the tyrant Peisistratus.

The Peloponnesian War
from poor or separated social classes, still until the war Athenians had felt most
comfortable with political power in the hands of men from old, wealthy fami-
lies—men like Cimon and Pericles. Now this ceased to be true. Richer men still
had the advantage in politics, but increasingly men whose fathers and grandfa-
thers had recently made money in business began to compete successfully with
those whose families had been living off their land holdings for generations. New
words, moreover, crept into discussions of Athenian politics: de¯mago¯gos and its
relative de¯mago¯gia, which first appears in the surviving literature in Aristophanes’
Knights, produced in 424 BC. Literally a “leader of the people”—surely there is
nothing wrong in that—in the hands of class-conscious critics the word demago-
gos came to signal a calculating politician who manipulated the voters for his
own ends rather than letting himself be guided by patriotism and principle. In
reality, however, there is no way to be sure of people’s motives, and sometimes
the word just betrays the class prejudice of the writer using it. Thucydides de-
scribed Pericles as leading the Athenian people rather than being led by them.
Did this mean Pericles was a demagogue too?
Cleon first appears in the pages of Thucydides in a dramatic debate that took
place in 427. The year before, several cities on the island of Lesbos had revolted
from the Athenian empire under the leadership of the Mytileneans, whose city
was the largest. Though the Spartans had promised aid to the rebels, it never ma-
terialized, and in 427 the Mytileneans surrendered to Athens. The Athenians ini-
tially voted to put all the men in Mytilene to death and to sell the women and
children into slavery, and they dispatched a boat to bring the news to the gen-
eral in command on the island. The next day, however, some people at least had
second thoughts, and a debate ensued. Cleon shows a cocky self-assurance in the
dismissive way he addresses his audience: “I, for my part,” he begins, “have of-
ten noticed before that democracies cannot rule over others, but I see it especially
now in these regrets of yours about Mytilene . . .” (3.37; Blanco 1998). Deriding
the Athenians for their openness and flexibility, he advocates a policy of harsh
consistency. Bad laws that stay the same, he insists, are better than good ones that
change. His studied anti-intellectualism contrasts pointedly with the praise of de-
liberation and debate in Pericles’ funeral oration delivered three years earlier: Or-
dinary people, Cleon says, “run their cities far better than intelligent ones, for
these want to seem wiser than the laws and to outdo whatever nonsense is said
in public assemblies. . . . They are the downfall of cities because of this sort of
thing” (3.37). In other respects, however, Cleon for all his crassness is plainly Per-
icles’ heir. “You don’t understand,” he says, “that you hold your empire as a
tyranny and that your subjects are schemers who are governed unwillingly”
(3.37). Compare Pericles in his last speech: “You hold your empire like a tyranny
by now. Taking it is thought to have been criminal; letting it go would be ex-
tremely dangerous” (2.63; Blanco 1998).
Diodotus, who is otherwise unknown, spoke against proceeding with the orig-
inal plan, making a marvelous argument grounded in human psychology. De-
terrence, he contended, was not as effective as commonly believed, because people
who undertake risky ventures do so in the expectation that they will succeed, not
205

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
fail. Furthermore, he argued, there was no merit in killing people even when they
had surrendered, for to do so removed any incentive for surrender in future re-
bellions. He then made a key observation about the dynamics of the empire. “So
far,” he maintained,
the populace in all of the cities is well-inclined toward you. Either they do not
join in rebellion with the oligarchs, or, if they are forced to do so, they quickly
turn against them. Thus, when you go to war you have the populace of the city
you are attacking on your side.
(The Peloponnesian War 3.47; Blanco 1998)
Though some might debate the accuracy of Diodotus’ contention, it certainly
makes us think twice about Thucydides’ claim that the Athenian empire was uni-
versally detested in the subject cities.
Diodotus won the day, and a second boat was sent out to overtake the first.
Envoys from Mytilene provided extra rations for the rowers and promised a large
reward if they arrived in time. As it happened, the rowers on the original boat
had been in no hurry to announce impending doom, and the second boat man-
aged to arrive just as the death sentence was being announced. Instead of putting
all the men to death and enslaving all the women and children, the Athenians ex-
ecuted the ringleaders of the revolt—who apparently amounted to over a thou-
sand men.
The War Continues
The tendency to keep land in the family constricted social mobility in Greece, lim-
iting opportunities for improving one’s lot in life. As Thucydides points out, the
war raging throughout Greece intensified the long-standing tensions between the
aristocrats, who considered a lavish lifestyle to be their birthright, and the ordi-
nary citizens struggling to make a living, for the former could expect help from
Sparta and the latter from Athens. The result was stasis (“civil strife”) more fre-
quent and ferocious than ever before. Thucydides describes the agony that en-
sued when the democratic party in Corcyra gained the upper hand and, as allies
of the demos, the Athenians under their admiral Eurymedon made no move to
curtail the butchery. To avoid death at the hands of the democrats, some oli-
garchic partisans
hanged themselves from trees. Others killed themselves in any way they could.
Eurymedon remained at Corcyra for seven days with his sixty ships, during
which the Corcyraeans ceaselessly slaughtered those among them whom they
thought to be enemies. . . . One saw every imaginable kind of death, and every-
thing that is likely to take place in situations like this did, in fact, take place—and
even more. For example, fathers killed their sons; people were dragged from the
temples and slaughtered in front of them; some were even walled up in the tem-
ple of Dionysus and left to die.
(The Peloponnesian War 3.81; Blanco 1998)
206

The Peloponnesian War
While operating in the west, the Athenians initiated a project which, while it
would not determine the final outcome of the war, nonetheless had dramatic
short-term effects. Held there by bad weather, the Athenian strategos Demos-
thenes (not to be confused with the famous fourth-century orator by the same
name) decided to build a fort at Pylos, the legendary home of Nestor. This
promontory combined with the narrow island of Sphacteria to enclose a body of
water known today as the Bay of Navarino.
Fearing that Sphacteria might fall into Athenian hands, the Spartans recalled
the army that was ravaging Attica and positioned 420 hoplites on the island.
When the Athenians defeated the Spartans in naval combat, effectively maroon-
ing the hoplites on Sphacteria, the Spartan government panicked and sent envoys
to Athens to plead for an armistice. So limited was the number of Spartans that
their government was willing to do anything to get those hoplites back—even
make a peace that took no account of their allies’ interests. On the advice of
Cleon, the Athenians refused, whether out of overconfidence or because they
feared the fallout from a hasty peace that ultimately excluded key players like
Corinth and Thebes.
The Spartans, then, remained on Sphacteria, and when Cleon made disparag-
ing remarks about the failure of Athens’ generals to capture them, he took for his
207
Figure 8.3. The Athenians achieved a great coup in marooning hundreds of Spartan sol-
diers on the island of Sphacteria shown here off the west coast of the Peloponnesus.
LAGOON
NAVARINO
BAY
S P H A C T E
R I A
PY
L
O
S
0
0
1
2 km
.5
1.5 miles
1
I O N I A
N
S E A

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
particular target the respected strategos Nicias. A wealthy and religious man,
Nicias had impressed many Athenians by the vast sums he spent on religious
festivals, and his base of support lay with Athens’ richer and more conservative
voters—the sort of men who despised Cleon. Pointing his finger at Nicias, Thucy-
dides reports, Cleon “said scornfully that if the generals were real men they could
easily set out with an armada and capture the troops on the island. If he were in
command, he continued, that was what he would do” (4.27; Blanco 1998). Nicias
promptly suggested that Cleon himself be given a special commission to go to
Pylos and get hold of the stranded hoplites. Against the expectation of upper-
class Athenians, the inexperienced Cleon worked well with Demosthenes, and to
the astonishment of all Greeks of all social classes, the Spartan soldiers surren-
dered rather than fight to the death. As 128 of the Peloponnesians had been killed
in the fighting, the Athenians now had 292 bargaining chips with which to ne-
gotiate an end to the war. Seeing their position strengthened by the possession of
hostages, the Athenians resolved to keep fighting rather than to make peace. This
was probably a mistake, for any peace that Sparta made in order to regain its men
was likely to alienate its allies and foster the disintegration of the Peloponnesian
League.
The presence of Spartan hostages at Athens put an end to the annual invasions
of Attica, but the war did not end, for in 424 the Spartans discovered what they had
previously lacked, at least since the loss of Archidamus around 427: a charismatic
general. As talented an orator as he was a strategist, Brasidas, by his campaigns up
north in Chalcidice, very nearly won the war for Sparta, just as Demosthenes and
Cleon had nearly won it for Athens at Pylos.
208
Figure 8.4. This bronze shield found in the Athenian agora was inscribed as booty taken
from Pylos.

The Peloponnesian War
Brasidas and Chalcidice (424–422 BC)
Athens’ hold on Chalcidice had always been fragile, and when some Chalcidic
towns requested Spartan aid and were joined in their appeal by Athens’ on-again,
off-again ally Perdiccas of Macedonia, the Spartans promptly dispatched the dy-
namic Brasidas. Once in Chalcidice, Brasidas persuaded the towns of Acanthus,
Stagirus, and Argilus to revolt from Athens. (His eloquence was great, but Thucy-
dides stresses that fear of the Spartan presence was also a factor in these revolts.)
Though Brasidas had accomplished much for Sparta, the greatest prize lay
ahead. Gaining possession of Amphipolis would require a little more effort, but
this cherished Athenian stronghold was Brasidas’ principal target, and in fact he
brought it over to the Spartan side in less than twenty-four hours. Horrified by
this loss, the Athenians banished one of their generals who had been offshore at
Thasos when the catastrophe occurred: the historian Thucydides. The events of
that snowy December night in the north played a large role in determining just
what form Thucydides’ history of the war, already begun earlier, would take. Just
as they cut off the opportunity for hearing speeches delivered in the assembly and
for picking up the latest scuttlebutt in the agora, they also ensured that Thucy-
dides, freed from civic responsibilities and perhaps more trusted by foreigners
now that he was on the outs with the home government, would have more reli-
able non-Athenian sources. Thucydides seems to know a great deal about Brasi-
das’ thinking, for example; perhaps the two men got to know each other.
The following spring (423) the Athenians and the Spartans signed a year’s
armistice, but when the armistice expired in 422, Cleon, now a regularly elected
general, met Brasidas in battle at Amphipolis. Greek generals fought in the front
lines, and in the fighting both Cleon and Brasidas were killed.
The Peace of Nicias and the
Peace of Aristophanes (421 BC)
The door to peace was opened by the deaths of the men Aristophanes called the
pestles who were grinding down the mortar of war. Athens and Sparta had both
had enough. Agriculture in Attica had been horribly disrupted and with it the trade
between city and countryside that was the foundation of polis life, and the Athe-
nians were unsettled by the patent unrest throughout their sphere of influence in
the north. Sparta was nervous about continuing its war with Athens when the
Spartan-Argive truce of thirty years was on the verge of expiring. A number of
Spartan soldiers had died in captivity in Athens, and the Spartans were extremely
eager to recover the survivors. Both sides were disturbed by the degree to which
they had been compelled to hire mercenaries to keep the war going; it seemed like
a bad precedent, and it was also costly. The other key players on the diplomatic
scene, however—Corinth, Megara, and Boeotia—had somewhat less to gain from
peace in general (although they had also experienced devastation during the war),
and nothing to gain from the particular peace on which the Athenians and Spar-
tans agreed. In fact, they refused to sign it. The highly problematic agreement
209

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
known as the Peace of Nicias (named for the principal Athenian negotiator,
Cleon’s old rival) was essentially a victory for Athens.
Countless men and women throughout the Greek world had no doubt longed
increasingly for peace during the ten years of the Archidamian War, but, as is of-
ten the case, we know most about the situation in Athens, from which the bulk
of our written sources originate. Comic dramas, for example, were produced
twice a year in Athens, both times at festivals of the god Dionysus. As at tragic
competitions, several dramatists presented plays, but though we know the names
of other comedians and fragments of their work remain, no whole plays by any
hand other than Aristophanes’ have survived from the fifth century. Obscene and
boisterous, Aristophanes’ plays also manifest a tender love of the countryside, a
nostalgia for a simpler time, and a sober commitment to peace. Though Aristo-
phanes’ comic genius was unique, his values must have been congenial to the
community; the decision whether to grant a chorus for training lay with the city
magistrates, and of course prizes were awarded by citizen judges.
In 421, with an end to the war in sight, Aristophanes wrote his Peace; by the
time it was presented, the treaty was close to becoming a reality. Here, parody-
ing a lost play by Euripides, Aristophanes shows his protagonist Trygaeus riding
on a huge dung beetle to the house of Zeus (accomplished on stage by a crane)
to inquire why Zeus is destroying Greece by war. There he learns from Hermes
that the gods have been alienated by the two sides’ childish squabbling. The au-
dience cannot have been entirely comfortable with Hermes’ evenhanded allot-
ment of blame. The gods, he says,
were frequently for peace.
But you guys wanted war. Laconians,
when once they got a little piece of luck,
would say, “By God, those Atticans will pay!”
Or if it seemed that luck was on your side,
and then the Spartans came about a peace,
at once you’d cry: “We’re being taken in!
Athena! Zeus! we can’t agree to this!
If we hang on to Pylos, they’ll come back. . . .”
(Peace 211–219)
He then explains that War has imprisoned Peace in a cave and, having obtained
a huge mortar in which to grind down all the Greek cities, has sent his slave Tu-
mult in search of pestles. Tumult, however, has learned that Athens and Sparta
have recently lost their pestles—Cleon and Brasidas. Perhaps, then, there is some
hope of setting Peace free.
Trygaeus finally persuades Hermes to help him organize the rescue of Peace.
This is no mean task, since it is difficult to get all the Greeks to pull together on
the necessary ropes even with divine assistance, but in time their efforts are suc-
cessful. The blessings Peace will bring are celebrated in terms that reflect the con-
cerns of the Athenian farmers in the audience:
210

The Peloponnesian War
Trygaeus: Fellow farmers! Stop and listen! Can you hear these
wondrous words?
No more spears, men, no more javelins, no more fight-
ing with our swords!
We’ve got peace with all its gifts now, we can trade in
all that arming
For a happy, happy song as we march home to do
some farming.
Chorus:
What a day, not just for farmers but for anyone worthwhile:
What a yearned-for, hoped-for vision! See how joyously
I smile
As I think about how soon I’ll see the vines upon my land;
And the fig-trees that I planted as a youth with my
own hand!
(Peace 551–558)
The terms of the real-life peace were to be observed for fifty years. Athens was
to keep the empire with which it had entered the war; the treaty contained the
expression “the Athenians and their allies.” Sparta was to return Amphipolis,
while Athens would abandon Pylos and the island of Cythera and release all pris-
oners of war. Though at tremendous cost in money and human lives, the Athenian
war goal had been met: The Spartans had failed to destroy the empire. Without even
trying, the Athenians had done much to weaken the Peloponnesian League. Af-
ter a grueling war of ten years Sparta had suffered loss of life and loss of prestige.
Now she was about to lose her allies as well, and disaffection among them placed
the new peace in serious jeopardy.
Angry that no substantial damage had been done to the Athenian empire and
that two cities on the west coast, Sollium and Anactorium, remained in Athenian
hands, Corinth refused to sign the peace. Megara would not sign an agreement
that allowed the Athenians to retain its port Nisaea—as the Spartans should have
foreseen. The Boeotians, furious at the order to relinquish the border fortress of
Panactum to the Athenians, not only declined to sign the treaty but demolished
Panactum sooner than give it back. The Amphipolitans refused to return to the
Athenian empire and even began revering Brasidas rather than the Athenian
Hagnon as their founder; in retaliation, the Athenians held on to Pylos. The
chance for a productive alliance between the two most powerful states in Greece
was lost, and Thucydides viewed the Peace of Nicias as a false peace, a troubled
interlude before the resumption of hostilities.
BETWEEN PEACE AND WAR
Events were to prove that the thousands who had died in the Archidamian War
had given their lives for nothing. Though the Athenians and Spartans who desired
211

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
peace wanted it very badly indeed, they had to contend with formidable counter-
vailing forces.
As a rule, it is dangerous to accord too large a role to high-profile individuals
in shaping the course of history. At times, however, a particular person does
seem to bear an extraordinary share of the responsibility for the way things turn
out. Such was the case with the flashy Athenian aristocrat Alcibiades. Strategos
for the first time in 420, Alcibiades had little prospect of making a name for him-
self in a tranquil world. His future glory was contingent on the disintegration of
the fragile peace. To Alcibiades, even more than to the average Greek aristocrat,
a life without glory was barely worth the name.
Alcibiades, Renegade Aristocrat
Alcibiades had been three when his father died, and he was raised in the home of
his relative Pericles. Handsome, witty, athletic, charming, and sensuous, he was ea-
gerly courted by lovers of both sexes. His rakish personality and flamboyant
lifestyle were conducive to anecdote, and Plutarch tells several stories illustrat-
ing the opposition between the civic-mindedness of Pericles and the irresponsi-
bility of his irreverent ward. One day, it seems, when Alcibiades had grown up
and wished to speak to Pericles, he “went to his house, but was told Pericles
could not receive him, as he was considering how to present his accounts to the
people. ‘Would it not be better,’ asked Alcibiades as he came away, ‘if he con-
sidered how to avoid presenting accounts to the people at all?’” (Plut. Alcibiades
7; Scott-Kilvert 1960).
Alcibiades never did like rules. His passions included his teacher Socrates, the
breeding and racing of horses, and indeed competition in all its forms, on and off
the track. His wealthy family had connections abroad, and despite his relation-
ship to Pericles, his grandfather had been the Spartan proxenos at Athens—the
man charged with representing Spartan interests in his home state. To the fam-
ily connections that were his by birth, he added a marriage connection; his wife
Hipparete belonged to one of the most wealthy and prominent families in Athens.
At first it appeared that Alcibiades’ interest in reactivating the war would
come to nothing. Although Elis and Mantinea joined the alliance Athens had
formed with Argos, Sparta managed to defeat the new grouping in battle, scor-
ing a decisive victory in Mantinea in 418 BC, and also succeeded in mending
fences with its disaffected allies Boeotia and Corinth, thus in effect restoring the
Peloponnesian League. Meanwhile tensions ran high among the various would-
be leaders in Athens. An ostracism might have decided the rivalry of Alcibiades
and Nicias, the hawk and the dove, but the two men seem to have panicked and
mobilized their supporters to turn on a third man, Hyperbolus, instead.
The fact that ostracism was in reality something of an honor is underlined by
Plutarch’s claim that it was Hyperbolus’ unworthiness that sparked this decision;
a contemporary comic poet apparently quipped, “The man, indeed, deserved the
fate, but not the fate the man.” At this distance, it is impossible to determine
whether the Athenians’ distress at the outcome of the ostracism resulted from
Hyperbolus’ political insignificance or his social origins; those who had been
212

The Peloponnesian War
ostracized earlier in the century came from aristocratic families. In any event, the
Athenians now abandoned ostracism and turned to a different strategy for en-
suring democratic control on government, making use of the graphe¯ paranomo¯n
(“indictment for illegal proposals”) to punish politicians who brought forward
proposals in conflict with existing laws. Like ostracism, however, this procedure
was often used politically—a development that is not surprising, since, without
a written constitution or bill of rights, only a highly subjective judgment could
determine what new laws were and were not in harmony with the old.
The Destruction of Melos (416 BC)
The years that followed were marked by conflict in Athens and chaos in the Pelo-
ponnesus. A disturbing Athenian naval expedition stands out from these troubled
years, memorialized in some of the most frequently read pages in Thucydides. In
416, probably at the instigation of Alcibiades, the Athenians dispatched ships to
the little island of Melos, which was allied with neither Athens nor Sparta, and
ordered it to join the Delian League. Hope of Spartan assistance moved the
Melians to turn Athens down. Spartan aid did not materialize, and as punish-
ment for their recalcitrance, the Athenians decided to kill all the Melian men and
sell all the women and children into slavery—all of them. The ambivalence that
had led them to limit their punishment of the Mytilenaeans to “ringleaders” in
427 was now a thing of the past. The episode plainly made a deep impression on
Thucydides, who chose to include in his history a chilling rendition of the con-
versation between the Melians and the Athenians—the only sustained dialogue
in his work. Melos was a tiny island in a remote locale. How did Thucydides
know what was said there in such detail? He didn’t. The set piece known as the
“Melian Dialogue” shows us Thucydides experimenting with an art form closer
to drama than to history.
Thucydides was not the only Athenian alive at the time who used his verbal
talents to showcase the horrors of war and to explore its corrosive effect on
morality. The following spring (415 BC) Euripides confronted the Athenians with
his anguished Trojan Women. No one could seriously doubt that this exquisitely
painful drama, ostensibly set in Troy in the aftermath of the city’s fall, was de-
signed to illustrate the dreadfulness of war in general and the current war in par-
ticular. The specter of the enslavement of the wives and sisters and daughters of
the Trojan heroes and the execution of the young Astyanax, Hector’s son, thrown
to his death from the city walls, was all too evocative of recent developments:
Many of those sitting in the audience had themselves done the killing at Melos.
It also proved prophetic of events yet to come.
THE INVASION OF SICILY (415–413 BC)
While a small number of men met daily to practice singing the unsettling choruses
in Euripides’ sobering drama, many more busied themselves preparing for the
largest military expedition in Athens’ history. Pericles had warned the Athenians
213

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
that attempts to expand their empire would undermine their chances of winning
the war, but Pericles was long dead and his strategy had died with him. In the
winter of 416–415 temptation had appeared to the Athenian assembly in the form
of ambassadors from the Sicilian city of Egesta, an old ally. Their request for as-
sistance against their neighbor Selinus provided a springboard for warmongers
like Alcibiades. In a war with Egesta, Selinus could count on the backing of Syra-
cuse, the most powerful city in Sicily—and a Corinthian colony. When Alcibiades
advocated full support for Egesta and Nicias argued with equal passion against
involvement in Sicily, the Athenians resolved on a peculiar compromise. Alcibi-
ades would indeed be sent west with a large force, but he would be accompanied
by two other strategoi—Lamachus, an experienced general, and Nicias himself,
whose presence they hoped would serve as a check on Alcibiades’ rashness.
The idea that Nicias’ prudence would counter Alcibiades’ impulsive nature
was singularly wrongheaded. Shortly before the expedition was to sail, more-
over, a bizarre nocturnal escapade in Athens sparked a scandal of extraordinary
proportions that spilled over from religion to politics. Outside Athenian homes
and temples stood religious images known as herms—stone pillars bearing im-
ages of the face and erect phallus of the god Hermes. They were meant to bring
good luck and protection from danger. One morning not long before the expedi-
tion was to set sail, the Athenians awoke to find that nearly all these herms had
been defaced—or rather dephallused.
Cultural differences make it hard for us fully to understand why Athenians re-
acted to this sacrilegious prank with utter terror and became convinced that a
plot was afoot to overthrow the government, but this is exactly what happened.
Though many were punished, responsibility for the project has never been de-
termined. It may have been the work of one or more of the organizations known
as hetaireiai. Drinking clubs composed of upper-class young men, often with oli-
garchic leanings, hetaireiai involved themselves in a variety of social and politi-
cal activities. To democrats, they seemed sinister and potentially treasonous.
Not surprisingly, fingers were pointed at Alcibiades, precisely the sort of ir-
reverent individual who would set his drinking companions on such an enter-
prise whether they belonged to a hetaireia, or not. Fuel was added to the flames
by accusations that Alcibiades had staged a burlesque mocking the mystery rites
celebrated at Eleusis, violating their secrecy by parodying them in front of the
uninitiated. Since he had solid support among the adventurous sailors bound for
Sicily, Alcibiades wisely demanded that he be tried at once, before the fleet left.
Instead, his opponents waited to bring charges until the expedition had sailed.
The fleet the Athenians dispatched for Sicily was entirely out of proportion to
the size or importance of its intended objective. It consisted of 134 triremes with
130 supply boats, a total of over 25,000 men. Dozens of merchant vessels decided
to accompany the navy, hoping for profits. Both citizens and foreigners crowded
the shore gazing with astonishment at the armada, which Thucydides says was
the most expensive any Greek city had launched until that day. Of the many who
sailed for Sicily, however, few returned. The Athenians received less support
from the cities of Sicily and southern Italy than they had expected, and even the
214

The Peloponnesian War
eager Egestans turned out not to have the resources they had claimed. Envoys
dispatched to Egesta, it proved, had been duped into believing the city was rich
when in fact it was poor. Thucydides tells how the various Egestans received the
crews of the Athenian ships in their homes, rounding up as many gold and sil-
ver cups as they could find in town and in the neighboring cities and presenting
them at parties as if they belonged to the host:
They all used the same goblets, for the most part, and they showed so much of
it everywhere that it absolutely awed the Athenian crewmen, who, when they re-
turned to Athens, spread the news about the great wealth they had seen. Those
who had been deceived in turn misled others, and they were all held responsible
by the troops when word got out that Egesta did not have any money.
(The Peloponnesian War 6.46; Blanco 1998)
Just about everything that could have gone wrong with the Sicilian enterprise
did. Lamachus died fighting. Alcibiades was recalled to stand trial, and on the jour-
ney managed to jump ship and defect to Sparta. When in the winter of 415–414
envoys from Syracuse and Corinth came to seek Spartan aid for the Sicilian cam-
paign, Alcibiades warned the Spartans that the Athenians were planning to con-
quer Sicily and Italy, attack Carthage, and then go after the Peloponnesus. The
dispatch of a Spartan general to Sicily, he suggested, might be necessary if the
Spartans wanted to prevent an Athenian takeover of the entire Greek world.
Nicias and Lamachus had occupied the plateau known as Epipolae west of Syra-
cuse and had begun building a north-south wall with the idea in mind of blockad-
ing the city. Now in sole command, Nicias successfully moved the Athenian fleet
into Syracuse’s harbor, creating a real possibility of blockading the city, but the
Spartans were determined to prevent the Athenians from conquering Sicily and
had sent a talented commander, Gylippus, to see what he could do. The arrival of
Gylippus with reinforcements changed the situation dramatically. Gylippus scaled
the Epipolae heights via a pass that the Athenians had carelessly left unguarded—
the same pass they themselves had used a few months before. The Syracusans,
moreover, built a counter-wall that destroyed Athenian chances for a blockade.
Nicias was now suffering acutely from kidney disease and asked the Atheni-
ans to recall him. They refused. Convinced the situation was hopeless, he tried to
dissuade them from continuing their efforts in Sicily by a long letter to the as-
sembly maintaining that only a force as large as the original expedition could
have any chance of success. To his horror, the Athenians sent Demosthenes out
at the head of the proposed reinforcements. When he arrived with the second
fleet and promptly suffered a serious reverse on the Epipolae heights, Demos-
thenes advocated withdrawal. Once more, however, religious anxiety intruded
into the secular sphere. When everything was ready for the Athenians’ departure,
Thucydides related,
and just as they were about to sail, there was an eclipse of the moon, which hap-
pened to be full. The event made most of the Athenians feel uneasy, and they
urged their generals to stay; and Nicias, who was too inclined to believe in the
215

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
interpretation of omens and that sort of thing, refused even to discuss a move un-
til after they had stayed for “three times nine days,” as their seers decreed. This
was the reason the Athenians stayed on after all their delays!
(The Peloponnesian War 7.50; Blanco 1998)
On learning that the Athenians had been planning to leave, the Syracusans at-
tacked the Athenian fleet and blocked the exit from the harbor. A fierce battle en-
sued, with some two hundred ships rammed together in a tight space. The din
made it impossible to hear the calls of the coxswains.
Unable to make their escape by sea, the Athenians resolved to depart over
land, abandoning their sick and wounded. About 40,000 men set out on the dis-
mal trek, the Syracusans hot on their heels. Nicias and Demosthenes became sep-
arated; the Syracusans caught up first with Demosthenes, who surrendered in the
hope of saving his soldiers’ lives. The Syracusans then overtook Nicias’ army.
Document 8.1. Thucydides is at his narrative best in portraying the final
collapse of the Athenian effort in Sicily.
The Athenians pushed on to the Assinarus River, all the while being devas-
tated by the spears, arrows and stones coming from everywhere and by the
hordes of cavalry and other troops. They thought that if they could just get
across the river, things would be a little easier for them. They were desper-
ate to stop the pain, to drink some water. When they got to the river, they
broke ranks and ran into it, every man struggling to make the brutal cross-
ing first as the enemy bore down. Driven to cross all together, they fell onto
one another and trampled each other down. Some were killed immediately
by their own spears; others got tangled up in their equipment and with each
other and sank into the river. Syracusans positioned on the other bank,
which was steep, hurled down spears at the Athenians, most of whom were
jumbled together ravenously drinking from the nearly dry riverbed. The
Peloponnesians went down into the river after them and did most of the
killing there; and though it quickly became fouled, the Athenians nonethe-
less fought among themselves to gulp the muddy water clotted with blood.
Finally, with dead bodies heaped atop each other in the riverbed, and
the army decimated, some in the river and others—such as got across—by the
cavalry, Nicias surrendered himself to Gylippus, trusting him more than
the Syracusans. He told Gylippus and the Spartans to do with him what
they wanted, but to stop slaughtering his men. After this, Gylippus ordered
his troops to take prisoners, whereupon the surviving men were brought in
alive, except for the large number who had been hidden by individual Syra-
cusan soldiers. They also sent a search party out after the three hundred
who had broken through the sentries by night and captured them. . . . A
large number, of course, were killed, for there was a great slaughter at the
river, greater than any which occurred in the whole war.
216

The Peloponnesian War
The Peloponnesian War 7.84–85; translated by Walter Blanco, in Walter
Blanco and Jennifer Roberts, eds., Thucydides: The Peloponnesian War. New
York: W.W. Norton, 1998.
The Athenians had lost tens of thousands of men and accomplished nothing.
For them, the outcome of the campaign was so horrific that they at first refused
to believe the appalling news. Plutarch claims that word of the disaster first
reached Athens by way of a hapless man who had reported it matter of factly to
a barber in Piraeus as if it were common knowledge: The agitated barber promptly
ran the 5 miles to Athens, where he repeated the tale. He was in the very process
of being tortured as a troublemaker when messengers arrived to confirm the as-
tonishing story. As Thucydides was later to write, “All was lost. Ships. Men.
Everything” (7.87).
THE WAR IN THE AEGEAN AND THE OLIGARCHIC
COUP AT ATHENS (413–411 BC)
The Greek world was as stunned by the Athenians’ defeat at Syracuse as it had
been by their victory at Marathon. The myth of naval superiority that had held
the Delian League together was shattered. Athens’ fighting force was vastly
smaller than it had been in 431. Money was in short supply; previously one tri-
erarch had been appointed for each ship, but soon after the disaster in Sicily the
Athenians introduced the syntrierarchy, allowing two men to share the expense.
For Athenian subjects, suddenly revolt became not merely an option but a power-
ful temptation. Alcibiades cruised the seas on Sparta’s behalf, fomenting rebellion
wherever he could. Meanwhile in Attica some twenty thousand slaves deserted to
the Spartan king Agis, who at Alcibiades’ instigation had established himself in
a fort at Decelea in northeast Attica. The disappearance of the slaves from the mines
prevented the continued tapping of the silver veins, and the strength of the en-
campment at Decelea interfered gravely with Athenian agriculture. Now the
Spartans could ravage Attica all year, killing farm animals as they went and keep-
ing Athens in a perpetual state of siege. Seeing success well within their grasp,
the invigorated Spartans set about building a new naval force of a hundred
triremes and began negotiating for Persian support.
Incredibly, it took Sparta eight years to bring Athens to its knees—eight years dur-
ing which the Athenians, crippled by devastating losses in Sicily, survived the loss
of the huge island of Euboea off the Attic coast and an oligarchic coup in the city.
The history of these eight years is crowded with shifting alliances, plots and coun-
terplots, murders and lies. Within Athens, lines between democrats and oligarchs ap-
pear blurred as key players in the political arena move back and forth between
the parties, and a new creature appears, the “moderate”—a politician whose mo-
tives for keeping one foot in each camp are often impossible to determine: Sincere
217

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
patriotism becomes increasingly difficult to distinguish from unprincipled time-
serving. Spartans are divided as to how seemly it might be to barter the Ionians’
freedom in exchange for Persian gold. Persians cannot decide which side, if any,
to support. Alcibiades remains a wild card, cagily shifting position to suit the
rapidly altering international situation—and to keep himself safe from the wrath
of Agis, whose wife he appears to have seduced. The fortunes of battle swing
wildly back and forth. In 413 Athens seemed to be finished; by 410 the Spartans
sue for peace. Athens wins a stunning victory in 406 only to lose the war by 404.
Civil Strife in Athens
The burst of Peloponnesian energy that erupted in the wake of Athens’ defeat in
Sicily was short-lived. The Spartans soon reverted to their natural sluggishness.
Their lukewarm efforts would have come to little had it not been for the dynamic
energy of Alcibiades and for the tensions that erupted in Athens, setting the
hoplites and the aristocratic elite against the thetes who manned the fleet.
For nearly a century after the clash between Cleisthenes and Isagoras, Athens
had been free from the danger of civil war. Unrest erupted, however, when men
of oligarchic inclinations played on the Athenians’ anxieties about the failure of
their democratic leaders to prosecute the war more successfully, particularly in
Sicily. The machinations of Alcibiades provided a catalyst for a more substantial
change in the government. Having worn out his welcome in Sparta—whether be-
cause of his alleged affair with the wife of King Agis or for some other reason—
he had begun to plot a return to Athens. The entry of Persia into the equation
provided the springboard he needed. In the years that followed the Athenian de-
feat in Sicily, Persian policy toward Greece was determined not primarily by the
king, Darius II, but by the coastal satraps—Pharnabazus (the satrap of Das-
cylium) in the north, and Tissaphernes (the satrap of Sardis) in the south.
Tissaphernes in particular had a lively interest in Greek affairs, and indeed in
Greek culture as a whole. At first he leaned toward Sparta, and in fact negotiated
a series of treaties with Sparta in which the Spartans, uncomfortably but unmis-
takably, agreed to sell out the freedom of the Greek cities of Ionia in exchange for
Persian gold. (Thus died the Spartans’ claim to be the liberators of Greece.) Not
long afterward, however, Alcibiades persuaded Tissaphernes that it might be bet-
ter for Persia to let Athens and Sparta wear each other down. When Tissaphernes’
support for the Spartan cause began to waver, Alcibiades sent word to Athens
that he had it in his power to bring the Persians into the war on the Athenian
side—but that their support would be contingent on replacing the democracy
with an oligarchy. His support, of course, would be contingent on his recall.
That Alcibiades really believed he could persuade Tissaphernes to pour money
into the Athenian treasury is unlikely, though not impossible. In the event, he
couldn’t, but by the time it became clear that the Persian support he had promised
was illusory, the wheels had been set in motion for a change in government and
Alcibiades’ return. It is an index of how deeply the long war had shaken the
Athenians that in 411 the assembly, some members intimidated and others just
218

The Peloponnesian War
demoralized, voted itself out of existence and placed the safety of the state in the
hands of a new, provisional Council of four hundred, which, it was understood,
would soon give way to a larger body of five thousand. Despite the way the war
had undermined confidence in the democratic government, this vote was made
possible only by the absence of the fleet, based now at Samos, for sailors, who
were generally poor men, could be counted on to oppose any reforms that had
the effect of limiting the franchise to property owners.
Experiments in Oligarchy
Neither of the reformers’ notions was entirely new. Solon was believed by many
people to have created a Council of four hundred—certainly such a body dated
from approximately his time—and the five thousand were thought to correspond
to the hoplite class. Sailors were right to be alarmed by such projects. What was
really at issue here was the disenfranchisement of the lowest class in the Solonic
census, the thetes. The notion of “hoplite democracy” had been Cimon’s ideal,
and he was not alone. From this moment many Athenians of antidemocratic ten-
dencies began to make use of a new watchword, “the ancestral constitution,” that
is, a democracy limited to landowners, which they insisted was more tradition-
ally Athenian than the upstart democracy that included the poor men who served
as rowers in the fleet. This issue, which had seemed to be settled in 508 with
Cleisthenes’ victory over Isagoras, was now once again on the floor.
Carrying arms and flanked by an additional 120 men, the Four Hundred also
entered the Bouleuterion where the council met, paid the councilors the balance
of what was owing to them, and dismissed them. Their own despotic rule was
also made easier by the ominous suspension of the graphe¯ paranomon, the indict-
ment for illegal proposals. There were now two Athenian governments—the oli-
garchy of the Four Hundred in the city and the democratic fleet stationed at
Samos, which functioned as the assembly.
The belief that Athens’ foreign affairs would do better under oligarchic guidance
suffered serious setbacks when the peace with Sparta failed to materialize—and
219
Figure 8.5. This Greek-style coin struck by the Per-
sian Tissaphernes reveals his desire to be identified
with Greek culture.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Euboea successfully revolted from the Athenian empire. The hoplites whom the
Four Hundred had set to fortifying the promontory of Eetionia at Piraeus mu-
tinied, and the Five Thousand were promptly installed. They then recalled Athens’
exiles, including Alcibiades, and governed Athens for eight months, from Sep-
tember 411 to June 410. Not a great deal is known about their government, though
they seem to have limited the franchise to the hoplite class (cutting out the thetes
who manned the triremes). Thucydides, who was frequently impatient with
democracy, praised the government of the Five Thousand as a laudable blending
of democratic and oligarchic elements.
The vigor the Athenians showed in rebuilding their fleet and carrying on the
war despite acute domestic conflict was remarkable. After a victory at Cynossema,
the Athenians, led by Alcibiades, scored a still more striking one at Cyzicus,
where the Spartans lost their admiral-in-chief, Mindarus. The battle is memorable
for the “laconic” dispatch the Athenians intercepted on its way to Sparta after-
ward: “Ships lost; Mindarus dead; men starving; can’t figure out what to do.” (It
is also memorable as the first major encounter of the war not described by Thucy-
dides: Thucydides’ account breaks off shortly after Cynossema. From this point
on the principal sources are Xenophon and Diodorus.) The victories in the east
had been won by the cooperation of the Five Thousand in Athens and the fleet at
Samos, and in June the democracy was formally restored at Athens. A number of
the leaders of the Five Thousand remained powerful under the democracy. Among
these was Hagnon’s son Theramenes, who seemed to find a place for himself in
any group. Animosity and suspicion were not entirely gone, however, and as one
of its first official acts the restored democracy administered a loyalty oath, requir-
ing each citizen to swear: “I will do my best to kill by word and by deed, by my
vote and by my hand, anyone who overthrows the Athenian democracy, holds of-
fice under an undemocratic regime, or seeks to establish a tyranny either for him-
self or for someone else. If anyone else kills such a person, I will consider him clean
in the eyes of gods and spirits” (Andocides, On the Mysteries, 97). The Spartans
sought peace from the restored democracy, but only on the basis of the status quo.
That the Athenians had regained their confidence is indexed by their refusal.
THE LAST YEARS OF WAR (407–404 BC)
In 407, however, the union of two powerful men dramatically altered the situa-
tion in the Aegean. Alcibiades was not the only Greek with charm. An enthusi-
astic friendship sprang up between Cyrus, son of the Persian king, and Lysander,
the ambitious chief admiral of the Spartan navy. Ultimately, their alliance spelled
doom for Athens.
That same year, Alcibiades, having raised a hundred talents for Athens by
looting the coast of Caria, decided it might finally be safe to return home. It was
an extraordinary circumstance—a man with so many friends that he was repeat-
edly elected to the board of generals but with so many enemies that he feared to
set foot on Attic soil. Once more, however, his ascendancy in his native polis was
220

The Peloponnesian War
remarkably brief. Within a matter of months, the Athenians lost twenty-two ships
to Lysander at a naval engagement off Notium, where Alcibiades had left his per-
sonal pilot Antiochus in charge with orders under no circumstances to engage the
Spartans. Antiochus, a friend of Alcibiades, probably had no business in a posi-
tion of such authority, since he was not a trierarch, and Alcibiades had acted un-
wisely in putting him there; but the strength of the Athenian reaction attests to
the continuing agitation of his enemies. Alcibiades’ career at Athens was finished.
It is certain that he was not reelected to the strategia, and it is likely that he was
actually deposed before his term was out. Rumors circulated that he had fortified
a castle in the Gallipoli peninsula as a refuge in case of emergency. Now that the
emergency had materialized, he promptly withdrew to this very fortress. He
never saw Athens again.
That spring the Athenians offered freedom to slaves who would join the navy
that was about to set out for the area of Lesbos. There they scored an impressive
victory in a huge naval battle off the Arginusae islands, sinking fully seventy-five
Peloponnesian ships. Some twenty thousand Greeks lost their lives. The after-
math of the battle witnessed a bizarre frenzy of self-destruction. Though the
Athenian navy was heartened by the victory at Arginusae, they knew that their ad-
miral Conon and his fleet were blockaded at Mytilene. While the Athenian strat-
egoi were debating whether to set about retrieving the sailors in the water or sail
to Mytilene to rescue Conon’s force, a sudden storm came up that made rescue
impossible. When news of the casualties reached Athens, people began anxiously
to cast blame on one another. The generals blamed the trierarchs Theramenes and
Thrasybulus, and the trierarchs blamed the generals. Whether the men in the wa-
ter were dead or alive is uncertain, but for Greeks the recovery even of bodies
was important, since the souls of those left unburied would wander eternally in
Hades, unable to find a resting place. The eight generals in command were sum-
moned home for trial, and six chose to return. In violation of customary proce-
dure—and over the protests of the philosopher Socrates, whose turn it happened
to be to chair the assembly meeting that day—the generals were tried on a single
slate, condemned, and executed. Ironically, after the death of his legitimate sons,
Pericles had implored the Athenians to confer citizenship on his sons by Aspa-
sia, and Pericles the Younger was among the generals put to death.
The Final Battle
Again, the Spartans offered peace on the basis of the status quo (though they
were willing to evacuate Decelea); again the Athenians declined. Time, however,
was running out, as was the pool of talented commanders—and of money. The
next major battle would be Athens’ last stand. Late in the summer of 405 BC
Lysander, making good use of the subsidies he had obtained from his friend
Cyrus, established a base in the city of Lampsacus in the Hellespont. In August
the Athenian generals Conon and Philocles stationed their fleet 2 miles across the
channel at Aegospotami. Alcibiades, seeing that the Athenians’ position was
highly vulnerable, descended from his fortress and advised them to move, but
221

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
they disregarded his cautions. Attacking one morning when the Athenians had
gone ashore for provisions, the Spartans captured 171 ships, and their infantry
overwhelmed the Athenian camp. Understandably, the Athenians’ carelessness
gave rise to rumors of treachery. Only a handful of Athenian vessels escaped, one
of them the official state trireme the Paralus, another commanded by Conon. Re-
membering the fate of the victors of Arginusae, Conon took refuge in Cyprus and
did not return to Athens until he had engineered a victory over the Spartans at
Cnidus in 394, ten years after the end of the war.
Lysander then called a meeting of the allies to solicit their thoughts about the
proper treatment of the prisoners. The speeches made about the Athenians,
Xenophon reports, were many and bitter,
both with regard to all the crimes they had committed in the past and about the
decree which they had passed to the effect that, if they won the naval action, they
could cut off the right hand of every man taken alive; there was also the fact that,
after capturing two triremes, one from Corinth and one from Andros, they had
thrown every man in the crews overboard. It was Philocles, the Athenian general,
who had all these men killed. Many other such stories were told, and in the end
it was decided that all the prisoners who were Athenian should be put to death
with the one exception of Adimantus. He had been the only man in the Assem-
bly who opposed the decree for cutting off the hands of prisoners. He was also,
it should be said, accused by some people of having betrayed the fleet. As for
Philocles, who had thrown the Andrians and Corinthians overboard, Lysander
first asked him this question: “What do you deserve for having been the first to
act like a criminal toward your fellow-Greeks?” He then had his throat cut.
(Hellenica 2.1.31–32; Warner 1979)
The Spartan victory at Aegospotami had cut off Athens from its principal
source of grain; to make sure there would be no slip-ups, Lysander also decreed
death as the penalty for anyone caught bringing grain to Athens. Lysander knew
that the war was now over, and the Athenians would know it soon enough, for
the Paralus was en route to Piraeus with the dismal tidings. The ship arrived at
night, and as the news was reported, Xenophon relates, “one man passed it on to
another, and a sound of wailing arose and extended first from Piraeus, then along
the Long Walls until it reached the city. That night no one slept. They mourned
for the lost, but more still for their own fate” (2.2.1; Warner). Late in the fall
Lysander sailed victorious for Piraeus. Along the way he accepted the surrender
of Athens’ former allies and replaced their democracies with oligarchic govern-
ments beholden to Sparta. He also ensured still further stress on the Athenians’
dwindling food supply by encouraging Athenian garrisons to return home. Samos
persisted in its loyalty to Athens, in recognition of which the Athenians unchar-
acteristically granted the Samians citizenship. Agis, whose occupation of Decelea
had played its desired part in the starvation of the city, moved down to the walls
of Athens, where he was joined by Pausanias, his co-king. Miserable and terri-
fied, the Athenians were at a loss for what to do. “They could see no future for
222

The Peloponnesian War
themselves,” Xenophon wrote, “except to suffer what they had made others suf-
fer, people of small states whom they had injured not in retaliation for anything
they had done but out of the arrogance of power and for no reason except that
they were in the Spartan alliance” (2.2.10).
The mutability of fortune had been a commonplace in Greek literature, and the
Athenians gathered in the theater in 415 had been given the opportunity to con-
template the cruelty of war’s chances in Euripides’ Trojan Women. Of those who
prosper, the Trojan queen Hecuba had suggested, “consider no-one blest until
he’s dead” (509–510). This notion so reminiscent of Solon’s warning to Croesus
in Herodotus’ cautionary tale was developed later in the play, as Hecuba under-
lines the foolishness of those who believe prosperity is secure:
like someone who’s gone mad, in changing moods
fortune leaps wildly, now this way, now that:
nobody ever prospers all the time.
(Trojan Women 1204–1206)
In the end, Athens was spared. The Thebans, Corinthians, and other Spartan al-
lies advocated doing to Athens precisely what had been done to Melos—killing
all the adult men and selling all the women and children into slavery. The Spar-
tans declined, pleading Athens’ noble service to Greece during the Persian wars.
The brutality of Lysander’s temperament makes it more likely that the real mo-
tive was fear of the power vacuum into which Corinth or—more likely—Thebes
could be counted on to rush.
Early in the spring the Athenians agreed to a treaty negotiated by Theramenes
on the Spartans’ terms: Athens would not only become Sparta’s ally but would
agree to the destruction of the Long Walls and the fortifications of Piraeus and
would surrender all but a dozen ships. Exiles would also be recalled; these were
largely men of oligarchic sympathies. The walls were pulled down, Xenophon
says, to the merry accompaniment of flutes, for “it was thought that this day was
the beginning of freedom for Greece” (2.2.23; Warner). The Spartans’ actions,
however, presaged ill for freedom. The willingness to sell out the Ionians to Per-
sia and the establishment of pro-Spartan oligarchies in cities formerly in the
Athenian empire were bad signs, and worse was to come.
TRANSLATIONS
Blanco, Walter. 1998. The Peloponnesian War, from Thucydides: The Peloponnesian
War, Walter Blanco and Jennifer Roberts, eds. New York: W.W. Norton.
Scott-Kilvert, Ian. 1960. The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch.
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Warner, Rex. 1979. Xenophon: A History of My Times [The Hellenica]. Har-
mondsworth, UK: Penguin.
223

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
SUGGESTED READINGS
Connor, W. Robert. 1992. The New Politicians of Fifth Century Athens. Indianapolis:
Hackett. A nuanced but highly readable examination of the changing dy-
namics of Athenian political life in the fifth century.
De Romilly, Jacqueline. 1988. Thucydides and Athenian Imperialism. Trans. P. Thody.
Reprinted Salem, NH: Ayer Co. Publishers. A classic study of Thucydides
and the empire.
Ehrenberg, Victor. 1974. The People of Aristophanes. Reprinted New York: Barnes
& Noble. A study of the sociology and economics of the Athenian state
based on a close examination of data in Aristophanes’ comedies.
Green, Peter. 1970. Armada from Athens. London: Hodder and Stoughton. A spir-
ited account of the Athenian invasion of Sicily by a distinguished ancient
historian.
Hornblower, Simon. 1986. Thucydides. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
A penetrating study of the “historian’s historian.”
Kagan, Donald. 2003. The Peloponnesian War. New York: Viking Press. A detailed
but highly readable analysis of the war’s military and diplomatic history.
Loraux, Nicole. 1986. The Invention of Athens: The Funeral Oration in the Classical
City. Trans. Alan Sheridan. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard Univer-
sity Press. An examination of the key role of the Athenian funeral oration
in shaping ideals of civic life and defining what Athens was all about.
Meiggs, Russell. 1972. The Athenian Empire. Oxford: Oxford University Press. A
history of Athens’ relationship with its allies from the inception of the
Delian League to the end of the Peloponnesian War, with chapters on the
judgments made on the empire in both the fifth and fourth centuries and a
chart recording tribute payments for the years 453 to 420.
Strauss, Barry. 1993. Fathers and Sons in Athens: Ideology and Society in the Era of the
Peloponnesian War. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. A sensitive
analysis of Athenian society during the last decades of the fifth century that
grounds conflict in intergenerational tension.
224

225
9
THE CRISIS OF THE
POLIS AND THE AGE OF
SHIFTING HEGEMONIES
There was nothing inevitable about the Spartans’ ultimate victory in the war.
Darius died in 404. Had the Athenians not been so careless at Aegospotami—or
had they not been betrayed—the withdrawal of Persian support that would
probably have attended on the king’s death would gravely have compromised
the Spartans’ chances of winning the war. On the other hand, the long war
taught Sparta a vital lesson about the centrality of naval power. When Sparta be-
came a naval power, the Athenians lost an important advantage, lost the war,
and lost their empire.
The economic consequences of the war were grave. Commerce by land and
sea was disrupted; cities like Corinth suffered immensely. Agriculture suffered
in most of Greece (although not, presumably, in Sparta, where helots continued
to till the land); the redoubled labor of women and slaves was not sufficient to
compensate for the death of farmers or their long campaigns away from home.
A good deal of territory was ravaged, and livestock and farming implements de-
stroyed as well as growing vines and olive trees. Some erstwhile farmers were
driven to take service as mercenary soldiers, an increasingly popular profession.
As usually happens in wartime, many women were forced to work outside the
home, and the loss of thousands upon thousands of soldiers and sailors left
many women without husbands. New patterns of labor within the oikos devel-
oped as well, as free women were more likely to work at home producing goods
not only for in-house consumption but for sale as well.
In Athens, as many as fifty thousand people had probably died of the plague,
many of them doing so before they could reproduce. War casualties seem to have
included at least five thousand hoplite soldiers and twelve thousand sailors (in-
cluding some three thousand executed by Lysander after Aegospotami). Probably
the number of adult male citizens in 403 was half what it had been in 431. Some
cities, like Melos and Scione, had been virtually annihilated. In Sparta, absolute

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
numbers dropped less sharply, but the various classes began to redefine them-
selves, as the ranks of commanders as well as soldiers were swelled not only
by distinguished mothakes (“children of Spartiate fathers and helot mothers”)
but also by helot fighters rewarded with freedom, known as neodamodeis (“new
citizens”).
The use of mercenaries and the periodic emergency enfranchisement of helots
and slaves—there were one thousand neodamodeis in Sparta by 421 and probably
at least fifteen hundred by the end of the war—blurred the lines that had tradi-
tionally divided citizens from noncitizens and eroded the concept of the citizen-
soldier and the citizen-sailor, and the frequency of bloody civil strife eroded the
concept of the polis itself. At the same time, however, the shattering of faith fos-
tered a questioning spirit that opened the door to the reflections of Socrates,
Xenophon, and Plato. The Peloponnesian War transformed the Greek world, but
it did not destroy it.
OLIGARCHY AT ATHENS: THE THIRTY TYRANTS
Sparta’s behavior throughout the Aegean soon put to rest any lingering notions
that its decision to spare Athens arose from a policy of generosity. In states for-
merly allied to Athens Lysander set up “decarchies,” that is, boards of ten pro-
Spartan officials designed to ensure oligarchic government and loyalty to Sparta.
For Athens itself plainly ten men would not suffice; there he forced the assembly
to ratify a board of thirty. Athenian citizens, these thirty were sympathetic to
Sparta and willing to sacrifice democratic principles, but they were not all com-
mitted oligarchs; they included, for example, the moderate Theramenes. The
most prominent of those who came to be known as the Thirty Tyrants, however,
left no doubt as to his political convictions. The oligarch Critias was a chilling fig-
ure—a pupil of Socrates, a relative of Plato, a brilliant intellectual, an avowed
atheist, a passionate antidemocrat, a longtime admirer of the Spartan constitu-
tion, and, as events were to show, a man who would order murders by the hun-
dreds without a qualm. Banished after the fall of the Four Hundred, to which he
had belonged, Critias was now back with a vengeance. The Thirty, according to
the author of the Athenaion Politeia sometimes attributed to Aristotle, “kept their
hands off none of the citizens, but put to death those of outstanding wealth or
birth or reputation, intending to put that source of danger out of the way, and
also desiring to plunder their estates; and by the end of a brief interval of time
they had made away with not less than fifteen hundred” (Ath. Pol. 35.4, Rack-
ham 1961). They also fortified their position with seven hundred Spartan soldiers
and a Spartan garrison commander similar to those Sparta had established in
states throughout the Aegean that it had “liberated” from Athenian hegemony.
Not all the victims of the Thirty were citizens who could possibly have been con-
ceived as political enemies; many were wealthy metics whose property the Thirty
coveted. Inevitably the Thirty were apprehensive about the possibility of a resis-
tance movement, and they suspected, with some justice, that such a movement
226

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
might be spearheaded by Theramenes, who had made clear his alarm at the
bloodbath. Summoned to the boule for a “trial” at which young oligarchs with
concealed weapons had been stationed by prearrangement, Theramenes de-
fended moderate government so convincingly that many listeners were per-
suaded. The reward for his eloquence was death. Critias promptly announced
that Theramenes was not entitled to a trial after all and had him dragged to
prison from the altar at which he had taken refuge. Forced to drink hemlock, the
poison used soon afterwards to execute Socrates, Theramenes went out in style
and not without irony, toasting Critias’ health with his last drops.
Ultimately the Thirty were undone by their own abandon. Though Sparta had
forbidden neighboring states to receive Athenian refugees, the murderous con-
duct of the Thirty had alienated many Greeks from Sparta, and neither Thebes
nor Megara was disposed to turn the refugees away. It was in Thebes that Athe-
nians under their leader Thrasybulus mounted an attempt to retake the city back
for the democrats. In the fighting Critias was killed.
Because they expected Spartan aid, the oligarchs at Athens rejected Thrasybu-
lus’ call for peace and union between the two camps. As it happened, however,
the murderous arrogance of Lysander and his associates was making many pow-
erful men at Sparta nervous, including the kings Agis and Pausanias. Marching
into Attica, Pausanias took the lead and masterminded not only the reconcilia-
tion of the various Athenian parties but also the eclipse (albeit temporary) of
Lysander. Under his aegis, the Athenians agreed on the first recorded amnesty in
history. The amnesty declared that only the Thirty and their chief officers could
be brought to justice for crimes committed before 403; all others were compelled
to renounce the many bitter grievances that had accumulated. In September,
Thrasybulus led his men unopposed to the Acropolis, where they sacrificed to
Athena for the salvation of the city and their own safe return. The work of
reestablishing democratic Athens then began.
THE TRIAL OF SOCRATES (399 BC)
The Athenians came remarkably close to respecting the terms of the amnesty on
which they had agreed. Nonetheless, decades of war followed by months of terror
under the Thirty had taken a heavy toll, and there was no lack of people eager
to assign blame for Athens’ problems. The colorful Socrates had annoyed jealous
parents whose young sons had lionized him, and though the Athenians were
averse to breaking the amnesty law, some were open to bending it. Three Athe-
nians—Anytus, Meletus, and Lycon—zeroed in on this eccentric old philosopher
who haunted the public spaces of Athens confuting the careless in argument.
Socrates (470–399 BC) had been quick to identify the drawbacks of democracy,
and he had also been the teacher of (at least) two men who in different ways had
harmed Athens: Alcibiades and Critias. The amnesty prevented his accusers from
charging Socrates with inciting his pupils to treason, so instead they brought a
rather odd three-pronged accusation: Socrates, they claimed, did not believe in
227

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
the gods of the state; he taught new gods; and he corrupted the young. This sort
of charge was unusual at Athens, but Greek states had no constitutional principles
separating church and state or safeguards for protecting freedom of expression.
Since Socrates never wrote anything, we are dependent for our conception of
him on the dialogues of his admirers Plato and Xenophon. Plato’s pupil Aristo-
tle observed about Socrates that the two things one could be certain of attribut-
ing to him were inductive reasoning and universal definition. We can be sure of
a few other things. Socrates, an Athenian citizen, performed conventional civic
services in Athens, fighting as a hoplite at Potidaea, Delium, and Amphipolis in
the Peloponnesian War and serving as president of the assembly on the day of
the Arginusae trial in 406. His avocation was discussing interesting philosophical
questions with young men, questions that focused on the best way for humans to
think and live; at least in his mature years, he was not particularly excited by nat-
ural science. He believed that the best way to develop ideas was in the give and
take of conversation, and that the best way to educate people was to ask them a
series of questions leading in a particular direction (now named for him “the So-
cratic method”). However painful it might be to find oneself the object of injus-
tice, he was firmly convinced that doing wrong oneself was the only real misfor-
tune that could befall a person. He had a keen wit and an engaging personality,
and pupils flocked to him eagerly, though he had nothing that could be called a
228
Figure 9.1. This bust of Socrates is
commonly attributed to the fourth-
century BC Greek sculptor Lysippus of
Sicyon, considered to be the founder
of the art of portraiture. A replica
stands in the Louvre Museum in Paris.

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
school. He was not a sophist; he became poor through his refusal to charge fees,
and his goal was to inculcate moral excellence, which he viewed as the particu-
lar excellence of a human being. Like the sophists, however, he used clever ar-
guments and subjected conventional notions to rational analysis, and like them
he disrupted the customary bond that placed education in the context of the fam-
ily, wounding Athenian parents whose sons preferred his company to theirs—
and who gave his ideas greater credence. Whom, Socrates asks Meletus in
Xenophon’s rendition of his defense speech, do I corrupt? “By God,” Meletus
replies, “I know some—those you’ve persuaded to obey you rather than their
parents” (Xenophon, Apology of Socrates 20). It is not surprising, therefore, that he
was mistaken for a sophist, or that the sophists’ shady reputation should have
rubbed off on him. He was parodied in Aristophanes’ Clouds, which showed him
carried across the sky in a crane in a flaky educational establishment known as a
“think shop.”
He also spoke sharply about democracy. Whether it is fair to say that he opposed
it and would have liked to see a different regime instituted at Athens is another
question. Socrates enjoyed puncturing illusions, and it may be that had he lived un-
der a monarchy or an oligarchy, those would have been the governments he spent
his time undermining. But if anything can safely be gathered from Plato’s dialogues,
then Socrates was troubled by the notion of amateur government, in which anyone’s
opinion counted for as much as the next man’s and in which a volatile assembly was
swayed this way and that by rhetorical displays. Most people, he pointed out, aren’t
terribly thoughtful or analytical, so why should “most people,” that is, the majority,
make the life and death decisions that affect the polis?
This is a question any advocate of democracy must ask, and Socrates’ insis-
tence on asking it need not be taken as implying that he wanted decisions made
by a minority. Combined with his association with Alcibiades and Critias, how-
ever, his pointed remarks about the foibles of democracy seemed downright un-
patriotic, and he could easily enough be cast as a purveyor of dangerous ideas.
By Athenian custom, Socrates’ trial took only one day. It is intolerably painful
for most readers of Plato’s Apology of Socrates to believe that the words written
down by Plato were not actually spoken at Socrates’ trial. Perhaps they were, and
perhaps they weren’t; Xenophon’s account of Socrates’ speech, also called the
Apology, is less inspiring and much shorter. (The Greek word apologia does not
connote “apologizing” in the modern sense but rather means a refutation.) Plato’s
rendition contains the famous dictum that “the unexamined life is not worth liv-
ing” and constitutes an extraordinarily moving paean to intellectual freedom and
the life of the mind. Shunning the strategy that he identifies as standard proce-
dure in an Athenian courtroom—weeping, pleading, parading his children in
front of the jury—Socrates, according to Plato, took the position that the best de-
fense was a strong offense. Using the question-and-answer method for which he
was famous and which had apparently gotten him into trouble, he demolished
his accusers by demonstrating the inconsistencies in their allegations and then
went on to explain in poignant detail the great service provided to the state by
his relentless probing. His service to the state, he argues, is precious and irre-
placeable. It is, literally, a godsend:
229

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Know that if you kill me, I being such a man as I say I am, you will not injure
me so much as yourselves; for neither Meletus nor Anytus could injure me; that
would be impossible, for I believe it is not the gods’ will that a better man be in-
jured by a worse. . . . For if you put me to death, you will not easily find another,
who, to use a rather absurd figure, attaches himself to the city as a gadfly to a
horse, which, though large and well bred, is sluggish on account of his size and
needs to be aroused by stinging. I think the god fastened me upon the city in
some such capacity, and I go about arousing, and urging and reproaching each
one of you, constantly alighting upon you everywhere the whole day long. Such
another is not likely to come to you, gentlemen; but if you take my advice, you
will spare me. But you, perhaps, might be angry, like people awakened from a
nap, and might slap me, as Anytus advises, and easily kill me; then you would
pass the rest of your lives in slumber, unless the god, in his care for you, should
send someone else to sting you.
(Apology 30C–31A; Fowler 1914, adapted)
Socrates persuaded nearly half the jury of 501 Athenian citizens; he seems to have
lost his case by about thirty votes. Meletus, the principal accuser, had proposed
the penalty of death. Athenian procedure called for convicted defendants to rec-
ommend an alternative penalty, and it seems clear that Socrates’ accusers ex-
pected him to propose exile—and would have been quite content to see him leave
town. He did no such thing, suggesting first a reward for his benefactions or, al-
ternatively, a small (but not trivial) fine. Xenophon ascribed this strategy to
Socrates’ wish to end a satisfying life before the sad realities of old age overtook
him; it is also possible that Socrates was testing the jury to see if they understood
who he really was and what he really provided to Athens. A number of those
who had wanted him acquitted had a change of heart and voted for the death
penalty. Socrates was then executed by one of the customary Athenian methods,
being ordered to down a poisonous draft of hemlock.
At his trial, if we are to believe Plato, Socrates prophesied that the Athenians
would bring great odium on themselves for killing him. He was right. Through-
out subsequent history, the execution of Socrates is the most serious charge that
has been brought by the critics of Athenian democracy. Socrates’ death also made
a deep impression on his brightest disciples, young aristocrats like Xenophon and
Plato. Xenophon’s works were very popular in ancient Rome and during the Re-
naissance. The dialogues Plato began soon after his teacher’s death, in which
Socrates served as a mouthpiece for his own thinking, became the foundation of
Western philosophy. In this way the strains occasioned by the Peloponnesian
War played a dramatic role in the history of ideas, as an enormous explosion of
creativity burst forth in the very city that had gone down to defeat.
THE FOURTH CENTURY: CHANGING
IDEAS, CONTINUING WARFARE
Already in the fifth century BC Greek thinkers had begun to ask the key questions
about the human community that would be explored in new ways in the fourth.
230

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
What was the purpose of civic life? Were the laws of the polis in accord with na-
ture or in conflict with it? Why were some people free and others not? Were the
souls of men and women the same or different? Should Greeks war with other
Greeks and enslave them when victorious? To these questions others came to be
added. Did the autonomous city-state provide the best way of life? Was warfare
worth the sacrifices it entailed? A smaller group debated larger questions—the
nature of justice, of piety, of courage, of love. New genres took the place of the
old as the search for meaning in life moved forward on different paths: Whereas
the painful issues of human existence had been explored during the fifth century
in tragedy and history, fourth-century thinkers developed the philosophical dia-
logue and prose treatise.
While some Greeks were subjecting their traditional values to scrutiny, others
perpetuated the squabbles of the fifth century. In many poleis the economic prob-
lems arising from the war exacerbated class tensions and sparked bloody civil
conflict. The eager involvement of Persia heightened an already chaotic situation.
When an extraordinary individual arose to the north in the form of Philip of
Macedon, the inability of the Greeks to work together productively had dramatic
consequences, and the autonomous polis ceased to be the defining political insti-
tution of the Greek world.
The long years of fighting at the end of the fifth century had harmed the econ-
omy of many Greek states sufficiently to create a desire for both booty and re-
venge. The postwar poleis, moreover, showed remarkable resilience, and within
less than ten years, the economy had rebounded sufficiently for people to con-
template new undertakings. The hostility of the Greek states soon found a focus,
and that focus was Sparta. In 395 Sparta’s old allies Corinth and Thebes were so
bitter that they actually combined with Athens to attack their old hegemon; neither
polis had gotten anything out of the war, and Sparta’s proclivity for interfering
with domestic governments caused considerable alarm. The war that ensued was
known as the Corinthian War, since much of the fighting took place in the area
of the isthmus. The first consequence of this futile war was the death of Lysander.
Soon afterwards the Persian navy, commanded by the satrap Pharnabazus and
the Athenian admiral Conon, defeated the Spartans decisively at Cnidus (394 BC)
in southwest Asia Minor. When Conon returned victorious to Athens he joined
his fellow citizens in rebuilding the Long Walls, assisted by a large infusion of
Persian funds.
In fighting this pointless war, the Greeks deployed not only hoplites and
sailors but also a wide variety of lightly armed troops including archers, slingers,
and javelin throwers. A particularly useful brand of javelin thrower was the man
known as the peltast, named for the small, round wicker shield he carried, the
Thracian pelte¯. Enjoying a mobility impossible for the more heavily armed hop-
lites, these troops could be used to forage for supplies, to seize and defend passes,
to ambush enemy soldiers, and to ravage hostile territory. They also played key
roles in what were basically hoplite confrontations, for harassment at a distance
by javelin-throwing peltasts made it difficult for the heavily armed enemy hop-
lites to retreat. A hardy band of peltasts backing up a hoplite force could easily
turn the tide of battle.
231

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
The war ended on terms that all Greeks outside Sparta found intensely hu-
miliating. The text of the dictated terms appears in Xenophon’s Hellenica:
I, King Artaxerxes, regard the following arrangements as just: 1. The cities in Asia
and, among the islands, Clazomenae and Cyprus should belong to me. 2. The
other Greek cities, big and small, should be left (autonomous) to govern them-
selves, except for Lemnos, Imbros and Scyros, which should belong to Athens, as
in the past. And if either of the two parties refuses to accept peace on these terms,
I, together with those who will accept this peace, will make war on that party
both by land and by sea, with ships and with money.
(Hellenica 5.1.31; Warner 1966)
It was most ironic that the guarantor of the peace was to be Persia’s ally Sparta,
since Sparta was getting a well-deserved reputation for meddling in the internal
affairs of other states. In the guise of enforcing autonomy, Sparta promptly set
about using force to dismantle a variety of existing arrangements. Mantinea, com-
posed of five villages, was compelled to tear down its fortifications and dissolve
itself into the five original communities. The Boeotian League was dissolved, and
in 382 the Spartans occupied the Theban acropolis and installed a pro-Spartan gov-
ernment. The Spartan government then executed the head of the pro-Athenian
faction at Thebes, Ismenias, on the grounds of conspiring with Persia. Sparta’s
record of collaboration with Persia made this turn of events particularly scan-
dalous throughout Greece.
In 379, seven of the partisans of Ismenias who had taken refuge in Athens
arranged to be brought to the pro-Spartan magistrates of Thebes, disguised as
women who had been supplied for their delectation. Drawing their weapons,
they easily overpowered and killed the oligarchs. The next day two Athenian
generals and their regiments appeared, quite possibly as volunteers, and helped
the Theban patriots expel the Spartan garrison. Nervous about Spartan reprisals,
the Athenians condemned both generals to death and in fact executed the one
who made the mistake of turning up for his trial. The Athenians’ decision was
quite reprehensible since their generals were clearly carrying out a policy that
had the people’s support.
Sparta, Athens, and Thebes
Not long afterwards, the Athenians allied with the Thebans for mutual protec-
tion against Sparta. They also moved forward with their plans to establish a new
naval confederacy known as the Second Athenian League. The establishment of
the League was commemorated in a decree which proclaimed that all allies “will
remain independent and autonomous, enjoying the form of government they
wish, admitting no garrisons or magistrates and paying no tribute. League pol-
icy was to be controlled by two bodies of equal weight, the Athenian assembly
(ekkle¯sia) and the assembly of the allies (synedrion). Although no tribute was spec-
ified, a system of syntaxeis (“contributions”) was set up to finance League opera-
tions. Periodic defaults make clear the ambivalence of some league members, but
232

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
the fact that about half the league’s seventy-odd members were former members
of the Delian League certainly needs to be thrown in with the other evidence con-
cerning the popularity of Athens’ earlier experiment in league leadership.
From this point on, the history of Greece involves a dizzying sequence of shift-
ing alliances marked by two notable military victories and by outside interven-
tions by eastern potentates such as Mausolus of Caria, technically a Persian
satrap but de facto an independent ruler who operated from Halicarnassus (the
home town of Herodotus), where he engaged Greek sculptors to construct the
huge tomb for him that has given us our English word mausoleum. Mausolus
saw the Athenian League as a serious obstacle to his ambitions, and he was quick
to encourage any unrest he could detect; it was after receiving promises of Car-
ian backing that Rhodes, Cos, and Chios revolted from Athens.
In mainland Greece, the Spartans and the Thebans met twice on the battlefield
with dramatic results on both occasions. In the 370s Thebes was stronger than
ever, led by two intimate friends, Epaminondas and Pelopidas. Both had been in-
volved in the liberation of Thebes from the Spartans in 379. Pelopidas excelled
primarily in generalship, Epaminondas in charismatic political leadership. On the
233
Figure 9.2. The Decree of Aristoteles, 377 BC. The names
of the cities that joined the alliance were inscribed on
the same stone as the decree. As new states joined, their
names were added.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
plain of Leuctra, Epaminondas packed his left wing (normally the weaker side of
a Greek formation) fully fifty shields deep. He also advanced in an oblique line
so as to hold back the center and right wing while overpowering the enemy with
the left at the point where he could expect the Spartan king Cleombrotus to be.
The cutting edge of the Theban line was provided by the elite corps known as the
Sacred Band, 150 pairs of select hoplites. Plato was probably thinking of the Sa-
cred Band when he wrote that “if one could contrive that a state or an army
should entirely consist of lovers and loved, it would be impossible for it to have
a better organization than that which it would then enjoy through their avoid-
ance of all dishonor and their mutual emulation; moreover, a handful of such
men, fighting side-by-side, would defeat practically the whole world” (Sympo-
sium 178-179; Hamilton). The Sacred Band and the novel tactics of Epaminondas
carried the day, killing nearly half the Spartans present including their king
Cleombrotus. The remainder of the Spartan army withdrew, the legend of Spar-
tan supremacy in hoplite warfare forever shattered.
When the Spartans’ weakness became apparent to their allies, the Pelopon-
nesus began seething with sedition. Democratic revolutions broke out in many
cities, and a league was formed consisting of Mantinea, Tegea, and the commu-
nities of southern and central Arcadia. Arriving in the Peloponnesus to give sup-
port to the league, Epaminondas’ army was unable to take the city of Sparta, but
it ravaged Laconia—and succeeded in the liberation of Messenia. Helots were
now to be citizens, and the new capital of Messene was founded on Mount
Ithome. Epaminondas also founded a new capital for the Arcadian League, Mega-
lopolis. This new foundation became the meeting place for the Council of Fifty
that represented the communities of the league in proportion to their population,
and of the Assembly of the Ten Thousand, open to all citizens. This development
indexed a growing interest in experimenting with thoroughly amicable federa-
tions, a new phenomenon in Greece.
Within a few years and with comparatively little loss of life, Thebes under
Epaminondas and Pelopidas managed to accomplish what generations of Athe-
nians could not. Sparta was finished as an international power. This did not
mean, however, that the Thebans achieved their goals. Pelopidas was killed fight-
ing in Thessaly. Epaminondas’ support in the Peloponnesus began to wane, and
a number of Arcadian communities allied with Sparta—and Athens—against
Thebes. Epaminondas met the alliance on the plain of Mantinea in 362 BC. De-
ploying the same strategy as at Leuctra and outnumbering the enemy by some
ten thousand men, the Thebans were victorious. But Epaminondas himself was
killed and with his dying breath counseled his countrymen to make peace.
For all his personal magnetism, Epaminondas seemed to have had no plan for
Greece beyond replacing Athenian and Spartan imperialism with Theban impe-
rialism. Ultimately Thebes gained nothing for itself, or for Greece, by its decade
of military ascendancy. Though the liberation of Messenia offers great satisfaction
to the enemies of slavery in all times and places, by knocking out Sparta as a mil-
itary power Epaminondas performed a great service to Philip of Macedon, the fu-
ture conqueror of Greece, something for which not all Greeks would ultimately be
234

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
grateful. Philip was also the beneficiary of the agitation of Mausolus, who did
so much to foment disaffection in the Second Athenian League. Late in 355 or
early in 354, Athens was forced to recognize the independence of Byzantium,
Chios, Rhodes, and Cos. Soon Lesbos and several other states also broke away
from the confederation. The sanitized Delian League had not endured more than
a generation.
LAW AND DEMOCRACY IN ATHENS
Whatever its successes or failures abroad, Athens had retained its domestic sta-
bility and continued to practice democracy at home interrupted by only two very
brief experiments in oligarchy in the later fifth century, each occasioned by the
strains of the long war and one of them imposed directly by a foreign power. A
key building block of the democracy was the people’s courts known as dicaster-
ies (dikaste¯ria). Athenian society was notoriously litigious, and in the hands of un-
scrupulous politicians court cases often became tools of factional strife. Trials of
impeached officials—strategoi in particular—were frequently of a political nature,
for impeachment at Athens was often used as a forum for a debate on foreign pol-
icy. Since decrees proposed in the assembly could be challenged by the graphe
paranomon (“indictment for illegal proposals”), it can be argued that in fourth-
century Athens the dicasteries rather than the ekklesia were the ultimate arbiters
of policy. In the absence of a supreme court or a body of jurisconsults, dicasteries
were also the arbiters of law. Courts were also used, of course, in the adjudication
of private lawsuits and criminal cases with no political ramifications.
The Functioning of Dicasteries
All male citizens over the age of thirty were eligible to serve on dicasteries, and
dicasts (jurors) were chosen each year by lot from those who volunteered. As we
saw in Chapter Six, to ensure that the composition of the courts would reflect the
voters of Athens, Pericles had instituted pay for jury service. The three obols a
day, or half the average wage of a laborer, doubtless attracted the poor, who
could not earn three obols another way, as well as comfortably retired older men
who enjoyed the opportunity to sit with their fellow citizens in situations that of-
ten offered spellbinding entertainment. The number of dicasts allocated to a
given case varied usually from 201 to 501 (odd numbers prevented a tie), al-
though a larger body might be used for high-profile trials of a political nature,
and some important political trials were held in the assembly itself. Large juries
were designed in part to involve large numbers of citizens in decision-making, in
part to discourage bribery. Further obstacles to bribery included an elaborate
mechanism to select juries by lot and the custom of choosing them at the last pos-
sible moment before the trial. Small plaques, each inscribed with a dicast’s name,
were inserted into a kle¯rote¯rion, an allotment device that distributed the names
haphazardly among the daily juries. Voting was by secret ballot. Each dicast was
235

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
given two pebbles or bronze discs, one of which had a hole punched through it;
a herald would proclaim that “the pebble with the hole is a vote for the prose-
cutor, and the whole pebble a vote for the defendant.” To cast his vote the dicast
would throw the one he wanted to be counted into a copper receptacle and dis-
card the other pebble into the wooden one.
As the case of Socrates reveals, the dicasts also determined the penalty. Precedents
were not binding, so each jury was sovereign and its decision final. There could be
no appeal to a higher court, for an Athenian dicastery was both the highest court and
the people. Consequently dicasts functioned as judges as well as jurors.
Murder and the Courts
The earliest known laws in Athens and those that remained unchanged for the
longest time concerned homicide. Since the Greeks believed that murder of-
fended the gods, there were religious sanctions against homicide, and anyone
who killed another person outside of wartime was considered polluted. At the
same time a pressing religious and social obligation lay upon the male next of kin
to avenge a death by killing the perpetrator, even if an act of homicide had been
involuntary, say, as the result of a hunting accident. In accordance with basic
principles of vendettas that operate across many societies, therefore, one homi-
cide could evolve into an unending series of retaliations. The Athenians claimed
to have founded the first law court in the world when Agamemnon’s son Orestes
came to Athens from Argos seeking absolution for the murder of his mother,
whom he had killed in order to avenge his slain father. The Bronze Age myth that
Aeschylus had fleshed out in his Oresteia had offered the playwright an oppor-
tunity to explain how law had come to replace family feud in just such a case.
The court of the Areopagus in Athens adjudicated the case, marking the historic
transfer of jurisdiction from the family to the state.
A personal element, however, remained, for accusations of homicide had to be
brought by family members. Thus, while the murder of a slave by his or her mas-
ter might be illegal, prosecution was unlikely in the absence of a citizen relative
who could bring charges. Throughout Athenian history, self-help remained a
central principle in law. (It also extended to helping friends and relations in a
wide variety of instances. Citizens were expected to show both friendship and
civic-mindedness by bringing cases on behalf of others who were wronged, such
as orphans or girls of marriageable age without dowries.)
Besides the Areopagus there were four additional venues for murder trials.
The court of the Palladion was used for unpremeditated killings, the Delphinion
for justifiable ones (i.e., homicides committed in self-defense, or by a man who
discovered someone in the very act of having intercourse with his wife, mother,
sister, or daughter). The Prytaneion handled cases of unidentified murderers and
cases in which an animal or an object such as a falling roof tile had caused a
death. Finally, those who were already sentenced to exile for homicide and were
on trial for an additional murder had to plead their cases on a boat off the coast
of Phreatto to avoid polluting the land of Attica.
236

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
Conduct of Cases
The seriousness of the charges dictated the amount of time allocated to a trial,
and the minutes were measured out by a water clock. The conduct of cases dif-
fered from those in modern Western courts in that the Greeks relied heavily on
the testimony of witnesses not only as to the facts but also as to the character of
the defendant. It was customary for witnesses to testify to the virtues of the ac-
cused and the public services he had performed—or to the calamities his family
would experience if he was convicted. Though rules of time were stringently ob-
served, rules of evidence were few, and defendants themselves were not discour-
aged from speechifying about their past services to the polis or from parading their
vulnerable children before the jury. Even after the advent of writing, Greeks re-
mained somewhat suspicious of texts, and jurors usually trusted the testimony
given by witnesses under oath more than written evidence; they understood that
a document such as a will could be forged. Slaves were often the optimal witnesses,
for they were ubiquitous and often obliged to assist their owners in illicit activities.
Theoretically, the testimony of slaves was admissible only if it had been given un-
der torture, but we are uncertain how often such torture was actually inflicted. Fol-
lowing a guilty verdict, prosecutor and defendant proposed alternate penalties, as
in the case of Socrates, and the jury decided between the two. The principle of self-
help also meant that in private, or civil, cases the prosecutor had to execute the
judgment himself. When the orator Demosthenes succeeded in convincing a jury
that his guardians had dissipated the fortune his father had left, it was his own re-
sponsibility to try to collect the missing funds and property.
The Athenian Democracy in the Fourth Century
The survival of so many speeches and inscriptions from the fourth century en-
ables us to see Athenian democracy in action more vividly in this period than was
possible for the fifth century. In some ways the democracy changed after the
restoration of 403, particularly in the constitution of various ad hoc boards of
nomothetai (“creators of laws”) to approve and review legislation. The fundamen-
tal principles, however, remained the same. All free adult males had a theoreti-
cally equal right to participate in government regardless of differential prestige
and economic standing. Women and slaves were excluded, and it was difficult
for resident aliens or their children to become citizens. Only men with two citi-
zen parents could vote. Wealth and illustrious ancestry were distinct advantages
in seeking public office. Boasting of your benefactions to the state was a good
strategy if you needed to defend yourself in court, which was often the case in
this litigious society. Although Solon’s four classes were never formally abol-
ished, it is clear that at least by the middle of the fourth century public offices
were open to men of all groups. Many the¯tes and zeugitai were selected for offices
chosen by lot, such as service on the boule¯. Thus participation in government was
widely diffused throughout the community of citizen males.
237

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Jokes in Aristophanes’ plays reveal a change in the dynamics of assembly at-
tendance. The Acharnians (425 BC) alludes to the habit of roping citizens in with
a cord covered with red paint that would smear the clothes of the recalcitrant,
but when women dress as men and pack the assembly in the Ecclesiazusae (392
BC) until a quorum is reached, the real men of Athens complain that they arrived
too late to get their pay. The carrot replaced the stick shortly before 400, when a
small salary was instituted for attendance at the assembly. By Aristotle’s time, it
had gone from one obol to a drachma (six obols) for an ordinary assembly and a
drachma and a half for the kyria ekkle¯sia, that is, the principal assembly of a pry-
tany. At the level of assembly attendance, then, the government of the fourth cen-
tury was somewhat more democratic than the fifth, for a higher number could
afford to take time away from work, though it remained the case that attending
meetings was easier for those who lived close by and those who worked for
themselves. The large number of political issues ultimately decided in the courts
was another democratic element.
As in the courts, where even criminal cases depended on volunteer prosecu-
tors to set them in motion, the voluntary principle played a key role in the as-
sembly. In the absence of organized political parties, concerned citizens took it
upon themselves to initiate legislation. No well-defined group of officeholders
saw itself—or was seen by others—as clearly marked off from the rest of the pop-
ulace. By “politicians,” people simply meant those who most enjoyed making
proposals in the assembly and giving speeches in their support. The importance
of oratory and debate to the functioning of the democratic system is attested in
the Greek word that comes closest to our word “politician”: rhe¯to¯r. Since rhe¯tores
shared common interests and habits, no doubt people were comfortable identi-
fying a particular citizen they might see walking down the street as “one of the
rhetores,” but it is important to remember that there was no official “board of
rhetores” to which such men belonged. Today it would be peculiar to identify
someone who did not hold public office as a politician, but the Athenians saw
nothing strange about it. It was precisely because of the power private citizens
could gain through skillful oratory that the Athenians made sure to have the
graphe paranomon on the books to ensure the accountability even of those who
took part in public affairs without holding office. Those convicted of proposing
something illegal were generally fined; three convictions deprived a citizen of the
right to make further proposals.
THE FOURTH-CENTURY POLIS
Although the bulk of our evidence comes from Athens, most Greeks, of course,
lived in other city-states. In the fourth century as in the fifth, some Greek poleis
were governed by democracies, others by oligarchies that varied in their nar-
rowness. As had always been the case in Greece, uneven distribution of wealth
fostered ever-present tensions that threatened constantly to erupt and disturb the
tenuous concord that united citizens, and changes of constitution were frequent.
238

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
Although warfare remained a fact of life, many people had come to question its
efficacy in improving their situations. While some poorer citizens continued to
welcome war for the pay it offered to rowers in the fleet, those who had land or
commerce to protect were hesitant. The ideal of the citizen-soldier was wearing
thin, and an increasing share of the fighting was conducted by mercenaries from
outside. Agriculture remained the basis of the economy, but the devastation of
the land during the Peloponnesian War had fostered a drift to the cities. By
throwing people together, this development heightened the awareness of eco-
nomic inequality and sharpened class bitterness. Plato and his pupil Aristotle
both took it for granted that a polis consisted in reality of two cities, one of the
many poor and one of the few rich. The division of citizens into haves and have-
nots that had always marked Greek states was exacerbated in the fourth century
by the increased poverty of the have-nots, bringing latent tensions to the surface.
Stasis
Bloodshed was common, and religious pieties were often ignored. In 392,
Corinthian democrats violated the sanctity of temples by murdering oligarchs
who had taken refuge there. Diodorus reports revolutions in Corinth, Sicyon, and
Phlius and Xenophon recorded serious tensions in Tegea, Phlius, Sicyon, Pellene,
and Elis. Diodorus, who shared the antidemocratic orientation of most ancient
writers, took a certain satisfaction in relating the torture and murder of the elite
by Argive democrats in 371, when class tensions erupted with violence excep-
tional even by Greek standards. After the execution of twelve hundred influen-
tial men, Diodorus contends,
the populace did not spare the demagogues themselves. Because of the magni-
tude of the calamity the demagogues were afraid that some unforeseen turn of
fortune might overtake them and therefore desisted from their accusation,
whereas the mob, now thinking that they had been left in the lurch by them, were
angry at this and put to death all the demagogues. So these men received the
punishment which fitted their crimes as if some divinity were visiting its just re-
sentment upon them, and the people, eased of their mad rage, were restored to
their senses.
(Library of History 15.58.4; Sherman 1952, adapted)
Beginning late in the fifth century, Greek intellectuals had begun calling for
homonoia (“concord”) among citizens, but the frequency with which the appeal
was made reveals the discordant reality: In fact the slogan caught on during the
contentious days of the Peloponnesian War. In praising the rule of law, Socrates
had insisted in the pages of Xenophon’s Memorabilia that throughout Greece
homonoia was advocated by the “best men” (the aristoi). Aristotle, however, took
a darker and more realistic view. In some states of his own day, he wrote in the
Politics, the oligarchs in charge take an oath to be hostile to the demos and “plot
whatever evil possible against the people” (1310a).
239

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Not all poleis were constantly torn apart by stasis and debilitated by interpo-
lis wars. Since the principal cause of internal weakness and vulnerability to out-
side attack was the frustrations of the poor, prosperity might act as a powerful
deterrent. Megara with its brisk woolen trade flourished throughout the fourth
century, and civil strife was rare. The progress of the economy was facilitated by
peace with other poleis: The alliance between Corinth and Athens during the
Corinthan War eliminated Megara’s pivotal position in interpolis diplomacy, and
the Megarians seem to have preserved their neutrality throughout that war.
Megarian woolens found eager markets throughout Greece. Sheep grazed in
abundance, and large numbers of slaves, probably mostly female, turned out
well-made and inexpensive garments. The private homes of Megara were known
for their elegance, and a variety of monuments decorated the city. The Athenian
sculptor Praxiteles (370–329 BC) produced numerous statues of the gods for the
sanctuaries of Artemis and Apollo and the temple of Aphrodite. Scopas, who
contributed to the Mausoleum in Caria, also worked in Megara. Exactly what
kind of government fourth-century Megara enjoyed is uncertain—Plato praised
it but did not describe it—but it seems at least to have been fairly stable. Megara
was not, however, entirely immune to the endemic stasis of the fourth century,
for Diodorus reports an abortive uprising in the 370s.
Marginalized Workers in the Economy
The economy of each polis was different, but throughout Greece prestige at-
tached to some kinds of work more than to others. Because social prejudices fa-
vored self-sufficiency through farming, or making money by selling the produce
of one’s land, free citizens tended to avoid involvement in commerce and bank-
ing, turning over these activities to metics and slaves. Such workers became im-
portant in the fourth century and often made considerable fortunes, for one phe-
nomenon that distinguished the polis of the fourth century from that of the fifth
was the rise of banking.
Bank owners trusted slaves to manage the daily operations of banks indepen-
dently and even to travel with large sums of cash. Such slaves were highly skilled,
usually literate, and very valuable. A slave who managed a bank could be com-
pletely responsible for his master’s property. Therefore, a master might write a
will freeing his bank manager on condition that he marry his widow and man-
age his bank in behalf of his minor children. Manumitted slaves became metics.
Some of these metics, including a certain Pasio and Phormio, were among the
wealthiest Athenians of the fourth century. In gratitude for their generous bene-
factions to the state, Athens rewarded them and their descendants with citizen-
ship. Thus slaves in banking might experience rapid social mobility.
The stigma that attached to working for someone else was greater for women
than for men; few women chose to work outside the home unless compelled to do
so by poverty. In the fourth century as in the fifth, however, some women did
work at service jobs outside their homes. Slave women were sometimes rented out
by their owners, and former slaves, metics, and even citizen women in straitened
240

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
financial circumstances worked at a variety of jobs. Some hired themselves out
as nurses for other women’s children; some sold goods in the marketplace; and
older women often served as hired mourners at funerals. Although unacceptable
for citizen women, prostitution was probably the work done most frequently by
women outside the home. Some were put to work when they were still children.
In Corinth, Nicarete, a former slave, purchased young girls from slaveholders
and trained them for their work:
Nicarete, who was the freedwoman of Charisius of Elis and the wife of his cook
Hippias, bought seven girls when they were small children. She was an astute
judge of natural beauty in little girls and furthermore she understood how to
bring them up and train them skillfully, for she made this her profession and got
her livelihood from the girls. She used to address them as daughters, implying
that they were free women, so that she might extract the largest fees from those
who wished to get close to them. When she had reaped the profit of the youth-
ful prime of each, she sold all seven of them: Anteia, Stratola, Aristocleia,
Metaneira, Phila, Isthmias, and this Neaera here . . .
Neaera . . . was working with her body, although she was still very young, for
she had not yet reached puberty.
(Pseudo-Demosthenes, 59.18–20; Murray 1936)
Neaera’s further adventures are also detailed in this speech, which is included
in the corpus of Demosthenes although it was almost certainly written by some-
one else. Two of Neaera’s clients purchased her from Nicarete to be their slave.
But when these men were about to marry, they offered Neaera the opportunity
to buy her freedom. Neaera borrowed her purchase price from former clients,
and repaid them from her earnings as a free prostitute. Her attempt at social mo-
bility was quashed, however, when she moved to Athens, married a certain
Stephanus, and pretended to be an Athenian citizen. Apollodorus, an enemy of
Stephanus (who had brought against him one indictment for an illegal proposal
and another for murder), brought her to trial for false assumption of citizen
rights. He also charged Stephanus with living with a non-Athenian woman as
though she were his wife, and with giving Neaera’s daughter in marriage to an
Athenian citizen as being his own daughter born from a citizen woman.
PHILOSOPHY AND THE POLIS
The changing political situation in the Greek world helped shape Greek thought
in each new generation, and the problems of the fourth-century polis were no ex-
ception. Philosophy evolved with the polis and survived it when Philip of Mace-
don brought the freedom of the independent city-states to an end in 338 BC. The
Greek word philosophos means “a lover of wisdom,” and for many years before
Plato and Aristotle founded their famous schools in Athens, Greek thinkers had
taken delight in searching for the underlying principles that shaped the cosmos
and determined the life humans made in it. Democritus contended that he would
241

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
“rather find the explanation for a single phenomenon than gain the kingdom of
Persia.” The truly prosperous man, Empedocles said, is one who enjoys the riches
of a divine intelligence. Philosophers came in many shapes. Thinkers like Thales
and Anaximander focused on the natural world. Others like Herodotus and
Thucydides used the writing of history as a vehicle for their ideas about the hu-
man condition, while still others expressed them through dramas as did Aeschy-
lus, Sophocles, and Euripides. In time, Xenophon and Plato would write dia-
logues and Aristotle treatises. These innovative thinkers explored the areas that
still make up philosophy today—ethics, logic, epistemology (the philosophy of
knowledge), metaphysics (the science of being), aesthetics, theology, philosophy
of science, and social and political theory.
It was in the realm of social and political theory that philosophy was most
closely tied to the polis. Because most surviving texts of political theory were com-
posed in democratic Athens, one might imagine that they praised democracy. In
fact, the opposite is true: The principal texts of Greek political theory were the work
of intellectuals who were intensely critical of democratic government. Indeed,
modern political scientists have observed that political theory—literally, “looking
at the city-state”—was invented to show why democracy could not possibly work.
It is the workings of democracy itself that reveal the ideology behind it.
Democracy and Political Theory
The anonymous satirist we call Old Oligarch had portrayed Athenian democracy
with biting irony as a beautifully efficient way of guaranteeing the suppression
of one class by another, but no surviving text treats the dynamics of democracy
in a positive way. Reconstructing the theory behind democracy from written texts
requires assembling patches from a variety of sources that engage the issue only
obliquely. Thucydides’ version of Pericles’ funeral oration gives us a sense of
what the Athenians at any rate prized in their government. At Athens, Pericles
says, worth is assessed in terms of ability, not wealth or class. Athenians consider
remaining aloof from politics a vice, not a virtue. They view debate as an aid to
constructive action, not a hindrance.
Just as Thucydides, who was not particularly sympathetic to democracy, in-
cluded Pericles’ speech in his history, so Plato, one of democracy’s sharpest crit-
ics, included a statement of democratic ideology in his dialogue Protagoras. There
the famous sophist tells a quaint myth in support of his thesis that all people pos-
sess the rudiments of civic-mindedness. In earliest times, Protagoras says, people
were unable to live together constructively in cities because of their lack of poli-
tike¯ techne¯, the skill of forming and managing a polis. Seeing this and fearing the
destruction of the species, Zeus sent Hermes to bring aido¯s (“shame”) and dike¯
(“justice”) to mortals. When Hermes asked Zeus whether these should be dis-
tributed to a select few, as was the case with the arts of medicine and other tech-
niques, or to everyone, Zeus ordered him to give some to everybody, since “cities
cannot be formed if only a few share in these skills as they do in the other arts”
(322D). It is for this reason, Protagoras says, that when the Athenians come together
242

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
to make decisions that require the sense of justice that goes into political wisdom
“they take advice from everybody, since it is held that for states to exist every-
one must partake of this excellence” (322E–323E).
Further clues are provided in the dozens of orations surviving from the fourth
century, which praise freedom of speech, liberty, equality before the law, and the
rule of law. Our best clue to the theory of democracy, however, is its practice. The
Athenian democracy itself reveals what most men in Athens believed about gov-
ernment: They believed in a democracy of male citizens that required active par-
ticipation on the part of these citizens, guaranteed by frequent rotation in office,
and they believed that the average free man was qualified to make political de-
cisions, as evidenced by the use of the lot and the taking of important decisions
in the assembly by majority vote. They believed in trial by jury, and they feared
the corruption that inhered in small groups more than the mob psychology that
threatened large ones. They believed that the people had the right to call its offi-
cials to account with regularity and on the slightest pretext. They believed that
the stability of the state was so crucial that it was reasonable to exile a man for
ten years under the system known as ostracism even if he had done nothing to
break the law. They believed in slavery and patriarchy. They believed that the
control of women’s sexuality was essential to the smooth functioning of the com-
munity and that the sequestration of women and girls was a good step in this di-
rection. We know all this not because they wrote it down but because of how they
chose to run their government and live their lives.
We know also that Greeks who did not live under democratic governments be-
lieved in the rule of law, which appears as a persistent leitmotiv in the literature of
the fifth and fourth centuries. Its prominence begins with the efforts of Herodotus
and Aeschylus to define and celebrate what it means to be Greek; for them living
under law played a key role in shaping that identity and Herodotus stressed the
Spartans’ reverence for law. Euripides, however, connected law with democracy in
his Suppliants, where he defined Athens even under Theseus as a place where
Our city is not subject to one man.
No, it is free, for here the people rule.
(404–406)
Under a tyranny, one man governs, keeping the law in his private hands, and
there is no equality:
But when the laws are written down, the weak
Enjoy the same protection as the rich.
(434–435)
Although many Athenians identified their democratic constitution with the rule
of law, Greek intellectuals sometimes saw things differently. Plato frequently
identified democracy with tyranny, and his pupil Aristotle complained that the
decrees of a democratic assembly were no different from the edicts of the tyrant.
243

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Plato
It is certainly a tribute to Athenian democracy that it produced its own most as-
tute critics. An aristocrat from one of Athens’ most distinguished families and a
relative of the oligarch Critias, Plato became a disciple of Socrates and was pro-
foundly shaken by his death. The loss of his mentor, however, only heightened
his creative powers. Over his lifetime, Plato composed numerous dialogues, in
most of which the principal part is played by a character he identifies as Socrates.
What is beauty? What is piety? What is justice? What is love? These questions
were explored in Plato’s Socratic dialogues. As Plato’s thinking evolved with the
passing of time, this “Socrates” had less and less in common with the historical
Socrates and came to serve as a vehicle for Plato’s own ideas.
Chief among these was the theory of Forms. Plato’s belief in Forms was con-
nected to his passion for definitions, for both depend on a conviction that seem-
ingly disparate acts and items can nonetheless be classified in categories—that
beautiful objects and acts and ideas, for example, all have something in common.
In Plato’s view, they all partake of the ideal Form of beauty. While a beautiful sun-
set might seem different from a beautiful mathematical proof or a beautiful young
athlete, in fact what ties them together is more enduring than what sets them apart.
The relationship of appearance to reality in Plato’s world view can perhaps be
best grasped in the context of mathematics. A ring or a princely diadem or the
244
Figure 9.3. This bust of Plato is a
Roman copy of a fourth-century
BC original.

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
perimeter of a hoplite shield might seem to the casual observer to be circles, but
they are not circles in the same sense that the locus of all points in a given plane
equidistant from a given point is a circle. They only look like circles; if you were
to put them under a magnifying glass you would see that they were not circles
at all, merely objects vaguely circular in appearance precisely because they bring
to mind the Form of the circle. Only the circle depicted in the mathematical def-
inition is a circle. Some people might say that these concrete objects are real cir-
cles whereas the geometrical concept is imaginary, but Plato was not one of these
people. For Plato, only the concept is real. The tangible objects are debased copies,
feeble imitations of the ideal Form. Plato, in other words, was an idealist and a
dualist. He believed in an opposition between the physical world of appearances,
which are deceptive, and the intellectual universe of ideas, which represent real-
ity. The first is tawdry and serves only to distract people from ultimate truth; the
second is noble, and to contemplate it ennobling.
In many ways Plato was a revolutionary. The close connection between ap-
pearance and reality was fundamental to Greek civilization. If you are rich and
handsome, most of his contemporaries believed, then probably you are also good;
if you are poor and ugly, probably you are bad as well. If everyone admires you,
then all is right with the world; if you are despised, then you have no reason to
go on. For most Greek men, reputation, power, and material success were central
to happiness. Like Socrates before him, who preferred being right to being alive,
Plato identified values that were more important than being well liked or envied.
245
Figure 9.4. This bust of Aristotle
dates from the Hellenistic Age.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
In his dialogue on government and education, The Republic, he raised a key ques-
tion about justice. Let us say, he proposed, that you had a magic ring that would
make you invisible. Would you practice justice, or would you take the opportu-
nity to grab as much power and wealth as you could, practicing injustice in the
happy expectation of getting away with it?
As usual, Plato does not appear in this dialogue. His brothers Glaucon and
Adeimantus, however, do, and they are quick to point out the customary Greek
view that only convention, nomos, holds people back from committing injustice.
The behavior that the man-made nomoi of punishment and disgrace discourage,
however, is encouraged by physis, the natural instinct that urges people to take
whatever they can get away with taking. This was the drive that Thucydides’
Athenians at Melos had identified as the customary engine of human conduct:
People, they had argued, “are always forced by the law of nature to dominate
everyone they can” (5.105; Blanco). This sort of thing, Glaucon and Adeimantus
say, is what the average person believes. It is up to Socrates to show that justice
is in fact good for people.
This is a large task, and Socrates decides to shift gears and explore justice in
the state in order to discover justice in the individual writ large. In the course of
this exploration, he spins out threads that are even more revolutionary. The sub-
ject of the dialogue becomes an ideal state of Plato’s imagining. It is a state di-
vided into three classes, corresponding to Plato’s conception of the tripartite na-
ture of the soul. At the top are the guardians, who represent reason. Their supreme
rationality, inculcated by years of education, qualifies them to govern. After them
come the auxiliaries, who are characterized by a spirited temperament which
suits them for the duties of soldiers. Last come the majority, who correspond to
desire in the soul: They are not especially bright or brave and live only to satisfy
their own material yearnings, and to perform the menial tasks the state requires
for subsistence.
The education and lives of the guardians soon become the focus of Plato’s at-
tention. They will study for many years, approaching the understanding of the
Forms by applying themselves to mathematics. Surprisingly, the guardians will
be of both genders, and Plato advocates a unisex education for them.
Document 9.1. Though on the whole, Socrates argues, women are inferior to
men in all skills besides weaving and cooking, nonetheless there will always be
individual women who are more skilled than individual men. When Glaucon
agrees, Socrates launches into his plan for having guardians of both sexes
(though he always speaks of guardians and their wives, never guardians and their
husbands).
SOC.
To conclude, then, there is no occupation concerned with the man-
agement of social affairs which belongs either to woman or to man, as such.
Natural gifts are to be found here and there in both creatures alike; and
246

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
every occupation is open to both, so far as their natures are concerned,
though woman is for all purposes the weaker.
GLAU.
Certainly.
SOC.
Is that a reason for making over all occupations to men only?
GLAU.
Of course not.
SOC.
No, because one woman may have a natural gift for medicine or for
music, another may not.
GLAU.
Surely.
SOC.
Is it not also true that a woman may, or may not, be warlike or athletic?
GLAU.
I think so.
SOC.
And again, one may love knowledge, another hate it; one may be
high-spirited, another spiritless?
GLAU.
True again.
SOC.
It follows that one woman will be fitted by nature to be a Guardian,
another will not; because these were the qualities for which we selected our
men Guardians. So for the purpose of keeping watch over the common-
wealth, woman has the same nature as man, save in so far as she is weaker.
GLAU.
So it appears.
SOC.
It follows that women of this type must be selected to share the life
and duties of Guardians with men of the same type, since they are compe-
tent and of a like nature, and the same natures must be allowed the same
pursuits.
GLAU.
Yes.
SOC.
We come round, then, to our former position, that there is nothing
contrary to nature in giving our Guardians’ wives the same training for
mind and body. The practice we proposed to establish was not impossible
or visionary, since it was in accordance with nature. Rather, the contrary
practice which now prevails turns out to be unnatural.
GLAU.
So it appears.
SOC.
Well, we set out to inquire whether the plan we proposed was fea-
sible and also the best. That it is feasible is now agreed; we must next set-
tle whether it is the best.
GLAU.
Obviously.
SOC.
Now, for the purpose of producing a woman fit to be a Guardian,
we shall not have one education for men and another for women, precisely
because the nature to be taken in hand is the same.
GLAU.
True.
The Republic 455; translated by F. M. Cornford, The Republic of Plato.
London and New York: Oxford University Press, 1945.
247

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
The guardians’ lives will be unusual in many respects. The acquisitive principle
that guides most people’s activities will be alien to them, for Plato envisions a
communistic regime within the guardian class; private property, though it exists
for the other two classes, will be abolished for the top group. Nor will they have
spouses in the conventional sense of the word. In short, they will have no oikoi—
something that makes them eminently un-Athenian. Though they will not live in
households, however, the guardians must reproduce in order to perpetuate the
system. An elaborate mathematical scheme will dictate temporary couplings.
(Plato was deeply influenced by the Pythagoreans, and he found in mathematics
not only the embodiment of perfect abstraction but elements of mysticism as well.)
Once born of these short-term “marriages,” however, children will be mixed in
with all the other children conceived around the same time and raised in common
nurseries. Thus, no parent will know his or her own child and vice versa.
Like other utopias, Plato’s is designed to demonstrate the shortcomings of real
states. Whether he ever planned or even wished to see his Republic established
is uncertain. What is clear is his dislike of the existing governments in Greece,
and particularly of democracy. Tyranny and oligarchy are easiest to dismiss; no-
body should have to live by the whims of a power-hungry autocrat, and money
is no measure of merit. Democracy is harder to dispose of, but living under a gov-
ernment he did not like galvanized Plato into a vehement attack on a system he
categorized as “an agreeable form of anarchy” marked by “an equality of a pecu-
liar kind for equals and unequals alike” (558C; Cornford 1945). The debunking of
the so-called equality of democracy was common to the thinking of fourth-century
intellectuals. Aristotle and Isocrates shared Plato’s preference for what they la-
beled “proportional” or “geometric” equality. It was the ratio between merit and
privilege, they argued, that ought to remain constant. Such a system was far more
equitable, they believed, than the “arithmetic” equality of democracy that ac-
corded equal privilege to people of unequal merit. For Plato, giving equal polit-
ical power to all alike was no different from giving all students the same grade
regardless of their performance on papers and exams.
Good government, Plato concluded, will never come into being until philoso-
phers and rulers are one and the same. Hoping to realize this goal in an imme-
diate and concrete manner, he accepted an invitation to travel to Sicily, where he
sought to educate the tyrant Dionysius II in philosophy, but Dionysius was al-
ready a mature adult, and the experiment was a complete failure. Closer to home,
Plato founded a school in Athens that he called the Academy because of its lo-
cation by the groves of the ancient Greek hero Academus. There men and a few
women studied for years to achieve an enlightenment which, in Plato’s view,
would qualify them to participate in government—but which he acknowledged
would in fact drive a wedge between them and their unenlightened fellow citi-
zens. Former students at the Academy included many famous philosophers, as-
tronomers, mathematicians, and even scientists. The presence of scientists at the
Academy is a testimony to its breadth, for Plato himself was not drawn to sci-
ence. How could he be, when he believed that only the eternal mattered—that
the forms were the ultimate and only reality? Science deals with change and with
248

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
motion. Like Parmenides, Plato conceived reality as unchanging and unchange-
able. Without a mechanism for explaining change, Plato’s idealist philosophy was
antithetical to science.
Aristotle
It was Plato’s star pupil Aristotle who founded the great institution of scientific
learning at Athens, the Lyceum. His father had been a court physician in Mace-
don, and he had been trained in scientific observation from his youth. He was
never happier than in the meticulous observation and classification of species.
Scholars in all disciplines, but especially perhaps biologists, will recognize the de-
light he took in connecting the particular to the general, and in observing nature
at work in all its perfection: Even in the animals that are not attractive to the senses,
he wrote, “the craftsmanship of nature provides extraordinary pleasures to those
who are able to recognize the causes in things and who have a natural inclination
to philosophy” (On the Parts of Animals 645a 7ff). Certainly Aristotle thrived in the
constantly changing world of nature, while Plato was happiest contemplating the
eternal truths of mathematics. For Aristotle, the dynamic power of change ac-
counted for a great deal of the excitement of mental life. And not only this: It was
movement toward a particular end—teleology, from the Greek telos meaning
“end” or “goal”—that he saw as the guiding force behind life. A prime mover, he
argued, shaped the universe in accord with his ends. Only the prime mover was
not itself moved. Loosely speaking, the prime mover was what most people would
call God. Aristotle’s philosophy was very popular in Europe during the Middle
Ages, when Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274 AD) adapted it to Christian theology.
Aristotle was a less eccentric person than Plato. Though he came from the Ion-
ian city of Stagira in northern Greece and hence did not belong in Athens the
same way the blue-blooded Plato did, he was more firmly grounded in the cus-
tomary relations of Greek society than Plato, who apparently never married or
had children. He lived with two successive women, his wife Pythias and then, af-
ter Pythias’ death, his concubine Herpyllis; he had a daughter and a son. After
Plato’s death in 347, when Aristotle had studied at the Academy for nearly
twenty years, he left Athens and took up residence in Assos in Asia Minor. Sev-
eral years later he returned to Macedon, where Philip had summoned him to
serve as tutor to the young prince Alexander. It was upon his return to Athens
in 335 that he established the Lyceum. He and his students conversed there while
strolling through the colonnaded walks (peripatoi, which gave his followers the
name “peripatetics” by which they are still known today). When he was accused
of impiety in the burst of anti-Macedonian feeling that erupted after news of
Alexander’s death arrived in Athens, Aristotle left Attica. Looking back somberly
at the trial of Socrates, he observed that he did not want the Athenians to sin a
second time against philosophy. He died the following year, in 322.
That Aristotle loved science while Plato loved mathematics reveals a profound
difference between the two men and their ways of engaging with the world of
ideas. Live things excited Aristotle and inspired in him the desire to categorize
249

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
them. The same urge would lead him to classify all the political arrangements fa-
miliar in his day in his famous work of political theory, the Politics. Where Plato
had used reason as virtually his only tool in the quest for understanding, Aristo-
tle placed tremendous importance on observation. His stay in northwest Asia Mi-
nor and the adjacent islands was particularly rewarding to him because of the op-
portunity it afforded him to study the lagoon of Pyrrha on Lesbos, which teemed
with life. Though reason was not his only tool, he was the founder of the disci-
pline of logic. To Aristotle we owe the articulation of the fundamental principle
of the syllogism—the principle that tells us that if A yields B and B yields C, then
A by itself must yield C. If Sneaky is a cat and all cats are mammals, then Sneaky
must be a mammal. Since the Parthenon is in Athens and Athens is in Attica, then
the Parthenon must be in Attica.
Whereas Plato had developed a framework for discussing politics so theoreti-
cal that scholars are often puzzled as to what real states he might have had in
mind, Aristotle approached the question of the human community by amassing
and analyzing a tremendous amount of data. In this project he was assisted by
his students at the Lyceum, where 158 essays on constitutions of various poleis
were drawn up. That all these have disappeared except for The Athenian Consti-
tution is an incalculable loss to the study of Greek history. Aristotle was fasci-
nated by issues surrounding government. His principal work of political theory
is his Politics, which remained a cherished handbook throughout the medieval,
Renaissance, and early modern periods.
In his conception of the universe at large, Aristotle differed with Plato on a key
point—the existence of Forms. To Aristotle, as to the average person, Forms were
not real. Only the combination of form and matter created something real. Plato,
Aristotle thought, had failed, like Parmenides, to account for change. Aristotle
also rejected the broad level of generalization at which Plato operated. In their
views of the human community, however, the two men were quite similar. Both
saw the polis as more than a practical arrangement for the exchange of goods and
mutual protection; for them human existence and the existence of the polis were
coterminous. (The lack of a state structure would make a fully human existence
impossible, but a structure larger than the polis seemed unimaginable. Aristotle
identified the largest possible size for the state at ten thousand citizens, the num-
ber who could be addressed by a speaker at one time.) Aristotle is famous for
having said “man is a political animal.” What he actually said is that people are
animals whose nature it is to live in a polis. Only in a polis could individuals re-
alize their social natures and grow through the sharing of ideas. This growth,
however, was limited to a few people of intellectual gifts who belonged to a so-
cial class that guaranteed them leisure for contemplation. Powerful obstacles pre-
vented the poor from participating in politics—especially the nonfarming poor,
who did “banausic” labor, arduous jobs that compromised the mind along with
the body. The best state, he concludes, will not make common laborers citizens,
for citizens must have adequate property to ensure sufficient leisure for goodness
and political activity. So much for democracy.
250

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
Both the blue-blooded Athenian aristocrat and Athens’ most famous metic,
then, were intensely class-conscious. Aristotle’s political philosophy, however,
differed from Plato’s in two key respects. First, Aristotle believed in collective
wisdom: A mass of people who are individually unwise, he argues, may surpass
the wisdom of the few best men, just as potluck dinners may prove to be tastier
than those hosted by a single individual. The masses, he claims, can be perfectly
good judges of music and poetry, since “some appreciate one thing, some an-
other, and taken together they appreciate everything” (Politics 1281b). For this
reason, he is open to a compromise similar to that of Solon: Poor people in his
ideal state would be allowed to choose officials and hold them to account, but not
to hold office. Second, Aristotle had such a powerful belief in natural hierar-
chies—free over slave, Greek over non-Greek, adult over child, male over fe-
male—that he recurred with some frequency to this theme of the inferiority of
women to men.
Whereas Plato’s utopia entailed a unisex education aimed at producing
guardian men and women who would govern together, Aristotle was a staunch
supporter of patriarchy, which he believed had a solid basis in women’s biolog-
ical inadequacy. Women, he maintained, had colder bodies than men. For this
reason, though they were able to provide matter for embryos, only men could
provide the soul. In the womb, embryos that stopped short of full development
for lack of heat became female. Thus women were literally half-baked. From this
came the inferior strength he identified in a variety of species. The female, he con-
tended, “is, so to speak, a deformed male” (Generation of Animals 737a). At times,
as was the case with the Hippocratics, Aristotle’s powers of observation deserted
him when women were their subject. The twentieth-century philosopher Bertrand
Russell quipped that Aristotle would not have claimed that women had fewer
teeth than men if he had allowed his wife to open her mouth.
For all their differences, Plato and Aristotle shared a passionate conviction that
the goal of philosophy was to enable selected people to pursue enlightenment in
a republic of virtuous citizens. The state for them meant the polis, and it was cen-
tral to the good life. Their thinking contrasts strikingly with that of most moderns,
who are more likely to see the state as designed to grant individuals the freedom
to pursue their private goals, particularly their economic ones. Though Plato and
Aristotle were both intensely critical of democracy, they shared with the Athen-
ian democrats an eminently Greek belief in the active nature of the polis. So far
from an artificial institution whose chief goal was to redistribute goods and pre-
vent crime, the polis was conceived by its residents as a force for the moral and
spiritual improvement of its citizens. For this force to operate properly, citizens
had to engage eagerly in political life; participation was a duty, not a right. The
problems of the fourth century, however, raised serious questions about whether
the polis as traditionally conceived was adequate to serve people’s needs.
The fourth century BC witnessed an explosion of creative energy in many areas:
Philosophy, biology, political theory, mathematics, and military science all made
251

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
significant advances. Where all this fertility was leading is unclear. Solid founda-
tions were established for intellectual traditions that lived and grew for centuries;
many of them still flourish in altered—or unaltered—forms. The knowledge gen-
erated did not, however, offer salvation to Greece. The increasing specialization of
the fourth century led to a division between generals and politicians that resulted
in more professional military skills. Consequently, generals in the fourth century
were better than those of the fifth. Their weapons and machinery were more ver-
satile and sophisticated. New ways of thinking also led to specialized monographs
like Xenophon’s treatises on the art of horsemanship and the skills necessary for
a successful cavalry commander, and the Siegecraft of the author known as Aeneas
Tacticus. No good, however, came of these improvements. Greeks simply ex-
panded the repertoire of available methods for killing.
The great texts of Greek political theory continue to be read today. The insight
they afforded, however, seems to have had little real-life application in their own
day. Plato’s students never did take over Athenian government, and Aristotle’s
influence on his pupil Alexander was limited. Identifying those who are likely to
govern best is always a challenge, and it contributes little to point out the im-
prudence of according sovereign power to a power-hungry tyrant, a clique of rich
men, or an angry mob. It is precisely because wealth and birth have historically
been the criteria for inclusion in the elite that democracy has become a popular
alternative to oligarchy. It is one thing to advocate an aristocracy of intellect and
another to design practical machinery for establishing one. It was a central tenet
of Greek intellectuals that most people lacked capacity for growth. Plato and
Aristotle worked on the assumption that the secret to reforming government was
in nurturing the tiny minority that had this capacity. Their goal was basically to
design a constitution that minimized the power prudence must accord to the
mindless masses who might otherwise rise up and slaughter their betters.
To say that the polis ultimately failed because it lacked a truly democratic ide-
ology would nonetheless be ridiculous on several counts. First, mighty empires
have flourished for long periods without any democratic ideology whatsoever.
Second, we know from the vigor and stability of fourth-century Athens that
democracy was alive and well, albeit not in the minds of Greece’s intellectuals.
Third, the polis did not entirely fail. The collapse of polis ideology before the
Macedonian onslaught was certainly noticeable in states like Athens and Sparta
that had once enjoyed the privilege of framing their own foreign policies. Smaller
poleis, however, had long been accustomed to eking out what dignity they could
in the shadow of greater powers. The bustling city in fact remained the core of
Greek civilization for centuries to come.
TRANSLATIONS
Cornford, F. M. 1945. The Republic of Plato. London and New York: Oxford University
Press.
252

The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies
Fowler, H. N. 1914. Plato: Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, Phaedrus. Loeb Classical Li-
brary. Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University Press.
Hamilton, Walter. 1951. Plato: The Symposium. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Murray, A. T. 1936. Pseudo-Demosthenes, Against Neaera, from Demosthenes. Vol. VI. Loeb
Classical Library. Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University Press.
Warner, Rex. 1979. Xenophon: A History of My Times [The Hellenica]. Harmondsworth, UK:
Penguin.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bryant, Joseph. 1996. Moral Codes and Social Structure in Ancient Greece. Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press. The connection between values and social organization
from the Archaic period through the Hellenistic Age.
Cartledge, Paul. 1987. Agesilaos and the Crisis of Sparta. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press. A close study of fourth-century Sparta.
Hansen, Mogens H. 1991. The Athenian Democracy in the Age of Demosthenes. Oxford and
Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell. An engaging analytical study of Athenian democ-
racy that is crammed with useful facts.
Hansen, Mogens H. 1991. The Trial of Socrates from the Athenian Point of View. Copenhagen:
The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters. Discussion of the sources, a re-
construction of the trial, and an investigation of the political background of the pros-
ecution.
Ober, Josiah. 1989. Mass and Elite in Democratic Athens: Rhetoric, Ideology, and the Power of
the People. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. A sociopolitical study of fourth-
century Athens that uses the findings of modern social scientists to shed light on the
ideology of the democracy as revealed in the work of the orators.
Sage, Michael, ed. 1996. Warfare in Ancient Greece: A Sourcebook. London and New York:
Routledge. A collection of passages relating to Greek warfare, tied together by
thoughtful and detailed commentary that includes critical readings of the sources
themselves.
Sinclair, T. A. 1968. A History of Greek Political Thought. 2nd ed. Cleveland and New York:
Meridian. A thought-provoking analysis of Greek political thinking from Homer
through the Roman conquest.
Todd, S. C. 1993. The Shape of Athenian Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press. A detailed
and analytical study of Athenian law dealing with both procedure and substance.
Tritle, Lawrence, ed. 1997. The Greek World in the Fourth Century: From the Fall of the Athen-
ian Empire to the Successors of Alexander. London and New York: Routledge. A col-
lection of essays on the problems of the fourth century, including chapters on
Thebes, the Greeks of Asia Minor, and the states of western Greece.
Wood, Ellen Meiksins. 1988. Peasant-Citizen and Slave: The Foundations of Athenian Democ-
racy. London and New York: Verso. The relationship between agrarian labor and
democracy in Classical Athens.
253

254
10
PHILIP II AND THE
RISE OF MACEDON
It is one of the paradoxes of ancient history that the Greek poleis maintained
their independence as long as they did. Their tiny size and fractiousness made
their escape from Persian conquest appear miraculous even in antiquity. The re-
turn of the threat of foreign conquest in the fourth century was not surprising,
but the source of the threat was not the mighty Persian Empire but the hitherto
insignificant kingdom known as Macedon or Macedonia.
The success of Macedon in conquering the Greek states was due partly to the
political divisions and economic strains that inhibited the evolution of a consis-
tent policy in Athens, partly to the mutual mistrust that prevented the formation
of an effective united front by the leading poleis—Athens, Sparta, and Thebes.
Credit, however, must also be given to the unique military and diplomatic gifts
of Philip II, who became king of Macedon in 359 BC.
EARLY MACEDON
Herodotus claimed that Perdiccas, the first king of Macedon, was promised the
land illuminated by the sun as his kingdom. The reality was different. For most
of early Macedonian history, the kings of Macedon ruled a chronically unstable
kingdom that was a state only in name. Sandwiched between Thessaly on the
south, Thrace and the Chalcidian League on the east, Paeonia on the north, and
Illyria and Epirus on the west, Macedonian kings struggled constantly to main-
tain their independence while simultaneously striving to assert their preemi-
nence over the local dynasts, who ruled the various regions that made up the
kingdom of Macedon.
Macedonia’s geography made their struggle more difficult. Macedonia con-
sisted of two distinct geographical regions: Lower Macedonia, the great alluvial
plain created by the Haliacmon and Axius rivers during their course to the Gulf

Philip II and the Rise of Macedon
of Therma, and Upper Macedonia, the horseshoe of rugged uplands and moun-
tains that stretched northwestward toward Illyria and Epirus. Lower Macedonia
formed the heart of the kingdom of Macedon and supported a large agricultural
population. Its mountainous hinterlands not only held extensive forests and rich
mineral deposits but also sheltered various tribes who jealously guarded their
freedom from the control of the lowland Macedonian kings. Uniting these two
regions was the essential precondition for the growth and expansion of Mace-
donian power.
MACEDONIAN SOCIETY AND KINGSHIP
Were the Macedonians Greek? This question is the most contentious issue in
Macedonian historiography. Conflicting claims to the territory of ancient Mace-
donia have made the question of the “Greekness” of the ancient Macedonians a
burning issue. Modern nationalists may be confident of their answers, but con-
temporary ideology has little relevance to antiquity. Thus, while recent epi-
graphic discoveries suggest that “Macedonian” was a dialect of northwest Greek,
it is clear that in antiquity neither Macedonians nor Greeks considered the Mace-
donians to be Greek. Except for the ruling Argead house, which was believed to
be of Argive origin, Greeks viewed the Macedonians as barbarians like their
Thracian and Illyrian neighbors.
More important, although Macedonian kings encouraged the Hellenization of
the Macedonian nobility, Macedonian and Greek culture had little in common.
Cities were the core of what was most distinctive in Greek civilization, but prior
to Philip’s reign, city life in Macedonia was limited to a few Greek colonies on
the coast of the Gulf of Therma and dynastic centers such as Aegae and Pella.
Most Macedonians were farmers or seminomadic pastoralists living in scattered
villages and owing allegiance to Macedonian aristocrats. Other differences di-
vided the two cultures as well, such as the polygamy of the Macedonian kings
and the Macedonians’ love of unmixed wine and their preference for tumulus
burial instead of simple cremation or interment. Indeed, the lifestyle of the Mace-
donian nobility had more in common with that of Homeric heroes than with that
of Classical Greeks. War and hunting were central to the life of a Macedonian no-
ble. Before being recognized as an adult, a young man had to spear a boar with-
out the aid of a net and kill an enemy. Feuds resulting from heavy drinking, com-
petition for preference at the royal court, and rivalries over the favors of young
men and women were common.
The monarchy was the central institution of Macedonian society. Like Louis
XIV of France, a Macedonian basileus (“king”) was an autocrat who could well
say “I am the state.” Theories that royal power was limited by an army assembly
have been shown to be groundless. The army might acclaim a new king and wit-
ness trials of nobles, but the king made all appointments and grants of land and
privilege, and only he responded to petitions. Treaties and alliances were made
255

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
with him personally, and foreign allies pledged their support to him and his fam-
ily. The king could even choose which of his sons would be his successor.
Macedonian kings were autocrats but they were not all-powerful. Greek polit-
ical theorists equated monarchy and tyranny because of the supreme importance
of the ruler’s personality in the public and private spheres. This was especially
true of Macedon, where the kings spent their lives in the midst of their hetairoi
(“companions”)—Macedonian nobles who formed their personal entourage.
These nobles provided the kings with their advisers and the members of their
bodyguard, and served in an elite cavalry unit commanded by the king. Not sur-
prisingly, Macedonian kings sat on insecure thrones. Only two predecessors of
Philip II died natural deaths; the rest died in battle or fell victim to conspiracies.
The Predecessors of Philip II
Philip II was the beneficiary of almost two centuries of patient state-building by
his Argead predecessors. The process began in the late sixth century BC with an
alliance between Amyntas I and Persia. The Macedonians were loyal allies, even
supporting the Persian invasion of Greece in 480 BC. Not surprisingly, Amyntas’
successor, Alexander I, encouraged the spread of stories after the Persian defeat
testifying to his covert support of the Greek cause during the invasion.
Persian rule brought Macedon great advantages by shielding the kingdom
from attack by its neighbors. After the Greek victory, Amyntas’ fifth century BC
successors—Alexander I, Perdiccas II, and Archelaus—extended their territory
northwestward into Upper Macedon and eastward to the rich silver mine beyond
the Axius River, making the kingdom the strongest power in the region. Mace-
don’s growing power and resources attracted the attention of Athens and other
Greek cities. Macedonian grain fed many of Athens’ allies and subjects, and
Macedonian timber was critical to Athens’ fleet. For their part, the Macedonian
kings used their wealth to win recognition as Greeks and Hellenize the royal
court. Alexander I may have competed in the Olympic games, while Archelaus
supported Greek artists and writers, such as the Athenian tragedian Euripides,
who wrote two tragedies at Archelaus’ court: the lost Archelaus, celebrating his
host’s alleged Argive ancestry, and the Bacchae, offering a terrifying evocation of
the power of Dionysus. By the reign of Philip II, the Macedonian court was the
principal cultural center in Macedon and the focus of the social life of the Mace-
donian aristocracy. Growing Macedonian power, however, threatened Athenian
interests in the north Aegean, prompting Athens to support Macedon’s Thracian
neighbors and various pretenders to the Macedonian throne.
When Philip II came to power in 360, Macedon was faced by the most severe
crisis in its history. Chronic instability had left the kingdom vulnerable to threats
from both Greek and non-Greek enemies. Philip’s own brother, Perdiccas III, had
been killed in battle in 360 BC by the Illyrians together with four thousand Mace-
donian troops and much of the Macedonian aristocracy. Surrounded by enemies
and beset by dynastic rivalries, the kingdom seemed on the verge of collapse.
256

Figure 10.1. Macedonia and its neighbors.
A
xi
us
R.
St
ry
m
on
R
.
St
ry
m
on
R
.
Ne
stu
s R
.
Ne
stu
s R
.
H
e
b
r
u
s
Da
nu
be
R.
Sparta
Corinth
Aegeae
Pella
Pella
Stagira
Amphipolis
Philippi
Ephesus
Byzantium
MOLOSSI
EPI
RUS
ELIMA
A
C
H
A
E
A
AETOLIA
P
H
O
C
IS
Thermopylae
T
H
E
S
S
A
L
Y
0
0
40
80
120
160 km
20
40
60
80
100 miles
H
al
ia
c
m
o
n
ARC
AD
IA
Samos
Rhodes
Cos
Chios
Lesbos
A
xi
us
R.
H
e
b
r
u
s
R
.
Da
nu
be
R.
Sparta
Corinth
Thebes
Chaeronea
Aegae
Olynthus
Amphipolis
Philippi
Philippi
Ephesus
Perinthus
Byzantium
Chalcedon
MOLOSSI
EPI
RUS
A
C
H
A
E
A
AETOLIA
P
H
O
C
IS
Thermopylae
T
H
E
S
S
A
L
Y
H
al
ia
c
m
o
n
ARC
AD
IA
ODRYSAE
TRIBALLI
GETAE
ODRYSAE
SCYTHAE
ODRYSAE
TRIBALLI
GETAE
ODRYSAE
SCYTHAE
Pydna
Pydna
Mt.
Pangaeum
Mt.
Pangaeum
R
.
Eu
bo
ea
Delphi
Athens
Mytilene
BOEOTIA
BLACK
SEA
PROPONTIS
AEGEAN
SEA

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
THE REIGN OF PHILIP II
Philip II was born about 382 BC, the last son of Amyntas III and his Illyrian wife
Eurydice. Plutarch says that Eurydice learned to read in order to educate her chil-
dren, but Philip’s education ended abruptly with the defeat of his brother Alexan-
der II and his own exile as a hostage in Thebes from 369 to 367 BC. His exile was
not all loss. Philip’s stay in Thebes soon after its victory at Leuctra gave him an
invaluable insight into contemporary Greek politics and military tactics.
Philip returned to Macedon in 367 as the kingdom descended into chaos. Three
kings ruled Macedon during the next seven years. Political instability also pro-
vided Philip with an unexpected opportunity, since the crisis following Perdic-
cas’ death demanded a ruler capable of taking decisive action. That ruler could
258
Figure 10.2a. Silver tetradrachm of Philip II (359–336 BC). Obverse: Head of Zeus. Reverse:
Mounted Macedonian king—probably Philip II—wearing Macedonian hat and cape.
Figure 10.2b. Silver tetradrachm of Philip II (359–336 BC). Obverse: Head of Zeus. Reverse:
Jockey commemorating the victory of Philip’s horse at Olympia in 356 BC.
a
b

Philip II and the Rise of Macedon
only be Philip, since he was the sole surviving adult Argead. Not surprisingly,
Philip quickly supplanted his infant nephew Amyntas as king of Macedon.
When Philip took power in 360, Macedon was threatened by foreign enemies
and rival claimants to the throne supported by the Thracian king Seuthes II and
the Athenians, still hoping to regain Amphipolis. In the next two years the situ-
ation changed dramatically. After neutralizing the Thracians and Athenians
through astute diplomacy, Philip quickly defeated both the Paeonians and Illyr-
ians and regained control of western and northwestern Macedonia. Philip’s bril-
liant diplomacy paved the way for his decisive military victories over the Paeo-
nians and Illyrians in 358 and set the pattern for the rest of his reign.
Success followed success during the remainder of the decade. Alliance with
the Molossians in Epirus secured Macedon’s western frontier and freed Philip to
turn eastward and seize the Greek cities on the coasts of Macedon and the gold
mines of Mount Pangaeus that financed his plans for the rest of his reign. In less
than a decade, Philip had freed Macedon from the enemies that had threatened
its survival since the sixth century. At the same time far-reaching reforms gave
the kingdom unprecedented military strength and political cohesion.
The Reforms of Philip II
Philip II’s reign coincided with a revolution in military tactics and weaponry that
ended the Greek hoplite’s dominance of the battlefield. By introducing these in-
novations to Macedon, Philip transformed it into the preeminent military power
in southeastern Europe. His most important military reform was the reorganiza-
tion of the Macedonian infantry. Philip created a new phalanx to replace the old
undisciplined militia that had served Macedonian kings so poorly in the past. The
six companies of the new phalanx were recruited from each of Macedon’s tradi-
tional territorial divisions, but they were equipped with new weapons and as-
signed a new role in battle. Each member of the phalanx wore a metal helmet and
carried a small shield and a short sword. His principal weapon, however, was an
enormous pike that could be as much as 18 feet long, allowing the soldier to
259
Figure 10.3. The Macedonian phalanx.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
strike a blow before his enemies could close and use their shorter weapons. The
presence of the phalanx in a battle forced Philip’s enemies to modify their tactics
to cope with it and allow the companion cavalry to deal a decisive blow to an en-
emy force already confused by the phalanx and the elite guard units protecting
its flanks.
Philip also strengthened the bonds between the army and the king by sharing
its hardships and dangers, as his loss of an eye and other wounds attested. He
conferred a new title on the common soldiers, pezhetairoi (“foot companions”),
suggesting that they too, like the nobles, were the king’s personal companions.
The rage of Alexander’s soldiers at the thought of sharing this status with Per-
sians revealed the strength of the bond Philip had forged with them. The bond
between the king and the Macedonian nobility also changed. Perdiccas III’s dis-
astrous defeat had devastated the Macedonian nobility and enabled Philip to re-
plenish the royal companions with Greeks and non-Greeks who flocked to Mace-
don in search of opportunity and wealth. Members of the old nobility also
benefited, receiving commands in Philip’s new model army. Their sons became
royal pages, personally serving the king and providing Philip with future offi-
cers, while also serving as hostages for the loyalty of their families.
Theopompus, the historian of Philip’s reign, sarcastically characterized his
new companions as men more suited to be “courtesans” than “courtiers.” Still,
they were loyal to Philip, and he rewarded them with land and treasure gained
by his victories. Projects such as the draining of marshland in Lower Macedonia
and the foundation of colonies such as Philippi further strengthened royal power
and resources. As a result, Philip possessed what no previous Macedonian king
had ever had before: a loyal base of support for his policies.
Philip Becomes a Force in Greece
Philip’s predecessors had tried to avert the danger posed by a united Thessaly by
supporting Larisa against Pherae and its Theban allies. Not surprisingly, Philip
also intervened in Thessaly following the conclusion of an alliance between Pho-
cis and Macedon’s old enemy Pherae.
Phocis had emerged in the mid-350s as a major power in central and northern
Greece, and the alliance of Pherae and Phocis alarmed both Larisa and Thebes,
forcing them to seek Philip’s aid. Philip initially underestimated the threat posed
by the alliance of Pherae and Phocis. Although Philip suffered two severe defeats
at the hands of Phocis in 353—the most serious of his entire reign—he crushed
them a year later at the Battle of the Crocus Field. This battle transformed Philip’s
position in Greece. After occupying Pherae and exiling its tyrant, Philip was ap-
pointed by the Thessalian League archo¯n (“commander-in-chief”) of Thessaly,
uniting Thessaly and Macedon and virtually doubling the military forces at his
disposal. It also allowed Philip to expand his influence deep into central Greece.
While Philip was busy in Thessaly, central Greece was convulsed by the Third
Sacred War. The war originated in Thebes’ attempt to humiliate Phocis by hav-
ing the Delphic Amphictyony severely fine the Phocians in 357 for cultivating
260

Philip II and the Rise of Macedon
sacred land. Phocis’ response was unexpected. Long Thebes’ main rival in cen-
tral Greece, Phocis had grudgingly recognized Theban suzerainty at the Battle of
Leuctra. In 357, the Phocians made a desperate effort to regain their indepen-
dence. Instead of submitting to Theban blackmail, they seized Delphi and used
Apollo’s treasures to recruit mercenaries. Athenian and Spartan hostility frus-
trated Thebes’ attempt to avenge the sacrilege, allowing Phocis to subdue much
of central Greece.
Conflicts with Thrace and Olynthus delayed Philip’s intervention until 347. Al-
though Macedonian power tipped the scales against Phocis, Philip sought to pre-
vent Thebes from profiting from his victory by secretly negotiating surrender
terms with Phocis. Facing the traditional penalty for such sacrilege—execution of
all adult males—the Phocians accepted the relatively mild terms offered by Philip
and surrendered in the summer of 346. Phocis’ cities were broken up into their
constituent villages, and the Phocians agreed to repay Delphi at a rate of sixty tal-
ents per year. Finally, Philip gained Phocis’ votes in the Delphic Amphictyony,
thus giving him a voting majority on the Amphictyonic Council. All Greece
learned the full extent of Philip’s new influence in Delphic affairs a year later,
when he presided over the Pythian games. Philip’s triumph in the Sacred War
also temporarily calmed relations between Macedon and Athens.
Philip, Athens, and the Peace of Philocrates
Tense relations between Athens and Philip dated to the beginning of his reign
when he bought Athenian neutrality by promising to restore Amphipolis and
then not only seized it but also captured Pydna, Methone, and Potidaea, thereby
eliminating Athens’ principal allies in the north Aegean. Athens delayed re-
sponding to Philip’s actions for almost a decade. This was largely the result of
the economic devastation caused by the Peloponnesian War, which limited
Athens’ ability to pursue a wide-ranging foreign policy in the early fourth cen-
tury. Athenian power was further constrained in the 350s by the defection of sev-
eral key allies from the Second Athenian League and by an important political in-
novation: the establishment of the Theoric Fund.
Eubulus (c. 405–c. 335 BC), Athens’ leading politician, persuaded the Atheni-
ans to pass a law assigning all fiscal surpluses to the Theoric Fund, which funded
public benefits such as repairing roads and fortifications and religious participa-
tion including distributions to Athenian citizens at religious festivals; it was
named after the “theatrical” performances that were part of these celebrations.
The orator Demades rightly called the Theoric Fund “the glue of the democracy,”
since it reduced tension between the rich and the poor. It also, however, encour-
aged a pacifist foreign policy in two ways: by lessening the poor’s need for the
pay they received for rowing in the fleet and by increasing their concern that sur-
plus funds would be redirected to military expenditures and their benefits re-
duced should war break out.
Eubulus’ cautious financial policies had dramatic results. Athenian revenues
rose from 130 talents to 400, enabling Athens to construct new triremes and to
261

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
262
Figure 10.4. Polyeuctus’ posthu-
mous portrait of Demosthenes was
erected in the Athenian agora in 280
BC and survives in this Roman copy.
It shows the orator as gaunt, wor-
ried, and thoughtful. (Note: The po-
sition of the hands is reproduced
incorrectly in this copy.)

Philip II and the Rise of Macedon
improve the docks and fortifications. The Laurium silver mines were reopened
and foreigners encouraged to settle in Attica and become metics. Only the threat
of Macedonian military intervention in central Greece in the late 350s prompted
the prosperous Athenians to finally take strong action.
With a Macedonian invasion of Attica seemingly imminent, the Athenians dis-
patched an expeditionary force in 352 to occupy Thermopylae, to block the Mace-
donian advance. The motion was made by a close associate of Eubulus. In a cri-
sis, Athens’ security overrode any scruples Eubulus and his supporters may have
had about dipping into the Theoric Fund. Otherwise, however, Athens failed ut-
terly to hinder the Macedonian king’s growing influence in northern and central
Greece. Athens’ actions in the early 340s were similarly ineffective. When Olyn-
thus tried to shift alliances from Macedon to Athens, Philip turned on his former
ally. Athens’ ineffective response to Olynthus’ appeals for help in 348 allowed
Philip to capture the city, raze it, enslave its citizens, and to dismantle the Chal-
cidic League, Macedon’s only potential Greek rival in the north Aegean.
Although Athens’ restraint as Philip’s power grew was prudent, its inability
to regain Amphipolis or aid its allies was humiliating. Not surpisingly, some
Athenian politicians demanded a more aggressive Athenian policy toward Mace-
don. The most prominent of these politicians was the orator Demosthenes. Demos-
thenes’ fame was such that the Roman statesman Cicero called his speeches
against Mark Antony “Philippics” after Demosthenes’ speeches against Philip.
Originally a supporter of Eubulus, by 351 Demosthenes had become disenchanted
with Eubulus’ policies and begun to forge a new political identity. In the First
Philippic, Demosthenes revealed his new views, attacking Philip and urging the
Athenians to prepare for war by building a strong navy. Although Demosthenes
continued to advocate resistance to Philip, even he recognized that the fall of
Olynthus, Philip’s triumph in the Sacred War, and the defection of Euboea made
peace imperative if Athens was to avoid total disaster.
The Athenian politician Philocrates negotiated peace with Philip in the sum-
mer of 346. Negotiating the treaty and securing its approval by the Athenian as-
sembly was a contentious process. Because the Peace of Philocrates quickly col-
lapsed amidst bitter recriminations, the details of its negotiation remain unclear,
but not its significance. Faced with the alternatives of fighting Macedon or ac-
cepting Philip’s terms, Athens chose the latter. Athens abandoned its claim to
Amphipolis, accepted the exclusion of its Phocian and Thracian allies from the
treaty, and agreed that the city and the Second Athenian League would become
allies of Philip and his descendants. Athens’ inability to prevent the growth of
Macedonian power and influence in Greece was clear to all.
The Aftermath of the Peace of Philocrates
The Peace of Philocrates ratified Philip’s supremacy in northern and central
Greece. His diplomatic triumph was, however, short-lived. As the likelihood of
war with Macedon receded, support for the treaty dissipated. Philip’s treatment
of Phocis also cast doubt on the credibility of the treaty’s negotiators, who had
263

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
promised that the Phocians would suffer no harm. When Philip also gained Pho-
cis’ two votes on the Amphictyonic Council, the Athenians and Spartans angrily
refused to send deputations to the Pythian games.
While Philip’s critics in Athens steadily undermined the Peace of Philocrates
and its supporters, Philip’s proposals to strengthen the peace were rebuffed.
Athens again demanded that he return Amphipolis. Philocrates, the architect of
the peace, was indicted for bribery and fled into exile, while Demosthenes, who
had helped negotiate the treaty, unsuccessfully impeached his fellow envoy
Aeschines in order to protect himself. Only Philip’s need for peace in Greece dur-
ing his Thracian campaign in 342 prevented him from taking strong action against
Athens. He finally declared war in 340, when Athens joined Persia to frustrate his
siege of the Hellespontine city of Perinthus. Athens responded with its own dec-
laration of war.
The actual outbreak of hostilities was delayed for another year. First, Philip
unsuccessfully besieged Byzantium; then he campaigned against the Scythians,
who ruled the hinterlands of modern Romania’s Black Sea coast and threatened
Macedonian control of Thrace. Nevertheless, he still gave Athens a sharp re-
minder of the potential consequences of war with Macedon by capturing the en-
tire Black Sea grain fleet in 340 BC, thereby threatening Athens with starvation.
Philip’s long-awaited opportunity to strike directly at Athens came in 339,
when he accepted the Delphic Amphictyony’s invitation to lead a sacred war
against the city of Amphissa, near Delphi. By the end of the year the Macedon-
ian army was in Phocis, within easy striking distance of Athens. Almost a decade
later Demosthenes proudly reminded the Athenians that only he had dared ad-
dress the assembly, when they learned of Philip’s presence in Phocis.
At dawn the next day the Prytaneis called the Council to the Chamber, and citi-
zens moved into the Assembly. . . . The Council appeared, announced the news
they had received, and brought forward their informant to repeat it. The herald
then voiced the question “Who desires to speak?” No one moved. The question
was repeated several times without a man standing up, though all the strategoi
were there, all the orators, and the voice of Athens called for a word to save
her. . . . I came forward and addressed the Assembly.
(On the Crown, pp. 169–172; Saunders 1975)
The Athenians’ despair was understandable. Few Peloponnesian cities had
heeded Demosthenes’ appeal to join in resisting Philip, so when battle was finally
joined in late summer 338 at Chaeronea in Boeotia, Philip faced only the levies of
Athens, Thebes and the Boeotian League and a handful of Peloponnesian units. A
monumental stone lion still gazes over the plain of Chaeronea, marking the site of
this pivotal battle in world history. Little is known about the battle itself beyond two
facts: Greek casualties were heavy, and the decisive blow was struck by the com-
panion cavalry led by Philip’s eighteen-year-old son and heir, Alexander. A thou-
sand Athenians were killed and another two thousand captured; the Thebans’ cher-
ished Sacred Band was annihilated. Philip’s triumph was complete. After Chaeronea,
resistance to Philip’s authority in Greece would have been futile. All that remained
to be determined was the form Macedonian domination of Greece would take.
264

Philip II and the Rise of Macedon
PHILIP’S PLANS FOR GREECE
Philip’s immediate concern after his victory at Chaeronea was how to deal with
his two principal enemies. The Thebans were treated with exemplary harshness.
As Thebes had a long record of collaboration with Persia and was Macedon’s
chief rival for power in Greece, Philip set out to break the city’s power. Theban
and other Boeotian prisoners were released only after payment of a heavy ran-
som. Thebes’ political leaders were either executed or exiled. A Macedonian gar-
rison was installed on the Cadmea, the city’s acropolis. Finally, Thebes was
stripped of its traditional position of leadership in the Boeotian League.
Philip’s treatment of Athens was dramatically different. Capturing the city
would require a difficult siege, and its fleet could threaten his projected Persian
campaign. Consequently, Athens escaped significant punishment despite its lead-
ing role in the war. Athenian prisoners were returned without ransom, and the
Athenian dead were escorted back to the city by an honor guard led by Alexan-
der and Antipater, Philip’s most trusted general. Nor did Philip object when
Demosthenes, his most implacable opponent, delivered the funeral oration over
the dead of Chaeronea.
Philip’s actions were well received. Many Greeks welcomed the humiliation of
Thebes, whose arbitrary behavior since the Battle of Leuctra had bred widespread
resentment. Athens, for its part, showered the city’s former enemies with honors,
265
Figure 10.5. This lion burial monument marks the graves of 254 Thebans buried at the site
of the Battle of Chaeronea.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
making Antipater and Alexander Athenian citizens and establishing a cult in
Philip’s honor in one of the city’s gymnasia. Athenian suspicion of Philip, of
course, did not disappear: A law passed in 337 promised severe penalties for con-
spirators against the democracy. Officially, however, relations were friendly. An-
tipater and Alexander were not the only Macedonian subjects to benefit from the
thaw in relations between Philip and Athens. As was mentioned in the previous
chapter, one person who took advantage of the new political climate was the
philosopher Aristotle, a close friend of Antipater and the former tutor of Alexander.
Aristotle returned to Athens in 335 and stayed until 322, when anti-Macedonian
sentiment forced him to flee to Euboea, where he died. Philip’s conciliatory pol-
icy toward Athens, however, had more practical goals, winning Athens’ acquies-
cence in his plans for Greece, and it succeeded. Not only did Athens offer no fur-
ther resistance to Macedonian preeminence in Greece, the Athenians also agreed
to send representatives to the general meeting of Greek states at Corinth that
Philip called in the summer of 337 BC.
The Corinthian League
Representatives of all the major Greek states except Sparta met at Corinth to learn
Philip’s plans. The centerpiece of the new order was an alliance, referred to by his-
torians as the Corinthian League, but which Philip called simply “the Greeks.” Its
stated goals were two: to maintain a common peace in Greece and to avenge the
Persian aggression against the Greeks. The alliance council (synedrion) was em-
powered to pass decrees binding on member states, to arbitrate disputes between
them, and to try individuals accused of treason. Member states also received
pledges of mutual nonaggression and support against attack or internal subver-
sion. Not surprisingly, the delegates approved Philip’s proposals and appointed
him he¯ge¯mon, (“leader”) of the alliance and commander of the war against Persia.
Document 10.1. Oath of Members of the League of Corinth
(338–337 BC). Fragment of an Athenian inscription recording the oath sworn
by the Athenians when they ratified the treaty establishing the League of Corinth.
Oath. I swear by Zeus, Earth, Sun, Poseidon, Athena, Ares, and all the gods
and goddesses. I will abide by the peace, and I will not break the agree-
ments with Philip the Macedonian, nor will I take up arms with hostile in-
tent against any one of those who abide by the oaths either by land or by
sea. I will not seize in war by any device or stratagem any city or fort or
harbor belonging to those who share the peace. Nor will I suppress the
kingdom of Philip or of his descendants or the constitutions in force among
any of those [who share the peace], when they swore the oaths concerning
the peace. I will not commit any act that contravenes the agreements nor
will I permit any other to do so. If any one breaks the agreements, I will
266

Philip II and the Rise of Macedon
assist those who have been wronged in accordance with their requests. I
will fight against those who break the common peace just as the common
council and the leader (he¯gemo¯n) decide. . . .
Inscriptiones Graecae 2.236.
Although the primary purpose of the League of Corinth was to legitimize
Philip’s domination of Greece, it also reflected important trends in contemporary
Greek thought. Ever since the end of the Peloponnesian War, Greek politicians
and thinkers had tried to end the chronic political and social unrest that plagued
Greece. The philosopher Plato, as was described in the previous chapter, offered
in the Republic and the Laws utopian visions of ideal cities free of stasis. More
pragmatic thinkers denounced wars between Greeks as civil wars, while insist-
ing that wars against barbarians were inherently just or even desirable as a way
of reducing internal tensions in Greece. These ideas were embodied in the so-
called “common peaces,” such as the King’s Peace and its successors, that are so
characteristic of fourth-century Greek diplomacy.
The most prominent just-war theorist was the Athenian educator Isocrates.
Isocrates was almost one hundred years old when the Battle of Chaeronea was
waged. Throughout his long career as a speech writer and teacher of rhetoric, he
had argued that the solution to Greece’s problems was conquering a portion of the
Persian Empire to which economically deprived and potentially dangerous seg-
ments of Greek society then could emigrate. Isocrates had appealed unsuccess-
fully to various Greek rulers to lead a united Greece in a crusade against Persia,
so Philip must have seemed his last chance to see his dream realized. Unfortu-
nately, we do not know how Philip reacted to Isocrates’ letter urging him to lead
such a crusade after his victory at Chaeronea, but by uniting in the League of
Corinth the ideas of a “common peace” and a crusade against Persia, Philip was
exploiting ideas that had been circulating widely in Greece.
The Death of Philip II
Philip’s planned invasion of the Persian Empire was well timed. The 330s were a
time of severe crisis for Persia. The power of the able but ruthless king Artaxerxes
III (358–338 BC) rivaled that of the founders of the empire. He had ended the
satrapal rebellions that had disrupted the reign of his father Artaxerxes II (405–359
BC), reestablished Persian authority in Phoenicia and Asia Minor, and even re-
conquered Egypt. Philip’s enemies such as Demosthenes appealed to Persia for
assistance against Macedon, but in vain, since Artaxerxes III had been assassi-
nated in 338 BC, precipitating a dynastic crisis that lasted for almost two years.
Philip exploited the chaos within the Persian Empire by sending an expedi-
tionary force commanded by his trusted general Parmenio across the Hellespont
in early 336 BC. The Macedonian army’s march south along the Anatolian coast in-
cited revolts in various Greek cities against their pro-Persian tyrants. At Eresus on
267

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Lesbos, the new government established a cult to Zeus Philippios, while the Ephe-
sians placed a statue of Philip in the temple of Artemis. Parmenio’s success augured
well for the invasion Philip intended the next year. Fate, however, intervened.
Philip was assassinated at Aegae in summer 336 by Pausanias, a member of his
own bodyguard. Philip’s assassination climaxed a political crisis that had begun
with his seventh marriage in 338. For most of his reign Philip’s queen had been
his fourth wife, the Epirote princess Olympias, the mother of his designated heir,
Alexander. Philip’s other marriages had served diplomatic ends without threat-
ening Olympias’ position at court. His seventh marriage, however, was different,
since Philip married a young Macedonian woman named Cleopatra, thereby al-
lying himself for the first time with a powerful Macedonian noble family.
Whatever Philip’s reasons for his marriage to Cleopatra—ancient writers ex-
plained it as a disastrous infatuation with a younger woman—its consequences
quickly became evident. In short order both Olympias and Alexander fell from
favor and fled into exile, amidst talk that Philip intended to supplant his son with
a “Macedonian” heir. The threat to Alexander’s position, however, proved short-
lived; Cleopatra bore Philip a daughter named Europa. The child’s name bore
witness to Philip’s pride in his accomplishments, but a woman could not succeed
to the Macedonian throne. Without a son to replace Alexander, Philip had to rec-
oncile with him. A mutual friend, Demaratus of Corinth, effected the rapproche-
ment. Although Olympias remained in exile in Epirus, Alexander returned to
Pella and resumed his place at court. The crisis over the succession had ended, it
seemed, without serious consequences.
Indirectly, however, Philip’s ill-advised marriage to Cleopatra proved his un-
doing. Philip became embroiled in the enmities of her family, and one of them
involved his assassin, Pausanias. According to Aristotle, Pausanias killed Philip
because the king had ignored extreme abuse of him by Cleopatra’s uncle Attalus.
Pausanias had been raped by Attalus’ servants to avenge the death of a young
relative of Attalus, whom Pausanias had slandered because Philip had preferred
the latter as his lover. Unwilling to offend Cleopatra’s family, Philip tried to pal-
liate Pausanias’ grievance by promoting him to the coveted rank of royal body-
guard. The wedding of Philip’s daughter Europa at Aegae gave Pausanias an op-
portunity for revenge. As Philip led a splendid procession into the theater,
Pausanias rushed forward and stabbed the king to death before the startled eyes
of the guests from all over the Macedonian empire. So ended the reign of the
most controversial of all Macedonian kings.
Since antiquity, historians have had difficulty assessing Philip and his achievements.
Polybius was bewildered by Theopompus’ observation that “Europe had never pro-
duced a man like Philip,” which seemed contradicted by his lurid catalogue of
Philip’s “crimes and follies,” including his unbridled sexuality and drunkenness, his
betrayal of his friends and allies, and his destruction of Greek cities. The problem,
of course, was perspective. The second-century BC historian Polybius found it diffi-
cult to sympathize with Theopompus’ Greek view of Philip as a foreign, malignant
force in Greek affairs and not as the founder of Macedonian greatness.
268

Philip II and the Rise of Macedon
Both points of view have merit. Philip’s influence on Greek affairs undeniably
was largely negative. The destruction of cities such as Amphipolis, Methone, Sta-
gira, and Olynthus is well documented. Philip was, however, first and foremost
king of Macedon, and his primary concern was the welfare of Macedon, not
Greece. In that regard he succeeded. During the twenty-four years of his reign,
Philip transformed Macedon from a kingdom on the verge of dissolution to a uni-
fied state, ruling an empire that extended from the Danube to southern Greece.
Whether his plans to extend Macedonian power into Asia were as grandiose as
those carried out later by Alexander cannot be known. Nevertheless, it is clear
that without Philip’s legacy of a united, powerful Macedon the achievements of
Alexander and his successors would have been impossible.
TRANSLATION
Saunders, A. N. W. 1975. Demosthenes and Aeschines. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Adcock, F. E. 1957. The Greek and Macedonian Art of War. Berkeley and Los Angeles: Uni-
versity of California Press. Clearly written introduction to Greek and Macedonian
ideas of war.
Andronicos, Manolis. 1984. Vergina: The Royal Tombs. Trans. Louise Turner. Athens: Ek-
dotike Athenon. Beautifully illustrated account of the discovery of the Macedonian
royal cemetery at Vergina.
Borza, Eugene N. 1990. In the Shadow of Olympus: The Emergence of Macedon. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. Insightful history of the kingdom of Macedon from its
origin to the reign of Philip II.
Cawkwell, George. 1978. Philip of Macedon. London: Faber & Faber. Perceptive biography
of Philip from a Greek viewpoint.
Ellis, J. R. 1976. Philip II and Macedonian Imperialism. London: Thames and Hudson. Lucid
treatment of Philip’s reign from a Macedonian viewpoint.
Sealey, Raphael. 1993. Demosthenes and His Time: A Study in Defeat. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. Important revisionist biography of the Athenian statesman.
269

270
11
ALEXANDER THE GREAT
Alexander the Great changed the world the Greeks knew forever, and the ef-
fects of his conquests reverberate to this day. News of recent events in Afghanistan
and Iran echoes the names of places he passed through, destroyed, built, and
changed, and by which he, in turn, was changed. Alexander’s death in 323 BC
marked the end of the Classical period. Yet, rarely has an epoch-making reign
begun in such uncertainty as that of Alexander.
Philip II had transformed Macedon into the leading military power in the re-
gion, controlling an empire that stretched from the Danube River to central
Figure 11.1. In this portrait of Alexander,
leonine hair adds to his ferocity. Roman
marble copy after the head of an original
Greek statue of about 330 BC. Inscribed
“Alexandros, son of Philip of Macedon.”

Alexander the Great
Greece, but his assassination on the eve of his projected invasion of Asia threat-
ened all of his achievements with ruin. Alexander III was only twenty years old
at the time of his father’s death in the summer of 336 BC. Omens were later said
to have forecast his rule. His mother, Olympias, even claimed to have dreamed
that lightning struck her womb. Although Philip had offspring from several of
his wives, Alexander was treated as his father’s heir throughout Philip’s reign
and carefully groomed for his future role. A series of Greek tutors including Aris-
totle provided him with an education in Greek literature and culture. From them
Alexander gained his lifelong love of Homer and his determination to equal or
excel the exploits of his legendary ancestors, Heracles and Achilles.
Alexander also had practical training in kingship, governing Macedon in Philip’s
absence, and suppressing a Thracian rebellion. He even commanded the compan-
ion (hetairoi) cavalry in the decisive Battle of Chaeronea in 338 BC. Nevertheless,
Alexander’s succession was not assured. Olympias and his closest friends and ad-
visers were in exile, and there were rumors implicating Olympias and him in
Philip’s assassination. There was also talk of other possible successors including
the former king (basileus), Amyntas IV. Antipater, Philip’s most senior comman-
der, saved the succession for Alexander, however, by quickly presenting Alexan-
der to the Macedonian troops at Aegae for the traditional acclamation as king.
CONSOLIDATING POWER
Alexander’s personal role was never more important than in the critical first year
of his reign. Philip’s senior commanders urged the young king to proceed cau-
tiously, consolidating his base in Macedon and conciliating Macedon’s northern
subjects and allies, even at the risk of losing influence in Greece. Not for the last
time Alexander rejected the advice of the Macedonian old guard in favor of de-
cisive action.
Greece first claimed Alexander’s attention. Immediately after Philip’s funeral,
Alexander made a sudden and dramatic appearance there, forcing anti-
Macedonian politicians at Athens and Thebes to abandon plans to exploit the
confusion after Philip’s assassination to free Greece. Alexander was confirmed
quickly in Philip’s former positions as archo¯n of Thessaly and he¯gemo¯n of the
Corinthian League, and Greek support for the war against Persia was reaffirmed.
After returning from Greece, Alexander campaigned in the spring of 335 against
the Thracians and Illyrians, thereby making clear that Philip’s death would bring
no easing of the Macedonian yoke.
Alexander’s campaign extended as far north as the Danube. Only sketchy ac-
counts of the course of events survive, but it is clear that his main target was the
Triballi, who had humiliated Philip in 339 after his victory over the Scythians.
The Triballi’s attempt to hold a key pass against Alexander failed, thanks to the
discipline of his Macedonian troops, who cleared a path for the wagons their en-
emies sent careening down the mountain in the hope of breaking their line. Trib-
allian resistance quickly collapsed, allowing Alexander to launch an amphibious
271

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
assault on an island where the Triballi had placed their women and children for
safety. The other Thracian tribes submitted after a dramatic raid across the
Danube into the territory of the Getae. He also concluded a treaty of friendship
with a group of Gauls, the vanguard of a migration that would greatly affect
southeastern Europe and Anatolia in the early Hellenistic period. Alexander com-
pleted his first major campaign by inflicting a severe defeat on his father’s old en-
emy, the Illyrian king Cleitus. Although he received the first of his many battle
wounds during the campaign, the Illyrian threat to Macedon’s western frontier
that had loomed over so many of his predecessors was at an end.
Alexander’s long absence in the north sparked rumors of his death in Greece.
Hope was mother to the fact. Demosthenes even introduced a supposed eyewit-
ness of Alexander’s death to the Athenian assembly. The Thebans revolted, be-
sieging the city’s Macedonian garrison on the Cadmeia, the acropolis of Thebes,
and inviting other Greek states to join them in the struggle for freedom. Forced
marches by Alexander, however, brought the Macedonian army to Thebes before
the rebellion could spread, persuading Athens and Sparta to withhold their sup-
port. When the Thebans nonetheless spurned his demand for surrender, the city
was stormed and sacked. Alexander ordered that Thebes’ Boeotian neighbors de-
cide the city’s fate; and they, ever resentful of Thebes’ past efforts to subdue
them, decided that the city should be destroyed and the remaining Thebans sold
into slavery. Alexander carried out the decree, sparing from destruction only
Thebes’ temples and the descendants and house of its illustrious poet, Pindar.
Greeks long remembered the destruction of Thebes as one of the great atroci-
ties of their history. Alexander himself was said later to have given special con-
sideration to personal requests by individual Thebans. For the moment, however,
his calculated use of terror achieved its purpose of discouraging resistance to
Macedonian rule in Greece. For the second time in a little over a year, the
Corinthian League acknowledged Alexander as its hegemon and affirmed its
support for his policies. Alexander, for his part, moderated the severity of his de-
mands on the Greeks, abandoning his call for the surrender of anti-Macedonian
leaders at Athens and elsewhere in Greece.
Similar ruthlessness was employed in Macedon. While Alexander won popu-
larity among his subjects with measures such as freeing Macedonians from all
personal obligations except military service, he quickly eliminated all potential ri-
vals. Olympias had Philip II’s last wife Cleopatra and her daughter Europa bru-
tally murdered and the male members of Cleopatra’s family were executed.
Amyntas IV, Alexander’s sole legitimate rival for the throne, who had survived
throughout the whole of Philip II’s reign, also was sacrificed to the new king’s
need for security. Their supporters fled to their only possible refuge, Persia, leav-
ing Alexander as the unchallenged ruler of Macedon.
Invasion of Asia
With Macedon secure, Alexander invaded Asia in the spring of 334 BC. His army
was fully 37,000 strong: its core was the 12,000 Macedonian phalanx troops,
272

Alexander the Great
supplemented by 3000 hypaspists (“royal guards”) and 1800 companion cavalry.
It also included special light-armed units from Illyria and Thrace and almost 9000
allied Greek infantry and cavalry. A fleet of almost 200 Greek ships supported
his troops and maintained his communications with Europe.
Alexander’s first actions in Asia were bold, even theatrical. He was the first
Macedonian to land on Asian soil, leaping ashore and casting his spear into the
land to claim all that he conquered as territory won by the spear. He then went
to the traditional site of Troy, where he sacrificed to Athena, asked pardon of the
legendary Trojan king Priam for invading Asia, and paid homage to his supposed
ancestor Achilles.
The symbolism suited the leader of the Greek crusade, but serious problems
lay behind all the bravado. Alexander had been compelled to leave almost half
his Macedonian troops with Antipater to control Greece and Macedon. In Asia,
everything won by Philip in 336 had been lost except for the bridgehead at Aby-
dus. Worse yet, Alexander had sufficient funds for only a brief campaign; and his
friends did not control the government and army. In Macedon, Antipater gov-
erned as his regent. Moreover, Alexander’s second-in-command in Asia was Par-
menio, a friend of Antipater and a former ally of Cleopatra’s family, whose rela-
tives held key commands in the army’s critical cavalry units. Alexander needed
a quick victory to achieve the goals of his campaign and to liberate him from the
control of the Macedonian aristocrats who had made him king. Fortunately, the
Persians proved to be “convenient enemies.”
The Battle of Granicus (334 BC)
The vast extent of the Persian Empire slowed mobilization of its main forces to
confront threats on its frontiers, forcing satraps to rely on their garrison troops to
cope with invasions. Satraps normally employed a defensive strategy that would
deny the enemy use of local resources until the Great King could mobilize and
bring the empire’s main forces to bear on the invader. The Anatolian satraps, who
were unwilling to risk the losses in revenue and the destruction of royal lands
that such a strategy would entail, chose a bolder course, deciding to confront
Alexander directly in battle in the hope of killing him.
The strategy almost worked. The Persians met Alexander at the River Grani-
cus, the modern Koçabas, in northwest Anatolia. The details of the battle itself
are disputed, but it is clear that the Persians nearly succeeded in killing Alexan-
der, who stood out clearly in the flamboyant “armor of Achilles” that he had
taken from the temple of Athena at Troy. Only the daring action of Cleitus the
Black, the brother of Alexander’s nurse, saved the king from certain death: At a
crucial moment Cleitus sliced off the arm of a Persian noble who was about to
deal a fatal blow to an already dazed Alexander.
Because the Persians had staked everything on killing Alexander, the failure of
their plan brought disaster. Their army was totally destroyed. The fate of the Greek
mercenaries who formed the core of the Persian army was particularly harsh.
Alexander ordered the slaughter of all but two thousand of them as traitors to the
273

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Figure 11.2. Alexander’s campaign.
274
Lake
Van
Lake
Urmia
Pella
Granicus (334)
Sardis
Ephesus
Gordium
Celaenae
Side
Miletus
Tyana
Issus (333)
Tyre
Gaza
Pelusium
Memphis
Ammon
Thapsacus
Nisibis
Gaugamela
Babylon
(323–death)
Ecbatana
Susa
Pella
Troy
Granicus (334)
Sardis
Ephesus
Gordium
Celaenae
Side
Miletus
Tyana
Issus (333)
Tyre
Gaza
Pelusium
Memphis
Ammon
Alexandria
(332)
Thapsacus
Nisibis
Gaugamela
Babylon
(323–death)
Ecbatana
Susa
Nile
R.
Euphrates R.
Tig
ris
R
.
A
r
a
x
es
R
.
H
a
l
y
s
R
.
BLACK
SEA
MEDITERRANEAN
SEA
Lake
Van
Lake
Urmia
Cyprus
Nile
R.
Euphrates R.
Tig
ris
R
.
A
r
a
x
es
R
.
H
a
l
y
s
R
.
RED SEA
Greek cause. The survivors were sent to Macedonia to work in chains. Alexander
boldly announced his victory to the Greek world by sending to Athens three hun-
dred suits of Persian armor as a dedication to Athena with the inscription: “From
Alexander, the son of Philip, and the Greeks, except the Spartans.”
Alexander’s victory at the Granicus changed the character of the war, depriv-
ing the Persians of their ability to mount an effective defense in Anatolia while
fomenting rebellion in Greece. Although the Phoenician fleet freely cruised the
Aegean, the Greeks as a whole refused to commit themselves to the Persian cause.
Alexander’s forces, meanwhile, swept south along the west coast of Anatolia. In

Alexander the Great
275
ARAL
SEA
Alexander’s Route
Persian Royal Road
SOGDIANA
H I N D U
K U
S
H
Oxus R.
In
du
s
R.
Hydaspes R.
Oxus R.
In
du
s
R.
Hydaspes R.
Persepolis (330)
Artacoana
Alexandria
Arachoton
(Kandahar:329)
Pattala
Taxila (326)
Drapsaca
Zariaspa
(Bactra:327)
Ai-Khanoum
Persepolis (330)
Artacoana
Alexandria
Arachoton
(Kandahar:329)
Pattala
Taxila (326)
Drapsaca
Zariaspa
(Bactra:327)
Ai-Khanoum
CASPIAN
SEA
SOGDIANA
H I N D U
K U
S
H
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600 km
400 miles
P
ERSIAN
GUL
F
quick succession the satrapies of Lydia, Caria, and Lycia fell. By the spring of 333,
Alexander had reached Gordium, the capital of the ancient kingdom of Phrygia,
near modern Ancyra in central Anatolia. In less than a year, Isocrates’ once seem-
ingly impossible dream of severing Anatolia from the Persian Empire had been
realized.
Alexander’s rapid conquest of Anatolia exposed the contradiction in his posi-
tion as hegemon of the League of Corinth and king of Macedon. As hegemon he
was required to respect the commitments he and Philip had made to the League
of Corinth. Consequently, he punished captured Greek mercenaries and turned

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
deposed pro-Persian tyrants over to the league council for trial. As king of Mace-
don, however, he dealt with conquered territory as he saw fit, and increasingly
his interests as king overrode his obligations to the League and his concern for
Greek opinion.
Greek Reaction
Alexander made his supremacy clear immediately after his victory at the Granicus.
Greek and non-Greek cities that surrendered were ordered to obey their new Mace-
donian satrap and to pay the same tribute they had paid to the Persians. When it
became clear that his previous severity had only stiffened the resolve of Greek mer-
cenaries in Persian service to fight, he eased the terms for their surrender. Similarly,
he encouraged democratic factions in the Greek cities of Asia when they offered
their support to the Macedonian forces. The newly “liberated” cities, however,
found that freedom had limits. They no longer paid “tribute” to the Persians, but
they now made financial “contributions” to the Macedonians and were severely
punished if they objected. Inscriptions from Chios and other Asian cities also doc-
ument Alexander’s readiness to intervene in the internal affairs of cities.
Alexander’s relationships with his new non-Greek subjects was similar. Al-
though his first Asian satraps were Macedonians, he soon began to court local
support. In Caria, he entrusted the civil administration of the area to Queen Ada,
who ruled as a widow like her predecessor Artemisia, who had commanded her
own ships at the Battle of Salamis. Ada showed her affection and gratitude by
adopting Alexander as her son and heir. Control of military affairs, however, re-
mained in the hands of a Macedonian garrison commander responsible to Alexan-
der. Still, the policy was clear. Non-Greek leaders who recognized Alexander
could expect royal favor and promotion.
Although Isocrates had dreamed of a new greater Greece in Anatolia, the true
situation was more accurately reflected in the symbolism of Alexander’s dramatic
severing of the “Gordian knot.” According to a famous legend, rule over Asia
was promised to whoever loosed the complex knot that connected the drawpole
to the wagon the first Midas had ridden when he became king of Phrygia. While
he was at Gordium, Alexander fulfilled the prophecy by slashing through the
knot with his sword, allowing no doubt that a new king had arisen in Asia.
A severe fever that brought Alexander to the brink of death delayed the depar-
ture of the Macedonian army from Anatolia until the summer of 333. His brush
with death revealed to everyone his unique importance to the expedition. Without
an heir, Alexander was indispensable. Only he held the army together and gave its
actions force and direction. The army’s dependence on Alexander would only in-
crease as its march carried it farther and farther away from Macedon.
The Battle of Issus (333 BC)
After his illness, Alexander made a characteristically bold decision. Instead of
seeking to confront the forces of Darius III directly in Mesopotamia, Alexander
276

Alexander the Great
moved south along the Syro-Palestinian coast toward Egypt. Behind this decision
lay a risky calculation. Having disbanded his own Greek fleet, Alexander hoped
to end Persian naval operations in the Aegean by depriving the Persian fleet of
its bases.
The strategy was daring and almost resulted in catastrophe. Alexander
marched south along the coast during the late summer and fall of 333. At the
same time, Darius III led the Persian Empire’s main forces northwestward from
Babylon, hoping to trap Alexander in Anatolia. On learning Alexander was ad-
vancing toward Syria, Darius followed in his rear, thereby severing Alexander’s
communications with Anatolia and his Macedonian base. Darius, however, failed
to exploit his advantage by allowing Alexander to choose to confront the Persian
army at Issus, a narrow coastal plain in Cilicia. Prevented from fully deploying
his forces, Darius was unable to benefit from the Persians’ numerical superiority.
Callisthenes, Aristotle’s nephew and the campaign’s official historian, treated
the Battle of Issus as a Homeric contest between Alexander and Darius III in
which victory resulted from a cavalry charge led by Alexander on the center of
the Persian line. Darius was forced to abandon his army and flee. A famous paint-
ing of the late fourth century BC brilliantly depicted this moment; a mosaic copy
277
Figure 11.3. This late Hellenistic mosaic from Pompeii is believed to be a copy of a fourth-
century BC painting depicting the Battle of Issus. It demonstrates that the legend of Alexan-
der had reached places he himself had never visited.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
of this painting was discovered at Pompeii and is now preserved in the Naples
Museum. The flight of Darius turned the defeat of the Persian army into a fear-
ful rout. Years later, Ptolemy I recounted in his history of Alexander how his
units had crossed streams on the piled up bodies of dead Persian soldiers.
Alexander’s victory at Issus was a fundamental turning point in his campaign.
The main Persian forces had been destroyed and Darius III had fled in disgrace.
The royal treasure stored at Damascus quickly fell into Alexander’s hands and
ended the financial problems that had threatened his plans since their inception.
Alexander had even captured Darius’ family, including his mother, wife, daugh-
ters, and son and heir to the Persian throne.
Alexander had not merely defeated the Great King: he had humiliated him.
This humiliation continued, as Alexander summarily rejected Darius’ written of-
fer of friendship and alliance in exchange for his family’s return. He also ac-
corded the Persian royal family the protection and public deference to which
their former station entitled them, but which they had lost when Darius deserted
them. The symbolism was clear and unambiguous: Henceforth Alexander was
the arbiter of the fate of the Achaemenids. The Greeks also understood the sig-
nificance of Alexander’s victory. After Issus all hope of Persian aid against Mace-
donian rule had to be abandoned. Not surprisingly, the rest of Greece remained
passive when Antipater crushed a Spartan rebellion in 331 BC.
FROM ISSUS TO EGYPT: CONQUEST OF
THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN (332–331 BC)
While Darius fled eastward, Alexander resumed his march toward Egypt. Most
of the Syrian and Phoenician coastal cities surrendered, successfully concluding
Alexander’s plan to defeat the Persian fleet by depriving it of its bases. The situ-
ation is less clear with regard to the interior of Syria and Palestine, but the surren-
der of the Samaritans in northern Judaea suggests that the peoples of these areas
also quickly came to terms with Alexander.
Only Tyre and Gaza resisted Alexander, and his response was characteristi-
cally vigorous. When the Tyrians rejected Alexander’s request to enter the city
and sacrifice to his ancestor Heracles in the guise of their chief god Melqart, he
besieged the city for almost eight months. After its capture in August 332, Tyre
also suffered the same brutal fate as Thebes: slaughter of most of the male pop-
ulation and sale of the surviving women and children. The decision by Gaza’s
Persian governor, a eunuch named Batis, to maintain his loyalty to Darius re-
sulted in a similar fate for his city two months later. The fall of Gaza gave Alexan-
der the greatest prize of the first phase of his Asian adventure: Egypt.
Alexander in Egypt
Alexander’s stay in Egypt dramatically altered his view of himself and his pub-
lic image, but the conquest of Egypt itself was anticlimactic, since Mazaces, the
last Persian satrap of Egypt, surrendered his satrapy without a fight.
278

Alexander the Great
Unlike most of the other peoples of the ancient Near East, the Egyptians had
never accepted Persian rule. Severe Persian repression had followed Egyptian re-
bellions during the fifth and fourth centuries BC. Not surprisingly, therefore, the
Egyptians welcomed Alexander’s army during its march to the ancient capital of
Memphis, where he held Greek-style games and sacrificed to Zeus. At the same
time, Alexander also carefully avoided the errors of his Persian predecessors,
publicly honoring the Apis bull, the living incarnation of Ptah, chief god of Mem-
phis, and other Egyptian deities. Alexander doubtless accomplished much dur-
ing the six months he spent in Egypt, but the sources concentrate on only two
episodes: his consultation of the oracle of Zeus-Ammon and the establishment of
Alexandria, the first city he founded.
The oracle of Zeus-Ammon, about 300 miles west of the Nile in the oasis of Si-
wah, was one of the three principal oracles patronized by the Greeks. The report
of Alexander’s visit to Siwah was a tale of miracle and romance. Unseasonable
rains provided water, and sacred animals, such as snakes or crows, served as
guides. Unfortunately, Alexander revealed neither his motives for consulting the
oracle nor its reply to him. Ancient and modern historians have proposed widely
differing explanations for his visit, suggesting that he desired to duplicate his leg-
endary ancestor Heracles’ visit to the oracle or to surpass the Persian king Cam-
byses, who had failed to conquer the oasis; or to obtain divine approval for the
new city of Alexandria.
All the ancient accounts agree, however, that the decisive moment of his visit
was when the chief priest of the oracle greeted him as “Son of Ammon.” Through
the process historians call syncretism (“the unification of religious beliefs”),
Greeks equated Ammon with Zeus. The Greeks, therefore, understood that the
priest had recognized Alexander as a son of Zeus. Whether or not the priest was
merely according Alexander the welcome traditionally granted a king of Egypt,
Alexander clearly took it as a divine sign that Olympias rightly claimed that there
had been something more than mortal about his birth.
Alexander had probably selected the site for his new city during his trip to Si-
wah, but the actual foundation of Alexandria occurred after his return from the
oracle in April 331. Strong Homeric associations probably influenced his choice
of the site: Just offshore was the island of Pharos made famous by the Odyssey. It
was also ideal for a great commercial center, with Pharos creating a sheltered an-
chorage and Lake Canopus linking it to the Nile and the interior of Egypt. Un-
derstandably, the sources depict Alexandria as destined for greatness, telling
how birds consumed the sacred flour with which Alexander was marking its
boundaries, thereby indicating that the city would nourish people from all over
the world.
Founding Alexandria was Alexander’s last major act in Egypt. It is difficult to
assess the full significance of Alexander’s conduct in Egypt, but his actions in
Egypt as a whole indicate significant continuity between his policies in Egypt and
those he followed in the territories conquered earlier in the campaign. This is par-
ticularly clear with regard to Alexandria, which was founded as a Greek polis
with citizenship limited to Greeks and Macedonians. Alexander’s organization of
Egypt itself likewise followed the model he had used in Anatolia. Thus, although
279

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
280
Figure 11.4. Representation of Alexander as Pharaoh before Ammon-Ra and Khonsu-
Thoth in the Bark shrine at Luxor temple at Thebes. C. 330–325 BC.

Alexander the Great
he did not appoint a single satrap for all of Egypt, Alexander retained much of
the Persian organization of Egypt, including the requirement that Egyptians pay
tribute. Both Egyptians and Greeks exercised only civil authority. Military power
remained in the hands of Macedonian officers.
Only in one area was there significant change, but that area was the most im-
portant of all: Alexander’s self-image. The revelation of his divine parentage at Si-
wah struck a responsive chord in Alexander. It confirmed his sense of his own
uniqueness and heightened his personal identification with his heroic ancestors
Heracles and Achilles. Henceforth, his unshakable belief in his connection to his di-
vine father Ammon would be the linchpin of his personality. His belief in his divine
descent also opened a rift between him and the older Macedonians. They could not
accept Alexander’s view of his special tie to a “barbarian” god and the implied slight
to Philip, the king they believed responsible for Macedonian greatness.
FROM ALEXANDRIA TO PERSEPOLIS:
THE KING OF ASIA (331–330 BC)
Shortly after founding Alexandria, Alexander left Egypt to seek a final and deci-
sive confrontation with Darius III. Darius, for his part, made one last desperate
effort to avoid battle, offering Alexander marriage to his eldest daughter, cession
of all territory west of the Euphrates River, and an enormous ransom for his fam-
ily. Darius’ offer was unprecedented. It involved division of the empire, surren-
der of several of its richest satrapies, and permanent exclusion of Persian power
from the shores of the Mediterranean.
Parmenio probably spoke for many when he advised Alexander to accept Dar-
ius’ proposal. Alexander, however, would have none of it, curtly observing that
he would accept it too—if he were Parmenio! Faced with Alexander’s refusal,
Darius hastily gathered together another army to face the Macedonians. The two
armies finally met on October 1, 331 BC, at Gaugamela in northeastern Iraq.
Thanks to the capture of the Persian plans in Darius’s headquarters after his de-
feat, the Battle of Gaugamela is the best documented battle in Greek history.
The Battle of Gaugamela (331 BC)
Learning from his defeat at Issus the previous year, Darius carefully chose a bat-
tlefield that suited the strengths and weaknesses of his army. Because his new
army was particularly strong in cavalry, but weak in first-line infantry, Darius
hoped that the broad plain of Gaugamela would allow the Persian cavalry to en-
velop Alexander’s Macedonians, while terror weapons such as scythed chariots
and elephants would confuse and disrupt the superior Macedonian infantry. De-
spite Darius’ careful preparations, however, the battle of Gaugamela ended just
like the battle of Issus with an attack by Alexander and the companion cavalry
on the center of the Persian army. Darius fled the battlefield and sought refuge
in eastern Iran. Although Alexander failed to capture Darius, the heartland of the
281

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Persian Empire was now his for the taking. With justification, his troops saluted
him as king of Asia.
Alexander captured Babylon, Susa, and Persepolis in rapid succession. His treat-
ment of his three great prizes, however, differed. Alexander entered Babylon in
triumph in mid-October, 331. As in Egypt, he sought to conciliate the influential
Babylonian priesthood, offering sacrifice to Babylon’s chief god Marduk and or-
dering the reconstruction of his temple that the Persians had destroyed a century
and a half earlier as punishment for a Babylonian rebellion. He rewarded the
satraps who had surrendered Babylonia and Susa by leaving them in their posi-
tions. Far different, however, was the fate of Persepolis and its citizens.
The Destruction of Persepolis
Persepolis was the spiritual center of the Persian Empire where major public rit-
uals of Persian rule such as the new year’s festival and the ceremonial presenta-
tion of their tribute to the Great King by his subjects took place. There also Greek
ambassadors had abased themselves before Persian kings since the reign of Dar-
ius I. Persepolis was therefore identified with Persian rule in the eyes of Greeks
282
Figure 11.5. Palace of Persepolis.

Alexander the Great
and Persians alike, and its treatment would send a clear message to both peoples.
The message Alexander chose to send was vengeance for the destruction wrought
during the Persian wars of the early fifth century BC. Just before leaving Persep-
olis in April, 330 BC, the Macedonians torched the city’s palaces.
A large entourage of noncombatants including slaves, women, children, and
entrepreneurs of all types accompanied the army. It was said that during a
drunken revel an Athenian, the courtesan Thaïs, suggested to Alexander and his
friends that Persepolis be burned in revenge for the Persians’ destruction of
Athens in 480. Thaïs may have inspired the actual burning of Persepolis, but
Alexander clearly had decided at the time of its capture that the city was to be
destroyed. Despite its surrender, Persepolis suffered the same fate as Thebes and
Tyre. In the twentieth century American archaeologists excavated Persepolis and
the last Shah of Iran restored the site. The excavations have also revealed that its
palaces were completely stripped of their treasures, the accumulated wealth of
two centuries of Persian imperial rule, before they were set on fire. With the
flames rising over the ruins of Persepolis, Alexander unmistakably signaled the
triumphant end of the Greek crusade.
THE HIGH ROAD TO INDIA:
ALEXANDER IN CENTRAL ASIA
As Alexander watched Persepolis burn, he could not know that the next four
years would be the most difficult of the campaign. At first, his good fortune
seemed to continue unabated. Darius had fled eastward from Media, leaving Ec-
batana to fall into Alexander’s hands with its treasures intact. Having secured
Persia and Media, Alexander discharged his remaining Greek troops. All that re-
mained was to capture Darius III himself and put an end to the long line of
Achaemenid rulers.
The Death of Darius (330 BC)
Leaving Parmenio behind at Ecbatana to secure his communications with the
west, Alexander raced after Darius. He hoped to intercept him before he could
reach Bactria, modern Afghanistan, and continue resistance from there. Before
Alexander could overtake the fleeing Great King, however, he learned that a ca-
bal of eastern satraps headed by Bessus, the satrap of Bactria, had assassinated
Darius III in July, 330 BC. Worse yet, Bessus had escaped to Bactria, where he had
assumed the throne of Persia as Artaxerxes IV.
The assassination of Darius III changed the dynamics of the campaign. Alexan-
der had hitherto acted in Persia as the avenger of past Persian misdeeds. It was
a stance that was popular with Greeks but hardly calculated to attract Persian
support. Darius’ assassination allowed Alexander to escape from this dilemma
by assuming the role of his successor and acting as defender of Achaemenid le-
gitimacy against the regicides. To symbolize his new role Alexander adopted a
283

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
style of dress that combined both Macedonian and Persian royal style. Darius’
body was brought back to Persia and buried with full royal honors. A rumor even
spread that Darius’ last wish had been that Alexander avenge him.
Alexander’s strategy was clever and effective. While Persian nobles and even
some surviving members of the Achaemenid house joined Alexander, Bessus
alienated potential supporters by failing to confront Alexander directly. As a re-
sult, resistance melted away as Alexander moved farther into eastern Iran. Fi-
nally, in the spring of 329, Bessus’ fellow regicides, fearful for their own survival,
betrayed Bessus to Alexander in exchange for a pardon and confirmation in their
offices, just as they had betrayed Darius III before. Acting as the successor of the
Achaemenids, Alexander turned Bessus over to his Persian supporters for trial
and execution as a regicide.
The Struggle for Bactria and Sogdiana (330–327 BC)
As Alexander marched farther and farther east, the miraculous and romantic ele-
ments of his epic increased. It was even rumored that, like a mythical hero, he en-
joyed a tryst with a mythical non-Greek woman: an Amazon queen. Unfortunately,
Alexander’s ignorance of conditions in eastern Iran almost cost him everything he
had gained through his astute dynastic policy. Unaware of the close ties between
the peoples of eastern Iran and the Scythians and the intricate network of tribal re-
lations in the region, Alexander ignited rebellion throughout much of Sogdiana
and Bactria by trying to establish a controlled border between Sogdiana and Scythia
at the Jaxartes River. The revolt lasted almost three years. By the time it ended in
327, Alexander had suffered the worst military defeats of the entire campaign and
developed a whole new approach to the control of conquered territory.
Alexander replaced Iranian satraps with Greek and Macedonian officials. He
also settled Greek mercenaries and discharged veterans in military colonies at
strategic sites in Sogdiana and Bactria. Most important, however, the crisis in cen-
tral Asia starkly revealed the growing tensions in the army and even within
Alexander’s court itself.
Macedonian Unrest
No Greek or Macedonian army had campaigned for so long or so far away from
home, and Alexander’s soldiers became more reluctant to advance ever farther
into Asia. Alexander had barely dissuaded his troops from going home as soon
as they learned of Darius’ death. The miseries of the subsequent struggles in Bac-
tria and Sogdiana only increased their frustration and longing for home. More
worrisome to his officers was Alexander’s abandonment of the traditional Mace-
donian style of kingship and the growing prominence of Iranians and Iranian
practices at court. The most dramatic example of the trend was Alexander’s mar-
riage in the spring of 327 to Roxane, the daughter of a powerful Sogdian noble.
The marriage was politically astute, since it brought Alexander the alliance of
one of the principal tribal chieftains in Bactria and Sogdiana, and then, as now,
284

Alexander the Great
the support of such men was the key to controlling the area’s fierce peoples. To
his officers and soldiers, however, the fact remained that Alexander’s queen and
the potential mother of his successor was not a Macedonian or even a Greek but
an Iranian! Of course, Alexander’s own mother also was not Macedonian but
from Epirus, and his rivals in Macedonia had tried to use his hybrid lineage as a
reason to deny him the throne.
285
Figure 11.6. Fresco from Pompeii believed to be a Roman copy of a late fourth-century BC
original depicting Alexander captivated by love of Roxane.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Alexander’s unsuccessful demand for the ritual prostration known as
proskyne¯sis on the part of all members of his court further increased tension at
court. Ancient and modern writers have connected Alexander’s desire for prosky-
nesis and his claim to be son of Ammon, but they disagree as to his intentions.
According to the historian Arrian, for example, Alexander desired that by per-
forming ritual prostration people would recognize his divine descent from Am-
mon, while the biographer Plutarch, on the other hand, thought that Alexander
hoped to use proskynesis as a device to dominate his eastern subjects.
Most modern scholars adopt a view similar to that of Plutarch, especially since
Persians viewed proskynesis as an affirmation of the hierarchical order of soci-
ety. Whatever Alexander’s intentions, however, he underestimated the resistance
to his plans. Greeks and Macedonians saw proskynesis as a recognition of divin-
ity and an unwelcome reminder of past Persian arrogance. They tolerated its per-
formance by Persians at Alexander’s court, but not his effort to make them also
perform it. It is not surprising, therefore, that for the first time there was open re-
sistance to Alexander’s policies and even conspiracies against his life.
The first sign of trouble appeared late in 330 and involved Parmenio’s son,
Philotas, the commander of the companion cavalry, who was executed for failing
to inform Alexander of an alleged plot to kill him. Whether the charges against
Philotas were true or not, Alexander henceforth took seriously the possibility of
conspiracies against him and acted accordingly, ordering the assassination of
Philotas’ father Parmenio. Alexander of Lyncestis, a son-in-law of Antipater, who
had been held under arrest since the beginning of the campaign, was also executed.
Alexander even instituted censorship of his soldiers’ and officers’ correspondence.
These measures muted the rancor at court, but they did not eliminate discon-
tent. The most dramatic incident was Alexander’s drunken murder in autumn
328 of Cleitus the Black, who had saved his life at the Granicus. Cleitus’ offense
was criticizing Alexander’s efforts to accommodate the Persians and his belittling
the contribution of his officers and soldiers to his successes. More seriously,
Alexander was nearly assassinated six months later by a group of his own pages,
who claimed at their trial that they hoped to free the Macedonians from Alexan-
der’s growing tyranny. As with Philotas, Alexander was implacable in the face of
disloyalty by members of his personal entourage. The pages were summarily
tried and executed. Callisthenes, Alexander’s historian and the pages’ tutor, who
had publicly opposed the introduction of proskynesis, was arrested and later
died under mysterious circumstances.
By the summer of 327, Sogdiana and Bactria had been secured. That happy
outcome, however, had required years of hard fighting and suffering and had re-
sulted in major changes, especially in the army. Forced to cope with a mobile and
resourceful enemy, Alexander reorganized his army to allow greater flexibility.
In particular, he extensively recruited Iranian units to supplement his steadily
dwindling supply of Macedonian and Greek troops.
Equally important changes occurred in Alexander’s court. Men personally tied
to Alexander, such as Perdiccas, Craterus, Lysimachus, and Ptolemy, had replaced
286

Alexander the Great
the Macedonian “old guard.” These men would play critical roles in the turbulent
events that followed Alexander’s death. Finally, the relationship between Alexan-
der and his soldiers had altered in a subtle but significant way. Their loyalty re-
mained unchallenged, but, as events in India were to demonstrate, Alexander
would never again be able to count on their unquestioning obedience.
INDIA AND THE END OF THE DREAM
When Alexander entered India in the summer of 327 BC, he believed he was ap-
proaching the end of the inhabited world. For Greeks and Persians alike, India
was the land of the Indus River, essentially modern Pakistan. Aristotle believed
that beyond India there was only a great desert and then ocean. Although Darius
I had incorporated India into the Persian Empire, Persian rule had long since ended
when Alexander entered the region. He believed he would be campaigning in a
land that Dionysus, Heracles, and the legendary Assyrian queen Semiramis had
failed to conquer, a land where cannibals and monstrous men and animals lived,
where cloth grew on trees, and ants mined gold. What Alexander actually found
was almost as remarkable and at least as strange to him: a vast subcontinent oc-
cupied by a network of peoples and states, who viewed him as a new piece to be
played in their complex political chess game.
As the Macedonian army descended through the Khyber Pass to the plain of
the Indus River in the summer and fall of 327, it encountered some of the fiercest
resistance in the campaign. Opposition ended only at Taxila, whose ruler, called
287
Figure 11.7. The Greek view of the inhabited world.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Taxiles, had already solicited Alexander’s aid while he was still in central Asia.
Taxila was one of the principal centers of Indian religious thought. There Alexan-
der met with a group of “naked philosophers”—ascetic Indian holy men, one of
whom, Calanus, even joined his expedition.
Taxiles had sought Alexander’s aid against his eastern neighbors, Abisares, the
ruler of Kashmir, and especially Porus, whose kingdom included all the territory
between the Jhelum and Chenab rivers. When Abisares offered his submission,
Alexander moved against Porus in early 326.
The Battle of the Hydaspes (326 BC)
The two armies met at the Hydaspes River, the modern Jhelum. There Alexander
found that Porus had established a strong defensive position, using his infantry
and his two hundred elephants to form a living wall along the east bank of the
river. Solving this difficult military problem took all of Alexander’s tactical skills
and involved a daring secret crossing of the flooded river. In the end, the out-
come was the same as that of his earlier battles: the total destruction of his en-
emy’s forces. Much to the displeasure of Taxiles, however, Alexander spared
Porus. Instead, impressed by the nobility of his defeated opponent, who asked
only to be treated “like a king,” Alexander restored his kingdom to Porus and
even added new territories to it.
Although Alexander did not realize it at the time, the confrontation at the Hy-
daspes was to be his last pitched battle. As the army marched farther eastward
through the Punjab, morale dropped steadily. The crisis came when Alexander
reached the river Hyphasis, the modern Beas. Exhausted by the stresses of fight-
ing and marching during the endless rains of the summer monsoon, terrified by
288
Figure 11.8. Silver five-shekel coin from Babylonia (c. 326–323 BC). Obverse: Alexander at-
tacking Porus on his elephant. Reverse: Alexander holding scepter and thunderbolt, at-
tributes of Zeus.

Alexander the Great
rumors of yet another great river valley occupied by great kingdoms possessing
thousands of war elephants, and doubtful that they would ever return home, the
army mutinied. This time not even Alexander could persuade his soldiers to go
on. Ultimately, Alexander yielded, defeated by his own army, and agreed to re-
turn to the Indus, where he had already ordered the construction of a great fleet.
The End of the Campaign
As Alexander kept his plans to himself, ancient and modern historians have spec-
ulated about his ultimate goals. After he had defeated Darius and taken control
of the Persian Empire, why did he continue to push ever eastward? Did he have
a master plan for world conquest when he left Macedonia, or did his ambitions
grow with each new success? Unfortunately, no definitive answer is possible.
Whatever Alexander’s ultimate intentions may have been, his army forced him
to adopt a more modest goal: the conquest of the Indus River Valley to its mouth.
From early winter 326 to midsummer 325, Alexander’s army moved steadily
southward against heavy resistance. The tale of slaughter told in the ancient
sources is unparalleled elsewhere in the campaign. Finally, in July 325, the army
reached the mouth of the Indus. On an island near its mouth, Alexander made
offerings to gods for whom his father Ammon had ordered sacrifices; then he
sailed out onto the Indian Ocean to pray to Poseidon for a safe voyage to Baby-
lonia. The preparations for the journey home had begun.
Results of the Indian Campaign
Alexander’s invasion was the first major incursion into India from the west since
the reign of Darius I almost two centuries earlier. Like that of Darius, Alexander’s
campaign produced a flood of new information about India and its peoples. Also
like the Persians, the Macedonians were to remain only briefly in India. Little
more than a decade after Alexander’s death the Macedonian presence had dis-
appeared from the Indian landscape and from Indian consciousness. While Greek
and Indian artistic traditions mingled to produce Gandara art and to establish a
stylistic vocabulary for expressing Buddhist traditions in human form, Indian
culture forgot the historical Alexander and remembered only the romantic Alexan-
der of medieval legend.
The ephemeral character of Alexander’s achievements in India suggests to
some historians that he lost interest in the area once his army’s mutiny halted his
advance to the Ganges Valley, but this is to confuse results with intentions. Alexan-
der’s political arrangements in India indicate that he intended to maintain control
of his Indian conquests after his return to the west. Three Macedonian satraps sup-
ported by strong detachments of mercenary troops governed the Indus Valley.
Loyal local rulers such as Taxiles retained their thrones under the supervision of
one of the Macedonian satraps. Three new Greek cities were founded in the north-
ern satrapy, and several foundations were also planned for the other satrapies.
Finally, the expanded kingdom of Alexander’s ally, King Porus, protected the
289

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Macedonian eastern flank. Alexander had planned carefully for his Indian do-
main, but the resources available to his agents proved inadequate to maintain
Macedonian rule in this remote part of his empire.
RETURN TO THE WEST
Alexander left India for Persia in late August 325. He intended to lead his army
through Gedrosia, an arid region in southwestern Pakistan. His purpose was to
establish supply depots for his fleet, which was to follow the time-honored route
along the north coast of the Indian Ocean from the mouth of the Indus River to
the Persian Gulf. Nearchus, the commander of Alexander’s fleet and one of his
closest friends, later claimed that Alexander, ever the competitor, was also deter-
mined to surpass Semiramis and Cyrus the Great of Persia, who lost their armies
in Gedrosia. For almost two months, Alexander’s men struggled through the arid
wastes of Gedrosia. Including the wives and children of his soldiers and camp fol-
lowers, possibly as many as eighty thousand souls comprised what was virtually
a moving city. Before the army finally reached Carmania and safety, thousands
died, including most of the soldiers’ families, who were swept away together with
the bulk of their possessions in a flash flood. Only news of the safe arrival of the
fleet at the head of the Persian Gulf in December 325 BC, after an adventure-filled
290
Figure 11.9. Indian statue of Buddha
showing Greek influence.

Alexander the Great
voyage that included encounters with whales and exploration of a “haunted” is-
land, lessened Alexander’s sense of having barely escaped total disaster.
Reorganization of the Empire
Alexander’s return from India sparked turmoil throughout his empire. Eight
satraps and generals—both Macedonians and Iranians—were quickly deposed
and executed. One of Alexander’s oldest friends, the royal treasurer, Harpalus,
fled to Athens with a huge fortune looted from the king’s funds and a private
army of six thousand mercenaries. The ancient sources argued that the upheaval
was caused by the deterioration of Alexander’s character. Modern admirers cite
his outrage at the reports of corruption and oppression by his officials. The truth
is more complex. Some victims of the king’s wrath, such as the governors of the
satrapies along his line of march through Gedrosia, clearly were scapegoats for a
disaster that was largely of Alexander’s own making. Others were victims of
court politics and jealousies, but as the Roman historian Curtius Rufus (10.1.7)
perceptively noted, most were guilty of the one unforgivable crime: They had as-
sumed Alexander would not survive and had begun to exploit his empire for
their own personal benefit.
Alexander’s actions were not limited to punishing overly ambitious and cor-
rupt subordinates. He also attempted to prevent similar problems in the future.
All satraps were ordered to disband their mercenary forces. When roving bands
of penniless cashiered soldiers threatened the security of his Asian realm, Alexan-
der ordered the cities of Greece to permit their exiles to return home. Fully twenty
thousand exiles are said to have heard Aristotle’s son-in-law Nicanor read the
royal decree at Olympia in the summer of 324 BC. Reintegrating them into their
various cities was to cause turmoil in Greece for years to come, sparking a last
desperate attempt by the Greek cities to free themselves from Macedonian rule
after Alexander’s death.
Uniting Greek and “Barbarian”
Almost as serious a threat to Alexander was the dismay of his veteran Mace-
donian troops at the changes in their relationship to their king. In the early spring
of 324 Alexander celebrated the conquest of India in grand style. Decorations
were distributed to officers of the army and fleet. The climax of the celebration
was a grand marriage ceremony in which Alexander himself took as wives daugh-
ters of Artaxerxes III and Darius III, although he was already married to Roxane,
following the precedent set by his father Philip II, who had married at least seven
women from territories he had conquered. In the same ceremony ninety of
Alexander’s principal officers married noble Persian and Median wives. Gifts
also were distributed to ten thousand of his soldiers who had followed Alexan-
der’s example and married Asian women, and the king paid their debts.
The good feelings quickly dissipated when Alexander introduced into the
army thirty thousand young Iranian troops trained to fight in Macedonian style,
whom he referred to as his “Successors.” Their name suggested that they were
291

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
eventually to replace his Macedonians. It is not surprising, therefore, that when
Alexander announced at Opis in the summer of 324 that he intended to discharge
and send home veterans who were too old or too ill to fight, the army mutinied.
The soldiers demanded that the king discharge them all and sarcastically urged
that he henceforth rely on his father Ammon. Only after Alexander reassured them
that his Macedonians were his only true “companions” did the mutiny subside.
The victory of his veterans was only symbolic. Although Macedonians occu-
pied seats of honor at a great banquet Alexander held at Opis to celebrate the end
of the mutiny, he remained steadfast in carrying out his original plans. He dis-
charged the veterans shortly thereafter and sent them back to Macedon, while re-
taining the children produced by their marriages to Asian women with him as
the nucleus of a new generation of soldiers loyal only to himself. In the mean-
time, the integration of Iranian units into the army continued.
Death in Babylon
The final year of Alexander’s reign was full of activity and unfulfilled plans. It
began with a personal tragedy. In November 324, Hephaestion, Alexander’s most
intimate friend, drank himself to death. The grief-stricken king executed Hep-
haestion’s doctor and ordered a monstrous ziggurat-like monument to Hephaes-
tion to be built at Babylon. When he believed he had received approval from Am-
mon, he ordered the Greek cities to grant his dead friend heroic honors. It may
also have been at this time that Alexander also demanded that the Greeks wor-
ship him as a god.
On his arrival at Babylon in the spring of 323, Alexander received delegations
bearing congratulations and petitions from the Greeks and other peoples of the
Mediterranean. He also began to formulate plans for his next major project, the
conquest of the Arabians, who, he claimed, had not sent an embassy to honor
him. But omens of his impending death were already being bruited about. In des-
peration, the Babylonian priests even revived the ancient substitute-king ritual: a
criminal was seated on the king’s throne dressed in the royal regalia, then exe-
cuted in the hope of averting the doom threatening the king.
This frantic effort was to no avail. On May 29, Alexander fell ill at a party hosted
by one of his officers. After suffering from fever and delirium for almost two
weeks, he died on June 10, 323 BC. According to later legends, he was the victim of
a plot concocted by Aristotle and Antipater, whom he had decided to replace as
his regent in Europe. More likely, his body, exhausted by the strain of constant
campaigning and numerous wounds, was unable to fight off a disease, possibly
malaria, that he contracted while at Babylon. He was not yet thirty-three years old.
THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF ALEXANDER
Hero or villain, the world was not the same after Alexander had passed through
it. From the Mediterranean to India, Eurasia had been linked together and would
292

Alexander the Great
remain so until the end of antiquity. Alexander’s plans for his empire are not
known, partly because Alexander did not expect to die when he did. There is,
however, a more fundamental reason. When the Roman emperor Augustus was
told that at the time of his death Alexander was perplexed about what he should
do next, he expressed his surprise that Alexander did not consider governing his
empire a greater challenge than conquering it. Not surprisingly, his papers con-
tained only schemes for grandiose monuments and future campaigns, not plans
for the governance of his empire. He may have thought it sufficient to simply re-
place the top echelon of Persian administrators with Macedonians, Greeks, and
native rulers loyal to him. It would be his successors who would shape the de-
tails of the new political order that would replace the Persian Empire and pro-
vide the framework for social and cultural relations in much of western Asia for
the rest of antiquity.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bosworth, A. B. 1988. Conquest and Empire: The Reign of Alexander the Great. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press. Unsentimental and clearly written political and mili-
tary history of Alexander’s reign.
Engels, Donald W. 1978. Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army. Berke-
ley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. A fascinating account of the
practical problems of supplying Alexander’s army during its long campaign.
Roisman, Joseph. 1995. Alexander the Great: Ancient and Modern Perspectives. Lexington, MA:
D. C. Heath. Valuable collection of primary and secondary sources dealing with
principal controversies concerning Alexander.
Stoneman, Richard. 1997. Alexander the Great. London: Routledge. Brief biography clearly
describing Alexander’s reign and its significance.
Wheeler, Mortimer. 1968. Flames over Persepolis: Turning-Point in History. New York: Rey-
nal and Company. Illuminating survey of the archaeological evidence for Alexan-
der’s campaign.
293

294
12
THE NEW WORLD OF THE
HELLENISTIC PERIOD
Alexander’s conquests changed forever the world the Greeks knew. Formerly
citizens of minuscule city-states on the fringes of the Persian Empire, the Greeks
came to share the rule of a vast territory that stretched from the Mediterranean to
India. This enormous “cosmopolis” (literally, “a city-state comprising the world”)
was unified only by the use of Greek as the common language of government
and culture and by the creation of islands of Greek culture in settlements scat-
tered in the region. The cosmopolis served as a huge arena for the military and
political struggles of the Hellenistic period. Against this bloody backdrop, Greeks
and non-Greeks tried to retain traditional values while living in a world vastly
different from that of their grandparents. Although the modern world owes
much to the classical polis and the culture it nurtured, in many respects its clos-
est affiliation is with this new era that historians call Hellenistic.
The Hellenistic period spans the three centuries from the death of Alexander
in 323 BC to the death of Cleopatra VII of Egypt in 30 BC. In many ways, the Hel-
lenistic age anticipated the problems faced by modern imperial powers in ruling
large multiethnic states. Most of the popular Hellenistic philosophies like Sto-
icism, Epicureanism, Cynicism, and Skepticism spoke to the needs of people who
shared many of the same interests and anxieties as people today. In the arts also
the repertoire of themes and styles expanded far beyond that typical of the Clas-
sical period. This was particularly true of sculpture, where the patronage of
kings and rich individuals freed professional artists to break out of the Classical
focus on the idealized young male to explore themes that challenged their tech-
nical skills, such as depicting with sympathy the emotions of defeated athletes,
the ravages of old age, and the lives of children, women, and even non-Greeks.
THE STRUGGLE FOR THE SUCCESSION
When Alexander died suddenly in 323 BC, the Persian Empire had disappeared, but
no regime had emerged to replace it. Only Alexander’s charismatic personality had

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
held his empire together. A new king had to be chosen quickly, but there was no
heir. Although his wife Roxane was pregnant, only Alexander’s mentally defi-
cient half-brother Arrhidaeus survived of his family. A regency, therefore, was
inevitable but who would lead it and in whose interest?
On his deathbed Alexander had given his signet ring to his chief minister,
Perdiccas, and his bodyguards and the cavalry supported Perdiccas’ proposal to
wait for the birth of Roxane’s child. The Macedonian infantry, however, mutinied
and demanded that Arrhidaeus become king. Only a bizarre compromise averted
civil war: If Roxane’s child were male, he and Arrhidaeus would be joint kings!
When Roxane gave birth to a son, he and Arrhidaeus were proclaimed kings as
295
Figure 12.1. This statue of an old
woman is either a Hellenistic origi-
nal of the third- or second-century BC
or a Roman marble copy.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Alexander IV and Philip III. Although the immediate crisis was over, events were
to prove the truth of Alexander’s prophecy that there would be great “funeral
games” over his corpse.
For almost half a century Alexander’s successors fought over his empire. Only
when the last of them died in 280 BC did a new political system emerge domi-
nated by three kingdoms, each ruled by a Macedonian dynasty: the Ptolemies in
Egypt, the Seleucids in western Asia, and the Antigonids in Macedon and north-
ern Greece. This arrangement formed the framework for political and social life
in Egypt and western Asia for over two centuries and nurtured a vibrant culture
that endured through later antiquity and the middle ages.
THE REGENCY OF PERDICCAS
More was at stake after Alexander’s death than the selection of his successor. De-
cisions also had to be made concerning the goals of the new imperial govern-
ment. Conquest and expansion characterized Alexander’s reign, and on his
deathbed Alexander was planning to invade Arabia. Perdiccas had no interest in
such projects. The exhausted soldiers demanded that Alexander’s final plans be
abandoned. The fantastic career of conquest that had begun a decade earlier was
over. The time for consolidation of Macedonian rule and enjoyment of the fruits
of victory had arrived, or so the soldiers thought.
With the succession settled, Perdiccas quickly organized the regency, beginning
by reallocating the satrapies of the empire. The sources anachronistically highlight
the satrapies assigned to Alexander’s successors: Cappadocia to Eumenes, Egypt to
Ptolemy, Thrace to Lysimachus, and much of western Anatolia to Antigonus the
One-Eyed. Cappadocia, however, had yet to be conquered, the corrupt usurper
Cleomenes of Naucratis held Egypt, and much of Thrace had been lost in a Thra-
cian rebellion. Perdiccas understandably needed to avoid alienating the powerful
Macedonian satraps in Asia to survive, and such appointments met this need.
Perdiccas’ other decisions were equally cautious. Three men were to govern
the empire in the name of the kings: Antipater, Alexander’s strategos in Europe;
Craterus, Alexander’s most prominent field commander; and, of course, Perdic-
cas himself. Macedonian unity was preserved, and Perdiccas’ principal rivals
shared the governance of the empire. Marriages of two of Antipater’s daughters
to Perdiccas and Craterus were to seal the alliance. Nevertheless, Perdiccas’ po-
sition began to crumble almost immediately.
Revolts broke out at both the eastern and western ends of the empire. Alexan-
der’s Asian subjects had remained quiet during the crisis after his death; not so
the Greeks. The Greek settlers in central Asia revolted first. Bactria was to become
home to a remarkable Greek kingdom that would exert a significant influence on
the cultures of central Asia and India, but that was in the future. In 323, twenty-
three thousand Greek settlers mutinied and started to march home. Perdiccas re-
sponded promptly, forcing the survivors to return to Bactria. The European
Greeks revolted at almost the same time.
296

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
The roots of the European uprising lay in the decree of 324 concerning the re-
turn of exiles, which threatened many Greek cities with social and political up-
heaval, but none more so than Athens and Aetolia. In desperation, Athens hired a
mercenary army and launched the strongest naval force mobilized by the city since
the Peloponnesian War. Victory initially seemed to be almost within the Greeks’
grasp. Antipater was besieged in the Thessalian city of Lamia, from which the re-
volt gets its name, the Lamian War (323–322 BC). But then events turned against
them. The Athenian fleet was decisively defeated at the Battle of Amorgos, while
Macedonian reinforcements from Asia freed Antipater and helped him defeat the
Greek army at Crannon in Thessaly in 322. Antipater intended that there should be
no further revolts. The League of Corinth was dissolved and with it the last traces
of the fiction that the Greeks were allies and not Macedonian subjects. Athens was
severely punished, and the democracy was dismantled. Demosthenes committed
suicide, and other democratic leaders were executed. Twelve thousand Athenians
failed to qualify for citizenship and were disfranchised. Athens was again ruled by
an oligarchy maintained in power by a foreign garrison.
The Death of Perdiccas
While Antipater was occupied with the Lamian War, Perdiccas was struggling to
control the satraps in Asia, especially Antigonus the One-Eyed, the satrap of Phry-
gia, who had refused to help Eumenes take control of his satrapy of Cappadocia.
To save himself, Antigonus fled to Macedon with the news that Perdiccas was
planning to marry Cleopatra, Alexander’s sister, despite his promise to wed one
of Antipater’s daughters. Antigonus’ news outraged Antipater and split the re-
gency, but Ptolemy ignited the wars of Alexander’s successors by diverting Alexan-
der’s funeral cortege to Egypt. Perdiccas could not ignore so direct a challenge to
his authority, but his invasion of Egypt in 321 failed when Ptolemy opened the
Nile dikes, drowning thousands of Perdiccas’ soldiers. Demoralized by defeat and
seduced by Ptolemy’s promises, Perdiccas’ officers assassinated him.
The victors quickly met at Triparadeisus in Syria to reorganize the regency.
Antipater replaced Perdiccas as regent for the kings, and the satrapies were re-
assigned yet again. Ptolemy and Lysimachus retained their satrapies, and Seleucus
received Babylon as his satrapy. Eumenes was condemned to death, Antigonus the
One-Eyed, appointed strategos in Asia, was ordered to hunt him down. Antipa-
ter himself returned to Macedon with the two kings. For the first time since
Alexander had crossed into Asia over a decade earlier, a king would occupy the
royal palace at Pella.
At first glance, little had changed. The empire was intact, and Philip III and
Alexander IV were still joint kings. Nevertheless, appearances were deceptive.
Perdiccas had failed to control the Asian satraps; and Antipater was unlikely
even to try. Indeed, by taking the kings back to Macedon, he had made clear that
Macedon was central in his view of the empire. The person best situated to ex-
ploit the new situation was Antigonus the One-Eyed, who controlled all royal
forces and resources in Asia.
297

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
THE PRIMACY OF ANTIGONUS THE ONE-EYED
Antigonus’ rise to preeminence in Asia was rapid. He quickly expelled Eumenes
from Cappadocia and was on the verge of subduing him when Antipater’s sud-
den death in 319 BC set off a new round of conflict. Antipater’s son Cassander re-
fused to accept his father’s choice of Polyperchon as regent for the two kings and
fled to Antigonus, precipitating the formation of a grand alliance of Antigonus,
Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus against the new regent.
The struggle lasted for three years, ending with the collapse of the royal cause
in both Europe and Asia and the destruction of the Argead house itself. Polyper-
chon enjoyed a brief period of success when Olympias joined the struggle on his
side—but her passion for her grandson Alexander IV led to the murder of Philip
III and his queen Eurydice and the alienation of much of the Macedonian aris-
tocracy, which rallied to Cassander. Shortly after the death of Philip III, Olympias
met a similar fate, leaving her grandson and Macedon in the hands of Cassander.
Although Cassander claimed to be regent for Alexander IV, he was in reality the
new ruler of Macedon. Alexander IV and Roxane were confined under house ar-
rest in Amphipolis, never to be seen in public again.
A similar fate befell the royal cause in Asia. Although Eumenes managed to
avoid defeat for three years, the end came in 316 when his own soldiers betrayed
him to Antigonus, who ordered his immediate execution. As in Europe, so in
Asia, a victory won in the name of the heirs of Alexander resulted instead in the
usurpation of Argead rule. Antigonus quickly appointed his supporters to key
satrapies. Not surprisingly, Seleucus quickly abandoned Babylon and fled to
Ptolemy. Although officially only strategos in Asia for Alexander IV, Antigonus
actually controlled the child-king’s vast Asian territories as securely as Cassander
did his European ones.
The “Freedom” of the Greeks
Antigonus’ triumph was brief. In 315 his allies demanded that he share the terri-
tories that he had captured. Antigonus responded with an ultimatum of his own
demanding that his rivals recognize all Greek states as free. Although these ulti-
matums were propaganda, Antigonus’ invocation of Greek freedom was a shrewd
attempt to build Greek support. Antigonus never freed the Greek cities he con-
trolled, but he was right to believe that his proclamation would be well received
in Greece. Already in 319, when Athens had rebelled, Polyperchon promised to
restore democracy and freedom to the Greeks. Antigonus hoped that his procla-
mation would have a similar effect among Cassander’s other embittered Greek
subjects when he invaded Macedon. Antigonus’ invasion of Macedon, however,
never materialized. Ptolemy defeated Antigonus’ son Demetrius at Gaza in 312
BC, and helped Seleucus return to Babylon, where he incited defections among
the eastern satraps. In 311 with his southern and eastern fronts in ruins, Antigonus
made peace with his former allies.
In the Peace of 311 Antigonus admitted that his attempt to gain control of all
of Alexander’s empire had failed. The treaty provided that Cassander would
298

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
remain as strategos in Europe, Antigonus would continue as strategos over all
Asia, Ptolemy and Lysimachus would retain their satrapies, and the Greek cities
would be free. In return for an empty pledge to support the principle of Greek
freedom, Antigonus had accepted the division of the empire as it had existed at
the beginning of the war.
Antigonus’ Last Gamble
The Peace of 311 was merely a truce that Antigonus and his rivals used to rebuild
their strength. War resumed in 307 when Demetrius invaded Greece with a man-
date “to free all the cities of Greece.” Success was immediate. Demetrius liberated
Athens from Cassander and restored the democracy. The next year he occupied
Cyprus, seizing Salamis in the first of the epic sieges that would gain him the so-
briquet Poliorcetes (“the Besieger”), and inflicted a crushing defeat on the fleet
Ptolemy sent to relieve the city. Demetrius’ victory transformed the political
world. Alexander’s successors had maintained they were only agents of the child-
king Alexander IV even after his death in 310, but when the news of Demetrius’
victory reached Antigonus’ army in Syria, his soldiers acclaimed Demetrius and
Antigonus as kings, thereby publicly admitting the end of the Argead dynasty.
Like Homer’s heroes, Macedonian kings were military leaders, and it was the
glory of Demetrius’ victory at Salamis that justified the acclamation of his father
and himself as king. Within a year Cassander, Lysimachus, Ptolemy, and Seleu-
cus also assumed the title “King,” thus affirming their independence. The strug-
gle for control of Alexander’s legacy that had been interrupted by the Peace of
311 had begun again. The end came in 301, when Lysimachus and Seleucus de-
feated Antigonus and Demetrius at Ipsus in central Phrygia. Antigonus was
dead, trampled by Seleucus’ elephants, and Demetrius was in headlong flight,
their dreams of empire in ruins.
BIRTH PANGS OF THE NEW ORDER
(301–276 BC)
After his death, Antigonus’ enemies divided his territories in Asia. Lysimachus
received Anatolia north of the Taurus Mountains, while Seleucus added to Baby-
lonia and Iran the coastal regions of southern Anatolia, Syria, and Mesopotamia.
The division of western Asia into two huge kingdoms should have created ten-
sion along their mutual borders, and so it would have except for an unforeseen
development. In 301, Ptolemy had occupied Judaea, Phoenicia, and southern
Syria. To protect himself, he formed an alliance with Lysimachus that was sealed
by the marriage of Lysimachus to Ptolemy’s daughter Arsinoë (the future queen
Arsinoë II of Egypt), and of Ptolemy’s younger son, the future Ptolemy II, to Lysi-
machus’ daughter. Seleucus responded by allying with Demetrius, the son of
Antigonus the One-Eyed, who now ruled a “sea empire” comprising his father’s
fleet and a handful of ports in the Aegean. The renewal of war seemed imminent,
but it was delayed for over a decade.
299

Figure 12.2. The Hellenistic world.
Altitude in meters
Over 1000
200–1000
0–200
Nile
R
.
Oront
es R
.
H
a
l
y
s
R
.
D
a
n
u
b
e
R
.
A
x
i
u
s
R
.
S
an
garius
R
.
B
o
r
y
s
t
h
en
es
R.
H
yp
an
is
R
.
0
0
100
200
300
400
500 km
100
200
300 miles
MAC
EDO
NI
A
P T O
L E M
I E
S
LY
CA
O
N
I
A
FAY
U
M
CARIA
LYDIA
MYSIA
PHRYGIA
A T T A L I D S
CAP
PA
DO
C
I
A
CILICIA
E G Y P T
B L A C K   S E A
RED
SEA
M E D I T E R R A N E A N
S E A
Crete
Cyprus
Rhodes
Samos
Chios
Lesbos
Euboea
Thasos
Corcyra
Nile
R
.
Oront
es R
.
H
a
l
y
s
R
.
D
a
n
u
b
e
R
.
A
x
i
u
s
R
.
S
an
garius
R
.
B
o
r
y
s
t
h
en
es
R.
H
yp
an
is
R
.
0
100
200
300
400
500 km
100
200
300 miles
MAC
EDO
NI
A
P T O
L E M
I E
S
LY
CA
O
N
I
A
FAY
U
M
CARIA
LYDIA
MYSIA
PHRYGIA
A T T A L I D S
CAP
PA
DO
C
I
A
CILICIA
E G Y P T
GETAE
MAEOTIS
ILLYRIA
THRACE
BITHYNIA
PAPHLAGONIA
PHOENICIA
S Y R I A
CYRENAICA
LYCIA
PISIDIA
GALATIA
Petra
Memphis
Oxyrhynchus
Naucratis
Alexandria
Pelusium
Cyrene
Apollonia
Gaza
Marissa
Ascalon
Jerusalem
Gerasa
Gadara
Tyre
Sidon
Byblus
Damascus
Palmyra
Apamea
Thapsacus
Antioch
Al Mina
Issus
Paphos
Citium
Salamis
Nagidus
Tarsus
Tyana
Lystra
Iconium
Eurymedon
Side
Xanthus
Rhodes
Cnidus
Knossos
Gortyn
Cydonia
Sparta
Corinth
Athens
Thebes
Demetrias
Aegae
Pella
Therme
Amphipolis
Apamea
Aphrodisias
Miletus
Ephesus
Smyrna
Sardis
Perge
Pergamum
Prusa
Nicaea
Cyzicus
Antioch
Gordium
Sinope
Amisus
Byzantium
Apollonia
Mesembria
Odessus
Callatis
Tomis
Istrus
Tyras
Olbia
Panticapaeum
Theodosia
Ancyra
Heraclea
Nicomedia

COLCHIS
C
HOR
AS
MI
A
H
YRC
AN
I
A
PARTHIA
M
E
D
I
A
A R M
E N
I
A
M E S O
P O T
A M
I A
COLCHIS
C
HOR
AS
MI
A
H
YRC
AN
I
A
PARTHIA
M
E
D
I
A
A R M
E N
I
A
M E S O
P O T
A M
I A
Lake
Van
Lake
Urmia
A
r
a
x
e
s
R
.
Tigris R
.
Eup
hra
te
s
R
.
H
yp
an
is
R
.
Trapezuz
Samosata
Carrhae
Nisibis
Tanais
Gaugamela
Arbela
Ecbatana
Dryra
Europos
Cunaxa
Babylon
Seleucia
Antiochea
Susa
Persepolis
Pasargadae
Trapezuz
Samosata
Carrhae
Nisibis
Tanais
Phasis
Gaugamela
Arbela
Ecbatana
Dryra
Europos
Cunaxa
Babylon
Seleucia
Antiochea
Susa
Persepolis
Pasargadae
C A S P IA N
S EA
ARAL
SEA
PERSIAN
GULF
Lake
Van
Lake
Urmia
A
r
a
x
e
s
R
.
Tigris R
.
Eup
hra
te
s
R
.
H
yp
an
is
R
.
Seleu
c id
s
Seleu
c id
s

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
During the 290s, the kings concentrated their efforts on the development of
their kingdoms. Lysimachus fought against the Getae, who lived across the
Danube, while founding or reorganizing several cities in Anatolia including Eph-
esus. Ptolemy designed the administration of Egypt, but the most active king was
Seleucus, who founded numerous cities and military settlements in Syria, in-
cluding his great new capital of Antioch near the mouth of the Orontes River. As
thousands of Greeks emigrated to Egypt and western Asia, the new cities grew
and prospered, acquiring large populations and splendid public buildings and
amenities unknown in Aegean Greece.
The Final Struggle
Demetrius Poliorcetes possessed a “kingdom” without a territorial base. In 294
he remedied that deficiency, seizing Macedon from the feuding sons of Cas-
sander. His success, however, was brief. For Demetrius, Macedon was only a
stepping-stone to Asia, but before his invasion was ready, his rivals struck. Lysi-
machus and Pyrrhus, the king of Epirus, invaded Macedon and forced Demetrius
into prematurely launching his Asian campaign in 286. The result was inevitable.
Outnumbered and ill, Demetrius surrendered to Seleucus and lived out the last
few years of his life under house arrest near Antioch.
Demetrius’ conquerors did not long survive him. Taking advantage of a bitter
succession crisis in Thrace, Seleucus invaded Lysimachus’ kingdom. The forces
of the two aging monarchs—both were over eighty—met in early 281 at Coru-
pedium (the “Field of Crows”), in Phrygia. At the end of the battle, Lysimachus
lay dead on the field and Seleucus, it seemed, finally had achieved the dream that
had haunted Perdiccas and Antigonus the One-Eyed and his son: the reunion of
Alexander’s empire. Seleucus did not long enjoy his triumph, being assassinated
by an exiled son of Ptolemy, Ptolemy Ceraunus (“the Thunderbolt”). The Thun-
derbolt’s moment of glory also passed quickly. In 279, he fell in battle, defending
Macedon against Gauls, whose migration from Western Europe home had begun
in the early fourth century.
The Gallic threat was brief, but it had significant consequences. The Gauls soon
transferred their terror to Anatolia, but only after being defeated at Delphi and Lys-
imacheia by the Aetolian League (the organization of the city-states of Northwest
Greece) and Antigonus Gonatas (“Knockknees”), the son of Demetrius Poliorcetes.
Their victories over the Gauls transformed the position of both the Aetolians and
Antigonus, legitimizing the emergence of the former as the preeminent power in
central Greece and the protector of Delphi and the latter as king of Macedon. The
final pieces of the new political system that had so gradually and painfully emerged
from the wreckage of Alexander’s empire had fallen into place.
THE POLIS IN THE HELLENISTIC WORLD
Despite the turmoil of the Hellenistic period, one aspect of Greek life remained
unchanged: The polis remained the center of Greek life. Old poleis such as Athens
302

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
and Ephesus prospered. War between poleis actually declined, and arbitration of
disputes became routine. Even the particularism of the classical polis was par-
tially overcome by the Aetolian and Achaean leagues, strong federations, which
expanded their membership to include cities outside central Greece and the
northern Peloponnesus.
Political trends that had appeared in the fourth century BC intensified in the Hel-
lenistic period. Virtually all Greek cities now claimed to have democratic govern-
ments. The claim, however, was largely empty since democracy increasingly signi-
fied little more than that a city-state was not ruled by a tyrant. Meanwhile, the
average citizen’s role in government declined as aristocratic oligarchies increasingly
managed affairs from behind the scenes. Wealthy men and women made generous
gifts to their cities, including aqueducts, feasts, schools, and various types of chari-
ties. Numerous inscriptions documenting their generosity and public service attest
to the patriotism of these new leaders as well as the poleis’ need for such men and
women to rescue them from recurrent financial, diplomatic, and social crises.
Athens and Sparta
Although the democracy was never fully restored, Athens flourished as the cul-
tural center of mainland Greece. Hellenistic Athenian culture differed greatly
from that of the classical city. The change is most obvious in drama, where the
303
Figure 12.3. This Roman bronze stat-
uette reflects the lost statue of the Tych
_
e
(Fortune) of the city of Antioch by Eu-
tychides. Here Fortune is personified as
a goddess wearing a crown represent-
ing the city walls.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
grand tragedies and biting political comedies of the Classical era were replaced
by a lighter genre known as New Comedy. The plays of Menander (344–c. 292
BC), its most famous practitioner, reflect the new political order and the interests
of its upper-class audience.
Menander had been a pupil of Theophrastus, Aristotle’s successor as head of
the Lyceum, and a friend of Demetrius of Phaleron, Cassander’s governor of
Athens. A Hellenistic critic wrote, “O Menander and O life, which one of you has
imitated the other?” Menander’s plays depict a Greece populated by swaggering
mercenaries, impoverished citizens living next door to wealthy people, courte-
sans and pimps, spendthrift youths, and respectable young women whose des-
tiny is marriage. Menander’s characters are engrossed in their private worlds, as
though weary of war and political upheaval.
Slaves are ubiquitous in New Comedy and in Hellenistic Athens. Constant
warfare had reduced many people to slavery, while slave dealers took advantage
of the practice of exposing unwanted newborns. Greeks had long used child ex-
posure, especially of females, to limit family size. Infant exposure forms the
theme of several of Menander’s plots (with happier destinies for their children
than those that awaited them in real life). Significantly, the chief divinity in New
Comedy is Tyche (“Fortune”), a fitting emblem of this chaotic era.
The altered temper of the times manifested itself also in philosophy. Plato and
Aristotle had directed their teachings to affluent men interested in the political life
of the autonomous poleis. Hellenistic philosophies, however, aimed to help people
cope with a vast world over which they had little control. Two of the most impor-
tant schools of Hellenistic thought flowered in Athens: Stoicism and Epicureanism.
Born in Cyprus, Zeno (335–263 BC), the founder of Stoicism, was a friend of
Antigonus Gonatas and lived in Athens, teaching at the Stoa Poikile (“Painted
Porch”). For this reason his followers received the name of Stoics (i.e., “Porchers”).
Zeno’s philosophy reflected the new political order. The earth stood at the cen-
ter of the universe with Zeus its prime mover. Just as cosmic motions never
changed and Zeus remained king of the gods, so monarchy was the divinely or-
dered system of government. Revolution, consequently, violated the natural or-
ganization of the world, whereas patriotism and public service harmonized with
the cosmic order. Serenity could be achieved only by those confident that they
had fulfilled their duties to others. Stoicism, thus, entailed a large dose of hu-
manitarianism and public service.
Zeno urged his followers to seek an inner tranquillity that was proof not only
against agonizing pain but also against excessive pleasure as well. He did not,
however, advocate withdrawal from social and political life. Stoics were to up-
hold justice, but not to engage in any serious attempts at reform. Stoics conse-
quently considered slaves spiritually as free as their owners, but they did not try
to abolish slavery. In keeping with their belief in an orderly universe, Stoics
thought life was rational and could be planned. Epicurus (341–270 BC) taught a
very different philosophy in the school he established in his home in Athens
called “The Garden,” including women among his students. Adopting the atomic
theory of Leucippus and Democritus, he rejected their determinism. Although he
304

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
agreed that atoms fell in straight lines from the sky, Epicurus argued that the
multiplicity of substances in the universe arose from periodic swerves in the
atoms’ paths, causing them to collide at a variety of angles. Like the kingdoms
carved out by Alexander’s successors, the universe was created by chance com-
binations, and would perish and regenerate by chance.
The gods had little role in this philosophy. Epicurus deduced that gods exist
since people saw their images in dreams, but they had no interest in humans, liv-
ing, instead, serene, untroubled lives, indifferent to prayers, offerings, and rituals.
(The good news was that the horrific punishments associated with the underworld
were fictions; the bad news was that the gods were not interested in listening to
complaints, offering solace, or avenging injustices.) After death, the atoms that
had comprised the soul and body of each person merely dissolved and recom-
bined to form new entities.
Understandably, Epicurus viewed happiness on Earth as the purpose of life.
He defined happiness as the attainment of ataraxia, an untroubled state free from
excessive pleasure and pain, much like the serenity advocated by Zeno. Unlike
Zeno, however, Epicurus advocated withdrawal from activities that might bring
pain, both the quest for love or money (which Stoics also saw as problematic) and
participation in politics (which Stoics praised). For Epicureans, anything that
might threaten ataraxia was to be avoided. Though today “Epicurean” connotes
indulgence in pleasure, particularly fine dining, Epicurus actually counseled
moderation in food and drink in order to avoid indigestion and hangovers. Epi-
cureans also approved of sex, provided love with all its pitfalls was avoided.
Despite their differences, Stoics and Epicureans shared a common goal: at-
taining tranquillity in a turbulent world. A similar aim characterized two other
philosophical schools popular in the Hellenistic period: Cynicism and Skepticism.
The principal theorist of the Cynic movement, Diogenes of Sinope (c. 400–325 BC),
maintained that civilization was unnatural. Denying that humans had needs dif-
ferent from those of animals, Diogenes scandalized contemporaries and earned
the name of the Cynic (“dog,” “kuo¯n” in Greek) by brazenly maintaining that peo-
ple should follow instincts just as animals do, even urinating and masturbating
in public. The Skeptics also shared the Cynics’ and Epicureans’ disillusionment
with Greek public life. Skepticism became popular around 200 BC. Stressing the
impossibility of certain knowledge, Skeptics urged withdrawal from the world.
The quest for truth and power, after all, was hopeless. Today, the words “skep-
tical” and “cynical” suggest people who are not easily persuaded. In this, Hel-
lenistic philosophies contrast sharply with those of Plato and Aristotle, who be-
lieved that knowledge was possible and could be gained through education.
While Athens continued to attract intellectuals, the center of philosophical spec-
ulation in the Hellenistic era shifted not only away from Athens but also away from
mainland Greece in general. Stoic thinkers came from places like Cyprus and
Syria, while Tarsus, Alexandria, and Rhodes became the most famous Stoic uni-
versity towns. Stoicism ultimately took root in the Roman Empire, fortifying the
minds and souls of men and women seeking to cope with and participate in the
government.
305

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Almost as remarkable was the fate of Sparta. After a century-long decline in
which the number of Spartiates dwindled to fewer than a thousand and tensions
between rich and poor became acute, two reformer kings, Agis IV (262–241 BC)
and Cleomenes III (235–222 BC), revived Sparta’s “Lycurgan” institutions. Debts
were canceled, land was redistributed, and the traditional Spartan educational
system, the ago¯ge¯, was reestablished. Sparta briefly became the Stoic model state.
The Stoic notion that individual suffering is part of some great natural scheme
and should be endured attracted Spartans as did the idea that austerity was
preferable to self-indulgence. For a few years, Spartan arms were invincible and
the city seemed on the verge of dominating the Peloponnesus again. Greek in-
tellectuals celebrated the Lycurgan system. Their dreams of Greek renewal were
shattered when the joint forces of Macedon and the Achaean League crushed the
Spartans at Sellasia in 222 BC. As the fate of Sparta revealed, not even the strongest
polis could resist the power of the Macedonian kingdoms.
THE MACEDONIAN KINGDOMS
Greek literature contains little information about the organization of the new
Macedonian kingdoms. Fortunately, archaeological evidence in the form of in-
scriptions and papyri has remedied this deficiency, revealing that the Hellenistic
kingdoms were conquest states based on two fundamental principles: first, that
the kingdom and its population belonged to the king; and second, that the king’s
business took precedence over all other considerations. These two principles
were common to all the Macedonian kingdoms. Thanks to the rich papyrological
evidence, however, their operation is clearest in the case of Ptolemaic Egypt.
Ptolemaic Egypt
Egypt’s wealth lay primarily in its agricultural land, which, as heirs of the Pharaohs,
the Ptolemies claimed to own. For practical purposes, however, the Ptolemaic
306
Figure 12.4. This gold octodrachm showing the
deified Ptolemy II and Arsinoë II was minted
by Ptolemy III (246–221 BC).

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
government divided Egyptian land into two categories: royal land for basic agri-
cultural production and “released land,” which was used to provide soldiers with
land grants, reward government officials, and support Egypt’s numerous temples.
The rest of the economy was also tightly organized. Activities such as textile, pa-
pyrus, and oil production were state monopolies, intended to generate the maximum
revenue for the king from fees and taxes. The system was managed by a bureau-
cracy headquartered in Alexandria but with agents—both Greek and Egyptian—in
even the smallest village. To ensure that the king’s work was done, every adult
from peasant to immigrant soldier was registered according to place of residence
and economic function. The king managed the whole system as an autocrat whose
word was law, while the institution of a cult of the living ruler, his wife, and his
ancestors legitimized royal rule while offering subjects a public means of demon-
strating their loyalty and gratitude for the “benefits” provided them.
Egyptian and cuneiform texts indicate that there was continuity between
Egyptian and Persian administrative practices and Hellenistic state organization.
Ptolemaic Egypt and Seleucid Asia, for example, maintained many of their tra-
ditional administrative structures, together with many of their key institutions,
and remained divided into their traditional subdivisions, such as nomes and
satrapies. Not surprisingly, the Greek terminology of many of our sources often
proves upon analysis to be a facade, hiding traditional preexisting institutions.
In Hellenistic Egypt and Asia, the temples still played major roles in the social
and economic lives of their peoples. Egyptian priests used the names of the Greek
gods, equated the Macedonian and Egyptian calendars, and translated royal ti-
tles into Greek in order to give a Hellenic cast to Egyptian religious traditions.
This continuity is not surprising, since the Ptolemies and Seleucids were both
Macedonian kings and also pharaohs and kings of Babylon, whose responsibili-
ties had included support of traditional institutions.
Epigraphical and papyrological evidence has revealed “irrationalities” and inef-
ficiencies in the kingdoms’ operations. Ptolemaic Egypt and Seleucid Asia were per-
sonal autocracies. Official documents describe their governments as consisting of
the “king, his friends” (the king’s personal entourage), “and the army.” Their power
was restrained only by fear of losing the support of their armies and generals, who
could unseat a king if provoked too far. Government officials were political ap-
pointees with often multiple and even conflicting responsibilities, who filled posts
assigned them by the king irrespective of their experience and qualifications.
Instead of smoothly functioning bureaucratic machines Hellenistic govern-
ments were inefficient and often arbitrary instruments, primarily designed to ex-
tract the maximum revenue from their rulers’ subjects. Documents such as the
letters of Ptolemy II (282–246 BC) forbidding lawyers from assisting individuals
in disputes concerning taxes bear witness to the kings’ insatiable need for money
to support their ambitious foreign policies and grandiose domestic projects. Sim-
ilarly, the numerous royal orders forbidding government officials from exploit-
ing the king’s subjects for personal gain and amnesties for unfulfilled obligations
to the government attest to the inherent inefficiency and corruption of these sys-
tems in actual practice.
307

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
HELLENISTIC SOCIETY
The new Macedonian monarchies not only posed a threat to the independence of
the cities of Aegean Greece, they also created unprecedented opportunities for in-
dividual Greeks. Whatever Alexander’s plans for the governance of his empire
may have been, his successors clearly decided to rely on Greek immigrants to
staff the upper levels of their governments.
New Opportunities in a Colonial World
The resulting opportunities were greatest for Greek men, who quickly formed a
powerful class of expatriate civilian and military officials. Inscriptions and papyri
document the wealth and influence of members of this new governing class, such
as Apollonius, the chief financial officer of Ptolemy II, and Zenon, the Carian im-
migrant who managed his estate. Less glamorous, but equally real and far more
numerous, were the multitude of minor, but potentially lucrative, administrative
jobs required to govern the new kingdoms. The court poet Theocritus spoke the
literal truth when he described Egypt as a land of opportunity for immigrants
and characterized Ptolemy II as a “good paymaster.”
Document 12.1. Letter of King Ptolemy II to Apollonius concerning
the revenues of Egypt (259 BC).
King Ptolemy to Apollonius, greeting. Since some of the advocates listed be-
low are intervening in fiscal cases to the detriment of the revenues, issue in-
structions that those advocates shall pay to the crown twice the additional
tenth and that they shall no longer be allowed to serve as advocates in any
matter. And if any of those who have harmed the revenues be discovered
to have served as advocate in some matter, have him sent to us under guard
and have his property assigned to the crown.
The Amherst Papyri (eds. B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt,
Vol. 2, London, 1901, Nr. 33) translated by Stanley M. Burstein,
The Hellenistic Age from the Battle of Ipsos to the Death of Kleopatra VII.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1985, pp. 121–122.
Opportunities expanded also for women, although not to the same extent. As
in the case of men, they were greatest for women of wealth. Queens like Arsinoë
II and Cleopatra VII of Egypt stand out in the ancient sources, but some Greek
cities allowed women to hold minor public offices in return for their willingness
to use their wealth for civic purposes. Some educated women even pursued ca-
reers, such as the Cynic philosopher Hipparchia and the professional musician
308

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
Polygnota of Thebes, who won honors at Delphi. More women, however, bene-
fited from the modest changes in their rights that occurred in the colonial society
of the Macedonian kingdoms, where marriage contracts and other legal docu-
ments reveal women capable of conducting their own business and seeking legal
redress for their husbands’ misconduct. Not surprisingly, the explosion of new
opportunities and royal patronage made the Hellenistic period one of the great
creative ages of Greek civilization.
Document 12.2. Marriage Contract of Heracleides and Demetria
(311 BC). The improved legal position of married women in the Hellenistic
period is clear in this marriage contract from Egypt. The diverse origin of Greek
immigrants to Egypt is evident in the variety of ethnics among the witnesses to
Heracleides’ and Demetria’s marriage contract.
Seventh year of the reign of Alexander, the son of Alexander, fourteenth
year of the satrapy of Ptolemy, month of Dius. Marriage contract of Hera-
cleides and Demetria. Heracleides, a free born man, takes as his lawful wife
Demetria, a free born woman from Cos, from her father Leptines, from Cos,
and from her mother Philotis. Demetria will bring with her clothing and or-
naments worth 1,000 drachmas. Heracleides will furnish to Demetria every-
thing that is appropriate for a free woman. We shall live together in whatever
place seems best in the common opinion of Leptines and Heracleides.
If Demetria shall be detected devising something evil for the purpose
of humiliating her husband Heracleides, she shall be deprived of everything
she brought to the marriage. Heracleides shall declare whatever charge he
may make against Demetria before three men whom both approve. Hera-
cleides may not introduce another woman into their home to insult Deme-
tria, nor have children from another woman, nor devise any evil toward
Demetria for any reason. If Heracleides shall be detected doing any of these
things and Demetria declares this before three men whom both approve,
Heracleides shall return to Demetria the dowry of 1,000 drachmas which
she brought, and he shall pay to her in addition 1,000 silver Alexandrian
drachmas. Demetria, and those with Demetria, shall be able to exact pay-
ment, just as though there were a legal judgment from Heracleides himself,
and from all of Heracleides’ property on both land and sea.
This contract shall be wholly valid in every way wherever Heracleides
produces it against Demetria, or Demetria and those with Demetria produce
it against Heracleides, in order to exact payment. Heracleides and Demetria
each have the right to preserve their contracts and to produce the contracts
against each other. Witnesses: Cleon of Gela, Anticrates of Temnos, Lysis of
Temnos, Dionysius of Temnos, Aristomachus of Cyrene, Aristodicus of Cos.
Elephantine Papyri (ed. O. Rubensohn, Berlin, 1907, No. 1, lines 1–18).
309

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
ALEXANDRIA AND HELLENISTIC CULTURE
Alexandria was the most famous and enduring of Alexander’s foundations, and
the site of his tomb. The first three Ptolemies transformed it into the foremost city
of the Hellenistic world with a multiethnic population including Macedonians,
Jews, Greeks, and Egyptians. The clearest symbol of Alexandria’s dynamism and
originality was its signature monument, the Pharos. Built by Ptolemy II, the
Pharos was the first skyscraper, a 400-foot-high polygonal tower topped by a
statue of Zeus Soter (“Savior”) whose beacon fire guided ships to Alexandria. The
Ptolemies also made Alexandria the cultural center of the Greek world. Like
Alexander, Ptolemy I and his immediate successors encouraged prominent Greek
scholars and scientists to come to Egypt. With the enormous wealth of Egypt at
their disposal, they could afford to subsidize intellectuals, encouraging artistic
and scientific work by establishing cultural institutions of a new type.
The Ptolemies’ principal cultural foundation was the “Museum,” so-named
because of its dedication to the nine Muses, the patron goddesses of the arts.
There distinguished scholars, supported by government stipends, could pursue
their studies in congenial surroundings including dormitories, dining facilities,
and pleasant gardens. To assist the Museum’s scholars, Ptolemy I established
(with the aid of Demetrius of Phalerum) a library intended to contain copies of
every book written in Greek. The library’s collection is said to have ultimately
reached 700,000 papyrus rolls.
The Ptolemies’ passion for their library was legendary. Ptolemy II supposedly
sponsored the Greek translation of the Jewish Bible, the Septuagint, and Ptolemy
III allegedly stole the official Athenian copy of the works of the three canonical
tragedians. Even the books of visitors to Egypt were seized—the owner received
a cheap copy—if the library lacked them. The library offered unprecedented re-
sources for scholarly research in every field of intellectual endeavor (despite
sneers at the occupants of Ptolemy’s “bird coop” who were expected to earn their
keep). Doctors and writers receiving government stipends served as physicians
and tutors to the royal family, and celebrated its achievements. The scholar and
310
Figure 12.5. Tetradrachm of the Roman em-
peror Commodus (AD 180–192) struck at Alex-
andria, showing ship(s?) passing the Pharos.

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
poet Callimachus catalogued the library in 120 books, thereby laying the foun-
dation for the history of Greek literature. In his poem The Lock of Berenice Calli-
machus also celebrated the transformation into a comet of a lock of hair dedicated
by Berenice II in 246 BC to commemorate the beginning of the Third Syrian War.
In a similar vein, Theocritus’ seventeenth Idyll extravagantly praised the first
decade of the reign of Ptolemy II, comparing the king and his sister-wife Arsinoë
II to Zeus and Hera.
The work of Alexandrian intellectuals was not limited, however, to satisfying
the whims of their royal patrons. Alexandrian writers made important innovations
in Greek literature. In his Idylls, brief dialogues or monologues set in an idealized
countryside, Theocritus introduced the pastoral mode into Western literature. Cal-
limachus inaugurated the tradition of “learned” poetry in works such as his
Hymns and Aetia, in which he retold in elegant verse obscure myths and the ori-
gins of strange customs and festivals collected from all over the Greek world. Cal-
limachus’ younger contemporary and rival Apollonius of Rhodes reinvigorated
the old epic genre with his acute psychological portraits of Jason and Medea in
his vivid retelling of the story of Jason and the Argonauts, the Argonautica. Eu-
hemerus, an ambassador of Cassander to Ptolemy I, used the utopian travel ro-
mance to propound in his Sacred Tale the radical idea that the gods had once been
great rulers worshiped after their deaths for their gifts to humanity like contem-
porary kings.
The Visual Arts
The visual arts reflect the combination of old and new that is a distinctive feature
of the Hellenistic Age. Classical artists had perfected a limited number of artistic
genres or types such as the idealized figure of an unemotional youthful nude
male. This type of figure continued to be sculpted as a heroic representation of
Hellenistic kings. Hellenistic art is, however, characterized by variety and exper-
imentation, providing dramatic renderings of a cross section of humanity expe-
riencing a variety of emotions under extreme stress as in the case of the Laocoön,
where the doomed effort to escape a horrible death is captured in stone; or the
Boxer, where the pathos of defeat is equally vividly depicted in bronze. Sculptors
particularly delighted, however, in exploring every aspect of the female nude as
illustrated by the various depictions of Aphrodite at her toilette. Sculpture thus
provides strong evidence of the new focus on the individual as special and
unique, rather than only a citizen of a polis.
The production of small terra-cotta figures began in the fourth century and
flourished in the Hellenistic period. These mold-made figurines were relatively
inexpensive and popular throughout the Greek world. They are our best evi-
dence for the visual arts as a reflection of reality, portraying people of all ages,
every social status, and a range of ethnicities, including chubby children; stooped,
stout, and wrinkled elderly people; elegant and graceful society women; and
members of the lower classes. Small bronze sculptures, though more expensive,
also depict a broad variety of people.
311

Figure 12.6a. Laocoön (Rome). Dramatic representation of the Trojan priest Laocoön and
his two sons being killed by sea serpents as punishment for advising the Trojans not to
bring the Trojan horse into the city. b. (Facing page) Bronze Boxer (Rome). Brilliant study
of an aging athlete. Cleaning has revealed that his body is covered with wounds repre-
sented by red copper inlays. c. (Page 314) Crouching Aphrodite (Rome). The goddess
Aphrodite represented as a beautiful woman interrupted by an unseen viewer as she
washes her shoulder and neck.
a

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
313
a
b

Portraiture on coins and in sculpture was also fostered by interest in the indi-
vidual and in the personality. Hellenistic portraits sought not only to portray the
actual features of the subject, but also to influence the viewer’s perception of the
character. The Ptolemies, for example, adeptly used visual imagery to gain sup-
port for their regime. Like Alexander, who encouraged belief in his own divinity
and was worshiped as a god after his death, Hellenistic rulers manipulated reli-
gion to legitimize their use of absolute power. Members of the ruling dynasties
were portrayed on coins and in sculpture with the attributes and epithets of gods
and heroes. The political and propagandistic value of sculpture is obvious in the
image of Alexander in the company of Egyptian divinities (Chapter Eleven, Fig-
ure 11.5) and in the sculpture of Arsinoë II portraying her as an Egyptian god-
dess. Viewers would immediately understand that Alexander and his successors
were not mere mortals but incarnations of divinities, and the rightful rulers of
Egypt and the Greek world.
Many monuments Hellenistic rulers commissioned are now known only
through images on coins, Roman copies, and verbal descriptions. These convey a
A Brief History of Ancient Greece
314
c

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
315
Figure 12.7. Miniature Hellenistic sculptures. a. Terra-cotta figurine of old nurse and child.
Late fourth century BC. b. Terra-cotta figurine of schoolgirl reading papyrus roll. c. Bronze
statuette of black youth in craftsman’s garb. Third to second century BC.
a
b
c
vivid impression of the wealth and power of the monarchs and proud cities who
constructed them. Artists traveled wherever such patrons beckoned. Bravura
characterizes many major Hellenistic sculptures such as the Victory (Nike¯) of
Samothrace dedicated by the Rhodians to commemorate their victories over An-
tiochus III of Syria (222–187 BC). Victory is portrayed alighting on the prow of a
ship. Her wet and windblown dress reveals the contours of her body, while the
cloth, flaring out behind the goddess, illustrates the drama and restlessness char-
acteristic not only of the art but also of Hellenistic life. Her raised wings also sug-
gest that her presence is not necessarily permanent. Like the goddess Tyche¯ (For-
tune), Victory can be fickle.
The visual arts also reveal nostalgia for a safer and more secure past. Portraits
of philosophers, poets, and other historical figures decorated public areas and
private enclosed spaces such as libraries (cf. Demosthenes, Chapter Ten, Figure
10.4). Some authors were even worshiped as divine. For example, portrait busts

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
316
Figure 12.8. Limestone statue of Arsinoë II in
Egyptian style. A hieroglyphic inscription on the
back pillar of Arsinoë’s portrait indicates that
the figure was dedicated not long after her death
and deification in 270 BC. Her corn curls were
painted black, and the face and parts of the body
were originally gilded. The full, curved lips,
highly arched brows, and large, wide-open eyes
are depicted in the Egyptian style, but the queen
carries a double cornucopia, an attribute of Greek
goddesses referring to their powers of fertility.
Figure 12.9. (Facing page) Victory (Nike) of Samothrace. The colossal statue known as the
Winged Victory dates from around 200 BC. Louvre Museum, Paris.

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
317

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
of Homer (about whose appearance nothing was known) were common, no
doubt because the Iliad was the most widely read book in the Greek world and
was used as a text in school. Nevertheless, despite the reverence for the past, the
visual arts allowed Hellenistic Greeks no doubt that the world had changed dras-
tically since the days of Achilles and the bards who first recited his exploits in
regular lines of verse.
318
Figure 12.10. This sculpted relief of the Apotheosis of Homer by Archelaus of Priene,
found in Bovillae, Italy, dates from around 221–205 BC. The deified poet, seated at the
lower left, holding a scroll and scepter, is crowned by Calliope (the Muse of epic poetry).
The other figures include Zeus and Mnemosyne (Memory), as well as their daughters, the
Muses. The sculpture was probably made for a poet who was victorious in a competition
at Alexandria.

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
Scholarship and Science
Hellenistic intellectuals also made fundamental contributions in the areas of liter-
ary scholarship and applied science. Callimachus and philologists such as Zen-
odotus and Aristarchus founded the critical study of Greek language and literature,
preparing texts of Homer and other poets that are the ancestors of those we still
use. The mathematician and geographer Eratosthenes established the principles
of scientific cartography, and produced a strikingly accurate estimate of the cir-
cumference of the earth. The physicist Ctesibius pioneered the study of ballistics
and the use of compressed air as a source of power, while other scientists exper-
imented with the use of steam to operate simple machines. More mundanely, an
unknown Ptolemaic technician invented the saqqiyah, an animal-powered water
wheel still used today in Egypt and the Sudan.
The doctors Herophilus and Erasistratus made fundamental discoveries con-
cerning the anatomy and functions of the human nervous, optical, reproductive,
and digestive systems by dissecting corpses, and even vivisecting criminals pro-
vided by the government for the “advancement of science.” The Hippocratic Oath
also dates to the Hellenistic period and enjoins physicians to promise to respect
their teachers and to hand on their knowledge only to their teachers’ sons and ap-
prentices. Doctors are to swear to abstain from harming any person and to refrain
from practicing abortion and euthanasia and from divulging what patients tell
them in confidence. Since there was no licensing of physicians in antiquity and
many conflicting medical doctrines and views of the physician’s ethical role, the
oath was by no means universally adhered to by Greek physicians, as is obvious
from medical texts that discuss abortion, and from the use of vivisection. Royal
patronage did, however, have a drawback. Areas that did not receive royal largess
tended to stagnate. Thus, apart from the Elements and Optics of the mathematician
Euclid, the Alexandrian contribution to the theoretical sciences and philosophy,
which were of limited interest to the Ptolemies, was undistinguished.
SOCIAL RELATIONS IN THE HELLENISTIC WORLD
Greek cultural preeminence tends to obscure the fact that Greeks were a minor-
ity in the Hellenistic world, even in cities like Alexandria and Antioch. Not sur-
prisingly, therefore, historians differ in their interpretations of relations between
immigrant Greeks and the native populations, some seeing the Hellenistic cities
as “melting pots” in which Greek and non-Greek cultures and peoples blended
into a new cosmopolitan civilization, and others as capitals of segregated soci-
eties in which social status and privilege were determined primarily by ethnicity
and in which the ethnicities that counted were Macedonian and Greek. A con-
siderable degree of social and cultural segregation was, of course, inherent in the
demography of the Hellenistic kingdoms because of the predominantly urban
character of Greek settlement. Studies of Egyptian villages have revealed an al-
most total absence of either Greek residents or Greek influence on daily life.
319

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
Segregation was not limited, however, to the countryside. Non-Greeks were not
citizens of the Hellenistic cities and lived in separate residential quarters. Greeks,
Egyptians, and Jews even used separate legal systems in Egypt. Ethnic prejudices
and tensions are also well documented by papyrological evidence. Theocritus char-
acterizes petty street crime as “an Egyptian game,” and an agricultural worker
complains of being treated with contempt “because I am a barbarian.” Prophecies
of the end of Macedonian rule are common in both Hellenistic Egyptian and Jew-
ish literature, and Hellenistic history is replete with rebellions intended to achieve
that goal.
The Place of Non-Greeks
Nevertheless, the picture of the Hellenistic kingdoms as totally segregated soci-
eties distorts ancient reality. Greek translations of Egyptian literature prove that
at least some Greeks were interested in contemporary Egyptian culture. More im-
portant, the native populations of the Hellenistic kingdoms were not united in
their reaction to Macedonian rule.
As in the past, the security of the Hellenistic kingdoms depended on the sup-
port of the local gods and their priesthoods. Although the Ptolemies strictly su-
pervised the temples of Egypt, they also generously subsidized them and their
priests, as is illustrated by the extensive temple building they sponsored. Study
of the Egyptian evidence for Hellenistic Egypt is only in its infancy, but papyri
document the prosperity of priestly families, which acquired large estates and
320
Figure 12.11. Eratosthenes’ Calculation of the Circumference of the Earth. Eratosthenes
measured at Alexandria the shadow cast by a pointer at noon of the summer solstice when
the sun was directly overhead at Aswan. By applying two simple geometric theorems—
the angles of similar triangles are equal and equal angles sweep out equal arcs—he con-
cluded that the 5000 stade distance between Alexandria and Aswan represented 1/50 of
a sphere with a circumference of approximately 250,000 stades, a little over 30,000 miles
(assuming a stade equaled 8 1/3 miles).
Shadow at
Alexandria
Earth
Syene
Alexandria
Rays of the Sun

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
321
Figure 12.12. The Rosetta Stone. 27 March 196 BC. Fragment of a black granite stele found
at the Rosetta mouth of the Nile containing a trilingual (Greek, Hieroglyphic [Middle
Egyptian], and Demotic [vernacular late Egyptian]) inscription recording a decree passed
by a synod of the priests of Egypt commemorating the coronation of Ptolemy V (204–180
BC) as king of Egypt.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
spent large sums on lavish tomb furnishings and dedications to the gods. Their
prosperity also provided the basis for a vigorous revival of Egyptian culture, re-
sulting in a variety of new literary and artistic works that are only now being
studied and appreciated. It is not surprising, therefore, that Egyptian priests con-
gratulated Ptolemy V for suppressing a native rebellion that threatened them as
much as him.
Opportunity was not limited to the religious elite. Village officials also prospered
by exploiting their role as intermediaries between the Greek-speaking central gov-
ernment and its Egyptian subjects. Not surprisingly, priests and local officials both
were singled out for reprisal during native uprisings. Similar patterns of royal pa-
tronage of temples and priestly prosperity characterize Seleucid Asia, where the Se-
leucid monarchs subsidized Babylonian temples and the temple of Yahweh at
Jerusalem and received the loyal support of their respective priesthoods.
Social and cultural factors also moderated ethnic segregation in the Hellenistic
kingdoms, especially demography. Although the Ptolemies encouraged Greek im-
migration with generous rewards including grants of land, the actual extent of im-
migration was limited and mostly male in character since most immigrants were
soldiers. The number of ethnic Greeks in the Hellenistic East was, therefore, prob-
ably small and intermarriage was not uncommon so that over time Greeks assim-
ilated somewhat to the social and cultural mores of their non-Greek neighbors. This
was particularly true in the area of religion, since Greeks, like other polytheists,
were already predisposed to honor the gods of countries in which they lived.
Hellenistic Religion
Greek religion underwent a profound change in the Hellenistic kingdoms. Pa-
ganism and polytheism were flexible, nondogmatic religious systems, open to
new divinities and to the reshaping of old ones with the result that the powers
of the old Olympian gods were often redefined, since they could no longer be
conceived as defending Greeks against non-Greeks. In Egypt, for example,
Ptolemy I ordered the creation of a new god to serve as Alexandria’s new patron
deity. The new god, Sarapis, was a synthesis of Egyptian and Greek elements,
combining aspects of Hades, Dionysus, Zeus, and Osiris. Outside Alexandria,
Greeks worshiped traditional Egyptian gods such as Isis and Osiris, aided by the
traditional Greek practice of identifying their own gods with those of other peo-
ples (syncretism).
In the process Egyptian gods also changed. Practices alien to Greek religious
traditions, such as animal worship or mummification, were purged from the new
Hellenized cults, while the Egyptian gods assimilated to the Greek gods with
whom they were identified. Isis, for example, was originally the wife of Osiris
and mother of Horus in the charter myth of the Egyptian monarchy, but through
her identification with Aphrodite, Demeter, and Athena, she assumed a charac-
ter unprecedented in Egyptian tradition: queen of the universe, benefactress of all
people, and creator of civilization. Thus accommodation between Greek and non-
Greek culture occurred.
322

Document 12.3. The Praises of Isis (first century BC or first century
AD). The Hellenization of Egyptian religion is evident in this inscription from
the city of Cyme in northwest Anatolia with its universalization of Isis’ power and
identifications of Greek and Egyptian gods (Hephaestus: Ptah, the creator god of
Memphis; Hermes: Thoth, god of wisdom and inventor of writing; and Cronus:
Geb, god of the earth and father of the royal gods of Egypt).
Demetrius, the son of Artemidorus, who is also called Thraseas, a Magne-
sian from Magnesia on the Maeander, an offering in fulfillment of a vow to
Isis. He transcribed the following from the stele in Memphis which stands
by the temple of Hephaestus.
I am Isis, the tyrant of every land; and I was educated by Hermes, and
together with Hermes I invented letters, both the hieroglyphic and the de-
motic, in order that the same script should not be used to write everything. I
imposed laws on people, and the laws which I laid down no one may change.
I am the eldest daughter of Cronus. I am the wife and sister of King
Osiris. I am she who discovered the cultivation of grain for people. I am she
who is called goddess by women. By me the city of Bubastis was built. I sep-
arated Earth from sky. I designated the paths of the stars. The sun and the
moon’s course I laid out. I invented navigation.
I caused the just to be strong. Woman and man I brought together. For
woman I determined that in the tenth month she shall deliver a baby into
the light. I ordained that parents be cherished by their children. For parents
who are cruelly treated I imposed retribution. Together with my brother
Osiris I stopped cannibalism.
I revealed initiations to people. I taught people to honor the images of
the gods. I established precincts for the gods. The governments of tyrants I
suppressed. I stopped murders. I compelled women to be loved by men. I
caused the just to be stronger than gold and silver. I ordained that the true
be considered beautiful. I invented marriage contracts. Languages I as-
signed to Greeks and barbarians. I caused the honorable and the shameful
to be distinguished by Nature. I caused nothing to be more fearful than an
oath. Anyone who unjustly plotted against others I gave into the hands of
his victim. On those who commit unjust acts I imposed retribution. I or-
dained that suppliants be pitied. I honor those who justly defend them-
selves. With me the just prevails.
I am mistress of rivers and winds and the sea. No one becomes famous
without my knowledge. I am the mistress of war. I am the mistress of the
thunderbolt. I calm and stir up the sea. I am in the rays of the sun. I sit be-
side the course of the sun. Whatever I decide, this also is accomplished. For
me everything is right. I free those who are in bonds. I am the mistress of
sailing. The navigable I make unnavigable whenever I choose. I established
the boundaries of cities.
The New World of the Hellenistic Period
323

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
I am she who is called Thesmophoros. The island from the depths I
brought up into the light. I conquer Fate. Fate heeds me. Hail Egypt who
reared me.
Inscriptiones Graecae 12.14; translated by Stanley M. Burstein,
The Hellenistic Age from the Battle of Ipsos to the Death of Kleopatra VII.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985, p. 147.
Over time the lack of rigid barriers between Greek and local societies resulted
in situations in which many individuals, who are referred to as “Greeks” in Hel-
lenistic sources, were not so much persons of Greek birth as of Greek culture—
people, that is, who had received a Greek education, adopted a Greek lifestyle
(and frequently a Greek name), and worshiped their old gods under Greek names.
Likewise, many “Greek cities” in the Near East were simply renamed local set-
tlements with citizen bodies composed of such acculturated non-Greeks. Some
Jews sought to transform Jerusalem into such a Greek polis in the early second cen-
tury BC, but other Jews led by the Maccabees vigorously opposed them. The conflict
escalated when Antiochus IV forbade the Jews to carry on their traditional religious
practices, and in 167 BC had the temple of Yahweh rededicated to Zeus. The festi-
val of Chanukah commemorates the Maccabees’ triumph over Antiochus and his
supporters. The books of First and Second Maccabees in the Apocrypha illuminate
the Hellenistic world from the viewpoint of a subject people and reveal that the
mass of the population of the Hellenistic kingdoms rejected Hellenization.
Macedonian rule in Egypt and western Asia lasted for almost three centuries.
Scholars evaluate its significance differently, some emphasizing the spread of
Greek culture in the region and others viewing it as a transitory period of colo-
nial rule in which Greek culture was little more than a veneer with limited in-
fluence. Not surprisingly, the truth is more complex. Hellenization did occur, but
primarily in the major urban centers of the region. Likewise, native traditions en-
dured and even flourished, but their vigor was short-lived, surviving often ex-
clusively among women. Education, culture, and elite status had always been
closely connected in the region. The privileged position enjoyed by Greek culture,
however, severed that link, encouraging native aristocrats to abandon their tra-
ditional cultures and Hellenize. The establishment of the Macedonian kingdoms,
therefore, marked the beginning of the end of the ancient civilizations of Egypt
and the ancient Near East.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Lewis, Naphtali. 1986. Greeks in Ptolemaic Egypt. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Account of life
in Ptolemaic Egypt as reflected in the careers of eight Greeks and Egyptians.
324

The New World of the Hellenistic Period
Momigliano, Arnaldo. 1975. Alien Wisdom: The Limits of Hellenization. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press. Pioneering study of cultural interaction in the Hel-
lenistic period.
Pollitt, J. J. 1986. Art in the Hellenistic Age. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Standard treatment of Hellenistic Art.
Pomeroy, Sarah B. 1984, 1989. Women in Hellenistic Egypt: From Alexander to Cleopatra. New
York: Schocken Books (1984); with a new foreword and addenda, Detroit: Wayne
State University Press (1990). Wide-ranging survey of the social, economic, and le-
gal status of women in Ptolemaic Egypt.
Shipley, Graham. 2000. The Greek World after Alexander: 323–30 BC. London: Routledge.
Comprehensive account of all aspects of Hellenistic history with full discussion of
sources and contemporary scholarship.
Walbank, F. W. 1992. The Hellenistic World, Rev. ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. Lucid brief history of the Hellenistic kingdoms from their foundation until the
Roman conquest.
325

326
EPILOGUE
In many ways the early third century BC was the climax of ancient Greek history.
Macedonian power and Greek culture reigned supreme in western Asia. New Greek
cities were founded throughout the region, and a person could travel almost to In-
dia speaking only Greek. The heyday of the Hellenistic kingdoms, however, was
brief, as their survival itself was called into question shortly after their founding.
The Seleucids’ kingdom proved the most vulnerable. From Antioch the Se-
leucids struggled to maintain control of the Asian territories of Alexander’s em-
pire. Seleucus I (311–281) gave up his claims to Alexander’s conquests in India
to Chandra Gupta (c. 324–300), the founder of the Maurya dynasty, who had al-
ready conquered northern India. Further territorial losses followed in the third
century BC. While Seleucus’ successors fought over the royal succession, enemies
attacked their western and eastern frontiers. In the west, the Attalids of Pergamum
seized control of much of Anatolia; in the east, the Parthians (Iranian-speaking
nomads) and rebellious Greek settlers carved out kingdoms for themselves in
eastern Iran and Bactria.
The Ptolemies’ hold on Egypt was more secure. Not until 170 BC did an en-
emy succeed in breaching Egypt’s defenses. Nevertheless, Ptolemaic authority in
Egypt also weakened significantly in the third century BC. Native rule was
reestablished in southern Egypt in the last decades of the century, while succes-
sion crises sapped the dynasty’s strength. By 200 BC, the Ptolemies ruled only
Lower and Middle Egypt. With the total collapse of the Hellenistic state system
in sight, Antiochus III (223–187 BC) and Ptolemy V (204–180 BC) launched vigorous
counteroffensives that seemingly restored their dynasties’ authority. Before the Se-
leucids and Ptolemies could fully consolidate their power, however, disaster struck
in the form of the Romans. Roman expansion into the eastern Mediterranean was
so dramatic and unexpected that the historian Polybius could justifiably ask the
deceptively simple question: How could anyone not be interested in knowing
how the Romans overthrew the world created by Alexander in less than half a
century?
Although Roman relations with Egypt dated to the 270s BC, Rome first inter-
vened in the political life of the eastern Mediterranean in the 190s BC, defeating

Epilogue
Philip V of Macedon and Antiochus III. The Romans did not annex any territory
after their victories, preferring instead to pose as the defender of Greek freedom.
The Senate’s refusal to brook potential rivals to Roman preeminence in the region,
however, effectively undermined all the Hellenistic kingdoms. By the mid-second
century, Macedon had been transformed into a Roman province. Meanwhile, the
Seleucids, weakened by dynastic rivalry and subversion often abetted by Rome,
were locked in a losing struggle with the Parthians. This struggle gradually re-
duced their kingdom to a few cities in Syria that Rome finally occupied in 63 BC.
The Ptolemies survived their Seleucid rivals by a generation, but only because the
Senate could not agree on which senator would take credit for the annexation of
Egypt. That debate ended in 31 BC, when Octavian defeated Antony and Cleopa-
tra VII at Actium in northwest Greece. With their suicides in 30 BC the long suc-
cession of Alexander’s successors finally ended.
In the end, Rome and Parthia turned out to be the ultimate heirs of Alexander’s
legacy, having extinguished the kingdoms of his successors. The demise of the
Hellenistic state system did not mark the end of Greek civilization, but it did
change its character and role. In the eastern portions of Alexander’s empire, Greek
civilization gradually disappeared. Macedonian and Greek rulers were responsi-
ble for the flowering of Greek culture in the Hellenistic East, and their patronage
ended with the disappearance of their kingdoms. Deprived of political support,
Greek culture withered as the new Parthian rulers of the Middle East sought to
rally support from the non-Greek elites of their territory by favoring local tradi-
tions. In the west, however, Greek culture flourished thanks to Roman support.
Although the Roman conquest of the eastern Mediterranean was marked by
brutality that belied the promise of “freedom” the Romans had made to the
Greeks in 196 BC after the defeat of Philip V, it was not the whole story. The Ro-
mans were no strangers to Greek culture. Greek influence on Roman culture
dated from the beginnings of Roman history and continued long after Greece had
become merely a minor province of the Roman Empire. Not surprisingly, Greek
327
Figure Epilogue 1. Coin portrait of
Cleopatra VII, who ruled Egypt from 51
to 30 BC.

A Brief History of Ancient Greece
literature and art were familiar to many upper-class Romans. Some senators, like
Fabius Pictor (c. 220 BC), the father of Roman history, even wrote books in Greek.
By the first century BC Roman culture was saturated with Greek influence. Rome’s
gods and myths had been recast in terms of Greek mythology. Latin writers con-
stantly echoed their Greek predecessors, so that a work like Virgil’s Aeneid,
Rome’s national epic, has to be read against the background of the Iliad and the
Odyssey to be fully appreciated. Virgil’s contemporary, Horace, was only recog-
nizing reality when he wrote that “Greece, though a captive, captured her fierce
conqueror, and brought the arts to rustic Latium” (Epistles 2.1).
Because of the Hellenization of the Roman upper class, the Romans made the
support of Greeks and Greek culture the linchpin of their rule of the eastern
Mediterranean. Greeks enjoyed privileged status, and Greek cities provided the
framework for Roman provincial administration.
The result was a remarkable renaissance in the cultural life of the Greek cities
during the first two centuries AD. Evidence of this renaissance is visible in the ru-
ins of the splendid public buildings that everywhere in the eastern Mediterranean
dominate the remains of Greek cities and the honorary statues that nowadays crowd
our museums. Greek writers, such as the historian Appian and the orator Aelius
Aristides, celebrated the benefits of the Pax Romana (“Roman Peace”). Science and
philosophy also flourished. Galen’s medical works and Ptolemy’s syntheses of as-
tronomy and geography remained authoritative for more than a millennium. The
Egyptian-born Neo-Platonist Plotinus created the last great philosophical system
of antiquity, a philosophical mysticism—loosely based on the works of Plato—
that was Christianity’s most formidable intellectual rival. Only in one area of Greek
life was there no renaissance: the civic and political culture of the Greek cities
themselves. Instead, during these same two centuries, the last vestiges of the po-
lis tradition of self-government disappeared. As the moralist and biographer
Plutarch candidly observed, “Nowadays, when the affairs of the cities no longer
include leadership in wars or the overthrowing of tyrannies or acts of alliances,
what opening for a conspicuous and brilliant public career could a young man
find?” Plutarch answered his own question by pointing out that “there remain
the public lawsuits, and embassies to the Emperor” (Precepts of Statecraft 805a–b;
Fowler). Not surprisingly, men such as Arrian, who was governor of Cappado-
cia under the emperor Hadrian (117–138 AD) and a historian of Alexander, aban-
doned their poleis, and found rewarding careers in the service of Rome.
While Greeks and Greek culture prospered under Roman rule, the same was
not true of the non-Greek cultures of Egypt and the Near East. Roman patronage
heightened the value of Greek culture and Roman citizenship. Non-Greek cul-
tural traditions and institutions were not repressed, but they were devalued. In
the second century AD the Syrian writer Lucian expressed the cultural priorities
of the new regime in his autobiographical essay The Dream, stating that without
a Greek education a man could only be an “artisan and commoner, always en-
vying the prominent and fawning on the man who was able to speak,” while the
educated man was “honored and praised, in good repute among the best people,
well regarded by those who are preeminent in wealth and breeding . . . and
328

Epilogue
considered worthy of public office and precedence” (The Dream 9–11). Lucian’s
calculation was correct. His Greek education and literary skill brought him fame
and a lucrative post on the staff of the Prefect of Egypt.
Some peoples, such as the Jews, resisted the assimilatory pressures of Roman
imperial society, sometimes violently. Others found in the new Christian church
opportunities for the satisfaction of the ambitions of their elites. Increasing num-
bers of non-Greeks, however, followed Lucian’s example, especially after 212 AD
when the emperor Caracalla erased the legal barriers between Greeks and non-
Greeks by conferring Roman citizenship on virtually all inhabitants of the empire.
The process of assimilation was not always free of friction. Complaints of
Greek prejudice and cultural chauvinism are frequent in the writings of Hell-
enized non-Greeks such as, for example, the Hellenized Syrian rhetorician Tatian,
who urged Greeks not to despise non-Greeks and their ideas since most Greek
practices “took their origin from barbarian ways” (Address to the Greeks 1.1). Nev-
ertheless, by late antiquity a significant portion of the social and intellectual elite
of the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire consisted of Hellenized non-
Greeks. The local languages of the region survived in the vernacular speech of
the urban lower classes and the countryside and even found new written ex-
pression in the literatures of Syriac and Coptic Christianity. But the traditional
cultures of Egypt and the Near East died, as the native elites that had patronized
them for millennia gradually deserted them. Meanwhile, the dominant strand in
the intellectual life of the eastern Mediterranean basin became what scholars call
Hellenism, essentially a cosmopolitan form of Greek culture loosely based on
Classical Greek literature. In this form Greek culture continued to flourish in the
lands conquered by Alexander the Great and influenced the medieval civiliza-
tions of Byzantium and Islam and through them the culture of western Europe
and the Americas.
TRANSLATION
Fowler, Harold N. 1936. Plutarch’s Moralia. Vol. X. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, MA
and London: Harvard University Press.
329

This page intentionally left blank 

331
GLOSSARY
acropolis—Literally, the “upper city,” the citadel of a city or town. Many citadel
hills had been the sites of Mycenaean palaces and remained as special places in
polis life. The most famous is the Acropolis of Athens, the religious center of the
city, which was magnificently adorned with temples in the fifth century.
agora—In Homer, the term for the “place of gathering,” the assembly of the peo-
ple. In the city-state period it denoted the public space of a city or town, being
both the marketplace and civic center. Lingering in the agora was the best way to
inform oneself about public affairs, make business contacts, and collect gossip.
Amphictyonic Council—The governing body of an ancient league of Delphi’s
neighbors, the Delphic Amphictyony, that administered the oracle. It also con-
ducted the Pythian games and dealt with transgressions against the oracle and
its territory. The members were ethne¯, of which the most important were the
Thessalians, Phocians, Boeotians, Dorians, and Ionians. Votes were unequally di-
vided among the members, so that Philip II’s acquisition of the twelve Thessalian
and two Phocian votes gave him a majority of the council’s twenty-two votes and
control of the Amphictyony.
archon—A common title (meaning “leader”) for the highest ranking magistrate
in the early city-states. During the Classical period, even when the strategoi had
become the most important officials in Athens, nine archons continued to be cho-
sen (by lot) to serve judicial and administrative functions.
aristocracy—The term aristokratia (“power in the hands of the best men”) was
coined, probably in the fifth century, possibly to describe the rule of the elite in
preference to the less noble-sounding oligarchia. Aristocratic power and exclu-
siveness were strongest in the early Archaic period and gradually weakened as
strong democratic sentiments emerged in the city-states.

Glossary
assembly—One of the two primary elements of Greek governance (see boule).
From the Dark Age on it was made up of the adult males of the community. In
the Dark Age, the assembly (called agora in Homer) had limited power vis-à-vis
the chiefs, although its concurrence was crucial. By the Classical period it had be-
come the deciding body of state policy. In Athens, the assembly or ekklesia met in
the open air on the hill called the Pnyx about forty times a year.
barbaros—Term for all people who were not Greek in language and culture, so
that the highly civilized and generally admired Egyptians and Persians were bar-
baroi. Increasingly from the fifth century on, however, barbaroi came to be stig-
matized as the inferior “others,” lacking the mental and moral capabilities that
belonged naturally to Hellenes.
basileus—The term for the legitimate monarch, the “king.” In Mycenaean society,
the title pasireu denoted a village or district adminstator; in the Dark Age basileis
were the warrior-chiefs who ruled the villages and districts. The hierarchy of
basileis was replaced in the Archaic Age by oligarchies of landed aristocrats.
boule—Term for the “council,” which was one of the two primary governing in-
stitutions of the Greeks (see “assembly”). Composed of the chiefs and other influ-
ential men in the Dark Age, it became the major organ of aristocratic power in the
Archaic Age. In Classical Athens, the boule¯ consisted of five hundred men chosen
by lot; it prepared business for the assembly and also tried certain court cases.
cella—The inner shrine of a temple. A gold and ivory statue of Athena, over 38
feet high and now lost, stood in the cella of the Parthenon.
city-state—See polis.
currency, Athenian—Units of Athenian currency included the obol, the drachma,
the mina, and the talent. Six obols made a drachma; one hundred drachmas made
a mina; and sixty minas added up to a talent. In fifth-century Athens, a silver
drachma coin was considered good pay for a day’s labor by an unskilled worker
and was probably a living wage for a small family. A drachma was the standard
daily pay for a rower in the fleet. Maintaining a trireme cost a talent a month.
demagogos—Literally, a “leader of the people.” Term used by some Athenians
to categorize democratic politicians, particularly after Pericles’ death. Usually it
had negative connotations and suggested that such a man was self-interested, un-
like a true statesman, who cared for the welfare of the state.
democracy—A form of government in Classical Greece that permitted all free
male citizens some degree of participation in politics, regardless of wealth or fam-
ily background. Despite ideologies of equality, economic inequalities prevailed
and generally brought political inequalities with them. Athens encouraged dem-
ocratic governments in its allies.
332

Glossary
demos—A territory and the people who live in it; thus, “the land” and “the peo-
ple.” It occurs in the Linear B tablets in the form damo, meaning, possibly, a vil-
lage community and its free inhabitants. Although always retaining its official
meaning of “the (whole) people,” aristocrats increasingly used it as an exclusive
term for the “commoners,” or the “masses.”
dicasteries (dikasteria)—Democratic courts at Athens. A dicasterion was com-
posed of hundreds of adult male citizens chosen by lot from those belonging to
the pool of jurors known as the heliaia (q.v.). Both the last-minute element of the
choice and the large size of the juries discouraged bribery, especially since Athen-
ian court cases had to be decided in a single day and there was no appeal from
its decisions. Beginning around the middle of the fifth century, jurors received a
small amount of pay for their services.
dokimasia—The scrutiny Athenian citizens had to undergo before assuming a
position in the government. Political enemies often used this procedure as a
means of keeping a man out of public office.
drachma—See currency, Athenian.
ekklesia—See assembly.
ephor (ephoros)—”Overseer,” an office found in Sparta and in other Dorian states.
In Sparta a board of five ephors was elected annually by the assembly; the senior
ephor gave his name to the year. The ephors had great power in the Spartan state,
including general control over the kings’ conduct.
epikleros—A brotherless Athenian girl compelled to marry her nearest male rel-
ative to produce a son to inherit her father’s property. Although often translated
“heiress,” the epikleros could not herself inherit but only transmit property.
ethnos—Term for a group of people who shared a common identity and territory,
but were not politically united, preferring local self-government. From the sixth
century BC on, Greek ethne¯ acted as unified states by forming federations of local
and regional segments of the ethnos. By the fourth century, ethnic confederacies
and leagues played a prominent role in the geopolitics of Greece.
genos—A category of families claiming descent from a single male ancestor. A
genos was led by its most prominent family and played a prominent part as a po-
litical group in the Archaic Age. In the Classical period genos membership con-
tinued to confer social prestige on their constituent families.
gerousia—The “council of elders” (from geron “old man”). Term used at Sparta
and in other poleis for the aristocratic council. The Spartan gerousia consisted of
the two kings plus twenty-eight men over age sixty who served for life.
333

Glossary
graphe paranomon—Athenian procedure used from the late fifth century BC to
indict a man for making an illegal proposal in the assembly. Since there was no
Athenian constitution and illegality was difficult to determine, the procedure was
usually used as a form of political attack. Those convicted were generally fined;
three convictions barred a citizen from making further proposals.
guest-friendship (xenia)—A form of ritual friendship, whereby a “stranger” (xenos)
entered into a hereditary relationship of mutual friendship with a man from another
demos, each obliged to offer hospitality and aid when they visited each other’s com-
munity. A prominent feature of Homeric society, xenia continued throughout an-
tiquity, eventually becoming the more formal diplomatic relationship of proxeny.
hegemon—A state or individual who headed an organization of states. Athens,
for example, was the hegemon of the Delian League, Sparta of the Peloponnesian
League. A hegemon was said to exercise hegemony, hence the period of Theban
ascendancy in the 360s BC is known as the Theban hegemony.
hektemoroi—A term used in Solonian Athens meaning “sixth-parters,” referring,
presumably, to poor farmers who had fallen into debt to wealthy landowners and
had to hand over to them a sixth of their produce under penalty of enslavement
for their debt.
heliaia—The body of prospective jurors from which dikasteria (q.v.) were se-
lected. Any adult male citizen might present himself for participation.
Hellenes—Greek name for themselves. They had a myth of an eponymous an-
cestor, Hellen, who was the son of Deucalion, the Greek Noah, and the father of
the eponymous ancestors of the Dorians, Ionians, and Aeolians. The common
name (and the supporting myth) probably arose relatively late, perhaps in the
eighth century BC.
helots—Term for groups of conquered people in Greece forced by their con-
querors to work as serfs on their former lands. It is most commonly associated
with Sparta, where helots probably outnumbered citizens by a ratio of seven to
one. The Spartan way of life both depended on and was formed by the state’s
ownership of thousands of helots in Laconia and Messenia. Fear of helot upris-
ings often discouraged Sparta from engaging in distant campaigns.
hetaira—Term meaning literally “female companion” and normally used for
courtesans in Classical Athens. Hetairai usually came from the metic class. Often
more cultivated than citizen women, they were trained to be entertaining and in-
teresting rather than to be thrifty managers of households. Since Pericles’ citi-
zenship laws of 451–450 made it impossible for a man to marry a metic woman,
many Athenian men formed long-term associations with hetairai simultaneously
with their legal marriages to Athenian women. Although some hetairai functioned
334

Glossary
as entrenched mistresses or even common-law wives, others were essentially
prostitutes.
hetaireiai—The military systems of some cities such as those in Crete grouped
men in hetaireiai or “bands of companions,” but the word is most commonly as-
sociated with hetaireiai or social clubs with political overtones, often of an anti-
democratic nature in Athens. The mutilation of the herms in 415 was allegedly
the work of such a hetaireia, and hetaireiai probably played a part in the oli-
garchic revolutions of 411 and 404.
hetairos—“Companion” or “comrade.” In the Dark Age, follower-bands of het-
airoi formed the military and political support of the chiefs who recruited and re-
warded them. For associations of hetairoi for in the city-states, see hetaireiai. In
Macedonia, the hetairoi were an elite band of warriors and advisors who formed
the retinue and personal bodyguard of the kings.
hoplite—Hoplite¯s. The heavily armored infantryman, named from his distinctive
shield (hoplon). Hoplites were the dominant military arm from the seventh cen-
tury on, gradually undergoing changes in weaponry and tactics. Because Greek
governments did not issue arms to their soldiers, hoplites tended to come from
the middle class, men able to afford armor and swords.
kleros—An allotment of farmland sufficient to support a citizen-family; it was
passed on in perpetuity in the male line. In oligarchic states, full citizenship was
frequently tied to the possession of a certain amount of land.
kore—“Maiden.” Term for the life-size or larger marble Archaic statues of clothed
females, made as cult offerings or grave markers. The term kouros (“youth”) is
used of the corresponding nude male statues.
liturgies—An indirect system of taxation at Athens whereby the rich were re-
quired to use their own money to finance public services such as the training of
a chorus for dramatic performances or sending a delegation to a religious festi-
val in another state. The trierarchy was the most expensive, requiring a man to
maintain a trireme for a year and to equip and train its crew.
megaron—A large rectangular building that served as the focal point of Myce-
naean palaces. Its function as the “great hall” of the ruler continued in the reign
of the Dark Age chiefs. In the city-states the ancient megaron achieved immortal-
ity as the basic plan of the Greek temple.
metics—Resident aliens in a Greek state. We know most about metics in Athens.
Although they lacked citizenship, metics mingled comfortably in Athenian soci-
ety and were called on for help in wartime, but they were not permitted to own
property or represent themselves in court.
335

Glossary
metropolis—“Mother-city.” Term for a polis that founded a colony. The relation-
ship between the mother-city and the new polis was normally very close, com-
bining economic, political, and spiritual ties.
mina—See currency, Athenian.
myth—All cultures possess myths, traditional tales that treat aspects of life that
are important to the collective group (e.g., marriage, initiation, food, cultural in-
stitutions, human-divine relations, etc.). The Greeks knew many such orally
transmitted stories going back to the second millennium BC and continually en-
riched by additions from the mythologies of the Near East. Greek historians de-
pended on myths to reconstruct the preliterate past. Modern researchers attempt
to glean from them historical or psychological realities.
nomos—Custom or law. Sometimes it corresponds to the English word “mores,”
connoting a way of doing things that is deeply embedded in a value system. It
can also be used, however, in a legal context; thus, for example, the rules laid
down by Solon were called his nomoi.
nomothetai—Athenian officials set up after the restoration of the democracy in
403 BC. The nomothetai reviewed and ratified the laws of Athens.
obol—See currency, Athenian.
oikist—The oikiste¯s (note the root of oikos) was the “founder” and the leader of a
colony sent out by a mother-city (me¯tropolis). The oikiste¯s had great authority in
the new settlement and was often deified after his death.
oikos—“Household.” The fundamental social and economic unit in Greek soci-
ety, comprehending the family group, its house, land, animals, and property, in-
cluding slaves.
oligarchy—Oligarchia (“rule by a few men”) replaced the system of ranked chief-
tains as the standard form of government in the early city-states. Opposition from
below the narrow ruling circle caused most oligarchies to broaden inclusion in
state affairs. Democratic poleis were subject to oligarchic revolutions, as in Athens
in 411 and again in 404 BC. Throughout the fifth and fourth centuries, tension be-
tween oligarchs and democrats—which often added up to tension between rich
and poor—was a constant factor in Greek political life and sometimes erupted in
bloodshed.
paramount—An anthropological term referring to the highest ranking leader of
a community or group. The major warrior-heroes of the Homeric epics, who rule
over other leaders as a “first among equals,” represent the paramount chiefs who
ruled during the tenth to eighth century BC.
336

Glossary
pediment—The elongated triangular spaces that sat on top of the columns on the
front and back of Greek temples. They were frequently adorned with elaborate
relief sculpture.
peltasts—Lightly armed Greek soldiers who carried light throwing spears and
small, round shields. They were deployed as skirmishers either alone or in con-
cert with hoplites. Although used during the Peloponnesian War, their impor-
tance increased dramatically in the fourth century.
pentakosiomedimnoi—The highest of the four property classes in the Solonic sys-
tem. To qualify for membership, the pentakosiomedimnoi or “500-measure men”
each needed an estate that produced at least 500 medimnoi (bushels) of produce
in any combination of oil, wine, or grain.
perioikoi—“Those who dwell about,” the term used for neighboring peoples sub-
ordinate to a dominating polis. The chief example is Sparta, which treated the
people of the perioecic communities of Laconia and Messenia as half-citizens,
who possessed local autonomy and were obligated to military service but had no
say in the conduct of policy.
phalanx—The tactical formation of a hoplite army, consisting in the Archaic and
Classical periods of ranks of heavy infantry, usually eight deep. The phalanx in-
troduced by Philip II of Macedon consisted of six brigades of fifteen hundred
men each. Each phalangite was armed with a short sword, a small round shield,
and a long pike (sarissa) up to 18 feet long, and they fought in rectangular for-
mations sixteen men deep.
phratry—A subdivision of the tribe (phyle¯) and, theoretically, a kin group. In
Classical times phratries were well-defined social groups concerned with defin-
ing descent and, therefore, citizenship. Every citizen family in Athens belonged
to a phratry.
phylai—“Tribes.” The term for the large descent groups into which a de¯mos was
divided. Ionian communities had four such “tribes,” Dorian communities three.
The tribes functioned as organizational units in the city-states. In his reform of
the Athenian government, Cleisthenes bypassed the four traditional tribes and
divided Attica politically and militarily into ten new phylai.
polemarch—The office of polemarchos (“war leader”) was common to many early
city-states. As army commander for a specified term, usually a year, and subject
to the policy of the aristocratic council, the polemarch was limited in his power.
Circa 500 BC, the military functions of the Athenian polemarch were transferred
to the board of ten strategoi (see strategos). After 487 BC, when the polemarch be-
came appointed by lot, his functions became mainly legal and ceremonial.
337

Glossary
polis—“City,” “town.” From the eighth century on, polis designated a political
community, composed of a principal city or town and its surrounding country-
side, which together formed a self-governing entity, the “city-state.” The small
polis was the principal form of Greek community, numbering in the high hun-
dreds by the fifth century BC.
probouleutic—The term for the council’s (boule¯’s) function of preparing state
business for consideration in the assembly.
probouloi—In Athens, a committee of ten older men that was set up to direct the
government in 413 BC. The establishment of the probouloi resulted from the shock
engendered by the disaster in Sicily.
proskynesis—Greek name for the Persian ritual greeting offered by social inferi-
ors to their superiors and by all Persians to the Persian king. In its simplest form,
proskyne¯sis involved merely blowing a kiss. Proskynesis to the Persian king, how-
ever, required full prostration before the ruler. Although Persians did not believe
that their king was divine, Greeks and Macedonians considered proskynesis ap-
propriate only to deities and resented attempts to make them perform it.
proxeny—The term used for a diplomatic arrangement whereby citizens in one
state, called proxenoi, looked after the interests of other states in their communi-
ties. The proxenos was highly honored by the foreign state he represented. The
system of proxeny (proxenia) developed from an earlier system of xenia or private
“guest-friendship” (q.v.).
prytanis—One of the titles for the presiding magistrate (or a college of magis-
trates) in a city-state. In the reorganization of the Athenian boule¯ (508 BC), ten
boards of fifty prytaneis each, chosen by lot from the ten new “tribes” (phylai),
took turns as the officials in charge of the daily business of the boule¯ and ekkle¯sia
for a tenth of the year. Each group of fifty men comprised a prytany.
redistributive system—The term for the kind of economic and political arrange-
ments found in the Bronze Age kingdoms of the Near East and Greece, where
most of the agricultural and manufactured production of a region was controlled
from the center (the king and his palace), which redistributed the resources as it
saw fit. In the Greek city-states, by contrast, the government exercised only lim-
ited control over production and distribution. See liturgies.
rhetores—The men who chose to involve themselves intensively in Athenian pol-
itics during the fourth century, proposing decrees and making speeches in the as-
sembly. It is often translated “politicians.”
Satrap—Title of the governors of the principal territorial subdivisions of the Per-
sian Empire, then of Alexander III’s empire, and later of the Seleucid kingdom.
338

Glossary
satrapy—Originally a province of the Persian Empire. Alexander III retained the
satrapal system of the Persian Empire as the administrative framework of his em-
pire. After the division of Antigonus the One-Eyed’s empire in 301 BC, the term
was used to designate the largest territorial subdivisions of the Seleucid kingdom.
sophists—Itinerant intellectuals who taught and gave speeches during the latter
part of the fifth century BC. Some were primarily teachers of oratory, while oth-
ers engaged in thoughtful speculation about society that challenged entrenched
conventions. Plato made the discrediting of the sophists an important part of his
dialogues, accusing them of substituting showy rhetorical displays for real wis-
dom such as Socrates possessed.
stasis—The term first for a group of men who take the same “stand” in a politi-
cal dispute—a faction—and then by extension the act itself of taking sides. In the
city-states stasis (civil strife) occurred between oligarchical factions and between
the rich and the poor. At its worst, stasis entailed bloodshed; thus containing it
within nonviolent bounds was a principal objective of the city-states.
stele—A stone slab inscribed with a text, a decoration, or both. Stelae could be
used to indicate graves, military victories, or property boundaries. Important
texts such as legal decrees and treaties might also be inscribed on them.
strategos—The common term for a “military leader.” In Athens, after 487, the ten
strategoi were the only elected high officials; thus most influential fifth-century
politicians were strategoi. In the early Hellenistic era, strate¯gos (general) was the
title of the highest-ranking Macedonian military commander in Europe and Asia.
The four attested strategoi of this period were Antipater, Polyperchon, and Cas-
sander in Europe and Antigonus the One-Eyed in Asia.
symposion—In Archaic and later periods the after-dinner “drinking party,” made
up of a small number (between fourteen and thirty) of men, was a frequent event
in adult male social life, primarily among the elite. The symposion was an impor-
tant bonding ritual among young aristocrats and (like the hetaireiai, q.v.) was often
the occasion of factional plotting. Meaning “drinking together,” it is the origin of
the English word symposium.
synedrion—A representative council such as that of the Second Athenian Confed-
eracy or the Corinthian League. The synedrion of the Second Athenian Confederacy
was composed of a single representative from each member state and ruled the
confederacy jointly with the Athenian assembly; policy decisions had to be rati-
fied by both bodies. The synedrion of the Corinthian League consisted of repre-
sentatives of the member cities and ethne¯ of the League. The latter synedrion was
responsible for upholding the Common Peace that established the Corinthian
League and was empowered to arbitrate disputes among its members and to try
individuals accused of betraying its goals.
339

Glossary
synoecism (synoikismos)—The term used for the process whereby several separate
communities were formed into a single political union. Synoecism also referred
to the actual movement of people from several communities into a new compos-
ite settlement.
talent—See currency, Athenian.
thes—The term for a free man who was forced by his poverty to hire out as a la-
borer for wages. In Athens, according to the economic divisions attributed to
Solon (c. 600 BC), the the¯tes (plural) formed the lowest class of citizens.
tholos (plural tholoi)—A type of monumental above-ground stone tomb (shaped
like a beehive) favored by the elites of the Late Bronze Age. In the Classical pe-
riod, circular structures, also called tholoi, served as temples and public buildings.
trireme—Term for the standard form of Greek warship (trieres) in the Classical
period. Propelled by three banks of oars, and attaining speeds of nine knots, the
trireme used its bronze ram to disable enemy ships.
tyranny (tyrannis)—The illegal seizure and control of governmental power in a
polis by a single strong man, the “tyrant” (tyrannos). Tyranny occurred as a phase
in many city-states during the Archaic period, and is often seen as an intermedi-
ate stage between narrow oligarchy and more democratic forms of polity. In the
late fifth and the fourth century, a new kind of tyrant, the military dictator, arose,
especially in Sicily.
wanax—“Lord,” “master.” The title of the monarchical ruler of a Mycenaean
kingdom. In the form anax it appears as the title of gods and high-ranking chiefs
in Homer.
xenia—See guest-friendship.
340

341
i
Papyrus roll containing speech of Hyperides. London, The British Library, Papyrus 115, cols.
27–34. Photo: Library. Reprinted by permission of The British Library.
ii
Cup depicting lessons in music and reading, Douris painter, Athens. From H.D. Amos &
A.G.P. Lang, These Were the Greeks (Chester Springs: Dufour Editions, Inc., 1982), p. 162, Fig.
15.1. Reprinted by permission of the Staatliche Musseen Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
1.1a Plan of the Minoan palace at Knossos. From Raimond Higgins, The Archaeology of Minoan Crete
(London: The Bodley Head, 1973), p. 41.
1.1b Plan of the Mycenaean palace at Pylos. From Donald Preziosi and Louise A. Hitchcock, Aegean
Art and Architecture (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 157, Fig. 97. Reprinted by
permission of publisher.
1.1c View of the ruins of the Minoan palace at Phaistos. Photo: The J. Allan Cash Photo Library,
London.
1.2
Fresco of a fisherman from Thera. Athens, National Archaeological Museum. Photo: Bil-
darchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
1.3a Inlaid dagger. Athens, National Archaeological Museum. Photo: Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich.
1.3b Plan and cross section of the Kato Phournos tholos tomb, Mycenae. Photo: British School,
Athens.
1.3c Interior vault of a tholos tomb, Mycenae. Photo: Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich.
1.3d Gold mask from shaft graves, Mycenae. Athens, National Archaeological Museum. Photo:
Foto Marburg/Art Resource, New York.
1.4b The megaron hall at Pylos. Photo: Alison Franz.
1.4c “The Lion Gate.” Photo: Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
1.5a Linear B tablet from Pylos. From Donald Preziosi and Louise A. Hitchcock, Aegean Art and Ar-
chitecture (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 158, Fig. 98. Reprinted by permission
of publisher.
1.5b Linear B tablet from the Mycenaean-ruled Knossos. From Donald Preziosi and Louise A.
Hitchcock, Aegean Art and Architecture (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 158, Fig.
99. Reprinted by permission of publisher.
1.6a Statue of goddess figure from Knossos. Herakleion, Crete, Archaeological Museum. Photo:
Foto Marburg/Art Resource, New York.
ART AND
ILLUSTRATION
CREDITS

Art and Illustration Credits
1.6b Gold ring from Knossos. Herakleion, Crete, Archaeological Museum. Photo: Hirmer Fotoarchiv,
Munich.
1.6c Scene on a gold ring from Late Bronze Age Mycenae. From Donald Preziosi and Louise A.
Hitchcock, Aegean Art and Architecture (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 139, Fig.
87. Reprinted by permission of publisher.
1.7a Bronze plate armor and boar’s tusk helmet. Nauplion Museum. Photo: German Archaeologi-
cal Institute, Athens.
1.7b Vase showing line of soldiers on the march, Mycenae. Athens, The National Archaeological
Museum. Photo: Archaeological Receipts Fund (TAP).
2.1a Submycenaean vase. Athens, Kerameikos Museum K2616. Photo: German Archaeological In-
stitute, Athens.
2.1b Late Protogeometric vase. Athens, Kerameikos Museum K576. Photo: German Archaeological
Institute, Athens.
2.2a Reconstruction of chief’s house at Lefkandi. Hugh Sackett, The British School at Athens. Photo:
The British School at Athens.
2.2b/c
“Village chieftain’s house” at Nichoria. From William A. McDonald et al., Excavations at
Nichoria in Southwest Greece: Vol. III, Dark Age and Byzantine Occupation (Minneapolis: Univer-
sity of Minnesota Press, 1983),  pp. 36–37, Figs. 2-22 and 2-23. Reprinted by permission of pub-
lisher.
2.2a “Ordinary” Dark Age house. From William A. McDonald, Progress into the Past: The Rediscov-
ery of Mycenaean Civilization, rev. ed. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990), p. 368, fig.
103. Reprinted by permission of publisher.
2.3a Gold jewelry from the tomb of a rich Athenian Woman. Athens, Agora Museum. Photo: Amer-
ican School of Classical Studies at Athens.
2.3b Terra-cotta chest with five model granaries. From Anthony M. Snodgrass, Archaic Greece: The
Age of Experiment (London: J.M. Dent and Sons, Ltd., 1980), Fig. 1. Reprinted by permission of
the American School of Classical Studies at Athens.
2.4a Graffiti on eighth-century vases. Transcriptions: L. H. Jeffery, LSAG in J. N. Coldstream, Geo-
metric Greece (Huntingdon, England: A&C Black Publishers Ltd., 1977), p. 298. Reprinted by
permission of publisher.
2.4b Late Geometric vase from the Dipylon cemetery. Athens, National Archaeological Museum
NM192. Photo: German Archaeological Institute, Athens.
2.5a Geometric krater from Athens. Paris, Louvre. Photo: Herve Lewandowski, Réunion des Musées
Nationaux/ Art Resource, New York.
2.5b Large Late Geometric grave amphora from the Dipylon cemetery. Athens, National Archaeo-
logical Museum 804. Photo: German Archaeological Institute, Athens.
2.5c A detail of Figure 2.5b. Athens, National Museum. Photo: German Archaeological Institute,
Athens.
2.6
Bronze statuette of man and centaur. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 17.190.2072.
Gift of J. Pierpont Morgan, 1917. Photo: Museum.
3.2
Corinthian vase with depiction of a hoplite battle. Rome, National Museum of the Villa Giu-
lia. Photo: Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich.
3.3a Athenian amphora. Boston, The Museum of Fine Arts 01.8037. Henry Lillie Pierce Fund. Photo:
Museum.
3.3b A symposion scene on an Athenian red-figure calyx krater. Munich, Staatliche Antikensamm-
lungen und Glyptothek. Photo: Museum.
3.4
Statue of an Egyptian nobleman. Boston, The Museum of Fine Arts 07.494. James Fund Pur-
342

Art and Illustration Credits
chase and Contribution, August 8, 1907. Photo: Museum.
3.5
Marble kouros. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 32.11.1. Fletcher Fund, 1932.
Photo: Museum.
3.6
Marble kouros. Athens, National Archaeological Museum NM3938. Photo: Museum.
3.7
Kore of Euthydicos. Athens, Acropolis Museum. Photo: Bridgeman-Giraudon/Art Resource,
New York.
3.8
Relief sculpture depicting the battle of the Gods and the Giants. Delphi, Archeological Mu-
seum. Photo: Nimatallah/Art Resource, New York.
3.9
The agora in the Archaic period, c. 500 BC. After J. Travlos 1974. Used with permission of the
American School of Classical Studies at Athens, Agora Excavations.
4.2
Bronze statuette of a running girl. London, The British Museum. Photo: Museum, courtesy of
trustees.
4.3
Hilaire Germain Edgar Degas’ “Young Spartans.” London, The National Gallery. Photo: Mu-
seum, courtesy of trustees.
5.1
Water jar from Athens depicting women at a fountain house (Hydria) by the Priam Painter. The
Toledo Museum of Art 1961.23. Photo: Museum.
5.2
Tetradrachm, Athens. New York, American Numismatic Society 1957.172.1033. Photo: Society.
5.3
Detail of Attic red-figure psykter. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 1989.281.69. Gift
of Norbert Schimmel Trust, 1989. Photo: Museum.
5.4
Statues of the tyrannicides Harmodius and Aristogiton. Naples, National Museum. Photo:
Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich.
5.6
Delegations bringing tribute to Persepolis. Photo: Barbara Grunewald © Bildarchiv Preussis-
cher Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
5.8
Herm of Themistocles. Ostia, Archaeological Museum. Photo: Antike Porträts © Bildarchiv
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
5.9
Ostraka discovered in the Athenian agora. Agora Excavations. Photo: American School of Clas-
sical Studies at Athens.
5.10 Reconstruction of the Athenian trireme of the Classical period. Photo: Paul Lipke/Trireme
Trust, Montague, Mass.
6.1
Section of Athenian Tribute List incription. Athens, Epigraphic Museum. Photo: Museum.
6.3
Bronze charioteer. Delphi Museum. Photo: Foto Marburg/Art Resource, New York.
6.4
Roman copy of diskobolos. Rome, National Museum. Photo: Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich.
6.5a Reconstructions of the east pediment of the temple of Zeus at Olympia. From Bernard Ash-
mole, Architect and Sculptor in Classical Greece (London: Phaidon Press, 1972), p. 25.
6.5b Seer from east pediment. Olympia Museum. Photo: Museum.
6.6
Marble relief depicting girl with doves. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 27.45.
Fletcher Fund, 1927. Photo: Museum.
6.7
Attic vase c. 470 BC. Boston, The Museum of Fine Arts 63.1246 Ca. 470. William Francis War-
den Fund. Photo: Museum.
6.8
Attic black-figure vase depicting crafts people at work. Boston, The Museum of Fine Arts,
01.8035. Henry Lillie Pierce Fund. Photo: Museum.
6.9
Detail of Attic red-figure wedding bowl by the Washing Painter. Munich, Staatliche Antiken-
sammlungen und Glyptothek. Photo: Museum.
6.10 Black-figure vase, attributed to the Amasis Painter. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of
Art 31.11.10. Fletcher Fund, 1931. Photo: Museum.
343

Art and Illustration Credits
7.2
Model of Periclean Acropolis. Toronto, The Royal Ontario Museum 956.118. Photo: Museum.
7.3
The Doric and Ionic orders. From John Boardman, ed., The Oxford History of Classical Art (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1997). Reprinted by permission of publisher.
7.4
Ground plan of the Parthenon. From John Boardman, ed., The Oxford History of Classical Art
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1997). Reprinted by permission of publisher.
7.5
The Parthenon today. Photo: Werner Forman Archive/Art Resource, New York.
7.6
Parthenon east frieze, slab V. London, British Museum. Photo: Foto Marburg/Art Resource,
New York.
7.7
Ground plan of Erechtheion. From J. Travlos, Pictorial Dictionary of Ancient Athens (New York:
Praeger Publishers), 1971, pp. 216–217. Reprinted by permission of Greenwood Publishing
Group, Inc.
7.8
Erechtheion, Athens Acropolis. Photo: The J. Allen Cash Photo Library, London.
7.9
Red-figure vase depicting man courting adolescent boy. Oxford, The Ashmolean Museum
1967.304. Photo: Museum.
8.2
Herm of Pericles by Cresilas. Photo: © Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
8.4
Bronze shield with graffiti. Agora Excavations. Photo: American School of Classical Studies at
Athens.
8.5
Coin struck by Tissapherenes. New York, American Numismatic Society 1967.152.462. Photo:
Society.
9.1
Bust of Socrates by Lysippus. Paris, Louvre. Photo: Bridgeman-Giraudon/Art Resource, New
York.
9.2
Decree of Aristoteles. Athens, Epigraphic Museum. Photo: Museum.
9.3
Bust of Plato, Roman copy. Paris, Louvre. Photo: Erich Lessing/Art Resource, New York.
9.4
Hellenistic bust of Aristotle. Paris, Louvre. Photo: Herve Lewandowski, Réunion des Musées
Nationaux/Art Resource, New York.
10.2a Silver tetradrachm of Philip II (Obverse: Zeus; Reverse: Mounted Macedonian king). Oxford,
The Ashmolean Museum, Plate 28, No. 512. Photo: Museum, Heberden Coin Room.
10.2b Silver tetradrachm of Philip II (Obverse: Zeus; Reverse: jockey commemorating victory of
Philip’s horse at Olympia). Oxford, The Ashmolean Museum, Plate 28, No. 513. Photo: Mu-
seum, Heberden Coin Room.
10.3
The Macedonian Phalanx. From Arther Ferrill, The Origins of War: From the Stone Age to Alexan-
der the Great (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1985), p. 177. Reprinted by permission of pub-
lisher.
10.4
Polyeuctus’ portrait of Demosthenes. Copenhagen, Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, cat. 436a, IN 2782.
Photo: Glyptotek.
10.5
Burial monument at Chaeronea. Photo: SEF/Art Resource, New York.
11.1
Portrait of Alexander as hero-king. Paris, Louvre Museum. Photo: Giraudon/Art Resource,
New York.
11.3
Mosaic from Pompeii. Naples, National Museum 10020. Photo: Alfredo D’Agli Orti, 1990 © Bil-
darchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
11.4
Alexander as Pharaoh. Chicago, The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago
P.38387/N.43812/CHFN 9246. Photo: Museum.
11.5
Palaces of Persepolis. Photo: ” Lloyd Cluff/CORBIS.
11.6
Fresco depicting Alexander and Roxane, Pompeii. From Andrew Stewart, Faces of Power:
Alexander's Image and Hellenistic Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), Fig. 6.
Pompeii, Soprintendenza archaeoligica di Pompeii, Villa dei Misteri.
11.7
The Greek view of the inhabited world. From N. G. L. Hammond, A History of Greece to 322 BC.
344

Art and Illustration Credits
3rd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986). p. 622. Reprinted by permission of publisher.
11.8
Silver five-shekel coin from Babylonia. London, The British Museum. Photo: Museum, cour-
tesy of trustees.
11.9
Indian statue of Buddha showing Greek influence. Rome, Museo Nazionale d’Arte Orientale.
Photo: Scala/Art Resource, New York.
12.1
Statue of old market woman. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 09.39. Rogers Fund,
1909. Photo: Museum.
12.3
Roman bronze statuette copy of the Tyche of Antioch by Eutychides. New York, The Metro-
politan Museum of Art 13.227.8. Rogers Fund, 1913. Photo: Museum.
12.4
Gold octodrachm showing Ptolemy II and Arsinoe II. New York, American Numismatic Soci-
ety 1977.158.112. Photo: Society.
12.5
Tetradrachm of Commodus. London, The British Museum. Photo: Museum, courtesy of
trustees.
12.6a Laocoon group, Rome. Vatican Museum. Photo: Nimatallah/Art Resource, New York.
12.6b Bronze boxer, Rome. Rome, Museo Nazionale Romano delle Terme. Photo: Scala/Art Re-
source, New York.
12.6c Crouching Aphrodite, Rome. From John Boardman, The Oxford History of Classical Art (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1997), p. 192, Fig. 190. Rome, National Museum of the Terme.
12.7a Miniature sculpture of old nurse with child. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art
10.210.38. Rogers Fund, 1910. Photo: Museum.
12.7b Miniature sculpture of school girl reading a papyrus roll. Hamburg, Museum für Kunst und
Gewerbe. Photo: Museum.
12.7c Bronze statuette of black youth. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 18.145.10. Rogers
Fund, 1918. Photo: Museum.
12.8
Limestone statue of Arsinoe. New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 20.2.21. Rogers
Fund, 1920. Photo: Museum.
12.9
The “Winged Victory.” Paris, Louvre Museum 2369. Photo: Alinari/Art Resource, New York.
12.10 Sculpted relief of the Apotheosis of Homer. London, The British Museum. Photo: Werner For-
man Archives/Art Resource, New York.
12.12 The Rosetta Stone. London, The British Museum. Photo: © Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbe-
sitz, Berlin.
Epi. 1 Coin portrait of Cleopatra VII. London, The British Museum. Photo: Museum, courtesy of
trustees.
345

This page intentionally left blank 

347
A
Abisares (ruler of Kashmir), 288
Academy, Plato’s, 247
Achaemenid rulers. See Darius III (king of Persia)
Acharnians (Aristophanes), 238
Achilles, 50
Acropolis, 169, 170, 171–176, 331
Ada, 276
Adimantus, 222
adultery, 99
Aegean civilizations, 15–35
Aegina, 144
Aegisthus, 185
Aegospotami, battle of, 221–223
Aelius Aristides, 328
Aeneid (Virgil), 328
Aeschines, 264
Aeschylus
on Athenian courts, 236
on the battle of Marathon, 130
concerns, 182
count of surviving plays, 179
The Persians, 135–136
tragedies, 7
writer of tragedies, 184
Aetia (Callimachus), 311
Aetolian League, 302
afterlife, 52
Agamemnon (Aeschuylus), 185–186
Agamemnon (wanax of Mycenae), 43, 50, 51
Agis IV (king of Sparta), 306
Agis (king of Sparta), 217, 222
agora, 48, 78, 176, 331
agriculture, 102–103, 113, 162, 225
aidos, 242
Airs, Waters, Places (Hippocrates), 179
akleros, 46
Akrotiri (Thera), 20–22
Alcaeus, 84
Alcibiades, 212–213, 214, 215, 217, 218, 220–221
Alcinous (ruler of Scheria), 45
Alcmaeonid genos, 112, 120, 131, 132, 195
Alcman, 94
Alexander I (king of Macedon), 256
Alexander III (the “Great,” king of Macedon)
in Athens after its defeat, 265
Bactria, 284
battles, 264, 273–276, 276–278, 277, 281–282,
288
belief in divine descent, 281
campaigns, 274, 289
conquest of India, 287–290
Darius III’s offer, 281
death in Babylon, 292
early biography, 271
in Egypt, 278–281
first year of reign, 271–272
governance of empire, 292
Greek reaction to victory at Granicus, 276
historical records, 8
images, 270, 280, 288, 314
invasion of Asia, 272–273
marriages, 284–285, 291
mutiny of soldiers, 288–289, 292
relationship with Philip II, 268
return from India, 290–292
Siwah, visit to, 279
INDEX
Note: Page numbers in bold refer to illustrations.

Index
Sogdiana, conquest, 284
Alexander IV (king of Macedon, son of Alexan-
der III), 295–296, 298
Alexander of Lyncestis, 286
Alexandria, 279, 310–319
alliances, 89, 105–106, 194
alphabet, 54–55
amnesty, first recorded, 227
Amorgos, 297
Amphictyonic Council, 331
amphictyony, 89
Amphipolis, 168, 263
Amyntas (king of Macedon), 256
Anacreon of Teos, 120
anarchy, 103
Anatolia, 274
Anaxagoras, 178
Anaximander of Miletus, 85
Anaximenes of Miletus, 85
ancestral constitution, 219
Andocides, 8, 220
Andromache, 50
Antigone (Sophocles), 186
Antigonus the One-Eyed (satrap of Phrygia),
296, 297, 298–299
Antioch, 302
Antiochus III (Seleucid king), 326
Antiochus IV (Seleucid king), 324
Antiochus (ship’s pilot), 221
Antipater, 265, 271, 278, 292, 296, 297, 298
Aphrodite, 51, 312, 314
Apocrypha, 324
apoikia, 66
Apollo, 32, 81, 87
Apollodorus, 241
Apollonius Rhodius, 8, 311
apologia, 229
Apology of Socrates (Plato), 229, 230
Apology (Xenophon), 229
Appian, 328
Arcadian League, 234
Archaic period, 6, 61
Archelaus (Euripides), 256
Archelaus (king of Macedon), 256
Archidamian War, 200–211
Archidamus, king of Sparta, 200
Archilochus of Paros, 82
architecture
Archaic, 78
in eighth century, 56, 58
in Greek cities under Rome, 328
Greek Dark Age, 41
at Lefkandi, 39, 40
Minoan, 20–22
Mycenaean, 27
at Nichoria, 39, 40
archons, 64, 111–112, 131, 331
Areopagus, 236
Ares, 32, 51
Arete, 45, 51
Argead house, 256, 298
Argonautica (Apollonius Rhodius), 311
Argos, 88–89
Aristagoras (tyrant of Miletus), 127
Aristarchus, 319
Aristides, 132, 139
aristocracy, 53, 70–71, 82–83, 252, 331
Aristogiton, 120, 121, 121
Aristophanes, 7, 147, 193, 229, 238
Aristoteles, Decree of, 233
Aristotle
on Athenian government, 112
biography, 248
on cities, 239
compared to Plato, 251
on craftsmen, 161
death of Alexander the Great, 292
after defeat by Philip II, 266
on democracy, 243
on human speech, 176
image, 245
on India, 287
logic, 250
as metic, 163
on the middle (class), 68
on nature, 248
on political theory, 250
on the rule of law, 239
on Sparta, 98, 101, 103, 104, 107
surviving records, 7–8
theory of Forms, 250
on tyrants, 76
on women, 251
armor, 74
Arrhidaeus, 295–296
Arrian, 286
Arsinoë II (queen of Egypt), 306, 314, 316, 316
art
Archaic, 76–78, 77, 79–81
Athenian, 148–157
in eighth century, 56, 57, 58
Hellenistic, 294, 311–318
Minoan, 20–22, 21
Mycenaean, 33
“orientalizing style,” 56
Sparta, 93
Artaxerxes I (king of Persia), 145
Artaxerxes III (king of Persia), 267
348

Index
Artaxerxes IV (king of Persia), 283–284
Artemis, 32, 81
Artemisia, 135
Aryan myth, 15
aryballoi, 2
Asia, Seleucid, 307, 322
Aspasia (mistress of Pericles), 157, 163
assembly, 48, 62, 64, 105, 146, 332
astronomy, 85–86
ataraxia, 305
Athenaion Politeia, 226
Athenian Constitution, 6, 250
Athenian League, Second, 232–233, 263
Athenian Tribute Lists, 139–140
Athens (Attica)
agriculture, fifth century, 162
alliance with Corcyra, 194
animosity toward, 198
art, 77, 78
the battle of Marathon, 129–131
Bronze Age to Early Archaic Age, 110–113
building projects under Peisistratus, 119
civil strife, 218–219
Classical demography, 158
Classical housing, 159–160, 161
Classical life cycle, 158
Cleisthenes’ reforms, 122
commerce, 117–118, 168
conflicts with its neighbors, 144
cost of defeat at Syracuse, 217
decrees against Megara, 195
after defeat by Philip II, 265–266
and Delian League, 139, 140–142
democracy in, 143, 145–148, 220, 235, 237–238
destruction of Melos, 213
early, government, 111–112
factions, 116
festivals under Peisistratus, 119
final battle of Peloponnesian War, 221–223
foreign policy under Peisistratus, 118–119
in the Hellenistic period, 303–305
historical records, 6
interest in the Black Sea region, 168
jobs under Peisistratus, 119
judicial system, 147
last years of Peloponnesian War, 220–221
life styles, 177
literature and art, 148–157
map, 123
after Marathon, 131–132
metics, 163–164
naval superiority, 141–142
officials, 147
oligarchy, 218–220
peace with Sparta and Persia, 145
after Peloponnesian War, 225
Periclean strategy, 201–203
after Persian Wars, 138
and Philip II’s Macedonia, 261, 263–264
plague, 203–204
and Potidaea, 194–195
relationship with Sparta, 142–143
repercussions of Archidamian War, 209
revolt in Chalcidice, 209
and Sicily, 166–167, 213–217
Solon’s reforms, 113–116
state pay for state service, 147–148
support of Ionian rebellion, 128
trade, fifth century, 162–163
trial of Socrates, 227–230
unification, 111
uprising after Alexander’s death, 297
votive offerings, 58
athletic competitions, Archaic, 87–88
atomic theorists, 178
awards, 88
B
Babylon, conquest of, 282
Bacchae (Euripides), 256
Bacchylides, 149
Bactria, 284, 296
banausic labor, 161
banking, 240
barbaros, 332
basileis. See also chiefs
Athenian, 111
described, 44–45, 332
in Hesiod’s Works and Days, 71
during Homeric period, 47–48
Macedonian, 255
and political union, 63–64
religious role, 48–49
in Sparta, 103
Batis, 278
Bessus, 283–284
“big man,” 13, 38
“black figure” art, 77–78, 160
Black Sea, 113
Blegen, Carl, 28
board game, 77
Boeotia, 211
Boeotian League, 145, 232, 265
boule, 48, 64, 122, 332
boxer, 313
boys, 95–96, 95–97, 157, 190
349

Index
Brasidas, 209
bribery, 235
Briseis, 50
Bronze Ages, 13–14, 14–35, 22–35
Byzantium, 68, 168
C
Callimachus, 8, 311, 319
Callisthenes, 277, 286
Cambyses (king of Persia), 124
Caracalla (emperor of Rome), 329
Cassander (son of Antipater), 298
casualties of Peloponnesian War, 225
cella, 332
Chaeronea, battle of, 264
Chalcidic League, 263
Chalcidice, 209
Chalcis, 88
Chandra Gupta, 326
chaos, 177
chariot races, 88
chariots, 33
chiefs, 44–45, 47–48. See also basileis
childbirth, 101
choral poetry, 81–82
choruses, 93–94, 100
Cimon, 140, 141, 142–143, 145
circumference of the earth, 320
citizenship, 70, 116
city-states, 14, 61–63
civil strife, 218–219
civilization, 13–14
Classical period, 6–8
clay vessels, 2
Cleisthenes, 122
Cleitus (king of Illyria), 272
Cleitus the Black, 273, 286
Cleombrotus (king of Sparta), 234
Cleomenes (king of Sparta), 121, 127–128
Cleomenes III (king of Sparta), 306
Cleon, 204, 205, 207, 209
Cleopatra (sister of Alexander III), 297
Cleopatra (wife of Philip II), 268, 272
Cleopatra VII (queen of Egypt), 327, 327
cleruchies, 140
clothing
athletic competition, 88
helots, 102
Minoan, 22
Mycenaean soldiers, 33
Spartan, 96, 97, 107
Clouds (Aristophanes), 147, 193, 229
Clytemnestra, 51, 185
coinage, 118, 119, 126, 127
colonization, 53–54, 65–68, 67
Colophon, 82
commerce, 9, 113, 114–115, 117–118
community, 45–47
Conon, 222, 231
conspiracy of Cylon, 112
Constantinople, 68
constitution of Sparta, 105
contraceptives, 101
Corcyra, 194, 206
Corinth
art, 76–78
conflicts with Athens, 144
feud with Corcyra, 194
fifth century commerce, 163
and Potidaea, 194–195
refusal to sign Peace of Nicias, 211
wars, 89
Corinthian League, 266–267, 271
Corinthian War, 231–232
cosmology, 85–87, 177–178
cosmopolis, 292
Council of Five Hundred, 122
councils of elders, 62, 64, 104
courts, 236
craftspeople, 161
Craterus, 296
Creon (king of Thebes), 186
Crete, 16, 20, 22–35
Critias, 226–227
Croesus (king of Lydia), 124, 180–181
Cronus, 51
Ctesibius, 319
cults, hero, 59
Cumae, 66
currency, Athenian, 332
Curtius Rufus, 291
Cyclopean walls, 25, 26
Cylon (tyrant of Athens), 75, 112
Cynicism, 305
Cypselus (tyrant of Corinth), 75, 76–77
Cyrene (Libya), 65, 66
Cyrus II (king of Persian), 124, 220
D
Darius I (king of Persia), 124, 126, 129
Darius III (king of Persia), 276–278, 281–284
Dark Age, 36–41, 43–52
decarchies, 226
350

Index
Decelea, 217, 221
Decree of Aristoteles, 233
Degas, Hilaire Germain Edgar, 107
Delian League, 139, 140–142, 144, 217, 235
Delos, 59
Delphi
and fourth century Phocis, 260–261
oracle of Apollo, 59, 87, 120–121, 133–134, 194
after Persian Wars, 139
relief sculpture, 81
statue, 151
Delphic Amphictyony, 260–261, 264
Delphinion, 236
Demades, 113, 260
demagogos, 76, 205, 332
Demaratus, 268
demes, 122
Demeter, 51
Demetrius (son of Antigonus the One-Eyed),
298, 299, 302
democracy
Athenian, 138, 143, 145–148, 220, 235, 237–238
Cleisthenes and, 122
described, 332
Greek practice of, 243
and imperial revenues, 162
and political theory, 242–243
reforms of Ephialtes, 143
Socrates’ questions, 229
Solon’s contribution, 116
Democritus, 178, 241–242
demos, 44, 46, 62, 333
Demosthenes (orator)
on Alexander the Great, 272
appeal to Persia, 267
extant speeches, 8
funeral oration over dead of Chaeronea, 265
image, 262
political views, 263
resistance to Philip II, 264
suicide, 297
Demosthenes (strategos), 207, 215
dicasteries, 235–236, 333
diet, 10
dike, 242
Diodorus, 8, 239
Diodotus, 205–206
Diogenes of Sinope, 305
Diomedes, 49
Dionysus, 32, 119
diplomacy, 48–49, 89
discus thrower, 151
Dissoi Logoi, 193
divine descent, 281
division of labor, marital, 159–160
Dodona, 59
dokimasia, 333
Dorians, 34
Doric order, 171
dowry, 159
drachma. See currency, Athenian
Draco, 113
dramas, 7. See also tragedy
Dream, The (Lucian), 328–329
drinking parties. See symposia
E
earth, theories of, 85, 86
Ecclesiazusae (Aristophanes), 238
economic divisions, 68–70
economies, 20, 29, 30, 46–47, 101–103, 307
education, 95–97, 99–100, 189–192, 246–247
Egesta, 214, 215
Egypt
Alexander the Great in, 278–281
civilization, 14
commerce with Athens, 163
under Darius I, 126
history, 34
influence on Greeks, 56, 78
Ptolemaic, 306–307
repository for Greek records, 6, 8
ekklesia, 146
Electra, 185
Elements (Euclid), 319
Elysian Fields, 52
Empedocles, 178, 241–242
endogamy, 99
Epaninondas, 233–234
Ephialtes, 142–143
ephors, 64, 104, 333
Epicureanism, 8, 304–305
Epidamnus, 193
epigraphists, 1
epikleros, 333
eponymous archon, 111
eponymous ephor, 104
Erasistratus, 319
Eratosthenes, 319, 320
Erechtheion, 173, 174, 175, 175
Eretria, 88, 128
ethics, 49–51
ethnic prejudices, 320
ethnos, 63, 89, 333
Euboea, 66, 145, 220
Eubulus, 261, 263
Euclid, 319
351

Index
Euhemerus, 311
Eumenes (satrap of Cappadocia), 296, 297, 298
Eumenides, The (Aeschylus), 185
Eupatrids, 111
Euripides
concerns, 182
count of surviving plays, 179
on the dreadfulness of war, 213
at Macedon, 256
on prosperity, 223
on the rule of law, 243
tragedies, 7
writer of tragedies, 188
Europa (daughter of Philip II), 268, 272
Eurydice of Macedon, 258
Eurymedon, 206
Evans, Sir Arthur, 16, 20, 24
exports, 30, 113
F
Fabius Pictor, 328
farming, 9, 10. See also food; livestock
federations, 89
festivals, 87–88, 119
feuds, 75
First Philippic (Demosthenes), 263
Five Thousand, 220
foreign policy, Athenian, 118–119
Forms, theory of, 244–245, 250
foundation oath, 65
Franchthi, 12–13
G
Gaia (“Mother Earth”), 10, 51
Galen, 328
Gaugamela, 281–282
Gaza, 278
gene (genos), 75, 112, 333
Generation of Animals (Plato), 251
Geometric style, 41, 43, 56
gerousia, 104, 333
girls, 157, 159, 189–190
Glaucus, 49
gods, 51–52, 86
Gordian knot, 276
Gorgo (daughter of Cleomenes), 127
government, 48–49, 103–105, 111–112
governmental structures, 63–64
graffiti, 55
Granicus, 273–276
graphe paranomon, 213, 219, 334
graves, 24, 39, 41, 42, 59
Greek influence, on Rome, 327–328
Greek language, 14–15
guest-friendship, 49, 334
Gylippus, 215
gynecology, 179
H
Hades, 51
Harmodius, 120, 121, 121
Harpalus, 291
“head man,” 13
Hector (leader of the Trojans), 44, 49, 50
hegemon, 334
hektemoroi, 113, 334
Helen of Troy, 43
heliaia, 143, 334
Hellas, 9–10
Hellenes, 334
Hellenic League, 132
Hellenica (Xenophon), 7, 222, 232
hellenikon, 89–90
Hellenistic period, 294, 300–301
helots, 69, 93–96, 101–104, 334
Hephaestion, 292
Hephaestus, 52
Hera, 32, 52
Heraclitus of Ephesus, 86
Hermes, 32, 214, 242
herms, vandalization, 214
hero cults, 59
Herodotus
on Aristagoras and Cleomenes, 127
on the battle of Marathon, 130
on the battle of Salamis, 135
on fortune, 181
on Greek Pantheon, 51
historian, 180–181
The Histories described, 7
on nomos, 192
on Peisistratus, tyrant of Athens, 117
on Perdiccas, 254
on the Persian Wars, 136
on the Persians, 126
on Sparta at the battle of Plataea, 101
Herophilus, 319
Hesiod, 6, 50, 51, 54, 71, 85
hetairai, 334–335
hetaireiai, 214, 335
hetairoi, 47, 157, 256, 335
Hiero, 151
352

Index
Hipparchus (co-tyrant of Athens), 120, 132
Hippias (co-tyrant of Athens), 120
Hippocrates, 179
Hippocratic oath, 319
Hippocratics, 179
Hippodameia, 152, 153
Hippodamus, 144
Hipponax of Ephesus, 82–83
historia, 180
Histories, The (Herodotus), 7, 51, 136, 180, 192
History (Thucydides), 7
Hittites, 28, 34
hoi agathoi, 69
hoi kakoi, 69
hoi polloi, 69
Homer, 6, 43–45, 318. See also Iliad (Homer);
Odyssey (Homer)
homicide, 46–47, 113, 236
homoioi, 102, 103
homosexuality, 99–100, 101
hoplites, 73, 73–76, 95–97, 219, 220, 335
Horace, 328
horses, 10
households, 46–47, 159
housing, 159–160, 161
Hydaspes, 288
Hymns (Callimachus), 311
hypaspists, 273
Hyperbolus, 212
I
Ibycus, 83
Idyll (Theocritus), 311
Iliad (Homer), 6, 43–44, 49, 50, 52, 328
India, 287–290, 288
individuality, 91
Indo-Europeans, 14–15, 15, 32
infanticide, 101, 157, 159, 304
“Inferiors,” 106
influence, political, 147
inheritance, 98, 106, 115
Inscriptiones Graecae (Burstein, tr.), 323–324
Ionia, 177–178, 218
Ionian Rebellion, 127–128
Ionic order, 171
iron technology, 37
Isaiah, 124
Isis, 322–324
Ismenias, 232
Isocrates, 8, 267
Issus, 276–278, 277
Italy, 167
J
Jason, 188
Jews, 124, 126, 324, 329
jobs, 119
judicial system, Athenian, 147
just-war theorist, 267
justice, 71, 115
K
kingdoms, Hellenistic, 306–307
kings, 20, 103
kingship, 255–256
kleroi, 46, 102, 140, 335
Knossos, 16, 17, 20, 21, 24
kore, 78, 80, 335
kouros, 78, 79–80
krypteia, 104
L
labor, 72, 161
Lacedaemon. See Sparta
Laconia, 91, 92
Lamachus, 214, 215
land tenure, 106
landowning, 53, 68, 219
Laocoön, 311, 312
Lasus of Hermione, 120
law, 113, 115–116, 193, 235
lawagetas, 28, 33
Laws (Plato), 267
League of Corinth, 297
leagues, 89
Lefkandi, 39, 59
Lelantine War, 88
Leonidas (king of Sparta), 134–135
Lerna (Argolis), 14
Lesbos. See Sappho
Leucippus, 178
Leuctra, 234
Libation Bearers, The (Aeschylus), 185
library of Alexandria, 310–311
Library of History (Diodorus), 239
Life of Alexander (Plutarch), 8
Life of Lycurgus (Plutarch), 100
Linear A writing, 20, 24
Linear B writing, 24–25, 28, 32, 44
literacy, 56
literature, Athenian, 148–157
liturgies, 148, 335
353

Index
livestock, 10–11
Lock of Berenice, The (Callimachus), 311
Long Walls, 144, 202, 223, 231
loyalty oath, 220
Lucian, 151, 328–329
Lyceum, 248
Lycurgus, 95, 105, 107
lyric poetry, 81–85, 148–149
Lysander (Ephor of Sparta), 220–223, 226, 227, 231
Lysias, 8
Lysimachus (satrap of Thrace), 296, 297, 302
Lysippus, 228
M
Maccabees, 324
Macedon, 254–256. See also Alexander III (the
“Great”); Philip II
magistracies, 64
manual labor, 72
Marathon, battle of, 129–131
Mardonius, 135
marriage
Athenians and aliens, 146
Classical period, 158–161
contract of Heracleides and Demetria, 309
cost to women, 188
division of labor, 159–160
dowry, 46, 159
elite vs. middle (class) view, 72
Plato on, 108
in Sparta, 98–99, 101
Massilia, 66
material record, 2–3
Mausolus of Caria, 233
Medea (Euripides), 188
medical care, 178–179, 319
“Mediterranean triad,” 10
Megacles (archon of Athens), 112, 117
Megara, 89, 144, 145, 195, 211, 240
megaron, 25, 26, 27, 39, 48, 335
Meletus, 230
Melian Dialogue, 213
Melos, 213
“men of equal status,” 102, 103
Menander, 7, 304
Menelaus (ruler of Sparta), 43, 52
Mesopotamia, 14
Messenian Wars, 93, 94
metalworking, 37
metics, 163–164, 335
metropolis, 65, 336
migrations, 36, 53–54, 65–68
Miletus, 85, 128–129
military reputations, 147
Miltiades, 130
Mimnermus, 83
mina. See currency, Athenian
Minos, 16, 20–22, 30, 32–33
mirage, Spartan, 91, 107–109
mixed constitution of Sparta, 105
mothakes, 226
mousike, 189
Museum of Alexandria, 310–311
mutiny, 288–289, 292
Mycale, battle of, 135
Mycenae
art and architecture, 23
discovery of, 16
early history (1600-1400 BC), 22–24
fall of its civilization, 33–35
later history (1400-1200 BC), 25, 28–35
palaces, 25
religion, 30, 32–33
Trojan War, 43–44
warfare, 33
Myron, 151, 152
myth, 336
Mytilene, 205
N
natural world, 177–179
Nearchus, 290
neodamodeis, 226
Neolithic (New Stone) Age, 12–13
Nestor, 28
New Comedy, 304
Nicarete, 241
Nichoria, 38–39
Nicias, 208, 209, 214, 215–217
nomoi, 192–193, 246, 336
nomothetai, 237–238, 336
nudity, 88
numismatists, 1
O
oath, foundation, 65
obol. See currency, Athenian
odes, epinician, 149
Odysseus, 12, 46, 47
Odyssey (Homer), 6, 43–44, 45, 47, 52, 328
Oeconomicus (Xenophon), 190
Oedipus Tyrannus (Sophocles), 186
354

Index
Oenomaus, 152, 153
oikistes, 65, 66, 336
oikoi, 46, 112, 157, 336
oligarchy, 64, 218–220, 336
Olympia (town), 59, 139
Olympias (wife of Philip II, mother of Alexan-
der the Great), 268, 298
Olympian games, 59, 87–88
On the Crown (Demosthenes), 264
On the Mysteries (Andocides), 220
On the Sacred Disease (Hippocratics), 179
Optics (Euclid), 319
oracles, 87, 120–121, 133–134, 194, 279
oral poetry, 43–45
Oresteia (Aeschylus), 184, 185–186, 236
Orestes, 185, 236
origin theories, 85–86
ostracism, 131–132, 212–213
ostraka, 131, 131
overseers. See ephors
oxen, 10
P
Palladion, 236
Pandora, 72
panhellenic institutions, 87–88
panhellenism, 58–59
Pantheon, 51–52
papyrus, 3, 4
Paralus, 222
paramount, 45, 336
Paris, 43
Parmenides, 86
Parmenio, 267–268, 281, 286
Parthenon, 169–173, 172, 173
Pausanias (king of Sparta), 222
Pausanias (assassin of Philip II), 268
Pausanias (nephew of Leonidas), 139, 142, 195
Pax Romana, 328
Peace of Nicias, 209–212, 211–212
Peace of Philocrates, 263–264
pederasty, 99–100, 190–191
pediment, 337
Peirithoos, 152, 153
Peisistratus (tyrant of Athens), 75, 116–121, 169
Peleus, basileus of Myrmidia, 47–48
Pelopidas, 233, 234
Peloponnesian League, 105–106, 211, 212
Peloponnesian War
Archidamian War, 200–211
Athenian invasion of Sicily, 213–217
combatants’ goals, 198
consequences, 225
effects, 200
final battle, 221–223
“First” undeclared, 143–144
historical record, 6–8
last years of the war, 220–221
map of alliances, 196–197
postwar Greek thinking, 230–231
Spartan measures, 100
Peloponnesian War (Pericles), 202–203, 205–206
Pelops, 152, 153
peltast, 231, 337
Penelope, 51
Pentakontaetia, 198
pentakosiomedimoi, 337
Perdiccas (regent for Alexander IV and Philip
III, kings of Macedon), 295, 296–297
Perdiccas I (king of Macedon), 254
Perdiccas III (king of Macedon), 256
Periander (tyrant of Corinth), 76, 89
Pericles
on the Acropolis, 169
and Alcibiades, 212
Alcmaeonid genos, 195
on Athenian expansion, 213–214
comparing Athens and Sparta, 202–203
death, 204
death of sons, 221
decrees against Megara, 195
and the growth of democracy, 145–148
image, 204
naval campaign in Cyprus and Egypt, 144
on political participation, 242
strategy in Peloponnesian War, 201–203
perioikoi, 93, 337
Persepolis, 124, 126, 282–283
Persia
battles in, 273–278, 277, 281–282
before Darius, 124
under Darius I, 124–126
in Greek politics, 136–137
invasion by Philip II, 267–268
invasion of Greece, 132–134
the Ionian Rebellion, 127–128
map of Persian Wars, 134
policy toward Greece, 218
pezhetairoi, 260
Phaestos, 18
phalanx, 73–74, 259, 259–260, 337
Pharnabazus (satrap of Dascylium), 218
Pharos, 310
Pherae, 260
Phidias, 173
355

Index
Philip II (king of Macedon), 258, 258–268
Philip III (co-king of Macedon, né Arrhideus),
295–296
“Philippics” (Demosthenes), 8
Philocles, 222
Philocrates, 263–264
philosophies
Archaic, 85–87
Hellenistic, 304
natural world, 177–179
and the polis, 241–242
surviving records, 7
Philotas, 286
Phocia, 89
Phocis, 260–261
Phocylides of Miletus, 83
phratry, 112, 337
Phrynichus, 128–129
phylai, 112, 337
physical contest, 8–10
physis, 192–193, 246
pillaging, source of honor and glory, 49
Pindar, 149
Pithecusae, 66
pithoi, 2
plague, 203–204
Plataea, 101, 135
Plato
the Academy, 247
on beauty and truth, 150
biography, 244
on cities, 239
on citizens knowing each other, 176
compared to Aristotle, 251
on democracy, 242–243, 247
dialogues, 230
Forms, 244–245
on Greek settlements, 12
guardians, 246–248
idealization of Sparta, 108
image, 244
on justice, 246
on pederasty, 190
philosophy, 244–249
surviving records, 7–8
trial of Socrates, 229, 230
unisex education, 246–247
utopia, 247, 267
Pleistarchus (son of Leonidas), 139
Pleistoanax (king of Sparta), 145
Plotinus, 328
Plutarch
on Athenian defeat at Syracuse, 217
on Cimon, 142
on Eurydice of Macedon, 258
on homosexuality, 100
Life of Alexander, 8
on political opportunity under Rome, 328
on ritual prostration, 286
on Spartans, 98–99, 102, 106–107, 108
Pnyx, 176
poetry
epic, 43–45
lyric, 81–85, 148–149
poleis
collapse, 252
defined, 46, 337
disappearance of tradition, 328
formation, 61–63
governmental structures, 63–64
in the Hellenistic period, 302–303
and philosophy, 241
the state as, 251
-system advantages, 89
polemarchos, 64, 111, 337
Poliorcetes. See Demetrius
politai, 62, 70
political influence, 147
political leadership, 131
political participation, 202–203
political structure, Athenian, 122
political theory, 242–243, 250
political unification, 62–63
politicians, 238
Politics (Aristotle), 68, 76, 250
Polybius, 268, 326
Polygnota, 308–309
Polynices, 186
Polyperchon, 298
Polyzalus, 151
population shifts, 36, 37
Porus (Indian king), 32, 288
Poseidon, 51
Potidaea, 194–195
pottery, 37, 56, 77, 77–78. See also “black figure”
art; “red figure” art; Geometric style; Pro-
togeometric pottery
Praxiteles, 240
Presocratics, 85–87
probouleutic, 337
probouloi, 337
production, 29
proskynesis, 286, 337
prostration, ritual, 286
Protagoras, 193
Protagoras (Plato), 242–243
Proteus, sea-god, 52
Protogeometric pottery, 37, 38
proxeny, 337
356

Index
Prytaneion, 236
prytaneis, 64, 122, 337
Pseudo-Demosthenes, 241
Ptolemies (kings of Egypt), 314, 320, 322, 326
Ptolemy (king of Egypt)
on Alexander the Great, 278
authority, 296, 297, 298, 299, 302
creation of Sarapis, 322
Egyptian kingdom, 306
scientific works, 328
Ptolemy II (king of Egypt), 306, 308
Ptolemy V (king of Egypt), 326
Ptolemy Ceraunus (son of Ptolemy I), 302
Pylos, 18, 28–30, 33, 207, 211
Pythagoras, of Samos, 86
R
raiding, 47
rationalists, 177–178
rebellion of Spartan helots, 102
reciprocity, 47–48
“red figure” art, 77, 78, 118, 120
redistributive system, 20, 28–29, 337
religion, 30, 32–33, 52, 322–324. See also gods
Renaissance, Greek, 53, 328
Republic (Plato), 108, 150, 246–247, 267
reputations, military, 147
resentment, 70–71
revenues, imperial, 162
revival, Dark Age, 41, 43–52
rewards, 88
rhetores, 238, 337
rhetoric, 193
Rome, 326–327, 327–328
Rosetta Stone, 321
Roxane (wife of Alexander the Great), 284–285,
291, 298
rule of law, 243
Russell, Bertrand, 251
S
Sacred Band, 234, 264
Sacred Tale (Euhemerus), 311
Salamis, battle of, 135
Samos, 58, 168, 222
Sappho, 83–84
Sarapis, 322
Sardis, 128, 129
satraps, 273–276, 337, 338
Sayings (Plutarch), 108
Schliemann, Heinrich, 16
scholarship, 319
science, 85–87, 319
sculpture, relief, 152, 153, 154
sea voyages, 9
secret police. See krypteia
segregation, 319–320
Seleucid Asia, 322
Seleucus I (satrap of Babylon), 297, 299, 302,
307, 326
Selinus, 214
serfs. See helots
settlements, 26, 37, 53–54, 65–68, 93, 94
sex, 98–99
sharecroppers. See hektemoroi
shield, 208
shrines, 59
Sicily, 149, 167, 167, 213–217
Sicyon, 89
Simonides of Ceos, 120, 135, 148–149, 191
Siwah, 279
Skepticism, 305
slaughtering, source of honor and glory, 49
slaves. See also helots
in Archaic period, 69–70
in banking, 240
craft industries, 161
in Hellenistic period, 304
Hesiod’s advice, 73
housing, 160
Mycenaean, 29–30
oikos, 46
Solon’s reforms, 113
Smyrna, 58
social classes, 69–70
social relations, 319–324
social structure
Cretan, 20
defined by landowning, 68–70
during Homeric period, 46–47
Mesopotamian, 14
at Pylos, 28–29
Solon’s Athens, 115
social values, 49–51
society
in the Early Dark Age, 38–39
Hellenistic, 308–309
Homeric, 44–59
Macedon, 255
Socrates, 193, 227–230, 228, 239
Sogdiana, 284
soldiers
Bronze Age, 32–33
Spartan, 95–97, 101
Solon, 113–116, 180–181
357

Index
sophists, 189, 192–193, 338
Sophocles, 7, 179, 182, 186–188
Sparta
aid to Chalcidice, 209
assembly, 105
Athens’ invasion of Sicily, 215, 216
battle of Thermopylae, 134–135
challenge for historians, 6
conflicts with Athens, 144
Corinthian War, 231–232
debasement of helots, 96
demography, 100–101
described, 91
deteriorating relationship with Athens,
142–143
dining groups. See syssitia
economy, 101–103
education and upbringing of boys, 95–97
ephors, 104
equality, 103
final battle of Peloponnesian War, 221–223
founding, 92–93
gerousia, 104
government, 103–105
in Hellenistic period, 306
helots, 93–95, 142
hoplite army, 95
“Inferiors,” 106
inheritance, 106
invigorated by Athens’ Syracuse defeat, 217
kings, 103
land tenure, 106
last years of the Peloponnesian War, 220–221
marriage, 98–99, 101
mixed constitution, 105
naval power, 225
non-participation in Ionian rebellion, 127
Peloponnesian League, 105–106
after Peloponnesian War, 225–226
population shrinkage, 101
prosperity, 93–94
reaction to Archilochus’ poetry, 82
repercussions of Archidamian War, 209
restoration of Peloponnesian League, 212
settlement, 93, 94
soldiers marooned at Sphacteria, 207–208
strategy in Archidamian War, 202
synoecism, 62
treatment of cowards, 96–97
wars, 88, 89
women, 97, 97–98
“Spartan mirage,” 91, 107–109
specialization, 252
speeches, 8
Sphacteria, 207, 207
stasis, 206, 239–240, 338
state, 251
state pay, 235, 238
steles, 338
stoas, 78
Stoicism, 8, 304, 305, 306
Stone Age culture, 12–13
strategoi, 122, 131, 338
structures, governmental, 63–64
Successors, 291–292
Suppliants (Euripides), 243
Sybaris, 89
symposia, 81–82, 83, 96, 338
Symposium (Plato), 190
syncretism, 279, 322
synedrion, 338
synoecism, 62–63, 111, 339
syntaxeis, 232
syntrierarchy, 217
Syracuse, 66, 214, 215–217
syssitia, 96
T
talent. See currency, Athenian
Tatian, 329
Taxila, 287–288
Taxiles, 287–288
Telemachus, 48
temples, 58, 78, 153
tensions among states, 88–89
Thaïs, 283
Thales of Miletus, philosopher, 85
The Capture of Miletus (Phrynichus), 128–129
The Persians (Aeschylus), 135–136, 136
Theagenes, tyrant of Megara, 75
Thebes, 195, 233–234, 264, 265, 272
Themistocles
Athenian reform, 131
battle of Salamis, 135
image, 128
ostracism, 132
post war activities, 142
preparation for Darius’ invasion, 129
preparation for war with Xerxes, 133
Theocritus, 8, 308, 311, 320
Theognidea (Theognis), 69, 84–85
Theogony (Hesiod), 6, 51
Theopompus, 260, 268
Theoric Fund, 260, 261
Thera, 65, 66
Theramenes, 220, 223, 226, 227
358

Index
Thermopylae, battle of, 134–135
Theseus, 111
Thespis, 184
Thessaly, 89, 260, 271
thetes, 46, 68, 219, 339
Thirty Tyrants, 226–227
Thirty Years’ Peace, 145
Thoas, 44
Tholos, 176
tholos tomb, 23, 24, 339
Thrasybulus (tyrant of Miletus), 89, 227
Thucydides
on animosity toward Athens, 198
colligation of Peloponnesian War, 200–201
on destruction of Melos, 213
effects of banishment, 209
on Government of the Five Thousand, 220
on Greek losses in Egypt, 145
on his method, 182–183
historian, 181–183
on the invasion of Sicily, 215–217
Peloponnesian War historian, 7
on the rebellion of Samos, 168
on Themistocles, 129
Thurii, 167–168
Tissaphernes (satrap of Sardis), 218, 219
trade, 9, 28, 30, 54, 162–163
tragedy, 183–184
treaties, 89
trials, 237
Triballi, 271–272
tribute, imperial, 162
triremes, 133, 339
Trojan War, 5–6, 43–44
Trojan Women (Euripides), 213, 223
Troy, 16, 34, 273
tyranny, 339
tyrants, 75–76
Tyre, 278
Tyrtaeus, 74, 93, 94, 102
U
unification, 111
universe, theories of, 85–86
Uranus, 51
V
vase, submycenaean, 38
vases, 152, 154, 155, 156, 157. See also “black fig-
ure” art; “red figure” art
Ventris, Michael, 24, 25
Victory (Nike) of Samothrace, 315, 317
Virgil, 328
visual arts, 150–157, 311–318
Vitruvius, 170
votive offerings, 58
W
walls, defensive, 58
wanax, 28, 33, 339
warfare, 33, 252
warlords, 47
wars, 88–89
water, 10
weapons, 33, 74
weather, 9, 10
women. See also girls
Aristotle on, 251
Athenian, 115, 146, 163
athletic competition, 88
denial of rights, 70
gynecology, 179
in Hellenistic kingdoms, 308–309
Hesiod’s distrust of, 72–73
housing, 160
marriage, cost to, 188
medical profession, 178
occupations, 29, 30, 46
after Peloponnesian War, 225
reputation, 161
roles in Homeric society, 50–51
Solon’s Athens, 115–116
Spartan, 97, 97–98, 101, 108
in 5th century paintings on vases, 157
working outside the home, 240–241
work, disdain for, 161–162. See also labor
Works and Days (Hesiod), 6, 50, 71, 85
writing, 54–55, 55
written records, 3–8
X
xenoi, 49, 334
Xenophanes of Colophon, 82, 86
xenophobia, 100
Xenophon
on Athens, 222, 223
on the destruction of the Long Wall, 223
on a girl’s education, 190
on homosexuality, 191
on marital division of labor, 159–160
on peace terms of Corinthian War, 232
359

Index
Peloponnesian War historian, 7
on Spartans, 99, 222
trial of Socrates, 229
Xerxes, 132–135
Y
“Young Spartans Exercising” (Degas), 107
Z
Zaleucus, 167
Zenodotus, 319
Zeno, 304
Zeus, 32, 51, 52, 242
Zeus-Ammon, 279
360

