
A History of the Classical Greek World, 
478–323 BC

Blackwell History of the Ancient World
This series provides a new narrative history of the ancient world, from the beginnings
of civilization in the ancient Near East and Egypt to the fall of Constantinople.
Written by experts in their ﬁelds, the books in the series offer authoritative, accessible
surveys for students and general readers alike.
Published
A History of the Ancient Near East
Marc Van De Mieroop
A History of Byzantium
Timothy E. Gregory
A History of the Classical Greek World
P. J. Rhodes
In Preparation
A History of Ancient Egypt
David O’Connor
A History of the Persian Empire
Christopher Tuplin
A History of the Archaic Greek World
Jonathan Hall
A History of the Hellenistic World
Malcolm Errington
A History of the Roman Republic
John Rich
A History of the Roman Empire
Michael Peachin
A History of the Later Roman Empire, AD 284–622
Stephen Mitchell

A History of 
the Classical Greek World
478–323 BC
P. J. Rhodes

© 2006 by P. J. Rhodes
BLACKWELL PUBLISHING
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
The right of P. J. Rhodes to be identiﬁed as the Author of this Work has been asserted in
accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs,
and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
First published 2006 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
1 2006
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rhodes, P. J. (Peter John)
A history of the classical Greek world: 478–323 B.C. / P. J. Rhodes.
p. cm.—(Blackwell history of the ancient world)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-631-22564-5 (hard cover: alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-0-631-22565-2 (pbk.: alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-631-22564-1 (hard cover: alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-631-22565-X (pbk.: alk. paper)
1. Greece—History—To 146 B.C.
I. Title.
II. Series.
DF214.R49 2006
938—dc22
2004028425
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library.
Picture research by Kitty Bocking 
Set in 10.5 on 12.5 pt Plantin
by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed and bound in India
by Replika Press Pvt. Ltd
The publisher’s policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable
forestry policy, and which has been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and
elementary chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text paper
and cover board used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
For further information on
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
www.blackwellpublishing.com

Contents
List of Illustrations
vii
List of Figures
viii
List of Maps
ix
Preface
x
Note on References
xi
1
Introduction
1
2
The Formation of the Delian League
14
3
The Peloponnese in the Early Fifth Century
22
4
Athens After the Persian Wars
31
5
The Athenian Empire in the Mid Fifth Century
41
6
Periclean Athens
54
7
The Greeks in the West: The Rise of Syracuse
71
8
The Peloponnesian War: Origins
81
9
The Peloponnesian War: Resources and Strategies
90
10
The Peloponnesian War: 431–421
101
11
The Athens of Cleon
116
12
The Peloponnesian War: 421–413
124
13
The Peloponnesian War: 413–404
142

14
Athens in the Late Fifth Century
155
15
The Athenian Empire: Retrospect
172
16
Introduction to the Fourth Century: The Common Peace
189
17
Sparta’s Imperialism and Collapse
204
Appendix: Persia and its Rebels
221
18
The Second Athenian League
226
19
Thebes and Northern Greece
244
20
Athens After the Peloponnesian War
257
21
The Western Greeks from Dionysius I to Timoleon
273
22
Philip II of Macedon
294
Appendix: Persia and the Greeks in the Reign of Artaxerxes III
323
23
Demosthenic Athens
328
Appendix: Sparta
344
24
Alexander the Great: Sources and Outline
347
25
Alexander the Great: Topics
359
26
Epilogue
384
Bibliography
388
Index
396
vi
CONTENTS

Illustrations
1
Athens: owl and Athena
11
2
Aegina: turtle and tortoise
42
3
The ﬁrst stele of the Athenian tribute lists: arrangement of lists
48
4
The ﬁrst stele of the Athenian tribute lists: reconstruction of 
fragments
49
5
Reconstruction of the Athenian acropolis
63
6
Polyzelus’ bronze charioteer at Delphi
74
7
Syracuse: ‘Demareteum’
77
8
The bay of Pylos: aerial photograph
107
9
Syracuse: aerial photograph
137
10
The prospectus of the Second Athenian League
231
11
Delphi: the temple of Apollo and the stoa of the Athenians
303
12
Reconstruction of Philip’s skull
322
13
Reconstruction of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus
324
14
The Alexander Sarcophagus (c.320)
363
15
Treasury relief at Persepolis
379

Figures
1
Fifth-century Spartan kings and regents
26
2
Thucydides the opponent of Pericles and Thucydides the historian
66
3
Tyrants of Gela/Syracuse, Acragas, Rhegium
73
4
Fourth-century Spartan kings and a regent
206
5
The electoral units of the Boeotian federation in the late ﬁfth and 
early fourth centuries
245
6
Tyrants of Pherae
250
7
The family of Dionysius I
278
8
Amyntas III of Macedon and his descendants
298
9
Satraps of Caria
323

Maps
1
Greece and the Aegean
xiii
2
Carthage, Sicily, Southern Italy
xiv
3
The bay of Pylos
106
4
The vicinity of Argos
128
5
The vicinity of Mantinea
129
6
Syracuse
136
7
Boeotia
246
8
The Persian campaign of Alexander the Great
350

Preface
This book gives an account of the ‘classical’ period of Greek history, from the
aftermath of the Persian Wars in 478 to the death of Alexander the Great in
323. I have tried to make it a straightforward account, but one which combines
analysis with narrative, which combines other aspects of Greek life with poli-
tical and military matters, and which shows clearly the evidence on which it is
based and the considerations which have to be borne in mind in using the evi-
dence. In the course of writing it I have on particular topics consulted works
by many people, including other histories comparable with this one, but I have
deliberately not directly compared my treatment of the period with any other.
The book will be published about the time of my retirement after teaching
Greek history in the University of Durham for forty years. I am enormously
grateful to the colleagues who supported me in that, and in particular to Dr 
O. T. P. K. Dickinson, who helped with the opening paragraphs of chapter 1
(but who is not to be blamed for what I have ﬁnally chosen to say there); to
the generations of students who listened to the lectures and participated in the
tutorials out of which the book has grown, and in particular to Mr S. English,
who as an undergraduate attended the lectures and tutorials and afterwards as
a research student read the whole book in draft and identiﬁed many points at
which it needed to be improved; and to Dr L. Rubinstein, who likewise has read
the whole book and helped me to improve it. I am grateful also to Mr A.
Bertrand of Blackwell Publishing, who invited me to write the book, and to
everybody who has been involved in its production; and to those who have given
permission for the use of copyright illustrations.

Note on References
Ancient Authors and their Works
There are four major collections of Greek and Latin texts:
1
the Budé series (also known as the Collection des Universités de France)
(Paris: Les Belles Lettres): texts with French translations and short notes;
2
the Loeb Classical Library (Harvard University Press): texts with English
translations and short notes;
3
the Oxford Classical Texts (Oxford University Press): texts;
4
the Bibliotheca Scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana (orig-
inally Leipzig: Teubner; now Munich: Saur): texts.
There are various English translations of the more popular works, in particu-
lar in the Penguin Classics series.
The abbreviations used here are mostly those used in the third edition of the
Oxford Classical Dictionary, but speeches are given both number and title, and
where the title is centred on a person the personal name is given in full (e.g.
Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon); notice also that Ath. Pol. without indication of author
denotes the work of that title attributed to Aristotle.
For shorter abbreviations used in part of chapter 22 see p. 309; and in 
chapters 24–5 see pp. 347–8. For some works by some authors alternative 
forms of reference are current. For the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia I use the chapter 
numbering of the most recent Teubner text, ed. M. H. Chambers (on older
systems see p. 12 n. 1 and p. 146 with n. 1 in chapter 13). Otherwise the instance
most relevant to this book is Plutarch’s Lives: here citations are by 
the chapters and sections of the Budé and Teubner texts; the Loeb texts use the
same chapters but divide them into fewer, larger sections; there are no Oxford
texts.

xii
NOTE ON REFERENCES
Collections of Inscriptions and Papyri
The abbreviations used here are mostly those used in the third edition of the
Oxford Classical Dictionary (OCD), but notice: M&L for OCD’s ML, and R&O
= P. J. Rhodes and R. Osborne, Greek Historical Inscriptions, 404–323 BC (Oxford
University Press, 2003); also:
C. Delphes:
Corpus des Inscriptions de Delphes
IK Placename:
volumes in the series Inschriften griechische Städte aus Kleinasien
In multiple references to texts, the symbol ~ precedes a reference to an English
translation.
Periodicals and Standard Books
Publication details of books cited will be found in the Bibliography on pp.
388–95. Titles of a few standard books are abbreviated as in the third edition
of the Oxford Classical Dictionary, e.g. CAH = Cambridge Ancient History. Titles
of periodicals are in general abbreviated as in L’Année Philologique, but in 
accordance with normal anglophone practice I use TAPA etc. where L’Année
Philologique uses TAPhA etc., and I abbreviate some single-word titles, e.g. Hist.
= Historia. Superior ﬁgures denote the second and subsequent series of peri-
odicals (e.g. CQ2), the second and subsequent editions of books (e.g. CAH 2).

Aegina
Ambracia
Argos
Athens
Byzantium
Calchedon
Carystus
Chalcis
Chios
Corinth
Corcyra
Cos
Cythera
Cyzicus
Dascylium
Delos
Eïon
Elis
Ennea Hodoi/
Amphipolis
Ephesus
Eretria
Erythrae
Halonnesus
Imbros
Leucas
Mantinea
Megara
Melos
Methymna
Methone
Miletus
Mytilene
Naupactus
Naxos
Olympia
Olynthus
Pella
Perinthus
Pherae
Plataea
Potidaea
Priene
Pylos
Samos
Sardis
Scyros
Sparta
Tegea
Thasos
Thebes
Zacynthus
Megalopolis
CEPHALLENIA
T H R A C E
M A C E D O N
CRETE
RHODES
LEMNOS
LESBOS
MESSENIA
T H E S S A LY
ACARNANIA
CEOS
C
H
A
L
C
I
D
I
C
E
C
H
E
R
S
O
N
E
S
E
E
U
B
O
E
A
Land over 200 m
Selected rivers
N
200 km
100 miles
Map 1
Greece and the Aegean

Acragas
Taras
Brundisium
Sybaris/Thurii
Croton
Hipponium
Caulonia
Locri
Rhegium
Tauromenium
Naxos
Catana
Leontini
Syracuse
Eryx
Motya
Lilybaeum
Panormus
Egesta
Selinus
Heraclea Minoa
Gela
Camarina
Himera
Kale Akte
Lipari
Is.
Mt. Aetna
Zancle/
Messana
Carthage
SARDINIA
M A G N A
G R A E C I A
S I C I LY
Neapolis
L U C A N I A
R. Halycus
R.
A
u
fi
d
u
s
C
A
L
A
B
R
I
A
CA
MP
A
NI
A
100 miles
150 km
N
R
.
C
r
i
m
i
s
u
s
Map 2
Carthage, Sicily, Southern Italy

Greece Before 478
Two large peninsulas project into the Mediterranean from Europe: Italy, divid-
ing the whole into a western half and an eastern half, and Greece, subdividing
the eastern half. What was to be the Greek world until the end of the fourth
century BC comprised mainland Greece, with the islands off the west coast; and
also the Aegean Sea, between mainland Greece and Asia Minor (present-day
Turkey), with the coast of Asia Minor to the east, the coast of Thrace (part of
present-day Greece) to the north, and the island of Crete (part of present-day
Greece) closing it to the south. Mainland Greece is divided by mountains into
many, mostly small, habitable areas, and by sea inlets (the Gulf of Corinth on
the west and the Saronic Gulf on the east) into northern and central Greece
and the southern part known as the Peloponnese, linked by the Isthmus of
Corinth (where there is now a canal from one side to the other). Advanced
civilisations developed earlier to the south and east of this area, in Egypt and
the near east, than to the north and west; and in Greece the most important
settlements were towards the south and east, and there was a tendency to look
for outside contacts to the civilisations to the south and east and to absorb inﬂu-
ences from them.
The ﬁrst advanced civilisations in the Greek region arose in the bronze age
of the second millennium: the Minoan civilisation of Crete (from c.2000: given
its modern name after the legendary king Minos), the Cycladic civilisation of
the Aegean (already important before c.2000 and ﬂourishing after: named after
the Cyclades, the large group of islands in the southern Aegean) and the Myce-
naean civilisation of the mainland (from c.1600, with palaces from c.1400:
named after Mycenae, near Argos, one of the main centres); from c.1400 Crete
and the Cyclades came under the inﬂuence of the Mycenaeans. Life was based
on substantial kingdoms, centred on large and rich palaces and served by
1
Introduction

bureaucratic administrations.The language of the Minoans was not Greek (their
Linear A texts have not yet been deciphered); the language of the Mycenaeans
was Greek (their Linear B texts were deciphered in the 1950’s); the Cycladic
civilisation has not left texts of its own. This was the world in which the classi-
cal Greeks’ legends of their heroic past were ostensibly set (the Trojan War, the
Oedipus story and so on).
That world broke up, in a period of destructions and population movements
whose causes are still disputed, about 1200–1000.The classical Greeks believed
that the Dorians, perceived as a separate strand of the Greek people, invaded
from the north and drove out the earlier inhabitants to the islands and the coast
of Asia Minor (e.g. Thuc. I. 2. vi, 12. iii). It is now thought unlikely that there
was a phenomenon which deserves to be called the Dorian Invasion, but it does
seem to be true that the Dorians were comparative newcomers in the Pelo-
ponnese and that the Greeks began migrating from the mainland to the islands
and the coast of Asia Minor – from north to south, the Aeolians and Ionians
from c.1000 and the Dorians slightly later.
Thucydides wrote of a continuous progress from the earliest and most primi-
tive condition of Greece to the climax of the ﬁfth century (I. 1–19), but modern
scholars have thought in terms of a dark age between the end of the bronze-
age civilisations and the ‘archaic’ period from c.800 to c.500: dark both in the
sense that the size of the population and the level of civilisation were lower than
before and after and in the sense that we know less about it than about the
periods before and after.There is still some justice in that view, though the dark
age now seems less dark in both those respects than it did half a century ago.
By c.800 the revival was well under way; but, in contrast to the bronze age,
there developed a large number of separate, small communities, which often,
and particularly towards the south and east, took the form of poleis, ‘city states’,
which comprised a town and the farm land around it and which aspired to a
high degree of independence and self-sufﬁciency. If these communities were
originally ruled by kings, the kings were not grand rulers like the oriental mon-
archs but more like the chief aristocrats depicted by Homer, and before long
kings gave way to ofﬁcials mostly appointed annually from within the aristo-
cracy of families which had emerged from the dark age owning the largest quan-
tities of good land.
Rising prosperity brought complications. The population was growing once
more, over time not dramatically but signiﬁcantly (though occasional bursts of
more rapid increase are not to be ruled out), and even after extending the land
which they controlled and cultivated communities reached the point where the
population (even though it was later to become still larger) seemed too large to
survive a run of bad years, or by comparison with a generation earlier. The
Greeks therefore took to trading on a larger scale, with one another and with
the outside world, to import what was not available in sufﬁcient quantities
locally, and they also started founding colonies around the Mediterranean and
the Black Sea (sometimes joining with the pre-existing population) – in conve-
nient places for gaining access to what they wanted to import, and in places
2
INTRODUCTION

where men under pressure at home could make a new life and grow their own
food. Most of the colonies became, technically, independent poleis, though they
had familial and religious links with their mother states and the mother states
hoped to retain inﬂuence over the colonies.
This process contributed to the pressures for political change. It was easier
in a trading world than in self-sufﬁcient agricultural communities for some men
to become richer and others to become poorer, and for those who had become
richer to think themselves as good as the established aristocracy. However, the
citizen farmer was still a common ideal, and in many states many citizens con-
tinued to own some land and to live at least partly off the produce of their land.
Coinage, convenient as a medium of exchange and of reckoning and storing
non-landed wealth, was not invented until the sixth century, and it is in Athens
in the second half of the ﬁfth that we ﬁrst ﬁnd a monetary economy in which
the average citizen is likely to possess coins and engage in monetary transac-
tions on a regular basis. There was a change in ﬁghting (though how great and
sudden a change is disputed), as cities took to relying on the heavy infantry
known as hoplites, organised in a phalanx whose success depended on the cohe-
sion of the whole body rather than the prowess of individual stars, so that all
who could afford the equipment and ﬁght in the phalanx might think that they
were equally important to their city. The invention of the alphabet, a system of
about two dozen characters (in contrast to the scripts with much larger numbers
of characters used in bronze-age Greece and in the near east), made it possi-
ble for literacy to become an accomplishment of citizens in general rather than
of a specialised class of scribes, and for laws to be written down and placed in
the public domain – a development which at ﬁrst may have been as valuable to
aristocrats afraid that one of their number would step out of line as to lower-
class people afraid of unfair treatment by the aristocrats. In some places there
may have been tension between inhabitants perceived as belonging to different
racial groups, for instance between Dorians and others in some cities in the
Peloponnese. And within the aristocracy or on the fringes of the aristocracy
there will have been ambitious or disaffected individuals who thought that they
did not do well enough out of the principle of holding ofﬁce when their turn
came round.
Different factors were of differing importance in different places, but in many
states in the seventh and sixth centuries power was seized by a tyrannos
(‘tyrant’), trading on whatever grounds for discontent and groups of discon-
tented people there were locally. The position of tyrant was not a formal ofﬁce
with deﬁned powers: some tyrants ruled autocratically, others by manipulating
the existing framework; some ruled cruelly, others mildly (it is only with Plato
and Aristotle in the fourth century that a tyrant was automatically seen as a
cruel autocrat). Tyrants were bad for the aristocrats, since they, like the lesser
citizens, became subject to the tyrant. Periods of tyrannical rule tended not to
last longer than two or three generations, as the original discontents were dealt
with or forgotten and the dominance of the tyrant came to be a new cause of
discontent; by the end of the sixth century most states had régimes in which
INTRODUCTION
3

basic political rights had been extended to all rich enough to ﬁght as hoplites,
and in several places pseudo-kinship organisations (tribes, phratries [‘brother-
hoods’] and the like) through which the aristocrats had controlled the popu-
lace had been supplanted by new organisations.
Two cities developed in unusual ways, so as to become much larger than
most, and in the ﬁfth century to become rivals for supremacy in Greece.
Sparta, in the south of the Peloponnese, had not one king but two, probably
a result of the amalgamation of neighbouring communities; it retained these
into the classical period and beyond, though many of their powers were trans-
ferred to an annually appointed board of ﬁve ephors (‘overseers’). By the eighth
century it had conquered the whole of its region of Laconia, making some of
the inhabitants perioikoi (‘dwellers-around’, independent within their own com-
munities but dependent on Sparta in foreign policy) and others helots (a word
which probably means ‘captives’, a serf class working the land of its Spartan
owners: they are the best-known but not the only instance of a serf class in early
Greece). In the late eighth and seventh centuries it expanded westwards into
Messenia, making perioikoi and helots of its inhabitants too, and thus coming
to control an area of about 2,400sq. miles = 6,200km2. It thus did not need to
found colonies overseas, apart from Taras in Italy, to accommodate men judged
not entitled to a share in the conquered land at home.
Probably early in the seventh century, after the ﬁrst round of conquests in
Messenia, tension led to the core of a settlement attributed to a man called
Lycurgus.The aristocrats came to an arrangement with the Spartan citizens to
maintain solidarity and preserve their superiority over the perioikoi and helots:
politically, the gerousia (council of elders, comprising twenty-eight men plus the
two kings) and assembly were given deﬁned roles in the running of the state;
economically, the conquered land and helots to work it were apportioned
among the citizens (but, despite what scholars used to believe, it now appears
that the distributed land became ordinary private property); socially, the exis-
tence of the lower orders made a full-time military life for the citizens both pos-
sible and necessary. For a long time this seemed to be a success: Sparta avoided
tyranny and became the strongest state in Greece, and people who lived else-
where professed admiration for its disciplined life.
In the sixth century Sparta’s attempts to expand northwards into Arcadia
were unsuccessful, and in the middle of the century there was a change of
policy: instead of setting out to be a Dorian conqueror Sparta set out to be a
Greek leader, binding other states to it by alliances. By the end of the century
nearly all the Peloponnesian states (but not Argos, which could never accept
Spartan leadership, and not Achaea, which had more to do with the north side
of the Gulf of Corinth than with the rest of the Peloponnese) were linked to
Sparta in an organisation for foreign policy which scholars call the Pelopon-
nesian League, in which they were consulted about joint action and bound to
accept majority decisions.
Originally Sparta’s culture had been like its neighbours’; but owing to the
conquest of Messenia and the need to keep the subject population under
4
INTRODUCTION

control, and perhaps also to the failure to conquer Arcadia, austerity came to
be prized as a Spartan virtue. It was perhaps more that Sparta did not parti-
cipate in developments enjoyed elsewhere than that Sparta became more
austere, but when Sparta and Athens became rivals in the ﬁfth century each
was proud to emphasise that it was not like the other.
Athens itself was never totally abandoned during the dark age, and was one
of the ﬁrst places to recover, but in the eighth and seventh centuries it was over-
taken by cities in the Peloponnese. Like Sparta it did not need to found colonies
but was able to expand into its own region, Attica (about 1,000sq. miles =
2,600km2); but the other inhabitants were not made subject to a ruling body
of Athenians but all became Athenian citizens.
Athens rose to prominence in the sixth century. In the late seventh century
an unsuccessful attempt at tyranny by Cylon was followed by Draco’s pub-
lication of written laws. In 594/3 Solon tried to mediate between the advan-
taged and the disadvantaged: he liberated a class of dependent peasants;
made wealth the sole qualiﬁcation for ofﬁce, enabling a wider range of rich 
men to challenge the landed aristocrats; formalised the decision-making 
process by creating a new council to prepare business for the citizens’ assem-
bly; revised the laws, and modiﬁed the judicial processes to make it easier for
underdogs to obtain justice. But his compromise was more than the rich aristo-
crats had feared yet less than the discontented had hoped for. After two earlier
attempts, from 546/5 to 511/0 Athens was subjected to the tyranny of Pisistra-
tus and his sons, who on the whole ruled constitutionally and mildly. During
the sixth century Athens prospered, welcoming trade rather than trying to
remain self-sufﬁcient, and becoming the Greek world’s leading producer of ﬁne
pottery.
The tyranny was ended when the Alcmaeonid family, sometimes collaborat-
ing with but at other times opposed to the tyrants, put pressure on Sparta to
intervene. Rivalry between the Alcmaeonid Cleisthenes and another aristocrat
led to the victory of Cleisthenes (and a quarrel with Sparta): Cleisthenes gave
the Athenians a new, locally based articulation of the citizen body, in ten tribes,
thirty trittyes (‘thirds’ of tribes) and 139 demes; and this supplanted the older
organisations as the basis of Athens’ public life, so that (for instance) the army
was organised in tribal regiments and the council which prepared the assem-
bly’s business became a council of ﬁve hundred, comprising ﬁfty members for
each tribe, with the individual demes supplying members in proportion to their
population. He also introduced the institution of ostracism, ﬁrst used in the
480’s, by which each year the citizens had the opportunity to send one man
into a kind of honourable exile for ten years without ﬁnding him guilty of any
offence.
In the course of the archaic period, as they had increasing contact with the
outside world, the Greeks became conscious of what they had in common as
Greeks in contrast to the barbarians (barbaroi, foreigners whose languages
sounded to Greeks like bar-bar). Of the civilised barbarians to the east and
south, those who impinged most on the Greeks were those who controlled
INTRODUCTION
5

western Asia Minor, inland from the Greek cities on the coast. For most of 
the archaic period, these were the Lydians, whose capital was at Sardis: they
acquired a kind of overlordship over the Asiatic Greeks, but though foreign 
were sympathetic, and made dedications at Greek temples. But Cyrus II 
of Persia, who had begun as a minor king to the east of the Persian Gulf,
in 550 conquered the Medes to his north (with the help of Babylon to his 
west, but in 539 he was to conquer Babylon too), and then c.546 conquered
Croesus of Lydia, and with him the Asiatic Greeks; the islands near the coast
perhaps made token submission at this point and were actually subjected
c.520–515.
In 525–522 the Persians conquered Egypt, which was a part of the Greeks’
world in the sense that Greek traders had operated there and Greek soldiers
had been employed there as mercenaries since the seventh century. About 514
they penetrated Europe, going north of the Danube to campaign unsuccessfully
against the Scythians (whom they believed to be a part of the same people that
had troubled their northern frontier further east), and they established a rather
insecure presence in Thrace, between the Aegean and the Danube. In 498–493
Miletus in Asia Minor (whose Persian-backed tyrant had incited the Persians
to an unsuccessful attack on Naxos, in the middle of the Cyclades) led the
Asiatic Greeks in the Ionian Revolt against Persia, and asked for support from
mainland Greece. Sparta, which had solemnly forbidden Cyrus to harm the
Asiatic Greeks but had taken no action against him, refused; but Athens,
perhaps already regarding itself as the mother city of the Ionian Greeks in the
Aegean and Asia Minor, did send help, and so did Eretria in Euboea. The
Greeks started well, but were defeated when they failed to work together and
the Persians brought in large forces.
The Persians wanted to expand anyway, and now had the excuse of revenge
on Athens and Eretria for attacking Greece. In 492 an expedition sent into
Thrace as the ﬁrst stage of an attack on Greece from the north was abandoned
when its ships were wrecked off Mount Athos. In 490 the Persians sailed
through the Cyclades, captured Naxos and captured Eretria, but when they
landed at Marathon in the north-east of Attica the Athenians, almost alone,
defeated them. In 480 a full-scale force under King Xerxes invaded, once more
around the north of the Aegean, and many but not all of the Greeks united to
resist: Sparta acted as leader, and Athens, which had spent the proﬁts from its
silver mines on new warships, provided more than half of the Greek navy. The
Persians proceeded successfully through Thrace, Macedon and Thessaly;
attempts to halt their advance at Thermopylae on land and at Artemisium by
sea were heroic but unsuccessful; but the Greek navy defeated the Persian in
the strait between Attica and the island of Salamis.The Persians then withdrew
their navy and most of their army; in 479 the remnant of the army was defeated
at Plataea, while the Greek navy landed on Cape Mycale in Asia Minor and
defeated the Persians there. Greece had been saved, but the Greeks must have
assumed that the Persians would now be even more eager for revenge and would
in due course return.
6
INTRODUCTION

Classical Greece
This book covers the classical period of Greece, from 478 to 323, in which the
Greeks (and particularly the Athenians and others living in Athens: Athens in
this period was culturally dominant, as it was not earlier or later) produced
exceptionally good work in literature, philosophy and the visual arts. Politically,
it is the period in which the concept of democracy appeared, as the culmina-
tion of what had been developing in the archaic period, and there was serious
thought and discussion about how states ought to be governed and how states
and individuals ought to behave.
In the half-century after the Persian Wars Sparta withdrew into the Pelo-
ponnese while Athens in an alliance known as the Delian League took over the
continuing struggle against Persia but increasingly turned that League into an
Athenian empire.There was an increasing polarisation between Athens, innova-
tive, a naval power, democratic and cultured, and Sparta, conservative, a land
power, a champion of oligarchy and becoming self-consciously uncultured. For
a time it seemed that there might be room for the two leading states in Greece;
but Athens became too powerful for Sparta to coexist with it, and so the years
431–404 saw the Peloponnesian War, in which Sparta and its allies set out to
break the power of Athens. They did so, but only by enlisting the help of the
former enemy Persia, which in return wanted to recover domination over the
Greeks of Asia Minor.
After the Peloponnesian War Athens made a remarkable recovery. In the ﬁrst
forty years of the fourth century Sparta, Athens and an increasingly ambitious
Thebes manoeuvred around one another and around the Persians, who ﬁnally
regained the Asiatic Greeks in 387/6 and otherwise aimed for a Greece in which
no state would be powerful enough to threaten Persia, and in which there would
be peace so that Greek soldiers would be available to ﬁght for Persia in its western
provinces. Sparta was defeated by Thebes in 371, in fact irreversibly though it
still hoped to recover its former power. But the Greek world was transformed by
the rise of Macedon, a kingdom on its northern edge. Between 359 and 336
Philip II made Macedon a power to be reckoned with, and incorporated almost
all of mainland Greece in a league of allies under his leadership; and between
336 and 323 Alexander the Great, with the forces of Macedon and of that league,
conquered the Persian empire and brought it into an extended Greek world.
The survival of evidence for historians to work from was transformed by the
invention of printing in the ﬁfteenth century AD: there is a good chance that at
any rate one copy will survive somewhere of work printed since then (but it will
be for future generations to discover how much is retrievable of texts generated
on and transmitted by computers in our own age). From the ancient world there
survives only a fraction of the material which we know was written, and much
more must have been written of which we know nothing. But, by the standards
of antiquity, the world of classical Greece is a world about which we are com-
paratively well informed.
INTRODUCTION
7

The histories survive of three men writing in successive generations.
Herodotus, the western world’s ﬁrst surviving serious historian, wrote in the
third quarter of the ﬁfth century a history culminating in the Persian Wars at
the beginning of the century: he provides a continuous narrative from 500 to
479, with a fair amount of material on the second half of the sixth century, a
certain amount on earlier history, and a few allusions to later events down to
430. Thucydides in the last quarter of the ﬁfth century wrote a history of the
Peloponnesian War from the incidents of 435 and after which led up to the war,
including also a short account of events from 478 onwards, designed to illus-
trate the growth of Athenian power; though he lived beyond the end of the war,
his history breaks off abruptly in the autumn of 411. Xenophon, active in the
ﬁrst half of the fourth century, was one of the historians who deliberately started
where Thucydides ended, and his Hellenica (Greek history) runs from 411 to
362. Later historical works include the Athenian Constitution written in the
330’s–320’s in the school of the philosopher Aristotle, drawing on a range of
now-lost sources including local histories of Athens. There is the Library of
History of Diodorus Siculus (Diodorus of Sicily), written between 60 and 30,
of which not all survives but the portion from 478 to the end of the fourth
century does: for this period it was based on fourth-century sources which no
longer survive, particularly an Asiatic Greek, Ephorus; for 431–411 it is ulti-
mately dependent on Thucydides, but after that it provides an account which
is independent of Xenophon and derived from reputable sources, and which
therefore deserves to be taken seriously. Many leading ﬁgures of the ﬁfth and
fourth centuries are among those given biographies in Plutarch’s series of Par-
allel Lives of famous Greeks and famous Romans, written around AD 100; and
the career of Alexander the Great generated many accounts, though none of
those which survive is earlier than that of Diodorus.
Other kinds of literature are useful to historians too. Athenian ﬁfth-century
drama is important: tragedies written throughout the century, and comedies
written in and after the 420’s. In the century between about 420 and 320 many
speeches for the Athenian lawcourts, and some speeches for the assembly, were
written up and put into circulation, and they provide a valuable body of mate-
rial. Some ‘speeches’, notably those of the long-lived Isocrates, are in fact politi-
cal pamphlets written in the form of speeches; and other pamphlets were written
too, of which a surviving specimen is the Athenian Constitution preserved with
the works of Xenophon.
In a world which lacked printing, broadcasting and the Internet, if texts were
to be publicised they had to be displayed in a prominent place. Temporary
notices tended to be written in charcoal on whitewashed boards, which have
not survived but are known about from literary references; permanent texts
were inscribed on stone slabs (stelai) or on bronze plates, and, conveniently for
historians, Athens took to publishing documents of various kinds on stone in
large quantities from the 450’s onwards. Coins – in the classical period the ‘owl’
coinage of Athens was the hardest currency of the Greek world – carried images
but not much in the way of text: they usually identify the issuing state but not
8
INTRODUCTION

the date of issue, and linking changes in a state’s coinage with political changes
is tempting but often dangerous. It is indeed true of archaeological ﬁnds in
general that dates derived from purely archaeological criteria cannot be precise,
and that buildings can be dated precisely only when we have evidence of other
kinds, for instance dated accounts of expenditure, as with the buildings erected
on the Athenian acropolis in the 440’s–430’s. Archaeologists are studying the
same world as historians, but both sides have to be careful not to misapply
material of one kind when interpreting material of another kind.
Greek communities, both cities and other kinds of state formation, were com-
munities of citizens, free adult males of local parentage: women were excluded
from political participation (as was universal until 1893 in New Zealand; in
Europe Liechtenstein in 1984 ﬁnally allowed women to vote on national issues
but still not on local issues), and so were children (as is still universal, though
there were then and are now disagreements over the age at which adulthood
begins). Unless a state was short of citizens, when it might be more generous,
immigrants had no right to acquire citizenship of the state to which they had
migrated, though individuals might be given citizenship as a reward for major
services; unless elevated to a more privileged status, free non-citizens were
usually not allowed to own land or a house in the state in which they lived.There
were also various non-free categories: chattel slaves, commonly non-Greek, who
were the possessions of their owners, and Greeks in various conditions of servi-
tude, of whom Sparta’s helots are the best-known but not the only instance.
Quantitatively, the gap between the richest and the poorest was enormous; but,
although horse-breeding was a sign of wealth and there were some luxury items,
there was not a very wide range of expensive goods, and to some extent the
richest tended to have more possessions than the poorest rather than better pos-
sessions. A man who owned a large quantity of land would own a number of
separate ﬁelds rather than a single large estate. Because there were slaves avail-
able for menial work, it tended to be thought degrading for a free man to work
for another (though nearly all our evidence comes from the rich end of the spec-
trum, and we do not know how many poor men did in fact have to endure that
degradation).There was no large-scale ‘industry’: on building projects, citizens,
free non-citizens and slaves worked side by side, as sub-contractors rather than
employees; there were workshops in which tens of men, mostly slaves, worked
together, but not larger units; and a typical overseas trader was a man who owned
one ship, and took other traders with him as passengers.
A typical city was governed by an assembly of citizens (which in an oligarchic
as opposed to a democratic state would have its membership limited by a pro-
perty qualiﬁcation, and would have fewer matters referred to it and less freedom
of debate), for which business would be prepared by a smaller council; ofﬁcials
were appointed annually, often (in oligarchies as well as democracies) with
limits on reappointment to prevent a few men from becoming too powerful;
there were no professional administrators and no professional lawyers, but
administration and justice were included in the responsibilities shared among
the citizens.
INTRODUCTION
9

Religion was polytheistic, and religious correctness was more a matter of 
performing the correct rituals, in the community and in the household, than 
of holding the correct beliefs or being in a healthy spiritual state. There were
not many (but there were some) professional religious specialists: religion 
was one aspect of the state’s life; priesthoods were among the state’s ofﬁces
(though some were hereditary in particular families); the state regulated
temples, their treasuries and so on (and could borrow from the temple trea-
suries for other purposes in times of need). Major religious festivals were impor-
tant occasions for the whole community: they included not only what we should
think of as religious ceremonies but also competitions in athletics, drama and
the like.
Schools existed, but education was a private matter in which the state was
not involved. Athens had institutions (the publication of documents; in the ﬁfth
century ostracism, where one voted against a man by handing in a potsherd
with that man’s name written on it; in the fourth century the requirement for
all 59-year-old men on the military registers to serve as arbitrators in private
lawsuits in which evidence was submitted in writing) which presupposed that
the average citizen had a basic functional literacy, more so in the fourth century
than in the ﬁfth. It is likely that that presupposition was justiﬁed for the citi-
zens who played an active part in politics; but we do not know what propor-
tion of the citizens had that degree of literacy, and we know even less about
places other than Athens. At the highest level, by the classical period there were
skilful writers of literature in both verse and prose (but no prose literature sur-
vives from earlier than 450), and there were philosophers of great intellectual
accomplishment.
In the wider world, a man was identiﬁed by his own name, his father’s name
(patronymic) and his state, e.g. the historian Thucydides son of Olorus, of
Athens.Within his state, if it was a larger one, he would be identiﬁed by a smaller
unit to which he belonged, in Athens the deme (demotic): e.g.Thucydides son
of Olorus, of Halimus.
Each state had its own calendar, with its own irregularities (so that it was
hard to establish that an event on a particular date in one place occurred on
the same day as an event on a particular date in another place). Usually the
year consisted of twelve lunar months of 29–30 days, c.354 days in all, and from
time to time a thirteenth, ‘intercalary’ month had to be added to keep the cal-
endar in step with the seasons.Years were not numbered but were identiﬁed by
an annual, ‘eponymous’ ofﬁcial, in Athens the archon, or by the year of
reign/ofﬁce of a ruler or priest. Many states, including Athens, began their year
in midsummer: a date in the form 478/7 denotes the Athenian (or other) ofﬁ-
cial year which by our reckoning began in 478 and ended in 477 (at Athens
this was the archonship of Timosthenes), and underlining, e.g. 478/7, is a con-
vention to indicate the earlier or later part of that year.
Likewise different states had different standards of measurement, weight and
currency (coins were of silver or, less often, gold or the alloy of gold and silver
known as electrum, and took their names from the weight of precious metal
10
INTRODUCTION

which they contained). The main unit of distance was the stade, usually in the
range 165–220 yards = 150–200 metres, and in Athens 193 yards = 176 metres
(but usually estimated rather than precisely measured). As a measure of capa-
city the Athenian medimnos was about 111–2 UK gallons = 14 US gallons = 52.5
litres. The Athenian scale of weights and coins was: 6obols = 1 drachma, 100
drachmae = 1 mina, 60 minas = 1 talent (there were no coins of as high a value
as the mina or the talent; sums of money are often expressed in drachmae and
talents without the use of minas); a standard 4-drachma silver coin (cf. ill. 1)
weighed about 0.6oz. = 17.2 grammes, implying a talent of about 57lb. = 25.8
kg., but by the fourth century Athens’ general weights were slightly heavier, with
a talent of about 60lb. = 27.6kg. The difference in circumstances is so great
that ancient currency cannot meaningfully be translated into modern, but the
following will give some idea of the value of money in Athens. In the late ﬁfth
century an unskilled worker could earn 1–2 drachma a day and a skilled 1
drachma; in the late fourth century an unskilled worker could earn 11–2 drach-
mae and a skilled 2–21–2. In the fourth century an invalid was entitled to a main-
tenance grant if his property was worth less than 300 drachmae; a man was
considered rich enough to be liable for the burden of liturgies (cf. pp. 331–2)
if his property was worth about 4 talents; one of the largest ﬁfth-century estates
is said to have been worth 200 talents, but there cannot have been many worth
more than 20 talents. In the fourth century the total valuation of the property
of all Athenians or else of all liable to the property tax called eisphora was about
6,000 talents (cf. p. 330). At the beginning of the Peloponnesian War in 431,
the total annual revenue of Athens, including the tribute paid by member states
of the Delian League, was about 1,000 talents; at that time the largest annual
tribute paid by an individual member state was 30 talents.
INTRODUCTION
11
Ill. 1
Athens: owl and Athena (reverse and obverse of two coins, c.480; 4dr.). 
Department of Ancient History and Classics, Trent University, © Michael Cullen, Trent
Photographics

NOTE ON FURTHER READING
In the second edition of the Cambridge Ancient History, vol. v, entitled ‘The Fifth Century
BC’, covers the period 478–404; vol. vi, entitled ‘The Fourth Century BC’, covers
404–323, and also includes regional surveys spanning the ﬁfth century and the fourth.
Of the standard histories from an earlier generation, the most reliable is J. B. Bury, rev.
R. Meiggs, History of Greece. V. Ehrenberg, From Solon to Socrates [sixth and ﬁfth cen-
turies], makes the greatest effort to integrate political and cultural history. Hornblower,
The Greek World, 479–323 BC, is the volume corresponding to this in a series compara-
ble to that to which this book belongs. Sealey, History of the Greek City States,ca.700–338
BC, has a political emphasis. Buckley, Aspects of Greek History, 750–323 BC, is not a sys-
tematic history but covers a series of topics. Davies, Democracy and Classical Greece, is
a good stimulus to further thought on the ﬁfth and fourth centuries for those who
already know the basic outline.
De Ste. Croix, The Origins of the Peloponnesian War, ranges more widely over the ﬁfth
century and even the fourth than its title might lead one to expect. The four volumes
by Kagan – The Outbreak of the Peloponnesian War, The Archidamian War, The Peace of
Nicias and the Sicilian Expedition, The Fall of the Athenian Empire – together provide a
detailed history from 478 (and on some topics before) to 404 which usefully surveys
the work of earlier scholars. Powell, Athens and Sparta, is of general relevance to the
ﬁfth century.
For the fourth century, Buckler, Aegean Greece in the Fourth Century BC, is a detailed
diplomatic and military history.Tritle (ed.), The Greek World in the Fourth Century, con-
tains chapters by different authors on the main fourth-century themes.
As for the source material, the main collections of Greek and Latin texts are the
Oxford Classical Texts (texts), the Bibliotheca Scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum
Teubneriana (texts), the Collection des Universités de France, often referred to as the
Budé series (texts, French translations, short notes), and the Loeb Classical Library
(texts, English translations, short notes). The more popular texts are translated into
English in the Penguin Classics series and in various other series; some texts which are
less popular but of particular use to historians are translated with commentaries in the
Clarendon Ancient History Series (Oxford University Press). On the problems of using
texts of different kinds as historical sources Pelling, Literary Texts and the Greek Histo-
rian, provides a discussion based on test cases from the ﬁfth century.
Commentaries on literary texts include: those on Thucydides by Gomme, Andrewes
and Dover, and by Hornblower; that on the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia (lacking the most
recent, Cairo fragments) by Bruce, and an edition of all the fragments with translation
and commentary by McKechnie and Kern;1 a now elderly commentary on Xenophon’s
Hellenica by Underhill; that on Diod. Sic. XV by Stylianou; that on the Aristotelian
Athenaion Politeia by Rhodes; that on Arrian’s Anabasis by Bosworth.
There are collections, with commentaries, of Greek inscriptions of particular histo-
rical importance – Meiggs and Lewis, A Selection of Greek Historical Inscriptions to the
12
INTRODUCTION
1
In this book I number the chapters as in the most recent Teubner text, ed. M. H. Chambers.
However, McKechnie & Kern use the numbering of the previous Teubner text, ed. V. Bartoletti,
in which Chambers’ ch. 4 is their ch. 1 and his chs. 6, 7, 8 are their chs. 5, 3, 4; Bruce has chs.
1–5 as in McKechnie & Kern and then (following the oldest editions) starts again from ch. 1 = 6
McKechnie & Kern = 9 Chambers.

End of the Fifth Century BC; Rhodes and Osborne, Greek Historical Inscriptions, 404–323
BC (the latter including translations) – and the two volumes by Fornara (to the end of
the ﬁfth century) and Harding (fourth century) in the series Translated Documents of
Greece and Rome provide translations, with a few notes, of inscriptions and some other
texts. Osborne, The Athenian Empire, translates and discusses inscribed and other texts
relevant to that subject; and the revised edition of Hill, Sources for Greek History,478–431
BC, provides a well-indexed collection of Greek and Latin texts. Bodel (ed.), Epigraphic
Evidence, is an account of the uses of inscriptions, based largely on Roman material but
relevant to Greek history too;Woodhead, The Study of Greek Inscriptions, is the standard
handbook on that subject.The standard handbook on Greek coins is Kraay, Archaic and
Classical Greek Coins.
The largest-scale and most authoritative classical atlas, of an austere kind showing
topography and locating sites, is Talbert (ed.), Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman
World. Smaller and cheaper, and containing in addition some thematic maps and plans
of battle sites, is Hammond (ed.), Atlas of the Greek and Roman World in Antiquity.
INTRODUCTION
13

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
478
Pausanias in Cyprus and Byzantium
478/7
foundation of Delian League
476
capture of Eïon
469 (?)
battle of Eurymedon
465/4–463/2
siege of Thasos
Sources
For the Persian Wars of 490 and 480–479 we have a detailed account from
Herodotus; for the Peloponnesian War (chapters 8–13) we have detailed
accounts from Thucydides to 411 and thereafter from Xenophon; but for the
Pentecontaetia, the (not quite) ﬁfty years between the Persian Wars and the
Peloponnesian War, we are much less well informed. Thucydides includes in I.
89–118. ii a sketch of the growth of Athenian power, to justify his view of the
truest reason for the Peloponnesian War. He remarks that this period was not
treated by his predecessors except in the Athenian history of Hellanicus, whose
account was brief and not chronologically precise (I. 97. ii): Hellanicus’ account
has not survived, but that comment is certainly applicable to Thucydides’ own
account. Two later writers are particularly important for this period: Diodorus
Siculus and Plutarch in his Parallel Lives (cf. p. 8). For the Delian League,
usually they and other writers give more information, of varying reliability, on
episodes mentioned by Thucydides rather than information on episodes not
2
The Formation of 
the Delian League

mentioned by him. Diodorus’ narrative is organised in an annalistic framework,
but where it can be checked his assignment of episodes to years is unreliable;
we should take more seriously for dating (but still not believe uncritically) those
sentences, apparently from a chronological table, which brieﬂy mention events
other than the main episode of a year. Inscriptions will become important for
the history of the Delian League from the 450’s (cf. pp. 45–51).
The Origins of the League
Various stories told in connection with the battle of Plataea in 479, the battle
in which the Persians invading Greece were ﬁnally defeated, seem to point
forward to later developments. Plataea was one of the Greek states which had
sworn to resist the Persians (e.g. Thuc. II. 72. i, 74. ii); and after the battle the
commander Pausanias made the allies swear to respect Plataea’s independence
and neutrality in return for which Plataea would tend the graves of the fallen
Greeks (Thuc. II. 71. ii, III. 58. iv, 68. i). But more than that is found in later
sources. An oath claimed to have been sworn before the battle was inscribed
on stone in the fourth century as an oath of the Athenians (R&O 88. 21–51),
and is quoted as an oath of the Greeks by the fourth-century orator Lycurgus
(Leocrates 80–1) and by Diodorus (XI. 29. ii–iii), but was rejected as a fabrica-
tion by the fourth-century historian Theopompus (FGrH 115 F 153). The lit-
erary versions include an undertaking to leave temples destroyed by the Persians
in ruins as a war memorial (known also to Isocrates, as a resolution of the
Ionians: IV. Paneg. 156).This is one of a number of alleged ﬁfth-century docu-
ments for which there is no ﬁfth-century evidence but which were known from
the fourth century onwards (the two best known are the alleged decree of
Themistocles, of 480, and the alleged Peace of Callias between Athens and
Persia, on which see pp. 47–8). The texts which were current later were prob-
ably not essentially authentic texts (which had undergone some editing) but
later reconstructions, made (not irresponsibly but on the basis of some genuine
tradition) to present vividly the achievements of the glorious past. It is likely
that there were one or more occasions in 479 when an oath of solidarity was
sworn, but it is not likely that the text was preserved, or that there was an under-
taking to leave the temples of the gods in ruins.
Diodorus also mentions a vow to celebrate a festival of freedom at Plataea
(XI. 29. i), and Plutarch writes of an annual meeting with games every fourth
year, a Greek contribution (syntaxis, a fourth-century term: cf. pp. 233, 367) 
to make war on the Persians, and the Plataeans to be sacred and inviolable,
sacriﬁcing on behalf of Greece (Plut. Arist. 21. i–ii). The games are not 
attested until the hellenistic period, and all this looks like later elaboration.
The origins of the League are better sought in the naval campaign of 479.
When the Greek ﬂeet was at Aegina in the spring, the Ionians appealed to it to
liberate them (Hdt.VIII. 132). After the battle of Mycale a council was held at
Samos, at which the Peloponnesians, thinking it impossible to protect the
THE FORMATION OF THE DELIAN LEAGUE
15

Ionians indeﬁnitely, wanted to transport them to Greece and give them land
taken from those who had supported the Persians, but Athens, which claimed
to be the mother city of the Ionians, successfully objected.Then Samos, Chios,
Lesbos and the other islands were admitted to the Greek alliance (Hdt. IX. 106.
ii–iv). After that, the Greeks sailed north to the Hellespont. When they found
that the Persians’ bridges had been broken up, the commander, Sparta’s king
Leotychidas, and the Peloponnesian contingents returned home; but others,
perhaps including some from the Asiatic mainland, stayed on under Athenian
leadership and besieged Sestos, on the European side of the Hellespont (Hdt.
IX. 114–21, Thuc. I. 89. ii).
Herodotus ends his history there. We think of the Persian Wars as ending
there, and we now know that the Persians would never invade Europe again;
but nobody knew at the time that the Persian Wars were at an end. The Per-
sians had been defeated and had withdrawn from Greece; but they had been
defeated and had withdrawn from Greece in 490, only to return with a larger
force ten years later. The Greeks could not believe that the Persian threat had
been eliminated.
In 478 the two Spartans who had commanded the Greek alliance in the pre-
vious year exchanged commands. Leotychidas took an army to Thessaly to
punish those who had supported the Persians (cf. pp. 25–6); and Pausanias,
regent for his cousin Plistarchus, took command of the ﬂeet. He campaigned
successfully, ﬁrst outside the Aegean in Cyprus, which was important both as
a Persian naval base and as an island some of whose inhabitants were or at least
regarded themselves as Greek; then he returned to the Aegean and went through
the Hellespont to Byzantium, still occupied by the Persians, and captured that
(Thuc. I. 94, cf. 128. v, Aesch. Pers. 891–2). But Pausanias made himself
unpopular with the allies. At Plataea he had mockingly contrasted Persian
luxury with Spartan austerity (Hdt. IX. 82). Now,Thucydides tells us, he wore
Persian costume, he went into Thrace with a ‘Median’ and Egyptian bodyguard
(the Greeks frequently referred to the Persians as the Medes), he feasted in the
Persian manner and became unapproachable.Thucydides also has him secretly
releasing prisoners who were relatives of the Persian King, and exchanging
letters with the King, offering to marry his daughter (I. 128–30, cf. 95. i). It is
hard to be sure how much of this is true, and, if true, how much belongs to
this occasion rather than to Pausanias’ later period in Byzantium (cf. pp. 26–7):
on this occasion there can hardly have been time for the exchange of letters,
and the offer to marry the King’s daughter looks suspiciously like an 
improvement on the rumour reported by Herodotus, that he married a satrap’s
daughter (V. 32).
But we can accept that his conduct made him unpopular, and that com-
plaints reached Sparta. He was recalled, and we shall look at his further career
in a Spartan context (Thuc. I. 95. iii, 128. iii: cf. pp. 26–8). A new alliance was
then formed under the leadership of Athens, which had taken the lead against
Sestos earlier. According to Thucydides, it was the allies who took the initiative
in approaching Athens (I. 95. i–iv, cf. 75. ii, 96. i); other texts suggest that the
16
THE FORMATION OF THE DELIAN LEAGUE

Athenians took the initiative (Hdt.VIII. 3. ii, Ath. Pol. 23. iv): there must at any
rate have been willingness on both sides. By the time the Spartans had sent out
a successor to Pausanias, a man called Dorcis, the new arrangements had been
made, and Dorcis was rejected. According to Thucydides the Spartans were
willing to acquiesce and let the alliance go ahead under Athenian leadership (I.
95. vi–vii), and that is probably true of the majority of the Spartans if not all
(cf. pp. 26–7).
Ath. Pol. 23. v writes of a full offensive and defensive alliance (‘to have the
same friends and enemies’), for all time (symbolised by dropping lumps of metal
in the sea), made for the Athenians with the Ionians by Aristides in 478/7.
Thucydides writes that a proschema (‘pretext’, which might imply a contrast
either between professed and real intentions or between original intention and
later development) was to get revenge for what they had suffered by ravaging
the King’s land (I. 96. i, cf.VI. 76. iii). Not all the allies had had their own land
ravaged, as the Athenians had, and few scholars have felt able to believe that
the purpose of this permanent alliance was simply raiding to obtain revenge.
Thucydides elsewhere has speakers referring to the liberation of the Greeks (III.
10. iii, VI. 76. iv), and that theme occurs in Herodotus’ account of 479: it is
very likely that both that and defence against further Persian attacks were
intended when the alliance was formed, and why Thucydides wrote only of
revenge and ravaging in I. 96 is an unsolved problem.
There are many other problems in Thucydides’ account of the organisation
of the new alliance (I. 96. i–97. i). The Athenians (speciﬁcally Aristides: V. 18.
v and the later sources) ‘determined which of the cities were to provide money
against the barbarians and which ships. . . . This was when the ofﬁce of Greek
Treasurers (hellenotamiai) was ﬁrst established for the Athenians, to receive 
the tribute (phoros) – for that was the name given to the payment of money.The
ﬁrst assessment of tribute was 460 talents.’ The likelihood is that at ﬁrst the
larger states all provided ships, as in other alliances the participants contributed
their own forces; but it has been argued that more than half of the eventual
members were so small that they could not man even one trireme for a long
campaigning season, and most of the smaller states are likely from the begin-
ning to have paid tribute. Aristides will have assessed the obligations of the dif-
ferent members, probably imposing a burden comparable to that imposed by
the Persians when they reassessed the tribute of their Greek subjects after the
Ionian Revolt of the 490’s (Hdt.VI. 42). But how were obligations in ships and
in tribute balanced? And can the ﬁrst assessment, even if it included a cash
equivalent for ships, have amounted to as much as 460 talents, given that in
453, when there were more members and nearly all paid tribute, the total seems
to have been under 500 talents? There have been various attempts to reject or
explain Thucydides’ ﬁgure; he has another surprisingly high ﬁgure for 431 (cf.
p. 91); the one inscribed assessment list which survives, that of 425, is an opti-
mistic list (IG i3 71: cf. p. 92), and one possible explanation is that Aristides
drew up an optimistic list in cash terms which included both actual and poten-
tial members, and that that list did indeed total 460 talents. Collecting the
THE FORMATION OF THE DELIAN LEAGUE
17

tribute, like commanding expeditions, could well have been accepted as a
responsibility of the leader, and we need not doubt that the hellenotamiai were
Athenians from the beginning.
Thucydides says that Delos, the small island in the southern Aegean with a
major Ionian sanctuary of Apollo (whence the alliance’s modern name, Delian
League), ‘was their treasury, and the meetings took place at the sanctuary.The
Athenians were leaders of allies who were at ﬁrst autonomous and deliberated
in common meetings.’ We know that the treasury was moved from Delos in
454/3 (the ﬁrst of the ‘Athenian tribute lists’ is that of 453: cf. p. 45). We have
no direct evidence for what became of the meetings, but after 454/3 we ﬁnd
Athens taking decisions which ought to have been taken by meetings of the
whole alliance if there were any, and we have no positive evidence that there
were any, so probably when the treasury was moved the meetings were discon-
tinued. The Mytilenaeans in a speech say that originally the Athenians led on
an equal basis, and that the allies were equal in votes (isopsephoi), but the large
number of votes (polypsephia) made it impossible to resist Athens (Thuc. III.
10. iv–v, 11. iv). Two scenarios have been proposed: that Athens on one side
was balanced by a council of allies, so that the allies together were equal in
voting power to Athens (somewhat as in Sparta’s alliance, the Peloponnesian
League, and in Athens’ fourth-century alliance, the Second Athenian League);
or that there was a single body in which each member including Athens had
one vote (as in the recent Greek alliance under Spartan leadership to resist the
Persians).The recent alliance is the more relevant precedent, and it is easier to
accept the claim that Athens led on a basis of equality if there was a single body
in which Athens had one vote like the other members.
When Naxos was coerced, after a few years, Thucydides writes of its being
‘enslaved contrary to what was established’ (I. 98. iv: cf. p. 19). States which
join an alliance always give up the total freedom to decide their own policy with
no reference to others which they might otherwise enjoy, but it was probably
not thought necessary to spell out any guarantees of autonomy at the League’s
foundation. No previous combination of states in Greece had seriously reduced
the members’ freedom; and after the Ionian Revolt, in which strong leadership
had been lacking and Athens had supported the Asiatic Greeks for the ﬁrst year
but not afterwards, it must have seemed more likely that the Athenians would
withdraw from the war against the Persians than that they would interfere with
the allies’ freedom. (The actual word autonomia may have been coined in con-
nection with the allies’ later attempts to retain as much freedom as they could
when Athens did start encroaching.)
How large did the League become, and how quickly? The League was re-
presented as a patriotic Greek alliance to ﬁght against the barbarians, formed
when the barbarians were on the defensive: support may have been widespread,
but we cannot be sure that every single state in and around the Aegean will
have been eager to join such an alliance (we happen to have evidence that
Adramyttium, on the Asiatic coast facing Lesbos, was still in Persian hands in
421: Thuc. V. 1). Thucydides and other writers refer to the allies as Ionians, a
18
THE FORMATION OF THE DELIAN LEAGUE

word which could be applied to the eastern Greeks generally, but which
attached more strictly to one strand of the Greek people, who could be distin-
guished from the Aeolians (to the north of them in the Aegean and Asia Minor)
and the Dorians (to the south). Delos was Ionian in the strict sense, and it no
doubt eased Athens’ relations with Dorian Sparta if it stressed its position as
alleged mother city and as leader of the Ionians; but, of the likely early members,
the cities of Lesbos were Aeolian and Byzantium was Dorian, and the League
can never have been limited to those who were Ionian in the strict sense. Indeed,
its members eventually included Carians, in south-western Asia Minor, who
were not Greeks though their history had for a long time been bound up with
that of the Asiatic Greeks.
The League’s Early Years
Thucydides gives a catalogue of episodes in the early history of the League (I.
98–101). Under the command of Cimon (son of the Miltiades who commanded
at Marathon in 490) they captured from the Persians Eïon, on the Thracian
coast at the mouth of the River Strymon.The area was important for silver and
for ship-building timber, and Plutarch adds the information that Eïon was
settled as an Athenian colony (Cim. 7. iii). They captured and the Athenians
settled the north Aegean island of Scyros, occupied by a non-Greek people
called Dolopians, and situated on the grain route from the Black Sea and the
Hellespont to Athens – and Plutarch adds that in response to an oracle Cimon
found and brought back to Athens what were said to be the bones of the hero
Theseus (Thes. 36. i–iii, Cim. 8. iii–vii). Carystus, at the south end of Euboea
and again on the route from the Hellespont to Athens, had been sacked by the
Persians in 490 and had supported them in 480: it was attacked and forced 
to join the League. The Aegean island of Naxos revolted from the League,
and was taken by siege and (metaphorically) enslaved: the best indication of
what that is likely to mean is what happened to Thasos a little later (below).
Thucydides does not say why Naxos revolted, but he attaches to this epi-
sode the comment that the Athenians were strict in exacting the allies’ contri-
butions – they were using a permanent alliance to ﬁght a permanent war – and
that more and more members lessened their ability to resist by choosing to 
pay tribute rather than contribute their own forces.
Next came a major victory over the Persians by land and sea, attributed to
Cimon again, at the mouth of the River Eurymedon, on the south coast of Asia
Minor not quite as far east as Cyprus. To have gone there the Athenians must
have felt safe in the Aegean, but Thucydides next mentions the revolt of the
north Aegean island of Thasos – because of a dispute with Athens over its
trading posts and a silver mine on the mainland.The Athenians besieged Thasos
(later sources indicate that Cimon was again in command), and it was only in
the third year that Thasos submitted: it had to demolish its city walls, surren-
der its warships, pay tribute in cash and give up its mainland possessions. The
THE FORMATION OF THE DELIAN LEAGUE
19

Athenians had tried to found a settlement at Nine Ways, where the Strymon
could be crossed, at the time when they occupied Eïon (scholiast [ancient com-
mentator] on Aeschin. II. Embassy 31); they tried again now, but the settlers
were defeated and killed by the Thracians when they ventured further inland.
‘In the third year’ is Thucydides’ ﬁrst indication of time; a later passage (IV.
102. ii–iii) and a probable emendation of schol. Aeschin. will make the three
years of the siege 465/4–463/2. There are texts giving 476/5 as the date of the
colony at Nine Ways coinciding with that at Eïon (schol. Aeschin.) and of the
oracle leading to the capture of Scyros (Plut. Thes. 36. i): some scholars have
used other texts to place Thucydides’ whole series of events in the 460’s, but
probably we should date Eïon 476 and Scyros 475, and Carystus and Naxos
not long after. It is possibly in response to success at the Eurymedon in 469
that Cimon and his fellow generals were invited to judge the tragedians’ com-
petition in the spring of 468 (Plut. Cim. 8. vii–ix). Into this period we have also
to ﬁt the reappearance of Pausanias and his occupation of Byzantium until he
was dislodged by the Athenians (Thuc. I. 128. ii–131. i): some have placed this
before Eïon, on the basis of texts which take Cimon there from Byzantium (e.g.
Diodorus XI. 60. ii), but it is easier to make sense of his and Themistocles’
careers if we rely on a text which has Pausanias in Byzantium until c.470 (Just.
Epit. IX. 1. iii: cf. p. 27). Just before and overlapping with the siege of Thasos,
there was ﬁghting involving Cimon against Persians and Thracians in the Cher-
sonese, the tongue of land on the European side of the Hellespont (Plut. Cim.
14. i, cf. the casualty list IG i3 1144).
Thucydides has written a selective account to illustrate the growth of Athen-
ian power: he does not include the last episode mentioned above, and there
may well have been many other episodes which he does not include and which
we do not know of. At Eïon, at the Eurymedon and in the Chersonese the
League fought against the Persians; at Carystus it attacked a city which had
earlier supported the Persians; in preventing Naxos from withdrawing it upheld
the permanence of a permanent alliance. On the other hand, Eïon was settled
by the Athenians; Scyros had nothing to do with the Persians but was of par-
ticular interest to Athens and again was settled by the Athenians; the location
of Carystus gave Athens a particular interest in that city; at Naxos Athens was
using force against a League member (the appearance of Carystonicus and Nax-
iades, in an Athenian casualty list of the 440’s, IG i3 1162. 27, 79, shows that
these were seen as achievements to be proud of); and Athens coveted the main-
land possessions of Thasos. In that case it is hard to understand how the attack
can have been justiﬁed to the League, since the large islands off the coast of
Asia Minor had similar peraiai, mainland dependencies, which they would not
want to lose to Athens.This episode, to which Diodorus attaches his comment
on Athens’ growing imperialism (XI. 70. ii–iii), was the most blatant case yet
of Athens’ using the League to further its own interests.
It is clear that from the beginning the Athenians found ways of advancing
their own interests through the League, but that does not prove that they had
sinister intentions from the beginning: more probably the anti-Persian inten-
20
THE FORMATION OF THE DELIAN LEAGUE

tions were genuine, and continued to be acted on, but opportunities presented
themselves and were accepted, and what was decided on one occasion set the
pattern for what might be decided on others.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On the Delian League as a whole Meritt et al., The Athenian Tribute Lists (with a general
narrative in vol. iii part 3), was the major study of the mid twentieth century, showing
great boldness in the restoration of fragmentary inscriptions. McGregor, The Athenians
and Their Empire, gives a very uncritical account by one of Meritt’s collaborators; Meiggs,
The Athenian Empire, is the best single-volume treatment; Rhodes, The Athenian Empire,
is a booklet which focuses on the main problems.
Different views of the League’s origin and organisation are given by J. A. O. Larsen,
‘The Constitution and Original Purpose of the Delian League’, HSCP li 1940, 175–213
(which I follow); N. G. L. Hammond, ‘The Origins and Nature of the Athenian Alliance
of 478/7 BC’, JHS lxxxvi 1967, 41–61, revised as ‘The Organization of the Athenian
Alliance against Persia’, in his Studies in Greek History, 311–45.
The chronology of the Pentecontaetia is full of uncertainties: there are similar but not
identical date tables in Gomme, Historical Commentary on Thucydides, i. 394–6; Meritt
et al., The Athenian Tribute Lists, iii. 175–9; CAH2 v. 506–11; there is a review of the
problems in Rhodes, The Athenian Empire, ch. 3; chronologies widely divergent from
those of Gomme, The Athenian Tribute Lists and CAH2, v, have from time to time been
canvassed but have not gained much support.
THE FORMATION OF THE DELIAN LEAGUE
21

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
c.494
Sparta defeats Argos at Sepeia
479
battle of Plataea: Tegea prominent but Mantinea and
Elis absent
478
Pausanias in Cyprus and Byzantium; same year (?)
Leotychidas in Thessaly
470’s–460’s
Sparta ﬁghting against enemies in northern
Peloponnese
c.465/4–456/5
Sparta’s Messenian War
Elis, Arcadia and Argos
By the beginning of the ﬁfth century most of the Peloponnese was linked to
Sparta through the set of alliances which we refer to as the Peloponnesian
League. In Arcadia, in the middle of the Peloponnese, whatever the exiled
Cleomenes may have done in the 490’s to create an anti-Spartan union (Hdt.
VI. 74. i) had not lasted: the cities of which we hear most are Mantinea and
Tegea, in the south-east, competing as often as they cooperated, Mantinea being
the smaller of the two. In 480 all the Arcadians contributed to the Greek force
resisting the Persians. In 479 Tegea as Sparta’s oldest ally disputed Athens’ claim
to take second place, but (despite the delay before the battle of Plataea was
fought) the contingent from Mantinea did not arrive until afterwards. Elis at
3
The Peloponnese in 
the Early Fifth Century

the beginning of the ﬁfth century controlled the north-west of the Peloponnese
as far south as Olympia: in 480 it was not represented at Thermopylae but did
contribute to the force assembled afterwards at the Isthmus of Corinth; but in
479 its contingent, like that of Mantinea, did not arrive at Plataea until after
the battle. Most if not all of what was later called Triphylia, the region south of
Olympia and north of Messenia, was at this time still independent, and a force
from Lepreum fought at Plataea. From the north-east of the Peloponnese,
Megara, Corinth, Sicyon and Phlius are mentioned at various points in 480–
479, as are the cities beyond Argos: Troezen, Epidaurus and Hermione.
Argos itself, which had never acknowledged Spartan supremacy, stayed out of
the war and was suspected of sympathising with the Persians; but dissidents in
Mycenae and Tiryns (cf. pp. 24–5) did ﬁght on the Greek side. Argos’ absten-
tion from the war was certainly a result of its traditional hostility to Sparta,
unaffected by a change of régime in the 490’s. Mantinea and Elis subsequently
punished their generals (and Elis got itself included in the inscribed lists of
patriotic states, though Mantinea did not): they may have been motivated pri-
marily by fear of ﬁnding themselves on the losing side.
For the twenty years or so after the war we have to make the best of a jigsaw
puzzle of evidence from which far too many pieces are missing. There are two
themes which can be traced: political change, in Elis, Mantinea and Argos; and
wars in which different states fought unsuccessfully against Sparta on different
occasions. A synoecism (a word which denotes either political amalgamation or
physical amalgamation or a combination of the two) of Elis is dated after the
Persian Wars by Strabo (336–7.VIII. iii. 2) and in 471/0 by Diodorus’ chrono-
logical source (XI. 54. i).There already existed both a town of Elis and an Elean
state before, and some at least of the other towns in the region continued to
exist afterwards: there may have been a greater concentration of political power
in the town of Elis, and some movement accompanied by a change in the
balance of power within the citizen body, but the evidence does not point to a
dramatic change. Elis may already at this time have dominated as perioikoi (sub-
ordinate ‘dwellers around’) some communities to the east, and some near
Olympia: in the middle of the ﬁfth century it extended its inﬂuence over the
whole of the later Triphylia (Hdt. IV. 148. iv: cf. pp. 98–9, 125–7, 198, 205).
Mantinea could be referred to as a polis at the time of the Persian Wars, and
indeed in the mid sixth century (Hdt. IV. 161. ii), and it is said by Strabo (cited
above) to have been synoecised by the Argives: it was to be split into its com-
ponent villages by Sparta in 385, and reunited in 370 when Sparta was no
longer strong enough to prevent it (cf. pp. 212, 217). A date around 470 for
the physical synoecism is acceptable but not demonstrable: this will have
involved the construction of an urban centre, and the migration of some of 
the population to it, but not the total abandonment of the old villages. In 421
Mantinea is described as democratic (Thuc. V. 29. i), and the aristocrats are
said to have been pleased when in 385 the synoecism was undone (Xen. Hell.
V. ii. 7). Tegea was a political entity in the ﬁrst half of the sixth century, when
it for a time resisted Sparta but eventually became Sparta’s ﬁrst ally (Hdt. I.
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY
23

65–8); despite that alliance, it harboured Spartan exiles both before the Persian
Wars and after (Hdt. IX. 37. iv,VI. 72. ii); we do not know when its synoecism
(Strabo) took place.
Argos had been defeated at Sepeia by Cleomenes c.494, but he had not fol-
lowed up the victory by bringing it into alliance with Sparta. As a result of the
losses in the battle, ‘their slaves had control of all their affairs, ruling and admin-
istering, until the sons of the fallen grew up’ (Hdt.VI. 83. i).The Greeks’ chattel
slaves came from various sources, commonly outside Greece, and it is hard to
think of them as a body of men capable of taking over the running of the state
after Sepeia. Argos had a serf class of gymnetes, and some have thought of them;
but more probably we should regard ‘slaves’ as aristocratic abuse rather than
literal truth, and follow Aristotle, who says that the Argives were obliged to take
in some of their perioikoi (Pol. V. 1303 A 6–8): in other words, there will have
been a synoecism, political if not physical, with men from the outlying com-
munities coming to enjoy a measure of power. The new régime continued the
policy of not submitting to Sparta; but Mycenae, to the north, and Tiryns, to
the south, remained independent, and fought under Spartan leadership against
Persia when Argos did not. It is possible, though not certain, that some
members of the old aristocracy found the new régime uncongenial, migrated
there, and were content to follow a policy opposed to that of Argos (Pausanias’
account of the Persian War memorial set up at Olympia refers to ‘the Tirynthi-
ans from the land of Argos’ and ‘those of the Argives occupying Mycenae’: V.
23. ii).
Herodotus (IX. 35. ii), echoed by Pausanias, gives in what should be chrono-
logical order a list of ﬁve Spartan victories: at Plataea, in 479; at Tegea, against
Tegea and Argos; at Dipaea, against all the Arcadians except Mantinea; against
the Messenians at ‘the Isthmus’; at Tanagra against Athens and Argos (cf.
p. 44). Diodorus, after narrating the earthquake at Sparta and the Messenian
War under 469/8 (cf. pp. 28–9), reports under 468/7 that after the Persian Wars
Argos and its allies besieged Mycenae; Sparta because of the earthquake and
the Messenian War could not help Mycenae; and the city was captured and
destroyed (XI. 65). Strabo names Cleonae and Tegea as Argos’ allies on this
occasion (377. VIII. vi. 19). After referring to the rule of the ‘slaves’ in Argos,
Herodotus reports that the sons of those who died at Sepeia recovered control
of Argos; the ‘slaves’ were driven out, and after a battle occupied Tiryns; after
a period of balance they were incited by a seer from Phigalea, in Arcadia, to
attack Argos, but after a long war Argos was victorious (VI. 83). And it may be
relevant that, when the Athenians ostracised Themistocles (who after the
Persian Wars showed signs of hostility to Sparta), he at ﬁrst lived in Argos and
visited other places in the Peloponnese, but ﬂed from there when the Spartans
produced accusations against him (Thuc. I. 135. iii–136. i: cf. p. 34).
Certainty is impossible, but the way in which the pieces were ﬁtted together
by Forrest makes as good sense as any. There had been a form of synoecism –
I should say producing not democracy but the admission to a share in power
of men who had previously been excluded from power – in Argos after Sepeia.
24
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY

In the late 470’s there were synoecisms in Mantinea and in Elis; Mantinea was
encouraged by Argos; and there grew across the Peloponnese an anti-Spartan
alliance, which will have been encouraged by Themistocles. To this phase can
be assigned Herodotus’ battle of Tegea and Diodorus’ war of Argos against
Mycenae (his explanation of Sparta’s inability to help Mycenae may be a mis-
taken inference from his own order of narration). Then came the counter-
revolution in Argos, by which the old dominant families recovered control, and
Themistocles no longer felt safe in the changed Argos. After that belong, cer-
tainly, Argos’ war against the ‘slaves’ in Tiryns, and probably Herodotus’ battle
of Dipaea, in which Mantinea was not ﬁghting alongside the other Arcadians
(Mantinea was to support Sparta against the Messenians: Xen. Hell. V. ii. 3).
This could belong in the early 460’s. At Dipaea, according to Isocrates (VI.
Archidamus 99) the Spartans fought with a single line of soldiers rather than a
full phalanx: this has been seen as an indication that the battle was fought after
the great earthquake and the outbreak of the Messenian War, but Dipaea is to
the north-west of Tegea, and we may wonder whether the Spartans would have
gone there at all then.
As for what happened in Argos, it may well be the case that those who had
been in control for a generation, and who had welcomed Themistocles, lost
power; and what happened next may even have been the work of the returned
aristocrats, hoping to do well under the new dispensation.There seems to have
been introduced either at this time or shortly afterwards a new articulation of
the citizen body, with four tribes each subdivided into twelve phratries, and
some public land (taken from individuals and from destroyed towns such as
Mycenae) assigned to them – a reform which points in a democratic rather than
an aristocratic direction; and this makes it easier to understand why, at the end
of the 460’s, a self-consciously democratic Athens on breaking with Sparta
formed an alliance with Argos (cf. p. 41). Certainly Argos could be described
as democratic in 421–420 (Thuc. V. 29. i, 31. vi, 44. i).
Sparta
In Sparta the Agid king Leonidas had been killed at Thermopylae in 480: his
son Plistarchus was too young to rule, so ﬁrst Leonidas’ brother Cleombrotus
acted as regent, and after Cleombrotus’ death in winter 480/79 his son 
Pausanias. Leotychidas had been Eurypontid king since the late 490’s. In 479
Pausanias commanded the Greek army which defeated the Persians at Plataea,
Leotychidas commanded the naval force which was victorious at Mycale.They
probably exchanged commands in 478. It was certainly in that year that 
Pausanias led a naval expedition ﬁrst to Cyprus and afterwards to Byzantium
(cf. p. 16); and we may guess that it was in the same year that Leotychidas went
north with an army to punish the Thessalians for supporting the Persians.
Herodotus reports that he accepted bribes when in a favourable position, and
was found sitting on a glove full of money; he was brought to trial in Sparta,
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY
25

he was exiled and his house was demolished, and he ended his life in Tegea (VI.
72). Plutarch includes in a list of tyrannies overthrown by the Spartans one put
down by Leotychidas in Thessaly (Her. Mal. 859 D); and among the stories of
Themistocles’ opposition to Sparta after the war he has a (dubious) plan of
Themistocles to destroy the Spartan ﬂeet at Pagasae, in Thessaly, and a pro-
posal of Sparta that states which had supported Persia should be expelled from
the Amphictyony, the league of largely northern and central Greek states which
controlled the sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi (Them. 20: cf. p. 32). Diodorus,
from his chronological source, records the death of Leotychidas in 476/5 (XI.
48. ii), but his dates for ﬁfth- and fourth-century Eurypontids seem to be seven
years too early: possibly the explanation of his confusion is that Leotychidas
was exiled in 476/5 and died in 469/8, or that immediately the throne was left
vacant and it was not until 469/8 that his grandson Archidamus II was recog-
nised as the next Eurypontid king.
Pausanias found himself in trouble too, and Thucydides gives an account 
in which he insists on the truth of charges which were never proved (I. 95,
128–135. i). When he made himself unpopular with the Greeks at Byzantium,
he was recalled and put on trial, and convicted on some lesser counts but 
acquitted of medism, treasonable support of the Persians, although that ‘seemed
very clear’. To succeed him the Spartans sent out a man called Dorcis, but by
the time he arrived the new alliance had been founded under Athenian leader-
ship, and his attempt to take command was rejected. According to Thucydides
the Spartans were happy to acquiesce in Athens’ new alliance (I. 95. vii, cf. Xen.
Hell. VI. v. 34); Ath. Pol. 23. ii, if we accept the papyrus’ text and give it its
natural interpretation, says they were not happy; Diodorus (XI. 50) has a
debate, in which it seemed likely that they would decide to ﬁght to recover their
leadership, but unexpectedly a member of the gerousia called Hetoemaridas per-
26
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY
AGIDS 
EURYPONTIDS
ANAXANDRIDAS II
ARISTON 
Menares 
CLEOMENES I
Key
ANAXANDRIDAS    king
CLEOMBROTUS    regent
Dorieus LEONIDAS
CLEOMBROTUS
DEMARATUS 
LEOTYCHIDAS II
c.520–490
490–480
???–c.492 
c.492–476/5 | 469/8
PLISTARCHUS PAUSANIAS NICOMEDES
Zeuxidamus
 480–c.460
PLISTOANAX
CLEOMENES Aristocles
ARCHIDAMUS II
c.460–408 
 476/5 | 469/8–427
PAUSANIAS
AGIS II 
AGESILAUS II
408–395
427–c.400 
c.400–360/59
Fig. 1
Fifth-century Spartan kings and regents

suaded them not to do so. Sparta was a notoriously secretive state, and this
story, at odds with Thucydides, of a debate which resulted in no action is more
likely to represent later invention, from a time when the Spartans were afraid
of Athens and were asking how they had allowed it to become so powerful, than
authentic tradition. No doubt there were some Spartans who supported 
Pausanias and his policy of involvement in the wider world; but when he and
Leotychidas had both shown that they could not be trusted away from home,
when the Athenian league was led by the pro-Spartan Cimon (cf. p. 32), and
when Sparta’s control of the Peloponnese was insecure, it is not surprising that
the majority was willing to leave the Aegean to Athens.
Pausanias, Thucydides tells us, returned to Byzantium in a private capacity,
with a ship from Hermione in the Argolid, ‘allegedly for the Greek war but in
fact in order to pursue his business with the Persian King’. He clearly did not
collaborate with the Athenians, and in that situation collaboration with the Per-
sians is likely enough. Eventually (perhaps c.470: cf. p. 20) the Athenians drove
him out of Byzantium, and he moved to Colonae, in Asia Minor inland from
the Hellespont. The Spartans sent a messenger to summon him home, and,
having avoided serious trouble before, he obeyed; he was at ﬁrst placed under
arrest, but released when he undertook to stand trial.
The story then becomes increasingly hard to believe.The Spartans were sus-
picious of him, but lacked the evidence that would justify them in punishing a
regent. It was apparently at this stage that they had removed from the memo-
rial set up at Delphi (from which the ‘serpent column’ survives in Istanbul) the
inscription in which Pausanias claimed personal credit for the defeat of the 
Persians, and substituted a simple list of the allied Greek states (M&L 27 ~
Fornara 59; according to [Dem.] LIX. Neaera 96–8 the change resulted from
a prosecution of Sparta before the Amphictyonic Council). He was said to be
in league with the helots, promising them citizenship if they would support him
– and Thucydides insists that this was indeed the case. He was also still in touch
with Artabazus, the Persian satrap in the Hellespontine province. One of his
messengers, realising that previous messengers had never returned, opened the
letter he was given and found that it included an instruction to kill the mes-
senger. He showed this to the ephors, who set up an encounter in which the
messenger reproached Pausanias for his lack of trust while some of them were
hidden as witnesses. Even after that the ephors did not act immediately. When
they were about to arrest him, one of them warned him, and he ﬂed to the sanc-
tuary of Athena of the Bronze House; he was blockaded there and starved to
death, but dragged out before he died to avoid polluting the sanctuary.
The story has surely been improved in the telling, and Thucydides’ certainty
about what cannot have been proved is suspicious. Not long afterwards the
helots did revolt (cf. below): that might conﬁrm the charge against Pausanias,
but it might be that as a suspect ﬁgure who was safely dead he was a conve-
nient scapegoat to whom blame could be attached. On the other hand, it is
likely that he had been in touch with Artabazus while in Byzantium and
Colonae, and it is credible that he remained in touch. But his chief offence was
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY
27

a greater degree of individualism than Sparta liked to see in its leading ﬁgures:
his father had been half-brother of an earlier individualist king, Cleomenes, and
Pausanias gave the name Cleomenes to one of his own sons (Thuc. III. 26. ii).
Thucydides was perhaps so conﬁdent because his information came from a
‘good’ source, i.e. after Pausanias’ death the ofﬁcial account of him in Sparta
was thoroughly hostile. In spite of that Thucydides pronounced Pausanias and
Themistocles to be the two most distinguished men of their generation (I. 138.
vi).
Thucydides claims in connection with Athens’ war against Thasos, of
465/4–463/2, that the Thasians asked Sparta to support them by invading
Attica. ‘They promised, hiding it from the Athenians, and intended to invade’,
but were prevented by an earthquake (which killed a large number of the citi-
zens) and the revolt of the helots and some of the perioikoi, particularly in
Messenia (Thuc. I. 101. i–103. ii). Here again we have a story which ends in
Sparta’s not taking action. Perhaps Thasos asked for Spartan help; but Athens
and Sparta had not yet quarrelled, the Athenians were still ﬁghting under the
leadership of Cimon, and Sparta was shortly to ask Athens for help. Probably
this like the story of Hetoemaridas is a later invention.
The rebels occupied Mount Ithome, in the centre of Messenia, and the 
Spartans tried to capture their stronghold. (We do not know what the Spartan
victory at ‘the Isthmus’ [p. 24] was.) As the war dragged on they appealed to
their allies, including Athens (still an ally by virtue of the Greek alliance of 481
against the Persians, and, says Thucydides, skilled in siege warfare). Cimon
went, with a force of four thousand hoplites according to Aristophanes (Lys.
1138–44). But, perhaps because of the success of Cimon’s opponent Ephialtes
in Athens (cf. p. 35), the Spartans ‘grew afraid of the Athenians’ daring and
revolutionary nature’, suspected that they might change sides and support the
rebels, and sent them home. Ephialtes had already been opposed to helping
Sparta, and Athens now broke off its alliance with Sparta, made alliances with
enemies of Sparta, and began building up its power in mainland Greece as well
as the Aegean (cf. pp. 41–5). The rebels on Ithome ﬁnally came to terms with
Sparta, were allowed to leave the Peloponnese, and were settled by the 
Athenians at Naupactus, on the north side of the Corinthian Gulf.
Thucydides dates the end of the war ‘in the tenth year’ (I. 103. i).There was
a time when scholars used to infer from his criticism of Hellanicus (cf. p. 14)
that every incident in his own account of the Pentecontaetia must have been
recorded in its correct chronological sequence, to realise that it is impossible to
ﬁnd as many as ten years between the events mentioned before this war and
those mentioned after, and to emend the text to obtain a smaller number. But
Thucydides does not use temporal expressions when moving from one area of
activity to another, and it is far more likely that in the interests of tidiness and
intelligibility he has allowed a measure of overlap. Diodorus gives his main nar-
rative of the war under 469/8, and like Thucydides says that it lasted ten years
(XI. 63–4); but from his chronological source he reports the end of the war
under 456/5 (XI. 84. viii). Philochorus seems to have dated the earthquake
28
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY

468/7 (FGrH 328 F 117 ~ Fornara 67. A), but Pausanias dated it 464/3 (IV.
24. v ~ Fornara 67. C, cf. Plut. Cim. 16. iv). Some scholars have opted for the
earlier date, supposing that Thucydides mentions the war at the point when it
ended; but Diodorus’ chronological source is more likely to be right than his
narrative date (cf. p. 15), and it is easier to believe that Thucydides mentions
the war at the point when it began, and that the Athenians settled the rebels at
Naupactus in the mid 450’s (cf. p. 44). The ten years of the war should be
c.465/4–456/5.
Maintaining control of the helots was always a high priority for Sparta (cf.
Thuc. IV. 80. iii). This war, and the fact that it ended in a compromise, will
have distracted Sparta’s attention from the wider Greek world. There were
young and inexperienced kings on both thrones: Archidamus had succeeded his
grandfather (cf. p. 26); by the early 450’s Plistarchus was dead and Pausanias’
brother Nicomedes was acting as regent for Pausanias’ son Plistoanax (Thuc.
I. 107. ii). It is no surprise that in the years which follow we do not ﬁnd Sparta
pursuing active policies. But on one count the Spartans seem not to have been
sufﬁciently worried. In the Persian Wars there were about 8,000 adult Spartan
citizens, not far short of the notional 9,000 of the archaic period. By 418 there
were signiﬁcantly fewer, though it is not certain how many fewer; at the begin-
ning of 371 there were perhaps 1,300, of whom 400 were killed in the battle of
Leuctra (cf. pp. 216–17). The earthquake caused heavy losses among the citi-
zens; the Peloponnesian War, a generation later, impeded the recovery which
might otherwise have occurred; but, although they attempted some devices to
stimulate the citizen birth rate, the Spartans did not promote signiﬁcant
numbers of non-citizens to citizen status, or relax those features of the citizens’
way of life which must have made the fathering of children harder.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
The best general accounts of Spartan history are Cartledge, Sparta and Lakonia, and
Forrest, History of Sparta. On the distinctive aspects of Sparta Michell, Sparta, gives a
traditional account. There are collections of articles embodying newer approaches in
Cartledge, Spartan Reﬂections; in Whitby (ed.), Sparta; and in a series of volumes edited
by Hodkinson and Powell (some naming Hodkinson ﬁrst, others naming Powell ﬁrst:
see Bibliography). Hodkinson, Property and Wealth in Classical Sparta, shows that a
number of long-held beliefs were unjustiﬁed. Kennell, The Gymnasium of Virtue, warns
against projecting back to archaic and classical Sparta all that is found in the late sources.
Luraghi and Alcock (eds.), Helots and Their Masters in Lakonia and Messenia, re-
examines that notorious institution.
On Peloponnesian history in the 470’s and 460’s see particularly W. G. Forrest,
‘Themistokles and Argos’, CQ2 x 1960, 221–41 at 221–32; A. Andrewes, ‘Argive Peri-
oikoi’, in ‘Owls to Athens’ . . . Sir K. Dover, 171–8.
On Elis see J. Roy, ‘The Synoikism of Elis’, in Nielsen (ed.), Even More Studies in the
Ancient Greek Polis, 249–64; and other articles by him in that volume, 229–47, and in
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY
29

Hansen (ed.), The Polis as an Urban Centre and as a Political Community, 282–320. On
Arcadia see Nielsen and Roy (eds.), Deﬁning Ancient Arkadia; Nielsen, Arkadia and Its
Poleis in the Archaic and Classical Periods. On constitutional change in Argos see M.
Piérart, ‘L’Attitude d’Argos à l’égard des autres cités d’Argolide’, in Hansen (ed.), The
Polis as an Urban Centre (above), 321–51, esp. 332–4.
In connection with Sparta, on the downfall of Pausanias see P. J. Rhodes, ‘Thucy-
dides on Pausanias and Themistocles’, Hist. xix 1970, 387–400. On the helot revolt of
the 460’s it is no longer fashionable to emend the ‘tenth’ year of Thuc. I. 103. i (e.g.
Gomme, Historical Commentary on Thucydides, i. 401–11): I follow D. W. Reece, ‘The
Date of the Fall of Ithome’, JHS lxxxii 1962, 111–20 (ten years, beginning where Thucy-
dides mentions it), against N. G. L. Hammond, ‘Studies in Greek Chronology of the
Sixth and Fifth Centuries BC’, Hist. iv 1955, 371–411 at 371–81 = his Collected Studies,
i. 355–95 at 355–65, and R. Sealey, ‘The Great Earthquake in Lacedaemon’, Hist. vi
1957, 368–71 (different versions of ten years, ending where Thucydides mentions it).
30
THE PELOPONNESE IN THE EARLY FIFTH CENTURY

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
480
Themistocles commands in Persian War
479
Aristides and Xanthippus command in Persian War
478/7
Aristides organises Delian League
472
Aeschylus’ Persians
463 (?)
Aeschylus’ Suppliant Women
462/1
Ephialtes’ reform of Areopagus; Athenian help rejected by
Sparta
458
Aeschylus’ Oresteian plays
Themistocles and Others
In 480 Themistocles commanded Athens’ forces against the Persians; and, it is
alleged, when the Greek generals voted to choose a ‘man of the campaign’,
everybody voted for himself ﬁrst and Themistocles second, and in Sparta 
he was honoured like no other foreigner (Hdt. VIII. 123–5). Yet in 479 
Themistocles is not heard of, but the Athenians at Plataea were commanded
by Aristides and the Athenians in the Greek navy by Xanthippus: perhaps the
Athenian attitudes to competition and taking turns had led to the conclusion
that other men should be given their chance to do well.
Xanthippus is not heard of again: he was presumably dead when his son 
Pericles, born in the 490’s, acted as choregos, the rich citizen given the duty of
4
Athens After 
the Persian Wars

overseeing and ﬁnancing the dramatic production, for Aeschylus’ tragedies in
473/2 (cf. p. 39). Ostraka reveal the existence of another son of Xanthippus,
Ariphron (named after Xanthippus’ father, but perhaps not the eldest son), who
is otherwise attested only as a guardian in the 430’s (Pl. Prt. 320 A).
For Themistocles after the war we have a number of stories in which he 
falls foul of Sparta. The story of rebuilding Athens’ walls is to be found in
Thucydides (I. 90–93. ii) as well as the later sources. Sparta urged that, in case
the Persians returned, it would be better to have no fortiﬁed cities north of 
the Isthmus of Corinth; Themistocles had himself sent to Sparta to temporise,
while Athens’ walls were rebuilt as quickly as possible; when rumours reached
Sparta, Spartans were sent to Athens to see what was happening but the 
Athenians did not let them return; when the walls had reached a sufﬁcient
height,Themistocles was joined by colleagues (one of whom was Aristides), and
informed the Spartans that Athens was safely fortiﬁed and was fully capable of
judging what was the best policy for itself and for all. Themistocles was also
responsible for fortifying the harbour at Piraeus, whose building he had insti-
gated earlier. Elsewhere we read of a plan of Themistocles to burn the Spartan
ﬂeet (at different locations in different sources), and of his opposing a Spartan
plan to exclude from the Delphic Amphictyony states which had supported the
Persians (cf. p. 26); the motif of his having a plan which cannot be made public
but is revealed to Aristides ﬂoats suspiciously between stories. As Thucydides
remarks (I. 93. ii), and as the surviving remains conﬁrm, Athens’ walls were
certainly rebuilt in great haste; how much of that story is true and how much
is an improvement on the truth, it is hard to tell. A plan by Sparta to reform
and to give itself a stronger position in the Delphic Amphictyony is easier to
accept than a plan by Themistocles to destroy the Spartan ﬂeet (on which cf.
p. 44).
It can be accepted that Themistocles envisaged a future for Athens in which
Sparta would be a rival rather than an ally; and in that he stands in contrast to
Cimon, son of the Miltiades who had commanded the Athenians at Marathon
in 490. Cimon in the 470’s and 460’s was to command a Delian League with
which the Spartans were content; he gave the name Lacedaemonius to a son
born in the 470’s; against the opposition of Ephialtes he took forces to help the
Spartans against the Messenians at the end of the 460’s (cf. p. 28).
In various other respects too Themistocles and Cimon can be seen as oppo-
nents or rivals. By the time of Thucydides (I. 20. ii,VI. 53. iii–59) it had become
a matter of controversy whether the ending of the Pisistratid tyranny in Athens
was due to the murder of Hipparchus by Harmodius and Aristogiton (in fact,
in 514) or to the expulsion of Hippias by the Spartans prompted by the
Alcmaeonid family (in 511/0). Cimon married an Alcmaeonid c.480; but statues
of Harmodius and Aristogiton were set up in 477/6, allegedly as a replacement
for earlier statues taken to Susa by the Persians (to be returned in the fourth
century by Alexander the Great), and the epigram on the base may have been
by the poet Simonides, who can be linked with Themistocles. Another matter
for controversy was which was Athens’ greater achievement against the Persians,
32
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS

the battle of Marathon, won by the hoplites and Cimon’s father Miltiades,
or the battle of Salamis, won by the navy and Themistocles (cf. Pl. Leg. IV.
707 A–D): Aeschylus’ Persians is, among other things, a play championing
Themistocles in that controversy (cf. below).
Themistocles had interpreted a Delphic oracle as encouraging the abandon-
ment of Athens and ﬁghting at Salamis (Hdt.VII. 140–3): Cimon was to inter-
pret an oracle and bring back the alleged bones of Theseus from Scyros (Plut.
Cim. 8. v–viii). Themistocles and Cimon are both associated with building 
projects: Themistocles (in addition to his involvement with the city walls) with
a sanctuary belonging to his family, the Lycomidae, and with a temple of
Artemis Aristoboule, ‘of best counsel’; Cimon not only with the Theseum but
also with the walls of the acropolis (Plut. Cim. 13. v, Paus. I. 28. iii) and with
the Painted Stoa, where one of the paintings depicted the battle of Marathon
(Plut. Cim. 4. vi–vii). We should not make too much of these things; and we
should remember, for instance, that in the early campaigns of the Delian League
Cimon was commanding naval forces; but there is enough evidence to justify a
view of Themistocles and Cimon as rivals, and Cimon as the more successful
of the two. After the rebuilding of Athens’ walls we do not hear much more
about Themistocles before his ostracism. He was choregos for the tragedian
Phrynichus in 477/6 (cf. p. 39); he went to the Olympic games, probably in
476, and is alleged to have received a hero’s welcome, to have urged the exclu-
sion of the tyrant Hieron of Syracuse (but that suspiciously preﬁgures Lysias’
urging of the exclusion of Dionysius, a century later: cf. p. 283) – and to have
rivalled Cimon in the lavishness of his lifestyle (Plut. Them. 17. iv, 25. i, 5. iv).
Aristides is harder to place. The main tradition makes Aristides and 
Themistocles opponents, with Aristides aristocratic where Themistocles was
democratic, and upright where Themistocles was wily. But there are traces of
an alternative version in which both were on the same side – for instance the
stories of Aristides’ involvement with Themistocles’ anti-Spartan plans – and
after organising the Delian League and its ﬁrst assessment of tribute Aristides
like Themistocles disappears from prominence, though he seems to have lived
until the mid 460’s. The ostracisms of the later 480’s are best seen as a three-
cornered battle, as a result of which Xanthippus and Aristides were ostracised
but Themistocles was not; after the Persian Wars, despite the main tradition,
Aristides and Themistocles were probably on the same side, in opposition to
Cimon.
Personalities were an issue in the 470’s; attitudes to Sparta were an issue;
recent history could be slanted in different ways. But there is no good evidence
that how Athens should be governed had yet become an issue.There are stories
about Aristides – that he hushed up an oligarchic plot at the time of the battle
of Plataea; that after the war he proposed that the constitution should be made
‘common’ and ofﬁcials appointed from all Athenians (Plut. Arist. 13, 22. i): the
ﬁrst may have a basis in truth if we regard the plotters as pro-Persian rather
than oligarchic; it is hard to know what to make of the second beyond the 
fact that somebody thought it appropriate to attribute democratic sympathies
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS
33

to him. When the constitutional issue did surface, Cimon was on the anti-
democratic side and men who can be linked with Themistocles were on the 
pro-democratic – but by then Themistocles himself was no longer in Athens.
The Ostracism and Exile of Themistocles
The men who had been ostracised in the 480’s were recalled at the time of
Xerxes’ invasion: Hipparchus did not return, and was condemned as a traitor
(Lycurg. Leocrates 117), but the others did, and Aristides and Xanthippus were
generals in 479. In the 470’s the practice of ostracism was resumed: the
Alcmaeonid Megacles was ostracised a second time (cf. Lys. XIV. Alcibiades i.
39); there were some votes against Ariphron, apparently an elder brother of 
Pericles, who presumably soon died; and Themistocles, who had survived in the
480’s, was now ostracised.
As with the rebuilding of Athens’ walls, we have a story which looks as if 
it had already undergone embellishment before it was recorded by Thucydides
(I. 135. ii–138). First Themistocles was ostracised, and went to Argos 
(cf. pp. 24–5). After the downfall of Pausanias, the Spartans alleged that
Themistocles had been involved in medism with him, and persuaded Athens to
recall him to stand trial (further embellishments in the later sources include a
ﬁrst stage in which he defended himself in letters and/or was acquitted, and a 
suggestion that he should be tried not by the Athenians but by the Greeks).
Without waiting for the summons to reach Argos he ﬂed – ﬁrst to Corcyra,
off the north-west coast of Greece, of which he was a benefactor (there are 
a few other signs that he was interested in the west); when Corcyra was afraid
to harbour him, to king Admetus of the Molossi on the mainland opposite
(holding on to the king’s young son in an act of supplication). After that he
crossed northern Greece and the Aegean (where he had to avoid the Athenian
navy) to Asia, wrote to the Persian King, and, after taking time to learn ‘Persian’
(Aramaic?), went to the court and was greatly honoured. He was given 
three cities in Asia Minor, Magnesia for his bread, Myus for his sauce and
Lampsacus for his wine – a reﬂection of the Persian custom of paying subor-
dinates in kind rather than in cash – and seems actually to have lived in Mag-
nesia. Coins were issued in Magnesia bearing his name and portrait, the earliest
known portrait coins.
The downfall of Themistocles is bound up with several of the chronological
problems of the 470’s and 460’s, and a great deal of effort has been devoted to
the search for solutions. Diodorus narrates the whole story under 471/0 (XI.
54. ii–59. iv), but in this period he assigns one major story to each year and his
assignments cannot be relied on. If Aeschylus’ Persians, of 473/2, is among other
things a defence of Themistocles, defending him cannot yet have become a lost
cause; but the play could have been performed either before his ostracism or
between that and his condemnation. According to Thucydides (I. 137. iii) the
King whom he met was Artaxerxes, who had recently succeeded after the death
– in August 465 – of Xerxes. Plutarch (Them. 27. i–ii) says that some fourth-
34
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS

century writers had him meet Xerxes, the King whom he had defeated at
Salamis; but that would be so much more effective dramatically that, if it were
true, the less effective story would hardly have been invented.We should accept
that Themistocles did not arrive in Asia before c.465.
Some scholars have tried to exploit Themistocles’ ﬂight across the Aegean.
According to Thucydides (I. 137. ii) he set out in a merchant ship from Pydna
in Macedon; he was travelling incognito, but when they came close to Naxos
while the Athenians were besieging it he revealed himself to the captain and
asked to be kept safe; and he eventually reached Ephesus. Plutarch (Them. 25.
ii–26. i) claims to be following Thucydides, but takes Themistocles from Pydna
past Thasos (probably: the manuscripts are divided between Thasos and Naxos)
to Cyme. If we knew which siege Themistocles had to avoid, that would help
us to date his crossing of the Aegean – but I suspect that the two versions of
the story are rival embroideries on the fact that, when crossing the Aegean, he
had to take care not to fall into the Athenians’ hands. It will ﬁt what we can
reconstruct of Peloponnesian history if Themistocles was out of Athens by
c.470; his ostracism may well have preceded his ﬂight to Asia by several years,
and the Thasos version of the story is chronologically the more plausible – but
that does not mean that it must be true.
Themistocles was one of a series of distinguished Greeks who ended their
lives as exiles in the Persian empire. The expelled Athenian tyrant Hippias had
accompanied the Persians when they invaded Greece in 490, and so had the
deposed Spartan king Demaratus in 480; but there was never another invasion
in which Themistocles could accompany the Persians. Ironically, he was guilty
of medism after the Athenians condemned him but not, as far as we know,
before.Thucydides considered him with Pausanias to have been one of the most
distinguished Greeks of his generation (cf. p. 28).
Ephialtes’ Reform of the Areopagus
Cimon’s supremacy remained unchallenged until the war against Thasos of
465/4–463/2 (cf. pp. 19–20), at the end of which he was accused of taking bribes
not to attack Macedon. On this occasion public prosecutors were appointed:
one of them was the young Pericles, and it is alleged that he was persuaded by
Cimon’s sister Elpinice not to press the case hard (Plut. Cim. 14. iii–15. i,
Per. 10. vi). Cimon was acquitted. When Sparta asked for help against the
Messenians (cf. p. 28), he wanted to help, Ephialtes did not, and again Cimon
was successful (Plut. Cim. 16. viii–x). It was probably while he was away (cf.
Plut. Cim. 15. ii) that Ephialtes gained a winning position in Athens and enacted
his reforms. The Spartans, suspicious of their Athenian allies, sent them away;
Cimon on his return tried to reverse the reforms, but he was unsuccessful, and
was ostracised, his opponents objecting both that he was pro-Spartan, philo-
lakon, and that he was anti-democratic, misodemos (Plut. Cim. 15. iii, 17. iii, Per.
9. v), and Athens turned to an anti-Spartan foreign policy.
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS
35

This was clearly an important turning-point in Athenian history, but our
sources tell us disappointingly little about it.Thucydides mentions Cimon’s help
for Sparta and Athens’ change in foreign policy but not the internal reform.
Diodorus records the reform under the year 460/59 (XI. 77. vi): it is not his
main episode for the year, but if it comes from his chronological source that
source was on this occasion mistaken: there is no other reason to doubt the
slightly earlier date of 462/1 given by Ath. Pol.
Ath. Pol. and Plutarch seem respectively to give favourable and unfavourable
accounts of the reform:
For about seventeen years after the Persian Wars the constitution in which the
Areopagus was dominant persisted, though it gradually declined. As the masses
increased, Ephialtes son of Sophonides became champion of the people, a man
who appeared to be uncorrupt and upright in political matters. He attacked the
council of the Areopagus. First he eliminated many of its members, bringing them
to trial for their conduct in ofﬁce.Then in the archonship of Conon he took away
from the council all the accretions which gave it its guardianship of the constitu-
tion, giving some to the council of ﬁve hundred and some to the people and the
jury-courts. (Ath. Pol. 25. i–ii)
When [Cimon] sailed out on campaign again, ﬁnally the many were unleashed,
and overturned the established order of the constitution and the traditional obser-
vances which they had previously followed; and with Ephialtes as leader they took
away from the council of the Areopagus all but a few of its judgments; and, making
themselves masters of the lawcourts, they pitched the city into undiluted demo-
cracy. Pericles was already powerful and thinking on popular lines. (Plut. Cim. 15.
ii: cf. Per. 9. v)
The council of the Areopagus (named after the hill on which it met, south of
the agora and west of the acropolis) was the body of which those who had served
each year as the nine archons became members for the rest of their lives: when
Ephialtes ‘brought its members to trial for their conduct in ofﬁce’, he perhaps
prosecuted archons on their retirement, to discredit the council which they were
to join. Powers taken away from the Areopagus might well have been repre-
sented as ‘accretions’, additions to its original and proper powers, by the reform-
ers and as part of the established order by their opponents.
But what were those powers? They were clearly, at least in part, judicial; and
they gave the Areopagus a ‘guardianship of the constitution’, already alluded to
in connection with its punishment of offenders in earlier chapters of Ath. Pol.
Probably the expression referred to the Areopagus’ general position in Athens
rather than to some speciﬁc power; possibly (and this would explain the rival
campaigning slogans) the Areopagus had at times taken to guarding the con-
stitution in new ways, perhaps by instituting new judicial processes, without
being explicitly authorised to do so by a decree of the assembly.
Two powers in particular seem likely candidates for removal from the 
Areopagus by Ephialtes. Eisangelia, often translated ‘impeachment’, a procedure
36
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS

for charges of major offences against the state (treason, attempting to overthrow
the constitution), had been in the hands of the Areopagus in the time of Solon
(Ath.Pol. 8. iv) but in later Athens was dealt with by the council of ﬁve hundred,
the assembly and the jury-courts: here is a power which was taken from the
Areopagus at some time, and this may well have been that time. Athenian ofﬁ-
cials were subject to various checks on their conduct: a validation, dokimasia,
before they entered ofﬁce; a vote of conﬁdence each prytany during their term
of ofﬁce; and a ﬁnancial/general accounting, logos/euthynai, at the end of their
term.We are on less ﬁrm ground here, but there are indications that validation
and accounting procedures already existed in Athens before Ephialtes’ reforms,
and it is credible though not demonstrable that they had been in the hands 
of the Areopagus and were taken from it by Ephialtes. If this is right, the 
Areopagus will in eisangelia and in the procedures for scrutinising ofﬁcials 
previously have possessed, and now have lost, powers of considerable political
importance. It retained judicial powers in connection with homicide and
wounding, and some religious offences (Ath. Pol. 57. iii–iv, 60. ii).
Some other changes which have been suggested ought to be mentioned. By
the late ﬁfth century there existed a ‘prosecution for illegality’, graphe para-
nomon, which could be used to overturn a decree of the assembly as being either
illegal or inexpedient (ﬁrst securely attested in 415: Andoc. I. Myst. 17): it 
has been suggested that this was a democratic replacement for a right of the
Areopagus to veto decisions of the assembly, but there is no evidence that such
a right ever existed. One power was lost about this time not by the Areopagus
but by the archons. Originally they had personally decided many lawsuits; Solon
had created a right of appeal against their decisions, to a body probably called
(h)eliaia, perhaps a judicial session of the assembly (Ath.Pol. 9. i, using the word
dikasterion); by the later ﬁfth century appeal had, as it were, become automatic,
and the archon merely conducted a preliminary enquiry before referring a case
to a jury-court (dikasterion), in which he presided (but he could still impose
very small ﬁnes on his own authority). Here it is perhaps better to think of a
gradual development, as men against whom archons ruled exercised their right
of appeal increasingly often; but there may well have been legislation standar-
dising the new procedures, and it may well have been enacted about this time.
Philochorus (FGrH 328 F 64. b. a) seems to credit Ephialtes with the creation
of a board of seven law-guardians, nomophylakes: there is no other reference to
such ofﬁcials before the late fourth century, and if they existed in the century
of the Attic orators we should expect to hear of them, so probably Philochorus
was wrong or has been misreported.
As a result of Ephialtes’ reforms the council of ﬁve hundred and the jury-
courts were to become busier, and Athens’ increasingly active control of 
the Delian League was to make them busier still. In 453/2 the smaller private
lawsuits were transferred to travelling justices (cf. p. 55). It is arguable that,
although since its creation by Cleisthenes the council had comprised ﬁfty
members from each tribe, it was only after Ephialtes that the tribal contingents
acted as the prytaneis, a standing committee of the council, each taking a tenth
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS
37

of the year.There is no clear evidence for prytaneis of this kind before Ephialtes,
and the tholos, the circular building on the west side of the agora which was
used by the prytaneis, was probably built about 460.
Why should the Areopagus have been deprived of power at the end of the
460’s? Ath. Pol.’s period of domination by the Areopagus after the Persian Wars
looks like a fourth-century attempt to answer the question: the last major
change in the constitution, that of Cleisthenes, had been in a democratic direc-
tion; if in the 460’s the Areopagus needed to be reformed, there must after
Cleisthenes have been an Areopagite resurgence (Ath. Pol. 41. ii, cf. 23. i). But
that resurgence is hard to credit. More importantly, Cleisthenes had created a
political system which required and must have been eliciting a high degree of
participation by the ordinary citizens; since 487/6 the archons, who were to
become members of the Areopagus, had been appointed by lot, while increas-
ingly the elected generals were becoming the most important ofﬁcials in Athens.
As a particular provocation, it was probably the Areopagus that had condemned
Themistocles, on an eisangelia (eisangelia Craterus, FGrH 342 F 11 ~ Fornara
65. B. 11), and had acquitted Cimon, in his euthynai (euthynai Ath. Pol. 27. i).
Citizens who were ready to take more control of the city’s affairs might well ask
by what right a body of ex-archons, no longer necessarily the most respected
men in Athens, but serving for life, who were consistently taking the side of
Cimon, should enjoy such a powerful position.
Self-interest was involved, foreign policy was involved, personalities were
involved; but members of Solon’s third class, the zeugitai, stood to gain as much
as members of the fourth, the thetes, and although in general terms we may see
the inﬂuence of Athens’ growing League and of the poorer men who rowed the
ships, we should not see this speciﬁcally as a victory of the oarsmen over the
hoplites.This can, however, be seen as a deﬁning moment in Athenian history,
when a constitutional change was made on democratic principle (cf. p. 39, on
Aeschylus). Within a few years, a self-consciously democratic Athens would be
encouraging and sometimes imposing democratic constitutions in the member
states of the Delian League (cf. pp. 46–7). It is probably no accident that, soon
after this reform, Athens took to inscribing on stone decrees of the assembly,
accounts of expenditure and other public documents on an unparalleled scale:
the leaders of the new democracy seem to have believed that, to do its job pro-
perly, the demos should be kept well informed.
The reform is attributed to Ephialtes, of whom we know only that he had
commanded an expedition to the south coast of Asia Minor (Plut. Cim. 13. iv)
but is said by a late source to have been poor (Ael. V.H. XI. 9). Plutarch men-
tions Pericles as a supporter of his, and the attribution of a subsequent reform
of the Areopagus to Pericles (Ath. Pol. 27. i, with no details) is probably a
garbled version of that.When his laws were repealed by the régime of the Thirty,
in 404/3, Ath. Pol. 35. ii refers to the laws of Ephialtes and an unidentiﬁable
Archestratus. Ephialtes himself was murdered not long afterwards – by 
Aristodicus of Tanagra according to Ath. Pol. 25. iv, but it was a notoriously
unsolved crime according to Antiph.V. Herodes 68: perhaps it was assumed that
38
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS

there must have been Athenians behind Aristodicus but they were never 
identiﬁed.
Tragedy and Politics
Most surviving Athenian tragedies have plots set in the heroic past of Greece.
It has become fashionable, however, to focus on the civic aspects of the festi-
vals of Dionysus at which tragedies and comedies were performed, and on
themes in the tragedies (such as the conﬂict between family and polis, or
between divine law and man-made law) which were of contemporary concern
to citizens of a ﬁfth-century polis. An older question, but one which still needs
to be addressed, is how far particular plays are concerned with the particular
political situation at the time of their ﬁrst performance.
In fact some early tragedies took their plots from recent history. Perhaps in
493/2, when Themistocles was archon, Phrynichus produced a play on The
Capture of Miletus by Persia at the end of the Ionian Revolt, which distressed
the Athenians, who had helped the Ionians in the ﬁrst year but not afterwards
(Hdt. VI. 21. ii); and probably in 477/6, when Themistocles was his choregos
(Plut. Them. 5. v), Phrynichus produced his Phoenician Women, which is said to
have treated the recent defeat of the Persians. Those plays do not survive, but
Aeschylus’ Persians does. It was produced in 473/2, with Pericles as choregos,
and it focuses on the Persian defeat at Salamis, or rather on the receipt ﬁrst of
the news and then of King Xerxes himself at the Persian court. At one level it
is a patriotic Greek play, celebrating a Greek success; at another level it is a
patriotic Athenian play, since the Athenian navy played the largest part in the
victory. At yet another level, because it focuses on Salamis and on Themisto-
cles, it can be seen as a play in support of Themistocles and in opposition to
Cimon (cf. p. 34). Aeschylus’ Suppliant Women is perhaps to be dated 464/3,
shortly before Ephialtes’ reforms. It is set in Argos in the heroic past, but the
king of this Argos is a very unkingly king, and the play emphasises very strongly
that the decision to receive the suppliants rests not with him but with the mighty
hand of the citizen assembly lifted up to vote – demou kratousa cheir, juxtapos-
ing the two halves of the word demokratia (l. 604). We do not have to suppose
that Aeschylus was indulging in crude political propaganda, but he was at any
rate engaging sympathetically with the democratic idea, about the time when
that idea was ﬁrst being explicitly formulated.
It is therefore interesting to read that in 469/8, when the younger Sophocles
was competing, allegedly for the ﬁrst time and against Aeschylus, the archon
called on Cimon and his fellow generals to take the place of the normal judges,
and they awarded ﬁrst prize to Sophocles (Plut. Cim. 8. vii–ix). The story may
have been improved in transmission; Sophocles may have presented what were
unquestionably better plays; but it looks as if we can link Aeschylus with demo-
cracy and its supporters, in opposition to Cimon.
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS
39

Shortly after Ephialtes’ reforms, in 459/8, Aeschylus produced his Oresteian
plays. The last of them, Eumenides, is centred on the trial of Orestes by the 
Areopagus for killing his mother Clytemnestra (N.B. ll. 681–710, Athena’s
speech instituting the council). Aeschylus’ featuring the Areopagus, with a func-
tion which it retained, so soon after the reform cannot be unconnected with it;
but, while some have seen him as endorsing the reform (as we should expect
from his earlier record), others have seen him as regretting it, or at any rate
fearing trouble in the future.The play also stresses unnecessarily the friendship
between Athens and Argos, which by the time of the play had become allies.
Aeschylus himself ended his life in Sicily; but it is not certain when or why he
left Athens.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On Themistocles after the Persian Wars see W. G. Forrest, ‘Themistokles and Argos’,
CQ2 x 1960, 221–41 at 232–41; Lenardon, The Saga of Themistocles; P. J. Rhodes,‘Thucy-
dides on Pausanias and Themistocles’, Hist. xix 1970, 387–400. On ostracism the most
up-to-date catalogue of surviving ostraka is by S. Brenne, in Siewert (ed.), Ostrakismos-
Testimonien I, 43–71 (suggesting on p. 48 that Ariphron, though named after his grand-
father, may not have been the eldest son); the most comprehensive study in English,
now somewhat dated, is Thomsen, The Origin of Ostracism.
On the reforms of Ephialtes, the most recent presentation of my views is in CAH 2 v,
ch. 4. ii; the most recent presentation of the minimalist views of R. Sealey is his
‘Ephialtes, Eisangelia and the Council’, in Classical Contributions . . . M. F. McGregor,
125–34, reprinted in Rhodes (ed.), Athenian Democracy, ch. 13; see also T. E. Rihll,
‘Democracy Denied: Why Ephialtes Attacked the Areopagus’, JHS cxv 1995, 87–98.
On Athenian tragedy and politics in this period there is a convenient presentation of
older views in Podlecki, The Political Background of Aeschylean Tragedy, esp. chs. 2, 4, 5.
More recent approaches include Pelling, Literary Texts and the Greek Historian, ch. 9;
Sommerstein, Aeschylean Tragedy, ch. 12.
40
ATHENS AFTER THE PERSIAN WARS

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
460 or 459
beginning of First Peloponnesian War and Egyptian
campaign
c.457
battles of Tanagra and Oenophyta
455 or 454
end of Egyptian campaign
454/3
treasury of Delian League moved to Athens
451
ﬁve-year truce between Athens and Peloponnesians
c.449
Peace of Callias between Athens and Persia (?)
446/5
Thirty Years’ Peace between Athens and Peloponnesians
The First Peloponnesian War and the Egyptian Campaign
After the dismissal of Cimon and his hoplites (cf. p. 28), the Athenians broke
off their alliance with Sparta, and instead made alliances with enemies of
Sparta, Argos in the Peloponnese and Thessaly in the north of Greece. There
followed a period in which they accepted an invitation to take the war against
Persia to Egypt, and at the same time, in what is known as the First Pelopon-
nesian War, built up their power in mainland Greece (Thuc. I. 102. iv–112. iv).
Megara, on the Isthmus of Corinth linking the Peloponnese to central
Greece, and involved in a border dispute with Corinth, broke with Sparta and
joined Athens: Athens set an example which was to be followed in the next few
5
The Athenian Empire in
the Mid Fifth Century

years in Athens itself and in Corinth by building long walls to join Megara to
Nisaea, its harbour town on the Saronic Gulf, in a single fortiﬁed area; and
Megara’s other harbour, Pegae, gave Athens access to the Corinthian Gulf.
Athens campaigned against Argos’ enemy in the Argolid, Epidaurus (which was
supported by Corinth and Sicyon), and was defeated on land at Halieis but 
victorious in a naval battle off Cecryphalea, in the Saronic Gulf. An on-going
dispute between Athens and the island of Aegina had been settled at the time
of Xerxes’ invasion, but now the Athenians resumed the offensive, winning a
naval battle and landing on the island. Corinth sent some hoplites to support
Aegina, and also moved into the Megarid. Athens did not withdraw from
Aegina, but sent a reserve force (the oldest and youngest) to the Megarid: these
ﬁrst had the better of a closely fought battle, and a few days later, when the
Corinthians claimed victory, defeated them more decisively. Thucydides men-
tions at this point the beginning of work on the long walls linking the city of
Athens to the coast at Piraeus and Phalerum; but at least the idea and perhaps
the formal decision and the ﬁrst work should be earlier than the building of 
the long walls for Megara. Eventually Aegina submitted to Athens and joined
the Delian League: until the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War it paid 30 tal.
a year, a rate matched only by Thasos. (About the middle of the century 
the design on Aegina’s coins changed from a sea-creature, a turtle, to a land-
creature, a tortoise – see ill. 2 – but the suggestion that that is a sign of sub-
mission to the naval power of Athens is fanciful.) Corinth had supported Athens
against Aegina in the 490’s, and we have no information on it in the 470’s and
42
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
Ill. 2
Aegina: turtle (c.480) and tortoise (fourth-century) (2dr.). Ashmolean Museum,
Oxford

460’s. Presumably it was provoked by Megara’s joining Athens; while for Athens
Megara represented an important gain, providing security against attacks from
the Peloponnese. In these campaigns there is no mention of Sparta, which pre-
sumably was still kept busy by the rebels in Messenia.
Athens had not given up the war against the Persians. A League force (one
inscription, M&L 34, commemorates a Samian achievement) of two hundred
ships was sent to Cyprus, where Pausanias had campaigned in 478 (cf. p. 16),
and while there accepted an invitation to go to Egypt, where a Libyan king
called Inaros had raised a revolt against Persia, killing the satrap Achaemenes
(cf. Hdt. II. 12. iv,VII. 7). Egypt could not be represented as Greek, as Cyprus
could, but it was part of the Greeks’ world – Greeks had been there as traders
and as mercenaries for two hundred years – and could reasonably be included
in a Greek war against Persia. They got control of the Nile delta, and of 
most of the city of Memphis, and settled down to besiege the remainder. An
Athenian casualty list gives the names of men who died in six places in one
year: Cyprus, Egypt, Phoenicia; Halieis, Aegina, Megara (M&L 33 = IG i3 1147:
beginning and end Fornara 78): without it we should not have known that this
campaign embraced Phoenicia as well as Egypt. It is conceivable, but far from
certain, that a place called Dorus, said to have been assessed for tribute
(Craterus, FGrH 342 F 1), was near Mount Carmel in Palestine; and that it
was in 458 that the Persians sent Ezra to Jerusalem, perhaps in response to
Athenian activity (Ezra vii. 7–8 – but it is disputed whether Ezra was sent by
Artaxerxes I, king at this time, or Artaxerxes II or III); it is more certain that
Nehemiah was sent to Jerusalem in 445, when Egypt was still or again in touch
with Athens (Nehemiah ii. 1–8; Athens and Egypt 445/4 Philochorus, FGrH
328 F 119).
A Persian envoy called Megabazus failed to bribe the Spartans to distract
Athens by invading Attica – the ﬁrst time the Persians are known to have tried
intervening in Greece in this way. One of the alleged ﬁfth-century documents
for which we ﬁrst have evidence from the fourth century (cf. p. 15) is an Athen-
ian decree outlawing from Athens and the League Arthmius of Zelea, a Greek
city near the Propontis, for bringing Persian gold to the Peloponnese (e.g. Dem.
XIX. Embassy 271, IX. Phil. iii. 41–3, Aesch. III. Ctesiphon 258, Din. II. Aris-
togiton 24–5): if that has a basis in truth, it may belong a few years later than
this, to the time of Cimon’s return to Athens (cf. p. 45). In due course the Per-
sians sent Megabyxus to Egypt with a large army. He expelled the Greeks from
Memphis, besieged them for eighteen months in Prosopitis (the southwestern
part of the delta), and eventually drained a canal and captured them. Most of
the Greeks were killed; a relief expedition arrived in time to join in the disas-
ter; a man called Amyrtaeus, ‘king in the marshes’, held out for a while, but
Inaros was betrayed and cruciﬁed. ‘Thus the Greeks’ affairs were ruined after
six years of war’ (Thuc. I. 110. i): if we may trust Thucydides’ narrative, this
was a disaster on a very large scale, though some have used Ctesias (FGrH 688
F 14 §36 [32] ~ Fornara 72) to argue that the Greek force was much smaller
than Thucydides claims, either from the beginning or after the initial success.
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
43

The Spartans had not been roused against Athens by Persia; but in central
Greece, when Phocis invaded Doris, alleged to be the original home of the
Dorians of the Peloponnese, Sparta sent a Peloponnesian army which drove the
Phocians out of Doris. They had gone by sea, across the Corinthian Gulf; but
when they were ready to return the Athenians took advantage of their alliance
with Megara to block both that route and the land route through the Isthmus.
The Peloponnesians moved into Boeotia, and Athens sent an army (including
Thessalians – who went over to the Peloponnesians – and Argives and also
Delian League allies: M&L 35 records Argive casualties; M&L 36 ~ Fornara
80, at Olympia, commemorates Sparta’s victory over Argives, Athenians and
‘Ionians’). In a battle at Tanagra there were heavy losses on both sides, but 
the Peloponnesians did well enough to be able to return via the Isthmus.
Two months later, however, the Athenians returned, defeated the Boeotians at
Oenophyta, and gained control of much of central Greece (this is probably the
context to which an Athenian treaty with the Delphic Amphictyony, IG i3 9 ~
Fornara 82, belongs).
Thucydides mentions that some Athenians hostile to the democracy made
contact with the Peloponnesians at Tanagra. According to Plutarch (Cim. 17.
iv–vii, Per. 10. i–iii), however, the ostracised Cimon tried to rejoin the Athen-
ian army; he was rejected, but he urged his friends to ﬁght valiantly and demon-
strate their loyalty, and they did so and were killed in the battle. Plutarch and
other writers then claim that Pericles had Cimon recalled to Athens, without
waiting for the end of his ten years of ostracism (Cim. 17. viii–18. i, Per. 10. iv);
but despite their allegation the war was not ended at this point, and the early
recall of Cimon is probably a ﬁction.
An Athenian naval force under Tolmides sailed round the Peloponnese,
burned the Spartan dockyard at Gytheum (the basis for the plan [cf. p. 32]
attributed to Themistocles?), sailed into the Corinthian Gulf and won victories
there. It is probably now that the Athenians acquired Naupactus, where they
settled the Messenians allowed to leave the Peloponnese (cf. pp. 28–9; an unpub-
lished inscription shows that they shared it with the previous inhabitants). After
this, however, Athens’ expansion ran out of steam. An expedition into Thessaly,
to restore an exiled ruler called Orestes, was unsuccessful; an expedition from
Pegae into the Corinthian Gulf, commanded by Pericles, won a battle against
Sicyon, near Corinth, but failed to capture Oeniadae, on the north side of the
mouth of the Gulf. After that Thucydides moves directly to the making, three
years later, of a ﬁve years’ truce between Athens and the Peloponnesians.
If the Spartan invasion of Attica which led to the Thirty Years’ Peace of 446/5
came shortly after the expiry of that truce, the truce can be dated to 451,
and the Thessalian campaign and Pericles’ expedition to 454. Also in 451 a
thirty-year peace was made between Argos and Sparta (Thuc. V. 14. iv). The
end of the six-year Egyptian campaign, mentioned by Thucydides before those
expeditions, should be 455 or 454; its beginning should therefore be 460 
or 459; and the Athenian casualty list enables us to put the beginning of the
First Peloponnesian War in the same year. Dates of 458/7 for Tanagra
44
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY

(Theopompus FGrH 115 F 88 ~ Fornara 76) and of 456/5 for Tolmides’ expe-
dition (schol. Aeschin. II. Embassy 75 ~ Fornara 84) are compatible with that;
Diodorus narrates Tanagra under 458/7 and Oenophyta under 457/6 (XI. 80,
82. iv–83. i), and since the battles were two months apart this could be correct
(but probably by accident).
Some scholars have thought that, in addition to their combining war against
Persia with expansion in Greece, this is the time when the Athenians began
acquiring interests in the west. M&L 37 = IG i3 11 ~ Fornara 81, on the swear-
ing of oaths to an alliance with Egesta, an inland city in the west of Sicily, has
the older style of Athenian lettering (cf. p. 46), and its preamble included the
archon’s name but only the last two letters of the name were read uncontro-
versially: -on, which unfortunately is the ending of many archons’ names. Claims
to detect further letters and identify either [Ha]bron (458/7) or [Ant]iphon
(418/7) have ﬁnally been settled by the reading of [An]tiphon: there is evidence
for Athenian involvement in the west before long, but this inscription belongs
not long before Athens’ Sicilian expedition of 415, which was theoretically in
support of Egesta (cf. pp. 68–9, 132).
If he was not recalled early, Cimon will have returned to Athens in 451, and
his return may have had an effect on policy.The ﬁve-year truce was made, and
after that ‘the Athenians held off from the Greek war’, and Cimon with a League
force returned to Cyprus. Some ships went on to Egypt, where Amyrtaeus was
still holding out. The rest besieged Citium, but Cimon died and the siege was
abandoned; the Persians were defeated on both land and sea, but the League
forces then returned home.
Athens, the League and the Persians
Thucydides moves on to further events in Greece: a Sacred War for the control
of Delphi; and the revolt of Athens’ mainland possessions and the campaign
leading to the Thirty Years’ Peace (cf. pp. 51–2). For developments in the Delian
League about the middle of the century we are dependent on inscriptions, and
a few passages in the later sources.
Originally the treasury of the Delian League had been at Delos, but in 454/3
the ‘Athenian tribute lists’ begin in Athens, a numbered series of lists (lists 1–15
on one large block of stone: a long series was clearly envisaged) of 1–
60 of the
tribute, given as an offering to the treasury of Athena, calculated not on the
annual totals but on the individual payments (IG i3 259–90: extracts from 259
= list 1 M&L 39 ~ Fornara 85): there is no evidence for it, but probably an
offering had previously been given to Delian Apollo. The move is generally
attributed to Pericles (e.g. Plut. Per. 12. i), but in one text to the Samians 
(Plut. Arist. 25. iii, apparently envisaging an earlier date): after the disaster in
Egypt there may have been genuine fear of a Persian resurgence (cf. p. 43, on
Arthmius), and although the move has commonly been seen as a sign of 
Athenian imperialism it may not have appeared like that at the time. The 
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
45

advantage for historians is that, in so far as the lists are preserved or can be
restored by comparison with adjacent lists, we can see which states paid tribute
in which years, and how much they paid.
If a doctrine formulated more than a century ago could be accepted, devel-
opments in the middle of the century might also be seen in a number of decrees
of the Athenian assembly. The Athenians did not make a regular practice of
naming the archon of the year in preambles until c.420, though there are some
earlier instances, and in some cases where the archon was named the relevant
part of the text is lost or damaged (cf. p. 45, on Egesta). Often, therefore, other
ways of dating ﬁfth-century decrees have to be found: for instance, by ﬁnding
a context in which the content makes sense, or by relying on the style of let-
tering used. In the course of the century the Athenian form of some of the
letters of the Greek alphabet changed: in particular, sigma (s) from 
to S, beta
(b) and rho (r) from 
to BP, phi (ph) from  or  to F. The newer forms of
these letters can be found in dated public documents (e.g. tribute lists) before
450; older and newer forms can coexist in the same inscription; but in docu-
ments which could be dated on other grounds the old beta and phi seemed not
to be found after c.445; later than that there was one inscription with the old
sigma (IG i3 440, of 443/2), and there were two with a transitional rho (IG i3
445 and 460, both of 438/7). It therefore seemed that older forms in docu-
ments which happen not to be datable on other grounds ought not to be sig-
niﬁcantly later. For many years a campaign against this doctrine has been fought
by H. B. Mattingly, who has argued for dating after c.430 many texts which
according to the doctrine ought to be dated before c.445, and if he were right
many signs of strong imperialism would ﬁrst appear not in the time of Pericles
but in the time of Cleon. His view that old-style lettering could persist much
longer seems now to have been vindicated since others have conﬁrmed on the
stone the reading of [An]tiphon in Athens’ alliance with Egesta.This means not
that all his suggestions of lower dates are necessarily right but that they cannot
be ruled out on the ground of letter-forms and that the arguments for indi-
vidual texts must be considered individually on their merits. I shall cite in this
chapter, with due warning, texts for which I think the early date still is or could
be correct.
The early tribute lists show considerable ﬂuctuation between years: in 454/3
about 137 members paid about 350 tal. (and 18 payments from small Carian
states, totalling about 7 tal., at the beginning of the next year’s list are prob-
ably late payments for this year), in 453/2 (not counting the 18) about 144 paid,
in 452/1 about 143, in 451/0 about 152 (including the small Carian states, so
without them only about 134), in 450/49 about 163, with an appendix of late
payments and second payments from states which had not originally paid in
full. Athens seems to have had particular difﬁculties in 453, the ﬁrst year of col-
lection in Athens, and 450, but to have succeeded in exerting more pressure
(or perhaps in a few cases in converting ship-providers to tribute-payers) in 449.
A decree for Erythrae, in Asia Minor (M&L 40 = IG i3 14 ~ Fornara 71),
now known only from a printed facsimile based on a lost copy of a lost stone,
46
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY

dealt with offerings at the Athenian festival of the Panathenaea (Erythrae as 
an Ionian city in the strict sense could be represented as a colony of Athens),
made arrangements for a council of 120 appointed by lot, to be established by
episkopoi, Athenian ‘overseers’, and a phrourarchos, ‘garrison commander’, pre-
scribed for this council an oath of allegiance to the people of Erythrae, Athens
and the allies, which included undertakings not to revolt and (perhaps) not
without permission from Athens to take back those who had ﬂed to the ‘Medes’
or to exile others; anybody exiled for murder in Erythrae was to be exiled from
‘the whole Athenian alliance’; there is a reference to ‘tyrants’. It appears that
Erythrae, under a régime which could be described as a tyranny, had revolted
with Persian support; Athens had recovered control, installed a garrison, and
had sent a commission of overseers who established a democratic constitution.
The facsimile shows strongly old-style lettering; attempts to restore an archon’s
name are unsafe, but the tribute record would justify a date at the end of the
450’s: the name of Erythrae ﬁrst survives in 450/49, with the bulk of its payment
in the second instalment.
From Miletus itself a decree of uncertain date (M&L 43 ~ Fornara 66)
outlaws certain men and their descendants; a decree probably of 436/5 (Klio lii
1970, 163–73, dating it one year earlier) displays constitutional machinery on
the Athenian model. A pamphleteer mentions Miletus as a city where Athens
supported an oligarchic régime but without success ([Xen.] Ath. Pol. iii. 11).
Miletus paid tribute in 454/3 and 452/1, and is perhaps to be restored in 453/2;
the whole of its payment in 450/49 was late. It seems likely that Miletus was in
revolt c.450; there may have been a second revolt later; the democratic consti-
tution may have been imposed either c.450 or later. However, an Athenian
decree for Miletus (IG i3 21 ~ Fornara 92) which has been dated 450/49 more
probably belongs to 426/5: in that a commission of ﬁve Athenians aged over 50
(?) was to be sent to Miletus in connection with a series of trials; there was an
Athenian garrison there.
Sigeum, at the mouth of the Hellespont, was praised for its loyalty under an
archon perhaps still to be restored as that of 451/0 (IG i3 17): this suggests that
neighbours had been disloyal and/or that there had been a risk that Sigeum
would be disloyal. And the late 450’s is probably the time to which we should
assign a decree for Phaselis, on the south coast of Asia Minor (M&L 31 =
IG i3 10 ~ Fornara 68), making favourable arrangements for lawsuits involving
citizens of Athens and citizens of Phaselis.
After the death of Cimon in Cyprus c.450 regular ﬁghting against Persia
seems to have come to an end; in 447/6 Athens began an elaborate building
programme on the acropolis, which was ultimately to include a temple of
Athena Nike, ‘Victory’, and Plutarch reports complaints that tribute which
should have been spent on ﬁghting the Persians was being spent on beautify-
ing Athens (cf. pp. 62–5). This involves us in a major cluster of problems.
From the fourth century onwards everybody knew of a ‘Peace of Callias’ by
which Athens bound the Persians to keep away from the Aegean and the west
coast of Asia Minor; there was an inscribed text in Athens – but Theopompus
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
47

denounced it as a forgery because it used the Ionian version of the Greek alpha-
bet, not the local version which the Athenians used to the end of the ﬁfth
century (evidence collected Staatsverträge 152 ~ Fornara 95). But this is another
alleged ﬁfth-century document for which there is no ﬁfth-century evidence. It
is not mentioned by Herodotus (unless it lies behind his reference to Callias’
presence at Susa ‘on some other business’:VII. 151), though it would be highly
relevant to his theme of conﬂict between Greece and Persia; and it is not men-
tioned by Thucydides, though it would be highly relevant to his sketch of the
growth of Athenian power, and when Persia supports Samos against Athens (cf.
pp. 67–8) he does not suggest that a treaty is being broken. Most scholars have
been sufﬁciently impressed by the later evidence to believe in a treaty. It is clear
that the fears of the late 450’s were no more and that Athens stopped prose-
cuting the war against Persia; there may even have been some kind of under-
standing with the Persian satraps in western Asia Minor; but the formal treaty
was probably invented after 386, when the Greeks of Asia Minor had been
handed back to Persia (cf. pp. 185, 193–5), to illustrate how much more glori-
ous the past had been than the shameful present.
But if the war was, even without a treaty, at an end, what was to become of
the Delian League, which had been formed to ﬁght against the Persians? Almost
certainly, there was one year in which no tribute was collected (cf. M&L 50 ~
Fornara 95. M). Lists 1–15 (IG i3 259–72: 454/3–440/39) were inscribed on a
48
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
left-
hand
side
LIST
14
LIST
15
L
I
S
T
L
I
S
T
L
I
S
T
3
L
I
S
T
4
L
I
S
T
5
L
I
S
T
X
b
l
a
n
k
b a c k
b l a n k
L I S T  Z
L I S T  1 0
L I S T  11
L I S T  1 2
L I S T  1 3
b l a n k
1
2
LIST
Y
blank
Ill. 3
The ﬁrst stele of the Athenian tribute lists: arrangement of lists

single large block of stone, but between 5 (263: 450/49) and 10 (267: 445/4)
there seem to have been not four lists but three (cf. ills. 3 and 4: in ill. 3 these
lists are labelled X,Y and Z). The ﬁrst of these (264 = X: about 150 members
paying) was not numbered; either 7 or 8 could be restored in the second (265
=Y: about 162); 9 can probably be restored in the third (266 = Z: about 156).
Various explanations have been attempted, but the best suggestion is that in
449/8 no tribute was collected; in 448/7 collection was resumed, but met with
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
49
Ill. 4
The ﬁrst stele of the Athenian tribute lists: reconstruc-
tion of fragments, inv. nos. EM6647, 12453 and 13454. Epi-
graphical Museum, Athens. Photo: Archaeological Receipts
Fund/TAP Service, Athens

some resistance, and the hellenotamiai were not sure whether to designate the
list 6 or 7 so they omitted the number; in 447/6 collection was more effective,
and that list was designated 8 as if there had been no interruption. A decree of
Cleinias, with the newer forms of some letters but a curved upsilon (u), lays
down procedures for the collecting and sending to Athens of the tribute, which
assumes that Athenian episkopoi are widespread and threatens harsh justice in
Athens for offenders; it also regards the sending of offerings to the Panathenaea
as standard and threatens harsh justice in connection with that (M&L 46 = IG
i3 34 ~ Fornara 98). Cleinias is a common name, but a possible identiﬁcation
would be Cleinias the father of Alcibiades, who was killed at Coronea in 447/6
(cf. p. 51), so the champions of early dates placed this in 448/7; but resem-
blances to the decree about weights, measures and coinage (M&L 45 = IG i3
1453 ~ Fornara 97), for which a later date seems more probable, suggest that
this should be placed in the 420’s (cf. pp. 92–3).
There is another alleged document which may be relevant here. We know
only from Plutarch (Per. 17) of a decree proposed by Pericles, inviting all 
the Greek states to send representatives to a congress in Athens to discuss 
the rebuilding of temples destroyed by the Persians (a speciﬁcally Athenian
concern), sacriﬁces to the gods on behalf of Greece and the preservation of
peace at sea; but Sparta declined the invitation, and the congress never met.
This too has been suspected of being a later invention, but it is hard to see why
an unsuccessful invitation should have been invented. If it is authentic, Athens
will have considered expanding the Delian League into a league of all the
Greeks, and have remitted the tribute for a year while this was being planned,
but when thwarted by Sparta’s opposition will have decided to continue with
the League that it had.
The building programme on the acropolis started in 447/6, and it was alleged
that this was ﬁnanced from the tribute. A papyrus fragment of a commentary
on a passage of Demosthenes which refers to that programme (most recent
reconstruction reprinted Meiggs, The Athenian Empire, 515: Fornara 94 trans-
lates that and two earlier reconstructions) seems to refer to a proposal of 
Pericles in the archonship of Euthydemus (450/49? 431/0?) and to a sum of
5,000 talents connected with Aristides (an accumulation of unspent tribute 
collected in accordance with his assessment?).This could conceivably allude to
a decree to transfer to an Athenian treasury an accumulation of unspent tribute;
but 450/49 looks slightly early for such a decision, and the uncertainties are so
great that no theory which depended on this text could be safe.
Even though some texts formerly dated now are to be moved to the 420’s,
this appears to be a time when the nature of the Delian League was transformed
(cf. the discussion of Athenian imperialism, p. 173). The League was kept in
existence, but no longer in order to ﬁght an unending war against Persia. All
the members were required to send offerings to the Panathenaea, as if they were
colonies of Athens. Democracies led by friends of Athens could be imposed on
states which under other régimes had opposed Athens. Another treatment
meted out to troublesome states was the conﬁscation of some of their land to
50
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY

be given to Athenian settlers, who would both beneﬁt economically at the other
state’s expense and serve as an informal garrison: Diodorus (XI. 88. iii) attri-
butes settlements in Euboea and Naxos to Tolmides, who died at Coronea in
447/6. Decisions were taken for the whole League by Athens, and it is likely
that when the treasury was moved to Athens the meetings held at Delos were
discontinued (cf. p. 18).The language of the League changes: in the decree for
Erythrae we found an oath of allegiance to Erythrae, Athens and the allies, and
a reference to ‘the . . . Athenian alliance’; but there are some decrees with the
older style of lettering which refer to ‘the cities which Athens rules’ (IG i3 19,
27), and in settlements with Colophon (M&L 47 = IG i3 37 ~ Fornara 99: in
l. 49 demos, implying a democratic constitution at Colophon, or even demokra-
tia, is probably to be restored), Eretria (IG i3 39 ~ Fornara 102) and Chalcis
(M&L 52 = IG i3 40 ~ Fornara 103; the last two are still best dated 446/5, even
if the ﬁrst is later) allegiance is simply to Athens.
The Thirty Years’ Peace
After the Cypriot expedition in which Cimon died,Thucydides concentrates on
events in Greece (I. 112. v–115. i). Delphi, with the surrounding region of
Phocis, had come under Athenian control after Oenophyta (cf. p. 44). In a
Sacred War the Spartans invaded and gave control of the sanctuary to the city
of Delphi, but after they had left the Athenians invaded and restored control to
the Phocians. Plutarch (Per. 21) names Pericles as the Athenian commander; a
fragment of Philochorus (FGrH 328 F 34. b) puts the Athenian response ‘in
the third year’, and there is no reason why that should not be right. Since Athens
and Sparta did not ﬁght against each other, this will not have broken the ﬁve-
year truce.
A revolt against Athens began in Boeotia, centred on the north-western cities
of Orchomenus and Chaeronea, with support from Euboea.The Athenians sent
an army under Tolmides, which recovered Chaeronea but during its return was
attacked and defeated at Coronea, after which Athens withdrew from Boeotia
(and presumably from the rest of central Greece).This was followed by a revolt
in Euboea. Pericles took an army there, but returned on learning that Megara
also was in revolt and the Peloponnesians were about to invade Attica. The 
Peloponnesians did invade, under the Spartan king Plistoanax, but they with-
drew without advancing beyond the plain of Eleusis. Pericles then returned to
Euboea and regained control of the island, expelling the inhabitants of the
northern city of Histiaea (who had killed the crew of an Athenian ship: Plut.
Per. 23. iv). A thirty years’ peace was made between Sparta and Athens: in addi-
tion to its losses in central Greece, Athens gave up its possessions in the Isthmus
and the Peloponnese, but apart from that the division of the Greek world into
an Athenian bloc and a Spartan bloc was recognised (cf. Thuc. I. 35. ii, 40. ii;
also 144. ii). Argos, which had made a thirty-year peace with Sparta in 451 (cf.
p. 44), was well disposed to Athens but technically neutral (Paus. V. 23. iv).
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
51

From Thucydides (II. 2. i, 21. i) we can calculate that the peace was made in
446/5: the revolts of Euboea and Megara will have been in 446, that of Boeotia
late in 447 or early in 446.
It was believed both in Sparta, which exiled Plistoanax (Thuc. II. 21. i,
V. 16), and in Athens, where there was a story that Pericles included in his
accounts a large sum for ‘necessary expenses’ (Ar. Nub. 859 with schol. ~
Fornara 104, Plut. Per. 23. i–ii), that Pericles had bribed Plistoanax. All too
often in Greece when a leader failed to press an advantage it was assumed that
he must have been bribed. On this occasion, there was little likelihood that
Sparta could have taken the well-fortiﬁed city of Athens; whether or not the
deal was eased by money, there must have been an understanding that Athens
would agree to the terms of the thirty years’ peace, and, although there was
enough anger in Sparta for Plistoanax to be exiled, the peace was made. It was
not a bad deal for Athens, which did not have the manpower to hold on to
extensive mainland possessions against widespread opposition (cf. p. 140, on
Sicily) in addition to its Aegean empire; and its possession of that empire was
conﬁrmed.
Inscriptions concerned with Athens’ recovery of Euboea show it taking a
tough line: allegiance is sworn to Athens alone (cf. p. 51); Chalcis (M&L 52 =
IG i3 40 ~ Fornara 103) gave hostages; it promised to obey and to denounce
any plans for further revolt; major lawsuits were to be transferred from local 
to Athenian courts – and some landowners were exiled (Plut. Per. 23. iv).
Hestiaea was resettled by the Athenians (Theopompus FGrH 115 F 387, Diod.
Sic. XII. 22. ii; the inscription IG i3 41 is very fragmentary). There seems to
have been further trouble in Eretria a little later, resulting in the taking of
hostages in 442/1 (Hesychius, Photius, Eretriako V katlogoV). We shall see
that Athens remained unchastened, and the peace was to last only until 431
(cf. pp. 81–9).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
For general books on the Delian League see the note at the end of chapter 2.
On the background to the First Peloponnesian War see D. M. Lewis, ‘The Origins of
the First Peloponnesian War’, Classical Contributions . . . M. F. McGregor, 71–8 = his
Selected Papers in Greek and Near Eastern History, 9–21.That Athens began its own long
walls before those of Megara is argued by Salmon, Pnyx and Parthenon (forthcoming).
Against the idea that the change from turtle to tortoise coins in Aegina was imposed
by Athens see Figueira, The Power of Money, 116–27. On Dorus, Ezra and Nehemiah
see R. J. Littman, ‘Dor and the Athenian Empire’, and C. Ehrhardt, ‘Athens, Egypt,
Phoenicia, c.459–444 BC’, AJAH xv 1990 [publ. 2001], 155–76 and 177–96. On the
alleged Athenian decree against Arthmius of Zelea see Meiggs, The Athenian Empire,
508–12.
On the dating of ﬁfth-century Athenian decrees from letter-forms, against the old
orthodoxy, see a series of studies by H. B. Mattingly, beginning with ‘The Athenian
52
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY

Coinage Decree’, Hist. x 1961, 148–88; that (at pp. 5–52) and many others are col-
lected in his The Athenian Empire Restored.The most thorough defence of the old ortho-
doxy was M. B. Walbank, ‘Criteria for the Dating of Fifth-Century Attic Inscriptions’
in FroV . . . B. D. Meritt, 161–9; revised as ‘Criteria for Dating’ in his Athenian Pro-
xenies of the Fifth Century BC, ch. 2. The orthodoxy was ﬁnally undermined by work on
Athens’ decree for Egesta (IG i3 11): [Ha]bron (458/7) was suggested by A. E.
Raubitschek, ‘Athens and Halikyai’, TAPA lxxv 1944, 10–14 at 10 n. 3; [Ant]iphon
(418/7) was ﬁrst suggested by Mattingly, ‘The Growth of Athenian Imperialism’, Hist.
xii 1963, 257–73 at 268–9 (=The Athenian Empire Restored, 87–106 at 99–101), and
gained more adherents after the attempts to apply modern technology by M. H. Cham-
bers et al., ‘Athens’ Alliance with Egesta in the Year of Antiphon’, ZPE lxxxiii 1990,
38–57; the reading of [An]tiphon on the stone was ﬁnally conﬁrmed by A. P. Matthaiou,
‘per thˆV IG i3 11’, in Matthaiou (ed.), Attikaí Epigrajaí . . . Adolf Wilhelm, 99–122.
On the mid-century changes in the Delian League see in general R. Meiggs, ‘The
Crisis of Athenian Imperialism’, HSCP lxvii 1963, 1–36. Among many discussions of
the alleged Peace of Callias see H. T. Wade-Gery, ‘The Peace of Kallias’, HSCP Supp.
i 1940, 121–56 = his Essays in Greek History, 201–32 (believing); D. L. Stockton, ‘The
Peace of Callias’, Hist. viii 1959, 61–79 (disbelieving), A. J. Holladay, ‘The Détente of
Kallias?’, Hist. xxxv 1986, 503–7 = his Athens in the Fifth Century, ch. 5 (informal agree-
ment). On Pericles’ congress proposal see R. Seager, ‘The Congress Decree: Some
Doubts and a Hypothesis’, Hist. xviii 1969, 129–41 (disbelieving); G. T. Grifﬁth, ‘A
Note on Plutarch Pericles 17’, Hist. xxvii 1978, 218–19 (believing). For a new study of
Athens’ coinage decree, supporting a date in the 420’s, see the forthcoming proceed-
ings of a conference held in Oxford in 2004.
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE IN THE MID FIFTH CENTURY
53

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
462/1
Ephialtes’ reform of Areopagus
451/0
Pericles’ citizenship law
447/6
beginning of building work on acropolis
c.444/3
colony at Thurii
c.443
ostracism of Thucydides son of Melesias
438/7
prosecution of Pheidias and of Pericles
437/6
colony at Amphipolis
433/2
winding-up of building work on acropolis
The Completion of the Classical Democracy
Ephialtes’ reform, if I am right to represent it as undertaken with the deliber-
ate intention of making Athens more democratic, marks a watershed in Athens’
political development (cf. pp. 35–9). The democracy was not welcomed by all
Athenians, but it had come to stay. For one more generation, however, politi-
cal leadership remained in the hands of aristocrats: leaders of a new kind did
not emerge until the 430’s and 420’s (cf. pp. 119–22).
Ath. Pol. 26. ii–iv chronicles three changes of the 450’s. In 457/6 the archon-
ship, previously restricted to the two highest of Solon’s four property classes,
was extended to the third class, putting it on a level with other ofﬁces. At ﬁrst
6
Periclean Athens

the practice of allotment from an elected shortlist, either reintroduced after
what Solon had instituted was abandoned under the tyranny, or else introduced
for the ﬁrst time, in 487/6, was retained; some time later allotment was adopted
for the selection of the shortlist as well as for the second stage, a tenth post was
created, ‘secretary to the thesmothetai’, and one of the ten was ﬁlled from each
of the ten tribes (Ath. Pol. 8. i, 55. i). The archons were becoming less impor-
tant as the generals became more important: this will have reinforced the ten-
dency to view them as routine rather than leading ofﬁcials. 453/2 saw the revival
of an institution of the sixth-century tyrants which had been abolished on their
overthrow: travelling justices, to decide minor lawsuits (where the sum at issue
was not more than 10 dr.: Ath. Pol. 53. ii) locally. In their ﬁfth-century mani-
festation they were called dikastai kata demous, ‘deme justices’, and there were
thirty of them, perhaps one for each of the thirty trittyes of Attica. Ephialtes’
reform, the archons’ loss of direct jurisdiction, and the development of the
Delian League will all have added to the business of the courts in Athens; many
low-level disputes were local, and this will have been a sensible way of reliev-
ing the pressure.
In 451/0 we have a law attributed to Pericles, limiting Athenian citizenship
to men with an Athenian mother as well as an Athenian father (previously only
the father had to be Athenian). According to Ath. Pol. 26. iv the change was
made ‘on account of the large number of citizens’; but if, as is likely, legitimate
birth was required for citizenship, this law would tend to restrict citizens’ choice
of wives more than the number of citizen sons whom they fathered. Earlier,
mixed marriages had probably been few but distinguished (one product of such
a marriage was Pericles’ opponent Cimon – and the law was not retrospective:
he did not lose his citizenship). The development of the Delian League and of
Athens as a major city was giving more Athenians the opportunity to travel
abroad and more foreigners an incentive to visit Athens. Probably mixed mar-
riages were becoming more frequent and were causing anxiety in some circles,
and the democrats, proud of the beneﬁts associated with Athenian citizenship,
wanted to ensure that those who enjoyed them were genuine Athenians. The
law was annulled or ignored towards the end of the Peloponnesian War, when
plague and ﬁghting had seriously reduced the citizen body, but in the fourth
century it was reafﬁrmed, and a positive ban on mixed marriages was added.
Ath. Pol. 27 is a rag-bag of material on Pericles. It includes a reform of the
Areopagus (probably in fact an allusion to Ephialtes’ reform: cf. p. 38); and it
ends with his introduction of payment for serving on juries, represented as a
political gambit against Cimon, who ‘was as rich as a tyrant’ and was using 
his wealth to exercise patronage on a scale which Pericles could not match (cf.
Gorgias fr. B 20 DK ap. Plut. Cim. 10. v). In the form in which the story is
told, it is discreditable to Pericles, suggesting that he bought political support
with the state’s money since he could not afford to do so with his own; but
democrats could have respectable grounds for objecting to Cimon’s use of his
wealth, and could argue that, if institutions which were democratic on paper
were to work democratically in practice, the poorer citizens (for jury service
PERICLEAN ATHENS
55

there was an age qualiﬁcation of 30 but no property qualiﬁcation) had to be
compensated for taking time away from their own affairs for public business.
This is probably to be dated in the 450’s, when the jury-courts were becoming
more important: the story should probably not be pressed to yield the conclu-
sion that payment must have been introduced when Cimon was in Athens,
between his return from ostracism and his death. It was to be the ﬁrst of a whole
series of payments for the performance of civilian duties, made to enable the
poorer citizens to play an active part in public life: by 411 there were payments
for holding various ofﬁces and serving in the council of ﬁve hundred, and at
the beginning of the fourth century payment for attending the assembly was
added (cf. pp. 162, 262–3).The payments were not lavish: that for jury service
was 2 ob. a day at ﬁrst, increased to 3 ob. in the 420’s, about what an unskilled
worker could earn. On this as on so many matters we have very little evidence
for states other than Athens: almost certainly Athens was the ﬁrst to make such
payments; at the beginning of the fourth century members of the Boeotian
federal council received their travelling expenses (Hell. Oxy. 19. iv Chambers),
and in the late fourth century there was payment for attending the assembly at
Iasus (R&O 99).
In 445/4 Athens received a gift of grain from another Egyptian ruler, Psam-
metichus (perhaps hoping for further support against Persia). Before this was
distributed among the citizens the registers were checked, and it is alleged that
nearly 5,000 men – perhaps about 10 per cent of the total – were found to be
wrongly registered and were deleted (Philoch. FGrH 328 F 119 ~ Fornara 86,
Plut. Per. 37. iv).This probably has no connection with Pericles’ citizenship law
beyond the belief that those who were to enjoy the beneﬁts of citizenship should
be truly Athenian; it is hard to believe that so large a number should have been
deprived of citizenship without there being more trace of the upheaval, but we
have no basis on which to arrive at an alternative ﬁgure.
The Government of the Democracy
At this point it will be convenient to survey the Athenian democracy as it func-
tioned in the second half of the ﬁfth century.
Like every Greek polis, Athens was a community of politai, citizens – adult
males of Athenian descent, on their mother’s side as well as their father’s after
the enactment of Pericles’ law (cf. p. 55). The citizens could own land within
the city’s territory (as non-citizens normally could not) and take part in the
government of the city, and they had to pay taxes and ﬁght for the city (though
for rowing the navy’s ships Athens relied on paid volunteers, not all of them
citizens, rather than conscription of the poorer citizens). Citizens’ wives and
daughters played no part in public life, except in religious matters, but they
were important as transmitters of property (a woman with no brother would
commonly be married to a relative, to keep property within the family) and of
citizenship. Citizens’ sons became citizens at the age of 18. From 18 to 20 they
56
PERICLEAN ATHENS

were epheboi, ‘on the verge of adulthood’: they formed a separate category in
the army, and they had some opportunities for military training, which were to
be developed into a regular programme in the 330’s (cf. p. 341). There were
perhaps as many as 60,000 adult male citizens (some of them living in settle-
ments outside Attica) in 431. Free men who were not of Athenian descent had
no automatic right to become citizens, though they might be rewarded with 
citizenship for exceptional services to the Athenians. Any who stayed for more
than a short period were known as metics (metoikoi, ‘migrants’): they had to
pay taxes and ﬁght in the army; we can only guess at their numbers, but there
may have been as many as 10,000–15,000 adult males in 431.
It is even harder to estimate the numbers of slaves, most of whom were non-
Greek. Some were owned by the state (and some of these had administrative
duties which required literacy); most were owned by individuals, and employed
in the household, on the land or in workshops; the largest concentration,
employed in the worst conditions, was to be found in the silver mines.The sta-
tistic with the strongest claim to be taken seriously is Thucydides’ statement
that more than 20,000 deserted when the Spartans established a fort in Attica
in 413 (VII. 27. v: cf. pp. 140–1). In 431 there may have been in the region of
100,000 slaves (of both sexes), and probably only the poorest citizens and
metics would not own any.The total population of Attica may have been in the
region of 300,000–400,000. The adult male citizens were dependent on the
women, children, metics and slaves to the extent that they could not have
devoted so much time to public life if there had not been others to work for
them while they were working for the city; but most ordinary citizens, for much
of the time, had non-citizens working alongside rather than instead of them,
and the Athenian citizens were not parasitic on the non-citizens as the Spartan
citizens were parasitic on the helots.
Draco in the late seventh century and Solon in the early sixth had been 
specially appointed legislators; but after that, until the end of the ﬁfth century
legislation and decision-making generally were by decree (psephisma) of the 
citizens’ assembly (ekklesia). As in most Greek states, the assembly’s business
was prepared by a smaller body, in Athens the council (boule) of ﬁve hundred.
Athens interpreted the general principle in such a way as to limit the assem-
bly’s freedom as little as possible: the assembly could not vote on a matter unless
it had been the subject of a prior resolution by the council (probouleuma), and
put to it by the council’s standing committee, the prytaneis (Ath. Pol. 45. iv).
Occasionally an ad hoc board of syngrapheis was used to draft a decree (e.g. IG
i3 78 = M&L 73 ~ Fornara 140). An Athenian probouleuma did not have to incor-
porate a speciﬁc recommendation, though it often did so; whether it did or not,
any citizen in the assembly was then free to speak, and to propose an alterna-
tive motion or an amendment to an existing motion; and the ﬁnal decision was
made by a simple majority (voting was usually by show of hands, with the votes
assessed but not precisely counted). There were no organised political parties,
and not even a Pericles could be sure that every vote would go as he wanted
(there is an element of wishful thinking in Thucydides’ representation of Peri-
PERICLEAN ATHENS
57

clean democracy as ‘rule by the ﬁrst man’: II. 65. ix). Normally the council
could prevent a debate by refusing to refer a matter to the assembly (Hdt. IX.
5 reports an instance from 479); but in one amendment to a decree a man
requires the council to put to the assembly what he is going to draft (M&L 73
= IG i3 78 ~ Fornara 140. 59–61).
By the fourth century the assembly was holding four regular meetings in each
of the ten prytanies of the year, the periods for which one tribe’s ﬁfty repre-
sentatives in the council provided the standing committee of prytaneis (there
had perhaps been an increase from one to four in the time of Pericles); and the
council met every day except major occasions in the religious calendar. Perhaps
until the time of Ephialtes (cf. pp. 37–8), the archons presided; in the second
half of the ﬁfth century the prytaneis presided, one of their number each day
acting as chairman. For some kinds of business in the assembly a quorum was
required: in 411, when the citizen body had been reduced by plague and war
casualties and many of the survivors were away from Athens, it could be alleged
that attendance never reached 5,000 (Thuc. VIII. 72. i); but before 431 atten-
dance probably exceeded 6,000.
There were various safeguards against rash decisions: the council’s prior
deliberation and publication of the assembly’s agenda; the possibility of attack-
ing a motion and its author in a lawcourt, in a graphe paranomon (cf. p. 37).
Sometimes a major decision was spread over two days, with debate on the ﬁrst
and voting on the second – but no guarantee that the same body of men would
be present on both days (cf. p. 83). Sometimes a matter was protected by a
clause requiring a vote of immunity, so that one meeting had to vote permis-
sion for a discussion before a second could hold that discussion (cf. M&L 58
= IG i3 52 ~ Fornara 119. B. 15–19). But in a crisis the safeguards might be
suspended or overridden (cf. pp. 161, 167).
In making decisions all the citizens, or as many of them as wished and con-
veniently could, were involved together; in carrying out decisions the citizens
could not be involved together, but the ﬁfth-century democracy involved the
citizens in turn, as far as possible, rather than relying on professional adminis-
trators or experts of any kind. Administration was simpler and required less
expertise than in the modern world – there was no need to regulate broad-
casting, because there was no broadcasting; there was no need to regulate edu-
cation, because education was not regarded as the state’s concern – but funds
still had to be raised and spent for such purposes as roads, water supply, public
buildings, and the army and navy. And the state could not straightforwardly 
run a deﬁcit (though it could borrow money from its temple treasuries: cf.
pp. 91–3): it could not spend money unless it had the money, and we hear, for
instance, of occasions when the lawcourts were suspended because there was
no money to pay the jurors’ stipends (e.g. Dem. XXXIX. Boeotus i. 17, XLV.
Stephanus i. 4, cf. XXIV. Timocrates 99).
The ﬁfth-century democracy divided the work that had to be done among a
large number of ofﬁcials, commonly boards of ten, one member appointed each
year from each of the ten tribes, and not eligible for reappointment to the same
58
PERICLEAN ATHENS

position. The 2 per cent tax on imports and exports (cf. Andoc. I. Myst. 134)
will serve as an example. There were no ofﬁcials who collected the tax: inter-
ested groups of individuals submitted bids; the contract was made with the
group which offered to raise the highest sum, in the presence of the council by
the board of poletai (‘sellers’); the record was kept for the council by a public
slave. When the payment fell due it was made to another board, the apodektai
(‘receivers’), again in the presence of the council, and the record of the con-
tract was cancelled (Ath. Pol. 47. ii–48. ii). The collectors were bound to pay
the sum stipulated in the contract: if they had collected more, they retained the
surplus as their proﬁt, but if they had collected less, they had to make good the
shortfall. If they failed to pay on time, they were pursued by another board on
behalf of the council, the praktores (‘exacters’). In the ﬁfth century, the money
collected was paid into a central treasury, whose location is unknown; expen-
diture from that had to be authorised, as an individual or as a recurring item,
by the assembly, and the payments were made by another board (apparently,
owing to fear of peculation, appointed not each year but each prytany), the
kolakretai (‘ham-collectors’). In the fourth century the central treasury was
replaced by separate spending authorities (cf. p. 263).
Separate from the state’s central treasury were the temple treasuries, with
their own treasurers, the most important being the treasury of Athena, on the
acropolis; but religion was integrated with the rest of the state’s life, the appoint-
ments were state appointments, and in time of need the state could borrow
from the temple treasuries (cf. pp. 91–3). Also separate, until c.411 (cf. p. 94),
was the treasury of the Delian League, moved to Athens in 454/3, whose trea-
surers were the hellenotamiai (cf. pp. 17–18, 45).
This fragmentation, and the fact that each year nearly every ofﬁcial was new
to his job, did not make for efﬁciency; but efﬁciency was not the main objec-
tive.The jobs were simple, without great opportunities for doing good or harm,
and the record-keeping was assisted by a small number of slave clerks; the
understanding was that the average citizen should be able and should be willing
to play a part, and that the jobs should be shared equitably among those who
were willing. The scope for inefﬁciency was mitigated by the fact that many of
the ofﬁcials, while new to the current year’s job, had done other jobs in previ-
ous years; and that the whole administrative process was overseen by the council
– itself appointed by lot for one year, from the demes in proportion to their
size, and (to provide a large enough pool of candidates) with men allowed to
serve twice in their lives (at any rate from the fourth century onwards: we have
no evidence for the ﬁfth).The administrative system in turn informed the deci-
sion-making of the assembly: the council which prepared the business knew
what was happening across the whole range of Athens’ public life; and many of
the men who attended the assembly were holding some ofﬁce at the time or
had done so recently (Ath. Pol. 24. iii claims that ﬁfth-century Athens had about
700 internal ofﬁcials and [probably a different number] external).
Justice had been dispensed in early Athens by the nine archons, and by the
former archons who made up the council of the Areopagus. Prosecution was
PERICLEAN ATHENS
59

nearly always left to an individual’s initiative; but at the beginning of the sixth
century Solon had created a distinction between graphai (literally ‘writings’),
public prosecutions on charges on which any citizen could prosecute, and dikai
(the general term for ‘lawsuits’), where only the injured party or his or her family
could prosecute; and he had also provided for appeals against the archons’ ver-
dicts (Ath.Pol. 9. i). By the second half of the ﬁfth century the system of appeals
had developed into one by which the archon held a preliminary enquiry and
the case was then tried in a court over which he presided, and the judicial com-
petence of the Areopagus had been reduced (cf. pp. 36–7); while in 453/2 the
lesser dikai were entrusted to the travelling deme justices (cf. p. 55).There were
special procedures for special cases (for cases retained by the Areopagus, for
eisangeliai on charges of major offences against the state, and for procedures for
checking ofﬁcials, cf. pp. 36–7; for the summary treatment of ‘common crimi-
nals’ see Ath. Pol. 52. i); but the great majority of cases were dikai and graphai
tried in a dikasterion (‘lawcourt’) under the presidency of an archon or other
ofﬁcial. The archon presided but did not give expert guidance; there were no
professional advocates, but litigants were expected to present their own cases
(though they could employ speech-writers, and could also call on supporting
speakers); the juries were large (never smaller than 201; for major graphai 1,001
or more). No trial was allowed longer than one day.
In the modern world states’ administrative apparatuses are powerful, and it
is thought important to keep the lawcourts independent of the administration
so that they can ensure that even the state obeys the law. In Athens, and in the
Greek world generally, the administrative apparatus was weak, and it was
thought natural that the executive power of the administrative ofﬁces should be
reinforced by judicial power. Many ofﬁcials therefore presided over courts trying
charges related to their ﬁeld of administration; and the council also acquired
judicial competence in administrative matters, though it had to refer a case to
a dikasterion if it thought a heavier penalty was needed than a 500-dr. ﬁne.
The courts were thus amateur bodies representative of the polis, pronounc-
ing the will of the people without expert legal guidance; but the currently fash-
ionable view of a trial as a contest in which the courts decided on the rival
claims to the people’s favour of the opposing litigants as citizens rather than on
the formal charges made and the cases presented in support of them is mis-
leadingly one-sided. More disturbing from our perspective is the fact that 
the Athenians did not distinguish as clearly as we should wish between illegal
conduct and politically unwise or unsuccessful conduct by public ﬁgures: it was
too easily assumed that an opposing politician or an unsuccessful commander
was wilfully failing to act in the best interests of Athens, and that – since no
Athenian would do that of his own free choice – he must have been bribed to
do so. Charges like ‘deceiving the people’ (e.g. Hdt. VI. 136. ii) made it all too
easy to blur the line between illegality and political misjudgment, and active
politicians and military commanders were frequently brought before the courts.
The principal ofﬁcials of early Athens had been the nine archons, but by the
middle of the ﬁfth century they had become routine ofﬁcials (cf. pp. 38, 54–5),
60
PERICLEAN ATHENS

and, at a time when Athens was militarily powerful, the ten generals (strategoi)
were not only the commanders of the army and navy but the state’s most impor-
tant ofﬁcials. Unlike the civilian ofﬁcials, they were appointed not by allotment
but by election, and they could be re-elected indeﬁnitely – so that in this period
the citizens elected the men who became their political leaders. When the ten
generals were instituted as a regular ofﬁce, by Cleisthenes, one was appointed
from each tribe; by the second half of the fourth century the tribal basis had
been abandoned (Ath. Pol. 22. ii, 61. i); but at any rate from 441/0 (Androtion
FGrH 324 F 38 ~ Fornara 110) until the middle of the fourth century it appears
that, while one general per tribe remained the norm, at least one exception was
allowed (so that there could be two generals from one tribe and none from one
of the others). It used to be thought that this was introduced to allow for the
predominant position of Pericles, to provide one general who would rank above
the others and to give a fair chance to other members of Pericles’ tribe.
However, it has been made clear that (apart from Alcibiades in 407/6: cf.
p. 149) one general did not rank above the others, and it now seems more likely
that the intention was to provide for cases in which one tribe did not have a
strong candidate. Often, when we know of two generals from one tribe, neither
looks like an also-ran who might have been elected only in a second round of
voting; so probably in such cases a man from another tribe either offered himself
to or was approached by a tribe which lacked a strong candidate of its own, to
act as its candidate.
But generals who were elected and who could be re-elected were an excep-
tion in a system which was calculated not to create a gulf between the author-
ities and the ordinary citizens, but which (as in Arist. Pol. III. 1277 B 13–16,
VI. 1317 B 2–3) assumed that the good citizen should rule and be ruled in turn.
In practice some did avoid public life, while those who liked doing so could
hold a variety of different ofﬁces over the years; but for the system to work a
fair number had to be willing to hold ofﬁce sometimes. Jury service is repre-
sented or misrepresented in Aristophanes’ Wasps as appealing to old men who
had time on their hands and found the stipend attractive. For the assembly there
was doubtless a spectrum from those who attended regularly to those who
attended rarely if ever. At any one time only a small number of men were active
politicians who frequently proposed decrees (in the time of Pericles these would
include generals and other ofﬁce-holders, but texts of decrees identify proposers
by name without any indication of ofﬁce), but there would be a large number
of men who made a proposal once or twice in their life, perhaps when serving
in the council. It was easier to take part in public life for those who lived, or
had access to hospitality, in or near the city than for those who lived at a dis-
tance (the remotest parts of Attica were about 30 miles = 50km. from the city);
but attending the assembly could be combined with other business in the city,
and distance will have been more of a disincentive to regular political activity
than to attending the assembly on important occasions. The council, at least,
with its membership based on the demes, should not have been dominated by
a city clique (though it will inevitably have been easier for those living in or
PERICLEAN ATHENS
61

near the city to attend regularly). Similarly, the provision of stipends mitigated
but did not eliminate the fact that the rich could devote their time to public
service more easily than the poor, but that will have had more effect on the
holding of time-consuming ofﬁces (and members of the lowest property class
were still not eligible to hold ofﬁces: cf. p. 260) than on (not yet paid in the
ﬁfth century) attendance at the assembly. The demokratia of the second half of
the ﬁfth century was not totally egalitarian, but it did indeed place consider-
able power in the hands of the people, or as many of them as chose to exercise
it – and Athens’ empire meant that there were far more decisions to be made
by council and assembly, more administrative jobs to be done and positions to
be held, and more cases coming before the lawcourts than would have been the
case in an ordinary city.
I end this survey with a paragraph on ostracism, introduced by Cleisthenes
and ﬁrst used in the 480’s. Once a year the assembly decided whether to hold
an ostracism; if it chose to do so, there was no list of candidates but each voter
wrote or had written for him on a potsherd (ostrakon) the name of his preferred
victim, and if at least 6,000 votes were cast in all the man with the largest
number had to go into exile, without loss of property, for ten years. Surviving
ostraka show that large numbers of men were voted against: some no doubt
attracted a few votes because of a private grudge, but those who attracted a
large number were voted against as public ﬁgures. Ostracism was used in effect
to choose between rival political leaders, of whom the winner stayed in Athens
while the loser was removed: thus at the end of the 470’s Themistocles was
ostracised and Cimon was not, at the end of the 460’s Cimon was ostracised
and Ephialtes was not (cf. pp. 34–5). The outcome of an ostracism might be
unpredictable, and after 415, when neither Nicias nor Alcibiades was ostracised
but Hyperbolus was, ostracism was not used again (cf. pp. 156–7).
Public Buildings
The inscribed accounts of the relevant boards of overseers (epistatai) enable us
to date a major programme of work on the acropolis (see ill. 5): the Parthenon,
the temple of Athena Parthenos (‘Virgin’), was built towards the southern edge
of the plateau between 447/6 and 433/2 (on the site of a building begun perhaps
after Marathon and not resumed after the Persian Wars: a temple built in the
sixth century was nearer the centre of the acropolis) (IG i3 436–51: e.g. M&L
59 ~ Fornara 120). Attributed to the architects Callicrates and Ictinus, the
Parthenon is a masterpiece of Doric architecture, which in such respects as the
positioning of the columns departs slightly from actual regularity in order to
enhance the appearance of regularity; the sculptures included a frieze running
round the top of the cella wall, depicting a procession whose signiﬁcance con-
tinues to be disputed (most often, though not always, since J. Stuart in 1789
seen as a representation of the Panathenaic procession – but, if so, what kind
of representation?). In recent decades the Parthenon has become controversial
62
PERICLEAN ATHENS

in another way: many of its sculptures were among those acquired from the
Ottoman empire, which was not interested in caring for its Greek remains, in
and after 1801 by Lord Elgin and bought for the British Museum in 1816;
these have been particularly emphasised in arguments as to whether objects
removed from their original location, legitimately by the standards of the time
but illegitimately by the standards which would be applied to comparable
objects found nowadays, ought to be returned. The eastern chamber of the
temple housed a gold and ivory statue of Athena, by the sculptor Pheidias, who
is said to have been a friend of Pericles and the master-mind behind the whole
programme: this was made between 447/6 and 438/7 (IG i3 453–60: e.g. M&L
54 ~ Fornara 114). In 437/6 work began under Mnesicles on the new Pro-
pylaea, the entrance building at the west end of the acropolis, on an axis exactly
parallel to that of the Parthenon (but one did not then have an uninterrupted
view of the Parthenon from the Propylaea as one does now) (IG i3 462–6: e.g.
M&L 60 ~ Fornara 118. B): this was left unﬁnished on the approach of the
Peloponnesian War (cf. p. 83).
On a bastion at the south-west corner, outside the Propylaea (the symmetry
of whose design was modiﬁed to allow for it), was built a small temple of Athena
PERICLEAN ATHENS
63
A
B
C
D
E
Ill. 5
Reconstruction of the Athenian acropolis: watercolour drawing by Peter Con-
nolly. A = the Parthenon, B = the Erechtheum, C = the Propylaea, D = the statue of
Athena Promachos, E = the Temple of Athena Nike. Peter Connolly/AKG Images

Nike (‘Victory’: at the time of writing, dismantled with a view to re-restora-
tion). For this we have two inscriptions, on the front and back of the same stele
(M&L 44, 71 = IG i3 35, 36 ~ Fornara 93, 139): the ﬁrst, with no date surviv-
ing but with older-style lettering, instructs Callicrates to draw up plans and pro-
vides for the appointment of a priestess (not from a particular family but from
all Athenian women – one of the very few cases in which we can see a con-
nection between ﬁfth-century Athenian religion and the democracy); the
second, dated 424/3, arranges for the payment of the priestess’s salary. There
is argument about the dating of the ﬁrst decree and the dating of different stages
in the building work; but the temple could have been planned in the 440’s, to
celebrate victory over the Persians from Marathon onwards, even if it was not
actually built and the priestess did not take ofﬁce until later.
War against the Persians had in fact come to an end, whether its ending was
marked by a formal treaty or not (cf. pp. 47–8), and resources were now avail-
able for a programme which would celebrate victory over the Persians and the
greatness of Athens, so that according to Thucydides one would imagine from
the remains of the Athens he knew that it was even more powerful than it actu-
ally was (I. 10. ii) – but it is not likely that in 479 there had been an under-
taking to leave in ruins as a war memorial temples which the Persians had
destroyed (cf. p. 15). But on Delos, no longer the centre of the Delian League,
work on a new temple of Apollo was broken off about the middle of the century.
Plutarch devotes a substantial section of his Pericles (12–14) to this building
programme. Pericles’ opponents complained that he had taken over the funds
of the Greeks from Delos and that money contributed for ﬁghting against the
Persians was being spent on adorning Athens like a wanton woman. He replied
that Athens was giving the allies the security they were paying for, the work pro-
vided not only everlasting glory but also immediate employment for those citi-
zens who could not ﬁght [in fact Athens at this time will have been a ﬂourishing
city which did not need to create employment, and many of those employed in
this way were not Athenian citizens]; and he offered to pay for the work himself
if the assembly was not satisﬁed.The assembly gave him its enthusiastic backing
– fortunately, since the cost must have been far beyond the means of the richest
individual, though the ﬁgure of 2,000 tal. given for the Propylaea is more prob-
ably the total cost of the work on the acropolis in this period (Harp. p 101 =
Suda p 2579 proplaia tauˆta ~ Fornara 118. A). The League could have
helped indirectly to pay for the work, merely by covering the military expenses
which Athens would otherwise have had to fund itself; but it may indeed have
contributed directly: the campaigning expenses which had to be funded from
the tribute will now have been less, but the tribute was not reduced; it is pos-
sible that a papyrus fragment attests the transfer of an accumulated surplus
from League funds to Athenian funds (cf. p. 50), and it is possible that in the
440’s and 430’s unspent surpluses were transferred year by year. From the
Athenian point of view, it was important that these were public buildings,
funded not by rich individuals (cf. p. 33) but (from whatever sources) by the
state, under the supervision of publicly appointed epistatai (cf. the statue of
64
PERICLEAN ATHENS

Athena Promachos, ‘Fighting in Front’, set up towards the west end of the
acropolis before 450: IG i3 435).
There was a good deal of other building, elsewhere in Athens and in the rest
of Attica, about this time: in the mid twentieth century much of it was attribu-
ted to a single architect and assigned to the 440’s and 430’s (including the
temple of Hephaestus, formerly misidentiﬁed as the Theseum, on the west side
of the agora, and the temple of Poseidon at Sunium), but it is now thought that
the similarities are not so great as to require a single architect, and that the work
was begun earlier and continued later (cf. pp. 122–3). Two other items, attrib-
uted explicitly to Pericles, are worth mentioning: the middle wall, built between
the two original long walls linking Athens to the Piraeus, and close to the more
northerly (Plut. Per. 13. vii–viii); and the odeum, south-east of the acropolis,
next to the theatre of Dionysus, said to have been ‘many-seated and many-
columned’ (not a very practicable combination) and to have been an imitation
of the Persian King’s tent (Plut. Per. 13. ix–x) – one manifestation of the fact
that, although the Persians were the ultimate enemy, the Athenians and other
Greeks were willing to adopt Persian fashions. The harbour town of Piraeus is
said to have been laid out on a grid plan by Hippodamus of Miletus (Arist. Pol.
II. 1267 B 22–3), who worked also at the Athenian colony of Thurii in Italy (cf.
pp. 68–9).
Pericles and Others
Pericles was undoubtedly one of the leading ﬁgures in Athens from the 450’s
to his death in 429. We have noted above that he cannot within the Athenian
framework have been as powerful as Thucydides wanted his readers to think,
and some scholars have been reluctant to believe that the policies pursued by
Athens in this period were to a serious extent Pericles’ policies; but our sources
associate him with enough items in both internal and external affairs to justify
the more usual assumption that, although Pericles can never have been sure
that a particular vote in the assembly would go as he wanted, the assembly’s
votes did go as he wanted more often than not.
After the death of Cimon, leadership of the opposition to Pericles is said to
have passed to one of Cimon’s relatives,Thucydides son of Melesias (for a pos-
sible reconstruction of the relationship see ﬁg. 2).According to Plutarch,Thucy-
dides was more a man of the agora and a politician, was responsible for a
polarisation of the Athenians into democrats and oligarchs, and made his upper-
class supporters sit together in the assembly to form a more effective block. He
pressed Pericles particularly on the building programme (and threats against
Athenian offenders in some imperial decrees may suggest that he attacked other
aspects of the empire); but the assembly backed Pericles, and when an ostracism
was held it was Thucydides who was expelled (Plut. Per. 11–14). Plutarch has
tried to reconcile his differing sources by claiming that at ﬁrst Pericles was one
competing politician among several, but after Thucydides’ ostracism he was
PERICLEAN ATHENS
65

unchallenged leader and was general every year for ﬁfteen years (Per. 16. iii): it
would be dangerous to count back from his death and insist that Thucydides
must have been ostracised in 444/3, but it must have happened about that time.
Although Pericles was not himself ostracised, it is possible that an associate 
of his was: Damon, said to have been his teacher (e.g. Plut. Per. 4. i–iv; in Ath.
Pol. 27. iv and Per. 9. ii Damonides is probably an error for Damon son of
Damonides). Another man perhaps ostracised about this time was a celebrated
athlete, whose political stance if any is not known, Callias son of Didymias
([Andoc.] IV. Alcibiades 32). Comedians other than Aristophanes mocked Peri-
cles for his elongated head (a collection of quotations in Plut. Per. 3. iii–vii);
Aristophanes’ description of him as ‘the Olympian’ (Ach. 530–1) may refer to
his manner and/or to his predominant position in Athens; Eupolis long after his
death referred to him as an exceptional orator (fr. 94 Kock = 98 Edmonds =
102 Kassel & Austin, from his Demes).
After the removal of Thucydides, Pericles did not in fact have everything his
own way. Plutarch, misled by Aristophanes’ Peace (cf. pp. 84–5), links with the
outbreak of the Peloponnesian War a series of attacks which seem rather to
belong to the early 400’s (Per. 31. ii–32). Pheidias, on completing his statue of
Athena in 438/7, was accused of embezzlement and ﬂed from Athens; he
obtained a new commission, to produce a statue of Zeus at Olympia, but ended
his life in trouble there in 432/1 (cf. Philoch. FGrH 121 ~ Fornara 116. A – but
the archons’ names have been corrupted in that text and Plutarch badly garbles
the story). Pericles’ mistress, Aspasia of Miletus, was prosecuted by Hermip-
pus (or, since he was a comic poet, perhaps simply attacked in a comedy) for
impiety: since she bore Pericles a son who held ofﬁce in 410/09, the liaison
began not later than 441, and we might expect an attack when it was compar-
atively new. (According to schol. Ar. Ach. 67 ~ Fornara 111, a decree ‘con-
cerning not comedying’ was in force from 440/39 to 437/6, but we do not know
precisely what it forbade.) Diopithes, who seems to have been a religious zealot,
66
PERICLEAN ATHENS
OLORUS I 
Thracian king
MILTIADES = Hegesipyle I 
MELESIAS
CIMON 
Elpinice 
d 
d 
= 
THUCYDIDES I
opponent of Pericles
OLORUS II 
  =   
 Hegesipyle II
THUCYDIDES II
historian 
Fig. 2
Thucydides the opponent of Pericles and Thucydides the historian (relation-
ships inside the box are conjectural)

was the author of a decree making it an offence ‘not to believe in divine things
or to teach about things up in the air’, apparently aimed at views like those 
caricatured in Aristophanes’ Clouds, and said to have been aimed at another
Milesian friend of Pericles, the philosopher Anaxagoras. The evidence for
Anaxagoras’ career is very muddled, but it is possible that he was prosecuted
for impiety, possible that that happened in 437/6, and even possible that the
prosecutor was Cleon (on whom see pp. 119–21; but an alternative attribution
was to Thucydides: for both see Diog. Laert. II. 12).
Finally, Plutarch mentions a prosecution of Pericles himself. A decree pro-
posed by Dracontides required him to submit his accounts to the prytaneis and
to undergo an archaic, religious form of trial, for which Hagnon substituted an
ordinary trial in a dikasterion. The charge appears to have been ﬁnancial; we
may guess that it was connected with the charge against Pheidias, and, since
we hear no more about it, that Pericles was acquitted. If these attacks are to be
dated to the early 430’s, they cannot be linked with Thucydides, who will have
been out of Athens. In any case, attacks on Pericles’ intellectual friends are more
likely to have come from the democratic end of the spectrum: Cleon may have
been the prosecutor of Anaxagoras, and Hermippus in one of his comedies
referred to Pericles’ being attacked by Cleon (Plut. Per. 33. viii). In Aristo-
phanes’ Knights (128–49 with schol.) Cleon the ‘leather-seller’ is preceded by
two other ‘sellers’: it looks as if Cleon and men like him were already making
their presence felt in the 430’s.
However, Thucydides the historian says nothing anywhere about opposition
to Pericles, except in connection with his strategy for the Peloponnesian War
(cf. p. 113), but presents him as an unchallenged leader.
External Affairs
The one episode after the Thirty Years’ Peace which Thucydides mentions in
his survey of the growth of Athenian power is the war against Samos, in 440–439
(I. 115. ii–117). Samos and Miletus were both laying claim to Priene, on the
Asiatic mainland north of Miletus, and when Samos gained the upper hand
Miletus with the support of some dissident Samians invoked Athens. Athens
(according to Plut. Per. 24. i, 25. i, after unsuccessfully calling on the Samians
to go to arbitration) intervened in Samos, taking hostages, installing a garrison
and setting up a democracy; but fugitive Samians obtained the support of Pis-
suthnes the satrap of Sardis and regained control; Byzantium revolted against
Athens in support of Samos. Athens sent sixty ships under Pericles, and then a
further forty from Athens and twenty-ﬁve from Chios and Lesbos (it appears
that by now Samos, Lesbos and Chios were the only members of the Delian
League still contributing ships: cf. Ath.Pol. 24. ii), and they won a battle, landed
on the island and began to besiege the city. On learning that the Persians’
Phoenician ﬂeet was to come to support Samos, Pericles went with part of his
force to deal with that, and in his absence the Samians won a battle and gained
PERICLEAN ATHENS
67

control of the sea. He returned and recovered control; he received further rein-
forcements; and after a nine-month siege the Samians were defeated in another
sea-battle and surrendered. They had to demolish part of their walls, to sur-
render their ships, to give hostages and to refund Athens’ expenditure on the
war (what their obligation was after that is not certain, but they were not
assessed for tribute in the usual way). Literary texts point to a ﬁgure of 1,200
tal. (Isoc. XV. Antid. 111, Diod. Sic. XII. 28. iii, Nep. XIII. Timoth. 1. ii). An
inscription recording payments from the treasury of Athena for the war has
items totalling 1,400 tal. or slightly more (M&L 55 = IG i3 363 ~ Fornara 113);
in 434/3 a decree will note that a sum of 3,000 tal. due to the treasury of Athena
has been paid; and it is perhaps best to assume that for this war the Athenians
began the practice of borrowing from the temple treasuries, and that in 434/3
this and other loans were repaid (cf. pp. 91–3). Probably, as at the beginning
of the episode, Athens also installed a democracy (cf. p. 143; what we have of
the inscribed settlement, M&L 56 = IG i3 48 ~ Fornara 115, is too fragmentary
to decide that question, but the text seems to have been more moderate in its
language than texts of a few years earlier).
Thucydides does not mention it here, but in his account of the debate at
Athens over Corcyra in 433 (cf. p. 83) he has the Corinthians claim that in the
Peloponnesian League they had voted successfully against a proposal to support
Samos (I. 40. v): for the matter to have gone that far, Sparta must have been
in favour of supporting Samos, although that would have been a breach of the
Thirty Years’ Peace. Pissuthnes did support Samos, and that will have been a
breach of the Peace of Callias if there was one (cf. p. 48). This was a major
episode: Athens had to use very large forces; it came nearer than at any other
time to being defeated by a rebellious ally (cf. Thuc. VIII. 76. iv); the Pelo-
ponnesians might have become involved and the Persians did (enabling or
requiring Athens to show that it would still act vigorously against the Persians
if the need arose).
Scattered pieces of evidence indicate that, although the Athenians were
excluded from mainland Greece proper by the Thirty Years’ Peace, they
remained interested in expanding where they could. Thucydides does not
mention them in his account of the Pentecontaetia, though it would have
strengthened his case that the Peloponnesian War arose from Athens’ power and
Sparta’s fear of it (cf. pp. 81–2) if he had done so.
In the west, which was a potential source of grain as well as more generally
an opportunity for expansion, Athens’ decree concerning an alliance with
Egesta in Sicily is to be dated not 458/7 but 418/7 (cf. pp. 45, 132). In Italy
there were various attempts at refounding Sybaris, a city which had been
destroyed by its neighbour Croton in 510. On the last of those occasions the
Sybarites appealed to Sparta and to Athens for support and Athens responded;
in this refoundation there was trouble between the original Sybarites and the
newcomers, from which the newcomers emerged victorious; they then made a
fresh start, with the new name Thurii, and sent for more settlers from Greece.
The new Thurii had a democratic constitution, with ten tribes (one named 
68
PERICLEAN ATHENS

after Athens, the other after different Greek peoples); its laws are attributed to
Charondas (but he was a sixth-century legislator: perhaps some of his laws were
adopted in Thurii) and the philosopher Protagoras; the men in charge of the
foundation were Lampon (an associate of Pericles and a religious specialist) and
Xenocritus (Diod. Sic. XII. 9–11[–18]). Diodorus makes this (after another
western item in ch. 8) his main episode for the year 446/5, and includes more
on Thurii in his brief entries for the next two years (XII. 22, 23). The orator
Lysias is said to have been one of those who joined in the colony, in 444/3 or
443/2 ([Plut.] X Orat. 835 C–D; Dion. Hal. 453. Lys. 1), and Thucydides son
of Melesias may have gone to Thurii when he was ostracised c.444/3 (cf. Anon
Life of Thucydides 7); another famous Greek who is said to have joined the colony
is Herodotus (Arist. Rh. III. 1409 A 28): it is commonly supposed that the last
refoundation of Sybaris was in 446/5 and the new foundation of Thurii in 444/3,
though neither date is secure. Settlers came from many places, though Pelo-
ponnesians were limited to individuals and places opposed to Sparta. As his
main item for 434/3 Diodorus reports conﬂict within Thurii over who should
be regarded as the founder of the city; Delphi was consulted and ascribed the
foundation to Apollo – essentially a victory for those who did not want to be
beholden to Athens (XII. 35. i–iii); in 415–413 supporters of Athens had the
upperhand (e.g.Thuc.VI. 104. ii,VII. 57. xi), but Thurii supported Sparta after-
wards (e.g. VIII. 35. i).
It was perhaps about the same time that the Athenians were involved further
north, in a refoundation of Neapolis (Strabo 246. V. iv. 7, Lycoph. 732–7 with
schol.). In 433/2 Athens was to renew alliances with Rhegium, on the toe of Italy,
and Leontini, in Sicily (cf. pp. 83–4): the lettering would support a date in the
mid 440’s for the original alliance with Rhegium, slightly earlier for Leontini.
In the north-west of Greece (on the mainland but outside the area in which
Sparta was interested), at a date which is uncertain but could be in the early
430’s, an Athenian force under Phormio assisted in a refoundation of
Amphilochian Argos, in opposition to Corinth’s colony Ambracia (Thuc. II. 68.
ii–viii: cf. p. 102).
In the Aegean world, after the failure of earlier attempts (cf. pp. 19–20), in
437/6 the Athenians at last succeeded in establishing a colony at Amphipolis,
in an area important for timber and for silver, where the Strymon could be
crossed inland from Eïon; again the settlers were a mixture of Athenians and
non-Athenians (Thuc. IV. 102. iii, Diod. Sic. XII. 32. iii, schol. Aeschin. II.
Embassy 31 ~ Fornara 62). Hagnon was in charge of the foundation; and, unusu-
ally, he appears to have been venerated there as a hero during his lifetime (Thuc.
V. 11. i with Hornblower’s commentary). Amphipolis was to be lost by the Athe-
nians in 424/3, and it was a cause of great annoyance that they never recovered
it (cf. pp. 111–12, 114, 299–300, 313–14).
Pericles himself is said to have led an expedition to the Black Sea, founding
a colony on the south coast at Sinope (Plut. Per. 20. i–ii, cf. the casualty list IG
i3 1180); the colony at nearby Amisus (Plut. Luc. 19. vii, Strabo 547. XII. iii.
14) may belong to the same occasion, as may a colony at Astacus in the Pro-
PERICLEAN ATHENS
69

pontis, reported by Diodorus from his chronological source under 434/3 (XII.
34. v [name emended], cf. Strabo 563. XII. iv. 2). It may also have been in the
430’s that Athens ﬁrst made an alliance with the Spartocid kings of the Cim-
merian Bosporus (the Crimea): a new dynasty was founded by Spartocus I
c.438/7, and Athens made an alliance with his son Satyrus I, who succeeded
him c.433/2 (R&O 64. 20–4).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On Pericles’ citizenship law see Patterson, Pericles’ Citizenship Law of 451–50 BC; A. L.
Boegehold, ‘Perikles’ Citizenship Law of 451/0 BC’, in Boegehold and Scafuro (eds.),
Athenian Identity and Civic Ideology, 57–66. On the working of the democracy in general,
Stockton, The Classical Athenian Democracy, is concerned with the ﬁfth century and
earlier; Sinclair, Democracy and Participation in Athens, spans the late ﬁfth century and
the fourth; Hansen, The Athenian Democracy in the Age of Demosthenes, concentrates on
the fourth century but contains much that is applicable to the ﬁfth. See also Rhodes,
‘Political Activity in Classical Athens’, JHS cvi 1986, 132–44, reprinted in Rhodes (ed.),
Athenian Democracy, ch. 7 (a detailed study); ‘Who Ran Democratic Athens?’, in Polis
and Politics . . . M. H. Hansen, 465–77, reprinted in Robinson (ed.), Ancient Greek
Democracy, 201–11 (a broad-brush treatment).
On the modiﬁed system for appointing generals, K. J. Dover, ‘dkatoV atoV’, JHS
lxxx 1960, 61–77 = his The Greeks and their Legacy, 159–80, established that one general
was not superior to the other nine; on why and how the system was modiﬁed see L. G.
Mitchell, ‘A New Look at the Election of Generals at Athens’, Klio lxxxii 2000, 344–60.
For ostracism see the note at the end of chapter 4.
On all buildings in Athens Travlos, Pictorial Dictionary of Ancient Athens, is invaluable.
The most up-to-date books on the acropolis are Hurwit, The Athenian Acropolis, and The
Acropolis in the Age of Pericles; the multi-volume publication of the agora excavations
includes as vol. xiv Thompson and Wycherley, The Agora of Athens. On the temple of
Athena Nike see Mark, The Sanctuary of Athena Nike in Athens; I. M. Shear,‘The Western
Approach to the Athenian Akropolis’, JHS cxix 1999, 86–127 at 120–5. On Pericles’
odeum see M. Miller, Athens and Persia in the Fifth Century BC, ch. 9. For a general
reconsideration of the dates of ﬁfth-century buildings in Attica see M. M. Miles, ‘A
Reconstruction of the Temple of Nemesis at Rhamnous’, Hesp. lviii 1989, 131–249 at
221–35.
Against the view that all Athens’ policies were Pericles’ policies see, e.g., Gomme,
Historical Commentary on Thucydides, i. 306–7. On opposition to Pericles see, for the
440’s, H.T.Wade-Gery, ‘Thucydides Son of Melesias’, JHS lii 1932, 205–27 = his Essays
in Greek History, 239–70; A. Andrewes, ‘The Opposition to Perikles’, JHS xcviii 1978,
1–8; for the 430’s, F. J. Frost, ‘Pericles, Thucydides the Son of Melesias, and Athenian
Politics before the War’, Hist. xiii 1964, 385–99, and ‘Pericles and Dracontides’, JHS
lxxxiv 1964, 69–72; R. W. Wallace, ‘Private Lives and Public Enemies’, in Boegehold
and Scafuro (eds.), Athenian Identity and Civic Ideology, 127–55. On attempts to restrain
comedians see A. H. Sommerstein, ‘Comedy and the Unspeakable’, in Law, Rhetoric
and Comedy in Classical Athens . . . D. M. MacDowell, ch. 13.
70
PERICLEAN ATHENS

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
480
battle of Himera
478/7
death of Gelon
467
death of Hieron
466
end of Syracusan tyranny
c.446/5
last refoundation of Sybaris
c.444/3
refoundation of Sybaris as Thurii
Introduction
In Sicily Thucydides (VI. 2–5) distinguished among the native peoples between
Elymans, in the far west of the island (in particular, at Egesta), allegedly
refugees from Troy; Sicans, whom he believed to be the original inhabitants;
and Sicels, whom he believed to have arrived from Italy and to have pushed the
Sicans into the western part of the island. These lived mostly in the interior,
and by the ﬁfth century the different native peoples were still perceived as dif-
ferent; they had to some extent been hellenised, more so in the east than in the
west, and the Elymans not until the ﬁfth century; otherwise they are not
archaeologically distinguishable. The term Siceliots was used of the Greek set-
tlers who had founded cities at various sites around the coast, except in the far
west, between c.735 and c.625. There were also Phoenician settlements in the
far west: Carthage claimed Sicily in its treaty of c.509 with Rome (Polyb. III.
7
The Greeks in the West:
The Rise of Syracuse

22–3); but if the Carthaginians thought of expansion when they accepted an
invitation to intervene in a dispute among the Greeks in 480, their defeat pre-
vented it (cf. below), and after that they did not attempt it until the end of the
ﬁfth century (cf. p. 275). Similarly, in Italy the various native peoples could be
referred to collectively as Itals (most important were the Etruscans, from whom
Rome made itself independent c.509), in contrast to the Italiots, Greeks who
had occupied sites from the Bay of Naples southwards from somewhat before
750 onwards.The native Italians were not hellenised as the native Sicilians were.
From the original foundation of Greek colonies to the late sixth century 
we have references to episodes and rulers in different places but cannot put
together a connected account.That continues to be the case in the ﬁfth century
for Italy, but for Sicily we become better informed with a series of tyrants in
Gela, beginning c.505, whose growing power culminated in their acquiring
Syracuse c.485, and who became friends or enemies of other tyrants. Events
down to 480 are dealt with by Herodotus, in connection with the war which
prevented Gelon of Syracuse from helping the Greeks of Greece against the
Persians. From 480 we have Diodorus, who may have used Ephorus for the
western Greeks as for the rest of his ﬁfth- and fourth-century Greek history
(though some have thought that for western matters he used the Sicilian
Timaeus as well or instead: cf. pp. 273–4), and who on Sicily has a fair amount
of information; and, since many of Pindar’s odes were written for Sicilian
tyrants, we have them and a substantial body of material in ancient commen-
taries on them. Diodorus’ narrative dates are no more secure for the west than
for Greece, but he and Aristotle’s Politics (V. 1315 B 34–8) have regnal years for
the Syracusan tyrants, and some ﬁrm dates are given by victor lists and the
commentaries on Pindar (where there is no other dating evidence, I give
Diodorus’ dates in brackets).
After previous tyrants had made Gela, a Rhodian/Cretan colony on the south
coast, the most powerful city in the eastern part of Sicily, Gelon, the ﬁrst ruler
from what appears to have been one of the leading families of Gela, acquired
the best site, the Corinthian colony of Syracuse on the east coast, c.485. He
made that his principal city, transporting people from other cities to build it up
and leaving his brother Hieron in charge of Gela. He formed marriage alliances
with another family of tyrants, based in Acragas (west of Gela on the south
coast: it had been settled from Gela): he himself married Demarete, daughter
of the tyrant Theron, and Theron married a daughter of Gelon’s brother
Polyzelus. Opposed to this southern alliance was a northern alliance based 
on Rhegium, a Euboean colony on the toe of Italy (now controlling another
Euboean colony, originally called Zancle but whose name he had changed to
Messene, on the Sicilian side of the strait), and Himera (on the north coast of
Sicily, founded from Zancle). Anaxilas of Rhegium married a daughter of 
Terillus of Himera, and after Theron captured Himera and expelled Terillus,
and Terillus and Anaxilas successfully appealed to Carthage for support, a major
war was fought in 480. The result was a victory at Himera for the southern
alliance, and for Gelon in particular; Anaxilas was brought into the Syracusan
72
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST

orbit, and Hieron married his daughter. The tyrants were active exponents of
the aristocratic virtues: they competed successfully in the great games; they
attracted poets to their courts, in particular to celebrate their victories; they
built impressive temples to the gods.They could be referred to as monarchs in
poetry for local audiences, but in inscriptions at the major Greek sanctuaries,
with the exception of Polyzelus (below), they identiﬁed themselves simply as
(e.g.) Gelon son of Dinomenes, the Syracusan (M&L 28 ~ Fornara 54).
One earlier episode is worth mentioning here for its relevance to ﬁfth-century
history. In 510 the legendarily rich Sybaris, under the instep of Italy, was
destroyed by its neighbour Croton (both were Achaean colonies). Dorieus, half-
brother of the Spartan king Cleomenes, who avoided Sparta after Cleomenes
became king, fought on the side of Croton, and then went to north-western
Sicily, intending to found a colony there, but was defeated and killed by a com-
bination of the Phoenicians and Egesta.
Hieron and Theron
Gelon died in 478/7: according to Diodorus (XI. 38) he insisted that he should
be buried in accordance with a law forbidding elaborate funerals, but the people
gave him a worthy tomb and a hero’s cult: his victory over the Carthaginians
was an impressive achievement, and compensated for the unpopularity which
his earlier population movements had caused. Presumably Gelon’s son was 
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST
73
GELA / SYRACUSE
DINOMENES I 
GELON 
HIERON
POLYZELUS 
THRASYBULUS 
(1) = ????  
(1) = ???? 
(1) = ????
(2) = (1) Demarete
(2) = d of Anaxilas 
(2) = (2) Demarete
(3) = niece of Theron 
S
DINOMENES II
ACRAGAS
RHEGIUM
THERON 
ANAXILAS 
(1) = ???? 
(1) = ???? 
(2) = d of Polyzelus 
(2) = d of Terillus
THRASYDAEUS 
Demarete 
S  O  N  S 
d
= (3) Hieron
d
= (2) Theron
(1) = (2) Gelon 
(2) = (2) Polyzelus
Fig. 3
Tyrants of Gela/Syracuse, Acragas, Rhegium

too young to succeed: Hieron moved from Gela to rule in Syracuse; the next
brother, Polyzelus, took over the widowed Demarete, and also succeeded
Hieron in Gela. (It was Polyzelus who, after a chariot-race victory probably in
478 or 474, dedicated the monument at Delphi from which the bronze chari-
oteer survives – cf. ill. 6; whereas Gelon and Hieron dedicated simply as indi-
viduals, the original version of Polyzelus’ epigram described him as ‘lord of
Gela’, but that was later replaced by a different text [SIG3 35. D; recent dis-
cussions summarised SEG xl 427].)
74
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST
Ill. 6
Polyzelus’ bronze charioteer
at Delphi. Erich Lessing/AKG Images

Before long, Polyzelus was seen by Hieron as a rival to be eliminated. An
opportunity was provided when men trying to refound Sybaris, besieged by
Croton, appealed for help to Hieron. Hieron sent Polyzelus with a force of 
mercenaries, hoping that he would be killed either by Croton or by the mer-
cenaries. We have differing accounts of what then happened. According to
Diodorus, Polyzelus refused to go and ﬂed to Acragas; war between Acragas
and Syracuse seemed likely, but was avoided when envoys from Himera
protested to Hieron against the rule of Theron’s son Thrasydaeus, but Hieron
betrayed the envoys to Theron, who then arranged a reconciliation between
Hieron and Polyzelus. According to Timaeus, Polyzelus did go to Sybaris but
was successful and was not killed, and he ﬂed to Acragas later when accused
of plotting revolution;Theron marched out against Syracuse, and war was pre-
vented by the mediation of the poet Simonides (Diod. Sic. XI. 48. iii–viii, 49.
iii [476/5]; Timaeus FGrH 566 F 93. b ap. schol. Pind. Ol. ii. 15 [29]).
While Theron built up his power in the west of the island (Paus. V. 25. v
reports a victory over Motya, and coins of Motya and Egesta show the inﬂu-
ence of Acragas), Hieron took an interest in Italy. He prevented Anaxilas of
Rhegium from making war on neighbouring Locri (Pind. Pyth. ii. 18–20 with
schol. [36–8]). Anaxilas had fortiﬁed the straits against Etruscan raiders (Strabo
256–7. VI. i. 5); and Hieron responded to an appeal from Cumae for support
against the Etruscans, who were perhaps in alliance with the Carthaginians, and
won a great victory (Diod. Sic. XI. 51 [474/3]; Pind. Pyth. i. 71–5 with schol.
71 [137]; dedication of bronze helmets at Olympia, in the name of ‘Hieron son
of Dinomenes and the Syracusans’, M&L 29 ~ Fornara 64). Presumably after
that, Syracuse established a colony on the island of Pithecusae (Strabo 248. V.
iv. 9). In Sicily, Hieron indulged in further population movement: the inhabi-
tants of Naxos and Catana were transported south to Leontini; and in 476
Catana had its territory enlarged and was refounded with new settlers as Aetna
– to be a kingdom for Hieron’s son Dinomenes, at ﬁrst under the guardianship
of Chromius, a brother-in-law of Gelon (Diod. Sic. XI. 49. i–ii; schol. Pind.
Nem. i. inscr.; Strabo 268. VI. ii. 3). When Dinomenes was proclaimed as king,
in 470, Pindar wrote Pythian i for the occasion, and Aeschylus wrote the tragedy
(not now extant) Women of Aetna (among other poets who visited Hieron’s court
are Simonides [cf. above] and Bacchylides, and we hear of two Syracusan poets,
Epicharmus and Phormus).
But by the end of the 470’s the tyrants were on their way out. In Acragas the
popular Theron died c.472. Thrasydaeus, who had already incurred unpopu-
larity in Himera, moved to Acragas and made himself unpopular there; accord-
ing to Diodorus he planned to attack Syracuse, but Hieron made the ﬁrst move,
and attacked Acragas and defeated it (perhaps 470).Thrasydaeus ﬂed to Megara
in Greece, where he was condemned to death; Acragas, and presumably
Himera, acquired constitutional government (Diodorus says ‘democracy’) and
treaties with Hieron (XI. 53 [472/1]). Anaxilas of Rhegium died in the 470’s,
leaving his sons under a regent called Micythus, who founded a colony at Pyxus,
on the west coast of Italy (XI. 59. iv [471/0]). Later Hieron encouraged the
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST
75

sons to take over: according to Herodotus, Micythus was expelled; Diodorus
has a story that he behaved so unselﬁshly that they asked him to continue, but
he insisted on resigning, and spent the rest of his life in Tegea, in Greece, in
high repute (Hdt. VII. 170. iii–iv; Diod. Sic. XI. 52, 66. i–iii [476/5, 467/6]).
Hieron himself, after several years of illness (cf. Pind. Pyth. ii, cf. Pyth. i. 46
sqq. with schol. 46 [89]), died in 467, at Aetna, where he was honoured as
founding hero. Our sources now say nothing of Polyzelus.Thrasybulus, the last
brother, took over: Hieron had been oppressive (Arist. Pol. V. 1313 B 11–16
refers to his spies), but Thrasybulus was much worse; the whole city united
against him (at ﬁrst, ostensibly in support of Gelon’s son: cf. Arist. Pol. V. 1312
B 9–16); there was a civil war, in which he relied on Aetna and his mercena-
ries, while the Syracusans gained help from many cities, Sicel as well as Greek.
Thrasybulus was defeated at sea and on land, and, within a year of his succes-
sion (466), he had resigned the tyranny and retired to Locri (Diod. Sic. XI. 66.
iv, 67–8 [467/6, 466/5]).
Finally, Rhegium and Messene expelled the sons of Anaxilas (Diod. Sic. XI.
76. v [461/0]).
Sicily after the Tyrants
After the departure of Thrasybulus the Syracusans established ‘democracy’,
instituted a cult of Zeus Eleutherios (‘of Freedom’) and liberated other cities.
Diodorus claims that this was a time of peace and prosperity (XI. 68. v–vi, 72.
i–ii). For ‘democracy’ in Syracuse cf. Arist. Pol. V. 1316 A 29–33; and Syracuse
was certainly democratic by 415 (cf. pp. 133–4). Temples in Himera, Syracuse
(Athena) and Gela (Temple C = Athena), begun after the victory of 480, had
probably been completed by the end of the Dinomenid tyranny. In Acragas work
on Sicily’s largest temple, the temple of Olympian Zeus, begun before 500, was
perhaps interrupted for a while and then resumed; less ambitious temples were
built later, beginning with Hera Lakinia in the 450’s. In the major cities the
coin types had not been changed by the tyrants, and were not changed on the
overthrow of the tyrants (the 10-drachma silver coins of Syracuse – cf. ill. 7 –
formerly identiﬁed with the gold coins mentioned by Diodorus after the victory
at Himera [XI. 26. iii], are now dated after the tyranny: a suggestion that they
were actually named not after Demarete but after the goddess Demeter could
still be correct with this dating); but many of the smaller cities adopted new
types after the return of their original populations. Rhegium changed from the
most recent designs (a mule-car on the obverse and a hare on the reverse) to
an earlier obverse used by Anaxilas (a lion’s head) and a new reverse (perhaps
the legendary founder, Jocastus); while Messene, after a period of uncertainty
which saw the issuing of gold coins, and some coins using the old name Zancle,
continued with Anaxilas’ later designs, but changed its spelling to the Doric
Messana.
76
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST

In terms of population, however, there was considerable upheaval: those who
had been transported by the tyrants from one city to another wanted to return
to their original homes and recover their property there; while the tyrants’ mer-
cenaries found themselves generally unwelcome, but were eventually allowed to
settle in Messana (which may be the occasion for the change to the Doric
spelling). Camarina, which had been destroyed by Gelon, was refounded by
Gela; Catana was reoccupied by its original population (cf. below), and Aetna
migrated to the inland Sicel site of Inessa (Diod. Sic. XI. 72. iii–73 [463/2], 76
[461/0], cf. Thuc. VI. 5. iii, Arist. Pol. V. 1303 A 38–B 2, FGrH 577 F 1).
Some years later, Diodorus reports that the enrolment of citizens and dis-
tribution of land was leading to strife and upheaval, particularly in Syracuse.
There, when a man called Tyndarides tried to make himself tyrant, he and his
supporters were lynched; after further attempts at tyranny the Syracusans insti-
tuted ‘petalism’ (voting with olive leaves), a device similar to the Athenians’
ostracism for removing citizens perceived as dangerous; after a few petalisms
the leading citizens thought it safer to keep out of politics, and there was a risk
of a populist revolution, until petalism was abolished (XI. 86. iii–87 [454/3]).
It appears that the popular leaders of this period may have been the ﬁrst to cul-
tivate a sophisticated rhetorical style (Diod. Sic. XI. 87. v, cf. Cic. Brut. 12). In
Acragas the philosopher Empedocles is said to have been inﬂuential: reliable
details are hard to come by, but he may have reconstituted the council of one
thousand to make it more democratic; it is said that he refused an offer of king-
ship, but eventually he was forced to leave the city and ﬂed to the Peloponnese
(Diog. Laert. VIII. 63, 66, 71, cf. Plut. Adv. Col. 1126 B).
These disturbances provided the opportunity for the rise of the only Sicel
leader who is named by our Greek sources, Ducetius. He ﬁrst appears joining
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST
77
Ill. 7
Syracuse: ‘Demareteum’ (c.460; 10dr.). Ashmolean Museum, Oxford

the recently liberated Syracuse in attacking Aetna–Catana, to allow the origi-
nal population to return (Diod. Sic. XI. 76. iii [461/0]: cf. above); he founded
a city at Menaenum, west of Leontini, and captured Morgantina, further inland
(XI. 78. v [459/8]); he united all the Sicel cities except Hybla, in the south,
under his leadership, and moved Menae (= Menaenum?) to a new site, refound-
ing it as Palice (XI. 88. vi–90. ii [453/2]). Next he captured Aetna–Inessa and
killed its ruler, perhaps still Hieron’s son Dinomenes. He invaded the territory
of Acragas, capturing the fort of Motyum and defeating the Acragantine and
Syracusan forces sent against him. After a winter during which they condemned
their general, the Syracusans sent a fresh expedition; Ducetius was defeated in
a major battle, and most of his allies deserted him; and Acragas recaptured
Motyum. Ducetius then ﬂed to Syracuse as a suppliant, and the assembly,
deciding that the rights of suppliants must be respected, sent him to Corinth,
in Greece, with a maintenance grant (XI. 91–2 [451/0]). But that decision was
made without consultation of Acragas: Acragas declared war on Syracuse, and
Ducetius took advantage of that to return to Sicily, with an oracle for the foun-
dation of a colony at Kale Akte, on the north coast. Syracuse defeated Acragas
(XII. 8 [446/5]); Ducetius built up Kale Akte, and might have used that as a
base for renewed expansion, but he died (XII. 29. i [440/39]).
The defeat of Acragas left Syracuse without a rival as the most powerful
Greek city in Sicily (XII. 26. ii–iv [442/1]). It gradually gained control of Sicel
cities in the interior, ending perhaps by capturing and destroying Palice (XII.
29. ii–iv [440/39]: Trinakie in the manuscripts at this point, Pikenous at the cor-
responding point in an epitome): Diodorus claims that it came to control all
the Sicel cities, but Thucydides suggests that some of the cities either soon
defected or were never conquered (Thuc. III. 103. i, IV. 25. ix, VI. 88. iv).
Diodorus’ last report on Sicily before the Peloponnesian War is that Syracuse
built 100 triremes, strengthened its other forces and levied more tribute from
the Sicels (XII. 30. i [439/8]) – but he goes on to mention, several years too
early, Athens’ intervention in the war between Corinth and Corcyra (cf. p. 82),
and there is no sign of that large navy when Athens sends an expedition to Sicily
in 427 (cf. pp. 103–4), so he may here be anticipating a later development.
The cities in the west of the island had gone their own way, and their temples
show stylistic inﬂuence from Athens rather than from the other Siceliot cities.
Selinus, on the south coast (colonised from Megara Hyblaea, itself destroyed
by Gelon), was busy building temples from the mid sixth century to the mid
ﬁfth: the temple of Hera and temple G are dated to the early ﬁfth century, and
temples A and O to the mid ﬁfth century. At Elyman Egesta, to the north, a
temple of which fragments survive was built about the 450’s, and the temple
which survives substantially complete towards the end of the century. The
inscription concerning Egesta’s alliance with Athens is to be dated not 458/7
but 418/7 (cf. pp. 45, 132); under 454/3 Diodorus records a war between Egesta
and ‘Lilybaeum’ – but Lilybaeum did not yet exist, and both Halicyae and
Selinus have been conjectured (XI. 86. ii); Athens made an alliance with 
Halicyae, perhaps in the late 430’s (cf. pp. 79, 132).
78
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST

Italy
In the earlier part of this period the Greeks in Italy are mentioned largely for
the tyranny of Anaxilas in Rhegium, and for Hieron’s victory over the Etruscans
in 474 (cf. p. 75). On the coast south of the bay of Naples Posidonia (Paestum,
founded from Sybaris) was a prosperous city which built several temples
between the mid sixth century and the mid ﬁfth: the so-called temple of Posei-
don, in fact more probably Zeus, has stylistic afﬁnities with temples in Himera
and Syracuse and was perhaps built after 474.
Under the instep of Italy Sybaris had been destroyed by Croton in 510 (cf.
p. 73), but coins show that the site continued to be occupied as a dependency
of Croton. There were various attempts at refounding an independent Sybaris:
ﬁrst in the 470’s, when Hieron may have sent Polyzelus to support the Sybarites
(cf. p. 75); a second time in 453/2, under a man called Thessalus, issuing coins
based on those of Sybaris’ colonies Laus and Posidonia (Diod. Sic. XI. 90. iii–iv,
cf. XII. 10. ii, Hdt. VI. 21. i). Perhaps in 446/5 (on the chronology and the
Athenian dimension cf. pp. 68–9) another attempt was made, after an appeal
to Sparta and Athens had elicited support from Athens: the coins show that at
this stage the city still used the name Sybaris. But the original Sybarites tried
to monopolise the best land and the major ofﬁces, and this led to ﬁghting in
which the newcomers were victorious. They then brought in further settlers
from Athens and elsewhere, and, perhaps in 444/3, made a fresh start with the
new name Thurii (Diod. Sic. XII. 9–11[–18], cf. Arist. Pol. V. 1303 A 31–3,
Strabo 263.VI. i. 13). Some of the original Sybarites settled at Sybaris-on-the-
Traes, to the south-east, where they issued coins continuing the designs of Posi-
donia used in 453/2, but after a while they succumbed to the neighbouring
Bruttii (Diod. Sic. XII. 22. i [445/4]).
There are signs of Athens’ growing interest in the west in the mid ﬁfth
century (cf. pp. 68–9). In the 440’s it responded to the invitations to the last
foundation of Sybaris and to its refoundation as Thurii; perhaps about the same
time it took part in a refoundation of Neapolis. In 433/2 Athens was to renew
alliances with Rhegium and Leontini: the lettering would support a date in the
mid 440’s for the original alliance with Rhegium, slightly earlier for Leontini;
and it was perhaps in the late 430’s that Athens made an alliance with Halicyae
near Egesta. But Thurii did not remain within the Athenian orbit: Diodorus
reports conﬂict among the settlers over who should be regarded as the founder
of the city; Delphi was consulted and ascribed the foundation to Apollo – essen-
tially a victory for the opponents of Athens (XII. 35. i–iii [434/3]).
There is a wider Italiot context for the foundation of Thurii, whose details
are regrettably uncertain. It is claimed that disciples of the philosopher Pythago-
ras (who migrated from Samos to Croton in the late sixth century, but ended
his life at Metapontium) were for a time inﬂuential, and made Croton the most
powerful of the Italiot cities; that there was later a period of disturbances in
which the meeting-houses (synedria) of the Pythagoreans were burned; the
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST
79

Achaeans were brought in as mediators; and that, some time before 417,
Croton, ‘Sybaris’ and Caulonia joined in a league of Zeus Homarios modelled
on the Achaean League (Polyb. II. 39. i–vi, cf. Iambl. V. P. 249, 255). Thurii is
more likely than any of the communities of Sybarites to be the ‘Sybaris’ which
joined in a league that included Croton. The Sabellian tribes were at this time
expanding from the interior of southern Italy and putting pressure on the
Greeks, and the new Thurii may have been welcome as a contributor to resist-
ing that pressure: there are stories of Thurii’s ﬁghting under the Spartan exile
Cleandridas against the Lucanians (Polyaenus, Strat. II. 10).
Thurii came into conﬂict with Sparta’s colony Taras over a settlement at Siris
to which they both laid claim, and Thurii’s forces were again commanded by
Cleandridas: Taras was ﬁnally successful, and moved the settlement to a new
site with the new name Heraclea (Diod. Sic. XII. 23. ii [444/3], 36. iv [433/2],
Strabo 264.VI. i. 14); it dedicated spear-butts at Olympia to commemorate its
victory (M&L 57 ~ Fornara 112).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
Freeman, History of Sicily, is a detailed account based on the literary sources (the earlier
part of the ﬁfth century, vol. ii; the period of the Peloponnesian War, vol. iii; from the
end of the ﬁfth century to the beginning of the third, reconstructed by A. J. Evans, vol.
iv). For a shorter but more up-to-date account see Finley, Ancient Sicily.
On the titles of the tyrants in poetry and in inscriptions see S. E. Harrell, ‘King or
Private Citizen: Fifth-Century Sicilian Tyrants at Olympia and Delphi’, Mnem.4 lv 2002,
439–64. On the dates of temples see Mertens, Der Tempel von Segesta, 186–205. On the
Syracusan ‘Demareteum’ see R. T. Williams, ‘The Demareteion Reconsidered’, NC7 xii
1972, 1–11 (not Demarete but Demeter); C. M. Kraay, ‘The Demareteion Reconsid-
ered: A Reply’, NC7 xii 1972, 13–24 (10-dr. silver coins c.465); N. K. Rutter, ‘The Myth
of the “Damareteion”’, Chiron xii 1993, 171–88 (hellenistic invention).
For doubts about Syracuse’s alleged new ships of 439/8 see Cawkwell, Thucydides and
the Peloponnesian War, 79, 86.
On Sybaris and Thurii, emphasising the Italian rather than the Athenian background,
see N. K. Rutter, ‘Diodorus and the Foundation of Thurii’, Hist. xxii 1973, 155–76.
80
THE GREEKS IN THE WEST

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
435
battle of Leucimme
433
battle of Sybota
432
battle at Potidaea and beginning of siege
432
Sparta and Peloponnesian League decide on war
431
beginning of Peloponnesian War
Thucydides’ Explanation
After devoting the opening chapters of his history to arguing that the Pelopon-
nesian War, fought between Sparta and Athens from 431 to 404, was greater
than any previous war, Thucydides writes:
The Athenians and Peloponnesians began it after breaking the Thirty Years’Treaty
which they had made after the capture of Euboea. As to why they broke the treaty,
I have ﬁrst written down the grievances (aitiai) and disputes (diaphorai), so that
no one should ever have to enquire from what origin so great a war broke out
among the Greeks. The truest reason (prophasis), but most concealed in word, I
believe to be that the Athenians became powerful, ﬁlled the Spartans with fear,
and forced them to go to war. But the following were the publicly mentioned griev-
ances on each side, as a result of which they broke the treaty and embarked on
the war. (I. 23. iv–vi)
8
The Peloponnesian War:
Origins

He then gives a narrative of two episodes, concerning Corcyra and Potidaea,
which served as grievances (I. 24–66); and of an assembly in Sparta at which
Corinth and others urged the Spartans to act, other grievances, concerning
Aegina and Megara, were mentioned, an Athenian delegation warned Sparta
not to go to war lightly, and the Spartans did decide that Athens was in the
wrong and they should go to war. Thucydides ends that section by repeating
that Sparta was moved more by fear of Athens’ growing power than by the allies’
complaints (I. 67–88); and he then, to justify this view, gives his account of the
growth of Athens’ power during the Pentecontaetia, the (nearly) ﬁfty years since
the Persian Wars (I. 89–118. ii). After that he resumes his narrative, with a con-
gress of the Peloponnesian League, which approves Sparta’s decision to go to
war; with an exchange of propaganda, in which Sparta begins with particular
grievances but ends by demanding that Athens should restore their freedom to
the Greeks; and with a speech by Pericles in Athens claiming that Athens was
well prepared, and that if it were to give way on the grievances Sparta would
come back with others (I. 118. iii–146).
Despite Thucydides’ hopes, subsequent generations have not accepted his
account as deﬁnitive, but have been provoked to ask a variety of questions: in
particular, what were his intentions in operating with two kinds of explanation?
why, among the four grievances, did he single out two for detailed treatment
and say so little about the others? what messages did he mean to convey about
the responsibility of Athens, Sparta and Corinth for the war, and should we
agree with him? It will be best to look in more detail at what he reports, and
then to return to the broader questions.
The Grievances and Disputes
Corcyra (I. 24–55) was a colony of Corinth on an island off the north-west
coast of Greece, and Epidamnus, on the mainland further north, was a joint
colony of Corcyra and Corinth. When the democrats of Epidamnus expelled
the oligarchs, and the oligarchs joined with the neighbouring Taulantians in
attacking Epidamnus, the democrats appealed to Corcyra, but Corcyra (which,
though comparatively democratic, had stronger links with the oligarchs) refused
to help; and the democrats then appealed to Corinth. Fifth-century Corinth
liked to maintain close and friendly links with its colonies, but had not suc-
ceeded with Corcyra, so it was glad to respond. Corinth sent fresh settlers to
Epidamnus; Corcyra besieged the city; after Corcyra defeated the Corinthians
in a naval battle off Leucimme, at the south end of Corcyra, Epidamnus capitu-
lated to Corcyra. If we count back in Thucydides from the beginning of the
Peloponnesian War, we obtain dates of 435 for Leucimme and the surrender of
Epidamnus, and, supported by inscriptions, of 433 for what followed (but
Diodorus narrates this affair under 439/8 and 436/5).
Each side devoted 434 to further preparations; in the spring of 433 a depu-
tation from each went to Athens, and Thucydides gives a debate. The Cor-
82
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS

cyraeans claim that, as they were not listed as allies of either side in the Thirty
Years’ Peace, they are entitled to join either side now; and that Athens, Corinth
and Corcyra have the three best navies in Greece, and since war between Athens
and the Peloponnesians is brewing it will be to Athens’ advantage to add
Corcyra’s navy to its own. The Corinthians reply that Corcyra’s previous neu-
trality is a sign not of virtue but of wickedness, that they should be free to deal
with Corcyra as they had supported leaving Athens free to deal with Samos (cf.
p. 68 – but the cases were not parallel, since Samos was recognised in the Thirty
Years’ Peace as a member of the Athenian bloc), and that the coming war is
‘still uncertain’.The Athenians devoted two days to the debate: on the ﬁrst they
listened to the speeches, and were inclined to favour Corinth, but on the 
second day they decided to make a purely defensive alliance with Corcyra.
(Thucydides was probably present, and must have known more than he tells
us: which Athenians changed their minds? and why? and what was Pericles’
position? Probably Pericles wanted to support Corcyra, as Plutarch claims [Per.
29. i], but Thucydides says nothing that would detract from his view of the
Athenians’ unanimously following Pericles’ lead.) In making a purely defensive
alliance the Athenians were hoping to keep their hands clean even if they were
drawn into ﬁghting against Corinth; and when they intervened in the battle
(below) they insisted that they were not breaking the Thirty Years’ Peace.
Athens originally sent just ten ships, under three generals one of whom was
Cimon’s son Lacedaemonius (the same generals are named in the ﬁrst half of
M&L 61 = IG i3 364 ~ Fornara 126, as drawing money for their expedition
from the treasury of Athena): Plutarch regards his appointment as a move by
Pericles to humiliate him, but more probably, if he had inherited his father’s
opposition to Pericles (which is not certain), the appointment results from the
strength of Pericles’ opponents in the assembly. In a battle at Sybota, between
the south end of Corcyra and the mainland, the Corinthians were getting the
upper hand and the Athenians had to intervene to prevent them from landing
on the island. By then Athens had decided to send a further twenty ships (on
the generals there is a disagreement between I. 51. iv and the second half of
the inscription, and Thucydides is probably to be convicted of an error), and
on their arrival the Corinthians withdrew.
Thucydides comments on the Athenians’ decision to support Corcyra that
they really were expecting a war with the Peloponnesians (I. 44. ii). Probably
in 434/3, so at the same time as or slightly before the alliance with Corcyra,
by the decrees of Callias the Athenians put their ﬁnances in good order, paying
outstanding debts to the sacred treasuries, combining a number of small trea-
suries in a treasury of the Other Gods, winding up the building programme 
on the acropolis (as a result of which the Propylaea was left unﬁnished), and
resolving to spend further surpluses on the dockyards and walls (M&L 58 = IG
i3 52 ~ Fornara 119: cf. pp. 91–2). In 433/2 they renewed permanent alliances
which they had made earlier with Rhegium and Leontini (M&L 63–4 = IG i3
53–4 ~ Fornara 124–5, where the original preambles have been replaced with
preambles naming that year’s archon). It does indeed appear that as early as
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS
83

433 the Athenians were envisaging a major war to which the west would be 
relevant.
The second grievance reported by Thucydides concerns Potidaea (I. 56–66),
on the western prong of Chalcidice, a tribute-paying member of the Delian
League but a colony of Corinth. He writes as if the Athenians decided to put
pressure on Potidaea because of its Corinthian connections, but he goes on to
show that they were also worried about the inﬂuence in the region of king
Perdiccas of Macedon (whose attitude to Athens ﬂuctuated but was currently
hostile), and Potidaea’s tribute record suggests that the pressure had begun
some years earlier. Athens ordered Potidaea to demolish part of its city wall,
send hostages and stop receiving the annual magistrates from Corinth whom
(remarkably) it was still receiving. Potidaea protested to Athens, in vain, and
appealed to Sparta, which promised to invade Attica if Athens attacked Poti-
daea (but did not do so until the war proper began in 431). In 432 (but
Diodorus’ date is 435/4), after paying their tribute in the spring, Potidaea and
its neighbours revolted, many coming together in nearby Olynthus; Athens sent
two expeditions, which went ﬁrst to Macedon and then to Potidaea. This time
it was Corinth which tried to keep its hands clean, sending not an ofﬁcial force
but a body of volunteers and mercenaries (cf. ‘privately’ in I. 66). There was a
battle, in which the Athenians were victorious; they settled down to an expen-
sive siege, which lasted until Potidaea capitulated in 430/29 (cf. p. 111).
Next Thucydides reports a Spartan assembly (I. 67–88), at which Corinth
and other members of the Peloponnesian League urged Sparta to take action.
Here two other grievances were mentioned. Aegina, in the Saronic Gulf, com-
plained that Athens was not allowing it the autonomy promised in ‘the treaty’
(I. 67. ii, cf. 139. i, 140. iii).Thucydides gives no indication of the basis for the
claim, not even whether ‘the treaty’ was the Thirty Years’ Peace or a separate
treaty between Athens and Aegina (IG i3 38 is too small a fragment to be helpful;
in 432 Aegina paid less than half of the 30 talents tribute which it had paid at
least until 440); but in 431 Athens was to expel the inhabitants of Aegina, alleg-
ing that they were ‘not least responsible for the war’ (II. 27. i: cf. p. 108).
The Megarians, on the Isthmus of Corinth, complained that they were being
excluded from the harbours of the Athenian empire and ‘the Attic agora’
because of a dispute over sacred land in the frontier region near Eleusis and
the harbouring of runaway slaves (I. 67. iv, cf. 139. i–ii, 140. iii–iv, 144. ii).
Plutarch (Per. 29. vii–31. i) shows that this was one of a series of measures, the
sequence of which was probably: by a decree of Pericles Athens sent a herald
with a moderate statement of Athens’ case; then came the exclusion decree;
after the Megarians killed a herald called Anthemocritus, a decree of Charinus
(which must be dated 431: cf. p. 106) committed Athens to implacable enmity
and invasions of the Megarid twice a year. Pericles refused to weaken over
Megara (when he insisted that the text of the exclusion decree could not be
taken down, an opponent suggested that it should be turned to face the wall).
On both occasions when Aristophanes alludes to the causes of the war, he
focuses on Megara, with stories (different, and probably both invented: the
84
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS

chorus responds to the second, ‘I never heard that before’) of Pericles’ involve-
ment for disreputable personal reasons (Acharn. 514–38, Peace 605–18; cf.
Cratinus, fr. 38. 44–8 Kassel & Austin) – which were taken seriously by later
writers. Thucydides, though he tells us little, indicates that this was the griev-
ance particularly stressed by the Spartans.
Despite an ingenious attempt by de Ste. Croix to argue otherwise, the exclu-
sion decree must be seen as an attempt to prevent Megara from trading with
Athens and the empire: the Athenians realised that their control of the sea could
be exploited to their own and their friends’ advantage and their enemies’ dis-
advantage (cf. pp. 176–7), and Aristophanes in Acharnians (535, cf. 719–835)
represents the Megarians as starving because of the decree. Megara since the
Thirty Years’ Peace had been a member of the Peloponnesian League: was
Athens breaking the peace? There were no international lawyers, and no stand-
ing body which could decide hard cases; the history of the late ﬁfth century
shows that a treaty was broken if people chose to regard it as broken, or not if
they chose not.The likelihood is that when the peace was made economic sanc-
tions had not been envisaged and so were not explicitly forbidden, and there-
fore Athens was not breaking the letter of the peace; but it may well have seemed
that Athens was overreacting to a small provocation. (Megara had supported
Corinth in 435 and 433, but we do not know how long this feud had been going
on, and both the ﬁrst decree and the second may have been earlier than the
Corcyraean episode.)
Sparta and Athens
In Thucydides’ account of the Spartan assembly a Corinthian speech stresses
the Athenians’ ambition and contrasts their energy with Sparta’s slowness. An
Athenian deputation is given permission to speak, refuses to respond to the
grievances, emphasises Athens’ strength and urges Sparta to think twice before
going to war; the empire is justiﬁed as the natural exercise of power (I. 72 with
73–81: on this speech cf. pp. 178–9). Of the Spartans, king Archidamus recom-
mends a gradual approach but the ephor Sthenelaidas in a laconic speech insists
that Athens is in the wrong so war is necessary – and he gained a very public
vote of approval by calling on the Spartans not merely to shout but to stand in
different places to declare their opinions.
The Delphic oracle was consulted and gave Sparta its support (I. 118. iii).
During the war the Athenians neither stayed away from Delphi nor were
debarred from visiting it, but access to and the status of Delphi was the ﬁrst
matter to be mentioned in the truce between Athens and Sparta in 423 and in
the Peace of Nicias in 421 (Thuc. IV. 118. i–iii, V. 18. ii).
To commit the Peloponnesian League to war, Sparta had to obtain a majo-
rity vote from the members. A congress was held (I. 119–125. i), to which
Thucydides assigns a second Corinthian speech, and the members did vote for
war.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS
85

By now it was fairly late in 432. For the winter of 432/1 Thucydides reports
an exchange of propaganda (I. 125. ii–146). The Spartans called on the Athe-
nians to expel those tainted by the curse on the Alcmaeonid family (resulting
from the killing of Cylon’s supporters when he tried to make himself tyrant, in
the seventh century), an attempt to undermine the position of Pericles, whose
mother was an Alcmaeonid. Athens responded with Spartan curses, resulting
from the death of Pausanias in the 460’s (cf. p. 27), perhaps aimed at Pericles’
xenos Archidamus. Sparta then called for an end to the on-going grievances (the
siege of Potidaea, the status of Aegina, and particularly the sanctions against
Megara); and ﬁnally (in effect invoking Thucydides’ ‘truest reason’) announced
that Sparta wanted peace, and there could be peace if Athens would leave the
Greeks autonomous (for this theme cf. Thucydides’ comment on support for
Sparta at the outbreak of the war, II. 8. iv). Thucydides ends book I with the
ﬁrst of the speeches attributed to Pericles: Sparta is refusing Athens’ offer to go
to arbitration; the grievances are mere pretexts, and if Athens gave way on them
Sparta would come back with others; Athens is better prepared than the Pelo-
ponnesians, but must not throw away its advantages by ﬁghting in Attica or
trying to enlarge the empire; it should reply ﬁrmly. As G.W. Hunt put it, in the
context of a British warning to Russia in the 1870’s,
We don’t want to ﬁght, but by jingo! if we do,
We’ve got the ships, we’ve got the men, we’ve got the money too.
Athens did reply ﬁrmly.
In the spring of 431 the Thebans (allies of Sparta) made a sudden attack on
Plataea (geographically in Boeotia, on the route from Thebes to the Pelopon-
nese, but an ally of Athens for nearly a hundred years): the attack misﬁred and,
perhaps in breach of an agreement, the Plataeans killed their captives (Thuc.
II. 2–6). This attack allowed the Athenians to claim that the Peloponnesians
were in breach of the peace. And so the war began.
Whose Fault?
Formally it was the Peloponnesians who judged that Athens had broken 
the peace, and who declared war, and in spite of their initial conﬁdence the
Spartans were later to feel guilty about this (Thuc.VII. 18. ii); but Thucydides
has referred to the grievances of each side against the other (I. 23. vi, 146).
Some scholars have thought that he originally concentrated on the grievances
and only later came to see the importance of his truest reason, and that book
I as we have it has been rewritten in the light of that change; but the book’s
organisation, though complex, is coherent, and the truest reason is so wide-
spread in book I that it is hard to imagine an earlier version which lacked it.
More probably Thucydides was from the beginning operating with two levels
of explanation. He was a historian proud of his ability to do better than others,
86
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS

as he made clear in ch. 20, towards the end of the opening section of book I;
and in his account of the causes of the war he both emphasised the ‘truest
reason’, which was ‘most concealed in word’, and gave his own version of the
‘publicly mentioned grievances’.
His choice of words for cause, ‘grievances and disputes’ contrasted with
‘reason’ (prophasis: a person’s or a state’s reason for acting), need not trouble
us: the words are appropriate in their context, but he himself calls the griev-
ances a reason in I. 118. i and 146. What is more important is that the griev-
ances were publicly mentioned while the reason was concealed, and that the
reason was truest. The reason is certainly not concealed in book I, from the
expectation of war when Athens agrees to support Corcyra to Sparta’s ﬁnal
demand. Presumably, when the war had started, other people focused on one
or more of the grievances – Aristophanes perhaps reﬂected public opinion in
Athens in blaming Megara and Pericles’ obstinacy, the Corinthians perhaps
blamed the volunteers who had gone to ﬁght for Potidaea – and Thucydides is
showing that he knows better. There are various possible explanations for his
giving detailed accounts of two grievances but not of the other two. If Aristo-
phanes is true to Athenian public opinion, Thucydides is perhaps reacting
against that; and if the suggestion that Pericles had disreputable personal
reasons for not giving way over Megara was widespread, it would not suit
Thucydides the admirer of Pericles to dwell on that. Thucydides was also a
patriotic Athenian: in his detailed accounts Athens makes an alliance with
Corcyra which it is entitled to make, and limits its support so that the conﬂict
with Corinth does not escalate; and it is within its rights in coercing Potidaea
as a member of the Delian League: the suspicious reader may wonder if Athens’
treatment of Aegina and Megara was harder to justify.
His narrative shows Athens technically in the right over the grievances, and
willing to go to arbitration when Sparta was not (but it is easy to score points
by offering arbitration when it is unlikely that acceptable arbitrators can be
found), and shows a slow Sparta pushed towards war by Corinth (Corinth was
indeed the strongest member of the Peloponnesian League after Sparta, but
would arguably have seemed less prominent if Thucydides had devoted equal
space to all grievances). He traces the growth of Athenian power from the begin-
ning of the Delian League, innocent in intention and accepted by Sparta (but
after the Thirty Years’ Peace, which tried to establish a balance between Athens
and Sparta, he mentions only Athens’ war against Samos, whereas to justify his
view of the truest reason he should – and could: cf. pp. 68–70 – have done more
to show why that treaty did not establish a sustainable balance). Although he
formulates his truest reason to state that fear of Athenian power forced Sparta
to go to war, the verdict which he has implied to most modern readers is that
the Peloponnesians were in the wrong in making war on Athens.
We should not make too much of the Corinthian pressure: it suited Thucy-
dides to contrast Athens’ energy with Sparta’s slowness, and the Corinthians
could actually have made that contrast. However, the view fashionable in the
early twentieth century that Athens was in competition with Corinth for control
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS
87

of trade with the west was based on an anachronistic view of trade and the
state’s interest in it.The willingness of Sparta, or at any rate some Spartans, to
support Samos in 440, and the attitude of Sthenelaidas in 432, warn us not 
to see too much reluctance in Sparta: nearly all those who begin a war like to
believe, and to convince others, that they are in the right, and it was the griev-
ances which enabled Sparta to do that. As for Athens . . . my judgment would
be that at any rate the Athenians did not try very hard to avoid war.When they
could have stayed out of the conﬂict between Corinth and Corcyra (cf. Thuc.
I. 40. iv), allowing them to weaken each other (cf. 44. ii), they chose to make
an alliance which could easily and in fact did lead to their ﬁghting against the
Corinthians, and at the same time they started preparing for a major war. Poti-
daea might have been put under pressure in 432 even if there had not been a
Corinthian interest there, but what Athens did was bound to annoy Corinth;
we know too little about how far back the grievances of Aegina and Megara
reached (but the First Peloponnesian War had demonstrated the advantage to
Athens of having Megara on its side: cf. pp. 41–5). The Athenian speech in
Sparta was not calculated to turn away wrath; the offer of arbitration implies
conﬁdence that Athens was in the right and/or that the offer would not be taken
up; the message of Pericles’ speech was that appeasement would not work,
Athens was better prepared than the Peloponnesians, so if the war must come
let it come.
I believe that the Athenians, and Pericles in particular, realised that Sparta
could not tolerate their continuing and growing power but sooner or later they
would have to ﬁght for it; they were certainly not prepared to avoid war by
giving up their ambitions; they adopted a high-risk strategy in the hope – which
was fulﬁlled – that the inevitable war would come in circumstances in which
they were better prepared than their enemies and could claim to be in the right.
Thucydides’ judgment about the truest reason is to be accepted, but I should
go further than he did on Athens’ willingness to provoke war. It was indeed to
be a war about the power of Athens.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
See in general de Ste. Croix, The Origins of the Peloponnesian War; Kagan, The Outbreak
of the Peloponnesian War; also Cawkwell, Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War, ch. 2;
Lazenby, The Peloponnesian War, ch. 2; Pelling, Literary Texts and the Greek Historian, chs.
5, 8.The view that a difference can be detected between Thucydides’ early and his later
view of the causes was supported by A. Andrewes, ‘Thucydides and the Causes of the
War’, CQ2 ix 1959, 223–39; rejected by D. Whitehead, ‘Thucydides: Fact-Grubber or
Philosopher’, G&R2 xxvii 1980, 158–65, Rhodes, ‘Thucydides on the Causes of the
Peloponnesian War’, Hermes cxv 1987, 154–65.
On the words aitia (‘grievance’) and prophasis (‘reason’) see particularly de Ste. Croix,
The Origins of the Peloponnesian War, ch. 2; L. Pearson, ‘Prophasis: A Clariﬁcation’, TAPA
ciii 1972, 381–94 = his Selected Papers, 120–33.
88
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS

On the Athenian Decrees proposed by Callias (M&L 58 = IG i3 52 ~ Fornara 119),
it has been shown that dating the two decrees to the same day depended on over-bold
restoration; but they may still belong to the same year, and, though later dates have been
proposed (see, e.g., Samons, Empire of the Owl, 113–38), I still believe that the year is
434/3, i.e. before the series of loans to the state recorded in M&L 72 = IG i3 369 (cf.
pp. 91–2). J. R. Grant, ‘A Note on the Tone of Greek Diplomacy’, CQ2 xv 1965, 261–6,
argued that the Athenian speech at Sparta in 432 was not as provocative as modern
readers are inclined to think.
On Athens’ dispute with Megara, de Ste. Croix, The Origins of the Peloponnesian War,
ch. 7, advanced an interpretation of the exclusion which has not found acceptance, but
I do accept his chronology of the episodes mentioned by Plutarch; for alternative
chronologies see C. W. Fornara, ‘Plutarch and the Megarian Decree’, YCS xxiv 1975,
213–28; Cawkwell, Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War, 111–14. P. A. Brunt, ‘The
Megarian Decree’, AJP lxxii 1951, 269–82 = his Studies in Greek History and Thought,
ch. 1, stresses that the exclusion decree need not have been very recent when the Mega-
rians complained about it in 432.
The theory of a war to control trade with the west was advanced by Cornford, Thucy-
dides Mythistoricus, 1–76, and Grundy, Thucydides and the History of His Age, ch. 15; it
was answered at the time by G. Dickins, ‘The True Cause of the Peloponnesian War’,
CQ v 1911, 238–48; and for a more recent rebuttal see de Ste. Croix, The Origins of the
Peloponnesian War, ch. 6, esp. 214–20.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ORIGINS
89

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
434/3 (?)
ﬁnancial decrees of Callias in Athens
431
outbreak of Peloponnesian War
428
ﬁnancial anxiety in Athens: eisphora of 200 talents
425
Athenian success at Pylos ends Peloponnesian invasions of
Attica
425
decree of Thudippus for reassessment of Delian League
tribute
421
Peace of Nicias: Athenian decision to repay sums borrowed
from sacred treasuries
415–413
Athenian expedition to Sicily
413
Spartan occupation of Decelea in Attica
413
Athens replaces Delian League tribute with harbour tax
412
Sparta ﬁrst secures Persian support
c.411–406
Athenian treasuries reorganised
404
Peloponnesian War ends with Athens’ coming to terms
with Sparta
The war of Sparta and its allies against Athens was a war of a land power against
a sea power, of states lacking ready money against a state well supplied with
ready money; and, since it was a war about the power of Athens, a war which
Sparta needed to win, in order to break Athens’ power, whereas for Athens
9
The Peloponnesian War:
Resources and
Strategies

avoidance of defeat would count as victory. The Spartan king Archidamus,
warning the Spartans not to rush into war, says that the Spartans are inferior
in ships, and still more inferior in money, which they neither possess publicly
nor readily contribute individually (Thuc. I. 80. iii–iv). Similarly Pericles, in his
ﬁrst speech in Thucydides, says, ‘The Peloponnesians are men who farm their
own land, and do not have money either individually or publicly; next, they lack
experience of lengthy and overseas wars. . . . Most importantly, they will be hin-
dered by the lack of money’ (I. 141. iii, 142. i).
Athenian Resources
From his opening chapters (e.g. I. 2. ii, 7) Thucydides shows his awareness of
the importance of ﬁnancial strength, but he rarely gives details. A great excep-
tion is his summary of a speech of Pericles at the beginning of the war (II. 13),
saying that ‘their strength lay in the receipt of money from the allies, and most
successes in war were won by judgment and a ready supply of money’ (§ii).The
Athenians had:
(§iii)
about 600 talents a year in tribute from the allies, apart from other
revenue [the tribute lists suggest about 400 talents, and perhaps
Thucydides’ ﬁgure, like his 460 talents at the League’s foundation
(cf. p. 17), is derived from an optimistic assessment list; Xen. An.
VII. i. 27 gives Athens’ total revenue as not less than 1,000 talents,
which is credible];
in coin on the acropolis, c.6,000 talents [in view of §v, this prob-
ably refers simply to the treasury of Athena; according to the 
manuscripts’ text, there had earlier been as much as 9,700 talents;
in an alternative version they had maintained about 6,000 and 
currently had 5,700];
(§iv)
uncoined gold and silver in the sacred treasuries, not less than 500
talents;
(§v)
money from the other sanctuaries, ‘not a little’ [this probably
includes the consolidated treasury of the Other Gods, established
in 434/3: cf. p. 83];
for use in desperate straits, the gold on Pheidias’ gold and ivory
statue of Athena, 40 talents [equivalent to 560 talents of silver; not
in fact used until 296/5 (FGrH 257a F 4. 1–16)];
(§§vi–viii)
for the catalogue of soldiers and ships see p. 95.
Athens seems never to have built up a surplus in the state treasury, but it
had built up surpluses in the sacred treasuries, and was willing to use these to
ﬁnance the war.The ﬁrst of Callias’ ﬁnancial decrees, probably in 434/3, noted
that 3,000 talents due to the treasury of Athena had been paid, and ordered
the payment of sums due to the other gods (M&L 58 = IG i3 52 ~ Fornara 119,
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES
91

A. 2–13). We can only guess how the debts had arisen, but a possibility is that
they were sums taken for the war against Samos in 440–439, which could be
repaid once Samos paid its reparations (cf. p. 68). Another inscription (M&L
72 = IG i3 369, extracts Fornara 134; table of annual totals M&L p. 217) gives
us a detailed record of sums taken as loans from the sacred treasuries in
426/5–423/2, with a summary for 433/2–427/6, a calculation of interest due and
(with a minor error) the total sum due in summer 422 – slightly under 5,600
talents capital and c.1,424 talents interest.We cannot deduct 5,600 from 6,000
and conclude that Athens had only 400 talents left: some of the money was
taken before the time of Pericles’ speech; his 6,000 talents is probably the ﬁgure
for the treasury of Athena only; and the treasuries are likely to have had some
income during these years, which may have exceeded their other expenses. A
special reserve of 1,000 talents was set aside in 431 and was not used until 412
(Thuc. II. 24. i, VIII. 15. i). What is certain is that at the beginning of the war
there were very large loans – c.1,145 talents in 432/1, c.1,370 in 431/0, c.1,300
in 430/29 – but c.600 talents in 429/8 and never more than 262 talents after
that: Athens had much less money left in 428 than in 431, but not much less
in 422 than in 428. Despite the conﬁdence displayed in Thucydides’ reports of
Pericles’ pronouncements, in the early years of the war the Athenians took
money from the reserves at a rate which would soon have led to bankruptcy,
but about 429/8 (perhaps not coincidentally, Pericles died in autumn 429:Thuc.
II. 65. ii) there was a change in policy.
Large and expensive naval expeditions were sent out in the ﬁrst two years of
the war, but not after that (though a campaign in Sicily, which had to be funded
throughout the year, was begun in 427 and reinforced in 425). More money
was obtained from the Delian League.Thucydides mentions ‘fund-raising ships’
in 430/29, 428/7 and 425/4 (II. 69. i, III. 129, IV. 50. i) – perhaps referring to
special levies or else to pressure on nominal members who did not pay regu-
larly. Assessments of tribute were normally made every four years, in the years
of the Great Panathenaea. If the orthodox arrangement of fragmentary tribute
lists from the early years of the war is right, there was no major change in the
ﬁrst war-time assessment in 430, but there was an additional assessment, with
signiﬁcant increases, in 428. Then, certainly, in 426 there was no assessment
but a decree of Cleonymus tried to improve the collection of tribute by having
individual citizens of allied states made eklogeis, ‘collectors’, with personal
responsibility for their state’s tribute (M&L 68 = IG i3 68 ~ Fornara 133); and
in 425 a decree of Thudippus ordered another assessment (IG i3 71; decree and
extracts from list M&L 69 ~ Fornara 136). It explicitly stated that the tribute
had become too little, and that no state’s assessment was to be reduced unless
it could demonstrate inability to pay; the list of assessments appended to the
decree has a total almost certainly to be restored as somewhat over 1,460
talents. The list is optimistic, including states which are unlikely to have paid
(e.g. Melos: cf. p. 131); but if the Athenians managed to collect 1,200 talents,
that will have been three times the pre-war level. The decree orders [a return
92
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES

to] assessments in Panathenaic years, and the assessment of 422 probably made
little change. Cleinias’ decree for the collection of tribute (M&L 46 = IG i3 34
~ Fornara 98) is probably to be dated after the assessment decree of 425. The
Athenians themselves also had to pay more towards the war: Thuc. III. 19. i
reports that in 428/7 they ‘paid for the ﬁrst time an eisphora (property tax) of
200 talents’; eisphora was already a possibility in 434/3 (M&L 58 = IG i3 52 ~
Fornara 119, B. 15–17), and it is possible but not certain that what happened
ﬁrst in 428/7 was that it was used to raise so large a sum.
The sums taken from the sacred treasuries were regarded as loans, and inter-
est was calculated on them – at a rate equivalent to 6 per cent p.a. to 426 but
1.2 per cent afterwards (cf. the War Loan stocks issued by the British govern-
ment in 1914–17, originally at rates rising from 4 per cent to 5.3 per cent but
reduced to 3.5 per cent in 1932): in summer 422 the total of capital and inter-
est due was c.7,024 talents. The orator Andocides claimed in 392/1 (III. Peace
8–9) that after the Peace of Nicias, in 421, the Athenians deposited 7,000 talents
on the acropolis (which may reﬂect a decision, perhaps partly rather than fully
carried out, to repay the whole outstanding debt), and received tribute of 1,200
talents a year (which may reﬂect assessment rather than payment). Certainly
reduced activity after summer 422 will have allowed a substantial recovery,
though we happen to have records of small loans from 418/7 onwards (M&L
77 = IG i3 370, part Fornara 144).
The ambitious Sicilian expedition of 415 (the original force will have cost at
least 150 talents per month, throughout the year) was undertaken in the false
expectation that Egesta would pay the whole cost (Thuc. VI. 6. ii–iii): in fact
Egesta provided only 60 talents in advance and 30 when the Athenians arrived
(8. i, 46. i), but the Athenians persisted with the campaign and sent substan-
tial reinforcements later; it is possible that a fragmentary inscription refers to
the setting aside of 3,000 talents for Sicily in 416/5 (M&L 78 = IG i3 93 ~
Fornara 146, frs. d + g). Ironically, the sales of property conﬁscated from those
convicted in connection with the religious scandals of 415 (cf. pp. 157–9) will
have made a signiﬁcant contribution to Athens’ funds. But the money was spent
in vain, and when the campaign ended in disaster in 413 the Athenians did not
have left sufﬁcient ships or skilled men for them or money to pay for ﬁghting
(Thuc.VIII. 1. ii).Thucydides writes of their being in ﬁnancial difﬁculties earlier
in 413, when they had sent reinforcements to Sicily and the Spartans had built
a fort at Decelea, thus preventing the Athenians from using their land and their
silver mines: at that point they replaced the Delian League’s tribute with a 5
per cent harbour tax, which they expected to yield more (VII. 28. iv–29. i).
Despite their failure in Sicily the Athenians resolved to keep going but to try
to economise (Thuc. VIII. 1. ii–iii); however, in 412 they had to use the 1,000
talents set aside at the beginning of the war (15. i). Sparta obtained Persian
support, and for a surprisingly long time the Athenians hoped that that could
be redirected to them; one of the reasons for the establishment of an oligarchic
régime in 411 was that an oligarchy would not have to pay civilian stipends and
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES
93

so would be cheaper. We hear of fund-raising expeditions in 411/0 (Xen. Hell.
I. i. 8). Probably the harbour tax was abandoned and the tribute resumed (the
assessment IG i3 100 is perhaps to be dated 410; cf. Xen. Hell. I. iii. 9), but
from 410 a 10 per cent tax was levied at the Bosporus (Xen. Hell. I. i. 22). In
410 an attempt was made to repay debts to the sacred treasuries (IG i3 99); but
later inscriptions show the treasuries providing money out of income, presum-
ably because they had no capital left (e.g. M&L 84 = IG i3 375 ~ Fornara 154,
3). Reorganisations were attempted, with the Athenian state treasury and the
Delian League’s treasury merged in or before 411 (cf. Ath. Pol. 30. ii) and the
treasuries of Athena and the Other Gods combined in 406. Although Pheidias’
statue of Athena survived, some gold statuettes were melted down for coinage,
and token, silver-plated bronze coins were issued (Ar. Ran. 718–26 with schol.
720 = Fornara 164. B, gold, 407/6; 725, bronze, 406/5). After the battle of
Aegospotami in 405 Athens could not afford to build yet more ships to replace
those lost then, and so the war came to an end.
Peloponnesian Resources
In the ﬁfth century Athens was not merely the most prosperous Greek city but
one whose prosperity took a form which made it exceptionally well supplied
with ready money. Sparta was at the other extreme, with citizens who lived off
the land which was farmed for them by their helots, and who made contribu-
tions in kind to the messes at which they ate; but most of Sparta’s allies were
agricultural communities (cf. Pericles in Thuc. I. 141. iii, and notice III. 5).
Corinth is likely to have been the strongest Peloponnesian state ﬁnancially, and
it claimed to be able and willing to contribute (I. 121. v), but there is no sign
that it did so on a large scale. Of the great panhellenic sanctuaries, Olympia
was controlled by Elis, a member of the Peloponnesian League, and Delphi
expressed its support for the Peloponnesians (I. 118. iii): the Corinthians sug-
gested that money could be borrowed from these (I. 121. iii, cf. Pericles in I.
143. i), but again there is no reason to think that this happened on a large scale.
Most of the western Greeks were of Peloponnesian origin, and Sparta hoped
for help from them (II. 7. ii), but they sent none until 412 and little then.
Almost our only other evidence is an inscription (IG V. i 1 = M&L 67 ~
Fornara 132; augmented by an additional fragment, SEG xxxix 370), which
records a modest number of modest contributions ‘to the Spartans for the war’
(the total is equivalent to a little over 13 Athenian talents). Some believe the
contributions to be spread over the 420’s–410’s (in which case it is striking that
Ephesus, in Asia Minor, and the island of Melos are among the contributors);
others date it c.411 (in which case the Melians must be exiles who escaped
before Athens’ destruction of their city in 416/5, and the Chian exiles will be
those of Diod. Sic. XIII. 65. iii–iv).
From the beginning of the war Sparta tried to obtain help from Persia, whose
wealth was by Greek standards unlimited; and so too did Athens, which had
94
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES

less need for Persian money itself but needed to prevent Sparta from obtaining
it (cf.Thuc. II. 7. i). By 413 Athens’ ﬁnancial superiority had been thrown away
in Sicily, and from 412 Sparta did obtain help from Persia (and the Athenians’
hopes were never fulﬁlled).This enabled Sparta at last to confront Athens effec-
tively at sea, and to persist until Athens was exhausted.
Athenian Forces and Strategy
Thuc. II. 9 lists the allies of each side at the beginning of the war. Athens had
the Delian League (including all the Aegean islands except Thera, which was
paying tribute by 429, and Melos), and Corcyra and other allies in north-
western Greece; Sparta had the Peloponnesian League (all the Peloponnese
except most of Achaea, which had joined by 429, and Argos), much of central
Greece and some places in the north-west.
For human as for ﬁnancial resources we have details on the Athenian side
but not on the Peloponnesian. The Periclean speech of 431 summarised by
Thucydides lists (II. 13. vi–viii) a ﬁeld army of 13,000 hoplites (probably those
aged 20–39), and, for garrison duties, 16,000 reserves (perhaps 10,000 ‘oldest
and youngest’ Athenians, aged 18–19 and 40–59, and 6,000 metics), 1,000
cavalry and 200 mounted archers (cf. Ar. Eq. 225), 1,600 archers, and 300 sea-
worthy triremes (which would require 60,000 crew members, an unknown pro-
portion of whom would be mercenaries from outside Athens, mostly from the
Delian League). Thucydides claims that at the beginning of the war the Athe-
nians set aside not only 1,000 talents but also their hundred best triremes (II.
24. ii). That would have been foolish and is hard to believe; but perhaps there
was a decision at the beginning of the war not to send out all the ships simul-
taneously but to keep at least a hundred in the docks (as far as we know, more
than two hundred were not in use at once until 413). In the League, Chios and
the cities of Lesbos still had navies, and contributed ﬁfty ships in 430 (II. 56.
ii), while Corcyra contributed ﬁfty ships in 431 (II. 25. i); allied soldiers were
used on a number of occasions, but not frequently or on a large scale. It is
usually assumed that the Athenians had about a 3:1 superiority in ships, and
far greater skill in the use of them, but a 1:3 inferiority in hoplites, and Sparta’s
hoplites were the best in ﬁfth-century Greece (cf. pp. 128–9).
Hoplite ﬁghting was done by the comfortably off, who could afford the
equipment: except in Sparta most hoplites were farmers, who would not be
eager to ﬁght at times when their farms needed attention. At the beginning of
the war not much importance was attached to soldiers other than hoplites; but
ﬁghting on rough terrain demonstrated the advantages of light infantry (NB the
defeat of Demosthenes in Aetolia in 426: Thuc. III. 97–8), and there were in
fact only two major hoplite battles in Greece during the war, in both of which
the Athenians were defeated: at Delium in 424/3 and at Mantinea in 418 (cf.
pp. 110, 128–9). Siege warfare was still rudimentary, though we are now at the
beginning of a century of development: at Plataea the latest in machinery was
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES
95

used by both attackers and defenders, but it was the blockade which ﬁnally led
to the city’s surrender (II. 75–8, III. 52. i–iii).
The Spartans began the war in the traditional way, invading Attica in the
spring, destroying the crops, and hoping that the Athenians would come out of
the city to ﬁght and be beaten. Remarkably, Pericles’ response was not to go
out and ﬁght a hoplite battle (though he did use cavalry to harass the invaders:
e.g.Thuc. II. 22. ii).The long walls, built in the 450’s–440’s (cf. pp. 41–2, 65),
made a single fortiﬁed area of Athens and Piraeus, and Pericles proposed that
the Athenians should abandon the countryside, migrate inside the fortiﬁcations
and rely on their control of the sea to import what they needed; they should
keep control of the empire, but not try to expand it or run unnecessary risks
(I. 143. ii–144. i, II. 13. ii, 65. vii). Animals were boarded out on Euboea and
other islands (II. 14. i). The city whose power had been built up by the navy
would continue to rely on its navy.
That, presented with approval by Thucydides, was a strategy for avoiding
defeat, not for gaining victory (though for Athens avoidance of defeat would
amount to victory: cf. pp. 90–1). Pericles in his ﬁrst speech says:
If they come against our land with foot-soldiers, we shall sail against theirs; and
the devastation of part of the Peloponnese will not be on the same level as [but
more serious than] that of the whole of Attica, for they will not be able to acquire
other land instead without ﬁghting for it, but we have plenty of land in the islands
and on the mainland, for control of the sea is a great thing. (Thuc. I. 143. iv–v)
In the ﬁrst two years of the war (but not afterwards) the Athenians did send
large and expensive expeditions against the Peloponnese (cf. pp. 106–8), but
they seem to have achieved little, and Thucydides’ narration of them is very dis-
jointed and unemphatic. As we have seen, Athens began the war spending
money at a rate which it could not afford to continue. The naval strategy and
Thucydides’ presentation of it is therefore problematic; and various explana-
tions have been attempted. Plutarch writes of relieving the overcrowding inside
Athens (Per. 34. v–35. i), and there is probably something in that. My own sug-
gestion is that Thucydides’ emphasis on the strategy of avoiding defeat and the
possibility of a long war (NB I. 141. iii and Archidamus in I. 81. vi) reﬂects
Pericles’ public pronouncements; but privately Pericles hoped that, if Athens
demonstrated that it was invulnerable to the Peloponnesians’ attacks and
capable of striking back, they would within a few years realise that in challenging
Athens’ power they had taken on an impossible task, and admit defeat – and
Pericles was wrong.
The biannual attacks on Megara which began in autumn 431 (Thuc. II. 31)
were the culmination of the dispute that had begun some years earlier (cf. pp.
84–5). Athens’ hoplites were not a match for the combined armies of the Pelo-
ponnesians, but they could face that of a single city (and withdraw if the other
Peloponnesians combined to oppose them); and they would have won a major
strategic advantage if they had gained control of the Megarid.There might have
96
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES

been hopes that the naval expedition of 430 would entice Argos out of its neu-
trality, but Thucydides does not say so (II. 56 – but Ar. Eq. 465–9 suggests that
Cleon was involved in an approach to Argos later); Prasiae in the Peloponnese
was captured in 430 but not retained; and Argos remained neutral until 420.
Thucydides reports discontent with Pericles’ defensive strategy in 431, and
Plutarch suggests that Cleon was one of the discontented (Thuc. II. 21. ii–22.
i, Plut. Per. 33. iv–viii). After Pericles’ death, more adventurous strategies were
attempted. From the beginning of the war Athens took some interest in north-
western Greece, an area containing several Corinthian colonies, and so an
outpost of Peloponnesian power, but accessible by sea. Demosthenes cam-
paigned unsuccessfully in Aetolia in 426 (Boeotia, mentioned III. 95. i, may
have been a long-term but was probably not an immediate objective: cf. p. 104);
and successfully, with the collaboration of Cleon, at Pylos in 425, which gave
Athens a stronghold in Sparta’s territory (cf. pp. 104–5) and (which could not
have been predicted) Spartan hostages whom Athens used to prevent further
invasions of Attica. There was an expedition to Sicily begun in 427, in which
ambitious hopes were invested eventually if not from the beginning, but which
had to be abandoned in 424 when the Sicilian Greeks reached an agreement;
Nicias captured Cythera in 424; there was an unsuccessful attack on Boeotia
in 424/3, with which Demosthenes was once more involved.
Sparta’s weak point was its large subject population of helots and perioikoi,
whose loyalty could not be taken for granted. After Athens’ capture of Pylos
and Cythera, Sparta was greatly afraid that Athens would use these to destabi-
lise the whole of Laconia and Messenia (cf. Thuc. IV. 41. iii, 55, V. 14. iii, 23.
iii); but that did not happen on a serious scale, and Thucydides does not make
it clear whether this was because the Athenians did not try hard enough to
exploit their advantage or because they tried but were unsuccessful.
Although Pericles was right to warn against taking unnecessary risks and
trying to enlarge the empire – and Athens’ Sicilian hopes were certainly mis-
guided – a long war which ended only with Sparta’s failing to defeat Athens
would not in fact be satisfactory, as the Peace of Nicias in 421 was to show.
Despite Thucydides’ lack of sympathy, avenues which offered the chance of
positive success without excessive risks for Athens were worth exploring.
Peloponnesian Forces and Strategy
The army which invaded Attica in 431 was a two-thirds levy (Thuc. II. 10. ii);
Plutarch gives a ﬁgure of 60,000 (Per. 33. v, An Seni 784 E), but most scholars
have thought about 30,000 more likely. At ﬁrst only allies north of the Isthmus
could provide cavalry (Thuc. II. 9. iii); Sparta created a force of 400 cavalry in
424 (Thuc. IV. 55. ii; cf. 44. i for Corinth’s lack of cavalry). In 433 Corinth and
its allies mustered 150 ships, but the largest Peloponnesian ﬂeet between 431
and 412–411 numbered 100 (I. 46. i, contr. II. 66. i).
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES
97

To break the power of Athens, the Peloponnesians needed a positive victory.
They had no short-term prospect of matching the Athenians at sea (but at ﬁrst
did not realise how far they fell short in skill as well as in numbers: Thuc. II.
85. ii), and could not expect to capture Athens and Piraeus by force.They began
the war by invading Attica, to damage the crops and provoke the Athenians to
come out and ﬁght (II. 11. vi–viii): most Greeks thought the Athenians would
not hold out for long (e.g. IV. 85. ii,V. 14. iii), and indeed in 430 (when a plague
added to their troubles: cf. pp. 112–13) they did try to come to terms. But 
invasions of Attica had to be abandoned when Athens threatened to kill the
prisoners taken at Pylos in 425, and many Spartans after that were willing 
to abandon the war and make peace with Athens.
In 429 naval battles in the Gulf of Corinth ended disastrously, and a plan to
attack the Piraeus in the following winter was aborted. But, according to Thucy-
dides, the Corinthians in 432 pointed out that there were other possibilities: to
detach Athens’ allies and take away its revenues, and epiteichismos, to establish
a fort from which Attica could be continually attacked (I. 122. i: cf. Athens’
occupation of Pylos and Cythera, p. 97). Epiteichismos required a situation in
which a comparatively small force could hold a strong point after a large force
had set it up; and the Peloponnesians achieved that only with their occupation
of Decelea in 413, when a large proportion of Athens’ manpower had been sent
to Sicily.
Some Peloponnesians did try to seize opportunities to detach allies from
Athens. Mytilene appealed for Peloponnesian support when it revolted against
Athens in 428, Sparta’s appeal for an additional invasion of Attica came at a
time which was too inconvenient for its allies, and the force which was sent to
Mytilene was singularly ineffective. Corinth sent back to Corcyra upper-class
prisoners captured in 433, to stir up an anti-Athenian movement, but the result-
ing conﬂict led to the victory of the pro-Athenian democrats in an exhausted
Corcyra. If north-western Greece was the outpost of Peloponnesian power
which the Athenians could reach by sea, the Thracian coast was the part of the
Athenian empire which the Peloponnesians could reach by land: the Spartans
accepted an opportunity to found a colony at Heraclea, near Thermopylae and
the route to the north, in 426, and from 424 until his death in 422 Brasidas
with a small force was active in winning cities in the Thracian region for Sparta,
though the reality turned out to be less generous to the cities than Brasidas’
promises.While Demosthenes was the most adventurous Athenian strategically,
Brasidas was the most adventurous Spartan: in the earlier years of the war he
was associated with the criticism of the Peloponnesian naval squadron in 429
after its ﬁrst defeat in the Corinthian Gulf, and with the plan to attack the
Piraeus; and he was sent as an adviser to Alcidas in the west after his inept
attempt to support Mytilene (NB Thuc. III. 79. iii).
Sparta did not control the Peloponnese as Athens controlled the Delian
League: at the end of the 420’s there was ﬁghting among the Arcadians (Thuc.
IV. 134, cf. V. 29. i, 33. i); Lepreum (close to Messenia), which before the war
98
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES

had come to an arrangement with Elis which involved its paying 1 talent a year
to Olympian Zeus, stopped paying by 421 and turned to Sparta for support (V.
31. i–v). Argos, always unfriendly to Sparta, kept to the thirty-year peace treaty
of 451 (cf. p. 44) until it expired in 421, but Sparta must have been afraid that
it would not. In 421 Sparta was not able to persuade all its allies to agree to
the Peace of Nicias.
As we noticed above, it was Persian support which from 412 onwards enabled
the Spartans to confront the Athenians at sea, and to persist (and grow in ex-
perience) until the Athenians were exhausted. To gain that support Sparta had
(at least in the short term: cf. pp. 145, 148–9) to be willing to pay Persia’s price,
the return to Persia of the Greeks of mainland Asia Minor: that was difﬁcult
for a state which claimed that it was ﬁghting to liberate the Greeks; and this,
in addition to the fact that the defeat of the Athenians became easier to believe
in after their failure in Sicily in 415–413, helps to explain why Sparta did not
succeed in gaining that support earlier.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On the Peloponnesian War in general see Cawkwell, Thucydides and the Peloponnesian
War; Kagan’s three volumes The Archidamian War, The Peace of Nicias and the Sicilian
Expedition, The Fall of the Athenian Empire; Lazenby, The Peloponnesian War.
On Athenian ﬁnance there is a thorough study in Samons, Empire of the Owl; Kallet-
Marx, Money, Expense and Naval Power in Thucydides’ History, and Kallet, Money and
the Corrosion of Power in Thucydides, show that, although he does not often supply the
kind of information we should like,Thucydides was by no means as neglectful of ﬁnan-
cial considerations as has sometimes been alleged.
For the Spartan inscription IG V. i 1 = M&L 67 ~ Fornara 132, since the publication
of the new fragment dates before the Athenian capture of Melos have been championed
by A. P. Matthaiou and G. A. Pikoulas, ‘don toiV LakedaimonoiV pottn plemon’,
horoV vii 1989, 77–124, Loomis, The Spartan War Fund (who includes an English trans-
lation of the revised text); a later date (involving the supposition that the Melian 
contributors are men who escaped from the island before it was captured) has been 
preferred by B. Bleckmann, ‘Sparta und seine Freunde im Dekeleischen Krieg: zu
Datierung von IG V. i 1’, ZPE xcvi 1993, 297–308, M. Piérart, ‘Chios entre Athènes et
Sparte’, BCH cxix 1995, 252–82.
The need of triremes for a friendly coast was stressed by A. W. Gomme, ‘A Forgot-
ten Factor in Greek Naval Strategy’, JHS liii 1933, 16–24, revised in his Essays in Greek
History and Literature, ch. 10.
On Athenian strategy in general see A. J. Holladay, ‘Athenian Strategy in the Archi-
damian War’, Hist. xxvii 1978, 399–427 = his Athens in the Fifth Century, ch. 6. The
problem of Pericles’ strategy and Thucydides’ downplaying of the naval campaigns of
431–430 has been discussed by G. Cawkwell, ‘Thucydides’ Judgment of Periclean Strat-
egy’, YCS xxiv 1975, 53–70; H. T. Wade-Gery, in the article ‘Thucydides’ in the OCD
(in the 3rd ed., p. 1519); H. D. Westlake, ‘Seaborne Raids in Periclean Strategy’, CQ
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES
99

xxxix 1945, 75–84 = his Essays on the Greek Historians and Greek History, ch. 5. In Thucy-
dides and the Peloponnesian War, ch. 3, Cawkwell argues that Thucydides was lacking in
strategic understanding.
On Spartan strategy see P. A. Brunt, ‘Spartan Policy and Strategy in the Archidamian
War’, Phoen. xix 1965, 255–80 = his Studies in Greek History and Thought, ch. 4;T. Kelly,
‘Peloponnesian Naval Strength and Sparta’s Plans for Waging War Against Athens’, in
Studies in Honor of T. B. Jones, 245–55, ‘Thucydides and Spartan Strategy in the Archi-
damian War’, AHR lxxxvii 1982, 25–54.
100
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: RESOURCES AND STRATEGIES

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
431
outbreak of Peloponnesian War
430–426/5
plague in Athens
428/7
revolt of Mytilene against Athens
427–424
Athenian campaign in Sicily
425
Athenian success at Pylos
424
Athens fails to take control of Megara; defeated by
Boeotians at Delium
424–422
campaign of Brasidas in north-east
423–422
one-year truce
421
Peace of Nicias
The war began in the spring of 431, when the Spartan king Archidamus sent
to Athens a herald who was rebuffed, and then formally invaded Athens’ terri-
tory (Thuc. II. 10–12): hence this ﬁrst phase of the war is known as the Archi-
damian War. Sparta was ﬁghting to liberate the Greeks, and to protect its own
position, by breaking up the Athenian empire; it had persuaded itself that it was
in the right (though later it came to have doubts:VII. 18. i–ii), and Thucydides
claims (though his narrative does not support this) that it had persuaded most
of the Greeks (II. 8. iv, cf. Archidamus in 11. ii).The war between Corinth and
Corcyra had petered out; Athens was besieging Potidaea; the friction between
10
The Peloponnesian War:
431–421

Athens and Megara was worsening; and Athens was to expel the inhabitants of
Aegina in the ﬁrst year of the war. After the unsuccessful Theban attack on
Plataea in the early spring, Athens evacuated all except the men capable of ﬁght-
ing, and supplied food and a garrison (II. 6. iv).
Almost every year to 425, the Peloponnesians invaded Attica in the spring:
in 429 they began the siege of Plataea instead; in 426 they turned back because
of earthquakes; in 425 they returned after ﬁfteen days because of the con-
frontation at Pylos; and after their success the Athenians threatened to kill their
prisoners if there was another invasion (Thuc. IV. 41. i). The longest invasion,
in 430, lasted forty days (II. 57. ii). The psychological effect on the Athenians
was probably worse than the physical: the Peloponnesians will have done con-
siderable short-term damage to Athenian agriculture (but they will not have
damaged every ﬁeld every year, and perhaps some farmers in remote places
risked not migrating into the city), but olives and vines are hard to kill, so there
will not have been great long-term damage.
Thucydides was dissatisﬁed with the use of ofﬁcial years (Athens’ year, and
those of some other states, started in the summer, so that one campaigning
season was spread over two years, but other states had other starting-points),
and he used his own system of seasonal years, divided into about eight months
of summer and four of winter (cf. II. 1–2. i, V. 20, 25. i–26. i). His narrative
rarely digresses outside that framework; but here it will be convenient to look
at the main events of the Archidamian War by regions rather than year by year.
The War in the West
Athens and the Peloponnesians (particularly Corinth) both had allies in the
north-west of Greece, and this was an area which Athens could reach by sea.
In their major naval expedition of 431, a hundred Athenian ships were joined
by ﬁfty from Corcyra and others from western allies: after descents on Laconia
and Elis (Thuc. II. 25), they continued north to Acarnania, and to the uncom-
mitted island of Cephallenia, which they won over (II. 30). In the following
winter a Corinthian expedition reinstated a ruler whom they had expelled from
the Acarnanian city of Astacus (II. 33). In 430 the Peloponnesians took the ini-
tiative, attacking the island of Zacynthus, allied to Athens, but failing to win it
over (II. 66); and on the mainland an attack by Ambracia and its barbarian
allies on Athens’ ally Amphilochian Argos was also unsuccessful (II. 68). In the
winter, in order to control the Gulf of Corinth, Athens sent twenty ships under
Phormio, who had been active in the west earlier (cf. p. 69), to Naupactus 
on the north side of the Gulf, where in the 450’s (cf. p. 44) it had settled the
Messenians who were allowed to leave the Peloponnese (II. 69. i).
In 429 Ambracia asked the Peloponnesians to join it in a major attack on
Acarnania. The Spartan Cnemus brought 1,000 hoplites, and the combined
army attacked Stratus, in the south of Acarnania; but when the barbarians in
102
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421

the centre rushed ahead of the others, and were caught in an ambush, the attack
collapsed, and Cnemus withdrew (Thuc. II. 80–2). A ﬂeet of forty-seven ships
from Corinth and its neighbours was intended to join Cnemus, but to do that
it would have to pass Phormio at Naupactus. With more than twice the Athe-
nians’ numbers, the Peloponnesians did not expect Phormio even to challenge
them; but he did. They formed a circle with their ships facing outwards; the
Athenians sailed in line round them, and attacked successfully when the wind
rose and the Peloponnesians were thrown into confusion (II. 83–4). The Spar-
tans did not appreciate the Athenians’ superiority in skill; Cnemus on leaving
Acarnania joined the defeated ﬂeet, and Brasidas and others were sent as advis-
ers. In a second battle the Peloponnesians had seventy-seven ships to the Athe-
nians’ twenty; Phormio was forced to move westwards from Naupactus to the
narrow mouth of the Gulf, and when the Peloponnesians attacked they got the
upper hand; but they immediately thought their victory was secure, and when
they pursued the eleven Athenian ships which had escaped towards Naupactus
Phormio was able to turn defeat into victory (II. 85–92). By that time Athens
had dispatched a further twenty ships, but they went ﬁrst to take part in a con-
ﬂict in Crete, and did not arrive in time to be of use (II. 85. iv–vi, 92). In the
winter Phormio campaigned in support of the Acarnanians, and then returned
to Athens (II. 102–3). No more is heard of him: probably he died. In 427 he
was succeeded at Naupactus, at the Acarnanians’ request, by his son Asopius,
who campaigned unsuccessfully in Acarnania and in the pro-Spartan Leucas,
where he was killed (III. 7).
In 427 a bitter civil war began in Corcyra, after Corinth had sent back upper-
class prisoners taken in 433 (cf. p. 83) to undermine Corcyra’s democracy and
alliance with Athens. Nicostratus went with twelve Athenian ships from Nau-
pactus to support the democrats, Alcidas with ﬁfty-three Peloponnesian ships
to support the oligarchs; Alcidas won a naval battle, but despite the urging of
Brasidas (present with him as an adviser after his inept attempt to support Myti-
lene: cf. pp. 108–9) he failed to follow it up, and when he learned that another
sixty ships were approaching from Athens he withdrew. For seven days the Cor-
cyraean democrats massacred many of their opponents, while the Athenians
looked on – and Thucydides attaches to this episode a general comment on 
the collapse of standards in strife between pro-Athenian democrats and pro-
Spartan oligarchs in the Greek cities (III. 70–85; general comment 82–3; 84 is
an interpolation).
Also in 427 Athens accepted an invitation to intervene in a war in Sicily.
Syracuse was getting the upper hand in a war with Athens’ ally (cf. pp. 79, 83)
Leontini, and Leontini appealed to Athens, sending a delegation which included
the orator Gorgias (whose style of rhetoric is said to have made a great impres-
sion on the Athenians: Pl. Hp. Mai. 282 B, Diod. Sic. XII. 53. ii–v). Athens sent
two generals with twenty ships, ‘on the grounds of their kinship, and wanting
to prevent the transport of grain to the Peloponnese from there and prospect-
ing whether it would be possible for them to get control of affairs in Sicily’
(Thuc. III. 86). We do not know to what extent the Peloponnesians were 
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421
103

importing grain from Sicily, but if they did they could spare more time from
their own farms for ﬁghting. Whether the Athenians were already thinking of
conquest in Sicily in 427 cannot be conﬁrmed, but they were certainly doing
so by the end of this campaign in 424.
In 426 the Athenian commanders at Naupactus were Demosthenes and
Procles. Prompted by the Acarnanians, they ﬁrst attacked Leucas; but they were
then persuaded by the Messenians at Naupactus to march into Aetolia, to the
north-east. Success there might pave the way for an attack on Boeotia from the
west (cf.Thuc. III. 95. i), and this year the Athenians were in fact to make direct
attacks on Boeotia (cf. p. 109); the circumstances of the campaigns make it
hard to believe that they were planned in conjunction with each other, but it is
possible that Demosthenes knew the other attacks were intended and did at
least hope to reach Boeotia in the same summer. The Aetolians were a primi-
tive people, living in mountainous country unsuitable for hoplites, and the Athe-
nians did not wait for light-armed support (III. 97. ii). A town called Aegitium
was abandoned by its inhabitants, and the Athenians took it, but they were
attacked with missiles by light-armed men from the surrounding hills, Procles
was among those killed, and Demosthenes had difﬁculty in extracting the army
and returning to Naupactus (III. 91. i, 94–8). Probably Demosthenes was
deposed: Thucydides writes that he was afraid to return to Athens (III. 98. v).
Still at Naupactus in the autumn, he persuaded the Acarnanians to come to
defend it when the Aetolians prompted Eurylochus, the Spartan commander
at Heraclea (cf. p. 111), to attack it (III. 100–2). Eurylochus was then asked to
join Ambracia in a winter attack on Amphilochian Argos, and the Acarnanians
invited Demosthenes to command their forces against Eurylochus. Learning
from his experience at Aegitium, he ambushed and defeated his opponents to
the north of the city; to damage their reputation he allowed the Peloponnesians
but not the others to escape; and further north, at Idomene, in an early morning
attack he defeated a relieving army from Ambracia (III. 102. v–vii, 105–114.
ii). Thucydides comments that Ambracia could have been taken but the Acar-
nanians were afraid to see it in Athenian hands (III. 113. vi); and the peoples
of the region then made a hundred-year treaty (III. 114. ii–iv), so that, although
the Athenians had had the better of the ﬁghting here, they ultimately derived
no beneﬁt from it.
Surviving oligarchs were still harassing the democrats in Corcyra; and the
war in Sicily was proceeding (Thucydides’ narrative of it is disjointed and low-
key, like his narrative of Athens’ naval expeditions of 431 and 430). In winter
426/5 the western allies persuaded Athens to send a further forty ships to Sicily:
ahead of them, Pythodorus was sent immediately with a few ships, to succeed
Laches, the one still living of the original two commanders, who apparently was
deposed (III. 115).
In spring 425 the Spartans sent sixty ships to support Corcyra’s oligarchs.
Athens dispatched under Sophocles and Eurymedon the forty ships destined
for Sicily; but on the way they were to support the democrats in Corcyra; and
104
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421

before that Demosthenes (who had returned to Athens and was probably a
general-elect for 425/4) had permission to use the squadron as it sailed round
the Peloponnese (Thuc. IV. 2. ii–iv).
For what follows Thucydides seems to exaggerate the element of chance
(though there was such an element) and to minimise the element of planning.
On the west coast of Messenia there is a bay at Pylos (cf. map 3 and ill. 8),
with the island of Sphacteria leaving a narrow opening to the north and a wider
opening to the south (the modern town of Pylos is on the mainland by the
southern opening).A storm provided the opportunity for the Athenians to pause
by the northern opening, and build fortiﬁcations on the mainland. When the
ships continued northwards, Demosthenes and some men stayed behind. The
Spartans recalled their invading army from Attica, marched to Pylos, and sum-
moned their ships from Corcyra; Demosthenes recalled the Athenian ships,
which had gone only as far as Zacynthus. The Spartan ships arrived ﬁrst,
entered the bay, and landed some men on Sphacteria; then the Athenian ships
arrived, and defeated the Spartans, so that the men on Sphacteria were trapped.
There was a truce for negotiations, which Cleon wrecked in the Athenian
assembly. When he taunted Nicias, the general who had been appointed to go
to Pylos, Nicias invited Cleon to go in his place, and Cleon found himself com-
mitted to doing so. He promised to bring back the Spartans from Sphacteria,
or to kill them there, in twenty days; he took light-armed troops; a ﬁre on the
island destroyed much of the brushwood which protected the Spartans; the
Athenians landed on the island, and, after some ﬁghting, 292 of the original
420 men, 120 of them being Spartiate citizens, surrendered. They were taken
back to Athens – within Cleon’s twenty days. Sparta sued unsuccessfully for
peace. The Athenians garrisoned Pylos with Messenians from Naupactus, who
spoke the Messenian dialect and could go about the country undetected. The
Athenians now had a valuable stronghold in Spartan territory; but Thucydides
disapproved of this success (it was achieved by Cleon, whom he disliked, and
Demosthenes, of whom his approval is muted, and it involved the rejection of
Spartan peace offers, which he probably thought should have been accepted
[IV. 3–6, 8–23, 26–41]).
Sophocles and Eurymedon continued to Corcyra, where the surviving
democrats were captured and treacherously killed (IV. 46–8). But Corcyra was
exhausted, and we hear no more of it until its involvement in Athens’ Sicilian
expedition of 415–413. Sophocles and Eurymedon reached Sicily in the
autumn. But in 424 a truce between Camarina, on the Athenian side, and Gela
was followed by a congress at Gela of the Sicilian Greeks. Thucydides gives a
speech to Hermocrates of Syracuse, warning of the Athenians’ ambition, and
urging the Sicilians to make peace and not to invoke outside intervention (an
argument convenient for Syracuse, which could dominate Sicily if its opponents
did not obtain outside help). A treaty was made, and the Athenian generals had
to accept it; but they returned to a conﬁdent and ambitious Athens (Ar. Eq.
173–4, 1300–15, attributes to Hyperbolus ambitions extending to Carthage),
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421
105

and were accused of having been bribed to withdraw: Eurymedon was ﬁned
and the other two were exiled (IV. 58–65). Leontini, which had asked for
Athens’ help in 427, was with the support of its upper class taken over by Syra-
cuse, but afterwards some of them with the help of the expelled democrats
established strongholds and tried to reassert its independence. In 422 Athens
sent Phaeax and two other envoys with a couple of ships, but they met with a
mixed reception and returned to Athens (V. 4–5).
Greece and the Aegean
The Peloponnesians invaded Attica in the spring of most years to 425 (cf.
p. 102). Athens attacked Megara with a full levy twice a year, beginning in the
autumn of 431 (Thuc. II. 31) – which means that the decree of Charinus, order-
ing these attacks (cf. p. 84), must be dated to the summer of 431. Also in 431
106
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421
Modern lagoon
(dry land in 425)
Modern
Gialova
Spartan camp?
Mt. Elias
S P H A C T E R I A
Grundy’s well
Modern Pylos
Rocks
Tomeus?
Voidokoilia
Bay
R.
G
i
a
l
o
v
a
Bouphras?
PYLOS
N
1.5 km
1 mile
Map 3
The bay of Pylos (after P. J. Rhodes, Thucydides: History IV. 1–V. 24
[Warminster: Aris and Phillips, 1998])

Ill. 8
The bay of Pylos: aerial photograph. Centre for the Study of Ancient Documents,
Oxford

the Athenians sent out a large naval expedition, a hundred of their own ships
and more than ﬁfty from their western allies, which made raids on the west
coast of the Peloponnese and continued further north (II. 17. iv, 23. ii, 25, 30:
cf. p. 102); they sent another thirty ships up the Gulf of Euboea (II. 26); they
expelled the inhabitants of Aegina, many of whom were settled by the Spartans
at Thyrea, on the east coast of the Peloponnese (II. 27). In 430 an expedition
of a hundred Athenian ships and ﬁfty from Chios and Lesbos went to the
Argolid: an attempt to capture Epidaurus was unsuccessful, other places were
raided; Prasiae, south of Thyrea, was captured and sacked, but not retained as
a hostile stronghold (II. 56).The naval activity of these years is problematic (cf.
p. 96): it used large and expensive forces but does not seem to have achieved
signiﬁcant results.
Conﬁdent of their naval superiority, the Athenians were not guarding 
the Piraeus against an attack by sea. In winter 429/8 the Spartan Brasidas
responded to a Megarian suggestion that the Peloponnesians should attack the
Piraeus.The Peloponnesians caused panic in Athens, after which the Athenians
did take more precautions, but they lost their nerve and did not in fact attack
the Piraeus but merely raided Salamis (II. 93–4).
The cities of Lesbos were still relatively independent, ship-providing
members of the Delian League. Mytilene was attempting a union of the cities
other than Methymna. It had contemplated revolting against Athens before the
war, but had not been supported by Sparta; in 428 it did plan revolt, and was
hurried into it when opponents informed Athens. Athens sent forty ships;
Mytilenaean representatives at the Olympic festival appealed for Peloponnesian
support. Sparta’s ﬁrst plan was for an additional invasion of Attica, to distract
the Athenians, but August was a busy time for Peloponnesian farmers and the
invasion did not take place; and the Athenians manned a hundred ships with
which they raided the region of the Isthmus, and sent further forces to block-
ade Mytilene (III. 2–18). Eventually, in 427, the Spartans sent Alcidas with
forty ships, and, ahead of him, Salaethus to say that help was coming. But
Alcidas travelled slowly, taking and killing prisoners rather than winning sup-
porters. Salaethus, despairing of his coming, armed the ordinary people of
Mytilene for a ﬁnal burst of resistance, but they refused to ﬁght (apparently
because they were starving rather than because they were pro-Athenian: III. 27.
iii, cf. p. 182) and Mytilene surrendered. The Athenian commander, Paches,
sent Salaethus and those most responsible to Athens.The original decision, on
the proposal of Cleon, was to kill all the men and enslave all the women and
children, and a ship was sent to take the news to Mytilene; but the next day
the decision was reconsidered. Thucydides gives us speeches by Cleon and
Diodotus, and Diodotus’ proposal to kill only those who had been sent to
Athens (still more than a thousand) was carried. A second ship taking the com-
paratively good news travelled quickly enough to prevent the killing of all the
men. Mytilene lost its ships, its walls and its mainland possessions, and own-
ership of its land was given to Athenian cleruchs – but an inscription (IG i3 66)
suggests that if Thucydides is right there was a relaxation not long afterwards.
108
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421

Paches recovered Colophon, on the Asiatic mainland near Ephesus, where since
430 a party backed by the Persians had gained control (III. 34); Alcidas scut-
tled back to Greece, pursued by storms (III. 25–50). Some Mytilenaean exiles
established themselves on the mainland opposite, and made raids from there
(III. 52).
In 429 the Peloponnesians, instead of invading Attica, had begun a siege of
Plataea (Thuc. II. 71–8): perhaps they were worried about the plague in Athens
(cf. pp. 112–13), perhaps they were under pressure from Thebes. No further
help for Plataea came from Athens (though those who escaped to Athens were
given citizenship); for the winter of 428/7 Thucydides gives a dramatic account
of the escape of half of the men (III. 20–4). In the summer of 427 the remain-
der surrendered: after they and the Thebans had stated their cases the men
(about 225 including a few Athenians) were killed and the few women were
enslaved (III. 52–68). The fate of Plataea did not have a serious effect on the
course of the war, but it was near to Athens and a long-standing ally, and
enabled Thucydides to make various points about the war, so he gave it a
detailed treatment.
In 426 an Athenian force under Nicias attacked Melos, by now the only
Aegean island not in Athenian hands, but failed to win it over. If the inscrip-
tion recording ﬁnancial contributions to Sparta (cf. p. 94) belongs to the
420’s–410’s, Melos afterwards became a supporter of Sparta. He then sailed to
the Gulf of Euboea, and at Tanagra in south-eastern Boeotia joined a large army
which had marched out from Athens.They won a battle but then returned home
(III. 91). This was the summer in which Demosthenes was hoping to reach
Boeotia through Aetolia, but a fully coordinated plan is hard to believe in: cf.
p. 104.
The main sanctuaries of the Greek mainland were hostile to Athens, and the
Athenians may after the plague (cf. pp. 112–13) have felt that the gods were
hostile. In winter 426/5 they ‘puriﬁed’ Delos, more drastically than Pisistratus
had done in the sixth century, by removing all bodies buried on the island and
forbidding births and deaths there, and they established or re-established a
major quadrennial festival (Thuc. III. 104).Work on the temple of Apollo, aban-
doned in the middle of the century (cf. p. 64), was resumed. In 422 they went
further and expelled the living Delians, but they allowed them to return in 421
(V. I, 32. i, cf. VIII. 108. iv).
In 425 Nicias sailed into the Saronic Gulf with an Athenian ﬂeet: he landed
and won a battle at Solygea, in Corinthian territory, and (as Demosthenes 
had installed a garrison at Pylos) installed a garrison at Methana in the Argolid
(IV. 42–5). An Athenian alliance with Halieis is perhaps to be dated shortly
afterwards (IG i3 75: 424/3?), and Cleon seems to have gone on a deputation
to Argos (Ar. Eq. 465–7: cf. pp. 96–7). Chios had been anti-Spartan in 427 
(III. 32. iii); in winter 425/4 it had started building a new wall, but, remem-
bering Mytilene, was obedient when Athens objected (IV. 51). The inscription
recording contributions to Sparta includes ‘the Chian exiles who are friends 
of the Spartans’: possibly it was when Chios assured Athens of its loyalty 
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421
109

that these men were sent into exile. In 424 Nicias again commanded an 
Athenian ﬂeet, capturing the island of Cythera, and making raids on Laconia,
including the area where the Aeginetans were settled: the settlement was
destroyed, and the surviving Aeginetans were taken to Athens as prisoners (IV.
53–7). With Pylos and Cythera in their hands the Athenians should have been
in a position to intervene effectively in Laconia and Messenia, but, for what-
ever reason, they never achieved as much as they hoped and the Spartans feared
(cf. p. 97).
Athens’ regular attacks on Megara had continued. In summer 424, when
exiled oligarchs seized Pegae, the port on the Gulf of Corinth, Megara’s demo-
cratic leaders, preferring Athens to their own oligarchs, plotted to betray the
city to Athens, but the plot was revealed. An Athenian force under Hippocrates
and Demosthenes was let into the long walls linking Megara to Nisaea, and
captured Nisaea; but the city of Megara remained closed, the Spartan Brasi-
das, preparing for his expedition to the north (cf. p. 111), frightened the Athe-
nians away, and the oligarchic exiles returned and took control of Megara (IV.
66–74). In the winter the Megarians recaptured and destroyed the long walls,
but Athens retained Nisaea (IV. 109. i).
In the winter of 424/3 another plot misﬁred. Pro-Athenian democrats in
Boeotia had made contact with Athens, and there was a plan by which simul-
taneously Siphae, on the Gulf of Corinth, was to be betrayed to Demosthenes,
who would arrive by sea from Naupactus, there was to be a rising at Chaeronea,
in the north-west, and an Athenian army was to march out to the sanctuary of
Delian Apollo (Delium), in the south-east. It is not clear whether there was
enough support for Athens across Boeotia to make this worthwhile; but, in any
case, the plot leaked out, and the intended synchronism broke down, so that
the Boeotians did not have to deal with all the threats at the same time. Boeo-
tian forces occupied Siphae and Chaeronea; Demosthenes went to Siphae but
withdrew. After that Hippocrates with in theory a full levy of citizen and metic
hoplites (but perhaps not a fully effective levy, since 7,000 is a rather low ﬁgure)
marched to Delium and fortiﬁed it, and then with most of his force set out for
Athens. The Boeotians under Pagondas assembled at Tanagra, with 7,000
hoplites, 1,000 cavalry and a large number of light-armed troops.They attacked
the Athenians, charging downhill; the Thebans on the right were, unusually,
twenty-ﬁve deep (eight deep was normal); as tended to happen in hoplite battles
(cf. Thuc. V. 71. i, and pp. 128–9, on the battle of Mantinea in 418), the right
wing of each phalanx was getting the better of the ﬁghting; but when Pagondas
brought in some of the cavalry, whom he had held back out of sight, the Boeo-
tians defeated the Athenians. There followed arguments over the return of the
Athenian dead and the status of Delium; eventually the Boeotians recaptured
Delium (IV. 76–7, 89–101. iv). An Athenian expedition to Euboea (Philoch.
FGrH 328 F 130: not in Thucydides) may have been a response to unrest after
Delium. In 423 the Thebans destroyed the wall of pro-Athenian Thespiae, west
of Thebes (IV. 133. i); in 422 the Athenian fort of Panactum, in the mountains
between Attica and Boeotia, was betrayed to the Boeotians (V. 3. v).
110
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421

The North-East
Macedon was important as the best source of timber for shipbuilding; king
Perdiccas continued to shift between Athens and the Peloponnesians in his alle-
giance. Further east, Athens gained an alliance with the Thracian ruler Sitalces
in 431 (Thuc. II. 29, cf. 67, Ar. Ach. 134–73). Potidaea, after a long and expen-
sive siege, capitulated in winter 430/29 and was resettled as an Athenian colony
(II. 29. vi, 58, 67. i, 70; cf. M&L 66 = IG i3 514 ~ Fornara 129).
The Chalcidians based on Olynthus, and their neighbours the Bottiaeans,
continued in revolt against Athens (cf. p. 84); from the early years of the war
we know of a few isolated incidents. In 429 the Athenians attacked Spartolus,
west of Olynthus: hopes of betrayal did not materialise; they won a hoplite battle
but were driven off by their opponents’ cavalry and light-armed (II. 79). In the
following winter there was a plan for Sitalces to attack Perdiccas and the Chal-
cidians with Athenian support, but the Athenians, allegedly not believing that
he would act, failed to arrive. Sitalces did act: for a month he overran Macedon
and the territory towards Chalcidice, but he was then reconciled with Perdic-
cas and withdrew (II. 95–101).We learn from inscriptions that, in order to keep
them loyal (cf. p. 177), Athens made special arrangements for two cities of the
Delian League: Methone, on the coast of Macedon, at various points between
430 and 423 (M&L 65 = IG i3 61 ~ Fornara 128); and Aphytis, on the western
prong of Chalcidice, perhaps in 428/7 (IG i3 62).
In winter 426/5 we have the ﬁrst sign of the Spartans’ interest in the north,
in their acceptance of an invitation from the Trachinians to found a colony at
Heraclea, near the pass of Thermopylae (Thuc. III. 92–3: NB 92. iv). After the
Athenians’ successes at Pylos and Cythera, many Spartans began to lose heart
for the war; but at some point the Chalcidians and Brasidas asked for support,
and in the summer of 424 we ﬁnd the adventurous Brasidas preparing a force
of liberated helots and 1,000 Peloponnesian mercenaries to go to this part of
the Athenian empire which was accessible by land (IV. 70. i, 74. i, 79. ii). He
set out after supporting the oligarchs of Megara (cf. p. 110).Travelling via Hera-
clea and Thessaly he reached Macedon, where Perdiccas hoped to use him
against one of his own rivals, Arrhabaeus, but Perdiccas and Brasidas quar-
relled, and Perdiccas then reduced his support for Brasidas (IV. 78–83).
Brasidas next went to Acanthus, on the east coast of Chalcidice, where the
citizens were divided.Thucydides gives him a speech, and says he made similar
speeches elsewhere (‘he was not a bad speaker for a Spartan’: IV. 84. ii): he
insists that he has come as a liberator, not to substitute one master for another
or to support one party against another – but he will devastate their crops if
they refuse to cooperate. The Acanthians found his speech attractive (but IV.
108. v describes one of his claims as enticing but untrue), and were afraid for
their grapes, not yet harvested: by a secret ballot they decided to go over to him
(IV. 84–8). Other successes followed, the greatest at the Athenian colony of
Amphipolis in winter 424/3: the historian Thucydides, serving as an Athenian
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421
111

general, travelled from Thasos in time to keep Eïon, on the coast, in Athenian
hands but not Amphipolis; and for that he was exiled, possibly at the instance
of Cleon (Marcellinus, Life of Thuc. 46). The cities were inclined to write off
Athens, and more of them joined Brasidas. The Athenians sent out garrison
forces, and Brasidas appealed to Sparta for reinforcements but without success
(IV. 102–16).
In the spring of 423 those who were anxious for peace negotiated a year’s
truce between Sparta and Athens, which they hoped would lead to a lasting set-
tlement. Scione, on the western prong of Chalcidice, went over to Brasidas after
the truce was made but before the news of it arrived: he refused to give it up,
and nearby Mende joined him too. Cleon carried a decree for Scione’s recap-
ture, and although the truce held elsewhere it did not hold in the north-east
(IV. 117–23). While Brasidas again fought for Perdiccas and quarrelled with
him, an Athenian force under Nicias and Nicostratus arrived, recovered Mende
and started to besiege Scione. By now Sparta had dispatched reinforcements
to Brasidas, but the currently pro-Athenian Perdiccas arranged to prevent the
main body from travelling through Thessaly, though some men reached Brasi-
das and some of them were appointed as governors of cities (IV. 124–32).
Early in 422 Brasidas made an unsuccessful attack on Potidaea. The truce
was prolonged until August (Thuc.V. 1: cf. p. 113).When it ﬁnally lapsed, Cleon
had himself sent to the north-east with a substantial force. He recovered Torone,
on the middle prong of Chalcidice (a creditable achievement), and went to
Eïon. Brasidas was based in Amphipolis. When the Athenian army grew impa-
tient, Cleon took it out to reconnoitre. Brasidas saw the Athenians, and when
they turned back towards Eïon he attacked and defeated them; Brasidas and
Cleon were both killed. Thucydides exaggerates the heroism of Brasidas and
the cowardice of Cleon, but it does seem that the Athenians were caught in a
trap which they ought to have avoided. Amphipolis adopted Brasidas in place
of the Athenian Hagnon as its founding hero, and Athens was never to recover
it; the surviving Athenians sailed home (V. 2–3, 6–11). At the end of the summer
the Spartans again sent reinforcements to the north-east, but the Thessalians
obstructed them, and on hearing of Brasidas’ death they turned back (V.
12–13).
The Progress of the War
At ﬁrst the Athenians spent their money irresponsibly, and Pericles may have
been more optimistic than Thucydides was prepared to admit. Athens survived
the Peloponnesian invasions, and suppressed the revolt of Mytilene; the Pelo-
ponnesians survived the Athenian attacks, but learned how far they were infe-
rior to the Athenians in skill at sea.The Athenians were doing somewhat better
than the Peloponnesians, but there was no prospect of a quick result.
In 430 Athens was struck by a plague, which persisted until 426/5; the crowd-
ing of the people inside the fortiﬁcations during the summer helped it to spread.
112
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421

Thucydides gives a vivid account both of the symptoms and of the effect on
the Athenians’ morale, but the disease has not been, and probably cannot be,
conclusively identiﬁed. It killed about a third of the hoplites and cavalry, and
presumably a similar proportion of the rest of the population (II. 47. iii–54, cf.
57–9, III. 87. i–iii).Whereas in 431 Pericles was criticised for his defensive policy
(II. 21. iii–22. i), in 430 he was criticised for leading Athens into the war: he
was deposed and ﬁned, and the Athenians attempted to make peace with
Sparta. As was to happen so often, peace was not made: the state which had
the upper hand thought total victory was within its grasp. Pericles was re-elected
and the war continued; he died, weakened by the plague, in autumn 429 (II.
59–65. iv; deposition Diod. Sic. XII. 45. iv, Plut. Per. 35. iii–v).
After that the Athenians brought their ﬁnances under control and risked
more adventurous strategies. Some resulted in failures or empty successes, but
the occupation of Pylos in 425 and Cythera in 424 put Athens in a position to
exert pressure on Sparta, and in 425 it was Sparta’s turn to make peace offers
which Athens turned down. But Pylos and Cythera were not effectively
exploited, and Athens’ run of successes was followed by a run of failures – at
Megara in 424, in Boeotia in 424/3, in the north-east from 424 to 422. From
425 there were some Spartans who wanted peace (although that would mean
deserting their actual and potential allies), and some Athenians turned towards
peace too. Hence the year’s truce of spring 423, renewed (as a corrupt sentence
in Thucydides almost conceals) until August 422. Cleon and Brasidas were par-
ticularly eager to continue the war; and after they were killed Nicias in Athens
and king Plistoanax of Sparta (exiled after the Thirty Years’ Peace [cf. p. 52]
but brought back 427–426) were able to work for peace (Thuc. V. 16. i).
From the beginning both sides had appreciated the potential importance of
involving Persia in the war (Thuc. II. 7. i, cf. Archidamus in I. 82. i). In 430
Peloponnesian envoys to Persia were betrayed to the Athenians in Thrace and
executed. In spring 425 Aristophanes’ Acharnians featured an Athenian embassy
which had spent years in luxury without obtaining money from Persia (61–125).
In winter 425/4 the Athenians captured a Persian envoy bound for Sparta, and
had his letters translated: they complained that a series of envoys from Sparta
had not brought a clear and consistent message – presumably because Persia
was demanding the return of the Asiatic Greeks, to Sparta’s great embarrass-
ment. The Athenians sent the envoy back with envoys of their own, but when
they learned of the death of King Artaxerxes (in winter 424/3) they abandoned
their mission (IV. 50). After that, apart from one sentence (in V. 1),Thucydides
has no mention of the Persians until 413/2 (VIII. 5). However, in 392/1 the
orator Andocides gave as an example of the Athenians’ folly their making an
alliance with the King through Andocides’ uncle Epilycus, but then abandon-
ing it to support the rebel Amorges (III. Peace 29; Amorges appears in Thuc.
VIII [cf. p. 143]). An additional fragment of an inscription makes it clear that
the Heraclides honoured for helping towards a settlement with the King was
Heraclides of Clazomenae, who later became an Athenian citizen, and whose
help must have been given before the end of the Peloponnesian War (M&L 70
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421
113

with 1998 Addenda = IG i3 227 with Addenda ~ Fornara 138 lacking additional
fragment: end 424/3?). It can now hardly be doubted that, although Thucydides
mentions the unsuccessful embassy but not the successful, when the bastard
Darius II had disposed of rival claimants and established himself as King (by
March 423), the Athenians did make a treaty with him. It would have been even
harder for them than for the Spartans to hand over the Asiatic Greeks, but in
423 both the Athenians and Darius were insecure, and a non-aggression pact
could have satisﬁed both sides.
Peace discussions between Athens and Sparta were renewed in 422/1.
Sparta’s anxiety was increased by the fact that its thirty-year peace with Argos
was about to expire; and at the end of the winter, to increase pressure on Athens,
Sparta announced plans to set up a hostile fort against Attica. What is com-
monly called the Peace of Nicias was made in the spring, about ten years after
the beginning of the war, to last for ﬁfty years, on the basis that prisoners taken
and conquests made during the war were to be returned, with a few qualiﬁca-
tions:Thebes was to keep Plataea and Athens Nisaea, on the pretext that these
had surrendered voluntarily, but it was explicitly stated that Amphipolis was to
be returned to Athens; six cities in the north-east were to pay tribute at Aris-
tides’ rate but could otherwise be neutral if they wished, but others including
Scione could be treated by the Athenians as they liked. If it had been fully imple-
mented this was a peace which should have satisﬁed Pericles and Thucydides:
the Athenian empire had survived the assault on it and Sparta had failed to
assert the freedom of the Greeks. But it was not fully implemented. Among
Sparta’s allies, Boeotia, Corinth, Megara and Elis did not share Sparta’s desire
to end the war, and all rejected the peace because territorial demands of theirs
were not satisﬁed (cf. pp. 124–5); when Amphipolis refused to be handed back
to Athens, the Spartan governor acquiesced. To reassure Athens, Sparta added
to the peace a ﬁfty-year alliance, and the Athenians then returned their pris-
oners from Sphacteria and so gave up their ability to put further pressure on
Sparta (V. 14–24). Without full acceptance and implementation on the Pelo-
ponnesian side Athens was unwise to accept the peace; and the polarisation of
Greece which had been unstable in the 430’s was to remain unstable.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
See in general Cawkwell, Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War; Kagan, The Archidamian
War; Lazenby, The Peloponnesian War. For many campaigns there are valuable investiga-
tions in Pritchett’s series Studies in Ancient Greek Topography.
Hanson, Warfare and Agriculture in Classical Greece, points out that olives and vines
are hard to destroy and that Peloponnesian invasions could not do long-term damage
to Athenian agriculture; J. A. Thorne, ‘Warfare and Agriculture: The Economic Aspect
of Devastation in Classical Greece’, GRBS xliii 2001, 225–53, stresses in response that
appropriation and destruction of the grain harvest would have a serious short-term
effect.
114
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421

On episodes involving the Athenian Demosthenes see Roisman, The General Demo-
sthenes. The suggestion that his Aetolian campaign was part of a three-pronged attack
on Boeotia was popular in the early twentieth century and was accepted by Kagan, The
Archidamian War, 199–200, 202; difﬁculties are noted by Rhodes, Thucydides: History,
III, 247, 252. On Pylos see also M. H. B. Marshall, ‘Cleon and Pericles: Sphacteria’,
G&R2 xxxi 1984, 19–36; Wilson, Pylos 425 BC; and, for different views on the problem
of distances, R. A. Bauslaugh, ‘The Text of Thucydides iv. 8 6 and the South Channel
at Pylos’, JHS xcix 1979, 1–6, C. Rubincam, ‘The Topography of Pylos and Sphakteria
and Thucydides’ Measurements of Distance’, JHS cxxi 2001, 77–90.
On the campaign in the north-east which ended with the battle of Amphipolis, further
successes of Cleon, suppressed by Thucydides, were suggested by A. B.West and B. D.
Meritt, ‘Cleon’s Amphipolitan Campaign and the Assessment List of 421’, AJA2 xxix
1925, 54–69, A. G. Woodhead, ‘Thucydides’ Portrait of Cleon’, Mnem.4 xiii 1960,
289–317 at 304–6, but shown to be unlikely by W. K. Pritchett, ‘The Woodheadean
Interpretation of Kleon’s Amphipolitan Campaign’, Mnem.4 xxvi 1973, 373–86, B.
Mitchell, ‘Kleon’s Amphipolitan Campaign’, Hist. xl 1991, 170–92 at 176–82. On the
site of Amphipolis see Lazaridis, Amphipolis.
On the plague at Athens see A. J. Holladay and J. F. C. Poole, ‘Thucydides and the
Plague of Athens’, CQ2 xxix 1979, 282–300, with various further studies, all collected
in Holladay, Athens in the Fifth Century, ch. 9A–F.
The Peace of Epilycus was believed in by H. T. Wade-Gery, ‘The Peace of Kallias’,
HSCP Supp. i 1940, 121–56 at 127–32 = his Essays in Greek History, 201–32 at 207–11;
rejected by D. L. Stockton, ‘The Peace of Callias’, Hist. viii 1959, 61–79 at 74–9; made
virtually certain by M. B. Walbank’s identiﬁcation of an additional fragment of M&L
70 = IG i3 227 ~ Fornara 138, in ‘A Correction to IG ii2 65’, ZPE xlviii 1982, 261–3,
‘Herakleides of Klazomenai: A New Join at the Epigraphical Museum’, ZPE li 1983,
183–4.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 431–421
115

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
429
death of Pericles
425
Acharnians, ﬁrst surviving comedy of Aristophanes
425
Cleon goes to Pylos
422
Cleon killed in battle of Amphipolis
Sources
Thucydides had a narrow view of what should be included in a history of the
Peloponnesian War: he makes clear his approval of Pericles and disapproval of
Pericles’ successors, but except in his extended treatment of the plague (cf. pp.
112–13) he gives only glimpses of the internal affairs of Athens. We therefore
have to turn to other literature of the late ﬁfth century.
One fascinating text is the pamphlet of the so-called Old Oligarch, the Athen-
ian Constitution preserved with the works of Xenophon but almost certainly not
written by him. It is a perverse defence of Athens’ democracy: the democracy
serves the interests of the ‘bad’ men, not of the ‘good’, but is appropriate to
Athens, where the lower-class men are important because they row the navy’s
ships, and it would not easily be overthrown. It begins with the ethos of the
democracy, the claim that metics and slaves are scarcely inferior to citizens,
Athens’ support for democrats in the allied states and the transfer of lawsuits
from there to Athens (ch. i). Next come an exposition of the advantages which
Athens enjoys as a sea power rather than a land power and comments on
11
The Athens of Cleon

comedy and the linking of democracy with lower-class interests (ch. ii). The
pamphlet ends with the busy-ness of Athens, support for democrats elsewhere
(occasional support for the upper classes has turned out unsuccessfully) and
the fact that Athens has few political exiles to form the basis for an attack on
the democracy (ch. iii).
When was this written, and in what circumstances? Suggestions have ranged
over the second half of the ﬁfth century, or even (to explain some resemblances
to Thucydides) a fourth-century writer producing a ﬁfth-century tract as a
rhetorical exercise. However, there are strong arguments for locating the 
pamphlet in the early years of the Peloponnesian War: references to Athens’
behaviour when the enemy invades ‘now’ (ii. 14–16), and to a sea power’s 
corresponding ability to raid the enemy’s land (ii. 4), look as if they were written
during the Archidamian War, when these things were happening. Since a refer-
ence to headlands or islands from which the mainland can be raided (ii. 13)
ﬁts Pylos and Cythera in 425–424, but a comment on a land army’s inability
to travel far from home (ii. 5) was refuted by Brasidas’ journey to the north-
east in 424, 425/4 is the best guess if we are looking for a precise date.
The sophists, the travelling teachers of the late ﬁfth century, were happy to
challenge all conventional wisdom, and the pamphlet should probably be seen
as an academic exercise from their circle rather than a manifesto written for
would-be revolutionaries. It offers a picture of an Athens where the democracy
can be criticised by men of the upper class but is not in serious danger – whereas
in 415 religious scandals were thought to be a sign of a plot against the demo-
cracy, and in 411 the democracy actually was overthrown (cf. pp. 157–9,
160–5). The claim that the rich suffer from the enemy invasions but the poor
do not (ii. 14) is in conﬂict with Thucydides (II. 65. ii), and is likely to be wrong
or at any rate exaggerated, since by no means all of the poor were landless
people living in the city.
Of the tragedians (cf. pp. 39–40),Aeschylus died in the middle of the century,
but Sophocles was still active and had been joined by Euripides. Sophocles
played some part in public life, as a hellenotamias in 443/2, a general in 441/0
and later, and one of the older citizens made probouloi in 413–411 to serve as
an emergency committee to put proposals to the assembly (cf. p. 160). His plays
belong, inevitably, to the intellectual climate of the time, as in the exploration
of the clashes between state and family, and divine law and human law, in
Antigone; but there is hardly any passage where we can detect an allusion or
response to contemporary events (Oedipus at Colonus 616–23 is the most likely
instance). Euripides did not have a public career; his plays seem to reﬂect the
thinking of a younger generation, with a more questioning attitude to the gods
and their justice, and a greater prominence given to ordinary people (in his
Electra, Electra has been married to an ordinary peasant, who treats his distin-
guished wife well). His plays can more easily be located in a particular context:
plays of the Archidamian War, such as Children of Heracles (430) and Suppliant
Women (c.422), show both hostility to Sparta and awareness of the horrors of
war, with the latter theme becoming more prominent over time; and the refusal
THE ATHENS OF CLEON
117

of the Thebans to return the bodies of the Argive dead in Suppliant Women is
likely to have been inspired by the refusal of the Boeotians to return the Athen-
ian dead after the battle of Delium in 424/3 (cf. p. 110). A lost play of Euripi-
des, the Cresphontes, contained a passage longing for peace which was quoted
in the version of Hermocrates’ speech at the congress of Gela by the historian
Timaeus (FGrH 566 F 22 ap. Polyb. XII. 26. v) and was parodied in Aristo-
phanes’ Farmers of 425–421 (fr. 111 Kassel & Austin). Suppliant Women also
contains a remarkable passage (399–466) in which a Theban herald attacks and
the Athenian king Theseus defends the principle of democracy. Both tragedi-
ans give their characters speeches which employ the same kind of argument as
speeches in Thucydides: he and the men whose speeches he reported or recon-
structed were also products of the intellectual climate of the time.
By the 420’s we also have Athenian Old Comedy, which was very much con-
cerned with current personalities, politics, literature and philosophy, but in ways
which make historical interpretation difﬁcult and have led to considerable dis-
agreement among scholars. From Aristophanes we know of a play called Baby-
lonians (426), in which ‘he comedied allotted and elected ofﬁcials and Cleon’,
as a result of which he was attacked, and perhaps formally prosecuted, by Cleon
(Ar. Ach. 377–82 with schol.).We then have a series of surviving plays. In Achar-
nians (425) the hero makes a private peace treaty with Sparta, while the war
continues to rage around him. In Knights (424) Cleon, Nicias and Demosthenes
are slaves of Demos, and Demos is dominated by Cleon; but Cleon the vulgar
leather-seller is supplanted by an even more vulgar sausage-seller, who liber-
ates Demos from his thraldom. Clouds (423) represents or misrepresents
Socrates as a typical sophist, who is interested in celestial phenomena and
teaches the rhetorical skill of winning arguments by making the worse cause
appear the better. Wasps (422) focuses on the Athenians’ fondness for litigation,
with the young Hate-Cleon trying to cure his father Love-Cleon of his addic-
tion. In Peace (421, produced about the time when the Peace of Nicias 
was ratiﬁed, so written before then) the hero rescues Peace from her long 
imprisonment.
To see Aristophanes as a paciﬁst, or as an opponent of democracy or of fash-
ionable cleverness, is too simple-minded; but at the other extreme A.W. Gomme
was surely wrong to claim that he aimed only to amuse and ‘there can be no
wrong side in a play’. ‘Even comedy knows about justice’ (Ar. Ach. 500).
Longing for peace when one is suffering from war is perfectly natural: Aristo-
phanes was certainly not unpatriotic (Dicaeopolis begins the defence of his
treaty with ‘I hate the Spartans enormously’: Ach. 509), but it is possible to see
him as suggesting that better policies could have prevented the war and could
now end the war (Cleon’s rejection of peace is featured in Eq. 794–6, cf.
1331–2, 1387–95, written when Athens was doing well). On the causes of the
war he tells two different stories, in Ach. 514–38 and Peace 605–18, each focus-
ing on Megara and the personal involvement of Pericles: the stories are prob-
ably invented, but the concentration on Megara and Pericles may well reﬂect
public opinion in Athens, and the starving Megarian of Ach. 729–835 supports
118
THE ATHENS OF CLEON

the view of the decree against Megara as imposing economic sanctions (cf.
pp. 84–5, 177). The empire Aristophanes accepted, as all Athenians seem to
have accepted it: his only complaints are that ﬂattering speakers from the cities
can fool the Athenian demos and that the income ﬁnds its way into the pockets
of men like Cleon rather than those of the ordinary citizens (Vesp. 655–712: cf.
below).
The Athenian demos has a heart of gold, but is capable of being led astray by
clever and ﬂattering speakers – a weakness against which Aristophanes claims
to protect it (Ach. 633–42) and from which the sausage-seller cures it at the
end of Knights (1316–1408). If Cleon had prosecuted him, Aristophanes will
have had a particular reason to dislike Cleon; but there is enough consistency
between the plays to suggest that Aristophanes generally disliked upstart dem-
agogues like Cleon and was gentler in his treatment of leaders from an upper-
class background, and we can see the same kind of man behind his portrayal
of Cleon and that by Thucydides (cf. p. 120). It should not worry us that in
the 420’s Cleon was the most popular politician and Aristophanes was the most
popular comedian: good jokes can be enjoyed by the victims’ supporters as well
as by their opponents. And surely many Athenians would laugh at Love-Cleon
but still turn up to earn their stipend for jury service. It is not always clear how
we should take comments on particular events: in Eq. 52–7 Demosthenes com-
plains that Cleon had taken over, and taken the credit for, his own achievement
at Pylos – but is that how Demosthenes perceived it? or how others perceived
it? or a serious or not so serious suggestion of Aristophanes?
Aristophanes is interesting to the historian also for his background depic-
tions: of festivals, for instance in Ach. 237–79 and 1000–1234; and various pas-
sages allow us to put together a picture of proceedings in the assembly, from
the arrival of the citizens (Ach. 40–4) and the prayer and curse which began
the meeting (Thesm. 295–311, 331–51) to the formal closure of the meeting
(Ach. 172–3). Clouds shows us how the sophists could be seen by their oppo-
nents, whether or not Aristophanes actually was an opponent, and whether or
not Socrates in the 420’s actually was that kind of man; from the treatment of
Euripides in various plays, and of Aeschylus in Frogs, we can see what features
of their plays were thought worthy of caricature.
Athens in the 420’s
Thucydides in his ﬁnal assessment of Pericles writes that he,
since he was strong in both repute and intellect and was conspicuously incor-
ruptible, held the masses on a light rein and led them rather than let them lead
him. . . . The result was in theory democracy but in fact rule by the ﬁrst man.The
leaders who followed Pericles were more on a level with one another, and as each
strove to become ﬁrst they tended to abandon affairs to the people to gratify their
whims. (II. 65. viii–x)
THE ATHENS OF CLEON
119

The Aristotelian Athenian Constitution has an over-schematic list of paired 
aristocratic and democratic leaders, in which Thucydides son of Melesias 
and Pericles are followed by Nicias and Cleon. After Pericles’ death (in 429:
cf. p. 113) things became much worse:
It was then that the people ﬁrst took a champion who was not of good repute
among the better sort, whereas previously it was always men of the better sort
who were popular leaders. . . . Cleon, it seems, more than anyone else corrupted
the people by his wild impulses, and was the ﬁrst man who, when on the plat-
form, shouted, uttered abuse and made speeches with his clothes hitched up [to
make wild gesticulation easier], while everyone else spoke in an orderly manner.
(Ath. Pol. 28. i, iii)
Thucydides’ contrast between the era of Pericles and what followed is at 
best exaggerated, since Pericles was not an unchallenged leader, and Athens’
mechanisms did not allow any man to enjoy as much power as Thucydides attri-
butes to him (cf. pp. 56–62, 65–7).What was different about the era of Cleon?
After the generation of Pericles, nearly all political leaders were men not from
the old aristocracy (the most striking exception in the late ﬁfth century is Alci-
biades: cf. p. 122). For Aristophanes Cleon is a leather-seller, the latest in a
series of ‘sellers’ (NB Eq. 125–43), and the truth behind that appears to be that
his father owned a successful tanning business, on the proceeds of which he
himself was able to enter public life. He was born probably in the 470’s, and
may already have challenged Pericles in the 430’s (cf. p. 67). As well as coming
from a new kind of background, he adopted a new kind of political style. He is
not known to have held any ofﬁce until he took over Nicias’ generalship in 425
(cf. p. 105), and he is not known to have performed any liturgies, as rich men
commonly did to demonstrate their public-spiritedness and gain supporters (cf.
pp. 331–2): his ascendancy was due to his success in making persuasive
speeches in the assembly and law-courts.While Pericles’ manner seems to have
been aloof (Plut. Per. 5, 7), Aristophanes represents Cleon as given to making
wild promises, and wild accusations against his opponents; this matches Thucy-
dides’ description of him as ‘most violent’ and ‘most persuasive’ (III. 36. vi, IV.
21. iii) and his account of his denunciation of Nicias and his twenty-day promise
over Pylos (IV. 27. iii–v, 28. iv), and Ath. Pol.’s account of his manner of speak-
ing. He is the ﬁrst man in connection with whom we meet the concept of the
demagogos, ‘people-leader’ (Thuc. IV. 21. iii, cf. Ar. Eq. 191), and probably the
term was coined with reference to him and men like him. For Thucydides’ com-
plaint that leaders after Pericles gratiﬁed the whims of the people, cf., e.g., Ar.
Eq. 868–911 (and, in the fourth century, Demosthenes’ complaints against his
opponents, e.g. III. Ol. iii. 22, 30–1). Leading politicians had always had to be
able to make speeches; but the rise of the demagogues is paralleled by the rise
of sophists claiming to teach the art of argument as the key to success in public
life (cf. p. 117). If he prosecuted Aristophanes and was responsible for the exile
120
THE ATHENS OF CLEON

of Thucydides (cf. pp. 111–12, 118), they will both have had personal reasons
for disliking him.
In the generations of Cimon and Pericles the same men had dominated the
assembly and had held ofﬁce as generals, and the Athenians’ political leaders
were thus men who had been elected to ofﬁce. Now we begin to ﬁnd a dis-
tinction between politicians active in Athens and generals active abroad, and
sometimes particular politicians cooperated with particular generals: Demo-
sthenes, with whom Cleon cooperated over Pylos and perhaps on other occa-
sions, is not known to have been active in politics. Politicians who held ofﬁces
could be called to account in connection with those ofﬁces, as Pericles was
deposed in 430 (cf. p. 113), but politicians who merely made speeches, propos-
ing courses of action for which the assembly voted, were harder to control.This
helps to explain the use of such charges as deceiving the people (often accom-
panied by a charge of taking bribes, since there was no concept of ‘loyal oppo-
sition’ and it was believed that nobody would want to mislead his fellow citizens
unless a foreign enemy had paid him to do so), and the blurring of the line
between political misjudgment and illegality.
Nicias, about the same age as Cleon and paired with him in Ath. Pol.’s list,
came from a similar background: his wealth was derived from the silver mines
(Plut. Nic. 4. ii), and it is again likely that his father founded the family fortune.
But Nicias, although he was not one of the aristocrats, behaved like them and
tried to make himself acceptable to them. He was a religious and indeed a
scrupulous man (cf. pp. 138, 140). He frequently performed liturgies (cf. p.
156). He may have been general every year from 427/6 until his death in Sicily
in 413: he seems to have been a competent commander, but more anxious to
avoid failure than eager to achieve success.
Asking which of the two was closer to Pericles is not very proﬁtable. Cleon
had more adventurous ideas on how to ﬁght the war, while Pericles would prob-
ably have approved of Nicias’ peace in 421 and his opposition to the Sicilian
expedition in 413. Cleon agreed with Pericles on the need for ﬁrm control of
the empire (Athens’ rule is called a tyranny by Pericles in Thuc. II. 63. ii, by
Cleon in III. 37. ii; Pericles is not known to have proposed killing all the men
of a rebellious city, but he might have done if he had lived longer), and he sought
to dominate the assembly in his way as Pericles had in his. Xenophon has
Theramenes say that Nicias and his son, though the son was a victim of the
Thirty in 404, ‘never did anything populist (demotikon)’ (Hell. II. iii. 39); but
while Nicias’ brothers were both to be involved in oligarchy at the end of the
century, there is no evidence that he himself ever opposed the democracy.
Other politicians whom we encounter in the 420’s include Cleonymus, a pro-
poser of decrees including that to improve the collection of tribute in 426 (cf.
p. 92): he is represented by Aristophanes as a glutton and a coward, and justi-
ﬁed the latter charge by running away after the battle of Delium in 424/3.
Thudippus, proposer of the decree for reassessment of the tribute in 425, prob-
ably married Cleon’s daughter. Hyperbolus, who aspired to take Cleon’s place
THE ATHENS OF CLEON
121

after his death (cf. Ar. Peace 679–87), is represented both by Thucydides (VIII.
73. iii) and by Aristophanes (Nub. 549–52) as particularly contemptible, we do
not know why: he is described as a lamp-maker, and as early as 424 credited
with ambitions extending to Carthage (both in Eq. 1302–15). Alcibiades (born
at the end of the 450’s) is not mentioned by Thucydides until V. 43. ii, but we
are told there that because of a family connection with Sparta (his grandfather
had been Spartan proxenos but had renounced the position, probably when
Athens turned against Sparta at the end of the 460’s: cf. p. 41) he had looked
after the Spartan prisoners from Sphacteria, and felt insulted when his Spartan
connection was not used in the making of peace in 421. He was an aristocrat;
Alcibiades was a name taken from Sparta by his family (Thuc.VIII. 6. iii); when
his father Cleinias died at Coronea in 447/6 (cf. p. 51), he was brought up by
Pericles, to whom he was related through the Alcmaeonids. He was ﬂamboy-
ant, ambitious and selﬁsh; we happen now to have an inscription showing him
as proposer of a decree in 422/1 (IG i3 [Add.] 227 bis, with p. 945 on nos.
91–2).
The plague of the early 420’s (cf. pp. 112–13) was devastating in the number
of people who died from it and in its effect on the morale of all the Athenians.
There was a growing tendency in the second half of the ﬁfth century for edu-
cated men to look for natural rather than supernatural explanations of natural
phenomena (exempliﬁed almost always in Thucydides’ writing, but I. 23. iii is
exceptional; for Pericles see Plut. Per. 6). Thucydides says that the plague
afﬂicted the pious as badly as the impious (II. 47. iv, 53. iv); but some people
were prompted to wonder whether Athens had offended the gods. A sanctuary
of Heracles Alexikakos, ‘averter of evil’, was established in the city (schol. Ar.
Ran. 501), and in 420/19, when the Peace of Nicias had made Epidaurus acces-
sible, the cult of the healing god Asclepius was brought from there to Athens
(cf. below). The ‘puriﬁcation’ of Delos (cf. p. 109) in winter 426/5, when the
plague ﬁnally ended, may well have been another response to the plague
(claimed not by Thucydides but by Diod. Sic. XII. 56. vi–vii).
The building programme on the acropolis had been wound up in 434/3 (cf.
p. 83), but it now appears that the war had little effect on building elsewhere
in Athens and Attica (cf. p. 65). On the acropolis, the temple of Athena Nike
outside the Propylaea was perhaps planned in the 440’s but built or at any rate
completed in the 420’s (cf. pp. 63–4); the statue was dedicated in 425 (IG ii2
403). In the agora, the Stoa of Zeus Eleutherios (‘of Freedom’) and South Stoa
I are dated to the 420’s, the Hephaesteum was completed then, and some
smaller sanctuaries were refurbished. The cult of Asclepius was brought from
Epidaurus in 420/19 (cf. above) – by a rich citizen, Telemachus, who had a
sanctuary built below the south cliff of the acropolis, west of the theatre of
Dionysus, and commemorated his foundation in a monument set up c.400 (IG
ii2 4960/1/3, cf. 4325). Among buildings elsewhere in Attica, the temple of
Nemesis at Rhamnus is also dated to the 420’s. For the temple of Athena Nike
(and after it the Erechtheum: cf. pp. 159–60, 170) the Ionic order was used,
and it has been suggested that the change from Doric to Ionic was a political
122
THE ATHENS OF CLEON

statement – but the other major buildings of the 420’s are still Doric, and there
is no evidence earlier than the fourth century for the use of these names for the
orders.
One ﬁeld in which Athens is not unique but participated in a trend to be
seen across Greece is that for the ﬁrst three quarters of the ﬁfth century lavish
private burials had been avoided except by a few families, but from c.425 such
burials came back into fashion.
In spite of the war, in spite of the plague, Athens was a city which was able
to ﬁnd the money and labour for public buildings, and in which the democracy
was not seriously challenged. Leaders like Cleon inserted a frenetic note, which
had been absent in the time of Pericles and of which Thucydides and Aristo-
phanes disapproved; until 424 the war brought more successes than failures.
Athens was still a conﬁdent city.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
The Athenian Constitution of the Old Oligarch is included in the Loeb and other edi-
tions of Xenophon’s Minor Works; the LACTOR translation has been revised by R.
Osborne; there is to be an edition with translation and commentary by J. L. Marr and
P. J. Rhodes. The Loeb editor, G. W. Bowersock, dates the pamphlet to the late 440’s
on account of the examples of Athens’ tolerating oligarchies given in iii. 11; among those
arguing from ch. ii for a date between 431 and 424 is W. G. Forrest, ‘The Date of 
the Pseudo-Xenophontic Athenaion Politeia’, Klio lii 1970, 107–16, cf. ‘An Athenian
Generation Gap’, YCS xxiv 1975, 37–52 at 43–7; a fourth-century rhetorical work,
acquainted with Thucydides, is the suggestion of S. Hornblower, ‘The Old Oligarch
(Pseudo-Xenophon’s Athenaion Politeia) and Thucydides: A Fourth-Century Date for
the Old Oligarch?’ in Polis and Politics . . . M. H. Hansen, 363–84.
Murray, Aristophanes, was typical of older studies in its straightforward willingness to
see political attitudes and messages in Aristophanes’ plays. For extreme opposition to
political interpretation see A. W. Gomme, ‘Aristophanes and Politics’, CR lii 1938,
97–109 = his More Essays in Greek History and Literature, 70–91; for a return to politi-
cal interpretation see de Ste. Croix, The Origins of the Peloponnesian War, app. 29; for jus-
tiﬁcation of the view that Aristophanes dealt more kindly with upper-class politicians
see A. H. Sommerstein, ‘How to Avoid Being a Komodoumenos’, CQ2 xlvi 1996, 327–56.
There is a study of Aristophanes in his context by MacDowell, Aristophanes and Athens;
carefully nuanced interpretations are offered by Pelling, Literary Texts and the Greek 
Historian, chs. 7, 8, 10; in favour of a formal prosecution after Babylonians see A. H.
Sommerstein, ‘Comedy and the Unspeakable’, in Law, Rhetoric and Comedy in Classical
Athens . . . D. M. MacDowell, ch. 13.
Demagogues were presented positively, as structurally necessary in a democracy in
which decisions were taken by mass meetings, by M. I. Finley, ‘Athenian Demagogues’,
P&P xxi April 1962, 3–24; reprinted in various collections; revised in his Democracy
Ancient and Modern2, ch. 2. The change in Athenian politics in the late ﬁfth century is
studied by Connor, The New Politicians of Fifth-Century Athens.
On burial practices in Athens and in Greece generally see I. Morris, ‘Everyman’s
Grave’, in Boegehold and Scafuro (eds.), Athenian Identity and Civic Ideology, 67–101.
THE ATHENS OF CLEON
123

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
421
Peace of Nicias
420
Athenian alliance with Argos and other Peloponnesian
states
418
Spartan victory in battle of Mantinea
416
Athenian capture of Melos
415–413
Athenian expedition to Sicily
413
Spartan occupation of Decelea in Attica
The Unstable Peace
In 421 the Peloponnesian War appeared to be over.Athens and Sparta had made
a ﬁfty-year peace and alliance by which Sparta had given up its hope of break-
ing the Athenian empire. But a peace which resulted from Sparta’s failure rather
than Athens’ success might in any case not have been long-lasting; and, as we
have seen (cf. p. 114), the terms of the peace were not fully implemented and
several of Sparta’s allies refused to swear to it.Thucydides, it seems, hoped that
the peace would last, but he came to see that it had not lasted, and to regard
the whole conﬂict from 431 to 404 as a single war: in V. 25–6 he gives us his
‘second preface’, linking what followed to the Archidamian War.
The Peloponnese was now seriously divided, and Corinth set about building
up an alliance of states which had not accepted the peace. Corinth was not to
12
The Peloponnesian War:
421–413

regain cities in the north-west to which it laid claim (V. 30. ii: Acarnania may
not have been a party to the peace). It was joined by Mantinea, which had
recently subdued some of its neighbours and had fought inconclusively against
Tegea (V. 29. i, cf. 33, IV. 134), Elis, which resented Sparta’s support of
Lepreum against it (V. 31. i–v, 34. i: cf. pp. 98–9), and the Chalcidians based
on Olynthus, not wishing to become tributary to Athens once more (Olynthus
was one of the cities made tributary but allowed to be neutral,V. 18. v; in general
the Thraceward cities not in Athenian hands did not accept the peace, V. 21.
i–ii), in making a defensive alliance with Argos, whose thirty-year peace with
Sparta was now expiring (V. 27–31). The allies seem to have had no common
purpose beyond unwillingness to be aligned with Sparta. Megara, which was
not to regain Nisaea, and Boeotia, which was to lose Panactum (V. 17. ii, 18.
vii), refused to join, claiming to ﬁnd oligarchic Sparta a more congenial partner
than democratic Athens (V. 31. vi: contrast the attraction of Athens’ democracy
for Mantinea and Argos, V. 29. i, 44. i); Mantinea’s enemy Tegea also was
approached but refused (V. 32. iii–iv).The Boeotians made their own, separate
‘ten-day’ truce with Athens (V. 26. ii, 32. v), perhaps one that could be ended
at ten days’ notice, and at some point the Chalcidians did likewise (VI. 7. iv).
Corinth tried to get the same terms, but was unsuccessful and had to remain
in a state of ‘treatyless ceaseﬁre’ (V. 32. v–vii).
Because of Sparta’s failure to enforce the peace in the north-east and on all
its allies (in particular, the Boeotians still held Panactum), Athens, while with-
drawing the Messenians of Naupactus from Pylos (and ﬁnding a home in
Cephallenia for the helots who had deserted to them), retained the site and
other places which it was supposed to give up (V. 35. ii–viii). Sparta meanwhile
intervened in Arcadia to liberate the communities taken over by Mantinea, sent
a garrison of liberated helots to Lepreum, and for a time subjected to partial
disfranchisement the prisoners returned from Athens (V. 33–4). In the north-
east Athens captured Scione and killed all the men; there should have been
hardly any women and children left in the city to be enslaved (V. 32. i). In the
following winter, however, Olynthus captured Mecyberna, nearby on the coast,
although there was an Athenian garrison in it (V. 39. i).
In the winter of 421/0 matters started to become more complicated. When
Sparta’s new ofﬁcial year began (probably after the autumnal equinox), two 
of the new ephors, Cleobulus and Xenares, were men opposed to the peace
with Athens. After a conference in Sparta had achieved nothing, they suggested
to the Boeotian and Corinthian representatives that Boeotia should join the
alliance which Corinth and others had made with Argos, and swing that alliance
into alignment with Sparta; some Argives also were eager to bring Boeotia into
the alliance, but their aim was to create a bloc which would be a match for
Sparta. Megara was to be brought in too. But the plan broke down through 
an excess of secrecy. The senior federal ofﬁcials of Boeotia, the Boeotarchs,
ﬁrst proposed a defensive alliance of Boeotia, Corinth, Megara and the north-
eastern cities opposed to Athens; but they failed to explain to the Boeotian
councils the pro-Spartan purpose behind joining the Argive alliance,
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
125

and the councils rejected the plan out of fear that it would alienate Sparta (V.
36–8).
The Spartans wanted the Boeotians to give them Panactum so that in accor-
dance with the Peace of Nicias they could return that to Athens and themselves
recover Pylos. Early in 420 the Boeotians made it a condition of this transfer
that Sparta should grant them an alliance – and they demolished the fort before
handing over the site (V. 36. ii, 39. ii–iii, 42. i). Argos, having heard no more
from Boeotia, and supposing that Sparta’s dealings with Boeotia had Athens’
consent, began to fear that it would be isolated, and so itself entered into nego-
tiations with Sparta, obtaining a draft of a ﬁfty-year peace with limited rights
to ﬁght over the territory disputed between them. But Sparta had not had
Athens’ consent, its alliance with Boeotia was therefore a breach of its alliance
with Athens, and the Athenians were angered by the destruction of Panactum,
and afraid that if Argos joined Sparta they would be isolated (V. 42, 43. iii).
This provided an opportunity for those Athenians who were opposed to the
Peace of Nicias, in particular Alcibiades. He invited Argos, Elis and Mantinea
to send envoys to Athens; at the same time, to prevent a breach, Sparta sent
envoys, one of whom was Endius, from the family linked to Alcibiades’ family.
The story which Thucydides then tells is difﬁcult to believe, but it is hard to
imagine a convincing scenario of which it might be a distortion. The Spartans
appeared ﬁrst before the council in Athens, and said that they were autokratores
(‘had full powers’, but the expression is often used in circumstances where it is
not clear how full the powers are) to settle the disputes. Alcibiades spoke to
them privately and promised that if they did not admit to the assembly that
they were autokratores he would help them to obtain the result they wanted.
However, in the assembly, when the Spartans did deny that they were auto-
kratores, Alcibiades denounced them. An earthquake led to the adjournment of
the assembly. When the assembly resumed, Nicias had himself and others sent
on a deputation to Sparta, but they achieved nothing, and at Alcibiades’
prompting Athens made a hundred-year defensive alliance with Argos, Elis 
and Mantinea. However, as relations between Athens and Sparta worsened,
Corinth’s alienation from Sparta was fading: it was not represented in Athens,
and afterwards refused an invitation to join the new alliance (V. 43–8, 50. v, cf.
IG i3 83).
Now Sparta had an alliance with Boeotia as well as with Athens, Athens had
an alliance with Argos and other Peloponnesians as well as with Sparta, and
Athens might be able to challenge Sparta on land in the Peloponnese as it could
not in the Archidamian War. However, although the next few years were to see
serious conﬂict between Sparta and Athens, it did not suit either to say that the
Peace of Nicias and their alliance were at an end.
Renewed Fighting
420 was an Olympic year, and at the beginning of the Olympic truce Sparta
continued its support for Lepreum by sending an army there. Elis responded
126
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413

by excluding Sparta and Lepreum from the festival. Afraid that Sparta might
use force, it was joined by the other members of the alliance in setting up a gar-
rison. Sparta did not break the peace, but harboured a grudge for twenty years
(V. 49–50. iv: cf. p. 205). In the winter the Spartan colony at Heraclea, near
Thermopylae, was defeated by the neighbouring peoples and its governor 
was killed; in summer 419, to prevent it from falling into Athenian hands, the
Boeotians took it over, to Sparta’s annoyance (V. 51–52. i; the Boeotians 
invited by Heraclea according to Diod. Sic. XII. 77. iv); it was apparently under
Spartan control again by 413/2 (cf. VIII. 3. i).
In 419 the Argive alliance tried to put pressure on Corinth. First Alcibiades
succeeded in taking an allied army through the Peloponnese to Patrae, in
Achaea, and encouraged it to build long walls down to the Gulf of Corinth, but
he was prevented by Corinth and Sicyon from establishing a fort at Rhium, at
the mouth of the Gulf (V. 52. ii). Argos began a war against Epidaurus, with
two expeditions, the second supported by Alcibiades; two Spartan expeditions
were halted by unfavourable auspices; in a conference at Mantinea summoned
by Athens, Corinth was not won over (V. 53–5). In the winter Sparta sent a gar-
rison to Epidaurus by sea; Argos protested that the Athenians ought to have
prevented that; and the Athenians solemnly recorded that Sparta was in breach
of the Peace of Nicias, and reinstated in Pylos the helots from Cephallenia 
(V. 56).
In 418 the Spartans decided that a major effort was needed, and under king
Agis assembled an allied army (including Corinthians and Boeotians) at Phlius
for an attack on Argos (see map 4). The Argives went out on the main road to
Nemea to confront the attackers, but Agis divided his forces: he took a route
through the hills via Orneae to the Argive plain, a contingent including the
Corinthians took a route bypassing Nemea, and another contingent including
the Boeotians was to take the main road. When Agis reached the plain, he was
between the city of Argos and the Argive army; the Argive army, which had
turned back and had brushed past the Corinthian contingent, was between Agis
and the Boeotian contingent. On each side the ordinary soldiers thought they
were in a winning position but their commanders did not; which side was in
the winning position depends on how far away the Boeotians were, and Thucy-
dides suggests that they were near enough for the advantage to lie with the Spar-
tans.Two leading Argives sympathetic to Sparta approached Agis, who accepted
their offer of a four-month truce. The armies dispersed without ﬁghting, but
the commanders on each side were in trouble, being thought to have thrown
away a good opportunity: Agis was given a suspended sentence, and a board of
advisers to prevent future errors (V. 57–60, 63).
An Athenian contingent reached Argos afterwards. Alcibiades was present,
but as an envoy, not a general: it is unclear whether the Athenians could not
arrive earlier or this year men less enthusiastic for the alliance were more inﬂu-
ential (more Athenians were to arrive after the battle of Mantinea: cf. pp.
128–9). The allies attacked and won over Orchomenus, in northern Arcadia;
when they chose Tegea rather than Lepreum as their next objective, the Eleans,
who had been present at Argos, returned home (V. 61–2).
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
127

When sympathisers in Tegea appealed urgently for help, the Spartans under
Agis hurried there and summoned their allies (cf. map 5). The Argive alliance
occupied the hills to the east of Mantinea. First Agis went within shouting dis-
tance of the enemy but withdrew.Then, to provoke the enemy into coming down
to the plain, he diverted a stream so that it would ﬂood Mantinean territory.
Finally he marched north, and was caught unexpectedly by the enemy march-
ing against him (the surprise is easier to understand if there was a wood in the
narrow part of the hour-glass-shaped plain, blocking the view; but the wood is
not mentioned until Paus.VIII. 11. i, v, of the second century AD). Hoplite pha-
lanxes always tended to sidle to the right (cf. p. 251), and on this occasion each
was too far to the right for an effective encounter. Agis ordered his left wing to
move to the left, and his right centre to move into the gap; the left wing did
move but the right centre did not, and he went into battle with a gap in his line.
Now, if ever, the Spartan army ought to have been defeated, but it was not:
128
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
N
10 miles
10 km
Argos
Corinth
Phlius
Nemea
Cleonae
Orneae
Mycenae
Saminthus
Sicyon
G u l f    o f    C o r i n t h
Gulf of
Argos
Mt
Celussa
Treton Pass
Map 4
The vicinity of Argos (after B. W. Henderson, The Great War Between Athens
and Sparta [London: Macmillan, 1927], p. 308)

Spartan skill and discipline were still too much for an opposing army of allies
who had little experience of ﬁghting together. Agis, in the centre, defeated the
Argives and then rescued his left wing; the Athenians, on the left of the oppos-
ing army, were able to withdraw but both their generals were killed. Spartan
reinforcements and allies, on their way to Mantinea, were not needed (V. 64–75.
iii). This battle of Mantinea was the largest hoplite battle in the Peloponnesian
War, with perhaps 11,000 on the Spartan side and 10,000 on the other (for
Spartiate numbers cf. p. 216): whereas a defeat for Sparta would have been 
disastrous, this victory enabled the Spartans to reassert their leadership in the
Peloponnese, and for the Athenians and Argives it would have been better not
to have tried than to have tried and failed so clearly.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
129
3 miles
4 km
TEGEA
(to Sparta)
R. Zanovistas
(to Argos)
(to Orchomenus)
MANTINEA
Mt.
Alesium
Pelagos Wood?
(to Argos)
Heracleum
R. Sarandopotamos
N
(to Hysiae)
Map 5
The vicinity of Mantinea (after J. F. Lazenby, The Peloponnesian War [London:
Routledge, 2004], p. 119, map 7)

Epidaurus took advantage of the engagement at Mantinea to attack Argos;
but after the battle the defeated allies, joined by Elis and reinforcements from
Athens, struck back and began a blockade of Epidaurus (V. 75. iv–vi).
Defeat improved the prospects of those Argives who sympathised with
Sparta: in the winter, despite the presence of Alcibiades arguing on the other
side, a draft was produced and a ﬁnal version agreed of a ﬁfty-year treaty of the
Spartans and their allies with the Argives and their allies, which apparently
envisaged a leadership of the Peloponnese shared between Sparta and Argos (it
was not to last long enough to be put to the test). They won over Perdiccas of
Macedon and renewed Sparta’s alliance with the Chalcidians of Olynthus; the
Athenians in obedience to Argos withdrew from Epidaurus; Mantinea came to
terms with Sparta (a thirty-year treaty: Xen. Hell. V. ii. 2) and gave up its claim
to the neighbouring communities. Sparta established a narrower oligarchy in
Sicyon (the ﬁrst attested instance of such constitutional interference by Sparta;
to be followed by interference in Achaea the following summer,V. 82. i), and a
pro-Spartan oligarchy came to power in Argos (V. 76–81).
But Argos was not to remain pro-Spartan and oligarchic for long. In the
summer of 417 the democrats overthrew the oligarchs at the time of the Spartan
Gymnopaediae: the Spartans postponed the festival and set out to support the
oligarchs, but turned back on learning that they were too late. Envoys from both
sides went to Sparta, and the Spartans decided to intervene but did not act;
the Argives with Athenian help (attributed by Plut. Alc. 15. iv–v to Alcibiades)
started building long walls down to the sea. In the winter Sparta and its allies
(except Corinth: we do not know why) attacked Argos: they hoped for treach-
ery, but in vain; they demolished the new walls; and on their way back they cap-
tured Hysiae, south-west of Argos, and killed all the free inhabitants. Argos then
raided Phlius, which had taken in most of the oligarchic exiles (V. 82. ii–83. iii).
Argos’ alliance with Athens was ﬁnally renewed in spring 416 (IG i3 86).
Alcibiades went to Argos and deported three hundred Spartan sympathisers 
(V. 84. i); the Argives attacked Phlius again but were caught in an ambush (V.
115. i). In winter 416/5 an intended Spartan attack on Argos was halted by
unfavourable auspices, and in Argos more Spartan sympathisers were arrested
(V. 116. i). Later Sparta and its allies (again without Corinth) did attack Argos
and established exiled oligarchs and a garrison in Orneae, north-west of the
city; but afterwards Argos and Athens attacked Orneae, the men escaped and
the town was destroyed (VI. 7. i–ii). Alcibiades had been supporting the anti-
Spartan democrats, but in summer 415 his friends in Argos were suspected of
plotting against the democracy, and to reassure the democrats Athens handed
over for execution the men deported the previous year (VI. 61. iii). In 414 the
Spartans set out to attack Argos but were halted by an earthquake, after which
Argos raided the disputed territory of Thyrea (VI. 95. i). A later invasion by
Sparta and its allies did take place; ships came from Athens to support Argos
and joined in a raid on the east coast of Laconia, and then Argos raided Phlius
again (VI. 105).
130
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413

In 419/8 Athens had reinstalled dissident helots in Pylos (cf. p. 127). In 416
they made a successful raid on the surrounding territory.The Spartans did not
themselves put an end to the Peace of Nicias, but they invited their allies to
raid Athens, and Corinth, not a party to the peace, did so (V. 115. ii–iii). Athens’
joining Argos in the raid of 414 was the clearest breach yet of the peace: since
421 Athens and Sparta had fought against each other, but this was the ﬁrst time
one party had invaded the other’s territory; the Spartans were now conﬁdent
that they were in the right. Now they offered to go to arbitration and Athens
refused (VII. 18. iii: contrast 432/1, pp. 86, 88).
We have glimpses of continuing activity in the north-east. In 417 Dium, on
the eastern prong of Chalcidice, defected from Athens (V. 82. i). In 418/7
Perdiccas had made an alliance with Sparta and oligarchic Argos; in 417/6 he
refused to support a planned Athenian campaign against the Chalcidians and
Amphipolis, and Athens blockaded Macedon (V. 83. iv); in 416/5 Athens sent
cavalry, including exiled Macedonians, by sea to harry Perdiccas, and the Chal-
cidians refused a Spartan request to support him (VI. 7. iii–iv); but by late
summer 414 Perdiccas was once more on the Athenian side, joining in an attack
on Amphipolis which failed to capture the city but set up a blockade (VII. 9).
A fragmentary inscription recording an alliance between Athens and Perdiccas
(IG i3 89) is perhaps to be attributed to this last change of alignment. Perdic-
cas died c.413: his successor Archelaus, under whom Macedon became greater
than under any of his predecessors (II. 100. ii), was to be consistently pro-
Athenian, but, in dealing with a weaker Athens, on his own terms; Athens
acquired oars from Macedon c.411–410 (Andoc. II. Return 11), and new ships
commissioned by Alcibiades in 407/6 were apparently built in Macedon (M&L
91 = IG i3 117 ~ Fornara 161).
Melos, in the southern Aegean, was the only island not in Athenian hands.
At the beginning of the war it was neutral; in 426 it withstood an Athenian
attack; in 425 it was included in the tribute assessment (for 15 talents, M&L
69 = IG i2 71 ~ Fornara 136. i. 65: Melos was one of the larger and more pro-
sperous of the island states), but that does not prove that Athens was in a posi-
tion to exact payment; if the earlier date for an inscription is correct, Melos
contributed money to Sparta in the 420’s (cf. pp. 94, 109). Although Thucy-
dides gives a detailed account of the episode, he does not explain why Athens
attacked Melos in 416, but Athens must have had respectable grounds for
sending a force which included allied ships and hoplites (V. 84). On landing
the Athenians ﬁrst sent envoys, who were allowed to speak not to the assembly
but to the ofﬁcials. Thucydides gives us a dialogue, which must be largely his
own reconstruction, since he was in exile from Athens and most of the Melians
were to be killed. As in earlier speeches, the Athenians talk the language of
power politics, claiming that they have come for their own advantage and it will
be better for the Melians if they submit; the Melians appeal to justice, the gods
and the Spartans, and refuse to submit. The Athenians set up a blockade and
withdrew most of their forces (V. 84–114). The defenders had some successes,
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
131

but in the winter, when the Athenians sent another force, Melos was betrayed
to them: they killed the men and enslaved the women and children (but some
escaped: Xen. Hell. II. ii. 9), and sent Athenian settlers (V. 115. iv, 116. ii–iv).
Later sources give some of the blame to Alcibiades ([Andoc.] IV. Alcibiades 22,
Plut. Alc. 16. v–vi), but he is not mentioned in Thucydides’ account.
This particular exercise of power seems not to have given the Athenians a
bad conscience (cf. Ar. Av. 186, of 414; but Euripides’ Trojan Women, of 415,
may have pricked some consciences), but it became notorious (e.g. Isoc. XII.
Panath. 63). Thucydides creates a dramatic contrast by placing this detailed
account of the sledgehammer’s cracking the nut before his detailed account of
the Athenians’ ambitious but disastrous expedition to Sicily.We should at least
remember that almost immediately before Melos he reports the Spartans’ killing
of the inhabitants of Hysiae – in a single sentence (VI. 83. ii: cf. p. 130).
Sicily
Athens had been interested in the west since the middle of the century, and
before the outbreak of the war had expected the west to become involved (cf.
pp. 68–9, 83–4). Sparta had hoped for support from the west, but in vain (cf.
p. 94). Athens sent forces to support Leontini against Syracuse in 427, and by
the time the Sicilians agreed to manage without outside intervention, in 424,
if not earlier, had begun to hope for conquests (cf. pp. 103–4, 105–6). There
was a further attempt at involvement in 422, soon abandoned (cf. p. 106).
Thucydides’ allegation that most Athenians knew nothing about Sicily and its
inhabitants (VI. 1. i) cannot be true.
The origin of Athens’ next intervention lay in the west of the island. Egesta,
towards the north, which in 418/7 renewed an alliance made with Athens in
427/6 (Thuc. VI. 6. ii; M&L 37 = IG i3 11 ~ Fornara 81, which contains the
oath and above which the decree of renewal could have been inscribed: cf. p.
45; there was added to that stele an alliance with nearby Halicyae, IG i3 12),
was at war with Selinus, on the south coast. Dorian Selinus gained the support
of Syracuse; Egesta (after ﬁrst appealing to Carthage, according to Diod. Sic.
XII. 82. vii) appealed to Athens, claiming to be able to pay the full costs, and
Athens sent men to investigate (Thuc.VI. 6). In Thucydides’ account the Athe-
nians were altogether too naïve, going from house to house and not realising
that they were seeing the same precious objects in each (VI. 46. iii–v): but, in
whatever way, they were deceived about Egesta’s wealth. He reports for the
spring of 415 a decision to send sixty ships under three generals, Alcibiades,
Nicias and Lamachus, to support Egesta against Selinus, to help refound Leon-
tini, and ‘to settle other matters in Sicily to Athens’ advantage’ (VI. 8. i–ii); else-
where he refers directly to hopes of conquering Sicily (VI. 1. i, 6. i), and he
attributes to Alcibiades, as Aristophanes in 424 had attributed to Hyperbolus,
hopes of Carthage too (VI. 15. ii, 90. ii, cf. 34. ii; for Hyperbolus cf. pp. 121–2).
A fragmentary inscription combines with a reference to sixty ships a vote on
132
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413

whether to send one general – who would presumably have been Alcibiades –
or a plurality (M&L 78 = IG i3 93 ~ Fornara 146, fr. b). Nicias had opposed
the expedition: the inclusion of him with Alcibiades among the commanders
reﬂects not a desire of ‘the Athenians’ that each should counter the excesses of
the other but the support in the assembly for him and his opinion.
Four days later, at an assembly to consider detailed arrangements for the
expedition, Nicias reopened the question. Thucydides gives him a speech in
which he (perhaps too presciently) highlights the difﬁculties, that Athens has
enough enemies nearer home and cannot afford to reach out for more power,
that Sicily will be hard to retain even if it is conquered (cf. p. 140), that Athens
cannot afford to squander its recently rebuilt resources, and that Alcibiades is
more interested in his own advancement than that of Athens. Alcibiades replies
that his personal ambitions are good for Athens as well as himself, that the
Greek Sicilians though numerous are a mixed rabble, and the opponents of
Syracuse will support Athens, that having set out on the path of empire Athens
cannot ration its imperialism.When the Athenians were not inclined to give up,
Nicias made a second speech, stressing the strength of the cities Athens was
going to attack, and the need for land forces of various kinds including cavalry
and light-armed, and doubting Egesta’s promised funds.When asked how large
a force was needed, he said at least a hundred triremes and ﬁve thousand
hoplites; and in their passion for the venture (VI. 24. iii) the Athenians agreed.
Nicias’ opposition had resulted in a much larger expedition, of which much
more could be expected, than had originally been intended (VI. 8. iii–26).
Despite the promise of money from Egesta, the inscription cited above can be
restored with a reference to ‘three thousand’, possibly the setting aside of 3,000
talents for the campaign (M&L 78 = IG i3 93 ~ Fornara 146, frs. d+g).
Before the expedition was ready to sail, panic was caused by the mutilation
in a single night of most of the herms in Athens (cf. pp. 157–9).This may have
been an unsuccessful attempt by opponents of the expedition to create
unfavourable omens; investigation uncovered stories of mock celebrations of the
Eleusinian Mysteries in which Alcibiades was involved. It was agreed that he
should sail with the expedition but be recalled to stand trial (VI. 27–9).
The expedition departed in the middle of the summer: the total force, includ-
ing those who joined at Corcyra, was larger than any Athens had sent out since
430: 134 triremes (100 Athenian) and two smaller warships, 5,100 hoplites
(1,500 Athenian; allies supplying soldiers included Argos and, technically as
mercenaries, Mantinea), various light-armed, thirty cavalry and a great variety
of camp-followers (VI. 30–32. ii, 42–44. i). These would have to be paid not
for a short campaign but all the year round.
While the Athenians had been divided over whether to go to Sicily, Thucy-
dides claims that the Syracusans were divided over whether to expect them (but
this is hard to believe, since they had been to Sicily before and there can have
been no secret about their preparations). We are given a speech by Hermo-
crates, warning that the Athenians will come, suggesting an alliance with
Carthage (allegedly afraid of an Athenian attack) and an appeal to Sparta and
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
133

Corinth, and proposing to sail across to the south-east of Italy and challenge
the Athenians there (which would probably have had disastrous results); a
speech by Athenagoras, refusing to believe that the Athenians will come, accus-
ing young men of using the bogey of Athens as an excuse for bringing in an
oligarchy and himself defending the principle of democracy; after which an
unnamed general tries to calm the situation and promises suitable precautions
(VI. 32. iii–42). Serious preparations were begun when the Syracusans learned
that the Athenians had reached Rhegium (VI. 45).
The Athenians crossed from Corcyra, making their way along the Italian
coast and ﬁnding that they were not very welcome, until they reached Rhegium,
on the toe of Italy.They were allowed to camp outside the city but not go inside;
Rhegium declared itself neutral, but if the Italian Greeks adopted a common
policy it would go along with that (VI. 44. ii–iv). Ships sent ahead brought back
the news that Egesta was not, after all, rich, and the generals reconsidered their
strategy. Nicias wanted to sail to Selinus and make a show of force, then unless
Egesta could after all provide funding return home (which he would presum-
ably have justiﬁed by claiming that the Athenians had been deceived). Alci-
biades wanted the Athenians to base themselves on Messana and to gain friends
in Sicily until they could attack Syracuse and Selinus. Lamachus wanted to
make an immediate attack on Syracuse (which might have succeeded if Syra-
cuse was as ill prepared as Thucydides suggests, but would have been disas-
trous if it failed).To resolve the deadlock, Lamachus backed Alcibiades, and his
plan was chosen (VI. 46–50. i).
Messana was unwelcoming, Naxos slightly less so. Catana was hesitant but
allowed the generals to address the assembly; while they were doing so, the
Athenian soldiers managed to enter the city, the supporters of Syracuse ﬂed,
and Catana made an alliance with Athens and became their base in Sicily (VI.
50–2). The Salaminia, one of Athens’ state ships, arrived to take back Alci-
biades and others for trial in connection with the religious scandals.They went
quietly but escaped during the journey: Alcibiades made his way (perhaps via
Argos: Isoc. XVI. Chariot 9, Plut. Alc. 23. i) to Sparta (VI. 53, 60–1, 88. ix).
His colleagues now had to pursue his strategy without him.
Late in 415 the Athenian forces, provoked by detachments of Syracusan
cavalry, were growing impatient for action. The generals sent a deceitful mes-
senger to entice the Syracusans to march north and attack the Athenians at
Catana on a particular day; and then, while the Syracusans were on their way,
themselves sailed south by night, entered the great harbour and landed on the
west side near the Olympieum (see map 6 and ill. 9).They were able to prepare
a stockade before the Syracusans came back to confront them; they won a battle;
but the Syracusan cavalry prevented them from following up their victory and
they returned to Catana (VI. 63–71). A promising plan had achieved nothing:
Nicias was criticised (Plut. Nic. 16), and Thucydides himself was perhaps 
critical (VII. 42. iii). A hoped-for revolution in Messana failed to occur, since
Alcibiades on his departure had warned the supporters of Syracuse; and the
Athenians spent the winter at Naxos, sending home for money and cavalry (VI.
74).
134
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413

In Syracuse, which currently had a democratic constitution with a board of
ﬁfteen generals, Hermocrates tried to restore morale and argued for fewer and
more powerful generals: he was made one of a board of three (to take ofﬁce at
the new year, perhaps in the spring), and Syracuse appealed for help to Corinth
and Sparta (VI. 72–3). Both sides tried to gain support in Sicily (Thucydides
gives us opposing speeches at Camarina from Hermocrates and an Athenian
called Euphemus). The Syracusans, to make the attackers’ job harder, built a
new wall which probably ran northwards from the north shore of the great
harbour to the sea; the Athenians appealed to Carthage (not now a further
target for conquest) and Etruria, where some cities were offering support (VI.
75–88. vi). Corinth as the mother city of Syracuse was eager to support it, and
joined in the approach to Sparta. By now Alcibiades was in Sparta.Thucydides
gives him a speech to the Spartan assembly, claiming that Athens’ democracy
is ‘agreed folly’, setting out an extreme version of Athens’ ambitions and sug-
gesting that there is a serious danger of their being achieved, and urging Sparta
to send soldiers and, even more, a Spartan to take command, and to fortify
Decelea in the north of Attica.The Spartans were persuaded. On the other side,
the Athenians sent 250 cavalry and thirty mounted archers, and 300 talents
(VI. 88. vii–93). How much difference did Alcibiades make? According to
Thucydides, before his intervention the authorities were inclined to tell Syra-
cuse not to surrender, but not to send help (VI. 88. x). In the event, Sparta sent
Gylippus as commander (perhaps a mothax, a Spartan of inferior origin brought
up with the Spartiates [Ael. V.H. XII. 43]; cf. Lysander, p. 149) and, we later
discover, two Spartan ships (VI. 104. i), and, in 413, 600 liberated helots (VII.
19. iii), which it might have done in any case in response to the appeal from
Syracuse and Corinth. It was not to invade Attica and fortify Decelea until 413
(cf. pp. 140–1). Probably Alcibiades was not as important as Thucydides sug-
gests; but the sending of Gylippus was nevertheless to prove crucial.
In 414 the Athenians began a major attack on Syracuse. They sailed south
and disembarked their soldiers at Leon, north-west of the city. These soldiers
made their way to Euryelus, at the west end of the plateau of Epipolae outside
the city, before the defenders were ready to guard the approaches, and when a
force did arrive they defeated it. They established a fort at Labdalum, on the
north edge of the plateau; reinforcements reached them, from Sicily and from
Athens; and, nearer to the city and towards the south edge of the plateau, they
built what Thucydides called ‘the circle’, which was to be the base for their siege
(VI. 96–8).They needed to match the whole length of the Syracusan wall built
in the winter, from the great harbour to the sea to the north; and Hermocrates
persuaded the Syracusans that it would be best to build an east–west wall across
the line of the Athenian wall, south of the circle, to prevent its completion.The
Athenians waited until the Syracusans grew careless, then attacked and cap-
tured the cross-wall. The Syracusans built a second cross-wall, further south.
The Athenians captured that too, though Lamachus was killed in the pursuit
of some ﬂeeing Syracusans. While most of the Athenians were still on the low
ground, the Syracusans attacked the circle: Nicias, suffering from a kidney
disease, was there and saved the circle. At this point the Athenian ﬂeet, which
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
135

had been waiting at Thapsus, sailed into the great harbour and joined the army
(VI. 99–102).
The Athenians appeared to be in a winning position, and gained further
allies.They now built two walls from the circle to the harbour, to protect them
against attacks either from the city or from outside.The Syracusans considered
surrendering and made overtures to Nicias; and they deposed their generals
and elected others (VI. 103). Gylippus, on his way with four Peloponnesian
ships, to be followed by a further thirteen, heard of this and despaired of Sicily,
but still hoped to make sure of Italy; Nicias heard of Gylippus’ coming but did
not take his small force seriously (VI. 105). In particular, Nicias failed to 
cut off Syracuse entirely by completing the wall to the north of the circle.
136
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
2 km
2 miles
Ortygia
Lysimelea
Dascon
Plemmyrium
R. Anapus
Great
Harbour
Little Harbour
He
lor
ine
Roa
d
SC3
SW
AN
AC
AA
SO
SW
SCI
AS
AD
AS
SC2
Contours at intervals of 25 metres
Precipitous ground
Marsh
Note: The lower reaches of the river were probably not as straight as shown above.
AA
Athenian advanced fortification
AC
Athenian Circle
AD
Athenian Crosswall
AN
Athenian Northern Wall
AS
Athenian Southern Wall
SC1 First Syracusan Counterwall
SC2 Second Syracusan Counterwall
SC3 Third Syracusan Counterwall
SO
City Wall of Syracuse
SW Syracusan Wall, winter 415/4
N
Olympieum
Euryelus
Teme-
nites
Labdalum?
Epipolae
Trogilus
Map 6
Syracuse (after K. J. Dover, Thucydides Book VI/Thucydides Book VII [Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1965], p. viii)

Ill. 9
Syracuse: aerial photograph. Science Photo Library, London

Gylippus sailed to Himera, on the north coast, and from there advanced 
on Syracuse, picking up allies as he went. The Corinthian Gongylus with one
advance ship from the following squadron reached Syracuse in time to prevent
its capitulation; the Syracusans marched out to meet Gylippus, and he 
arrived via Euryelus and the northern part of Epipolae. Nicias did not respond
to an immediate challenge, when he might still have succeeded, and Gylippus
entered the city (VII. 1–3. iii).
Nicias still did not have the northern wall completed while there was time.
The Syracusans captured the Athenian fort at Labdalum, and started building
a third cross-wall, north of the circle. Nicias, in a futile diversion, built forts on
Plemmyrium, the headland south of the harbour entrance, and sent ships to try
to intercept those coming to join Gylippus. In ﬁghting on Epipolae Gylippus
was defeated in a ﬁrst battle but returned and was victorious in a second, and
the cross-wall was continued beyond the line of the Athenian wall, so that Syra-
cuse could not now be cut off; and the Peloponnesian ships arrived and entered
the harbour (VII. 3. iv–7. i). Gylippus set out to raise more forces in Sicily, and
asked for more from Corinth and Sparta. Nicias sent a letter to Athens, asking
either to be recalled or to be sent reinforcements as substantial as the forces
already with him, and to be relieved of his own command. The Athenians did
not relieve Nicias, but they appointed two men with him as immediate col-
leagues, and Eurymedon, who had been in Sicily in 425–424, and Dem-
osthenes, the most energetic commander of the 420’s, to take reinforcements,
Eurymedon during the winter and Demosthenes the main force in the spring
(VII. 7. ii–17).
In Syracuse in 413 Hermocrates returned to inﬂuence, if not to ofﬁce (VII.
31. iii); and the Syracusans made simultaneous attacks by land and sea:
they were defeated at sea, but their land forces captured the Athenian forts on
Plemmyrium and gave them control of the entrance to the harbour (VII. 21–
5). Wanting to achieve more before the Athenian reinforcements arrived, they
strengthened their ships for an old-fashioned ramming battle, and again
attacked by land, against the Athenian wall, and by sea: this time they were
unsuccessful on land but at sea on a third day of ﬁghting they caught the 
Athenians unprepared and defeated them (VII. 36–41).
Demosthenes engaged in raiding around the Peloponnese on his way (cf.
p. 140); Eurymedon returned and joined him; and they arrived at Syracuse
together: Athens’ total reinforcements amounted to 82 ships, 5,000 hoplites and
many light-armed. Demosthenes wanted to strike immediately while the shock
of his arrival was greatest, and decided on a night attack, going up to Epipolae
by Euryelus and proceeding along the Syracusan cross-wall from the west.This
started well but, with too many men recently arrived and not knowing the
terrain, ended in confusion and slaughter (VII. 42–6). Demosthenes then
wanted to withdraw; but Nicias still had hopes (with some justiﬁcation,Thucy-
dides suggests) of a Syracusan surrender, and would not even move to Thapsus
or Catana. When he at last relented, there was an eclipse of the moon (on 27
August), and he let the seers persuade him to wait another month (VII. 47–50).
138
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413

The Athenians were defeated in another naval battle, in which Eurymedon was
killed; and in yet another, with every available man on every available ship. After
that they still had sixty ships, more than the enemy, but the men refused to ﬁght
again (VII. 51–72). If they had moved at once, the Athenians could have extri-
cated themselves by land while the Syracusans were celebrating, but Hermo-
crates sent men posing as traitors to Nicias to persuade the Athenians to wait
until the Syracusans were ready for them (VII. 73–4). Finally the Athenians set
out in a westerly direction, until they came to the head of a valley, where the
Syracusans blocked their advance. After forcing their way through, they turned
south-eastwards towards the sea. They became separated; Demosthenes with
the rearguard was trapped in an olive grove on the sixth day of the retreat, and
eventually surrendered; two days later Nicias surrendered after discipline had
broken down at the crossing of a river (VII. 75–85).
Thucydides states that Gylippus wanted to take Nicias and Demosthenes
back to Sparta, but they were executed; otherwise the survivors were impris-
oned in the quarries outside Syracuse, some sold into slavery after ten weeks
but the Athenians and their western Greek allies kept for eight months (VII.
86–7). Diodorus (XIII. 19. iv–33. i) and Plutarch (Nic. 28) give different ver-
sions of a debate the truth behind which is probably that what was actually
done was proposed by the demagogue Diocles (cf. pp. 274–6), while Hermo-
crates and Gylippus argued for milder treatment.
Thucydides calls this the greatest success for the victors and greatest disas-
ter for the defeated in Greek history (VII. 87. v–vi), and the superlative is justi-
ﬁed. The Athenians had started with great ambitions, had spent large sums of
money and had sent large numbers of ships and men; but few of the men and
none of the ships returned home, the money was spent in vain, and the psycho-
logical effect, on them and on the whole Greek world, was enormous. (The one
comparable shock was to be the defeat of the Spartan army at Leuctra in 371:
cf. pp. 216, 251). The impression given by books VI–VII is that the attack on
Syracuse could have succeeded (and if Syracuse was conquered the rest of Sicily
would probably have followed: cf. Alcibiades in VI. 91. iii), and indeed very
nearly did succeed; but the chance of victory was thrown away when Nicias
failed to prevent Gylippus’ entry, and his subsequent mistakes, and his refusal
to withdraw when he was likely to be blamed for withdrawal, made a bad 
situation worse. II. 65. xi has a different emphasis: the expedition
involved not so much an error of judgment about the people against whom it 
was sent as the failure by those who sent out the expedition to make the right
decisions in support of the men who had gone. Instead, through the accusations
made against individuals in the struggle for political supremacy, they made the
expeditionary force less effective.
The allusion is presumably to the trial of those accused of involvement in the
religious scandals (cf. pp. 157–9), in particular the recall of Alcibiades and his
consequent exile; and we may also fault the refusal to relieve Nicias in 414/3;
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
139

but otherwise the detailed narrative does not suggest that the Athenians at home
did not support the expedition adequately.We are more likely to think that the
venture was ‘an error of judgment about the people against whom it was sent’:
controlling a large and populous island at a distance from Athens would be
much harder than controlling the islands and coastal cities of the Aegean; and,
although in the short term Athens could have conquered Sicily, it is hard to
believe that it could have retained Sicily for long against opposition (cf. Nicias
in VI. 11. i, Euphemus in VI. 86. iii).
The hard-headed Thucydides has puzzled his readers by making no comment
on Demosthenes but remarking that Nicias was particularly undeserving of 
his fate because of his devotion to virtue (VII. 86. iv–v). Although Thucydides
did not believe in piety, he did believe in moral standards as well as in hard-
headedness, and the morality of a Nicias who was by conventional standards a
good man but who took decisions as a result of which more Athenians suffered
and died than need have done was perhaps more easily praised by Thucydides
than by some of Nicias’ critics in our time. Gylippus’ achievement seems not
to have been appreciated by the Spartans, and he is mentioned only in one later
episode (cf. p. 152).
Meanwhile
For 415–413 Thucydides concentrates almost entirely on the Sicilian expedi-
tion, and gives us only fragments of information on other matters. In 415, at
the time of the religious scandals in Athens, Boeotian troops were active near
the Athenian frontier and a Spartan force went as far as the Isthmus to co-
operate with them (Thuc. VI. 61. ii, Andoc. I. Myst. 45). In 414 in Thespiae
(where Thebes had intervened in 423: cf. p. 110) a democratic rising was put
down with Theban help, and some democrats ﬂed to Athens (VI. 95. ii).
In spring 413 the Athenian Conon (the ﬁrst appearance of a man who was
to be important later), who was at Naupactus with eighteen ships, reported to
Demosthenes and Eurymedon that he was being challenged by twenty-ﬁve
Corinthian ships (so that troop-carriers could take Peloponnesian reinforce-
ments to Sicily) and could not ﬁght against them without more: they let him
have ten ships from their force (VII. 19, 31. iv–v). Later in the year he had been
succeeded by another commander and the Athenians had thirty-three ships; the
Corinthians manned a few more, and fought a close battle which for them was
as good as a victory (VII. 34): the Athenians no longer had the overwhelming
naval superiority which they had enjoyed in the 420’s (cf. p. 103).
But the most important development in Greece in 413 was that the Spar-
tans, believing themselves to be in the right after the raid of 414 (cf. p. 130),
and thinking it safe since so much of Athens’ manpower was committed to
Sicily, sent a Peloponnesian force to invade Attica under king Agis, and built a
fort at Decelea, in the hills east of north from Athens: Alcibiades is said to have
been urging this since 415/4 (cf. p. 135), and the location at any rate may have
140
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413

been his suggestion. Agis was to remain there with a garrison until the end of
the war, and this, by denying the Athenians the use of the countryside and the
silver mines, was to do the Athenians much more psychological and economic
damage than the short invasions of the early years of the war (VII. 19. iii, 27–8,
Hell. Oxy. 20. iii–v Chambers). The Athenians still did not abandon Attica
entirely: a fort was built at Sunium in 413/2 (VIII. 4), and another at nearby
Thoricus in 409 (Xen. Hell. I. ii. 1). While the Peloponnesians were invading
Attica, the Athenians sent out thirty ships, together with those bound for Syra-
cuse under Demosthenes, to attack Spartan territory: they collected hoplites
from Argos, raided the east coast of Laconia, then opposite Cythera (which they
still retained, as they did Pylos) they set up a fort on the mainland (VII. 20,
26).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
See in general Cawkwell, Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War; Kagan, The Peace of Nicias
and the Sicilian Expedition; Lazenby, The Peloponnesian War. For many campaigns there
are valuable investigations in Pritchett’s series Studies in Ancient Greek Topography.
On the diplomatic problems following the Peace of Nicias see particularly H. D.
Westlake, ‘Thucydides and the Uneasy Peace – A Study in Political Incompetence’, CQ2
xxi 1971, 315–25 = his Studies in Thucydides and Greek History, ch. 7; R. Seager, ‘After
the Peace of Nicias’, CQ2 xxvi 1976, 249–69.The view of ‘ten-day’ truces adopted here
is that of A. Andrewes in Gomme et al., Historical Commentary on Thucydides, iv. 11: the
alternative view that they had to be renewed every ten days is championed by M.Arnush,
‘Ten-Day Armistices in Thucydides’, GRBS xxxiii 1992, 329–53; D. Whitehead, ‘The
Ten-Day Truce (Thucydides, 5. 26. 2, etc.)’, in Frézouls and Jacquemin (eds.), Les Rela-
tions internationales . . . 1993, 189–210.
On the battle of Mantinea see A. W. Gomme, ‘Thucydides and the Battle of Manti-
neia’, in his Essays in Greek History and Literature, 132–55; and, on the problem of
Spartan numbers, Gomme et al., Historical Commentary on Thucydides, iv. 110–17 (by
Andrewes, believing in an error in Thuc. V. 68. iii, but starting from the material of
Gomme, who did not believe in an error).
Athens’ Sicilian expedition is treated by Freeman, History of Sicily, vol. iii, ch. 8. On
the Syracusan leader Hermocrates see H. D. Westlake, ‘Hermocrates the Syracusan’,
BRL xli 1958/9, 239–68 = his Essays on the Greek Historians and Greek History, 174–202.
For a suggestion that Thuc.VI–VII consciously exposed the Athenians’ inadequacies see
B. Jordan, ‘The Sicilian Expedition was a Potemkin Fleet’, CQ2 l 2000, 63–79.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 421–413
141

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
412
Sparta ﬁrst secures Persian support
411
oligarchic revolution in Athens
410
Athenian victory at Cyzicus
406
Spartan victory at Notium
406
Athenian victory, but failure to recover bodies, at Arginusae
405
Spartan victory at Aegospotami
404
Peloponnesian War ends with Athens’ coming to terms with
Sparta
Thucydides, VIII
Despite the great blow of their failure in Sicily, the Athenians resolved to ﬁght
on.They built more ships and made other preparations, and took economy mea-
sures including the abandonment of the fort opposite Cythera (VIII. 1, 4).
Nevertheless, their new weakness signiﬁcantly changed the situation. Sparta was
now more hopeful of defeating Athens and becoming the undisputed leader of
Greece (VIII. 2); and called on its allies to join in building a hundred ships,
including twenty-ﬁve each from Sparta and Boeotia and (fewer than we might
expect) ﬁfteen from Corinth (VIII. 3. ii). Whatever we think of the popularity
of the Delian League with its member states (cf. pp. 178–85), Athens will now
13
The Peloponnesian War:
413–404

have looked much less able to compel loyalty than in the past.Various members
of the League made contact with the Spartans: ﬁrst the Euboeans and then the
Lesbians with Agis at Decelea, who decided Lesbos was the more important;
then the oligarchic leaders of Chios, and Erythrae, with the authorities in Sparta
(VIII. 5. i–iv).
Approaches to Sparta were also made by Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus, the
Persian satraps of Sardis and Dascylium: they were under pressure from Darius
to collect tribute from the Asiatic Greeks, and Tissaphernes was given a su-
perior position in the region (VIII. 5. iv–6. i). According to Andocides, after
making the treaty with the King with which his uncle Epilycus was involved (cf.
pp. 113–14), the Athenians foolishly broke it and supported the rebel Amorges
(III. Peace 29). Amorges was a bastard son of Pissuthnes, a satrap of Sardis who
had revolted perhaps at the end of the 420’s and had been replaced by 
Tissaphernes (Ctesias FGrH 688 F 15 § 53 [52]); he himself was in revolt with
Athenian support in Thuc.VIII (cf. 28. ii, 54. iii), and Tissaphernes had orders
to take him dead or alive. When his revolt began is not certain; an Athenian
general was present at Ephesus in spring 414 (M&L 77 = IG i3 370. 78–9), and
it is possible that an Athenian called Melesandrus was involved with Amorges
in 414/3 (IG i3 371. 3, TAM i 44. a. 45, 55). Though some have doubted it,
it does seem credible that the Athenians had decided for some reason to back
Amorges and this provoked the Persians into supporting Sparta.
The Spartans were torn between a Hellespont strategy (which was ultimately
to win the war for them) and an Aegean strategy (for which they would have
the support of Chios’ navy). They were inclined to the Aegean by Alcibiades
(who had friends in Miletus: VIII. 17. ii) and his Spartan family friend (cf. p.
126) Endius, currently ephor – Alcibiades perhaps exercised more inﬂuence on
Spartan policy now than earlier – and a meeting in Corinth in spring 412
adopted Chios–Lesbos–the Hellespont as an order of priority. While the 
Isthmian games were celebrated, in mid-summer, the Athenians discovered
what was intended. When the Peloponnesians set out from Cenchreae,
Corinth’s port on the Saronic Gulf, with just twenty-one ships, an Athenian
squadron chased them back to land, but Alcibiades, after he had put pressure
on Endius, went at last with the Spartan Chalcideus and ﬁve ships to Chios.
Other cities joined in revolt against Athens; Athens used its emergency reserve
of 1,000 talents (cf. pp. 92–3), and replied by blockading the Peloponnese and
sending ships to Samos, which was to be Athens’ main base in the Aegean until
the end of the war (VIII. 6. ii–17. iii). If the Athenians had imposed a demo-
cracy on Samos in 439 (cf. p. 68), they must later have tolerated a return to
oligarchy; but a democratic rising in 412 had their approval (VIII. 21, cf. IG i3
96).
At this point Thucydides quotes the ﬁrst of three treaties between the 
Spartans and the Persians: it is made with ‘the King and Tissaphernes’ and
claims that ‘whatever land and cities the King possesses and the King’s fathers
possessed shall belong to the King’; the war is to be prosecuted jointly (VIII.
17. iv–18). Revolt against Athens continued to spread. Both sides reinforced
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404
143

their Aegean ﬂeets, and Hermocrates brought Sparta twenty ships from 
Syracuse and two from Selinus (a few more from the west were to follow). Asty-
ochus as navarch (Sparta’s principal naval commander) was reluctant to take
risks against the Athenians; the Athenians were fairly successful at striking back,
particularly in the islands (but they never recovered Chios, though it was
divided between anti-Athenian and pro-Athenian factions). After the Athenians
had won a battle off Miletus and the Peloponnesians had gained reinforcements,
the Athenian general Phrynichus refused to risk another battle against slightly
superior numbers: Thucydides praises his caution, but some other Athenians
thought and some modern scholars have agreed that a little more boldness
would have been worthwhile. His withdrawal enabled the Spartans to capture
Iasus, in Caria, and hand over it and Amorges to Tissaphernes (VIII. 19–28).
In winter 412/1 campaigning continued,Tissaphernes reduced his rate of pay
for the Peloponnesian ﬂeet (VIII. 29–36. i), and we are given a second treaty
between the Spartans and the Persians: this states not what the King is to
possess but that neither Sparta nor the King shall attack or levy tribute from
what the other possesses; the King is to pay for forces in his territory at his invi-
tation, which could provide an excuse for withholding payment (VIII. 36. ii–37).
On Chios the Athenians were building a fort, and, when the city asked 
Astyochus for help and he refused, Pedaritus, the Spartan commander there,
complained to Sparta. A squadron of ships from Sparta brought Lichas (winner
of the chariot race at Olympia and an inﬂuential man) and ten other inspec-
tors/advisers to Astyochus, with permission to go north to the Hellespont and
to replace Astyochus with their own commander Antisthenes. Astyochus was
retained in ofﬁce, but Lichas objected to the extent of the Persian claims – as
far as central Greece – which, though probably not intended, would be allowed
by the wording of the two treaties. The Spartans won over Rhodes, but the 
Athenians, though too late to prevent that, were becoming more conﬁdent 
than Phrynichus had been earlier, while the Spartans were afraid to face them
in a straightforward naval battle; and Pedaritus was killed in ﬁghting against 
the Athenian fort on Chios (VIII. 38–45, 55, cf. 60. ii–iii).
By now Alcibiades had fallen out with the Spartans. In Sparta, he had
allegedly formed a liaison with the wife of the absent Agis (cf. p. 205); his inﬂu-
ence was presumably reduced when Endius’ year as ephor ended in autumn
412; and it is alleged that Astyochus was sent orders to kill him. At some point
he moved from Miletus to Tissaphernes’ court at Sardis, urging Tissaphernes
to limit his support for Sparta and suggesting that a balance or even an 
Athenian victory would be better for him than a Spartan victory (cf. Sparta’s
inland ambitions in the 390’s: pp. 207–9).The two lovers of intrigue doubtless
enjoyed manoeuvring around each other. Wanting to return to Athens, Alci-
biades made contact with leading men in the ﬂeet at Samos, suggesting that if
Athens overthrew its democracy and recalled him he could obtain Persian
support for Athens.We shall follow the oligarchic movement at pp. 160–5. Alci-
biades was distrusted by Phrynichus, who, not realising how far he had already
lost the conﬁdence of the Spartans, tried to betray him to them. The Atheni-
ans negotiated through Alcibiades with Tissaphernes, but gave up when 
144
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404

confronted with a demand not only for mainland Asia Minor but also for the
offshore islands and a Persian presence in the Aegean (45–56). It seems unlikely
that Tissaphernes, under orders from the King, seriously considered changing
sides; we cannot be sure what Alcibiades believed; but the Athenians were to
continue to hope that Persia could be won over until 407 (cf. pp. 148–9).
That round of negotiations had broken down in time for a new treaty to be
made between Sparta and the Persians in spring 411. This has a more elabo-
rate preamble, so may have been ratiﬁed at a higher level, than its predecessors,
and it involves a larger number of Persians, including Pharnabazus. In response
to Lichas it limits the King’s claims to mainland Asia Minor, but makes it 
clear that there they are total (in the mention of ‘territory’ but not ‘cities’ the
Spartans may have seen a loophole, but the Persians surely did not); if 
Tissaphernes continues to pay for the Peloponnesian ﬂeet after the arrival of
the Persians’ ﬂeet, that payment is to be treated as a loan (VIII. 57–8).
The war started to move northwards. The Spartan Dercylidas went to the
Hellespont by land from Miletus, and Abydus and Lampsacus went over to
him.The Athenian Strombichides went by sea from Chios, was able to recover
Lampsacus but not Abydus, and established a fort opposite Abydus at Sestos
(VIII. 61–2). Neither side was eager to ﬁght unless it could be sure of winning.
Among the Peloponnesians there were increasing complaints about Astyochus
and about Tissaphernes, while Pharnabazus was eager to attract them into his
area. Clearchus took forty Peloponnesian ships and won over Byzantium; the
Athenians sent ships to Sestos (VIII. 78–80). When the Milesians captured a
fort established in their territory by Tissaphernes, they were rebuked by Lichas,
who said that they ‘must submit to moderate slavery and cultivate Tissaphernes
until they got a good settlement of the war’: that raises doubts about his com-
mitment to the third treaty. Mindarus arrived as Spartan navarch to succeed
Astyochus: Astyochus, Hermocrates and an envoy of Tissaphernes all went with
their various complaints to Sparta. Tissaphernes himself set off for Aspendus,
on the south coast of Asia Minor, allegedly in order to bring 147 Phoenician
ships, but he never brought them (it is possible that they were needed against
a revolt in Egypt and were no longer available to him). Meanwhile Alcibiades
had joined the (once more democratic) Athenian ﬂeet at Samos, where he had
been made general. He prevented the ﬂeet from abandoning the Aegean to sail
back and restore the democracy at Athens; he followed Tissaphernes as far 
as Phaselis, and claimed the credit for the ships’ not coming to support the
Peloponnesians (VIII. 81–8, 99, 108. i–ii).
In the autumn Mindarus accepted Pharnabazus’ invitation and went north
with his full force, managing to reach Abydus (which was to be Sparta’s main
base in the region) while the Athenians under Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus were
preoccupied with recovering Eresus on Lesbos. After they had followed him, a
major battle was at last fought, off Cynossema, with seventy-six Athenian ships
against eighty-six Peloponnesian: the Athenians’ centre was driven to the shore,
but the Peloponnesians relaxed too soon and the Athenians’ wings closed in
and defeated them. This victory did a good deal to restore Athenian morale
(VIII. 99–107).
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404
145

In Greece, early in 411 the Boeotians with help from Eretria had captured
the border territory of Oropus from Athens (VIII. 60. i–ii). The oligarchic
régime of the Four Hundred tried to make peace with Sparta, but was not pre-
pared to concede all that Sparta demanded – and in any case the democrats 
at Samos would not have accepted an agreement made by the oligarchs in
Athens (VIII. 70. ii–71, 86. ix, 90, 92. iv, Ath. Pol. 32. iii). In the autumn a 
Peloponnesian ﬂeet bound for Euboea caused panic in Athens and was pur-
sued into the Euripus; the Peloponnesians won a battle, and all Euboea except
Oreus in the north went over to them: Euboea was economically important to
the Athenians, and this was a disaster for them. However, the Peloponnesians
then failed to sail back and attack Athens, which was in disarray as the Four
Hundred were deposed (VIII. 91–6).
Thucydides’ text ends with the expulsion of Persian garrisons from 
Antandrus and Cnidus, and the return of an anxious Tissaphernes from
Aspendus to Ephesus (VIII. 108. iii–109).
After Thucydides: Sources
Thucydides’ text breaks off in the autumn of 411, and all that we have must
be all that was ever made public, since a number of fourth-century historians
started their works at that point.
One of those works is the Hellenica (411–362) of Xenophon, an Athenian
who spent much of his life, in the ﬁrst half of the fourth century, in exile as a
dependant of the Spartans. He was not a historian of the calibre of Thucydides.
In the earlier part of his work, covering the end of the Peloponnesian War, where
he marks a new year pseudo-Thucydidean indications of time have been added
by an interpolator (e.g. I. i. 37–ii. 1); but in this narrative we have one new year
too few between 411 and the end of the war: no attempt to identify the ‘empty
year’ has solved all the problems, but in this book I have assumed that the empty
year is 410/09, after the battle of Cyzicus, so that the return of Thrasyllus to
the Aegean (I. ii. 1) belongs to 409, not 410.
Our other continuous narrative for this period is that of Diodorus Siculus
(415/4–405/4 in book XIII). As for the rest of the ﬁfth century and the ﬁrst half
of the fourth, his principal source was Ephorus (and he has forced into an annal-
istic framework material which was not organised annalistically by Ephorus: cf.
p. 15); papyrus fragments have made it clear that for the late ﬁfth century and
the early fourth Ephorus used another continuation of Thucydides, which has
become known as the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia from Oxyrhynchus in Egypt, where
the ﬁrst fragment was found (chs. 1–3 Chambers deal with 409, 4–8 with
409–406,1 9–25 with the mid 390’s). The fragments point to a detailed and
fairly sober narrative, following Thucydides’ organisation by summers and
146
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404
1
NB Chambers modiﬁes Bartoletti’s arrangement of the Florence fragments, so that chs. 3, 4,
5 Bartoletti become chs. 7, 8, 6 Chambers.

winters and numbered years (NB 12. i; in 5. v a résumé of earlier events on
Chios refers to Thucydides).Theopompus of Chios (FGrH 115) wrote Hellenica
in continuation of Thucydides (411–394: Diod. Sic. XIII. 42. v), but what we
know of him does not match the style of these fragments. Cratippus of Athens
(FGrH 64) is alleged to have edited Thucydides’ text (Dion. Hal. Thuc. 16): if
the fragments are to be attributed to a writer whose name is known, he is the
least unlikely candidate, but we know so little about him that, if he was the
author, we are not much wiser.Whereas to 411 Ephorus had based his account
on Thucydides, from 411 this account and Xenophon’s are independent of each
other: neither is to be preferred invariably and automatically; but, even where
we have only Diodorus’ version of the alternative, there are several places where
that seems preferable to Xenophon’s account. One fault presumably to be
blamed on Diodorus himself is a confusion of names: in book XIII he never
uses the name Tissaphernes but calls both satraps Pharnabazus; similarly,
in XIII. 64–97 he uses the name Thrasybulus for both Thrasybulus and 
Thrasyllus, and in XIII. 69. v he mentions Thrasybulus where he apparently
should have mentioned Conon.
Plutarch, as always, used a variety of sources. Two of his lives cover the end
of the war, Alcibiades and Lysander.
After Thucydides: The End of the War
After Cynossema Mindarus summoned the Peloponnesian force from Euboea,
but that was wrecked off Mount Athos with few survivors. He was joined by
Dorieus, who had been guarding against a pro-Athenian revolution in Rhodes;
and the Athenians were joined by Alcibiades. The Peloponnesians won a ﬁrst
battle (unless this is a careless reference to the battle in the Euripus: Xen. Hell.
I. i. 1); Alcibiades arrived in time to help the Athenians to victory in a second
(Xen. Hell. I. i. 2–7, Diod. Sic. XIII. 41. i–ii, 45–47. ii, Plut. Alc. 27. i–ii).
In winter 411/0 the Athenians dispersed. Thrasyllus went to Athens to fetch
reinforcements; Alcibiades went in state to visit Tissaphernes, was imprisoned
but managed to escape (Xen. Hell. I. i. 8–10, Plut. Alc. 27. vi, 28. i). In spring
410 he rejoined Thrasybulus in the Hellespont, and from Athens there came
not Thrasyllus but Theramenes, one of the leading ﬁgures of the intermediate
régime currently in power (cf. pp. 164–5). Thrasyllus, it seems, was more of a
committed democrat than the others, and did not cooperate easily with them.
Mindarus and Pharnabazus captured Cyzicus. The battle of Cyzicus is one of
the episodes for which Diodorus has what seems to be the better account:
Athens had eighty-six ships to the Peloponnesians’ sixty (Xen.); the Athenians
landed their soldiers at a distance and divided their ﬂeet; Alcibiades with part
of the ﬂeet enticed Mindarus away from the harbour, and then the others 
came up and cut him off; Mindarus ﬂed to Pharnabazus on the mainland, his
ships were destroyed or captured, and on land he was defeated and killed. The
Athenians took control of the Propontis, and set up a toll post at Chrysopolis,
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404
147

opposite Byzantium (Diod. Sic. XIII. 47. iii–viii, 49–51, 64. ii; Xen. Hell. I. i.
11–22, Plut. Alc. 28. ii–ix). Xenophon and Plutarch quote the message sent to
Sparta, in eleven words of Greek: ‘Ships gone; Mindarus dead; men starving;
don’t know what to do’ (Xen. Hell. I. i. 23, Plut. Alc. 28. x). In breach of its
treaty with Persia, Sparta sent envoys including Endius to Athens to offer 
peace, on the basis of the status quo except that forts (i.e. Pylos and Decelea)
were to be returned; but in Athens, once more democratic, the demagogue
Cleophon had the offer rejected (Diod. Sic. XIII. 52–3, Philoch. FGrH 328 F
139). It is understandable that the Athenians did not think this a good enough
offer, but at this point it might have been to their advantage to accept it.
In the west, the democrats in Corcyra, helped by the Athenian Conon from
Naupactus, got the upper hand in another bout of civil disturbance (Diod. Sic.
XIII. 48). Elsewhere Athens was less successful: in 410 or 409, when Sparta
attacked Pylos by land and sea Athens sent Anytus to defend it, but he was
turned back by storms, and his acquittal when he was put on trial became 
notorious as an instance of bribery (Diod. Sic. XIII. 64. v–vii, cf. Xen. Hell.
I. ii. 18, Ath. Pol. 27. v). In 409 Megara recaptured Nisaea, after which the 
Athenians won a hoplite battle but did not recover the site (Hell. Oxy. 4, Diod.
Sic. XIII. 65. i–ii).
In the Hellespont Pharnabazus supported the defeated Spartans and enabled
them to build new ships (Xen. Hell. I. i. 24–6). Athens’ forces dispersed; they
were short of hoplites and cavalry, and achieved little (Xen. Hell. I. i. 35–6,
Diod. Sic. XIII. 64. i).When Thrasyllus left Athens, in 409, he went not to the
Hellespont but to Samos and Ionia: his campaign started well but in an attack
on Ephesus he was defeated by Tissaphernes and the Peloponnesians’ Sicilian
contingent (Xen. Hell. I. ii. 1–13, Hell. Oxy. 1–3, Diod. Sic. XIII. 64. i). In the
autumn he joined the other Athenians at Sestos, but at ﬁrst there was tension
between his contingent and the others; in the winter they fortiﬁed Lampsacus
and made raids on Pharnabazus’ territory (Xen. Hell. I. ii. 13–17, Diod. Sic.
XIII. 64. iv, Plut. Alc. 29. iii–v). In 408 the Athenians concentrated on the
Bosporus, and made generous settlements with the cities as they were recov-
ered: ﬁrst Calchedon came to terms with Theramenes; after Alcibiades had col-
lected allies from Thrace and the Chersonese he captured Selymbria; late in the
year Byzantium was betrayed to the Athenians when the Spartan governor
Clearchus became unpopular for giving food only to his garrison (Xen. Hell. I.
iii, Hell. Oxy. 6, Diod. Sic. XIII. 66–7, Plut. Alc. 29. vi–31. viii; treaty with
Selymbria M&L 87 = IG i3 118 ~ Fornara 162). Athens now controlled the
whole Bosporus–Hellespont region, and must have seemed to be in a strong
position. A fragment of Androtion tells us of another Spartan peace offer, again
involving Endius, which resulted in a return of prisoners but no more (FGrH
324 F 44 ~ Fornara 157).
Both sides at this point made further approaches to Persia. After the fall of
Calchedon Pharnabazus agreed to escort Athenian and other envoys to the
King, and they spent the winter at Gordium in Phrygia. But in spring 407 they
met a Spartan delegation, returning with the news that the King had granted
148
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404

all that they wanted, and had appointed his younger son Cyrus (aged 16: Plut.
Artax. 2. iv) as karanos to take charge of the campaign (Xen. Hell. I. iii. 8–14,
iv. 1–7). It has been argued that what the King granted included a ‘Treaty of
Boeotius’, conceding that the Asiatic Greeks were to pay tribute to Persia but
otherwise to be autonomous (cf. the terms discussed in the 390’s, p. 192, and
the terms offered to some north-eastern cities in the Peace of Nicias, p. 114).
After the war Sparta did not immediately hand over the Asiatic Greeks to Persia;
Tissaphernes when he returned to Sardis demanded them; they appealed to
Sparta for support against him and Sparta responded. It is easier to believe that
this new treaty existed and Tissaphernes was regarding it as obsolete after
Sparta’s support for Cyrus’ revolt than that an ungrateful Sparta was wilfully
breaking the treaty of spring 411.The Athenians still did not despair of Persian
help: in 407 they approached Cyrus through Tissaphernes, without success
(Xen. Hell. I. v. 8–9); and we have a frustrating decree for Evagoras of Salamis,
in Cyprus, which cannot be dated, in which the Athenians appear to regard the
Persian King as an ally (IG i3 113: 411–407?). By now Spartan navarchs were
appointed for a year, beginning in the spring. Lysander (from a distinguished
family which had fallen on hard times, and, like Gylippus, brought up as a
mothax: Plut. Lys. 2, Ael. V.H. XII. 43) was appointed for 407/6 and established
a good relationship with Cyrus, and they reﬁtted the Spartan ﬂeet at Ephesus
(Xen. Hell. I. v. 1–10, Diod. Sic. XIII. 70, Plut. Lys. 3–4).
In 407 Thrasybulus, who since Cyzicus had been active off the Thracian coast
with a detachment from Athens’ ﬂeet, recovered Thasos and other cities (Xen.
Hell. I. iv. 9, Diod. Sic. XIII. 72. i–ii); Neapolis on the mainland opposite Thasos
had remained loyal and Athens was duly grateful (M&L 89 = IG i3 101 ~
Fornara 156). The main ﬂeet returned to Athens under Thrasyllus. Alcibiades,
still an exile after the scandals of 415 (he had been accepted by the ﬂeet but
not yet by the democratic régime in Athens: cf. pp. 164–5), was cautious; but
the Athenians welcomed him back and cleared him of the old charges. On his
proposal they ratiﬁed treaties he had made in the ﬁeld (M&L 87–8 = IG i3
118–19 ~ Fornara 162–3), and they made him supreme commander, the only
occasion when one Athenian general was superior to his colleagues. He raised
fresh forces, and in the autumn, after winning a battle on Andros but not recov-
ering the city, proceeded eventually to Samos (Xen. Hell. I. iv. 8–23, Diod. Sic.
XIII. 68–9, Plut. Alc. 32–35. iv).
He later moved to Notium, on the mainland north of Lysander’s position at
Ephesus; and early in 406 he left the ﬂeet (going to different destinations
according to different sources, but possibly to Phocaea, which Thrasybulus was
besieging), entrusting it not to another general but to Antiochus, a helmsman
who was a friend of his, with orders not to risk a battle before he returned. But
Antiochus did risk a battle. It appears that he and Lysander were each trying
a version of the tactics which had worked at Cyzicus, and Lysander was the
more successful. Leaving the main ﬂeet in reserve, Antiochus took ten ships
and with two of these tried to tempt a small squadron of Lysander’s ships; but
Lysander sank Antiochus’ ship and killed him; the other Athenians panicked;
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404
149

and when Lysander brought out his whole ﬂeet the main Athenian ﬂeet was
unprepared and was defeated. Alcibiades on his return offered a second battle,
which Lysander refused; he then withdrew the Athenian ﬂeet to Samos (Hell.
Oxy. 8, Diod. Sic. XIII. 71; Xen. Hell. I. v. 11–15, Plut. Alc. 35. v–viii, Lys. 5.
i–ii). Without waiting to be prosecuted, he withdrew to Thrace. The Athenian
generals elected for 406/5 did not include him but did include Conon and 
Thrasyllus, and Conon went from Andros to Samos to take over the Athenian
ﬂeet (Xen. Hell. I. v. 16–20, Diod. Sic. XIII. 74, Plut. Alc. 36. i–v, Lys. 5.
iii–iv). About this time Athens appears to have made an alliance with Carthage,
now ﬁghting against Athens’ enemies in Sicily (M&L 92 = IG i3 123 ~ Fornara
165); but it had no practical effect.
Lysander was succeeded by Callicratidas (allegedly another mothax: Ael. V.H.
XII. 43) as Spartan navarch for 406/5, and this led to considerable friction.
Lysander returned the unspent balance of Cyrus’ money, and his friends did
not cooperate with Callicratidas; Callicratidas was unhappy at ﬁghting with
Persian help against fellow Greeks, disliked paying court to Cyrus, and moved
from Ephesus to Miletus, less convenient for communication with Sardis (Xen.
Hell. I. vi. 1–11, Plut. Lys. 5. v–6. viii, cf. Diod. Sic. XIII. 76. ii). He then went
north to Lesbos and captured Methymna, releasing his non-slave captives other
than the Athenians. Conon arrived too late to save Methymna, and Callicrati-
das trapped and blockaded him in the harbour of Mytilene (Xen. Hell. I. vi.
12–23, Diod. Sic. XIII. 76. iii–79. vii). The Athenians made a special effort to
send out another ﬂeet: gold dedications were melted down for coinage (Ar. Ran.
718–26 with schol. 720 = Fornara 164. B), slaves were liberated to row (Xen.
Hell. I. vi. 24, Ar. Ran. 693–4 with schol. 694 = Hellanicus FGrH 323a F 25 ~
Fornara 144. A; IG i3 1032, a list of ships’ crews including therapontes, l. 227,
may belong here), and all eight available generals went with the ships via Samos
to Lesbos. At the beginning of the Athenian year 406/5 more than 150 ships
confronted Callicratidas. He left ﬁfty ships blockading Conon and with 120
attacked the Athenians near the Arginusae Islands, off the mainland opposite
Lesbos. The Peloponnesians were more experienced than the newly recruit-
ed Athenians, and were now prepared to try skilled manoeuvres; but the 
Athenians were overwhelmingly victorious, losing twenty-ﬁve ships to more
than seventy Peloponnesian, and Callicratidas was killed.The weather was bad,
and the Athenians were unable either to pick up survivors and their dead (for
the consequences of that cf. p. 167: six generals including Thrasyllus were exe-
cuted and two escaped into exile) or to go to relieve Conon, but the blockad-
ing squadron withdrew to Chios (Xen. Hell. I. vi. 24–38, II. i. 1–5, Diod. Sic.
XIII. 97–100. vi). Ath. Pol. 34. i has another Spartan peace offer now, but this
appears to be the post-Cyzicus offer misplaced.
Sparta’s allies and Cyrus asked for Lysander to be appointed as navarch again
for 405/4. That was not allowed, so Aracus was made ﬁgurehead navarch with
Lysander as his secretary. He returned to Ephesus, and revived the Spartan ﬂeet
with more Persian money, while Cyrus departed to his father’s deathbed and a
succession dispute (cf. p. 205) (Xen. Hell. II. i. 6–14, Diod. Sic. XIII. 100.
150
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404

vii–viii, 104. iii–iv, Plut. Lys. 7. ii–9. ii). He moved to Miletus, apparently unchal-
lenged by the Athenians at Samos, supported an oligarchic revolution (Diod.
Sic. XIII. 104. v–vi, Plut. Lys. 8, 19. iii), and continued south to Caria and
Rhodes; Diodorus and Plutarch have him crossing the Aegean to Aegina and
Attica, and meeting Agis; ﬁnally, in the autumn he went to the Hellespont,
pursued by the Athenians, and captured Lampsacus (Xen. Hell. II. i. 15–19,
Diod. Sic. XIII. 104. vii–105. i, Plut. Lys. 9. iii–iv).
The Athenians went ﬁrst to Sestos; then, short of supplies and hoping for 
a quick battle, to the open beach of Aegospotami opposite Lampsacus;
but Lysander did not give them their quick battle. Alcibiades came to the 
Athenians – to offer his help and that of the Thracians and/or to urge a move
to the greater safety of Sestos (both may be true but the ﬁrst is the more impor-
tant) – but the Athenians were not prepared to trust him again (Xen. Hell. II.
i. 20–6, Sestos; Diod. Sic. XIII. 105. ii–iv, help; Plut. Alc. 36. vi–37. iii, Lys. 9.
v–11. i, both). In the more probable account of the battle Philocles, one of the
Athenian generals and commanding on the day in question, put out with thirty
ships to tempt Lysander, while holding the remainder in reserve; but Lysander
was ready for him and put out with his whole ﬂeet; and the rest of the 
Athenians were not ready. Lysander destroyed or captured nearly all the 
Athenian ships (though some more escaped than the nine or ten, from a total
of 180, of our main sources), and all the Athenian prisoners, perhaps
3,000–4,000, were killed. Conon, who got away with a few ships, went to Evago-
ras of Salamis (Diod. Sic. XIII. 106. i–vii; a different account Xen. Hell. II. i.
27–32, Plut. Alc. 37. iv–v, Lys. 11. ii–13; for Conon cf. pp. 192, 207–8).
Lysander recaptured Byzantium and Calchedon, closing the route from the
Black Sea, and proceeded slowly through the Aegean to Athens (only Samos
did not surrender: he returned to capture it in 404; for Athens’ gratitude 
see M&L 94 = IG i3 127 ~ Fornara 166 + R&O 2, complete dossier IG ii2 1),
sending back to swell the starving crowds all the Athenians whom he captured.
Pausanias, the other Spartan king, brought an army from the Peloponnese to
join Agis in blockading Athens by land, and Lysander’s ﬂeet completed the
blockade (Xen. Hell. II. ii. 1–9, iii. 6–9, Diod. Sic. XIII. 106. vii–107. iii, Plut.
Lys. 13. iii–14. iv). Cleophon refused to surrender, but the Athenians’ resources
were exhausted, and it is hard to see what they could have done; he was removed
on a trumped-up charge (cf. p. 168), and Theramenes spent three months
talking to Lysander. Eventually, in spring 404, Theramenes headed an Athen-
ian delegation to Sparta: some of Sparta’s allies would have liked Athens 
to be totally destroyed, but that did not suit Sparta; the terms agreed were that
Athens should demolish the long walls and the Piraeus walls, lose all but twelve
ships and all its overseas possessions, take back its exiles (mostly oligarchs 
from 411–410), and become a subordinate ally of Sparta (Andoc. III. Peace
11–12, Xen. Hell. II. ii. 10–23, Diod. Sic. XIII. 107. iv–v, cf. XIV. 3. ii, vi, Plut.
Lys. 14. iv–x). ‘They proceeded to tear down the walls to the accompaniment
of pipe-girls with great enthusiasm, thinking that day was the beginning of
freedom for Greece’ (Xen. Hell. II. ii. 23).
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404
151

Lysander received extravagant honours: the ‘navarchs dedication’ at Delphi,
placed at the beginning of the Sacred Way, immediately before the Athenian
monument for Marathon, was a large group of statues in the foreground of
which was Lysander crowned by Poseidon (M&L 95, Paus. X. 9. vii–xi, cf. Plut.
Lys. 18. i); in Samos games named after him and other honours make him one
of the ﬁrst Greeks seriously to challenge the boundary between men and gods
(Duris FGrH 76 FF 26, 71, IG XII. vi 334). Agis replied to Lysander with a
dedication in which he claimed to be king of land and sea (Plut. De Tranq.Anim.
467 E–F). Gylippus, who defeated the Athenians in Sicily, makes a less glori-
ous appearance: he was entrusted by Lysander with taking captured money back
to Sparta, and was found to have helped himself to some of it (Diod. Sic. XIII.
106. viii–x, Plut. Lys. 16–17. i).
Athens Defeated
Sparta had set out in 431 to break the Athenian empire and liberate the Greeks,
and in 404 the Athenian empire was broken. The Archidamian War, from 431
to 421, had conﬁrmed the superiority of the Athenians at sea and their invul-
nerability as long as they maintained that superiority; the attempt to destabilise
Sparta from Pylos and Cythera had achieved little, but the Peace of Nicias, with
its return to the prewar situation, would have looked a sufﬁcient success for
Athens if it had been fully implemented. It was not fully implemented. In 
the years which followed, Athens’ resources and ambitions recovered; but the
new alliance which faced Sparta on land in the Peloponnese was defeated at
Mantinea in 418, and Athens squandered its resources in the misguided at-
tempt to conquer Sicily in 415–413. Athens’ raiding Spartan territory in 414
was followed by Sparta’s establishing a fort at Decelea in 413; and when Athens
backed the rebel Amorges, Sparta in 412–411 agreed to abandon the Asiatic
Greeks in exchange for Persian support.
Both sides were hampered by internal disagreements: in Sparta between
those who were happy to pay Persia’s price and those who were not, in Athens
between oligarchs and democrats. After 413 Athens’ ability to continue build-
ing more ships and ﬁnding men to row them was greater than might have been
expected (cf.Thuc. II. 65. xii), and from late 411 to early 407 it must still have
seemed possible that Athens would win the war; but with Cyrus’ more whole-
hearted support Sparta could keep going until Athens was exhausted – and 
it was that exhaustion rather than the political disagreements blamed by 
Thucydides which ﬁnally lost Athens the war.
The Athenian empire was indeed broken; and shortly after the war we ﬁnd
Sparta paying dues to a Delian sanctuary freed from Athenian control (I. Délos
87 = R&O 3). However, the war did not solve the problems of power within
Greece. The members of the Delian League found themselves not liberated or
(in the case of mainland Asia Minor) handed back to Persia but taken over by
Sparta; and, as Thucydides has the Athenians predict in 432 (I. 76. i, 77. vi),
the Spartans soon became no less unpopular than the Athenians.They became
152
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404

unpopular with their allies in mainland Greece too, who saw their wishes
ignored in the ﬁnal settlement and derived little beneﬁt from being on the
winning side in the war.Within ten years of the end of the war, several of them
made an anti-Spartan alliance in which Athens joined; in 386, after ﬁtfully ﬁght-
ing for the Asiatic Greeks against Persia, Sparta ﬁnally abandoned them to
Persia; in 378 Athens founded a new league to resist Spartan imperialism.
In Athens the combined effects of plague and war had reduced the popula-
tion to about half its prewar level. The democracy had lost the war, and with
the navy limited to twelve ships the lower-class oarsmen were not in the im-
mediate future going to be important; but the oligarchy set up with Spartan
support in 404 was to prove so unpleasant that the restored democracy of 403
proved exceptionally stable, and in other respects recovery seems to have been
faster than we might have expected.Victory in the war brought unprecedented
quantities of foreign wealth into Sparta (though wealth had not previously been
as totally absent as the Spartans later liked to imagine). More seriously, at least
since the earthquake of c.464 (cf. pp. 28–9) Sparta’s citizen population had
been declining, and casualties in the war will have assisted the decline; there
was a growing division within the citizen body between the very rich families
and the others, and it is not clear how far the decline is due to an absolute
shortage of men of citizen ancestry and how far it reﬂects the downgrading of
men unable to pay their mess dues. In any case, an increasingly ambitious
Sparta was based on a decreasing number of citizens; and when Sparta’s hoplite
army was defeated by Thebes at Leuctra in 371 the bubble burst.
The rest of Greece was therefore to lose the stability which the polarisation
around Sparta and Athens had maintained for much of the ﬁfth century.
Argos, Sparta’s traditional rival in the Peloponnese, and Corinth, the leading
member after Sparta of the Peloponnesian League, both suffered from internal
divisions and were unable to step into the gap. Instead the centre of gravity
moved northwards. Thebes as the strongest city in Boeotia tried to become 
the dominant power on the Greek mainland; Jason of Pherae in Thessaly, in 
the 370’s, and Philip of Macedon, in the middle of the fourth century, devel-
oped ambitions, ﬁnally fulﬁlled by Philip, to control Greece. It suited Persia to
continue as Tissaphernes had begun, to maintain a balance among the Greeks;
and when the Greek states were at peace Greek mercenaries were available to
ﬁght in the western provinces of the Persian empire. The abandonment of the
Asiatic Greeks in 386 was seen as a great betrayal; fourth-century Greeks
claimed that Greece had been great when it was united against Persia at the
beginning of the ﬁfth century, and Philip of Macedon planned and his son
Alexander undertook a war against Persia for which Greek enmity provided a
convenient excuse.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
See in general Cawkwell, Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War; Kagan, The Fall of the
Athenian Empire; Lazenby, The Peloponnesian War.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404
153

On Sparta’s treaties with Persia see Lewis, Sparta and Persia, chs. 4–5; and, on one
particular problem, Lewis, ‘The Phoenician Fleet in 411’, Hist. vii 1958, 392–7 = his
Selected Papers in Greek and Near Eastern History, 362–8, D. Lateiner, ‘Thucydides and
the Phoenician Fleet (Thuc. VIII. 87)’, TAPA cvi 1976, 267–90. On Tissaphernes see
H. D. Westlake, ‘Tissaphernes in Thucydides’, CQ2 xxxv 1985, 43–54 = his Studies in
Thucydides and Greek History, 166–80. Among those who have rejected Lewis’s Treaty
of Boeotius is C. J. Tuplin, ‘The Treaty of Boiotios’, Achaemenid History ii 1984 [publ.
1987], 133–53.
For the suggestion that Athens’ support for Amorges was not a cause (as in Andoc.
III. Peace 29) but a result of Persia’s support for Sparta see H. D.Westlake, ‘Athens and
Amorges’, Phoen. xxxi 1977, 319–29 = his Studies in Thucydides and Greek History,
103–12.The effect of political divisions on Athenian generals and strategies is discussed
by A. Andrewes, ‘The Generals in the Hellespont, 411–407’, JHS lxxiii 1953, 2–9.
For a series of studies of episodes of which Xenophon and Diodorus give markedly
different accounts see R. J. Littman, ‘The Strategy of the Battle of Cyzicus’, TAPA xcix
1968, 265–72; C. Ehrhardt, ‘Xenophon and Diodorus on Aegospotami’, Phoen. xxiv
1970, 225–8;A.Andrewes,‘Notion and Kyzikos:The Sources Compared’, JHS cii 1982,
15–25. For the problem of Xenophon’s missing year see A. Andrewes, CAH2 v. 503–5.
On the population of Athens Hansen, Three Studies in Athenian Demography, ch. 3,
and Rhodes, Thucydides: History, II, 271–7, independently arrived at a total of c.60,000
adult male citizens before the Peloponnesian War (higher than earlier estimates); and 
I agree with Hansen, Demography and Democracy, that there were c.30,000 adult male
citizens in the fourth century (rather than c.20,000).
154
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: 413–404

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
417
Nicias at Delian festival
416 (?)
Alcibiades at Olympic games
415 (?)
ostracism of Hyperbolus
415
mutilation of herms
411
régime of Four Hundred
411/0
intermediate régime of Five Thousand
407
return to Athens of Alcibiades
406
battle of Arginusae and condemnation of generals
404
surrender of Athens to Sparta
Alcibiades, Nicias and Hyperbolus
When Cleon died in 422, Hyperbolus, a demagogue of similar style and with
a similarly activist policy for Athens, hoped to gain greater prominence for
himself, and he was a member of the council in 421/0 (IG i3 82. 5 with 42, cf.
Plato Com. fr. 182 Kassel & Austin). On the less activist side, the truce of 423
is associated with Laches, a general on various occasions until he died at 
Mantinea in 418 (Thuc. IV. 118. xi), and the peace of 421 was the work 
of Nicias and Laches; Alcibiades felt insulted because in spite of his family 
connection with Sparta he was not used in the negotiations (V. 16. i, 43. ii; on
the whole of this paragraph cf. p. 121–2).
14
Athens in the Late Fifth
Century

In the years which followed, Alcibiades set about aligning Athens with Argos
and other Peloponnesian states opposed to Sparta – no doubt partly because
of the perceived insult, partly because the peace was proving unsatisfactory,
partly because that new alliance provided opportunities for the adventurous
kind of policy which appealed to him – while Nicias tried to salvage the peace.
The allies were defeated at Mantinea in 418, and it is possible that that 
year Athens did not participate as enthusiastically as it might have done; but
Alcibiades continued to work with Argos. He was not one of the generals
involved in the capture of Melos in 416/5, but Plutarch makes him a supporter
of the decree by which the men were killed and the women and children
enslaved (Alc. 16. vi), and a speech to which we shall return below alleges that
he had a child by one of the women ([Andoc.] IV. Alcibiades 22). It is no sur-
prise to ﬁnd Alcibiades eager and Nicias reluctant to undertake the Sicilian
expedition of 415; the appointment of both as commanders reﬂects the support
for both in the assembly.
As well as standing for different policies, Alcibiades the ﬂamboyant aristo-
crat and Nicias the respectable emulator of the aristocrats were personal rivals.
Nicias was a great performer of liturgies, and put a particular effort into leading
Athens’ delegation to the Delian festival of 417 (Plut. Nic. 3. v–4. i); it was
probably in 416 that Alcibiades indulged in a more personal form of ostenta-
tion by entering no fewer than seven teams in the chariot race at Olympia, of
which his best came ﬁrst, second and fourth (Thuc. VI. 16. ii, cf. 12. ii, Plut.
Alc. 11).
At some point not later than 415 what was to be Athens’ last ostracism was
held. According to Plutarch, Hyperbolus proposed an ostracism, hoping 
that the Athenians would use it to choose between Alcibiades and Nicias, but
Alcibiades and Nicias joined forces and persuaded their supporters to vote
against Hyperbolus, and it was he who was ostracised; an alternative version
gave the role of Nicias to the less prominent Phaeax (Plut. Nic. 11, Alc. 13, cf.
Arist. 7. iii–iv).We have surviving ostraka against all of those, and various others
including Cleophon, to be prominent later (cf. p. 166), and a brother of his.
A fragment of Theopompus appears to say that Hyperbolus was ostracised 
for six years (FGrH 115 F 96. b ~ Fornara 145. B), which if we counted from
his death in 412/1 (Thuc.VIII. 73. iii) would point to 418 or 417; but Theopom-
pus may actually have said that Hyperbolus was Athens’ leading demagogue for
six years until his ostracism, which if we counted from Cleon’s death in 422/1
would point to 416 or 415, and a fragmentary inscription perhaps shows 
Hyperbolus still active in Athens at the end of 418/7, after the spring when the
ostracism would have been held (IG i3 85). Most scholars now accept that we
must choose between 416 and 415.
Preserved with the speeches of Andocides is a speech (IV) Against Alcibiades,
apparently written in the character of Phaeax for a situation in which he, Nicias
and Alcibiades are the prospective victims; but, as far as we know, speeches were
not delivered before the votes were cast, and there are passages in the speech
which it is hard to think were written at the time. Probably the speech is a later
156
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

rhetorical exercise; it does not mention the imminent Sicilian expedition, but
in other respects the year envisaged is 415.An invitation to the citizens to choose
between Alcibiades and Nicias would make sense in any of the possible years;
since we know that the Sicilian expedition was hotly debated, and it is possible
(though not certain) that the writer of the speech knew when the ostracism had
been held, 415 is the likeliest year. Thucydides mentions the ostracism only in
connection with Hyperbolus’ murder; but he despised Hyperbolus and the
ostracism failed to resolve the clash between Alcibiades and Nicias, so his not
mentioning it in its place is intelligible.
Hyperbolus would presumably have preferred Alcibiades to be ostracised, as
the man whose style and policies made him the greater threat to Hyperbolus’
own position. It would be typical of Alcibiades to resort to a device which
eliminated Hyperbolus, and which weakened Nicias, who could have been told
that unless he cooperated with Alcibiades he might be the victim. Subsequently
the assembly continued to be asked each year whether it wanted to hold an
ostracism, but regularly decided against. This will be not because Hyperbolus
was worthless, but because his banishment showed that ostracism was an unre-
liable weapon. Prosecution in the lawcourts could be aimed speciﬁcally at the
intended victim, and that was done all too often over the next century.
The Herms and the Mysteries
In 415, shortly before the Sicilian expedition was due to sail, Athens was 
rocked by a religious scandal. Most of the herms (busts of the god Hermes on
a plinth with a phallus) were damaged in a single night: ‘The affair was taken
rather seriously; it seemed to be an omen for the expedition and to have been
done with a view to conspiracy for revolution and the overthrow of the demo-
cracy’ (Thuc.VI. 27. iii). An enquiry elicited information not about the mutila-
tion but about mock celebrations of the Eleusinian Mysteries in private houses,
in which Alcibiades was said to have participated. Alcibiades wanted to stand
trial immediately, but his enemies reckoned that with the expedition about to
sail he would too easily secure acquittal, so it was resolved that he should be
recalled later (Thuc. VI. 27–9). Information came in and arrests were made;
Thucydides comments that no accusations were ignored but good men were
considered suspect on the evidence of bad. Eventually one of the arrested men
was persuaded to give information about the herms, on which Thucydides
remarks that nobody could be sure either at the time or later whether he was
telling the truth, but the people were greatly relieved to believe that the matter
was settled (VI. 53. ii, 60). The tension was heightened by operations of the
Spartan and Boeotian armies near the Athenian frontiers, and there was
renewed suspicion that the profanation of the Mysteries and Alcibiades’ involve-
ment were part of the same plot. The Salaminia, one of the state ships, was 
sent to Sicily to fetch him and other men accused, but he escaped to the 
Peloponnese (VI. 53. i, 61: cf. p. 134).
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
157

In addition to Thucydides’ account we have that of the man who turned
informer, Andocides, in the speech (I) On the Mysteries which he delivered when
his involvement in these matters was used against him in 400 (cf. p. 267); Lysias,
VI. Against Andocides, from the same trial, is less informative. According to
Andocides, a man called Dioclides gave false information, that he had seen 
the mutilators, about three hundred, of whom he named forty-two including
Andocides and several of his relatives. These were all arrested, and one of the
innocent relatives persuaded Andocides to tell what he knew in return for a
promise of immunity. His story is that the mutilation was the work of a hetai-
reia, an association of upper-class ‘companions’, to which he belonged; it was
proposed at a drinking party and he had opposed it; it was carried out later,
when he had been injured in an accident and could not take part; the deed was
a pistis, an act undertaken as a ‘pledge’ to cement the loyalty of the participants
(Andoc. I. Myst. 37–69). He says less about the Mysteries, but he admits that
the men accused included his father and other relatives (17–24), and it is pos-
sible that he was himself involved.
Those who stood trial were sentenced to death, and those who ﬂed into exile
were condemned in their absence.Their property was conﬁscated and sold, and
substantial fragments survive of the ‘Attic stelai’ recording the sale of the con-
ﬁscated property (IG i3 421–30, extracts M&L 79 ~ Fornara 147. D, cf. Poll.
X. 97, Philoch. FGrH 328 FF 133–4 ~ Fornara 147. A–C). The stelai give fas-
cinating information on the possessions of rich Athenians and the prices which
they could fetch when sold in these abnormal circumstances; for the economic
exploitation of the Delian League by Athenians it is particularly interesting 
that Oeonias, known otherwise only as one of the accused men named by 
Andocides (I. Myst. 13), had estates in Euboea which were sold for the 
enormous sum of 811–3 talents (IG i3 422. 375–8: cf. p. 176).
Public mutilation of herms and private mocking of the Mysteries were dif-
ferent kinds of act, though some men were accused and convicted of both.The
mutilation, at a time of heightened tension, was presumably intended to shock,
and did shock; there had been previous occasions when statues were damaged
by drunken young men (Thuc. VI. 28. i), but this does seem to have involved
more than drunkenness and high spirits. If the plotters had hoped to overthrow
the democracy, we might have expected further moves to take advantage of the
initial panic, perhaps seizure of the acropolis or the council-house. There were
no such moves, and although plotters can be incompetent there was probably
not a plot against the democracy; but fear of such a plot shows that the stabi-
lity of the 420’s (cf. pp. 116–17) was wearing thin. More likely, perhaps, is a
last-ditch and again unsuccessful attempt to stop the Sicilian expedition by cre-
ating unfavourable omens: the pious Nicias would not have tried to prevent the
expedition in this way, but there may have been men who shared his disapproval
of the expedition but not his piety. On the other hand, profaning the Myster-
ies in private was presumably intended not to become public knowledge but 
to amuse the participants, men who will not have been thoroughgoing atheists
but who, while perhaps thinking of themselves as such, will have had enough
158
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

residual religion to derive amusement and a guilty thrill from daring the gods
to punish them for their mockery of religious rites.
It ﬁts the suggestion that there was an attempt to stop the Sicilian expedi-
tion, for which Alcibiades was enthusiastic, that, when the mutilation had
created the initial panic, men came forward to accuse Alcibiades and others 
of profanation; and there are some signs that Dioclides’ denunciations may 
have been an attempt to hit back at enemies of Alcibiades. The men named by
Andocides as eager for the investigation were leading demagogues, Cleonymus,
Pisander and Androcles (I. Myst. 27), while Alcibiades was an aristocrat chal-
lenging the demagogues at their own game (cf. pp. 155–7), and Andocides and
his hetairoi seem not to have been enthusiastic democrats. On the other hand,
the formal prosecutor of Alcibiades was Thessalus, one of the sons of Cimon
(Plut. Alc. 19. iii, 22. iv). Thucydides’ account prompted him to a digression
on the overthrow of the Pisistratid tyranny, and the connection is probably that
Alcibiades was perceived both by democrats and by ‘respectable’ aristocrats as
dangerously like a tyrant (and fear of Spartan involvement reminded him of the
ending of the tyranny, in which Sparta had been involved).The expedition went
ahead, and, ironically, the proceeds from the sales will have made a signiﬁcant
contribution to the funding of it. Alcibiades made his way to Sparta, where
Thucydides reports him as saying that in Athens he had to accept and try to
moderate the democracy; democracy is agreed folly, but a change of régime in
the middle of the war would not be safe (VI. 89. iii–vi).
Euripides’ Trojan Women was produced in the spring of 415, between the
capture of Melos and the sailing of the Sicilian expedition: it focuses on the
disasters accompanying the destruction of Troy, and may in part have been
prompted by the fate of Melos. Aristophanes’ Birds was produced in spring 414,
when it was still hoped that the Sicilian expedition would succeed: two men
who have had enough of Athens set out to found a new city in the sky, Cloud-
cuckooland; the new city turns out to possess the familiar faults of Athens’ inter-
nal and imperial politics; but it is all light-hearted, including a reference to the
fate of Melos (Av. 186: cf. pp. 131–2), and attempts to see the Sicilian expedi-
tion or Alcibiades in the play are unconvincing. A scholium on Av. 1297 infers
from a passage in a play by Phrynichus produced at the same time that a man
called Syracosius carried a decree ‘that people should not be comedied by
name’ (cf. p. 66, on an attempt to restrain comedy in 440/39); while the attacks
in Birds show that there cannot have been a total ban, the play does not name
any of the men known to have been accused of involvement in the religious
scandals, and some scholars have thought of a decree protecting them, but more
probably there was no decree of Syracosius.
The principal item in Athens’ building history in this period is the beginning
of the Erechtheum, the complex temple on the northern part of the acropolis
(the name is used rarely in ancient texts, but see Paus. I. 26. v). The building
accounts for 409/8 (IG i3 474) start with a reference to a decree of the begin-
ning of that year authorising the resumption of work which was already well
advanced, and scholars assume that construction began shortly after the Peace
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
159

of Nicias and was suspended perhaps when resources were concentrated on the
Sicilian expedition, perhaps when economy measures were taken after the
expedition’s failure.
The Four Hundred and the Five Thousand
In 415 the stability of the democracy was wearing thin; in 411 the democracy
was overthrown, only to be restored in 410.
The Sicilian expedition of 415–413, debated and approved by the assembly,
ended in disaster; and by the time it ended the Spartans were established in
their fort at Decelea, in the north of Attica.The Athenians nevertheless decided
to ﬁght on, but ‘to restrain matters in the city somewhat with a view to
economy’, and they appointed an emergency committee of ten older citizens as
probouloi, to make preliminary proposals to the assembly as was traditionally
done by the council (Thuc.VIII. 1. iii, cf. Ath. Pol. 29. ii).We do not know how
their duties were dovetailed with those of the council: in Aristophanes’ Lysi-
strata we encounter a proboulos, attended by Scythian archers, where we should
expect to encounter the prytaneis, the tribal contingent serving as the council’s
standing committee (387–610); he is a pompous ofﬁcial but is not something
new and dangerous; he has obtained wood for oars and needs to arrange for
payment (421–3). Probably the probouloi had to be over 40; we know two of
them, the tragedian Sophocles, who was born c.496 and had a civic as well as
a literary career, and Hagnon, who was born before 470, was a supporter of
Pericles and served as general several times between 440/39 and 429/8 (cf. pp.
117; 67, 69). With the need for economy we might be tempted to link the 
creation of a board of poristai, ‘providers’ of funds, but they are ﬁrst attested as
early as 419, when Athens was not in ﬁnancial difﬁculties (Antiph. VI. Chor.
49).
By the end of 415 Alcibiades was in Sparta; after prompting Sparta to con-
centrate its effort in the Aegean rather than the Hellespont, by the end of 412
he had moved to the court of Tissaphernes and had made contact with sym-
pathetic Athenians in the ﬂeet at Samos (Thuc. VIII. 45–9). About the end of
December a deputation was sent to Athens headed by Pisander, who in 415
had been a demagogue eager for investigation of the religious scandals (cf. p.
159), claiming that ‘if Alcibiades were recalled and they did not keep to the
same style of democracy they could have the King as an ally and get the better
of the Peloponnesians’. This was opposed at ﬁrst, especially by the families
responsible for the Eleusinian cult, whose Mysteries Alcibiades had mocked,
but was ﬁnally accepted as Athens’ only hope. Pisander encouraged the hetai-
reiai of politically minded upper-class men to work together for the oligarchic
movement, obtained the deposition of Phrynichus (who had been working
against Alcibiades: cf. p. 144) and another general, and the sending of replace-
ments, and returned to Samos with men authorised to negotiate with 
Alcibiades and Tissaphernes (VIII. 53–4). The negotiations with Tissaphernes
160
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

broke down, and about the end of March 411 the Persians made a new treaty
with Sparta (cf. p. 145). The champions of oligarchy in the ﬂeet decided to go
ahead without Alcibiades; they won over some of the Samians (despite their
recent restoration of democracy: cf. p. 143); they sent some men to allied states
to set up oligarchies there, and Pisander and others back to Athens (VIII. 63.
iii–65. i). Pisander and his colleagues reached Athens about April/May. The 
oligarchic movement was under way: Androcles (cf. p. 159) and some other
democrats had been assassinated; an oligarchic programme was circulating, that
civilian stipends should be abolished and political rights limited to not more
than ﬁve thousand men ‘able to serve with their wealth and their bodies’, i.e.
those of hoplite class and above; the democratic political processes were still
functioning but were dominated by the oligarchs (VIII. 65. ii–66).
For what follows we have two accounts: in Thucydides, VIII, interspersed
with his narrative of other events, and, since he was in exile, based on what
others told him; and in Ath. Pol. 29–33, which is partly based on Thucydides,
partly derived from a source with access to documents in which the oligarchic
revolutionaries tried to make their actions look respectable by democratic cri-
teria of respectability. How we are to reconstruct what happened has given rise
to much controversy.
An assembly was held at which syngrapheis, a drafting committee (used on
other occasions in the ﬁfth century: cf. p. 57), were appointed to draw up 
proposals. Ath. Pol., which cites the decree, probably has the details right: the
ten probouloi were to be joined by twenty others; other citizens could submit
proposals; and an amendment called on the syngrapheis ‘to look for the tradi-
tional laws which Cleisthenes enacted when he established the democracy’
(Thuc. VIII. 67. i, Ath. Pol. 29. ii–iii). The word ‘oligarchy’ was being avoided,
as on Pisander’s ﬁrst visit, and the propaganda offered a democracy purged of
its recent excesses; the council was to be of four hundred because that was 
the size of Solon’s council. There was much talk now and later of the patrios
politeia, the ‘traditional constitution’: this was useful propaganda for the olig-
archs, and probably some of them believed it themselves, but to committed
democrats the traditional constitution was the democracy under which they
lived until 411.
The syngrapheis reported to a later assembly, held according to Thucydides
at Colonus, about a mile (1.5km.) outside the city: modern scholars have sus-
pected that, with the Spartans in Attica, poorer men who could not afford arms
would be more reluctant to attend than richer, but at that distance the danger
cannot have been great, and there must have been a respectable pretext for
meeting there.The poorer citizens will in any case have been under-represented,
since many of them will have been with the ﬂeet at Samos. Our sources agree
that the syngrapheis began by suspending all the normal safeguards against
improper legislation and insisting that all proposals should be put to the vote.
They then diverge.Thucydides attributes the positive proposals emphatically to
Pisander, Ath. Pol. by implication to the syngrapheis, and both may be true if
Pisander was one of the syngrapheis and claimed to be speaking on behalf of all.
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
161

Almost all civilian stipends were abolished, as in the programme already circu-
lating.Thucydides, who has already mentioned that programme, then mentions
the appointment of the Four Hundred – ﬁve men to choose a hundred, who
were to choose the remaining three hundred – as a body who were to rule with
full power and convene the Five Thousand when they saw ﬁt. Ath. Pol. men-
tions the entrusting of the state for the duration of the war to not less than ﬁve
thousand, and the appointment of a hundred men to draw up a register of them;
it defers the Four Hundred to a document quoted later. The two accounts
should be combined: what was proposed now was a citizen body of ﬁve thou-
sand, with residual sovereignty, and a powerful council of four hundred; the
Four Hundred were probably appointed on the spot by Thucydides’ method
(Thuc. VIII. 67–68. i, Ath. Pol. 29. iv–v).
The Four Hundred did not take over the state immediately. Ath. Pol. 30–1
has a second committee of a hundred appointed, to work out the details of the
constitution (credible enough, after the basic principles had been decided at
Colonus), and two constitutional documents, one ‘for the future time’ and a
second ‘for the immediate crisis’. Probably the committee set to work in the
days after Colonus, and a split opened between moderates who were seriously
interested in a different kind of constitution (the future constitution divides the
restricted citizen body into quarters in the manner of the Boeotian constitu-
tions: cf. p. 245) and extremists who wanted to seize power for themselves (the
immediate constitution includes a mechanism for the appointment of the Four
Hundred, which will explain why Ath. Pol. has not mentioned them earlier); the
extremists insisted that in the present crisis things must be done their way, but
to appease the moderates offered the possibility of another kind of constitution
later.
When they were ready the Four Hundred occupied the council-house 
by force, giving the democratic council its pay for the remainder of its year of
ofﬁce (about a month). Ath. Pol. dates the dissolution of the old council to 14
Thargelion (xi) (c.9 June) and the ‘entry’ of the Four Hundred to 22 
Thargelion (c.17 June); Thucydides refers to the Four Hundred’s prayers and
sacriﬁces (Thuc.VIII. 69–70. i, Ath. Pol. 32. i). Presumably the old council was
dismissed and the Four Hundred took over de facto on the 14th, and the new
régime was formally inaugurated, and the constitutional documents were
perhaps published, on the 22nd.
Four men are named as particularly responsible for the revolution (Thuc.
VIII. 68, Ath. Pol. 32. ii: the absence of Phrynichus from the papyrus text of
Ath. Pol. is probably due to a copyist’s error): Pisander, who played the leading
role in public; Antiphon, the éminence grise in the background (scholars argue
over whether he is the same man as ‘Antiphon the sophist’, but probably he is
not;Thucydides admired the speech which he made when put on trial after the
fall of the Four Hundred); Phrynichus, who particularly distrusted Alcibiades,
and joined the oligarchs when they broke with Alcibiades; and Theramenes, son
of the proboulos Hagnon, who proved to be unhappy both with democracy and
with extreme forms of oligarchy. The original argument for a change to olig-
162
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

archy had been that it would enable Athens to bring back Alcibiades and obtain
Persian help in defeating Sparta; but Persian help had not been obtained, the
oligarchs had broken with Alcibiades, and they were to attempt to make peace
with Sparta. Richer citizens could easily be persuaded that a democracy in
which they had to share power with poorer citizens was not in their interests
(cf. the Old Oligarch, pp. 116–17); after the failure in Sicily democratic Athens
could no longer be represented as successful; when Athens was short of money
an oligarchic régime in which the citizens did not have to be paid for public
service had the attraction of cheapness; and (though the movement began at
Samos) the absence of the ﬂeet and its oarsmen will have tilted the social and
political balance in Athens. Probably some men sincerely believed that the
democracy had gone too far and a more restrained form of constitution would
be better, while others wanted power for themselves and their friends. No doubt
different men supported or acquiesced in the oligarchy for different combina-
tions of these reasons. While Thucydides represents the establishment of the 
oligarchy as due to conspiracy and intimidation, he also suggests that nobody
tried very hard to preserve the democracy.
Once they were in power, the Four Hundred ruled by force, killing, exiling
or imprisoning some of their opponents (Thuc. VIII. 70, Ath. Pol. 32. ii). The
register of the Five Thousand was begun but never completed – a speech in
defence of a man who was one of the Four Hundred and one of the registrars
claims that he tried to enrol as many as nine thousand (Lys. XX. Polystratus 13)
– and no assemblies of the Five Thousand were held (Thuc.VIII. 92. xi, 93. ii,
cf. 89. ii; Ath. Pol. 32. iii, 33. ii).
Far from prosecuting the war against Sparta, the Four Hundred tried to make
peace. First they approached Agis at Decelea, but he responded by attacking
Athens; later with Agis’ support they sent a series of embassies to Sparta, the
last headed by Antiphon and Phrynichus, but achieved nothing (Thuc.VIII. 70.
ii–71, 86. ix, 90. ii, 91. i). Ath. Pol. 32. iii claims that Sparta was demanding
that Athens should give up its empire: that may well be true, and there was the
additional problem that the régime at Athens could not commit the ﬂeet at
Samos.
The Four Hundred had sent envoys to Samos to announce the change of
régime, with an assurance that all of the Five Thousand would be involved in
affairs (Thuc.VIII. 71). However, about the time when the Four Hundred came
to power in Athens, the ﬂeet reverted to democracy. In the polis of Samos the
men won over by the Athenian oligarchs were plotting against their democracy,
and had assisted in the murder of Hyperbolus, living there since his ostracism,
but with the help of democratically minded Athenians the plot was frustrated.
While the Four Hundred’s envoys were travelling to Samos, the state ship the
Paralus was sent with the news from Samos to Athens: there most of the crew
were transferred to another ship, but the messenger Chaereas got back to Samos
with an exaggerated account of what had happened in Athens. In the ﬂeet
Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus emerged as democratic leaders.The Athenians and
the Samians swore to be loyal to the democracy and to persevere in the war
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
163

against Sparta.The ﬂeet behaved as a polis in exile, electing new ofﬁcials includ-
ing Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus as generals; it recalled Alcibiades, who still
claimed that he could obtain Persian support, and made him general too (Thuc.
VIII. 73–7, 81–2). The envoys from Athens, hearing the news from Samos,
delayed but eventually arrived and were allowed to make a statement, in which
they denied any intention of surrendering to Sparta. Alcibiades was now in
Samos; Thucydides praises him for arguing against abandoning the Aegean to
the Spartans in order to return to Athens and restore the democracy there (cf.
VIII. 82. ii), and the envoys were sent back with the message that Alcibiades
approved of the Five Thousand and of the abolition of civilian stipends, but not
of the Four Hundred (VIII. 77, 86. i–vii).
The return of the envoys stimulated discontent among the ordinary citizens
in Athens; the lead was taken by Theramenes (cf. p. 162) and by Aristocrates,
a man from an old-established family, who commanded a tribal regiment under
the Four Hundred and was a general both before and after the oligarchy. The
Four Hundred started to build a wall at Eetionea, on the north-west of the
Piraeus, allegedly to defend Athens against an attack by the Athenian ﬂeet from
Samos but in reality,Theramenes argued, to let the Peloponnesians in.When it
was learned that Peloponnesian ships were on their way to Euboea (cf. p. 146),
he suggested they were actually bound for Athens. When Phrynichus returned
from the last, unsuccessful, embassy to Sparta, he was assassinated in the agora.
As the ships came nearer to Athens, there was a mutiny among the hoplites
building the wall, which ended with their demolishing it and claiming that the
Five Thousand rather than the Four Hundred should rule. The Four Hundred
offered to convene an assembly; but on the day in question the ships, which
had been to Megara, were sighted sailing past Salamis. The Athenians rushed
down to the Piraeus; when the ships moved on to the Euripus, the Athenians
manned ships which followed them and were defeated in a battle; but the 
Peloponnesians did not seize the opportunity to sail back and attack Athens
(Thuc. VIII. 89–96). This was about the beginning of Boedromion (iii) 411/0,
late September (Ath. Pol. 33. i).
In an ad hoc assembly on the Pnyx, the regular meeting-place, the 
Athenians voted to depose the Four Hundred and entrust the state to the Five
Thousand; and this was followed by a series of further meetings. Thucydides
and Ath. Pol. express approval of the government of Athens under this inter-
mediate régime, but they do not give details: the abolition of civilian stipends
was upheld, and Thucydides writes of ‘a reasonable mixture with regard to the
few and the many’ (Thuc.VIII. 97. i–ii, Ath. Pol. 33). Some have suggested that
the future constitution of Ath. Pol. 30 was now put into effect, but what little
evidence we have does not support that. Others, emphasising the shortage of
evidence for the restoration of the democracy later (cf. p. 165), have argued
that this régime was almost identical with the democracy. More probably this
régime combined the democratic principle that power should reside in the
assembly rather than in the council (and perhaps reverted to a council of ﬁve
hundred, but elected rather than allotted) with the oligarchic principle that the
164
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

citizen body should be limited to those ‘able to serve with their wealth and their
bodies’. The intermediate régime voted to persevere with the war, recalling
Alcibiades and seeking a reconciliation with the ﬂeet at Samos. Some of the
extremists escaped to the Spartans at Decelea (Thuc. VIII. 97. iii–98); others
including Antiphon stayed in Athens, and were put on trial and condemned
(Craterus FGrH 342 F 5; [Plut.] X Orat. 833 D–834 B ~ Fornara 151; frag-
ments of Antiphon’s speech fr. B. 1 in the Loeb Minor Attic Orators, i).
The full democracy was restored in 410, probably after the battle of 
Cyzicus had once more demonstrated the importance of the navy for Athens.
Thucydides’ narrative ends in the autumn of 411 (cf. p. 146); neither Xenophon
nor Diodorus mentions the restoration; Ath. Pol. 34. i begins a short and inac-
curate passage bridging 410–404 with what is probably an allusion to it. The
best evidence for the restoration is a decree quoted by Andocides (I. Myst. 96–8)
which is dated to the ﬁrst prytany of 410/09, goes out of its way to refer to ‘the
council of ﬁve hundred appointed by lot’, and reafﬁrms the law against the over-
throw of the constitution; probably the calendar was adjusted so that a new year
for the council began at the restoration.
We have seen above that there was a mixture of motives for overthrowing the
democracy in 411. The way in which the régime of the Four Hundred devel-
oped could not please those who were hoping for more effective prosecution 
of the war or for a moderation of democracy’s recent excesses, and the rever-
sion of the ﬂeet at Samos to democracy produced a fatal split between the 
Athenians in Athens and those at Samos. Those who were dissatisﬁed 
included Theramenes, who had been one of the leaders of the original revolu-
tion, and Aristocrates, a member of and a military ofﬁcer under the Four
Hundred.The collapse of that régime after the battle in the Euripus is no cause
for surprise. The lack of Thucydides’ narrative makes it harder to pronounce
on the end of the intermediate régime; but it followed a success, not a failure,
and Theramenes and Aristocrates were not put on trial.We shall see some signs
of friction, but this was apparently a much less traumatic change.
The Restored Democracy
In terms of personalities, there seems superﬁcially to be a considerable degree
of continuity between the intermediate régime and the democracy. The com-
manders of the Hellespont ﬂeet at Cyzicus, including Alcibiades, and also
Theramenes, who had joined it in 410, remained with it until it returned to
Athens in 407. However, Alcibiades, who had his rights restored by the inter-
mediate régime in 411, did not have them restored by the democracy until 407,
and neither he nor Theramenes or Thrasybulus seems to have been elected
general by the democracy: they continued to command the ﬂeet because they
were acceptable to the ﬂeet. Aristocrates, however, was elected general for
410/09, and so was Thrasyllus, who had returned from Samos to Athens in 411.
On the chronology adopted in this book, Thrasyllus stayed in Athens in 410,
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
165

began 409 campaigning separately in the Aegean, and was not wholly welcome
when he rejoined the main ﬂeet in the autumn (cf. pp. 147–8).
Those who had killed Phrynichus were now honoured (M&L 85 = IG i3
102 ~ Fornara 155, Lys. XIII. Agoratus 70–6, Lycurg. Leocrates 112–15); and
Phrynichus himself was posthumously condemned, either now or earlier,
under the intermediate régime. The prosecutor was Critias (Lycurg. Leocrates
113), related both to Andocides and to the philosopher Plato, and tenuously to
the early sixth-century reformer Solon. The leading demagogue in this period
was Cleophon, regularly referred to as a lyre-maker (e.g. Andoc. I. Myst. 146,
Ath. Pol. 28. iii); ostraka show that he and a brother attracted votes in 415;
their father Cleïppides was a general in 429/8 and a candidate for ostracism in
the 440’s. He introduced the diobelia (Ath. Pol. 28. iii), a 2-obol grant whose
basis is unclear but which must have been some kind of state support for men
unable to maintain themselves while the Spartans were at Decelea. He was
strongly opposed to peace with Sparta, and still unwilling to come to terms
after Athens’ defeat at Aegospotami (cf. pp. 151, 168).
Draco in 621/0 and Solon in 594/3 had been specially commissioned law-
givers; but since then laws had been enacted by decrees of the assembly, which
were not systematically dated and preserved. By the end of the ﬁfth century it
must have been hard to discover what the current law on a particular matter
was; and the oligarchic revolution of 411 will have exposed that fact, as men
who were distressed at what had happened thought that there must surely be
laws to prevent such happenings.We have noticed that in 410/09 the law against
overthrow of the constitution was reafﬁrmed (cf. p. 165); and in the same year,
to guard against the formation of claques, members of the council were required
to sit in the seats allocated to them (Philoch. FGrH 328 F 140). At the same
time the restored democracy embarked on a recodiﬁcation of Athens’ laws.We
learn from a speech of Lysias for the prosecution of Nicomachus, one of the
commissioners appointed for the purpose, that what was envisaged as a short
and simple task, ‘to write up the laws of Solon’, was still unﬁnished when the
democracy was overthrown again in 404; it was resumed in 403 and ﬁnally com-
pleted in 400/399 (Lys. XXX. Nicomachus, esp. 2–5; for the later stages cf. pp.
260–1). Now and later the Athenians tended to refer to all their current laws
as ‘the statutes of Draco [on homicide: cf. Ath. Pol. 7. i] and the laws of Solon’,
and the task will have taken time because of the difﬁculty of ﬁnding and iden-
tifying those more recent enactments which modiﬁed the original laws of Draco
and Solon and were currently valid. There survive from the ﬁrst phase of the
commissioners’ work an inscription of 409/8 giving Draco’s homicide law
(M&L 86 = IG i3 104 ~ Fornara 15) and an inscription collecting various laws
about the council of ﬁve hundred (IG i3 105).
After the successes of the Hellespont ﬂeet in 410–408 (cf. pp. 147–8), it
returned to Athens in 407. It was Thrasyllus, trusted by the democracy, who
brought the main ﬂeet: Alcibiades came by an indirect route and did not arrive
until he had been elected general for 407/6. (Thrasybulus, from the Hellespont
ﬂeet, was elected general also, but Theramenes, as far as we know, was not.)
166
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

Alcibiades was cleared of the religious charges made against him in 415, treaties
he had made in the ﬁeld were ratiﬁed (cf. p. 149), and unprecedentedly he was
made commander-in-chief, superior to the other generals. Ever since the Spar-
tans had occupied Decelea, the normal procession from Athens to Eleusis for
the Mysteries had been replaced by a journey by sea; but this year Alcibiades 
paid his debt to the Eleusinian goddesses by using a detachment of soldiers to
escort the traditional procession (Xen. Hell. I. iv. 8–21, Diod. Sic. XIII. 68–
69. iii, Plut. Alc. 32–4). Either on this occasion or under the intermediate ré-
gime a decree for his recall was proposed by Critias (Plut. Alc. 33. i).
The run of successes, for Athens and for Alcibiades, ended with the battle
of Notium, early in 406 (cf. pp. 149–50). Possibly Alcibiades was formally
deposed (Nep. VII. Alc. 7. iii, Plut. Lys. 5. iii); possibly he was prosecuted by
Cleophon (Phot. Bibl. 377 A 18–19); certainly he withdrew into exile in Thrace.
It was perhaps because of his links with Alcibiades that Critias was exiled at the
same time, on the proposal of Cleophon: he went to Thessaly, where he is said
to have worked for democracy and to have supported the serfs known as pen-
estai against their masters (Xen. Hell. II. iii. 15, 36, Mem. I. ii. 24, Arist. Rh. I.
1375 B 31–4). The generals elected for 406/5 included Conon, who took over 
Alcibiades’ ﬂeet, Aristocrates and Pericles (son by Aspasia of the famous 
Pericles), all re-elected from the previous year; also Thrasyllus; but not 
Thrasybulus, another man associated with Alcibiades.
Conon was blockaded in the harbour of Mytilene by the Spartan 
Callicratidas; and to rescue him Athens made a supreme effort, melting down
gold dedications for coinage, liberating slaves who were willing to row, equip-
ping and manning another 110 ships (to which others were added from the
allies) and sending with them all eight available generals. The battle of Argi-
nusae was won, but in bad weather, and the Athenians did not pick up corpses
or shipwrecked survivors (cf. p. 150). That news, arriving after the news of the
victory, led to a great outburst of anger in Athens: two of the eight generals did
not return; by an irregular procedure the six who did return were all condemned
to death by the assembly. Xenophon has a dramatic account in which this was
the result of a campaign orchestrated by Theramenes (he and Thrasybulus had
been serving in the ﬂeet as trierarchs, commanders of individual ships, and the
generals claimed to have given them the job of picking up); Diodorus has a 
less sinister and more credible account in which the trierarchs and the gener-
als each tried to save themselves by blaming the other party. The story has
gained additional notoriety from the fact that one of the prytaneis (the presid-
ing committee comprising one tribal contingent of councillors: cf. p. 58), who
tried in vain in an emotional meeting to insist on lawful procedure, was the
philosopher Socrates.The formal proposer of the motion to condemn the gen-
erals was Callixenus, not otherwise known; the demagogue Cleophon plays no
part in the story. Once the generals had been killed, the Athenians’ mood
changed, and Callixenus and others were arrested and charged with deceiving
the people; but in the turmoil at the end of the war they escaped trial (Xen.
Hell. I. vii, Diod. Sic. XIII. 101–103.ii).
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
167

Conon, to rescue whom the battle had been fought, survived, retained
command of the ﬂeet, and was re-elected for 405/4. Theramenes, who had not
been elected since the restoration of the democracy, was elected now but
rejected in the dokimasia which men had to undergo before entering ofﬁce 
(Lys. XIII. Agoratus 10; for the procedure cf. p. 37); there is no mention of
Thrasybulus. At Aegospotami in 405 Alcibiades tried to join the Athenians once
more, but they would not have him; in the more probable account of the battle,
Philocles was the general who attempted to trap Lysander but was trapped by
him. He and other generals were captured by Lysander, and he was put to 
death; but Conon escaped to Evagoras of Salamis in Cyprus, and was to play
an important part in the history of the 390’s (cf. p. 151, and for Conon’s later
career pp. 207–8, 210, 226–7).
While Athens was blockaded, during the winter of 405/4 (cf. p. 151), those
who for various reasons had been made atimoi, deprived of rights, had their
rights restored (cf. Andoc. I. Myst. 73–9). A ﬁrst attempt to come to terms with
Sparta was unsuccessful; but a member of the council who proposed accepting
Sparta’s demand for the demolition of the long walls was imprisoned, and
Cleophon was opposed to surrender (cf. Aeschin. II. Embassy 76).Theramenes
had himself sent to talk to Lysander, and spent three months with him at Samos.
During his absence a legal ‘discovery’ enabled the council to add itself to a
normal jury and condemn Cleophon on a technical charge of desertion (cf. Lys.
XIII. Agoratus 7–12, XXX. Nicomachus 10–14). Theramenes then headed a
formal delegation to Sparta, and brought back terms which were reluctantly
accepted. All exiles were recalled (Xen. Hell. II. ii. 10–23: cf. p. 151). Lysander
returned to Athens, and at his prompting the oligarchic régime of the Thirty
was instituted (cf. pp. 257–60).
The democracy had lost the war; while Cleophon tried to prevent a settle-
ment Theramenes obtained one, under which Athens’ navy and oarsmen were
not going to be signiﬁcant. Lysander himself was particularly fond of narrow
oligarchies: it is no surprise that Athens was to undergo another bout of olig-
archy. In the last years of the war Theramenes and Thrasybulus had been
suspect, primarily, it seems, because of their links with Alcibiades. Afterwards
it could be alleged that oligarchic sympathisers had been disloyal in the last
campaigns (Lys. XII. Eratosthenes 36) and that the council of 405/4 was full of
oligarchs (Lys. XIII. Agor. 20), but those charges may be the result of hind-
sight: until the war was over, the war and personalities seem to have counted
for more than forms of constitution. As for Alcibiades, after the defeat of Athens
he made his way to the court of Pharnabazus, hoping to be escorted to 
the Persian King, but at the prompting of the Thirty in Athens and Lysander
Pharnabazus had him killed (Diod. Sic. XIV. 11. i–iv, Plut. Alc. 37. vi–39,
cf. Xen. Hell. II. iii. 42).
Not surprisingly, there is more of an atmosphere of crisis in the comedies
produced in the later years of the war than earlier. Eupolis’ Demes, commonly
dated 412 though some would put it slightly earlier, does not survive complete,
but there are papyrus fragments which allow a reconstruction (see Loeb Select
168
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

Papyri, iii, no. 40): Myronides (who commanded Athenian armies in the 450’s
but is not attested subsequently) has recently died, and on arrival in the under-
world reports on the parlous state of Athens; Solon, Miltiades, Aristides and
Pericles are chosen to investigate and Myronides escorts them back to con-
temporary Athens; they are met perhaps by a proboulos (but this speaker is left
unidentiﬁed in the latest edition, Eupolis fr. 99 Kassel & Austin), who cannot
offer generous hospitality, and they deal with rogues of various kinds.
Aristophanes’ Lysistrata and Thesmophoriazusae are probably to be dated to
January/February and March/April 411 respectively. In Lysistrata the women,
to force their husbands to make peace, refuse to have sexual intercourse with
them, and seize the acropolis and the treasuries on it; in this play, certainly, a
proboulos plays the part which would normally be played by the prytaneis (cf.
pp. 58, 167); Pisander (ll. 489–91) is still perceived as a demagogue. Thesmo-
phoriazusae, if the normal dating is correct, is nearer to but still before the oli-
garchic coup: the women hold an assembly to discuss punishing Euripides for
his travesties of them; current politics are largely avoided, but there are allu-
sions to fear of an alliance with the Persians (ll. 336–7, 365–6) and of tyranny
(ll. 338–9, 1143–4, cf. 361–2), behind which may lie a suspicion that Alcibiades
might return as a Persian-backed tyrant.
Of contemporary tragedies, Euripides’ Iphigenia Among the Taurians (413),
Helen (412) and Ion (410) tend to be regarded as ‘escapist’; Orestes (408?) and
Iphigenia at Aulis (408–406) are more melodramatic. From antiquity onwards
readers have tried to see Cleophon and others behind the characters of Orestes:
the characters are better seen as types than as identiﬁable individuals, but the
play undoubtedly presents a pessimistic view of public processes and private
agendas. Phoenician Women (c.409) focuses on the personal ambition and
absolute power of Eteocles, and may have been inspired by the selﬁsh lust for
power of men in Athens. Sophocles’ Philoctetes was produced in 409: reﬂections
of a particular context are always hard to ﬁnd in his plays, but some modern
scholars have been inclined to see in the need to reintegrate Philoctetes into
society an allegory for the problem of Alcibiades. Euripides (it is usually believed
but has recently been doubted) left Athens for the court of Archelaus of
Macedon, and he and Sophocles both died in 406. Aristophanes’ Frogs (405)
is a reaction to their deaths: there are no good tragedians left in Athens, so
Dionysus goes to the underworld to bring one back; Sophocles is uninterested,
so the play turns into a contest between Aeschylus and Euripides, in which
Aeschylus is the winner. Aristophanes had always preferred upper-class leaders
to upstarts (cf. p. 119); as we might expect, he is hostile to Cleophon (ll. 678,
1504, 1532–3); he deals gently with Theramenes’ wavering between democracy
and oligarchy (ll. 534–41, 967–70); more generally, in passages which appear
serious he complains that the city is relying on worthless men rather than good
(ll. 718–37, 1446–58), and, while approving of the liberation of slaves who
rowed at Arginusae, argues that men who have lost their rights [mostly men
involved in the oligarchy of 411–410] should have them restored. By now 
Alcibiades had gone into exile for the second time, and in the contest the ﬁrst
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
169

question put to each poet as a test of their value to Athens is, ‘What should be
done about Alcibiades?’ (ll. 1418–23). The state’s need to economise had im-
pinged on the poets: Frogs 367 (cf. schol.) alludes to a reduction in the fee paid
to competing dramatists.
We noted above that work on the Erechtheum was suspended c.415–413 but
resumed in 409: that was a time when it seemed possible that Athens might yet
win the war, and those given employment on the work will have been glad of
it; apart from a few details, the temple was ﬁnished by the end of the war. Xen.
Hell. I. vi. 1 reports that in 406/5 the ‘old temple of Athena’ was destroyed by
ﬁre: that was perhaps the opisthodomos, reconstructed as a treasury on the site
of an older temple between the Parthenon and the Erechtheum (cf. M&L 58
= IG i3 52 ~ Fornara 119, A. 15–18, B. 23–5, and for the ﬁre Dem. XXIV.
Timocrates 136); an inscription which has been thought to show that the ﬁre
spread to the Erechtheum (IG ii2 1654) is more probably of about the 370’s.
The assembly met on the Pnyx to depose the Four Hundred in 411 (cf. p.
164), but the retaining wall may have collapsed soon afterwards: shortly before
the installation of the Thirty it met in the theatre at Munichia (Piraeus) (Lys.
XIII. Agoratus 32, 55; cf. the ad hoc meeting in 411,Thuc.VIII. 43. i), and the
only assembly known to have been convened by the Thirty met in the odeum
(Xen. Hell. II. iv. 9–10).The Thirty are alleged to have rebuilt the Pnyx, chang-
ing its orientation (so that speakers faced inland instead of seawards: Plut.
Them. 19. vi) and increasing its area by about 40 per cent, but they were not
much interested in assemblies, and this is more probably the work of the
restored democracy. In the agora a new council-house was built to the west of
the old, probably in the last years of the war: the old council-house remained
standing, and came to be used as a repository for records and to be known as
the Metroum, sanctuary of the Mother of the Gods.
At the end of this chapter it must be stressed that 413–404 was a period 
of considerable hardship for individual Athenians – largely (cf. pp. 140–1)
deprived of the use of the countryside throughout the year (but the smaller 
population and the absence of many ships for most of the time will have made
Athens less crowded than in the early summers of the war), and having to buy
imported food. Nevertheless, dramatic and other festivals continued to be 
celebrated, and building work proceeded and provided employment for some
of the men.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On Alcibiades see Ellis, Alcibiades; Rhodes, ‘What Alcibiades Did or What Happened to
Him’.
On the ostracism of Hyperbolus, Theopompus FGrH 115 F 96 (b) = Fornara 145B
was reinterpreted by A. E. Raubitschek, ‘Theopompos on Hyperbolos’, Phoen. ix 1955,
122–6 = his The School of Hellas, ch. 40. Ostracism in 416 was argued for by C. Fuqua,
‘Possible Implications of the Ostracism of Hyperbolus’, TAPA xcvi 1965, 165–79; in
170
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY

415 by Rhodes, ‘The Ostracism of Hyperbolus’, in Ritual, Finance, Politics . . . D. Lewis,
85–98; 417 has been defended by some continental scholars. On Plutarch’s treatments
of the story see Pelling, Literary Texts and the Greek Historian, ch. 3.
On the religious scandals of 415: the fullest study is Furley, Andokides and the Herms;
on the approaches of Thucydides and Andocides see Pelling, Literary Texts and the Greek
Historian, ch. 2. On the alleged decree of Syracosius restricting attacks in comedy see
A. H. Sommerstein, ‘Comedy and the Unspeakable’, in Law, Rhetoric and Comedy in
Classical Athens . . . D. M. MacDowell, ch. 13.
The revolutions of 411 are discussed thoroughly by Hignett, A History of the 
Athenian Constitution, ch. 10 and app. 12.The failure of democrats to resist the oligarchs
is stressed by M. C. Taylor, ‘Implicating the Demos: A Reading of Thucydides on the
Rise of the Four Hundred’, JHS cxxii 2002, 91–108. That what I call the intermediate
régime of 411–410 scarcely differed from the democracy was argued by G. E. M. de
Ste. Croix, ‘The Constitution of the Five Thousand’, Hist. v 1956, 1–23, and rejected
by Rhodes, ‘The Five Thousand in the Athenian Revolutions of 411 BC’, JHS xcii 1972,
115–27; the view that it was an embodiment of the ‘future’ constitution of Ath. Pol. 30,
popular in the early twentieth century, has been revived by E. M. Harris, ‘The Consti-
tution of the Five Thousand’, HSCP xciii 1990, 243–80. Antiphon the speech-writer
and Antiphon the sophist are considered to be the same man by Gagarin, Antiphon the
Athenian, to be different men by Pendrick, Antiphon, of Athens.
On the revision of the laws begun in 410/09 when the democracy had been restored
see Rhodes, ‘The Athenian Code of Laws, 410–399 BC’, JHS cxi 1991, 87–100.
On the differing treatments by Xenophon and Diodorus of the sequel to Arginusae
see A. Andrewes, ‘The Arginousai Trial’, Phoen. xxviii 1974, 112–22.
On Eupolis see Storey, Eupolis, Poet of Old Comedy: at 112–14 he suggests a date of
417 or perhaps 416 for Demes.
Attribution of the rebuilding of the Pnyx to the restored democracy in and after 403
(rather than to the Thirty, as in Plut. Them. 19. vi) is due to R. A. Moysey, ‘The Thirty
and the Pnyx’, AJA2 lxxxv 1981, 31–7.
ATHENS IN THE LATE FIFTH CENTURY
171

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
478/7
foundation of Delian League
454/3
treasury moved to Athens
c.449
Peace of Callias between Athens and Persia (?)
446/5
Thirty Years’ Peace between Athens and Peloponnesians
recognises two power blocs
431
Sparta begins Peloponnesian War professing intention of
liberating the Greeks
404
end of Peloponnesian War and of Delian League
Rise and Fall
As we have seen in earlier chapters, the Delian League was founded in 478/7
to continue the war against the Persians, when the Spartan Pausanias had made
himself unpopular with the allies. Athens had the executive power, providing
the commanders and the treasurers; but Thucydides emphasises the League’s
innocent beginning, and those who remembered the Ionian Revolt will have
been more afraid that Athens would lose interest than that it would become
domineering. However, the League was unlike any earlier alliance in Greece:
Athens took a permanent alliance to mean permanent campaigning, and
required contributions of ships or tribute in cash from the allies year after year.
Even from the beginning, activity was not limited to campaigning against the
15
The Athenian Empire:
Retrospect

Persians (Eïon was justiﬁed on that basis but Scyros was not), and Athens found
ways of furthering its own interests through the League’s activity (e.g. the
colonies at Eïon and Scyros).Within ten years Naxos had been forced to remain
in the League against its will; within ﬁfteen, Thasos had been coerced when it
resisted Athens’ desire for its mainland possessions.
In the early years League campaigns were regularly led by the pro-Spartan
Cimon, and Sparta acquiesced in the League’s development; but from 462/1,
while Cimon was ostracised, Athens’ democratic leaders were prepared to chal-
lenge Sparta’s supremacy in mainland Greece, and while ﬁghting against the
Persians continued (now in Cyprus and Egypt), allied forces were used also in
Greece as Athens built up its power there. However, c.454 that expansion ran
out of steam, and the forces in Egypt suffered a major defeat, after which there
was a serious possibility that the Persians might strike back.The moving of the
treasury from Delos to Athens, which appears to us as a symbol of growing
Athenian imperialism, may at the time have seemed a reasonable precaution.
In 451 Athens made a ﬁve-year truce with the Peloponnesians. Shortly after-
wards Cimon died in another campaign in Cyprus; and, after that, regular ﬁght-
ing against Persia came to an end, whether the formality of the Peace of Callias
is authentic or is a fourth-century invention.
One result of the moving of the treasury was the inscription of the ‘Athen-
ian tribute lists’, an annual series beginning in 453 recording the offering to
Athena of 1–
60 of the tribute, calculated separately on each state’s payment.These
tribute lists indicate that in the late 450’s and early 440’s there were some years
in which Athens’ demands met with considerable resistance; and, if some
decrees assigned to the middle of the century are rightly so assigned, there is
evidence for Athens’ interfering in individual states (such as Erythrae, where
there was a Persian-backed revolt, and Miletus, which had a democracy mod-
elled on that of Athens by the 430’s). However, decrees on the collection of the
tribute and the sending of offerings to festivals, and on the use of Athenian
weights, measures and coinage, are more probably to be dated to the 420’s.
Almost certainly, when the treasury was moved, councils in which the allies
were represented were discontinued. Garrisons, and ofﬁcials of various kinds,
were sent to member states. The language of the League changed, with oaths
sworn to the Athenians rather than to the Athenians and the allies, and ‘the
Athenian alliance’ became ‘the cities which Athens rules’. It is now reasonable
to speak of an Athenian empire.
By the 440’s all the allies except Samos, Chios and the cities of Lesbos were
paying tribute rather than providing ships: this was probably cheaper as well as
easier on their manpower, but lessened their ability to pursue an independent
policy (cf.Thuc. I. 98. ii–iii).Work on the temple of Apollo at Delos was aban-
doned, and in 447 Athens embarked on an ambitious building programme on
the acropolis, ﬁnanced partly from surplus tribute. Even in the 470’s Athenian
settlements had been planted abroad, and about the middle of the century
several allied states received settlements which both provided land for the set-
tlers and served as informal garrisons.
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
173

Revolts in mainland Greece were followed by the Thirty Years’ Peace of
446/5, by which Athens lost its mainland possessions but its control of the
League was recognised; the Greek world was divided between a Spartan bloc
based on the mainland and an Athenian bloc based on the Aegean. In 440–439
Athens’ intervention in a dispute between Samos and Miletus led to a major
war against Samos, which had Persian support, after which Samos was deprived
of its ships and had to refund Athens’ war expenses.
The Thirty Years’ Peace lasted only ﬁfteen years before the outbreak of the
Peloponnesian War in 431. Thucydides’ ‘truest reason’ for the war is Athens’
power and Sparta’s fear of it. I have argued that after the Thirty Years’ Peace,
while Athens did not encroach on the part of the Greek world in which Sparta
was interested, it continued to expand elsewhere, so that the balance of power
could not be held; and that in the late 430’s Athens pursued a high-risk strat-
egy, which suggests that it was prepared to accept the challenge and tried to
ensure that the conﬂict would break out in circumstances favourable to itself.
According to Thucydides (who perhaps does not tell the whole truth: cf. p.
96), Pericles had a defensive strategy for Athens in the war: to avoid a major
battle on land, to rely on sea power for survival, to keep a ﬁrm hold on the
empire but not to try to enlarge it. Mytilene, on Lesbos, revolted in 428–427
and was ﬁrmly dealt with; Chios, in 425/4, when ordered to demolish a new
wall, obeyed.The level of tribute was increased, as Athens used up its reserves,
but the Athenians also taxed themselves more heavily to pay for the war. It is
probably to this period that we should date decrees improving the mechanisms
for collecting the tribute (Cleonymus’ decree, M&L 68 = IG i3 68 ~ Fornara
133, is certainly of 426/5; Cleinias’ decree, M&L 46 = IG i3 34 ~ Fornara 98,
is best dated c.425/4), and requiring the allies to use Athenian weights and mea-
sures and Athenian silver coins (M&L 45 = IG i3 1453 ~ Fornara 97): these
texts threaten heavy penalties for non-compliance (and seem to envisage oppo-
sition in Athens as well as among the allies: cf. p. 181), and assume that there
will be Athenian ofﬁcials present in most allied cities.
After Pericles’ death, not all Athenians shared his view that they should not
try to enlarge the empire: in more than one part of the Greek world there was
fear that Athenian support would lead to Athenian control, including Sicily,
where a force which had become large and ambitious had to withdraw in 
424. The part of the empire most vulnerable to Spartan intervention was the
Thraceward region: the Spartan Brasidas was there from 424 to 422, insisting
that he had come not to substitute Spartan rule for Athenian but to liberate the
cities; he had considerable success, but there was an iron ﬁst inside his velvet
glove (cf. pp. 182–3). Another intervention in Sicily, in 415, in response to the
opposition of Nicias made larger and more ambitious than it might otherwise 
have been, was to prove the turning-point in the war. In 413 the Athenians 
were totally defeated there, with great loss of men, ships and money, and
damage to their morale. Before their defeat they replaced the tribute with a
harbour tax, which they hoped would yield more money (but they probably
reverted to tribute in 410); after it, various allied states made contact with
174
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

Sparta, as for the ﬁrst time it seemed possible that Athens would be defeated
in Greece and the Aegean too.
In the last phase of the war Sparta, in order to obtain Persian help, promised
to return the Greeks of mainland Asia Minor to Persia: there are some signs of
discontent among the Asiatic Greeks, but certainly not overwhelming repug-
nance; it is possible that in 408/7 Sparta obtained the lesser commitment that
the Asiatic Greeks were to pay tribute to Persia but be independent otherwise.
Some allies, notably Samos, remained loyal to Athens or returned to loyalty;
others, notably Chios (torn between anti-Athenian and pro-Athenian factions),
held out against Athens. There were times when it seemed that the Athenians
might yet be victorious, but in 405/4 they were defeated, and their empire came
to an end.
Burdens and Beneﬁts
All states which join an alliance lose the total freedom to decide their own poli-
cies without any reference to others. How serious that loss is depends on how
the policies of the alliance are decided. In the Delian League there were at ﬁrst
meetings in which Athens, though inﬂuential as holder of the executive power,
probably had one vote like each other member; but the meetings were prob-
ably discontinued when the treasury was moved to Athens in 454/3, and states
which contributed by paying tribute could not withdraw their forces from a
campaign of which they disapproved.
There had not been any previous Greek alliance in which the leader
(hegemon) had interfered in the internal affairs of the other members. When
Thucydides writes that the Athenians ‘were leaders of allies who were at ﬁrst
autonomous’ (I. 97. i), this is probably a comment prompted by hindsight; no
guarantees are likely to have been thought necessary at the League’s founda-
tion. Internal interference need not lie behind his remark that Naxos ‘was the
ﬁrst allied state to be enslaved contrary to what was established’ (I. 98. iv), but
it was occurring by the middle of the century (in general,Thuc. III. 82. i, [Xen.]
Ath. Pol. i. 14, 16, iii. 10–11), with the imposition of democracies in Erythrae
in the late 450’s (M&L 40 = IG i3 14 ~ Fornara 71), in Samos in 440/39 (Thuc.
I. 115. iii) and in Miletus by the mid 430’s (Klio lii 1970, 163–73). In 411
Athens’ oligarchs similarly set up oligarchies in the allied states (Thuc. VIII.
64–65. i, and cf. [Xen.] Ath. Pol. i. 14). Other forms of political interference
occurred too: major lawsuits were transferred from local courts to Athenian
courts, which were likely to favour litigants with a pro-Athenian record, at ﬁrst
in individual cases (e.g. Chalcis in 446/5, M&L 52 = IG i3 40 ~ Fornara 103)
and later generally (Antiph. V. Herodes 47, cf. Thuc. I. 77. i, [Xen.] Ath. Pol. i.
16–18), though much of the interference was not systematic but was in response
to particular provocations. Offenders against imperial decrees would be tried in
Athens (M&L 45 §12 = IG i3 1453 §10 ~ Fornara 97 §12, M&L 46 = IG i3 34
~ Fornara 98. 31–43), and Athens claimed the right to exile offenders from the
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
175

territory of all League members (M&L 40 = IG i3 14 ~ Fornara 71. 31). Sup-
porters of Athens could be awarded the privileged status of Athenian proxenos
(representative) and benefactor (e.g. IG i3 19; for collaboration with Athens
notice Thuc. III. 2. iii).
Economically, the most obvious burden on the allies was (except in the cases
where they provided ships) the payment of tribute, for which there were prece-
dents not within the Greek world but in barbarian rule over Asia Minor (Hdt.
I. 6. ii, 27. i, Lydia; III. 89–96, VI. 42. ii, Persia). As remarked above, it was
probably less burdensome to pay tribute than to provide ships and man them
every summer, but on account of the near-eastern precedents it could easily be
seen as a sign of subjection.The general level of tribute seems to have remained
constant until after the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, when increases
were imposed not in a spirit of greater exploitation but to contribute to the cost
of ﬁghting the war. Tribute could be remitted when Athens wanted to retain
the loyalty of a strategically located member (M&L 65 = IG i3 61 ~ Fornara
128. 5–9, 29–32, IG i3 62. 16–17), and some of the money found its way back
to the allies through wages for oarsmen and others employed by Athens. In
Athens, the League provided employment for more ofﬁcials and oarsmen than
would otherwise have been needed; surplus tribute seems to have contributed
directly to ﬁnancing the acropolis building programme of the 440’s–430’s, and
the fact that some items could be charged to the tribute will have helped 
the Athenians to pay for other things out of their own funds; but catalogues of
Athenians maintained at the allies’ expense are caricatures (Ath. Pol. 24. iii, cf.
Ar. Vesp. 707–11, [Xen.] Ath. Pol. i. 15–17, iii. 4).
The other main aspect of the economic burden for the allies and gain for the
Athenians concerns Athenians’ acquisition of allies’ land. Athens had been
interested in founding settlements in important locations from the beginning
of the League and before; from about the middle of the century a number of
allies whose conduct had provoked Athens had to give up some of their land
for an Athenian cleruchy (klerouchoi, ‘allotment-holders’, were men who occu-
pied land abroad but remained citizens of Athens; the previous owners may
then have had to lease back the land or work as hired labourers on it) (e.g. Plut.
Per. 11. v–vi, Diod. Sic. XI. 88. iii).Those settlements will have beneﬁted poorer
citizens (cf. M&L 49 = IG i3 46 ~ Fornara 100. 43–6), but there were oppor-
tunities for the rich also: normally non-citizens of a state could not own land
in that state unless given exemption from that rule as a privilege, but it seems
to have become possible for Athenians to acquire land in allied states, to such
an extent that Oeonias, one of the men involved in the religious scandals of
415, had land in three parts of Euboea which when conﬁscated was sold for as
much as 811–3 talents (IG i3 422. 375–8).
Athens’ control of the Aegean and ability to prevent piracy will to some extent
have beneﬁted everybody (except would-be pirates), and insistence on the use
of Athenian weights, measures and coinage (M&L 45 = IG i3 1453 ~ Fornara
97) will have been beneﬁcial economically but may have been perceived by some
of the allies as an affront to their pride (cf. contemporary debates about the
176
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

European Union and its currency, the Euro). However, the chief beneﬁciary
will have been Athens, which became the focal point of the Aegean’s trade: it
could itself import whatever it wanted, and it could use its power to help friends
and harm enemies (Thuc. I. 120. ii, II. 38. ii, III. 86. iv, [Xen.] Ath. Pol. ii. 6–7,
11–12): economic sanctions were imposed on Megara in the 430’s (cf. p. 85),
while in the 420’s Methone on the coast of Macedon was given permission,
which other states must have lacked, to import grain from the Black Sea, in a
decree which reveals the existence of Athenian Hellespontophylakes, ‘guardians
of the Hellespont’ (M&L 65 = IG i3 61 ~ Fornara 128. 34–41, cf. IG i3 62. 0–5
for Aphytis). Economic beneﬁts of another kind for Athens are highlighted by
[Xen.] Ath. Pol. i. 17: when traders came with their goods, when men came
from the allied states to bring their tribute or to put a request to the assembly
or to be tried in the lawcourts, the Athenian state proﬁted from increased tax
revenue and there were various opportunities for individual Athenians to make
money from the visitors.
Some scholars have claimed that, whereas in the archaic period the Greek
cities of Asia Minor and the offshore islands were prosperous and intellectually
active, when they were incorporated in the Delian League it was Athens that
was prosperous and intellectually active while the eastern Greeks were in
decline. Literary evidence does not suggest impoverishment (e.g. Thuc. VIII.
24. iv, 40. ii, on Chios), and recent work has cast doubt on the extent of the
material decline. For all the incompleteness of our archaeological knowledge,
it appears to be true that the eastern Greeks did not build monumental temples
in the ﬁfth century as some of them had in the sixth, but that appears equally
true of most other Greeks, both inside the Delian League and outside. In terms
of building temples and celebrating the festivals centred on them, in the ﬁfth
century the rest of the Greek world chose not to compete with Athens – but
that is a sign of Athens’ cultural predominance in the Greek world rather than
of its economic exploitation of the empire.
Religion
That leads us to the use of religion to reinforce Athens’ position in the League.
When the League was founded, it suited Athens to represent it as an Ionian
league (cf. pp. 18–19). For that purpose Delos, a small island but home of an
Ionian sanctuary and cult of Apollo, was appropriate as the focal point of the
League, and a new temple was begun and other buildings were erected while
it served that function. In the middle of the century, when the treasury was
moved to Athens, work on the temple was suspended; in the 420’s there was
renewed Athenian interest in Delos, but now in a Delos wholly under Athen-
ian control (cf. p. 109).
From the middle of the century the allies were involved in the cults and fes-
tivals of Athens.The tribute was brought to Athens before and displayed at the
Great Dionysia, which thus became an imperial festival (schol. Ar. Ach. 504,
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
177

Isoc. VIII. Peace 82; cf. M&L 46 = IG i3 34 ~ Fornara 98. 18–22, M&L 68 =
IG i3 68 ~ Fornara 133. 10–15). At ﬁrst only those who were Ionian in the
narrow sense, who could be expected to regard Athens as their mother city, had
to send offerings to the Panathenaea (e.g. Erythrae, M&L 40 = IG i3 14 ~
Fornara 71. 2–8), but in 425/4 offerings of a cow and a suit of armour were
required from all the allies (instituted M&L 69 = IG i3 71 ~ Fornara 136. 55–8;
cf. M&L 46 = IG i3 34 ~ Fornara 98. 41–3). Perhaps in the 430’s, the allies
were required but the other Greeks were merely invited to send offerings to the
Eleusinian Mysteries (M&L 73 = IG i3 78 ~ Fornara 140. 14–21; 24–6 with
30–6). In allied cities horoi (markers) invoking Athena, and Ion and his sons
(e.g. IG i3 1481–99), may attest the imposition of Athenian cults or alter-
natively the conﬁscation of land which was then added to the possessions of
Athenian deities.
The League did not only help to pay for the work on the acropolis, but there
was League symbolism in the work. If the temple of Athena Nike was planned
in the 440s (cf. pp. 63–4), it was surely inspired by the consciousness of victory
over the Persians (scenes on the frieze perhaps included the battle of Marathon),
whether or not that victory had been sealed by a Peace of Callias. Among the
statues set up on the acropolis was one of Athena Lemnia by Pheidias, cele-
brating the sending of cleruchs to Lemnos c.450 (Paus. I. 28. ii, Lucian Imag-
ines 4, cf. 6).
In Samos a sculpture group showed the introduction of Heracles to Olympus,
and featured not Samian Hera but Athena with Heracles and Zeus (Strabo 637.
XIV. i. 14): this was perhaps set up by supporters of Athens in Samos after the
war of 440–439. Ephesus, on the other hand, was prepared to rival Athens: a
group of Amazons, carved by several leading sculptors including Pheidias (Plin.
H.N. XXXIV. 53), advertised the Artemisium there as being no less venerable
and distinguished than Athens’ sanctuaries.
These developments should not be seen as surprising or as a sinister manipu-
lation of religion. Religion was ‘embedded’ in Greek society as Christianity 
used to be but no longer is embedded in the society of the European states and
their overseas colonies, and as other religions are still embedded in some
present-day societies; and it will have been thought natural that Athens’ deal-
ings with the allies, like other aspects of Athenian life, should have a religious
dimension.
Attitudes to the Empire
Thucydides’ speakers frequently claim that it was natural that the Athenians
should exercise such power as they could, and that those who were subjected
to Athenian power should dislike it. The Athenian envoys to Sparta in 432 are
represented as saying that Athens’ empire is based on the three considerations
of fear, honour and advantage; Athens acquired its leadership at the allies’
178
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

invitation, but as it became unpopular had to tighten its control; one cannot
object when states protect their own interests; Athens had done nothing sur-
prising or contrary to human nature, but deserved gratitude for behaving with
more justice than its power would allow (I. 75–6; cf. Pericles in II. 64. v).
However, it was ﬁrst suggested by G. Grote in the nineteenth century, and
argued strongly by G. E. M. de Ste. Croix in the middle of the twentieth, that
the truth may be different, that, because democratic Athens supported demo-
cracies in the empire, the empire may have been disliked by upper-class 
oligarchs but liked by lower-class democrats.
De Ste. Croix, who held a minimal view of the authenticity of Thucydides’
speeches, believed that the speeches reﬂect Thucydides’ own view that the 
Athenians exercised their power unashamedly and the allies hated it, but that
Thucydides’ narrative shows his view to be mistaken. I believe that, although
there is an element of invention in the speeches, the arguments in them are
those that the speakers actually did use or could genuinely have been expected
to use. Thucydides does at any rate allow speakers to contradict one another,
so that in the debate on Mytilene Cleon claims that everybody joined in oppo-
sition to Athens but Diodotus alleges that the upper-class leaders in the cities
are anti-Athenian while the lower classes are pro-Athenian (III. 39. vi; 47. ii,
iv): we can never be conﬁdent that a statement made by a Thucydidean speaker
is believed by Thucydides to be true.
There are certainly many passages where speakers express what de Ste. Croix
regarded as Thucydides’ own view: the empire is described as a tyranny not
only by the Corinthians (I. 122. iii, 124. iii) and by Cleon and Euphemus (III.
37. ii, VI. 85. i) but also by Pericles (II. 63. ii). Pericles proposed in 432/1 that
Athens should leave the allies autonomous if they had been autonomous at the
time of the Thirty Years’ Peace and if Sparta left its perioikoi autonomous (I.
144. ii), and his strategy for Athens in the Peloponnesian War included keeping
a ﬁrm control of the empire: the honour could not be had without the effort,
and even if it was unjust to acquire the empire it would be dangerous to 
let it go (II. 63). In the debate on Mytilene, Diodotus no less than Cleon talks
the language of power politics and Athens’ advantage (III. 37–48), though
Thucydides in his introduction remarks that after the original decision the 
Athenians ‘had a sudden change of mind and reckoned that it was a savage
policy and a big decision to destroy a whole city rather than those who were
guilty’ (III. 36. iv). In 415/4 Euphemus addresses Camarina in the same way:
the Athenians have indeed gone to Sicily to protect their own interests, but it
suits their interests that Syracuse should be weak and its enemies strong (VI.
82–7). The fullest exposition of this attitude is to be found in the Melian Dia-
logue (V. 85–111), where the Athenians do not deign to justify their attack, but
we know and you know that considerations of justice weigh in men’s arguments
when they are equal in coercive strength, while those who are superior do what
they can and the weak acquiesce. . . . We are here for the advantage of our empire.
(V. 89, 91)
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
179

It is unlikely that Thucydides could have obtained a detailed account of what
was said on that occasion, and he has certainly written up this episode for dra-
matic effect (cf. p. 132), but the message is the same as in the speeches, and
we cannot obtain a milder picture by jettisoning the dialogue but retaining the
speeches.
This view of Athenian power is not a private fantasy of Thucydides.
For Aristophanes also Athens is a tyrant (cf. below); for the Old Oligarch the
Athenian demos treats the empire in ways conducive to its own interests ([Xen.]
Ath. Pol. i. 14–18); and it is clear from fragments from the sophists and repre-
sentation of their arguments by Aristophanes and Plato that the exercise of
power, by states and by individuals, was indeed discussed in terms of that kind
in the late ﬁfth century. However, it may well be that Thucydides distorts by
including so many and such emphatic expressions of this view. He represents
his hero Pericles as claiming that Athens’ empire was something to be proud of
(II. 36. ii–iii, 63. i, 64. iii); as an Athenian and an admirer of Pericles he surely
shared in that pride; but also, although he was not a religious man, he believed
in morality and lawful conduct (cf. II. 53 on the effects of the plague, III. 82–3
on stasis) – and what was Athens’ empire but the successful exercise of law-
lessness on the largest scale? I suspect that he returns to the question so often
because he could not satisfactorily resolve it.
Some modern liberals, disappointed in Thucydides, have hoped to ﬁnd in
Aristophanes a renunciation of cynical imperialism, but he probably offers little
to comfort them. In his lost Babylonians of 426 the Babylonians seem to have
been slaves, branded and working a treadmill, but the context is unclear, and
it is by no means certain (as was once maintained) that this was a depiction of
Athens’ cruelty towards the allies.The reason for Cleon’s attack on the play (cf.
p. 118) was that in the presence of foreigners (i.e. at the Dionysia) Aristophanes
slandered Athens; speciﬁcally, he slandered ‘allotted and elected ofﬁcials, and
Cleon’ (Ar. Ach. 501–2, 630–1, schol. 378); and behind that probably lies the
claim made in Acharnians that Aristophanes beneﬁts the Athenians ‘by pre-
venting them from being deceived too much by the words of foreigners, from
delighting in being ﬂattered, from being gaping citizens; for previously envoys
would come from the cities to cheat you’, and thus by showing up what demo-
cracy, in Athens and generally, is really like (Ach. 633–42). Similarly, in Knights,
Demos, you have a ﬁne empire, since all people fear you like a man who is a tyrant
[that Athens is a tyrant is taken for granted]; but you are easily led astray, you
delight in being ﬂattered and cheated, you gape at whoever is currently speaking,
you have a mind but it’s never at home. (Eq. 1110–20)
In Wasps Hate-Cleon tries to show his father Love-Cleon how he is imposed
on by the demagogues, by reckoning up the income from the allies and showing
how little of it is spent on jurors’ pay, i.e. how little beneﬁt accrues to the ordin-
ary citizens (Vesp. 655–85, 698–712): the only objection to the extraction of
money from the allies is that those who grow rich on it are the politicians.
180
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

Beyond that there is Birds, where the new city in the clouds turns out to have
all the familiar faults of Athens (cf. p. 159); among the uninvited guests who
arrive are an episkopos, one of the ‘inspectors’ sent by Athens to the allied states,
who begins by asking, ‘Where are the proxenoi?’, the ‘representatives’ who can
be expected to be pro-Athenian (Av. 1021–53); and a decree-seller, whose three
sample decrees are parodies of a judicial settlement between Athens and an ally,
a requirement to use Athenian measures, weights and coins (cf. p. 174), and
sanctions against allies who refuse to welcome Athenian ofﬁcials (Av. 1035–57).
There are perhaps a few crumbs of comfort for liberals here, but to my mind
the emphasis is on Athenian busybodyness rather than oppressiveness.
Another comedian, Eupolis, seems to have focused on the allied cities in his
Cities (Poleis: perhaps to be dated to the end of the 420’s): recent work suggests
that they were depicted unsympathetically as women bringing tribute to Athens.
There are a few pointers in inscriptions to opposition – Cleinias’ tribute
decree threatens penalties for any Athenian or ally who commits an offence in
connection with the tribute (M&L 46 = IG i3 34 ~ Fornara 98. 31–41); an
undertaking to enforce the decree on weights, measures and coinage is added
to the councillors’ oath (M&L 45 §12 = IG i3 1453 §10 ~ Fornara 97 §12) –
but opposition of what kind? Thucydides son of Melesias objected not to the
League or to the collection of tribute but to the spending of the tribute on build-
ings in Athens rather than on war against Persia (Plut. Per. 12. i–iv, 14. i). Cleon
in the 420’s seems to have been obsessed with his enemies (cf. p. 120), and this
could be reﬂected in decrees of that time. The oligarchs in 411 wanted not to
abandon the empire but to replace democracy with oligarchy among the allies
as well as in Athens (Thuc. VIII. 64–65. i, cf. 91. iii); but Thucydides says that
Phrynichus, just as he believed that Alcibiades was committed neither to olig-
archy nor to democracy but to the furtherance of his own career, believed that
the allies wanted neither slavery combined with oligarchy nor slavery combined
with democracy but freedom irrespective of constitution (VIII. 48. iv–v), and
Thucydides himself endorses that belief (VIII. 64. v).
As for the Athenians’ treatment of opposition, as far as we know they had
not gone to the extent of killing all the men in a city before Cleon proposed to
do that in Mytilene in 427, and on that occasion a (slightly) less severe deci-
sion was taken ultimately; they did kill all the men in Scione in 421 and in
Melos in 416/5; but this severity was not peculiar to Athens: the Peloponnesians
killed all the men in Plataea in 427, and in Hysiae in 416. However, in 
Thucydides’ Mytilene debate Diodotus argues that rebels who expect the 
ultimate punishment have no reason not to resist to the end (Thuc. III. 46. i),
and on occasions the Athenians realised that it was important to treat a state
generously in order to retain its loyalty. From the 420’s we have a series of
decrees making special provisions for Methone, on the coast of volatile
Macedon (M&L 65 = IG i3 61 ~ Fornara 128), and similar provisions were
made for Aphytis, in Chalcidice near to the hostile Olynthus (IG i3 62). In 408
on recovering Calchedon and Byzantium they levied tribute at the previous rate
but did not take reprisals (Xen. Hell. I. iii. 8–9, Diod. Sic. XIII. 66. iii, 67. v–vii);
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
181

Alcibiades’ treaty with Selymbria included the return of hostages, freedom for
Selymbria to choose its own constitution, possibly the cancellation of debts to
Athens, and the renunciation of Athenian and allied claims to property in the
city (M&L 87 = IG i3 118 ~ Fornara 162. 8–26).
The Athenians normally encouraged, and when provoked sometimes
installed, democracies in the allied states (cf. p. 175; [Xen.] Ath. Pol. iii. 11
notes that occasions when they supported oligarchies turned out badly). Mean-
while Sparta, though not itself a typical oligarchy, encouraged oligarchies among
its allies (cf. Thuc. I. 19, V. 81. ii). Thus, as the Greek world became polarised
between Athens and Sparta, there was a tendency for democrats to look to
Athens for support and oligarchs to Sparta (Thuc. III. 82. i). It is this that led
Grote and de Ste. Croix to believe that the Athenian empire was not univer-
sally hated by those subjected to it, as the Thucydidean analysis of power poli-
tics requires, but while hated by upper-class oligarchs was in fact popular with
lower-class democrats: the burden of paying the tribute will have fallen largely
on the rich upper class, while political support and opportunities for employ-
ment, for instance in the Athenian navy, will have beneﬁted the poor lower class.
The facts suggest that both the Thucydidean view and the alternative are 
too one-sided. From Naxos in the League’s ﬁrst ten years to Potidaea and 
Olynthus in 433/2 we can draw up a long list of revolts before the outbreak 
of the Peloponnesian War; in most cases we do not know what led to the revolt
or how widely it was supported. Mytilene, which revolted in 428, was one of
the few ship-providing allies which had not been subjected to Athenian inter-
ference; it had considered revolting before the war but had not then been
encouraged by Sparta (Thuc. III. 2. i). It was oligarchic, so its revolt was the
work of the oligarchs. After the city had been under siege during the winter,
supplies of food ran short and there was no sign of the promised help from
Sparta; the ordinary people were given weapons for a ﬁnal effort but refused to
ﬁght, accusing the men in power of hoarding food for themselves, and forcing
them to come to terms with Athens (III. 27–28. i): the impression given by the
narrative is that the people could endure no more, not that they were pro-
Athenian.
When the Spartan Brasidas went to the Thraceward region in 424, he went
ﬁrst to Acanthus, which was divided between those who had encouraged his
expedition and the demos; ‘nevertheless the mass (plethos) through fear for the
[grape] harvest, which was still outside, was persuaded by Brasidas’ to give him
a hearing (IV. 84. ii). Brasidas made a speech which he was to repeat in other
cities, and which included a claim which Thucydides describes as enticing but
untrue (IV. 108. v): he had indeed come as a liberator, not to substitute Spartan
rule for Athenian or to support one party against another in the city, and had
bound the Spartan authorities by an oath [which suggests that they might not
have been so generous otherwise], but if Acanthus did not accept his liberation
he would impose it by force (IV. 85–7). After debate, by a secret ballot, the
Acanthians decided to go over to him, ‘because what Brasidas said was attrac-
tive and through fear for their harvest . . . and making him give pledges to keep
182
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

the oaths sworn by the Spartan authorities’ (IV. 88). Athens had sent additional
garrisons to the region (IV. 82). Most cities, like Acanthus, hesitated but did in
the end go over to Brasidas; Argilus and Scione (IV. 103. iv, 120. i), and perhaps
some others about which Thucydides says little, joined him spontaneously.
Amphipolis, where the primary division was between Athenians and non-
Athenians, was won over by generous terms (IV. 105–6); Torone was betrayed
by a few men (IV. 110–113. i). In spite of his promises, Spartan governors 
were in due course sent to the cities (IV. 132. iii). In Mende a few men had
outmanoeuvred the majority, and Athens treated it generously on recovering 
it (IV. 123. ii, 130. iv–vii); but Scione, threatened with destruction, held out
until 421, when it was captured and destroyed (IV. 122. vi, V. 32. i), and
Amphipolis, which should have been returned to Athens under the Peace of
Nicias, refused to comply (V. 18. v, 21. i–ii). Those who revolted ‘thought they
were in no danger, being as greatly deceived about Athenian power as it was
afterwards shown to be . . . and they became bold and thought that no retalia-
tory force would reach them’ (IV. 108. iv–v).
This does not point to a simple conclusion: where there was a division, the
lower classes were more likely to support Athens than the upper; but Brasidas
was popular because he offered freedom rather than pro-Spartan oligarchy, and
he was feared because if his offer was not accepted he would enforce it, while
the rebels thought they could safely go over to him because the Athenians would
not be able to recover them.
There was large-scale allied involvement in Athens’ Sicilian expedition of
415–413. Thucydides gives a catalogue for the summer of 413, when all those
who were going to take part had arrived, listing both tribute-paying (they pro-
vided soldiers: cf.VI. 25. ii) and ship-providing members of the League, as well
as allies of other kinds and mercenaries (VII. 57). Most of these remained loyal
to the end, not accepting the Syracusans’ invitation to desert when they were
caught in their retreat (VII. 82. i), but Thucydides suggests that the chief
concern of the League members during the campaign was ‘for their immediate
safety, of which there was no hope unless they won, and as a bonus that if they
helped to subdue someone else their subjection might become easier’ (VI. 69.
iii).
After the failure of that attempt to enlarge the empire, it did begin to seem
possible that Athens might be unable to hold on to the empire it had, and the
last phase of the war began with approaches to Sparta by the cities of Euboea
and Lesbos, and by Chios and Erythrae (VIII. 5. i–v). Others joined in the
revolt, and Athens recovered some but not others. Chios resisted repeated
Athenian attempts to regain it. In Samos, on the other hand, a democracy came
to power and was staunchly loyal to Athens (VIII. 21, cf. IG i3 96); after
Aegospotami the democrats killed some of their opponents and, alone of the
allies, refused to submit to Lysander until he besieged the city (Xen. Hell. II.
ii. 7, iii. 6–7, cf. Diod. Sic. XIV. 3. iv–v, Plut. Lys. 14. ii); in 405/4 Athens showed
its gratitude by conferring citizenship on all the Samians (IG ii2 1: M&L 94 =
IG i3 94 ~ Fornara 138 + R&O 2 ~ Harding 5). The situation was complicated
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
183

by Sparta’s promising in 412/1 that the Greeks of mainland Asia Minor would
not be liberated but would be returned to the Persians. Persian rule was by now
only a distant memory, and the prospect does not seem to have caused wide-
spread alarm. However, in 411 Miletus captured a fort built by Tissaphernes,
and was angry when told by the Spartan Lichas that it and the others in the
King’s territory ‘must submit to moderate slavery and cultivate Tissaphernes
until they got a good settlement of the war’ (VIII. 84. v); and later that year
Persian garrisons were expelled by Antandrus and Cnidus (VIII. 108. iv–
109. i).
Other considerations need to be borne in mind, as well as liking or loathing
for Athens and the League. Athens and Sparta were both much larger and more
powerful than most Greek cities, and, whatever a city’s sympathies, if a Spartan
force arrived on its doorstep it might well seem prudent to join the Spartans,
and later if an Athenian force arrived it might seem prudent to return to its old
allegiance and plead that it had had no choice. Beyond any immediate threat
to itself, a city might well judge that its interests would best be served by being
on the winning side (cf. Paus. VI. 3. xv–xvi), and notice Thucydides’ remark,
quoted above, that the Thraceward cities misjudged Athens’ strength. Other
considerations likely to be important in some cases are a city’s proximity to the
Persians and liking or disliking of them, and proximity to a more powerful Greek
city against which Athens might be seen as a protector. Whatever the attitudes
of the ordinary members of the lower classes, one group of men likely to have
been enthusiastic for Athens will have been those democratic political leaders
who were in a position of power in their cities with Athenian support, and who
without it might well lose that position: all too often in Greece political leaders
of various hues would rather be in power with external support than out of
power in an independent city (see Thuc. III. 82. i, and cf., for instance, Megara
in 424, IV. 66. iii).
Class loyalty did count for something in the Greek world, and there are pas-
sages where Thucydides notes that because of a city’s constitution it was per-
ceived as a congenial or uncongenial ally by another city (V. 29. ii, 31. vi, 44.
i). But polis loyalty counted for something too, and Athens had infringed the
independence of its allies as no Greek city had done before: Thucydides states
that at the beginning of the Peloponnesian War people’s sympathies were with
the Spartans because they proclaimed that they were going to free Greece (II.
8. iv–v); Brasidas insisted that he would be a liberator, and Phrynichus thought
that what the allies wanted was freedom irrespective of constitution (cf. pp. 181,
182–3); Xenophon writes that the day when the demolition of Athens’ long
walls was begun was hailed as the beginning of freedom for Greece (Xen. Hell.
II. ii. 13). In more than one area in the Greek world Thucydides notes fears
that Athenian support would turn into Athenian domination (north-west
Greece, III. 114. ii–iv with 113. vi; Sicily, IV. 60–1 in Hermocrates’ speech at
Gela; cf. Boeotia, IV. 92. v–vi in Pagondas’ speech before Delium). Certainly
the richer citizens in the allied states are more likely to have been opposed to
Athens and the League, and the poorer more likely to have been in favour, and
184
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

probably there were some places at some times when that was the more impor-
tant consideration; many may have been comparatively happy to stay in the
League while it seemed secure, but eager to abandon the ship when it began
to sink; but the desire for local independence was genuine and important,
and although Thucydides over-simpliﬁes he may not have been fundamentally
wrong.
After 404
At the end of the Peloponnesian War Athens lost all its overseas possessions, not
only the League proper but also the islands in the northern Aegean which it had
acquired early in the ﬁfth century, Lemnos and Imbros.What Sparta was com-
mitted to in respect of the Asiatic Greeks depends on whether we accept a Treaty
of Boeotius in 408/7 (cf. pp. 149, 191); as we shall see, what actually happened
was that immediately Sparta took over the Athenian empire, including the cities
on the Asiatic mainland; and when Tissaphernes claimed the Asiatic Greeks for
Persia they appealed to Sparta for support and were granted it; then for some
years Sparta vacillated between ﬁghting in Asia Minor and trying to negotiate a
compromise.Thucydides has the Athenians in 432 predicting that if Sparta were
to rule in Athens’ place it would be even more unpopular than Athens (I. 77. vi,
cf. 76. i), and this was borne out. In 395 Athens joined several of Sparta’s former
allies in the Corinthian War against Sparta; and Xenophon gives the Thebans a
speech appealing for Athenian support in which they take it for granted that
Athens would like to recover its empire, and say,‘When you ruled over the largest
number, you had the largest number of enemies’ (Xen. Hell. III. v. 8–15). In
387/6 Sparta did by the Peace of Antalcidas ﬁnally surrender the Asiatic Greeks
to Persia in return for Persia’s backing terms which Sparta wanted in Greece
(and the ﬁfth-century Peace of Callias between Athens and Persia was perhaps
invented then to demonstrate how much more glorious the past had been: cf.
pp. 47–8); elsewhere in the Greek world Sparta’s conduct was increasingly inter-
fering, to such an extent that in 378 Athens founded a new league with the aim
of resisting Spartan imperialism.
Orators and others in Athens could offer a conventional defence of or attack
on the ﬁfth-century empire to suit their current purposes. Lysias’ Funeral Speech
of c.390, generalising from the Corinthian War to claim that Athens has always
fought on the side of freedom and justice, insists that in the ﬁfth century ‘the
Athenians made Greece free and their own fatherland the greatest’; for seventy
years they kept the allies free from stasis, obliging them to live in equality [i.e.
democracy], and made them as well as Athens strong, keeping the Persians at
bay (Lys. II. Epitaph. 54–7). In Plato’s Gorgias (c.390–385?) it is the creators
of Athens’ power, Themistocles, Cimon and Pericles, who are responsible for
Athens’ troubles rather than Alcibiades (Plat. Grg. 518 E–519 B). Isocrates in
his Panegyric of c.380, arguing for a Greek war under Athenian leadership
against Persia, claims in response to objections that Athens was milder than any
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
185

other ruler, dealing with the cities not as a master but as an ally, supporting the
people and opposing oligarchies (Isoc. IV. Paneg. 100–6, cf. 80–1). By contrast,
in On the Peace, c.355 at the end of the Social War, he rejects imperialism as a
failure, and writes of ‘the licentiousness of our fathers, who . . . made them-
selves hated amongst the Greeks and drove into exile the best men in the other
cities’ (Isoc. VIII. Peace 79). Later still, in his Panathenaic of c.342–339, in the
course of a contrast between Athens and Sparta, he sets the Peace of Callias
against the Peace of Antalcidas (Isoc. XII. Panath. 106), and, while admitting
the unpopularity of the transfer of lawsuits, the collection of tribute and the
severe treatment of rebel cities, claims that Sparta’s behaviour has in every
respect been worse (§§56–73). Demosthenes in his Third Philippic of 341 con-
trasts with the Greeks’ leaving Philip of Macedon free to do whatever he likes
the assertion that, when Athens, Sparta or Thebes tried to be overbearing, the
other Greeks did not let them get away with it but rallied in support of those
who were wronged (Dem. IX. Phil. iii. 22–5).
The clearest indication of what was remembered and resented is the series
of promises made in the prospectus of the Second Athenian League (378/7)
that Athens would not do various things which it had done in the Delian
League: the allies are to be free and autonomous, living under whatever con-
stitution they wish, not receiving a garrison or governor, not paying tribute; and
no houses or land in allied territory are to be owned by Athenians, either pub-
licly or individually (IG ii2 43 = R&O 22 ~ Harding 35. 19–46). As we shall see
in chapter 18, at the beginning the Second League was popular (Sparta in the
present was a greater cause of worry than an Athens which seemed to have
learned from the past), and on the whole kept its promises; but, as Athens had
not disbanded the Delian League when it ceased wanting to ﬁght against Persia,
it did not disband the Second League when, within ten years of its foundation,
far from wanting to resist Sparta it made an ally of Sparta, and the League
failed to ﬁnd a new purpose and its promises were increasingly broken.
What are we to make of the Delian League? There had never before in the
Greek world been an organisation which embraced so many Greek states and
subjected them to such an extent to the will of the leader (cf. Thuc. II. 64. iii:
various passages in Thucydides contrast the alternatives for Athens of ruling
others and being ruled by others).This was, however, accomplished within what
Greeks could regard as an acceptable framework: the members were not incor-
porated in the Athenian state, as Rome was to incorporate its subjects (to be
made part of a greater Athens, even with citizenship, would have been far more
shocking to Greeks than what was done in the Delian League), but remained
technically independent poleis, with their own laws, their own political machin-
ery, their own cults and festivals, and so on. Nevertheless, most of them not
only did lose the freedom to decide their own foreign policy but also were sub-
jected to various kinds of internal interference (the form of constitution, the
transfer of lawsuits to Athens, the payment of tribute as well as the sending of
offerings to Athenian festivals, the loss of land for settlements of Athenian citi-
zens), though much of this interference was not systematic throughout the
186
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

League but took the form of ad hoc reactions to particular provocations. On
the other hand, there were economic beneﬁts for everybody in belonging to an
organisation which kept the Aegean free from pirates, whose use of common
standards facilitated trade, and which provided employment for many men 
who were not self-sufﬁcient landowners. Where Athens had encouraged or
demanded democracy many individuals enjoyed political rights which they
might otherwise not have enjoyed; and the polarisation of the Greek world
between Athenian-backed democracies and Spartan-backed oligarchies made
for stability, as we shall see when we look at the less stable world of the fourth
century.
Whether a state would be better off inside the League or outside depends on
what alternative is set up for comparison: a world in which the League existed
but a particular state tried to go it alone, a world in which the League as we
know it did not exist but some other kind of organisation did, or a world in
which there was no signiﬁcant entity larger than the individual poleis and each
polis had to do the best that it could for itself. As the Athenians themselves were
to ﬁnd when facing Philip of Macedon (cf. chapter 22), local pride and ma-
terial interest might point in different directions, and how that dilemma was to
be resolved would depend on one’s own priorities; the same dilemma has faced
the states of Europe confronted by the European Union.
For Athens itself there can be no doubt that its position at the head of the
League made available to it resources which would have been beyond the reach
even of this exceptionally large Greek polis on its own, and it is hard to believe
that ﬁfth-century Athens could have risen to such heights of achievement in
drama and in the visual arts without these resources and without the conﬁdence
which came with the success of the League. It was the state which built up the
empire which was ‘an education for Greece’ (Thuc. II. 41. i).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
For general books on the Delian League see the note at the end of chapter 2.
On the extent to which the empire was exploited economically by Athens see Meiggs,
The Athenian Empire, chs. 13–14; M. I. Finley, ‘The Fifth-Century Athenian Empire: A
Balance Sheet’, in Garnsey and Whittaker (eds.), Imperialism in the Ancient World,
103–26. On the previous owners of land given to Athenian cleruchs see R. Zelnick-
Abramovitz, ‘Settlers and Dispossessed in the Athenian Empire’, Mnem.4 lvii 2004,
325–45.That we should see the cultural predominance of Athens, not only in the empire
but throughout the Greek world, rather than the impoverishment of the other members,
is argued by R. Osborne, ‘Archaeology and the Athenian Empire’, TAPA cxxix 1999,
319–32. On the transfer of lawsuits from allied cities to Athens see G. E. M. de Ste.
Croix, ‘Notes on Jurisdiction in the Athenian Empire’, CQ2 xi 1961, 94–112, 268–80;
Meiggs, The Athenian Empire, ch. 12.
The suggestion of Grote, History of Greece, vi. 9–10, 182–4 (12-vol. edition) = v.
149–51, 319–21 (10-vol. edition) that, in contrast to the view of Thucydides, the empire
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT
187

was not unpopular with all its subjects but popular with lower-class democrats and
unpopular only with upper-class oligarchs, was argued vigorously by G. E. M. de Ste.
Croix, ‘The Character of the Athenian Empire’, Hist. iii 1954–5, 1–41. Among the
responses which he elicited, see particularly D. W. Bradeen, ‘The Popularity of the
Athenian Empire’, Hist. ix 1960, 257–69; J. de Romilly, ‘Thucydides and the Cities of
the Athenian Empire’, BICS xiii 1966, 1–12. Fifth- and fourth-century judgments on
the empire are reviewed by Meiggs, The Athenian Empire, chs. 21, 22.
The view of Aristophanes’ Babylonians as a sympathetic portrayal of Athens’ op-
pressed subjects was developed by G. Norwood, ‘Aristophanes’ Babylonians’, CP xxv
1930, and criticised by W. G. Forrest, ‘Aristophanes and the Athenian Empire’, in The
Ancient Historian and His Materials . . . C. E. Stevens, ch. 2. On Eupolis see Storey,
Eupolis: Poet of Old Comedy, and on his Cities see I. Storey, ‘The Politics of Angry
Eupolis’, AHB viii 1994, 107–20 at 109–11.
188
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE: RETROSPECT

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
392
ﬁrst Spartan attempt at a common peace treaty
387/6
Peace of Antalcidas
375
renewal of peace
371
peace treaties before and after battle of Leuctra
367
Thebes wins support of Persians but Greeks reject peace treaty
365
Thebes makes treaty with Corinth and other cities
362
treaty after battle of Mantinea
346
Peace of Philocrates between Athens and Philip II of Macedon
338/7
common peace treaty and creation of League of Corinth after
battle of Chaeronea
The fourth century can be divided into four sections, the ﬁrst three of which
are included in this book. (1) To about 360 Sparta, Athens and Thebes
attempted in turn to dominate the Greek world, with Persia in the background
as a power to be invoked by the currently predominant Greek city to reinforce
its predominance. (2) From 359 to 336 Philip II of Macedon achieved a leading
position in the Greek world, which he clothed in familiar Greek diplomatic
forms, and at the end of his reign he took advantage of the Greeks’ hankering
after unity through another war against Persia, to plan such a war. (3) 
Philip was assassinated after he had sent out his advance forces; his successor
Alexander III (336–323) undertook the campaign and conquered the Persian
16
Introduction to 
the Fourth Century: 
The Common Peace

empire, but his increasing adoption of oriental practices alienated the more 
conservative Macedonians and Greeks. (4) Alexander died young, without
leaving a viable heir; after his death his leading generals competed for
supremacy, originally on behalf of a possible heir but later for themselves; and
the ﬁrst phase in this competition reached its climax when in 306–304 the
leading contenders each took the title king and it became clear that the Graeco-
Macedonian world was to centre on a plurality of large kingdoms.
For the second and third sections Macedon provides a unifying thread, but
the ﬁrst is more complex. In this chapter an outline narrative of the period
404–336 will be given, linked to a series of ‘common peace’ treaties; in chap-
ters 17–19 the years 404–359 will be explored in more detail, from the angles
of Sparta, Athens and Thebes in turn, and in chapter 20 the internal affairs 
of Athens in the same period will be studied. This will involve some repeti-
tion, but will allow the most important themes and events to appear in differ-
ent contexts.
Sources (cf. pp. 146–7, on 411–404)
Xenophon’s Hellenica (probably resumed after a pause) covers the régime of
the Thirty and the restoration of democracy in Athens in II. iii. 11–iv, and then
continues to 362 in books III–VII. He spent most of that period as an exile
from Athens, living in the Peloponnese as a dependant of the Spartans: not
every sentence is favourable to Sparta (NB V. iv. 1: Sparta was deservedly pun-
ished for its occupation of Thebes in 382), but the general tendency of his
account is, and in particular favourable to king Agesilaus; and, more seriously
for those who want to use it as a historical source, it shows little interest in areas
and episodes in which Sparta was not involved and/or which Xenophon found
uncongenial. Nothing is said of the foundation of the Second Athenian League;
the only mention of the new Arcadian capital Megalopolis is in a list of sup-
porters of Thebes in 362 (VII. v. 5); and the Theban leaders Pelopidas and
Epaminondas are similarly neglected. The Hellenica like Thucydides’ his-
tory contains speeches, but it does not contain a declaration of policy on the
speeches. A defender has argued that the substance of the speeches is usually
authentic; at worst the speeches represent what a contemporary thought plau-
sible that particular men should have said on particular occasions. Xenophon
also wrote a separate work on Agesilaus, and his Anabasis gives an account of
Cyrus’ campaign against his brother Artaxerxes II (book I) and the return of
Cyrus’ mercenary army, in which Xenophon himself became one of the leaders,
to the Greek world.
Diodorus continued to use Ephorus, and Ephorus for the period which 
it covered – to 386? – continued to use the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia. Diodorus’
account is not consistent in its sympathies, but (presumably reﬂecting changes
in Ephorus’ sources) is particularly hostile to Sparta and Agesilaus in the
opening chapters of book XV (1–22, covering 386/5–381/0) yet becomes
190
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY

favourable to Sparta and Agesilaus after that. Narrative dates, as always, are
Diodorus’ own; accounts of battles tend to be conventional, and Leuctra is
badly garbled (cf. pp. 251–2); he is capable of striking errors, e.g. killing
Chabrias in 375 (XV. 36. iv), when he still had a long career ahead of him; but
he gives a far more balanced account of the period than Xenophon. As for the
last years of the Peloponnesian War, when there is a direct disagreement
between the two, we cannot assume automatically that one is the superior
source and must therefore be right.
From Plutarch we have lives of the Spartans Lysander and Agesilaus, and of
the Theban Pelopidas; he wrote an Epaminondas which has not survived (the for-
merly widespread view that Paus. IX. 13–15. vi is a résumé of it is fragile). From
the beginning of the period we have Andocides’ speeches (I) On the Mysteries
and (III) On the Peace, and speeches written by or attributed to Lysias. Isocrates,
who lived from c.436 to 338, wrote lawcourt speeches for clients in the 390’s,
but is best known as a teacher of rhetoric and a writer of pamphlets in the form
of speeches. He was a reﬂecter of current ideas rather than an original thinker;
one theme to be found in several of his speeches is that the Greeks were at their
best when they were united in ﬁghting against Persia rather than quarrelling
among themselves, so they ought to unite in ﬁghting against Persia once more
(an idea given added momentum by the return of the Asiatic Greeks to Persia
under the Peace of Antalcidas in 386). From one decade to the next Isocrates
looked to a different state or man to lead the Greeks in that war.
As in the ﬁfth century, Athens was the state most given to inscribing public
documents on stone: we have a particularly rich collection of texts, with which
Diodorus’ account harmonises well, on the foundation of the Second Athenian
League (cf. pp. 229–33).
The Origins of the Common Peace
When the Peloponnesian War ended, Sparta was committed to the unqualiﬁed
return of the Asiatic Greeks to Persia if the treaty of 411 was still in force, to
their becoming tributary to Persia but otherwise autonomous if the sending of
Cyrus had been preceded by a Treaty of Boeotius in 408/7 (cf. pp. 149, 185).
In fact it took over the cities in Asia Minor along with the other cities of the
Athenian empire; and when Cyrus revolted against Artaxerxes, in 402, he was
supported by nearly all of the Asiatic Greeks and by Sparta. When Artaxerxes
reinstated Tissaphernes as satrap of Sardis, he demanded the submission of the
Asiatic Greeks, they appealed to Sparta, and Sparta agreed to support them: it
is more likely that there was a treaty of 408/7 which Tissaphernes regarded as
obsolete after the Greeks’ support for Cyrus than that Sparta was wilfully break-
ing the treaty of 411.The ﬁrst Spartan forces were sent to Asia Minor in autumn
400.
Sparta’s intervention was originally on a small scale, with men other than
kings as commanders, and the ﬁghting was punctuated by truces. In 398
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
191

Spartan envoys went to the Persian court (Ctesias FGrH 688 F 30 §74 [63]).
After some truces which the Spartan Dercylidas made with one enemy in order
to concentrate on another (cf. p. 207), in 397 he accepted a truce offered by
Tissaphernes to explore the possibility of a treaty by which the Asiatic Greeks
would be autonomous and Sparta would withdraw its troops and commanders
(Xen. Hell. III. ii. 12–20, Diod. Sic. XIV. 39. iv–vi). In 396 king Agesilaus went
to Asia and took reinforcements: on arrival he accepted a truce to enable 
Tissaphernes to consult the King about the autonomy of the Asiatic Greeks,
but Tissaphernes in fact asked for a large army (Xen. Hell. III. iv. 5–6, Ages. i.
10–11, Plut. Ages. 9. i, Polyaenus Strat. II. 1. viii). In 395, after a victory of Age-
silaus near Sardis,Tissaphernes was executed and replaced by Tithraustes, who
announced the King’s terms: that Sparta should withdraw and the Asiatic
Greeks should be autonomous but pay ‘the ancient tribute’. Agesilaus said he
could not agree without authority from Sparta, but let Tithraustes pay him to
move into Pharnabazus’ satrapy of Dascylium (Xen. Hell. III. iv. 25–6, Diod.
Sic. XIV. 80. viii, Plut. Ages. 10. vi–viii). In 394 there was a meeting between
Agesilaus and Pharnabazus but not another proposal for a settlement (Xen.
Hell. IV. i. 29–40: cf. p. 208).
In Greece Sparta had been alienating its former allies, and showing an inter-
est north of the Isthmus of Corinth as well as in the Peloponnese. Timocrates
of Rhodes was sent, probably by Pharnabazus in 397, with money to subsidise
opponents of Sparta. In 395 a border dispute between Phocis, backed by Sparta,
and Locris, backed by Boeotia, led to the outbreak of the Corinthian War against
Sparta; Lysander was defeated and killed at Haliartus, and in 394 Agesilaus had
to return from Asia to ﬁght for Sparta in Greece. The Athenian Conon, who
had escaped to Cyprus at the end of the Peloponnesian War, was by now com-
manding ships for Pharnabazus. In 394 they defeated Sparta’s ﬂeet at Cnidus,
effectively ending Sparta’s supremacy in the Aegean, and in 393 they sailed to
Greece, taking money to Corinth and to Athens.
Sparta was not doing well either in Asia Minor or in Greece, and in 392
turned to diplomacy. Antalcidas was sent to Tiribazus, the current satrap in
Sardis; Conon headed a delegation from Athens; deputations went also from
Sparta’s other main opponents in the Corinthian War, Boeotia, Corinth and
Argos. Antalcidas proposed that Persia’s claim to the Asiatic Greeks should be
accepted, and all other islands and cities should be autonomous; but this
worried Athens (which had recovered the north Aegean islands of Lemnos,
Imbros and Scyros, and did not want to lose them again), Boeotia (since Sparta
was threatening in the name of autonomy to require the breaking-up of the
Boeotian federation), and Corinth and Argos (which were forming a poli-
tical union and did not want that to be undone), so no agreement was reached.
Tiribazus supported the Spartans and arrested Conon, but the failure of the
peace proposals suggested that Sparta would continue ﬁghting against Persia,
so Tiribazus was replaced by the anti-Spartan Struthas (Xen. Hell. IV. viii.
12–17, cf. Diod. Sic. XIV. 85. iv).
192
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY

The next stage is omitted both by Xenophon and by Diodorus; but, though
not all have accepted it, we should probably use a fragment of Philochorus
(FGrH 328 F 149 ~ Harding 23) and Andocides’ speech (III) On the Peace to
date to 392/1 a congress at Sparta in which the Spartans tried to gain accep-
tance for modiﬁed terms. Athens was to be allowed the three islands as an
exception to the principle of autonomy for all (Andoc. III. Peace 12, 14); and
the rest of the Boeotian federation could remain if Orchomenus, which had
gone over to Lysander in 395, were allowed to secede (§13, cf. §20); but no
concession was made to Corinth and Argos (cf. §§24–8, 31–2); and Andocides’
speech says nothing about the Asiatic Greeks. Andocides and his fellow-envoys
urged the Athenians to accept the peace, but the Athenians were not prepared
to abandon the Asiatic Greeks, rejected the peace and exiled their envoys. We
do not know whether the Boeotians were prepared to accept the peace as their
envoys recommended, but Corinth and Argos rejected it, and no peace was
made.
The wars continued, in Asia Minor and in Greece. Most strikingly, in 390
the Athenian Thrasybulus in a one-year campaign went some way towards reviv-
ing the Athenian empire, but the next year he was killed and his successors did
not build on what he had begun. In a pair of inscriptions, in 387/6 Athens
abstained from interfering with Clazomenae as long as it paid Thrasybulus’ 5
per cent tax (IG ii2 28 = R&O 18 ~ Harding 26), and about the same time it
made a decree for a politically divided Erythrae which gave a reply (unfortu-
nately not preserved) ‘about not giving up Erythrae to the barbarians’ (SEG
xxvi 1282 = R&O 17 ~ Harding 28). However, in 388/7 Antalcidas as Spartan
navarch made an alliance with Tiribazus (who had been reinstated in Sardis),
defeated the Athenians and recovered control of the Hellespont. From this posi-
tion of strength he was able once more to try for a peace treaty, and this time
the other Greeks did not feel able to resist.
In 387/6 Tiribazus proclaimed ‘the peace which the King had sent down’
(which is commonly referred to either as the King’s Peace or as the Peace of
Antalcidas): the cities in Asia and Clazomenae and Cyprus were to belong to
the King [Cyprus was currently in revolt, and the Greeks had tangled with it;
Clazomenae was barely separate from the mainland, and was in an area impor-
tant for Persia’s preparations against Cyprus: cf. pp. 221–2]; Lemnos, Imbros
and Scyros were to belong to Athens; all other Greek cities, small and great,
were to be autonomous. The Greeks returned home to report the terms;
Agesilaus had to threaten invasion to make Thebes accept the disbanding of the
Boeotian federation and Corinth and Argos dissolve their union, but the others
accepted without demur (Xen. Hell.V. i. 29–36, Diod. Sic. XIV. 110. iii–iv, Plut.
Artax. 21. iv–v).
Persia at last gained the Asiatic Greeks, whom it had long been demanding:
this was a price which the Greeks had to pay, but it was widely regarded as a
betrayal, and Sparta’s ﬁnally coming off the fence on this side harmed its repu-
tation. How Persia treated the Asiatic Greeks, and how they reacted, we are not
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
193

told; but we shall see that by the 360’s it had broken the treaty by taking pos-
session of Samos.That and the other offshore islands will in any case have been
weakened by the fact that their mainland dependencies passed into Persian
hands. A settlement which maintained a balance of weakness among the Greeks
would help to ensure that none was likely to cause trouble for Persia; and while
the Greeks were at peace Greek mercenaries were available to ﬁght for Persia
(but also for rebels against Persia) in the western provinces of the empire.
This was to be a lasting ‘common peace’ for all the Greeks (Andoc. III. Peace
17, cf. 34; the term ‘common peace’ appears in IG iv 556 = R&O 42 ~ Harding
57. 2, probably of 362/1, and is used frequently by Diodorus but never by
Xenophon), and in that respect it differed from earlier treaties which simply
made peace for a speciﬁed period between states which had been at war. A set-
tlement on the basis of autonomy for all seems at ﬁrst sight straightforward and
fair, but the reality was far more complicated. Who were ‘all the Greeks’ who
accepted it, and to whom was it to apply? Primarily, still, those who had been
involved in the Corinthian War; beyond them, the treaty was probably thought
of as applying generally to Greece proper and the Aegean and its Thracian coast,
but perhaps not to Crete or the north-west of Greece and more certainly not
to the more distant Greek settlements; and probably the terms were heard in
Sardis and subsequently ratiﬁed by some of those other Greeks, particularly
those who wanted to make it clear that the provision for autonomy applied to
them. How great a degree of independence was autonomy and what were the
entities entitled to it? Sparta used the treaty to break up the Boeotian federa-
tion, but did not break up other federations (such as the Achaean, within 
the Peloponnese and certainly within the treaty’s geographical scope, and the
Aetolian), in which it was less interested, and it may well not have insisted 
on a change in status for the lesser cities in Boeotia which were not members
represented in the federation but were subordinate to one of those members.
It broke up the union of Corinth and Argos, and in 385 it was to split the
century-old polis of Mantinea into its component villages. But there was no sug-
gestion that Salamis, which had been a possession of Athens since the sixth
century, was an island which was entitled to autonomy or else needed to be
mentioned as an exception like Lemnos, Imbros and Scyros; or that the cities
of Sparta’s perioikoi were cities which were entitled to autonomy of a kind which
they had not hitherto possessed.
There was no impartial machinery for deciding hard cases or for enforcing
the treaty: Sparta decided on the interpretation, and with the threat of Persian
backing enforced the treaty, not because the treaty gave Sparta a privileged posi-
tion but because, although it had not been strong enough to achieve military
victory, it was currently in a superior position and had surrendered the Asiatic
Greeks in return for Persian support in Greece. Agesilaus was an enemy of
Antalcidas, but he saw how the treaty could be exploited to Sparta’s advantage,
and in a remark quoted by Plutarch on three occasions he replied to a com-
plaint that the Spartans were medising that it was the Persians who were lacon-
ising (Plut. Ages. 23. iv, Artax. 22. iv, Spartan Sayings 213 B). We shall see that
194
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY

later treaties did try to incorporate a mechanism for enforcement, but each
treaty was made at the instance of one state which hoped to use it in its own
interests.
Breaches and Renewals of the Peace
Sparta showed that the peace was to be interpreted by it to suit its own inter-
ests. In 385 it attacked Mantinea, and ended by splitting it into the separate
villages which had coalesced to form a single polis perhaps c.470 (cf. p. 23);
Mantinea appealed to Athens, but Athens ‘did not choose to break the common
agreement’ (Diod. Sic. XV. 5. v); presumably Sparta claimed that the principle
of autonomy should be applied to the villages rather than to the single polis. In
382 Sparta responded to an appeal to intervene against the Chalcidian federa-
tion being built up by Olynthus in the north-east. The appeal came from the
threatened cities of Acanthus and Apollonia according to Xenophon, from
Amyntas of Macedon according to Diodorus (Xen. Hell.V. ii. 11–20, Diod. Sic.
XV. 19. ii–iii): both may be true, but Xenophon’s version suggests that Sparta
was again claiming to enforce the autonomy principle (we do not know whether
Olynthus or any of its neighbours had sworn to the peace). Olynthus appealed
to Athens and Thebes: Athens is not known to have responded but Thebes did.
On their way north in 382 Sparta’s forces accepted an invitation to enter
Thebes, where they installed a garrison and a pro-Spartan régime: this direct
occupation of one of the major cities of Greece was greatly shocking, and is
easier to understand if Sparta gave as its excuse the refusal of Thebes to join
in enforcing the peace against Olynthus (cf. Xen. Hell. V. ii. 34).The war in the
north continued to 379, when the federation was dismantled and Olynthus was
made a subordinate ally of Sparta; meanwhile in the Peloponnese Sparta
insisted on the restoration of exiles in Phlius c.384–383, and in 379 after a long
siege imposed a garrison and a new constitution. Sparta had apparently reached
a new height of power.
It must have been hard for other states to know what kinds of relations Sparta
would allow. In 386/5 Athens praised the Thracian king Hebryzelmis, but did
not grant him an alliance (IG ii2 31 = Tod 117 ~ Harding 29); in 385 it refused
to help Mantinea against Sparta; but in 384 a way forward was found: with
Chios (which had been hostile to Athens in the last years of the Peloponnesian
War but defected from Sparta after the battle of Cnidus) Athens made a purely
defensive alliance, which was stated very emphatically to be on the basis of
freedom and autonomy and within the framework of the King’s Peace (IG ii2
34–5 = R&O 20 ~ Harding 31).
Theban opponents of Sparta ﬂed to Athens, and a series of setbacks for
Sparta began when in winter 379/8 these exiles returned and assassinated the
pro-Spartan leaders. A raid on Athenian territory by the Spartan garrison com-
mander in Thespiae, Sphodrias, prompted Athens to action, and in 378/7 
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
195

the Second Athenian League was founded.We possess an inscribed prospectus
setting out the terms on which states were invited to join (IG ii2 43 = R&O 22
~ Harding 35): the League’s aim was that Sparta should allow the Greeks to
live in freedom and autonomy, and to support the King’s Peace [that clause was
deleted in the 360’s when Athens had reason to dislike the Persians]; Greeks
and barbarians outside the King’s domain were invited to join, on the basis of
freedom and autonomy, ‘on the same terms as Chios, Thebes and the other
allies’, and subject to various promises, which may be seen both as undertak-
ings that Athens would not treat the new League as it had treated the Delian
League and as an attempt to spell out what was to be understood by auto-
nomy.This defensive alliance, which bound its members to support one another
against Sparta or any other breaker of the peace, also provided its members
with a mechanism for enforcing the peace.
While successfully recruiting members for the new League, the Athenians
won their ﬁrst major naval victories since the Peloponnesian War, defeating the
Spartans off Naxos in 376 and off Alyzia in Acarnania in 375; and on the main-
land the Thebans drove the Spartans out of Boeotia, began organising a new
federation, more dominated by Thebes than the old, and in 375 defeated a
Spartan army at Tegyra, near Orchomenus. In 375 the King’s Peace was
renewed. Xenophon, not mentioning Sparta’s plight, says that Athens was
exhausted, and worried by the resurgence of Thebes, and so made peace with
Sparta (Xen. Hell. VI. ii. 1). According to Diodorus, however, the Persians
wanted Greek mercenaries for a campaign in Egypt and so urged the Greeks
to make a common peace, which they gladly did (Diod. Sic. XV. 38). Diodorus
badly confuses this treaty and the next, in summer 371, ascribing both to
Persia’s initiative and on each occasion having the Thebans excluded because
of their claim to swear for the whole of Boeotia.The exclusion of Thebes belongs
to the later occasion (and on this occasion Thebes must have made some show
of dismantling the new federation), but a fragment of Philochorus (FGrH
328 F 151 ~ Harding 44) conﬁrms for this occasion the involvement of Persia,
and mentions Athens’ celebration with a cult and statue of Eirene (Peace);
Diodorus’ clause that the cities were to be ‘autonomous and ungarrisoned’ is
probably authentic.
The new peace was broken almost immediately. Conﬂict between Athens and
Sparta continued in the west, culminating in victory for Athens and the demo-
crats in Corcyra in 372. On the mainland Thebes resumed the development of
a Boeotian federation under its control; in 373/2 it angered Athens by destroy-
ing Plataea (which had been destroyed in 427, cf. p. 109, but refounded after
the Peace of Antalcidas) and interfering in Thespiae; then it began to threaten
Phocis, and Sparta sent an army to help in the defence. In summer 371 the
Athenians, increasingly uncomfortable with their Theban allies, sent envoys to
Sparta to discuss peace and invited the Thebans to send envoys too. Xenophon
gives us speeches by three of the Athenian envoys: Callias, full of his own impor-
tance; Autocles, criticising Sparta’s conduct; and the leading politician Calli-
stratus, arguing that Athens and Sparta ought to be on the same side. Peace
196
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY

was agreed on condition that governors should be withdrawn and forces
demobilised, and the cities should be autonomous.The Thebans were originally
included, as Thebans; afterwards they returned and asked to be recorded as
Boeotians. Sources other than Xenophon report a heated altercation between
Agesilaus and the Theban Epaminondas, in which Epaminondas argued that if
the Boeotian cities were to be autonomous the cities of Sparta’s perioikoi should
be too; Xenophon agrees that it was Agesilaus who ﬁnally excluded Thebes from
the treaty. Diodorus both ascribes the initiative to Persia and has the Thebans
excluded, as in 375: this time he is right about the exclusion of the Thebans
but it does not seem likely that the Persians were involved (Xen. Hell. VI. iii,
Diod. Sic. XV. 50. iv–v [cf. 38. iii: Callistratus and Epaminondas, 375], Plut.
Ages. 27. v–28. iv, Nep. XV. Epam. 6. iv, cf. Paus. IX. 13. ii).This time the treaty
included what may be called an optional sanctions clause: if any state broke the
peace, the others might if they wished support those who were wronged, but
were not obliged to do so (Xen. Hell. VI. iii. 18).
The Spartan king Cleombrotus, commander of the army sent to Phocis,
asked what he should do, and was told to attack Thebes if it would not leave
the Boeotian cities autonomous. The result was the battle of Leuctra, in which
Sparta was overwhelmingly defeated. After that, Athens took the initiative in
convening a conference of ‘the cities which wished to participate in the peace
which the King had sent down’ (which means that this was a renewal of 
the King’s Peace, not that the King was involved on this occasion). The parti-
cipants swore to ‘the treaty which the King sent down and the decrees of the
Athenians and their allies’: it is not credible that all the participants, including
Sparta, were now enrolled in the Second Athenian League, and the best
explanation is that autonomy was to be deﬁned for the peace as it was in the
League. This time there was a compulsory sanctions clause: if any state broke
the peace, the others were obliged to support those who were wronged.Thebes
was certainly not a participant; Elis refused to swear, because its claim to recover
dependent territories lost c.400 was not allowed (Xen. Hell. VI. v. 1–3).
The Athenians were later to claim that the Greeks, and Amyntas III of
Macedon (who died in 370/69), and the Persian King had all recognised their
right to Amphipolis and the Chersonese (Dem. XIX. Embassy 253, Aeschin. II.
Embassy 32, [Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 29, Dem. IX. Phil.iii. 16). Since they began
ﬁghting for Amphipolis and the Chersonese in 368, and this is the one confer-
ence convened by Athens, this is probably the occasion to which they are allud-
ing; but it is likely that the claim is doubly disingenuous. Peace treaties could
be made on the basis of the status quo, as in the Peace of Philocrates between
Athens and Philip in 346, or on the basis of a return to an earlier situation, as
in the Thirty Years’ Peace in 446/5 or the Peace of Nicias in 421, or, in a gambit
which was often to be employed in the fourth century, on the basis of echein ta
heauton, that states should possess what belonged to them (a formula which
usually covered a claim to some territory which they did not at the time
possess). Probably the peace of autumn 371 was made on the basis of echein ta
heauton, and the participants agreed to that, but the Athenians’ claim that
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
197

Amphipolis and the Chersonese belonged to them was not spelled out in the
peace: ‘possessing what belongs to them’ was included in the promises made in
the prospectus of the Second Athenian League, which underlay this peace (IG
ii2 43 = R&O 22 ~ Harding 35. 11–12), and Isoc. VIII. Peace 16 indicates that
at least one common peace was made on that basis. That the Persian King
accepted the Athenians’ claim was probably a further instance of ‘spin’: he 
was not in fact involved on this occasion, but, since the participants swore 
once more to ‘the treaty which the King sent down’, his agreement could be
postulated.
Leuctra revealed suddenly that Sparta was not as strong as everybody 
had assumed, and the next few years were to see a number of revolutions in
Peloponnesian cities, where Sparta was no longer able to underwrite pro-
Spartan oligarchies. Most important was the re-creation by Mantinea in 370 of
the single polis dismantled in 385, and after that Mantinea’s joining with the
other Arcadians in a new federal state, which built a new major city at Megalo-
polis, in the south-west near Laconia and Messenia. Arcadia joined with Argos
and Elis an in anti-Spartan alliance, and failed to gain the support of Athens
but did gain that of Thebes. In the winter of 370/69 the allies invaded Laconia
and liberated Messenia – which Sparta was never prepared to accept. In this
new world, despite the declared objectives of the Second Athenian League, it
was now in Athens’ interests to support Sparta rather than Thebes, and Athens
made an alliance with Sparta in 369 (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 1–14, Diod. Sic. XV.
67. i).
In the next few years there was a good deal of ﬁghting in the Peloponnese
(and Thebes built up a league of its own in central Greece, and intervened 
in Thessaly, but this did not involve Sparta or interest Xenophon), while the
Athenians started campaigning, without much success, for the territories which
they claimed in the north. Ariobarzanes, the satrap of Dascylium, was still a be-
liever in Persian support for a Spartan-backed common peace. In winter 
369/8 he sent Philiscus of Abydus, who convened a peace conference at Delphi:
agreement could not be reached, more probably because of Sparta’s claim to
Messenia (Xenophon), which was currently the live issue, than because of
Thebes’ claim to Boeotia (Diodorus), so Philiscus’ money was spent on mer-
cenaries to ﬁght for Sparta (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 27, Diod. Sic. XV. 70. ii), and 
Ariobarzanes, he and others were made Athenian citizens (Dem. XXIII.
Aristocrates 141–2, 202).
In 367 the Thebans tried to obtain a common peace to their advantage.
According to Xenophon Sparta was the ﬁrst to send an envoy to the King;
envoys then went also from Thebes and its Peloponnesian allies, and from
Athens. The Theban representative was Pelopidas, and he dominated the con-
ference and obtained a draft which included rulings on a number of current
issues: Messenia was to be independent, the region to the south of Olympia
now known as Triphylia was to belong to Elis and not to Arcadia, the Athen-
ian navy was to be beached (perhaps that was the only anti-Athenian clause
and there was not a clause stating that Amphipolis and the Chersonese were to
198
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY

be independent); there was to be a compulsory sanctions clause. One of Athens’
envoys was persuaded to acquiesce, for which he was prosecuted by his col-
league (and it was probably on this occasion that the Athenians deleted the
clause in favour of the King’s Peace from the prospectus of their league: cf. p.
196); the Spartan Antalcidas committed suicide. Back in Greece, in 367/6, the
Thebans convened a conference at which they hoped to gain acceptance of the
terms, but too many states had grounds for dissatisfaction: the Arcadians walked
out of the conference, and when the Thebans sent envoys calling on the cities
to swear to the peace they all refused (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 33–40, cf. Diod. Sic.
XV. 81. iii, 90. ii, Plut. Pel. 30). One result of Thebes’ gaining the support of
Persia was that, in the Satraps’ Revolt in the western provinces of the Persian
empire, Athens and Sparta both supported the rebels: in 366–365 the 
Athenians besieged Samos and captured it from the Persians, but then did 
not liberate it but turned it into an Athenian cleruchy.
Theban policies in the Peloponnese were proving unsuccessful: in 366 an
attempted annexation of Achaea by Thebes and Argos misﬁred, and the
Achaeans became allies of Sparta; and the Arcadians, alienated by Thebes’ pro-
posal to award Triphylia to Elis, did not end their alliance with Thebes but made
a new alliance with Athens. The next peace treaty is problematic. Diodorus
under the year 366/5 (for which he has no major episode but a few short entries)
reports that the King persuaded the Greeks to end their wars and make a
common peace (Diod. Sic. XV. 76. iii). Xenophon in a context of 366–365
reports that in Corinth, which was in an unstable condition (about this time a
man called Timophanes tried to make himself tyrant but was assassinated),
Athens attempted to intervene but was frustrated. The Corinthians then tried
to make peace with Thebes for themselves and their allies; Sparta gave per-
mission, but would not itself join the peace and thereby give up the attempt to
recover Messenia. Corinth insisted on peace only with Thebes, not alliance; and
(perhaps in spring 365) a peace was made, on the basis of echein ta heauton,
which included several cities in the north-eastern Peloponnese (Xen. Hell. VII.
iv. 4–11). Isocrates’ (VI) Archidamus was written for this context, and some have
used it to support Diodorus; the best solution is that the participants claimed
to be renewing the King’s Peace once more but the participants were a limited
range of states. This treaty involving Peloponnesian allies of Sparta but not
Sparta itself marked the end of the Peloponnesian League.
In Thessaly Thebes had been supporting a federation of cities against a
dynasty of tyrants in the city of Pherae, and Thebes’ intervention ended suc-
cessfully (but with the death of Pelopidas) in 364, when the tyrants had their
power limited to that one city and were made allies of Thebes. Athens had been
supporting Pherae, and Theban hostility to Athens continued: in 366 Thebes
managed to gain possession of the disputed territory of Oropus; Diodorus
reports a plan, instigated by Epaminondas, to build a hundred triremes and win
over Athens’ Aegean allies, and a Theban naval campaign in 364 stirred up
trouble in Ceos. In 362 and 361 Alexander of Pherae, now constrained on land,
turned to attack Athens by sea.
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
199

In the Peloponnese friction over Triphylia led to the outbreak in 365 of a war
between Elis and Arcadia, with other Peloponnesians and Athens supporting
Arcadia but Sparta supporting Elis. In 364 with Arcadian support the people
living near Olympia, the Pisatans, celebrated the Olympic festival, and in ﬁght-
ing in the sanctuary the Eleans won a battle but could not dislodge the 
Pisatans. However, in 363 a rift opened up in Arcadia, with a Mantinean faction
unhappy to spend sacred funds from Olympia on mercenaries, and sympathetic
to Sparta, while a Tegean faction was happy to spend the money and remained
friendly with Thebes. In winter 363/2 the Mantinean faction was powerful
enough to make peace between Arcadia and Elis, but the disagreement devel-
oped into open war, with Mantinea allied to Sparta, Elis, Achaea and Athens,
and Tegea and Megalopolis to the other Peloponnesians and Thebes. In 362
Epaminondas took an army to the Peloponnese, and after he and the Spartans
under Agesilaus had marched and counter-marched between Arcadia and
Laconia there was a battle at Mantinea, in which Epaminondas was killed when
his army was getting the upper hand. Xenophon ends his Hellenica by remark-
ing that the battle which might have resolved the power struggle in Greece
resulted in fact in even more indecisiveness and confusion than before (Xen.
Hell. VII. v. 26–7).
The Greeks then made ‘a common peace and alliance’, i.e. a peace with a
compulsory sanctions clause; because it was stipulated that Messenia was to be
autonomous, Sparta stood out; but presumably the Theban-dominated Boeotia
was allowed to participate as ‘Boeotia’ (Diod. Sic. XV. 89. i–ii, Polyb. IV. 33.
viii–ix, Plut. Ages. 35. iii–iv). This is probably the context to which we should
assign an inscription in which the Greeks who have made a common peace
reply to ‘the man who has come from the satraps’ that if the King does not
make trouble for them they will not make trouble for him (IG iv 556 = R&O
42 ~ Harding 57): i.e. they refuse to help the rebels in the Satraps’ Revolt
(though the Athenian Chabrias went to Egypt as a freelance mercenary com-
mander), but Sparta, not participating in the peace, sent Agesilaus to Egypt (he
died on the return journey, after about thirty years as one of Sparta’s most active
kings).
Philip II of Macedon
The Greek world was transformed by the reign of Philip (359–336). Previously
Macedon had been an unstable kingdom on the edge of the Greek world;
in the 360’s Athens had tangled with it through its attempt to recover 
Amphipolis, and Thebes through its intervention in Thessaly. When Philip 
came to the throne he quickly strengthened the kingdom, and began to seize
opportunities to expand it eastwards towards the Hellespont and southwards
towards Greece. At an early stage he annoyed Athens, by seizing Amphipolis in
357, in circumstances which led the Athenians to allege that he had cheated
them: Athens declared war, but was prevented from acting against him by the
200
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY

Social War of 356–355 against members of a League which had lost its purpose
since Leuctra and was unstable after Thebes’ activity in the late 360’s.
In Greece Thebes, though it had lost Pelopidas and Epaminondas, was still
the strongest and most ambitious single power; and it attempted to use the
Amphictyony of mostly central Greek states which controlled Delphi as an
instrument of its power. In 363 Thebes was granted precedence in the consul-
tation of the oracle, and some leading men of the polis of Delphi were expelled
by the Amphictyony and welcomed in Athens. Thebes also used the Amphic-
tyony to impose ﬁnes on states hostile to it: Sparta for sacrilege committed
during the occupation of Thebes in 382, and Phocis for cultivating the sacred
plain of Cirrha, by the Gulf of Corinth below Delphi. In 356 the Phocians seized
Delphi, thus provoking the Third Sacred War, in which Phocis was supported
by Sparta and Athens and opposed by the Amphictyony and Thebes. Philip took
advantage of this to become involved on the side of the Amphictyony, while his
expansion towards the Hellespont led to further conﬂict with Athens.
Athens turned to less ambitious policies after losing several of its League
members in the Social War, but was prepared to oppose Philip when he directly
threatened Athenian interests, and in the early 340’s tried to build up a south-
ern Greek alliance to resist his expansion southwards. Philip encouraged uncer-
tainty as to whether he would continue to support the Amphictyony; at the
beginning of 346 the Athenians’ plans were frustrated when the Phocians,
hoping Philip would change sides, refused to cooperate with them, and so they
tried to make peace with Philip. They wanted a common peace treaty, which
would embrace all their allies including the Phocians; Philip insisted on peace
between himself and his allies and ‘Athens and its allies’ (meaning the League),
and, when it was too late for anybody to help the Phocians, made it clear that
he was still on the side of the Amphictyony. The Phocians surrendered, Philip
was given their place in the Amphictyony, and Athens again felt cheated (Diod.
Sic. XVI. 59–60, Just. Epit. VIII. 4. i–5. v, cf. speeches of Demosthenes and
Aeschines: pp. 309–13).
In Athens Aeschines wanted to accept the peace and make the best of it;
Demosthenes, claiming that Philip had designs on Athens and all of Greece,
wanted to renew the conﬂict. Philip offered to renegotiate the peace, and to
enlarge it into a common peace, which he now thought he could turn to his
advantage, but Athens wrecked the negotiations by making demands which
Philip could not have been expected to accept. Athens declared war on Philip
in 340; a Fourth Sacred War began later that year, and Philip entered it in 339;
by then Athens and Thebes were united against him, and he defeated them at
Chaeronea in 338. After that he combined several strands in fourth-century
institutions: a common peace treaty, based on territorial adjustments which
would help to maintain a balance of weakness; a league of allies, the so-called
League of Corinth, with Philip as its hegemon, ‘leader’, and with a representa-
tive council (thus providing mechanisms not only for enforcing the treaty when
it was broken but also for deciding what should count as breaches of it);
and in the council not equality of representation as in the Peloponnesian and
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
201

Athenian Leagues but proportional representation as in the Boeotian federa-
tion dissolved in 386 and in the Arcadian federation of the 360’s. Sparta, on
account of Messenia, refused once more to take part; Athens joined (and so
what remained of the Second Athenian League was disbanded); Thebes (more
severely treated, as a former ally which had turned against Philip) had a pro-
Macedonian government and a garrison installed (Diod. Sic. XVI. 89, Just. Epit.
IX. 5. i–iv, cf. IG ii2 236 = R&O 76 ~ Harding 99. A). Mainland Greece, except
Sparta, was now subject to Philip. He did install some garrisons (in Thebes,
Ambracia and Corinth, the so-called ‘fetters of Greece’), but in general his
supremacy did not take the form of outright conquest and direct intervention:
like the leading Greek cities before him he clothed his supremacy in garb which
left the cities theoretically autonomous members of an alliance, but the mecha-
nisms he created made it clear that his allies would be expected to decide as he
wanted.
Since before the Peace of Antalcidas there had been talk of the desirability
of uniting the Greeks once more in a war against Persia, and the abandonment
of the Asiatic Greeks under that treaty was a further wrong to be avenged. From
346 (in his V. Philip) Isocrates had looked to Philip to lead the Greeks in that
war: I argue in this book that gaining supremacy in Greece was an objective in
its own right for Philip, not just a necessary preliminary to that war, but towards
the end of his reign he was contemplating war against Persia, and the Greeks’
desire for revenge provided a convenient excuse. The League of Corinth for-
mally decided to ﬁght that war and appointed Philip as commander; he sent
out advance forces in 336; when he was assassinated that summer, his son
Alexander succeeded to his position in Macedon and in the League, and suc-
cessfully undertook the war.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On the common peace treaties in general see Ryder, Koine Eirene. Problems in the inter-
pretation of the terms are explored by Rhodes, ‘Making and Breaking Treaties in the
Greek World’, in de Souza and France (eds.), War and Peace in Ancient and Medieval
History, forthcoming.
On the question whether Andoc. III. Peace and Philoch. FGrH 328 F 149 = Harding
23 refer to 392/1 or to 387/6 see E. Badian, ‘The King’s Peace’, in Georgica . . . G.
Cawkwell, 25–48 at 26–34 (387/6); A. G. Keen, ‘A “Confused” Passage of 
Philochoros (F 149A) and the Peace of 392/1 BC’, Hist. xliv 1995, 1–10, ‘Philochoros
F 149A&B: A Further Note’, Hist. xlvii 1998, 375–8 (392/1). More drastically, it is ar-
gued that Andoc. III is not an authentic speech but a later rhetorical exercise by E. M.
Harris, ‘The Authenticity of Andokides’ De Pace: A Subversive Essay’, in Polis and 
Politics . . . M. H. Hansen, 479–505.
On the peace of 387/6 and its aftermath see R. Seager, ‘The King’s Peace and the
Balance of Power in Greece, 386–382 BC’, Ath.2 lii 1974, 36–63; Badian, ‘The King’s
Peace’ (cf. above).
202
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY

The interpretation which I give of ‘the decrees of the Athenians and their allies’ in
the peace of autumn 371 is due to M. Sordi and is accepted by Ryder, Koine Eirene,
132–3: against it see Lewis, Selected Papers in Greek and Near Eastern History, ch. 5.
The view that the peace of 365 was in theory a renewal of the King’s Peace but the
participants were a limited range of states is due to M. Zahrnt, ‘Xenophon, Isokrates
und die koin ernh’, RM2 cxliii 2000, 295–325 at 314–21.
INTRODUCTION TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
203

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
402–400 (?)
Spartan war against Elis
400
Sparta begins ﬁghting in Asia Minor
395
Corinthian War begins in Greece
392
ﬁrst Spartan attempt at a common peace treaty
387/6
Peace of Antalcidas
382
Spartan occupation of Thebes
382–379
Spartan war against Olynthus
371
Sparta defeated by Thebes in battle of Leuctra
370/69
Messenia liberated from Sparta
362
stalemate battle of Mantinea
To the Peace of Antalcidas: Lysander, Pausanias, Agesilaus
After the defeat of Athens in the Peloponnesian War, the member states of the
Delian League were not liberated but taken over by Sparta: tribute was col-
lected (Diod. Sic. XIV. 10. ii, claiming over 1,000 talents a year, cf. Isoc. XII.
Panath. 67–9, Polyb. VI. 49. x), and oligarchic constitutions were imposed.
Sparta in general favoured oligarchies, but the rule of small cliques is associ-
ated particularly with Lysander: he was behind decarchies, rule by boards of
ten, in many cities, and the Thirty in Athens (Nep. VI. Lys. 1. v, Plut. Lys. 13.
v–ix, but ephors’ orders Diod. Sic. XIV. 13. i; for Athens see below). In Byzan-
tium the Spartan commander Clearchus made himself tyrant, but the Spartans
drove him out (Diod. Sic. XIV. 12). Coins issued by a number of east Greek
17
Sparta’s Imperialism 
and Collapse

cities, with Heracles strangling two snakes, and SUN (for symmachikon,
‘alliance’), on the obverse and the city’s normal design on the reverse, are best
attributed to supporters of Lysander c.405–400. Lysander himself, as the man
who had won the war for Sparta, received extravagant honours (cf. p. 152).
For a while there was a reaction against Lysander. In 403, when the Thirty
in Athens withdrew to Eleusis, he supported them, but king Pausanias won the
backing of a majority of the ephors, and arranged a reconciliation between the
men in the city and the returning democrats (cf. p. 259). For that Pausanias
was brought to trial before the gerousia and the ephors, and was narrowly 
acquitted, with king Agis voting against him but all the ephors for him (Paus.
III. 5. ii). Around the Aegean Lysander’s decarchies were replaced by patrioi
politeiai, ‘traditional constitutions’, on the orders of the ephors. Diodorus has a
story that, after setting up oligarchies elsewhere, for Sparta itself Lysander
plotted to replace the hereditary kings with elected kings. He tried to buy the
support of oracles, was denounced by the oracle of Ammon (in north Africa)
and was tried but acquitted; a speech advocating the plan was discovered among
his papers after his death – a detail which, even if invented, must have seemed
plausible, though we tend to think of the Spartans as particularly uninterested
in written texts (Diod. Sic. XIV. 13, cf. Plut. Lys. 19. vii, 20, 24–5, 30. iii–v).
However, when Lysander’s friend Cyrus prepared to revolt against Artaxerxes
II, in 402, he employed Clearchus, who became the principal commander of
his mercenaries, and Sparta sent a substantial contribution and a commander,
Chirisophus (Xen. Anab. I. iv. 2–3 less clear than Hell. III. i. 1, Diod. Sic. XIV.
19. ii–v).
Sparta still resented its exclusion from the Olympic games by Elis in 420 (cf.
pp. 126–7), and Elis was among the states which deﬁed Sparta by harbouring
democratic exiles from Athens in 404–403. Probably in 402–400, after demand-
ing the autonomy of the perioikoi living to the south and east of Elis proper,
Agis fought a three-year war. In the second year he called on Sparta’s allies,
and Boeotia and Corinth refused; in the third year Elis capitulated, and was
required to leave the perioikoi autonomous (the southern cities united in a Tri-
phylian federation: cf. SEG xxxv 389, xl 392 = R&O 15. A, B), but not to give
up the superintendence of Olympia, ‘since the Spartans thought the rival
claimants were rustics and not competent to superintend’; also to give up its
triremes, and to leave its harbours of Phea and Cyllene, to which Sparta wanted
access, unfortiﬁed (Xen. Hell. II. ii. 21–31; Diod. Sic. XIV. 17. iv–xii, 34. i, has
two campaigns and Pausanias as commander). Sparta then expelled the Messe-
nians who had been living in Naupactus since the 450’s and in Cephallenia
since 421 (Diod. Sic. XIV. 34. ii–vi, cf. pp. 44, 125).
About 400, after his victory in Elis, Agis died. He had a son, Leotychidas,
but Lysander successfully supported rumours that Leotychidas’ father was
Alcibiades (cf. p. 144) and obtained the throne for Agis’ half-brother Agesilaus
(Xen. Hell. III. iii. 1–4, Plut. Alc. 23. vii–ix, Ages. 3, Lys. 22. vi–xiii). Lysander
hoped to rule through a grateful Agesilaus, but Agesilaus proved to be one of
Sparta’s strongest kings; he also stressed his attachment to traditional Spartan
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
205

virtues, refusing a statue when other leading Spartans were setting up ostenta-
tious monuments, and refusing divine honours in Thasos (Xen. Ages. xi. 7, Plut.
Spartan Sayings 210 C–D). Soon after his accession a revolt was planned by
Cinadon, a hypomeion (‘inferior’, perhaps a man of Spartiate ancestry who had
been downgraded for inability to provide his mess contributions) who hoped
to unite all the unprivileged classes against the homoioi (‘equals’, a term perhaps
introduced when full Spartiates needed to be distinguished from ‘inferiors’).
He was dealt with ﬁrmly, and in a typically Spartan way (sent out of the city
with a detachment of men who had orders to arrest him); but the episode,
though not necessarily the tip of an already large iceberg, reminds us that Sparta
was becoming more fragile (Xen. Hell. III. iii. 4–11, Arist. Pol. V. 1306 B 34–6,
Polyaenus Strat. II. 14. i).
Sparta’s citizen numbers were suffering an irreversible decline, owing in par-
ticular to the earthquake of c.464 (cf. pp. 28–9) and losses during the Pelo-
ponnesian War, but also to a social structure which was not conducive to the
frequent fathering of children. Ancient texts allege that there was a moral
decline, attributable especially to the inﬂux of foreign wealth at the end of the
Peloponnesian War, and claim that previously coinage in precious metals had
been totally banned but after the war it was conceded that coinage could be
held by the state but not by individuals (Xen. Lac. Pol. vii. 6, Plut. Lys. 17, Posi-
donius FGrH 87 F 48. c ~ Fornara 167).The truth appears to be that, although
Sparta did not issue coins, possession had not previously been banned, but the
ban on private possession was a response to the suddenly increased quantity
after the war, enforced at ﬁrst but not for long. Plutarch’s life of the third-
century Agis claims that originally Spartans had not been able to dispose of
their kleros, their ‘allotment’ of land, and this was ﬁrst allowed by the rhetra (lit-
erally ‘saying’: used of Spartan laws) of an ephor called Epitadeus (Plut. Agis
5. iii–iv), a change which scholars have tended to date to this period; but more
probably Spartans were never forbidden to dispose of their land, and the ori-
206
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
AGIDS 
EURYPONTIDS
PAUSANIAS 
ARISTODEMUS
regent 394
AGIS II
427–c.400 
   ?
Leotychidas 
AGESILAUS II
c.400–360/59
408–395 
AGESIPOLIS I
395–380 
CLEOMBROTUS I
380–371
ARCHIDAMUS III
360/59–338
AGESIPOLIS II
371–370 
CLEOMENES II
AGIS III
338–331/0
 EUDAMIDAS I
331/0– ? 
Agesilaus
       370–309 
Acrotatus 
Cleonymus 
Key
PAUSANIAS    king
ARISTODEMUS    regent
Fig. 4
Fourth-century Spartan kings and a regent

ginal ban and the rhetra were invented by third-century reformers, perhaps
under the inﬂuence of Plato. However, it remains true that in the fourth century
a small number of families, and often women where there were no male heirs,
got possession of an increasing proportion of the land (cf. Arist. Pol. II. 1270
A 15–29), and Sparta’s shortage of citizens was due to the downgrading of
potential citizens as well as to a shortage of citizen births (cf. Arist. Pol. II. 1271
B 26–37).There were some attempts to stimulate the birth rate within the exist-
ing social framework (e.g. wife-sharing; privileges for fathers of many sons);
sons of ‘inferiors’ and some others could be brought up with the ‘equals’ as
mothakes (cf. pp. 135, 149, 150); but this was not enough, and the Spartan army
relied increasingly on perioikoi and liberated helots (cf. below, esp. pp. 216–17).
When Tissaphernes returned to Sardis, he claimed the Greek cities of Asia
Minor; they appealed to Sparta and Sparta agreed to support them. In autumn
400 Sparta sent not a citizen army but an army of liberated helots and allies
(including Athenians), commanded by a man called Thibron: the term harmost
(harmostes, ‘arranger’) is used, especially by Xenophon, of such commanders of
non-citizen forces, whether employed for campaigning or for garrison duties.
This force was joined by the survivors of Cyrus’ mercenary force; it penetrated
further inland than the Athenians had done (for the likelihood that Sparta
would do this cf.Alcibiades in Thuc.VIII. 48. iii), but, although Thibron appears
less incompetent in Diodorus’ account than in Xenophon’s, he did not make
much progress in liberating the Asiatic Greeks (Xen. Hell. III. i. 3–7, Diod. Sic.
XIV. 35. vi–37. iv).
In spring 399 Thibron was recalled, and ﬁned and exiled for letting his troops
ravage the land of the Greeks he had gone to help. His successor was Dercyli-
das (the ﬁrst of a series of men linked with Lysander), described as deceitful
and unSpartan, and as liking to be away from home (Ephorus FGrH 70 F 71,
cf. Xen. Hell. III. i. 8; Hell. IV. iii. 2). He made a truce with Tissaphernes in
order to concentrate on Pharnabazus, the satrap of Dascylium; he had con-
siderable success, and made a truce with Pharnabazus before wintering in
Bithynia (Xen. Hell. III. i. 8–ii. 5, Diod. Sic. XIV. 38. vi–vii). In 398 three inspec-
tors, headed by another man connected with Lysander, reappointed Dercyli-
das: he renewed his truce with Pharnabazus and went to the Chersonese to
fortify that against Thracian attacks; and he besieged and captured Atarneus,
on the Asiatic coast opposite Mytilene (Xen. Hell. III. ii. 6–11, Diod. Sic. XIV.
38. vi–vii). In 397 he was probably inspected and appointed again; in response
to another appeal from the Asiatic Greeks, Sparta ordered him to move south
into Caria to put pressure on Tissaphernes, and Pharax, again connected with
Lysander, was sent with ships to support him. Pharnabazus joined Tissa-
phernes; but when a battle was about to be fought near Ephesus,Tissaphernes
offered a truce to discuss a deal by which the Spartans would withdraw and the
Asiatic Greeks would be autonomous (Xen. Hell. II. iii. 12–20, Diod. Sic. XIV.
39. iv–vi; for the truce cf. p. 192). However, in 398 Pharnabazus had gone to
the King and had obtained permission to raise a ﬂeet to be commanded by the
Athenian Conon (who since the end of the Peloponnesian War had been with
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
207

Evagoras in Cyprus: cf. p. 151); in 397/6 Conon with a ﬁrst contingent of ships
was besieged in Caunus, north-east of Rhodes, by Pharax but was relieved by
Pharnabazus, after which Rhodes defected to him from the Spartans (Diod.
Sic. XIV. 39. i, 79. iv–vii, Philoch. FGrH 328 F 144 ~ Harding 12. B).
The war continued, and in 396 Sparta sent reinforcements, and Agesilaus as
commander. He still did not have Spartiate soldiers, but he had a board of thirty
Spartiate assistants including Lysander; of Sparta’s allies, Boeotia, Corinth and
Athens all refused to serve. Seeing himself as a successor to Agamemnon in the
Trojan War, Agesilaus went to Aulis to sacriﬁce before crossing the Aegean, but
the Boeotians interfered, an act for which he never forgave them. On arrival 
at Ephesus he accepted Tissaphernes’ offer of a truce to discuss terms, but 
Tissaphernes asked the King for an army (cf. p. 192). Lysander hoped to control
Agesilaus, but Agesilaus got him out of the way to the Hellespont, where he
won over Spithridates, a subordinate of Pharnabazus. Agesilaus campaigned
against Tissaphernes, was hampered at ﬁrst by a lack of cavalry but proceeded
to raise a force (Xen. Hell. III. iv. 1–15, Diod. Sic. XIV. 79. i–iii, Plut. Ages.
6–9). In 395 Agesilaus’ thirty Spartiates were replaced by a new board. He
defeated the Persians in a battle near Sardis of which we have very different
accounts from Xenophon and the other tradition: either in the absence of 
Tissaphernes he won a straightforward cavalry battle (Xenophon) or he
ambushed a force which Tissaphernes was commanding. He was unable to take
the city; but Tissaphernes was executed and replaced by Tithraustes, the King’s
grand vizier (the decision will have been taken before the battle). Tithraustes
announced the King’s terms: that Sparta should withdraw and the Asiatic
Greeks should be autonomous but pay ‘the ancient tribute’ (cf. p. 192). Agesi-
laus said he could not agree without authority from Sparta, but let Tithraustes
pay him to move against Pharnabazus (Xen. Hell. III. iv. 16–29, Hell. Oxy.
14–17, Diod. Sic. XIV. 80, Plut. Ages. 10). He then engaged in campaigning
and diplomacy. Agesilaus hoped with Spithridates’ help to win over the king of
Paphlagonia (east of Pharnabazus’ satrapy), but his plans were wrecked when
his subordinate Herippidas won a victory but took all the booty for Sparta. After
ravaging Pharnabazus’ estates Agesilaus had a meeting at which he urged
Pharnabazus to defect from the King, and Pharnabazus replied that if he were
made subordinate to another commander he would defect, but if he were made
commander himself he would ﬁght for the King. Agesilaus then moved south,
intending in spring 394 to advance into the interior (Xen. Hell. IV. i, Hell. Oxy.
24–5, Plut. Ages. 11–15. i).
What were the two sides trying to achieve? For Persia, which suggested the
compromises, the terms always included the withdrawal of Spartan forces; and
if the Asiatic Greeks paid tribute a formal concession of autonomy would not
make much difference to the ways in which Persian power was actually exer-
cised. Agesilaus’ attempt to sacriﬁce at Aulis was a strong gesture, and there are
passages suggesting that he had extensive ambitions for conquest (Xen. Hell.
IV. i. 41, Ages. i. 8, 36, Hell. Oxy. 25. iv, Diod. Sic. XIV. 80. v, Plut. Ages. 15.
i–iii), yet at ﬁrst he like Dercylidas before him was prepared to consider the
208
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

compromise. He had to satisfy the authorities in Sparta, who may well have
been divided in their attitudes to adventures in Asia, and indeed he had Spar-
tiate advisers with him; probably his own ambitions increased as he campaigned
successfully, but it is not clear how far he hoped to go, or what kind of demar-
cation he wanted to establish or could have established between a reduced
Persian empire and the territories detached from it.
Agesilaus’ high point came after his meeting with Tithraustes, when the 
Spartans gave him authority at sea as well as on land, and he gave the naval
command to his inexperienced brother-in-law Pisander (Xen. Hell. III. iv.
27–9). But Conon had been building up the ﬂeet he commanded for Pharna-
bazus (Hell. Oxy. 12. ii, Diod. Sic. XIV. 79. viii). In 395 he supported a demo-
cratic revolution in Rhodes (Hell. Oxy. 18, Androtion FGrH 324 F 46; cf.
Athenian honours for a Rhodian in 394/3, IG ii2 19), obtained funding from
Tithraustes and dealt with a mutiny of Cypriots in his ﬂeet (Hell. Oxy. 22–3);
then he visited the King and obtained full support from him (Diod. Sic. XIV.
81. iv–vi). In August 394 (dated by an eclipse) Conon and Pharnabazus
defeated and killed Pisander in a major battle off Cnidus (Xen. Hell. IV. iii.
10–12, Diod. Sic. XIV. 83. iv–vii, Philoch. FGrH 328 F 145 ~ Harding 12. B).
This ended Sparta’s control of the Aegean: Conon and Pharnabazus won over
mainland and island cities, expelling Spartan garrisons and promising auto-
nomy (Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 1–6, Diod. Sic. XIV. 84. iii–iv). Although the victory
was technically a Persian one, Athens honoured both Conon and Evagoras, and
fragments of the decree for Evagoras show him represented as ﬁghting as a
Greek for the freedom and autonomy of the Greeks (R&O 11). By then Agesi-
laus had had to return to Greece.
In 404 Sparta had dealt with Athens as it wanted, not as its allies had wanted
(cf. p. 151); it seemed to have monopolised the proﬁts of victory, and it had
not liberated but had taken over the Delian League. Boeotia and several Pelo-
ponnesian states harboured Athenian democrats in 404–403, and Boeotia and
Corinth refused to join Pausanias’ expedition (cf. p. 259); the war of revenge
on Elis harmed Sparta’s reputation, and Boeotia and Corinth abstained from
that conﬂict; Athens began to show signs of independence from 397 (cf. pp.
226–7); and in 396 Boeotia, Corinth and Athens abstained from Agesilaus’
expedition and the Boeotians interfered with his sacriﬁces. Sparta’s ambitions
at this time were widespread: the ﬁrst Spartan mentioned in connection with
Dionysius of Syracuse was a freelance, but later Dionysius was given ofﬁcial
support (cf. pp. 276, 280). Another area of interest was northern Greece: Sparta
expelled the Messenians from Naupactus (cf. p. 44), put down a revolt in its
colony at Heraclea and installed a garrison at Pharsalus, in Thessaly (Diod. Sic.
XIV. 38. iv–v, 82. vi; cf. below). Timocrates brought money from Pharnabazus
to encourage Sparta’s enemies (cf. p. 192).
In 395 the Boeotians engineered a dispute between Locris (probably eastern
Locris, towards Thermopylae) and Phocis; Phocis appealed to Sparta and
Boeotia was joined by Athens in backing Locris; and so began what is called
the Corinthian War since after the ﬁrst two years the war was centred on Corinth
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
209

(Xen. Hell. III. v. 3–16, Hell. Oxy. 20–1, Diod. Sic. XIV. 81. i–ii, cf. Athenian
alliances, IG ii2 14, 15 = R&O 6, Tod 102 ~ Harding 14. A, 16). Sparta sent
Lysander to Boeotia via Phocis and Pausanias via the Megarid: Lysander won
over Orchomenus, in north-western Boeotia, but fought a battle at Haliartus
before Pausanias (perhaps reluctant to cooperate) had joined him, and was
defeated and killed. Pausanias withdrew under a truce, for which he was con-
demned in absence: he retired to Tegea (where he wrote a book on Sparta’s leg-
endary reformer, Lycurgus) and was succeeded by his son Agesipolis I (Xen.
Hell. III. v. 67, 17–25, Diod. Sic. XIV. 81. ii–iii, Plut. Lys. 28–30. i). Sparta’s
enemies were joined by Corinth and Argos, the Euboeans and states in north-
ern Greece; in Thessaly they enabled Larisa to take Pharsalus from the Spar-
tans, and Heraclea was returned to the neighbouring Trachinians (Diod. Sic.
XIV. 82: Heraclea perhaps after Agesilaus’ march in 394).
Sparta therefore recalled Agesilaus, who left Asia but hoped to return. In 
July 394 Aristodemus, regent for Agesipolis, defeated the alliance at the River
Nemea, west of Corinth: Dercylidas, travelling east to Abydus, where after
Cnidus he assembled a number of expelled harmosts, met Agesilaus and gave
him the news (Xen. Hell. IV. ii. 9–23, iii. 1–3, Diod. Sic. XIV. 82. x–83. ii).
Agesilaus travelled through Thrace and Thessaly to Boeotia; in August, on
hearing the news of Cnidus, for the sake of morale he announced that Pisander
was dead but victorious; he then gained a far from decisive victory at Coronea
and after it abandoned Greece north of the Isthmus (Xen. Hell. IV. iii. 3–iv. 1,
Ages. ii. 1–13, Diod. Sic. XIV. 83. iv–v, 84. i–ii, Plut. Ages. 17–19. iv).
In 393 Conon and Pharnabazus sailed to Greece. They raided Laconia and
occupied Cythera, and took money to Corinth, which spent it on ships to ﬁght
against Sparta in the Gulf of Corinth, and to Athens, where it helped to pay
for the rebuilding of the walls which was already under way (Xen. Hell. IV. viii.
7–11, Diod. Sic. XIV. 84. iv–v, Philoch. FGrH 328 F 146 ~ Harding 12. B).
Conon also established a force of light-armed mercenaries, based in Corinth
but commanded by Athenians: at ﬁrst Iphicrates, later Chabrias (Androtion
FGrH 324 F 48 = Philoch. FGrH 328 F 150 ~ Harding 22. A). Corinth became
the base of the anti-Spartan alliance and Sicyon the Spartans’ base. In spring
392 the enemies of Sparta in Corinth engineered a massacre of their opponents,
and shortly after that, to strengthen the position of the anti-Spartan party, some
kind of political union was made between Corinth and Argos, perhaps iso-
politeia, ‘equal citizenship’, by which citizens of each had the rights of citizens
in the other. Some survivors of the massacre left Corinth but returned under
an amnesty, and enabled a Spartan force to capture Corinth’s long walls and
the harbour town of Lechaeum (Xen. Hell. IV. i. 1–13, Diod. Sic. XIV. 86. i–iii).
Things were not going well for the Spartans, either in Greece or in the
Aegean, so in 392 they tried to win by diplomacy what they could not win by
ﬁghting, and Antalcidas obtained the ﬁrst draft of a common peace treaty by
which the Asiatic Greeks would be returned to Persia and all other cities and
islands would be autonomous. When this was rejected by their opponents, the
Spartans offered modiﬁed terms at a conference in 392/1, with concessions to
210
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

Athens and Boeotia but not to Corinth and Argos, but Athens as well as Corinth
and Argos still objected, and no peace was made (cf. pp. 192–3).
Fighting continued in the north-eastern Peloponnese, particularly over
Corinth’s long walls and Lechaeum. In 390, when Argos on the strength of its
union with Corinth was about to hold the Isthmian games, Agesilaus enabled
the Corinthian exiles to hold the games, but afterwards the Argives returned
and held the games again. Iphicrates and his mercenary force, backed up by
Callias with Athenian hoplites, caught a division of the Spartan army outside
Lechaeum and annihilated it. It was perhaps after this that Iphicrates tried to
get control of Corinth but failed and was dismissed, and then the union between
Corinth and Argos may have been intensiﬁed (Xen. Hell. IV. iv. 14–v. 9, viii. 34,
Diod. Sic. XIV. 86. iv–vi, 91. ii–92. ii). North of the Gulf of Corinth, in 389–388
Agesilaus enabled the Achaeans to retain Calydon, which they had acquired
some time before (Xen. Hell. IV. vi–viii. 1, Plut. Ages. 22. ix–xi). In 388 or 387
Agesipolis attacked Argos, and when Argos tried to prevent him by changing
its calendar to bring on the festival of the Carnea he gained permission from
Olympia and Delphi to ignore that, and also refused to be put off by an earth-
quake (Xen. Hell. IV. vii. 2–7, Arist. Rh. II. 1398 B 33–1399 A 1; cf. Diod. Sic.
XIV. 97. v [Agesilaus]). From Aegina the Spartans made trouble for Athens,
and in 387 raided the Piraeus (Xen. Hell. V. i. 1–24).
The war was not over in the east. In 391 Sparta sent the earlier unsuccess-
ful Thibron to ﬁght against Struthas, the current satrap of Sardis, but he was
defeated and killed (Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 17–19, Diod. Sic. XIV. 99. i–iii). He was
succeeded by the more successful Diphridas (who managed to capture and
obtain a ransom for Struthas’ daughter and son-in-law), and Ecdicus was sent
to Rhodes (where there was renewed conﬂict between oligarchs and demo-
crats). In 390 Teleutias succeeded Ecdicus, and on his way out captured an
Athenian squadron sailing to support Evagoras of Salamis (Xen. Hell. IV. viii.
20–4, Diod. Sic. XIV. 97. i–iv).The Athenian Thrasybulus was sent to help the
Rhodian democrats, but went ﬁrst to the Hellespont and had a highly success-
ful campaign as he made his way from there to Rhodes; but in 389, when fund-
raising took him to Aspendus, on the south coast of Asia Minor, he was killed
(Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 25–31, Diod. Sic. XIV. 94, 99. iv–v). Sparta sent Anaxibius
to the Hellespont; Athens sent Iphicrates with those of the mercenaries who
had left Corinth with him; and Anaxibius was defeated and killed (Xen. Hell.
IV. viii. 31–9). While Struthas was satrap of Sardis, c.391–388, Miletus and
Myus referred a territorial dispute to him and he referred it to a jury from the
other cities of the Ionian koinon (Milet I. ii 9 = R&O 16 ~ Harding 24).
Antalcidas was made Spartan navarch for 388/7: he went to Ephesus and
sent Nicolochus to the Hellespont; with Tiribazus, reinstated as satrap of Sardis,
he went to talk to the King. When he returned, in 387, Nicolochus was being
blockaded in Abydus by the Athenians; by pretending to head for the Bosporus,
Antalcidas ended the blockade; he then captured a relief squadron and regained
control of the Hellespont for Sparta (Xen. Hell. V. i. 6–7, 25–8, cf. IG ii2 29 =
R&O 19). The anti-Spartan Pharnabazus had been removed from Dascylium
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
211

to marry the King’s daughter (Xen. Hell.V. i. 28); and from its position of com-
parative strength Sparta was able to obtain and impose on the Greeks the King’s
Peace: Persia received the Asiatic Greeks; elsewhere, apart from Athens’ three
north Aegean islands, there were no exceptions to the principle of autonomy
for all, and Agesilaus by threatening to invade insisted on the dismantling of
the Boeotian federation and of the union of Corinth and Argos.The anti-Persian
Agesilaus could see the advantage for Sparta, and declared that the Persians
were laconising (cf. p. 194). Corinth rejoined the Peloponnesian League, and
some opponents of Sparta were exiled and went to Athens (Xen. Hell. V. i. 36,
iii. 27, Dem. XX. Leptines 54). There may subsequently have been approaches
to Sparta by Evagoras of Salamis (Theopompus FGrH 115 F 103. x) and the
Persian rebel Glos (Diod. Sic. XV. 9. iii–v, 18. i–ii, 19. i), but it is unlikely that
they obtained anything.
From the Peace of Antalcidas to Leuctra: 
Agesilaus, Agesipolis, Cleombrotus
After the Peloponnesian War Sparta had taken revenge on Elis; after the Peace
of Antalcidas it took revenge on Mantinea, as an ally which had not been suf-
ﬁciently loyal. Because of his father’s connections with Mantinea, Agesilaus had
the command given to Agesipolis, though Agesipolis’ father had connections
with the Mantinean democrats. In 385 Mantinea refused to demolish its walls,
and appealed to Athens, which was cowed by the Peace of Antalcidas and would
not help; Agesipolis invaded, and summoned a contingent from Thebes. When
he diverted a river to undermine the wall, Mantinea capitulated: the polis was
split into the separate villages which had united perhaps c.470, and these
became oligarchic and pro-Spartan; the democratic leaders were allowed to
leave, and some went to Athens (Xen. Hell. V. ii. 1–7, Diod. Sic. XV. 5. iii–v;
Thebans Plut. Pel. 4. v–viii, Paus. IX. 13. i; exiles to Athens IG ii2 33. 7–8).
Probably Sparta announced its intention of dismantling the polis from the begin-
ning, and was abusing the autonomy principle by applying it to the villages.
Appeals came to Sparta to act against the expanding Chalcidian federation
of Olynthus: from Acanthus and Apollonia according to Xenophon, from
Amyntas of Macedon according to Diodorus. If cities threatened with absorp-
tion did appeal, Sparta in responding may have invoked the autonomy prin-
ciple once more. Olynthus was in touch with Athens and ‘Boeotia’: there is no
secure evidence for Athenian support, but there is some for Theban (Xen. Hell.
V. ii. 15, 27, 34, FGrH 153 F 1). Sparta’s campaign was approved by the Pelo-
ponnesian League, but for the ﬁrst time League members were allowed to con-
tribute cash instead of soldiers, as the members of the Delian League had been
allowed to pay tribute instead of contributing ships (Xen. Hell. V. ii. 11–22,
Diod. Sic. XV. 19. iii; Hell.VI. ii. 16 reports that nearly all paid cash for Sparta’s
expedition to Corcyra in 373). The contributions would be spent on the mer-
cenaries who were increasingly being used by all states: by the time of the battle
212
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

of Mantinea, in 362, the presence of mercenaries even in a Spartan army ﬁght-
ing in the Peloponnese did not call for comment (Xen. Hell. VII. v. 10).
Agesilaus did not go to Olynthus, but the commanders sent in 382 were men
connected with him. Thebes refused to join the campaign, but Leontiades,
leader of the pro-Spartan party, invited Phoebidas to enter the city as he was
marching north with part of Sparta’s advance force; he did, and occupied the
acropolis, the Cadmea. The anti-Spartan leader Ismenias was arrested, and
(despite Sparta’s current alignment) condemned as a mediser for accepting
Timocrates’ money in the 390’s; many of his supporters ﬂed to Athens. The
ephors and other Spartans were angry at Phoebidas’ unauthorised action;Agesi-
laus, who may have been privy to the plan, talked them round (he had hated
the Thebans since the incident at Aulis in 396), though according to most of
the sources Phoebidas was still ﬁned (Xen. Hell. V. ii. 23–36, Diod. Sic. XV. 20,
Plut. Ages. 23. vi–24. i, Pel. 5–6). Pro-Spartan régimes were set up in the other
Boeotian cities too (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 46).
Phoebidas’ brother Eudamidas continued north with his part of the force,
and the main army from the Peloponnesian League followed under Teleutias.
In 381 Teleutias was killed and Agesipolis went with reinforcements (not
another League army, but it included volunteers from the perioikoi, and there
were thirty Spartiate advisers). He captured Torone in 380 but was taken ill and
died; the throne passed to his brother Cleombrotus; his command was taken
over by Polybiadas, who in 379 starved Olynthus into submission. It was mildly
treated, and made a subordinate ally of Sparta; its Chalcidian federation was
presumably dismantled or at least reduced, but Olynthus and whatever
remained continued to use the title ‘the Olynthians’ (Xen. Hell. V. ii. 24, 37–iii.
9, 18–20, 26, Diod. Sic. XV. 22. ii, 23. ii–iii; title coins and IG ii2 43 = R&O 22
~ Harding 35. 101–2). Perhaps during this northern war, Sparta became
involved in Thessaly again and in Histiaea in Euboea (cf. pp. 250–1).
Agesilaus meanwhile had been dealing with Phlius, in the north-eastern 
Peloponnese. Sparta had not insisted on the return of pro-Spartan exiles in 391
(Xen. Hell. IV. iv. 5), but did insist c.384–383 (Hell. V. ii. 8–10); in 381 Phlius
supported Agesipolis’ expedition to Olynthus, but was grudging in its treatment
of the returned exiles, who included friends of Agesilaus. In spite of doubts
among the Spartans, Agesilaus campaigned enthusiastically against Phlius,
besieging it for twenty months until it surrendered in 379. It tried to surrender
to the authorities in Sparta, but Agesilaus arranged for the decision to be
referred to himself: the offenders were executed, a new constitution was intro-
duced and he installed a garrison (Hell. V. iii. 10–17, 21–5).
At this point both Xenophon and Diodorus remark on the extent of Sparta’s
power: Olynthus and Phlius had been subdued,Thebes was occupied, Corinth
and Argos had been weakened, and the Persian King in the east and Dionysius
of Syracuse in the west were friendly (Xen. Hell. V. iii. 27, Diod. Sic. XV. 23.
iii–iv). From now onwards, however, Sparta was going to encounter problems;
and the friction between the two royal houses, which can already be detected
in the reign of Agesipolis, was to increase in the reign of Cleombrotus. Agesi-
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
213

laus favoured hard-line policies, and tended to have links with oligarchs in other
cities; he may still have hankered after a war against Persia; in Greece his main
enemy was Thebes. The Agid kings were more willing to conform to treaty
obligations and the wishes of Sparta’s allies, and tended to have links with
democratic leaders; and Cleombrotus preferred ﬁghting against the traditional
enemy, Athens; the ephors when mentioned were on their side.
Sparta’s troubles began in winter 379/8, when Theban exiles returned and
assassinated the ruling clique (cf. pp. 229, 248). The Spartan garrison com-
mander withdrew under a truce, for which he was executed. While it was still
winter, Sparta sent an army, under Cleombrotus since Agesilaus pleaded that
(in his mid sixties) he was too old. Cleombrotus entered Boeotia, but did very
little apart from leaving Sphodrias with a garrison in Thespiae. Athens had given
Thebes some help; while Spartan envoys were in Athens to complain, Spho-
drias raided the Thriasian plain, in the west of Attica, allegedly intending to go
on to the Piraeus. Athens protested, and Sphodrias was put on trial. Cleom-
brotus backed him from the beginning; at ﬁrst he was opposed by Agesilaus
and ‘those in the middle’ (probably those uncommitted, rather than a ‘middle
party’); but Agesilaus’ son was the lover of Sphodrias’ son, and Agesilaus was
won over. Sphodrias was acquitted, and Athens came out openly against Sparta
(Xen. Hell. V. iv. 1–34, Diod. Sic. XV. 25–7, 29. v–vii, Plut. Ages. 24. iv–26. i,
Pel. 14–15. i; for the foundation of the Second Athenian League see pp.
229–30). According to Diodorus, Sphodrias acted on the orders of Cleombro-
tus, and that seems likely enough, since in the years that followed Cleombro-
tus was happier ﬁghting against Athens than against Thebes; but, according to
Xenophon and Plutarch, Sphodrias was bribed by the Thebans, who wanted to
create an incident that would commit Athens to their side.
In summer 378 Agesilaus invaded Boeotia. He was perhaps a better com-
mander than Cleombrotus (Xenophon), but he also had more enthusiasm for
ﬁghting against Thebes (Plut. Ages.). But he too made little headway: he left
Phoebidas as harmost in Thespiae, and Phoebidas was killed in a cavalry battle.
In 377 he invaded again: there was skirmishing near Thebes, with Athenians on
the Theban side and Olynthians on the Spartan. Because of the invasions,
Thebes had to import corn from Thessaly: the ships were intercepted by the
Spartan harmost at Oreus, in the north of Euboea (where Sparta had earlier
expelled a supporter of Jason of Pherae: Diod. Sic. XV. 30. iii–iv), but the
Thebans managed to detach Oreus from Sparta (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 35–57, Diod.
Sic. XV. 31. iii–34. ii, Plut. Ages. 26, Pel. 15). On his return journey Agesilaus
burst a blood vessel (cf. Plut. Ages. 27. i–iii), as a result of which he was out of
action for several years. In 376 Cleombrotus tried to invade, but the Thebans
and Athenians held the mountain passes against him. Since the allies were eager
for a naval campaign against Athens, Pollis was sent out with sixty ships,
and prevented the corn ships from continuing to Athens beyond the south of
Euboea; but an Athenian ﬂeet under Chabrias convoyed the ships, and then
besieged Naxos and defeated Pollis (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 58–61, Diod. Sic. XV. 34.
iii–35. ii).
214
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

After the Athenian League’s campaign of 377 but in connection with Agesi-
laus’ campaign of 378, Diodorus reports a change in Sparta’s military organi-
sation: fear of the League was making Sparta more anxious to conciliate its
allies, so to spread the burden fairly the army was organised in ten divisions on
a regional basis, Sparta providing one and the Peloponnesian League, allies in
northern Greece and ‘Olynthus and the Thraceward region’ providing the
others; as in the war against Olynthus, cash equivalents of soldiers were allowed.
Different scholars have guessed at different contexts. Agesilaus is not normally
associated with consideration for the allies, but that may not have been the
motive for a system in which members of the Peloponnesian League were on
the same level as Olynthus; and, whatever the date, this is best seen as a sequel
to the defeat of Olynthus.
There were further setbacks for Sparta in 375. In Boeotia two of the six morai
of the Spartan army, guarding Orchomenus, were defeated at Tegyra by the
Theban cavalry and ‘sacred band’ (the professional nucleus of their hoplite
force: cf. p. 249) under Pelopidas (Plut. Pel. 16–19, cf. Ages. 27. iv, Diod. Sic.
XV. 37. i–ii; omitted by Xenophon). Prompted by Thebes, Athens began a 
war in the west to distract Sparta: Timotheus won the support of Cephallenia,
Acarnania and Corcyra, and when Sparta sent a ﬂeet under Nicolochus 
Timotheus defeated him off Alyzia, opposite Leucas (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 626,
Diod. Sic. XV. 36. v–vi, cf. IG ii2 96 = R&O 24 ~ Harding 41). In Thessaly
Jason, tyrant of Pherae, was building up his power (cf. pp. 250–1): Polydamas
of Pharsalus appealed to Sparta, and Xenophon gives him a speech claiming
that, if Sparta sent a large army, the cities would desert Jason, but, if it thought
liberated helots and a harmost would be enough, it need not bother – and Sparta
could not support on a large scale so advised Pharsalus to submit (Xen. Hell.
VI. i. 2–19). Another appeal came from Phocis, under attack by a Thebes 
which now dominated Boeotia: here Sparta did respond on a large scale,
sending Cleombrotus with four morai, and the Thebans withdrew (Xen. Hell.
VI. i. 1, ii. 1).
In 375/4, at Persia’s prompting, the King’s Peace was renewed: probably the
ﬁrst moves were made early in 375 and the year’s events only increased Sparta’s
willingness to make peace (cf. p. 196). But the peace was broken almost at once.
Late in 375 Timotheus, on his way back to Athens, restored exiles in Zacyn-
thus, and Sparta protested. In 374 Sparta sent expeditions to Zacynthus and
to Corcyra; in 373 it sent a further sixty ships under Mnasippus to Corcyra,
and he ravaged the countryside and blockaded the city, but kept his own mer-
cenaries short of pay and provisions.Timotheus delayed in coming from Athens,
because of difﬁculties in raising men and money. He was dismissed; Ctesicles
went over land in winter 373/2 and enabled the Corcyraeans to defeat and kill
Mnasippus; Iphicrates arrived by sea in 372, in time to defeat a Syracusan
squadron sent to support Sparta (Xen. Hell. VI. ii. 2–39, Diod. Sic. XV. 45–46.
iii, 47. i–vii). On land Thebes was becoming increasingly strong, to the dis-
comﬁture of Athens (cf. pp. 235, 249–50); in 372/1 it again moved against
Phocis and Sparta again sent Cleombrotus (Xen. Hell. VI. iii. 1, iv. 2).
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
215

Athens’ worries about Thebes led to the conference in Sparta in summer 371
(perhaps mid July), where the common peace was renewed and Agesilaus,
making his ﬁrst appearance in the record since his illness, excluded the Thebans
when they claimed to swear for Boeotia (cf. pp. 196–7).The terms included the
withdrawal of forces, so Cleombrotus asked what he should do. One Spartan,
Prothous, wanted to recall him and invite contributions to rebuilding the temple
of Apollo at Delphi, recently destroyed by ﬁre and/or earthquake (cf. p. 254),
but this was dismissed as nonsense (by Agesilaus, according to Plutarch) 
and he was told to attack Thebes if it would not respect the autonomy of the
Boeotian cities. Cleombrotus avoided the route guarded by the Thebans, and
reached Leuctra in the territory of Thespiae, but Sparta’s weakness was exposed
when he was outgeneralled, defeated and killed, by an army using novel tactics
which he could not cope with; despite his best attempts, Cleombrotus died
implementing Agesilaus’ policy (for the battle, perhaps mid August, cf. pp.
251–2).The surviving ofﬁcers made a truce to withdraw, and returned to Sparta
with the reserve force brought by Agesilaus’ son Archidamus (Xen. Hell. VI. iv.
3–26, Plut. Pel. 20–3, Ages. 28. vii–viii, Paus. IX. 13. iii–xii; Diod. Sic. XV. 51–6
is badly muddled). Athens organised a peace treaty, from which Thebes was
excluded (cf. pp. 197–8). Cleombrotus’ throne passed ﬁrst to his elder son Age-
sipolis II, who died in 370; then to his younger son Cleomenes II, who reigned
until 309 but about whom hardly anything is recorded.
After Leuctra: Sparta in Decline
The defeat of a Spartan army in a major battle was a great shock. After this
Sparta was on the defensive; within the next ten years it was to lose Messenia,
lose the Peloponnesian League, and see Agesilaus serving as a mercenary com-
mander in Egypt.
Sparta’s shortage of citizen manpower (cf. pp. 206–7) was now all too
evident. Stories about the distribution of kleroi in the archaic period assume
9,000 citizens (e.g. Plut. Lyc. 8. v–vi); for the early ﬁfth century Herodotus esti-
mates 8,000 adult males, of whom 5,000 fought at Plataea (Hdt. VII. 234. ii;
IX. 10. i, 28. ii). But the earthquake of c.464 caused heavy losses (cf. pp. 28–9),
and the Peloponnesian War will have hampered recovery. Perioikoi seem to have
formed half of ‘the Lacedaemonians’ at Plataea, 40 per cent in the Pelopon-
nesian War (cf. the prisoners from Sphacteria,Thuc. IV. 38. v with 40).Thucy-
dides’ details of the Spartan army at Mantinea in 418, a ﬁve-sixths levy (Thuc.
V. 68 with 64. iii), allow us to estimate 2,100–2,500 adult Spartiates if the text
is right, 3,600–4,300 if there were not six lochoi but six morai each of two lochoi
in the main army. Heavy casualties continued after the Peloponnesian War:
for instance, about 250 out of perhaps c.600 Lacedaemonians were killed 
at Lechaeum in 390 (Xen. Hell. IV. v. 17). At Leuctra Cleombrotus had a 
two-thirds levy of men up to 55, which included 700 Spartiates, of whom 400
were killed (Xen. Hell.VI. iv. 15 with 17): in the main army Spartiates may now
216
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

have been only 10 per cent, and in all there were perhaps c.1,300 adult Sparti-
ates before the battle and c.900 after. Aristotle remarked that the land would
support 1,500 cavalry and 30,000 hoplites, but in fact there were not even 1,000
(Arist. Pol. II. 1270 A 29–31). The decline continued: Plutarch claims that in
the 240’s there were not more than 700, of whom perhaps 100 ‘possessed land
and an allotment’, but probably his 100 were the very rich, there were 700
‘equals’ and the ‘inferiors’ were his ‘destitute and disfranchised mass’ (Plut. Agis
5. vi).
The Spartiates were better trained than other Greek hoplites, but as army
numbers were maintained by increasing the proportion of non-Spartiates the
Spartiates’ skill will not have counted for much. Leuctra showed suddenly that
Sparta had been ‘punching above its weight’ and was no longer to be feared;
its conduct since the Peloponnesian War had won it enemies rather than friends;
a determined revolt by the lower orders could not have been suppressed, but,
fortunately for the Spartiates, the lower orders did not immediately lose the
habit of obedience. Other Greeks adjusted to the new reality more easily:
Sparta’s allies in northern Greece transferred their allegiance to Thebes; we
should transpose to this context what Diodorus says of the aftermath of the
peace of 375, that the cities fell into confusion, especially in the Peloponnese,
and there were moves towards democracy and the exile of pro-Spartan oligarchs
(Diod. Sic. XV. 40). He reports separately under 370/69 a particularly violent
episode in Argos, the skytalismos, ‘clubbing’: the people were ﬁrst incited against
the rich but then turned against the demagogues who had incited them (Diod.
Sic. XV. 57. iii–58, cf. Plut. Praec. Ger. Reip. 814 B). Neither Corinth nor Argos
was capable of ﬁlling the gap created by Sparta’s weakness.
But the most serious threat to Sparta came from Arcadia. In 370 the Man-
tineans voted to recreate and fortify their single city, dismantled in 385. Agesi-
laus unsuccessfully tried to dissuade them, but was not prepared to break the
peace by attacking; they were supported by other Arcadians and Elis.They then
supported a party in Tegea which wanted an Arcadian federation. Oligarchic
anti-federalists ﬂed to Sparta; in the skirmishing which followed Sparta under
Agesilaus did support the anti-federalists, while Elis and Argos supported the
federalists, who emerged successful when Agesilaus withdrew (Xen. Hell. VI. v.
6–21, Diod. Sic. XV. 59, 62. i–ii, Plut. Ages. 30. vii). The federation was based
on an assembly of ten thousand (perhaps all who satisﬁed a low property quali-
ﬁcation), a council and a body of damiorgoi (in an inscription, ﬁfty appointed
in proportion from participating communities). ‘Lepreum’, i.e. Triphylia, the
southern part of the territory liberated from Elis c.400, at ﬁrst supported Sparta
but was induced to join (Xen. Hell.VII. iv. 33–4, IG V. ii 1 = R&O 32 ~ Harding
51). Xenophon mentions a professional nucleus for the army, the eparitoi (cf.
the Theban sacred band: p. 249); Diodorus’ ﬁve thousand epilektoi, ‘chosen’,
may be the same body but given too high a ﬁgure (Xen. Hell. VII. iv. 33, cf. 22,
v. 3; Diod. Sic. XV. 62. ii, 67. ii). The man who emerged as leader of the fed-
eration was Lycomedes of Mantinea (e.g. Diod. Sic. XV. 62. ii: in ‘Lycomedes
of Tegea’ in 59. i either the man’s name or the city is wrong).
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
217

Arcadia and its allies appealed ﬁrst to Athens, which was not now interested
in opposing Sparta, and then to Thebes (Diod. Sic. XV. 62. iii, cf. Xen. Hell.
VI. v. 19). In winter 370/69 the Arcadians attacked Heraea and forced it to join
the federation (Xen. Hell. VI. v. 22, cf. IG V. ii 1).When the Thebans and their
central Greek allies arrived, under Epaminondas and Pelopidas, they invaded
Laconia: some of the perioikoi supported them, but when Sparta offered
freedom to loyal helots over 6,000 responded; Sparta itself escaped but the port
of Gytheum was attacked. Then – omitted by Xenophon – the invaders moved
west into Messenia, which Sparta had possessed since the eighth/seventh cen-
turies, and liberated that: a polis of Messene was founded on Mount Ithome,
and some other independent poleis came into existence. Wintry conditions and
shortage of supplies led to the break-up of the expedition; Sparta and its allies
had persuaded Athens to send a force under Iphicrates, but he was singularly
ineffective in trying to prevent the Thebans from returning home (Xen. Hell.
VI. v. 22–52, Diod. Sic. XV. 62–67. i, Plut. Ages. 31–33. iv, Pel. 24, Paus. IX.
14. iv–vii; on Iphicrates cf. p. 236). Sparta was never willing to accept the loss
of Messenia; and the loss was a blow to Sparta’s economic base as well as to
its pride. The Arcadians dedicated a statue group at Delphi, at the beginning
of the Sacred Way, directly opposite Sparta’s navarchs dedication.
Another important development omitted by Xenophon is the creation from
a number of small communities of the new ‘great city’ of Megalopolis, in the
south-west of Arcadia near Laconia and Messenia. This was part of Arcadia’s
assertion of itself against Sparta: eventually, if not immediately, Megalopolis
incorporated some communities which had previously been under Spartan
control. Different texts point to different dates for the foundation, but the deci-
sion, building and formal inauguration will have taken some time; the ascrip-
tion of credit to Thebes suggests that the process was not completed until after
370/69, but there are Megalopolitan damiorgoi in IG V. ii 1 = R&O 32 ~ Harding
51, probably of 369–367 (Parian Marble FGrH 239 A 73, 370/69 or 369/8;
Diod. Sic. XV. 72. iv, 368/7; Paus. VIII. 27. i–viii, cf. IX. 14. vi, 15. vi, 371/0
but Theban involvement).
In 369 envoys from Sparta and the Peloponnesian League went to Athens to
make a ﬁrm alliance (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 1–14, Diod. Sic. XV. 67. i: cf. p. 236).
This year (probably) saw the ﬁrst of a series of campaigns in the north-east
Peloponnese: Epaminondas came south with the Thebans once more; Diony-
sius of Syracuse sent light cavalry to support Sparta (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 15–25,
Diod. Sic. XV. 68–70. i). Phlius, where friends of Sparta had been in control
since Agesilaus’ intervention in 381–379, resisted attacks this year and again
later (Xen. Hell. VII. ii). In 369/8 Philiscus came to Greece from Ariobarzanes;
a conference at Delphi failed to agree on a new treaty, since Sparta would not
abandon its claim to Messenia, so his money was spent on mercenaries for
Sparta (cf. p. 198). In 368 another force from Syracuse arrived and, though
Athens would have liked to use it against Thebes in Thessaly, this was again
used by Sparta. In southern Arcadia Agesilaus’ son Archidamus won the ‘tear-
less victory’ in a battle in which no Spartans were killed (but hardly more than
218
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

ten thousand of the enemy, as claimed by Diodorus) against a combination of
Arcadia, Messene and Argos (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 28–32, Diod. Sic. XV. 72. iii,
Plut. Ages. 33. v–vi).
In 367 the states were preoccupied with the talks in Susa from which Thebes
brought a draft treaty through which it hoped to add the weakening of Athens
to the weakening of Sparta, thus ending the link between Sparta and Persia 
(cf. pp. 198–9), and there was no major campaign in the Peloponnese. In 366
Epaminondas with Argive support attacked hitherto neutral Achaea, originally
bringing it into a subordinate alliance but not interfering internally. When the
Arcadians objected that the oligarchic régimes were likely to go over to Sparta,
Thebes sent harmosts, exiled the oligarchs and set up democracies. But this
policy backﬁred: the oligarchs returned and regained control, and did then align
Achaea with Sparta (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 41–3, Diod. Sic. XV. 75, ii). In Sicyon,
between Achaea and Corinth, a leader called Euphron had originally supported
Sparta, but in 368 (Diodorus: better than Xenophon’s later context) with
support from Arcadia and Argos he had set up an anti-Spartan democracy and
then ‘made himself tyrant’ and liberated a body of serfs. In 366 the Arcadians
under Aeneas of Stymphalus (probably the Aeneas Tacticus whose manual On
Withstanding a Siege survives) occupied the city of Sicyon and restored the olig-
archic exiles; Euphron ﬂed to the harbour and handed that over to Sparta. Later
a Theban harmost was installed on the acropolis; Euphron returned with mer-
cenaries from Athens and with the support of the democrats got possession of
the city but not the acropolis. He went to Thebes to try to buy a settlement,
but was followed there and assassinated by his opponents; despite the label
‘tyrant’ his supporters secured a public funeral for him (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 44–6,
iii, Diod. Sic. XV. 70. iii).
A breach between Arcadia and Thebes began with the inclusion in the draft
treaty of a clause returning to Elis the territory which it claimed, and
Lycomedes and the other Arcadians walked out of the conference in Thebes
(cf. p. 199). In 366, without breaking off the Theban alliance, Lycomedes per-
suaded the Arcadians to make a new alliance with Athens, which was thus allied
both to Arcadia and to Sparta. He was killed on his way home, but the alliance
held, and Athens sent cavalry with instructions to defend Arcadia but not to
attack Sparta (Xen. Hell. VII. iv. 2–3, 6).
Corinth was in an unstable state. The Athenians when making their alliance
with Arcadia decided to ensure that Corinth ‘should be kept safe for the Athen-
ian people’, but the Corinthians expelled Athenian forces from their territory
and refused admission to an Athenian ﬂeet under Chares, and then hired mer-
cenaries to ﬁght against their neighbours (Xen. Hell.VII. iv. 4–6). It was perhaps
at this point that Timophanes tried to make himself tyrant, and was assassi-
nated by opponents including his own brother, Timoleon (Plut. Tim. 4–5, cf.
7. i; contr. Diod. Sic. XVI. 65, 340’s; for the later career of Timoleon see pp.
289–92). In 365, feeling isolated, Corinth made an approach to Thebes for a
peace treaty, and at the same time consulted Sparta: Sparta was willing to let
its allies make peace, though it lamented that they would not ﬁght for it now
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
219

when it had fought for them in the past, and that Thebes was allowing Persia’s
claim to Asia Minor but not Sparta’s much older claim to Messenia; and Sparta
would not itself participate in a treaty which guaranteed the independence of
Messenia. Corinth refused the Thebans’ request for an alliance as well as a peace
treaty. The upshot was probably a treaty which was represented as another
renewal of the King’s Peace but which covered only Thebes and its allies, and
the cities of the north-east Peloponnese; and it marked the end of the Pelo-
ponnesian League (cf. p. 199). Isocrates’ pamphlet (VI) expressing Sparta’s
reaction was written in the name of Archidamus: Agesilaus, who might have tried
harder not to let the League go, was out of Sparta assisting in the Satraps’ Revolt
(cf. p. 223), and the other king, Cleomenes, was a nonentity.
War between Elis and Arcadia followed Thebes’ proposal to restore territory
to Elis, when in 365 Elis captured Lasion (one of the more northerly of the
communities which it lost c.400, which must have joined the Arcadian federa-
tion).The Arcadians fought back vigorously, getting possession of Olympia and
at one point entering the city of Elis and ﬁghting in the agora there; Elis was
supported by Achaea. In 364 the Arcadians invaded Elis again. Sparta, like
Achaea, was now allied to Elis, and a force under Archidamus occupied
Cromnus, south of Megalopolis, but the Arcadians, supported by Messene,
Argos and Thebes, captured almost all of the Spartan garrison. The Arcadians
had encouraged those living around Olympia to form a Pisatan state (cf. SIG3
171, and the adventurously restored SEG xxix 405; gold coins Kraay, Archaic
and Classical Greek Coins, no. 333 = CAH2 plates v–vi no. 260), and with support
from Arcadia, Argos and Athens the Pisatans celebrated that year’s Olympic 
festival; Elis and Achaea tried to dislodge them, ﬁghting in the sanctuary but
without success (Xen. Hell. VII. iv. 12–32, Diod. Sic. XV. 77. i–iv, 78. ii–iii, 82.
i). One result of this episode was that the Arcadians started using sacred funds
from Olympia to pay their eparitoi; but upper-class leaders in Mantinea headed
a faction which disapproved of this, and despite the opposition of the federal
ofﬁcials (probably the damiorgoi) obtained a majority vote in the Arcadian
assembly; the ofﬁcials appealed to Thebes for support but the assembly coun-
termanded the appeal. In winter 363/2 the Mantinean faction remained 
dominant, and negotiated peace between Arcadia and Elis. During the peace
celebrations in Tegea a Theban harmost was persuaded to arrest members of
that faction; Mantinea persuaded him to release them, and protested to Thebes,
but in 362 Epaminondas came south with an army from Thebes and its allies.
The Mantinean faction, with Elis and Achaea, appealed to Sparta and Athens
(Xen. Hell. VII. iv. 33–v. 3; Diod. Sic. XV. 82. i–iv makes the Mantineans those
who favoured using the sacred funds).
Epaminondas went to Tegea, and was joined by Argos and Messene, and
Tegea’s Arcadian supporters. While Agesilaus (back from the Satraps’ Revolt,
now aged 80 or over) was marching north, Epaminondas headed south to attack
Sparta. Agesilaus was warned and returned in time; Epaminondas reached the
outskirts of the city but was driven back. He then returned to Arcadia; Agesi-
220
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

laus followed him; and in a battle outside Mantinea the Theban army was
getting the upper hand when Epaminondas was killed. The result was a stale-
mate, with both sides claiming victory and (as Xenophon lamented) the power
struggle unresolved (Xen. Hell.VII. v. 4–27, Diod. Sic. XV. 82. v–88, Plut. Ages.
34. iii–35, Polyb. IX. 8). Afterwards another common peace treaty was made,
with Sparta again excluded on account of Messenia (cf. p. 200).
In 361 some of the men who had been drafted into Megalopolis tried to
return to their old homes, with the support of the Mantinean faction and its
allies; but the Megalopolitans appealed to Thebes, Thebes sent an army under
Pammenes, and he forced the dissidents to return (Diod. Sic. XV. 94. i–iii).
After that the division in Arcadia persisted, with each side claiming to be ‘the
Arcadians’; it was the Mantinean faction which joined with Achaea, Elis and
Phlius in making an alliance with Athens in 362/1 (IG ii2 112 = R&O 41 ~
Harding 56).
APPENDIX: PERSIA AND ITS REBELS
Artaxerxes II (Mnemon) succeeded Darius II in 405/4, and reigned until 359/8; but he
was challenged by his younger brother Cyrus (born in 423, just after Darius’ accession,
whereas Artaxerxes may have been born as early as 453). Cyrus collected forces in 402,
including a body of ten thousand Greek mercenaries; in 401 he marched east, but in a
battle at Cunaxa, by the Euphrates upstream from Babylon, he was defeated and killed,
though his Greeks were undefeated (Xen. An. I, Diod. Sic. XIV. 19–24). Tissaphernes,
whom Cyrus had supplanted in Sardis in 407 (cf. p. 148–9), fought on Artaxerxes’ side,
and after the battle he treacherously killed the Greek commanders (Xen. An. II. iii, v,
Diod. Sic. XIV. 26). He returned to Sardis in 400 (Xen. Hell. III. i. 2, Diod. Sic. XIV.
35. ii), while the Greeks made their way through Armenia to the Black Sea (Xen. An.
II–VII, Diod. Sic. XIV. 25–31).
In Egypt a revolt against Persia began under Amyrtaeus c.404/3; despite several
attempts the Persians were not to recover Egypt until 343/2, and then only for a short
time.Tamos, an Egyptian who had served in Ionia under both Tissaphernes and Cyrus,
on Tissaphernes’ return ﬂed to Egypt but was put to death (Diod. Sic. XIV. 35. iii–v).
In 396 the Spartans tried to make an alliance with Egypt, and were granted supplies
but not an alliance (Diod. Sic. XIV. 79. iv).
Cyprus was another problem area. The city of Salamis had long been ruled by kings
of a Greek dynasty, as vassals of Persia; a Tyrian had seized power by the 430’s, and
c.415 he was killed and succeeded by another Phoenician; Evagoras, of the old ruling
family, expelled him in 411 and set about increasing the power of Salamis within Cyprus
(Diod. Sic. XIV. 98. i, Isoc. IX. Evagoras 18–20, 26–32,Theopompus FGrH 115 F 103.
ii). There was also contact between him and Athens, as a result of which he was made
an Athenian citizen some time between 411 and 407 (IG i3 113, cf. Isoc. IX. Evagoras
54, [Dem.] XII. Letter of Philip 10). Conon took refuge with him after Aegospotami
(Xen. Hell. II. i. 29, Diod. Sic. XIII. 106. vi), and it was with his support that Conon
was appointed to command a ﬂeet for Pharnabazus in 398 (Isoc. IX. Evagoras 55–6, cf.
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
221

Diod. Sic. XIV. 39. i–ii). After the battle of Cnidus, in 394, Athens honoured Evagoras
as well as Conon, describing him as a Greek ﬁghting on behalf of the Greeks (R&O
11).
Diodorus mentions a ten-year war (cf. Isoc. IX. Evagoras 64) between Evagoras and
the King, beginning it under 391/0 when the Cypriot cities not yet in Evagoras’ power
appealed to the King (Diod. Sic. XIV. 98. i–iv) but ending it under 386/5 and 385/4
(Diod. Sic. XV. 2–4, 8–11): an astronomical diary allows us to conclude that the war
began in 391, the ﬁghting recorded in Diodorus XV was in 386 and 385, but Evagoras
did not capitulate until 381. In 391 the King gave the command against Evagoras to
Autophradates and to ‘Hecatomnos the dynast of Caria’ (Diod. Sic. XIV. 98. iii–iv, where
Autophradates’ name has probably been lost at the beginning of §iv,Theopompus FGrH
115 F 103. iv): Hecatomnos’ family is attested at the beginning of the ﬁfth century (Hdt.
V. 118. ii), and it is most likely that c.392/1 Caria had been detached from the satrapy
of Sardis and, in a departure from the ﬁfth-century policy of appointing Persian satraps
(though vassal rulers had been tolerated in some areas, e.g. Cyprus), had been given to
the head of this leading family. About 390 there was an embarrassing episode when
Athens, currently on the Persians’ side, sent ships to Evagoras, and these were captured
by Sparta, currently opposed to Persia (Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 24); c.388 a second Athen-
ian force, under Chabrias, did reach Evagoras (Xen. Hell. V. i. 10–12).
The Peace of Antalcidas, in 387/6, allowed Persia to concentrate on its rebels. The
treaty stated that Cyprus was to belong to the King (Xen. Hell. V. i. 31); but it did not
mention Egypt, so Chabrias moved there (Dem. XX. Leptines 76). Evagoras made an
alliance with Acoris in Egypt, and Hecatomnos supported him; and he captured Tyre
and other places in Phoenicia. Against him Artaxerxes sent Tiribazus, now satrap of
Sardis, and Orontes, previously satrap of Armenia, with Glos, son of Tamos and son-
in-law of Tiribazus, commanding the ships. Evagoras was defeated in a naval battle off
Citium, and the Persians began to besiege Salamis (Diod. Sic. XV. 2–4, Isoc. IX. Evago-
ras 62,Theopompus FGrH 115 F 103. vi).When it seemed unlikely that he could hold
out, Evagoras approached Tiribazus, whose terms were that his power should be limited
to Salamis, he should pay tribute, and he should be obedient ‘as a slave to his master’.
Evagoras refused to accept the last clause, and made contact with Orontes, who
denounced Tiribazus for disloyalty and had him sent to Artaxerxes as a prisoner, and
made a treaty by which Evagoras was to obey ‘as a king to a king’ (Diod. Sic. XV. 8–9.
ii, Theopompus FGrH 115 F 103. ix). Eventually Tiribazus vindicated himself and
Orontes was in trouble (Diod. Sic. XV. 10–11). Evagoras survived until he was assassi-
nated in 374/3 (Diod. Sic. XV. 47. viii), and the dynasty lasted until 310.
In Egypt Acoris and Chabrias fought successfully against Persia for three years, prob-
ably 385–383 (Isoc. IV. Paneg. 140).When Tiribazus was arrested Glos defected to Egypt
and made an alliance with Acoris; he may have approached Sparta but it is unlikely that
he obtained an alliance; before long he was murdered (Diod. Sic. XV. 9. iii–v, 18. i).
Once Evagoras had been dealt with, Persia concentrated on Egypt. The command was
given to Pharnabazus (one of three commanders in 385–383; transferred from Das-
cylium, where he was succeeded by his son Ariobarzanes). In 380/79 he protested to
Athens against Chabrias’ ﬁghting for the Egyptians, and the Athenians recalled him and
sent Iphicrates to ﬁght for the Persians (Diod. Sic. XV. 29. i–iv). Substantial prepara-
tions were made over several years; the need for Greek mercenaries underlay Persia’s
interest in renewing the King’s Peace in 375 (Diod. Sic. XV. 38. i: cf. p. 196); and the
invasion ﬁnally took place in 374. Large forces were mustered at Ace, in Palestine, and
sailed to Egypt.With one contingent they gained a foothold in the Nile delta, but when
222
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

Iphicrates wanted to advance inland and attack Memphis, Pharnabazus insisted on
waiting for the rest of his force.The Egyptians fought back, and when the Nile ﬂooded
the Persians had to withdraw. Iphicrates returned to Athens in time to take over Timo-
theus’ command in 373/2 (Diod. Sic. XV. 41–3: cf. pp. 234, 269), while Timotheus took
over Iphicrates’ position ([Dem.] XLIX. Timotheus 25–8, 59–60). Pharnabazus was
replaced by Datames, satrap in the east of Asia Minor (perhaps originally Cilicia, to
which he had added Cappadocia), but he seems not to have acted against Egypt (Nep.
XIV. Dat. 3. v).
Instead Datames became involved in what is seen as the beginning of the Satraps’
Revolt. Our only continuous account is by Diodorus, all under the year 362/1 (XV.
90–3), but our other, scattered, evidence shows that his account is badly confused.
About 370/69 Datames returned to Cappadocia, dealt with a rebel but then rebelled
himself, and got in touch with Ariobarzanes at Dascylium; but Autophradates was sent
from Sardis, besieged him and induced him to return to apparent loyalty (Nep. XIV.
Dat. 4–8).Ariobarzanes became vulnerable, as a supporter of Persia’s pro-Spartan policy
left behind when in 367 Artaxerxes was won over by Thebes (cf. p. 198), and because
the satrapy was claimed by his half-brother Artabazus. In 366 Ariobarzanes was in revolt,
and Athens sent Timotheus to support him yet not to break the King’s Peace. Persia at
some point had broken the peace by occupying Samos, and from autumn 366 to autumn
365 Timotheus besieged it, capturing it for Athens (Isoc. XV. Antid. 111, Dem. XV. Lib.
Rhod. 9). Ariobarzanes was besieged by Autophradates in Assus or Adramyttium, and
Timotheus and the Spartan Agesilaus went to relieve him, whereupon Autophradates
and Mausolus (who had succeeded his father Hecatomnos: cf. p. 323) withdrew, and
even gave Agesilaus money (Xen. Ages. ii. 26, Polyaenus Strat.VII. 26, Nep. XIII. Timoth.
1. iii, Isoc. XV. Antid. 112). Autophradates and Mausolus came out on the side of the
rebels, and so did Orontes (restored to favour and given a command in Mysia, in north-
western Asia Minor), who became the leader of the revolt; and the rebels made an
alliance with Tachos, the current ruler in Egypt. In 362/1 the rebels approached the
Greeks: the participants in the latest common peace refused to back them (IG iv 556
= R&O 42 ~ Harding 57: cf. p. 200), though the Athenian Chabrias went back as a free-
lance to command the ﬂeet (Nep. XII Chab. 2. i, iii); but Sparta was not a participant
and sent Agesilaus ofﬁcially, with thirty Spartiate advisers, to command the Greek 
mercenaries – so that at last he found himself ﬁghting against Persia once more (Xen.
Ages. ii. 28–30, Plut. Ages. 36–37. i).
But the revolt then collapsed, with treachery all round. In 361, while Tachos advanced
into Syria against Agesilaus’ advice, in Egypt his nephew Nectanebo was proclaimed
king: Chabrias wanted to support Tachos, Agesilaus after consulting Sparta backed
Nectanebo, and Tachos, deserted, surrendered to the Persians. Agesilaus supported
Nectanebo against another claimant, and in winter 360/59 died in Cyrene on his way
home, to be succeeded by his son Archidamus III (Plut. Ages. 37. ii–40, cf. Xen. Ages.
ii. 29–31, Nep. XVII. Ages. 8). He had been a strong king, and an exponent of active
policies for Sparta, but he had not been successful, partly because of Sparta’s inherent
weakness and partly because he was not interested in making Sparta popular.
Meanwhile Rheomithres, used by the satraps to communicate with Tachos, had gone
over to the King. In 360 Orontes took an army to Syria, heading for Mesopotamia, and
Datames, once more on the rebels’ side, crossed the Euphrates (Polyaenus Strat. VII.
21. iii), but Orontes then changed sides – after which he disappears from history.
Autophradates, who had captured Artabazus, the claimant to Dascylium, released him
and made peace, and Artabazus took possession of Dascylium (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
223

154–8). Ariobarzanes was betrayed by his son Mithridates (Xen. Cyr. VIII. viii. 4, Arist.
Pol. V. 1312 A 16). Datames returned to Cappadocia: in 359 he beat off an attack by
Artabazus, but in winter 359/8 he was murdered by Mithridates (Nep. XIV. Dat. 9–11).
Artaxerxes himself died, at an advanced age, in 359/8, and, since his other sons had
already been eliminated by plots, was succeeded by Artaxerxes III (Ochus) (Plut. Artax.
26–30). He began his reign by ordering the disbanding of the satraps’ mercenary armies,
but the main danger had passed.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
For general studies of Sparta see the note at the end of chapter 3. Books devoted to
Sparta in this period include Cartledge, Agesilaos and the Crisis of Sparta; David, Sparta
Between Empire and Revolution; Hamilton, Sparta’s Bitter Victories (on the Corinthian
War), and his Agesilaus and the Failure of Spartan Hegemony.
On the SUN coinage the view which now seems likely to be correct (earlier interpre-
tations had attributed the coins to one side or the other in the 390’s) is that of S. Kar-
wiese, ‘Lysander as Herakliskos Drakonopnigon,’ NC cxl = 7xx 1980, 1–27. On Spartan
imperialism after the Peloponnesian War see H. W. Parke, ‘The Development of the
Second Spartan Empire’, JHS l 1930, 37–79. On Sparta’s dealings with Persia see
Lewis, Sparta and Persia, ch. 6. On Agesilaus and his opponents see R. E. Smith, ‘The
Opposition to Agesilaus’ Foreign Policy, 394–371 BC’, Hist. ii 1953–4, 274–88;
G. L. Cawkwell, ‘Agesilaus and Sparta’, CQ2 xxvi 1976, 62–84. On the Locrians whose
quarrel with the Phocians led to the outbreak of the Corinthian War see J. Buckler, ‘The
Incident at Mount Parnassus, 395 BC’, in Tuplin (ed.), Xenophon and His World . . . 1999,
397–411 ch. 8. 2.
On Sparta’s social problems see Hodkinson, Property and Wealth in Classical Sparta,
and his earlier article, ‘Warfare,Wealth and the Crisis of Spartiate Society’, in Rich and
Shipley (eds.), War and Society in the Greek World, 146–76. For the suggestion that the
‘rhetra of Epitadeus’ is a ﬁction inﬂuenced by Plato see E. Schütrumpf, ‘The Rhetra of
Epitadeus; A Platonist’s Fiction’, GRBS xxviii 1987, 441–57. On the size of the citizen
population see Gomme et al., Historical Commentary on Thucydides, iv. 110–17 (by
Andrewes, believing in an error in Thuc. V. 68. iii, but starting from the material of
Gomme, who did not believe in an error); de Ste. Croix, The Origins of the Peloponnesian
War, app. 16.
On the chronology of the 360’s I follow J. Roy, ‘Arcadia and Boeotia in Peloponnesian
Affairs, 370–362 BC’, Hist. xx 1971, 569–99, in preference to the lower chronology of
J.Wiseman, ‘Epaminondas and the Theban Invasions’, Klio li 1969, 177–99. On Megalo-
polis and Arcadia see S. Hornblower, ‘When was Megalopolis Founded?’, BSA lxxxv
1990, 71–7 (foundation begun 371/0, as in Pausanias, but took some time); Nielsen,
Arkadia and Its Poleis, 229–69 (Triphylia), 414–55 (Megalopolis).
The chronology of Persia’s war against Evagoras was settled by R. J. van der Spek,
‘The Chronology of the Wars of Artaxerxes II in the Babylonian Astronomical Diaries’,
Achaemenid History xi 1998, 239–54 at 240–51.
On Glos see T. T. B. Ryder, ‘Spartan Relations with Persia After the King’s Peace: A
Strange Story in Diodorus 15. 9’, CQ2 xiii 1963, 105–9 (believing a deal with Sparta
224
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE

was made); G. L. Cawkwell, ‘Agesilaus and Sparta’ (above), 70–1 (not believing); S.
Ruzicka, ‘Glos, Son of Tamos, and the End of the Cyprian War’, Hist. xlviii 1999, 23–43.
On the Satraps’ Revolt see M. J. Osborne, ‘Orontes’, Hist. xxii 1973, 515–51, and his
Naturalization in Athens, ii. 61–80; Hornblower, Mausolus, 170–82; Weiskopf, The So-
Called ‘Great Satraps’ Revolt’; J. D. Bing, ‘The Iconography of Revolt and Restoration in
Cilicia’, Hist. xlvii 1998, 41–76.
SPARTA’S IMPERIALISM AND COLLAPSE
225

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
395
Athens joins enemies of Sparta in Corinthian War
390
campaign of Thrasybulus in the Aegean
387/6
Peace of Antalcidas
378
foundation of Second Athenian League
371
battle of Leuctra ends need for Athens to oppose Sparta
356–355
Social War
338/7
formation of League of Corinth ends Second Athenian
League
Athens’ Recovery after the Peloponnesian War
By the treaty which ended the Peloponnesian War Athens lost all its overseas
possessions, had its navy limited to twelve ships, and became a subordinate ally
of Sparta, bound to follow Sparta’s lead in foreign policy (cf. p. 151). Accord-
ingly it contributed to Sparta’s war against Elis c.401 (Xen. Hell. III. ii. 25) and
to Thibron’s expedition to Asia Minor in 400 (Xen. Hell. III. i. 4: sending olig-
archic cavalrymen Athens was glad to be rid of). But it is not long before we
ﬁnd moves towards an independent policy. Arms and ofﬁcers were sent to the
Persian ﬂeet being assembled under Conon’s command, and in 397 envoys were
sent to the Persian King, but were caught by the Spartans and executed (Hell.
Oxy. 10. i ~ Harding 11. A). In 396 Athens refused to contribute to Agesilaus’
18
The Second 
Athenian League

expedition (Paus. III. 9. ii–iii). Demaenetus with the secret backing of the
council and of democratic leaders set out with a trireme to join Conon: when
he was discovered and reported to the Spartans, the council panicked and pre-
tended to know nothing, but he got away (Hell. Oxy. 9 [~ Harding 11. a], 11).
In 395 Athens was drawn into the Corinthian War fairly readily (and Thrasy-
bulus, opposed to war in 396, was ready for war now: Hell. Oxy. 9. ii, contr.
Xen. Hell. III. v. 16). Xenophon’s Theban speech in Athens accepts that Athens
wants to recover its empire; Sparta is unpopular in the Peloponnese and has
deceived those whom it liberated from Athens; Athens could now become more
powerful than ever (Xen. Hell. III. v. 8–15). Athens had started rebuilding the
Piraeus walls by 395/4, before Cnidus (IG ii2 1656–7 = R&O 9); work on them
and the long walls was helped by the money which Conon brought in 393 (Xen.
Hell. IV. viii. 9–10, Diod. Sic. XIV. 85. ii–iii), and the mercenary force at Corinth
was commanded by Athenians, ﬁrst Iphicrates and, after he unsuccessfully tried
to seize Corinth for Athens, Chabrias (Androtion FGrH 324 F 48 = Philoch.
FGrH 328 F 150 ~ Harding 22. A; Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 34, Diod. Sic. XIV. 92.
ii). Cnidus and its aftermath, though in fact a victory of Athens’ traditional
enemy, Persia, were treated as a Greek and an Athenian success (cf. p. 209), so
extravagantly that Conon became the ﬁrst living Athenian to be honoured with
a statue in the agora (Dem. XX. Leptines 68–70); Athens also honoured Evago-
ras of Salamis, likewise associated with Cnidus (R&O 11), Dionysius of Syra-
cuse, whom Conon hoped to detach from Sparta (IG ii2 18 = R&O 10 ~ Harding
20, Lys. XIX. Property of Aristophanes 19–20; cf. p. 282) and others, and Conon
was honoured in Erythrae (IK Erythrai und Klazomenai 6 = R&O 8 ~ Harding
12. D).
By 392 Athens had begun to rebuild its navy, and had regained the north
Aegean islands of Lemnos, Imbros and Scyros, protecting the route from the
Hellespont to Athens, which it had possessed for most of the ﬁfth century (cf.
Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 15, Andoc. III. Peace 12). It had also regained Delos (inde-
pendent shortly after the war, I. Délos 87 = R&O 3; administered by Athenian
and probably Andrian amphictyons 393/2–389/8, I. Délos 97). The ﬁrst peace
proposals in 392 would have deprived it of all overseas possessions once more;
the second in 392/1 made an exception of the northern islands but not of Delos;
Andocides’ speech on that occasion suggests that some Athenians were han-
kering after more (Andoc. III. Peace 15). In any case the Athenians were not
yet ready to agree to a treaty which would abandon the Asiatic Greeks (cf. p.
193). Sparta returned to the Aegean in 391, and Athens’ support for Evagoras
when Persia had begun to regard him as a rebel caused embarrassment on all
sides; but in 390 Thrasybulus had a remarkable campaign. He was sent to
support the democrats in Rhodes; but he went ﬁrst to the Hellespont, where
he mediated between two Thracian rulers and made both allies of Athens; he
restored the democracy in Byzantium, made an alliance with Calchedon and
imposed a 10 per cent tax on trade passing through the Bosporus (cf. Dem.
XX. Leptines 60); he defeated a Spartan harmost on Lesbos; there are traces of
his activity in various other places in the islands and on the mainland; he
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
227

imposed a general 5 per cent tax, and claimed the right to exile men from the
territory of Athens and its allies (IG ii2 24/28 = R&O -/18 ~ Harding 25/26).
He ﬁnally reached Rhodes, but early the next year he was killed on a fund-
raising expedition to Aspendus, on the south coast of Asia Minor (Xen. Hell.
IV. viii. 25–30, Diod. Sic. XIV. 94, 99. iv–v). By then he had been ordered back
to Athens, and his colleague Ergocles was charged with embezzlement (Lys.
XXVIII. Ergocles, XXIX. Philocrates). His successor Agyrrhius did little, but 
Iphicrates, sent to the Hellespont, defeated and killed the Spartan Anaxibius 
at Abydus (Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 31–9).
In 387 Iphicrates and Diotimus blockaded the Spartan Nicolochus in
Abydus, but Antalcidas rescued him by a trick, captured a further Athenian
squadron coming from Thrace, and so regained control of the Hellespont (Xen.
Hell. V. i. 6–7, 25–8). Athenian recriminations are revealed by a decree hon-
ouring Phanocritus of Parium: the original proposal, which was presumably
bland, does not survive, but an amendment makes it clear that Phanocritus had
given information about the enemy ships which the generals had disbelieved
(IG ii2 29 = R&O 19). The Athenians did not lose hope: inscriptions show
Athens giving reassurances to Erythrae ‘about not giving up Erythrae to the
barbarians’, and deciding not to send a garrison and governor to Clazomenae
as long as it paid Thrasybulus’ 5 per cent tax (SEG xxvi 1282/IG ii2 28 = R&O
17/18 ~ Harding 28/26). But when Antalcidas again offered a common peace
treaty the Athenians and the other Greeks had to accept it: the Asiatic Greeks
were surrendered to Persia; Athens’ three northern islands were the only excep-
tions to the autonomy rule, so it lost Delos once more; and Sparta proceeded
to interpret the autonomy rule in its own interests. Athens had, nevertheless,
made a very rapid and convincing recovery from its defeat in the Peloponnesian
War.
The Foundation of the Second Athenian League
The abandonment of the Asiatic Greeks, to which Sparta had committed itself
in 412–411, had at last taken place, and was seen as a great betrayal. In Aristo-
phanes, as early as Peace (421), we can ﬁnd the idea that while the Greeks
quarrel among themselves they are exposing themselves to the possibility of an
attack by Persia (Peace 105–8, 406–8, Lys. 1128–35). Gorgias in his Olympic
Speech, best dated 408, and his Funeral Speech, of unknown date, had claimed
that the Greeks ought to ﬁght against the barbarians, not against one another
(82 A 1. iv–v DK). Lysias’ (XXXIII) Olympic Speech is dated 388 by Diodorus
(XIV. 109. iii) but more probably belongs to 384: it appears to be complaining
of the situation after the King’s Peace, when some Greeks were subject to Persia
and others to the tyranny of Dionysius of Syracuse, and calling on Sparta to
lead the Greeks in reasserting their freedom. Isocrates in his (IV) Panegyric,
c.380, contrasted the glories of the alleged ﬁfth-century Peace of Callias (cf.
pp. 47–8) with the humiliation of the Peace of Antalcidas (§§117–20) and, while
228
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

nominally pleading for Athens and Sparta to be reconciled and to cooperate
against Persia (§§16–17), went on to defend Athens’ ﬁfth-century empire
(§§100–6) and to claim that Athens should lead the Greeks against Persia once
more (cf. his later summary, XV. Antid. 57–62; another condemnation of the
Peace XII. Panath. 106).
But in the years after 386 the peace and Sparta’s interpretation of it were
facts to be lived with. In 386/5 the Thracian Hebryzelmis was praised but not
granted an alliance (IG ii2 31 = Tod 117 ~ Harding 29). In 385 Athens was
afraid to help Mantinea against Sparta, though it did take in refugees afterwards
(Diod. Sic. XV. 5. v, IG ii2 33. 7–8). In 382 there was talk of an alliance with
Olynthus when that was threatened by Sparta (Xen. Hell. V. ii. 15), but none
seems to have been made; refugees were taken in once more, from Thebes when
that was occupied by Sparta (Xen. Hell. V. ii. 31, Plut. Pel. 6. iii–v). But Chios,
Mytilene and Byzantium maintained their connection with Athens (Isoc. XIV.
Plataic 26–7), and in 384/3 Athens found a solution appropriate to the new cir-
cumstances: a defensive alliance with Chios was made, on the basis of freedom
and autonomy and within the framework of the King’s Peace (IG ii2 34–5 =
R&O 20 ~ Harding 31).
In 379/8 the Theban exiles set out from Athens to overthrow the pro-Spartan
régime (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 2, Diod. Sic. XV. 25. i, Plut. Pel. 7–12), and they
received military support from Athens – apparently unofﬁcial according to
Xenophon, ofﬁcial according to Diodorus and others; perhaps forces were sent
ofﬁcially to the border and on their own initiative entered Boeotia (Xen. Hell.
V. iv. 9; Diod. Sic. XV. 25. iv–26, cf. Din. I. Demosthenes 38–9, Aristid. I. Pana-
thenaic 294).When Cleombrotus took a Spartan army he had to go via Plataea
since Chabrias was blocking the route through Attica (Xen. Hell.V. i. 14).When
Sparta protested, Athens panicked and condemned the generals who had gone
to Boeotia (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 19, cf. 22, Plut. Pel. 14. i; omitted by Diod. Sic.).
It was while Spartan envoys were in Athens that Sphodrias invaded Attica from
Thespiae; Athens protested but the Spartans acquitted him; and Athens then
came out openly in opposition to Sparta (cf. p. 214).
Xenophon reports that the Athenians put gates on the Piraeus, and pro-
ceeded to build ships and support the Boeotians enthusiastically, but he does
not directly mention the Second Athenian League. Diodorus has an account
(XV. 28–9) which dovetails well with an important series of inscriptions. After
Cleombrotus’ winter expedition (27. iii) the Boeotians united in an alliance
[perhaps the ﬁrst move towards the revival of the federation], and Athens sent
envoys to the states under Sparta’s control, inviting them to assert their
common freedom. This met with considerable success, ﬁrst with Chios and
Byzantium, then with Rhodes, Mytilene and others. Excited at the good will of
the allies, Athens established a council (synedrion) of allies, to meet in Athens,
each member having one vote, the members to be autonomous and Athens to
be the leader (hegemon). Sparta tried to discourage cities from joining, and pre-
pared for a hard war (28). After a digression on Persia’s current attempt to
recover Egypt (29. i–iv), Diodorus continues with the episode of Sphodrias,
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
229

whom he calls Sphodriades, and which he is probably wrong to place here rather
than before the creation of the League; the Athenians voted that Sparta was in
breach of the peace and decided to go to war; they admitted Thebes to the
synedrion on the same terms as the other members; and they voted to give up
existing cleruchies and forbade Athenians to farm land outside Attica (29.
v–viii).
In the epigraphic record the ﬁrst stage is the alliance of 384/3 with Chios,
which was used as a model for the League. Next Byzantium is made an ally of
Athens and the other allies, on the same terms as Chios (IG ii2 41 = Tod 121
~ Harding 34). A later stage is represented by a decree for Methymna, on
Lesbos, which is already an ally of Athens and now has its alliance extended to
the other allies; the synedrion now exists and is involved in the oath-taking, and
Methymna is to be added to an already existing list of allies (IG ii2 42 = R&O
23 ~ Harding 37; for adding to the list cf. below). A very fragmentary inscrip-
tion contains an amendment to a decree concerning Thebes, and mentions men
from Chios and Mytilene (IG ii2 40; trans. of a speculative reconstruction
Harding 33).
We also have an inscription of spring 378/7 which embodies a prospectus for
the League, setting out not its organisation (the existence of the synedrion is
taken for granted) but its aim and the terms on which states are invited to join,
followed by a list of members (IG ii2 43 = R&O 22 ~ Harding 35: see ill. 10).
The aim of the League is, ‘So that the Spartans shall allow the Greeks to be
free and autonomous, and to live at peace occupying their own territory in secu-
rity, [[and so that the peace and friendship sworn by the Greeks and the King
in accordance with the agreements may be in force and endure]]’ (ll. 9–15; for
the later erasure of the bracketed clause see p. 236). An invitation is extended
to Greeks and barbarians outside the King’s domain to join, subject to various
promises: they are to be free and autonomous, with whatever constitution they
wish, not subjected to a governor or garrison or to the payment of tribute, on
the same terms as Chios, Thebes and the other allies (ll. 15–25). All property
publicly or privately owned by Athenians in allied territory will be renounced;
all stelai (inscribed stones) at Athens unfavourable to any allies will be demol-
ished; from 378/7 it will be illegal for Athenians publicly or privately to own
property in allied territory, and charges in connection with this are to be laid
before the synedrion (ll. 25–46). The alliance is to be a defensive alliance (ll.
46–51). After a clause providing for the publication of the decree with a list of
members (ll. 63–72), the decree ends with the appointment of envoys to go to
Thebes [possibly to persuade the Thebans to join as Thebans, not as Boeotians]
(ll. 73–7).
The promises are promises that Athens will not treat this League as it had
treated the Delian League, and they also serve to spell out what freedom and
autonomy are to mean in practical terms.The model is now not just Chios but
Chios and Thebes, which suggests that these speciﬁc promises may have been
added at the point when Thebes joined. The promise about Athenian-owned
property is separate from the original list, and also appears at a later point in
230
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
231
Ill. 10
The prospectus
of the Second Athenian
League, 
inv. 
no.
EM10397. Epigraphical
Museum, Athens
Diodorus’ account, so it should be seen as an addition to the original scheme:
it applies only to states which join the League as free and autonomous allies,
and therefore not to Lemnos, Imbros and Scyros (which had been recognised
as Athenian possessions in the King’s Peace). It is not in fact likely that there
was much Athenian-owned property elsewhere at this date, or that there were
many stelai unfavourable to potential allies: these clauses indicate that the decks
will be completely cleared, not that there is much clearing to be done.
The list of members was inscribed in instalments by different hands. It begins
below the original decree; below that part of the list there survives the begin-
ning of another decree; the list continues on the left-hand side of the stele.

Inscribed in the same hand as the original decree, presumably at the same time,
are Chios, Mytilene, Methymna, Rhodes, Byzantium and, heading a second
column,Thebes (i. 79–83, ii. 79): these were still the only members in the spring
of 377. (The decree for Methymna, mentioned above, provided for Methymna
to be added to an already existing list: perhaps Methymna joined after the
general decree had been enacted but before it was inscribed.) The remaining
batches of names will be considered below when we look at the development
of the League. Diodorus claims that seventy members joined (XV. 30. ii);
Aeschines claims that seventy-ﬁve were lost in the Social War of the 350’s
(Aeschin. II. Embassy 70); there were ﬁfty-three or slightly more in the inscribed
list. Despite the League’s declared purpose, most of the members were states
not seriously threatened by Sparta in the 370’s.
The structure of this League was different from that of the Delian League
(cf. p. 18). Probably (until 454/3, when the council was abandoned) the Delian
League had a council in which Athens had one vote along with each of the
allies.This League had a synedrion permanently in Athens, of which Athens was
almost certainly not a member, with its own presidential apparatus (a Theban
president in R&O 29). For League matters, the synedrion and the Athenian
council both acted as probouleutic bodies, and the Athenian assembly took 
the ﬁnal decision, but presumably could not commit the allies to a decision 
they had said they would not accept. Thus Athens’ two decrees of 368 for
Dionysius of Syracuse (IG ii2 103/105 + 223 = R&O 33/34 ~ Harding -/52: cf.
p. 236) show the council sending a recommendation directly to the assembly
on an Athenian matter but asking the opinion of the synedrion ‘about the build-
ing of the temple [at Delphi] and the peace’, which must cover the question of
admitting Dionysius to the League; and the synedrion must have refused to have
Dionysius as a member, since the second decree makes a bilateral alliance
between Dionysius and Athens. In a decree of 362/1 (IG i2 112 = R&O 41 ~
Harding 56) the synedrion took the initiative in accepting an alliance with Pelo-
ponnesian states, it passed its recommendation to the council and the council
passed it to the assembly. We shall see that, at different stages in the negotia-
tion of the Peace of Philocrates between Athens and Philip in 346, the synedrion
put forward recommendations; but by then it was a weak body, and it also said
it would accept whatever Athens decided (cf. pp. 241, 310). At the end of 373/2
the synedrion imposed a settlement after a civil war in Paros, and Athens
required Paros to send offerings to festivals as a colony (R&O 29).
We do not hear of any trials of the kinds provided for – by the synedrion if
Athenians were accused of owning property in allied territory, by Athens and
the allies [perhaps in these cases the synedrion would have been invited to
conﬁrm an Athenian verdict] if anybody [apparently any Athenian] was accused
of trying to overturn the arrangements for the League. The ﬁrst procedure
envisages a common fund of the allies, to beneﬁt from conﬁscations. On the
other hand, the promise not to collect tribute, repeated in decrees for some
individual allies, makes it hard to believe that there were regular ﬁnancial levies
from the beginning; presumably the assumption was that allied states would
232
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

provide and pay for their own forces. There may have been some voluntary
fund-raising: in 375 there is a complaint that the Thebans were not providing
money for a naval campaign which they had instigated (Xen. Hell. VI. ii. 1, cf.
V. iv. 62). There were ﬁnancial problems in 373 (cf. below), and it may have
been at that point that the decision was taken to collect money after all, but to
call the payments not phoros, ‘tribute’, but syntaxeis, ‘contributions’ ([Dem.]
XLIX. Timotheus 49, Theopompus FGrH 115 F 98 ~ Harding 36). Evidence
for sums collected is scanty and late: totals of 45 talents in the late 350’s, 60
talents c.347 (Dem. XVIII. Crown 234, Aeschin. II. Embassy 71) and 5 talents
each from Eretria and Oreus in the late 340’s (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 94, 100).
The synedrion seems to have approved both assessments and expenditure (IG
ii2 233 = R&O 72 ~ Harding 97. 27–8; IG ii2 123 = R&O 52 ~ Harding 69.
9–11). ‘The men elected by the people to exact from the islanders the money
that they owe’ (IG ii2 111 = R&O 39 ~ Harding 55. 12–14) were perhaps men
appointed to collect arrears of syntaxeis. It does not look as if there was ever a
likelihood that the syntaxeis would become a means of Athenian oppression.
The Development of the League: To Leuctra
The second batch in the League’s list of members (ii. 80–4) comprises the cities
of Euboea other than Histiaea/Oreus, and nearby Icus: these are the ﬁrst addi-
tions mentioned by Diodorus (XV. 30. i), and we have a decree for the admis-
sion of Chalcis, still in 378/7 (IG ii2 44 =Tod 124 ~ Harding 38). In the summer
of 377 Chabrias attacked Histiaea but did not capture it (cf. p. 251; force could
be used against states reluctant to join), and then recruited members elsewhere
in the Aegean, including Peparethus and Sciathus (Diod. Sic. XV. 30. ii–v; on
the stele i. 85–9, including Peparethus and Sciathus). 376 was the year in which
a Spartan blockade threatened Athens’ corn supply but Chabrias with an Athen-
ian ﬂeet escorted the corn ships and then besieged Naxos and defeated the
Spartans (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 60–1, Diod. Sic. XV. 34. iii–35. ii): perhaps all the
remaining members on the front of the stele joined this year. His victory was
the ﬁrst major Athenian naval success since the Peloponnesian War, and he was
honoured with a statue in the agora (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 243, Arist. Rh. III.
1411 B 6–7, Nep. XII. Chab. 1. iii); a surviving statue base (Hesp. xxx 1961,
74–91) records honours awarded by various bodies resulting from his cam-
paigns of 376 and 375.
Probably the ﬁrst entry on the left-hand side of the stele is ll. 131–4, level
with the beginning of the list on the front, and some distance below the other
entries: ‘The People of Zacynthus in Nellus’. This must be connected in some
way with Timotheus’ campaign of 375, possibly the beginning rather than the
end.At the top of the left-hand side (ll. 97–8) the best restoration is:‘The People
of Pyrrha’, on Lesbos, known to be a member but not listed elsewhere. Next
come Abdera and other places in the north-east (ll. 99–105: Olynthus is
included, as ‘The Chalcidians from Thrace’).These will result from a campaign
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
233

of Chabrias in 375, when he defended Abdera against a Thracian attack,
installed a garrison (breaking one of the League’s promises, however virtu-
ously), and, despite an error in Diodorus’ text, was not murdered (Diod. Sic.
XV. 36. i–iv). Prompted by the Thebans, Conon’s son Timotheus campaigned
in the west: of his gains Xenophon mentions Corcyra, Diodorus mentions
Cephallenia, Acarnania and king Alcetas of the Molossi; he defeated the Spar-
tans off Alyzia, after which the King’s Peace was renewed, and he was recalled
to Athens but restored exiles in Zacynthus on his way home (Xen. Hell. V. iv.
62–6, Diod. Sic. XV. 36. v–vi). Acarnania, one city of Cephallenia, and Alcetas
and his son Neoptolemus appear on the stele (ll. 106–10; we do not know what
name has been erased in l. 111, but the frequent guess that it was Jason of
Pherae is insecure: cf. p. 251), but not Corcyra or the other cities of Cephal-
lenia; separate inscriptions provide for the admission of Corcyra, Acarnania and
Cephallenia (IG ii2 96 = R&O 24 ~ Harding 41, dated 375/4) and record the
admission of Corcyra (IG ii2 97 = Tod 127 ~ Harding 42) and arrangements
with Cephallenia including reference to a garrison (Agora xvi 46). The most
likely explanation is that proceedings were interrupted by the renewal of the
King’s Peace and the recall of Timotheus to Athens, then further delayed by
the renewed ﬁghting in the west, and not completed until the end of that ﬁght-
ing in 372 (cf. below). Timotheus like Chabrias was honoured with a statue in
the agora (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 243, Nep XIII. Timoth. 2. iii). He and Conon
were honoured in other places too, and texts referring to him and the year 375/4
have been read on the base of the ‘dancing girls’ column north-east of the
temple of Apollo at Delphi (cf. SEG xxxiii 440).
Other names on the stele (ll. 112–30) are from the Aegean; certainly none is
later than 373 and probably none is later than 375. This batch begins with
Andros: Delos was presumably made independent of Athens under the Peace
of Antalcidas (cf. pp. 227–8), but Athenian amphictyons are attested there again
from 377/6, and they are joined by Andrians from 374/3 (I. Délos 98 = R&O
28). There was room on the stele for further names but, for whatever reason,
although the League continued to grow (cf. Xen. Hell. VI. ii. 11–13, Diod. Sic.
XV. 47. ii–iii, on Timotheus’ activity in the Aegean in 373), further names were
not added to the list.
When Timotheus, on his way back to Athens, restored exiles in Zacynthus,
Sparta protested. In 374 Sparta sent expeditions to Zacynthus and to Corcyra;
in 373 it sent a further sixty ships under Mnasippus to Corcyra, and he ravaged
the countryside and blockaded the city. Timotheus delayed in coming from
Athens, because of difﬁculties in raising men and money in the Aegean, and it
was perhaps in response to these difﬁculties that the levying of syntaxeis was
introduced (cf. p. 233). He was deposed and put on trial (cf. [Dem.] XLIX.
Timotheus 6–24, naming Callistratus and Iphicrates as prosecutors and saying
that Alcetas and Jason spoke in his defence; Diodorus wrongly has him rein-
stated). Ctesicles went over land in winter 373/2 and enabled the Corcyraeans
to defeat and kill Mnasippus; Iphicrates arrived by sea in 372, pausing in
Cephallenia when he knew that Mnasippus was dead; he arrived in time to
234
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

defeat a Syracusan squadron sent to support Sparta, and then hired out his
sailors to work on the land in Corcyra and himself and his soldiers to ﬁght for
the Acarnanians. In 371 he collected money in Cephallenia and was preparing
to attack Laconia when he was overtaken by the next peace treaty (Xen. Hell.
VI. ii. 2–39, Diod. Sic. XV. 45–46. iii, 47. i–vii). Before the campaign of 373/2
Diodorus has a chapter on Iphicrates’ military innovations, crediting him in
particular with converting hoplites into peltasts by giving them the light Thra-
cian shield, the pelte, lengthening their swords and spears and devising the Iphi-
cratid boot (cf. the Wellington boot of the nineteenth century AD) (Diod. Sic.
XV. 44, cf. Nep. XI. Iph. 1. iii–iv): apart from the boot, there is no other indi-
cation that hoplite equipment was changed in these ways, and if there is any
truth behind the report it may refer to an experiment with the mercenaries
whom Iphicrates had been commanding in Egypt.
Thebes was becoming an increasingly embarrassing member of the League.
It provided ships for Timotheus in 373 ([Dem.] XLIX. Timotheus 14–16), and
a president for the synedrion on the last day of 373/2 (R&O 29); but it destroyed
Plataea, refounded after the Peace of Antalcidas, in 373/2 and put increasing
pressure on Thespiae (cf. pp. 249–50).The peace of summer 371 resulted from
an approach by Athens to Sparta when Callistratus argued that Athens and
Sparta ought to be on the same side, and Thebes was excluded from the treaty
(cf. pp. 196–7). That was followed by Thebes’ defeat of Sparta at Leuctra, a
battle in which Athens was not involved.
The Development of the League: From Leuctra to the Social War
The Thebans announced their victory at Leuctra to their Athenian allies, but
the herald was received with a stony silence (Xen. Hell.VI. iv. 19–20).The peace
treaty of autumn 371 was organised by Athens: it included Sparta and excluded
Thebes; it was based on ‘the decrees of the Athenians and their allies’ [i.e.
freedom and autonomy were to be understood as in the League]; its territorial
basis was probably echein ta heauton, that states should possess what belonged
to them, which Athens was to exploit in the years that followed (cf. pp. 197–8).
The aim of the League, ‘So that the Spartans shall allow the Greeks to be free
and autonomous, and to live at peace occupying their own territory in secu-
rity’, had been accomplished by Thebes’ defeat of Sparta – Sparta would not
after this be a threat to the freedom and autonomy of the Greeks – but, as
Athens did not disband the Delian League when it gave up regular warfare
against Persia in the middle of the ﬁfth century (cf. pp. 47–50), it did not now
disband the Second League. However, it was increasingly to pursue policies
which the League’s members could not join in supporting.
Thebes must now have ceased to be a member of the League, as did the
other central Greek members, which adhered to Thebes rather than to Athens.
It was now in Athens’ interests to support not Thebes but Sparta, so in 370
Athens rejected the appeal from Arcadia and its allies (Diod. Sic. XV. 62. iii;
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
235

later denounced as a bad decision by Dem. XVI. Megalopolitans 12, 19), and in
winter 370/69 sent Iphicrates to attack the Thebans on their homeward journey
– which he did ineffectively: some Athenians were slower than others to recog-
nise the new reality (Xen. Hell. VI. v. 49–52: cf. pp. 269–70). In 369 a ﬁrm
alliance was made between Athens and Sparta, but anachronistic fear led to the
decision that the command should alternate between the two every ﬁve days,
not be given to Athens at sea and Sparta on land (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 1–14, Diod.
Sic. XV. 67. i: cf. p. 270). When the Thebans returned to the Peloponnese,
Chabrias was effective in ﬁghting against them (Diod. Sic. XV. 69). We learn
from an inscription that in 369/8 envoys went to Athens from Mytilene, anxious
about the new policy: the leading politician Callistratus was responsible for the
reply, that when Sparta broke the treaties and threatened the Greeks Athens
called on the Greeks to join in resisting, but . . . [and frustratingly the rest of
the text is lost] (IG ii2 107 = R&O 31 ~ Harding 53. 35 sqq.). Now that Athens 
and Sparta were on the same side, Athens made an alliance with Dionysius of
Syracuse, but it appears that the synedrion refused to have him as a member 
of the League (IG ii2 103/105 + 223 = R&O 33/34 ~ Harding -/52: cf. p. 232).
To add to the allies’ discomﬁture, Athens began to exploit the echein ta
heauton clause in the peace to attempt to recover former possessions in the
north-east: Amphipolis, which it had lost to the Spartans in 424/3 and should
have recovered under the Peace of Nicias in 421 but did not (cf. pp. 111–12,
114), was a matter of pride as well as economic advantage; the Chersonese, on
the European side of the Hellespont, through which the corn ships sailed from
the Black Sea to Athens, was an area in which Athens had been interested since
the sixth century. In the hinterland was the Odrysian kingdom of Thrace, with
which Athens was always anxious to maintain a good relationship: Hebryzelmis
was succeeded by Cotys in 383/2; at some date he was made an Athenian
citizen, and c.386 Iphicrates married his sister (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 118,
129).
In 368 Iphicrates was sent against Amphipolis: he at ﬁrst supported one
claimant to the Macedonian throne, Ptolemy, against his rival Pausanias, but
later fell out with Ptolemy (Aeschin. II. Embassy 26–9, Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates
149). Thebes too became interested in Macedon through its involvement in
Thessaly, and in 368, when Thebes was attacking Alexander of Pherae, Athens
sent a force under Autocles to support him (Diod. Sic. XV. 71. v). So in 367,
when Pelopidas gained the King’s support for peace terms advantageous to
Thebes, those terms were to include the disbanding of the Athenian navy (cf.
pp. 198–9). Too many states were provoked, and Thebes did not get its treaty,
but it was probably at this point that the Athenians erased the reference to the
King’s Peace in the prospectus of the League (cf. p. 230: it did not occur to
them to erase the hostile reference to Sparta immediately before), and Athens
like Sparta gave its support to the satraps in revolt against the King. Ario-
barzanes and Philiscus, the agent he sent to Greece in 369/8 (cf. p. 198), were
made Athenian citizens (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 141, cf. 202), and in 366
Timotheus was sent to support Ariobarzanes yet not break the King’s Peace.
236
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

From autumn 366 to autumn 365 he besieged Samos and captured it from the
Persians (Isoc. XV. Antid. 111, Dem. XV. Lib. Rhod. 9), after which Athens
shocked the Greek world by not liberating Samos but turning it into an Athen-
ian cleruchy (Diod. Sic. XVIII. 18. ix, Strabo 638. XIV. i. 18, Arist. Rh. II. 1384
B 32–5; reinforced in 362/1, schol. Aeschin. I. Timarchus 53). He was joined by
the Spartan Agesilaus in relieving Ariobarzanes when he was besieged in
Adramyttium or Assus (Xen. Ages. ii. 26, Polyaenus Strat. VII. 26). In 365/4 he
replaced Iphicrates on the Amphipolis front (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 149,
schol. Aeschin. II. Embassy 31), after which Iphicrates ﬁrst fought for Cotys
against Athens, then retired to fortresses of his own (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates
130–2).Timotheus captured various cities including Potidaea, which by invita-
tion became another Athenian cleruchy (Diod. Sic. XV. 81. vi, Din. I. Demos-
thenes 14; cleruchy 362/1 IG ii2 114 = Tod 146 ~ Harding 58).
The continuation of this war need not be followed in detail: it included some
successes (Timotheus captured Sestos and Crithote, in the Chersonese: Nep.
XIII. Timoth. 1. iii, Isoc. XV. Antid. 108, 112) but also some failures (in 360/59,
after being defeated near Amphipolis, Timotheus burned his ﬂeet rather than
let it fall into enemy hands [schol. Aeschin. II. Embassy 31, Polyaenus Strat. III.
10. viii]). Shortage of money remained a problem: Timotheus issued bronze
coins, some of which have been found at Olynthus ([Arist.] Oec. II. 1350 A
23–30, cf. CAH2 pls. v–vi no. 227). Several commanders were insufﬁciently suc-
cessful and were prosecuted; Amphipolis continued to elude Athens.
Nearer home Oropus, disputed between Athens and Boeotia (cf. p. 146), was
made independent in 404 (cf. Lys. XXXI. Philon 9) but not long afterwards
absorbed into Boeotia again (Diod. Sic. XIV. 17. i–iii); it was presumably made
independent again under the Peace of Antalcidas; but by 373/2 it had placed
itself in Athens’ hands (Isoc. XIV. Plataic 20). In 366 Themison, tyrant of
Eretria, seized it, claiming to support a body of exiles. Athens recalled Chares
from the Peloponnese and tried to recapture it; it was entrusted to the Thebans
pending arbitration, and they were allowed to keep it (Xen. Hell.VII. iv. 1, Diod.
Sic. XV. 76. i, schol. Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 85 = Agatharchides FGrH 86 F 8).
Chares returned to the Peloponnese and was involved in an unsuccessful
attempt ‘to keep Corinth safe for the Athenian people’. As affairs in the Pelo-
ponnese became more complicated, in 366 Athens became an ally of Arcadia
and in 364 it supported the Arcadians in their war against Elis (cf. p. 220).
In 364 the Thebans stepped up their hostility to Athens. Epaminondas had
urged them to build dockyards and a hundred triremes (it is not clear whether
all of these were built); he tried to win over Rhodes, Chios and Byzantium (we
have a decree in which Cnidus makes Epaminondas its proxenos, SEG xliv 901,
and one in which the Boeotians appoint a Byzantine proxenos, SEG xxxiv 355,
but neither is precisely dated); in a naval campaign he drove away an Athenian
ﬂeet under Laches (Diod. Sic. XV. 78. iv–79. i). Revolts in Ceos in 363/2, dealt
with by Chabrias (IG ii2 111 = R&O 39 ~ Harding 55), may have been encour-
aged by Thebes’ challenge to Athens, but there seems to have been a local
reason, in that the Ceans preferred to function as a single entity while Athens
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
237

preferred to deal with the cities separately. Whatever Thebes’ naval campaign
may have achieved, it was not repeated; but in 362 and 361 Alexander of Pherae
in Thessaly, after being subjected to Thebes, turned against his Athenian allies,
attacking some of the Aegean islands and defeating an Athenian ﬂeet under
Leosthenes, and even raiding the Piraeus (Diod. Sic. XV. 95. i–iii, Polyaenus
Strat. VI. 2, [Dem.] L. Polycles 4). In response to that, in 361/0 the Athenians
broke off their alliance with Alexander and made an alliance with the federa-
tion of Thessalians opposed to him (IG ii2 116 = R&O 44 ~ Harding 59).
In the course of the 360’s Athens had done a great deal to alarm its allies.
The founder of an anti-Spartan League had become an ally of Sparta. Already
in the 370’s garrisons, however justiﬁable, and levies of money called syntaxeis
had appeared, and Paros had been treated as a colony and required to send
offerings to Athenian festivals (R&O 29). Cleruchies in Samos and Potidaea,
and attempts at conquest in the north, did not impinge directly on the states
which were members of the League, but they were worryingly reminiscent of
the ﬁfth century, and the members must have wondered how far the League’s
promises would protect them. In Ceos revolts were ﬁrmly put down, and some
major lawsuits had been made transferable to Athens (IG ii2 111 = R&O 39 ~
Harding 55). Chares in 361/0 supported the oligarchs in civil strife in Corcyra,
and gained Athens a bad reputation (Diod. Sic. XV. 95. iii, Aen.Tact. xi. 13–15).
Athens’ alliance with Peloponnesian states in 362/1 was recommended by the
synedrion (IG ii2 112 = R&O 41 ~ Harding 56. 18–19), but there is no sign that
for the alliance with the Thessalians it was consulted or given the chance to
swear, though the alliance included the League (IG ii2 116 = R&O 44 ~ Harding
59).
The situation in the north was transformed by two deaths. In 360/59 the
Thracian Cotys was murdered, and his son Cersebleptes was challenged by 
two rivals, Berisades and Amadocus. We learn, mostly from Demosthenes, of 
a series of Athenian attempts to reach a satisfactory settlement with them.
After earlier agreements, which he regarded as shameful, in winter 357/6 
Chares secured ‘most excellent and just’ terms: Thrace was divided between
Berisades in the west, Amadocus in the centre and Cersebleptes in the east, but
for some purposes was regarded as a single entity, and some Greek cities were
regarded both as dependent on the Thracian rulers and as allies owing syntax-
eis to Athens (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 163–73, cf. IG ii2 126 = R&O 47 ~
Harding 64).
In 359 Perdiccas of Macedon was killed in a war against the Illyrians and
succeeded by his brother Philip. One of the rival claimants, Argaeus, was backed
by Athens. Philip tried to keep his enemies divided, and withdrew from
Amphipolis, suggesting that he would allow Athens to acquire it (for references
to secret talks or promises cf. p. 299). The Athenian force failed to support
Argaeus, and he was defeated (Diod. Sic. XVI. 2. vi–3. vi). But in 357 Philip
captured Amphipolis and retained it for himself, leaving the Athenians to claim
that he had cheated them, as a result of which they declared war on him (Diod.
238
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

Sic. XVI. 8. ii–iii, Isoc. V. Philip 2, Aeschin. II. Embassy 70, III. Ctesiphon 54);
at the beginning of the year 356/5 they made an alliance with Philip’s barbar-
ian neighbours (IG ii2 127 = R&O 53 ~ Harding 70). We shall look at Philip
and the Athenians’ dealings with him in chapter 22; but other concerns pre-
vented them from prosecuting the war against him for Amphipolis.
In 357 the Athenians had an important success. Since Leuctra the cities of
Euboea had been allied with Thebes, not Athens, but now Athens took advan-
tage of disagreement between pro-Theban and pro-Athenian parties to regain
Euboea for Athens – within thirty days according to Aeschines (Diod. Sic. XVI.
7. ii, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 85). An inscription of 357/6 preserves the end of
the treaty with Carystus and mentions the other cities (IG ii2 124 = R&O 48 ~
Harding 65), and ends with eight names of generals who swore to it: the ﬁrst
name is erased but decipherable as Chabrias; of the second there survives only
the beginning, Cha[–]. Editors have usually supposed the second name to be
Chares, and have been puzzled as to why Chabrias should have been erased;
but we obtain an easier timetable and an explanation if we suppose that Chares
was not included, because he was away making the ﬁnal agreement with the
Thracian rulers, and that Chabrias’ name was inscribed twice in error and
therefore erased once.
But that success was followed by failure in the Social War, Athens’ war with
the allies. Different texts point to different dates and durations; Diodorus nar-
rates it in two sections, under 358/7 and 356/5, and probably his sections actu-
ally belong to the campaigning seasons of 356 and 355. He states that Rhodes,
Chios, Cos and Byzantium rose against Athens (we have no other evidence that
Cos was a member of the League, but it is not unlikely). In the background
was Mausolus of Caria, for whom the Greek world provided the easier option
for expansion after the collapse of the Satraps’ Revolt (Dem. XV. Lib. Rhod. 3;
Erythrae’s honours for Mausolus, IK. Erythrai und Klazomenai 8 = R&O 56,
may have been awarded at this time). An Athenian ﬂeet under Chares block-
aded Chios, but was decisively beaten at sea, and Chabrias (not a general,
despite Diodorus, so the date must be 356/5) was killed (Diod. Sic. XVI. 7.
iii–iv; Chabrias Nep. XII. Chab. 4. i, cf. Dem. XX. Leptines 82). In 355 the
rebels took the offensive, raiding Lemnos, Imbros and other islands and besieg-
ing Samos. Athens sent Timotheus, Iphicrates and Menestheus with sixty ships
to join the sixty under Chares (making the largest Athenian ﬂeet known in the
period 404–323). They headed for Byzantium and the rebels followed; at
Embata, between Chios and the mainland, the others refused to ﬁght owing to
bad weather, and Chares had to withdraw or fought and was defeated. He
denounced his colleagues, who were deposed and recalled for trial (cf. p. 271),
and himself retired into the service of Artabazus the satrap of Dascylium, now
in revolt against Persia, but was recalled when the Persians protested.There was
a fear that Persia might in response support the rebels, so the war ended, with
Athens accepting defeat and several east Greek members leaving the League;
those to the south passed into the orbit of Mausolus (Diod. Sic. XVI. 21–22.
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
239

ii, Polyaenus Strat. III. 9. xxix; loss of members Isoc. VIII. Peace 16, Dem. XV.
Lib. Rhod. 26; for Artabazus and Mausolus cf. pp. 323–5).
Before and during the war we ﬁnd further garrisons in allied territory. It was
probably in 357/6 (to ﬁt what is known of his career) that Arcesine on Amorgus
honoured Androtion, who had been governor for at least two years and had lent
money without interest for purposes including the payment of a garrison (IG
XII. vii 5 = R&O 51 ~ Harding 68): we do not know why Athens had subjected
Arcesine to a governor and a garrison, but on my dating of the war and the
inscription this will have been before the war. An Athenian decree of summer
357/6, during the war on all chronologies and arising out of the war, provides
for one of the generals to take care of Andros, and for its garrison to be paid
‘out of the syntaxeis in accordance with the resolutions of the allies’ (IG ii2 123
= R&O 52 ~ Harding 69).
Defeats at sea and the secession of major allies suggest that Athens was
weaker now than at any time since the Peloponnesian War. Isocrates’ pamphlet
(VIII) On the Peace belongs to this context: c.380 in his (IV) Panegyric he had
foreshadowed the foundation of the League (cf. pp. 228–9), but now he wrote
it off as a failure.True peace was needed, not a mere breathing space (§§16–26);
Athenian imperialism with its syntaxeis and synedroi had not worked (§29);
Athens should stop aiming to rule at sea, which was neither just nor possible
nor expedient (§§64–94, 114–15) – but if Athens did so the Greeks would
admire it so much that they would concede all that it wanted (§§22–3, 136–40).
Xenophon’s Ways and Means (Poroi), written about the same time, likewise
claims that Athens needs peace, and that a policy of peace rather than war is
more likely to make friends for Athens (§v). These works reﬂect the current
mood in Athens: since Leuctra Athenian foreign policy had lost its way, and
under a new generation of politicians ambitious foreign adventures were
renounced and the priority was given to ﬁnancial recovery (cf. pp. 332–3, 336).
The Last Years of the League
After the Social War the history of the League is bound up with that of Athens’
dealings with Philip of Macedon: for the context cf. chapter 22. The Chalcidi-
ans of Olynthus seem to have left the League in the 360’s as a result of Athens’
revived ambitions in the north-east: an Athenian decree of 363/2 refers to ‘the
war against the Chalcidians and against Amphipolis’ (IG ii2 110 = R&O 38.
8–9). In 357 Athens and Philip competed for their allegiance, and Philip was
the winner (cf. R&O 50 ~ Harding 67), promising to capture Potidaea for them:
he did that in 356, sending the Athenians home (Diod. Sic. XVI. 8. iii–v). By
352/1, however, Olynthus was encircled by Philip and worried, and it then made
peace with Athens and rejoined the League (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 107–9,
cf. IG ii2 211 = Tod 166. 1–3). After Philip had absorbed western and central
Thrace, Cersebleptes in the east had come under threat; in 353/2, when Chares
had captured Sestos, Cersebleptes ceded the Chersonese (except Cardia, on the
240
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

isthmus) to Athens, and Athens sent cleruchs (Diod. Sic. XVI. 34. iii–iv, cf. re-
ferences to Athenian archontes in Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 159–61).
In 349/8 Philip moved against Olynthus, and there was renewed trouble in
Euboea. Demosthenes, who by this time wanted to strike against Philip as near
as possible to the heart of Macedon, considered Olynthus the more important,
but most Athenians attached a higher priority to Euboea: in the event, Euboea
passed out of the Athenian orbit and Philip captured Olynthus. Refugees from
Olynthus went to Athens (IG ii2 211 = Tod 166, as normally restored) and to
Lemnos (IG XII. vii 4 ~ Harding 81).
Athens still had friends, inside and outside the League: there are records of
crowns dedicated in Athens by various cities between 354/3 and 345/4 (IG ii2
1437. 10–18, 1438. 15–16, 1441. 5–18, 1443. 89–122). We happen to know
that Mytilene was ruled by an anti-Athenian oligarchy in the late 350’s (Dem.
XIII. Organisation 8, XV. Lib. Rhod. 19) and then by a tyrant ([Dem.] XL.
Boeotus. ii. 37); but in 347/6 the tyranny was overthrown, perhaps with help
from Athens, and Mytilene rejoined the League (IG ii2 213 =Tod 168 ~ Harding
83).
When Athens made peace with Philip in 346, nominally to end the war over
Amphipolis, the League was involved. Athens chose a representative of the allies
(from Tenedos) to serve on the ﬁrst embassy to Philip (Aeschin. II. Embassy
20).The synedrion wanted to wait until the results of Athens’ attempts to build
up an alliance against Philip were known, but it would then accept whatever
Athens decided; Athens followed Demosthenes in putting proposals to Philip’s
representatives as soon as they arrived (Aeschin. II. Embassy 60–2). The
synedrion then wanted a peace which any Greek state could join within three
months, but Demosthenes, after establishing that Philip would not accept that,
gained approval for a more limited peace.That more limited peace was between
Philip and his allies and Athens and its allies ([Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 31, cf.
Dem. XIX. Embassy 278). Some Athenians hoped to interpret that to cover
every state with which Athens had an alliance, including Phocis and Halus, with
which Philip had not been prepared to make peace. Ofﬁcially, however, ‘Athens
and its allies’ meant the League: Cersebleptes tried but was not allowed to join
the League in time to be included in the peace, and then the synedrion swore
to the peace on behalf of the allies (Aeschin. II. Embassy 82–90, III. Ctesiphon
73–4). Later, when Philip offered to renegotiate the peace, the Athenians
ensured the failure of the negotiations by making demands which Philip could
not accept, applying the principle of possessing what belongs to a state to
Amphipolis and also to the island of Halonnesus, which Philip offered to give
to them but they said he must ‘give back’, since it belonged to them by right
([Dem.] VII. Halonnesus: Amphipolis §§24–9).
At the end of the 340’s the cities of Euboea returned once more to the Athen-
ian side. Callias of Chalcis, who hoped to form a Euboean league, fell out with
Philip and turned to Athens. In 342 Philip enabled unpopular leaders to take
control of Eretria and Oreus, but in 341 Athens overthrew them, and Callias
was able to include these cities in his league with a special afﬁliation to the
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
241

Athenian League, by which they paid syntaxeis only to the Euboean League
(Philoch. FGrH 328 FF 159/160 ~ Harding 91/92, Charax FGrH 103 F 19 ~
Harding 91, Dem. IX. Phil.iii. 57–62, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 89–105 with schol.
85, 103, Diod. Sic. XVI. 74. i). That was an unusually generous arrangement,
and Aeschines complains that Demosthenes deprived Athens of the syntaxeis,
but the Athenians had been generous on previous occasions when they were
anxious to keep cities loyal (cf. Methone in the 420’s, p. 177; Calchedon and
its neighbours in 408, p. 148). Elsewhere Aenus, on the coast of Thrace,
deserted Athens for Philip c.341 ([Dem.] LVIII. Theocrines 37–8); but an Athen-
ian decree of 340/39 praises Tenedos, which has lent money to Athens and is
therefore not to be subjected to any exactions or assessed by the synedrion for
syntaxeis until the loan has been repaid (IG ii2 233 = R&O 72 ~ Harding 97).
In 339 Philip’s entry into the Fourth Sacred War led to an alliance between
Athens and Thebes once more; but in 338 he defeated them at Chaeronea, and
his victory put an end to the League (cf. Paus. I. 25. iii), with Athens and all
the other mainland Greeks except Sparta enrolled in the League of Corinth
under Philip’s leadership.
Isocrates’ last major work, (XII) Panathenaic, was written c.342–339, and
aimed to show that it was Athens rather than Sparta that had beneﬁted the
Greeks (§§24, 96, 112). In §§53–69, 88–94, he contrasts Athens’ conduct in the
Delian League favourably with Sparta’s conduct after the Peloponnesian War;
he scarcely mentions the Second League, except to say that when Sparta’s
supremacy was ended two or three Athenian generals copied the Spartans’ bad
habits (§§100–1).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
For general studies of Athenian policy in the fourth century see E. Badian, ‘The Ghost
of Empire: Reﬂections on Athenian Foreign Policy in the Fourth Century BC’, in Eder
(ed.), Die athenische Demokratie im 4. Jahrhundert v. Chr., 79–106; P. Harding, ‘Athen-
ian Foreign Policy in the Fourth Century’, Klio lxxvii 1995, 105–25.
For the beginning of the fourth century see R. Seager, ‘Thrasybulus, Conon and
Athenian Imperialism, 396–386 BC’, JHS lxxxvii 1967, 95–115; G. L. Cawkwell, ‘The
Imperialism of Thrasybulus’, CQ2 xxvi 1976, 270–7.
On the Second Athenian League Marshall, The Second Athenian Confederacy, is still
useful; see also Larsen, Representative Government; Cargill, The Second Athenian League
(believing that after the closing of the inscribed list there were no further members and
that Athens kept its promises to the members).
On the League’s foundation I follow D. G. Rice, ‘Xenophon, Diodorus and the Year
379/378 BC’, YCS xxiv 1975, 95–130 (foundation after Sphodrias’ raid), against G. L.
Cawkwell, ‘The Foundation of the Second Athenian Confederacy’, CQ2 xxiii 1973,
47–60 (foundation before Sphodrias’ raid, as in Diod. Sic. XV. 28–9). For a recent
attempt to settle the chronology of the later 370’s see C. M. Fauber, ‘Deconstructing
375–371 BC: Towards An Uniﬁed Chronology’, Ath.2 lxxvii 1999, 481–506. On the
242
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE

chronology of Androtion’s career, Athens’ recovery of Euboea and the Social War I
follow G. L. Cawkwell, ‘Notes on the Social War’, C&M xxiii 1962, 34–49: among other
views, earlier dates had been proposed, for Androtion’s year in the council with effects
for Euboea and the Social War, by E. Schweigert, ‘Greek Inscriptions, 4. A Decree 
Concerning Elaious’, Hesp. viii 1939, 12–17; D. M. Lewis, ‘Notes on Attic Inscriptions,
xiii. Androtion and the Temple Treasures’, BSA xlix 1954, 39–49.
THE SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
243

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
395 
Corinthian War begins in Greece
387/6
Peace of Antalcidas
382
Spartan occupation of Thebes
379/8
liberation of Thebes
371
Sparta defeated by Thebes in battle of Leuctra
367
Thebes wins support of Persians but Greeks reject peace treaty
364
Thebes defeats Pherae in battle of Cynoscephalae; Pelopidas
killed
362
stalemate battle of Mantinea; death of Epaminondas
The Boeotian Federation to the Peace of Antalcidas and 
the Spartan Occupation
By 519 there was a Boeotian federal state, and Plataea gained an alliance with
Athens when it resisted pressure to join the federation (Hdt.VI. 108; date Thuc.
III. 68. v). In 480–479 the principal ofﬁcials of the federation, the boeotarchs,
are attested (Hdt. IX. 15. i, Paus. X. 20. iii), but the Thebans later blamed their
going over to the Persians on a ruling clique of a few men, contrasted with what
they called ‘an oligarchy based on legal equality’ (dynasteia: Thuc. III. 62. iii).
Boeotia came under the control of Athens c.457 but broke away in 447/6 
(cf. pp. 44, 51–2); and there was then reconstituted a federation which lasted
until the Peace of Antalcidas in 387/6.
19
Thebes and 
Northern Greece

THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
245
Its organisation in the 390’s is set out by Hell. Oxy. 19. ii–iv ~ Harding 15:
it differed from Athens and its demes in that Boeotian cities had a greater degree
of separate existence and independence than Athenian demes (they could, for
instance, issue their own coins as Athenian demes could not).There were eleven
electoral units (see ﬁg. 5 and map 7). However, in 424 Chaeronea had been
dependent on Orchomenus (Thuc. IV. 76. iii), and we may guess that before
the destruction of Plataea in 427 (cf. p. 109) Thebes had two out of a total 
of nine units. There were also lesser cities, dependent on one or another of 
the greater (e.g. Mycalessus, dependent on Tanagra), which were not directly
represented in the federation. Each unit provided one boeotarch (in the last 
two units the cities were represented in turn) and sixty members of the federal
council; and the army and every aspect of the federation were based on these
units.There was a property qualiﬁcation for citizenship; in the individual cities
the citizens were divided into four councils, which took it in turn to act as the
probouleutic body; and we learn from Thucydides (V. 38. ii) that the federal
council was divided into quarters in the same way.The boeotarchs were power-
ful ofﬁcials; in the cities it is not clear whether there were assemblies or only
meetings of the four councils; there is no sign of a federal assembly.
In the Peloponnesian War the Boeotians had been allies of Sparta. The
Thebans, in addition to securing the destruction of Plataea, had incorporated
dependent communities by synoecism (Hell. Oxy. 20. iii), and had interfered 
in Thespiae, where there were Athenian sympathisers (Thuc. IV. 133. i,VI. 95.
ii). In 412/1 they had taken over Oropus, on the borders of Attica (Thuc.VIII.
60. i); in 404 it was made independent (cf. Lys. XXXI. Philon 9), but they 
recovered it in 402/1 and eventually incorporated it in Thebes (Diod. Sic.
XIV. 17. i–iii). During Sparta’s occupation of Decelea, in the last years of the
Peloponnesian War (cf. pp. 140–1), they had seized the opportunity to acquire
deserting slaves and movable property from the Attic countryside (Hell. Oxy.
20. iv–v). At the end of the war they were among the allies of Sparta who would
have liked to see Athens totally destroyed (Xen. Hell. II. ii. 19).
But it did not suit Sparta to destroy Athens, and the Boeotians like others
were soon alienated: Thebes was one of the cities which deﬁed Sparta by har-
bouring democratic refugees from Athens (Hell. Oxy. 20. i, Diod. Sic. XIV. 6),
and the Boeotians joined Corinth in refusing to contribute to Pausanias’ cam-
paign against Athens and Agis’ second campaign against Elis (Xen. Hell. II. iv.
Thebes (2 units on its own account + 2 on account of Plataea and its dependencies) 
4 
Orchomenus and Hyettus 
2 
Thespiae with Eutresis and Thisbae 
2 
Tanagra 
1 
Haliartus, Lebadea, Coronea 
1 
Acraephnium, Copae, Chaeronea 
1 
Fig. 5
The electoral units of the Boeotian federation in the late ﬁfth and early fourth
centuries

City
Sanctuary
Road
Mt.
Chlomon
Mt.
Laphystium
Mt.
Helicon
Mt.
Ptoön
Mt.
Hypatus
Mt.
Messapium
Mt.
Teumessus
Mt.
Pastra
Mt.
Parnes
Mt.
Pateras
Mt.
Cithaeron
HALIARTUS
Onchestus
THISBAE
THESPIAE
Creusis
Hysiae
Heleon
THEBES
Scolus
Erythrae
Eleutherae
TANAGRA
Delium
Oenophyta
Eretria
Oropus
Amphiareum
Chorsiae
COPAE
ACRAEPHNIUM
Anthedon
Chalcis
Aulis
HYETTUS
ORCHOMENUS
CHAERONEA
Itonium
Alalcomenae
CORONEA
Lake
Copais
Mt.
Sphinx
R. Cephisus
R.
O
ë
r
o
ë
R
.
Per
m
e
ss
u
s
R
.
T
h
es
p
i
u
s
R.
Aso
pu
s
R
.
C
uari
u
s
R
.
T
r
i
t
o
n
R
. L
o
p
h
i
s
R
. H
e
rc
yna
R
.
M
e
l
as
Mycalessus
Glisas
L O C R I S
P H O C I S
E U B O E A
N
20 km
20 miles
R. Phalarus
LEBADEA
Teneric
Plain
Ascra
Aonian
Plain
R. Ismenus
EUTRESIS
Leuctra
Plataea
AT T I C A
Map 7
Boeotia (block capitals denote cities formally represented in the pre-386 federation)

THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
247
30, III. ii. 25: cf. pp. 205, 259). The Hellenica Oxyrhynchia contrasts a pro-
Spartan party led by Leontiades and others with an opposing party, ‘accused
of atticising but not in fact pro-Athenian’, led by Ismenias and others.The pro-
Spartan party had been dominant during the war, but after it the other party
grew in power, in Thebes and in the rest of Boeotia (20. i–ii).The climax came
when Agesilaus set out for Asia Minor in 396, and the Boeotians not only
refused to contribute soldiers but also interfered with his sacriﬁce at Aulis (Xen.
Hell. III. iv. 3–4, Plut. Ages. 6. vi–xi: cf. p. 208).
Boeotia was one of the places visited by Timocrates with money from 
Pharnabazus (Hell. Oxy. 10. ii, 21. i, Xen. Hell. III. v. 1: cf. p. 192), and in 395
the Boeotians supported Locris against Phocis and brought about the
Corinthian War (cf. pp. 209–10). Lysander, before he was defeated and killed
at Haliartus, won over Orchomenus to the Spartan side;Agesilaus, recalled from
Asia Minor to ﬁght in Greece, travelled by land round the north of the Aegean:
he was successful enough at Coronea to continue to the Peloponnese, but
Sparta then abandoned Greece north of the Isthmus.
Lysander’s success at Orchomenus suggested that Boeotia, which under
Thebes was hostile to Sparta, might be broken up; and so, when Sparta turned
to diplomacy in 392, the terms proposed were that all islands and cities should
be autonomous: this was intended to mean that the federation should be broken
up, and the Thebans objected (Xen. Hell. IV. viii. 14–15). In 392/1 Sparta was
prepared to allow the rest of the federation to survive if Orchomenus could
secede (Andoc. III. Peace 13, 20): Andocides suggests that the Boeotians
accepted this, but probably, as in the case of Athens, the Boeotian representa-
tives in Sparta accepted but they still had to gain the approval of the council.
In the Peace of Antalcidas in 387/6 there was no concession to Boeotia:Thebes
wanted to swear for the whole of Boeotia, but Agesilaus did not allow it, and
when he threatened to invade the Thebans did accept the treaty and Sparta’s
interpretation of it (Xen. Hell. V. i. 31–3).We are not told how far the Spartans
went in applying the principle of autonomy to Boeotia, but may guess that they
were not interested in those lesser cities which were subordinate to one of the
greater, and left their status unchanged. However, an independent Plataea was
refounded, and families which had been granted Athenian citizenship returned
(Paus. IX. 1. iv); and presumably Oropus was made independent too.
Thebes was sufﬁciently cowed to assist in the Spartan attack on Mantinea
in 385 (Plut. Pel. 4. v–viii, Paus. IX. 13. i). Ismenias and Leontiades remained
at the head of their opposing parties (both polemarchs in Xen. Hell. V. ii.
25), and Ismenias remained inﬂuential enough for Thebes to be in touch with
Olynthus, and to refuse to join in Sparta’s campaign of 382. Leontiades invited
Phoebidas, as he was marching north with part of Sparta’s advance force, to
occupy Thebes, and he did so. Agesilaus was certainly responsible for Sparta’s
acceptance of what had been done, and may have approved the plan in advance.
A Spartan garrison was installed on Thebes’ acropolis, the Cadmea, and pro-
Spartan régimes were installed in the other cities; Ismenias was condemned as
a mediser for accepting Timocrates’ money in the 390’s, and three hundred of

248
THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
his supporters ﬂed to Athens, where Leontiades’ party managed to have one of
them murdered (cf. p. 213).
The Revival of Thebes and the Federation; Jason of Pherae
Although in general Xenophon says little about Thebes, he regarded Sparta’s
occupation of the Cadmea as wicked, and gives a detailed account of the lib-
eration. Phillidas, secretary to the ruling board of polemarchs, met Melon, one
of the exiles, in Athens, and Melon enlisted a few collaborators, among them
Pelopidas. In winter 379/8, when the polemarchs were holding a symposium to
celebrate the end of the year, Melon and his associates were brought in, and
each took a place beside one of the polemarchs and killed him; Leontiades was
killed in his own house.The Spartan garrison commander called for help from
Plataea and Thespiae, but help came for the other side from Athens, and he
made a truce and left Thebes (cf. pp. 214, 229). To hamper Sparta’s attempts
to reassert control, early in 378 the Thebans constructed a ditch and stockade,
running west–east for a considerable distance about 3 miles = 5km. south of
the city (Xen. Hell. V. iv. 38–41, 48–9).
We have looked above at those attempts, at Sphodrias’ raid on Athenian 
territory (more probably incited by Cleombrotus, as stated by Diodorus,
than by the Thebans, as claimed by Xenophon and Plutarch), and at Athens’
institution of its Second League, with Thebes as a founder member. When 
the Athenians issued a prospectus for the League, early in 377, negotiations
with Thebes were still continuing (IG ii2 43 = R&O 22 ~ Harding 35. 73–7):
perhaps the Thebans were trying to join the League in the name of Boeotia,
and Athens was resisting.
When the Boeotian federation was revived, it had an archon as its titular head
and seven boeotarchs; and we now ﬁnd not a federal council with proportional
representation of the greater cities but a federal assembly. (At city level Thebes,
at least, seems to have had a council as well as an assembly: Xen. Hell. VII. iii.
5–12, Diod. Sic. XVII. 9. i.) Some have supposed that the seven boeotarchs
represent the old electoral units without Orchomenus and Thespiae, but that is
hard to reconcile with there already being seven in 371 (Paus. IX. 13. vi–vii).
All known boeotarchs of the revived federation were Thebans: probably the
units were not used, the boeotarchs could in theory come from any city, but an
assembly meeting in Thebes and dominated by Thebans usually if not always
elected Thebans. On account of its being governed by an assembly rather than
a council, the revived federation has often been considered democratic, but
there is little evidence to support this. The pro-Spartan régimes in Thebes and
the other cities are referred to as a tyranny (Xen. Hell. IV. iv. 2, Thebes) or a
dynasteia (§46, the other cities); but as the Thebans showed in the 420’s the
opposite of such a régime need not be democracy (cf.Thuc. II. 62. iii–iv).There
is no reason to think that the property qualiﬁcation for citizenship in the cities
and the federation was abandoned; the combination of a limited citizen body

THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
249
with a citizen assembly is reminiscent of Athens’ intermediate régime of
411–410 (cf. pp. 164–5); the main effect of the change from council to assem-
bly will have been to strengthen the position of Thebes within the federation.
How soon the federation was set up and how quickly cities were incorpo-
rated in it is uncertain. Plutarch has boeotarchs in 378, immediately after the
liberation (Pel. 13. i, 14. ii); but according to Isocrates (XIV. Plataic 29) the
Thebans at ﬁrst assured the Spartans that they would not disturb ‘any of 
the previous agreements’, presumably the Peace of Antalcidas and Sparta’s
application of it to Boeotia. Xenophon has Thebes campaigning against Thes-
piae and other cities early in 377 (Hell. V. iv. 42–4). When Pelopidas died in
364, that is said to have been his thirteenth year as boeotarch (Plut. Pel. 34.
vii). Despite the claim that he served every year (Diod. Sic. XV. 81. iv), we know
that he was not boeotarch in 371; but it may be that that was his only year out
of ofﬁce, and in that case Plutarch will be wrong to write of boeotarchs in 378,
and the federation (however extensive) and the ofﬁce will have been revived 
in 377.
In the fourth century ﬁghting was increasingly done by mercenaries, who
were more professional than citizen soldiers but less likely to remain loyal.
Thebes now tried to combine the advantages of citizens and mercenaries by
creating a body of three hundred citizen hoplites, allegedly all homosexual
couples, maintained on the Cadmea, known as the hieros lochos (commonly
referred to in English as the sacred band). This was created by Gorgidas and
at ﬁrst regularly commanded by Pelopidas, and it proved highly successful until
it was annihilated at Chaeronea in 338 (Plut. Pel. 18–19, Polyaenus Strat. II. 5.
i). In 375 Pelopidas took the sacred band and a few cavalry to attack the still
pro-Spartan Orchomenus while its Spartan garrison was away; on learning that
the Spartans were returning he withdrew, but the two forces met at Tegyra: the
Spartans with two of their army’s six morai outnumbered the Thebans and were
overconﬁdent, but the Thebans defeated them (Plut. Pel. 16–17, Diod. Sic. XV.
37. i–ii; omitted by Xen. Hell.).
The Thebans then moved to attack Phocis, and Sparta sent Cleombrotus
with the rest of the Spartan army to defend it (Xen. Hell. VI. i. 1, cf. ii. 1); but
things were going badly for Sparta, and Athens was beginning to feel uncom-
fortable with an increasingly powerful Thebes as an ally, so Persia’s proposal 
of a renewal of the King’s Peace was accepted (cf. p. 196). Diodorus’ claim
that, after an argument between the Theban Epaminondas and the Athenian
Callistratus, Thebes was excluded because it demanded to swear for Boeotia
(XV. 38. iii) is a contamination from the peace of summer 371. On this occa-
sion Thebes was included: presumably as Thebes, and presumably it made a
show of dismantling the Boeotian federation which it had been reviving.
The show did not last long. The refounded Plataea, like the earlier city,
inclined to Athens rather than to Thebes, and in 373/2 the Thebans destroyed
it and its inhabitants again ﬂed to Athens (Diod. Sic. XV. 46. iv–vi, Paus.
IX. 1. v–viii). This prompted Isocrates’ (XIV) Plataic, in which we read that
Thespiae and Tanagra have been ‘made subordinate to Thebes’, presumably

250
THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
forced into the federation (§§8–9); pressure on Thespiae continued, and it is
possible that by 371 the city had been destroyed and its citizens dispersed in
scattered settlements (cf. Xen. Hell. VI. iii. 1, 5, Diod. Sic. XV. 46. vi, 51. iii;
Thespians at Leuctra but allowed to withdraw, Paus. IX. 13. viii). However 
awkwardly, Thebes remained a member of Athens’ League, providing ships for
Timotheus in 373 and a chairman for the synedrion on the last day of 373/2
(cf. p. 235).
By now Thebes had as an ally Jason, the ruler of Pherae in south-eastern
Thessaly (perhaps named after that famous legendary Thessalian, Jason the 
Argonaut). Thessaly, a fertile region in north-eastern Greece, continued for a
long time to be dominated by land-owning aristocrats, and was traditionally
organised in four regional units known as tetrads; there were large settlements
in the east in the archaic period, but the development of cities as important
entities began in the ﬁfth century, in particular Larisa, Pharsalus and Pherae.
In the last years of the Peloponnesian War Lycophron had become tyrant of
Pherae, ‘wanting to rule the whole of Thessaly’; he was opposed particularly by
Larisa, where the Aleuadae family was dominant, but won a major battle at the
time of an eclipse, in September 404 (Xen. Hell. II. iii. 4). The Aleuadae were
supported by king Archelaus of Macedon (cf.Thrasymachus, 85 B 2 DK, Arist.
Pol. V. 1311 B 17–20; also [Herodes], Peri Politeias). If, whoever wrote it, Peri
Politeias is well informed, Sparta too may have tried to establish a link with
Larisa; but at some point Sparta had an alliance with Lycophron (Xen. Hell.
VI. iv. 24), and in the early 390’s put down a revolt in Heraclea and installed
a garrison in Pharsalus (Diod. Sic. XIV. 38. iv–v, 82. vi). In 395 Medius of
Larisa was at war against Lycophron, gained the support of the Corinthian War
coalition and conquered Pharsalus; since Agesilaus was able to pass through
Thessaly to Boeotia in 394, it may have been afterwards that the coalition took
Heraclea and returned it to the neighbouring Trachinians (Diod. Sic. XIV. 82.
v–vii).
We next hear of Thessaly in the 370’s, when Jason had succeeded his father
Lycophron in Pherae. He had helped a man called Neogenes to become tyrant
of Histiaea, at the north end of Euboea. Neogenes was unpopular, and the 
LYCOPHRON I
?–406–395–?
POLYALCES 
JASON
?–377–370
POLYDORUS
370
POLYPHRON
370–369/8 
TISIPHONUS
358–c.355
LYCOPHRON II
PITHOLAUS
Thebe  
 = ALEXANDER
369/8–358
c.355–352
Fig. 6
Tyrants of Pherae (Polyalces was either a brother or a son of Lycophron I;
Tisiphonus, Lycophron II and Pitholaus were probably sons of Polyalces, adopted by
Jason when he inherited Polyalces’ wife)

THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
251
Spartans expelled him; Histiaea therefore resisted incorporation in the 
Athenian League in 377, when the other cities of Euboea joined (Diod. Sic.
XV. 30, cf. p. 233; it joined in 375). In Pharsalus, perhaps during the Olynthian
war, a pro-Spartan tyrant called Polydamas had come to power, and seems to
have ruled well. Xenophon reports an appeal by him in 375 for support against
Jason: with Polydamas’ support Jason could easily become tagos of all Thessaly
(an old military ofﬁce which he was resuscitating for his own purposes); the
Boeotians and others were Jason’s allies, and the Athenians would like to be but
he thought he could become more powerful at sea (which renders the restora-
tion of his name in an erasure in the list of League members unlikely); if the
Spartans sent a substantial Spartan army, the cities would desert Jason, but it
would be pointless to send merely liberated helots commanded by a private
citizen. Sparta could not send the help asked for, and Jason did become tagos
and proceeded to raise large forces from the cities of Thessaly (Xen. Hell. VI.
i. 2–19; cf. pp. 215, 234). By 373 Jason was friendly with Athens, if not a
member of the League: he went there in 373/2 to speak for Timotheus at his
trial ([Dem.] XLIX. Timotheus 10), and the Athenian force sent to Corcyra
during the winter probably travelled through Thessaly as well as Molossis (Xen.
Hell. VI. ii. 10). Jason’s expansion took him into Perrhaebia, the mountainous
region between Thessaly and Macedon, where he dictated terms to king
Amyntas (Diod. Sic. XV. 57. ii, 60. ii, cf. Isoc. V. Philip 20, Arr. Anab. VII. 9.
iv).
In 372/1 as in 375 the Thebans moved against Phocis. In July 371 the 
Athenians invited the Thebans to join them at a peace conference in Sparta;
the Thebans were represented by Epaminondas (making his ﬁrst certain
appearance in history, though there are stories pushing his career back many
years earlier). He did originally agree to a treaty in which the Thebans were to
participate as Thebans; when he returned and asked to have ‘Thebans’ changed
to ‘Boeotians’, that led to an argument with Agesilaus and the exclusion of 
the Boeotians (cf. pp. 196–7, 216, 235). Sparta had sent king Cleombrotus 
to defend Phocis; since the treaty required the withdrawal of forces, he asked
what he should do, and was ordered to attack Thebes if it would not leave the
Boeotian cities autonomous. He avoided the Theban army and reached Leuctra,
south of Thespiae; but there in August Epaminondas defeated him in one of
the most pivotal battles in Greek history (cf. p. 216).
Exactly how the Thebans defeated the Spartans it is hard to make out from
the sources. It is at any rate clear that, whereas the nature of hoplite equipment
encouraged phalanxes to shift to the right, and the right wing was regularly the
strong wing (cf. p. 128), the Thebans concentrated their attack on the left, with
an unusually deep formation (this time ﬁfty men: they had used deep forma-
tions before) and the sacred band at the front on the wing; and, after an initial
cavalry skirmish in which the Spartans were driven back, the Theban cavalry
were used to guard the held-back right wing of their phalanx. The Spartans
were unable to cope with this reversal of normal tactics (Xen. Hell.VI. iv. 10–15,
Plut. Pel. 23, Paus. IX. 13. iii–xii, Diod. Sic. XV. 55–6).

252
THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
The Thebans announced their victory to allies not involved in the battle,
Athens and Jason. Athens gave the messenger an icy reception; Jason hurried
south with land and sea forces, but a strong Thebes would have been a threat
to him, so instead of helping Thebes to defeat the reserve forces sent from
Sparta he negotiated for the Spartans’ withdrawal (Xen. Hell. VI. iv. 19–26:
Diod. Sic. XV. 54. v–vii has Jason arriving and arranging a truce, after which
Sparta’s reinforcements join Cleombrotus and the battle is fought). Jason
returned home, making a show of force in Phocis and Locris, and capturing
Heraclea (Xen. Hell. VI. iv. 27, Diod. Sic. XV. 57. ii). He ‘persuaded the 
Thessalians to lay claim to the leadership of Greece’ (Diod. Sic. XV. 60. i–ii,
cf. Xen. Hell. VI. iv. 28); there may even have been a suggestion that he would
undertake the war against Persia after which Isocrates and others had been han-
kering (Xen. Hell. VI. i. 12, cf. pp. 228–9). He planned to attend and preside
over the Pythian games at Delphi in 370, perhaps hoping to reinvigorate the
Amphictyony rather than, as Xenophon suggests, to plunder the sacred trea-
sures; but before the festival he was assassinated at a cavalry review, leaving con-
temporaries and us to wonder what he would have achieved if he had lived.
Certainly he had united Thessaly and was making it a force to be reckoned with
– but strong leaders can inspire fear, and his killers were honoured in the Greek
cities (Xen. Hell. VI. iv. 29–32, Diod. Sic. XV. 60. v).
After Leuctra
Thebes/Boeotia did not participate in the common peace organised by Athens
in autumn 371 (cf. pp. 197–8); and, whether it resigned or was expelled or no
formal step was taken,Thebes ceased to belong to the Second Athenian League.
Instead it built up its own alliances in central Greece: Diodorus mentions
Phocis, Locris and Aetolia (XV. 57. i), and Xenophon gives a list of allies who
joined in the invasion of Laconia in 370/69, beginning with ‘Phocians, made
subject, and Euboeans from all the cities’ (Hell. VI. v. 23, cf. Diod. Sic. XV. 62.
iv): the Euboeans too must have left the Athenian League.There are signs that
Thebes organised its allies in a league, with a synedrion: a speech in Xenophon’s
Hellenica refers to a ‘common resolution of the allies’ (VII. iii. 11), and Byzan-
tium’s contributions to Thebes in the Third Sacred War were brought by its
synedroi (IG vii 2418 = R&O 57 ~ Harding 74. 11, 24). Within Boeotia, the
Thespians took refuge in a stronghold called Ceressus, but that was captured
by Epaminondas, and references in the orators suggest that the survivors were
expelled from Boeotia (Paus. IX. 14. ii–iv, cf., e.g., Isoc. VI. Archidamus 27).
When Diodorus says that the Thebans intended to enslave Orchomenus but
were dissuaded by Epaminondas and included it among their allies (XV. 57. i),
this probably means that it was forced to join the Boeotian federation. In 364
aristocratic refugees from Thebes joined the knights of Orchomenus in a plot;
but this was betrayed to the boeotarchs, and, in the absence of Epaminondas
and Pelopidas and to the disapproval of at least Epaminondas, the city was 

THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
253
captured, the men were killed and the women and children were enslaved
(Diod. Sic. XV. 79. iii–vi, cf. Paus. IX. 15. iii).
We have seen that in winter 370/69 the new Arcadian federation and its allies,
when their appeal to Athens was rejected, gained the support of Thebes and its
central Greek allies for the attack on Sparta which resulted in the liberation of
Messenia, and the Thebans gained some of the credit for the foundation of
Megalopolis, in south-western Arcadia (cf. p. 218). Pelopidas and Epaminon-
das were among the boeotarchs and commanders of this expedition: on their
return they were prosecuted because they had not been in Thebes to leave ofﬁce
at the end of the year, but they were acquitted (Nep. XV. Epam. 7–8, Plut. Pel.
24–5, Sayings of Kings and Commanders 194 A–C). It was probably in summer
369 that Epaminondas went south again, and took part in the ﬁghting in the
north-eastern Peloponnese (cf. p. 218). On his return he was again prosecuted:
this time he was accused of taking bribes to spare Sparta, and was deposed and
not re-elected boeotarch for 368 (Diod. Sic. XV. 72. i–ii).
In Thessaly Jason on his death in 370 had been succeeded by his brothers
Polydorus and Polyphron, of whom the latter soon killed the former. Polyphron,
who ‘made the tageia like a tyranny’ and intervened in both Pharsalus and
Larisa, was in 369/8 killed and succeeded by Polydorus’ son Alexander, who
became ‘a harsh tagos to the Thessalians, and a harsh enemy to the Thebans
[immediately] and the Athenians [later]’ (Xen. Hell. VI. iv. 33–5, cf. Diod. Sic.
XV. 60. v, 61. ii). The Aleuadae of Larisa appealed ﬁrst, in 369, to Alexander
II of Macedon, who responded by taking over Larisa and Crannon for himself
(Diod. Sic. XV. 61. iii–v).They then appealed to Thebes, and an army was sent
under Pelopidas (who had been a friend of Jason: Plut. Pel. 28. v–x): he took
over Larisa, fought and negotiated inconclusively with Alexander of Pherae,
mediated between Alexander of Macedon and his rival Ptolemy, and imposed
on this Alexander an alliance under which he sent hostages to Thebes. It was
perhaps now that the Thessalians opposed to Pherae were organised in a koinon
(Diod. Sic. XV. 67. iii–iv, Plut. Pel. 26, but Aeschin. II. Embassy 26–9 shows
that Philip must be one of the hostages taken from Ptolemy in 368; on Macedon
cf. p. 297).
Alexander of Macedon was assassinated, and was succeeded by Ptolemy (cf.
p. 297). In 368 Pelopidas and Ismenias went as envoys: ﬁrst to Macedon with
mercenaries, where Ptolemy tried to outbid them for the mercenaries but came
to terms and sent further hostages; then to Alexander of Pherae, who arrested
them. While Thebes sent an army, Alexander made an alliance with Athens,
which sent ships and men to support him, and would have liked to send the
soldiers sent to the Peloponnese by Dionysius I of Syracuse.The Thebans were
abandoned by their Thessalian allies and withdrew, pursued by Alexander;
Epaminondas, serving this year as a private soldier, was elected commander and
extricated the army (Diod. Sic. XV. 71–72. ii, Plut. Pel. 27–29. i, Paus. IX. 15.
i–ii, cf. Xen. Hell. VII. i. 28). In 367 Epaminondas returned as boeotarch com-
manding an army: Alexander released Pelopidas and Ismenias, and offered
peace and alliance; Epaminondas agreed only to a thirty-day truce, but took no

254
THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
further action when it expired (Diod. Sic. XV. 75. ii, Plut. Pel. 29, Paus. IX. 15.
i–ii). On the Athenian side, Isocrates considered Alexander a possible leader of
a Greek crusade against the Persians (Speusippus, Letter to Philip 13).
In 366 Epaminondas returned to the Peloponnese, attacking Achaea and
making it an ally; he did not interfere in the cities’ internal affairs; afterwards
at the Arcadians’ prompting the Thebans set up anti-Spartan democracies, but
the oligarchs recovered control and made alliances with Sparta (cf. p. 219: this
is Epaminondas’ ﬁrst appearance in Xen. Hell.).
In 369/8 Philiscus, sent to Greece by Ariobarzanes, after failing to arrange 
a common peace spent his money on mercenaries for Sparta (cf. pp. 198, 218);
but in 367, when Sparta sent a delegation to the King, Pelopidas, returned from
Thessaly, headed a rival delegation from Thebes and its allies, and won over the
King to an anti-Spartan stance (this is his only appearance in Xen. Hell.). In
particular, having defeated Sparta and having been opposed by Athens in the
north, the Thebans now wanted to challenge Athens, and one of the proposals
was that the Athenian navy should be beached. Other proposals annoyed other
Greeks; in winter 367/6 the Arcadians walked out of the conference held in
Thebes, and Corinth took the lead in refusing to swear to the treaty. Corinth
and its neighbours did make peace with Thebes, but refused to make an alliance,
in 365 (cf. pp. 198–9, 219–20, 236).
The challenge to Athens continued. Oropus, presumably made independent
of Thebes under the Peace of Antalcidas, was in Athens’ hands by 373/2.
When Themison of Eretria seized it on behalf of a body of exiles in 366, it was
entrusted to Thebes, and in the ensuing arbitration Epaminondas successfully
defended Thebes’ right to it (cf. p. 237). Diodorus records a speech of
Epaminondas, persuading the Thebans to build a hundred triremes and enlist
the support of Rhodes, Chios and Byzantium: it is not clear whether the
hundred ships were built, but in a naval campaign in 364 he drove away an
Athenian ﬂeet. There are undatable decrees in which Cnidus appointed him
proxenos and the Boeotians appointed a Byzantine proxenos; also one in which
the Boeotians appointed a Carthaginian proxenos – but that need have nothing
to do with the naval policy (cf. pp. 237–8; the inscriptions are SEG xliv 901,
SEG xxxiv 355, IG vii 2407 = R&O 43 ~ Harding 48).
Thebes’ northern interests extended to Delphi. The temple of Apollo there
had been destroyed by ﬁre and/or earthquake in 373/2 (Parian Marble FGrH
239 A 71); in 371 one Spartan proposed that Cleombrotus should attend to
that rather than to the Boeotians (Xen. Hell. VI. iv. 2), and in 368 that was one
of the matters raised with the Athenians by Dionysius I of Syracuse (IG ii2 103
= R&O 33. 8–10); the Amphictyony of mostly central Greek peoples responsi-
ble for Delphi began collecting funds for the rebuilding in 367/6 (e.g. C. Delphes
ii 4 = R&O 45 ~ Harding 60). The Thebans built a treasury at the south-west
corner of the site to commemorate their victory at Leuctra; and near Sparta’s
navarchs monument (cf. p. 152) dedications were set up in the 360’s by the
Arcadians and the Argives (Paus. X. 11. v, 9. v–vi [‘Tegeans’], 10. v). In 363/2
after a period of stasis some aristocrats of the polis of Delphi were expelled, and

THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
255
took refuge in Athens (IG ii2 109 = SIG3 175, an Athenian decree explicitly
denying the legality of their expulsion); and it was perhaps in 360/59 that
Thebes was granted promanteia, precedence in the consultation of the oracle
(SIG3 176). In the 350’s ﬁnes imposed by the Amphictyony on enemies of
Thebes were to provoke the Third Sacred War (cf. pp. 302–4).
Alexander of Pherae had a run of successes in Thessaly, so in 364 his oppo-
nents appealed to Thebes again, and in July, though an eclipse of the sun was
seized on by doubters, Pelopidas went with volunteer cavalry and mercenaries.
At Cynoscephalae, west of Pherae, he was victorious but was killed, and the
Thebans then sent a major army which won a second battle. The Thessalians
gave Pelopidas a lavish funeral, and dedicated a statue of him at Delphi; Alexan-
der was allowed to survive, but as a subordinate ally of Thebes and with his
power restricted to Pherae (Diod. Sic. XV. 80, Plut. Pel. 31–35. iv; statue SEG
xxii 460 ~ Harding 49). On 362 and 361 Alexander turned to attacking the
Athenians by sea, and in 361/0 they broke off their alliance with him and made
one with the koinon (cf. p. 238).
Relations between the Arcadians and Thebes had been worsening, and before
he was killed in 366 Lycomedes of Mantinea had made an alliance between
Arcadia and Athens (cf. p. 219). In 363 a split opened in Arcadia between a
Mantinean faction which was unhappy about using temple funds from Olympia
to pay Arcadia’s professional citizen soldiers, the eparitoi, and was inclining
towards Sparta, and a Tegean faction which was happy with the use of the sacred
funds and remained loyal to Thebes. In 362 Epaminondas went to the 
Peloponnese with an army from Thebes and its allies, including Thessalians both
from the koinon and from Pherae, but not including the Phocians, who claimed
to have only a defensive alliance with Thebes (Xen. Hell. VII. v. 4); Mantinea
was supported by Sparta and its allies including Athens. After both sides had
marched and counter-marched from Arcadia to Laconia and back, a battle 
was fought outside Mantinea: when Epaminondas seemed likely to repeat the
success of Leuctra, he was killed, and the result was a stalemate. Thebes con-
tinued to support the Tegean faction, sending Pammenes in 361 to force back
citizens of Megalopolis who were trying to return to their original homes (cf.
pp. 220–1).
This was not the end of Thebes’ supremacy – it remained the most ambi-
tious and powerful city in Greece until, by the end of the Third Sacred War,
it was exhausted despite being on the winning side – but Pelopidas and
Epaminondas were both dead, and much of Thebes’ success had been due 
to them. While Xenophon minimised the importance of both, Diodorus gave
them their due (obituaries of Pelopidas XV. 81. i–iv, of Epaminondas XV. 88,
cf. 39. ii–iii). Earlier both were praised by Polybius (Pelopidas for opposing
Alexander, VIII. 35. vi–viii; Epaminondas at Mantinea, IX. 8; Thebes’ short-
lived success due to them, not to the constitution,VI. 43. v–vii); and Nepos and
Plutarch wrote lives of both (but Plutarch’s Epaminondas has not survived).
They are praised, by writers for whom ‘democracy’ need mean nothing more
speciﬁc than constitutional government as opposed to tyranny, as champions

256
THEBES AND NORTHERN GREECE
of freedom and democracy, and Paus. IX. 15. vi quotes the inscription on 
a statue base of Epaminondas, ending, ‘ . . . and the whole of Greece is
autonomous in freedom’. It can at least be said that they are not associated with
the worst episodes, the reversal of Epaminondas’ original decision on Achaea
and the treatment of Orchomenus; but in general they stood for a powerful
Thebes.The new federation was dominated by Thebes as the old had not been;
and the Thebans were willing to use force against opponents both inside and
outside Boeotia, and to exploit the principles of the common peace as the 
Spartans and Athenians had done before them. Pelopidas and Epaminondas
were not, of course, without opponents in Thebes: our sources mention
Meneclidas, who is accused of jealousy but may have had genuine disagree-
ments with them on policy (Nep. XV. Epam. 5. ii–vi, Plut. Pel. 25).
The greatest legacy of this Theban supremacy was a weakened and isolated
Sparta. Improvements on traditional hoplite tactics were to be developed
further by Philip of Macedon; Thessaly had been made a ﬁeld for Greek and
Macedonian intervention, and Thessaly and Delphi were to bring Philip into
Greece.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On Thebes and Boeotia in general, see, before 371, Buck, Boiotia and the Boiotian League;
after, Buckler, The Theban Hegemony. On the cities of Boeotia see M. H. Hansen, ‘An
Inventory of Boeotian Poleis in the Archaic and Classical Periods’, in Hansen (ed.), Intro-
duction to an Inventory of Poleis, 73–116.
On the organisation of the Boeotian federation before the Peace of Antalcidas see also
Bruce, Historical Commentary on the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia, 102–18, 157–64; Larsen,
Greek Federal States, 26–40. On Pelopidas and Epaminondas see G. L. Cawkwell,
‘Epaminondas and Thebes’, CQ2 xxii 1972, 254–78. On the Leuctra campaign see 
J. M. Buckler, ‘Plutarch on Leuctra’, SO lv 1980, 75–93; Lazenby, The Spartan Army,
ch. 9; C. J. Tuplin, ‘The Leuctra Campaign; Some Outstanding Problems’, Klio lxix
1987, 72–107. That after Leuctra Thebes organised its allies in a league is argued by 
D. M. Lewis, ‘The Synedrion of the Boeotian Alliance’, in Schachter (ed.), Essays in the
Topography, History and Culture of Boiotia, 71–3; that it did not is argued by Buckler, The
Theban Hegemony, 222–33, and ‘The Phantom Synedrion of the Boiotian Confederacy,
378–335 B.C.’, in Polis and Politics . . . M. H. Hansen, 431–46.
On Thessaly see Westlake, Thessaly in the Fourth Century BC; Sprawski, Jason of Pherae.
There is a text of [Herodes], Peri Politeias, in Meyer, Theopomps Hellenika, 202–8.

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
410–399
revision of laws
404–403
régime of Thirty
400/399
trials of Andocides and Socrates
c.380’s–370’s
institution of proedroi
367–363
change in appointment of principal secretary
361
exile of Callistratus
The Thirty and the Restoration of the Democracy
Xenophon, who may have served in the cavalry under the Thirty (e.g. Hell. III.
iv. 2–7; for his horses cf. An. III. iii. 19), gives a detailed account in Hell. II. iii.
11–iv; Diodorus and Justin follow Ephorus (who was not here using Hell. Oxy.)
in giving accounts favourable to Theramenes, who played an important part in
making peace with Sparta and bringing the régime into existence but then fell
out with the extremists; Ath.Pol. 34–8 has a version in which the order of events
is changed to minimise Theramenes’ responsibility for the Thirty’s misdeeds,
and has an additional board of Ten invented to portray Rhinon in a good light
(cf. pp. 259–60), but 39–40 contains valuable information on the reconcilia-
tion; Lysias’ speeches (XII) Against Eratosthenes and (XIII) Against Agoratus are
important. The term Thirty Tyrants, often found in modern books, is appar-
ently due to Ephorus: fourth-century Athenians referred to them as ‘the olig-
archy’ or ‘the Thirty’.
20
Athens After 
the Peloponnesian War

Probably Athens’ peace treaty with Sparta in 404 did not prescribe a change
of constitution (Xen. Hell. II. ii. 20, Diod. Sic. XIII. 107. iv, Andoc. III. Peace
11–12, contr. Ath. Pol. 34. iii, Diod. Sic. XIV. 3. ii, vi, Just. Epit. V. 8. v); but it
may have contained some reference to tradition which could be exploited to
imply the ‘traditional constitution’ (cf. p. 161), and, since the democracy had
lost the war and for the foreseeable future the navy was to be unimportant, the
change is not surprising.The treaty did require the restoration of exiles, mostly
oligarchs from 411–410, among them Critias (cf. pp. 166–7). The council of
405/4 is said to have had an oligarchic bias (Lys. XIII. Agoratus 20); a man
called Agoratus was used to give evidence against prominent democrats (Lys.
XIII. Agoratus); in the upper-class hetaireiai ﬁve ‘ephors’ (using a Spartan word)
were appointed, and with ‘phylarchs’ as tribal agents they intimidated citizens
before meetings of the assembly (Lys. XII. Eratosthenes 43–7).
Early in the summer, with that champion of narrow oligarchies Lysander
present, an assembly was held at which Dracontides proposed the appointment
of a board of thirty, to revise the constitution and in the meantime to act as a
provisional government. Theramenes spoke (not against, as his apologists
alleged); Lysander remarked that, by not demolishing the walls soon enough,
the Athenians were in breach of the treaty, and they must accept the change;
opponents walked out; and the motion was carried. According to Lysias the
Thirty were to be ten nominated by Theramenes, ten nominated by the ‘ephors’
and ten chosen from those present (a show of representing all shades of
opinion); we have a list of the Thirty, including Critias, Dracontides and
Theramenes, which as far as it can be checked is compatible with the sugges-
tion that they comprised three from each tribe (Xen. Hell. II. iii. 2 [list], 11,
Diod. Sic. XIV. 3. v–4. i, Ath. Pol. 34. iii, Lys. XII. Eratosthenes 71–6).
Xenophon agrees with the sources most favourable to Theramenes that 
the new régime began mildly, but there is no sign of mildness in Lys. XII.
Eratosthenes, where it is claimed that Theramenes was as bad as the other olig-
archs. Ofﬁcials and a council of ﬁve hundred were appointed; the Thirty did
not draw up a new constitution, but they annulled the laws which had weak-
ened the council of the Areopagus (cf. pp. 35–9), and they removed from the
laws qualifying clauses (e.g. those invalidating a will drawn up under improper
pressure), according to Ath. Pol. because these provided opportunities for jurors
to exercise discretion.They condemned democrats denounced by Agoratus, but
also ‘sycophants’ accused of making a living through prosecutions and threats
of prosecution (Xen. Hell. II. iii. 11–12, Diod. Sic. XIV. 4. ii, Ath. Pol. 35. i–iii,
Lys. XIII. Agoratus 34–5).
If Xenophon has the right order of events, the degeneration began with the
request (opposed by Theramenes) for a Spartan garrison. A reign of terror
began; when Theramenes protested, Critias and others drew up a list of three
thousand men who were to retain some rights; after a further protest those not
on the list were disarmed. When Theramenes objected to a plan to kill rich
metics for their money (for the plan cf. Lys. XII. Eratosthenes, esp. 5–8), he was
denounced at a meeting of the council by Critias. Theramenes replied, Critias
258
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

did not trust the council to condemn him but removed him from the three thou-
sand and then, in the name of the Thirty, condemned him (Xen. Hell. II. iii.
13–56, cf. Diod. Sic. XIV. 4. iii–5. iv). Theramenes was a controversial ﬁgure
at the time and has remained so ever since: a man of principle or a trimmer
who ﬁnally guessed wrongly? It is at any rate possible that he was genuinely
unhappy both with full democracy and with extreme oligarchy, and that, when
memories of 411 were still fresh and he was the man who had made the treaty
which had ended the war, he thought that in 404 he would be able to get the
kind of régime that he wanted, but the extremists were too ruthless for him.
Those not on the list of the three thousand were excluded from the city, and
many went into exile, given refuge in deﬁance of Sparta’s orders by Megara,
Argos and Thebes.The democrats’ ﬁght back began during the winter of 404/3,
when Thrasybulus (for whose earlier career cf. pp. 165–7) with about seventy 
supporters set out from Thebes and occupied Phyle, on the slopes of Mount
Parnes in north-western Attica. Gradually more men joined him; an attempted
blockade was frustrated by a snowstorm; when his force had grown to seven
hundred he made an attack on the oligarchs’ camp and defeated them (Xen.
Hell. II. iv. 1–7, Diod. Sic. XIV. 5. v–6, 32–33. i). The Thirty grew worried,
and prepared two possibilities for a safe retreat by sentencing to death all the
men of Eleusis and Salamis (Xen. Hell. II. iv. 8–10, Diod. Sic. XIV. 32. iv, Lys.
XII. Eratosthenes 52, XIII. Agoratus 44). A few nights after his victory 
Thrasybulus took advantage of the demolished walls to move to the Piraeus,
and occupied Munichia, the hill on the side towards Phalerum. After the
restoration there was to be a distinction between the ‘men of Phyle’, who had
joined Thrasybulus when that was still a risky thing to do, and the ‘men of
Piraeus’ (e.g. the opening lines of R&O 4; Harding 3 translates a different recon-
struction). The oligarchs attacked, but they were beaten off, and Critias was
among those killed (allegedly his funeral monument depicted Oligarchy setting
ﬁre to Democracy and had an inscription referring to the hybris of the accursed
demos: schol. Aeschin. I Tim. 39 [82 Dilts] = Critias 88 A 13 DK).
The three thousand, or a body claiming to represent them, deposed the
Thirty, most of whom withdrew to Eleusis, and to replace them elected a new
board of Ten. There may have been hopes among the democrats that the Ten
would be more tractable, but if so the hopes were not fulﬁlled.There was further
skirmishing; the democrats’ numbers continued to grow, and they prepared to
besiege the city. Both the city and the oligarchs at Eleusis appealed to Sparta,
and Lysander arranged for money to be lent for hiring mercenaries, while 
he went by land to Eleusis and his brother Libys went by sea. Later, however,
king Pausanias gained the support of three of the ephors, and took an army of
Spartans and allies to Athens (but the Boeotians and Corinth refused). After
making a show of force, he arranged for both sides to send envoys to Sparta,
and Sparta sent commissioners to help him make a settlement (Xen. Hell. II.
iv. 10–38, Diod. Sic. XIV. 33. ii–vi, cf. Lys. XII. Eratosthenes 58–61). Ath. Pol.
38 distinguishes between the original Ten, who proved hostile to the demo-
crats, and a second Ten, including Rhinon, who worked for reconciliation:
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
259

Rhinon managed to continue his career under the democracy, and this is pre-
sumably a device to separate him from the original anti-democratic stance of
the Ten.
The settlement of summer 403 was that the democracy was to be restored
in Athens but, for those unhappy with that arrangement, Eleusis was to be avail-
able as a semi-independent state; there was to be an amnesty for all except the
Thirty, the Ten and those ofﬁcials most closely associated with them, and even
for them if they successfully submitted to euthynai (Eratosthenes, attacked by
Lysias [XII] for killing Lysias’ brother Polemarchus, was one who attempted
this: we do not know the outcome).To ease the settlement Archinus foreclosed
on the period during which withdrawal to Eleusis was allowed, and he intro-
duced the procedure of paragraphe, under which a defendant could plead for a
prosecution in breach of the amnesty to be disallowed (Isoc. XVIII. Callimachus
2–3). Thrasybulus wanted to be generous in rewarding citizens and non-
citizens who had fought on his side, but Archinus resisted that too, and even-
tually, in 401/0, limited rewards were decreed, probably including citizenship
for non-citizens who had been at Phyle (IG ii2 10 = R&O 4 ~ Harding 3). In
that year the oligarchs at Eleusis hired mercenaries to attack Athens, but those
in the city marched out against them and Eleusis was once more fully incor-
porated in the Athenian state (Xen. Hell. II. iv. 38–43, Ath. Pol. 39–40).
We know from a fragment of a speech by Lysias (XXXIV. Traditional 
Constitution) that a man called Phormisius proposed that citizenship should 
be restricted to landowners; but the full democracy was restored, and indeed
with the number of citizens halved by the plague and the war the exclusion of
the thetes from ofﬁces was no longer enforced (Ath. Pol. 7. iv–8. i). However,
Pericles’ citizenship law (cf. p. 55), allowed to lapse during the war, was reaf-
ﬁrmed and strengthened (Ath. Pol. 42. i, Dem. LVII. Eubulides 30, [Dem.] LIX.
Neaera 16). The state ofﬁcially made a fresh start: oaths were sworn, the laws
were to be applied to acts committed in and after 403/2, and Athens ofﬁcially
adopted the Ionian alphabet (the alphabet which we regard as the standard
Greek alphabet) in place of its local alphabet (Theopompus FGrH 115 FF
154–5), thus formalising what was in fact a long process already under way.We
shall see that the understanding of democracy was to change after the middle
of the fourth century, but after 411–410 and 404–403 nobody active in politics
would admit to being an opponent of democracy.
Laws and Decrees
On the ﬁrst restoration of the democracy, in 410, the Athenians had begun to
compile their ﬁrst coherent code of laws since the time of Solon. What was
perhaps envisaged as a short and simple task turned out not to be, and was still
unﬁnished when the Thirty came to power (cf. p. 166). They began a legal
reform of their own (cf. p. 258). In 403 the democratic compilation was
resumed, and the code and the religious calendar associated with it were com-
260
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

pleted in 400/399 (see particularly Lys. XXX. Nicomachus, accusing one of the
commissioners of malpractice in connection with the compilation; Andoc. I.
Myst. 81–9).
In the sixth and ﬁfth centuries laws were made by decree of the assembly,
and the same enactment could be termed law (nomos) or decree (psephisma,
‘thing voted’) according to how one thought of it.The procedures used between
403 and 399 involved boards of nomothetai, ‘law-enacters’ (Andoc. I. Myst.
83–4); the Athenians decided to make a distinction between (superior) laws and
(inferior) decrees (Andoc. I. Myst. 87, 89), and set up a procedure for enact-
ing further laws, by nomothetai after the assembly had set the machinery in
motion, after 399. The word nomos embraces law and custom. Herodotus had
observed that different peoples have different nomoi and each consider their own
the best (III. 38); many of the sophists of the late ﬁfth century had contrasted
nomos, as human convention, which could have been decided otherwise, with
physis, nature, which is unalterably as it is, and some had represented laws as a
device used by some members of society to constrain others, as regulations
which one might disobey if it was to one’s advantage and one could get away
with it (for variations on that theme see P. Oxy. xi 1364 = Antiphon the Sophist
87 B 44 DK, Hippias of Elis in Pl. Prt. 337 D 1–3, Thrasymachus in Pl. Resp.
I and Callicles in Pl. Grg.).That way lay the jungle, and the distinction between
laws and decrees, in Athenian practice and in Aristotle’s philosophy (e.g. Eth.
Nic. V. 1137 B 11–29, Pol. IV. 1292 A 4–37), was in part an attempt to rescue
law for the respectable side of the fence. It may also have been an attempt to
make future attacks on the democracy more difﬁcult.
The theory was that permanent decisions applicable to all should be embod-
ied in laws, decisions for particular occasions or particular individuals in decrees
(cf. also the orators, e.g. Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 86–7, 218). In practice, I
suspect, the code of 399 was taken as a starting-point, so that it required a law
to modify the code of laws, but other matters – including all questions of foreign
affairs, even treaties intended to last for ever – could still be decided by decrees.
One area which was regulated by law was ﬁnance: there are decrees which add
to the burden of the assembly’s expense account (on which cf. p. 263) and call
on the nomothetai to increase the allocation to that account (e.g. IG ii2 222.
41–52). Our corpus of inscribed laws from fourth-century Athens is gradually
growing, but we still have far more decrees than laws.The evidence for fourth-
century law-making is problematic, but it seems likely that at ﬁrst the proce-
dure was so restrictive that it was rarely used; later it was made easier and was
used more frequently. Procedures for detecting and eliminating contradictions
suggest that the Athenians aimed to have a coherent code with no contradic-
tions, but by the third quarter of the century that aim was no longer achieved,
and in 330 conﬂicting laws on the proclamation of crowns could be cited
(Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 32–48, Dem. XVIII. Crown 120–1; cf. p. 342).
The procedure for the enactment of decrees by the assembly after probouleu-
sis by the council remained as it had been in the ﬁfth century (cf. pp. 57–8);
but the use of ad hoc boards of syngrapheis to draft some decrees was discred-
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
261

ited by the syngrapheis who ushered in the oligarchy of 411, and instead in the 
fourth century the assembly sometimes instructed the council to produce a
probouleuma for the next meeting (e.g. IG ii2 125 = R&O 69 ~ Harding 66).The
language of inscribed decrees becomes more informative, and by the second
half of the century a distinction had become established between formulae men-
tioning the council, used when the assembly enacted what had been recom-
mended to it by the council (‘Resolved by the council and people’, etc.: e.g. IG
ii2 110 = R&O 38), and formulae not mentioning the council, used when the
assembly enacted something not recommended by the council, either because
it rejected or rewrote the council’s recommendation or because the council’s
probouleuma was open and made no recommendation (‘Resolved by the people’,
etc.: e.g. IG ii2 337 = R&O 91 ~ Harding 111, where an open probouleuma is
followed by the assembly’s decree). Fourth-century decrees are divided fairly
evenly between the two categories, which suggests that council and assembly
were both taking their decision-making duties seriously (but from the middle
of the third century the assembly tended to rubber-stamp the council’s 
recommendations).
Institutional Changes
The last change in the constitution chronicled by the Athenaion Politeia was the
restoration of democracy in 403, ‘from which the constitution has continued to
that in force today, continually increasing the power of the masses’ (41. ii). Cer-
tainly there was no single point at which a major change in the constitution
occurred, until the failure of a rising against Macedon led to the introduction
of an oligarchic régime in 321; but there were a number of single changes at
different points. It is hard to maintain that Athens became ever more demo-
cratic. Some scholars have argued that, on the contrary, the democracy of the
fourth century was less extreme than that of the ﬁfth; I argue that changes made
in the early fourth century were in the spirit of the ﬁfth-century democracy, but
some changes made later (cf. pp. 328–36, 339–40) were not.
Soon after the restoration payment was introduced by Agyrrhius for the one
civic duty for which it had not been provided before, attendance at the assem-
bly: originally 1 obol but raised to 2 and then to 3 by the time of Aristophanes’
Ecclesiazusae, in the late 390’s (Ath. Pol. 41. iii, Ar. Eccl. 183–8, 289–92, etc.).
Payment was not for all who attended, but for a limited number or perhaps for
those who arrived by a speciﬁed time: the aim may have been to encourage
punctual attendance as much as a large attendance, but after the recent bouts
of oligarchy it was no doubt considered important to strengthen the demo-
cracy’s assembly. Payment for holding many routine ofﬁces is not positively
attested in the fourth century, and some have argued that many of the old
stipends were abolished, but more probably the silence is accidental. Most of
the payments which are attested had been increased by the time of the Athenaion
Politeia (62. ii), but jurors’ pay remained the 3 obols ﬁxed by Cleon (cf. pp.
262
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

55–6; also 118–19).The assembly needed six thousand or more men to attend
on the same day (which will have become harder to achieve from the reduced
number of citizens at the end of the Peloponnesian War: cf. p. 260), as the courts
did not, and it appears that 3 obols were still sufﬁcient to attract the numbers
of jurors that were needed.
More will be said about ﬁnancial matters later (cf. pp. 328–35), but one
important change belongs to the early fourth century. In the ﬁfth century there
was a single state treasury, into which revenue was paid and from which expen-
diture was made on the authorisation of the assembly; c.411 that was amalga-
mated with the treasury of the Delian League (cf. pp. 59, 94). In the fourth
century there was a merismos (allocation) of funds to different spending author-
ities – the assembly, the council, etc. – which were free to use their funds as
long as they presented satisfactory accounts at the end of the year (Ath. Pol.
48. i–ii; ﬁrst attested in IG ii2 29 = R&O 19, of 386). This devolved budgeting
suggests that the Athenians were thinking about what they could afford to 
spend in different areas; but the combination of devolved budgeting and insuf-
ﬁcient funds produces inﬂexibility, since if all the money has been allocated it
is impossible to provide more in one area without taking away from another.
During the ﬁrst half of the century two changes were made in the organisa-
tion of government. In the second half of the ﬁfth century meetings of the
council and assembly had been presided over by the prytaneis, the ﬁfty members
of the council from one tribe who served as standing committee for a tenth of
the year (cf. p. 58).That was still the case probably at the time of Aristophanes’
Ecclesiazusae (prytaneis 86–7, no mention of proedroi), and possibly until c.384/3
(possible date of law in [Dem.] LIX. Neaera 89). Not later than 379/8 that duty
had been transferred to a new board of proedroi, ‘presidents’, one member of
the council from each tribe except the current prytany, picked by lot each day
(Ath. Pol. 44. ii–iii; ﬁrst attested CSCA v 1972, 164–9 no. 2).
Until at least 368/7 inscriptions show that the principal secretary of the
Athenian state, responsible for publishing decrees and laws, was a member of
the council, elected for one prytany from a tribe other than the current prytany;
by 363/2 the secretary was appointed by lot for a whole year and from the whole
citizen body, but before long each tribe in the regular order was in turn pro-
viding the secretary (Ath. Pol. 54. iii; decrees of 368/7 IG ii2 104 = Tod 134
contr. IG ii2 105 + 523, 106, 107 = R&O 34, -, 31 ~ Harding 52, -, 53; decrees
of 363/2 IG ii2 109, 110, 111 = R&O -, 38, 39 ~ Harding -, -, 55). For the
old-style secretary the standard title was ‘secretary of the council’; for the new
either that could be used or ‘secretary by the prytany’ (a strange title for the
new secretary, which has to be interpreted as meaning ‘prytany by prytany’
throughout the year), and in the hellenistic period this second title became stan-
dard. Ath. Pol. 54. iv mentions a secretary ‘in charge of the laws’; but laws like
decrees were published by the principal secretary, and inscriptions attest a par-
allel secretary ‘in charge of the decrees’ (e.g. IG ii2 223 C = Agora xv 34. 3,
1700. 216 = 43. 230); neither is found before the middle of the century. Ath.
Pol. 54. v mentions an elected secretary who read out documents at meetings
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
263

of the council and assembly: this was important when papers could not be dis-
tributed, and was considered a skilled job.
Proedroi whose identity was not known before the day of the meeting could
not be bribed (cf. below, on jurors); but there is no indication that the prytaneis
were accused of taking bribes or were considered dangerously powerful, and
the creation of the proedroi was probably a further embodiment of the ﬁfth-
century principle of distributing work as widely as possible. Efﬁciency was not
a high priority in democratic Athens (cf. p. 59); but expecting each tribal con-
tingent of councillors to contain at least one man capable of serving as the prin-
cipal secretary for just one prytany in his life, while it tells us something about
expectations of literacy among politically active Athenians, was perhaps an
excessive deﬁance of efﬁciency.The change to a secretary who, though still not
eligible for reappointment, served for a whole year and was appointed from the
citizen body at large, is one of a number of moves in the direction of efﬁciency
which we see from the middle of the fourth century.There was a growing body
of secretaries, serving the courts and various ofﬁcials, and men attracted by this
work could hold different secretarial posts in different years.
One judicial change we have noticed above: the introduction of paragraphe
as a procedure to have a prosecution dismissed if, whatever its other merits,
it was in breach of the amnesty of 403; later it was extended to allow other
grounds for dismissal. There was a major change in the trial of private suits,
those in which only the injured party could prosecute. In the ﬁfth century the
smaller cases had been decided locally by the thirty dikastai kata demous, the
larger by a jury in the same way as public suits (cf. p. 55). But in the last years
of the Peloponnesian War the dikastai kata demous stopped travelling to the
demes, and the events of 404–403 made thirty an inauspicious number, so in
the fourth century there were forty of them, and they continued to work in the
city. For the larger private suits, for sums over 10 drachmae, a new procedure
was created. Each citizen (probably only of hoplite status or above) spent his
last year on the military registers, when he was aged 59, as a public arbitrator
(diaitetes): the larger private suits went ﬁrst to one of these, and then to a jury
only if one of the parties appealed. This will have reduced the money spent on
juries, at a time when Athens was short of money but had accepted the extra
burden of paying for attendance at the assembly: the use of all men, or all but
the poorest men, in a year-group as arbitrators was a substitute consonant with
the ﬁfth-century understanding of democracy (Ath. Pol. 53).
Another feature compatible with democratic principles was the increasingly
elaborate way of assigning jurors to courts. Six thousand men over 30 years old
were enrolled each year. In the late ﬁfth century each magistrate had a panel
of jurors assigned to him for the whole year, so that it will have been known in
advance which jurors would decide which case. Bribery will have been easy, and
there was a notorious instance in 410 or 409 (cf. p. 148). In the early fourth
century the six thousand were divided into ten sections for the year, so that
jurors would still have the same colleagues during the year, but sections were
allotted to courts day by day (Ar. Eccl. 681–8, Plut. 277–8, 972). By the second
264
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

half of the century the ten sections were still used, with approximately equal
numbers in each tribe; each juror had a ticket (pinakion), bearing his name,
demotic and section letter; and at the beginning of each day when the courts
were to meet there were elaborate allotment procedures (some involving the
placing of jurors’ tickets in allotment-machines) to assign jurors and magistrates
to courts.This will have made it impossible to predict which jurors would serve,
with which colleagues, in which courts, for which magistrates; indeed, the devel-
opment acquired a momentum of its own, and generated more levels of arbi-
trariness than were needed to achieve the desired result (Ath. Pol. 63–6; many
bronze pinakia survive).
Fourth-century judicial procedures may have seen an increasing use of
written documents.We cannot date changes, and in any case practices may have
become increasingly frequent before they were made compulsory; but by the
350’s it was a requirement that prosecutors should submit a written document
when initiating their cases, and in court witnesses no longer gave their evidence
orally but simply acknowledged the correctness of a document prepared in
advance. Certainly when a private suit went to a court on appeal against an
arbitrator’s decision (Ath. Pol. 53. ii), and apparently when a public suit went
to a court from the magistrate’s preliminary hearing (a lid referring to an ana-
krisis), documents were placed in a sealed jar and only those documents could
be used in the court.
Originally different bodies and ofﬁcials had kept their own records; but late
in the ﬁfth century a new council-house was built beside the old, and the old
came to be used as a central record ofﬁce; the rebuilding and enlargement of
the Pnyx, where the assembly met, is probably the work of the restored demo-
cracy (cf. p. 170).
Politics and Politicians
The split between political and military leaders which had begun in the genera-
tion of Cleon (cf. pp. 119–21) continued in the fourth century, and military
leaders are often found taking employment abroad when not commanding for
Athens. Civilian leaders are often referred to as politeuomenoi, ‘politicians’, or
rhetores, ‘speakers’ (the latter already by Aristophanes, e.g. Ach. 38). This
development presented problems for a demos which liked to control its leaders:
ofﬁcials were appointed for one year and were subject to various checks, and
military ofﬁcials, who could be reappointed, were appointed by election; but
men who were simply habitual speakers in the assembly and lawcourts held no
ofﬁce through which they could be called to account, and if things turned out
badly could claim that the decisions had been taken not by themselves but by
the assembly or a jury.
Already in the early ﬁfth century it had been possible to prosecute a leading
man for deceiving the people, by promising a success which did not materialise
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
265

(Miltiades in 489: Hdt. VI. 136). By 415 there existed the graphe paranomon,
which could be used against a decree and its proposer (cf. pp. 37, 58), and the
fourth century added the graphe nomon me epitedeion theinai against a law and
its proposer (‘prosecution for enacting an inexpedient law’, Ath. Pol. 59. ii; in
fact either illegality or inexpediency could be alleged in either suit). The code
of laws completed in 399 included a consolidated law on eisangelia, the proce-
dure used for major offences against the state (cf. pp. 36–7), and one possible
charge there was ‘being a rhetor and taking bribes to speak contrary to the best
interests of Athens’ (Hyp. IV. Euxenippus 7–9, where Hyperides stresses that this
is aimed at rhetores and not at ordinary citizens). When there was no concept
of ‘loyal opposition’, and the understanding of gift-giving and bribery was such
that giving bribes in the interests of one’s own state was acceptable (cf. p. 52,
on Pericles), it is not surprising that accusations of bribe-taking were frequently
made and are hard for us to evaluate.
Aeschines invoked against Timarchus in 346/5 a dokimasia of rhetores, which
we should perhaps see as an equivalent for non-ofﬁce-holders of the dokimasia
which men appointed to ofﬁces had to undergo (Aeschin. I. Timarchus 28–32;
cf. the questions asked at the dokimasia of archons, Ath. Pol. 55. iii). This may
have been instituted at the beginning of the century. There was no list of
approved rhetores, to which politicians were added after passing a dokimasia, but
if a man thought a rhetor unworthy he could institute a dokimasia against him;
Aeschines’ prosecution of Timarchus is the only known instance of this.
Ostracism remained theoretically available, but was not used after 415 (Ath.
Pol. 43. vi; cf. pp. 156–7). For the next century prosecutions of leading politi-
cal and military ﬁgures were frequent, sometimes on charges directly connected
with their public careers, sometimes on other charges but still with their public
careers in the background. The Athenians did not distinguish clearly between
political or military misjudgment or misfortune and illegal conduct, and charges
such as speaking contrary to the best interests of Athens encouraged the blur-
ring of that distinction.
As in the ﬁfth century, there was nothing resembling the party politics and
party organisation of modern states (though Athens came nearer to that in the
time of Philip of Macedon than at other times: cf. p. 337). Politicians were per-
ceived primarily as individuals, though particular men might be known for
championing particular policies, such as friendship with Thebes, and might have
particular associates and particular opponents. I believe that in the earlier part
of the fourth century most men had similar hopes for Athens most of the time,
but at crucial turning-points some men turned more promptly than others.
(Most of what follows is focused on foreign affairs: for more details and refer-
ences see chapters 16–19.)
Men prominent in the early years of the restored democracy included Thrasy-
bulus, the leader of the returning democrats; Agyrrhius, the introducer of
assembly pay and a councillor and secretary in 403/2; and Anytus, one of 
the men of Phyle. Archinus, a man of Phyle but careful to avoid democratic 
triumphalism (cf. p. 260), is not heard of afterwards.
266
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

There are two important trials known to us which were held in 400/399.
Andocides had been involved in the religious scandals of 415 and had had olig-
archic sympathies (cf. p. 158); he returned under the amnesty of 403 and held
various religious ofﬁces; but he allegedly fell foul of the aristocratic Callias on
personal grounds and of Agyrrhius by beating him to a tax-collecting contract.
He could not now be prosecuted directly for what he had done in 415, but in
autumn 400 his opponents claimed, probably wrongly, that his case was not
covered by the amnesty: we have his defence (Andoc. I. Myst.) and part of a
speech for the prosecution (Lys. VI. Andocides). His formal prosecutors were
men with oligarchic connections, including Meletus (Andoc. I. Myst. 92–5); his
supporting speakers were men of democratic respectability, including Anytus
and perhaps Thrasybulus (Andoc. I. Myst. 150: ‘Thrasyllus’ MSS); he was
acquitted.
In spring 399 the philosopher Socrates was prosecuted, accused of impiety
in that he was religiously unorthodox himself and corrupted the young by teach-
ing them his unorthodoxy (Xen. Ap. 10, Diog. Laert. II. 40). As formulated,
that did not break the amnesty, but those whom Socrates was alleged to have
corrupted included men involved in oligarchy, such as Alcibiades and Critias,
and Socrates had himself remained in Athens under the Thirty, though he had
not obeyed them (Pl. Ap. 32 C 4–D 8, cf. Xen. Mem. I. ii. 31–8), so the prose-
cution had a political dimension. Whether Socrates had ever held the views on
heavenly bodies and on rhetoric as a skill to be used in bad causes as well as
in good which are attributed to him in Aristophanes’ Clouds remains uncertain,
but some Athenians had come to be worried by such views. The formal prose-
cutor was Meletus, perhaps the prosecutor of Andocides (though the name is
not rare), but associated with him was Anytus, one of Andocides’ defenders.
Notoriously, Socrates was convicted, and, since he did not propose a serious
alternative penalty, condemned to death.
The author of the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia liked identifying groups of 
politicians and attributing political stances to them (cf. p. 247, on Thebes).
For 396, when Demaenetus, allegedly with the secret backing of the council,
was caught taking a trireme to join the Persian ﬂeet commanded by Conon,
he reports that the council denied responsibility. The distinguished and 
elegant = the respectable and property-owning were content with the status 
quo and did not want to quarrel with Sparta; a group centred on Thrasybulus,
Aesimus and Anytus thought it would be dangerous to fall foul of Sparta,
while a group including Epicrates, a man of Piraeus, and Cephalus, a 
defender of Andocides, had been eager for war even before they took Timo-
crates’ money; and the many and democratic had been anti-Spartan but through
fear acquiesced in the disowning of Demaenetus (Hell. Oxy. 9–10. ii: there is
not much support for this division between rich and poor, but see Ar. Eccl.
197–8).
To make sense of Athenian politics it is worthwhile to see how far particu-
lar men are associated with particular policies, or are regularly found to be coop-
erating with or opposed to other men. In what follows I shall comment from
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
267

this angle on Athens’ involvement in the affairs of the wider Greek world in the
ﬁrst half of the fourth century (cf. above, esp. chapter 18).
In 395 Thrasybulus was no longer unwilling to quarrel with Sparta: he pro-
posed the alliance with Boeotia, and commanded the Athenian force sent there
(Xen. Hell. III. v. 16; Plut. Lys. 29. i, Paus. III. 5. iv). After the victory at Cnidus
in 394 Conon became the ﬁrst living man to be honoured with a statue in the
agora.The comedian Plato represented Epicrates and Phormisius (the man who
had proposed limiting citizenship to landowners) as receiving rich bribes from
the Persian King (frs. 119–23 Kock/Edmonds = 127–31 Kassel & Austin), and
Plut. Pel. 30. xii and Ath.VI. 251 A–B have a story of Epicrates’ responding suc-
cessfully in the assembly: interpreting fragments of a lost comedy is dangerous,
but it is possible that this is not simply a comedian’s fantasy and they did serve
on an embassy to Persia.
Thrasybulus perhaps went through a period of unpopularity (cf. Ar. Eccl.
202–3, 356). When Sparta turned to diplomacy, the Athenian envoys who 
proposed accepting the revised terms of 392/1 included Andocides and 
Epicrates: the assembly, unwilling to abandon the Asiatic Greeks, rejected the
terms and condemned them in absence; the prosecutor was Agyrrhius’ nephew
Callistratus, who was to become a leading ﬁgure in the 370’s and 360’s (Philoch.
FGrH 328 F 149 ~ Harding 23). Aggressive policies followed. Iphicrates, the
ﬁrst commander of the mercenary force established at Corinth with Persian
money, tried but failed to get control of the city; ships were sent to support
Evagoras against the Persians in Cyprus; and in 390 Thrasybulus had his highly
successful Aegean campaign, reminiscent of the ﬁfth-century empire and
extending to the Asiatic territory claimed by the Persians. He died in 389, and
was given a lavish tomb in Athens (Paus. I. 29. iii), but there were accusations
of embezzlement and suggestions that he might have become tyrant of Byzan-
tium (cf. Lys. XXVIII. Ergocles 5, Ar. Plut. 550), and two men who had been
with him were put on trial (Lys. XXVIII. Ergocles, XXIX. Philocrates). Agyrrhius
succeeded him in the Aegean: he was not very successful, but the Athenians
continued to take an active line in general. Iphicrates fought against Sparta in
the Hellespont. Chabrias, a leading military commander from now until the
mid 350’s, went to support Evagoras against Persia c.388, and the decrees for
Erythrae and Clazomenae shortly before the King’s Peace show that Athens did
not want to abandon the Asiatic Greeks to the barbarians and had not changed
its policy. Iphicrates was to establish a particular connection with Thrace, mar-
rying the sister (probably) of the future king Cotys not later than 387/6 (Dem.
XXIII. Aristocrates 129, Anaxandridas fr. 41 Kock/Edmonds = 42 Kassel &
Austin).
In 387 Sparta tricked the Athenians and regained control of the Hellespont,
and after that Athens did have to agree to the King’s Peace and the abandon-
ment of the Asiatic Greeks. Cephalus was the author of the amendment express-
ing indignation about the trick (IG ii2 29 = R&O 19). When Athens found a
way forward in the new world after the Peace, he and Aesimus were two of the
envoys sent to Chios to receive its oath to the alliance (IG ii2 34–5 = R&O 20
~ Harding 31. 39–43). One man disappears from view for some time: Agyrrhius
268
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

was found guilty of embezzling public money and, unable to repay, spent several
years in prison (Dem. XXIV. Timocrates 135).
We learn from one of Lysias’ speeches (XXVI. Evandrus) of an odd episode
in 382.The man originally appointed archon for 382/1, Leodamas, on the olig-
archic side in 404–403 (Arist. Rh. II. 1400 A 32–6), was successfully challenged
in his dokimasia by a Thrasybulus (of the deme Collytus, whereas the more
famous Thrasybulus was of Stiria; he was a man of Phyle, he was one of the
generals tricked in 387, he had been Amphictyon of Delos, one of the men
appointed by Athens to administer the sanctuary of Apollo there, and he
appears in Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 138–9 in a list of Theban sympathisers). The
man appointed as substitute was Evandrus, more implicated in the oligarchy
than Leodamas. He was challenged by a friend of Leodamas (Lysias’ speech
was written for this challenger) and defended by Thrasybulus – and his appoint-
ment was upheld. Twenty years after the event involvement with the Thirty
could still be cited against a man, but it was clearly not the most important
consideration.
Among those who supported the liberation of Thebes in 379/8 were Cephalus
and a nephew of Thrasybulus of Collytus (Din. I. Demosthenes 38–9); and
Thrasybulus served with the men involved in the organisation of the Second
Athenian League on the embassy to Thebes of IG ii2 43 = R&O 22 ~ Harding
35. 72–7. Agyrrhius had emerged from gaol in time to be the proposer of the
grain-tax law of 374/3 (SEG xlviii 96 = R&O 26); and his nephew Callistratus
became one of the major ﬁgures of the 370’s–360’s. Diodorus includes in his
account of the League’s foundation the appointment as generals of Timotheus,
Chabrias and Callistratus (XV. 29. viii), but he may be wrong to include 
Callistratus among the generals. Callistratus was active in politics in Athens –
it was he who was responsible for at any rate the name of the syntaxeis collected
after a while from the League members (Theopompus FGrH 115 F 98 =
Harding 36) – while Timotheus and Chabrias in the early years commanded
Athens’ forces. Timotheus was Conon’s son, here beginning his career, while
Chabrias was the general most closely linked with Callistratus; both were hon-
oured with statues, Chabrias for his victory off Naxos in 376, Timotheus for
Alyzia in 375. Iphicrates was for many years an enemy of Timotheus ([Dem.]
XLIX. Timotheus 66): he was sent to ﬁght for Persia against the Egyptians when
Chabrias was recalled from ﬁghting for the Egyptians; in 373, when Timotheus
was in trouble for not going promptly enough to Corcyra, Iphicrates, back from
Egypt, joined Callistratus in prosecuting him ([Dem.] XLIX. Timotheus 9) –
and Timotheus took over Iphicrates’ position on the Persian side against the
Egyptians. In 372 Iphicrates took Callistratus (‘though not a friend’) and
Chabrias as fellow generals to Corcyra.
In summer 371 the Athenians were becoming worried about Thebes, and
invited the Thebans to a peace conference in Sparta. Xenophon names eight
Athenian delegates, who seem to have had a range of views, and gives speeches
to three: the aristocrat Callias, full of his own importance; Autocles, hostile to
Sparta as his family consistently was; and Callistratus, arguing successfully 
for reconciliation between Athens and Sparta (Xen. Hell. VI. iii). The only 
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
269

previous evidence for Callistratus’ hostility to Thebes is that Diodorus has
Thebes excluded from the peace of 375 after argument between him and
Epaminondas (XV. 38. iii), but that is not to be relied on: it is better to see 
the Athenians in general as pro-Theban before 371 and anti-Theban after, and
Callistratus as one of the ﬁrst to make the change.
After Leuctra Callistratus had Iphicrates sent to oppose the Thebans’ return
from the Peloponnese in 370/69 ([Dem.] LIX. Neaera 27), and Iphicrates’ lack
of success suggests that he was unhappy with that task; Chabrias did better
against the Thebans in 368. An Athenian commander in the Peloponnese 
in 366, Timomachus, was a son-in-law of Callistratus ([Dem.] L. Polycles 48).
Callistratus himself was the proposer of the frustrating decree of 369/8 which
explained to Mytilene Athens’ change of alignment: the justiﬁcation of opposi-
tion to Sparta in the 370’s survives but the justiﬁcation of Athens’ new policy
does not (IG ii2 107 = R&O 31 ~ Harding 53. 35 sqq.). Not all Athenians
accepted the change: in the alliance of 369 with Sparta Cephiosodotus, still
afraid of Sparta, insisted on an alternation of command every ﬁve days rather
than Spartan command on land and Athenian at sea (Xen. Hell. VII. i. 12–14).
Unfortunately we know nothing about the Athenian delegates to the peace con-
ference in Persia in 367: one, Timagoras, accepted rich gifts from the King,
supported Pelopidas and was prepared to accept his proposed terms; the other,
Leon, objected and on their return had Timagoras condemned.
In 366 we have the ﬁrst attested appearance of a man who was to serve often
as general during the next forty years, Chares. He was transferred from the
Peloponnese for the unsuccessful attempt to recover Oropus for Athens; we 
do not know how they were connected with him or Oropus, but Callistratus
and Chabrias were prosecuted and acquitted in connection with Oropus. The
prosecutor was Leodamas, who had opposed Chabrias’ honours in 376;
Callistratus’ defence is said to have inspired the young Demosthenes; Plato is
said to have spoken for Chabrias (Arist. Rh. I. 1364 A 19–23, Plut. Dem. 5. i–iv,
Diog. Laert. III. 23–4). Chares then failed in an attempt on Corinth; and in
361/0 he gained a bad reputation for supporting oligarchs in Corcyra. The
politician to whom Chares seems to have been closest is Aristophon, active from
the democratic restoration until he died at the age of about a hundred in the
330’s but prominent from the late 360’s onwards; he was allegedly prosecuted
in seventy-ﬁve graphai paranomon but never convicted (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon
194). At this time, after Chabrias had suppressed the original revolt in Ceos,
he was sent back to deal with the further trouble and proposed the surviving
decree. In connection with some aspect of this affair he was prosecuted by
Hyperides (on whom cf. p. 337) and narrowly acquitted (IG ii2 111 = R&O 39
~ Harding 55; schol. Aeschin. I. Timarchus 64 [145 Dilts]; Hyp. IV. Euxenippus
28). He proposed a decree dispatching forces to the north in 362/1 ([Dem.] L.
Polycles 4–6), and prosecuted Leosthenes when he was defeated by Alexander
of Pherae in 361 ([Dem.] LI. Trierarchic Crown 8–9).
At some time in the 360’s Timotheus and Iphicrates were reconciled, and
Timotheus’ daughter married Iphicrates’ son Menestheus ([Dem.] XLIX.
270
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

Timotheus 66). Both Timotheus and Iphicrates were involved in Athens’ wars in
the Aegean and the north, though never together. Many generals found them-
selves prosecuted for their failures in these wars, including Timotheus ([Dem.]
XXXVI. Phormio 53).
Callistratus and Chabrias remained active to 362, but in 361 there was major
trouble, of which we know only the outcome: Callistratus was prosecuted, prob-
ably on a charge of not speaking in Athens’ best interests, and in his absence
was condemned to death; he appears in exile to have helped the Macedonians
to increase their tax revenues ([Arist.] Oec. II. 1350 A 16–23); later he risked
returning to Athens but was put to death (Hyp. IV. Euxenippus 1–2, Lycurg.
Leocrates 93). Chabrias left Athens in 361 to ﬁght once more for the Egyptians
against Persia.
Familiar names persist to the Social War of 356–355. In Athens’ attempts to
reach a satisfactory agreement with the successors of Cotys in Thrace, Chabrias,
back from Egypt, in 358 accepted what Demosthenes called the worst terms
yet (but seems not to have suffered for it); Chares in 357/6 achieved the ﬁnal
settlement, of which Demosthenes approved (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 163–73).
In that year Chabrias and Iphicrates were among the generals who swore to the
alliance with Carystus after Athens’ success in Euboea (IG ii2 124 = R&O 48
~ Harding 65. 19–23: on the list of generals who swore cf. p. 239). In the Social
War, in 356/5 Chares was the general defeated off Chios, and Chabrias,
not now a general, was killed. In 355 Timotheus, Iphicrates and Menestheus
because of the weather refused to join Chares in ﬁghting at Embata, where 
he was defeated. Chares then joined the Persian rebel Artabazus. Aristophon
prosecuted the others;Timotheus was ﬁned and went into exile, Iphicrates and
Menestheus were acquitted, and Timotheus and Iphicrates both died soon after
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 21, Nep. XI. Iph. 3. iii, XIII. Tim. 3, Isoc. XV. Antid. 129, Din.
I. Demosthenes 13–14 = III. Philocles 17).
In general, there seems to be more long-term consistency in men’s personal
friendships and hostilities (though the reconciliation of Timotheus and 
Iphicrates warns us not to rely too much on that contention) than in their poli-
tical stances (though some men remained friends of Thebes when that was no
longer fashionable). The major turning-points in Athenian foreign policy are
the abandonment of subordination to Sparta in the 390’s and the realisation
that Sparta was less of a threat than Thebes from 371 onwards, and here we
see some men making the change sooner than others, though most Athenians
did in the end make the change. On internal matters there is no evidence that
in the early fourth century there were serious disagreements or that particular
men stood for distinctive policies.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On the régime of the Thirty see Hignett, History of the Athenian Constitution, ch. 11 and
apps. 13–14; Krentz, The Thirty at Athens.
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
271

On the working of the constitution in the fourth century see in general Sinclair,
Democracy and Participation in Athens; Hansen, The Athenian Democracy in the Age of
Demosthenes.
On laws and decrees see M. H. Hansen, ‘Nomos and Psephisma in Fourth-Century
Athens’, GRBS xix 1978, 315–30, ‘Did the Athenian Ecclesia Legislate After 403/2?’,
GRBS xx 1979, 27–53 = his The Athenian Ecclesia, 161–76(–177), 179–205(–206).
On the enactment of laws in the fourth century see the different views of D. M.
MacDowell, ‘Law-Making at Athens in the Fourth Century BC’, JHS xcv 1975, 62–74;
Rhodes, ‘Nomothesia in Fourth-Century Athens’, CQ2 xxxv 1985; M. H. Hansen,
‘Athenian Nomothesia in the Fourth Century BC and Demosthenes’ Speech Against Lep-
tines’, C&M xxxii 1971–80, 87–104, ‘Athenian Nomothesia’, GRBS xxvi 1985, 345–71.
For the suggestion that the purpose of assembly pay was to secure a punctual atten-
dance rather than a large attendance see P. Gauthier, ‘Sur l’institution du misthos de
l’assemblée d’Athènes’, in Piérart (ed.), Aristote et Athènes, 231–50. On the widespread
continuation of payment for ofﬁce-holding see M. H. Hansen, ‘Misthos for Magistrates
in Classical Athens’, SO liv 1979, 5–22, ‘Perquisites for Magistrates in Fourth-Century
Athens’, C&M xxxii 1971–80, 105–25 (disbelieving); Gabrielsen, Remuneration of State
Ofﬁcials in Fourth-Century BC Athens (believing). On the merismos of revenue to differ-
ent spending authorities see Rhodes, The Athenian Boule, 99–101. On the institution of
the proedroi see The Athenian Boule, 25–7 with (1985 reissue) 306. On the secretaries
see The Athenian Boule, 134–41; A. S. Henry, ‘The Athenian State Secretariat and 
Provisions for Publishing and Erecting Decrees’, Hesp. lxxi 2002, 91–118.
Among a great many studies of the trial of Socrates, see Guthrie, A History of Greek
Philosophy, iii. 380–5; also Stone, The Trial of Socrates (regarding Socrates as an authori-
tarian élitist who deserved his fate). On politicians of the early fourth century see R.
Sealey, ‘Callistratos of Aphidna and His Contemporaries’, Hist. v 1956, 178–203 = his
Essays in Greek Politics, 133–63; Rhodes, ‘On Labelling Fourth-Century ·AthenianÒ
Politicians’, LCM iii 1978, 207–11. On politics and society see Strauss, Athens After the
Peloponnesian War.
272
ATHENS AFTER THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
410 (?)
ﬁrst Carthaginian forces sent to Sicily
406/5
Dionysius appointed general in Syracuse
405
end of ﬁrst Carthaginian war
c.397–392
second Carthaginian war
386
Dionysius I’s capture of Rhegium
383/2–374 (?)
third Carthaginian war
368
Dionysius I begins fourth Carthaginian war
368/7
Dionysius I dies, succeeded by Dionysius II
357
exiled Dion returns to Sicily
354
Dion murdered
c.346
exiled Dionysius II returns to Syracuse
344
Timoleon arrives in Sicily
337
ﬁnal victories of Syracuse under Timoleon; death of
Timoleon
Sources
The west throughout this period is covered by Diodorus, but the unevenness
of his treatment suggests that he did not follow the same source throughout,
and there has been a good deal of inconclusive argument as to which sections
derive from which sources. On western as on other matters, there are some
21
The Western Greeks
from Dionysius I 
to Timoleon

short insertions into the narrative from a chronological source (cf. p. 15). In
XIII. 34–XIV (412/1–387/6) his account is detailed and hostile to Dionysius:
several times he cites Timaeus of Tauromenium (FGrH 566), who lived from
the mid fourth century to the mid third; but he also cites Ephorus, whom he
was following on Greece and the Aegean (the two contrasted XIII. 54. v, etc.),
so perhaps he was using both – and probably behind both lay the favourable
account of Dionysius’ early supporter Philistus (FGrH 556). Book XV
(386/5–361/0) is much briefer on Sicily, uncommitted on Dionysius and hostile
to demagogues: it may be based on Ephorus without Timaeus, or else on the
fourth-century Theopompus of Chios (FGrH 115), whose Philippic History
included three books on the two Dionysii (cf. XVI. 71. iii). Within book XVI
(360/59–336/5) there seems to be a mixture of sources, with Theopompus and
Timaeus the principal but not the only candidates.
For Dionysius II and the liberators there are eulogising biographies of Dion
and Timoleon by both Nepos and Plutarch: for Dion it appears that Heraclides’
supporter Athanis (FGrH 562) underlies the hostile, later part of Nepos’ life
and Dion’s supporter Timonides of Leucas underlies Plutarch’s; both lives of
Timoleon depend on Timaeus, directly and/or through a hellenistic biography.
We have independent fourth-century material in the Platonic Letters iii, vii,
viii, which, whether or not they are by Plato, appear to be well informed, and
in passages of Aristotle’s Politics.The western Greeks were not given to inscrib-
ing public documents on stone, but there are relevant inscriptions from main-
land Greece; and there are some interesting coins.
The Origins of the Syracusan Tyranny
Hermocrates of Syracuse led the resistance to Athens’ Sicilian expedition of
415–413 (on which cf. pp. 132–40); he was deposed when the resistance seemed
likely to fail, but was in favour though apparently not in ofﬁce by the time the
Athenians were defeated (Thuc. VI. 103. iv; VII. 21. iii, 73). What turned 
the tide was the arrival of forces from the Peloponnese led by the Spartan 
Gylippus. After the Athenians’ defeat, the truth behind the accounts of
Diodorus and Plutarch is probably that Hermocrates and Gylippus argued for
more generous treatment of the captives, and the harsh treatment decided on
was urged by Diocles (Diod. Sic. XIII. 19. iv–33. i, Plut. Nic. 28).
In 412 Hermocrates and others were sent with just twenty ships from Syra-
cuse and two from Selinus to support the Spartans in the Aegean (a few more
western ships followed), and he became critical of the Persian Tissaphernes and
of Sparta’s navarch Astyochus (Thuc. VIII. 26. i, 29. i, 45. iii, 84–5). In his
absence there was a democratic revolution in Syracuse. Aristotle says the demos
changed from politeia (his word for a compromise between democracy and olig-
archy) to democracy (Pol. V. 1304 A 27–9); Diodorus has an account which
confuses the Diocles of the late ﬁfth century with an archaic lawgiver (XIII.
274
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

33. ii–iii, 34. iv–35), and all we can be sure of is an increase in the number of
generals and allotment for civilian appointments. Either in 411 or in 410 
Hermocrates and his colleagues were exiled and three men were sent to take
over. Hermocrates joined the entourage of the Persian Pharnabazus (Thuc.VIII.
85. iii contr. Xen. Hell. I. i. 27–31, cf. Diod. Sic. XIII. 63. i–ii).
While Syracuse became involved in a war with the cities to the north (cf.
Diod. Sic. XIII. 56. ii), Egesta gave way in its dispute with Selinus, but Selinus
took more than the land originally at issue, and so, perhaps in 410, Egesta
appealed to Carthage. There were Carthaginian traders and settlements in
Sicily, and Greek traders in Carthage; but Carthage had not tried to interfere
in Sicily since its defeat in 480, and had not responded to an appeal from Egesta
in 416/5 (Diod. Sic. XII. 82. vii) or taken advantage of the Athenian expedi-
tion. Some Athenians may have hoped to conquer Carthage after Sicily, but
after their arrival they asked for Carthaginian support, and an inscription reveals
contact in 406 (IG i3 123 = M&L 92 ~ Fornara 165). At this time the leading
position in Carthage, given the title basileus, ‘king’, by our Greek sources (not
the shophet, ‘judge’, as often claimed, but the milk, war-leader), was hereditary
in the Magonid family; Hannibal, grandson of the Hamilcar who was defeated
and killed at Himera in 480, now welcomed an opportunity to avenge that
defeat. The council (gerousia in our sources) was divided, but made Hannibal
strategos, while ﬁrst unsuccessfully trying to arrange for arbitration by Syracuse.
That year Carthage sent 5,000 Libyans and 800 Campanian mercenaries to
Egesta, and they took advantage of Selinus’ carelessness to win a victory. As
Hannibal prepared for a major expedition, Egesta looked to him and Selinus
to Syracuse (Diod. Sic. XIII. 43–4).
At the beginning of 409 Syracuse sent ﬁve more ships to the Aegean (Xen.
Hell. I. ii. 8); but Hannibal went to Sicily with a large force (Ephorus said
200,000 infantry and 4,000 cavalry, Timaeus half that number) but a limited
objective. He landed near the Carthaginian settlement of Motya, at the west
end of the island. He ﬁrst attacked Selinus, and captured it and killed many 
of the inhabitants, while forces from Acragas and Gela waited to be joined by
Syracuse in going to the rescue.When the Syracusans reached Acragas they sent
envoys who negotiated a settlement: survivors could remain in Selinus but pay
phoros to Carthage (Diod. Sic. XIII. 54–59. iv). Hannibal then crossed the island
to Himera, being joined by many Sicans and Sicels, while Diocles pursued him
with the Greek forces from Acragas, and the ships sent to the Aegean returned.
A false rumour of an attack on Syracuse led Diocles to start evacuating Himera
and hurry back, and enabled Hannibal to capture a weakened city. He killed
the inhabitants and destroyed the city, disbanded his forces but left some to
support his allies, and returned home. The campaign had lasted three months,
and the opposition had failed disastrously (Diod. Sic. XIII. 59. iv–62; three
months interpolation in Xen. Hell. I. i. 37).
It is perhaps after this that coins from Panormus continue to copy Syracu-
san designs but bear the legend ZIZ, perhaps the Punic name of Panormus
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
275

(Kraay, Archaic and Classical Greek Coins, pp. 227–8 no. 866), and it is perhaps
in connection with this ﬁrst invasion that the Carthaginians began issuing
Greek-type coins with their own designs (Kraay p. 234 no. 872).
If the dates given above are correct, 408 was a quiet year. Hermocrates was
still with Pharnabazus, waiting to be sent along with others to the Persian court
(Xen. Hell. I. iii. 13, iv. 1); but early in 407 he arrived in Messana with money
from Pharnabazus. He hired mercenaries and collected some fugitives from
Himera; after failing to gain reinstatement in Syracuse, he went to Selinus and
began building that up again. As he raided the area of the Carthaginian settle-
ments he gained more adherents and a good reputation. Collecting the bones
of the Syracusans left unburied when Diocles had abandoned Himera, he took
them to Syracuse and waited outside for a response: the Syracusans, afraid of
a tyranny, exiled Diocles and accepted the bones, but did not accept him. Later
he returned on the invitation of some friends and forced his way into the agora,
but he and most of his supporters were killed and the remainder were exiled;
allegedly one supporter was Dionysius, mistakenly left for dead (Diod. Sic. XIII.
63, 75. ii–ix).
Hermocrates had shown that the Carthaginian settlements were vulnerable
to attack, but Hannibal’s easy success at Himera may have aroused Carthagi-
nian ambitions. Diodorus next mentions a Syracusan embassy to Carthage
(XIII. 79. viii), perhaps prompted by news of the preparations.The elderly Han-
nibal had a relative, Himilco, appointed as colleague, and collected forces from
around the western Mediterranean; this time the army was given as 300,000
by Ephorus, as 120,000 by Timaeus. In spring 406 an advance squadron of
Carthaginian ships was defeated by the Syracusans off the west end of the
island, but their main force reached Sicily without trouble and made for
Acragas, an obvious target east of Selinus on the south coast and at the height
of its prosperity (its agricultural produce was sold to Carthage: Diod. Sic.
XIII. 81. iv–v). When Acragas rejected an offer of alliance or neutrality the
Carthaginians besieged it; Acragas hired a mercenary force under the Spartan
freelance Dexippus, and also the Campanians whom Hannibal had used in 409
but then dismissed. The Carthaginians’ desecration of tombs outside the city
led (it was said) to a plague and the death of Hannibal. Supporting forces came
to Acragas from Syracuse and elsewhere under Daphnaeus, and between Gela
and Acragas they won a battle, but the victory was not followed up either by
them or by the generals of Acragas, who were consequently stoned by their
fellow citizens. Daphnaeus began a blockade of the Carthaginian camp, but as
winter approached his men grew careless, a supply squadron from Syracuse was
captured by the Carthaginians, and it was now Acragas that was short of food.
The Campanians switched to the Carthaginian side, the Italian Greeks among
Acragas’ defenders returned home, and in December the people of Acragas
decided to abandon the city (going to Gela at ﬁrst, eventually settled by the
Syracusans at Leontini). After a siege of seven or eight months, the Carthagini-
ans occupied Acragas, another striking achievement (Diod. Sic. XIII. 80–91. i,
cf. interpolation in Xen. Hell. I. v. 21).
276
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

The Greek Sicilians were desperate, converging on Syracuse and some
sending their families to Italy. At an assembly in Syracuse the young Dionysius,
a secretary (Dem. XX. Leptines 161) and a man who had fought well, proposed
that the generals should be lynched; when the ofﬁcials imposed a ﬁne, the rich
Philistus offered to pay that and any subsequent ﬁne. Dionysius urged the
appointment of better men as generals, and a new board was appointed includ-
ing himself. He proceeded to avoid his colleagues, claiming that they were in
league with the enemy, and endeared himself to the ordinary citizens but not
to the upper class; and he persuaded the assembly to recall exiles, many of
whom had (like himself) been supporters of Hermocrates. For Diodorus, he
was from the beginning planning to make himself tyrant, but he could well have
begun as a sincere objector to the disastrous failure to resist Carthage (Diod.
Sic. XIII. 91. ii–92).
In 405 Gela, the Carthaginians’ next obvious target, appealed to Syracuse
for help. Dionysius took a force there. He exploited a conﬂict between the rich
and ‘the people’ to secure the condemnation of the rich, and he used their
wealth to pay Dexippus’ mercenaries. He promised to double the pay of his
own soldiers and return to Gela with a larger force. Arriving in Syracuse, he
protested at the holding of a festival while the soldiers went unpaid, and per-
suaded the assembly to appoint him strategos autokrator and double the soldiers’
pay. (The Platonic Letter viii. 353 A 6–B 4, 354 D 5–6, has Dionysius and his
future father-in-law Hipparinus appointed, but that may be a falsiﬁcation in the
interest of Hipparinus’ son Dion. Hipparinus is a backer of Dionysius in Arist.
Pol. V. 1306 A 1–2.) Next we have one of the favourite gambits of the would-
be tyrant. He ordered the army to assemble at Leontini, claimed to have been
attacked on the way, and persuaded the people there to vote him a bodyguard
(Arist. Pol. III. 1286 B 39–40 suggests there was an argument over the size of
the bodyguard). He then armed a rabble of men as mercenaries and ﬁlled the
military ofﬁces with his supporters (but he distrusted Dexippus and sent him
back to Greece). He took up residence in the dockyard at Syracuse, and con-
tracted a double marriage with Hermocrates’ family: he married Hermocrates’
daughter and his sister married Hermocrates’ brother-in-law. An assembly was
held to condemn Daphnaeus and Demarchus, the latter one of the generals
who had supplanted Hermocrates in 410 (Diod. Sic. XIII. 93–96. iv, cf. inter-
polation in Xen. Hell. II. ii. 24; in Arist. Pol. V. 1305 A 26–6, 1310 B 30–1, cf.
1313 B 26–8, Dionysius is a demagogue who attacks Daphnaeus and the rich).
Dionysius was a man of humble origins who used demagogic methods and
attacked the rich in order to provide for his supporters. However, there were
also rich men among his supporters, and the primary reason for his rise to power
was most probably indignation at the inadequacy of the resistance to the
Carthaginians – and resistance to the Carthaginians was still needed.
In the summer the Carthaginians destroyed Acragas and advanced on Gela.
The women and children refused evacuation to Syracuse, and joined in a valiant
defence; Dionysius brought a large army and navy.When he attempted a three-
pronged attack there was a failure of coordination, with both wings defeated
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
277

HERMOCRITUS*
HERMOCRATES   =   d
HIPPARINUS
MEGACLES
Aristomache = (2)
DIONYSIUS I
406/5–368/7
TIMOCRATES = (3)
THEARIDAS = (1)
}
}
Arete  (2)  =   DION
357–354
ARETAEUS
S
HIPPARINUS
353–351/0
NYSAEUS
351/0–348/7
Sophrosyne = DIONYSIUS II
HERMOCRITUS
Dicaeosyne = (2) LEPTINES (1) = d
PHILISTUS   =   d
d
APOLLOCRATES
S
S
d
368/7–355 
348/7–343
(1)   =   d
(2)   =   Doris
POLYXENUS = Theste
Fig. 7
The family of Dionysius I. (The manuscripts of our source texts call Dionysius I’s father Hermocrates, but almost certainly the correct
name is Hermocritus, given to one of his sons)

while Dionysius and his mercenaries in the centre were delayed in passing
through the city – after which he decided to evacuate Gela, and also Camarina,
the next city along the coast. Not surprisingly, it was now Dionysius’ turn to
be accused of collusion with the enemy. His Italian allies deserted him; the 
Syracusan cavalry, unable to get at him on the journey, beat him back to Syra-
cuse, where they raped his wife and drove her to suicide. Dionysius hurried in
pursuit, burned the city gate which had been closed against him, fought a battle
in the agora and killed and exiled opponents.The surviving cavalry ﬂed to Aetna
(the inland site at Inessa: cf. p. 77); the people of Gela and Camarina,
distrusting Dionysius, joined the fugitives from Acragas in Leontini (Diod.
Sic. XIII. 108. ii–113, cf. interpolation in Xen. Hell. II. ii. 24; suicide Plut. Dion
3. ii).
At this point there is a lacuna in Diodorus. The text resumes with the
Carthaginians suffering from a plague (perhaps on account of the marshy land
outside Syracuse: cf. Thuc. VII. 47. ii) and offering terms which Dionysius
accepted. Carthage was to possess its original settlements and the Elymans and
Sicans of the west; Selinus, Acragas, Himera, Gela and Camarina could con-
tinue as cities, but unfortiﬁed and tributary to Carthage; Leontini, Messana 
and the Sicels were to be autonomous, as was Syracuse (but a stipulation that
Syracuse was to be ruled by Dionysius is implausible); captured men and ships
were to be returned. The Carthaginians departed, taking the plague with them
(Diod. Sic. XIII. 114. i–ii). Having gained a greater interest in Sicily, the
Carthaginians were to retain it until driven out by the Romans in the third
century. They never captured Syracuse but sometimes overran the rest of the
island; each of the following wars was to end with a distinction between a
western part of Sicily which they controlled and an eastern part which they 
did not.
The Rule of Dionysius I
The next Carthaginian war was started by the Greeks. Before that Dionysius
had consolidated his position. He fortiﬁed the peninsula of Ortygia (see map
6) and reserved that for his friends and mercenaries, and he reassigned land to
supporters among citizens and non-citizens, including liberated slaves, possibly
the serf class of Kyllyrioi (Diod. Sic. XIV. 7. i–v; Kyllyrioi Hdt.VII. 155. ii). His
position was such that he could be called basileus, ‘king’, in an Athenian speech
of 400 (Lys. VI. Andocides 6–7); in three Athenian decrees he is given the title
archon of Sicily (IG ii2 18 = R&O 10 ~ Harding 20, of 394/3; 103, 105 + 523 =
33, 34 ~ -, 52, of 368). In the ﬁfth century Gelon and Hieron had dedicated
at Delphi and Olympia as individuals, but Polyzelus as ‘lord of Gela’ (cf. p. 74).
Dionysius began a war against the Sicels, but a mutiny led to his hurrying back
to Syracuse. The rebels blockaded him, and obtained ships from Messana and
Rhegium. Dionysius was now in serious difﬁculties, but while opening negotia-
tions for his withdrawal he invited the Campanian mercenaries to come from
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
279

western Sicily, and in the end he defeated the rebels (Diod. Sic. XIV. 7. v–9).
A Corinthian, Nicoteles, was acting as champion of the citizens; but a Spartan
agent perhaps called Aristas arrived, nominally to support them but in fact 
to support Dionysius and try to earn his gratitude. Dionysius disarmed the 
citizens, built further walls, eventually one enclosing the whole of Epipolae 
(see map 6), and strengthened his forces (Diod. Sic. XIV. 10 [Aristus], cf.
70. iii [Aretes], 18).
Perhaps in 402, Dionysius began a war against the Greek cities north of 
Syracuse. First he captured Aetna, the refuge of his dissident cavalry. He
attacked Leontini, occupied by fugitives from the cities of the south coast, but
did not have the machines for a siege. He turned inland to the Sicels, helping
a tyrant to seize power in Enna but then deposing him, attacking but making
a treaty with Herbita (its ruler Archonides afterwards founded the city of
Halaesa on the north coast). On the east coast, Naxos and Catana were both
betrayed to Dionysius: he enslaved the citizens, sacked the cities, and gave 
the land to the Sicels in the case of Naxos, to the Campanian mercenaries in
the case of Catana. When Dionysius returned to Leontini, the people there
agreed to migrate to Syracuse (Diod. Sic. XIV. 14–16. iv). Like Gelon and
Hieron, Dionysius seems to have been anxious that there should be no east
coast city which could rival Syracuse. Under 400/399, from his chronographic
source, Diodorus notes that Dionysius founded a colony at Adranum, below
Mount Etna (Diod. Sic. XIV. 37. v). However, Rhegium, incited by Syracusan
exiles, was becoming worried and decided to attack Dionysius before it was too
late. It sent out a large force which was joined by one from Messana; but
Messana’s generals had not consulted the assembly, their soldiers mutinied, the
campaign collapsed and the two cities made peace with Dionysius (Diod. Sic.
XIV. 40).
Dionysius next began preparations for a war with Carthage – presumably
more to regain lost ground than to keep the Sicilian Greeks submissive, as
Diodorus alleges. Perhaps building on developments in machinery which had
reached Carthage from Phoenicia, he is credited with technical innovations:
quadriremes and quinqueremes, and catapults, which are not found in main-
land Greece until later (cf. pp. 316, 341). If this is correct, and it is not impos-
sible, the larger ships will have had more than one man to an oar rather than
more than three banks of oars, and the catapults will have been arrow-ﬁring
mechanical bows. He built up a large citizen and mercenary army, with parti-
cular encouragement from Sparta. For the payment of his mercenaries he issued
gold and 10-drachma silver coins (Kraay pp. 231–3 nos. 815–16, 818–19). To
assure himself of support, he adopted a more conciliatory attitude. He won over
Messana with a gift of land. He offered land and a marriage alliance to Rhegium
but was rebuffed; but Rhegium’s rival Locri provided Dionysius with a wife
called Doris, and at the same time he married Aristomache, the daughter of his
Syracusan supporter Hipparinus.When he held an assembly to urge war against
Carthage, Diodorus says the citizens hated the Carthaginians and blamed them
for their subjection to him, and they hoped that the war would result in better
280
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

treatment for them and would provide an opportunity to reclaim their freedom
(Diod. Sic. XIV. 41–43. iv, 44–5).
In an exceptional occurrence, perhaps in 397, the Greeks in Syracuse and
the other cities drove out the Carthaginian traders, and Dionysius sent an
ultimatum demanding the liberation of the cities. He took a large army and
navy (said to be 80,000 infantry, over 3,000 cavalry, nearly 200 warships); Eryx
in the north-west of the island submitted to him, but Motya demolished the
causeway linking it to the mainland and prepared to resist. Dionysius built a
mole, and campaigned in the vicinity while the work proceeded. Meanwhile
Carthage sent ten ships to raid the harbour of Syracuse, and Himilco took a
hundred ships to Motya but did not ﬁght a battle. The siege of Motya was a
contest of machines and ingenuity; Dionysius ﬁnally captured the city with
much slaughter. At the end of the summer he returned to Syracuse, leaving a
garrison in Motya, Egesta and Entella under siege, and his brother Leptines as
navarch with 120 ships (Diod. Sic. XIV. 46. i–v, 47, 53. v).
In 396 Dionysius had smaller forces, perhaps owing to shortage of funds, but
he returned to the west, where Egesta held out against his siege and burned the
attackers’ camp. The Carthaginians appointed Himilco basileus (it is not clear
what his position had been since Hannibal’s death: perhaps he was already
basileus and was now made strategos autokrator). Himilco went to Panormus, on
the north coast, with large forces (300,000 infantry, 4,000 cavalry, 400 war-
ships according to Ephorus, 100,000 plus 30,000 raised in Sicily according 
to Timaeus). He recovered Motya and the other western cities (founding 
Lilybaeum, to the south, to replace Motya: Diod. Sic. XXII. 10. iv, cf. XIII. 54.
iv), and as Dionysius withdrew, destroying the crops, Himilco proceeded along
the north coast to Messana: when its army had gone out against his army, his
ships sailed in and captured the city, which he destroyed (Diod. Sic. XIV. 54.
ii–57, 58. iii–iv).
Dionysius prepared to resist in Syracuse and Leontini. Himilco encouraged
the Sicels in Naxos to found Tauromenium, to the north; and an eruption of
Etna forced him to take an inland route to Catana while his ﬂeet under Mago
sailed directly there. Dionysius sent Leptines to ﬁght against Mago before
Himilco could join him, but Leptines was defeated, Dionysius retired to defend
Syracuse, and his abandoned allies left him (Diod. Sic. XIV. 58. i–ii, 59–61).
In the winter of 396/5 he sent his brother-in-law Polyxenus with a further appeal
to the Greeks of Italy and to the Spartans and other Greeks. Himilco sailed into
the great harbour of Syracuse, landed and overran the countryside, allegedly
raiding temples of Demeter and Core and desecrating tombs (Diod. Sic. XIV.
62–63. iii).
In 395 Polyxenus brought thirty ships from Sparta and elsewhere, with 
the Spartan ‘Pharacidas’ (perhaps the Pharax who had been active in the
Aegean: cf. pp. 207–8). While Dionysius and Leptines were away to fetch sup-
plies, the Syracusans won a naval battle: this led to a Syracusan challenge to 
Dionysius, but Pharacidas and the mercenaries remained loyal to him. Then 
the Carthaginians were again hit by a plague. Dionysius was victorious in a
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
281

combined land and sea attack, after which Himilco gave him a bribe of 300
talents, it is alleged, and sailed away at night. Of the remainder of his force the
Sicels escaped, the Iberians were enrolled as mercenaries by Dionysius, the rest
were captured and sold. Himilco’s shameful return prompted a serious revolt
in Libya and led him to commit suicide (Diod. Sic. XIV. 63. iv–77).
Dionysius’ mercenaries were unpaid and disaffected: in the last attack on the
Carthaginians he had contrived the death of some (Diod. Sic. XIV. 72. ii–iii);
after the war he settled the others in Leontini and hired a fresh force. In
Messana he settled Locrians and others, including fugitive Messenians (cf. pp.
28–9, 44, 125), but he moved the Messenians elsewhere when Sparta protested
against their being placed in the city named after Messenia. In 395–394 he cam-
paigned successfully against the Sicels (Diod. Sic. XIV. 78). In 394, with Locri
allied to Dionysius and Messana resettled by him, Rhegium felt threatened. It
therefore welcomed opponents of Dionysius and settled some at Mylae, on the
north coast, and then (under Heloris, a former supporter of Dionysius now 
in exile) attacked Messana; but Messana defeated the Rhegians and captured
Mylae. In the winter Dionysius made an unsuccessful attack on Tauromenium,
in which he was nearly killed; after which Messana and Acragas defected from
him (Diod. Sic. XIV. 87–8).
In the same winter, 394/3, Athens honoured Dionysius and tried to detach
him from Sparta. Conon’s plan for a marriage alliance between Dionysius and
Evagoras of Salamis came to nothing, but it was claimed that Dionysius had
been dissuaded from sending ships to support Sparta (IG ii2 18 = R&O 10 ~
Harding 20, Lys. XIX. Property of Aristophanes 19–20; cf. p. 227).
Mago, it seems, had been left by Himilco in Sicily, and he began a Carthagi-
nian recovery, with mild treatment of subjects and encouragement of Diony-
sius’ opponents. In 393 he attacked Messana but was defeated by Dionysius at 
Abacaene. Dionysius next made a surprise attack on Rhegium, burning the
gates but failing to get in, and then made a year’s truce (Diod. Sic. 90. ii–vii).
In 392 Mago was sent reinforcements from Carthage, and he won over most
of the Sicels’ cities but not the strong city of Agyrium. Dionysius went there,
cut Mago’s supply lines and waited to starve him, but was unsuccessful since
the Syracusan army grew impatient and returned home. Carthage offered and
Dionysius accepted terms similar to those of 405 (cf. p. 279), except that the
Sicels were made subject to him: the Carthaginians were thus accepting that
they had failed to conquer the east of the island. Dionysius replaced the Sicels
in Tauromenium with some of his mercenaries (Diod. Sic. XIV. 95–96. i; from
the chronological source XVI. 7. i has under 358/7 another foundation of 
Tauromenium, with survivors from the old Naxos, by Andromachus, father of
the historian Timaeus).
In southern Italy a league comprising Croton and neighbouring cities, with
institutions copied from Achaea, had been formed some time before 417 
(cf. pp. 79–80). About 393, under pressure from the Lucanians on one side and
Dionysius on the other, other cities of south-west Italy including Rhegium
joined them in an enlarged Italiot League (Diod. Sic. XIV. 91. i). Peace with
282
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

Carthage enabled Dionysius to deal with Rhegium, and that was now to involve
dealing with the League. In 390 he made Locri his base for a war against
Rhegium and Croton, but an attempt to intercept ships sailing from Croton to
Rhegium failed when Dionysius was caught in a storm. He made an alliance
with the Lucanians, who in 389 defeated Thurii: some surviving Thurians ﬂed
to passing ships, which turned out to be a Syracusan squadron under Leptines.
However, instead of completing the Lucanian victory Leptines arranged a set-
tlement between the Lucanians and the League, to which Dionysius reacted by
replacing him with his brother Thearidas (Diod. Sic. XIV. 100–102. iii).
In 388 Thearidas captured a Rhegian squadron in the Lipari Islands, while
Dionysius began a siege of Caulonia; the resistance was coordinated by Croton,
with the exiled Syracusan Heloris in command. At the River Eleporus, north
of Caulonia, Dionysius ﬁrst defeated and killed Heloris with an advance party
and then defeated the main army, but he released his prisoners and left the
cities of the League independent. Rhegium, threatened with a siege, submitted,
and had to pay an indemnity, surrender its ships and give hostages. Caulonia
and Hipponium were destroyed, their citizens transported to Syracuse and their
land given to Locri (Diod. Sic. XIV. 103–106. iii, 107. ii–iv). Dionysius was not
yet ﬁnished with Rhegium. In 387 after provoking a breach of the settlement
he began a siege. He suffered a nearly fatal wound, but in 386, after almost a
year, starvation led to Rhegium’s unconditional surrender; its general Phyton
was humiliated and killed, and its citizens were ransomed or sold as slaves
(Diod. Sic. XIV. 107. v–108, 111–12). It is said that Dionysius intended, but
did not manage, to build a wall across the toe of Italy to strengthen his posi-
tion there (Strabo 261. VI. i. 10).
With Dionysius at the height of his power, we pass from the detailed narra-
tive of Diodorus XIV to the scraps of book XV.
Since Lysias’ speech urging Dionysius’ exclusion from the Olympic games
(XXXIII. Olympic, where 5 calls him ‘the tyrant of Sicily’) ﬁts better into a
context after the Peace of Antalcidas, it was probably in 384 rather than 388
that Dionysius sent his brother Thearidas with chariots and his poems to
compete there: not only did Lysias denounce Dionysius, but his poems were
laughed at, his chariots were involved in accidents and the homeward-bound
ship was driven into Taras by a storm (Diod. Sic. XIV. 109. i–vi, 388/7; XV. 7.
ii–iii, 386/5). In Syracuse Dionysius was trying to build up a court circle, but
had to face home truths about his poetry from the dithyrambist Philoxenus and
about his tyranny from Plato. Dionysius’ brother-in-law Dion had introduced
Plato to Dionysius, and after the encounter Plato had to be got out of 
Syracuse, though the story that Dionysius had him sold as a slave is likely to
be a ﬁction (Diod. Sic. XV. 6–7. i, Plut. Dion 4–5. vii).
Dionysius had trouble with men who initially had supported him. Of early
supporters, Hipparinus had died; Polyxenus is not heard of after being sent to
support Sparta in 387 (below); Heloris, previously described as Dionysius’
adopted father (Diod. Sic. XIV. 8. v), was in exile by the late 390’s, serving
Dionysius’s enemies Rhegium and the Italiot League. Of Dionysius’ brothers,
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
283

Leptines was dismissed after reconciling Thurii and the Lucanians, but 
Thearidas seems not to have suffered for his involvement in the ﬁasco at
Olympia. Diodorus reports that Leptines and Dionysius’ early backer Philistus
were exiled and welcomed in Thurii but later returned; Leptines on his return
married one of Dionysius’ daughters, and fought and died at Cronium (XV. 7.
iii–iv; Cronium p. 285). According to Plutarch Philistus was exiled for showing
his ambition by marrying a daughter of Leptines: he went to the Adriatic and
(this at least seems to be correct) did not return until after Dionysius I’s death
(Plut. Dion 11. iv–vii).
Abroad, after conquering the toe of Italy, Dionysius extended his interests
further. While he had not sent help to Sparta in 393, he did send Polyxenus
with ships to join Antalcidas in the Hellespont in 387 (Xen. Hell. V. i. 26:
cf. above). Diodorus (XV. 13, 385/4; 14, 384/3) begins by mentioning the Ionic
Gulf, Epirus and a plan to sack Delphi (presumably an unfounded rumour: cf.
Jason of Pherae, p. 252). Dionysius made an alliance with the Illyrians and
helped them to restore Alcetas, an exile in Syracuse, as king of Molossis, despite
Spartan intervention on the other side (for Alcetas in the 370’s cf. p. 234). He
had already founded a colony at a site probably to be read as Issa = Vis, one of
the islands off the Dalmatian coast. (The manuscripts of Diodorus seem to refer
to Lissus = Lesh, on the mainland 35 miles = 55km. north of Epidamnus, but
that seems not to have been settled this early; however, SIG3 141, recording the
sending of settlers from Issa to Black Corcyra = Korcˇula, is now known to be
of the late fourth or early third century, and so does not prove that Issa was
settled by Dionysius.) From this base Dionysius did something which is lost in
a lacuna in Diodorus’ text, and he helped the Parians when they colonised
nearby Pharos = Hvar, and again later when the Illyrians supported the natives
against the settlers. A fragment of Theopompus (FGrH 115 F 128c) seems to
credit Dionysius with a presumably short-lived colony at Adria, at the mouth
of the Po; but Ancona, on the Italian mainland about the same latitude as Issa,
is said to have been founded by opponents of Dionysius (Strabo 241. V. iv. 2).
On the other side of Italy Dionysius raided the Etruscan temple of Agylla =
Caere (cf. Strabo 226.V. ii. 8: the Etruscans were friends of Carthage; and it is
alleged that the Gauls after their sack of Rome in 386 offered him an alliance
[Just. Epit. XX. 5. iv]).
In Syracuse Dionysius devoted himself to public works, as ambitious tyrants
often did: he is credited with grandiose temples and gymnasia, but also docks
and walls (Diod. Sic. XV. 13. v); and he spent the proceeds from Agylla on mer-
cenaries, with a view to another war against Carthage (Diod. Sic. XV. 14. iv).
Diodorus, while implying that that war was a lengthy one, narrates the whole
of it under 383/2 (XV. 15–17); some scholars prolong it to 374 because a
Spartan force sent to Corcyra then pretended to be heading for Sicily (Diod.
Sic. XV. 46. ii), which is possible but not certain. Dionysius provoked the war
by winning over the cities subject to Carthage. Carthage made an alliance with
the Italiot League, and its restoration of Hipponium, which Dionysius had
destroyed in 388 (Diod. Sic. XV. 24. i, from the chronological source), is 
284
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

presumably an episode in this war. So too, probably, are a naval attack by 
Dionysius on Thurii, frustrated by the wind (Ael. V.H. XII. 61), and his capture
of Croton (Livy XXIV. 3. viii, Dion. Hal. Ant. Rom. XX. 7. iii). It is possible
also that during this war he lost Locri and had to recover it (cf. Just. Epit. XXI.
2, Pl. Leg. I. 638 B 1–2).The war ended with two major battles. First, at Cabala
Dionysius was victorious and Mago was killed.Then the Carthaginians offered
terms and Dionysius demanded withdrawal from Sicily and repayment of his
costs, so they made a truce. However, Mago’s son (Himilco if Polyaenus Strat.
V. 10. v belongs here) revived the army and returned (cf. Polyaenus Strat. VI.
16. i). Then at Cronium, near Panormus, the Carthaginians were victorious 
and the reinstated Leptines was killed. Carthage now proposed terms which
Dionysius accepted: Carthage was to have Selinus and the territory of Acragas
as far as the River Halycus, and Dionysius had to pay 1,000 talents. (These
cities had been in the Carthaginian sphere before, but had perhaps gone over
to Dionysius. It is disputed whether the river is correctly called Halycus or
Lycus, but it appears in any case to be the Platani, between Selinus and Acragas
with Heraclea Minoa at its mouth: Heraclea will have been a possession of
Acragas now ceded to Carthage.)
Dionysius was sufﬁciently recovered to send help to Sparta in 372, and again
in 369 and 368 (cf. pp. 215, 218: in 372 his ships, with dedications for Delphi
and Olympia, were captured by the Athenian Iphicrates). After Leuctra Athens
was on the same side as Sparta, and in 368 Dionysius was made an ally of
Athens but was not accepted by Athens’ allies as a member of the League (cf.
pp. 232, 236).
As for Carthage, Diodorus mentions a plague and a revolt of the Libyans
and Sardinia in connection with the restoration of Hipponium (XV. 24. ii–iii,
379/8), and a plague and a revolt of the Libyans as providing the opportunity
for Dionysius’ last Carthaginian war, in 368 (XV. 73. i). Presumably these re-
ferences are to the same plague and revolt, which will have begun not many
years before 368. In 368 Dionysius manufactured a border dispute and invaded
western Sicily; he won over Selinus and Entella, and captured Eryx but failed
to take Lilybaeum. On hearing of a ﬁre in the Carthaginian docks he sent most
of his ships back to Syracuse, but the Carthaginians sent a ﬂeet under Hanno
(Polyaenus Strat. V. 9), which unexpectedly attacked the ships in the harbour
below Eryx and captured them. A truce was made for the winter (Diod. Sic.
XV. 73. i–iv) – and during that winter Dionysius died (cf. below), and his suc-
cessor Dionysius II made peace with Carthage (Diod. Sic. XV. 73. v, XVI. 5.
i–ii).
Himilco seems not to have succeeded Mago as Carthaginian basileus: Hanno,
the commander in 368, was a rich man and strongly anti-Greek but not a
Magonid. He secured the condemnation of his rival Suniatus [Eshmuniaton],
who was in touch with Dionysius; and some time later he tried to seize auto-
cratic power, eventually with the support of a slave class and the Libyans, but
was suppressed (Arist. Pol. V. 1307 A 2–5, Just. Epit. XX. 5. xi, XXI. 4). After
that Carthage settled into the constitution which Aristotle compared with the
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
285

Spartan and the ‘Cretan’. The council (gerousia) was divided into pentarchies
which chose the Hundred and Four; there were still basileis, from a range of
families, who commanded the armies subject to the control of the Hundred
and Four; there were institutions which could be compared with the Spartan
messes; and there was an assembly, which had the opportunity to exercise power
when the ofﬁcials and council disagreed (Pol. II. 1272 B 24–1273 B 26).
Having become an ally of Athens in 368, Dionysius I sent his tragedy The
Ransom of Hector for performance at the Lenaea early in 367, and it was awarded
the ﬁrst prize. Diodorus has a story of his dying through excessive celebration
of that success, and in this way rather than by beating the Carthaginians ful-
ﬁlling an oracle that he would die when he had defeated his betters (XV. 74.
i–iv). IG ii2 105 + 223 = R&O 34 ~ Harding 52 should not, as it once was, be
dated to the later part of 368/7, and there is no reason why Dionysius should
not have died shortly after the Lenaea and why the story should not be based
on that much truth: if he ‘became tyrant’ in 406/5, the sources will be correct
in giving him thirty-eight years in power.
It is hard to make a fair assessment of Dionysius’ rule, since we hear of little
apart from warfare, and have a detailed but hostile account for the ﬁrst half of
his reign but a perfunctory account for the second. He rose to power through
dissatisfaction with the unsuccessful resistance to Carthage, but was not himself
a great deal more successful, which provoked opposition to him. Carthage
tended to deal more cruelly than Greeks with defeated enemies, and Greeks
forced to choose between Carthage and Dionysius tended to prefer Dionysius;
Syracuse itself was never taken by the Carthaginians, and a division of Sicily
between Carthage in the west and Syracuse in the east became established.
Outside the Carthaginian sphere, at his most powerful Dionysius controlled
much of Sicily, the toe of Italy and some places further aﬁeld. In Sicily some
old cities died, some new ones came into existence, movements of population
and Carthaginian attacks were so frequent that there was little stability except
in Syracuse. Dionysius portrayed himself as a just ruler, and gave his daughters
the names of virtues; intellectuals were welcome at his court as long as they did
not speak too freely; the constitutional mechanisms of the polis seem not to have
been entirely abolished, but his son Dionysius II succeeded to his position
without difﬁculty. In some ways Dionysius I foreshadows the hellenistic kings,
but it is unlikely that he used the title basileus, and the story of his wearing the
Persian diadem (Livy XXIV. 5. iii–iv) was perhaps invented as a precedent for
Hieron in the third century.
Dionysius II and the Liberators
Dionysius II, whose mother was Doris of Locri, was Dionysius I’s eldest son.
Whereas Dion and Timoleon caught the Greeks’ imagination, we know little
about him. It was alleged that Dion had tried to induce the elder Dionysius to
leave the tyranny to his sons by Dion’s sister Aristomache (Nep. X. Dion 2. iv–v,
286
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

Plut. Dion 6. ii–iii). Diodorus suggests that the younger Dionysius had had little
education and was not a dynamic man (Diod. Sic. XVI. 5).
Dion tried to attend to his education, bringing back Plato for the purpose,
and Dion’s opponents secured the recall of Philistus to act as a counterpoise.
Dion was accused of instructing the Carthaginians to negotiate only through
him, and was got out of the city to Greece; Plato failed to achieve a reconcilia-
tion, and at the end of a war about which we know nothing he returned to
Athens (Pl. Ep. vii. 328 B–330 C, 337 E–338 A, cf. Ep. iii. 316 C–317 A, Plut.
Dion 9–17, Diod. Sic. XVI. 6. ii–iv). Later Dionysius induced Plato to visit again
(he was in Syracuse when there was an eclipse of the moon, on 12 May 361:
Plut. Dion 19. vi), but he failed to achieve a recall of Dion; instead relations
worsened, Dion’s property was conﬁscated and his niece and wife Arete given
another husband. A mutiny among mercenaries whose pay had been reduced
was blamed on Heraclides, an associate of Dion, who escaped from Syracuse;
and in 360 Plato left (Pl. Ep. vii. 338 A–341 A, 345 C–350 B, cf. Ep. iii. 317 A,
318 C, Plut. Dion 18–21; Diod. Sic. omits this visit, and XVI. 6. iv has Hera-
clides leaving with Dion). Plato met Dion at the Olympic festival that summer,
and Dion began to plan his return to Syracuse (Pl. Ep. vii. 350 B–E).
It took time for Dion to gather supporters: his links with Plato will have 
made him suspect to some, others will have thought he merely wanted to take
Dionysius’ place. Even Plato saw in him ambition and desire for revenge as well
as idealism (Ep. vii. 350 B–351 C); Aristotle, who is silent on the Platonic con-
nection, mentions Dion’s contempt for Dionysius as a drunkard, and cate-
gorises Dion as ambitious not for his own advantage but for glory, and as a man
within the family who overthrew a tyrant (Pol. V. 1312 A 4–6, 21–39, B 16–17).
In 357 (after an eclipse of the moon on 9 August: Plut. Dion 24. i) he set out
from Zacynthus with a few fellow exiles, a small mercenary force and a supply
of arms for the Sicilians (the success of so small a force was remarked on already
in 355: Dem. XX. Leptines 162). Dionysius was away in Italy, and Philistus was
watching the short sea crossing, so Dion crossed the open sea to Heraclea
Minoa, where the Carthaginian governor was a friend. As in Diodorus’ account,
Heraclides should be seen as a partner, to follow with reinforcements; Plutarch
projects back their later quarrel and makes him a rival liberator (Diod. Sic. XVI.
6. v, 9. ii–iv, cf. 10. v, 11. iii, Plut. Dion 22–26. i, 32. iii–iv).
Dion advanced on Syracuse, picking up support from Greek cities, Sicans
and Sicels, and some Italiots. He was welcomed by the Syracusans despite the
attempts of Timocrates (the man who had taken over his wife) to keep them
under control, and made a triumphal entry into the outer city. The assembly
offered to make him and his brother Megacles strategoi autokratores, but they
insisted on a board of twenty, half from the city and half returned exiles.
Timocrates ﬂed, leaving Ortygia with a garrison but no commander. Dionysius
had heard the news, and returned seven days after Dion’s entry. He opened
negotiations and tried to import food; on one occasion he attacked the outer
city but was beaten back. In reporting the negotiations, Diodorus concentrates
on Dion’s attempts to outwit Dionysius, while Plutarch shows Dionysius trying
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
287

to drive a wedge between Dion and the citizens. Philistus returned, bringing
cavalry from Rhegium (which Dionysius II had refounded: Strabo 258. VI.
i. 6); he tried to recover Leontini for Dionysius, but the Syracusans helped 
the Leontinians to defeat him (Diod. Sic. XVI. 9. v–13, 16. i, Plut. Dion 26.
ii–32. ii).
Perhaps in 356 Heraclides arrived with his forces. He was elected navarch,
but Dion insisted on his being a subordinate, not an independent commander,
and in a battle he defeated Philistus, who committed suicide or was killed.
Dionysius resumed negotiations, and when unsuccessful departed to Locri,
leaving his son Apollocrates with the garrison in Ortygia. A rift opened between
Dion, who had perhaps been too tolerant of Dionysius’ overtures and was cer-
tainly no democrat, and Heraclides, who was blamed for letting Dionysius
escape and who became a supporter of extreme measures including redistri-
bution of land. A new board of twenty-ﬁve generals was appointed, including
Heraclides but not Dion. Dion joined the mercenaries, whose pay was in
arrears, and withdrew to Leontini, pursued by the Syracusans but defeating
them (Diod. Sic. XVI. 16. ii–17, Plut. Dion 32. ii–40). It was perhaps at this
point that three prostatai of the city were elected: Heraclides, Athanis (who was
to continue Philistus’ history) and an Achaean (Theopompus FGrH 115 F
194).
The garrison in Ortygia was starving, but in 355 Dionysius sent a man called
Nypsius with supplies. After his arrival the citizens won a battle, but later he
overran the outer city; and in response the Syracusans recalled Dion and the
mercenaries, who regained the outer city. Dion was proposed as strategos
autokrator by Heraclides, but the poorer citizens objected; Dion retained 
Heraclides as navarch, but insisted on annulling the redistribution of land.
Heraclides led an expedition to Messana and disparaged Dion; a Spartan agent
called Pharax complicated matters before joining Dionysius; another Spartan
agent, Gaesylus, arranged an uneasy reconciliation between Dion and Hera-
clides. By now the garrison was again starving, Apollocrates negotiated for its
withdrawal, and the whole of Syracuse came under the control of Dion; the citi-
zens voted to honour him as a hero (Diod. Sic. XVI. 18–20, Plut. Dion 41–52:
hero, benefactor and saviour Diod. 20. vi, saviour and god Plut. 46. i). Perhaps
now, Dion and Heraclides were listed together in the record of thearodokoi to
look after messengers from the sanctuary at Epidaurus (IG IV2. i 95. 39–40).
Dion was still in touch with Plato (cf. Pl. Ep. iv). In Syracuse he refused to
demolish the citadel or Dionysius I’s tomb, or to discharge his mercenaries; he
apparently hoped to set up some kind of oligarchy, and summoned advisers
from Corinth. Heraclides objected, and we read that Dion procured his assas-
sination but when he was safely dead gave him a grand funeral. In 354, however,
the Athenian Callippus, who had come to Syracuse with Dion (said to be a 
Platonist, but Plat. Ep. vii. 333 E denies this), had Dion murdered (Plut. Dion
53–7, cf. Tim. 1. ii, Diod. Sic. XVI. 31. vii). It is hard to be sure what kind of
régime Dion had envisaged for Syracuse: he had no doubt learned something
from Plato, but he probably objected speciﬁcally to Dionysius II rather than to
288
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

autocratic rule as such. The Platonic Letters vii, defending Plato’s involvement
in Syracuse, and viii, advising what to do next, belong to the context shortly
after Dion’s death.
Syracuse then suffered under a series of rulers. Callippus lasted thirteen
months: in 353, while he was attacking Catana, Hipparinus (half-brother of
Dionysius II and nephew of Dion) set out from Leontini, where Dion’s sup-
porters had ﬂed, and captured Syracuse (Plut. Dion 58. i–iv, cf. Diod. Sic. XVI.
36. v). Callippus, driven from Sicily, captured Rhegium from a garrison
installed by Dionysius, but was murdered there (Plut. Dion 58. v–vii, cf. Diod.
Sic. XVI. 45. ix). In 351, when Hipparinus was killed, he was succeeded by his
brother Nysaeus; both are said to have been drunkards (Theopompus FGrH
115 FF 186–8, Ael. V.H. II. 41). Dionysius since 356 had been based in Locri:
about 346 he was expelled from there and his wife and daughters were tortured
and killed. He returned to Syracuse, captured it from Nysaeus and, embittered
by his exile, ruled savagely (Plut. Tim. 1. i–v, Just. Epit. XXI. 3. ix–x). Dion’s
supporters then appealed to Hicetas, a friend of Dion (Plut. Dion 58. viii) now
ruling in Leontini (and recorded as Leontini’s Epidaurian thearodokos in IG iv2.
1 95. 66–8): ‘not better than any of those who were admittedly tyrants, but they
had no one else to turn to’ (Plut. Tim. 1. vi).
Hicetas encouraged the Syracusans to appeal to their mother city, Corinth,
but also opened negotiations with Carthage. Corinth saw this as an opportu-
nity to deal with the embarrassment of Timoleon, who c.365 (but Diodorus
makes the episode recent) had been involved in the killing of his own brother
Timophanes when he tried to make himself tyrant (cf. p. 219): if Timoleon
wanted to oppose tyranny, let him do it in Sicily. Early in 344 Timoleon was
sent with a small force (but a dedication, SEG xi 126a = R&O 74, points to
more support from Corinth and its colonies, eventually if not at ﬁrst, than our
literary sources reveal). Hicetas, once he was certain of Carthaginian support,
told the Corinthians not to bother to send help, but Timoleon went neverthe-
less (Diod. Sic. XVI. 65, 66. i–v, Plut. Tim. 2–8).
Hicetas attacked Syracuse, feigning retreat and defeating Dionysius’ forces
when they pursued him. Meanwhile the Carthaginians sent a large force under
Hanno (if this is Hanno the great, his downfall came soon afterwards, and
Mago’s withdrawal from Syracuse in 343 may be connected with it), which cap-
tured Entella. Hicetas had some Carthaginian ships sent to intercept Timoleon
at Rhegium, but he slipped away and reached Tauromenium, where he was 
welcomed by Andromachus. (Andromachus, whose son was Timaeus, is never
described as a tyrant, and was not overthrown by Timoleon – whether because
he was virtuous or because he was the ﬁrst to welcome Timoleon.) At Adranum,
to the south of Mount Etna, Hicetas and Timoleon were invited to support
opposing parties, and Timoleon, despite his inferior numbers, was successful in
a surprise attack (Diod. Sic. XVI. 66. v–68. x, Plut. Tim. 9–12).
On the liberation of Syracuse Diodorus and Plutarch diverge irreconcilably.
In Diodorus’ account, spread over three years (XVI. 68. xi, 69. iii–vi, 70. i–iii),
Timoleon marched on Syracuse immediately after his success at Adranum
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
289

[345/4]. He occupied the outskirts while Hicetas was in the middle city and
Dionysius in Ortygia, and the Carthaginian ﬂeet arrived in the great harbour.
He received reinforcements from ‘Marcus’ of Catana and from Corinth; the
Carthaginians withdrew, leaving Hicetas isolated and Timoleon able to take over
the whole of the outer city [344/3]. Finally Dionysius surrendered, and was dis-
patched to retirement in Corinth [343/2: cf. the papyrus chronicle, P. Oxy. i 12
= FGrH 255, iv]. In Plutarch’s account (Tim. 13–21) the success at Adranum
won Timoleon allies, in particular Mamercus of Catana. Within ﬁfty days of
Timoleon’s arrival in Sicily (16. ii) Dionysius surrendered to him, and 
Timoleon sent men to take over Ortygia and dispatched Dionysius to Corinth.
Hicetas besieged Ortygia but failed to procure the assassination of Timoleon;
the Carthaginians under Mago sailed into the great harbour. Hicetas and Mago
attacked Catana, from which Timoleon was supplying Ortygia, but returned to
Syracuse when the garrison captured part of the outer city. Despite Hanno’s
attempt to prevent it, reinforcements from Corinth reached Timoleon, and he
then marched on Syracuse. His soldiers and those of Hicetas began to frater-
nise; Mago departed; Timoleon made a three-pronged attack and was victori-
ous with no losses, and so gained control of all Syracuse.
Certainty is impossible, but most scholars have preferred Plutarch’s order of
events. If that is right, what will have happened quickly is that Timoleon,
perhaps representing himself to Dionysius as an ally, persuaded him to hand
over Ortygia and retire to Catana; in 343 the Carthaginians arrived in the
harbour but inexplicably departed, Hicetas was defeated but was allowed to
withdraw with his surviving forces, and ﬁnally Dionysius was shown that he had
no future in Sicily and sent to Corinth.
Unlike Dion, Timoleon did demolish the tyrants’ buildings in Ortygia. He
gave Syracuse a new constitution, reported by Diodorus in two phases: in the
ﬁrst, ‘democracy’, with a new code of laws, emphasising equality in private rela-
tions, and the amphipolos of Olympian Zeus as the chief annual ofﬁcial; in the
second, connected with an invitation to men to settle in Syracuse, a revision of
the ‘laws of Diocles’ (cf. pp. 274–5) bearing on public affairs, guided by a
Corinthian called Cephalus (Diod. Sic. XVI. 70. iv–vi [343/2], 82. vi–vii
[339/8], cf. Plut. Tim. 22. i–iii, 23, 24. iii). The two phases may be authentic;
the Dionysii had not abolished all political institutions, but after the ending of
the tyranny and the departure of its supporters a comprehensive reform was
necessary, and while some matters had to be decided quickly others will have
taken time. Under Corinthian inﬂuence, ‘democracy’ is not likely to be more
speciﬁc than constitutional government; a powerful council is likely, but it 
is not clear whether the synedrion of six hundred involved in the later rise of
Agathocles (Diod. Sic. XIX. 5. vi with 4. iii, 6. iv: cf. p. 292) is that council
degenerated or a later creation; there are various references to decisions of an
assembly (Diod. Sic. XVI. 90. i, XIX. 3. iv, 5. v, Plut. Tim. 38. iv, 39. v).
However, Timoleon himself retained a powerful position, probably as strategos
autokrator, and Plutarch quotes a resolution of ‘Timoleon and the Syracusans’
290
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

(Tim. 22. viii); after he ﬁnally resigned, there was perhaps an annual board of
generals (cf. Diod. Sic. XIX. 3. i, iii).
Settlers (Diod. Sic. XVI. 82. iii, v, 83, cf. XIX. 2. viii, Plut. Tim. 22. iv–24.
i) must have been badly needed, as in the upheavals since the return of Dion
many people had been killed and many more must have ﬂed from what had
previously been Sicily’s greatest city. Attracting settlers will have taken time,
since at ﬁrst people must have hesitated to believe that Timoleon’s régime would
be better than previous régimes; but in the end they came, more from Sicily
and southern Italy than from Greece and the Aegean, and the archaeological
evidence points to an impressive revival not only in Syracuse but throughout
Greek Sicily. Coins of Corinth and its colonies found their way to Sicily in large
quantities, presumably in payment for Sicilian agricultural produce, and 
Syracuse and brieﬂy Leontini issued coins of Corinthian type (Kraay p. 236
nos. 820, 854).
Meanwhile, in the rest of Sicily there were still tyrants and Carthaginians,
and Timoleon set out to deal with both. In 342 he failed to capture Leontini,
to which Hicetas had returned, but he liberated Engyum and Apollonia, sending
Apollonia’s tyrant Leptines to join Dionysius in Corinth. In Timoleon’s absence
Hicetas attacked Syracuse and was defeated, but it seems unlikely that, as
Plutarch claims, he was persuaded to resign his tyranny. Timoleon raided the
rest of the island, to liberate Entella and other cities, and to obtain booty to
help pay for the mercenaries (Diod. Sic. XVI. 72. ii–73. ii, Plut. Tim. 24.
i–ii, iv). Mago had committed suicide after abandoning Syracuse in 343 (Plut.
Tim. 22. viii); but perhaps in 341 (Diodorus has nothing on Sicily between
342/1 and 340/39) the Carthaginians sent a fresh expedition, and Timoleon 
was able to include in his army troops from Leontini. He invaded the west of
the island, and his great inferiority in numbers (12,000 [Diodorus] or 7,000
[Plutarch] against 70,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry from Carthage) was
increased when a body of mercenaries deserted. However, at the River Crimi-
sus (probably the Belice, which enters the sea near Selinus) he was helped by
a hailstorm which blew on to his men’s backs and into the enemy’s faces to
defeat the Carthaginians and capture their camp; the surviving Carthaginians
withdrew to Lilybaeum.Timoleon did not follow up the victory, but it was cele-
brated as a great success, with dedications in Syracuse and Corinth (Diod. Sic.
XVI. 73. iii, 77. iv–81. ii, Plut. Tim. 25–30. iii: Plutarch 29. v–vi quotes a dedica-
tion by ‘the Corinthians and Timoleon the general’, but the surviving inscrip-
tion from Corinth, SEG xi 126a = R&O 74, is a dedication by Syracuse and
various Corinthian colonies).
In 340 we ﬁnd Hicetas and Mamercus of Catana in alliance with the
Carthaginians, commanded by Gescon (Hanno’s son, recalled from exile) and
for the ﬁrst time using Greek mercenaries, and they had successes both in 
the west and in the north-east of Sicily (Diod. Sic. XVI. 81. iii–iv, Plut. Tim.
30. iv–x). In 339, however, Timoleon won victories over Hicetas and over
Mamercus and the Carthaginians, after which the Carthaginians made peace.
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
291

Their sphere was once more to be bounded by the River (Ha)lycus (cf. p. 285);
the Greek cities were to be free, and Carthage was not to support tyrants (Diod.
Sic. XVI. 81. iii–iv, 82. iii, Plut. Tim. 31, 34. i–ii). Timoleon was then free to
deal with the remaining tyrants. Hicetas was captured and executed, perhaps
after a trial; the tyrants of Centuripa and Agyrium were overthrown and 
publicly executed; liberated cities were brought into alliance with Syracuse.
Mamercus went to Italy to gain the support of the Lucanians, but his supporters
turned back and surrendered Catana to Timoleon; Mamercus took refuge with
Hippo in Messana, but in 337 Hippo was captured in an attempted escape and
tortured to death. After that Mamercus surrendered and was put to death in
Syracuse (Diod. Sic. XVI. 82. iv, Plut. Tim. 32–3, Polyaenus Strat. V. 12. ii).
The population of Leontini was transported to Syracuse, but that of Camarina
was reinforced (Diod. Sic. XVI. 82. vii).
The tyrants had been disposed of, and Timoleon was going blind, so he
resigned ‘after serving as general for eight years’. Soon afterwards he died; he
was honoured before his death and buried gloriously after it (Diod. Sic. XVI.
90. i, Plut. Tim. 37. iv–39). His propaganda attributed his success to the favour
of the gods and the good fortune which that brought; Polybius belittled his
achievement, and criticised Timaeus for his extravagant praise of it (XII. 23.
iv–vii). The truth appears to be that Timoleon genuinely did disapprove of
despotic rule, but was prepared to hold a quasi-tyrannical position and to beat
the tyrants at their own tricks in order to achieve their overthrow. He was an
able commander, good at improvising, and picked good subordinates. He did
not drive the Carthaginians back from the position they had obtained at the
beginning of the century, but he limited them to that, and he brought the rest
of Sicily a generation of peace and prosperity, at a time when Philip of Macedon
was making himself master of Greece (cf. chapter 22). But he could not satisfy
everybody: we hear nothing of Sicily in the time of Alexander the Great, but in
317 Agathocles made himself tyrant in Syracuse, offering a cancellation of debts
and redistribution of land.
On the Italian Greeks we have little information except where they are caught
up in Sicilian history. Sparta’s colony Taras was one of the most ﬂourishing
cities, becoming the leader of the Italiot League, and transferring the League’s
sanctuary from Croton to Heraclea in 374. An inﬂuential ﬁgure in the second
quarter of the century was Archytas, a philosopher-politician who was general
seven times in wars against the Messapians, and who helped to arrange for
Plato’s ﬁnal departure from Syracuse in 360 (Pl. Ep. vii. 338 C, 350 A–B, Plut.
Dion 20, Diog. Laert. VIII. 79–82). Rhegium seems to have become indepen-
dent after it was captured from Dionysius II by Callippus at the end of the
350’s, and Locri expelled Dionysius c.346 (cf. p. 289). In 346 Taras was at war
with the Lucanians. Phalaecus, the last Phocian general in the Third Sacred
War, set out with his mercenaries to ﬁnd employment in this war, but they
mutinied; Sparta sent king Archidamus with a force to support Taras, but he
was killed in battle in 338 (Diod. Sic. XVI. 61. iv–63. ii, 88. iii–iv: cf. pp. 344–5).
Perhaps from 334 to 331 Alexander of Molossis went to ﬁght for Taras (the ﬁrst
292
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON

of a series of Epirote interventions in Italy which eventually were to bring Rome
into the Balkan peninsula; he is said to have made a treaty with Rome): he
overran much of southern Italy, but his successes alarmed Taras, which turned
against him, and he died in a battle against the Italians (Livy VIII. 3. vi, 24,
Strabo 256.VI. i. 5, 280 VI. iii. 4, Just. Epit. XII. 2. i–xv).The other Greek city
which became particularly important was Neapolis, which seems to have
enjoyed a good relationship with its Italian neighbours, and which may have
made a treaty with Rome in 326 (Livy VIII. 26. vi).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
Freeman, History of Sicily, vol. iv, was edited after Freeman’s death by A. J. Evans. For
a shorter but more up-to-date account see Finley, Ancient Sicily.
On the sources of our sources, for Diod. Sic. XIII–XV see D. M. Lewis, CAH2 vi,
121–3, with citation of earlier discussions; for book XV Caven, Dionysius I, 187–8,
despairingly suggests that an original, fuller text has been ousted by an epitome. For
book XVI and the lives of Timoleon by Nepos and Plutarch see Talbert, Timoleon and
the Revival of Greek Sicily, ch. 2. On the Platonic Letters see Brunt, Studies in Greek
History and Thought, ch. 10, esp. 312–30, 339–42 (arguing that vii is reliable, whether
by Plato or not, iii is a rhetorical exercise derived from vii, viii must be a later exercise
since it is unaware of the suicide of Dion’s son).
On Dionysius I see Caven, Dionysius I. Dionysius’ ambitions and achievements in the
Adriatic are minimised by A. G. Woodhead, ‘The “Adriatic Empire” of Dionysius I of
Syracuse’, Klio lii 1970, 503–12.
On Dion see H. D.Westlake, ‘Dion: A Study in Liberation’, DUJ2 vii 1945–6, 37–44
= his Essays on the Greek Historians and Greek History, ch. 15; ‘Friends and Successors
of Dion’, Hist. xxxii 1983, 161–72; Berve, Dion (in German). On Dion’s heroic honours
see A. B. Bosworth, ‘Heroic Honours in Syracuse’, in Heckel and Tritle (eds.), Cross-
roads of History:The Age of Alexander, ch. 1.
On Timoleon see H. D. Westlake, ‘Timoleon and the Reconstruction of Syracuse’,
CHJ vii 1941–3, 73–100 = his Essays, ch. 17; ‘The Purpose of Timoleon’s Mission’, AJP
lxx 1949, 65–75 = his Essays, ch. 16; Timoleon and His Relations with Tyrants; Talbert,
Timoleon and the Revival of Greek Sicily.
On the Carthaginians in Sicily see C. R.Whittaker, ‘Carthaginian Imperialism in the
Fifth and Fourth Centuries’, in Garnsey and Whittaker (eds.), Imperialism in the Ancient
World, ch. 3.
THE WESTERN GREEKS FROM DIONYSIUS I TO TIMOLEON
293

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
359
accession of Philip
357
capture of Amphipolis
356–346
Third Sacred War
346
Peace of Philocrates between Philip and Athens
340
Athenian declaration of war against Philip
340–338
Fourth Sacred War
338
Philip’s victory over Athens, Thebes and others in battle of
Chaeronea
336
assassination of Philip
Sources
Xenophon’s Hellenica ends in 362. Diodorus covers the reign of Philip in book
XVI: Ephorus wrote as far as the siege of Perinthus in 340/39 but without com-
pleting his history, and his son Demophilus ﬁlled a gap by writing book XXX,
on the Third Sacred War. A possible source for Diodorus where they were not
available is the rhetorical and anecdotal Athenian Diyllus (FGrH 73: cf. Diod.
Sic. XVI. 14. iii–v, 76. v–vi). The result in Diodorus is an account which is 
generally favourable to Philip, and more detailed before 346 than after. Our
other narrative account is in Latin, in the epitome of the Philippic History of
Pompeius Trogus (ﬁrst century BC) by Justin (variously dated between c.200
and c.400 AD), VII–IX, which is hostile to Philip.
22
Philip II of Macedon

PHILIP II OF MACEDON
295
There is plentiful but difﬁcult material in the Athenian orators, particularly
Demosthenes and Aeschines, who were much involved in the history of the
period and anxious to justify the positions which they had adopted at different
times. Demosthenes was born probably in 384/3, the son of a rich manufac-
turer of knives and beds. His father died when Demosthenes was seven, leaving
him under guardians who misappropriated his inheritance. It is alleged that he
originally studied oratory so that he could prosecute his guardians, and he won
his cases in 363 but had difﬁculty in recovering the property. From 355 he made
speeches in the assembly (he is the only Athenian orator from whom assembly
speeches survive: as with lawcourt speeches, the relationship between the texts
transmitted and the speeches originally delivered is controversial; cf. p. 315)
and in public prosecutions, but for some time he was consistently on the losing
side. He regarded Philip as a major threat from c.351 onwards, but between
348 and 346 favoured a peace which he expected to prove that his fears were
justiﬁed. He was therefore behind the Peace of Philocrates made with Philip in
346 but did not expect it to last; from 344 he looked for renewed conﬂict, and
gained support inside and outside Athens, but the conﬂict led to Philip’s victory
at Chaeronea in 338. He led the rejoicing when Philip was killed in 336, and
supported the revolt of Thebes in 335, but for much of Alexander’s reign he
was out of the limelight. He was involved in the scandal surrounding Alexan-
der’s ﬂeeing treasurer, Harpalus, in 324–323; he was behind the rising against
Macedon in the Lamian War after Alexander’s death; in 322 when Athens was
defeated he was demanded by Macedon but committed suicide. His speeches
and his policies have elicited strong reactions. In trying to evaluate them we
need to distinguish different questions: whether Philip was indeed a threat to
Athens and to all of Greece, and, if so, whether Demosthenes’ was the right
policy for opposing him.
Aeschines, one of Demosthenes’ opponents, was an older man, born prob-
ably c.390, and not from a rich background. His father was on the democratic
side and lost property in 404–403, and afterwards worked as a schoolmaster; his
mother was perhaps a priestess in a secret cult. He learned the art of speaking
as an actor, and by serving among the state secretaries he gained familiarity with
the working of Athens’ institutions and with the archives. Politically, he was a
supporter of Eubulus, opposed to Demosthenes’ plans for resistance to Philip.
Until 346 opposition to Demosthenes’ plans did not entail opposition to any
plans for resistance, but when the plans which Aeschines was supporting at the
beginning of 346 collapsed he felt peace had to be made with Philip, and then
and afterwards he wanted to trust Philip and make the best of the peace. In 343
he was narrowly acquitted when Demosthenes prosecuted him for his role in
346 (Dem. XIX. Embassy and Aeschin. II. Embassy belong to this trial); in 330
he was overwhelmingly defeated when he revived the prosecution, started but
abandoned in 336, of a man who had proposed honours for Demosthenes
(Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon, Dem. XVIII. Crown); and he then left Athens.
Isocrates was old but still writing. Speech-pamphlets from this period include
VIII. Peace, c.355, and VII. Areopagitic, c.354, on the external and internal poli-

tics of Athens respectively; XV. Antidosis, c.353, and XII. Panathenaic, 342–339,
defences of his career and the policies he had urged; V. Philip, 346, and two
Letters to Philip, urging Philip to lead the Greeks in a patriotic war against Persia
(cf. p. 191). Hyperides was a supporter of Demosthenes against Macedon from
the late 340s onwards, but prosecuted him in the affair of Harpalus. Lycurgus 
is best known as a ﬁnancier, but his one preserved speech is Against Leocrates,
a man accused of deserting Athens at the time of Chaeronea. From the
Corinthian Dinarchus we have three prosecution speeches for the Harpalus
affair. Demades was a man willing to collaborate with Macedon in the 330’s
and 320’s, but the speech On the Twelve Years defending his policies is a student’s
exercise.
From Plutarch for the reign of Philip we have lives of two Athenians, Dem-
osthenes and Phocion. We have inscriptions from Athens and elsewhere, in-
cluding part of the foundation document of Philip’s League of Corinth.
Macedon before Philip
Lower Macedonia was the plain surrounding the Thermaic Gulf (which
stretched farther inland than it does now: Pella was not far from the coast),
with communications in four directions: south via Tempe and Thessaly to
central and southern Greece, east through coastal Thrace to the Hellespont
(these were the two most attractive options for a king looking to expand), west
across the mountains to Illyria and the Adriatic, north by the Axius (present-
day Vardar/Axios) valley to the Danube basin. Surrounding the plain were the
hilly regions of Upper Macedonia, peopled by tribes with their own rulers,
which the kings of Macedon hoped to control.
In terms of ancient perceptions, the Macedonians were fringe Greeks, who
could be regarded as Greek or barbarian according to one’s convenience.Their
language was probably a dialect of Greek; their kings claimed to be descended
from Heracles, and were accepted as Greek for the purpose of competing in
the Olympic games from the beginning of the ﬁfth century (cf. Hdt.V. 22,VIII.
137. i, Thuc. II. 99. iii, V. 80. ii). In terms of present-day boundaries, Lower
and the southern part of Upper Macedonia are in Greece, but the northern
part of Upper Macedonia is in the Republic of Macedonia which was part of
the former Yugoslavia.
Macedon in the classical period had a kingship limited by tacit understand-
ing rather than by explicit rules (Thuc. I. 13. i was perhaps thinking of
Macedon; cf. Arr. Anab. IV. 11. vi): the succession was within the Temenid
family, but not necessarily from father to son, and the new king had to be
acceptable to the people embodied in the army; capital trials also were decided
by the people (Curt.VI. viii. 25).The ruler of Macedon was commonly referred
to as king, but probably did not use basileus as a formal title; the oath sworn by
the members of his League of Corinth in 338/7 refers to his basileia (IG ii2 236
296
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

= R&O 76 ~ Harding 99. a. 11–12), but basileus ﬁrst appears as a title in Alexan-
der’s letter to Chios in 334 (Tod 192 = R&O 84. A ~ Harding 107. 1). Until
the fourth century the army effectively comprised the cavalry force of the king
and his ‘companions’ (hetairoi), and the infantry was a disorganised mob (Thuc.
IV. 124. i).
If Amyntas I made token submission to the Persians after Darius’ Scythian
expedition of c.514 (Hdt.V. 17–21), that had little effect; Macedon was (re)con-
quered in 492 (Hdt. VI. 44. i), and in 480–479 Alexander I was nominally on
the Persian side but was on good terms with the Greeks and was used as a go-
between. Before and during the Peloponnesian War Perdiccas I manoeuvred
successfully between Athens and Sparta until his death c.413. His successor
Archelaus was pro-Athenian, at a time when Athens needed his support more
than he needed Athens’; Thucydides describes him as a strong king who con-
structed roads and buildings, strengthened the cavalry and infantry, and
achieved more than the eight kings before him (II. 100. ii). It is probably he
who moved the capital from Aegeae (now discovered at Vergina and excavated:
cf. p. 321) to Pella; he attracted a cultural court circle; and at the end of his
reign he was strong enough to interfere in Thessaly (cf. p. 250). But his death
in 399 was followed by a period of dynastic trouble, until Amyntas III, from
another branch of the family, became king c.393. At least once he was driven
out by the Illyrians and some of his territory was taken by Olynthus (Diod. Sic.
XIV. 92. iii–iv, XV. 19. ii, perhaps records the same episode twice), but he
returned and remained king until his death in 370/69.
Then followed another period of instability, with a succession of kings 
who were all sons of Amyntas III apart from Ptolemy of Alorus, who was
husband of Amyntas’ daughter and technically regent for Perdiccas (Aeschin.
II. Embassy 29). Athens became involved with Macedon through its attempt 
to recover former possessions in the north, in particular Amphipolis, and 
Thebes became involved through its interest in Thessaly (cf. pp. 236–7, 253).
Perdiccas III was killed in 359 in an attack on the Illyrians. He had a son,
Amyntas, but he was very young; only Justin claims that Philip was appointed
regent for him, and since one charge never made against Philip by Demosthenes
is that he was not rightfully king, we should accept that Philip was made king
on Perdiccas’ death (Diod. Sic. XVI. 2. i–iv, Just. Epit. VII. 5. viii–x); after
returning from Thebes (cf. p. 253) he had held some regional command (Ath.
XI. 506 E–F). Amyntas lived through Philip’s reign, and at some point married
Philip’s daughter Cynanne, but was one of those put to death after Philip’s
assassination.
Philip in the 350s
The Illyrians, to the west, and the Paeonians, to the north, were both threaten-
ing, and there were also other claimants to the throne. Perdiccas’ son Amyntas
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
297

ALEXANDER II
370/69–368
Key
AMYNTAS    king
PTOLEMY    regent
PERDICCAS III
368–365–359
Amyntas       =       Cynanne
 Philinna = PHILIP II
 Audata =
 = 
Olympias
359–336
Philip III
Arrhidaeus
(b. 356 
or earlier)
ALEXANDER III
THE GREAT
336–323
(b. 356)
Cleopatra
Alexander
of Epirus
Europa
(b. 336)
Archelaus
Arrhidaeus
Menelaus
Gygaea = (1)      AMYNTAS III      (2) = (1)       Eurydice       (2) = (2)
392–370/69
= Cleopatra
337
=
336
Eurynoe = (1)
PTOLEMY
368–365
Fig. 8
Amyntas III of Macedon and his descendants (This stemma does not include all the wives and children of Philip II)

PHILIP II OF MACEDON
299
was left alive throughout Philip’s reign, to be put to death by Alexander (cf. p.
349); it was perhaps now that Archelaus, eldest son of Amyntas III by 
his ﬁrst wife, was put to death and his brothers were exiled (cf. Just.VIII. 3. x);
but the two claimants of whom we hear most were apparently from other
branches of the Temenid family: Pausanias, backed by Thracians (probably by
Berisades, in western Thrace), and Argaeus, backed by Athens (Diod. Sic. XVI.
2. v–vi).
Diodorus (XVI. 3. i–ii) credits Philip immediately with an army reform which
must have taken some time, in particular organising an effective infantry
phalanx for the ﬁrst time (whether or not he was the ﬁrst to give this body the
name pezetairoi, ‘foot companions’: cf. p. 360). These men were more lightly
armed than Greek hoplites, but equipped with the sarissa, a spear which at 18
ft. = 5.5m. was twice as long as Greek hoplites’ spears, so that, when Mace-
donian infantry fought Greek hoplites, the Greeks would be impaled on the
Macedonians’ spears before the Macedonians came within reach of the Greeks’.
He used his cavalry in wedge-shaped units, echoing the diamond used by Jason
of Pherae (Arr. Tact. 16. vi, cf. iii). Demosthenes commented several times on
the variety of his forces and his ability to use them all the year round, without
having to disclose his plans in advance through the public procedures of a polis
(Dem. I. Ol. i. 4, IX. Phil. iii. 49–50, XVIII. Crown 235). The military devel-
opment was accompanied by economic and social development. Arrian gives
Alexander a speech in which he claims that Philip transformed the Macedo-
nians from primitive pastoralists into city-dwelling agriculturalists (Anab. VII.
9. ii): how much had already been done before Philip and how much was left
for him to do is disputed, but it must be under Philip that the plain of Philippi
was drained (Theophr. Caus. Pl. V. 14. v–vi). His conquests enabled him to
found cities (cf. Just. Epit. VIII. 5. vii); and by making grants of estates he
recruited Thessalians and other Greeks to the ranks of his cavalry companions
(Theopompus FGrH 115 F 224).
To give himself time, by bribes and promises Philip made peace with the
Paeonians (and presumably with the Illyrians too; this is probably when he
married the Illyrian Audata: e.g. list in Ath. XIII. 557 B–E), and detached the
Thracians from Pausanias (Diod. Sic. XVI. 3. iv, cf. Just. Epit. VII. 6. i–v). To
detach the Athenians from Argaeus, he withdrew a garrison installed in
Amphipolis by Perdiccas; Argaeus, accompanied by an Athenian general to
Methone, advanced on Aegeae but was unwelcome there and was defeated by
Philip; then, says Diodorus, Philip made peace with Athens on the basis that
he abandoned all claims to Amphipolis (Diod. Sic. XVI. 3. iii, v–vi, 4. i).When,
in 357, he captured Amphipolis (below), the Athenians claimed to have been
cheated, and referred to a secret (Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 116, II. Olynth. ii.
6, [Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 27,Theopompus FGrH 115 F 30): there cannot have
been a secret treaty, since only the assembly could commit Athens to a treaty,
but there could have been secret negotiations, and Philip was to prove very good
at dropping hints which were accepted as promises by others but not intended
as promises by him.

In 358 the army was sufﬁciently revived for Philip to ﬁght successfully ﬁrst
against the Paeonians and then against the Illyrians (Diod. Sic. XVI. 4. ii–vii,
crediting him with 10,000 infantry and 600 cavalry). In 358/7 he seems to have
made his ﬁrst contact with the Thessalian koinon, marrying Philinna of Larissa,
who bore him the mentally handicapped Philip Arrhidaeus (garbled in Just.
Epit. VII. 6. viii); and in 357 he made an alliance with Molossis, marrying
Olympias, the niece of king Arybbas, who bore him Alexander in 356 and a
daughter, Cleopatra (Just. Epit. VII. 6. x–xii). Then, late in 357, he captured
Amphipolis (by force: a consequence of the developments in machinery which
were tipping the balance in favour of the attackers): the Athenians, trusting his
hints, had rejected Amphipolis’ plea for help (Dem. I. Olynth. i. 8, Theopom-
pus FGrH 115 F 42), but Philip kept Amphipolis for himself (Diod. Sic. XVI.
8. ii, cf.Tod 150 = R&O 49 ~ Harding 63).The Athenians indignantly declared
war (Isoc. V. Philip 2, Aeschin. II. Embassy 70, III. Ctesiphon 54), but were dis-
tracted by the stasis in Euboea in 357 and the outbreak of the Social War in
356 (cf. pp. 239–40).
Olynthus, which the Athenians had spurned when they thought Philip would
be cooperative, abandoned an earlier alliance with the Illyrians (Staatsverträge
307) and made an alliance with him, by which he promised to capture Poti-
daea for Olynthus. In 356 he did that, letting the Athenian cleruchs leave but
selling the Potidaeans into slavery; he also took Pydna (which the Athenians
had perhaps contemplated giving him in exchange for Amphipolis) for himself
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 8. iii–v,Tod 158 = R&O 50 ~ Harding 67). In western Thrace
Datus had been refounded as Crenides by Thasos in 360/59, about the time of
Cotys’ death, and in 356 Philip responded to its appeal for help against the
Thracians and refounded it again as Philippi.With Amphipolis and Philippi he
controlled the gold and silver mines of the Mount Pangaeum region, and this
provided him with a secure ﬁnancial base (Diod. Sic. XVI. 3. viii, 8. vi–vii,
Steph. Byz. s.v. Philippoi). At ﬁrst Philippi continued coining under its new
name (Kraay, Archaic and Classical Greek Coins, p. 145 nos. 509, 510); and
Philip’s own coinage, in silver and after 348 in gold, was to supplant Athens’
coinage as the most desirable currency in the Greek world (Kraay pp. 146–7
nos. 511–13).
In the summer of 356 Athens made an alliance with Philip’s barbarian
enemies, western Thrace, Paeonia and Illyria, but it was still preoccupied with
the Social War, and in 355 Philip was able to frighten the barbarians into sub-
mission (Diod. Sic. XVI. 22. iii, IG ii2 127 = R&O 53 ~ Harding 70). It was
perhaps in 355 too that Philip responded to another invitation from the Thes-
salian koinon: in 358/7 Alexander of Pherae was murdered by his wife Thebe
and her brothers (cf. p. 250, ﬁg. 6); one of these,Tisiphonus, took over the city,
and after an initial period of good rule became as despotic as Alexander. We
should regard as indecisive an episode recorded by Diodorus in which Philip
intervened and defeated Pherae (XVI. 14. i–ii). Methone, on the coast of
Macedon, remained hostile to Philip, but it was besieged and captured in the
300
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

ﬁrst half of 354, in a campaign during which an arrow blinded Philip in one
eye (Diod. Sic. XVI. 31. vi, 34. v–vi, Just. Epit. VII. 6. xiii–xiv).
Thus by the mid 350’s Philip had made substantial advances both eastwards
and southwards. His further southward progress is bound up with the Third
Sacred War, which we shall consider below, but it will be convenient to pursue
his Thracian activity here. In 353 Chares, recalled to Athens’ service after sup-
porting the Persian rebel Artabazus (cf. pp. 239–40), was based at Neapolis, on
the Thracian coast: he failed to obstruct a naval squadron of Philip’s, returning
from an attack on Abdera and Maronea; he perhaps now defeated a mercenary
force commanded for Philip by Adaeus; and he reported a meeting of Philip,
the Theban Pammenes and Apollonides, agent of the east Thracian Cersebleptes
(Polyaenus Strat. IV. 2. xxii,Theopompus FGrH 115 F 249, Dem. XXIII. Aristo-
crates 183). Chares also captured Sestos, in the Chersonese, for Athens. Perhaps
as a result of that, Cersebleptes decided against an alliance with Philip, and in
353/2 allowed Athens to send cleruchs to the Chersonese (Diod. Sic. XVI. 34.
iii–iv, IG ii2 1613. 297–8, cf. Dem. XXIII. Aristocrates 181).
In 352 after his successes in Thessaly Philip advanced to Thermopylae, but
the Athenians blocked his passage there (cf. p. 305). He promptly returned to
Thrace, and late in 352 at the invitation of Byzantium, Perinthus and the central
Thracian Amadocus was engaged in a siege of Heraion Teichos, a fortress of
Cersebleptes near the Propontis. Athens voted a relief expedition of forty ships,
but delayed when the news came that Philip was ill, and ﬁnally sent ten ships
in the autumn of 351. How much Philip ﬁnally achieved now is uncertain:
Cersebleptes was left in his kingdom, but on sufferance, and perhaps now had
to send his son as a hostage to Macedon (Theopompus FGrH 115 F 101, schol.
Aeschin. II. Embassy 81 [178 Dilts], Dem. III. Olynth. iii. 4–5). On his way to
or from Thrace Philip made a demonstration against Olynthus, which had wel-
comed him as an ally earlier but was now feeling threatened by him: Olynthus
made peace with Athens, and there was talk of an alliance (Dem. XXIII. Aristo-
crates 108, III. Olynth. iii. 7). In the Aegean, Philip’s ships attacked Lemnos and
Imbros, and the southern tip of Euboea, and even raided Marathon and cap-
tured a sacred trireme (Dem. IV. Phil. i. 34).
Philip was a long way from making war on Athens, but by advancing to Ther-
mopylae and the Hellespont he could be perceived as threatening Athens (cf.
Dem. XIX. Embassy 180), and he had harmed Athens’ interests and pride in
various ways. We should probably date to 352/1 the ﬁrst speech in which
Demosthenes treats Philip as a major threat to Athens, his (IV) First Philippic.
The message of the speech is that Athens has lost allies and northern settle-
ments by waiting for Philip to strike and reacting apathetically; Athens should
seize the initiative by maintaining a permanent raiding force in the north, with
a nucleus of citizens (a sign of the extent to which fourth-century wars were
being fought by mercenaries), living largely off booty (since the Social War
Eubulus had been trying to prevent unproﬁtable military expenditure: cf. pp.
332–3).The Athenians did not follow this advice – probably rightly. Philip was
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
301

certainly conscious of Athens, as a city whose interests had several times clashed
with his, but it is doubtful if at this stage he was speciﬁcally targeting Athens.
In any case, Demosthenes was recommending this policy too late: it might have
achieved something in the early years of Philip’s reign, but by now he was too
strong in and near Macedon to be vulnerable to attacks on a scale which Athens
could afford.
The Third Sacred War to 352
Many scholars have supposed that Diodorus without realising it narrated one
year of the war twice, but what I say below is based on the view that that sup-
position is mistaken. Diodorus’ account probably does, however, include some
smaller duplications, with an episode included in the main narrative at one point
and noted from his chronological source at another.
We have seen that in the 360’s Thebes took an interest in Delphi (cf. pp.
254–5). In the early 350’s the Amphictyony imposed ﬁnes on two enemies of
Thebes: on Sparta, for sacrilege committed in the occupation of the Theban
Cadmea from 382 to 379; and on Phocis, which had refused to support the
Thebans at Mantinea in 362 (cf. p. 255), probably for cultivating the sacred
plain of Cirrha, by the Gulf of Corinth below Delphi, which was used for 
pasturing sacriﬁcial animals. Both refused to pay, and one of the Phocians,
Philomelus, urged his people to assert their traditional claim to control Delphi
(cf. p. 51). He was elected strategos autokrator, and gained a promise of unofﬁ-
cial support from king Archidamus of Sparta (Diod. Sic. XVI. 23–24. ii, cf. 29.
ii–iv, Just. Epit. VIII. 1. iv–vii).
In 357/6 (Diod. Sic. XV. 14. iii–iv, Paus. X. 2. iii) Philomelus seized Delphi,
killing the Thracidae who opposed him but reassuring the other Delphians,
defeated a Locrian attack, erased the decree against the Phocians, and insisted
that he would not plunder the sanctuary but was merely asserting the Phocians’
rights.While the Boeotians prepared to ﬁght against him, he raided Locris; and,
being in possession of Delphi, he ‘consulted’ the oracle by forcing the fright-
ened Pythia on to the tripod, in reaction to which she exclaimed that he could
do what he liked (Diod. Sic. XVI. 24. iii–27. ii, Just. Epit. VIII. 1. viii–xi). In
the winter of 356/5 he sent embassies to the Greek cities, gaining the support
of Athens, Sparta and some other Peloponnesian cities, and did not touch the
sacred treasures but taxed the rich Delphians to build up a mercenary army
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 27. iii–28. ii, Just. Epit. VIII. 1. ix–x).
Inscriptions from Delphi show that the men expelled in 363 (cf. pp. 254–5)
returned and one of them, Aristoxenus, was archon of Delphi for 356/5. The
board of naopoioi responsible for rebuilding the temple functioned normally
until 357/6. However, there were no sessions in 355 or 354; then ‘wartime
naopoioi’ from states on the Phocian side met from spring 353 to spring 351
(they deposited their funds, with which the Phocians did not interfere, with the
city of Delphi). After that, meetings were abandoned until after the war (C.
302
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

Ill. 11
Delphi: The temple of Apollo and the stoa of the Athenians (the drawing shows the sixth-century temple which was destroyed
in 373/2; the replacement was built on the old plan, and as far as possible used the old columns). From Guide de Delphes, le Site. ©
EFA/Y. Fomine, D. Laroche

Delphes ii 31. 1–70; resumption 345/4, C. Delphes ii 34 = R&O 66).The wartime
naopoioi include unspeciﬁed Locrians, perhaps from Amphissa (cf. below), and
we have a fragment of an Athenian alliance with unspeciﬁed Locrians of about
this time (IG ii2 148). Probably in 356/5 the city of Delphi honoured the sons
of Athens’ ally Cersebleptes (SIG3 195: archon restored). An inscription from
Thebes records contributions of money to the Boeotians for the war over three
years c.354–352: the contributors include Byzantium, which in the Social War
had left the Athenian League, and the Boeotian proxenos in the pro-Athenian
Tenedos (IG vii 2418 = R&O 57 ~ Harding 74). Xenophon’s Poroi, of the late
350’s, says that all will be supportive if Athens works not by ﬁghting but by
diplomacy to make Delphi ‘autonomous as in the past’ (v. 8–9).
In 355 Philomelus was attacked by the Locrians but defeated them by the
Phaedriadae cliffs. The Locrians then appealed to the Thebans, who appealed
to the Thessalian koinon. The Amphictyony formally declared a sacred war
against the Phocians, and most of the central Greeks joined the Amphictyonic
side (Diod. Sic. XVI. 28. iii–29. i): alignments were much as they had been in
the 360’s. In winter 355/4 Philomelus further increased his forces, and possibly
now did use the sacred treasures (Diod. Sic. XVI. 30. i–ii; contr. acquittal 56.
v). His successes continued in 354, with a cavalry victory over the Locrians and
Thebans, and then a victory over the Thessalians at Argolas, in eastern Locris;
but later in the year he was defeated by the Thebans at Neon, near the head of
the Cephisus valley, and committed suicide (Diod. Sic. XVI. 30. iii–31. iv, Just.
Epit. VIII. 1. xii–xiii, cf. Paus. X. 2. iv). This might have ended the war. The
Thebans did not follow up their victory, and were conﬁdent enough to send
their general Pammenes to support the Persian rebel Artabazus in 353 (Diod.
Sic. XVI. 34. i–ii).The Phocians considered admitting defeat, but Onomarchus,
the ﬁrst of three generals from the same family, persuaded them to persevere
and drew on the sacred treasures to strengthen his forces (Diod. Sic. XVI. 31.
v, 32. i–33. ii, Just. Epit. VIII. 1. xiv).
In 353 Onomarchus had a series of successes in the territories around Phocis,
among other things gaining the submission of the Locrians of Amphissa; in
Boeotia he took Orchomenus but was unsuccessful in a siege of Chaeronea.
Philip was brought in to support the Thessalian koinon, while Onomarchus’
brother Phayllus went to support Lycophron of Pherae (Tisiphonus was dead).
Philip defeated Phayllus, but Onomarchus went to Thessaly and in two battles
gave Philip the most serious defeats in his reign – which perhaps gave the Greeks
the false impression that he was not strong enough to pose a serious threat.
Late that year or early 352 Onomarchus turned to Boeotia, where he won a
battle and took Coronea (Diod. Sic. XVI. 33. iii–iv, 35. i–iii, Just. Epit. VIII. 2.
i–ii, Arist. Eth. Nic. III. 1116 B 15–23, Ephorus FGrH 70 F 94).
In 352 Philip returned to Thessaly and persuaded the Thessalians ‘to under-
take the war jointly’; it was probably at this point that the koinon took the sur-
prising step of appointing him as its archon (cf. Alexander’s succession to the
position, p. 349). On the other side Lycophron summoned Onomarchus and
the Phocians, ‘offering to organise the affairs of Thessaly together with them’;
304
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

the Athenians sent Chares by sea to the Gulf of Pagasae. In the major ‘battle
of the Crocus Field’, to the west of the Gulf, Philip’s soldiers wore laurel crowns
so symbolise their holy cause, the Phocians were defeated, and Onomarchus
was among those killed in the stampede to the ships. Phayllus took over the
command of the Phocians, and set about reviving their forces; but Lycophron
and Pitholaus surrendered Pherae to Philip (they and their mercenaries were
allowed to withdraw, and joined the Phocians). Philip went on to capture
Pagasae (an earlier capture, after that of Methone, must be either an error by
Diodorus or a mistaken restoration in the text of XVI. 31. vi). He then advanced
to Thermopylae, but the Athenians reacted promptly, and he did not force the
passage. Phayllus moved into Boeotia but was three times defeated (Diod. Sic.
XVI. 35. iii–36. i, 37–38. ii, Just. Epit. VIII. 2. iii–xii, cf. Dem. XIX. Embassy
84, 319).
An episode in the Peloponnese displays the same alignment of the Greek
states.While the Greeks were preoccupied with the Sacred War, Sparta tried to
exploit the principle of echein ta heauton (cf. p. 197) to recover Messenia, and
in 353 attacked Megalopolis. Megalopolis appealed to its allies, including
(thanks to the treaty after Mantinea) Athens; Athens’ sympathies were with
Sparta, on the same side in the Sacred War; Demosthenes in (XVI) For the
Megalopolitans urged Athens to support Megalopolis rather than leave it to
Thebes to do so. Athens reafﬁrmed its support for the independent Messene
but did not take part in the war; Thebes and several Peloponnesian states sup-
ported Megalopolis; Sparta was supported by the Phocians and, from the
summer of 352, the mercenaries from Pherae. In 352 Sparta captured Orneae,
west of Argos, and sacked Helisson, west of Mantinea; in 351, with little hap-
pening in central Greece, the Thebans sent a larger force and were victorious
at Thelphusa, in the west of Arcadia, and elsewhere; in 350 there was a Spartan
victory and the war ended with a truce which changed nothing (Diod. Sic. XVI.
34. iii, 39).
Olynthus and Euboea
Two crises blew up in 349/8, both of concern to Athens. We have seen that in
the late 350’s Olynthus was feeling threatened by Philip and was moving
towards Athens. Olynthus took in Philip’s surviving step-brothers as refugees
(Just. Epit. VIII. 3. x); this provided Philip with the excuse for an attack, and
he began in the summer of 349 by taking some of the smaller cities of Chalci-
dice. Olynthus made an alliance with Athens, which sent Chares with an expedi-
tion in support (Diod. Sic. XVI. 52. ix, Philoch. FGrH 328 F 49). It may be
true that Philip then had to interfere in Pherae, but hardly that Pitholaus had
returned and had to be expelled again (Diod. Sic. XVI. 52. ix, cf. Dem. I. Ol.
i. 22, II. Ol. ii. 11).
Euboea had rejoined Athens in 357 (cf. p. 239), but in enemy hands could
provide an invader from the north with a means of by-passing Thermopylae.
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
305

Early in 348 Plutarchus of Eretria appealed for Athenian support when chal-
lenged by the exiled Clitarchus, and Phocion was sent with a small force; Callias
of Chalcis obtained mercenaries from Phocis to support the other side. There
was anxiety in Athens: Apollodorus proposed that surplus revenue should be
transferred to the stratiotic fund (cf. p. 334) and the council proposed a major
expedition. However, Apollodorus’ proposal was quashed, and the major expe-
dition was not sent since Phocion reported that he had won a victory although
Plutarchus had turned against Athens. Early in the summer Phocion called for
reinforcements, expelled Plutarchus from Eretria and returned to Athens. But
by midsummer things had gone badly wrong for Athens: Molossus, Phocion’s
successor, was captured by Plutarchus, Athens had to pay 50 talents to ransom
him and others, and all of Euboea except Carystus, in the south, passed out of
Athens’ sphere of inﬂuence (Plut. Phoc. 12–14. ii, Dem. XXI. Midias 161–4,
and various allusions by Demosthenes and Aeschines; schol. Dem. V. Peace 5
[21 Dilts], Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 86 [190 Dilts]). There are slight indications
that Philip gave some help to the anti-Athenian side (Aeschin. III, Ctesiphon 87,
Plut. Phoc. 12. i).
Meanwhile, in spring 348 Athens sent further help to Olynthus, transferring
a force under Charidemus from the Hellespont. Philip took more of the cities
of Chalcidice; the Olynthians were defeated in battle and besieged; and when
they appealed for a citizen force Athens prepared a substantial expedition, once
more under Chares. But during the summer that was delayed by the regular
‘etesian’ winds, which hampered sailing to the north; at some point the pro-
Athenian Apollonides was expelled from Olynthus and ﬂed to Athens, and a
decree to grant him citizenship was proposed but was quashed through a graphe
paranomon (Dem. IX. Phil. iii. 56, 66, [Dem.] LIX. Neaera 91). In late summer,
before Athens’ expedition could arrive, Olynthus was betrayed to Philip; the
population was enslaved and the city destroyed (Philoch. FGrH 328 FF 50–1,
156, Diod. Sic. XVI. 53. ii–iii, 55. i).
For Demosthenes, supporting Olynthus was in line with the policy of the
First Philippic, to strike at Philip as near to the heart of Macedon as possible,
and he was energetic in championing Olynthus. His (I–III) Olynthiacs i–iii were
probably delivered, in that order, in the second half of 349. In a speech of 346
he describes the Euboean campaign as inglorious and expensive, and claims 
to have been the only man to have opposed it (V. Peace 5). But Athens could
not save Olynthus if Philip was determined to take it; Euboea in 348, like 
Thermopylae in 352, was more obviously relevant to the security of Athens,
and it is not surprising that most Athenians thought Euboea more important
than Olynthus. The Euboean campaign was a campaign of Eubulus and his 
supporters: Demosthenes describes Eubulus’ friend Midias as an agent of
Plutarchus (Dem. XXI. Midias 110, 200), and Eubulus’ relative Hegesilaus was
prosecuted for deceiving the people in connection with it (Dem. XIX. Embassy
290 with schol. [513 Dilts]).
In midsummer 348 there were reports that Philip would like peace with
Athens (Olynthus had not yet fallen, and this suggestion was probably a device
306
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

to undermine Athenian support). Philocrates proposed that Athens should
receive a deputation from Philip; he was prosecuted in a graphe paranomon, was
defended by Demosthenes, and, in Demosthenes’ ﬁrst success in a public issue,
was acquitted (Aeschin. II. Embassy 12–15, III. Ctesiphon 62). From this point
until peace was made in 346 Demosthenes was in favour of peace, and we have
to assume that he was sulking at the Athenians’ failure to take notice of his
warnings, and wanted a treaty not because he believed in peace but because 
he believed that Philip’s subsequent conduct would show that his warnings 
had after all been justiﬁed. On the other hand, Eubulus and his associates,
including Aeschines, were alarmed after the failure in Euboea and the fall of
Olynthus, and in winter 348/7 under a decree of Eubulus embassies were sent
out to rouse the Greeks against Philip, Aeschines going to Arcadia (Dem.
XIX. Embassy 9–11, 203–14, Aeschin. II. Embassy 79).
The End of the Third Sacred War
Phayllus had succeeded Onomarchus as Phocian general after the battle of the
Crocus Field. In 351, while the Thebans were making their main effort in the
Peloponnese, he was defeated in one night attack but nevertheless captured 
the whole of eastern Locris. He died in the winter of 351/0, and was succeeded
by Onomarchus’ son Phalaecus under the guardianship of Mnaseas. In 350 the
Thebans pulled out of the Peloponnese. They ﬁrst killed Mnaseas in a night
attack and then defeated Phalaecus in a cavalry battle; Phalaecus took
Chaeronea but was driven out, and the Boeotians then ravaged Phocis. In 349
there were only minor skirmishes (Diod. Sic. XVI. 38. iii–vii, 39. viii, 40. ii,
Paus. X. 2. vi–vii). Although Athens and Phocis were on the same side in the
Sacred War, the Phocians supported the anti-Athenian side in Euboea. In the
Sacred War 348 was a largely successful year for them: after a Boeotian raid on
Hyampolis, north of Boeotia, Phalaecus defeated the Boeotians at Coronea and
captured several cities, and another Boeotian raiding party was defeated as it
returned home (Diod. Sic. XVI. 56. i–ii).
The Phocians had good prospects of victory, but some were feeling uneasy
about their use of sacred treasures to pay for mercenaries, and so in winter
348/7 Phalaecus was deposed, a triumvirate was appointed in his place, and an
investigation into the use of the sacred treasures was made. Philomelus was
absolved, but the treasurer, Philo, and the remaining generals were found guilty
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 56. iii–57, cf. Paus. X. 2. vii). In 347 the Phocians continued
the war, building on their successes of 348, and the Thebans appealed to Philip,
who had played no part in the war since 352. He sent a token force, not dis-
pleased at the Thebans’ weakness but not wanting to condone the Phocians’
sacrilege, according to Diodorus, and the Thebans successfully attacked a fort
which the Phocians were building at Abae, near Hyampolis (Diod. Sic. XVI.
58, cf. Dem. XIX. Embassy 141).
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
307

The Thebans asked Philip to support them again in 346. The Phocians
appealed to Sparta and Athens, inviting the Athenians to occupy forts in Locris
to the east of Thermopylae, and Athens sent Proxenus with an expedition of
ﬁfty ships. But in a counter-revolution about February 346 Phalaecus returned
to power, Athenian and Spartan offers of help were rebuffed, and the Phocians
refused the truce for the Lesser Eleusinian Mysteries (Diod. Sic. XVI. 59. i–ii,
Aeschin. II. Embassy 132–5, cf. 37, Dem. XIX. Embassy 322): presumably there
had been contact between Phalaecus and Philip, and Philip was dropping
encouraging hints to Phalaecus.
We shall look in more detail below at the effect of this on Athens. Eubulus
and his associates had been trying to organise resistance to Philip by the south-
ern Greeks, but this depended on cooperation with Phocis, and without that
cooperation resistance was no longer feasible, so they turned to peace. The
terms – peace for ‘Athens and its allies’, i.e. the Second Athenian League – were
agreed and sworn to in Athens in mid to late April. Philip and his allies had to
swear, but he was in Thrace ﬁghting against Cersebleptes, and envoys from
Athens and almost all of Greece spent June waiting at Pella for him to return.
When he did return he was in no hurry to swear, but assembled a large army,
and the envoys accompanied him and it south. There was considerable uncer-
tainty about his intentions, and Aeschines hoped that the Phocians might yet
be saved. When the Athenian embassy reached home, on 8 July, Philip was at
Thermopylae, giving dubious assurances to the Phocians; Demosthenes in his
report to the council urged that the Phocians should not be abandoned; but on
11 July, when the assembly met, Philip’s position was known and Athens could
only advise the Phocians to submit. On 18 July the Phocians capitulated;
Phalaecus secured terms by which he and his mercenaries were allowed to with-
draw (Dem. XIX. Embassy 53–66, Diod. Sic. XVI. 59. iii, Just. Epit. VIII. 5.
i–iii). In a caricature of the roaming mercenaries’ existence, Phalaecus ﬁrst tried
to take them to a war in Italy, but they mutinied (cf. p. 292); he then took them
to Crete, where in ﬁghting for Cnossus they were defeated and he was killed
by Archidamus and a Spartan force ﬁghting for Lyctus (cf. p. 344). Philip had
remained true to the Amphictyony’s aim of punishing the sacrilegious Phocians,
and by encouraging uncertainty about his intentions he had on behalf of the
Amphictyony won a bloodless victory.
In late summer 346 he convened an extraordinary meeting of the Amphi-
ctyonic council. The Phocians were expelled from the Amphictyony, required
to repay the stolen funds, allegedly more than 10,000 talents altogether, origi-
nally at the rate of 30 talents per half-year (they began in autumn 343 [C.
Delphes ii 36 = R&O 67], and by the last attested payment, probably in 319/8,
had paid c.400 talents; cf. below), were disarmed and were made to live in small
villages. Nicaea, immediately to the east of Thermopylae, which had been in
the hands of the Phocians, was given to the Thessalians (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon
140). Sparta also was expelled from the Amphictyony (Paus. X. 8. ii: it had
perhaps voted with the Dorians of central Greece), but Athens (which had one
of the two Ionian votes) was not. The Amphictyony was reconstituted, with
308
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

Thessaly, of which Philip was archon, taking ﬁrst place and Philip himself (not
Macedon) second. If it had not already happened earlier, two of the smaller
peoples who had originally been represented separately were now combined in
a single unit, and the unit thus freed was assigned to the polis of Delphi. In the
autumn Philip presided over the Pythian games (Diod. Sic. XVI. 59. iv–60, Just.
Epit.VIII. 5. iv–vi). In 343/2 the Delphian building accounts record the removal
of statues of Onomarchus and Philomelus (C. Delphes ii 34 = R&O 66. ii. 56–9):
either this was a surprisingly delayed damnatio memoriae or in their current posi-
tion the statues were simply in the way of the building works.
What Philip hoped to achieve in 346 will be discussed below. What he did
achieve was a recognised position of importance in the Greek world through
his membership of the Amphictyony. The Phocians had been justly, though
perhaps not as drastically as the Thebans and Thessalians wished, punished for
their sacrilege; the Thebans, after ten years of war, much of it fought in Boeo-
tian territory, were weakened and gained little from being on the winning side
(cf. Isoc. V. Philip 53–5); Athens and Sparta had both been on the losing side,
and Greek states or parties within states hostile to them were increasingly likely
to look to Philip for support (cf. Isoc.V. Philip 74, Dem.V. Peace 18, Polyb. IX.
33. ii–xii, XVIII. 14).
The Peace of Philocrates
Demosthenes and Aeschines told their stories in 343, when Demosthenes pro-
secuted Aeschines, and again in 330, when Aeschines prosecuted Ctesiphon (in
this section their four major speeches are cited brieﬂy as A. II, III, D. XIX,
XVIII). What actually happened is hard to disentangle, since each had made a
major change in policy which he was anxious to conceal: Demosthenes from
348 until peace was made wanted to get peace on whatever terms he could, but
once it had been made looked for renewed conﬂict (once Philip provided a justi-
ﬁcation: see p. 312 on Dem. V. Peace); Aeschines originally, from 348 until in
346 Phalaecus made resistance impossible, wanted to resist, but he was then
forced to look for peace, and wanted to make the best of Philip’s hints at the
time and of the disappointing outcome afterwards (he was still proud of the
peace in 346/5, I. Timarchus 174; contrast his defensiveness in 343, A. II. 56,
79).
Theoretically Athens had been at war with Philip since his capture of
Amphipolis in 357, and the Peace of Philocrates was to end that war. In the
summer of 348, to weaken Athens’ support for Olynthus, Philip let it be known
that he was interested in peace, Philocrates proposed that Athens should receive
a deputation from him, and he was successfully defended by Demosthenes (cf.
pp. 306–7). No deputation came, but Philocrates and Demosthenes had Aristo-
demus (an actor with contacts in Macedon and elsewhere) sent to negotiate
with Philip over Athenians captured in Olynthus; eventually, perhaps early 346,
Aristodemus reported that Philip would like even an alliance (A. II. 15–17).
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
309

Eubulus and Aeschines had become worried about Philip: embassies were sent
to southern Greek states in winter 348/7 (cf. above); and again in winter 347/6
to invite representatives to a war congress (A. II. 87–9, III. 64–70, D. XIX. 15,
XVIII. 23–4). About February 346 Phalaecus returned to power in Phocis and
rejected Athenian and Spartan help.
Probably the news of that rejection led the Athenians to seek peace (cf.
A. II. 134). Late in February Philocrates proposed the dispatch of the ﬁrst
embassy to Philip, including himself, Demosthenes (he was nominated by
Philocrates, but in his speeches he tries to distance himself from Philocrates),
Aeschines and Aristodemus (A. II. 18–20, D. XIX. 12–13). The envoys 
hurried (D. XIX. 163); allegedly Demosthenes as the youngest member lost his
nerve when addressing Philip (A. II. 34–5). In mid March they returned, bring-
ing a letter from Philip. Demosthenes was a councillor for this crucial year
347/6. In the council he proposed the standard honours for the envoys; in the
assembly, again speaking last, he disparaged Philip but proposed that the assem-
bly should meet on two successive days (cf. the decision over Corcyra and
Corinth in 433, p. 83) to discuss peace and alliance (A. II. 45–54, 110, D. XIX.
234).
The synedrion of Athens’ League proposed waiting until the envoys inviting
to a war congress had returned, and then holding assemblies to discuss 
peace; but added that it would accept what Athens decided (A. II. 60). Dem-
osthenes’ original plan was for assemblies on 8–9 Elaphebolion = 5–6 April,
before the Dionysia (A. III. 67), but Philip’s envoys did not arrive in time.
Demosthenes saw to their entertainment at the Dionysia (A. II. 55, 110–11, III.
76, D. XIX. 234, XVIII. 28), and his revised plan was for assemblies on the
ﬁrst two days available after the festival, 18–19 Elaphebolion = 15–16 April,
with discussion on the ﬁrst day and the vote on the second (A. II. 61–2, 65,
109).
It now becomes particularly hard to work out what happened, but a possi-
ble solution is as follows. On the 18th there were at any rate two proposals
under discussion: one from the League synedrion, that there should be a
common peace, which any Greek state might join within three months (A. III.
69–70); and another from Philocrates, that there should be a peace explicitly
excluding Phocis and Halus, a city on the Gulf of Pagasae which was currently
being besieged by Pharsalus with support from Philip (D. XIX. 159). The
synedrion’s proposal was supported by Aeschines, who wanted peace but did
not want to abandon Phocis (A. II. 63, III. 71, D. XIX. 14), and also by Dem-
osthenes, who proposed that it should be put to Philip’s envoys (D. XIX. 144).
Philip’s envoys were not brought in until the 19th. Demosthenes alleges that
on that day he continued to support a common peace but Aeschines had
changed his position and now supported Philocrates. Demosthenes goes on to
claim that the Macedonians said an alliance with Phocis was impossible, and
Aeschines said they had to say that because of Thebes and Thessaly but Athens
should nevertheless trust Philip (D. XIX. 15–16, 144, 321, cf. A. II. 63). To
Demosthenes’ allegations Aeschines has various responses: that there was to be
310
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

no debate on the 19th, so he could not have supported Philocrates; that Dem-
osthenes himself had prepared a motion identical with that of Philocrates (A.
II. 64–8); that when circumstances were against Athens Aeschines did advocate
the peace which Demosthenes calls disgraceful (A. II. 79). In 330 Aeschines
claims that Demosthenes said the synedrion’s proposal was pointless unless the
Macedonians accepted, there could not be peace without alliance and Athens
could not wait on others; and that after that Demosthenes interrogated Anti-
pater, Philip’s chief representative, and gained acceptance for Philocrates’
motion (A. III. 71–2).
On the 18th, it seems, the Athenians had discussed unrealistically what kind
of peace they would like; on the 19th Demosthenes discovered from Antipater
what kind of peace Philip would allow – and then there must have been a
renewed debate, considering peace on Philip’s terms or no peace. Aeschines,
trusting in Philip’s hints, wanted peace; Demosthenes, wanting Philip to be
committed to something, wanted peace; Eubulus dwelled on the ﬁnancial 
consequences of not making peace (D. XIX. 291). Not everybody agreed:
Hegesippus, who had proposed the alliance with the Phocians at the beginning
of the Sacred War, was opposed on their account (A. III. 118 with schol. [265
Dilts]; D. XIX. 72–4 with schol. 72 [172 Dilts]), and Aristophon insisted on
Athens’ claim to Amphipolis and thought it had the resources to ﬁght
(Theopompus FGrH 115 F 166). Philocrates’ proposal was carried but in an
amended form, not excluding Phocis and Halus but including ‘Athens and its
allies’ (D. XIX. 159). As what followed in the next few days makes clear, that
was taken to mean Athens and the League, but there was a loophole which
people could try to exploit, since the words might mean Athens and every state
allied to Athens, including Phocis.
The peace was not made until both sides had sworn to it. After meeting
Athens’ ﬁrst embassy Philip had set out for Thrace, promising not to touch the
Chersonese. On 23 or 24 Elaphebolion = 20 or 21 April he captured Hieron
Oros, and Cersebleptes ‘lost his kingdom’ (though he was not ﬁnally evicted
until 342).The next day in Athens Demosthenes tried to rule out of order, and
the assembly considered but rejected, a request from Cersebleptes to be admit-
ted to the League and the peace; and on the proposal of Philocrates the League
synedroi swore to the peace (A. II. 82–90, III. 73–4, D. XIX. 174, 181). Philip
and his allies had to swear too. Athens’ second embassy, to receive their oaths,
did not hurry; but, despite Demosthenes’ indignation (D. XIX. 154–6, XVIII.
25–31), while Philip was in Thrace there was no point in hurrying.They arrived
at Pella in late May, and Philip arrived in late June. As he prepared for a major
expedition, the envoys from Athens and elsewhere lobbied him. Demosthenes,
at odds with his colleagues, refused to tangle with Philip over Phocis and Thebes
but arranged the ransom of some Athenian prisoners (A. II. 97–100, 106–12,
D. XIX. 166–73). Aeschines claims to have urged Philip to punish only the indi-
viduals responsible for the sacrilege at Delphi and not to allow Boeotia to be
dominated by Thebes (A. II. 101–5, 113–19); Demosthenes blames Aeschines
for excluding Phocis, Halus and Cersebleptes from the peace (D. XIX. 44, 174,
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
311

278). Probably Philip did drop hints that he would not punish the innocent 
and did not want a powerful Thebes; Aeschines wanted to believe and did,
Demosthenes did not.
Philip swore at Pella (D. XVIII. 32), but his allies did not swear until the
expedition reached Pherae (D. XIX. 158). He was at Thermopylae when the
Athenians reached home, on 13 Scirophorion = 8 July. Demosthenes persuaded
the council to recommend to the assembly not to abandon Phocis, but in the
assembly on 16 Scirophorion = 11 July this probouleuma was not read out: pre-
sumably it was now known that it was too late to save Phocis. Aeschines
reported Philip’s hints and urged the Athenians to trust them; a formal letter
from Philip was read out; a motion of Philocrates (who seems to have been a
sincere supporter of peace with Philip) was carried, extending the treaty with
Philip to his descendants, calling on the Phocians to surrender Delphi to the
Amphictyony, and promising that Athens would help to enforce that (D. XIX.
31–50, cf. A. II. 119–23). A third embassy was appointed, to report this to
Philip; Demosthenes refused to serve, and Aeschines stayed in Athens too.
Philip sent a letter asking Athens to send its army against the Phocians, but
Demosthenes persuaded the assembly not to do so (D. XIX. 121–4, cf. 51–2,
A. II. 94–5, 137–8).
The Phocians capitulated on 23 Scirophorion = 18 July; the third embassy
turned back on hearing the news. The Athenians panicked, deciding to
strengthen their fortiﬁcations, bring their women and children into the city and
celebrate the Heraclea inside the city – but Philip made no move against Athens.
He dealt with Phocis through the Amphictyonic council; he captured Halus and
gave it to Pharsalus (D. XIX. 36–9, Str. 433. IX. v. 8). A fourth embassy went
to Philip, and Aeschines claims to have saved some innocent Phocians (D. XIX.
59–60, 86, 125, A. II. 95–6, 139, 142–3).
The hints encouraged by Aeschines had proved vain, and the Athenians were
angry. They boycotted the Pythian games (D. XIX. 128); they gave a hostile
reception to the request to recognise Philip’s admission to the Amphictyony (D.
XIX. 111–13); and they remained in touch with Sparta (Dem. V. Peace 18). It
seems that some men were prepared to go to war against Philip, but Dem-
osthenes in (V) On the Peace took the line that war was inevitable but Athens
should wait for a suitable occasion; if they fought now they would be techni-
cally in the wrong and the Greeks would unite against them; they should not
risk that for the sake of ‘a shadow at Delphi’. Isocrates, however, now focused
on Philip as the man to lead the Greeks in a patriotic war against the Persians
(V. Philip, of 346; Letters to Philip).
What of Philip? Some have thought that his hints were intended seriously,
and that he would have preferred to act on them but was prevented by the
intransigence of Demosthenes. That is hard to believe – he had no reason to
turn against Thebes, and would have lost face badly if he had decided that the
Phocians were not wicked after all – but he was fond of keeping his opponents
guessing and undermining their opposition, and by doing this now he was able
to win the war without a battle. Others have suggested that he was already think-
312
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

ing of a war against the Persians, and wanted a cooperative Athens for the sake
of its navy; but despite Isocrates there is no sign that Philip was interested in
Persia before 341 (the claim that at some point there was an alliance between
Philip and Artaxerxes, in Darius’ letter in Arr. Anab. II. 14. ii, is almost cer-
tainly false). More probably, for a man brought up on the edge of the Greek
world, a recognised position in Greece was an important objective in its own
right; Demosthenes’ opposition was tiresome, but there were Athenians willing
to acknowledge him; and Athens was a well-fortiﬁed city and could not easily
be taken by force.
Philip’s Final Victory
In Athens there was a revision of the citizen registers (Aeschin. I. Timarchus 77
with schol. [169 Dilts], 86, Androtion FGrH 324 F 52, Philoch. FGrH 328 F
52, cf. Isae. XII. Euphiletus, Dem. LVII. Eubulides), and one of the men rejected
was to be charged by Demosthenes with attempting to burn Athens’ dockyards
for Philip (cf. pp. 339–40). Although Phocis was a sore point, Philip’s campaign
in Thrace while the peace was pending was more obviously unfair and more of
a threat to Athens’ interests: Euclides was sent to remonstrate, and Philip
offered to cut a canal through the isthmus of the Chersonese (Dem. VI. Phil.
ii. 30, [Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 39–40).
Philip strengthened his position at home, with various movements of popu-
lation (Dem. XIX. Embassy 89, Just. Epit. VIII. 5. vi–6. ii). Perhaps in 345, he
campaigned against the Illyrians and was wounded (Diod. Sic. XVI. 69. vii,
Just. Epit. VIII. 6. iii, Didymus xii. 64–xiii. 2). In 344 he ‘expelled tyrants’ from
Thessaly (there was trouble involving a man called Simus in Larisa, and he
installed a garrison in Pherae), and Demosthenes refers to his instituting 
a ‘decadarchy’, the rule of a clique of ten men (Diod. Sic. XVI. 69. viii;
Dem. XVIII. Crown 48, Arist. Pol. V. 1306 A 26–30 with Kraay p. 119 no. 395;
[Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 32; Dem. VI. Phil. ii. 22). In 343/2 Athens tried to win
over the Thessalians (schol. Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 83 [181 Dilts]), but did not
succeed, and in 342 Philip revived the old organisation of Thessaly in four
regional units known as tetrads (Dem. IX. Phil. iii. 26,Theopompus FGrH 115
FF 208–9).
In the course of 344 various envoys from Philip and his allies went to Athens,
complaining of slanders against Philip and support for Sparta, and offering an
amendment (epanorthosis) of the peace terms. Demosthenes’ (VI) Second Philip-
pic is a fairly early reply. A little later there coincided with a deputation from
Philip one from Persia, and the Athenians together with the Spartans conﬁrmed
their friendship with Persia but (unlike Thebes) declined to send troops for the
latest attempt on Egypt (Philoch. FGrH 328 F 157, Diod. Sic. XVI. 44. i–ii
[misdated: cf. p. 325]). At this stage Athens was without a settled policy, but
the pendulum swung towards hostility to Philip. Hegesippus persuaded the
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
313

Athenians to take a hard line, demanding under the principle of echein ta heauton
the return of Amphipolis and of forts in Thrace which Philip had captured in
346, and the expansion of the Peace of Philocrates into a common peace. Hege-
sippus visited Macedon and made himself highly unpopular, and in response
to Philip’s offer to give (didonai) to Athens Halonnesus, an island in the north
Aegean which he had cleared of pirates, Hegesippus insisted that it belonged
to Athens and Philip could only give it back (apodidonai). The matter dragged
on to 342, when Philip was willing to submit to arbitration over the Thracian
forts (where he had a strong case) and to accept a common peace (which he
now thought he could use to his advantage), but only to ‘give’ Halonnesus and
not to give Amphipolis. [Dem.] VII. Halonnesus is Hegesippus’ unrepentant
reaction; and Philip seems to have lost patience. Plato’s nephew Speusippus in
his Letter to Philip of 343/2, trying to outdo Theopompus and Isocrates, sug-
gested that through Heracles Amphipolis (§6) and other places ‘belonged’ to
Philip.
Immediately after the peace Demosthenes planned with Timarchus to pro-
secute Aeschines for his conduct on the second embassy (Aeschin. II. Embassy
96), but Timarchus’ private life left him vulnerable and in 346/5 Aeschines pro-
secuted him (Aeschin. I. Timarchus: cf. p. 337). In 343, as attitudes to Philip
were hardening, charges were brought to court. Philocrates was prosecuted by
Hyperides, and was condemned in absence (Dem. XIX. Embassy 116–19,
Aeschin. II. Embassy 6, Hyp. IV. Euxenippus 29–30); Proxenus was perhaps con-
demned for delay in conveying the second embassy to Philip (Dem. XIX.
Embassy 280 with schol. [493 Dilts]). Nevertheless, when Demosthenes himself
prosecuted Aeschines, Eubulus spoke for the defence, and by a small majority
Aeschines was acquitted (Idomeneus FGrH 338 F 10 ap. Plut. Dem. 15. v,
[Plut.] X Orat. 840 C).
In various parts of Greece there were local conﬂicts, not stirred up by Athens
or Philip but often leading to their being invoked as supporters. In 344 Argos
and Messene accepted help from Philip against Sparta, despite a warning from
Demosthenes (Dem. VI. Phil. ii. 15, 19–26); but in 343/2 they and other Pelo-
ponnesian states became allies of Athens (schol. Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 83 [181
Dilts], cf. IG ii2 225). In Megara (with which Athens had had frontier problems
in the late 350’s: IG ii2 204 = R&O 58, Androtion FGrH 324 F 30, Philoch.
FGrH 328 F 155) a pro-Athenian party asked Athens for help against an aris-
tocratic, pro-Philip party, and Phocion was sent and rebuilt the long walls
linking Megara to the harbour town of Nisaea (Dem. XIX. Embassy 87, 204,
294–5, 326, 394, Plut. Phoc. 15). In Elis there was a revolution, for which
Demosthenes blamed Philip (Dem. XIX. Embassy 260, 294, X. Phil. iv. 10). In
343/2 Philip intervened in Molossis, ousting king Arybbas in favour of Alexan-
der, Arybbas’ nephew and Olympias’ brother: Arybbas ﬂed to Athens and was
welcomed with a decree making the (unfulﬁlled) promise to restore him to his
realm ([Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 32, Theopompus FGrH 115 FF 206–7, Just.
Epit. VIII. 6. iv–viii, Diod. Sic. XVI. 72. i [garbled], IG ii2 226 = R&O 70).
Demosthenes served on an embassy to Ambracia and Acarnania, and to oblige
314
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

Corinth the Athenians campaigned in Acarnania (Dem. IX. Phil. iii. 34, 72,
[Dem.] XLVIII. Olympiodorus 24–6, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 97–8).
In Euboea, which Athens had lost in 348, Philip’s interventions were badly
judged. Demosthenes refers to Philip’s partisans as tyrants and their opponents
as the demos: probably ‘tyrant’ is simply a smear-word, and Philip might have
reversed the labels, but the men Philip supported do seem to have been unpop-
ular. In Eretria in 343 he destroyed the harbour town of Porthmus and put
Clitarchus and others in power; in 342 further expeditions were needed to keep
them in power. In Oreus Philip established Philistides and others (Dem. IX.
Phil. iii. 57–62). Callias of Chalcis fell out with Philip and, failing to get help
from Thebes, gained an alliance with Athens.With his help the Athenians over-
threw the régime in Oreus at the end of 342/1 and the régime in Eretria at the
beginning of 341/0 (a recently published Eretrian law to protect their demo-
cracy probably belongs to this context). Callias then with Demosthenes’ support
created a Euboean League afﬁliated to the Athenian, on terms that if the
Euboeans paid syntaxeis to their own league they did not have to pay to the
Athenians also (Aeschin. III. Ctes. 89–94, 100–5, schol. 85, 103 [184, 222
Dilts], Philoch. FGrH 328 FF 159–60, Diod. Sic. XVI. 74. i).
Open conﬂict between Philip and Athens was to arise from the Chersonese.
In 342 Philip returned to Thrace, ﬁnally expelled Amadocus’ son Teres from
the middle kingdom and Cersebleptes from the eastern ([Dem.] XII. Philip’s
Letter 8–10), and set about founding military colonies. Athens sent further
cleruchs to the Chersonese, with a garrison under Diopithes; and Diopithes
came into conﬂict with Cardia, on the isthmus. Cardia had been retained by
Cersebleptes when he ceded the Chersonese to Athens (Dem. XXIII. Aristo-
crates 181–3) and had been speciﬁed as an ally of Philip in the Peace of
Philocrates, but Athens had been disputing the extent of its territory ([Dem.]
VII. Halonnesus 39–44). Philip, spending the winter of 342/1 in Thrace,
protested to Athens, and ‘the philippisers among the politicians’ wanted to give
way (Dem. VIII. Chersonese, hyp. 3); but Demosthenes championed Diopithes,
claiming that Philip could not want Thrace for its own sake but, although he
was not openly at war, his aim was to conquer Athens and all Greece (cf. Diod.
Sic. XVI. 71. i–ii). The Demosthenic corpus contains three speeches of 341:
VIII. Chersonese, IX. Philippic iii (in longer and shorter versions), X. Philippic iv
(repeating some material from VIII). It need not surprise us if at this crucial
time Demosthenes revised and recycled material for delivery in Athens and for
circulation outside.Thrace was not as undesirable as Demosthenes claims, but,
if Philip did not want Thrace for its own sake and needed some further motive
for reaching the Hellespont, cutting Athens’ corn supply was not the only pos-
sibility: Dem. X. Phil. iv. 31–4 shows the earliest awareness that Philip might
make war on Persia.
Diopithes was left in command: by midsummer he had attacked the Thra-
cian coast and Philip was known to be supporting Cardia. Demosthenes was
determined to represent Philip as a threat not just to Athens but to everybody.
He won over Byzantium and various others to the Athenian side (Dem. XVIII.
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
315

Crown 244, 302, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 256); Hyperides won back Rhodes and
Chios ([Plut.] X Orat. 850 A, cf. Dem. IX. Phil. iii. 71, Hyp. frs. 5–6 Burtt).
Persia too was approached, and Persian money reached Diopithes after his
death (Arist. Rhet. II. 1386 A 13) and perhaps reached Demosthenes and
Hyperides too ([Plut.] X Orat. 848 E). In winter 341/0 Demosthenes and
Callias of Chalcis toured the Peloponnese to invite representatives to a war con-
gress. Aeschines gives a date and suggests that the congress never met; but,
whether or not it did meet then or later, it is clear that an alliance against Philip
was growing.
Various acts of hostility were committed against Philip: Callias attacked cities
on the Gulf of Pagasae and captured ships bound for Macedon; the people of
Peparethus expelled Philip’s troops from Halonnesus; the Athenians seized a
Macedonian herald and published his dispatches ([Dem.] XII. Philip’s Letter 5,
12–15, 2). Diopithes was kept in the north-east, and by spring 340 Chares was
there too (IG ii2 228 = R&O 71 ~ Harding 94). Tenedos lent money to Athens
to help pay for action against Philip (IG ii2 233 = R&O 72 ~ Harding 97). A
mercenary force was stationed on Thasos ([Plut.] X Orat. 845 F). At the
Dionysia of 340 Demosthenes was for the ﬁrst time awarded a crown for his
services to Athens (Dem. XVIII. Crown 83, 223). In summer 340 Philip sent a
ﬂeet into the Propontis and, because of the hostility of the Athenian cleruchs,
an army to support it. He began a siege of Perinthus, using the most up-to-date
machinery. There seems to have been a particularly signiﬁcant development in
military technology under Philip and Alexander: at Perinthus both sides used
arrow-ﬁring catapults, and Philip’s may have been torsion-powered, but there
is still no sign of stone-throwing catapults, though the Phocians are said to have
had what may have been non-torsion stone-throwers in 353–352 (Polyaen. II.
38. ii); for the attribution of the ﬁrst catapults to Dionysius I of Syracuse cf. p.
280. The Persian King ordered his satraps to support Perinthus; and Byzan-
tium sent help, so Philip detached part of his force to besiege that, and pro-
bably Selymbria too (Diod. Sic. XVI. 74. ii–76. iv, Just. Epit. IX. 1. ii–v, Philoch.
FGrH 328 FF 53–4).
[Dem.] XII. Philip’s Letter to Athens, complaining of incidents to the summer
of 340, and effectively if not explicitly declaring war (§23), appears to be authen-
tic in substance if not word for word (but [Dem.] XI. Reply is a compilation
from Demosthenes’ speeches).When Philip captured Athenian merchant ships
waiting for Chares to escort them from the Black Sea, Athens declared war on
Philip, with each side accusing the other of breaking the Peace of Philocrates
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 77. ii, Just. Epit. IX. 1. v–viii, Philoch. FGrH 328 FF 55, 162,
schol. Dem. XVIII. Crown 76 [140 Dilts]). Chares was unpopular with the cities
under siege, but Phocion and Cephisophon were acceptable (Plut. Phoc. 14.
iii–viii, IG ii2 1629. 957–65); help came from Athens’ allies, and from Persia
(Paus. I. 29. x, Arr. Anab. II. 14. v). Philip was making no progress, and in
spring 339 decided to withdraw, tricking the Athenians in order to extract his
ships from the Black Sea (Frontin. Str. I. iv. 13, 13A). He surely did not, as
Diodorus claims (XVI. 77. iii), make a treaty, but this was his ﬁrst setback since
316
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

he had been stopped at Thermopylae in 352. He went north and raided the
lands of a Scythian ruler in the Dobrudja, but as he returned he was attacked
and wounded by the Triballians (Just. Epit. IX. 1. ix–3. iii).
Philip was brought back into Greece by the Fourth Sacred War. At 
Delphi Athens had been renewing Persian War dedications, with inscrip-
tions emphasising that Thebes had then fought on the enemy side. At the 
Amphictyonic council in autumn 340, when the representatives of Thebes’ ally
Amphissa used that as the starting-point for a denunciation of Athens,
Aeschines as Athens’ representative responded by pointing out that the
Amphissans were themselves at fault for cultivating the sacred plain of Cirrha,
and a skirmish on the plain followed. In the winter an extraordinary meeting
of the Amphictyonic council was held, and declared a sacred war against
Amphissa. Thebes, not wanting to attack Amphissa, stood out of the war; and
Demosthenes, now seeing Thebes as the only possible bulwark between Philip
and Athens, by sharp practice in the assembly kept Athens out too. Early in 339
an Amphictyonic force, commanded by a Thessalian as was appropriate when
Thessaly occupied the leading position in the Amphictyony, attacked Amphissa,
and Amphissa submitted; at the spring council the Amphictyony imposed a ﬁne
on Amphissa. However, by the time of the autumn council the ﬁne had still not
been paid, and Philip, back from the Propontis and the Dobrudja, was invited
to command. In their accounts of this affair in their speeches of 330, Aeschines
accuses Amphissa of acting for Thebes, while Demosthenes accuses Aeschines
of acting for Philip. Very probably Aeschines innocently thought that the best
way to avoid trouble for Athens was to make trouble for somebody else, and
the affair ran out of control; Philip did not plan or want the war, but when
called in he made effective use of it (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 107–29, Dem.
XVIII. Crown 143–55).
Philip had a garrison in Nicaea, east of Thermopylae, which he had taken
over from the Phocians in 346. By the time he marched south, Thebes 
had expelled this garrison (Philoch. FGrH 328 F 56). Instead of going through
Thermopylae to attack Nicaea, he took the high-level north–south route which
begins west of Thermopylae; but from Cytinium, instead of continuing south
to Amphissa, he turned south-east down the Cephisus valley.The news that he
had captured Elatea in that valley caused panic in Athens, vividly described by
Demosthenes, and (in spite of Thebes’ action at Nicaea) fear that Philip and
Thebes would again act as allies and would attack Athens. Demosthenes got
himself sent to Thebes; Philip also sent a deputation; but Demosthenes suc-
ceeded in securing an alliance with Thebes. The alliance came at a price –
Thebes’ control of Boeotia was recognised, Thebes was to command solely on
land and jointly at sea, Athens was to pay two thirds of the campaign’s cost –
but if Thebes was to join Athens against Philip the price had to be paid (Dem.
XVIII. Crown 156–88, 211–17, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 130–51, Plut. Dem. 18,
Diod. Sic. XVI. 84. ii–85. iv, Just. Epit. IX. 3. iv–vi). Each side appealed to allies
for support; many joined Athens and Thebes, and none from the Peloponnese
is known to have joined Philip (Dem. XVIII. Crown 237).
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
317

In the winter Thebes and Athens held a line running west–east from Mount
Parnassus to Parapotamii, and Philip failed to break through. In spring 338
Demosthenes was honoured in Athens for the second time. But Philip tricked
the Theban Proxenus and the Athenian Chares by pretending to withdraw from
Cytinium, and then advanced to take Amphissa and to reach the Gulf of
Corinth at Naupactus. With Philip in their rear, his opponents’ position was
untenable. They moved to Chaeronea, and it was not until early August (7
Metageitnion in the Athenian calendar: Plut. Cam. 19. viii) that the ﬁnal battle
was fought there. Philip had 30,000 infantry and 2,000 cavalry, his opponents
perhaps about the same numbers. In the Cephisus valley below the city he was
facing south-east, on the right himself with his young son Alexander on the left;
his opponents were facing north-west, with the Athenians on the left and the
Thebans and other Boeotians on the right. Philip with his wing drew back, tiring
the Athenians, before he attacked, while Alexander on the left annihilated the
Theban sacred band; the Macedonians were victorious. Among the Athenian
captives were the general Chares and Demades, who for the next twenty years
was to be a leading pro-Macedonian politician; among those who escaped after
the battle was Demosthenes (Diod. Sic. XVI. 85. ii–86, Just. Epit. IX. 3. ix–xi,
Polyaenus Strat. IV. 2. ii, vii, Plut. Dem. 20. i–ii). The evidence we have does
not justify Demosthenes’ attempt to blame the Theban generals for the defeat
(Dem. LX. Epitaph. 22).
After Chaeronea
In Athens the news was greeted with alarm: Hyperides was responsible for
emergency measures (Lycurg. Leocrates 36–7, [Plut.] X Orat. 848 F–849 A, cf.
Hyp. fr. 18 Burtt), and so after his return was Demosthenes, perhaps through
his friends (Dem. XVIII. Crown 248, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 159, Plut. Dem. 21.
iii); originally there was a proposal to make Charidemus, an extreme opponent
of Macedon, commander in chief, but in the end the position went to the ex-
perienced Phocion (cf. p. 340). Philip exulted in his victory, chanting the decree
preamble ‘Demosthenes son of Demosthenes, of Paeania, proposed’, but was
reproached by Demades, who afterwards went with Aeschines to negotiate, and
obtained lenient terms (Diod. Sic. XVI. 87, Just. Epit. IX. 4. i–v, Plut. Dem. 20.
iii). As in 346, it is hard to think that Philip could have taken Athens by force
if he had wanted to do so, and he had reason to be lenient to Athens. By now
he was thinking of a Persian war, for which the Athenian navy could be useful
– and, while Athens had been an honest enemy, Thebes was an ally which had
turned against him.
Philip toured Greece, to have his supremacy acknowledged by all except
Sparta, which he deprived of border territories and which could conveniently
be left in isolation (Just. Epit. IX. 5. iii; Diod. Sic. XVII. 3. iv–v says Arcadia).
Otherwise he imposed a general settlement designed to keep his enemies weak.
In Boeotia the federation was retained, but Plataea,Thespiae and Orchomenus
318
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

were to be refounded (their rebuilding took some time), and Thebes was given
a garrison and a régime dominated by returned pro-Macedonian exiles (Diod.
Sic. XVI. 87. iii, Just. Epit. IX. 4. vi–x, cf. Arr. Anab. I. 7. xi, Just. Epit. XI. 3.
viii). Oropus was probably made independent (IG vii 4250–1 = R&O 75, sug-
gesting 338–335). Philip also installed garrisons in Corinth (Plut. Arat. 23. iv)
and Ambracia (Diod. Sic. XVII. 3. iii), but Chalcis, another ‘fetter of Greece’,
may not have been garrisoned until later. For Athens ‘deprivation of the islands
and the ending of sea power’ (Paus. I. 25. iii) meant the loss of the League, but
not of Lemnos, Imbros, Scyros, Delos and Samos. On what now seems to be
the best dating of the Phocians’ repayments to Delphi (cf., e.g., Ellis, Philip II
and Macedonian Imperialism, 123 table 2), after beginning in 343/2 to make
semestrial payments of 30 talents, they changed in 341/0 to annual payments
of 30 talents, made no payment in 338/7, and changed to annual payments of
10 talents in 336/5 or 335/4. Nonpayment in 338/7 may be linked to the
Chaeronea campaign, in which (some of) the Phocians were restored to their
cities by Thebes and Athens and fought on their side (Paus. X. 3. iii–iv), but
the other changes cannot be linked to known events.
To consolidate his arrangements, Philip convened a meeting in Corinth in
winter 338/7, at which he imposed on the Greeks a common peace treaty and
organised them in what modern scholars call the League of Corinth (Diod. Sic.
XVI. 89, Just. Epit. IX. 5. i–iv). An inscription gives us part of the oath sworn
by the members, and part of the list of members, with numerals against the
names (IG ii2 236 = R&O 76 ~ Harding 99. A). The undertakings include: not
to overthrow the kingdom of Philip or his descendants, or the constitution
which each participant had when it joined; not to break the agreement or allow
anyone else to do so; if anyone did break it, to respond to the injured party’s
call and to ﬁght against the offender as decided by the synedrion and called 
on by the hegemon (‘leader’). Another text provides the qualiﬁcation that the
constitutional guarantee did not apply when the existing constitution was a
‘tyranny’, and mentions guarantees against execution and exile, land reform,
liberation of slaves and the like ([Dem.] XVII. Treaty with Alexander 7; 15–16).
Enforcement of a common peace had always been problematic, though the
later treaties had tried to make some provision; now the obligations were drawn
up stringently, and enforcement was guaranteed by combining the common
peace with a league of allies, which had a synedrion and a hegemon. The guar-
antee of constitutional stability may be compared with the guarantee of con-
stitutional freedom in the Second Athenian League (cf. p. 230); the numerals
in the list suggest not one vote for each state but proportional voting and mili-
tary contributions as in the Boeotian federation prior to 386. But Philip was in
control: it was inconceivable that anyone but he would be hegemon (and Alexan-
der succeeded to this position as of right in 336: cf. p. 349); in the hegemon’s
absence a board of ‘those appointed to the common protection’ (cf. the title of
the Comité de Salut Public in France in 1793) deputised for him (e.g. [Dem.]
XVII. Treaty with Alexander 15); and the members swore allegiance to the
kingdom of Macedon in perpetuity. Certainly when the League was revived in
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
319

302, and perhaps in the League as originally organised, decisions were binding
on member states, and they could not call their representatives to account (IG
IV2. i 68 = Staatsverträge 446. iii. 18–21).
Earlier in the century Sparta, Athens and Thebes in turn had used the
common peace as a means of advancing their partisan interests; now Philip 
used the common peace and the League to dress up in familiar diplomatic 
garb his control of Greece. For the lesser cities, membership of a league 
controlled by Philip (distant, and with other things to think of) was probably
preferable to membership of a league controlled by Sparta, Athens or Thebes,
and preserving what autonomy they could between or under the shadow of 
one of their powerful neighbours had always been the best they could hope 
for. For the major cities, by contrast, freedom meant freedom both to give
orders to lesser cities and not to take orders from any superior, and they had
now lost that freedom. (The ideal of freedom combined with rule over others
is found in many texts from Hdt. I. 210. ii onwards; Lycurg. Leocrates 42 disin-
genuously represents Athens as a champion of freedom for the Greeks but a
ruler over barbarians, and §50 makes Chaeronea the end of freedom for all the
Greeks.)
The kind of position Philip ﬁnally attained in Greece is presumably the kind
of position he wanted to attain, both in 338/7 and earlier: he wanted a recog-
nised position as the leader of the Greeks; he wanted the Greeks to cooperate
in his further plans; but except when they ungratefully turned against him, as
Thebes did, he wanted to get his way without direct interference in their affairs,
and he was happy to control them through the League of Corinth rather than
by direct conquest. Demosthenes was right to see him as a threat to Athens,
and to the position in the Greek world to which Athens had aspired for the past
century and a half, but he was not right to see him as a threat to the freedom
of all the Greeks.
Probably a foundation meeting of the League was followed by a second
meeting which decided on a war of revenge against Persia (coincidentally, being
weakened by dynastic troubles: cf. p. 326) and appointed Philip to command
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 89, Just. Epit. IX. 5. v–vii), and which outlawed any Greeks
who might ﬁght for the Persians (Arr. Anab. I. 16. vi). The theme of Greek
revenge was convenient; but when the Persians had invaded Greece in 480
Macedon was on the Persian side, and in the last years of Philip’s reign and the
ﬁrst years of Alexander’s some Greeks looked to Persia for support against
Philip. In due course the Aegean islands were to be added to the League, but
the Greeks of mainland Asia Minor probably were not (cf. p. 367). To conﬁrm
the incorporation of the islands in the League, we have an inscription which
shows Argos arbitrating between Melos and Cimolus ‘in accordance with the
resolution of the council of the Greeks’ (IG XII. iii 1259 = R&O 82).
While prosecutions raged in Athens (cf. p. 338), Philip returned to Macedon
and ended his reign with dynastic trouble (cf. ﬁg. 8). There had been many
women in Philip’s life: it is not proﬁtable to distinguish between wives and mis-
tresses, but, since Philip Arrhidaeus had been judged unsuitable and Alexander
320
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

had been recognised as heir (cf. p. 300), Alexander’s mother, Olympias of
Molossis, will have had an entrenched position. But in 337, in love (according
to the sources) and/or under pressure from the Macedonian nobility, Philip took
a Macedonian wife, Cleopatra, and her uncle Attalus prayed for a ‘legitimate’
heir. Probably this marriage produced only a daughter, but it could have pro-
duced a son, who if Philip lived long enough could have supplanted Alexander.
Alexander and Olympias ﬂed to Molossis, but a reconciliation with Alexander
was arranged (Plut. Alex. 9. v–xiv, cf. Just. Epit. IX. 5. ix, 7. ii–vi, XI. 11. iii–v).
Plutarch has a story that Pixodarus, satrap of Caria, offered his daughter in
marriage to Philip Arrhidaeus, Alexander angrily claimed her for himself, and
Alexander was not exiled but several of his friends were (Plut. Alex. 10. i–iv; cf.
Arr. Anab. III. 6. v, conﬁrming the exile of several friends). In spring 336 Philip
sent out his advance forces to Asia Minor, commanded by Parmenio, his best
general, an Amyntas, probably of Lyncestis in Upper Macedonia, and Attalus,
the uncle of his new wife (Diod. Sic. XVI. 91. ii–v, XVII. 2. iv, Just. Epit. V. 9.
viii).
Alexander of Molossis was angered by Philip’s breach with his sister
Olympias, and to placate him Philip offered him in marriage the Cleopatra who
was his daughter by Olympias. The marriage was celebrated at Aegeae in
summer 336; but at the celebration Philip was stabbed to death. The killer, a
member of his bodyguard called Pausanias, was caught and killed by friends of
Alexander before he could tell his story; Antipater presented Alexander to the
soldiers as the new king. Pausanias had a personal motive, which Aristotle
believed: he had been sexually humiliated by Attalus, and Philip would not allow
him revenge. The ofﬁcial investigation blamed the princely family of Lyncestis
(though Alexander of Lyncestis himself was spared because he was quick to
acknowledge Alexander) and Philip’s nephew Amyntas. Philip’s new wife
Cleopatra and her daughter, and Cleopatra’s uncle Attalus, who was in Asia
Minor with Philip’s advance forces, might pose a threat to Alexander, so they
were put to death. There were rumours that Olympias and/or Alexander were
behind the murder, not wanting to be supplanted by Cleopatra and a son she
might bear. It is likely enough that Pausanias acted from more than personal
motives, but the truth is irrecoverable (Diod. Sic. XVI. 91. iv–94, XVII. 2. iii–vi,
5. i–ii, Just. Epit. IX. 6, 7. i, viii–xiv, Plut. Alex. 10. v–vii, De Alex. Fort. i. 327
C, cf. Arist. Pol. V. 1311 B 1–3, Arr. Anab. I. 25. i–ii; Amyntas Arr. FGrH 156
F 9. 22 cf. Polyaenus Strat. VIII. 60).
Among the ﬁnds at Aegeae (Vergina) are lavish tombs under a great tumulus,
with grave-goods pointing to the second half of the fourth century. It has been
suggested that tomb II was the tomb of Philip and one of his wives, that one
of the ivories in the tomb is a portrait of Philip, and that the bones found there
are the bones of Philip, reﬂecting his loss of an eye in the siege of Methone
(and an over-developed right side and under-developed left side for which there
is no other evidence): cf. ill. 12.This has been accepted by many scholars though
not by all, and may be judged likely; those who do not accept it consider this
tomb to be that of Philip Arrhidaeus and his wife Eurydice.
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
321

Theopompus wrote that Europe had never produced a man like Philip
(FGrH 115 F 27). Diodorus described him as the man who from the lowest of
beginnings had created the greatest of kingdoms, achieving this not so much
by ﬁghting as by talking to people (XVI. 95. ii–iii, but more emphasis on mili-
tary achievement in 1. iii–vi). For Justin he was a man given to deceit, for whom
no means of prevailing were shameful (Epit. IX. 8). Arrian gives Alexander 
a speech in which he says that Philip transformed the Macedonians from pri-
mitive pastoralists into city-dwelling agriculturalists (cf. p. 299) and made
Macedon powerful in Greece (Arr. Anab. VII. 9. ii–v). Philip did not begin with
a totally primitive Macedon, but at his accession it was weak and threatened by
its Greek and barbarian neighbours, and in twenty-three years he made it pro-
sperous and the ruler of the mainland from the Peloponnese to the Hellespont.
But at the moment of his assassination it must have seemed entirely possible
that the throne would be contested and that what Philip had gained would be
lost. In Athens, Demosthenes led the rejoicing, while Phocion deplored it
(Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 77–8, Diod. Sic. XVII. 3. ii, Plut. Dem. 22, Phoc. 16.
viii).
322
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
Ill. 12
Reconstruction of Philip’s skull, from tomb II at Vergina. Manchester Museum,
University of Manchester

APPENDIX: PERSIA AND THE GREEKS IN THE REIGN OF ARTAXERXES III
Artaxerxes II (Mnemon) died in 359/8, and was succeeded by his son Artaxerxes III
(Ochus), who ruled until 338. The Satraps’ Revolt of the 360’s had collapsed, but the
new king took the precaution of ordering the satraps to disband their mercenary armies
(cf. p. 224).
Prominent between Persia and the Greeks in the reign of Artaxerxes III was Caria,
which c.392/1 had been detached from the satrapy of Sardis and entrusted to the local
aristocrat Hecatomnos (cf. p. 222). He died in 377/6, and power then passed to his
various sons and daughters in succession, the daughters marrying the sons and retain-
ing power when their husbands died.The Carians were not Greek, but their history had
been bound up with that of the Asiatic Greeks for a long time, and they were consid-
erably hellenised. Hecatomnos gained control of Miletus, and issued coins of Milesian
type, which continued into the early years of Mausolus (Kraay p. 275 no. 998). Miletus
must then have been lost, since we hear of Mausolus’ failing to capture it (Polyaenus
Strat. VI. 8); but later Miletus set up statues of Idrieus and Ada at Delphi (Tod 161. B
= Fouilles de Delphes, III. iv 176). Early in his term of ofﬁce, which coincided with the
beginnings of the Second Athenian League, Mausolus moved his capital from inland
Mylasa to coastal Halicarnassus, and strengthened that by incorporating neighbouring
communities (Vitr. De Arch. II. viii. 10–11, Strabo 611. XIII. i. 59). His tomb there, the
Mausoleum, a building which combined Greek and near-eastern motifs, was one of the
wonders of the ancient world (Plin. H.N. XXXVI. 30–1, ill. 13).
In the 360’s Mausolus dabbled in the Satraps’ Revolt, but not sufﬁciently to make
his position untenable (cf. p. 223); after that he decided that the Greek world offered
the better prospects for expansion. He was behind the League members which revolted
against Athens in the Social War of 356–355 (Diod. Sic. XV. 7. iii, Dem. XV. Liberty of
Rhodians 3: cf. pp. 239–40), and after the war Rhodes, where an oligarchy replaced a
democracy, Cos and Chios came under his control (Dem. XV, hyp., V. Peace 25).
Between 353/2 and 351/0 (§27) exiled Rhodian democrats appealed to Athens for
support which Demosthenes wanted to grant (XV. Liberty of Rhodians), but the Athe-
nians did not act there, though they did in 352/1 reinforce their cleruchy in Samos
(Philoch. FGrH 328 F 154). The islands of the south-east Aegean were still in Carian
hands in 346; and when in 341 Hyperides made them allies of Athens once more this
does not mean that they had broken away from Caria. In 341 Ada was ousted by the
last brother, Pixodarus. Presumably under pressure from the centre, he married his
daughter, another Ada, to a Persian, Orontobates, who was made joint satrap of Caria
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
323
HECATOMNOS
c.392/1–377/6 
MAUSOLUS
377/6–353/2
Artemisia
353/2–351/0
IDRIEUS
351/0–344/3
Ada
344/3–341/0 
=
=
PIXODARUS
341/0–336/5  
Ada  =  ORONTOBATES
joint–336/5–334
Fig. 9
Satraps of Caria

and retained the satrapy when Pixodarus died in 336/5. The elder Ada submitted to
Alexander and was reinstated by him – but made him her heir, and after her death he
appointed an ordinary satrap (Diod. Sic. XVI. 74. ii, XVII. 24. ii, Arr. Anab. I. 23.
vii–viii, VII. 23. i, Strabo 656–7. XIV. ii. 17).
Inscriptions shed interesting light on the rule of the Hecatomnids. We have a series
of decrees in Greek from Mylasa (dated by Persian Kings and Mausolus as satrap), and
a decree from Iasus (dated by local ofﬁcials), dealing with the punishment of men dis-
loyal to Mausolus (IK Mylasa 1–3 = R&O 54, SIG3 169 = IK Iasos 1).We have decrees
of Erythrae, opposite Chios, honouring ‘Mausolus son of Hecatomnos, of Mylasa’ and
Artemisia, and ‘Idrieus son of Hecatomnos, of Mylasa’, as if they were citizens of a
Greek city (IK Erythrai und Klazomenai 8 = R&O 56, SEG xxxi 969 ~ Harding 28. B).
Also we have a decree of Mausolus and Artemisia themselves, identiﬁed simply by name,
and referring in the text to ‘as much territory as Mausolus rules’, which by either an
ignorant or a creative adaptation of a Greek institution confers the status of proxenos on
the whole Cretan city of Cnossus (Labraunda III. ii 40 = R&O 55).We have a decree of
Xanthus, in Lycia (to the east of Caria), of 337, whose dating formula names Pixodarus
as ‘satrap of Lycia’ and ofﬁcials whom he had appointed: this is a trilingual inscription,
in Greek, Lycian (these two texts are fairly close) and Aramaic, the administrative lan-
guage of the Persian empire (this text seems to be aimed more at the Persians, inter alia
dating by Artaxerxes IV and styling Pixodarus ‘satrap of Caria and Lycia’) (Fouilles de
324
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
Ill. 13
Reconstruction of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus. © Museum of Ancient Art,
University of Aarhus, Denmark

Xanthos, vi; Greek text R&O 78). Technically the Hecatomnids were satraps, and at
some point they acquired Lycia in addition to Caria. In the Aegean world, however,
their subordination to Persia was played down, they behaved like independent rulers,
and Erythrae at least treated them as distinguished citizens of a city: they may be seen
as forerunners of the hellenistic kings.
By the end of the Satraps’ Revolt Artabazus had taken over the satrapy of Dascylium,
but by 355 he was in revolt. After the Social War the Athenian Chares joined him with
a mercenary army, and in 354 they won a famous victory over a Persian commander
called Tithraustes; but Persia complained to Athens, Demosthenes was with the majo-
rity in opposing conﬂict with Persia, and Chares was recalled. Instead in 353 Thebes
sent Pammenes to support Artabazus, and they won two victories but Artabazus then
fell out with Pammenes (Diod. Sic. XVI. 22. i–ii, 34. i–ii, schol. Dem. III. Ol. iii. 31,
IV. Phil. i. 19 [146, 84b Dilts], FGrH 105 F 4, Polyaenus Strat. VII. 33. ii, Dem. XIV.
Symmories 2–13).We then hear no more of Artabazus until the late 340’s, when he was
a refugee in Macedon (cf. below).
Artaxerxes campaigned twice against Egypt, unsuccessfully in the late 350’s and 
successfully in the late 340’s; but Diodorus records the successful campaign under
351/0–350/49 and nothing under the 340’s (traces of the unsuccessful campaign XVI.
40. iii, iv–v, 44. i, 48. i–ii; cf. Dem. XV. Liberty of Rhodians 5, 11–12, Isoc.V. Philip 101).
If Persia’s subsidy to Thebes (Diod. Sic. XVI. 40. i–ii) belongs to this war, Thebes like
Athens must have recanted its support for Artabazus.
By the mid 340’s Egypt’s revolt had spread to Phoenicia and Cyprus (Diod. Sic. XVI.
41, 42. iii–iv, cf. 40. v). In 344 Artaxerxes, preparing to campaign in person, sent an
appeal for support to the Greek cities: Athens and Sparta merely conﬁrmed their friend-
ship, but Thebes, Argos and the Asiatic Greeks provided a total of 10,000 men (Diod.
Sic. XVI. 40. vi, 44. i–iv: cf. p. 313) – while there were 4,000 Greeks with Mentor and
20,000 with Nectanebo (42. ii, 47. vi).The recovery of Cyprus was entrusted to Idrieus
of Caria (though in 346 Isocrates had thought he might join the rebels:V. Philip. 102–3),
accompanied by the Athenian Phocion as a mercenary commander: Salamis in Cyprus
endured a siege for a while, but ﬁnally submitted (Diod. Sic. XVI. 42. vi–ix, 44. i–iii).
In 343 the Phoenicians, with Greek mercenaries from Egypt under Mentor of Rhodes,
repelled Persia’s advance forces. The revolt there collapsed when Tennes of Sidon
betrayed the city to the Persians; the city was destroyed but Tennes was put to death
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 43, 44. iv–45. i). A story of the Egyptian Nectanebo’s dream about his
neglect of the temple of the war-god Onuris is dated 5/6 July 343; Speusippus’ Letter to
Philip, probably of 343/2, complains of a shortage of papyrus because of the reconquest
(§14; date from §7); so the recovery of Egypt should be dated winter 343/2. Artaxerxes
was joined by his Greek mercenaries, and Mentor with his force defected to him.
Nectanebo held Pelusium, at the eastern mouth of the Nile delta, but failed to make
trusting use of his mercenary commanders; after a defeat which need not have been
fatal he withdrew to Memphis, at the apex of the delta. The Persians’ forces mastered
Egypt (thanks particularly to Mentor and the grand vizier Bagoas), and Nectanebo ﬂed
to Ethiopia (Diod. Sic. XVI. 46. iv–51). At some point in the next few years (perhaps
338–336) Egypt rebelled again, under Khababash, but was conquered by Persia again
(cf. the hieroglyphic ‘satrap stele’ of 312/1: see note on further reading at the end of the
chapter).
After this success Mentor was able to intercede for his brother Memnon and his
brother-in-law Artabazus, who were now exiles in Macedon. Mentor was given a
command on the coast of Asia Minor, where he dealt with Hermias of Atarneus (said
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
325

by Demosthenes to be in league with Philip) and other trouble-makers (Diod. Sic. XVI.
50. vii, 52, cf. Theopompus FGrH 115 F 291, Dem. X. Phil. iv. 32); on his death he
was succeeded by Memnon, who was to be important in the resistance to Alexander in
335–334. Bagoas remained with Artaxerxes, and in Diodorus’ account came to fancy
himself as a king-maker. In November 338 he poisoned the king, killed his older sons
and put the youngest, Arses, on the throne as Artaxerxes IV, hoping to rule through
him. Arses proved intractable, so in June 336 Bagoas killed him and his children, extin-
guishing the direct royal line, and installing as Darius III Codoman, descended from a
son of Darius II. After that he tried to kill Darius too, but Darius switched the cups
and it was Bagoas who died (Diod. Sic. XVI. 50. viii, VII. 5. iii–6. iii, Just. Epit. X. 3,
cf. Trogus Prologue X, Arr. Anab. II. 14. v). Darius had a good record, and was not an
unworthy successor; but his succession certainly resulted from a period of major
upheaval, in which members of the royal family may have played a greater part and
Bagoas a lesser than in Diodorus’ story.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On Macedon before Philip II see Hammond and Grifﬁth, History of Macedonia, vol. ii,
chs. 1–4 (by Hammond: accepting the Argive origins claimed by the royal family, as
other scholars do not, and taking a more formal view than other scholars of the working
of the kingdom); Borza, In the Shadow of Olympus.
On the reign of Philip see Cawkwell, Philip of Macedon (preceded by various articles,
which are cited there: some of these are reprinted in Perlman’s collection, noted below);
Ellis, Philip II and Macedonian Imperialism; Hammond and Grifﬁth, History of Macedo-
nia, vol. ii, chs. 5–21 (ch. 20 by Hammond, otherwise by Grifﬁth). Hatzopoulos and
Loukopoulos (eds.), Philip of Macedon, contains chapters by experts as well as good 
pictures.
The point that Athens could not make a secret treaty with Philip about Amphipolis
was made by G. E. M. de Ste. Croix, ‘The Alleged Secret Pact Between Athens and
Philip II Concerning Amphipolis and Pydna’, CQ2 xiii 1963, 110–19 (reprinted in
Perlman, ch. 3). On the Third Sacred War see Buckler, Philip II and the Sacred War; the
once-popular view that Diodorus had reduplicated a whole year of the war was rebutted
by N. G. L. Hammond, ‘Diodorus’ Narrative of the Sacred War’, JHS lvii 1937, 44–78
= his Studies in Greek History, ch. 15 (but he was perhaps wrong not to allow minor
doublets).
Among many treatments of Athens’ responses to Philip see Harris, Aeschines and
Athenian Politics; Sealey, Demosthenes and His Time. Perlman (ed.), Philip and Athens,
reprints a number of important articles. On Euboea in the 340’s see P. A. Brunt, ‘Euboea
in the Time of Philip II’, CQ2 xix 1969, 245–65; J. M. Carter, ‘Athens, Euboea and
Olynthus’, Hist. xx 1971, 418–29. The view championed by Ellis, that in 346 Philip
would have preferred to cooperate with Athens against Thebes but was frustrated by
Demosthenes, was ﬁrst advanced by M. M. Markle, ‘The Strategy of Philip in 346 BC’,
CQ2 xxiv 1974, 253–68. For Speusippus’ letter see Natoli, The Letter of Speusippus to
Philip II.
The Eretrian law to protect the democracy is published by D. Knoepﬂer, ‘Loi
d’Érétrie contre la tyrannie et l’oligarchie’, BCH cxxv 2001, 195–238 and cxxvi 2002,
149–204.
326
PHILIP II OF MACEDON

On military technology see especially Marsden, Greek and Roman Artillery, i. Histori-
cal Development.
On the origins of the Fourth Sacred War see P. D. Londey, ‘The Outbreak of the 4th
Sacred War’, Chiron xx 1990, 239–60 (not planned by Philip). On the battle of
Chaeronea see N. G. L. Hammond, ‘The Two Battles of Chaeronea (338 BC and 86
BC)’, Klio xxxi 1938, 186–218, of which the part on 338 is reprinted in his Studies in
Greek History, ch. 16; W. K. Pritchett, ‘Observations on Chaironeia’, AJA2 lxii 1958,
307–11. On Philip’s territorial settlements after the battle see C. Roebuck, ‘The Settle-
ments of Philip II with the Greek States in 338 BC’, CP xliii 1948, 73–102 = his Economy
and Society in the Early Greek World, 131–50 (and reprinted in Perlman [ed.], Philip and
Athens, ch. 12 – but by a printer’s error there the ﬁrst half of the article was originally
omitted).
On the murder of Philip, Alexander was suspected by E. Badian, ‘The Death of Philip
II’, Phoen. xvii 1963, 244–50; Olympias by R. Develin, ‘The Murder of Philip II’,
Antichthon xv 1981, 86–99; the ofﬁcial verdict was accepted by N. G. L. Hammond,
‘The End of Philip’, in Hatzopoulos and Loukopoulos (eds.), Philip of Macedon, 166–75;
Olympias and Alexander are exonerated by E. Carney, ‘The Politics of Polygamy:
Olympias, Alexander and the Murder of Philip II’, Hist. xli 1992, 169–89.
For tomb II at Vergina as that of Philip and one of his wives see N. G. L. Hammond,
‘The Evidence for the Identity of the Royal Tombs at Vergina’, in Adams and Borza
(eds.), Philip II, Alexander the Great and the Macedonian Heritage, 111–27 = his Collected
Studies, ii. 271–87, and for the reconstruction of the skull as Philip’s skull A. J. N. W.
Prag et al., ‘The Skull from Tomb II at Vergina: King Philip II of Macedon’, JHS civ
1984, 60–78; in favour of Philip Arrhidaeus and Eurydice see Borza, In the Shadow of
Olympus, 256–66.
On the Hecatomnids of Caria see Hornblower, Mausolus. For the story of Nectanebo’s
dream see L. Koenen, ‘The Dream of Nektanebos’, BASP xxii 1985, 171–94; for
Speusippus’ letter see Natoli, The Letter of Speusippus to Philip II. The ‘satrap stele’
is translated by Bevan, A History of Egypt under the Ptolemaic Dynasty, 28–32; and 
the episode of Khababash is discussed by Briant, From Cyrus to Alexander, 717–18 
with 1017–18, S. Burstein, ‘Prelude to Alexander: The Reign of Khababash’, AHB xiv
2000, 149–54. On Hermias of Atarneus see P. Green, ‘Hermias of Atarneus and His
Friendship with Aristotle’, in Heckel and Tritle (eds.), Crossroads of History:The Age of
Alexander, ch. 2. Against Diodorus’ account of Bagoas and the Achaemenid royal 
family see Briant, From Cyrus to Alexander, 769–80 with 1033–4; also E. Badian, ‘Darius
III’, HSCP c 2000, 241–68.
PHILIP II OF MACEDON
327

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
357
Periander’s law for trierarchic symmoriai
356/5
Leptines’ law on exemptions from festival liturgies
late 350’s (?)
institution of theoric fund
346
Peace of Philocrates with Philip
343
Aeschines acquitted in Embassy trial
336
Ctesiphon’s proposal to honour Demosthenes
336
law threatening Areopagus
c.336–324
Lycurgus and friends epi tei dioikesei
c.335/4
reorganisation of ephebeia
331–330
Spartan-led rising against Macedon
330
Ctesiphon acquitted in Crown trial
324
Harpalus in Athens
323–322
Athens leads Lamian War against Macedon
Finance
Athens like other ancient states lived from hand to mouth.There was no notion
of ‘controlling the economy’ in a modern sense (though in the fourth century
the merismos, on which cf. p. 263, shows that the Athenians were trying to 
23
Demosthenic Athens

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
329
work out what they could afford): taxes were imposed to raise funds for neces-
sary expenditure.Without the kind of credit system with which we are familiar,
not even the state could spend money which it did not have; shortage 
of funds was said to bias the courts against rich men whose property might 
be conﬁscated if they were condemned (e.g. Ar. Eq. 1357–61, Lys. XXVII.
Epicrates 1, XXX. Nicomachus 22, but we do not ﬁnd this allegation in the
Demosthenic period), and in crises lack of money to pay jurors led to a sus-
pension of the courts (e.g. in 348: Dem. XXXIX. Boeotus i. 17). When there
was surplus money, it had traditionally found its way into the temple treasuries,
from which the state might later borrow (cf. pp. 91–3); the treasuries of Athena
and of the Other Gods, amalgamated in 406, were separated in 385 and recom-
bined (as ‘the treasury of Athena’) c.346.We have noticed already that, whereas
in the ﬁfth century Athens had a central state treasury, in the fourth it made
an allocation to separate spending authorities (cf. p. 263). It is not until the
middle of the fourth century that we ﬁnd any conscious attempt to build up
surplus funds.
In the ﬁfth century the Delian League had added to the number of salaried
posts, but the tribute had reduced the range of purposes for which the 
Athenians had to spend their own money; in the fourth century the syntaxeis of
the Second League did not raise large sums and the sums they did raise did
not enrich Athens. The silver mines had been abandoned in the ﬁnal phase 
of the Peloponnesian War, and were not very productive in the ﬁrst half of 
the century. In the years immediately after the Peloponnesian War, the collec-
tors of the 2 per cent import tax in 402/1 paid 30 talents and made a proﬁt 
of 3 talents; the collectors in 401/0 paid 36 talents and made a small proﬁt
(Andoc. I. Myst. 133–4). At the beginning of the Peloponnesian War Athens’
total annual revenue, including about 400 talents tribute, had been about 1,000
talents. In 341 Demosthenes claimed that ‘not long ago’ (the 350’s?) Athens’
annual revenue was only 130 talents but now was 400 talents (X. Phil.iv. 37–8);
[Plut.] X Orat. 842 F credits Lycurgus (who was inﬂuential c.336–324; cf. p.
334) with increasing the revenue to 1,200 talents whereas once it was only 60
talents (but in the light of Andocides, above, the 60 talents is hard to believe
for any date; the 1,200 talents is perhaps credible if seen as the equivalent of
600 a century earlier). As for expenditure, I believe that the posts that remained
in the fourth century were still salaried, and the burden of assembly pay was
added; by the 330’s–320’s payments (except to jurors) were at about double
the rate of the beginning of the century (cf. pp. 262–3), and then the assembly
will have cost about 45 talents a year, the council 26 talents, the courts perhaps
150 talents. Money will have been needed for festivals (and estimates of grants
paid from the theoric fund, on which see pp. 333–4, to enable citizens to attend 
festivals have ranged from c.15 to c.100 talents a year), and for roads and 
buildings. But Athens’ greatest expenditure, in the ﬁrst half of the century
beyond Athens’ means and without producing commensurate results, was on
wars and on ships and other equipment for wars. Demosthenes in a speech of
c.353/2 remarks that the revenue from taxes is not sufﬁcient for the state’s

330
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
regular expenditure, so recourse is needed to ‘additional payments’ (XXIV.
Timocrates 96–7): this probably includes ﬁnes and conﬁscations, and also eis-
phorai and epidoseis.
Most Athenian taxes were indirect taxes, such as the 2 per cent import tax,
where the amount paid by individuals depended on their consumption (and
metics and visitors paid like citizens – but there were some additional burdens
on foreigners, such as the poll tax called metoikion levied on metics: Harp.
metokion [m 27 Keaney]); a recently discovered inscription has revealed a tax
in kind levied on the grain grown on Lemnos, Imbros and Scyros (SEG xlviii
96 = R&O 26); but Athens devised particular means of raising larger sums from
the richer inhabitants.
One of these is the property tax known as eisphora (‘paying in’), which was
available in 434/3 and was levied at any rate from 428/7 (cf. p. 93): modern
books often refer to it as the ‘war tax’, since military needs were usually the
reason for its being levied. Eisphora was levied ad hoc in the years and at the
rate (usually 1 per cent or 2 per cent) decided by the assembly, on the pro-
perty of all residents rich enough to qualify (it is not clear how many these 
were but probably rather more than the number liable for the liturgies to be 
discussed below). We are given 6,000 and 5,750 talents for the total declared
valuation (timema) of all inhabitants or all liable in 378/7 and 354/3 (Polyb. II.
62. vii, Dem. XIV. Symmories 19); the ‘sixth part’ paid by metics (Dem. XXII.
Androtion 61, IG ii2 244. 20) perhaps indicates that a metic paid 1–6 more than a
citizen with the same valuation. In this area as in many, Athens suffered 
from weak enforcement procedures. In 378/7 those liable were organised in a
hundred contribution groups, symmoriai (Clidemus FGrH 323 F 8, Philoch.
FGrH 328 F 41). By 364/3 the liturgy (cf. below) of proeisphora had been
created, by which the richest three members of each symmoria were required to
advance the whole sum due from the symmoria, and were left to reimburse
themselves from the other members (Dem. XXI. Midias 153 with 157, XVIII.
Crown 103 with 171; ﬁrst attested Isae.VI. Philoctemon 60). In the 350’s Andro-
tion served on a commission to collect arrears of eisphora from 378/7 to
(perhaps) the introduction of proeisphora: from a total of somewhat over 300
talents, 14 talents were outstanding, and the commission collected 7 talents
(Dem. XXII. Androtion 44).
Sometimes an appeal was made for epidoseis, voluntary gifts. At Artemisium
in 480 Clinias provided his trireme and crew at his own expense (Hdt. VIII.
17), and we hear of a man who provided two triremes in the Peloponnesian
War (Xen. Hell. II. iii. 40). Our earliest occurrence of the word is in 394,
when cash contributions were invited, and lists were published of those who
paid and those who promised but did not pay (Isae. V. Dicaeogenes 37–8). Re-
ferences to epidoseis become frequent from the middle of the century (Dem.
XXI. Midias 160–1 calls an appeal in 357 the ﬁrst); a decree of the 240’s invites 
epidoseis of not more than 200 dr. and not less than 50 dr. and is followed by
a list of contributors (IG ii2 791, revised Agora xvi 213). We shall notice a 

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
331
particular category of epidoseis below, in connection with Lycurgus’ building
programme.
The rich were also expected to contribute to the state’s expenses through 
the institution of liturgies. Leitourgia, in Athens and elsewhere in classical
Greece, denoted ‘work for the people’ in the sense that a man was given a 
public task to perform directly at his own expense, without the intervention 
of ofﬁcials or contractors to collect the money and spend it. Those at Athens
fall into two classes: festival liturgies, commonly involving responsibility for a
sequence of plays or a team of performers at a festival; and the trierarchy, where
the state provided a warship, its basic equipment and the crew’s wages, and the
trierarch had to take charge of the ship and cover the other running costs for
the year.
The maximum that could be required of a man was one festival liturgy in
two years (Dem. XX. Leptines 8) or one trierarchy in three (Isae.VII. Apollodorus
38). Probably the rule was that liturgies should be assigned to the richest men
who could not claim exemption; if a man thought that somebody richer than
himself had been passed over, he could challenge him in an antidosis (‘giving in
exchange’) either to take over the liturgy or, if the man challenged did not accept
that he was richer, to exchange property with him (Lys. IV. Wound 1 cites an
exchange; [Dem.] XLII. Phaenippus in connection with a challenge reports the
making of an inventory and the sealing of buildings). But, while some men tried
to avoid liturgies, others were proud to demonstrate their public spiritedness
by performing more, and spending more on them, than was positively required:
one man claims to have performed eleven festival liturgies between 411/0 and
403/2, and to have spent 31–2 talents on them when he could have spent only 1
talent; in the same period he spent 6 talents on seven years of trierarchy (Lys.
XXI. Taking Bribes 1–5). Lavish performance of liturgies was a way in which a
public ﬁgure could acquire a favourable image: many festival liturgies were per-
formed in a competitive context (e.g. competitions between tribal teams); there
could be prizes for trierarchs too (e.g. IG ii2 1629 = R&O 100 ~ Harding 121.
190–204; Dem. LI. Trierarchic Crown); and it was natural to want one’s own
team or ship to be better than others. Thus through the institution of liturgies
Athens channelled the competitive instincts of the upper class in the direction
of public service.
At state level there were at least 97 festival liturgies in an ordinary year, 118
in the years of the Great Panathenaea, and there were some deme liturgies too;
metics shared in some festival liturgies and had some liturgies of their own. Ant.
VI. Chorister gives a good impression of what was involved. The trierarchy was
limited to citizens, and the burden was unpredictable: in any one year many or
few ships might be needed, for a long or a short period, and they might or might
not encounter the hazards of battle and bad weather. The trierarchy had origi-
nally involved personal as well as ﬁnancial responsibility for a ship, but in the
fourth century it was possible to pay a contractor (Dem. XXI. Midias 80, 155).
The minimum level of property which made a man liable for liturgies was about

332
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
3–4 talents; as farmers will still insist today, some kinds of wealth in terms of
property do not generate large quantities of ready money, and a liturgy could
be a heavy burden for a man who barely qualiﬁed, especially if he had to pay
an eisphora in the same year.
In the fourth century it became increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd enough men to
perform liturgies: Athens’ citizen population after the Peloponnesian War was
about half what it had been before (cf. p. 260), and proportionately there were
perhaps more very rich men but fewer moderately rich. The ﬁrst concession
was the appointment of two men as joint trierarchs for a single ship (Lys.
XXXII. Diogiton 24–6, Dem. XXI. Midias 154). In 357 a law of Periander
organised the 1,200 richest citizens in twenty trierarchic symmoriai (modelled
on the symmoriai for eisphora, above), after which there were still particular trier-
archs for particular ships, but some at least of the costs were shared equally 
by all the 1,200, who thus had to pay small sums regularly rather than large
sums occasionally ([Dem.] XLVII. Evergus and Mnesibulus 21 with Dem. XIV.
Symmories 16–17). A particular problem with festival liturgies was that exemp-
tions had been awarded to many individuals and ofﬁce-holders: Leptines 
proposed to deal with these by banning almost all exemptions; in 355/4 
Demosthenes in an unsuccessful attack on that law protested that the lack of
rewards would discourage benefactors and that it would be better to use a
system of symmoriai here too (Dem. XX. Leptines). In 354/3 Demosthenes
attacked the system of trierarchic symmoriai, again unsuccessfully, claiming that
there were so many exemptions that a list of 2,000 would be needed to obtain
1,200 actual contributors, and that contributions in proportion to wealth would
be better than equal contributions (Dem. XIV. Symmories). In 340, when Athens
declared war on Philip and Demosthenes was in a dominant position, he did
introduce proportional contributions: references to ‘the three hundred’ (those
liable for proeisphora) may mean that under the new system they bore the whole
burden, or simply that they bore the lion’s share (Dem. XVIII. Crown 102–9,
Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 222, Din. I. Demosthenes 42, Hyp. fr. 43. i Burtt). It is
possible but not certain that this was modiﬁed by Aeschines (Aeschin. III. Ctesi-
phon 222, Dem. XVIII. Crown 312 but contr. 107). Overall, the effect of the
various changes was to spread the burden of liturgies somewhat more fairly
among the richer Athenians.
Until the 350’s Athens was spending heavily on military activity (after
Leuctra trying, without much success, to recover ﬁfth-century possessions: cf.
pp. 236–7), and was perpetually short of money. After the Social War we see a
considerable ﬁnancial recovery, associated with Eubulus in the 350’s and 340’s
and with Lycurgus in the 330’s and 320’s. Xenophon, back in Athens, wrote
his Ways and Means (Poroi) in the late 350’s and this seems to reﬂect the think-
ing of Eubulus (Eubulus is said to have proposed Xenophon’s recall: Diog.
Laert. II. 59). Athens should be revived as a trading centre, with inducements
for non-citizens such as the right (for those judged suitable) to own land and
houses, and quick settlement of disputes (ii. 1–iii. 5) – privileges were granted
more frequently to favoured foreigners, and special ‘monthly’ commercial suits

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
333
had been created by 343/2 ([Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 12). (Remarkably) sub-
scriptions should be invited to a capital fund, and spent on such objects as
hotels (or perhaps brothels) and a state-owned merchant ﬂeet (iii. 6–14) – state-
owned hotels and merchant ships were too much for Athens, but Lycurgus did
raise substantial loans ([Plut.] X Orat. 841 D, 852 B). More should be made of
the silver mines, and the capital fund could provide state-owned slaves to work
them (iv) – inscriptions show that mining activity revived, and reached a peak
in the 340’s. All this needs peace, and a board of eirenophylakes, ‘guardians of
the peace’ (v) – after the Social War Athens did try to avoid ﬁghting except
where its interests were directly threatened; in 346 Eubulus stressed the ﬁnan-
cial consequences of not making peace with Philip (cf. p. 311), and even
Demosthenes in his First Philippic tried to work out what the campaigning he
wanted would cost (IV. Phil. i. 21–2).
An important contribution to this recovery was made by what seems at ﬁrst
sight to be an extension of the old-style democracy, the creation of the theoric
(festival) fund to pay grants to citizens covering the cost of theatre tickets at
the major festivals: Demades called this ‘the glue of the democracy’ (Plut.
Quaest. Plat. 1011 B). Some texts attribute this to Pericles (e.g. Plut. Per. 9. i),
others to Agyrrhius (e.g. Harp. qewrik [q 19 Keaney]); but they introduced
other state payments (Pericles jury pay, Agyrrhius assembly pay), and it is
noticeable that Aristophanes never mentions that citizens were paid to go to 
his plays, so it is better to follow the texts which link the fund with Eubulus
and Diophantus (Hesychius [d 2351 Latte], Suda [d 1491 Adler] dracm
calazwˆsa, schol. Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 24 [65 Dilts]), and to date it to the
second half of the 350’s.)
Like all funds, this received an annual allocation; and it beneﬁted from the
provision that it should also receive any surplus revenue, which previously had
gone to the stratiotic (army) fund (cf. [Dem.] LIX. Neaera 4–5). This allowed
it to accumulate a substantial surplus, to be spent for purposes which its con-
trollers approved, so that Aeschines could claim that ‘because of your trust in
Eubulus, those elected to control the theoric fund, before Hegemon’s law was
passed, [controlled various ﬁnancial ofﬁces, were responsible for various build-
ing projects,] and had virtually the whole ﬁnancial administration (dioikesis) of
the city’ (III. Ctesiphon 25). By the time of the Ath. Pol. the fund was controlled
by a board of ten men; but an inscription of 343/2 is best interpreted as in-
dicating that at that date the fund had a single treasurer (IG ii2 223. C. 5–6,
where the man named, Cephisophon, was a man of some prominence). Lycur-
gus later was subject to a law which limited tenure of his ofﬁce for four years
([Plut.] X Orat. 841 B–C: ‘ﬁve’ years by inclusive counting), and it is an attrac-
tive possibility that that was Hegemon’s law, aimed at weakening the theoric
treasurer by limiting tenure and substituting a board for a single man. After-
wards the theoric board and the stratiotic treasurer joined with the council in
supervising the old-style ﬁnancial ofﬁcials (Ath. Pol. 47. ii), and perhaps pre-
viously it was just the theoric treasurer who had this power. The theoric ofﬁ-
cials were elected, (presumably) by analogy with the treasurer of the stratiotic

334
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
fund, who was elected as all military ofﬁcials were elected. In the time of
Eubulus the single treasurer directly controlled the one fund in which there was
spare money, and was in a strong position in combining with the annually
changing council to supervise the other ofﬁcials, so that he was better placed
than any one else to understand Athens’ ﬁnancial position.
In 349/8, when Demosthenes wanted energetic support for Olynthus, he and
Apollodorus attacked the rule directing surpluses to the theoric fund (Dem. I.
Ol. i. 19–20, III. Ol. iii. 10–13, [Dem.] LIX. Neaera 4–5; cf. Dem.’s attack on
the fund in XIII. Organisation 1–2, 10, probably of the late 350’s). In 346
Eubulus mentioned ‘making the theoric monies stratiotic’ among the conse-
quences which would follow from not making peace with Philip (Dem. XIX.
Embassy 291). After the Peace of Philocrates Demosthenes gained increasing
support, and a favourable reference to the fund in 341 (X. Phil. iv. 35–45) sug-
gests that by then he and his friends were in control. In 339/8, when Philip had
entered the Fourth Sacred War, on the proposal of Demosthenes work on the
ship-sheds and the storehouse for hanging tackle (paid for from the fund:
recently excavated, and cf. IG ii2 1668) was halted, and ‘they decreed that all
the [surplus?] monies should be stratiotic’ (Philoch. FGrH 382 F 56a). That
decision was perhaps reversed after Chaeronea, but in 337/6 Demosthenes
himself was the theoric treasurer (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 24). It seems likely
that a position which had been acceptable when in the hands of Eubulus was
perceived by Demosthenes’ opponents as undemocratic when in the hands of
Demosthenes, and that we should place Hegemon’s law here as a reaction by
Demosthenes’ opponents.
Whatever the political implications, the ﬁnancial achievements of the theoric
treasurer were undoubted, and those achievements were continued by Lycur-
gus. For three quadrennia, perhaps c.336–324, ﬁrst Lycurgus himself and then
(because tenure was limited) friends of his held a position connected with ﬁnan-
cial administration ([Plut.] X Orat. 841B–C, cf. decree ap. 851 F–852 E, Diod.
Sic. XVI. 88. i). Probably there was created for him the ofﬁce well attested in
the hellenistic period, epi tei dioikesei (‘in charge of the ﬁnancial administra-
tion’), and the Xenocles honoured for his work in that position (Agora xvi 77)
was one of the friends who held ofﬁce after him.
Lycurgus ‘found sources of revenue, built the theatre, the odeum, the dock-
yards, constructed triremes and harbours’ (Hyp. fr. 23 Burtt); the decree
posthumously honouring him alleges cash distributions totalling 18,900 talents
(hard to believe), the raising of capital and the making of loans from it, the pro-
vision of sacred treasures and of ships and military equipment (X Orat. 851
F–852 E). We shall look at some aspects of his achievement below. The decree
claims that he underwent accounting many times and was never convicted;
when he died, about 325/4, the ofﬁce passed to an opponent, Menesaechmus
(Dion. Hal. 660. Din. 11), who alleged that Lycurgus was a state debtor and
had his sons arrested, but Demosthenes and Hyperides secured their release (X
Orat. 842 E, Dem. Letter iii, Hyp. fr. 23 Burtt).

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
335
Athens went into the hellenistic period with the ofﬁcial (from 287 a board)
epi tei dioikesei and the stratiotic treasurer as its principal ﬁnancial ofﬁcials; the
allocation of funds to separate authorities seems to have been changed to the
maintenance of separate accounts within a central treasury.
Institutional Changes
The new ﬁnancial posts provided scope for administrators with expertise, as the
old-style administrative posts did not; and we have seen that changes in the sec-
retaryship in the 360’s provided some scope for expertise there (cf. p. 263).The
same may be said of a change in the appointment of the ten generals.They were
elected and could be re-elected; originally one had to come from each tribe,
but from at any rate 441/0 some exceptions were allowed, probably to cater for
cases in which a tribe had no strong candidate (cf. p. 61). That system was
probably still operating in 357/6, when we know eight of the generals and they
come from seven tribes, but by the 330’s–320’s they were elected irrespective
of tribe (Ath. Pol. 61. i): it had come to seem more important to have compe-
tent generals than to maintain tribal representation. Another change in the 
generalship was made too. Originally all the generals had been given particular
duties ad hoc; there is no sign that things were different in 357/6 (IG ii2 124 =
R&O 48 ~ Harding 65. 19–23; IG ii2 123 = R&O 52 ~ Harding 69. 13–15); but
a ‘general for the defence of the territory’ seems now to be attested in 356/5
(SEG xlvii 159. 2–4, where the crucial words are restored; certain in 352/1, IG
ii2 204 = R&O 58. 19–20), and by the time of the Ath. Pol. there were regular
postings for ﬁve of the ten, ‘for the hoplites’ in expeditions outside Attica, ‘for
the territory’, two ‘for the Piraeus’ and the military buildings and equipment
there, and one ‘for the symmoriai’, in charge of the trierarchic system (61. i). In
the hellenistic period the link with the tribes was so far forgotten that the
number of generals remained ten when the number of tribes was increased, and
eventually there were regular duties for all ten.
Piecemeal changes in the machinery of justice continued. We do not know
whether it was a matter of regulation or simply of practice, but it is striking that
we know of no eisangeliai, charges of major offences against the state, tried by
the assembly after 362/1. A jury-court contained fewer men, paid at a lower
rate, and the use of juries rather than the assembly may have been an economy
measure introduced after the Social War.
In the 340’s a new kind of lawsuit was introduced, the ‘monthly’ suit, prob-
ably available every month and accelerated by by-passing the Forty and the
arbitrators and going straight to a court. Probably the ﬁrst of these were the
‘commercial’ suits, in existence by 343/2, concerning trade to and from Athens
where there was a written contract, and open to citizens, metics and foreigners
on an equal basis (Ath. Pol. 52. ii–iii, 59. v, [Dem.] VII. Halonnesus 12, Dem.

336
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
XXXII. Zenothemis 1); these accelerated suits for traders are foreshadowed in
Xen. Poroi ii. 3.
There were also important changes in the powers and activities of the 
Areopagus, which we shall examine below in connection with politics and 
politicians.
Policies, Politics, Politicians
Some men already prominent before the Social War remained active after,
notably Aristophon and Chares, but the stage was largely occupied by a new
generation (evidence supporting many statements undocumented here is cited
in chapter 22, above). Eubulus, who had been one of the nine archons in
370/69, and Diophantus were both important in the late 350’s and the 340’s,
and were responsible for the development of the theoric fund (cf. p. 333).They
were not military men, but can be associated with the policy of concentrating
on serious threats which Athens pursued after the Social War. In 352 Dio-
phantus proposed the thanksgiving sacriﬁce when Philip was halted at Ther-
mopylae (Dem. XIX. Embassy 86 with schol. [199 Dilts]). Men involved in the
Euboean war of 348 had links with Eubulus: Phocion, who was primarily a
general but saw himself as a general-cum-politician in the older manner (Plut.
Phoc. 7. v–vi), when he did engage in politics was on the side of Eubulus 
and Aeschines; Hegesilaus was related to Eubulus (Dem. XIX. Embassy 290);
Midias was to be defended against Demosthenes by Eubulus (Dem. XXI.
Midias 205–7). After the fall of Olynthus Eubulus proposed the decree under
which envoys were sent to mobilise southern Greek opposition to Philip (Dem.
XIX. Embassy 304); but Phalaecus’ rejection of Athenian help in 346 forced a
change of policy, and Eubulus was in favour of the Peace of Philocrates (Dem.
XIX. Embassy 291, XVIII. Crown 21). Aeschines had at one time supported
Aristophon but switched his support to Eubulus (Dem. XIX. Embassy 290–1,
XVIII. Crown 162), and he served on one of Eubulus’ embassies in 348/7
(Aeschin. II. Embassy 79, Dem. XIX. Embassy 303–6).
Demosthenes began speaking in major prosecutions and on public issues 
in 355, but until 348 was consistently on the losing side. The prosecutions of
Androtion (XXII), Leptines’ law (XX), Timocrates (XXIV) and Aristocrates
(XXIII) all seem to have failed. XIV. Symmories did not secure a reform of the
trierarchic system; XVI. Megalopolitans did not persuade Athens to support
Megalopolis against Sparta; XIII. Organisation did not undermine the theoric
fund; IV. Philippic i did not result in a campaign against Philip in the north; XV.
Liberty of Rhodians did not secure support for the Rhodian democrats against
a Carian-backed oligarchy; I–III. Olynthiacs i–iii did not persuade Athens to
support Olynthus as strongly as Demosthenes wanted, and Demosthenes was
alone in opposing the Euboean war (V. Peace 5). But in 348, when Eubulus was
becoming alarmed about Philip, Demosthenes, disgruntled at the Athenians’
failure to act on his warnings, defended Philocrates when the latter was 

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
337
prosecuted for proposing to follow up Philip’s offer of negotiations, and was
successful.
In 346 Aeschines and Eubulus were in favour of the Peace of Philocrates,
because Phalaecus had made it necessary, and because they trusted Philip’s
hints; Demosthenes was in favour, in the expectation that Philip’s subsequent
conduct would justify his warnings; two men mentioned as opposing the peace
are Aristophon and Hegesippus. In the autumn of 346 Demosthenes advised
against immediate conﬂict with Philip, in V. Peace, and prepared to attack
Aeschines for his part in the negotiations. However, the original attack misﬁred,
as the main prosecutor, Timarchus, had an unsavoury personal record which
made him vulnerable (Aeschin. I. Timarchus, of 346/5). After that, Demosthenes
gained increasing support, and in 343 Philocrates was successfully prosecuted
by Hyperides (Dem. XIX. Embassy 116–19, Aeschin. II. Embassy 6, Hyp. IV.
Euxenippus 29–30); Proxenus was perhaps condemned for delay in conveying
the second embassy to Philip (Dem. XIX. Embassy 280 with schol. [493 Dilts]);
Demosthenes himself prosecuted Aeschines, while Eubulus and Phocion were
among his defenders, and by a small majority Aeschines was acquitted (Dem.
XIX. Embassy, Aeschin. II. Embassy; Eubulus and Phocion Aeschin. II. Embassy
184; Idomeneus FGrH 338 F 10 ap. Plut. Dem. 15. v, [Plut.] X Orat. 840 C).
By then Aeschines was trying to distance himself from the peace, whereas in
346/5 he associated himself with it (Aeschin. II. Embassy 56 contr. I. Timarchus
174).
After 346 we can identify supporters of Demosthenes. Hegesippus, opposed
to the peace, defended Timarchus against Aeschines (Aeschin. I. Timarchus 71).
He also took an unproductively hard line when Philip offered to amend the
peace ([Dem.] VII. Halonnesus), and served on one of Demosthenes’ embassies
to the Peloponnese (Dem. IX. Phil. iii. 72). Hyperides prosecuted Philocrates
in 343 (Hyp. IV. Euxenippus 29–30), was appointed in place of Aeschines to
defend Athens’ control of Delos (cf. p. 340), and in 341/0 renewed Athens’
alliances with Rhodes and Chios. Lycurgus, who is linked with Demosthenes
([Plut.] X Orat. 848 F) and was to be hard on alleged traitors after Chaeronea,
served on Demosthenes’ embassies, and so did Polyeuctus (Dem. IX. Phil. iii.
72 [Lycurgus not all manuscripts], [Plut.] X Orat. 841 E).
Demosthenes remarks on the solidarity of his opponents (XIX. Embassy
225–6).We come closer in this period than in most to party politics, with groups
of men agreeing on distinctive policies over a range of issues, but the collision
is at an angle rather than head-on. For Demosthenes resistance to Philip was
all-important, but that conditioned his views on ﬁnancial matters; for Eubulus
ﬁnancial recovery was all-important, but that conditioned his views on Philip.
Attitudes to democracy were affected too: Demosthenes accused his opponents
of being unpatriotic, and tended to identify democracy with freedom from an
external master rather than with internal freedom, while they in response
accused him of being undemocratic (cf. p. 340).
When war was declared against Philip in 340, Demosthenes reformed 
the trierarchic system; when Philip entered the Fourth Sacred War, in 339/8,

338
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
Demosthenes had surplus revenue diverted to the stratiotic fund (cf. p. 334).
He was crowned for his services to Athens in 340, and again in the spring of
338; in 338 Hyperides was one of the proposers, and he was challenged but
unsuccessfully in a graphe paranomon (Dem. XVIII. Crown 83, 222–3, 249,
[Plut.] X Orat. 846 A, 848 D, F).
In the years after Chaeronea there were frantic swings of the pendulum.
Hyperides and Lycurgus seem both to have been members of the council in
338/7 (Lucian, Parasite 42). Hyperides was responsible for emergency measures
immediately after the battle (Lycurg. Leocrates 36–7, [Plut.] X Orat. 848 F–849
A, cf. Hyp. fr. 18 Burtt); and Demosthenes proposed measures after his return
from the battle, perhaps through his friends (Dem. XVIII. Crown 248 contr.
Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 159, cf. Plut. Dem. 21. iii). Originally Charidemus, a
man from Oreus who had been made an Athenian citizen and who was an
extreme opponent of Macedon, was proposed as commander in chief, but the
job eventually went to Phocion (cf. p. 340). On the other side Demades, a man
from a poor background who was to be prominent among the friends of
Macedon in the 330’s and 320’s, was captured in the battle, was liberated after
reproaching Philip for his wild exultation (cf. p. 318), and then went with
Aeschines to negotiate with Philip. Phocion also supported acceptance of the
peace (Plut. Phoc. 16. v). Athens voted citizenship and other honours for Philip
and Alexander ([Demades] Twelve Years 9, schol. Aristid. Panath. 178. 16 [iii.
297 Dindorf]).
In winter 338/7, as the new reality sank in, there was a change of mood.
Aeschines was nominated but Demosthenes was appointed to deliver the
funeral oration for those killed at Chaeronea (Dem. XVIII. Crown 285–8, Plut.
Dem. 21. i–ii); and work on the fortiﬁcations continued, with Demosthenes as
a member of the supervisory board (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 17, 31, Dem. XVIII.
Crown 113). Demosthenes was elected theoric treasurer for 337/6 (Aeschin. III.
Ctesiphon 24); Acarnanians were honoured who had fought with the Athenians
as volunteers at Chaeronea and had ﬂed to Athens after Philip’s settlement (IG
ii2 237 = R&O 77 ~ Harding 100); even Phocion had his doubts about the
League of Corinth (Plut. Phoc. 16. v–vii).The rival factions took to the courts.
Demosthenes was constantly under attack (Dem. XVIII. Crown 249); Aristo-
giton was involved in prosecutions of him and of Hyperides (schol. [Dem.]
XXV. Aristogiton i. 37 [16 Dilts]), [Plut.] X Orat. 848 F–849 A, cf. Hyp. fr. 18
Burtt). In return, Lycurgus prosecuted men for cowardice in 338 (Lycurg. frs.
9–10 Burtt, cf. Diod. Sic. XVI. 88. i–ii); and when Demades proposed honours 
for one of the men who had betrayed Olynthus to Philip in 348, Hyperides
prosecuted him for that (Hyp. fr. 19 Burtt).
Early in 336 Ctesiphon proposed that Demosthenes should be honoured for
a third time; but as Philip’s Persian campaign got under way public opinion
shifted yet again: honours were voted for Macedonians (IG ii2 239–40 = Tod
180–1), and even for Philip himself in connection with Cleopatra’s wedding
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 92. i–ii). Aeschines took advantage of this shift to launch a
prosecution of Ctesiphon, on three counts: that he was proposing honours for

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
339
Demosthenes while Demosthenes held ofﬁces for which he was subject to
account; that he was proposing proclamation of the honours at the Dionysia;
and, above all, that he was making a false statement in a public document 
by claiming that Demosthenes always spoke and acted in the best interests of
Athens (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 9–31, 32–48, 49–50). Then Philip was mur-
dered. There was a chance that the succession would be disputed and all that
he had achieved for Macedon would be undone; while Demosthenes led the
rejoicing in Athens, Aeschines dropped the prosecution.
All too quickly, Alexander asserted himself and marched into Greece.When
he reached Thebes, Athens panicked and sent a deputation to protest its loyalty;
Demosthenes, though a member of the deputation, could not face Alexander
and turned back (there were allegations that he was in touch both with Attalus
and with the Persians), and it was Demades who made an agreement with
Alexander (Diod. Sic. XVII. 4. v–ix, cf. 3. ii, 5. i, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 161,
[Demades] Twelve Years 14). In 335, while Alexander campaigned in Thrace and
Illyria, Demosthenes was allegedly receiving Persian money to support Greek
resistance to Macedon (Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 239–40, Din. I. Dem. 10, 18–22,
Plut. Dem. 20. iv–v). Rumours that Alexander had been killed led Thebes to
revolt, with encouragement from Demosthenes, but again Alexander quickly
appeared, and Thebes was destroyed; and again there was a panic in Athens.
Originally Alexander demanded that his opponents should be handed over to
him: Demosthenes, Lycurgus and Charidemus appear in all versions of the list,
Polyeuctus (and, less likely, Hyperides) in some. Phocion would have handed
them over, but on Demades’ proposal the two of them went to talk to Alexan-
der, and Alexander was satisﬁed with the exile of Charidemus – who, with
others, joined the Persians (Plut. Dem. 23. vi probably gives the authentic list;
variants Diod. Sic. XVII. 15, Arr. Anab. I. 10. iii–vi, Plut. Phoc. 17. ii–x). Athens
rewarded Demades with a statue and meals in the prytaneion, despite the 
opposition of Lycurgus and Polyeuctus (Din. I. Demosthenes 101, cf. Lycurg fr.
14 Burtt, Polyeuctus fr. i. 1 Sauppe).
By now the council of the Areopagus had attained a surprising prominence.
At the beginning of the century Athens’ new code of laws had been entrusted
to the care of the Areopagus (decree ap. Andoc. I. Myst. 84), but there is no
sign that this had any practical effect. About 354 Isocrates in VII. Areopagitic
wrote of a glorious past of Athens in which the Areopagus had played an impor-
tant role. In 352/1 the Areopagus, appropriately in view of its religious con-
cerns, headed a list of those who were to take care of the Athenian sanctuaries
(IG ii2 204 = R&O 58. 16–23).
More strikingly, from the mid 340’s we ﬁnd the Areopagus on a number of
occasions making an apophasis (‘report’) to the assembly (cf. Din. I. Demosthenes
50–1). In 345 Timarchus put forward a plan to clean up the area of the Pnyx:
in accordance with his decree the Areopagus was called on to report, and it
reported unfavourably (Aeschin. I. Timarchus 81–4). Two other episodes are
probably to be dated c.345–343. A man called Antiphon, deleted from the
citizen registers in 346, was charged by Demosthenes with intending to set ﬁre

340
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
to Athens’ dockyards for Philip; Aeschines successfully defended him; but the
Areopagus had the case reopened and he was convicted (Dem. XVIII. Crown
132–3 with schol. [245, 249, 252 Dilts], Plut. Dem. 14. v). When the Delians
complained to the Delphic Amphictyony about Athens’ control of their sanc-
tuary of Apollo, the assembly elected Aeschines to respond, but referred the
matter to the Areopagus, and the Areopagus substituted Hyperides – who con-
vinced the Amphictyony (Dem. XVIII. Crown 134–6, [Plut.] X Orat. 850 A, cf.
Hyp. fr. 1 Burtt). After Chaeronea, when some men wanted the chief command
to be conferred on Charidemus, the Areopagus persuaded the assembly to
appoint Phocion (Plut. Phoc. 16. iv). Dinarchus mentions a decree of Demo-
sthenes authorising the Areopagus to punish offenders, and cites four cases
including that of Antiphon (Din. I. Demosthenes 62–3); but probably he is con-
fusing the issues, and these were all instances of apophasis, which as an exercise
of the citizens’ right to address the assembly may not have required formal insti-
tution. After Chaeronea the Areopagus condemned some of the men accused
of cowardice or treason (Lycurg. Leocrates 52–4, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 252),
and it is here that we should place Demosthenes’ decree giving the Areopagus
enhanced judicial powers.
Except in the case of Phocion’s command, the Areopagus was consistently
taking Demosthenes’ side on controversial matters, and his opponents were
alarmed and considered this undemocratic. This, I believe, is why, in early
summer 337/6, when the mood in Athens was pro-Macedonian, a law was
passed threatening the Areopagus with suspension if the democracy was over-
thrown (Agora xvi 73 = R&O 79 ~ Harding 101); similarly a powerful theoric
treasurer was perceived as undemocratic when that treasurer was Demosthenes,
and Hegemon’s law on ﬁnancial ofﬁcials (cf. pp. 333–4) probably belongs to
this same context. The Areopagus’ prestige survived the attack: it was ordered
to investigate allegations about Demosthenes and Persian money in 335, with
no result that we know of (Din. I. Demosthenes 10), and the matter of Harpalus’
money in 324–323 (below).
At this time there seems to have been a good deal of sensitivity about demo-
cracy, but a lack of clarity about what the essentials of democracy were. In Apol-
lodorus’ speech Against Neaera, of c.343–340, and Isocrates’ Panathenaic,
of c.342–339, we have praise of the democracy attributed to the legendary
Theseus, which is represented as a democracy of a moderate kind ([Dem.] LIX
Neaera 75–7; Isoc. XII Panath. 143–8).The relief at the top of the stele bearing
the law threatening the Areopagus has been identiﬁed as showing Demokratia
crowning Demos. In 333/2 the council set up a statue of Demokratia, and in
the following two years the generals are recorded as sacriﬁcing to Demokratia
(IG ii2 2791; 1496. 131–2, 140–1); it has been suggested that the cult was 
instituted in 403/2 but was given new emphasis in the 330’s.
After 335 politics entered a new phase: for the time being, Alexander was
unquestionably in control, and Athens had to live with that; but there was still
a chance that he would be defeated and killed in his Asiatic wars and that
Macedon’s supremacy would collapse, and Athens had to be ready to seize the
opportunity if it arose. Demosthenes and his supporters kept in the background

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
341
and his opponents ran Athens, except that Lycurgus took charge of the ﬁnances
(though Demades was stratiotic treasurer, at any rate in 334/3: SEG xxi 552.
12). Attempts were made both to revive Athens’ morale after the humiliation
of Chaeronea and to maintain Athens’ military preparedness.
In what has been called the silver age of Lycurgus (by comparison with 
the golden age of Pericles), Athens enjoyed its ﬁrst major public building 
programme since Pericles’ time (cf. [Plut.] X Orat. 841 C–E). Under Eubulus
and/or Lycurgus the Pnyx was remodelled.Work in the agora included rebuild-
ing the temple of Apollo Patroos, north of the council-house complex, and 
relocating to face that complex the monument of the eponymoi (the tribal
heroes), whose base served as a state notice-board. A monumental theatre of
Dionysus was built, and a Panathenaic stadium. Whereas the Periclean build-
ings had been erected largely at public expense (‘public’ including tribute 
from the Delian League: cf. pp. 50, 62–5), Lycurgus encouraged rich individ-
uals to make contributions in exchange for inexpensive honours: a decree of 
Lycurgus honours a Plataean who helped with the theatre and the stadium 
(IG ii2 351 + 654 = Schwenk 48 = R&O 94 ~ Harding 118); in 321/0 Xeno-
cles, the epimelete of the Mysteries, built a bridge on the Sacred Way from
Athens to Eleusis (IG ii2 1191, 2840, Anth. Pal. IX. 147).There was a religious
revival: festivals were reorganised, with speciﬁc items of revenue earmarked 
to ﬁnance them (Agora xvi 75 = Schwenk 17 = R&O 81, cf. IG ii2 333 =
Schwenk 21); deﬁnitive texts of the tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles and
Euripides were edited ([Plut.] X Orat. 841 F); Athens was assiduous in sending
delegations to sanctuaries elsewhere (e.g. Hyp. IV. Euxenippus 22–4, Lyc. fr. 4
Burtt).
Athenians came of age at 18, and for two years were epheboi, ‘on the verge
of adulthood’. There had always been training opportunities of some kind for
the epheboi (cf. Aeschin. II. Embassy 167), but about 335/4 a compulsory two-
year programme was instituted for all young Athenians (probably, of hoplite
class and above): the ﬁrst year was devoted to military training, visits to temples
and garrison duty at the Piraeus, the second to garrison duty on the frontiers
(Ath. Pol. 42. ii–iv: inscribed lists begin with the epheboi of 334/3, IG ii2 1156).
When Athens had been great, it had been a great naval power. An enlargement
of the navy was begun in the time of Eubulus – Athens had 283 ships in 357/6,
despite the Social War 349 in 353/2 (IG ii2 1611. 9, 1613. 302) – and under
Lycurgus there was further enlargement and also modernisation, with the intro-
duction of quadriremes and quinqueremes (ships with more than one man to
an oar, more stable but slower: for the attribution of this development to Diony-
sius I of Syracuse cf. p. 280; quinqueremes were to replace triremes as the stan-
dard Greek warships) – 392 triremes + 18 quadriremes = 410 in 330/29, 360
triremes + 50 quadriremes + 2 quinqueremes = 412 in 325/4 (IG ii2 1627.
266–9, 275–8, 1629. 783–812 corrected). This was a larger navy than Athens
had had in the ﬁfth century, but the expenditure seems to have been futile:
Athens could not ﬁnd the oarsmen for so many ships, and there was now no
rival naval power against which so many ships would be needed (in the Lamian
War of 323–322 Athens used only 170 ships).

342
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
Charidemus and others had joined the Persians (cf. p. 339), and Iphicrates
the younger along with envoys from Sparta and Thebes was found in Darius’
entourage after the battle of Issus in 333 (Arr. Anab. II. 15. ii–iv). Alexander
kept the Athenian contingent when he dismissed the rest of his ﬂeet in 334
(Diod. Sic. XVII. 22. v), and took care to keep Athens loyal (Arr. Anab. III. 6.
ii, 16. vii–viii). Despite the hopes of his opponents, he defeated Persian armies
at the Granicus in 334 and at Issus in 333 (on his campaigns see chapter 24).
In 331, as he was about to face the Persians in Mesopotamia, the Spartans took
advantage of trouble in Thrace to rise against Macedon (cf. p. 345), and Athens,
whose sea power could seriously have increased the pressure on Macedon, had
to decide whether to join the rising. Demades helped to keep Athens out of it
(Plut. Praec. Ger. Reip. 818 E), and this time Demosthenes played safe (Aeschin.
III. Ctesiphon 165–7, Din. I. Demosthenes 34–6, Plut. Dem 24. i). However,
Lycurgus’ honours for the Plataean who supported the building programme
praised him also for offering to make an epidosis ‘towards the war if there were
any need’ (inscription cited above, 12–15): probably this is the war in question,
and its mention indicates that Lycurgus would have liked Athens to take part.
If the anti-Macedonian [Dem.] XVII. Treaty with Alexander is by Hyperides and
is to be dated 331, perhaps he too was in favour.
But the rising was defeated, and the Persians were defeated at Gaugamela.
In 330 Lycurgus made the anti-Macedonian gesture of prosecuting one more
man for treasonable conduct in 338, Leocrates, who escaped by a tied vote
(Lycurg. Leocrates, cf. Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 252). Aeschines seized the oppor-
tunity to revive the prosecution of Ctesiphon, which he had dropped in 336
(Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon, Dem. XVIII. Crown), but he had misjudged the mood
of the Athenians: although resistance to Macedon was not possible now, the
jurors backed the man who had resisted when it was possible. Aeschines failed
to obtain a ﬁfth of the votes, and left Athens ([Plut.] X Orat. 840 C–E, Plut.
Dem. 24. ii–iii).
From the mid 330’s to the late 320’s there were corn shortages in Greece,
caused apparently by crop failures in and near the eastern Mediterranean, and
known to us particularly from inscriptions. Heraclides of Salamis in Cyprus
helped Athens in 330/29 and 328/7 by selling corn at a fair price, and by making
an epidosis (IG ii2 360 = R&O 95). Demosthenes served on a purchasing board
and contributed 1 talent ([Plut.] X Orat. 845 F, 851 B). In 325/4, to protect
imports from the west against pirates, the Athenians sent a colony to the Adri-
atic, presided over by Miltiades, a member of the family which had been inﬂu-
ential in the sixth and ﬁfth centuries (IG ii2 1629 = R&O 100. 165–271, part
trans. Harding 121). An inscription from Cyrene lists those to whom it sup-
plied corn, with Athens as the largest recipient (SEG ix 2 = R&O 96 ~ Harding
116). There seems also to have been an attempt to bring more land in Attica
under cultivation, and at the same time to raise money by selling off under-
used public land.
Athens received corn also from Harpalus, Alexander’s treasurer (while it sup-
plied him with women), and rewarded him with citizenship (Theopompus

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
343
FGrH 115 FF 253–4 and Python ap. Ath. XIII. 595 A–596 B, cf. 586 C–D).
Subsequently, in 324, when Alexander returned to the centre of his empire 
and began punishing offenders (cf. pp. 357, 372), Harpalus ﬂed, and
approached Athens with thirty ships, six thousand mercenaries and a large sum
of money. Demosthenes had largely remained out of the limelight since 330;
but now he proposed the decree forbidding Harpalus to land. After taking his
ships and mercenaries to Taenarum (cf. below), Harpalus returned to Athens
as a suppliant with 700 talents.Various Macedonians demanded that he should
be surrendered to them but, again on Demosthenes’ proposal, the Athenians
decided to surrender him only if demanded by Alexander himself, and mean-
while to place him under arrest and keep the money on the acropolis. Alexan-
der’s edict for the restoration of exiles threatened Athens’ possession of Samos,
and it was again Demosthenes who headed Athens’ delegation to the Olympic
games to raise the issue with Alexander’s representative Nicanor (cf. Din. I.
Demosthenes 81–2, 103). Shortly after this Harpalus escaped (to Crete, where
he was murdered), and when the Athenians checked the money they found that
half had gone (Diod. Sic. XVII. 108. vi–109. i, Plut. Dem. 25, [Plut.] X Orat.
846 A–B).
There was an outcry, and by a decree of Demosthenes the Areopagus was
commissioned to investigate. After six months it produced a list of offenders
headed by Demosthenes and Demades, and also including Polyeuctus and 
Aristogiton; there was inevitably a story that Phocion had resisted temptation.
Public prosecutors were elected, who like the accused came from both sides of
the old political divide: they included Hyperides and Menesaechmus. We have
four prosecuting speeches, Hyperides V. Demosthenes, and Dinarchus (written
for others) I. Demosthenes, II. Aristogiton, III. Philocles. Demosthenes was tried
ﬁrst, ﬁned 50 talents and escaped into exile; Demades also was convicted; some
men including Aristogiton were acquitted (Diod. Sic. XVII. 108. vii, [Plut.] 
X Orat. 846 C, Plut. Dem. 26. i–iv, Phoc. 21. iii–iv, Din. I. Dem. 45, 82, Hyp.
V. Demosthenes col. 18, Dem. Letter iii. 37, 42). This was an explosion of anger
in some ways comparable to the explosion after the battle of Arginusae in 406
(cf. p. 167); and shortly afterwards the nature of the world was changed by
Alexander’s death.
An Athenian called Leosthenes became leader of the body of mercenaries
which began to assemble at Taenarum in Laconia when Alexander ordered
provincial governors to dismiss their mercenary forces, and he was in touch
with the Athenian council and also with the Aetolians (Diod. Sic. XVII. 111.
i–iii, XVIII. 9. i–iii, Paus. I. 25. v,VIII. 52. v).There is a Leosthenes who appears
as general ‘for the territory’ in an Athenian inscription (Reinmuth, Ephebic
Inscriptions 15, l.h.s. 2–6): this second Leosthenes was the son of the Leosthenes
who was defeated by Alexander of Pherae in 362–361 (cf. p. 238), and who
went in exile to the Macedonian court (Aeschin. II. Embassy 21 with schol. [46b
Dilts]). Often the ephebic inscription has been dated 324/3 and Leosthenes the
general ‘for the territory’ has been identiﬁed with Leosthenes the mercenary
commander; but more probably they are different men.

344
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
When Alexander died, in June 323, the old political alignments in Athens
resurfaced. Athens led a Greek rising against Macedon, in what is called the
Lamian War, since the main land campaign was fought near Lamia in Thessaly
(in general, Diod. Sic. XVIII. 8–18). This rising was the work of Hyperides,
backed by Demosthenes, who was allowed to return from exile (Plut. Dem. 27,
[Plut.] X Orat. 846 C–D, 849 F–850 A), and it was opposed by Demades, who
lost his political rights after three times prosecuting unsuccessfully in graphai
paranomon, and by Phocion (Diod. Sic. XVIII. 18. i–ii, Plut. Phoc. 22. v–23, 26.
iii).The inﬂuence of Hyperides is reﬂected in the fact that in 322 he was chosen
to deliver the Funeral Oration (VI). But after a Macedonian victory at Crannon
the rising collapsed. Demades had his rights restored, and he and Phocion 
negotiated with Antipater. Antipater’s demands included the handing over 
of Demosthenes, who committed suicide, and Hyperides, who was sent to
Macedon and executed.Though Phocion was not an enthusiast for democracy,
in general the pro-Macedonians were neither more nor less democratic than the
anti-Macedonians, but Demosthenes and his supporters had too often linked
democracy with freedom. In the ﬁrst of a series of changes over the next half-
century, Athens was given not only a Macedonian garrison but an oligarchic
constitution (Diod. Sic. XVIII. 18, Plut. Dem. 28, Phoc. 26. iii–28, [Plut.] X
Orat. 846 E–847 B, 849 A–D). Demades and Phocion were both put to death
in the upheavals of the next few years.
APPENDIX: SPARTA
When Cleombratus was killed at Leuctra in 371 he was succeeded by his elder son,
Agesipolis II; but Agesipolis died almost immediately, in 370, and the Agid throne then
passed to Agesipolis’ brother Cleomenes II, who reigned until 309 but has left hardly
any trace in the records. Of the Eurypontids, Agesilaus survived the battle of Mantinea
in 362 and died in 360/59 on his way back from mercenary service in Egypt. He was
succeeded by his son Archidamus III, who is commonly mentioned when Sparta was
involved in foreign affairs: he was consulted by Philomelus before his seizure of Delphi
in 356 (Diod. Sic. XVI. 24. i–ii, cf. Paus. III. 10. iii) and was appointed to command
the Spartans in support of the Phocians in 346 (Diod. Sic. XVI. 59. i).When the Spar-
tans did take part in the war, at Thermopylae in 352, Diodorus does not name the com-
mander (XVI. 37. iii). From 353 to 350, while the Greeks were distracted by the Sacred
War, Sparta tried to recover Messenia on the principle of echein ta heauton and attacked
Megalopolis, and here again Archidamus is mentioned as commander (Diod. Sic. XVI.
39. i: cf. p. 305). In the west, Sparta had supported Dionysius I in Syracuse; and Spartan
agents were active there in the mid 350’s (cf. p. 288).
In 344 Sparta was ﬁghting against Argos and Messene, which received help from
Philip (Dem. VI. Phil. ii. 15, hyp. 2). Perhaps after that Archidamus went abroad: ﬁrst
to Crete, where he successfully supported Lyctus in a war against Cnossus, which was
employing Phalaecus and his surviving mercenaries (Diod. Sic. XVI. 62. iii–iv, under
346/5); then to Italy to support Sparta’s colony Taras against the Lucanians, where he

DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
345
was killed in 338, allegedly on the day of the battle of Chaeronea (Diod. Sic. XVI. 62.
iv–63. ii, 89. iii–iv). He was succeeded by his eldest son Agis III.
The Spartans did not ﬁght at Chaeronea, and they did not take part in Philip’s
common peace and League of Corinth. It appears that Philip invaded Laconia, and gave
various border territories to Sparta’s enemies; with or without a treaty, Sparta acqui-
esced. In 334 after the battle of the Granicus Alexander’s dedication in Athens cele-
brated a victory won by him and ‘the Greeks except the Spartans’, and in 333 there was
a Spartan envoy with Darius at Issus (Arr. Anab. I. 16. vii, II. 15. ii–v; cf. p. 352–3). An
attempt to ﬁght back in Alexander’s rear had been begun by Memnon and was con-
tinued after his death by Pharnabazus and Autophradates: Agis asked them for ships
and men to ﬁght in the Peloponnese, but after Issus they could spare only 30 talents
and ten ships, which were taken by Agis’ brother Agesilaus to Crete. Agis himself in 332
joined Autophradates at Halicarnassus, receiving more money and 8,000 of Darius’
mercenaries, and he took them to Crete: gratitude earned there might gain him more
mercenaries for ﬁghting in Greece (Arr. Anab. II. 13. iv–vi, Diod. Sic. XVII. 48. i–ii,
Curt. IV. i. 38–40).
For what follows the exact dating is uncertain, but the essentials are clear enough. At
some point in 331, if not before Alexander’s victory at Gaugamela, surely before the
news of it had reached Greece (contr. Diod. Sic. XVII. 62. i), the attention of Antipater
in Macedon was distracted by a rebellion of Memnon, the Macedonian governor of
Thrace, and Agis seized the opportunity to begin a rising in Greece.With support from
most of the Peloponnese and Thessaly he had an army of 2,000 cavalry, 20,000 citizen
infantry and 10,000 mercenaries, but Athens did not join in (cf. p. 342). After winning
an initial victory, he began a siege of Megalopolis with good prospects of success. In
the winter of 331/0, if the episode was over, Alexander did not yet know: he sent 3,000
talents to provide whatever Antipater needed for the war (Arr. Anab. 16. ix–x, cf. Diod.
Sic. XVII. 64. v, Curt.V. i. 43). Antipater came to an arrangement with Memnon, raised
an army of 40,000 (to which some League of Corinth states contributed) and marched
to Megalopolis. Either late in 331 or early in 330 the Spartans were defeated and Agis
was killed (Diod. Sic. XVII. 62–3, Curt. lacuna – VI. i, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 165–7,
Din. I. Demosthenes 34). Cleomenes’ son Acrotatus was beaten up for opposing the
exemption from disgrace of Spartans who survived the defeat (Diod. Sic. XIX. 70. iv–v).
Antipater took hostages from Sparta and referred the matter to the League, and the
League referred it to Alexander (Diod. Sic. XVII. 73. v–vi).We are not told the outcome
for Sparta, but presumably it was required to join the League; Achaea and Elis were
made to pay compensation to Megalopolis (Curt. VI. i. 20). Sparta is not among the
states supplied with corn by Cyrene, but Elis is (SEG ix 2 = R&O 96 ~ Harding 116:
Elis l. 34), so Sparta’s absence more probably reﬂects lack of need than hostility. Agis’
brother Eudamidas succeeded him: despite the wishes of some, Sparta refused to join
Athens in the Lamian War in 323, and Eudamidas is associated with that refusal (Plut.
Spartan Sayings 220 E–F).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
On eisphora see G. E. M. de Ste. Croix, ‘Demosthenes’ tmhma and the Athenian 
Eisphora in the Fourth Century BC’, C&M xiv 1953, 30–70; P. J. Rhodes, ‘Problems 

346
DEMOSTHENIC ATHENS
in Athenian Eisphora and Liturgies’, AJAH vii 1982 [published 1985], 1–19. On 
festival liturgies see J. K. Davies, ‘Demosthenes on Liturgies: A Note’, JHS lxxxvii 1967,
33–40; on the trierarchy see Gabrielsen, Financing the Athenian Fleet. On the theoric
fund and Lycurgus’ ofﬁce epi tei dioikesei see Rhodes, The Athenian Boule, 105–8, 235–40.
The suggestion that the katagogia of Xenophon, Poroi, iii. 12, are not hotels but broth-
els was made by A. J. Graham, ‘The Woman at the Window: Observations on the “Stele
from the Harbour” of Thasos’, JHS cxviii 1998, 22–40 at 36–7.
On judicial changes see P. J. Rhodes, ‘Judicial Procedures in Fourth-Century Athens:
Improvement or Simply Change?’, in Eder (ed.), Die athenische Demokratie im 4. Jh. v.
Chr., 303–19. On Eubulus see G. L. Cawkwell, ‘Eubulus’, JHS lxxxiii 1963, 47–67;
on Phocion see Tritle, Phocion the Good. On changing understandings of democracy 
see P. J. Rhodes, ‘Democracy and Its Opponents in Fourth-Century Athens’, in a 
forthcoming Chieti conference volume. On the different lists of Athenians demanded 
by Alexander in 335 see Bosworth, Historical Commentary on Arrian, i. 93–5.
On the revival of the Areopagus see P. J. Rhodes, ‘Judicial Procedures in Fourth-
Century Athens’ (above), 311–14; R. W. Wallace, ‘“Investigations and Reports” by the
Areopagos Council and Demosthenes’ Areopagos Decree’, in Polis and Politics . . .
M.H.Hansen, 581–95; J. A. Sullivan, ‘Demosthenes’ Areopagus Legislation – Yet Again’,
CQ2 liii 2003, 130–4.
On the silver age of Lycurgus see F. W. Mitchel, ‘Athens in the Age of Alexander’,
G&R2 xii 1965, 189–204.
On Agis’ war against Macedon see E. Badian, ‘Agis III: Revisions and Reﬂections’,
in Ventures into Greek History · . . . N. G. L. HammondÒ, ch. 13.

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
336
accession of Alexander
334
Alexander’s entry into Asia; battle of the Granicus
333
battle of Issus
332
sieges of Tyre and Gaza
331
battle of Gaugamela
330
death of Darius
326
battle of Hydaspes
324
Alexander’s return to Susa
323
death of Alexander
Sources
The works on Alexander by contemporaries and near-contemporaries have not
survived. Of the ﬁve major accounts which do survive, that of Diodorus (book
XVII), written in the ﬁrst century BC, is the earliest. Q. Curtius Rufus almost
certainly wrote in the ﬁrst century AD and was known to Tacitus; if he is the
Curtius Rufus of Tac. Ann. XI. 20–1, he was active in the second quarter of the
century and held ofﬁce under Tiberius and Claudius: he wrote, in Latin, a highly
rhetorical history of Alexander in ten books (I–II are lost, and there are lacunae
in what survives). Plutarch (ﬁrst/second centuries AD) wrote a life of Alexander
(the Roman parallel is Caesar; in this and the following chapter, references to
Plutarch without further speciﬁcation are to the Alexander), and his Moralia
24
Alexander the Great:
Sources and Outline

include two essays On Alexander the Great’s Good Fortune or Good Qualities
(which will be cited as De Alex. Fort. i/ii). Arrian, from Nicomedia at the east
end of the Propontis, was active in the ﬁrst half of the second century AD and
held ofﬁce under Hadrian: he saw himself as a second Xenophon, and hence
his history of Alexander was entitled Anabasis (references to Arrian without
further speciﬁcation are to this); he also sought to celebrate Alexander the
second Achilles as Homer had celebrated Achilles. Among his other works was
the Indike, written in an imitation of Herodotus’ Ionic Greek, which provides
information about India and an account of Nearchus’ voyage from the mouths
of the Indus to the Persian Gulf in 325. In Justin’s epitome of Pompeius Trogus
(Latin, c.200–400 AD: cf. p. 294; in this and the following chapter, this will be
cited simply as Just.), books XI–XII are devoted to Alexander.
Arrian’s narrative has generally and rightly been regarded as the best. He was
not a penetrating historian, and his reasons for trusting his preferred sources
are naïve (cf. Arr. I, preface). Partly because of his ‘Homeric’ aim (for his aim
of celebrating Alexander as earlier Greek writers had celebrated their heroes see
I. 12. ii–v), he was too willing to see nothing but good in Alexander and to min-
imise Alexander’s difﬁculties; but his sources were men who had served under
Alexander, and were as well placed as any to know the truth even if it might
not always suit them to tell the truth. These were Ptolemy (FGrH 138), a life-
time friend of Alexander and eventually a major ofﬁcer, who after his death took
possession of Egypt and founded the Ptolemaic dynasty there, and Aristobulus
(FGrH 139), who held lower positions and had strong botanical and geo-
graphical interests; Arrian also used Nearchus (FGrH 133), the commander 
of Alexander’s ﬂeet in 326–325. Curtius has some material in common with
Arrian; but much of the material in Diodorus, Curtius and Justin comes 
ultimately from a common source, probably Clitarchus (FGrH 137), who is 
not known to have served under Alexander himself but who wrote before the
end of the fourth century: he had a taste for the sensational, but preserved a
considerable amount of detail, not always favourable to Alexander. Plutarch, as
always, used a variety of sources. Admirers of Alexander have been particularly
disposed to accept Arrian’s account; on the other hand, it would be dangerous
to assume, as some revisionist historians have been tempted to do, that what is
favourable to Alexander must be distorted by bias and what is unfavourable
must be truthful.
Early writers whose accounts have been lost include Aristotle’s nephew 
Callisthenes (FGrH 124), who accompanied Alexander in some sense as ofﬁ-
cial historian, but who was put to death after the ‘conspiracy of the pages’
(cf. p. 371); Chares (FGrH 125), Alexander’s chamberlain, who wrote about
episodes at Alexander’s court; and Onesicritus (FGrH 134), Nearchus’ helms-
man, who wrote a ﬁctionalised account modelled on Xenophon’s Cyropaedia.
A ‘source’ of an altogether amazing kind is the Alexander Romance, falsely attri-
buted to Callisthenes.Three very different Greek versions survive, and versions
in Latin and in various eastern languages added further elaborations:
Alexander’s adventures include ascending into the sky in a basket borne by
348
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE

eagles and descending into the sea in a diving-bell. Towards the other extreme
(in the opinion of some scholars), one of the sources cited for the end of 
Alexander’s life (cf. pp. 351, 357) is a diary, the ephemerides (FGrH 117).Views
of this have ranged from an ofﬁcial journal of the whole campaign, underlying
much of what Arrian obtained from Ptolemy, to a hellenistic fabrication, fraudu-
lently ascribed to Alexander’s secretary Eumenes (on Eumenes cf. p. 374). A
recent study suggests that it may actually be the work of Eumenes, not an ofﬁ-
cial record or covering the whole campaign, but an account written up to
emphasise Alexander’s drinking habits and to show that Hephaestion’s and
Alexander’s deaths were due to natural causes.
Accession and Consolidation
When Philip was killed, in July 336, Alexander, not quite 20 years old but
already with military experience, was the obvious successor, though after
Philip’s marriage to Cleopatra he and his mother Olympias had quarrelled with
Philip. Antipater presented Alexander to the soldiers as the new king. Two
princes from Lyncestis and Amyntas the son of Perdiccas III, whom Philip had
left alive, were ofﬁcially blamed and put to death; Cleopatra and her infant
daughter were killed, and so too was her uncle Attalus, who had gone with
Philip’s advance force to Asia Minor.
In response to rumours of rebellion in Greece Alexander marched south.
Mountaineering was needed to by-pass opposition in the pass of Tempe
(Polyaenus Strat. IV. 3. xxiii), but after that the Thessalians acknowledged him
as archon for life in succession to Philip, and next the Amphictyony at 
Thermopylae recognised him; when he camped outside Thebes the Thebans
acknowledged him and the Athenians, who had been in touch with Attalus, sent
protestations of loyalty. Finally, at Corinth a congress of the League appointed
him as commander of the Greek war of revenge against Persia (Diod. Sic. XVII.
3–4, Arr. I. 1. i–iii, Just. XI. 2. iv–vi, 3. i–ii, Plut. 14. i–v).
First, however, Macedon’s other European neighbours had to be dealt with.
Leaving Antipater in Macedon, Alexander campaigned ﬁrst in Thrace as far as
the Danube and then in Illyria. He was successful, but at one point he was dan-
gerously trapped in Illyria (cf. p. 366), and rumours that he had been killed
encouraged revolt in Greece – in particular, by Thebes, proposing ‘to liberate
Greece and overthrow the tyrant of Greece’, supported by Demosthenes with
Persian money and hoping for support from various Peloponnesian states too.
All too quickly, Alexander arrived outside Thebes, and captured the city; Arrian
blames the general Perdiccas for attacking prematurely, and the Greeks in
Alexander’s army for the worst of the violence, but Diodorus does not. The
episode was treated as rebellion by a member state of the League of Corinth,
and was referred to the League’s synedrion, with the result that, with the ex-
ception of the ﬁfth-century poet Pindar’s house, the city was destroyed. Like
Sparta’s occupation of Thebes in 382, the destruction of Thebes shocked the
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE
349

500 miles
500 km
Pella
Granicus
Ancyra
Gordium
Sardis
Ephesus
Halicarnassus
Issus
Gaugamela
Arbela
Ecbatana
Rhagae
Opis
Tyre
Gaza
Memphis
Alexandria
Susa
Persepolis
Alexandria
Kandahar
Patala
Harmozia
Bactra
Kabul
Aornus
Nicaea
Maracanda
Alexandria Eschate
Nautaca
Caspian
Gates
Pura
Pasargadae
Mountainous areas
Deserts
The empire at the death of Alexander
Sea route of Nearchus, 325
Land route of Craterus, 325
334
334
332
330
324
325
326
328
327
323
MEDIA
CARMANIA
GEDROSIA
ARIA
PARTHIA
LYCIA
P
A
M
P
H
Y
L
I
A
H
Y
R
C
A
N
I
A
SOGDIANA
HI
N
DU
KU
SH
B l a c k   S e a
C a s p i a n  S e a
Aral
Sea
Red Sea
Persian Gulf
ARMENIA
R
.
E
u
p
h
ra
te
s
R.
Ti
gri
s
R
.
I
n
d
us
R
.
H
y
p
h
a
s
i
s
R
.
H
y
d
a
s
p
e
s
329
R
.
O
x
u
s
R
.
J
a
x
a
r
t
e
s
Alexandria
324
CI
L
IC
I
A
331
PERSIS
EGYPT
SYRIA
Ammonium
Babylon
Taxila
Bucephala
ARACHOSIA
DRANGIANA
Alexandria
B
A
C
TR
IA
331
325
330
N
333
Map 8
The Persian campaign of Alexander the Great

Greeks (cf. Polyb. IX. 28. viii, 34. i). Thebes’ place as the headquarters of the
Boeotian federation was taken not by another city but by the sanctuary of Posei-
don at Onchestus, to the north-west of Thebes. As for Athens, Alexander ﬁrst
demanded the surrender of the backers of Thebes, but was eventually satisﬁed
with the exile of Charidemus, who joined the Persians (Arr. I. 1. iv–10, Diod.
Sic. XVII. 8–15, Plut. 11. v–13, cf. his Dem. 23, Phoc. 17, Just. XI. 2. vi–x, 3.
iii–4; for the Athenians cf. p. 339). In fact some other Athenians went to ﬁght
for the Persians also.
Alexander against Darius
In 336 Philip had sent Parmenio and Attalus to Asia Minor, and Parmenio was
now left in command. They had landed at Ephesus in 336 and had won con-
siderable support from the Greek cities, probably among the islands as well as
on the mainland (cf. p. 367); but in 335 Memnon of Rhodes (on whom see pp.
325–6) led a Persian counter-attack, and Parmenio lost most of his gains and
withdrew to Abydus to await Alexander’s arrival (Diod. Sic. XVII. 7).
Alexander came in 334. Like Agesilaus in 396 (cf. p. 208), he represented
the Greeks’ war against the Persians as a continuation of the war against Asia
begun with the Trojan War: he sacriﬁced on the European side of the Helles-
pont at what was said to be the tomb of the Trojan War hero Protesilaus; he
sacriﬁced again while crossing and on landing in Asia; and he then went to Troy,
sacriﬁced there and honoured the tomb of Achilles (Lysimachus, one of his
tutors, had encouraged him to see himself as a second Achilles: cf. p. 374) (Arr.
I. 11. v–12. v, Diod. Sic. XVII. 17. ii–18. i, Just. XI. 5. vi–xii, Plut. 15. vii–ix).
Some texts allege that Alexander was in touch with Rome (Strabo 232. V. iii.
5, Plin. H.N. III. 57, Memnon FGrH 434 F 18. ii): the Romans are said to have
made a dedication at Delphi after their capture of Veii in the 390’s (Diod. Sic.
XIV. 93. iii–iv, Livy V. 28. i–v), but contact between Alexander and Rome is
probably the product of later wishful thinking (cf. Arr. VII. 15. v–vi, rejecting
an alleged Roman embassy to Alexander in 323 – with a good reason, the silence
of the best sources, as well as a bad one, that republican Rome would not have
sent envoys to a foreign king).
The Persians had not challenged Alexander’s crossing of the Hellespont.
Memnon advised a scorched-earth strategy, but Arsites, the satrap of Das-
cylium, did not want to see his estates ruined, so Alexander had to ﬁght his ﬁrst
major battle at the River Granicus, which ﬂows into the south-west of the Pro-
pontis. Our sources give two very different accounts, which may be different
attempts to conceal an initial defeat (cf. p. 362), but in the end Alexander was
victorious, ﬁghting in what was to be his standard order in a major battle, with
infantry in the centre,Thessalian cavalry on the left, and himself attacking with
the Macedonian cavalry from the right. Several Persian leaders were killed; but
the campaign almost ended at this point: Clitus ‘the black’ was just in time to
lop off the arm of a Persian who was about to bring his sword down on 
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE
351

Alexander’s head (Arr. I. 13–16, Diod. Sic. XVII. 18. ii–21, Just. XI. 6. i–xiii,
Plut. 16). At Dium in Macedonia Alexander commissioned statues of Mace-
donians who had fallen in the initial attack (Arr. I. 16. iv, Just. XI. 6. xii–xiii,
Plut. 16. v); to Athens he sent three hundred Persian panoplies, to be dedicated
with the inscription, ‘Alexander son of Philip and the Greeks except the Spar-
tans ·dedicated theseÒ from the barbarians living in Asia’ (Arr. I. 16. vii, Plut.
16. xviii): the campaign was both an expansionist venture of the Macedonian
kingdom and a Greek war of the League of Corinth.
Alexander was now free to receive or exact the allegiance of both Greeks and
barbarians in western Asia Minor. Memnon was now placed in charge of the
Persian defence, and sent his wife and children to Darius as hostages: he held
out in Halicarnassus, and after the outer city had fallen to Alexander he took
to the islands of the Aegean. Alexander, inferior at sea and perhaps short of
funds, disbanded his ﬂeet (apart from the Athenian ships, kept as hostages) and
talked of defeating the Persian ﬂeet by capturing all its harbours (Arr. I. 20. i,
cf. 18. ix, Diod. Sic. XVII. 22. v–23. i).This was a risk, since Memnon was still
at large in the Aegean, and he might have taken the war back to Greece and
caused enough trouble to force Alexander to return, but it paid off (Arr. I.
17–24. iv, Diod. Sic. XVII. 21. vii–28, cf. Just. XI. 6. xiv–xv, Plut. 17. i–iii).
In 333 Memnon won over Chios and Lesbos (having to besiege Mytilene)
and received envoys from the Cyclades – but he then died. Our sources claim
that his death seriously harmed Darius’ cause, but he could have achieved more
if he had made for the Greek mainland. He was succeeded by his nephew
Pharnabazus and by Autophradates, who had some successes, but their merce-
naries were summoned to join Darius’ army, and in the meantime Hegelochus
assembled a new ﬂeet for Alexander and in 333–332 recovered the Greek cities
(Arr. II. 1–2, 13. iv–vi, III. 2. iii–vii, Diod. Sic. XVII. 29, Curt. IV. i. 34–7, v.
14–22, Plut. 18. v).
Alexander in the winter of 334/3 followed the coast of Asia Minor to Side
and then turned inland to Gordium, the old capital of Phrygia.There a waggon
was fastened to a plinth, and it was said that whoever undid the knot would
become ruler of Asia: Alexander either removed the pin or impatiently cut
through the knot. He then continued to Tarsus in Cilicia (Arr. I. 24. v–29, II.
3–4. vi, Curt. III. i, iv, Just. XI, Plut. 17. iv–18. v). He had proceeded through
Asia Minor, but can hardly be said to have conquered it. Antigonus Mon-
ophthalmus (‘the one-eyed’) was appointed as satrap of Phrygia at the begin-
ning of 333 (Arr. I. 29. iii; Lydia, wrongly, Curt. IV. i. 35) and retained that
position to Alexander’s death and beyond. Our sources do not tell us much
about what happened except in the vicinity of Alexander, but in 332 Antigonus
and others were to defeat contingents which had escaped from Darius’ army
after Issus (Curt. IV. i. 34–5, v. 13), and later he took control of Pamphylia and
Lycia, in the south of Asia Minor (cf. Diod. Sic. XVIII. 3. i, Curt. X. x. 2).
In 333, when Alexander was delayed by a fever, Darius took a large army to
the plain of north-western Syria, and in the autumn, while Alexander took the
coastal route through the Syrian gates, Darius, impatient or misinformed, took
352
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE

an inland route towards Cilicia and reached the coast in Alexander’s rear.
Alexander turned back to ﬁght in the coastal plain of Issus, where Darius could
not beneﬁt from his larger numbers: once Alexander was clearly winning,
Darius ﬂed, abandoning his chariot, his shield, his bow, his cloak and his family
– and Alexander surprised his men by giving the family appropriate royal treat-
ment (Arr. II. 4. vii–13. i, Diod. Sic. XVII. 30–8, Curt. III. v–xiii, Just. XI. 8–10.
v, Plut. 18. vi–21, 24. i–iii). Others captured on the Persian side included a
number of Spartans and renegade Athenians (Arr. II. 15. ii, Curt. III. xiii. 15,
with different names). Also among the captives was Barsine, a daughter of
Artabazus and widow of both Mentor and Memnon, who later bore Alexander
a son, Heracles. In 310 Heracles was produced as a possible king, but in 309
he was killed (Curt. X. vi. 10–12, cf. Just. XIII. 2. vi–vii, Diod. Sic. XX. 20.
i, 28. i–ii). After the battle we have the ﬁrst of three alleged offers of terms 
by Darius to Alexander, this time an alliance and the ransom of his family, an
offer which Alexander rejected (Arr. II. 14, Diod. Sic. XVII. 39. i–iii [where
Alexander suppresses Darius’ actual offer and publicises a fake, more obviously
worthy of rejection], Curt. IV. i. 7–14, Just. XI. 12. i–ii).
Darius retired to the centre of the empire to prepare for another encounter.
Alexander did not immediately follow him, but this should not surprise us: not
only did he complete his plan of denying the Phoenician ﬂeet any bases on land,
but it would be natural for a man brought up in the Greek world to complete
the conquest of the empire’s Mediterranean provinces before pushing further
east. In 332 (when the Greeks at the Isthmian games voted to congratulate
Alexander) he moved southwards along the coast of Syria, where the other cities
submitted but Tyre, on an island just off the coast, did not. For seven months
Alexander besieged the city, building out a mole from the mainland on which
to set up his machines. He ﬁnally broke down part of the city wall on the
seaward side, with rams mounted on ships, and entered with great slaughter.
The other city which had to be taken by a siege, lasting two months, was Gaza,
on a mound a short distance inland: after its capture its governor was dragged
round the city behind Alexander’s chariot, as in the Trojan War Hector was said
to have been dragged behind the chariot of Achilles (Arr. II. 13. ii–27, Diod.
Sic. XVII. 39. iii–49. i, Curt. IV. i. 1–26, ii. 1–v. 9, vi, Just. XI. 10. vi–xiv, Plut.
24. iv–25). After the siege of Tyre Alexander is said to have received and rejected
a second letter from Darius, offering the land west of the River Halys, i.e.
western Asia Minor (Curt. IV. v. 1–8, Just. XI. 12. iii–iv).
Egypt had spent much of the past century and more in revolt against the
Persians: the satrap surrendered without ﬁghting, and Alexander was welcomed
as a liberator. He founded his ﬁrst Alexandria on the coast, on the west side of
the Nile delta, and in the winter of 332/1 he visited the oracle of Ammon in
the Libyan desert. In 331 he returned to Tyre, on the way putting down a revolt
in Samaria. He delayed for some time, perhaps expecting Darius to come to
Syria to ﬁght, but eventually moved eastwards (Arr. III. 1–7. i, Diod. Sic. XVII.
49–52, Curt. IV. vii–viii, Just. XI. 11, Plut. 26–7; Samaria Curt. IV. viii. 9–10,
Joseph. A.J. XI. 297–345). Darius is said to have made a third offer, this time
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE
353

of all the land west of the Euphrates: Parmenio said that if he were Alexander
he would accept, and Alexander replied that if he were Parmenio he would
accept (Arr. II. 25. i–iii [wrongly attached to the siege of Tyre], Diod. Sic. XVII.
54, Curt. IV. xi, Just. XI. 12. ix–xvi, Plut. 29. vii–ix).
Darius made his preparations in Babylon, and to force Alexander to approach
by way of the Tigris Mazaeus, the satrap of Syria, burned the crops in the Eu-
phrates valley. Darius waited for Alexander at Gaugamela, preparing a battle-
ﬁeld on which he would be able to use his large numbers.The battle was fought
on 1 October (Plut. 31. viii with his Cam. 19. v); and, as at Issus, Alexander
was more effective at exploiting a gap in the Persian line than were the Persians
at exploiting a gap in his line. Darius ﬂed through the mountains to Ecbatana
(Arr. III. 7–16. ii, Diod. Sic. XVII. 53–61, Curt. IV. ix–xvi, Just. XI. 13–14. vii,
Plut. 31–3).
Alexander proceeded to Arbela, where he found Darius’ treasures but not
Darius; to Babylon, where Mazaeus, who had commanded the right wing in
the battle and then had withdrawn in good order, surrendered to him and in
return became Alexander’s ﬁrst Iranian satrap; and to Susa, where again there
was no resistance. As he continued through the mountains to Persepolis, his
route through the Persian Gates was blocked by Ariobarzanes, the satrap of
Persis, but he was shown a more difﬁcult route which enabled him to attack
Ariobarzanes from the rear. The palace at Persepolis was destroyed, either as a
deliberate act of revenge for the Persians’ destruction of Athens in 480 or as
the climax of a celebration which got out of hand (Arr. III. 16. iii–18, Diod.
Sic. XVII. 64–73. i, Curt. V. i–vii, Just. XI. 14. viii–xii, Plut. 35–8; on the 
destruction of Persepolis cf. pp. 374–5). Meanwhile the last round of opposi-
tion to Alexander in Greece occurred. If not before Gaugamela, before the news
of Gaugamela had reached Greece, Agis of Sparta, who had been in touch with
the Persian commanders in western Asia Minor, led a Greek rising and attacked
Megalopolis; but late in 331 or early in 330 he was defeated and killed by
Antipater (cf. p. 345).
Winter kept Alexander in Persepolis and Darius in Ecbatana. In spring 330
Darius withdrew to the east, and Alexander advanced to Pasargadae and then
(according to Arrian) to Ecbatana.There the League of Corinth’s war of revenge
was ofﬁcially ended, and the Greeks serving as allies were discharged (but many
re-enlisted as mercenaries). He then divided his forces, leaving Parmenio behind
with a part, and Harpalus to take charge of the treasures (Arr. III. 19; but in
Curt. V. xiii. 1–3 Alexander by-passed Ecbatana to pursue Darius, and Diod.
Sic. XVII. 74. iii–iv, Curt. VI. ii. 15–17, Plut. 42. v, cf. Just. XII. 1. i, link the
discharge of the Greeks with Darius’ death). With a smaller and lighter force
Alexander went in pursuit of Darius, but about July/August, before he could
catch up with him, Darius was ﬁrst arrested and then stabbed to death by
Bessus, the satrap of Bactria, who had commanded the Persian left wing at
Gaugamela. Alexander gave Darius a royal funeral, and from this point increas-
ingly represented himself as a legitimate King of Asia (Arr. III. 20–2, Diod. Sic.
XVII. 73. i–iv, Curt. V. viii–xiii, Just. XI. 15, Plut. 42. v–43: cf. p. 375).
354
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE

After Darius’ Death
Bessus now claimed to be King (Artaxerxes V), so the pursuit of Darius turned
into the pursuit of Bessus; but Artabazus, brother-in-law of Mentor and
Memnon, refused to follow Bessus and joined Alexander. Satibarzanes, satrap
of Aria, submitted but afterwards rebelled, so Alexander turned south-east from
Hyrcania to deal with him: his capital Artacoana was captured, and an 
Alexandria founded at the present-day Herat, but Satibarzanes caused further
trouble when Alexander moved on and was ﬁnally killed in 329 by a force which
Alexander detached to deal with him (Arr. III. 23–8; versions of a signiﬁcantly
different narrative in Diod. Sic. XVII. 74–81, Curt. VI. ii–VII. ii). Alexander
then surprised Bessus by travelling through the Hindu Kush to Bactria while it
was still winter (330/29). Bessus withdrew into Sogdiana, north of the Oxus
(Amudar’ya); Alexander pursued him, and Bessus was abandoned to Alexan-
der by Spitamenes: a special court of the Medes and Persians was convened to
condemn him for the murder of the King (Arr. III. 28–30, Diod. Sic. XVII.
81–3, Curt. VII. iii–v, Just. XII. 5. ix–xii).
Alexander proceeded to the Jaxartes (Syrdar’ya), beyond which were Scythi-
ans (it was still believed, as it had been believed by the Persians in the sixth
century, that all the northern peoples from the lower Danube to this region
were Scythians). On the river he founded Alexandria Eschate (‘remotest’:
Khodjend) – which in recent times has commemorated another hero, under the
name Leninabad. But Spitamenes rebelled, besieged Maracanda (Samarcand)
and annihilated a force sent to defend it. Alexander now encountered his ﬁrst
serious local resistance since Tyre and Gaza in 332: he had to reorganise his
cavalry in units which could be used independently in guerrilla warfare, and he
received reinforcements in 329/8. Campaigning here continued through 328,
but eventually Alexander gained the upper hand and Spitamenes was killed by
his followers. In Arrian’s account, in 327 Alexander had mountaineering 
successes at the Sogdian Rock, with a heavy snowstorm and capture by 
‘winged mountaineers’ who climbed above the stronghold, and at the Rock of
Chorienes, and he went back through the Hindu Kush. Early in 326 he cap-
tured Aornus (probably Pir-sar, despite recent challenges to the identiﬁcation),
the most spectacular of his mountain achievements, and then reached the Indus
(Arr. IV).This version produces a very empty 328 and a very full early 327, so
we should probably prefer the alternative. In this second tradition, instead of
the Sogdian Rock and the Rock of Chorienes the same stratagems are used
against the Rock of Arimazes and the Rock of Sisimithres, in the summer of
328, before Alexander’s return to Maracanda and the killing of Clitus (below);
in 327 Alexander leaves his winter quarters too early and suffers casualties 
from a snowstorm before proceeding to Aornus and India (Diod. XVII.
lacuna–84–86. iii [cf. XVII. table of contents], Curt. VII. vi–VIII. xii. 3, Metz
Epitome [another text in the Clitarchan tradition, available only for this part of
the campaign], cf. Plut. 58. iii–iv).
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE
355

Since the death of Darius Alexander had had increasing trouble with leading
Macedonians and Greeks. In autumn 330 Parmenio’s son Philotas was said to
have withheld news of a conspiracy, for which he was executed, and emissaries
were sent to kill Parmenio too.As legitimate King of Asia Alexander was increas-
ingly using Asiatic troops, retaining Asiatic satraps and adopting aspects of
Persian costume and manners: at Maracanda in autumn 328 Clitus ‘the black’
mocked Alexander in the course of a drunken argument, and the argument
ended with Alexander’s killing Clitus. In 327 Alexander married Roxana,
daughter of Oxyartes of the Sogdian Rock (Arrian) or of Chorienes, a satrap
who submitted to Alexander after the episode of the snowstorm (preferable
restoration in Curtius, supported by the Metz Epitome – but some editors have
restored Oxyartes). He then attempted to introduce the custom of proskynesis
(prostration) to the European side of his court, but abandoned it after opposi-
tion, particularly from Callisthenes; and after that Callisthenes was condemned
as instigator of the ‘conspiracy of the pages’ (cf. pp. 370–1, 380).
From the Indus Alexander moved on to its tributary the Hydaspes (Jhelum),
beyond which a king called Porus was waiting to resist him. He managed to get
his men across the river, and in the last of his major battles defeated Porus –
but Porus, unlike Darius, was a worthy foe who did not ﬂee when defeated, and
he was reinstated as a vassal ruler. India was perhaps believed to be the east-
ernmost part of Asia, and there were reports of a large kingdom, ripe for con-
quest, between the Indus and the Ganges. Alexander wanted to conquer this
and go on to the end of Asia; but his men were demoralised by the thought of
the large kingdom, by diarrhoea caused by the unfamiliar fruits, by the rain and
mud of the monsoon season, and by the ever-growing distance from home. At
the easternmost tributary of the Indus, the Hyphasis (Beas), in the autumn, the
army mutinied, and Alexander had to give way. After building twelve large
altars, he turned back to the Hydaspes and, using newly built ships, made his
way to the mouths of the Indus. On the journey Coenus, who had been the
army’s spokesman at the Hyphasis, died; and Alexander was seriously wounded
when he risked his life to spur on the army in an attack on the town of the
Malli. In the summer of 325 they reached the Ocean and were startled by tides
the like of which are unknown in the Mediterranean, and they made their base
Patala (Bahmanabad) (Arr.V. 1–VI. 20. i, Diod. Sic. XVII. 86. iii–104. ii, Curt.
VIII. xii. 4–IX. x. 2, Just. XII. 7. iv–10. vi, Plut. 59–66. ii).
After exploring the mouths of the Indus, Alexander set out to return to the
central cities of the empire. Craterus was sent by an inland route with the vet-
erans; Nearchus was to sail to the Persian Gulf; and Alexander went with the
rest of the army through the desert of Gedrosia (the Makran), to respond to
the challenge of what was reputed to be difﬁcult and to explore the coast and
make preparations for the ﬂeet. The journey through the desert proved all too
difﬁcult and led to heavy losses; Alexander and the survivors reached Pura in
late 325 or early 324, and spent several days celebrating their deliverance (Arr.
VI. 28. i–ii rejects, and cites the silence of Ptolemy and Aristobulus on, stories
of a Bacchic revel; but if the stories were true these authors could have chosen
356
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE

to suppress them). In Carmania, near the mouth of the Persian Gulf, they were
joined by Craterus and made contact with Nearchus, and the army continued
via Pasargadae and Persepolis to Susa (Arr.VI. 20. ii–VII. 4. i, Diod. Sic. XVII.
104. iii–107, Curt. IX. x. 3–X. i. 16, Just. XII. 10. vii, Plut. 66. iii–68. i).
The Final Year
Many must have thought that Alexander would not return alive, so it is not sur-
prising that he found it necessary to assert his authority. Various commanders
were summoned and arrested for misconduct, and some were later executed;
the treasurer Harpalus ﬂed to Greece with mercenaries and money (cf. p. 343).
Nicanor was sent with orders to be proclaimed at the Olympic games that all
Greek cities were to take back their exiles. There were also various festivities.
Alexander and many of his ofﬁcers married Persian wives (in Alexander’s case,
two); ordinary soldiers had their liaisons recognised and their debts paid.There
was a parade of 30,000 epigonoi (‘successors’), young orientals who since 327
had been undergoing training in the Macedonian style of ﬁghting. During the
summer of 324 Alexander went to the Persian Gulf, and then to Opis on the
Tigris and to Ecbatana. At Opis (Arrian: in the alternative tradition Alexander
seems still to be at Susa) he announced his intention of sending the European
veterans home. This led to a mutiny; Alexander disbanded the army; the army
asked for pardon and obtained it, and there was a great banquet of reconcilia-
tion; but Alexander persisted with his plan. Craterus was sent back with the
veterans, while Antipater, who had been in charge in Macedon but had fallen
out with Olympias, was to join Alexander (Arr. VII. 4. ii–13, Diod. Sic. XVII.
108–110. vii, Curt. X. i. 17–iv with lacunae, Just. XII. 10. viii–12, Plut. 68.
ii–71).
In the autumn of 324 Hephaestion, the man closest to Alexander, died,
apparently as a result of excessive drinking: this was a great blow to Alexander.
In 323 he moved to Babylon: he had plans for expeditions into Arabia and to
explore the Caspian, and there was talk of wilder schemes. Envoys came from
Greece to pay Alexander divine honours, and there are allegations of embassies
from more distant places including Rome (on which cf. p. 351). But there were
various unfavourable omens. On 29 May Alexander was taken ill after a party,
and on 10 June he died, not quite 33 years old. A pamphlet in the Alexander
Romance (III. 31) alleged a plot by Antipater and his son Cassander to poison
him – but it is not clear that slow poisons were available. The ephemerides gave
an account of Alexander’s last days, stressing his drinking habits and blaming
his death on an incidental illness. Aristobulus denied his drinking habits, claim-
ing that he went to parties only out of consideration for his companions. Prob-
ably the ephemerides are near enough to the truth: Alexander’s hard ﬁghting,
hard living and hard drinking had weakened him, and a chill which a ﬁtter man
would have survived proved fatal. He left two sons, Heracles, born to Barsine
in 327 (cf. p. 353), and Alexander, to be born to Roxana shortly after his death.
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE
357

It was said that he was asked on his deathbed who was to succeed him and
replied, ‘the best’ or ‘the strongest’ (Arr. VII. 14–30, Diod. Sic. 110–18 with a
lacuna, Curt. X. lacuna–v, Just. XII. 13–16, Plut. 72–7).
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
General books on Alexander include Bosworth, Conquest and Empire; Green, Alexander
of Macedon; Hamilton, Alexander the Great; Lane Fox, Alexander the Great; Stoneman,
Alexander the Great. Collections of studies by different authors include Bosworth and
Baynham (eds.), Alexander the Great in Fact and Fiction; Grifﬁth (ed.), Alexander the
Great:The Main Problems; Roisman (ed.), Brill’s Companion to Alexander the Great; and
‘Alexander the Great’, G&R2 xii 1965, fasc. 2.
For general discussion of the sources see Bosworth, From Arrian to Alexander; E.
Baynham, ‘The Ancient Evidence for Alexander the Great’, in Brill’s Companion (above),
ch. 1. For commentaries on the surviving sources see Atkinson, Commentary on Q.
Curtius Rufus’ Historiae Alexandri Magni; Bosworth, Historical Commentary on Arrian’s
History of Alexander; Hamilton, Plutarch, Alexander: A Commentary;Yardley and Heckel,
Justin, Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus, i. Books 11–12: Alexander the
Great (introduction, translation, commentary). For Diod. Sic. XVII the Loeb edition
(vol. viii, by C. B. Welles) contains some notes. The ‘fragments’ quoted from the lost
sources are translated in vol. i of Robinson, The History of Alexander the Great, and dis-
cussed in Pearson, The Lost Historians of Alexander the Great. A translation of the Metz
Epitome, by J. C. Yardley with commentary by E. B. Baynham, is forthcoming in the
Clarendon Ancient History Series. On the ephemerides (diary) of the end of Alexander’s
reign see Bosworth, From Arrian to Alexander, ch. 7. On the Alexander Romance see
Stoneman, The Greek Alexander Romance (translation with introduction and notes).
A. B. Bosworth, ‘Plus ça change . . . Ancient Historians and Their Sources’, Cl. Ant.
xxii 2003, 167–98, uses Curtius as a test case to argue that historians followed their
sources faithfully, presenting what they found in their own way but not irresponsibly
adding material. The opposite had been argued for Curtius by P. McKechnie, ‘Mani-
pulation of Themes in Quintus Curtius Rufus Book 10’, Hist. xlviii 1999, 44–60.
Bosworth, ‘Mountain and Molehill? Cornelius Tacitus and Quintus Curtius’, CQ2 liv
2004, 551–67, explores the use of Curtius by Tacitus but rejects identiﬁcation with the
senator of Ann. XI.
358
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: SOURCES AND OUTLINE

500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300
334
Alexander’s entry into Asia; battle of the Granicus
333
battle of Issus
332
sieges of Tyre and Gaza
331
battle of Gaugamela
330
death of Darius
330
execution of Philotas and Parmenio
328
killing of Clitus
327
trouble over proskynesis
326
battle of Hydaspes
324
Alexander’s return to Susa
323
death of Alexander
Military Matters
Traditionally the strength of the Macedonian army was in the cavalry, formed
by the nobles who were the king’s hetairoi (companions). At some stage the duty
of guarding the king in battle was given to a unit known as the ile basilike (royal
squadron); at the beginning of Alexander’s Asiatic campaign the cavalry was a
force of eight ilai, of which one was the ile basilike or agema; there were also
four ilai of prodromoi = sarissophoroi (‘forward-runners’ = sarissa-bearers), last
mentioned as a separate category in 329 and after that probably incorporated
in the companions. Philip was the ﬁrst to organise an effective infantry force,
25
Alexander the Great:
Topics

armed with the formidable sarissa (cf. p. 299); at the beginning of Alexander’s
campaign this was organised in six regiments known as taxeis, whose taxiarchs
were important men. Anaximenes (FGrH 72 F 4) credits an Alexander with
giving the names hetairoi to the cavalry and pezetairoi (foot-companions) to the
infantry. Philip had pezetairoi by 349 (Dem. II. Ol. ii. 29), but according to
Theopompus (FGrH 115 F 348) they were an élite body. Perhaps we should
infer from Anaximenes that Alexander the Great gave the names hetairoi to the
whole cavalry force (in the sources for Alexander that word can be used either
of the cavalry or of the greater nobles who were more literally the king’s com-
panions) and pezetairoi to the whole infantry force. In a number of places Arrian
refers to some of the infantry as asthetairoi (ﬁrst in II. 23. ii), a word which
editors for many years emended out of existence. The meaning of the preﬁx is
unknown; possible guesses are that the asthetairoi came from Upper Macedo-
nia and the pezetairoi from Lower, or (since the number of taxeis given this name
by Arrian seems to increase) that it was a title of honour which could be con-
ferred on a taxis. In addition to the six taxeis, Alexander had an élite infantry
body known as hypaspistai (‘shield-bearers’): this was perhaps a new name for
Philip’s pezetairoi; they were organised in three chiliarchies (literally, ‘commands
of a thousand’), one being the royal chiliarchy or agema. There has been much
argument as to whether they were armed in the same way as or more lightly
than the main infantry force: probably they were armed in the same way for
major battles involving large numbers but could be armed differently for special
duties. The title somatophylakes (bodyguards) is used sometimes of the agema
of the hypaspists, sometimes of a small number of men serving as Alexander’s
personal aides, at ﬁrst high-ranking but outside the general structure of the
army, later usually cavalry commanders (Arr. VI. 28. iv lists seven existing and
one new for 325).
Alexander inherited from Philip the use of a variety of forces in conjunction.
His Greek allies in the League of Corinth provided him, in particular, with
Thessalian cavalry, almost as good as the Macedonian, and with hoplites; he
also had Greek mercenaries, light infantry from Thrace, especially Agrianian
javelin-men, and engineers and bematistai (surveyors). Little is said about this
in the sources, but the success of his campaign depended on considerable organ-
isation for the conveyance of supplies and reinforcements, and for planning his
advances into unfamiliar territory (there are glimpses at Arr. III. 6. viii,VI. 20.
v, 27. i).
The force which he took to Asia in 334 probably comprised 4,500 or 5,100
cavalry and 32,000 infantry, of whom 2,700 (including the prodromoi) and
12,000 were Macedonians (Diod. Sic. XVII. 17. iii–iv, a detailed catalogue, cf.
Arr. I. 11. iii); the higher ﬁgures of Anaximenes, 5,500 [or 6,100?] cavalry and
43,000 infantry (FGrH 72 F 29 ap. Plut. De Alex. Fort. i. 327 D–E), probably
include the advance force of 336 (cf. Polyaenus Strat.V. 44. iv). Reinforcements
reached Alexander on various occasions to 328/7, and again in India in 326 and
in the centre of the empire in 324–323; but garrisons were left in various places,
there were casualties in battle and from disease and other hazards, and for much
360
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

of the time after 330 the army was divided and substantial parts of it were not
with Alexander.The army which fought at Gaugamela in 331 is given by Arrian
as 7,000 cavalry and 40,000 infantry (III. 12. v), and probably the force actu-
ally with Alexander was until 323 never afterwards as large. In 334 substantial
forces were left with Antipater in Macedon, 1,500 cavalry and 12,000 infantry
according to Diod. Sic. XVII. 17. v, and in 331 Antipater raised an army of
40,000 including loyal Greeks to ﬁght against Agis (Diod. Sic. XVII. 63. i – but
with difﬁculty, Aeschin. III. Ctesiphon 165). Some scholars have reckoned that
by the end Macedon was seriously denuded of manpower; but others, taking
seriously the fact that no Macedonian reinforcements are mentioned after 330,
have resisted that conclusion.
On various occasions the nature and organisation of the army had to be
changed. In 330, when he continued eastwards in pursuit of Darius, Alexander
left substantial forces with Parmenio and with Harpalus, but Parmenio’s men
rejoined him in 329 (Arr. III. 19. vii–viii, Curt. VII. iii. 4). After Darius’ death
there was increasing need for the use of separate detachments and guerrilla
ﬁghting; in 330 (Curt. VI. vi. 15) or in 327 before entering India (Plut. 57. i,
Polyaenus Strat. IV. 3. x) Alexander is said to have had the waggons and surplus
baggage burned to produce a lighter army. Ships were built in 326 for the
journey to the mouths of the Indus (Diod. Sic. XVII. 89. iv–v, Curt. IX. i. 3–4),
and more ships, and dockyards, in 335 when he arrived there (Arr.VI. 18. ii–v,
20. i, v); but, except in the sieges of Miletus and of Tyre (p. 365), Alexander
had no occasion for ﬁghting on the water.
Originally the Macedonian cavalry were commanded by Parmenio’s son
Philotas, and the individual ilarchs seem not to have been important men; in
331 after Gaugamela each ile was subdivided into two lochoi (Arr. III. 16. xi).
After Philotas’ execution in 330 his command was divided between two hip-
parchs, the experienced Clitus ‘the black’ and Alexander’s friend Hephaestion
(Arr. III. 27. iv). Later the cavalry were reorganised in eight hipparchies, one
being the agema, and the individual hipparchs (of whom Hephaestion was still
one) were leading men as the ilarchs had not been (ﬁrst mentioned in 329, Arr.
III. 29. vii, but it may be that the ﬁrst uses of the word are non-technical and
the reorganisation followed the killing of Clitus in 328); for what was done in
324 see below. There was no comparable reorganisation of the infantry, except
that by 327 there were at least seven taxeis (Arr.V. 11–12); before entering India
in 326 the hypaspists were given silver shields and the title argyraspides (Just.
XII. 7. v: earlier uses of the title by Diodorus and Curtius are anachronistic).
After Gaugamela Alexander started appointing oriental satraps (cf. p. 368),
and later he started using oriental troops (ﬁrst clear instance Arr. IV. 17. iii, in
winter 328/7). At ﬁrst these were organised in their own divisions and fought
in their own manner, but a process of integration was begun at Susa in 324.
There are problems with the text of Arr. VII. 6. iii–iv, where the manuscripts
offer some outstanding orientals ‘incorporated in the companion cavalry’, ‘a
ﬁfth hipparchy, not wholly barbarian’, and the enlistment of barbarians in the
enlargement of the whole cavalry force. Usually it is thought that after the losses
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
361

in Gedrosia the eight Macedonian hipparchies had been reduced to four, a few
orientals were designated hetairoi and were enrolled in these, and a ﬁfth, largely
oriental, hipparchy was added; but it has been suggested that the ﬁfth hipparchy,
‘not wholly barbarian’, implies that four other hipparchies were created which
were wholly barbarian, and that apart from the privileged few oriental hetairoi
Arrian says nothing here about the Macedonian hipparchies. At any rate, there
were now some orientals in the Macedonian hipparchies and one mixed hip-
parchy. As for infantry, in 327, 30,000 young orientals were set aside to be given
a Macedonian training, and these epigonoi (‘successors’) were paraded before
Alexander in 324 (Arr.VII. 6. i, Diod. Sic. XVII. 108. i–iii, Plut. 71. i, cf. Curt.
VIII. v. 1, Just. XII. 12. iii–iv). Alexander’s plan to send veterans home and rely
on his new forces led to the mutiny at Opis (cf. p. 376); at Babylon in 323 in
a sixteen-rank phalanx orientals ﬁlled all ranks except the ﬁrst three and the
last (Arr. VII. 23. iii, cf. Diod. Sic. XVII. 110. i–ii).
In his three major battles against the Persians Alexander placed the six taxeis
of the phalanx in the centre and the hypaspists immediately to their right;
Parmenio as second-in-command was on the left wing with the Thessalian 
and other allied cavalry and some light-armed troops; Alexander commanded
on the right wing with the Macedonian cavalry and other light-armed, and
attacked from there (e.g. Granicus, Arr. I. 14. i–iii). Inspiring leadership was
important, but essentially it was the better army which won these battles.
For the battle of the Granicus in 334 the sources offer two versions, which
differ so much that, whichever is right, it is hard to see how the other can have
come into existence. Arrian gives the Persians 20,000 cavalry and 20,000 Greek
mercenary infantry (with no mention of Persian infantry), Diodorus 10,000
cavalry and 100,000 infantry. In one version the Persians were stationed on the
right bank of the river, with the cavalry in front with no room to charge and
the infantry behind. When Alexander arrived Parmenio advised waiting until
the next morning but Alexander insisted on ﬁghting immediately; the pro-
dromoi attacked the Persians’ extreme left, and, when a gap appeared in their
left centre, Alexander plunged in.There was a mêlée as the Macedonians fought
their way across the river, until the Persians’ centre caved in and their wings
ﬂed; the mercenaries stood ﬁrm but were massacred (Arr. I. 13–16, cf. Plut.
16). In the other version the Persians were camped beyond the river;
Alexander did wait until morning, and crossed the river unopposed; the battle
followed, with the Persians’ cavalry in front and infantry behind as in the ﬁrst
version (Diod. Sic. XVII. 19–21, cf. Fragmentum Sabbaiticum FGrH 151 F 1.
1, Just. XI. 6. x–xiii, Polyaenus Strat. IV. 3. xvi). Most scholars have preferred
Arrian’s version, though some have thought that it makes the Persians too
incompetent and have preferred Diodorus’; it is an attractive suggestion that
behind the two versions lies an initial failure, which the two versions suppress
in different ways, that Alexander ﬁrst fought to cross the river and was defeated,
but the next morning succeeded in crossing and then fought successfully.
At Issus in 333 Darius had reached a narrow coastal plain in Alexander’s
rear, which did not allow him to take advantage of his large numbers (but pre-
362
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

sumably not as large as alleged, from 310,000 by Curtius to 600,000 as hearsay
by Arrian). Between the two armies the plain was crossed by the River Pinarus
(which of three possible identiﬁcations is chosen does not greatly affect the
general situation). Alexander had to ﬁll the whole width of the plain, so as not
to be outﬂanked. Darius commanded from the centre, where he placed his
infantry; he massed his cavalry on the right, to try to force a gap between the
enemy left and the sea; and he sent a detachment into the foothills to his left
to try to outﬂank Alexander. Alexander sent some light-armed troops to deal
with this detachment, and himself attacked the Cardaces, an élite infantry body,
on the Persian left. In his phalanx a gap opened between the taxeis towards the
right, moving forwards with him, and those towards the left, holding back with
Parmenio, and Darius’ Greek mercenaries pressed into this breach; but they
were less effective than Alexander, who wheeled to the centre when the Persian
left had collapsed. Darius led the Persians in ﬂight, and Alexander pursued until
nightfall (Arr. II. 6–11, Diod. Sic. XVII. 33–4, Curt. III. viii–ix. 15, Just. XI. 9.
i–x, Plut. 20. i–v, Polyb. XII. 17–23).
At Gaugamela in 331 Darius chose his battleﬁeld and made careful pre-
parations: he arrived ﬁrst, and levelled the ground for the sake of his cavalry
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
363
Ill. 14
The Alexander Sarcophagus (c.320), showing Alexander attacking Persian
horsemen. Istanbul Museum/photo Art Archive, Dagli Orti

and scythed chariots. Again the ﬁgures we are given are unbelievable: infantry
from Curtius’ 200,000 to Arrian’s hearsay 1,000,000 (but they played no sig-
niﬁcant part in the battle), cavalry from Arrian’s hearsay 40,000 to Diodorus’
200,000, but clearly more than the 7,000 given by Arrian for Alexander’s army,
and the sources agree on 200 chariots. On reaching a ridge from which the
enemy could be seen, Alexander took Parmenio’s advice and paused for recon-
naissance, but rejecting the further advice to attack that night he then waited
until morning.The Persians had cavalry on both wings, chariots and perhaps a
few elephants in front of their line; Alexander, afraid of being outﬂanked,
inclined both his wings backwards, and placed a reserve line of infantry behind
the main phalanx. As he advanced, Alexander directed his whole army to the
right, to put the Persians off balance and get away from their prepared ground.
Bessus on the Persian left tried to outﬂank Alexander’s right, and Alexander fed
troops against him; in Alexander’s centre the use of javelins and good discipline
prevented serious harm from the chariots; on the other wing Mazaeus attacked
Parmenio and sent a detachment to attack Alexander’s base camp (successfully,
but without serious effect). As at Issus, a gap appeared in the centre of Alexan-
der’s phalanx (some Persian cavalry broke through that, and perhaps through
the reserve line too) and also between Darius’ left and centre; and, as at Issus,
Alexander was more successful at exploiting the enemy’s gap. Again, Darius
ﬂed, and Alexander pursued until night. There are stories that Parmenio was
in serious difﬁculty on the left and sent a plea for help to Alexander, who for
that reason turned back from pursuing Darius; but in a mêlée of perhaps
200,000 men, with clouds of dust, it is unlikely that Parmenio could have got
a message to Alexander, let alone that Alexander could have responded. The
story helped to explain Darius’ escape, and was no doubt elaborated when Par-
menio was in trouble later (cf. pp. 370–1) (Arr. III. 9–15, Diod. Sic. XVII.
56–61, Curt. IV. xii–xvi, Just. XI. 13–14. iii, Plut. 32–3).
At the Hydaspes in 326 Alexander had to cross a wide and fast-ﬂowing river,
and then ﬁght against the Indian prince Porus on the other side, and here he
did have scope for tactical brilliance. Porus was waiting with an army which
included chariots and elephants, blocking all the crossings, and expecting rein-
forcements. After a series of feints Alexander divided his army into three sec-
tions: Craterus was left opposite Porus with a substantial force; Alexander took
his section several miles upstream, where there were islands in the middle of
the channel; the third section was to use intermediate crossing-points. Alexan-
der crossed under cover of rain and night, using boats and stuffed skins, and
destroyed a force which Porus sent, too late, under his son; and the middle
section crossed too. Porus left a small division opposite Craterus and faced
Alexander with his main army, stationing infantry with elephants in front in the
centre and cavalry with horses in front on the wings. Horses cannot face ele-
phants unless trained, so Alexander had to deal with Porus’ cavalry before his
infantry attacked Porus’ elephants and infantry. He advanced with most of his
cavalry visible on the right wing but the rest, under Coenus, hidden in the rear;
364
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

when he charged from the right wing, Porus brought his own right-wing cavalry,
perhaps behind his main lines, to reinforce the attacked left; Coenus then
emerged and took Porus’ right wing in the rear. After that Alexander’s infantry
attacked, and Porus’ army was defeated with great slaughter; Craterus in the
meantime crossed the river, and joined in the pursuit (Arr.V. 9–18, Curt.VIII.
xiii–xiv; cf. Diod. Sic. 87–9, Just. XII. 8. i–vii, omitting the crossing of the river,
also Polyaenus Strat. IV. 3. xxii).
Siege warfare was an area in which Alexander excelled (though he did also
experience setbacks), taking advantage of technical developments which had
begun under Philip and which continued under him (cf. p. 316). In 334 he
attacked ﬁrst Miletus and then Halicarnassus, the strongest walled city in Asia
Minor, where Memnon was holding out. At Halicarnassus Alexander had
towers, rams and catapults (this is the ﬁrst mention of torsion-powered stone-
throwers); the defenders had towers and arrow-ﬁring catapults. At one point
Alexander breached the wall, but the defenders had built a demi-lune, a semi-
circular additional wall, inside; when some of his soldiers, the worse for drink,
attacked that, the defence was so effective that Alexander had to make a truce
to recover his dead. However, a three-wave attack on Alexander started well but
ended badly; after that Memnon set ﬁre to and abandoned the outer city, and
Alexander moved on without capturing him or two citadels (Arr. I. 20. v–23.
vi; Diod. Sic. XVII. 23. iv–27. vi, making Alexander’s difﬁculties clear as Arrian
does not); the citadels fell only to Alexander’s commanders late in 333 (Arr. II.
5. vii).
In 332 most Phoenician cities submitted to Alexander (and their ships
became available to him), but Tyre on its offshore island held out for seven
months and hoped for help from Carthage. Under Diades of Thessaly Alexan-
der’s army used the most impressive range of machinery yet seen. Using stone
from the remains of Old Tyre on the mainland, Alexander built a mole out into
the strait, at the end of which he erected towers carrying catapults. When the
Tyrians set ﬁre to an old ship and used that to destroy the towers, he rebuilt
them. The Tyrians would not ﬁght at sea, so he blockaded them in their har-
bours; he set up new machines on the mole, and he mounted rams on ships to
attack other parts of the city wall which were less strong (a development fore-
shadowed by the Athenians’ mounting towers on a large ship at Syracuse in
413: Thuc. VII. 25. vi). However, the Tyrians ﬁred missiles and dropped 
boulders in the sea to prevent the ships from coming close. When the Tyrians
made a sortie from their northern harbour at siesta-time, Alexander was caught
unprepared, but retrieved the situation. Ultimately the ram-ships made a breach
in the wall on the seaward side while other ships ﬁred missiles and attacked the
harbours; Alexander’s men used boarding-bridges to enter the city from ships
(Arr. II. 16–24, Diod. Sic. XVII. 40–6, Curt. IV. ii–iv. 18, Just. XI. 10. x–xiv,
Plut. 24. ii–25. ii).
Inland Gaza resisted too: it was on a mound surrounded by sand which
caused problems for Alexander’s towers and machines; he built a ramp for these
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
365

(but not all round the city, as Arrian claims), and the walls were overcome by
a combination of bombardment and undermining (Arr. II. 25. iv–27, Diod. Sic.
XVII. 48. vii, Curt. IV. vi. 7–30, Plut. 25. iv–v).
Alexander’s tactical ingenuity is apparent in a number of smaller episodes.
In his Balkan campaign of 335, when he was not accompanied by any of Philip’s
experienced generals, he dealt with a waggon attack in Thrace by getting his
men to open their ranks (to be done again at Gaugamela, above) or, where there
was not room for that, to lie under the cover of their shields, and he stuffed
skins used for tents to make rafts to cross the Danube (copied from Xen. Anab.
I. v. 10; and to be done again at the Hydaspes, above). When dangerously
trapped in a valley by the Illyrians, he frightened them off by a parade con-
ducted in silence until it ended with a blood-curdling shout. He used portable
catapults as ﬁeld artillery (Arr. I. 1. vii–x, 3. vi, 5. xi–6. iv, 6. viii).
In 331/0, when he was on his way to Persepolis, and his route through the
Persian Gates was blocked, he learned of a mountain route from his prisoners
and followed that with part of his force, so that the Persians were trapped
between this contingent and Craterus with the remainder (Arr. III. 18. ii–ix,
Diod. Sic. XVII. 68, Curt.V. iv, cf. Plut. 37. i–ii). In 328–326 there were several
spectacular exploits. The Sogdian Rock/Rock of Arimazes was captured by
‘winged mountaineers’ who used tent-pegs as pitons to climb above the fortress
(Arr. IV. 18. iv–19. iv, Curt. VII. xi, Polyaenus Strat. IV. 3. xxix). To reach the
Rock of Chorienes/Rock of Sisimithres a ravine was bridged (Arr. IV. 21. i–ix,
Curt.VIII. ii. 19–28, Plut. 58. iii–iv). At Aornus guides showed how light troops
could reach the ridge from the north, and a mound was built into a ravine to
bring Alexander’s catapults within range (Arr. IV. 28. vii–30. iv, Diod. Sic. XVII.
85–86. i, Curt. VIII. xi. 1–25, Just. XII. 7. xii–xiii, Plut. 58. iii–v). In 326 at
Sangala, between the Hydaspes and the Hyphasis, the Indians’ camp was pro-
tected by three lines of waggons in front of the city: a cavalry attack by Alexan-
der failed to provoke a battle, and an infantry attack drove the Indians back
into the city.Alexander built a stockade round the city and stopped two attempts
at breaking out; ﬁnally he broke in by undermining the wall and using scaling-
ladders, without needing the machines which Porus brought – but this was an
expensive victory: Arrian reports 17,000 Indians killed, and on Alexander’s side
under 100 killed but over 1,200 wounded (Arr. V. 22–24. v, Diod. Sic. XVII.
91. iv, Curt. IX. i. 14–25, Polyaenus Strat. IV. 3. xxx).
As a commander Alexander was never at a loss, never conceded the impos-
sible. He remembered successful devices, from his reading and his own ex-
perience; he was successful in various kinds of ﬁghting (but never had to master
naval warfare). He drove his men hard and fast, frequently surprising the enemy
by appearing sooner than they had thought possible; and he took a personal
interest in his men and set a personal example (e.g. Arr. I. 16. v, VI. 26. i–iii)
– sometimes, as at the town of the Malli in 326/5 (Arr. VI. 8. iv–12, Diod.
Sic. XVII. 93–95. ii, Curt. IX. ii–iii. 19, Just. XII. 8. x–xvii, Plut. 62), taking
risks which even by the standards of ancient warfare a commander ought not
to take.
366
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

Administration
The Greeks of Asia Minor had been subject to Persia since the Peace of Antalci-
das, in 387/6, so they were now to be ‘liberated’ (cf. Diod. Sic. XVI. 91. ii
[Philip], XVII. 24. i): in 334 Alcimachus was ordered to replace oligarchies with
democracies, restore laws and remit the tribute exacted by Persia (Arr. I. 17.
ix–18. ii). Alexander did not favour democracy as such, but inclined that way
in Asia because the existing oligarchies had collaborated with the Persians. In
various ways he claimed honours in the cities: in 333/2 Miletus appointed him
stephanephoros (‘crown-wearer’, the eponymous ofﬁcial of the year: Milet I. iii
122, excerpted SIG3 272, with editors’ date corrected); at Priene, following a
precedent set by the Hecatomnids, he became the dedicator of the new temple
of Athena (I. Priene 156 = R&O 86. A ~ Harding 105, cf. Mausolus and Idrieus
at Labraunda, Labraunda iii 13–14 and 15–19), but Ephesus is said to have
rejected his offer to pay for and dedicate its temple of Artemis (Str. 640–1. XIV.
i. 22). Parmenio and Attalus had added the island states to the League of
Corinth (e.g. Chios: Tod 192 = R&O 84. A ~ Harding 107. 10–15). Probably
the Greeks of the mainland were not enrolled in the League but were made
allies on such terms as Alexander chose, and since at ﬁrst Alexander was in
need of funds they paid a syntaxis (‘contribution’, as in the Second Athenian
League: cf. p. 233) to him instead of tribute to the Persians (e.g. Priene: I.Priene
1 = R&O 86. B ~ Harding 106. 13–15, probably modifying an original settle-
ment in which a syntaxis had been required). The language was different, but
in practice the Greeks were probably neither more free nor ﬁnancially better
off than they had been under the Persians.
Aspendus, perceived as Greek even if strictly it was not, was originally to
provide money and horses, and after it revolted had to pay a larger sum and
regular tribute to the satrap (Arr. I. 26. ii–27. iv). There is a story that at the
end of his reign Alexander offered the Athenian Phocion the revenues of a city
in Asia, as the Persian King had bestowed cities on his favourites (Plut. Phoc.
18, vii–viii, Ael. V.H. I. 25; for the Persian practice cf. p. 34).
Otherwise Alexander retained existing practice.The barbarians’ territory was
not to be ravaged, because it now belonged to the Macedonians (Just. XI. 6. i).
Alexander began by appointing Macedonians as satraps in Dascylium and
Sardis and claiming the tribute for himself. In Sardis he also appointed a gar-
rison commander and a ﬁnancial ofﬁcer.This used to be seen as an innovation,
but it is becoming increasingly clear that here too he was continuing a Persian
practice: whatever the formal relationship between satrap, other ofﬁcials and
king, it was hoped that if one became disloyal the others would remain loyal.
But for propaganda purposes the peoples of the western provinces could be ‘lib-
erated’ too: ‘He granted to the Sardians and the other Lydians to use the ancient
laws of the Lydians and made them free’ – which no doubt meant in practice
that they too would be neither more nor less free than under the Persians (Arr.
I. 17. i–vii). In Caria Ada, ousted by Pixodarus (cf. pp. 323–4) but holding out
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
367

in Alinda, submitted to Alexander and was reinstated; but after her death he
appointed a Macedonian satrap (Arr. I. 23. vii–viii,VII. 23. i). Sabictas ?= Abis-
tamenes, in Cappadocia, was perhaps another native ruler rewarded for sub-
mission (Arr. II. 4. ii, Curt. III. iv. 1).
Syria, liberated by the Persians from Babylon, remained pro-Persian until
Gaugamela (Arr. III. 11. iv, cf. p. 353 on Samaria); but Egypt, in rebellion for
much of the time since the mid ﬁfth century, welcomed Alexander (Diod. Sic.
XVII. 49. i, Curt. IV. vii. 1–5, cf. Arr. III. 1. ii). Egypt was given tactful treat-
ment: over the province proper were to be two Egyptian nomarchs (but one
declined so the other took the whole), ‘to govern their nomes as established
since antiquity’; there were European army commanders, and two Egyptian
Greeks were put in charge of the western and eastern frontiers; the one in the
east, Cleomenes, was to receive the tribute from the nomarchs, and he eventu-
ally made himself satrap (Arr. III. 5. ii–vii, Curt. IV. viii. 5; Cleomenes as satrap
[Arist.] Oec. II. 1352 A 16, Arr. Succ. FGrH 156 F 1. 5, Paus. I. 6. iii).
In 331 before leaving Tyre for Mesopotamia Alexander gave special appoint-
ments to two Macedonians: Coeranus was to collect tribute in Phoenicia, and
Philoxenus in Asia ‘this side’ (i.e. north-west) of the Taurus (Arr. III. 6. iv).
Because in Harpalus’ absence (cf. p. 372) they had been in charge of Alexan-
der’s treasury, some have seen their new appointments as powerful posts with
authority over several provinces, but more probably they were to collect money
from regions not subject to satraps in the usual way: the cities of the Phoeni-
cian coast, and perhaps Caria, still in the hands of Ada, but where Philoxenus
himself subsequently became satrap.
The ﬁrst oriental appointed as satrap was Mazaeus, satrap of Syria under
Darius, who in 331 burned the crops in the Euphrates valley and then 
commanded Darius’ right wing at Gaugamela. After the battle he retired to
Babylon, there submitted to Alexander and was made satrap, with a Greek 
garrison commander and a Macedonian ﬁnancial ofﬁcer (Arr. III. 16. iv, Curt.
IV. xvi. 7, V. i. 17–18, viii. 12, cf. Diod. Sic. XVII. 64. v). He was the ﬁrst of a
series of Iranian satraps with European ofﬁcers set beside them. Alexander
could not claim to ‘liberate’ the heart of the empire as he had ‘liberated’ the
western provinces; he was to represent himself as legitimate king (cf. p. 375),
and to make his rule acceptable he needed the cooperation of the local aristo-
cracy – but a Macedonian was appointed to the strategically important 
province of Arachosia, south of Bactria, centred on Kandahar (Arr. III. 28. i,
Curt. VII. iii. 5). In fact, as Alexander moved further east, Iranian satraps 
and usurpers caused trouble, and they ﬁgured prominently in the purge of 324;
most provinces were in European hands when Alexander died. In India Alexan-
der reverted to appointing Macedonian satraps, but under them cooperative
native rulers were retained and gained the territory of those who refused to
cooperate. Porus is referred to as king and had no European troops stationed
with him (Arr. VI. 2. i, cf. V. 29. iii; but called satrap Plut. 60. xv): after the
abandonment of further eastward expansion, he was a vassal ruler on the edge
of the empire.
368
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

According to Plutarch Alexander ‘established more than seventy cities among
barbarian tribes, planted Asia with Greek magistracies, and mastered their
uncivilised and beastly way of life’ (De Alex. Fort. i. 328 E–F). It has been gen-
erally acknowledged that the number is a great exaggeration, and the latest
serious study is the most drastic, reducing the number of Alexandrias to six –
in Egypt; in Aria (Herat); Alexandria Eschate (Khodjend); in Susiana, near the
mouth of the Tigris; Bucephala, on the Hydaspes, where Alexander’s horse
Bucephalas died; in Macarene = of the Oreitae, between the Indus and Gedrosia
– though there were other places, not founded as cities, where Europeans were
installed in garrisons. Except in Egypt the cities were on the sites of older
settlements: their purpose was primarily strategic and administrative, to keep
garrisons in vital places and to act as a focus for the government of non-
urbanised regions. Some seem to have been intended as trading centres too,
but Plutarch’s view of them as a means of spreading Greek civilisation is seri-
ously mistaken: despite his own Greek education Alexander was not fond of the
Greeks, and the settlements were in fact resented both by the native popula-
tions on whom they were inﬂicted and by the Europeans who were deposited
in them. In 325, perhaps in response to a rumour that Alexander had been
killed at the town of the Malli, 3,000 men left in Bactria set out for the Mediter-
ranean (Diod. XVII. 99. v, Curt. IX. vii. 1–11); and after Alexander’s death
more than 23,000 men, ‘thrown out in the remotest parts of the kingdom,
longing for the Greek training and way of life’, rose up in revolt, but were
defeated and treacherously killed (Diod. Sic. XVIII. 4. viii, 7). But, although
we should not attribute hellenising intentions or practices to Alexander, his con-
quests did in the end have a hellenising effect. Greeks and Macedonians became
involved in government, and Greek became the language of government; the
western and central provinces of the empire became part of a Greek/eastern
Mediterranean world; and Greektype cities were founded later on a substantial
scale by the Seleucids.
Alexander and his Subordinates
The commanders of Philip’s advance force in 336 included Parmenio, his best
general (cf. Plut. Sayings of Kings and Commanders 177 C), and Attalus, the uncle
of his new wife. Alexander succeeded to the throne with the support of Antipa-
ter; he had no reason to love Attalus, and Parmenio acquiesced in his killing (cf.
pp. 321, 349). In 334 Antipater was left behind in charge of Macedon, and
Alexander began the Asiatic campaign with an army consisting largely of men
who had fought under Philip and with Parmenio and his family well entrenched
in positions of command. Parmenio himself ranked next to Alexander, com-
manding the left wing in the major battles while Alexander commanded the
right; his son Philotas commanded the Macedonian cavalry, another son,
Nicanor, commanded the hypaspists, and Nicanor’s brother-in-law Coenus
commanded a taxis of the phalanx (e.g. Arr. I. 14. i–ii). In addition to these,
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
369

Asander, possibly but not certainly Parmenio’s brother, was made satrap of
Sardis (Arr. I. 17. vii); and Coenus’ brother Cleander fetched reinforcements
from Greece in 334–332 and commanded the ‘old mercenaries’ at Gaugamela
(Arr. I. 24. ii, II. 20. v, III. 12. ii; probably to be restored in III. 6. viii).
But before long Parmenio’s family was in trouble. In winter 332/1 his
youngest son, Hector, died in an accident on the Nile (Curt. IV. viii. 7–9).
Asander was replaced as satrap of Sardis in 331, and no more is heard of him
except that in winter 329/8 he brought reinforcements to Alexander (Arr. III.
6. vii, IV. 7. ii). In 330, after Darius’ death, Nicanor died, and Philotas was left
behind to attend to the funeral (Curt. VI. vi. 18–19, cf. Arr. III. 25. iv). Later
that year, when Philotas had rejoined Alexander, there was a major crisis. A
man called Dimnus formed a conspiracy, and his beloved Nicomachus asked
Philotas to inform Alexander. Philotas did not do so, but the news reached
Alexander by another route. Philotas’ arrest was arranged by six men who were
to be important subsequently: Coenus and Craterus, commanders of taxeis of
the phalanx, Hephaestion and the Greek Erigyius, childhood friends of Alexan-
der, and Perdiccas and Leonnatus, two of the killers of Philip’s assassin (Diod.
Sic. XVI. 94. iv). Philotas was arrogant and unpopular (cf. Diod. Sic. XVII. 66.
vii, Plut. 40. i, 48), but here may have been guilty of no more than failing to
pass on information which he did not take seriously. However, prompted by
Craterus, Alexander demanded the death penalty, and the army voted it. Par-
menio, with a substantial force and no longer with Alexander, might not be
trustworthy after his son’s execution, so Cleander and others were given the job
of killing him.Various other men were put on trial, and some were condemned
but others acquitted. A number of the soldiers were disaffected, and were put
together in a unit of ataktoi (‘unassigned’, or perhaps ‘undisciplined’) (Arr. III.
26–7, Diod. Sic. XVII. 79–80, Curt.VI. vii–VII. ii, Just. XII. 5. iii, Plut. 48–9).
There is a series of stories in which Alexander beneﬁted from not following
Parmenio’s advice: his advice to wait until morning at the Granicus (Arr. I. 13.
ii–vii, Plut. 16. iii; but see p. 362); his advice to ﬁght a naval battle when besieg-
ing Miletus (Arr. I. 18. vi); his warning against the doctor who treated Alexan-
der in Cilicia in 333 (Arr. II. 4. ix–x, Curt. III. vi. 4–12, Just. XI. 8. v–ix, Plut.
13. v–viii); his willingness to accept Darius’ ﬁnal offer of terms (Arr. II. 25. ii
[misplaced], Diod. Sic. XVII. 54. iv–v, Curt. IV. xi. 11–15, Plut. 29. viii); at
Gaugamela his advice to delay for reconnaissance was accepted but his further
advice to attack at night was not (Arr. III. 9. iii–iv, 10, cf. Curt. IV. xii. 21); his
advice not to destroy Persepolis (Arr. III. 18. xi–xii). In each of the major battles,
Parmenio had been in a defensive position on the left, while Alexander had
attacked on the right; at Gaugamela, it was said (improbably: cf. p. 364), Par-
menio had to send a message to Alexander, who turned back from pursuing
Darius to help him (Arr. III. 15, Diod. Sic. 60. vii–viii [the message did not
reach Alexander], Curt. IV. xvi. 1–3, Plut. 32. v–vii [Alexander rejected the
appeal]). It has been suggested that Alexander had been scheming for a long
time to escape from the clutches of Parmenio, and that in 330 his plans ﬁnally
bore fruit; but Alexander was a man who reacted impulsively to crises rather
370
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

than a patient plotter. Parmenio would not have been left behind with a sub-
stantial force if he had not been trusted, and the hostile stories may as well have
been circulated after the crisis, to suggest that Parmenio had not been such a
great man after all, as in preparation for it.
Immediately Philotas’ cavalry command was divided between Clitus ‘the
black’ and Alexander’s friend Hephaestion. Coenus and Cleander backed
Alexander and continued to prosper. But otherwise this crisis brought to the
top a new group, men who were Alexander’s rather than Philip’s. Coenus,
Craterus, Hephaestion and Perdiccas were all to be hipparchs when the cavalry
were reorganised; Leonnatus held important commands (after as well as before
the crisis over proskynesis, so if the mockery is to be attributed to a Leonnatus
[Arr. IV. 12. ii] rather than Polyperchon [Curt. VIII. v. 22] it must be a differ-
ent Leonnatus), as did Erigyius until his death in 327. Other childhood friends
who had been exiled by Philip were to rise to prominence too (Arr. III. 6. iv–vi):
Harpalus (cf. p. 372) had been treasurer from the beginning; Ptolemy held his
ﬁrst command in 330 and was now made a bodyguard (Arr. III. 18. ix, perhaps
exaggerating; 27. v); the Greek Nearchus had been made satrap of Lycia in 333
and was later to command Alexander’s ﬂeet; Erigyius’ brother Laomedon, being
bilingual, was put in charge of the Persian prisoners. Meanwhile Antipater, who
had backed Alexander as the new king in 336, was left in command in Macedon.
Further crises followed. In 328 Clitus ‘the black’, about to be left behind as
satrap of Bactria, showed anger at Alexander’s growing oriental affectations and
denigration of Philip, and was killed by Alexander in a drunken argument.
Alexander kept to his tent for three days, until he was persuaded to continue
by the argument that the king’s acts are by deﬁnition just or, according to
Curtius, by the army’s voting to condemn Clitus (Arr. IV. 8–9, Curt. VIII. i.
19–ii. 12, Just. XII. 6, Plut. 51).
In 327, when Alexander tried to introduce the custom of proskynesis to his
European followers, the opposition was led by Aristotle’s nephew Callisthenes
(cf. p. 380). As well as being the ofﬁcial historian of the campaign, Callisthenes
seems to have had some responsibility for the pages, the sons of leading Mace-
donians who were attached to the court to attend on Alexander. Led by one
whom Alexander had had ﬂogged, some of them, allegedly worried by Alexan-
der’s orientalism and his elimination of opponents, formed a plot, and news of
it reached Alexander. They were tortured and executed, and Callisthenes was
blamed, but Curtius maintains he was innocent, and Arrian says that although
Ptolemy and Aristobulus considered him guilty most writers claimed that
Alexander had already come to hate him and was ready to believe the worst of
him. Disagreement about how Callisthenes died suggests something other than
a public condemnation: the opportunity to remove him was no doubt conve-
nient for Alexander but need not have been manufactured by him (Arr. IV.
13–14, Curt. VIII. vi–viii, Plut. 55, cf. Just. XV. 3. ii–vi).
So far Alexander had had problems with high-ranking individuals, but the
army had supported him. In 326, however, the army mutinied at the Hypha-
sis, and Alexander had to abandon his plans to continue farther east. Coenus,
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
371

who was connected with Parmenio’s family but had backed Alexander against
Philotas, and who could be described as ‘among those most loyal to Alexander’
(Arr.VI. 2. i), acted as the army’s spokesman (Arr.V. 25–29. iii, Diod. Sic. XVII.
93. ii–95. ii, Curt. IX. ii–iii. 19, Just. XII. 8. x–xvii, Plut. 62). In the journey to
the coast Alexander had to work hard to recover the army’s loyalty, taking
unnecessary personal risks until in the attack on the town of the Malli he was
seriously wounded. In the course of that journey Coenus died, of an illness, as
our sources agree (Arr. VI. 2. i, Curt. IX. ii. 20); and while this too may have
been convenient for Alexander, we are not justiﬁed in suspecting foul play.
Neither are we justiﬁed in seeing the march through the desert of Gedrosia
as an act of expiation imposed on the army. Alexander wanted to explore, and
to support Nearchus and the ﬂeet; stories that Semiramis and Cyrus had had
difﬁculties there constituted a challenge, but he did send Craterus and the 
veterans by an easier route (Arr.VI. 24. i–iii).The difﬁculties were genuine; on
reaching Pura Alexander blamed the satrap Apollophanes for failing to forward
supplies, but we have to turn to Arrian’s Indike to discover that Apollophanes
had been unable to do that because he had been killed in a battle (Arr.VI. 20.
v, 27. i, Ind. 23. v).
In his ﬁnal years Alexander conducted a purge, particularly of Persian satraps
and usurpers; but Cleander and his accomplices in killing Parmenio, who had
remained in Media, were summoned and executed also, while Atropates, the
Persian satrap of Media, had remained loyal to Alexander and survived, and
Cleomenes, who in Egypt had enlarged his position and had offended the Egyp-
tians but had done nothing to worry Alexander, had his misdeeds condoned
(Arr.VI. 27. i–iv, 29–30,VII. 4. iii, 23. vi–viii, Diod. Sic. XVII. 106. ii–iii, Curt.
IX. x. 20–1, X. i. 1–9, 30–42, Plut. 68. iii–vii). We need not be surprised that
various men had assumed that Alexander would not return alive and had mis-
behaved accordingly (Arr. VII. 4. ii, Diod. Sic. XVII. 108. iv, Curt. X. i. 7). As
always Alexander reacted impulsively to news of trouble, but we need not
suppose that he imagined trouble where there was none, or had become neuro-
tically afraid of anyone who might not be totally obedient: since we tend to hear
only about men in high positions, we need not assume that those promoted to
ﬁll gaps were safe nonentities.
One man who expected punishment and did not wait for it was Harpalus,
one of Alexander’s childhood friends who was unﬁt for ﬁghting and so made
treasurer. He was said to have ﬂed to Megara, in Greece, in 333 before the
battle of Issus, but to have been persuaded to return to that position in 331
when Alexander advanced to Mesopotamia (Arr. III. 6. iv–vii). For Alexander
to forgive and reinstate a man who had offended him would be unparalleled,
and it is an attractive suggestion that Harpalus’ ﬂight was a cover for his going
as a spy to investigate the trouble brewing in Greece. In 330 Harpalus was left
in charge of the central treasuries when Alexander continued in pursuit of
Darius (Arr. III. 19. vii); but he took to enjoying women and a notoriously luxu-
rious life, in Babylon and in Tarsus (Cilicia). In 325/4 he ﬂed, with as many
mercenaries and as much money as he could take, and sought refuge in Athens,
372
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

whose favour he had been cultivating; what happened after that we have studied
in an Athenian context (Diod. Sic. XVII. 108. iv–viii, Curt. X. lacuna–ii. 1–3,
cf. Just. XIII. 5. ix, Plut. 41. viii, and see p. 343).
It was Alexander’s intention that when Craterus, who was ill, had returned
to Macedon with the veterans, he would succeed Antipater there and Anti-
pater would take reinforcements to Alexander. Some including Curtius have
thought that Antipater was now facing trouble, but Arrian denies that. A 
possible explanation lies in the fact that Antipater and Alexander’s mother
Olympias had quarrelled. Not later than 331 she had gone to Molossis, where
her daughter Cleopatra had been ruling in the absence of her husband Alexan-
der (who went to ﬁght in Italy in 334 and died there: cf. pp. 292–3), but Cleopa-
tra had not welcomed Olympias, and had herself returned to Macedon to get
away from Olympias. After that, Olympias and Antipater each denounced the
other to Alexander. We cannot tell whether in planning to remove Antipater
from Macedon Alexander believed Olympias and had therefore become 
distrustful of Antipater, or merely wanted to increase the distance between
Olympias and Antipater. In fact Alexander’s intentions were not carried out. At
the time of Alexander’s death Craterus had not gone further than Cilicia, while
Antipater, who had perhaps recently been in contact on his own account with
the Aetolians, had not himself left Macedon but had sent his son Cassander;
and after Alexander had died Craterus and Antipater joined forces to defeat the
rebellious Greeks in the Lamian War (Arr. VII. 12. iv–lacuna, Diod. Sic. XVII.
118. i, XVIII. 4. i, 12. i, 49. iv, Curt. X. vii. 9, x. 14–15, Just. XII. 14. iii, Plut.
49. xiv–xv, 68. iv–v, 74. ii–vii, Livy VIII. 24. xvii).
Diodorus links with Alexander’s punishment of disobedient ofﬁcials an order
to the satraps to disband their mercenary armies (as Artaxerxes had ordered in
359/8: cf. pp. 224, 323). The intention cannot have been to remove all troops
from the provinces; there is a suggestion that Alexander may have wanted to
recruit the men into his own army; but the order created a ﬂood of unemployed
soldiers, many of whom found their way to Taenarum in Laconia (Diod. Sic.
XVII. 106. ii–iii, 111. i, cf. Paus. I. 25. v,VIII. 52. v: see p. 343). Another order
issued in 324 was that the Greek cities were to take back their exiles (Diod. Sic.
XVII. 109. i, XVIII. 8. ii–vii, Curt. X. ii. 4–7, Just. XIII. 5. ii–v): exile was one
factor which led men to take up mercenary service, and the order may have been
intended to weaken the force taken by Harpalus and/or the force building up at
Taenarum (which Harpalus’ men joined). Athens was worried, because it had
occupied Samos since 365 (cf. pp. 223, 236–7, and see IG XII. vi 17 = R&O 90.
B ~ Harding 127); probably the order was a breach of the principle of stability
underlying the League of Corinth (thus Curtius: cf. p. 319), and probably
Alexander had long since ceased to care about the League’s rules. Of inscrip-
tions concerning the return of exiles, R&O 85 (B = IG XII. ii 6 ~ Harding 113),
from Mytilene, is better associated with local arrangements in the 330’s, but Tod
202 = R&O 101 ~ Harding 122, concerning Tegea, is rightly dated to 324–323.
Hephaestion, joint hipparch with Clitus and then one of the many hipparchs,
but apparently not a particularly good military commander, was the man closest
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
373

to Alexander (Curt. III. xii. 16). Probably they were lovers: at Troy in 334 he
played Patroclus to Alexander’s Achilles (Arr. I. 12. i); after Issus Darius’ mother
is said to have mistaken him for Alexander (Arr. II. 12. vi–viii, Diod. Sic. XVII.
37. v–vi, Curt. III. xii. 16–17). In 324 he became second in command, being
described as ‘chiliarch [the term used by Greeks for the Persians’ grand vizier:
cf. Diod. Sic. XVIII. 48. iv] in charge of the companion cavalry’; his hipparchy
was called his chiliarchy, and it was still named after him after his death (Arr.
VII. 14. x). No one really succeeded him, but technically his position was taken
by Perdiccas (Diod. Sic. XVII. 110. viii, XVIII. 3. iv, Plut. Eum. 1. v, Arr. Succ.
FGrH 156 F 1. 3). Hephaestion was on bad terms with the other leading men:
as a supporter of Alexander’s orientalising tendencies he clashed with those who
disapproved, Craterus (Plut. 47. ix–xii, cf. Diod. Sic. XVII. 114. i) and Callis-
thenes (cf. Plut. 53. i); he quarrelled also with Eumenes (Plut. Eum. 2, cf. Arr.
VII. 13. i, 14. ix).
Eumenes, a Greek from Cardia, had been Philip’s secretary and became
Alexander’s (Nep. XVIII. Eum. 1. v–vi, 13. i, Plut. Eum. 1. iv, Arr. V. 24. vi,
VII. 4. vi); after Hephaestion’s death he was assiduous in proposing honours
(Arr. VII. 14. ix), and when Perdiccas was promoted he took over Perdiccas’
hipparchy (Nep. XVIII. Eum. 1. vi, Plut. Eum. 1. v). Eumenes may well be the
compiler of the diary whose purpose was to stress the court’s heavy drinking
and the responsibility of that for the deaths of Hephaestion and Alexander (cf.
pp. 349, 351, 357).
Aims and Ideals
Alexander was a Macedonian given a Greek education. His mother Olympias
claimed to be descended from Achilles (Diod. Sic. XVII. 1. v, Plut. 2. i, cf. Arr.
I. 11. viii); Lysimachus, one of his tutors, taught him to think of himself as
Achilles (Plut. 5. viii); he read the Iliad with Aristotle, and treasured that copy
of the text (Plut. 8. ii, 26. i–ii); he and Hephaestion were compared with Achilles
and Patroclus (cf. above) – and in 335 Demosthenes called him Margites, the
simpleton of a Greek epic (Aesch. III. Ctesiphon 160, Marsyas FGrH 135 F 3).
For the Macedonians the war against Persia was a war of conquest, but Philip
had already for the sake of the League of Corinth adopted the motif of a war
of revenge for Persia’s ﬁfth-century invasion of Greece (cf. Polyb. III. 6. ix–xiv:
see p. 320). Like Agesilaus before him (cf. p. 208), Alexander represented the
enmity of Greece and Persia as a continuation of that between Greece and Troy,
and he emphasised this in his sacriﬁces at the crossing of the Hellespont and
in his visit to Troy. It was good propaganda, and he probably believed it himself.
But by 330 the object of the Greek war of revenge had been achieved: Darius
had been defeated, and Alexander controlled the centre of the empire; Perse-
polis had been destroyed – whether as a deliberate act of policy, opposed by
Parmenio (Arr. III. 18. xi–xii), or as the culmination of a drunken revel, incited
by Ptolemy’s future mistress Thais and afterwards regretted (Diod. Sic. XVII.
374
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

72, Curt.V. vii. 3–11, Plut. 38; and regretted later in Arr.VI. 30. i).The Greeks
who had come as allies were discharged (at Ecbatana, Arr. III. 19. v; after
Darius’ death, Diod. Sic. XVII. 74. iii, Curt. VI. ii. 7). What was Alexander to
do after that? The pursuit of Darius supplied an immediate aim as long as he
lived; the pursuit of Bessus after that. And then – by the time he reached the
Indus Alexander is unlikely to have believed that the eastern ocean was as near
as is claimed in Arr.V. 26. i, Diod. Sic. XVII. 89. v, Curt. IX. i. 3, ii. 26–8, Just.
XII. 7. iv; but he may well have believed that it was within reach and that he
could conquer the whole of Asia. Our sources represent him as a man for whom
beyond each challenge there arose another, a man driven by powerful impulses
to see what others had not seen, to outdo the exploits of previous heroes and
men.The expression, ‘A strong desire (pothos, in Latin cupido) seized him’, used
frequently of Alexander (e.g. Arr. I. 3. v, II. 3. i, Curt. III. i. 16, Just. XI. 7. iv),
is applied often enough to others too in classical literature, and there is no
reason to think that this particular expression originated with him or referred
to any particular drive which affected him distinctively, but it certainly appears
true to the picture of his character which we are given.
From 330 onwards Alexander increasingly represented himself as a legiti-
mate king – though as ‘King of Asia’ (Plut. 34. i, cf. earlier Diod. Sic. XVII. 17.
ii, Arr. II. 14. viii–ix) he was not directly the continuator of the Persian Kingdom
and its titles but the creator of something new. He was appointing Persians as
satraps of the central provinces, and was to enlist oriental troops, at ﬁrst in se-
parate units and eventually in the same units as Europeans; he gave Darius a
royal funeral (Arr. III. 22. vi, Plut. 43. vii), and punished Bessus for killing the
King (Arr. III. 30. iv–v, IV. 7. iii–iv, Diod. Sic. XVII. 83. ix, Curt.VII. v. 36–43,
x. 10, Just. XII. 5. x–xi, Plut. 43. vi). Worryingly for the Greeks and Macedo-
nians, he adopted elements of Persian costume and customs, though not the
precise dress and ceremonies of the Great King; he tried to extend the practice
of proskynesis to his European followers (cf. p. 380); he married Roxana in 327,
and he and his courtiers took Persian wives in 324; he showed a particular
respect for the man who had made Persia great, Cyrus II (e.g. Arr.VI. 29. iv–xi,
Curt. X. i. 30–5, Plut. 69. iii–v). To the disgust of his traditionally minded fol-
lowers, Alexander was becoming an oriental monarch (Arr. IV. 7. iv, 9. ix, Diod.
Sic. XVII. 77. iv–vii, Curt. VI. vi. 1–11, Just. XII. 3. viii–xii, Plut. 45. i–iv). On
the other hand, he was far from gaining the approval of the Persians: he did not
observe the cult of Ahura Mazda and the other ceremonies of the Achaemenid
Kings or use their titles; the great capital cities were simply places to be gar-
risoned and/or looted; Iranian satraps with European ofﬁcers set beside them
are as likely to have felt humiliated as honoured.
How did Alexander perceive the various peoples who became subject to him
in his kingdom of Asia? There are four texts on the basis of which it has been
claimed that Alexander was the ﬁrst person to conceive of the unity of mankind,
but the claim does not appear justiﬁed. Plut. 27. x–xi (cf. his Sayings of Kings
and Commanders 180 D) ends a chapter on Alexander’s visit to the oracle of
Ammon (cf. p. 378) with a conversation between Alexander and the suspiciously
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
375

named and otherwise unattested philosopher Psammon: Alexander ‘was greatly
pleased at what was said, that all men are under the kingship of God . . . but
even more Alexander expressed a more philosophical opinion about this, saying
that God is the common father of all men but makes the best particularly his
own’. This is surely non-egalitarian: what it stresses is that Alexander thought
some of God’s sons are more equal than others. Non-egalitarian again is
Arrian’s account of the banquet of reconciliation at Opis in 324, after Alexan-
der had quelled the mutiny of the veterans (VII. 11. viii–ix): there was a great
feast, attended by some 9,000 men;
he was seated and they were all seated; around him the Macedonians, next in
order to them the Persians; after them those of the other peoples who had prece-
dence in rank or for any other quality; and he and those around him [presumably
only those nearest to him] drank from the same bowl and made the same liba-
tions . . . and he prayed for various beneﬁts including concord and partnership in
rule for the Macedonians and the Persians.
We may compare Xerxes’ council of war at Salamis in 480 (Hdt. VIII. 67.
ii). This is hierarchical; it does not make a rigid distinction between
Greeks/Macedonians and barbarians; but otherwise the most that can be said
is that it recognises two master races rather than one (cf. Alexander’s Mace-
donian and Persian bodyguard: Phylarchus FGrH 81 F 4, Polyaenus Strat. IV.
3. xxiv, Ael. V.H. IX. 3).
Alexander’s Greek education will have taught him to make a rigid distinc-
tion between Greeks and barbarians. Isocrates claimed that the Athenians were
superior to other Greeks as Greeks to barbarians and human beings to animals
(XV. Antid. 293), and advised Philip to beneﬁt the Greeks, be king of the Mace-
donians and rule over the barbarians (V. Philip 154). Aristotle regarded bar-
barians as innately inferior to Greeks and ﬁt to be slaves (Pol. I. 1252 A 24–B
27; III. 1285 A 14–22, VII. 1327 B 18–38 distinguishes between the spirited
barbarians of Europe and the submissive barbarians of Asia). In De Alex. Fort.
i, after a chapter on Alexander’s (doubtful: cf. p. 369) achievement in giving
the crude barbarians the beneﬁts of Greek civilisation, Plutarch continues (329
A–D): Zeno [active from the end of the fourth century, founder of the Stoic
school] sketched the dream of the unity of mankind, but Alexander
provided the fact for the theory: for he did not, as Aristotle had advised him,
behave as a leader to the Greeks and a master to the barbarians, caring for the
Greeks as his friends and kindred but bearing down on the barbarians as animals
and plants [there is no conﬁrmation that Aristotle went that far] . . . but thought
he had come from God as a common uniter and reconciler of them all . . . bring-
ing together from all sides as if he were mixing in a loving-cup their lives, their
customs, their marriages and their ways of life. [In other respects there should be
no difference between them, but] Greeks should be distinguished by goodness and
barbarians by badness.
376
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

A slightly different slant is found in Strabo. 66. I. iv. 9:
Eratosthenes [head of the library at Alexandria at the end of the third century]
did not approve of those who divided the whole mass of men into Greeks and
barbarians, and those who advised Alexander to treat the Greeks as friends and
the barbarians as enemies. He said it was better to base the distinction on good-
ness and badness; for many of the Greeks are bad and many of the barbarians are
civilised. . . . So Alexander, ignoring the advice, was able to accept and beneﬁt as
many men as were reputable.
Experience will indeed have shown Alexander that many of the Greeks were
bad and many of the barbarians were civilised, and he no doubt came to appre-
ciate aspects of Persian court life. He needed the cooperation of the Persian
aristocracy, and there were advantages to be gained from intermarriage (no
European women were married to Asiatic men; of the European men, only
Peucestas, made satrap of Persis in 324, took to Persian ways with enthusiasm
[Arr. VI. 30. ii–iii], and only Seleucus made a successful and lasting marriage
[to Spitamenes’ daughter Apame: Arr.VII. 4. vi]). Alexander’s empire provided
a context in which doctrines of the brotherhood of man could develop, as the
world of the Greek states did not, but there is no evidence that Alexander
believed in a mixed culture or that he philosophised about what he was doing.
Plutarch made the essential point when he said in De Alex. Fort. i that Alexan-
der provided the fact for the [later] theory.
At the end of his reign the Greeks were voting divine honours to Alexander.
For a while it was believed by modern scholars that the Greeks made clear-cut
distinctions between gods, heroes and human beings, and that if Alexander was
indeed worshipped as a god in his lifetime that was startlingly new; but it is
now coming to be seen that Alexander’s deiﬁcation was the natural culmina-
tion of a century or more of development. Descent from a god or hero was
often claimed by kings and aristocrats (Alexander as a Temenid was descended
from Heracles, and through Olympias was descended from Achilles), and com-
parison with a god of those who had outstanding achievements was a common
literary conceit. Isocrates writing to Philip referred to those who had been
judged demigods for their campaigns against the barbarians (V. Philip 137), and
in the Second Letter to Philip said that if he conquered the barbarians nothing
would be left for him but to become a god (Ep. III. Phil. ii. 5: authenticity dis-
puted). Aristotle thought that in an imperfect world a plurality of men was
better than one, but if one man really did surpass the others he would be like
a god among men and would deserve total obedience (Pol. III. 1284 A 3–11,
1288 A 8–9, cf.VII. 1332 B 16–22). Callisthenes, who was to refuse to perform
literal proskynesis to Alexander (cf. p. 380), was happy to write of him as son of
Zeus, and of the waves of the sea as performing proskynesis to him (FGrH 124
FF 14, 31 – echoing Xen. Anab. I. iv. 18, of Cyrus in 401).
But there is more to it than that. While it was common for founders and
benefactors of cities to be venerated as heroes after their death, as Brasidas was
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
377

by Amphipolis after 422, it appears that before then the original founder,
Hagnon, had been venerated during his lifetime (Thuc. V. 11. i: cf. p. 69).
Outside that context, a hero cult is already attested for the boxer Euthymus of
Locri in the mid ﬁfth century (Pliny H.N.VII. 152, Paus.VI. 6. iv–xi, cf. Strabo
255.VI. i. 5, Ael. V.H. VIII. 18). Lysander, who won the Peloponnesian War for
Sparta, was shown being crowned by Poseidon in the ‘navarchs dedication’ at
Delphi, and at Samos there were games named after him and other honours
normally reserved for gods – while Agesilaus is said to have refused divine
honours in Thasos (cf. pp. 152, 205–6). In Sicily Dion, when he had at last got
control of all of Syracuse from Dionysius II and his forces, is said to have been
voted a hero’s honours (cf. p. 288); and at the other end of the Greek world
Clearchus, tyrant of Heraclea Pontica (on the south coast of the Black Sea)
from 364/3 to 353/2, to have received proskynesis and ‘the honours of the
Olympians’ (Suda k 1714 KlarcoV). The most relevant precedents are pro-
vided by Philip, who if he did not quite become a god came very near to it.
Early in his reign Crenides was named Philippi after him, and an inscription
attests temene of Philip there, a word which could denote either ‘properties’ of
Philip or ‘sanctuaries’ dedicated to him (SEG xxxviii 658 with xlviii 708, xlix
768; cf. p. 300). After Chaeronea the Philippeum at Olympia was built, to house
statues of himself and his family (Paus.V. 20. ix). At Ephesus there was a statue
of Philip in the temple of Artemis (Arr. I. 17. xi); the people of Eresus on Lesbos
had a cult of Zeus Philippios (IG xii. 2 526 = R&O 83. g. front = Harding 112.
B. 4–5). As part of the celebration of his daughter Cleopatra’s wedding in 336
a statue of Philip was paraded with the statues of the twelve Olympian gods
(Diod. Sic. XVI. 92. v, cf. 95. i).
What of Alexander? When Olympias had fallen out with Philip, it suited her
to claim that Alexander’s true father was not Philip but Zeus (Plut. 2–3. iv). It
was reported by Callisthenes (so well before the end of Alexander’s life) that
the sanctuary of Branchidae (Didyma) near Miletus, sacked by the Persians
after the Ionian Revolt at the beginning of the ﬁfth century, resumed operation
and sent oracles to Alexander in Egypt about his birth from Zeus (FGrH 124
F 14. a), and Arrian states that Alexander went to the oracle of Ammon (identi-
ﬁed by the Greeks with Zeus) to ﬁnd out about his dual paternity (Zeus and
Philip, as Heracles was son of Zeus and of Amphitryon) (III. 3. i–ii, cf.VII. 29.
iii). So before Alexander went to the oracle, he was already beginning to think
that he had a divine father. As pharaoh of Egypt he had become a descendant
(but not son) of Ammon ex ofﬁcio; if the priest did greet him as son of
Ammon/Zeus (pai Dios, but Plutarch suggests that this might have been a mis-
interpretation of paidion, ‘boy’), he may have meant no more than that. The
consultation was private; Alexander was said to be pleased; and he said he would
tell Olympias when he next saw her, which he never did. Later, at the mouth
of the Indus, he was to make sacriﬁces said to be ordered by Ammon (Arr.VI.
19. iv, cf. Ind. 18. xi); the claim of Curtius and Justin that his followers were
told to pay him divine honours looks like later embroidery (Arr. III. 3–4, Diod.
Sic. XVII. 49–51, Curt. IV. vii. 5–30, Just. XI. 11. ii–xii, Plut. 26. x–27. ix).
378
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

Ill. 15
Treasury relief at Persepolis, showing the King receiving proskynesis. © The Oriental Institute Museum, University of Chicago

In 327 Alexander tried to extend the Persian practice of proskynesis – techni-
cally blowing a kiss (cf. ill. 15), which might be accompanied by a bow or full
prostration – to his European followers. It was a Persian social custom to offer
proskynesis to a superior and to kiss an equal, as those who had read Herodotus
would have known (I. 134. i, combining proskynesis with prospipton, ‘falling
down’); Aristotle regarded it as a barbarian form of honour (Rhet. I. 1361 A
24–7). The Persian King was not regarded as a god, and those who performed
proskynesis did not regard the objects of it as gods. Nevertheless some Greeks
may have interpreted it in this way (cf. Isoc. IV. Paneg. 151); they certainly
thought it a gesture appropriate only to gods and degrading if performed to
human beings (Xen. An. III. ii. 13). There are two accounts of Alexander and
proskynesis. One involves a debate among the intellectuals, in which Callisthenes
expressed opposition, the Macedonians applauded him and Alexander agreed
to abandon the idea (Arr. IV. 10. v–12. i, Curt. VIII. v. 5–21). The other is a
story of a drinking party at which the guests performed proskynesis and Alexan-
der responded with a kiss, but Callisthenes while Alexander was not watching
refused to perform, and Alexander when told of it refused him his kiss (Arr. IV.
12. ii–v, Just. XII. 7. i–iii, Plut. 54. iv–vi from the chamberlain Chares). It is
unlikely that both are true, and the experiment is more probable than the
debate. Curtius, at least, thought that Alexander was claiming divine honours;
some modern scholars have supposed that he merely wanted to unify court
ceremonial and, since he was in Asia, to follow the Asiatic model. It is not credi-
ble that Alexander thought those who performed proskynesis were worshipping
him as a god; but he was increasingly seeing himself as somebody special and
as the son of Zeus; probably the east was going to his head and he liked being
reverenced in that way, and to that extent the revulsion of the Macedonians and
Greeks was justiﬁed.
In 323 the oracle of Ammon pronounced that the dead Hephaestion was to
be venerated as a hero (Arr. VII. 23. vi, cf. 14. vii, Plut. 72. iii; worshipped as
a god Diod. Sic. XVII. 115. vi, Just. XII. 12. xii, cf. Lucian Calumny 17); and
‘at this point embassies came from Greece, and their envoys were crowned
themselves and came up to Alexander and crowned him with gold crowns,
indeed like sacred envoys coming to honour a god’ (Arr. VII. 23. ii). Decisions
are attributed to various Greek states: to Sparta, laconically, ‘Since Alexander
wants to be a god, let him be a god’ (Plut. Spartan Sayings 219 E, Ael. V.H. II.
19, the only suggestion that the initiative was Alexander’s). In Athens Demades
proposed the recognition of Alexander as a thirteenth god; Demosthenes and
Lycurgus are both said to have opposed it, but in 324/3 Demosthenes, perhaps
sarcastically, granted that ‘Alexander could be the son of Zeus and of Poseidon
too if he liked’ (Ael. V.H. V. 12;Timaeus ap. Polyb. XII. 12b. iii, [Plut.] X Orat.
842 D; Hyp. V. Demosthenes col. 31, cf. Din. I. Demosthenes 94); Hyperides in
his Funeral Oration of 323/2 complained in general terms of divine and heroic
honours paid to men (VI. Epitaph. 20–1). But Curt. X. v. 11 says the Mace-
donians refused, and the Suda’s entry on Antipater says that he was opposed
(Suda a 2703 AntpatroV).
380
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

There is enough smoke for us to infer a ﬁre: that the Greeks paid divine
honours to Alexander at the end of his reign is likely. But it is less likely that
they did so at his request – and we should reject the suggestion that, since he
wanted to order the Greek states to take back their exiles but had no right to
do so (cf. p. 373), he decided to become a god so that Alexander the god would
order what Alexander the man could not: he was past caring about his legal
rights, and although Greek states consulted oracles they did not receive and
obey divine commands. There is no suggestion that any orientals, for most of
whom it would indeed have been blasphemous, were called on to worship him
as a god or did so, beyond the claim that since the (not yet conquered) Arabs
had only two gods Alexander thought they should recognise him as a third (Arr.
VII. 20. i, Strabo 741. XVI. i. 11). In a Greek context, after what had gone
before, admiration or ﬂattery would suggest that divine honours were a ﬁtting
tribute to the man who had so spectacularly surpassed the achievements of his
predecessors, and it is likely that Alexander enjoyed this tribute to his achieve-
ments without any sense of blasphemy. Divine honours for rulers were to
become standard in the hellenistic period, ﬁrst attested for Antigonus at Scepsis
(OGIS 6).
Alexander died in 323, shortly before his 33rd birthday. What might he 
have done if he had not died then? Arrian credits him in Bactria with intend-
ing to make an expedition from the Bosporus into the Black Sea, and at the
Hyphasis with intending to circumnavigate Africa (IV. 15. v–vi; V. 26. i–ii,
cf. Plut. 68. i [later context]). In 323 he ordered an exploration of the 
Caspian, and he began preparations for an expedition to Arabia, to which he
had already sent explorers (VII. 16. i–iv;VII. 19. iii–20. x, Strabo 766. XVI. iii.
3, 778. XVI. iv. 19). There are other, less reliable, hints of further territorial
ambitions (Arr. IV. 7. v, VII. 1. i–iv; Curt. X. i. 17–19 [the western plan to be
mentioned below]).
After his death, at a conference in Babylon Perdiccas produced plans said to
have been found among Alexander’s papers, and persuaded the army to disavow
all except the completion of Hephaestion’s funeral monument, as ‘over-
ambitious and hard to achieve’. Diodorus gives as the chief of these: to build
1,000 ships larger than triremes, and to conquer the west by travelling along
the north African coast via Carthage to the Straits of Gibraltar, crossing into
Spain and returning through Europe, building harbours as he went; to build six
temples costing 1,000 talents each; to arrange mass transportations of popula-
tion between Europe and Asia, producing intermarriage and concord; to build
a great pyramid to Philip (XVII. 4. i–vi). Alexander is no more likely than
Lysander (cf. p. 205) to have made written notes of his plans for the future,
but, whether authentic or not, with the possible exception of large-scale inter-
marriage and concord the plans are in character and credible as plans. But it
is important that they were produced in order to be rejected, as after Julius
Caesar’s death it was decided – but not adhered to – that no decree of his should
be published (Cic. Phil. i. 3, cf. Phil. ii. 91, Dio Cass. XLIV. 53. iv, cf. XLV. 23.
vii): none of Alexander’s generals was to be able to steal a march on the others
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
381

by claiming, ‘We must do X because Alexander told me that he intended to do
X’.
At any rate, it seems that when Alexander thought of the future he thought
in terms of further conquests and magniﬁcent monuments. Yet large parts of
the empire he had already conquered were still unpaciﬁed, and Greece was on
the point of rebellion: his existing empire needed years of consolidation and
careful administration, as according to Plutarch the Roman emperor Augustus
had remarked (Roman Sayings 207 D). There is no indication that Alexander
intended to turn to that, or that he had given any thought to a world which no
longer contained himself.
Alexander had conquered the Persian empire; he had created a new king-
ship, and in his army he had done something to mingle Europeans and 
Asiatics; but he had not to a signiﬁcant extent had either a policy of fusion or
a policy of spreading Greek civilisation, and so it is hard to accept the picture
of Alexander the dreamer painted by W. W. Tarn in the ﬁrst half of the twenti-
eth century. He had provoked, by his sympathetic reception of oriental ways,
and had dealt with opposition from leading Macedonians and Greeks, but on
the whole he had reacted impulsively as crises occurred, and it is equally hard
to accept the picture of Alexander the schemer painted by E. Badian in the
second half of the twentieth century. He was a military genius, clever in adapt-
ing to circumstances and inspiring as a leader of his own men, as military his-
torians have long recognised; but (although on a smaller scale Greeks had been
equally drastic in their treatment of defeated enemies) his military successes
involved killing enemies on a scale not normally encountered in Greek and
Macedonian warfare, as A. B. Bosworth has recently emphasised. He was a
pragmatic administrator but not a patient organiser. Personally, he was a man
who was eager to be up and doing, to discover new places and outdo the
achievements of others; hard-living, like all the Macedonian nobility; impulsive
rather than deliberate; and, especially towards the end, something of a fanatic.
And in June 323 he died, with no obvious heir.
NOTE ON FURTHER READING
For general books on Alexander see the note at the end of chapter 24. A list of studies
of particular episodes and problems would be enormous, and I limit myself largely to
the more widely ranging works and to works which I follow on controversial matters.
Fuller, The Generalship of Alexander the Great, is a study by a professional soldier.
Engels, Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army, addresses impor-
tant questions but is vitiated by the assumption that Alexander would not have used
waggons. On military matters see also A. R. Burn, ‘The Generalship of Alexander’,
G&R2 xii 1965, 140–54; B. S. Strauss, ‘Alexander:The Military Campaign’, in Roisman
(ed.), Brill’s Companion to Alexander the Great, ch. 5. Asthetairoi are seen as the men from
Upper Macedonia by A. B. Bosworth, ‘sqtairoi’, CQ2 xxiii 1973, 245–53; as distin-
382
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS

guished regiments by [Hammond and] Grifﬁth, History of Macedonia, ii. 709–13. The
view of the battle of the Granicus taken here was advanced by Green, Alexander of
Macedon, 489–512 – but withdrawn in the 1991 reissue of the book, p. xiv, comment-
ing only that recent studies had convinced him that it was ‘ﬂat wrong’. Darius’ strategy
for resisting Alexander is discussed by E. E. Garvin, ‘Darius III and Homeland Defense’,
in Heckel and Tritle (eds.), Crossroads of History:The Age of Alexander, ch. 5.
On administration see E. Badian, ‘The Administration of the Empire’, G&R2 xii 1965,
166–82, and ‘Alexander the Great and the Greeks of Asia’, in Ancient Society and Insti-
tutions . . . V. Ehrenberg, 37–69; W. E. Higgins, ‘Aspects of Alexander’s Imperial Admin-
istration’, Ath.2 lviii 1980, 129–52. An authoritatively minimalising view of Alexander’s
foundations of cities is given by Fraser, Cities of Alexander the Great.
Berve, Das Alexanderreich, ii, collects and discusses all the evidence for Alexander’s
subordinates; the most important are treated also by Heckel, The Marshals of Alexan-
der’s Empire; and see also W. Heckel, ‘King and “Companions”: Observations on the
Nature of Power in the Reign of Alexander’, in Brill’s Companion to Alexander the Great
(above), ch. 8. The view, here rejected, of Alexander as neurotically seeking to escape
from the clutches of men who might be too powerful for him was advanced by E. Badian
in several detailed studies and in his ‘Alexander the Great and the Loneliness of Power’,
AUMLA xvii May 1962, 80–91 = his Studies in Greek and Roman History, 192–205;
he has returned to the theme in ‘Conspiracies’, in Bosworth and Baynham (eds.),
Alexander the Great in Fact and Fiction, ch. 3.That Harpalus’ ‘ﬁrst exile’ was a cover for
a mission to spy on the Greeks was suggested by Lane Fox, Alexander the Great, 164
with 519, 411 with 542; Green, Alexander of Macedon (1974 Penguin edition), 222–3
with 538 n. 55, 281.
On Alexander as King of Asia see E. Fredericksmeyer, ‘Alexander the Great and the
Kingship of Asia’, in Alexander the Great in Fact and Fiction (above), ch. 5; M. Brosius,
‘Alexander and the Persians’, in Brill’s Companion to Alexander the Great (above), ch. 7.
That Alexander believed in the ‘brotherhood of man’ was claimed by W. W. Tarn,
‘Alexander the Great and the Unity of Mankind’, PBA xix 1933, 123–66 = Grifﬁth
(ed.), Alexander the Great: The Main Problems, ch. 12, and his Alexander the Great, ii.
399–499 app. 25; and rebutted by E. Badian, ‘Alexander the Great and the Unity of
Mankind’, Hist. vii 1958, 425–44 = Alexander the Great:The Main Problems, ch. 13.
A minimalising view of Alexander’s deiﬁcation was taken by J. P.V. D. Balsdon, ‘The
“Divinity” of Alexander’, Hist. i 1950, 363–88 = Alexander the Great:The Main Problems
(above), ch. 9; his divinity is taken more seriously by E. Fredericksmeyer, ‘Alexander’s
Religion and Divinity’, in Brill’s Companion to Alexander the Great (above), ch. 10. On
Euthymus of Locri see B. Currie, ‘Euthymos of Locri: A Case Study in Heroization in
the Classical Period’, JHS cxxii 2002, 24–44.
That Alexander’s posthumous plans were produced in order to be rejected is stressed
by E. Badian, ‘A King’s Notebooks’, HSCP lxxii 1967, 183–204.
ALEXANDER THE GREAT: TOPICS
383

We began in the aftermath of the Greeks’ defeat of the invading Persians in
480–479. This was to be a deﬁning episode for classical Greece, producing a
greater and more self-conscious Greek unity than had been achieved before,
and identifying the Persians (whose empire, despite the failure of this attempt
to expand into mainland Greece, was in other respects as strong as ever) as the
national enemy par excellence. Sparta, the strongest Greek state hitherto and the
leader in the resistance to Persia, for a variety of reasons was not prepared to
continue, so those who did want to continue the war against Persia were 
organised in the Delian League under the leadership of Athens.
In the second quarter of the ﬁfth century Athens drove the Persians back
from the Aegean as far as seemed worthwhile, until c.449 regular ﬁghting
against Persia was discontinued. During and after this process the Delian
League was increasingly turned into an Athenian empire, in which the member
states were made subordinate to Athens as Greek states had never before been
made subordinate to a dominant state. Internally Athens took the ﬁnal steps
from a broadly based constitution to a democracy, in which basic political rights
were extended to all free men of Athenian parentage, and the importance of
the navy, whose ships were rowed by the poorer citizens, and of the empire
meant that these rights were worth having and were proudly exercised. As
democracy came to be distinguished from oligarchy, some other Greeks decided
that they did not prefer democracy, and as Athens came to act as a champion
of democracy in the Greek world Sparta, at the head of the Peloponnesian
League, came to act as a champion of oligarchy. In this same period Athens
came to be the economic centre of the Greek world, as the hub around which
Aegean trade revolved, and the intellectual centre of the Greek world, with a
large proportion of the best literature written by Athenians or by others living
in Athens, and a large proportion of the best art and architecture produced for
or in Athens.
26
Epilogue

Sparta had at ﬁrst been unworried by the Delian League, but worries began
as after c.460 Athens’ power was extended into mainland Greece. Rebellions in
447–446 seemed to have reversed the growth of Athens, and the Thirty Years’
Peace of 446/5 tried to establish a balance of power between an Athenian bloc
based on the Aegean and a Spartan bloc based on the mainland. However,
Athens’ ambitions were unchecked, and it became clear that the growing power
of Athens would not be compatible with the continuing power of Sparta. In the
430’s Athens pursued risky policies which provoked, and may well have been
intended to provoke, a confrontation.
In the Peloponnesian War, begun in 431, apparently but unsatisfactorily 
concluded in 421 and ﬁnally ended in 404, Sparta set out to break the power
of Athens and ‘liberate the Greeks’. Athens had the greater resources, and was
largely invulnerable to what the mainland Greeks on their own could do to it;
but Athens’ resources were squandered in a misguided attempt to conquer Sicily
in 415–413. Since the beginning of the war Sparta had been trying to gain the
support of Persia with its vast resources, and Athens had been trying at least to
prevent that situation from coming to pass; after 413 Sparta saw a possibility
of victory and was prepared to pay Persia’s price, that the Greeks of Asia Minor
should not after all be liberated but should be handed back to Persia. That
enabled Sparta to keep going until Athens’ resources were exhausted, and in
404 Athens had to acknowledge defeat and the Delian League was broken up.
Athens was made subordinate to Sparta, though Sparta’s allies would have
liked to see it destroyed. Elsewhere Sparta began to follow Athens’ imperial
example, both among its allies and among states ‘liberated’ from Athens. As for
the Asiatic Greeks, Sparta may before the end of the war have negotiated suc-
cessfully for something less than total abandonment; in the event, when in 400
Persia laid claim to the Greek cities of Asia Minor, they appealed to Sparta and
Sparta began ﬁghting against Persia on their behalf. In Greece, with ﬁnancial
encouragement from Persia, a combination of Athens and Sparta’s former allies
began ﬁghting against Sparta in the Corinthian War. In the Aegean and Asia
Minor a navy commanded by an Athenian for a Persian satrap fought against
Sparta, and paradoxically was represented as ﬁghting for the freedom of the
Greeks. But as the Spartans made no headway they turned to diplomacy, and
in 387/6 the King’s Peace or Peace of Antalcidas returned the Greeks of Asia
Minor to Persia in exchange for a ruling that elsewhere all cities and islands
were to be autonomous.
Sparta, which had obtained the treaty from Persia, proceeded to interpret it
to suit its own interests, culminating in the occupation by Spartan troops of the
major city of Thebes. In 379/8 Thebes was liberated with the support of 
Athens, and Athens then founded the Second Athenian League, aiming to
defend the Greeks against Spartan imperialism and promising not to repeat the
imperial practices of the Delian League. In 371 at Leuctra Sparta was over-
whelmingly defeated by a Thebes which was already too strong for Athens’
comfort, and within a few years Messenia had been liberated from Sparta and
the Peloponnesian League had broken up. In the 360’s, on the mainland Athens
EPILOGUE
385

found it convenient to support Sparta against Thebes, while in the Aegean it
could ﬁnd nothing to do with the League except try to recover ﬁfth-century
possessions; and Thebes persuaded Persia that it was now the state most worthy
of support, and set out to break Athens as it had broken Sparta.
Macedon, a marginally Greek kingdom in the north, had since the begin-
ning of the ﬁfth century impinged on the southern Greeks, but as an entity for
them to exploit rather than one capable of exploiting them. But in 359 it gained
in Philip II a king who was able to pull the country together, and to satisfy his
ambitions by a clever combination of ﬁghting and diplomacy. Between 356 and
346 he took advantage of the Third Sacred War, provoked by the attempts of
the Thebans to use the sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi as a vehicle for Theban
policies, to gain for himself a recognised position in Greece; and the Fourth
Sacred War of 340–338 ended with his defeating a combination of Athens and
Thebes, and creating the League of Corinth as a means of dressing his control
of Greece in familiar and (to all but the most ambitious states) unworrying
clothes.
Since the late ﬁfth century, and particularly after the King’s Peace, there had
been those who complained that the Greeks had been at their best when united
against the Persians, and that they ought to unite against the Persians once more
rather than quarrel amongst themselves. After forming the League of Corinth,
Philip planned to undertake a war against Persia at the head of the Greeks. He
was assassinated in 336, but his son Alexander the Great undertook that war
and conquered the whole of the Persian empire. But Alexander died in 323,
contemplating further conquests rather than consolidation, and leaving no
obvious heir.
What we call the hellenistic period, between Alexander’s death and the
Roman conquest, began as Alexander’s generals started competing, at ﬁrst in
theory on behalf of possible heirs, and with the aim of gaining possession of
the whole empire, later to carve out separate dominions for themselves. In
306–305 the various claimants started calling themselves kings; by the 270’s
three major kingdoms had been established, the Antigonids in Macedon, the
Ptolemies in Egypt and the Seleucids in the near east. The Antigonids and the
Ptolemies were both interested in Greece, the Ptolemies and the Seleucids were
both interested in Asia Minor and the Levant.The Greek cities formed leagues
and manoeuvred between the kings very much as in the past they had formed
leagues and manoeuvred between the leading cities; in Asia Minor smaller king-
doms emerged, in particular that of the Attalids of Pergamum. The eastern
provinces of the empire had been abandoned by Seleucus to Chandragupta,
king of the Indian peninsula, in exchange for 500 elephants.
The rulers were Greek and Macedonian, and the whole area of the succes-
sors’ kingdoms came to form an extended Greek world. Greek cities of a kind
were founded, especially in Asia; but of course outside Europe there were large
bodies of non-European subject peoples. The Romans were prompted to take
a military interest in Greece by the activities of the kings of Epirus towards the
middle of the third century and by the alliance between Hannibal of Carthage
386
EPILOGUE

and Philip V of Macedon at the end of the century; and it is because the Greek
world had been extended in this way that, once they had become involved, the
Romans did not stop until they had taken over all of these kingdoms, ending
with Egypt in 30 after the death of Cleopatra VII. And, among other conse-
quences of the development which began with Alexander’s conquests, it is
because the near east had become part of the Greek world and then part of the
Roman world that Christianity was to spread westwards into that Graeco-
Roman world rather than eastwards into Asia.
EPILOGUE
387

The following list gives publication details of books mentioned in the Note on Further
Reading at the end of each chapter; Festschriften are listed under the name of the hon-
orand, after books by the honorand; where a book has different publishers in the UK
and the USA, the UK publisher is named ﬁrst.
Adams,W. L. and Borza, E. N. (eds.), Philip II, Alexander the Great and the Macedonian
Heritage. Washington, DC: University Press of America, 1982.
Atkinson, J. E. Commentary on Q. Curtius Rufus’ Historiae Alexandri Magni. Amsterdam:
Gieben, 1980/Hakkert, 1994–
.
Badian, E. Studies in Greek and Roman History. Oxford: Blackwell/New York: Barnes and
Noble, 1964.
Berve, H. Das Alexanderreich auf prosopographischer Grundlage, 2 vols. Munich: Beck,
1926.
——Dion. Abh. Mainz x 1956.
Bevan, E. A History of Egypt under the Ptolemaic Dynasty. London: Methuen,
1927.
Bodel, J. (ed.), Epigraphic Evidence: Ancient History from Inscriptions. London: Routledge,
2001.
Boegehold, A. L. and Scafuro, A. C. (eds.), Athenian Identity and Civic Ideology. Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Borza, E. N. In the Shadow of Olympus: The Emergence of Macedon. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1990.
Bosworth, A. B. A Historical Commentary on Arrian’s History of Alexander. Oxford 
University Press, 1980–
.
——Conquest and Empire. Cambridge University Press, 1988.
——From Arrian to Alexander. Oxford University Press, 1988.
Bosworth, A. B. and Baynham, E. (eds.), Alexander the Great in Fact and Fiction. Oxford
University Press, 2000.
Briant, P., trans. Daniels, P.T. From Cyrus to Alexander: A History of the Persian Empire.
Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns, 2002.
Bibliography

Bruce, I. A. F. A Historical Commentary on the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1967.
Brunt, P. A. Studies in Greek History and Thought. Oxford University Press, 1993.
Buck, R. J. Boiotia and the Boiotian League, 432–371 BC. University of Alberta Press,
1994.
Buckler, J. Aegean Greece in the Fourth Century BC. Leiden: Brill, 2003.
——Philip II and the Sacred War. (Mnem. Supp. 109.) Leiden: Brill, 1989.
——The Theban Hegemony, 371–362 BC. Harvard University Press, 1980.
Buckley, T. Aspects of Greek History, 750–323 BC. London: Routledge, 1996.
Bury, J. B., rev. Meiggs, R. A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great. London:
Macmillan/New York: St. Martin’s, 41975.
Cambridge Ancient History2, vols. v/vi. Cambridge University Press, 1992/4.
Cargill, J. L. The Second Athenian League: Empire or Free Alliance? University of 
California Press, 1981.
Cartledge, P. A. Agesilaos and the Crisis of Sparta. London: Duckworth/Johns Hopkins
University Press, 22002.
——Sparta and Lakonia: A Regional History, 1300 to 362 BC. London: Routledge, 22002.
——Spartan Reﬂections. London: Duckworth/University of California Press, 2001.
Caven, B. Dionysius I, War-Lord of Sicily. Yale University Press, 1990.
Cawkwell, G. Philip of Macedon. London: Faber, 1978.
——Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War. London: Routledge, 1997.
——Georgica: Greek Studies in Honour of George Cawkwell. BICS Supp. 58, 1991.
Connor, W. R. The New Politicians of Fifth-Century Athens. Princeton University Press,
1971; reissued with new preface Indianapolis: Hackett, 1992.
Cornford, F. M. Thucydides Mythistoricus. London: Arnold, 1907.
David, E. Sparta Between Empire and Revolution (404–243 BC). New York: Arno,
1981.
Davies, J. K. Democracy and Classical Greece. London: Fontana/Harvard University
Press, 21993.
De Ste.
Croix,
G.
E.
M.
The
Origins
of
the
Peloponnesian
War.
London:
Duckworth/Cornell University Press, 1972.
De Souza, P. and France, J. (eds.), War and Peace in Ancient and Medieval History. Cam-
bridge University Press, forthcoming.
Dover, K. J. The Greeks and their Legacy. (Collected Papers, ii.) Oxford: Blackwell, 1988.
——‘Owls to Athens’: Essays on Classical Subjects Presented to Sir Kenneth Dover. Oxford
University Press, 1990.
Eder, W. (ed.), Die athenische Demokratie im 4. Jahrhundert v. Chr. Stuttgart: Steiner,
1995.
Ehrenberg, V. From Solon to Socrates. London: Methuen/New York: Barnes and Noble,
21973.
——Ancient Society and Institutions: Studies Presented to Victor Ehrenberg. Oxford: Black-
well, 1966/New York: Barnes and Noble, 1967.
Ellis, J. R. Philip II and Macedonian Imperialism. London: Thames and Hudson,
1976.
Ellis, W. M. Alcibiades. London: Routledge, 1989.
Engels, D. W. Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army. University
of California Press, 1978.
Figueira, T. J. The Power of Money: Coinage and Politics in the Athenian Empire. Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press, 1998.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
389

Finley, M. I. Ancient Sicily. (Originally published as vol. i of 3-vol. A History of Sicily,
with vols. ii–iii by D. M. Smith.) London: Chatto and Windus/Totowa, NJ: Rowman
and Littleﬁeld, 21979.
——Democracy Ancient and Modern. London: Hogarth Press/Rutgers University Press,
21985.
Fornara, C. W. Translated Documents of Greece and Rome, i. Archaic Times to the End of
the Peloponnesian War. Cambridge University Press, 21983.
Forrest, W. G. A History of Sparta, 950–192 BC. London: Duckworth, 21980.
Fraser, P. M. Cities of Alexander the Great. Oxford University Press, 1996.
Freeman, E. A. The History of Sicily from the Earliest Times, 4 vols. Oxford University
Press, 1891–4.
Frézouls, E. and Jacquemin, A. (eds.), Les Relations internationales: Acres du Colloque
de Strasbourg 15–17 juin 1993. Paris: De Boccard for Université de Strasbourg,
1995.
Fuller, J. F. C. The Generalship of Alexander the Great. London: Eyre and Spottiswoode,
1958/Rutgers University Press, 1960.
Furley, W. D. Andokides and the Herms. BICS Supp. lxv 1996.
Gabrielsen, V. Financing the Athenian Fleet: Public Taxation and Social Relations. Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1994.
——Remuneration of State Ofﬁcials in Fourth-Century BC Athens. Odense University
Press, 1981.
Gagarin, M. Antiphon the Athenian. University of Texas Press, 2002.
Garnsey, P. D. A. and Whittaker, C. R. (eds.), Imperialism in the Ancient World.
Cambridge University Press, 1978.
Gomme, A. W. Essays in Greek History and Literature. Oxford: Blackwell, 1937.
——More Essays in Greek History and Literature. Oxford: Blackwell, 1962.
Gomme, A. W., Andrewes, A., and Dover, K. J. A Historical Commentary on Thucydides,
5 vols. Oxford University Press, 1945–81.
Green, P. Alexander of Macedon. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974; reissued University
of California Press, 1991.
Grifﬁth, G. T. (ed.), Alexander the Great: The Main Problems. Cambridge: Heffer/New
York: Barnes and Noble, 1966.
Grote, G. History of Greece, ‘new edition’. London: Murray, 1869/84 (12 vols.); 1888
(10 vols.).
Grundy, G. B. Thucydides and the History of His Age. London: Murray, 1911; reissued
as vol. i, with a second volume added, Oxford: Blackwell, 1948.
Guthrie, W. K. C. A History of Greek Philosophy, 6 vols. Cambridge University Press,
1962–81.
Hamilton, C. D. Agesilaus and the Failure of Spartan Hegemony. Cornell University Press,
1991.
——Sparta’s Bitter Victories: Politics and Diplomacy in the Corinthian War. Cornell 
University Press, 1979.
Hamilton, J. R. Alexander the Great. London: Hutchinson, 1973/University of Pittsburgh
Press, 1974.
——Plutarch, Alexander: A Commentary. Oxford University Press, 1969.
Hammond, N. G. L. (ed.), Atlas of the Greek and Roman World in Antiquity. Park Ridge:
Noyes, 1981.
——Collected Studies, 5 vols. Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1993–2001.
——Studies in Greek History. Oxford University Press, 1973.
390
BIBLIOGRAPHY

——Ventures into Greek History ·Dedicated to Nicholas G. L. HammondÒ. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1994.
Hammond, N. G. L. and Grifﬁth, G. T. A History of Macedonia, vol. ii. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1979.
Hansen, M. H. Demography and Democracy: The Number of Athenian Citizens in the Fourth
Century B.C. Herning: Systime, 1986.
——(ed.), Introduction to an Inventory of Poleis. (Copenhagen Polis Centre Acts 3.)
Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy, 1996.
——The Athenian Democracy in the Age of Demosthenes. London: Duckworth (Bristol
Classical Press), 21998/University of Oklahoma Press, 1999.
——The Athenian Ecclesia: A Collection of Articles 1976–83. Copenhagen: Museum 
Tusculanum Press, 1983.
——(ed.), The Polis as an Urban Centre and as a Political Community. (Copenhagen Polis
Centre Acts 4.) Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy, 1997.
——Three Studies in Athenian Demography. Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy, 1988.
——Polis and Politics: Studies in Ancient Greek History Presented to Mogens Herman
Hansen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 2000.
Hanson,V. D. Warfare and Agriculture in Classical Greece. University of California Press,
21998.
Harding, P. Translated Documents of Greece and Rome, ii. From the End of the Peloponnesian
War to the Battle of Ipsus. Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Harris, E. M. Aeschines and Athenian Politics. New York: Oxford University Press,
1995.
Hatzopoulos, M. B. and Loukopoulos, L. D. (eds.), Philip of Macedon. Athens: Ekdotik
Aqhnwn, 1980/London: Heinemann, 1981.
Heckel, W. The Marshals of Alexander’s Empire. London: Routledge, 1992.
Heckel, W. and Tritle, L. A. (eds.), Crossroads of History: The Age of Alexander.
Claremont, Calif.: Regina, 2003.
Hignett, C. A History of the Athenian Constitution to the End of the Fifth Century BC.
Oxford University Press, 1952.
Hill, G. F., rev. Meiggs, R. and Andrewes, A. Sources for Greek History, 478–431 BC.
Oxford University Press, 1951.
Hodkinson, S. Property and Wealth in Classical Sparta. London: Duckworth and Classi-
cal Press of Wales/Oakville, Conn.: David Brown, 2000.
Hodkinson, S. and Powell, A. (eds.), Sparta: New Perspectives. London: Duckworth and
Classical Press of Wales, 1999.
Holladay, A. J. Athens in the Fifth Century and Other Studies in Greek History. Chicago:
Ares, 2002.
Hornblower, S. A Commentary on Thucydides. Oxford University Press, 1991–
.
——Mausolus. Oxford University Press, 1982.
——The Greek World, 479–323 BC. London: Routledge, 32002.
Hurwit, J. M. The Acropolis in the Age of Pericles. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
——The Athenian Acropolis. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Jones, T. B. Studies in Honor of Tom B. Jones. (Alter Orient und Altes Testament 203.) 
Kevelaer: Butzon and Bercker, 1979.
Kagan, D. The Archidamian War. Cornell University Press, 1974.
——The Fall of the Athenian Empire. Cornell University Press, 1987.
——The Outbreak of the Peloponnesian War. Cornell University Press, 1969.
——The Peace of Nicias and the Sicilian Expedition. Cornell University Press, 1981.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
391

Kallet, L. Money and the Corrosion of Power in Thucydides: The Sicilian Expedition and its
Aftermath. University of California Press, 2001.
Kallet-Marx, L. Money, Expense and Naval Power in Thucydides’ History, 1–5. 24.
University of California Press, 1993.
Kennell, N. M. The Gymnasium of Virtue: Education and Culture in Ancient Sparta.
University of North Carolina Press, 1995.
Kraay, C. M. Archaic and Classical Greek Coins. London: Methuen/University of 
California Press, 1976.
Krentz, P. The Thirty at Athens. Cornell University Press, 1982.
Lane Fox, R. Alexander the Great. London: Allen Lane with Longman/New York: Dial,
1973.
Larsen, J. A. O. Greek Federal States: Their Institutions and History. Oxford University
Press, 1968.
——Representative Government in Greek and Roman History. (Sather Lectures 28.) Uni-
versity of California Press, 1955.
Lazaridis, D. Amphipolis. Athens: Archaeological Receipts Fund, 1997.
Lazenby, J. F. The Peloponnesian War: A Military Study. London: Routledge, 2004.
——The Spartan Army. Warminster: Aris and Phillips/Chicago: Bolchazy-Carducci,
1985.
Lenardon, R. J. The Saga of Themistocles. London: Thames and Hudson, 1978.
Lewis, D. M. Selected Papers in Greek and Near Eastern History. Cambridge University
Press, 1997.
——Sparta and Persia. Leiden: Brill, 1977.
——Ritual, Finance, Politics: Athenian Democratic Accounts Presented to David Lewis.
Oxford University Press, 1994.
Loomis, W. T. The Spartan War Fund. (Hist. Einzelschriften 74.) Stuttgart: Steiner,
1992.
Luraghi, N. and Alcock, S. E. (eds.), Helots and Their Masters in Lakonia and Messenia:
Histories, Ideologies, Structures. Washington, DC: Center for Hellenic Studies, 2003.
MacDowell, D. M. Aristophanes and Athens. Oxford University Press, 1995.
——Law, Rhetoric and Comedy in Classical Athens: Essays in Honour of Douglas M.
MacDowell. Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2004.
McGregor, M. F. The Athenians and Their Empire. University of British Columbia Press,
1987.
——Classical Contributions: Studies in Honour of Malcolm Francis McGregor. Locust
Valley, NY: Augustin, 1981.
McKechnie, P. R. and Kern, S. J. Hellenica Oxyrhynchia, Edited with Translation and
Commentary. Warminster: Aris and Phillips, 1988.
Mark, I. S. The Sanctuary of Athena Nike in Athens: Architectural Stages and Chronology.
Hesp. Supp. 26, 1993.
Marsden, E. W. Greek and Roman Artillery, i. Historical Development. Oxford University
Press, 1969.
Marshall, F. H. The Second Athenian Confederacy. Cambridge University Press, 1905.
Matthaiou, A. P. (ed.), Attikai Epigrajai sumposion eiV mnhmhn Adolf Wilhelm
(1864–1950). Athens: Ellhnik Epigrajik Etairea, 2004.
Mattingly, H. B. The Athenian Empire Restored. University of Michigan Press, 1996.
Meiggs, R. The Athenian Empire. Oxford University Press, 1972 (corr. 1975).
Meiggs, R. and Lewis, D. M. A Selection of Greek Historical Inscriptions to the End of the
Fifth Century BC. Oxford University Press, r1988.
392
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Meritt, B. D. ForoV: Tribute to Benjamin Dean Meritt. Locust Valley, NJ: Augustin,
1974.
Meritt, B. D.,Wade-Gery, H.T., and McGregor, M. F. The Athenian Tribute Lists, 4 vols.
i Harvard University Press; ii–iv Princeton: American School of Classical Studies at
Athens, 1939–53.
Mertens, D. Der Tempel von Segesta und die dorische Tempelbaukunst des griechischen
Westens in klassischer Zeit. Mainz: von Zabern, 1984.
Meyer, E. Theopomps Hellenika. Halle: Niemeyer, 1909.
Michell, H. Sparta. Cambridge University Press, 1952.
Miller, M. C. Athens and Persia in the Fifth Century BC. Cambridge University Press,
1997.
Murray, G. Aristophanes: A Study. Oxford University Press, 1933.
Natoli, A. F. The Letter of Speusippus to Philip II: Introduction, Text, Translation and
Commentary. (Hist. Einzelschriften 176.) Stuttgart: Steiner, 2004.
Nielsen, T. H. Arkadia and Its Poleis in the Archaic and Classical Periods. Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 2002.
——(ed.), Even More Studies in the Ancient Greek Polis. (Copenhagen Polis Centre Papers
6; Hist. Einzelschriften 162.) Stuttgart: Steiner, 2002.
Nielsen, T. H. and Roy, J. (eds.), Deﬁning Ancient Arkadia. (Copenhagen Polis Centre
Acts 6.) Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy, 1999.
Osborne, M. J. Naturalization in Athens, 3 vols. in 4. Brussels: Royal Academy of
Belgium, 1981–3.
Osborne, R. The Athenian Empire. LACTOR Series i, 42000.
Patterson, C. Pericles’ Citizenship Law of 451–50 BC. New York: Arno, 1981.
Pearson, L. Selected Papers. Chicago: Scholars Press, 1983.
——The Lost Historians of Alexander the Great. New York: American Philological Asso-
ciation, 1960.
Pelling, C. Literary Texts and the Greek Historian. London: Routledge, 2000.
Pendrick, G. J. Antiphon, of Athens. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Perlman, S. (ed.), Philip and Athens. Heffer/New York: Barnes and Noble, 1973.
Piérart, M. (ed.), Aristote et Athènes/Aristoteles and Athens. Paris: De Boccard for 
Université de Fribourg, Séminaire d’Histoire Ancienne, 1993.
Podlecki, A. J. The Political Background of Aeschylean Tragedy. University of Michigan
Press, 1966.
Powell, A. Athens and Sparta. London: Routledge, 22001.
——(ed.), Classical Sparta: Techniques Behind Her Success. London: Routledge/Univer-
sity of Oklahoma Press, 1989.
Powell, A. and Hodkinson, S. (eds.), Sparta: Beyond the Mirage. London: Classical Press
of Wales and Duckworth, 2002.
——The Shadow of Sparta. London: Routledge for Classical Press of Wales, 1994.
Pritchett, W. K. Studies in Ancient Greek Topography, 8 vols. i–vi (University of 
California Publications: Classical Studies) University of California Press, 1965–89;
vii–viii Amsterdam: Gieben, 1991–2.
Raubitschek, A. E. The School of Hellas. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Reinmuth, O. W. The Ephebic Inscriptions of the Fourth Century BC. (Mnem. Supp. 14.)
Leiden: Brill, 1971.
Rhodes, P. J. The Athenian Boule. Oxford University Press, 1972; reissued with addi-
tions and corrections, 1985.
——The Athenian Empire. G&R New Surveys 17 21993.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
393

——(ed.), Athenian Democracy. Edinburgh University Press/New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2004.
——A Commentary on the Aristotelian Athenaion Politeia. Oxford University Press, 1981;
reissued with addenda 1993.
——Thucydides: History, II. Warminster: Aris and Phillips, 1988.
——Thucydides: History, III. Warminster: Aris and Phillips, 1994.
——‘What Alcibiades Did or What Happened to Him’. (Inaugural Lecture.) University of
Durham, 1985.
Rhodes, P. J. and Osborne, R. Greek Historical Inscriptions, 404–323 BC. Oxford 
University Press, 2003.
Rich, J. and Shipley, G. (eds.), War and Society in the Greek World. London: Routledge,
1993.
Robinson, C. A., Jr. The History of Alexander the Great, 2 vols. Providence: Brown 
University, 1953–63.
Robinson, E. W. (ed.), Ancient Greek Democracy. Oxford: Blackwell, 2003.
Roebuck, C. Economy and Society in the Early Greek World. Chicago: Ares, 1979.
Roisman, J. (ed.), Brill’s Companion to Alexander the Great. Leiden: Brill, 2003.
——The General Demosthenes and His Use of Military Surprise. (Hist. Einzelschriften 78.)
Stuttgart: Steiner, 1993.
Ryder, T. T. B. Koine Eirene. Oxford University Press for University of Hull, 1965.
Salmon, J. B. Pnyx and Parthenon: Public Building in Attica. Oxford University Press,
forthcoming.
Samons, L. J., II, Empire of the Owl: Athenian Imperial Finance. (Hist. Einzelschriften
142.) Stuttgart: Steiner, 2000.
Schachter, A. (ed.), Essays in the Topography, History and Culture of Boiotia. (Teiresias
Supp. 3.) Montreal: Department of Classics, McGill University, 1990.
Sealey, R. A History of the Greek City States, ca. 700–338 BC. University of California
Press, 1976.
——Demosthenes and His Time: A Study in Defeat. New York: Oxford University Press,
1993.
——Essays in Greek Politics. New York: Manyland, 1967.
Siewert, P. (ed.), Ostrakismos-Testimonien I. (Hist. Einzelschriften 155.) Stuttgart:
Steiner, 2002.
Sinclair, R. K. Democracy and Participation in Athens. Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Sommerstein, A. H. Aeschylean Tragedy. Bari: Levante, 1996.
Sprawski, S. Jason of Pherae. Kraków: Jagiellonian University Press, 1999.
Stevens, C. E. The Ancient Historian and His Materials: Essays in Honour of C. E. Stevens.
Farnborough: Gregg International, 1975.
Stockton, D. The Classical Athenian Democracy. Oxford University Press, 1990.
Stone, I. F. The Trial of Socrates. Boston: Little, Brown, 1988.
Stoneman, R. Alexander the Great. (Lancaster Pamphlets.) London: Routledge, 22004.
——The Greek Alexander Romance. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991.
Storey, I. C. Eupolis, Poet of Old Comedy. Oxford University Press, 2003.
Strauss, B. S. Athens After the Peloponnesian War: Class, Faction and Policy 403–386 BC.
London: Croom Helm, 1986/Cornell University Press, 1987.
Stylianou, P. J. A Historical Commentary on Diodorus Siculus, Book 15. Oxford 
University Press, 1998.
Talbert, R. J. A. (ed.), Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World. Princeton 
University Press, 2000.
394
BIBLIOGRAPHY

——Timoleon and the Revival of Greek Sicily, 344–317 BC. Cambridge University Press,
1975.
Tarn, W. W. Alexander the Great, 2 vols. Cambridge University Press, 1948.
Thompson, H. A. and Wycherley, R. E. The Agora of Athens. (The Athenian Agora, xiv.)
Princeton: American School of Classical Studies at Athens, 1972.
Thomsen, R. The Origin of Ostracism. Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1972.
Travlos, J. Pictorial Dictionary of Ancient Athens. London: Thames and Hudson/New
York: Praeger for German Archaeological Institute, 1971.
Tritle, L. A. Phocion the Good. London: Croom Helm, 1988.
——(ed.), The Greek World in the Fourth Century. London: Routledge, 1997.
Tuplin, C. (ed.), Xenophon and His World: Papers from a Conference Held in Liverpool in
July 1999. (Hist. Einzelschriften 172.) Stuttgart: Steiner, 2004.
Underhill, G. E. A Commentary . . . on the Hellenica of Xenophon. Oxford University
Press, 1900.
Wade-Gery, H. T. Essays in Greek History. Oxford: Blackwell, 1958.
Walbank, M. B. Athenian Proxenies of the Fifth Century BC.Toronto and Sarasota: Stevens,
1978.
Weiskopf, M. J. The So-Called ‘Great Satraps’ Revolt’, 366–360 BC. (Hist. Einzelschriften
63.) Stuttgart: Steiner, 1989.
Westlake, H. D. Essays on the Greek Historians and Greek History. Manchester Univer-
sity Press/New York: Barnes and Noble, 1969.
——Studies in Thucydides and Greek History. Bristol: Bristol Classical Press, 1989.
——Thessaly in the Fourth Century BC. London: Methuen, 1935.
——Timoleon and His Relations with Tyrants. Manchester University Press, 1952.
Whitby, M. (ed.), Sparta. Edinburgh University Press, 2002.
Wilson, J. B. Pylos 425 BC. Warminster: Aris and Phillips, 1979.
Woodhead, A. G. The Study of Greek Inscriptions. Cambridge University Press, 21981.
Yardley, J. C. and Heckel, W. Justin, Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus,
i. Books 11–12: Alexander the Great. (Clarendon Ancient History Series). Oxford 
University Press, 1997.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
395

Abdera: in Second Athenian League
233–4
Abydus: in Peloponnesian War
145
Acarnania: in Peloponnesian War
102–4
Achaea
390’s
211
360’s
199–200, 219–20, 254
Acragas
tyrants early C5
72–5
mid C5
77–8
and Carthage late C5
275–9
Ada of Caria: daughter of Hecatomnos
323–4, 367–8
Aegina
in First Peloponnesian War
42–3
430’s
82, 84, 86–8
in Peloponnesian War
101–2, 108, 110
Aegospotami: battle in 405
151
Aeschines of Athens
307–8, 309–13, 314,
317–18, 336–40, 342; cf. 201, 295
Aeschylus of Athens, tragedian
in Athens
39–40
in Sicily
75
in Aristophanes’ Frogs
169–70
Aetna
at Catana
75–6
at Inessa
77, 279, 280
Aetolia
in Peloponnesian War
97, 104
C4
252
Agathocles, tyrant of Syracuse
290,
292
Agesilaus II, king of Sparta
205–23;
cf. 190–4, 200, 247, 250, 344
Agesipolis I, king of Sparta
210, 212–13
Agis II, king of Sparta
in 418
127–9
at Decelea
140–1, 143, 151–2, 163
Elean war and death
205
Agis III, king of Sparta
345, 354
Agyrrhius of Athens
228, 262, 266, 268
Alcibiades of Athens
early career
122, 126–30, 132, 155–7
Sicilian expedition
132–5, 139
religious scandals
133–4, 157–9
later career
143–51, 160–1, 164–8
in Aristophanes
169–70
Alexander I, king of Macedon
297
Alexander II, king of Macedon
253
Alexander III (the Great), king of Macedon
347–83; cf. 189–90, 318, 319, 320–1,
339–44
Alexander, king of Molossis
292–3, 314,
321
Index
Athens and Sparta are mentioned throughout this book: under their names topics are indexed
but not events or individuals. Many entries are arranged chronologically, and for this purpose
the fourth century (‘C4’) is treated as beginning in 404.

INDEX
397
Alexander, tyrant of Pherae
253–5;
cf. 199, 236, 238, 300
Alexandria: cities founded by Alexander the
Great
353, 355, 369
Alyzia: battle in 375
196, 215
Ambracia
in Peloponnesian War
102–4
garrisoned by Philip
202
Ammon, oracle of
and Lysander
205
and Alexander the Great
353, 378, 380
Amorges, Persian rebel
113, 143–4
Amorgus: in Second Athenian League
240
Amphipolis
Nine Ways
19–20
Athenian colony
69
in Peloponnesian War
111–12, 114, 183
360’s
197–200, 236–7
in reign of Philip
236–9, 241, 299–300,
309, 311, 314
Amyntas III, king of Macedon
251, 297
Amyntas of Macedon, son of Perdiccas III
297, 321, 349
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, philosopher
and associate of Pericles
66–7
Anaxilas, tyrant of Rhegium
72–3, 75–6
Andocides of Athens
on Peace of Epilycus
113–14, 143
and religious scandals of 415
158–9,
191, 267
on democratic restoration in 410
165
and peace negotiations of 392/1
191,
193, 268
speech Against Alcibiades attributed to
156–7
Andros: in second Athenian League
240
Androtion of Athens: governor of Arcesine
240
Antalcidas of Sparta
in 392
192, 210
in Hellespont in 387
211
Peace of, in 387/6
193–4, 211–12,
cf. 153, 185, 186, 196, 228–9, 247
suicide
199
Antipater of Macedon
311, 321, 344,
349, 351, 369, 373, 380
Antiphon of Athens: in 411
162–5
Arcadia
C6
4–5
470’s–460’s
22–5
in Peloponnesian War
98
C4
198–200, 217–21, 235, 237,
253–5
see also Mantinea, Megalopolis, Tegea
Archelaus, king of Macedon
131, 250,
297
Archidamus II, king of Sparta
26, 29,
85–6, 91, 101
Archidamus III, king of Sparta
344–5;
cf. 223, 308
Argaeus: claimant to throne of Macedon
299
Arginusae Islands: battle in 406
150, 167
Argos
470’s–460’s
22–5
in First Peloponnesian War
41, 42, 44,
51
in Archidamian War
95, 97, 99, 109,
114
later in Peloponnesian War
125–30,
133, 141, 156
early C4
192–4, 210–12
skytalismos in 370/69
217
360’s
220
Ariobarzanes, satrap of Dascylium
222–4;
cf. 198, 218, 236–7, 254
Aristides of Athens
17, 31, 33–4
Aristophanes of Athens: comedian
84–5,
87, 118–19, 132, 159, 169–70, 180–1,
228, 267
Aristophon of Athens
270–1, 311, 336–7
Aristotle of Stagira, philosopher: Athenian
Constitution attributed to
8, 120,
161–5, 257–60
Arrian: historian
348
Artabazus, satrap of Dascylium
223–4,
239, 304, 325, 355
Artaxerxes I, King of Persia
34–5
Artaxerxes II, King of Persia
221–4;
cf. 191, 205
Artaxerxes III, King of Persia
323–6;
cf. 224
Artaxerxes IV, King of Persia
326
Arthmius of Zelea
43
Arybbas, king of Molossis
300, 314
Aspasia of Miletus: mistress of Pericles
66
Astyochus of Sparta: naval commander
144–5
Athenian League, Second
foundation and history
228–42; cf. 153,
185, 186, 195–6, 198, 248

398
INDEX
Athenian League, Second (cont’d)
introduction of syntaxeis
232–3
after Leuctra
235–8; cf. 252
Social War
239–40; cf. 200–1, 232
Peace of Philocrates
310–11
dissolved after Chaeronea
319; cf. 202
Athens
external affairs
14–21, 41–52, 67–70,
172–87, 226–42
internal affairs
31–40, 54–67, 116–23,
155–70, 257–71, 328–44
buildings
on acropolis
47, 50, 62–5, 83, 122–3,
159–60, 170, 178
in agora
38, 123, 170, 265
long walls
41–2, 65, 151
on pnyx
164, 170, 265, 341
institutions
archons
54–5, 58, 59–60
Areopagus
35–40, 59–60, 258,
339–40, 343
assembly
57–8, 261–3
council of ﬁve hundred
37–8, 56,
57–8, 60, 162, 165, 166, 168
epheboi
56–7, 341
ﬁnance
45, 59, 68, 83, 91–4, 263,
330–4
Four Hundred
160–5; cf. 144–6
generals
61, 335
lawcourts
36–7, 55–6, 59–60, 260,
262–3, 329, 335–6
laws and decrees
166, 258, 260–2
ostracism
33, 34, 35, 62, 65–6, 156–7,
266
probouloi
160
proedroi
263–4
prytaneis
37–8, 57, 263–4
secretaries
263–4
stipends
55–6, 162, 164, 262–3,
329
Thirty
257–60; cf. 204–5
plague 430–427/6
98, 112–13, 122
population of citizens and others
55–7,
153, 260, 263
see also Piraeus
Attalus of Macedon
321, 349, 351
Aulis: Agesilaus’ attempted sacriﬁce at
208–9
Babylon
354
Bagoas: grand vizier of Persia
325–6
Boeotia
in First Peloponnesian War
44–5, 51–2
in Peloponnesian War
97, 109, 110,
125–7, 140, 142, 146
imitation by Athenian oligarchs in 411
162
early C4
244–8; cf. 192–4, 205, 208–12
370’s–360’s
248–56; cf. 196–7, 200, 216
settlements in 338/7 and 335
318–19,
351
see also Orchomenus, Plataea, Thebes
Boeotius of Sparta: possible treaty of
149,
185, 191
Bosporan kingdom (Crimea)
70
Brasidas of Sparta: army commander
98,
103, 108, 110, 111–12, 174, 182–3,
377–8
Byzantium
470’s
16, 19, 20, 26–7
supports Samos 440–439
67
in Peloponnesian War
145, 148, 151
in Second Athenian League
229–32,
237, 239, 254
ally of Thebes
252, 304
besieged by Philip
316
Callias of Athens: ﬁnancial decrees of
83,
91–2
Callias of Athens: possible Peace of
15,
47–8, 68, 173, 185, 186, 226
Callicratidas of Sparta
150
Callippus of Athens: tyrant of Syracuse
288–9
Callisthenes of Olynthus: under Alexander
the Great
348, 356, 371, 377, 380
Callistratus of Athens
268–71; cf. 196–7,
234–5, 236, 249
Caria: Persian satrapy C4
323–5; cf. 222
Carthage
early interest in Sicily
71–3, 75
in Peloponnesian War
122, 132, 133,
135, 150
in Sicily after 413
275–95
Carthaginian proxenos of Boeotians 254
Carystus: in Delian League
19–20
catapults
280, 316, 365
Ceos: in Second Athenian League
199,
237–8
Cephalus of Athens
267–9
Cersebleptes: Thracian ruler
238, 240–1,
301, 304, 311, 315

INDEX
399
Chabrias of Athens
200, 210, 214, 222–3,
227, 229, 233–4, 236–7, 239, 268–71
Chaeronea
in First Peloponnesian War
51
in Peloponnesian War
110
battle in 338
318; cf. 201, 242, 249
Chalcidians see Olynthus
Chalcis
c.446
51–2
c.342
241, 315
Chares of Athens
237–9, 270–1, 301,
316, 318, 325, 336
Charidemus of Oreus, later of Athens
306, 318, 338–9, 351
Chersonese: C4
197–9, 236–7, 240–1,
301, 313, 315–16
Chios
in Delian League
67, 173
in Peloponnesian War
94, 95, 108,
109–10, 143–5, 174, 175
in second Athenian League
229–32;
cf. 195, 237, 239, 254
and Mausolus
239, 323
and Alexander the Great
352
Cimon of Athens
19–20, 28, 32–9, 44–5,
47, 55–6, 173
Cinadon of Sparta
206
Clazomenae: and Peace of Antalcidas
193, 228
Clearchus of Sparta
145, 204–5
Cleinias of Athens: tribute decree
50, 93,
174
Cleombrotus I, king of Sparta
213–16;
cf. 229, 248–9, 251–2
Cleomenes II, king of Sparta
216, 344
Cleon of Athens
46, 67, 97, 105, 108–9,
112, 118–19, 120–1, 179–81
Cleonymus of Athens
92, 121, 159,
174
Cleophon of Athens
148, 151, 156,
166–8, 169
Cleruchies
in Delian League
50–1, 176
in Second Athenian League
199,
230–1; see also Chersonese, Potidaea,
Samos
Clitus of Macedon: under Alexander
351–2, 356, 361, 371
Cnidus: battle in 394
192, 209, 210, 227
Coenus of Macedon: under Alexander
369–72; cf. 356, 364–5
coinage
in Delian League
42, 50, 174, 176–7
in west C5
76, 79
in Athens late C5
150
SUN coinage
204–5
in Sparta C4
206
of Hecatomnos
323
in west C4
237, 275–6, 280, 291
of Philip
300
Conon of Athens
in Peloponnesian War
147, 148, 150–1,
167–8
C4
192, 207–10, 221–2, 226–7, 234,
268, 269
Corcyra
430’s
82–4, 87–8, 101
in Peloponnesian War
95, 98, 103,
104–5
in Second Athenian League
196, 215,
234–5, 238
Corinth
in First Peloponnesian War
41–3
430’s
82–5, 87–8, 101
in Archidamian War
97–8, 102–3
later in Peloponnesian War
124–7, 130,
135, 138, 140, 142
early C4
192–4, 205, 208–12, 227
360’s
199, 219–20, 237, 254
and Timoleon’s liberation of Syracuse
289–91
garrisoned by Philip
202, 319
Corinth, League of
319–20; cf. 201–2,
242, 349, 354, 360, 367, 373, 374,
381
Corinthian War
209–11; cf. 185, 192,
227
Coronea
battle in 447/6
51–2
battle in 394
210
Craterus of Macedon: under Alexander
356–7, 364–5, 371–3
Crimisus, River: battle in 341
291
Critias of Athens
166, 167, 258–9
Croton
C5
79–80
C4
282–3, 285, 292
Curtius (Q. Curtius Rufus): historian
347–8
Cynossema: battle in 411
145
Cyprus
in 478
16

400
INDEX
Cyprus (cont’d)
mid C5
43, 45, 47, 173
C4
221–2; cf. 193, 325
Cyrus of Persia: son of Darius II
149–50,
152, 191, 205, 221
Cythera: in Peloponnesian War
97, 110,
141, 142, 152
Cyzicus: battle in 410
147–8, 165
Darius II, King of Persia
114, 148–50
Darius III, King of Persia
326, 351–4,
362–4
Decelea: in Peloponnesian War
93, 135,
140–1, 143, 151–2, 161, 163, 165
Delian League
14–21, 41–52, 67–70,
172–87; cf. 25–6, 64, 91–4, 152, 158,
204
Delium: battle in 424/3
95, 110
Delos
in Delian League
18, 19, 45, 64, 173,
177
in Peloponnesian War
109, 156, 177
C4
152, 227–8, 234, 319, 340
Delphi
mid C5
44, 51, 79
in Peloponnesian War
94
and Jason of Pherae
252
and Thebes 360’s
201, 254
Third Sacred War
302–5, 307–13; cf.
201, 255
Fourth Sacred War
317–18; cf. 201,
242
and Alexander the Great
349
dedications
serpent column
27
Polyzelus’ charioteer
74
navarchs dedication
152
dancing girls column
234
360’s
254–5
Demades of Athens
338–9, 342–4; cf.
296, 318, 380
Demarete, daughter of Theron of Acragas
72, 74, 76
democracy
in Asia Minor under Alexander the Great
367
in Athens under Ephialtes
38–40; cf. 54
in Athens second half C5
56–62
in Athens 420’s
126–7
in Athens 415
157–9
in Athens and Samos 411–410
143–6
in Athens after Thirty
260–5
in Athens in time of Demosthenes
328–36, 337, 339–40
in Boeotia after 379
248–9
in Delian League
38, 46–7, 50, 175,
179, 181–2, 184, 187
in Peloponnese after Leuctra
217, 254
in Syracuse during Peloponnesian War
133–5
in Syracuse under Timoleon
290–1
polarisation of Greek world C5
123,
125, 184, 187, 384
Demosthenes of Athens: military
commander C5
98, 104, 109, 110,
121, 138–40
Demosthenes of Athens: politician C4
241–2, 301–2, 306–8, 309–13, 313–22,
332, 334, 340–4; cf. 201, 295, 349,
380
Dercylidas of Sparta
145, 192, 207, 210
Dinarchus of Corinth: orator in Athens
296, 343
Diocles of Syracuse
274–6
Diodorus Siculus
on Pentecontaetia
14–15
on Sicily C4
72, 139
contrasted with Xenophon on late
C4–early C5
146–7, 167, 190–1, 257
on Sicily C4
273–4
on Philip
295
on Alexander the Great
347–8
Dion of Syracuse
286–9
Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse
276–86;
cf. 209, 215, 218, 227, 228, 232, 236
Dionysius II, tyrant of Syracuse
286–90
divine and heroic honours for mortals
Hagnon and Brasidas
112, 377–8
Lysander
152, 378
rejected by Agesilaus
206, 378
Dion
288, 378
Philip
378
Alexander and Hephaestion
377–81
drama, Athenian
39–40, 66, 117–19, 159,
160, 168–70
Ducetius, Sicel leader
77–8
Egesta
Elyman city
71
mid C5
78
date of alliance with Athens
45, 46, 68,
78, 132

INDEX
401
in Peloponnesian War
132–4
late C5–C4
275, 281
Egypt
C5
43, 45, 56, 173
rebellions against Persia C4
221–3,
325; cf. 196, 200, 313
and Alexander
353, 368
Eïon
470’s
19–20, 173
in Peloponnesian War
112
Eleusinian Mysteries
and Delian League
178
scandal in 415
133–4, 139, 157–9,
160
Elis
470’s–460’s
22–5
in Peloponnesian War
125–7
C4
197, 198, 200, 205, 217, 219–20,
226
Embata: battle in 355
239
Endius of Sparta
126, 143–4, 148
Epaminondas of Thebes
249–56; cf. 197,
199, 218–21, 237
Ephesus
in Delian League
178
in Peloponnesian War
149–50
Ephialtes of Athens
35–40; cf. 28
Ephorus: historian
146–7, 190–1, 257,
274, 294
Epidamnus: disputed between Corinth and
Corcyra
82
Epidaurus
cult of Asclepius
122
in Peloponnesian War
108, 127–30
Epilycus, Peace of
113–14
Epitadeus of Sparta: alleged rhetra of
206–7
Eretria
in Delian League
51–2
C4
241, 305–6, 315
Erythrae
in Delian League
46–7, 173, 175, 178
in Peloponnesian War
143
Peace of Antalcidas
193, 228
and Mausolus
239, 323–4
Etruscans
75, 284
Euboea
c.446
51–2
in Peloponnesian War
96, 143, 146, 164
in Corinthian War
210
in 370’s–360’s
233, 252
in time of Philip
239, 241–2, 305–7,
315
see also Carystus, Chalcis, Eretria,
Histiaea
Eubulus of Athens
332–4, 336–7,
cf. 306–8, 309–11, 314, 341
Eumenes of Cardia
349, 374
Eupolis of Athens: comedian
168–9, 181
Euripides of Athens: tragedian
117–18,
132, 159, 169–70
Eurymedon, River: battle c.469
19–20
Evagoras, ruler of Salamis
in Peloponnesian War
149, 151, 168,
221
C4
221–2; cf. 208–9, 211, 212, 227
Gaugamela: battle in 331
354, 361, 363–4
Gaza: siege in 332
353, 365–6
Gedrosia: Alexander’s journey in 325
356
Gela
tyrants CC6–5
72–6
congress in 424
105
late C5
275–9
Gelon, tyrant of Gela and Syracuse
72–3
Granicus, River: battle in 334
351–2, 363
Gylippus of Sparta
135–40; cf. 152, 274
Hagnon of Athens
67, 69, 112, 160, 162
Haliartus: battle in 395
192, 247
Halicarnassus: siege in 334
352, 365
Halonnesus: 340’s
314, 316; cf. 241
Halus: in 346
310–12
Halycus, River: limit of Carthaginian power
in Sicily
285, 292
Harpalus of Macedon
342–3, 354, 357,
372–3
Hecatomnos, satrap of Caria
222, 323
Hegesippus of Athens
311, 313–14, 337
Hellanicus of Mytilene: historian
14, 28
Hellenica Oxyrhynchia
12, 146–7, 190
Hellespont
in Delian League
19–20
in Peloponnesian War
143–51
in 387
193, 211
in time of Philip
201, 296, 301, 315–16
see also Chersonese
Hephaestion of Macedon: under Alexander
357, 361, 370–1, 373–4, 380, 381
Heraclea, near Thermopylae
111, 209–10,
250, 252
Heraclides of Syracuse
287–8

402
INDEX
Hermocrates of Syracuse
105, 133, 135,
138–9, 144–5, 274–7
Hicetas, tyrant of Leontini
289–92
Hieron, tyrant of Syracuse
72–6
Himera
in 480
72
in 409
275, 279
Hipparinus, tyrant of Syracuse
289
Histiaea (Oreus)
in Delian League
51–2
early C4
213, 214, 233, 250–1
340’s
241, 315
Hydaspes, River: battle in 326
356,
364–5, 366
Hyperbolus of Athens
105, 121–2, 155–7,
163
Hyperides of Athens
334, 337–40, 343–4;
cf. 296, 314, 316, 318, 380
Hyphasis, River: mutiny in 326
356,
371–2
Illyrians: and Macedon
297–300, 313,
349, 366
Imbros: C4
185, 192–3, 212, 227–8, 231,
319
inscriptions: problems of dating
45–6
Iphicrates of Athens
210–11, 215, 227,
228, 234–5, 236–7, 239, 268–71
Ismenias of Thebes
213, 247–8
Isocrates of Athens
185–6, 191, 199, 220,
240, 254, 295–6, 312–13, 339–40,
376
Issus: battle in 333
352–3, 362–3
Italy
C5
72, 79–80
C4
282–3, 284–5, 292–3
Jason, tyrant of Pherae
250–2; cf. 153,
215, 234
Justin: historian
257, 294, 348
King’s Peace
see Antalcidas, Peace of
Lamachus of Athens
132–5
Lechaeum: in Corinthian War
210–11
Lemnos: C4
185, 192–3, 212, 227–8,
231, 319
Leontiades of Thebes
213, 247–8
Leontini
in Peloponnesian War
69, 79, 83–4,
103, 106, 132
late C5–C4
277–9, 281, 288, 289,
291–2
Leotychidas II, king of Sparta
16, 25–6
Leotychidas of Sparta: putative son of Agis
II
205
Lepreum: in Peloponnesian War
98–9,
125, 126–7
Lesbos
in Delian League
19, 67, 173
in Peloponnesian War
95, 108–9, 143,
145
in Second Athenian League
232–3
and Alexander
352
see also Methymna, Mytilene
Leuctra: battle in 371
216, 251–2; cf. 29,
197, 235
Lichas of Sparta
144–5
literacy
3, 10, 16, 27, 205, 265
Locri (in Italy)
280, 283, 289, 292
Locris: C4
209, 252
Lycophron, tyrant of Pherae
250
Lycurgus of Athens
333–4, 337–9, 341–2;
cf. 296, 329, 380
Lysander of Sparta
in Peloponnesian War
149–52, 168
C4
204–5, 207–8, 210; cf. 192, 247,
258–9
Macedon
C5–early C4
84, 111, 130–1, 234–5,
296–7
Philip II
294–326; cf. 189, 200–2,
336–40
Alexander III (the Great)
347–82;
cf. 190–1, 300, 318, 320–1
Mantinea
early C5
22–5
in Peloponnesian War
95, 125–30, 133,
152, 156
in 385
194, 195, 212, 229, 247
360’s
198–200, 217–21, 255
Mausolus, satrap of Caria
323–4; cf. 223,
239
Mazaeus of Persia
354, 364, 368
Megalopolis
218; cf. 198, 200, 224, 253,
255, 305, 345, 354
Megara
in First Peloponnesian War
41–3,
51–2
Athenian sanctions
82, 84–5, 86–8,
177

INDEX
403
in Peloponnesian War
96–7, 101–2,
106, 110, 125, 148
in time of Philip
314
Melos: in Peloponnesian War
94, 109,
131–2, 156, 179–80
Memnon of Rhodes
351–2, 365
Messana (earlier Zancle; in Sicily)
C5
72, 76–7
late C5–C4
279, 280, 282
Messenia
460’s–450’s
28
in Peloponnesian War
105
liberated in 370/69
218; cf. 198, 220–1,
253, 305
Methone
in Delian League
177, 181
captured by Philip
300–1, 321
Methymna
in Peloponnesian War
108
in Second Athenian League
230, 232
Miletus
in Delian League
47, 67–8, 173, 174,
175
in Peloponnesian War
143–51
Mindarus of Sparta
145, 147–8
Molossis
and Philip
300, 314
and Italy
292–3
Motya
275, 281
Mytilene
revolt in 428–427
98, 108–9, 174, 179,
181, 182
in Second Athenian League
229–32,
236, 241
and Alexander
352
Naupactus
home for fugitive Messenians
28–9,
44–5
in Peloponnesian War
102–3, 104, 105
C4
205, 209
Naxos
in Delian League
18, 19–20, 35, 173,
175
battle in 376
196, 214, 233
Neapolis (in Italy)
C5
69, 79
C4
293
Nemea, River: battle in 394
210
Nepos: biographer
274
Nicias of Athens
in Archidamian War
109, 110, 120–1
Peace of
113–14, 124–6; cf. 93, 97,
152, 197
after the Peace
126, 155–7, 158
Sicilian expedition
132–40
Notium: battle in 406
149–50, 167
Nysaeus, tyrant of Syracuse
289
Oenophyta: battle c.457
44–5
oligarchy
in Asia Minor in 334
367
in Athens 420’s
116–17
in Athens in 415
157–9
in Athens and Samos in 411–410
143–6, 160–5; cf. 93–4
in Boeotia
244, 248–9
in Delian League
179, 181–2
in Greek world after Peloponnesian War
153, 204–5
in Peloponnese after Leuctra
217, 254
in Syracuse 133–4, 135
polarisation of Greek world C5
123,
125, 184, 187, 384
Olympia
in Peloponnesian War
94, 126–7, 156,
205
attacked by Sparta c.400
205
and Dionysius I in 384
283
360’s
220, 255
Olympias of Molossis: wife of Philip
300,
314, 320–1, 349, 357, 373, 374
Olynthus
403’s
84
in Peloponnesian War
111, 125
early C4
195, 297
after Peace of Antalcidas
212–13, 215,
229, 233, 247
in time of Philip
240–1, 300–1, 305–7,
309
Opis: mutiny and banquet in 324
357,
362, 376
Orchomenus (in Boeotia)
in First Peloponnesian War
51
before Peace of Antalcidas
193, 210,
245, 247
after Peace of Antalcidas
215, 248–9,
252–3, 318–19
Oreus see Histiaea
Orontes of Persia
222–3
Oropus
in 411
146, 245

404
INDEX
Oropus (cont’d)
after Peace of Antalcidas
247
in 366
199, 237, 254
made independent by Philip
319
Paeonians: and Macedon
297–300
Parmenio of Macedon: under Alexander
369–71; cf. 351, 354, 356, 362
Pausanias of Sparta, regent
16, 20, 25–8,
34
Pausanias, king of Sparta
151, 205, 210,
259
Pelopidas of Thebes
248–56; cf. 198, 199,
215, 218
Peloponnesian League
after Peace of Antalcidas
212, 215
ends in 365
199, 220
Peloponnesian War, First
41–53
Peloponnesian War
81–115, 124–54
Perdiccas II, king of Macedon
84, 111,
130–1, 297
Perdiccas III, king of Macedon
238, 297
Perdiccas of Macedon: commander under
Alexander
371, 374, 381
Pericles of Athens
to mid C5
31–2, 35, 38, 39, 44, 46,
50–2, 55–6
in Athenian democracy
57–8, 65–7,
119–20
after Thirty Years’ Peace
67–8, 69–70
causes of Peloponnesian War
84–5,
86–8
resources and strategy for Peloponnesian
War
91–2, 96
Perinthus: siege in 340
316
Persepolis: destruction in 330
354, 374–5
Persia
and Pausanias
26–7
and Themistocles
34–5
and Delian League
14–21, 41–53,
67
Peloponnesian War
93, 94–5, 99,
113–14, 175, 183–4, 191
early C4
191–202, 207–12, 221–2
after Peace of Antalcidas
222–4; cf.
199–200, 229–30, 236–7, 323
support for Thebes in 367
198–9, 219,
236, 254
Artaxerxes III and successors
323–6; cf.
313
Greek desire for war against
202, 228–9
war planned by Philip
312–13, 315–16,
320
conquest by Alexander
347–82
see also Antalcidas, Peace of, and Kings
and other leading men
Phaeax of Athens
106, 156–7
Phalaecus of Phocis
307–8, 309–10
Pharnabazus of Persia
satrap of Dascylium
143–51, 168, 192,
207–12
later career
222–3
Pharsalus: C4
209–10, 215, 250–1, 253
Pheidias of Athens: sculptor
63, 66–7,
178
Pherae: C4
199, 250–1, 300, 304–5, 313
Philip II, king of Macedon
294–322; cf.
153, 189, 200–2, 234–5, 240–2, 253,
336–9
Philip Arrhidaeus of Macedon
300, 320–1
Philiscus of Abydus
198, 218, 254
Philistus of Syracuse
274, 277, 284, 287
Philocrates of Athens
306–7, 309, 314,
337
Philocrates, Peace of
309–13; cf. 197,
232, 313–14, 337
Philomelus of Phocis
302–4, 307, 309
Philotas of Macedon
369–71; cf. 356, 361
Phocion of Athens
336–8, 343–4; cf. 306,
314, 316, 322, 325, 367
Phocis
mid C5
44, 51
Corinthian War
209
370’s–360’s
215, 249, 251, 252, 255
Third Sacred War
302–5, 307–13;
cf. 201, 241
330’s
319
Phoebidas of Sparta
213, 214, 247–8
Phormio of Athens
69, 102–3
Phrynichus of Athens: tragedian
39
Phrynichus of Athens: late C5
162–4,
166; cf. 144, 160
Pindar of Boeotia: and Sicily
72, 75
Piraeus
made Athenian harbour
32
in Peloponnesian War
108, 151, 164
in downfall of Thirty
259
C4
210, 211, 227, 238
Pisander of Athens
159, 160–3
Pixodarus, satrap of Caria
323–5
Plataea
ally of Athens
86, 244

INDEX
405
in Peloponnesian War
86, 95–6, 102,
109, 245
C4
196, 235, 247, 249, 318–19
Plato of Athens
166, 274, 283, 287
Plistoanax, king of Sparta
29, 51–2, 113
Plutarch of Chaeronea
on C5
14, 50, 64–7, 139, 156
on C4
191, 274, 296, 347–8
Polyzelus of Syracuse and Gela
72–6
Porus, Indian ruler
356, 364–5, 368
Potidaea
C5
82, 84, 86–8, 101, 111
C4
237–8, 240
Priene
in Delian League
67
and Alexander
367
Pylos
taken by Athens in 425
97, 105, 152
afterwards
125, 127, 131, 148
quadriremes and quinqueremes
280,
341
religion
in Delian League
50, 177–8
scandals in Athens in 415
157–9
in Athens C4
341
see also divine and heroic honours for
mortals
Rhegium
early C5
72–3, 75–6
Athenian alliance
69, 79, 83–4
late C5–C4
280, 282–3, 289, 292
Rhodes
390’s
209, 211, 227–8
in Second Athenian League
229–32,
237, 239, 254
and Mausolus
239, 323
Rome
and Carthage
71
and Etruscans
72
and Neapolis
293
and Alexander
351
Samos
in Delian League
45, 48, 67–8, 83, 92,
173, 174, 175, 178
in Peloponnesian War
143–51, 160–4,
175, 183
honours for Lysander
152, 378
after Peace of Antalcidas
194, 199
Athenian cleruchy
237–8, 239, 319,
323, 343
Sardis
battle in 395
208
and Alexander
367
Scione: in Peloponnesian War
112, 125
Scyros
C5
19–20, 173
C4
192–3, 212, 227–8, 231, 319
Selinus
in Peloponnesian War
132, 134, 275
afterwards
275, 279
Selymbria
in Peloponnesian War
148, 182
siege in 340
316
Sicily
mid C5
71–8
in Archidamian War
94, 97, 103–4,
105–6
in 415–413
93, 132–40, 174, 183
late C5–C4
273–92
see also individual cities and leading men
slaves
alleged régime of, in Argos
57
in Athens
57, 150
Socrates of Athens: trial
267; cf. 119
Sophocles of Athens
civic career
160
tragedies
39, 117, 169
Sparta
harmosts
207
population
citizen numbers
216–17; cf. 29, 153,
207
helots
4, 9, 27–8, 97, 207
hypomeiones
206
mothakes
135, 149, 150, 207
perioikoi
4, 97, 194, 207
speeches
in Thucydides
179–80
in Xenophon
190
Sphodrias of Sparta
195, 214, 229–30,
248
Sthenelaidas of Sparta
85–6, 88
Struthas, satrap of Sardis
211
Sybaris
68–9, 73, 75, 79; see also Thurii
Syracuse
tyrants C5
72–6
after the tyrants
76–8
in Peloponnesian War
103, 106, 132–40
afterwards
274–92

406
INDEX
Tanagra: battle c.457
44–5
Taras
C5
80
C4
292–3
Tegea
early C5
22–5
in Peloponnesian War
125–30
360’s
217–21; cf. 200, 255
Tegyra: battle in 376
215, 249
Tenedos: in Second Athenian League
241, 242, 304, 316
Thasos
in Delian League
19–20, 28, 35, 173
in Peloponnesian War
149
Thebes
in Peloponnesian War
86, 109
404–360
244–56; cf. 189–90, 195–200,
212, 214, 217–21, 229–33, 235–8
sacred band
215, 249, 318
in time of Philip
302–5, 307–9,
311–12, 317–19; cf. 201–2, 239, 242,
301, 304, 325
destroyed by Alexander
349–51
see also Boeotia
Themistocles of Athens
24–5, 31–9
Theopompus of Chios: historian
274
Theramenes of Athens
in Peloponnesian War
147–8, 151, 162,
164–9
and Thirty
257–9
Theron, tyrant of Acragas
72, 75
Thespiae
in Peloponnesian War
110, 140
C4
248–50, 318–19
Thessaly
C5
25–6, 41, 44, 167
370’s–360’s
250–1, 253, 255; cf. 199,
213, 215, 238
and Philip
296, 300, 304–5, 313
and Alexander
349
see also Pharsalus, Pherae
Thibron of Sparta
207, 211
Thrace
in Peloponnesian War
111, 150–1
404–360
195, 229, 236, 238, 240–1
in time of Philip
296, 299–301, 311,
313, 314
in time of Alexander
345, 349,
366
Thrasybulus of Athens (of deme Stiria)
in Peloponnesian War
145, 147, 149,
163–8
opponent of Thirty
259–60
early C4
193, 211, 227–8, 266–8
Thrasyllus of Athens
145, 147–50,
163–7
Thucydides of Athens (son of Melesias)
65–6, 69, 120
Thucydides of Athens (son of Olorus)
end of his history
146
exile
111–12
on Athenian politics and politicians
105, 119–20, 126, 157, 161–5,
180
on causes of Peloponnesian War
81–9
on Peloponnesian War
96, 124, 126,
132, 174
on Pentecontaetia and Delian League
14, 16–18, 175, 178–9
on plague in Athens
112–13
on Sparta and empire
152
seasonal years
102
speeches
179
Thudippus of Athens
92, 121
Thurii
Sybaris to mid C5
68–9, 73, 75, 79
440’s
68–9, 79–80
C4
283–4, 285
Timaeus of Tauromenium: historian
274,
289
Timarchus of Athens
314, 337, 339
Timoleon of Corinth and Syracuse
289–92; cf. 219
Timotheus of Athens
215, 223, 234–7,
239, 269–71
Tiribazus, satrap of Sardis
192, 193, 211,
222
Tissaphernes, satrap of Sardis
in Peloponnesian War
143–9, 160–1,
221
afterwards
185, 191–2, 207–8, 221
Tithraustes, grand vizier of Persia
208–9
Tolmides of Athens
44
Tyre: siege in 332
353, 365
women
generally
9
in Athens
56; cf. 55

INDEX
407
Xanthippus of Athens
31–3
Xenophon of Athens
Agesilaus, Anabasis
190, 348
Hellenica
146–7, 167, 190–1,
257
Ways and Means
240, 332–3
Athenian Constitution attributed to (‘Old
Oligarch’)
116–17, 180
Zancle
see Messana


