
The Short Oxford History of Europe
Classical Greece

The Short Oxford History of Europe
General Editor: T. C. W. Blanning
Classical Greece
500–323 
Editor: Robin Osborne
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogotá Buenos Aires Calcutta
Cape Town Chennai Dar es Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul
Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai
Nairobi Paris São Paulo Shanghai Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw
with associated companies in Berlin Ibadan
Oxford is a trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Oxford University Press 2000
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2000
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organizations. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
(Data applied for)
ISBN 0–19–873154–X (hbk)
ISBN 0–19–873153–1 (pbk)
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Typeset in Minion
by ReﬁneCatch Limited, Bungay, Suﬀolk
Printed in Great Britain by
T.J. International Ltd., Padstow, Cornwall

General Editor’s Preface
The problems of writing a satisfactory general history of Europe are
many, but the most intractable is clearly the reconciliation of depth
with breadth. The historian who can write with equal authority about
every part of the continent in all its various aspects has not yet been
born. Two main solutions have been tried in the past: either a single
scholar has attempted to go it alone, presenting an unashamedly
personal view of a period, or teams of specialists have been enlisted to
write what are in eﬀect anthologies. The ﬁrst oﬀers a coherent per-
spective but unequal coverage, the second sacriﬁces unity for the sake
of expertise. This new series is underpinned by the belief that it is this
second way that has the fewest disadvantages and that even those can
be diminished if not neutralized by close cooperation between the
individual contributors under the directing supervision of the vol-
ume editor. All the contributors to every volume in this series have
read each other’s chapters, have met to discuss problems of overlap
and omission, and have then redrafted as part of a truly collective
exercise. To strengthen coherence further, the editor has written an
introduction and conclusion, weaving the separate strands together
to form a single cord. In this exercise, the brevity promised by the
adjective ‘short’ in the series’ title has been an asset. The need to be
concise has concentrated everyone’s minds on what really mattered
in the period. No attempt has been made to cover every angle of every
topic in every country. What this volume does provide is a short but
sharp and deep entry into the history of Europe in the period in all
its most important aspects.
T. C. W. Blanning
Sidney Sussex College
Cambridge

Contents
List of Illustrations
x
List of Contributors
xi
1 The creation of classical Greece
1
Robin Osborne
The natural world of Greece
3
The pre-classical past: the literary inheritance
5
The pre-classical past: oral history
10
The pre-classical past: the monuments
12
City and nation
18
The programme of this book
21
2 The economy
23
Paul Millett
The political economy of Attic Oratory
23
Back to the land
26
From the shop ﬂoor
31
The silver lining
35
Toilers of the sea
39
Go a-borrowing, go a-sorrowing? 
44
The heart of the matter
49
Envoi
51
3 The classical city
52
Rosalind Thomas
The civic model
52
Citizens and citizenship
55
Athens and Sparta
60
The polis
69
Religious activity and the polis
74

viii
|
contents
4 The city at war
81
Hans van Wees
The causes of war
82
The soldiers: military roles and social status
84
Waging war
93
The economics of warfare
106
The transformation of classical warfare
109
5 Political conﬂicts, political debates, and political thought
111
Josiah Ober
Introduction: civil war in Corcyra,  bc
111
Political theory: the sources of conﬂict and its prevention
115
Democracy at Athens and its critics
121
Political conﬂict on stage
126
Spartan oligarchy: the rise and fall of a political ideal
131
Monarchy revisited
134
Conclusions: from destructive political conﬂict to constructive
political debate
135
6 Private life
139
James Davidson
The body
142
Dress
144
Diet and health
149
Oikos: household and house
151
Family
154
Slaves
158
Friendship
160
Sexuality
162
A civic morality
165
Conclusion
168
7 The ﬁfth century: political and military narrative
170
Lisa Kallet
The Ionian Revolt and the Persian Wars
171
Consequences of the Persian Wars
173

contents
|
ix
The Delian League and the creation of empire
176
Sparta, Corinth, and Athens, –
182
Greeks in the West
184
Thucydides and the development of a genre
185
The Peloponnesian War
187
Conclusion
196
8 The fourth century: political and military narrative
197
Robin Osborne
Discerning a pattern
197
A pattern repeated
202
The decades of uncertainty
206
The rise of Macedon
211
Greece into Asia
219
9 Epilogue
223
Robin Osborne
Further Reading

Chronology

Glossary

List of Ancient Authors

Maps

Index


List of Illustrations
. Hoplites in action. Black-ﬁgure ‘eye-cup’ by Exekias, third
quarter of the sixth century

Munich, Antikensammlungen  (ABV .). Courtesy of the Hirmer
Fotoarchiv, Munich
. Peltast. Red-ﬁgure cup of c.

University of Leipzig, Antikenmuseum T. (ARV .). Courtesy of
the Institut für Klassische Archäologie und Antikenmuseum der Universität
Leipzig
. Reconstruction of an ancient trireme

Courtesy of Boris Rankov
. Bronze statuette of a hoplite

Staatliche Museen, Berlin, Antikensammlung, Misc. . Courtesy of
Antikensammlung, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin––Preussischer Kulturbesitz
. Diagram of hoplite ranks

Drawing by Hans van Wees
. Statue of Aeschines

Museo Nazionale Archeologico Naples, . Courtesy of Deutsches
Archäologisches Institut, Rome
. A house on the Pnyx

By John Ellis Jones. Courtesy of the Belgian Committee for Excavation in
Greece
. A veiled and crowned bride. Red-ﬁgure loutrophoros

Staatliche Museen, Berlin, Antikensammlung F. Courtesy of Antiken-
sammlung, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin––Preussischer Kulturbesitz
. School scene. Red-ﬁgure cup signed by Douris

Staatliche Museen, Berlin, Antikensammlung F, ARV ..
Courtesy of Antikensammlung, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin––Preussischer
Kulturbesitz
. Demosthenes. Copy of a statue by Polyeuktos, erected in the
Athenian Agora in 

Ny Carlsberg Glyptothek . Courtesy of the Ny Carlsberg Glyptothek
Maps
Map The Greek World

Map Mainland Greece


List of Contributors
james davidson is Reader in Ancient History at Birkbeck College,
London, and author of Courtesans and Fishcakes: the Consuming
Passions of Classical Athens () and One Mykonos ().
lisa kallet is Professor of Ancient History at the University of
Texas at Austin and author of Money, Expense and Naval Power in
Thucydides’ History –. ().
paul millett is Lecturer in Ancient History in the University of
Cambridge and Fellow of Downing College. He is the author of
Lending and Borrowing in Ancient Athens ().
josiah ober is David Magie Professor of Ancient History at Princ-
eton University and author of Fortress Attica: Defense of the Athenian
Land Frontier, – bc (), Mass and Elite in Democratic Athens:
Rhetoric, Ideology and the Power of the People (), The Athenian
Revolution: Essays on Ancient Greek Democracy and Political Theory
(), and Political Dissent in Democratic Athens: Intellectual Critics
of Popular Rule ().
robin osborne is a Professor of Ancient History in the University of
Oxford and Fellow of Corpus Christi College. He is the author of
Demos: the Discovery of Classical Attika (), Classical Landscape
with Figures: the Ancient Greek City and its Countryside (), Greece
in the Making – bc (), and Archaic and Classical Greek Art
().
rosalind thomas is Reader in History at Royal Holloway, Uni-
versity of London, and author of Oral Tradition and Written Record in
Classical Athens (), Literacy and Orality in Ancient Greece (),
and Herodotus in Context: Ethnography, Science and the Art of Persua-
sion ().
hans van wees is Lecturer in Ancient History at University College
London, and author of Status Warriors: War, Violence and Society in
Homer and History () and Greek Warfare: Myths and Realities
().

1
The creation of
classical Greece
Robin Osborne
Classical Greece is both an icon and an enigma.
An icon. The architectural forms and proportions displayed by public
buildings of the ﬁfth and fourth centuries bc have become the refer-
ence point for all modern western architecture, whether it espouses
them or rejects them. The selective naturalism of classical sculpture
and its sensuous exploration of the naked human body has put ﬁg-
urative art at the centre of the grand tradition of painting, as well as
of sculpture, and has become the epitome of the art of a free and self-
conﬁdent society. The crises and dilemmas of individual, family,
and community, probed and unfolded in Greek tragedy, have been
endlessly reinvestigated by successive generations of writers from
Roman times to the present day and have acquired archetypal status
as the essential expressions of human psychology. The relativism of
Heraclitus or Protagoras, the idealism of Plato, the scepticism of
Democritus, are still the basic expressions of what are fundamental
philosophical positions, and the logic of Aristotle has only recently
ceased to conﬁne and control the nature of all philosophical argu-
ment. The determination by a community as a whole of its actions
and policies through the medium of the popular assembly is still held
out as the model of truly democratic practice.
An enigma. The classical Greek world was very diﬀerent from the
earlier great civilizations of Mesopotamia and Egypt. It was a world
of tiny, more or less independent ‘cities’, many of which enjoyed no
special resources and whose livelihood was based on agricultural
produce which uncertain rainfall rendered highly unpredictable.

2
|
classical greece
Clustered around the shores not just of what is today Greece but also
of southern Italy, Sicily, southern France, Asia Minor, the Black Sea,
and Cyrenaica, these cities were frequently in conﬂict; only in the face
of invasion on a massive scale from the mighty Persian empire or
under the compulsion of a single brieﬂy paramount city, as Athens in
the middle of the ﬁfth century, was there any signiﬁcant degree of
collaboration. The Greeks themselves talked of being united by
blood, customs, religion, and language, but in each case it is more a
matter of similarity than identity: the Greek language included dia-
lects whose structural similarity does not preclude a level of linguistic
diversity so high as to make the degree of mutual intelligibility ques-
tionable; Greek religion was polytheistic and accommodated any
number of gods and heroes worshipped in peculiar local rituals as
well as through animal sacriﬁce whose basic rules were common;
Greeks paraded myths of descent that united them with some
Greeks (for example as part of the ethnic group identifying itself as
‘Dorians’) and divided them from other Greeks (the genealogies of
‘Dorians’ and ‘Ionians’ had nothing in common), but those myths
can be shown to be ﬁctions that both removed and created ethnic
distinctions. These salient features of classical Greece certainly dis-
tance it from the great civilizations of the Near and Middle East, but
they fail to mark it out from other parts of Iron Age Europe. And the
subsequent history of Greece, a history of conquest by Rome, is one
shared by both the rest of Iron Age Europe and by the Near East.
How then are the cultural achievements of classical Greece to be
explained?
This volume stands at the head of a History of Europe because of
the icon that classical Greece has become. European identity in the
two and a half millennia that have passed since has been formed by
the processes of comparison and contrast with an image of classical
Greece, and every study of subsequent European culture, taking cul-
ture in its broadest sense, is a study of response to that classical past.
For subsequent volumes the interest lies in the icon, in the manipula-
tion of an image of classical Greece, as the story and the cultural
products of the classical Greek city are taken up separately and indi-
vidually and put to work to social and political ends. This volume is
concerned with how those elements which later ages have selected for
exploitation hang together; the classic cultural products become
themselves part of the evidence as we look behind the images and try

the creation of classical greece
|
3
better to understand the nature of the enigma, if not to solve it, and
put on display the sort of world that produced the art, literature, and
philosophy that have determined what art, literature, and philosophy
are like for Europeans of all subsequent ages.
The natural world of Greece
The Greek peninsula jutting out into the central Mediterranean con-
sists of small upland and small and larger lowland plains divided by
mountains. Communications by land within the peninsula are
restricted, and land communications with the rest of Europe to the
north very poor. The peninsula’s jagged coastline oﬀers numerous
landing places and harbours, and communications by sea, whether
hugging the coast or making use of chains of islands, are relatively
easy. Archaeological evidence suggests that from well back into the
third millennium bc communications around and across the south-
ern Aegean were lively. Within the classical period too, it was the sea
which enabled Athens to build up the enormous network of alliances
that comprised her ‘empire’; the rival ‘league’ of Sparta, the city with
the dominant land army, included few cities outside the Peloponnese.
Physical geography conspired with climate to make much of main-
land Greece and the islands marginal for agriculture. In a general
pattern of long dry windy summers and wet winters, the south-
eastern part of the Greek peninsula normally receives too little rain
to support garden vegetables without irrigation (see below p. ).
Marked variation from year to year means that in dry years even less
thirsty cereal crops can be totally wiped out in this region,
and reduced crop yields are not infrequent in those regions with a
generally higher average precipitation. Upland areas enjoy plentiful
rainfall, but at higher altitudes areas suitable for cereals are restricted,
and their growth, and that of vines, retarded by the cold, while olives,
which can survive drought, cannot tolerate mountain winters.
From the Bronze Age onwards Greeks sailed from the mainland
and islands of the Aegean and Ionian seas to settle in other regions of
the Mediterranean, and part of the attraction of doing so was to
secure more favourable agricultural conditions: Sicily is notably wet-
ter than mainland Greece, and the Greek settlement at Cyrene was in

4
|
classical greece
the one area of that part of north Africa with good rainfall. In these
foreign parts cereal monoculture and production primarily with an
eye to the market were possible; in the Greek mainland it was import-
ant to combine arable and pastoral agriculture and to grow a little of
everything. Hedging bets against what the year might bring, storing
some, eating some, and selling some of the produce––this was the
essential strategy of any small farmer.
Climate had its eﬀect on communications also. The winters are wet
enough––extremely wet in the mountains––to produce seasonal tor-
rents that could be quite impassable, and in ancient as in modern
times everyone knew stories of ﬂash ﬂoods that had simply washed
away villages or ﬁelds. Coupled with unpredictable seas, on which
none would venture, this severely restricted winter communications:
trade and war alike were normally matters for the long summer sea-
son. A city could expect to have the months of winter uninterrupted
by visitors, and whether for purposes of survival or for purposes of
entertainment, residents had to shift for themselves and for each
other.
The wild landscape that formed a backdrop to human activities
was probably not very dissimilar to what can be seen today. In several
pat of Greece there are limestone basins drained through swallow-
holes; attempts were made to drain these from the Bronze Age
onwards, with sporadic success, but fen and marsh continued to pro-
vide an important resource absent from the systematically drained
modern landscape. On the other hand claims of massive deforesta-
tion since antiquity seem mistaken: Greece today has a greater area of
woodland than it had ﬁfty years ago, and the classical landscape may
have been less wooded than today’s.
The border between the cultivated and the wild ﬂuctuated accord-
ing to population pressure, and there is some evidence that the ﬁfth
and particularly the fourth century saw marginal areas pressed into
cultivation. At all times the wild landscape was itself heavily
exploited, for fuel and food; the milk products and meat on which
cities relied came from animals supported on the uncultivated
landscape. Nor was the rough landscape unimportant in inter-city
relations: the movement of shepherds through the mountains that
divided cities ensured that news spread quickly and widely, and, as
the plot of Sophocles’ tragedy Oedipus the King shows, it was not
always the élite who were the best informed.

the creation of classical greece
|
5
The pre-classical past: the literary inheritance
There are parts of the circuit wall left, including the gate with lions standing
on it. They say this is the work of Cylopes, who built the wall of Tiryns for
Proetus. In the ruins of Mycenae is a water-source called Perseus’ spring, and
the underground chambers of Atreus and his sons where the treasuries of
their wealth were.
So Pausanias (. . –) wrote in his guidebook in the second century
ad. Monumental remains dating to the second half of the second
millennium bc or earlier were visible in various parts of Greece, and
graves and grave-goods from the Bronze Age were uncovered from
time to time (the ‘Treasury of Atreus’, named from a mythical ruler
associated with Mycenae, was in fact a grave). But the past to which
the remains of Mycenae, Tiryns, and so on, were ascribed by classical
Greeks was not the past of complex bureaucratic societies, with which
the decipherment of the Linear B tablets from late Bronze Age Greece
has made modern scholars familiar, but the heroic past known from
epic poetry and above all from the poems ascribed to Homer.
Between the political and material achievements of the late Bronze
Age and the formation of the city-states which ﬂourished so vigor-
ously in the ﬁfth-century bc lay a gulf which we know as the Dark
Age; for us it is increasingly illuminated by archaeology, but classical
Greeks had no memories of this period and no physical evidence of it
remained above ground.
Herodotus’ Histories, his inquiries into ‘the great and remarkable
deeds of the Greeks and the Persians and . . . why they went to war
with each other’ (Preface), written in the second half of the ﬁfth
century bc, are our best source for what classical Greeks believed
about their past. He claims at one point (. ) that it was Homer and
Hesiod, whom he places about  years before his own time (i.e. in
the late ninth century bc), to whom the Greeks owed their knowledge
of the gods. The discovery of the names of many of the classical gods
in Linear B texts from the late Bronze Age has shown how false
Herodotus’ belief is. But this only shows the more clearly both the
extent to which the world in which classical Greeks lived was a world
constructed by literary texts and the limitations of classical memory
and oral tradition.

6
|
classical greece
Hesiod, who ﬂourished around , was credited with a series of
poems of which the two most important were an account of the
creation of the world in terms of divine genealogy, entitled the
Theogony, and a description of how to run a farmer’s life properly,
known as the Works and Days. Homer was credited not only with the
Iliad, telling of the quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon and its
tragic consequences, and the Odyssey, telling of Odysseus’ (Ulysses’)
eventful return journey from Troy to Ithaca, but also with other epics
related to events at Troy and with a series of hymns to the major gods.
The works attributed to Homer and Hesiod relate systematically the
stories of only a few Greek heroes, but they provide an anchorage
for a large part of what has come to be known as ‘Greek myth-
ology’; more importantly, they oﬀer pictures of a world in which
the larger-than-life ﬁgures of mythology face and cope with situ-
ations comparable to those facing ordinary people within the Greek
city.
The form of the Iliad and Odyssey makes it clear that they are the
product of a long poetic tradition stretching back into the Bronze
Age; the content of Hesiod’s poems, and of the Theogony, in particu-
lar, seems so closely related to traditions from the Near East as to
make totally independent invention unlikely. In this way these foun-
dational texts made ﬁfth-century Greeks the inheritors not simply of
a world of small communities with short and parochial histories, but
of an extensive, if heavily pre-packaged, prehistory and of stories and
ideas with deep roots in the wider Indo-European world to which
they also owed their language. Greek politics may owe nothing to the
great dynastic kingdoms of the Near East, but Greek forms of
thought and means of expression could not have developed without
those earlier developments further east.
The heroic Greece of the Homeric poems is already a Greece frag-
mented into independent city-states. These could he mobilized, part-
ly by means of kinship ties between rulers, into co-operative reaction
to a foreign threat (Paris’ abduction of Helen, wife of Menelaus the
ruler of Sparta), but they were competitive and maintained proud
independence––as Achilles does when Agamemnon appropriates his
share of Trojan War booty. Political succession in this world was
insecure: Odysseus’ son Telemachus cannot simply take over his
father’s power in Ithaca. But even as they quarrelled among them-
selves the élite kept themselves at a distance from the ordinary troops,

the creation of classical greece
|
7
as emerges when one of the rank-and-ﬁle, named Thersites, tries
joining in the criticism of Agamemnon.
Homer’s heroes ﬁght above all for their honour, which they main-
tain by martial valour, by skill in speaking and acuity of political
analysis, and by the ability to bestow valuable gifts on others. How
one source of honour compares to another is subject to debate:
Achilles refuses the recompense that others regard as suﬃcient
repayment for the slight from Agamemnon, and he extorts revenge
from the body of Hector for the death of his soulmate Patroclus that
is signalled as excessive. Ends can be made to justify the means, and
Odysseus’ endless deceptions are redeemable by success, but some
loyalty to kin and to friends is absolute, and so, when men are away
from home, is loyalty to fellow countrymen (‘citizens’ is not yet the
appropriate term).
Homer’s account of warfare is highly stylized. At centre stage her-
oes, whose donning of heavy armour is described in intricate detail,
ﬁght duels in which there is space for taunting words, even for the
exchange of armour when opposing warriors discover an old link
between their families, and to and from which they travel in chariots.
Actual encounters tend to be brief, and in many cases a single blow
proves immediately fatal. Words and actions compete for attention in
this account in which the actions of an individual hero are followed
through in detail and the values that are at issue are openly paraded
in challenges, petitions, and the ripostes to them. But in the back-
ground are the masses of the rank-and-ﬁle, raising clouds of dust as
they march to battle and sustaining the conﬂict over a long battle line.
This is warfare strongly shaped by convention, but also warfare where
numbers count and everyone has a part to play.
Success or failure in war, as in other enterprises in Homer, depends
upon the attitude taken by the gods. The gods debate amongst them-
selves the overall course of events, arguing for their own favourites
and harbouring grudges or favour according to past actions which
have pleased or displeased them. The gods also intervene directly,
disguising themselves as humans in order to give messages and
change the course of events, or even entering the battleﬁeld––where
they can be wounded. Men repeatedly assume that the gods will
intervene on the side of the morally right, but the gods and goddesses
are shown to he motivated more by self-interest than by morality;
their world, like the world of men, is above all a world in which

8
|
classical greece
current actions are undertaken in response to past actions, but where
only the cross-cutting interests of others ensure that the reciprocity is
even vaguely balanced. When Poseidon wants to punish the people of
Phaeacia for helping Odysseus (whom Poseidon hates for his blind-
ing of the Cyclops) get home, Zeus has him turn only the returning
Phaeacian ship to stone, and not destroy their whole city, but this
does little to mitigate the reader’s sense of injustice that a ‘good turn’
should be rewarded in this way.
Reciprocity similarly characterizes the behaviour of the gods in the
poems of Hesiod. This comes out in the Theogony’s account of the
successive generations of gods, in which Cronos, who becomes top
god by castrating his father Heaven, who will not allow his children to
come to light, is himself ousted by Zeus after he tries to swallow his
own children. But it is perhaps clearest of all in the accounts he gives
to explain the miserable condition of humanity and why men have to
toil to feed themselves when animals do not. Men have to toil for the
means of life because Zeus hid it, and Zeus hid it as part of a succes-
sion of sanctions against the crafty Prometheus, who had forced the
gods to choose between the fat and bones or the meat of sacriﬁcial
animals, and had made human retention of the meat useful by re-
capturing the ﬁre which Zeus had then hidden. Throughout this
story, which proceeds with Zeus creating Pandora, the ﬁrst woman,
beautiful but loaded with troubles for men, basic features of human
life are explained as the result of a process of give and take with the
gods, in which human attempts to alter their lot for the better always
risk counter-measures from the gods.
But as in the Homeric poems, so also in Hesiod, the gods who
often seem to act in an arbitrary fashion are portrayed within an
overall framework that stresses the necessity of moral behaviour, the
rewarding of the just and the punishment of the wicked. In the
Odyssey creatures that are unsociable and obey no rules, such as the
Cyclops, or ﬂout the rules, like the suitors for the hand of Odysseus’
wife Penelope, get outwitted and punished. In Hesiod’s Works and
Days the poet himself, although very aware that human agents of
justice can act crookedly, urges his brother Perses to work hard and
time his actions carefully on the basic assumption that prosperity is
earned by good sense and hard work and is not a windfall gain. In
both Homer and Hesiod, the temptation to believe that the world and
its events are as arbitrary as they seem coexists with the desire to

the creation of classical greece
|
9
believe that there is a system after all. The gods are given an uneasy
place between being free and being entirely determined agents.
The profound uncertainty that lies at the heart of Greek tragedy is
deeply rooted not just in the text of the Homeric poems but in the
world view that those poems and the poems of Hesiod exploit and
explore. Many of the plots of tragedy are built around incidents con-
nected with the Iliad in particular, and from at least the sixth century
some painters of pots had similarly explored the poignant potential
for building on the Homeric stories of Achilles, Ajax, and other her-
oes. Achilles, Agamemnon, and in a diﬀerent way also Odysseus, are
oﬀered to the readers of the Homeric poems as men who combine
ﬁne moral qualities with moral short-sightedness: tragedy further
explores the characters of Agamemnon and Odysseus in particular,
and creates similar moral dilemmas for other heroes who in the
archaic period seem to have lived less morally complicated lives. But
whereas the Homeric poems explore dilemmas primarily on an indi-
vidual level, classical tragedy, performed in a diﬀerent political con-
text, repeatedly makes the interests of the community an element in
the moral equation.
In a similar way, classical Greek philosophy can also be seen to
grow out of Homer and Hesiod. Out of Hesiod, as it seeks an alterna-
tive account of the origins of the world to his divine genealogy, and
seeks an original state of the world that can be justiﬁed by argument,
as Hesiod’s own original Chaos (Theogony ) is not. Out of both
Hesiod and Homer, as it rejects whimsical gods and, while noting that
it is simply because they are men that men think gods must look like
men, insists that gods must live up to the moral standards expected of
men. Out of Homer’s heavy concentration on direct speech, on per-
suasion, and on the diﬃculty of knowing whether a speaker is telling
the truth or not, as it turns the informal distinctions between types of
communication that can be observed in epic into the formal cate-
gories that mark the beginning of the study of rhetoric. But here too,
as with the development of tragedy, we are not dealing simply with a
‘natural’ development out of the earlier literature. The political
importance of speaking before mass bodies created a new necessity
for the analysis of rhetoric, and the frequency of public debate in
general quickened the pace of critical thought in natural philosophy,
ethics, and theology.

10
|
classical greece
The pre-classical past: oral history
Although Herodotus opens his account of relations between Greece
and Persia by putting the great war against Persia of the early ﬁfth
century into the context of hostile relations between Greece and Asia
going back to such incidents as Paris’ abduction of Helen, the great
heroes of Greek myth make virtually no appearance in his work. His
opening account of abduction and counter-abduction is in fact put
into the mouth of the Persians, and throughout his work it is what
people say about themselves and their past that provides Herodotus’
primary data. And because political behaviour, the decision to ﬁght,
is his primary interest, it is stories about politics that dominate
his work.
Herodotus is concerned with the big questions of political power
and historical causation: what makes a city strong and what weak?
what has determined the course of history? His answers to these
questions are consonant with the model of the world oﬀered by
Homer and Hesiod. Events of today have a relationship with events of
the past: no action is taken that does not also have a reaction, and the
strong city is the city favoured by the gods which is also the city
capable of concerted and regulated actions rather than the city that is
disunited and subject to no law. Famously Herodotus suggests that it
was giving equal rights to political participation to all (native free-
born adult males) that enabled Athens to advance from a minor to a
major power among Greek cities.
Herodotus’ informants did not necessarily share his agenda. They
told stories about the past not in order to make Greek success against
Persia comprehensible but for local reasons, perhaps most frequently
to justify their current political regime and their current allies and
enemies. Cities with monarchs, like the Greek city of Cyrene in Libya,
told stories about the remarkable achievements that led to the foun-
dation of the monarchy; cities that had had monarchs and deposed
them, like Corinth or Athens itself, adapted those stories to become
stories of abuse that justiﬁed the deposition. Individual families told
stories that claimed glorious deeds by ancestors and defended their
past political record in the light of current political preferences.
The pressures on the past from those who told stories about it left

the creation of classical greece
|
11
it heavily patterned. The patterns in the accounts that have come
down to us are partly created by Herodotus himself, partly by his
informants, partly by the informants who lie behind the versions of
past events we ﬁnd in later historians, in the Athenian orators, or in
the inscriptions which commemorated the past by reproducing what
were claimed as past decisions. Every city could point to successes
achieved with the explicit support of the gods, consulted through
oracles, to rulers whose abuses led to their downfall and/or set-backs
for the city as a whole, to acts of deception––in particular false claims
to oracular backing or divine support––which had led to short-term
but also short-lasting success, to law-givers who displayed their wis-
dom above all by the paradoxical means by which they achieved their
ends. Behind this pattern, as behind the Homeric and Hesiodic
poems, is an assumption of order and morality.
In his account of the history of Persia, Herodotus (. –) tells
that after the death of the (bad) king Cambyses the Persians had a
debate over whether to continue with monarchy or to adopt either
oligarchy, in which political participation was restricted to the well-
born or wealthy, or democracy (see further p. ). The historicity of
this debate is dubious, but it does accurately represent the choice that
was set up for all Greek cities by the stories told about the past. The
trouble with a sole ruler is presented as that he is subject to no
control, that power corrupts and leads to savagery, and that the one
who should be above envy in fact becomes jealous of the best men in
the state. The trouble with rule by the people is that they are ignorant
and irresponsible, capable of even greater violence than the sole ruler,
and that factionalism inevitably means that one man ends up getting
himself installed as ruler. The trouble with oligarchy is that the few
who have power compete with each other and that this leads to
conﬂict and bloodshed within the city. The tone of the debate is
negative: it is allowed that democracy has the ﬁnest of all names,
equality of rights, but all that is said in favour of oligarchy is that it is
in the self-interest of those nobles who are holding the debate. This
negativity is an almost inevitable product of a (Greek) world in which
stories of the past are most often told for their cautionary eﬀect.
The negative slant on the past even extends to ﬁgures whose own
reputations are glowing. The Athenian Solon was responsible for
formulating the law code for the city at the beginning of the sixth
century which probably ﬁrst gave some judicial power to the people

12
|
classical greece
and may well have transformed Athenian society by eliminating the
enslavement of Athenians for debt. But Herodotus presents Solon not
as a political reformer but as a wise man whose sagest advice is that
no one should be called happy till he is dead.
It is this essentially negative view, not just of politics but of life, that
classical Greeks inherited. The glorious past belonged in the age of
heroes and was lost beyond recall; the real past was full of trickery,
violence and abuse, both within individual cities and in relations
between cities. Promises could not be trusted, and nothing was stable.
That instability did indeed mean that improvement was always pos-
sible: Lycurgus the Spartan lawgiver was held to have turned his city
round from being the most lawless to being the best governed, and
with good government, success in inter-city relations had followed.
But disadvantages were visible in all arrangements, and Sparta’s most
recent stories were of king Cleomenes (c.–), who invented
oracles, broke sacred laws, damaged the property of the gods, and
ended up mad, killing himself in a gruesome way. However hand-
some the façade might look at any moment, disaster was always
waiting to happen.
The pre-classical past: the monuments
Herodotus (. ) tells that Sparta attempted at one time to conquer
her northern neighbour Tegea and to enslave her people, as she had
earlier enslaved the people of Messenia as helots, before turning to a
policy of seeking alliance with her on the basis of common ancestry.
He knows this episode to be true because he has seen, in the temple of
Athena Alea at Tegea, the fetters which the Spartans had brought with
them to use upon the conquered and which the Tegeans, successful in
resisting their attack, had then used on their Spartan prisoners of war.
The conﬁrmation of a story by an object still visible in his day is a
frequent motif in Herodotus: that the poet Arion, when thrown
overboard by the Corinthian sailors with whom he was travelling,
was carried to shore by a dolphin is conﬁrmed by a statuette of a
ﬁgure on a dolphin in the sanctuary of Poseidon at Taenarum; the
wealth of the prostitute Rhodopis, freed from slavery in Egypt by the
brother of the poet Sappho, is demonstrated by her dedication of

the creation of classical greece
|
13
spits at the sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi; the proﬁt made by a
Samian merchant named Colaeus after his ship, bound for Egypt, was
blown through the straits of Gibraltar and ended up at Tartessus in
south-west Spain, is shown by his dedication of a colossal bronze
mixing-bowl at the sanctuary of Hera on Samos.
Because sanctuaries were repositories of dedications made by past
generations, they were also repositories of stories. Unusual objects in
sanctuaries demanded explanation, and found it in accounts of how
they came there. Such accounts might preserve memories of events
which would otherwise be forgotten; they might be used to conﬁrm
claims about the past which needed reinforcement; they might stimu-
late the fancy and lead to impressive ﬁctions. One way or another
they contributed to the rich resources that classical Greeks had to
hand for thinking about the present.
The physical legacy of the past to the ﬁfth century consisted not
just of curious objects that had been dedicated to gods but of the
temples which dominated sanctuaries and of texts displayed in them.
From the ﬁrst appearance of the Greek alphabet, invented on the
model of the Phoenician alphabet probably in the eighth century,
sanctuaries had attracted written texts. Men addressed their dedica-
tions to gods in writing, put up laws in sanctuaries to ensure divine
oversight of them and deposited treaties in the presence of the gods
to prevent their being lightly transgressed. Such inscriptions were
liable to become diﬃcult to read over time, both because the way
individual letters were written changed, and because stones became
eroded, but it seems that in Athens reference was still being made in
the ﬁfth century to Solon’s law code, which was displayed on the
Acropolis, and Thucydides (. ) tries to prove the correct sequence
of the sons of the Athenian sixth-century ruler Pisistratus by refer-
ence to the inscription on the altar of Apollo Pythius by which
Pisistratus’ grandson commemorated his holding of the chief magis-
tracy at Athens, the archonship, in /––an inscription which still
survives (Fomara ).
Most classical cities told stories about how they got their laws,
stories that invariably celebrated an individual lawgiver, not
infrequently a man brought in from another city or who was held to
have drawn ideas from elsewhere. This promotion of the lawgiver
served, in part at least, to increase the standing of the laws: the more
remarkable the lawgiver the more reluctant ordinary mortals should

14
|
classical greece
be to change his laws. Complete rewriting of law codes was rare in
classical Greece, and even dramatic changes in constitution tended to
be accomplished with the minimum of legislative change; when indi-
viduals established themselves as sole rulers they more normally
ignored than changed the laws. Old laws were socially conservative,
and the relics of old social institutions became embedded in them.
Athenian litigants exploited the fact that many laws were old and
phrased in peculiar ways in order to insist that the lawgiver really
meant something that suited their own case: appeal to the lawgiver’s
intention became a major tool of legal argument.
Through the laws displayed in sanctuaries, the past reached for-
ward to constrain the actions, and promote the ingenuity, of the
classical present. In a similar way the temples and monumental sculp-
tures that dominated those sanctuaries framed the classical view both
of the gods and of humanity. Monumental stone temples were ﬁrst
constructed in the seventh century, and during the sixth century
virtually every major sanctuary was transformed by the construction
of one or more large temples. In Ionia the cities of Samos and
Ephesus, and in Sicily the cities of Selinus and Acragas, each built
temples more than m. long, m. wide, and with columns – m.
high (in the case of Samos two successive such temples); Selinus, not
content with a single massive temple built ﬁve further large temples
in the course of the sixth century, with more to follow in the early
ﬁfth. Mainland cities were in general more moderate in the scale of
their activity, but a temple of × m. was begun (but not ﬁnished)
at Athens, whose acropolis saw two successive temples to Athena
constructed within the sixth century, both richly adorned with sculp-
ture. At the sanctuaries at Olympia and Delphi, widely visited by
Greeks to participate in games at both and to consult the oracle at the
latter, temple building was accompanied by the competitive building
by various cities from the mainland and Sicily of small but ornate
treasuries to contain precious dedications.
The architectural form set in the seventh and sixth centuries was to
govern the appearance of Greek temples throughout the classical
period and be heavily inﬂuential also on later Greek and Roman
buildings. Temples were gabled buildings on a substantial base,
usually oriented east–west, with columns at either end if small and
columns all round if large. Within the colonnade was a rectangular
structure containing a room in which the cult statue stood, and

the creation of classical greece
|
15
sometimes a further room in which temple treasures were stored.
There were two basic types of column and associated patterns of
architectural detailing, known as Ionic and Doric, and the classical
period saw some innovation in the forms and combinations of these,
but both the ‘syntax’ and the ‘morphology’ of classical architectural
form were established by .
The same could be said for cult practices. Worship of the gods
focused upon the altars generally found in front of the east façade of
temples. On designated festival days a procession consisting of priests
or priestesses and other sacred oﬃcials, the animals to be slaughtered,
and the group on whose behalf the sacriﬁce was being oﬀered, made
its way to the altar. The animals were made to indicate their consent
and then their throats were slit. A butcher divided up the victims,
whose innards were grilled and whose ﬂesh was either roasted or
boiled, and the assembled group enjoyed the feast, taking away any
remaining meat for subsequent consumption. In the case of deities
connected closely with the earth, the so-called chthonic deities, no
meat was taken away––sometimes the victim was entirely burnt up
and there was no meat to be consumed. Already this pattern of
religious activity is outlined in the Homeric poems, and the paradox
that it is the human participants rather than the gods who get to
enjoy the best parts of the sacriﬁced animal ‘explained’, as we have
seen, in Hesiod’s Theogony. Religious laws from the classical period
arrange the details of processions, victims, and the distribution of
meat to participants to achieve political ends, but animal sacriﬁce
continued to have a ‘pre-political’ function, as both the culminating
event of religious festivals and the prime source of meat for the in-
habitants of the classical city.
Various rituals further elaborated Greek festivals: cult statues
might be washed or adorned with new garments, secret objects might
be moved from one place to another or displayed to initiates, and so
on. The most important of the elaborations, however, was the add-
ition of competitions in athletic and/or cultural prowess. From at
least the eighth century––according to claims by a ﬁfth-century
scholar, from ––races had been part of the festival of Zeus at
Olympia, and during the seventh and sixth centuries further athletic
events had been added. The quadrennial Olympic games became the
biggest event in the calendar for élite families from all over the Greek
world, the place at which a city ruler might advertise for a husband

16
|
classical greece
for his daughter and the place to show oﬀ both individual and city
wealth. Victory at Olympia brought no direct ﬁnancial prize, but it
gave enormous prestige; cities gave special rights to citizens who
scored success in the games, rights that ranged from free meals to a
special place in the battle line. In the ﬁfth century stories were told at
Athens of a man who attempted to seize power on the basis of the
kudos an Olympic victory had brought him, and of another who ﬁrst
ascribed a victory to the jealous ruler Pisistratus in an attempt to
curry favour, and was then secretly executed by Pisistratus’ sons when
his successes became too persistent. In the early sixth century other
sanctuaries had established lookalike games, so that every year there
was a major athletic event to which competitors came from all Greek
cities.
Festivals provided opportunities not only for competition between
cities but for competition within cities. At Athens from the middle of
the sixth century the major festival of Athena featured athletic events,
including team events, and also competitions for the recitation of the
Homeric poems. Later in the century the festival of Dionysus, known
as the Great or City Dionysia, acquired a dramatic competition which
involved the performance ﬁrst of just tragedies and then later of both
tragedy and comedy over several days. In the later sixth century the
Athenians added competitions to more and more festivals, multiply-
ing the number and variety of opportunities citizens had for display-
ing prowess and earning both reputation and monetary rewards.
Classical alterations to festivals––such as the addition of a parade of
tribute-paying allies to an Athenian festival in the middle of the ﬁfth
century––exploited possibilities that were already there, rather than
creating a radically new pattern of activity.
If there was a revolution in the world of the sanctuary, a way in
which the monuments of classical Greece broke with the pattern
established by the monuments of archaic Greece, it was in sculpture.
Some sort of cult statue representing the god or goddess whose sanc-
tuary it was seems to have been found already in the temples of the
eighth century. Small bronze ﬁgurines of men were also dedicated to
deities in that century, along with rather more numerous ﬁgures of
cattle and sheep, animals which were sacriﬁced, and birds and horses,
animals which were not. From the end of the following century,
sanctuaries also saw life-sized or more than life-sized stone ﬁgures,
partly inspired by Egyptian practices. These standing ﬁgures came to

the creation of classical greece
|
17
be dedicated in very large numbers indeed: we know of more than a
hundred at the sanctuary of Apollo Ptoieus in Boeotia.
Most of these large stone statues took a very stereotyped form: the
statues of men showed them naked with one foot slightly advanced
and their arms by their sides; the statues of women showed them
clothed and with an oﬀering in one hand. Although in the course of
the sixth century these statues came to make more detailed reference
to the precise appearance of men and women, and although when
occasionally used as markers on graves statues of this form were in
some sense associated with an individual, these kouroi and korai, as
they are called, were never lifelike representations of the appearance
of particular men or women. Rather they owed their popularity and
usefulness to the rather generalized reference that they made to the
males and females of the human species. There were statues of diﬀer-
ent forms, including men carrying animals to sacriﬁce and men
mounted on horses, but they too were generic rather than speciﬁc in
their reference.
Classical dedications abandoned the stereotyped kouros and kore
form as they also abandoned stone as the medium. Bronze statues
dominated the new sculptural range in sanctuaries, and men might
now appear engaged in athletics or music or equipped with helmet
and spear. But most importantly, although they did not become por-
traits, they did become individualized; the detailed reference to taut
or slack ﬂesh, the keenness or languidity of eye, the poise and balance
of the ﬁgure, all encourage the viewer to attribute to the statue the
qualities (age, physical ﬁtness) and even the thoughts and passions of
a living individual. To enter a sixth-century sanctuary was to enter a
forest of symbols; to enter a sanctuary in the middle of the ﬁfth
century was to enter a world of living people. Here was an area where
the development of new technical resources (in particular through
bronze-casting), aided perhaps by the massive destruction of old
monuments at Athens as a result of the Persian invasion, made for a
real break between the classical Greek world and its archaic past.

18
|
classical greece
City and nation
Few pots made in previous centuries can have been visible or known
to Greeks of the ﬁfth century. Pots used in a domestic context got
broken and discarded, pots dedicated in sanctuaries got periodically
cleared up and deposited out of sight, and pots placed in graves were
necessarily invisible. The well-preserved Greek pots of the sixth and
ﬁfth centuries in museums today are the ones recovered from graves,
and in particular from graves in Italy. Our access to archaic pottery
enables us, however, to see more clearly developments that the oral
traditions and upstanding monuments from the period rendered less
strongly visible to Greeks themselves.
Until into the seventh century production of ﬁne pottery was
widespread through mainland Greece and the islands. Archaeologists
can distinguish diﬀerent regional schools of production by their pref-
erences for certain shapes, by their use of certain subsidiary patterns,
and by their choice of ﬁgure scenes and the way the ﬁgures are
depicted. Pottery certainly did move about the Greek world; even
back in the eleventh century a new pottery style developed in Athens,
and known by archaeologists as Protogeometric, had stimulated
lookalike rival products in the Peloponnese, the Cyclades, Thessaly,
and Asia Minor. But until the seventh century access to other tradi-
tions seems simply to have encouraged local endeavours. From the
seventh century onwards this changes and Greek pottery begins
to pick up motifs from the east as well as from other Greek cities.
Corinth, partly by latching onto the fashion for perfumed oil, itself
a habit acquired from the east, established itself as the major ﬁne
pottery supplier for the rest of the Greek world. A century later
Athenian potters, specializing in larger vessels that could be used for
drinking parties, captured the market, driving out even Corinthian
products. By the ﬁfth century virtually nowhere in the Greek world
apart from Athens was producing really ﬁne pottery.
Even the ﬁnest pottery was not expensive, and the economic bene-
ﬁt to Athens from the Athenian near-monopoly was probably not
great, but this humble product does serve to indicate how the Greek
world was coming to be less diverse, more conscious of what cities
had in common. A similar story, in which eastern inﬂuence plays a

the creation of classical greece
|
19
major part in establishing a prevailing type, and individual cities
cease to produce distinct products, can be told about Greek sculpture
and architecture. Greek temple building in stone seems to have been
inspired by the cut-stone architecture of Egypt, and the schools of
architecture that developed––Doric on the mainland (with a varia-
tion played in Sicily and South Italy), Ionic in Asia Minor, a quite
distinct Doric style in the Cyclades––were broadly regional, not city-
speciﬁc. Regional diﬀerences can also be noted in stone sculpture
from the ﬁrst appearance of monumental stone statues of standing
men and women, again directly inspired by Egyptian work, in the late
seventh century, but there is much evidence that both sculptors and
their works moved about the Greek world and that the market did
not at all respect city boundaries.
The uses of mythology make it clear that cities sought to ﬁnd a
place for themselves as part of a larger whole. Even while promoting
distinct styles in ﬁne pottery, the demand seems to have been for
scenes which related to stories and heroes with little or no local
connection, not for myths of particular local relevance. The great
Homeric epics are remarkably lacking in local enthusiasms, even
though Ionia claimed Homer’s birthplace; any city that chose to make
special its major festival by having performances of Homeric epic, as
Athens did, was forgoing the chance to promote its own particular
history and mythology, and choosing to celebrate Greek rather than,
in this case, Athenian achievements.
The diversity and disunity of early Greece is a major theme in the
discussion that opens Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War
between Athens and Sparta at the end of the ﬁfth century. Thucydides
argues that that war was the greatest Greece had known because
earlier disunity had meant that never before had the whole Greek
world been involved in a single conﬂict. Thucydides accounts for the
parochial nature of early Greek history in terms of the early poverty
of the land, and the subsequent self-interest of sole rulers whose
ambitions were limited to providing for their own comfort. What
made ﬁfth-century Greece diﬀerent was partly the strong constitu-
tion and ambitious government in Sparta, which brought about the
end of sole rule elsewhere, but more important was the outside threat
of Persia, which impelled unprecedented numbers of Greek states to
join together to face the Persian invasion.
Greek cities had become aware of the Persian empire and the threat

20
|
classical greece
that it posed when the Persians had conquered the kingdom of Lydia
in the middle of the sixth century and had become the overlords of
the Greeks of Asia Minor. It became apparent that the Persians were
actively looking to extend their empire in this direction when they
tried to conquer the land of the Scythians to the north of the Black
Sea in the penultimate decade of the sixth century. If a not very well
co-ordinated revolt by Ionian Greeks against the Persians in the s
precipitated the ﬁrst attempt to invade the Greek mainland in , it
can only have hastened what will already have seemed to many to be
inevitable.
Some Greeks had proﬁted from the Persian overlordship of Ionia.
Persia liked to work through native agents, and at the end of the sixth
century most Greek cities of Asia Minor were controlled by Greek
rulers who owed their position to the Persians. For the élite of a small
city facing an enormous empire there was eﬀectively little choice:
collaboration with Persia oﬀered the only way to preserve personal
status. For Persia, working with the willing was preferable to repress-
ing the unwilling, and the internal divisions that promoting a single
man or family to pre-eminence were bound to cause would only
make a city the easier to rule.
That there is a history of classical Greece to be written, and that
that history can be the ﬁrst volume of a history of Europe, depends,
as Thucydides saw, on two momentous events. It depends on the
Persian invasions being repulsed by an alliance of Greek cities that
was suﬃciently large to enable it, when victorious, to present its story
as the story of the Greeks as a whole (see below, p. ). That in turn
depends upon the second factor: the development in a body of Greek
cities of constitutional government such that individual self-interest
could be subordinated to the interests of the whole community (see
below, Chapter ), and a war against impossible odds could seem
worth undertaking.
It is at Athens that we know the story of the development of consti-
tutional government best, and it is the story of Athens that has central
place in Herodotus’ account of how the Greeks defeated the Persians.
It is also at Athens that we can best witness the cultural ﬂowering that
has inspired classical Greece the icon. Athens––the urban centre,
together with its surrounding countryside, known as Attica––was
peculiarly large, in area (, square km.) and in population (per-
haps , adult male citizens and –, total residents by

the creation of classical greece
|
21
the middle of the ﬁfth century); Athens was peculiarly rich, by virtue
of the silver mines at Laurium in the southern part of Attica
(see below, pp. –); Athens was also peculiarly well placed,
geographically, to dominate others.
What happened in Athens and what Athens achieved, however,
depended crucially on her being part of the wider Greek world.
Athens had not been politically or culturally dominant during the
archaic period. Socrates and Plato were Athenians by birth, but
Heraclitus, Democritus, Aristotle, and Theophrastus were not:
Athenians had no monopoly over the development of philosophy (see
below, p. ). Phidias and Praxiteles were Athenian, but the other
painters and sculptors who dominate ancient accounts of the history
of classical art––Polyclitus, Polygnotus, Zeuxis, Apelles, Scopas, and
Lysippus––were not: Athens had no monopoly over developments in
the visual arts. All the complete extant tragedies and comedies are by
Athenian poets, but the remains of poetry celebrating victories in
games are dominated by Pindar, a Theban, and Bacchylides from the
island of Ceos, the remains of the showy choral poetry known as
dithyramb by Timotheus from Miletus: only part of the song-culture
of classical Greece was monopolized by Athenians. Unpicking the
enigma that is classical Greece demands that we delve into the history
of Greece as a whole, not of Athens alone.
The programme of this book
This chapter has attempted to indicate both the physical nature of the
Greek world and the ways in which the achievements of the past and
the stories about those achievements encouraged certain attitudes
and created certain expectations in the people of classical Greece. In
the chapters that follow we explore what Greeks of the ﬁfth and
fourth century made of those constraints and opportunities as they
secured their material well-being, organized, and theorized, their
communal life, both as individual cities and in competition with one
another, and forged their distinct lifestyle. In the ﬁnal two chapters
we explore the dynamic created by the complex of interactions
between individuals and cities and try to show how events were
shaped by and fed back into the culture of the city. If the enigma of

22
|
classical greece
classical Greece resists ﬁnal solution, we hope at least to have taken
the icon out of the gallery and put it back into context, so that it
ceases to be part of the deadening weight of tradition and becomes
once more an eﬀective inspiration.

2
The economy
Paul Millett
The political economy of Attic Oratory
What could be more natural than for a farmer to increase the prod-
uctivity of his land by grubbing up an old tree stump? The dangers
involved in such an apparently uncontroversial act were brought
home to an Athenian citizen of the early fourth century who, far from
being rewarded for good husbandry, found himself in court facing
exile, loss of property, or possibly death. His opponents alleged that
he had torn out no ordinary tree, but the stump of an olive tree which
was sacred to the goddess Athena.
Scattered through Attica (the rural hinterland of Athens) were
sacred olive trees which were supposedly propagated from an ancient
tree on the Acropolis, the gift of Athena herself. Complex regulations
governed the collection of oil from these trees, destined to be given as
prizes to athletes victorious in the Panathenaic Games ([Aristotle],
Constitution of the Athenians ; see below, p. ). Every year, the
Council of the Areopagus received reports from inspectors on the
state of Athena’s olives, with ﬁnes for farmers who cultivated too
close to them. Even stumps of apparently dead trees were protected in
case they produced new growth. It was such a stump, complete with
its enclosure, that our citizen stood accused of uprooting and carting
away. The case was heard before the Council of the Areopagus, in its
capacity as a law-court (see below pp. –). The law of Athens
ordained, at least in theory, that the appropriate penalty was death.
In his defence the accused produced as witnesses three previous
cultivators who rented the land from him, testifying that there was no
such sacred stump (Lysias . –). He also protested that any petty
ﬁnancial gain would be far outweighed by possible repercussions

24
|
classical greece
against him: his action would have been open for all his neighbours
to see––and some of them were at odds with him over his property
(. –). Furthermore, such an act of impiety would have put him at
the mercy of his slaves (doing all the hard work on the stump), who
could at any time have gained their freedom by informing against
him. For the rest of his life, he reminds the jury, he would have had to
refrain from punishing them (. ). Moreover, the general tenor of
his life as a citizen refutes the accusation against him: he has paid his
property tax and performed expensive public services (so-called ‘lit-
urgies’): equipping triremes, and sponsoring choruses in Athens’
dramatic festivals (. –).
In Athenian courts, litigants presented their own cases in the form
of more-or-less extended speeches which were delivered in their own
words. Such was the theory of it; but, in reality, those who could
aﬀord it, employed a professional speechwriter (logographos) who
crafted a suitable speech to be learnt by heart. Our defendant was
wealthy or desperate enough to secure the services of Lysias, the
greatest logographos of his day. The source for our litigant’s trials and
tribulations is the seventh speech of Lysias called (predictably) On the
Olive Stump.
It is on this and a further  speeches, making up the so-called
corpus of the Attic Orators, that historians are largely dependent for
their detailed reconstruction of economy and society in classical
Greece. Other types of testimony, including drama, narrative his-
tories, political pamphlets, philosophy, inscriptions, and archaeology
naturally have their parts to play; but the speeches of the Orators (in
particular, law-court speeches) form the basis of the exploration of
the Greek economy that follows. Although this approach enables
economic history to be seen, as it were, in the making, it has clear
implications for the scope of our analysis.
. As the label suggests, Attic Oratory is exclusively an Athenian
phenomenon with nothing comparable surviving from any other
Greek state. Any account of the ancient Greek economy in practice
becomes an analysis of the economy of Athens. Classical Athens was
in crucial ways unique and cannot straightforwardly stand proxy for
other Greek states. In particular, the experience of empire in the ﬁfth
century and the extension of democratic stability (probably inter-
linked) make for distinctive economic relationships. Where possible,
however, contrasts may be drawn with what little is known of other

the economy
|
25
Greek economies. An idiosyncratic case in point is the Spartan
‘command economy’, which met agricultural needs through direct
exploitation by the Spartiate élite of the state-owned workforce of
helots. Money in Sparta took the deliberately cumbersome form of
iron spits: accumulated wealth was meant to be conspicuous.
. Dependence on Attic Oratory places chronological limits on
any analysis. Broadly speaking, law-court speeches extend from the
late ﬁfth century (c.) down to the destruction of the democracy in
. Extrapolation beyond these boundaries on the basis of other
types of testimony is possible but precarious. Moreover, for any inte-
grated reconstruction to be feasible, there is the necessary but defens-
ible assumption that, between the end of the Peloponnesian War
() and the ending of democracy, fundamental economic practices
and relationships within Athens remained broadly static. As else-
where in the Greek world, warfare and possibly bad harvests provided
the major factors making for short-run disequilibrium and change
(see below, p. ).
. Speeches of the Attic Orators owe their survival to their status
through antiquity as outstanding examples of rhetoric (some 
speeches were known to the Romans). This has implications for the
historian. With few exceptions, the speeches stand in isolation so that
we know nothing of opponents’ arguments or even the jurors’ ver-
dict. Such is the case with On the Olive Stump, where we are also left
in ignorance of the name of the litigant. We may hope that surviving
speeches cover a representative range of subject matter, but litigants
who could aﬀord the services of a distinguished logographos would
tend to come from the upper end of society. The speaker in On the
Olive Stump is one of many litigants who emphasizes to the jury his
expenditure on public services, placing him in the top few per cent of
the citizen body.
. Although we are at the mercy of the litigants as to what they
choose to include and leave out, the case as presented (irrespective of
innocence or guilt) must have seemed plausible to a jury chosen by
lot, normally numbered in hundreds, and broadly representative of
the citizen body as a whole (see below, pp.  and –). In this way,
it becomes possible as it were to ‘read between the lines’ and draw
inferences about socio-economic attitudes and institutions prevailing
in fourth-century Athens. So On the Olive Stump serves to highlight
inter alia the use of slaves in agriculture (at least by the Athenian

26
|
classical greece
élite), the importance of neighbours (who, the speaker says, not only
know what is open for all to see but get information of what we try to
keep hidden), the role of wealthy Athenians in paying direct taxes and
providing public services (his liturgies, deployed as evidence of good
character), and the possibility of buying and renting land in Athens
(not all land is to be thought of in terms of inalienable ancestral
estates).
Perhaps most striking is the way in which On the Olive Stump
combines in a narrow compass key aspects of the life of the polis
(‘city-state’). Appropriately enough, oikonomia (our word ‘econ-
omics’) derives from the business of managing the individual
households (oikoi) that were the building blocs of the polis. Aristotle
in Book One of his Politics (an exposition of the nature of the polis-
state) builds on the oikos, with its family, land, property and slaves, as
the primary context for the acquisition and accumulation of wealth.
Whatever the realities behind the case in question, the minor eco-
nomic act of uprooting an olive tree turned out to have religious
implications, legal repercussions, and possibly political ramiﬁcations:
the speaker seems to protest too much in distancing himself from the
recent lawlessness of the Thirty Tyrants (. ) (for whom see below,
pp. – and ). All this exempliﬁes a crucial theme of the Greek
polis economy: the extent to which economy, culture, and society
were blended to create an economic system that was, in the broadest
sense, political.
Back to the land
Our initial encounter with the Greek economy, through the Orators,
is deliberately one that involves agriculture, at the heart of ancient
economy and society. Although the city of Athens and the associated
harbour complex of Piraeus (itself a sizeable town) combined to
create the most urbanized community in the Aegean world, perhaps
half the total population depended directly on farming for its liveli-
hood. Xenophon in his treatise On Estate Management (Oeconomi-
cus) chose to manipulate agricultural themes, familiar to his élite
readers, as the basis of moral lessons: ‘The earth willingly teaches
right behaviour to those who can learn’ (. ). Several of

the economy
|
27
Aristophanes’ popular heroes may loosely be classed as ‘peasants’ (in
Acharnians, Peace, Clouds, Wealth). On the Olive Stump provides a
vivid vignette of the wealthy landowner, beset by hostile neighbours,
suspicious of his slaves, and wanting so far as possible (as he puts it)
to ‘avoid law-suits and public aﬀairs by leading a quiet life’.
Two points of general interest emerge from the speech (. ). The
speaker refers in passing to ‘the other plots of land’ which he owns on
the plain of Attica. This fragmentation of holdings would seem to be
the norm, at least for larger landholders: ownership of several pieces
of land, more or less scattered (see below). Any ineﬃciency, in terms
of wasted time, was compensated for by reducing risk of crop losses
through exploitation of the local or ‘micro-climates’ associated with a
semi-mountainous terrain. Secondly, the litigant casually mentions
how many olive trees are distributed over his various properties. The
impression, conﬁrmed by other evidence, is of so-called ‘polyculture’:
making maximum use of available land by growing a mixture of
crops (grain, pulses, olives, vines) on the same plot. Again, additional
demands on labour time would be compensated for by minimizing
the risk of losing an entire crop. The importance of growing a wide
range of crops has been conﬁrmed by the comparative evidence of
modern practice on the isolated peninsula of Methana in the NE
Peloponnese. ‘Here we have a little of everything’, as one inhabitant
put it.
Overriding concern with spreading of risk meant that crop special-
ization would be rare. Olives are rightly regarded as a key crop in
Greece and Attica. Apart from providing food, fuel for lighting and a
substitute for soap, Athenian olive oil, being of superior quality, was
exported as a semi-luxury. But, even here, there is no evidence for
crop specialization. For at least ten years after planting, until the root
system became established, olives needed irrigation; thereafter,
extraction of the oil remained labour-intensive. Such may have been
the thinking behind the apparently inconvenient scattering of sacred
olive trees throughout Attica: some would survive. But even Athenians
could not live by olives alone. For evidence of other, staple crops, we
turn to a second law-court speech: Against Phaenippus Concerning an
Exchange of Properties, written by Demosthenes () for an unnamed
litigant in the mid-fourth century.
The circumstances of the speech illustrate the politicizing of eco-
nomic activity characteristic of democratic Athens. A citizen who felt

28
|
classical greece
he was being unfairly burdened by a liturgy might nominate a substi-
tute, supposedly wealthier citizen to take his place. If the latter
refused, he might be challenged by the former to a complete exchange
of properties (antidosis). In this way, in theory at least, public services
would end up being performed by the wealthiest citizens, without the
need for the cumbersome and inaccurate registration of property. In
reality, challenges to exchange properties understandably resulted in
angry dissent among the Athenian élite: the jurors sat back and
enjoyed the fun.
In Against Phaenippus the unnamed speaker accuses his opponent
of having concealed the resources of his extensive landed estate. In
the course of the denunciation, it transpires that Phaenippus
allegedly has on his property not one but two threshing ﬂoors (. ),
and has stored up more than a thousand measures of barley and eight
hundred of wine to be sold oﬀ respectively, he claims (. ), at
eighteen and twelve drachmas per thirty-kilogram and ﬁfty-litre
measure respectively (famine prices!). In addition, a team of six
donkeys carries away timber through the year to the tune of twelve
drachmas per day (. ). The speaker’s failure to mention wheat, the
other staple grain, may be signiﬁcant. Although wheat was preferred
over barley for consumption, it was a drought-sensitive crop and
Attica was one of the driest parts of Greece. In the absence of irriga-
tion (applied systematically only to fruits and vegetables), modern
ﬁgures for rainfall suggest loss of the wheat crop in ancient Attica one
year in four (barley,  in ). Possibly Phaenippus grew and kept
wheat for his own table, cultivating for sale the less esteemed but
hardier barley; or perhaps it was a bad year (see below, p. ).
Making allowance for forensic exaggeration, Phaenippus, with an
implied annual income of around , drachmas, emerges as a very
wealthy man in a world where a skilled workman might earn two
drachmas per day (when work was available). In conﬁrmation, it is
stated that he is a keen breeder of horses (. ): the élite pastime,
possible only with access to plenty of good pasture. The city of
Athens depended in large but disputed measure on Phaenippus and
his like to supply it with food (see below), and to provide, from
proﬁts gained in the market-place, public services and property taxes.
Large landowners were, however, in a tiny minority compared with
the independent smallholders of Attica (some of them tenants), who
are largely invisible in law-court speeches. Perhaps closest comes the

the economy
|
29
unnamed speaker in Demosthenes’ speech Against Callicles (),
embroiled with his neighbour in the country in a dispute over ﬂood-
damage. Otherwise, the rustic characters of Aristophanes’ plays,
combined with the early archaic testimony of Hesiod’s poem Works
and Days and hints from archaeology, form a fragile basis for general-
ization about non-élite agriculture (see above, p. ). It seems rea-
sonable to suppose that, of necessity given the size of their holdings
(as little as four or ﬁve acres), less use was made of fallow, and the hoe
may have taken the place of ox and plough. Although most house-
holds will have had the occasional pig, goat, and sheep (essential for
sacriﬁce), larger herds were, like Phaenippus’ six donkeys, the pre-
serve of the wealthy. Scope for manuring was correspondingly
reduced (see above, p. ). In other ways, however, large and lesser
landholders seem similarly to have combined elementary technology
with practices (such as extensive storage of crops) aimed at minim-
izing risk, but balanced by low yield and high eﬀort (see above, p. ).
A fair bit of the extra eﬀort was borne by compulsory labour.
Commonplace throughout Greece was the exploitation in agriculture
of submerged groups in the population; the helots of Sparta (handing
over perhaps half their produce) are the best known but by no means
the only example: penestai in Thessaly, klarotai and oiketai in Crete,
and many more. In Attica, the legislation of Solon, early in the sixth
century, had made illegal the formal subordination of poorer to rich-
er Athenians ([Aristotle], Constitution of the Athenians ). This may
in part explain the extensive use, unique to Athenian agriculture, of
the labour of chattel-slaves, extending (if Aristophanes’ plays are to
be believed) down through society to poorer landholders. At harvest
time, additional labour would be hired and/or use made of neigh-
bours on a reciprocal basis. With diﬀerent emphases, all cultivators
will have aimed at self-suﬃciency (autarkeia), which paradoxically
involved production of a surplus to be exchanged for cash. The élite
needed abundant liquid resources to support an appropriate lifestyle
(including tax and liturgy payments), and all had to purchase items
such as iron tools which were needed for, but not susceptible to,
do-it-yourself.
Although there is a natural tendency to contrast urban and rural
economies, the distinction in the case of Athens was blurred. In
simple terms, a proportion of cultivators may have lived in the city,
either (if wealthy) leaving the day-to-day management of their land

30
|
classical greece
to overseers, or themselves walking out to work it on a regular basis.
In Lysias’ speech On the Murder of Eratosthenes (), a wayward wife is
able to welcome her lover into the town house because her husband is
often away, working on his farm. Problems begin when, one day, he
arrives home unexpectedly. Although most smallholders lived away
from the city, they congregated in villages or townships (‘demes’)
rather than inhabiting isolated farmsteads (see below, p. ). The
need for mutual support in a potentially hostile environment (to say
nothing of the advantage of a secure water supply) made it desirable
to have neighbours close at hand. The whole of Menander’s comedy
The Bad Tempered Man pivots on the perverseness of an individual
who tries to cut himself oﬀ from the wider community; unsuccess-
fully, as he falls down a well and needs someone to pull him out.
All citizens living in Attica maintained political, religious, and pos-
sibly economic links with the city. Apart from serving in the army or
navy during the slack season for farming, cultivators might be
engaged (possibly with their draft animals) in public building pro-
jects. More generally, there was the draw of the city as a political and
market centre (see below, p. ). The philosopher Theophrastus
wrote his Characters in the later fourth century as an illustration by
contraries of acceptable behaviour in the polis. It consists of thirty
caricatures of the kinds of disagreeable individuals (all male) who
might be met on the streets of Athens; one of whom is the agroikos or
Rustic (). Among other things, he is guyed in terms which embrace
city and countryside, attending the assembly and making use of city
services.
He drinks pungent soup before attending the assembly and swears that no
perfume smells so sweet as thyme . . . He doesn’t trust his friends and rela-
tions but asks advice on the most important matters from his slaves. He
describes all the aﬀairs of the assembly to hired hands on his farm . . . In the
streets, he doesn’t enjoy or gawp at anything, but stands in rapt attention at
the sight of a cow, a donkey, or a goat . . .
If he has lent someone a plough, basket, sickle, or bag, he goes to ask for it
back in the middle of the night . . . And when he is going to the city, he asks
anyone he meets about the price of hides and salt ﬁsh . . . and he says right
away that, when he gets there, he’s going to get his hair cut, have his shoes
resoled, get some salt ﬁsh along the way from Archias, and have a good sing
in the public baths.

the economy
|
31
From the shop ﬂoor
The piece of land of olive-stump fame had, within the space of ﬁfteen
years (–), four diﬀerent owners (one for only two months) and
three further tenants: one of them a freed slave (. , –). This
implies a degree of economic ﬂuidity and even opportunism that
gains credibility from the conﬁgurations of at least the wealthier
households. The speeches written by Isaeus, involving disputed
inheritances, are hardly the most readable bits of Attic Oratory; but
they preserve valuable details of the composition of the estates at
issue. The estates of Ciron (. ) and Stratocles (. –) break down
as follows:
Farm at Phyla ( or so miles north of city)
, dr.
House at Athens (lived in by Ciron)
,
House ‘near Dionysus in the Marshes’ (rented out)
,
Slaves (generating income)
– – – –
Three female (domestic) slaves
– – – –
Furniture (value given includes slaves)
,
Sums of money (‘not inconsiderable’) lent at interest– – – –
Farm at Thria (close to Eleusis, leased out)
, dr.
House at Melite (in the city, rented out)
,
House at Eleusis (c. miles NW of city; rented out)

Furniture, sheep, barley, wine, fruits
,
Cash in hand

Loans without interest
,
Loans at interest
,
Notable is the range of income-earning assets: land and houses pre-
dominate, but there are also money out on loan and income-earning
slaves. This arguably reﬂects not so much economic rationalism as
piecemeal opportunism; an hypothesis strengthened by the physical
fragmentation of élite households, with property held in various
demes across Attica (compare the evidence of the Attic Stelae, below).
The pattern is reinforced by the summary, preserved in Aeschines’
speech Against Timarchus (), of the estate of the father of Timarchus,
whose properties were located as far aﬁeld from the city as Cephisia
( km. NE) and the mining area ( km. S). Aeschines provides the

32
|
classical greece
jury with a blow-by-blow account of how this extensive if scattered
estate was broken up and sold piecemeal in order to evade (not avoid)
liability for liturgies (. –). Irresponsible handling of one’s
patrimony chimed in with the sexual deviance (homosexual prostitu-
tion) and incompetence in public aﬀairs of which Timarchus stood
accused by his political opponent, Aeschines (. ).
Details are forthcoming of the income-earning slaves owned by
Timarchus’ father: ‘ . . . nine or ten slaves who were skilled shoemakers
each of whom paid a rent of two obols per day and the overseer of the
workshop three obols. Besides these there was a woman skilled in ﬂax
working, who produced ﬁne goods for the market, and also a man
skilled in embroidery’ (see below, p. ). This indicates how larger-
scale manufacturing might have been organized. Here, the slaves (at
least, the shoemakers) seem to have ‘lived apart’, organized by a third
party and paying over a ﬂat rate to their owner.
The estate of Demosthenes’ father was almost unique in contain-
ing, at his death, no real property save the family house (valued at 
minas). His slave manufacturers were part of the household itself and
integrated into the family accounts. Says the son, in one of ﬁve
speeches attempting to recover his embezzled inheritance (–),
‘My father, men of the jury, left two workshops, both doing a large
business. One was a sword manufactory, employing thirty-two or
thirty-three slaves, most of them worth ﬁve or six minas each . . . The
other was a couch manufactory, employing twenty slaves, given to my
father as security for a debt for forty minas. These brought him a
clear income of twelve minas’ (. ). Elsewhere he speaks indis-
criminately of his guardians ‘making the slaves disappear’ and ‘mak-
ing the workshop disappear’. In line with opportunist acquisition of
assets is the apparently fortuitous way in which Demosthenes’ father
gained his couch manufacturers––as security on a defaulted debt.
These are almost the largest known holdings of manufacturing
slaves from Athens and Greece; Lysias and his brother had, at the
close of the Peloponnesian War, a shield-manufactory employing
anything up to  slaves (. ). At the other end of the scale were
artisans working either alone or alongside just one or two slaves. One
thinks of the shopkeepers and craftsmen in and around the Agora
with whom Socrates passed the time of day. Evidence of archaeology
suggests for them shops-cum-houses-cum-workshops barely large
enough for a small family with a slave or two. In a speech attributed

the economy
|
33
to Lysias (. ), a disabled shoemaker appeals to the Council of Five
Hundred for a means-tested pension, adducing in support of his
poverty that he is ‘not yet able’ to acquire anyone (meaning a slave) to
help him in his work. As with agriculture, slave ownership in the city
extended well down the social scale. Considerations of status out-
weighed what we might call economic rationality.
Any additional, regular labour over and above the artisan and his
immediate family would be supplied by slave- and not wage-labour.
‘Those who can aﬀord it buy slaves so that they may have fellow-
workers’, asserts Xenophon’s Socrates, assuming agreement
(Memorabilia . . ). Wage-labour was essentially casual labour, as
employed at harvest time (see above). Elsewhere, Xenophon shows
Socrates encountering the once wealthy Aristarchus whom the civil
war of  has robbed of revenues from land and house property (.
). Socrates has to exert all his powers of argument to persuade
Aristarchus to make ends meet by putting to work as weavers the
numerous female relatives who, having sought refuge with him, are
eating their heads oﬀ. In the course of the dialogue, Socrates lists
various Athenians who apparently make a good living by exploiting
the non-agricultural labour of slaves (making pearl barley, baking
bread, running up capes and cloaks).
What plainly troubles Aristarchus is the notion of free women
weaving not for domestic consumption (the norm), but for sale.
Once his scruples have been overcome, the household is simply and
successfully converted from domestic to petty commodity produc-
tion. The ease of the transformation ties in with the rudimentary
nature of most manufacturing, exploiting basic technology, which
is not to say that a high degree of skill was not involved. Support for
this low level of capitalization comes from the circumstances of
Hyperides’ speech Against Athenogenes: a cautionary tale of sex and
shopkeeping.
Epicrates, an Athenian citizen, was consumed with desire for a
slave boy owned by one Athenogenes, a perfume manufacturer. At the
prompting of Athenogenes, the boy, aided and abetted by a siren-like
courtesan named Antigone, persuaded Epicrates to buy him along
with his father and brother for forty minas: the three of them made
up the work-force of the perfumery. Deprived of his work-force,
Athenogenes oﬀered to throw in the perfume business, arguing that
the value of the raw materials would easily cover any triﬂing sums

34
|
classical greece
owed. In his eagerness to clinch the deal, Epicrates failed (as he dis-
armingly confesses) to read the small print and subsequently found
himself besieged with creditors demanding repayment of ﬁve talents.
Reading between the lines, Athenogenes’ perfume business consisted
of the slave work-force, stocks of raw materials, perhaps a stall on the
market and little else.
Perfume manufacturers loom surprisingly large in our surviving
sources: they had a ﬁxed place in the Athenian Agora where the
jeunesse dorée congregated (see below). The cultural signiﬁcance of
perfume combined with its status as a luxury good to ensure a proﬁt-
ably elastic demand: you can’t have too much of a good thing. Not
so, it seems, with mundane goods: the pots, pans, couches, tables,
chairs, shoes, clothing, and so on needed in the everyday business of
life. Xenophon points to the potential problem of inadequate
demand (Education of Cyrus . . ):
In small towns, the same workman makes chairs and doors and ploughs and
tables, and often this same artisan builds houses; and even so he is thankful if
he can only ﬁnd enough employment to support him. And it is of course
impossible for a man of many trades to be proﬁcient in all of them. In large
cities, on the other hand, inasmuch as many people have demands to make
on each branch of manufacturing, one trade alone, and often less than a
whole trade, is enough to support a man.
He goes on to cite the case of shoemaking, with diﬀerent individuals
cutting out separate parts of each shoe. Not that this is to be confused
with the division of labour in the pin-factory with which Adam
Smith’s Wealth of Nations famously opens. Xenophon is here con-
cerned not with enhanced productivity but the quality of the prod-
uct. The context of his comment is the superior quality of the food in
the palace of the Persian King. Also, Xenophon’s argument is based
on the assumption that demand would not normally be boosted by
access to markets external to the city.
Athens of course qualiﬁed as a ‘large city’: in the classical period,
there was none larger; but there were still constraints on eﬀective
demand. In our own capitalist society, economies are in large part
driven by aggregate household demand. In the Greek world, house-
hold demand for purchased goods was restricted by both the drive for
self-suﬃciency, as noted above, and also by practical limitations.
Houses, even of the wealthy, tended to be comparatively small with

the economy
|
35
basic furnishings. As Xenophon puts it, ‘When someone has enough
furniture for his house, he stops buying it there and then’ (Poroi . ).
Absent were the ‘consumer durables’ that have become such a feature
of our post-war homes. In the Greek world, their place both as status
symbols and labour-saving devices seems to have been taken by
slaves.
Something of the diﬀering emphasis on real property, slaves, and
portable property comes across from the so-called Attic Stelae
(Fornara ). These are a battered collection of inscriptions, found
in the Agora, recording the sale of property at auction of the ﬁfty or
so individuals (mostly wealthy) found guilty of mutilating the Herms
in  (see below, p. ). The fragments which survive are diﬃcult to
interpret; items are omitted which did not need to be sold oﬀ: cash
and precious metals could be added directly to the Treasury. But what
remains striking is the gap between the abundance (and value) of
land and houses and slaves recorded on the stelae and the seemingly
trivial collections of bronze pots, kitchen utensils, and tunics (see
below, pp. –). Even the notorious voluptuary Alcibiades could
muster only a motley collection of items.
Of course, possession of luxury goods might in part redress the
balance, but, at least in democratic Athens, overtly conspicuous con-
sumption was ideologically sensitive. Litigants in law-courts tend to
down-play possible manifestations of their wealth. The speaker in
Lysias’ On the Murder of Eratosthenes reassures the jurors that the
two-storied house he describes to them is ‘just a little one’ (. ).
Theophrastus’ Character who is ‘Avid for Petty Ambition’ () is
pilloried for having (apart from a grandiose house) a pet monkey, a
short-tailed ape, Sicilian doves, Laconian dogs, a jackdaw complete
with miniature shield, dice made of gazelle-horn, oil ﬂasks from
Thurii, walking-sticks from Sparta, and a Persian carpet.
The silver lining
One category of item missing from the Attic Stelae, no doubt passed
direct to the Treasury, was the silverware presumed to have graced the
tables of the wealthiest Athenians. For an impression of what might
have been (absent also from the Athenian archaeological record),

36
|
classical greece
there are the remarkable hoards of silver and silver-plate from
Rogozen in ancient Thrace. Other parts of the Greek world (Siphnos,
Thasos, Amphipolis) possessed, and had their histories inﬂuenced by,
deposits of precious metals; but nowhere to the extent that Athens’
destiny was moulded by the silver mines at Laurium in SE Attica.
In various ways, mining was an exceptional and even disruptive
activity, attracting outsiders into this corner of Attica. Aside from the
actual removal of the ore from the ground (calling for shafts and
galleries), there was need for extensive surface workings to extract the
silver: mortars, grinding-mills, washing tables (with storage of water),
and furnaces. Substantial traces remain to this day. Apart from
extensive and expensive capital expenditure, plenty of labour was
required, skilled and unskilled. A speech of Demosthenes (, Against
Pantaenetus) centres on a dispute arising out of ownership of a set of
surface installations. The speaker explains how he and his partner
lent Pantaenetus  minas on the security of a mine installation and
thirty slaves. The slave work-force is one of the largest known from
classical Athens, and the loan of  minas almost the largest from the
corpus of the Orators.
Realistic estimates of the total number of slaves involved in mining
at its height range from , to , (from an overall slave popu-
lation guessed to be between , and ,). We are speciﬁcally
told by Xenophon that Nicias, the Athenian General of the later ﬁfth
century, owned one thousand slaves in the mines (Poroi, . ). So
that the great man should not soil his hands, they were rented out to a
middleman (Sosias the Thracian), who paid over one obol per day
per slave and provided replacements as required. Laurium was one
area of Attica where slaves probably outnumbered the free popula-
tion. As a hint of the dangers, in c. bc the mining area was the
scene of the only known outbreak of mass violence by slaves in
Athens. More than one thousand were involved, but the trouble was
brutally suppressed before it could spread (Diodorus . . ).
Mining operations were largely the preserve of wealthier members
of the population: high returns set against high risk. The unnamed
litigant whom we earlier encountered, trying to foist his liturgy onto
Phaenippus, complains to the jury that he owes the treasury three
talents rental over a failed mine (. ). Although mines were on
private land, ore beneath the surface was state property. Mining
concessions were leased out at a rent appropriate to the prospects of

the economy
|
37
proﬁt from the mine, on which royalties were also due. Details of
approximately  leases survive in inscriptions from the fourth cen-
tury, and the lessees include a high proportion of Athenians (about
one third) known to be wealthy and prominent in other ﬁelds, includ-
ing politics. The father of Timarchus, it will be recalled, owned two
workshops in the mining area. Plainly, Nicias was not alone.
The Laurium deposits were being exploited by the Early Bronze
Age, but it was with the beginning of the ﬁfth century that the mines
played their part in shaping Athenian history, and with it economy
and society, through the next couple of centuries. In the late s, a
major silver strike resulted, we are told, in a windfall gain for the
treasury of one hundred talents ([Aristotle], Constitution of the
Athenians . ). Resisting the temptation to divide up the silver
among themselves, the Athenians used the money to build one hun-
dred triremes, which were soon to be instrumental in defeating the
Persians at Salamis and establishing Athens as the leading naval
power in the Aegean (see below, pp.  and ). Those Athenians
who were too poor to serve as hoplites found places as rowers in the
ﬂeet on which Athens’ supremacy depended (see below, p. ). As
the anti-democratic author of a ﬁfth-century pamphlet (the so-called
‘Old Oligarch’) grudgingly concedes, it’s only right that the common
people should have political power in Athens: they are, after all, the
ones who power the ships (. ). More than that, Athenian naval
power underpinned the acquisition of the empire, which in turn
funded, through tribute and other revenues, the costly Athenian
brand of democracy.
Some ﬁgures. Thucydides (. ) has Pericles say that the empire at
the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War brought Athens an annual
income of six hundred talents (credible in the light of surviving
Tribute Quota Lists). For the same date, Xenophon gives one thou-
sand talents (a suspiciously round ﬁgure) as the sum of Athens’ total
revenues, internal and external (Anabasis . . ) (see below, p. ).
It seems safe to conclude that, without the resources of empire, the
Athenians could not have funded pay for public oﬃce (even the poor
could take part) and an all-powerful ﬂeet (one talent in rowers’ wages
alone to keep just one trireme at sea for one month) and supported
public works (the Parthenon, not including the cult statue, cost about
 talents) and built up a cash reserve of almost , talents on
the Acropolis (Thuc. . ). This last beneﬁt marks Athens oﬀ from

38
|
classical greece
virtually all other poleis (including Sparta), who ran their public
ﬁnances on a hand-to-mouth basis (see below, p. ). In the fourth
century, the Thessalian city of Pharsalus used the personal fortune of
its most distinguished citizen as a rolling fund to equalize imbalances
in income and expenditure from one year to the next (Xenophon,
Hellenica . . –).
The notion of ﬁfth-century interdependence of imperialism and
democracy in Athens necessarily raises the question of resources in
the fourth century. The empire with its revenues came to an abrupt
end in , and subsequent attempts to revive revenue-raising alli-
ances (notably, the so-called ‘Second Athenian Confederacy’, –)
proved abortive. And yet Athens down to  maintained its restored
democracy (enhanced from  by payment for attending the
assembly), deployed a powerful ﬂeet, and intermittently erected
public buildings. Replacement funds were presumably provided by
the Athenian élite through liturgies, impositions of property and
‘semi-voluntary’ subscriptions. Pressure was placed on the wealthy
gathered in the assembly to compete in contributing sums to the
public treasury; at which point, Theophrastus’ ‘Mean Man’ ()
would quietly slip out. Upper-class complaints, particularly from
Xenophon (Symposium . –, Oeconomicus . –), that burdens
on the wealthy made it ‘better to be poor than rich’ may for once
have had some substance. Increasing ﬁnancial pressures may help
explain the élite involvement in mining noted above.
After the strike of s, the mines have a low proﬁle in our literary
sources until the later ﬁfth century, but modern excavations at the
mining centre of Thoricus conﬁrm continuing activity. The Spartan
occupation of Decelea in NE Attica in  denied the Athenians access
to the mines; the ‘more than , skilled slaves’ whom Thucydides
identiﬁes as defecting to the Spartans may well include many mine
workers (. ). In / the Athenians issued a gold coinage and
shortly after a copper coinage. Only in  was the familiar silver
coinage reintroduced. Distribution of mining leases through time
suggests an upswing in mining activity around the mid-fourth
century (pre-: c.; –: c.). Conﬁrmation comes from
Xenophon’s treatise called Poroi (‘Ways and Means’) dated c.,
which mentions work in the mines ‘restarting only recently’.
Xenophon’s Poroi is something new in Greek literature: a focused
attempt to solve Athens’ problems of underfunding in ways which

the economy
|
39
would be painless not only for her wealthiest citizens but also for her
disenchanted allies. He canvasses various revenue-raising schemes:
attracting immigrants and traders to Athens who will increase the tax
base, setting up a state-owned merchant marine, pursuing the peace-
dividend; but his main emphasis is on systematic exploitation of the
Laurium mines (). In brief, Xenophon envisages a massive state-
owned cadre of mine-slaves to be rented out to private entrepreneurs,
giving a clear proﬁt of one obol per slave per day. The scheme is to be
built up by stages until there are suﬃcient slaves to guarantee each
citizen an income of three obols per day. To the modern eye,
Xenophon’s modest proposal seems impossibly ﬂawed: he makes the
explicit assumption that the silver will never run out and always
retain its value. But a comparison with Book Two of the pseudo-
Aristotelian Oeconomica with its catalogue of crisis measures for
raising cash (through a combination of forced loans, currency
debasement, and trickery), highlights the originality of Xenophon’s
analysis.
Toilers of the sea
In the prelude to his proposals, Xenophon praises (to modern eyes,
not altogether accurately) the natural advantages of Athens. In add-
ition to natural fertility and the excellence of the harbour of Piraeus,
Athens is (he says) attractive to traders because, in place of a return
cargo, they may export silver. ‘And this is good business, because they
will be able to sell the silver anywhere in the world for more than the
original purchase price’ (. ). In treating Athenian silver as an
exportable commodity rather than a means of exchange, Xenophon
puts his ﬁnger on an economic factor setting Athens apart from
much of the Greek world.
Trade was vital for the survival of virtually every Greek polis.
Sparta, with access to the extensive area of Messenia, was a possible
exception (see below, p. ). But Thucydides presents the Corinthi-
ans, eager for war against the Athenians in , as warning their
inland allies (including the Spartans?) that losing control of coastal
areas would hamper the imports and exports on which they all
depended (. ). Corinth, situated near the isthmus connecting

40
|
classical greece
central Greece and the Peloponnese, owed more than most poleis to
revenues derived from trade. Maritime trade was the norm: with few
exceptions, bulk transport overland was either impossible or pro-
hibitively expensive. Some exchange was inevitable to compensate for
permanent imbalances of raw materials and other essentials of life.
Copper, tin, and iron are unevenly distributed around the Mediter-
ranean so that, without ongoing redistribution, most poleis (includ-
ing Athens) would have remained in the Stone Age. Most slaves were
barbarians and necessarily came from beyond the fringes of the
Greek world (see below, p. ). Also, given regional variations in
rainfall, staple grains were regularly traded around the Mediterranean
to meet temporary shortfalls (see below, p. ). The importance of
these types of trade can hardly be overstated. There was in addition a
persistent trade in prestige goods and local specialities. A long list
could be drawn up (silphium from Cyrene, frankincense from Syria,
ivory from Libya); we have already met a handful of items in the
prized possessions of the ‘Man of Petty Ambition’.
A limiting factor in the scale of trade (particularly in non-
essentials) was the ability of a community to pay for imports in cash
or kind. The resources of most poleis stretched little way beyond their
land and those labouring on it (see above, p. ; below, p. ). Faced
with recurring food shortages through excess population (as opposed
to poor harvests), the medium-term solution generally lay in export-
ing people rather than importing food. Not so with Athens. Although
the quantities are disputed, for much of the ﬁfth and fourth centuries,
Athens was able to sustain a substantial and recurring import bill for
grain (mainly wheat) needed to support a population anywhere
between , and , greater than the ‘carrying capacity’ of
Attica (at most ,) (see below, p. ). Also, a range of authors
(the Old Oligarch, Thucydides, the comic poet Hermippus, Isocrates)
emphasizes the abundance of goods on sale in Athens from overseas
as if a reﬂection of Athenian power.
The presence of so many luxury goods could in part be explained
through Athens’ role as an entrepôt (as implied by Isocrates, . ):
in which case, no import bill would be borne by Athenians. But
Thucydides (. ) and the Old Oligarch (. ) suggest from their
diﬀerent political perspectives that enjoyment of luxuries was part
and parcel of the ideology of democracy in Athens. In any case, grain
imported for domestic consumption, along with other essentials,

the economy
|
41
would have to be paid for from Athenian resources. Presumably, the
cost would be met over time through a shifting balance between
export earnings, imperial revenues, and silver from Laurium. Atten-
tion has focused on the disputed signiﬁcance of painted pottery as
the key export from Athens: highly priced luxury cargo, or cheap and
cheerful spaceﬁllers (see above, p. )? Even if the former, it seems
out of the question that trade in pottery alone could oﬀset the grain
imports needed to feed as many as ,. Whereas Athenian mar-
ble gets a mention: ‘much in demand by both Greeks and barbarians’,
says Xenophon (Poroi . ), our literary sources are signiﬁcantly silent
about pottery production and producers.
Best estimates suggest that, by the time the population of Athens
outstripped its carrying capacity in the mid-ﬁfth century, resources
of empire were already available to close the gap. Tribute directed
towards public and rowers’ pay could be used to purchase imported
wheat: sitos can mean both grain and pay. In the background, and
increasingly prominent in the fourth century, the Laurium mines
acted as a massive bullion reserve buried in the ground rather than in
the vault of a central bank. Inﬂationary tendencies inherent in any
increase in the money supply through tribute and newly minted silver
would have been moderated by expenditure on imports; to say noth-
ing of the practice of hoarding, putting the silver back in the ground.
The only indication of the overall scale of Athens’ imports and
exports comes from  and the speech On the Mysteries by the
politician Andocides, in which he defends himself against a charge of
impiety. He counter-attacks by accusing one of his prosecutors,
Agyrrhius, of having a prior grudge against him (. –). Andocides
explains how, the previous year, he broke a ring of tax-farmers, head-
ed by Agyrrhius, who were collusively and corruptly bidding for the
right to collect the two per cent tax on imports and exports passing
through Piraeus. (Indirect taxes were regularly ‘farmed out’ in this
way.) The sum oﬀered by Andocides and his associates was thirty-six
talents, which (he claims) still allowed them a small proﬁt in farming
the tax. That would imply a combined value of imports and exports
somewhere in the region of , talents. Uncertainties remain: it is
just possible (though unlikely) that the ﬁgure may not include the
duty on cereals: a later speech refers to ‘the two per cent tax on grain’
([Demosthenes] . ). Either way, , talents remains an impres-
sive ﬁgure (at least  drachmas for every adult, male citizen); and

42
|
classical greece
this with Athens at its lowest economic ebb, in the aftermath of defeat
in the Peloponnesian War.
Consideration of how imports were paid for should not imply that
the Greeks themselves had any formal idea of a balance of payments;
still less any preﬁguring of the mercantilist doctrine (a sixteenth-
century notion) that the state should intervene to ensure the value of
exports exceeded that of imports. Characteristic of Greek maritime
trade was its fragmentation and remoteness from state control.
In Xenophon’s Oeconomicus (. –), Socrates cites as an agreed
analogy the behaviour of traders, who
. . . from their passion for grain, sail in search of it wherever they hear it is
most abundant, crossing over the Aegean, Euxine, and Sicilian Seas. And
when they have got as much of it as they can, they bring it away over the
water, stowing it in the vessel in which they themselves sail. And when they
are in want of money, they do not dispose of their freight haphazardly, or
wherever they happen to be; but wherever they hear that grain will fetch the
highest price, and that men set the highest store by it, they carry it there, and
oﬀer it for sale to them.
Socrates’ words contain an edge of criticism. What might today be
regarded as the proper working of the market mechanism (high
prices attract suppliers) was viewed with suspicion as traders seem-
ingly took advantage of those in need. Hostility is palpable from
conservative thinkers. Aristotle (in his Politics, b) saw traders as
exchanging not in order to gain what was needed (which was natural
and acceptable) but unnaturally to make a proﬁt, which necessarily
meant deceit in order to buy cheap and sell dear (see below, p. ).
Plato saw traders as a disruptive element from which he wished to
insulate his near-ideal community of the Laws (–). They were to
be kept at arm’s length and dealt with by specially appointed oﬃcials.
Those involved in trade had either severed or at least weakened links
with their own polis. Typically they were of low status, which made all
the more galling their ability to lord it over citizen consumers (see
below).
Identiﬁable, local demand for specialist goods (such as speciﬁc
types of ﬁne painted pottery) may have encouraged pre-planned voy-
ages. Some  per cent of surviving pots made in the later sixth-
century ‘Workshop of Nikosthenes’ in Athens with known ﬁndspots
are from Etruria in Italy. But the picture of opportunistic ‘tramp

the economy
|
43
trading’ presented by Xenophon’s Socrates remains a reasonable
reﬂection of reality: one man owning a single ship of which he was
the master. Not all traders owned their own ships: a merchant (empo-
ros) might hire cargo space from a shipowner (naukleros). Nor could
all merchants and masters aﬀord to buy outright their own cargoes,
but were forced to borrow the purchase price (or part of it). In these
maritime loans, principal and interest were repaid out of the pro-
ceeds of selling the cargo; but only on condition that the ship arrived
safely at its agreed destination. Losses through shipwreck or piracy
(increasingly a fourth-century problem) were borne by the lender,
which gave the transaction an insurance eﬀect. Because of the high
risks involved for the lender, rates of interest ranged from . to 
per cent or more per voyage.
‘The resources required by those who engage in trade come not
from those who borrow, but from those who lend; and neither ship
nor shipowner nor passenger can put to sea, if you take away the part
contributed by those who lend.’ So a foreigner called Chrysippus told
an Athenian jury in his speech Against Phormio (). As a disap-
pointed lender in a maritime loan, his exaggeration seems pardon-
able. His is one of four speeches, all attributed to Demosthenes (,
, ), arising directly out of maritime loans, and in the course of
which reference is made to a further twenty such loan transactions.
The experiences related by Chrysippus were more or less typical of
his fellow litigants. He and his partner (neither of them Athenian
residents) lent , drachmas to the metic Phormio to ﬁnance a
trading voyage to the Bosporus. Phormio agreed to put on board a
ship owned by the naukleros Lampis a cargo worth , drachmas
and either to make a return voyage to Athens handing over there a
total of , drachmas, or, if he preferred to remain in the Bosporus,
to hand the cash to Lampis for transmission back to Athens. In the
event, he stayed behind and the returning ship was sunk with almost
all hands; Lampis escaped in the ship’s boat. Phormio claimed that,
according to the usual terms of maritime credit, loss of the ship
absolved him of all obligations. Chrysippus begged to diﬀer, arguing
that Phormio never handed the money over to Lampis in the
Bosporus.
These four speeches, supported by archaeology, provide much of
our detailed knowledge of trading around the classical Greek world
(the voyage to the Bosporus seems to have carried perfumed olive oil;

44
|
classical greece
the return voyage, hides and possibly slaves). But they also introduce
several of the measures used by the Athenians in the fourth century
to boost not exports but imports of crucial commodities: chieﬂy
grain, but also timber, ﬂax, and ruddle for shipbuilding. No longer
were the Athenians, as the Old Oligarch put it, ‘Rulers of the Sea’, able
to coerce and control suppliers of raw materials.
Against Phormio is dated to the early s. During the previous
decade, the Athenians had experienced recurring diﬃculties in secur-
ing adequate grain imports. Against this background, Chrysippus
accuses Lampis of carrying grain from the Bosporus not to Athens
but to Acanthus in NE Greece: an act punishable for an Athenian
resident by death. To compound the felony, Lampis had allegedly
taken fraudulent advantage of a long-standing concession by the
Bosporan king Paerisades that grain shipped to Athens should be free
of export duty. Where possible, the Athenians cultivated with some
success good diplomatic relations with kings of the Black Sea region,
a major source of imported grain (see below). Chrysippus details
how, in contrast to Lampis, he and his partner had, in time of short-
age, given the Athenians two talents for the purchase of grain and
sold oﬀ , measures of wheat at the ‘established price of ﬁve
drachmas per measure’ when it was fetching sixteen drachmas on the
open market. The very existence of the speech Against Phormio is
testimony to Athenian anxiety to attract traders. By a special dispen-
sation restricted to trading disputes, Chrysippus, though not even a
metic, was able to appear in court to deliver his accusation in person.
Go a-borrowing, go a-sorrowing?
An Athenian decree, voted by the assembly in , praises King
Paerisades and his brother Spartacus, ‘because they are good men and
promise the people of Athens to see to the export of wheat as their
father did . . . and the People is to grant Spartacus and Paerisades the
privileges which it granted to Satyrus and Leucon and to crown each of
them at the Great Panathenaea with a crown of gold worth ,
drachmas’ (Harding ). Some ﬁfty years earlier (c.), a young vis-
itor from the Bosporus had occasion to invoke before an Athenian jury
the good name of King Satyrus, then approaching the end of his reign:

the economy
|
45
My father, men of the jury, is Sopaeus; all who sail to the Black Sea know that
his relations with Satyrus are so intimate that he is a ruler of an extensive
territory and has charge of that ruler’s entire forces. Having heard reports
both of this state [of Athens] and of other lands where Greeks live, I desired
to travel abroad. And so my father loaded two ships with grain, gave me
money, and sent me oﬀ on a trading expedition and at the same time to see
the world.
Arriving in Athens, the son of Sopaeus was introduced to the banker
Pasion, with whom he deposited his money, as much as , gold
staters (c., drachmas). When he got into trouble for providing a
maritime loan on a ship apparently trading with the enemy (Sparta),
Pasion found him a citizen guarantor to stand surety for seven
talents. Meanwhile, back in the Bosporus, Sopaeus was accused of
plotting against Satyrus and suspicion also fell on the son. Moves
were made to extradite him and conﬁscate his money. The son of
Sopaeus therefore colluded with Pasion to conceal the existence of his
bank deposit and feign poverty by fabricating imaginary loans at
interest. In time, Sopaeus was rehabilitated and Satyrus made
appropriate amends. Great, therefore, was the son’s chagrin (or so he
claimed) when Pasion not only denied to his face that any deposit
existed but accused him of fraudulently receiving six talents from
Cittus, his slave assistant. After repeated attempts to have Cittus
tortured, so getting to the bottom of the matter, had been blocked by
Pasion, the dispute came to court.
The speech written for the son of Sopaeus by Isocrates () is
the earliest of six speeches dealing with the banking business
belonging to Pasion (Demosthenes , , , , ). Of the twenty
or so banks known from Athens, his was easily the most prosperous
and durable (see below). Pasion himself was originally a bankers’
slave who c. gained his freedom, took over his masters business,
and eventually bought his way into the citizen body. On his death,
he was reputedly worth almost sixty talents (apparently his brush
with the son of Sopaeus did him no lasting harm). Incredibly,
Pasion’s pathway from slavery to citizenship was followed by
his own bank-slave, Phormio (not the opponent of Chrysippus).
Lest this give a false impression of upward social mobility in Athens,
it must be stressed that such rags-to-riches stories are utterly
exceptional. Pasion’s son Apollodorus never rid himself of the
stigma (real or imagined) that he owed his citizenship not to birth

46
|
classical greece
but a decree of the people. ‘The mouse has just tasted pitch; for he
wanted to be an Athenian’ is the taunt that, in his paranoia, he
attributes to one of his many opponents ([Demosthenes] . ; see
below).
Almost all bankers were metics and many were ex-slaves; the detail
of Isocrates’ speech helps conﬁrm their location on the periphery of
polis-society, providing services to those outside the community of
citizens. Taking deposits, extending credit and, possibly most import-
ant of all, changing money, which was the original function of Greek
bankers, are all attested. The Greek word, ancient and modern, for
‘bank’ (trapeza) refers to the moneychanger’s table. The son of
Sopaeus, never in Athens before, was introduced to Pasion by
Pythodorus the Phoenician (. ). He seems himself to have acted as
middleman in later arranging for Hippolaïdes ‘my guest and friend’
to borrow from Pasion (. ).
The advantage for a trader in having a banker he could trust is
shown up in the speech Against Callipus, attributed to Demosthenes
(), but delivered (and probably written) by Apollodorus, son of
Pasion. He recounts how the Heraclean merchant Lycon, shortly
before sailing to Libya, reckoned up his account with Pasion and
ordered the sum of , drachmas to be paid over to his partner,
Cephisiades of Scyros. Lycon was killed by pirates, and Callipus, the
Heraclean proxenos or honorary consul, tried to appropriate the
deposit. Despite coming under pressure from Callipus (a high-status
citizen) to disregard his obligation to a mere metic, Pasion apparently
kept faith and handed over the cash to Cephisiades. The bank itself
(or at least a branch) was located in the Piraeus. It was no empty
generalization when Apollodorus talked about Lycon using his
father’s bank ‘like the other merchants’ (§).
Citizens, by contrast, would normally have networks of friends,
neighbours, and relations to whom they could turn to supply most of
the services oﬀered by bankers. Only four citizens are known to have
deposited cash with bankers. One was Demosthenes’ father, heavily
involved in manufacturing, having money with Pasion; another was
Epicrates, temporarily depositing with a banker the purchase-price of
Athenogenes’ three slaves.
Twenty years after Pasion’s death in , Apollodorus was still try-
ing to recover monies allegedly owing to his father. Part of his cam-
paign of litigation was an accusation for perjury Against Stephanus

the economy
|
47
(Dem. . –), where a character attack on his opponent indicates
the ideology of reciprocal assistance between citizens:
You have been better oﬀ than you deserved, yet to whom among the mass of
the Athenians have you ever made a contribution? To whom have you ever
given help? To whom have you done a kindness? You could not mention a
single one. But, while lending out money at interest and regarding the mis-
fortune and necessities of others as your good fortune, you ejected your uncle
Nicias from his ancestral home, you have deprived your mother-in-law of the
resources on which she lived . . . No one has ever exacted payment from a
man defaulting on the principal as harshly as you exact interest from your
debtors.
The implication is that the good Athenian should be prepared to
assist his fellow-citizens (and certainly his friends and relations) with
interest-free loans. Of course, citizens did regularly lend to each other
at interest. In addition to loans at interest in the estates of Ciron and
Stratocles, Demosthenes Senior had at his death about one talent lent
out at  per cent per month, the ‘standard rate’ in fourth-century
Athens. But the underlying ideology was one of reciprocal assistance
to those in need; at least, if there was an existing relationship or one
was being cultivated for the future.
The ‘contribution’ mentioned by Apollodorus refers to so-called
eranos credit: small sums supplied without interest or security to one
in need by a plurality of private lenders (friends, neighbours, and the
like). Apart from his talent out at interest, Demosthenes’ father had a
further talent, lent in sums of  or  drachmas, which have
plausibly been identiﬁed as eranos loans. As often, Theophrastus’
Characters indicates appropriate behaviour by its opposite. The
‘Mean Man’ (), seeing the approach of a friend he knows to be
collecting eranos contributions, will duck down a sidestreet and go
home by a roundabout way.
Some implications of the reciprocal basis of credit and its relation-
ship to friendship emerge from yet another speech by Apollodorus:
Against Nicostratus, again preserved under Demosthenes’ name ().
Apollodorus and Nicostratus were neighbours in the country who
helped each other out. ‘I came to feel on such intimate terms with
him’, says Apollodorus, ‘that he never failed to win any favour he
asked of me; and he, on his part, was useful in looking after my aﬀairs
and managing them’ (§).
On the occasion in question, three of the slaves on Nicostratus’

48
|
classical greece
farm ran away. He went after them and, by a stroke of poetic justice,
was captured by pirates and himself sold as a slave at Aegina, oﬀ the
coast of Attica. Apollodorus provided Nicostratus’ brother, Deinon,
with a gift of  drachmas to fetch him home. On his return,
Nicostratus came to Apollodorus, complained that his relations had
let him down, confessed that he needed twenty-six minas to pay
oﬀ his ransom, and urged him to make an eranos contribution.
Apollodorus responded with a further gift of ten minas which he
raised by oﬀering pledges (cups and a gold crown) to a banker. On
to a good thing, Nicostratus a few days later pleaded for an immedi-
ate loan of the remaining sixteen minas to pay oﬀ the strangers
who had ransomed him and were threatening to re-enslave him. He
promised, once that threat was lifted, to make an eranos collection to
recompense Apollodorus. Although Apollodorus readily agreed, he
was himself at this time short of ready cash (§).
Accordingly, I oﬀered my tenement house as security for a loan of sixteen
minas from Arcesas of Pambotadae, whom Nicostratus himself introduced to
me. He lent me the money at the rate of . per cent per month. But when
Nicostratus had got the money, so far from showing gratitude for what I had
done for him, he immediately began to lay a plot against me, to rob me of my
money, and become my enemy.
Hence the court case. Although no conﬁdence can be placed on the
accuracy of Apollodorus’ allegations, key points emerge. There is the
potential complexity of credit relations: the initial obligation arising
out of the ransom resulted in seven separate loan transactions (far
more, had Nicostratus’ projected eranos been collected). The motive
for borrowing, to meet a ransom, was typical of Athenian credit
relations; similarly ‘unproductive’ borrowing embraced funeral
expenses, dowries, and (for the élite) funding of liturgies and tax
payments. Finally, there is the way in which reciprocity seems to lurk
behind not only credit relations but also friendship, and the wider
range of inter-personal relations, justice included (see above, p. ;
below, p. ). Not for nothing did the son of Sopaeus end his speech
as he began: with a sharp reminder to the jury of the beneﬁts Satyrus
and his own father had bestowed on the Athenians, allowing them
grain when other Greeks went without.

the economy
|
49
The heart of the matter
Our exploration of the Greek economy began in the Athenian coun-
tryside. It ends at the very heart of the city, in the Agora. In this
handful of acres, formally marked oﬀ with boundary-stones, and
lustral basins, and lined with civic buildings, the whole life of the
polis was concentrated: administration, publicity, justice, ostracism,
religion, processions, dancing, athletics, and equestrian displays.
Small wonder that ‘market-place’ might seem an inadequate label for
such a highly charged area (see below, p. ). The Agora was the
prime meeting-place in Athens, where citizens and others might go to
get information, meet their friends (or enemies), gamble, torture a
slave, hire or get hired as wage labourers, accost a prostitute, seek
asylum (if a slave), have a haircut, go begging, fetch water, watch
cock-ﬁghting, and ﬁnd out the time from the public water clock.
Intermixed with all this was the business of buying and selling, car-
ried on in traders’ stalls scattered over the Agora. The comic poet
Eubulus highlights the mingling of marketing with the courts (many
of the law-suits mentioned above will have been heard in courts in or
near the Agora):
In one and the same place you will ﬁnd all kinds of things for sale together at
Athens: ﬁgs, bailiﬀs, bunches of grapes, turnips, pears, apples, witnesses,
roses, medlars, milk-puddings, honeycombs, chickpeas, lawsuits, beestings,
curds, myrtle, allotment machines, irises, lambs, water-clocks, laws and
indictments.
The element of exaggeration need only be slight. It seems possible
that the jurors at the trial of Socrates would have sat on stone benches
in the open air overlooking all the bustle of the Agora; behind them,
on the hill crowned by the Temple of Hephaestus, there was carried
on the business of bronzefounding and the hiring of casual labour.
Conservative theorists disliked and devised alternatives for this
mixing up of functions. Both Plato and Aristotle present schemes
whereby the business of marketing (and its personnel) could be
sealed oﬀ from more ‘digniﬁed’ Agora activities like religion and
politics (see below, p. ). In the case of Athens, the assembly-area of
the Pnyx was too accessible for their comfort: just a ten-minute walk,

50
|
classical greece
south of the Agora. Xenophon has Socrates distastefully imagine a
typical assembly as full of clothing-cleaners, shoemakers, carpenters,
smiths, peasants, merchants, and ‘those who trade in the Agora, who
think of nothing but buying cheap and selling dear’ (Memorabilia .
).
What seems to have aroused particular disapproval was the way the
Agora provided civic space within which poorer citizens (and even
non-citizens) might legitimately mingle with those of higher status
(see below, p. ). Moreover, the business of the Agora gave scope
for subversion (even inversion) of prevailing hierarchies. Epicrates
feelingly denounces the perfumer Athenogenes as ‘a speechwriter, an
agora-type and, worst of all, an Egyptian’ (§). Characters in comedy
regularly express outrage at ways in which stallholders behave as if
the superiors of their natural betters (Athenaeus . c–b). ‘It’s
ten-thousand times easier to get access to and a decision from the
Athenian General Staﬀ than attention and a civil response from a
ﬁshmonger . . . So brazen are they in overcharging that, like the
Gorgon, their looks turn customers to stone . . . Here’s one who
wears his hair long, claiming it’s dedicated to some god; in reality,
he’s concealing the brand on his forehead showing he’s the worst sort
of slave. As if to prove the point, he takes the purchase price in one
currency and gives change in another, making thereby an extra proﬁt
on the deal.’
A market then, but not a market economy. To be sure, money, in
the form of silver coinage, was part of every Athenian’s life as a means
of exchange (perhaps less so as a store of value). From , public
testers of silver coinage sat daily at designated spots in the Agora and
Piraeus. A well-preserved inscription gives details of their terms of
reference, including ﬁfty strokes for the tester (a public slave) if he
failed to turn up (Harding ). Prices of staple commodities might
ﬂuctuate with supply, especially in time of obvious shortage; but
underlying this (and possibly making prices ‘sticky’) was the notion
of an ‘accepted price’: the ﬁve drachmas for which Chrysippus
beneﬁcently sold oﬀ his grain (see above). The habitual practice of
bargaining further modiﬁed the idea of market exchange. Haggling in
the Agora should be seen not as establishing a price at which the
market would be cleared (Adam Smith’s ‘invisible hand’ at work), but
rather as an expression of relative power and status. The comic poet
Alexis fantasizes about legislation that would prevent ﬁshmongers

the economy
|
51
from bargaining by forcing them to name a fair price at the very
outset. ‘In this way, old man, old woman, and child will do their
marketing at a ﬁfth of the price.’
Alexis imagined protection for the weakest members of the citizen
community. The Agora was an area where status could be both
asserted and challenged with few holds barred. Provided with ‘the
knowledge’, an individual might tour around the Agora with con-
ﬁdence, knowing not only the speciﬁc places where items were sold
(‘I went around to the garlic and the onions and the incense’), but
also the associations of each location. To be avoided by respectable
people were ‘Cercopes’ (allegedly stolen goods on sale) and the
‘Women’s market’ (degrading for a male citizen). By contrast, those
wishing to assert high status would frequent the bankers’ tables or,
aspiring to fashion, the perfumers’ stalls. According to the comic poet
Eupolis, a peasant who found himself mixed up in the conversation
there would feel decidedly out of place.
Envoi
It will not have escaped the sceptical reader that many of the texts
referred to in the above discussion of the Greek economy are open to
alternative readings. Is it feasible, after all, to talk in terms of industry
in Athens? Did wealthy Athenians deliberately maintain a balanced
portfolio of assets? Was trade actually geared to sustaining economic
growth? Was not the Athenian economy essentially market-
orientated and eﬀectively proto-capitalist? It is hoped that the
author’s view is clear: the Greek economy was neither primitive nor
did it foreshadow capitalism; but, as an integral part of a complex
culture and society, it possessed its own distinctive sophistication. It
was, at the least, all so very diﬀerent.

3
The classical city
Rosalind Thomas
The civic model
In the s, a woman called Neaera was prosecuted at Athens for
fraudulently passing herself oﬀ as a woman of Athenian birth and
marrying an Athenian man. She was really a foreigner from Corinth,
the prosecutor alleged, and, still worse, had been a courtesan and
former slave. Yet Stephanus, an Athenian, had married her, presenting
her as a fully legitimate Athenian wife and their children as legitimate
Athenians, and he had also arranged for Phano, her equally dissolute
and non-Athenian daughter, to marry an Athenian who held the
oﬃce of King Archon. As his wife, Phano had participated in certain
secret and special rites of the Athenian festival of the Anthesteria, in
which she made oﬀerings on behalf of the city and was given in ritual
marriage to the god Dionysus. So still worse, the gods were oﬀended
at this non-Athenian presiding over Athenian rituals, a horrible abuse
of the most sacred.
The prosecution speech, preserved under Demosthenes’ name
(Demosthenes ), charged Neaera with being a foreigner and living
in an illegal marriage, but the real target of the prosecution was
Stephanus, her ‘husband’, and it was a serious attack: by Athenian law
an Athenian could not marry a woman of non-Athenian birth, and if
he fraudulently gave an alien woman to an Athenian in marriage, he
would be disfranchized. Children born from a non-Athenian wife
could not become Athenian citizens. Neaera’s professional activities
in Corinth only added to the picture of deception and deceit and
heightened the shock the Athenian jury was supposed to feel at this
woman’s daughter performing the ancient religious rites of Athens.
So great was the gulf between the city-states of Athens and Corinth,

the classical city
|
53
not very far from each other, which shared a common language,
common gods, and a common Greek culture. For all the movement
of individuals between these two prosperous cities, Athenian citizens
and Corinthian citizens, and their wives, lived in separate worlds,
politically and legally insulated from each other.
There was an unbridgeable gulf between the physical mobility of
individuals like Stephanus and Neaera and the rigid political realities
in each city-state or polis. The Corinthian citizen belonged to an
oligarchy, a constitution which gave political rights to a narrow
property-based citizen body and political power to a still narrower
body, with its own legal regulations. The Athenian citizen was subject
to the laws, expectations, and customs of the Athenian radical dem-
ocracy, a constitution which gave extensive political powers to a large
male citizen body and which prided itself on the extent of individual
freedom. Each had quite diﬀerent political rights and a particular
range of obligations, laws, and restrictions which amounted almost to
a distinct culture. Greek city-states were ﬁercely independent and
often profoundly antagonistic to their immediate Greek neighbours.
Within the city-state it also mattered whether you were a citizen or
not: even legal rights and penalties were aﬀected. An extreme and
brutally clear case of diﬀerentiation by civic status appears in a ﬁfth-
century law-code published by Gortyn in southern Crete. The ﬁnes
for rape and adultery were carefully calibrated according to the civic
status of the two people involved (with an extra twist according to
relationship). A free man who raped a household slave was subject to
a minor ﬁne of merely , , or  obols. But a slave who had the
temerity to rape a free person was ﬁned a sum at least a hundred
times more (, obols). Adultery with a free woman brought a ﬁne
of  obols, or , if the adultery took place in the house of a close
male relative; adultery between two slaves incurred a ﬁne of merely
 obols, a tenth of the lower sum––and so on. We get a chilling sense
of the exact ‘worth’ of each individual in this Cretan city-state: a slave
was ‘worth’  times less than a free person. Gortyn may be extreme,
but the general principle is found all over Greece.
The civic model and civic divisions are at the core of Greek society.
Our own words ‘politics’ and ‘political’ derive from the Greek word
polites, ‘citizen’, the active members of the polis (city-state: plural
‘poleis’). The polis was a community of citizens, and personal rela-
tions were regulated by law by the individual polis for its citizens.

54
|
classical greece
Every polis involved its citizens in some form of active decision-
making, whatever its precise political constitution, otherwise it risked
not being considered a polis at all: Haemon in Sophocles’ Antigone
() retorted to the ruler Creon that a city ‘is not a polis if one man
rules it’. The mass of surviving literature from the classical period
derives from members of city-states; all classical discussions of
the ideal state, including Plato’s Republic and Laws, and Aristotle’s
Politics, are premised on the model of the polis. Experimentation in
political forms invariably circled around the basic ideal of the polis,
though alongside the polis there existed the tribal state or ‘ethnos’,
and leagues and federal states which oﬀered alternatives of varying
degrees of permanence and attractiveness to the glorious isolation of
the self-governing polis. The inﬂuence of the civic model was so
strong that sub-groups also mimicked the language and behaviour of
the larger polis.
Many city-states inscribed on stone slabs their decrees, treaties, and
laws. Athens’ inscriptions are most voluminous, for the democracy
demanded public accountability and visibility, as well as monumental
signiﬁcance, for the lasting decisions of the democratic institutions
and the laws that bound them. But other cities also put written
documents on stone: Gortyn in Crete, not a democracy, inscribed its
vast law code on the back of its theatre wall for everyone to see. So if
we add our literary evidence, our knowledge of the detailed workings
of innumerable city-states can often be surprisingly good and very
precise.
Inscriptions are a powerful supplement to the narratives of the
historians and to the highly articulate political theorists such as Plato
and Aristotle, whose analyses of the polis had their own agenda. They
also provide invaluable evidence for the many city-states which were
less prominent, powerful, or articulate than Athens. Inscriptions
reveal minute self-regulation by smaller city-states, often enacted
surprisingly early. A law recently found on the island of Thasos in the
northern Aegean includes regulations about the public cleanliness of
this city-state, an island with its own silver mines, close to the
Thracian shore and mines of the north Aegean. It shows an early zeal
for urban supervision, and an astute sense of how to persuade
oﬃcials to collect ﬁnes (by ﬁning them instead). Amidst tough
regulations and ﬁnes about building or digging cisterns, this early
ﬁfth-century law continues:

the classical city
|
55
Let every inhabitant keep the street in front of his house clean . . . let him take
up what litter comes from the houses and what is in the road, when the
magistrates order so; whosoever does not do any of these things according to
the law, he shall owe one twelfth of a stater for each day to the polis; the
oﬃcials shall exact it [the penalty] and keep half themselves . . . Nobody is
allowed to climb up on the roofs of public buildings in this road to watch [a
procession?] and no woman is permitted to watch from the windows. For
whichever of these things (i.e. crimes) he does, let the occupier owe to the
polis a stater for each oﬀence; the oﬃcials shall exact it and keep half them-
selves. (SEG , )
Such is the kind of regulation that city-states could impose upon
themselves, and consider important enough to inscribe in stone. We
may reckon on at least  poleis, large and small, in Greece,
and another  in the colonies around the Mediterranean and
Black Sea (Herodotus alone mentions  city-states), all of which
decided upon regulations and laws of their own, following local and
particular anxieties and needs.
Citizens and citizenship
If the city-state consists above all of its citizens, what made a citizen?
Citizenship was central to the social, political, and cultural identity of
the Greeks in an active sense which seems remote from the experi-
ence of many members of the modern nation-state. Whether or not
someone was a Spartan, an Athenian, or a Corinthian citizen brought
with it profound cultural and political consequences. Being a citizen
of a certain polis slotted that citizen into the small world of a particu-
lar community which had enormous power to shape its own politics,
religion, and culture.
In the early archaic period communities seem to have consisted
simply of all inhabitants, the more crucial divisions being between
the free and the slave, or the free and the debt-bondsman, and
between those who were regarded as noble, aristocratic, and the rest.
It is probable that the idea of the citizen became more closely politic-
ally deﬁned as the polis and its political system became more reﬁned
and institutionalized. In the eighth century most settlements were
run by a few aristocrats, and the mass of the free inhabitants had

56
|
classical greece
neither political rights nor obligations. ‘Citizens’ perhaps grew out of
what were at ﬁrst merely the free male inhabitants of a polis, who
owned and farmed the land; it was later that the role narrowed to
become speciﬁcally the free males with political rights. These rights
emerged from complex shifts in power and revolution as laws and
political structures developed over the seventh and sixth centuries.
The military role of the polis’ inhabitants in the hoplite phalanx
was crucial, for hoplite ﬁghting was a mode of warfare which from
the seventh century onwards gave an equally important role in the
ranks of infantry to the ordinary citizen as to the aristocracy (see
below, p. ). With citizen-farmers in the hoplite phalanx, the city-
states developed a set of ideals that elevated the courage of the citizen
ﬁghting for his city in the front rank. As the Spartan poet Tyrtaeus
put it in his military exhortation in the late seventh century, ‘This is
excellence, this is the best and most beautiful prize in the world for a
young man to win, for he brings a common good to the polis and the
whole people, the man who remains steadfast unceasingly in the front
ranks’ (frag. ). The citizens’ military role, their direct and immedi-
ate function as defending army against any enemy, almost a standing
army composed of the whole citizen-body, meshed with their polit-
ical status, and identiﬁed the individual’s honour with his city-state’s.
Hence the political strength of the citizen body as voters in the citizen
assembly.
Citizenship in the classical period was a jealously guarded privil-
ege. Sparta notoriously oﬀered her citizenship to only two members
of other Greek poleis in her entire history down to the end of the
fourth century despite a catastrophic drop in her citizen numbers by
the early fourth century. At the high point of her empire, Athens
actually tightened the rules for citizenship in the Periclean law of /
, so that citizens now had to have two parents, rather than one, of
citizen birth (a further tightening in the fourth century lay behind
Neaera’s case). It is really only from the s on that our evidence
indicates that Athens granted citizen rights to wealthy foreigners or
non-Athenian benefactors. Such grants were the butt of jokes in com-
edy in the s (see Aristophanes’ Acharnians, below), but became
more common in the fourth century as Athenian conﬁdence waned
and her desire to favour rich foreigners grew. But it would have been
unthinkable to Athens to oﬀer Athenian citizenship to her ﬁfth-
century subject allies as a way of strengthening the alliance. Quite

the classical city
|
57
exceptionally, the citizens of the island of Samos were oﬀered
Athenian citizenship in /, as the Athenians were losing the
Peloponnesian War, as a recognition of their staunch loyalty (‘And in
return for the beneﬁts they have conferred upon the Athenians and
since they now highly esteem them and propose beneﬁts for them, it
has been resolved by the Council and the People that the Samians
shall be Athenians, governing themselves in the manner they
themselves prefer.’). This decree was, at the end of the war, a purely
honoriﬁc act: the Athenian empire had ridden rough-shod over the
autonomy of many of the allied city-states; now when it granted citi-
zenship wholesale to another polis, it carefully assured Samos that she
would retain her autonomy. But in the Greek classical world that was
almost a contradiction in terms: how could you be loyal citizens of two
city-states? We can well see why these wholesale grants were so rare.
Loss of citizen rights was termed atimia, literally ‘being without
honour’. Similarly the expression achrestos, literally ‘useless’,
appeared in the archaic period in a Cretan law, in a context where it
meant that an individual so punished would be unable to hold oﬃce
or use his political rights. There is an echo in the ﬁfth century in the
Periclean Funeral Speech in Thucydides’ History, where Pericles
declares that the Athenians consider those who are politically inactive
to be ‘useless’ (. . ). Loss of citizen rights was a devastating
punishment. To have citizen rights and not use them was equally
despised.
In the Politics, in the fullest Greek discussion of citizenship we
have, Aristotle struggled to ﬁnd a single deﬁnition of citizenship from
all the varieties of citizenships in the Greek world, and eventually
settled on a political one: ‘A citizen is he who has the power to take
part in the deliberative and judicial administration of the polis’ (Politics
b). By that, he included the power to take part in the assembly, the
deliberative gathering of all citizens who then voted on proposals in
war, peace, and anything else. But which men were citizens varied
considerably from state to state. In general, to be a citizen one had to
be a hoplite, and own and farm land: only a radical democracy like
the Athenian gave citizen rights even to the landless. A man who had
full citizen status in a democracy might not necessarily have it in an
oligarchy (literally ‘rule by the few’), since citizen rights would then
be conﬁned to a smaller body, usually the rich. Sparta at one extreme
was particularly rigid, requiring not only birth, but a certain level of

58
|
classical greece
land and contributions to the common messes of the city: if these
contributions could not be maintained, that is, if the citizen fell below
a certain level of wealth, the Spartiate lost his status.
But wealth alone did not make someone a citizen: plenty of very
wealthy men born outside Athens lived there but were debarred from
citizen rights. Athenian trials and Athenian comedy contain many
accusations of barbarian ancestry precisely because this would be a
good way of jeopardizing citizenship. Other cities demanded parents
of citizen birth for two or three generations. But cities whose citizen
population was declining might also make a call for new citizens to
‘ﬁll up’ the citizen body––the great hope, presumably, for many of the
dispossessed. According to the ﬁfth-century Sicilian orator Gorgias,
the citizens of Larissa in Thessaly were a ‘manufactured article,
made, like the kettles which bear the city’s name, by the magistrates’
(Aristotle, Politics b).
Within the citizen body of a given state, the wealthier citizens
tended to have more access to political oﬃce than the poorer citizens.
An oligarchy might be ruled by a very narrow group who held oﬃce
within a wider citizen body, as at Corinth, where we hear remarkably
little about its assembly. In essence oligarchy was rule by the few and
the rich, democracy rule by the people, or as Aristotle puts it, rule by
the free. With so much variation in citizen bodies, it is no surprise
that Aristotle had such diﬃculty in ﬁnding a single deﬁnition of the
citizen; the deﬁnitions he rejected emphasize a central feature of the
polis, that citizenship was fragile and could be temporary.
Citizens expected that their children would be citizens of their
polis, and various city-states, Athens most spectacularly, had tradi-
tions that they had always lived in the same land, which implied a
tight and almost mystical identiﬁcation between the land and the
citizens of the polis. The Athenian tradition connected with their
ﬁrm belief that they were more civilized because they were more
settled and less ‘mixed’ than other city-states. It gave the whole citizen
body something akin to an ancient aristocratic lineage, a long pedi-
gree and a myth of origin (compare the created citizen Apollodorus,
above, pp. –), and it may have been a reaction not only to their
main Greek opponents like Dorian Sparta, who had rousing tradi-
tions of the Dorian invasion of Greece, but also to the fragility of a
politically created citizenship.
Citizenship was no inalienable birthright; it was a legal and polit-

the classical city
|
59
ical creation. It could be redeﬁned in a revolution to give citizen
rights to large numbers of new citizens, or to remove citizens, or to
reduce the access to political inﬂuence of large numbers (compare
pp. – below). It could be lost for other reasons, treason and
impiety being the most serious. In fourth-century Athens, Aeschines
tried to get his opponent Timarchus, a prominent politician, deprived
of full citizen rights on the grounds that he had been a prostitute––
and was therefore likely to do anything for money (see above,
pp. –). At Sparta those who committed acts of cowardice, or
showed other signs of inadequacy, also forfeited their citizen rights
(these sub-groups had appropriate names, e.g. ‘The Tremblers’).
Disfranchisement, enfranchisement, oaths of allegiance: all could
be overturned in time of revolution. If revolution involved redistribu-
tion of land, as it often did, in most cities that would mean loss of
citizen rights, and with mass expulsions in revolutions, there were
numerous exiles (the historian Herodotus was one). Citizens could be
degraded to resident aliens, or worse. Aristotle, in one of the more
convoluted and astonishing sections of Politics, is even perplexed by
the question of whether a polis remains the same polis when its
constitution changes. The question would not arise for a modern
nation state: France remained France through revolution, whether its
constitution was a monarchy or democracy. What made the question
acute for Aristotle was that the polis was so closely identiﬁed with its
citizen body. With relatively little state apparatus, no permanent
‘executive’ beyond public slaves, very little bureaucracy, the polis was
run by its citizens, even if a narrow élite at the top might hold most
oﬃces, and in time of revolution the sense of who was actually an
‘Athenian’ or ‘a Samian’ might become problematic.
In the oligarchic coup at Athens in , the democracy was per-
suaded to vote itself out of existence, and power was given over to a
far narrower group which labelled itself ‘the Four Hundred’. This
acted as the council for a body of ‘Five Thousand’ citizens, and ini-
tially tried to ignore the , altogether, who were all who could
furnish a suit of hoplite armour (Thucydides . ) (by contrast, the
radical democracy of the ﬁfth century, with around , citizens,
included a lowest property class, the thetes, of which about ,
were landless according to one orator). Attica as a territory remained
constant under the oligarchy, but ‘the Athenians’ with full citizen
rights were a much reduced body, and decrees issued by the council

60
|
classical greece
in that period, opening without the conventional democratic refer-
ence to ‘Council and People’ (see below), represented a much
reduced body of citizens. No wonder polis stability was a major pre-
occupation of Greek thinkers.
A further problem was vigorously discussed: whether to accept
into the citizen body those who belonged to certain professions, and
what to do about traders and, often the same people, resident visitors
from other cities (metics). One of the dangers perceived by anti-
democratic politicians and theorists was that the area of the city
where trade was concentrated tended to be more democratically
inclined than the rest. This was the case in Piraeus, Athens’ port,
where there was a particularly large concentration of foreigners (see
above, p. ). It could be seriously suggested that a city might wish to
keep traders out of the main area of the polis, the political ‘Agora’ or
market-place, and both Plato and Aristotle went so far as to suggest
that there should be a separate agora reserved for trading. In practice
the political and the economic inevitably mixed, and it is only
occasionally that we learn of speciﬁc deﬁnitions of citizenship that
sought to exclude trade. Several oligarchies had laws against citizens
making money in trade (Aristotle, Politics b). Thebes had a law
which allowed a man to hold oﬃce only if he had retired from
business for ten years (Politics a) and one can imagine aspiring
oﬃce holders rushing to create middlemen for the purpose.
Athens and Sparta
What exactly was meant by political citizenship depended, as we
have seen, on whether a city-state was a radical democracy (such as
Athens), in which the mass of the people held political power, an
oligarchy run by a narrower body, or somewhere on the wide spec-
trum of possibilities in between. We shall concentrate on Athens as
the best documented of all constitutions, and on Sparta, which can be
treated as an oligarchy even though in formal terms it was a mixed
constitution with monarchic, democratic, and oligarchic elements.
Athenian democracy was radical and exceptional (indeed the most
radical democracy the world has known), and was both criticized and
feared by many non-Athenians.

the classical city
|
61
Athens became a radical democracy in the s when the judicial
powers held by the old council of the Areopagus were transferred to
the popular courts and popular assembly. After the disaster of the end
of the Peloponnesian War (–), and the emotional and physical
horrors of the two periods of oligarchy towards its end, the powers of
the assembly were reduced and further power was transferred to
magistrates, but the most basic radical elements remained. Those
radical features consisted of the very large citizen body, which
included ‘thetes’, men with little or no property; the fact that all
political decisions were subject to the will of the demos, the people;
that the leaders themselves were held accountable to the people in the
Assembly and popular jury courts; and that there was pay for oﬃce-
holding and jury service which allowed the poorer citizens to play a
fuller role in the democracy, or at least not be debarred totally
by poverty. As Pericles is made to say in his somewhat lukewarm
description of this democratic principle in the Funeral Speech in
Thucydides, ‘nor does poverty bar the way, but a [poor] man is able
to serve the city, despite his lack of authority’ (Thucydides . . ).
This was direct democracy, in which the people exercised their
political power by being present and voting directly on any issue
rather than by voting for representatives as in modern (represen-
tational) democracy. Most oﬃcials were chosen by lot, not election
(the generals were an important exception, see below). The citizens
expressed their will mainly in the Assembly (ekklesia), and in the ﬁfth
century all serious business, and much which we would consider
minor business for committees, including numerous decisions
involving money, came before the Assembly; its vote was ﬁnal.
In one of the most famous expressions of their sovereignty, the
Assembly in  made the brutal decision to punish the Mytileneans
for revolting by massacring the male citizens, and selling the women
and children into slavery. Overnight, however, people began to regret
the decision––presumably people were anxiously conferring in the
Agora, the houses and streets of the centre of Athens––and an emer-
gency Assembly was called the very next day to reopen the question.
The arguments for and against such ruthlessness were put to the
people, dramatized brilliantly by Thucydides via two opposing
speeches by Cleon (for extreme punishment) and Diodotus (calcu-
lated mercy) (. –), and the majority narrowly overturned the
previous day’s decision. This was what was meant by the authority

62
|
classical greece
and sovereignty of the people: the citizen assembly had the power of
decision and eﬀectively the power of law in the ﬁfth century, and the
decision was reached in debate on the day. It is also illustrates what
many saw as the ﬁckle nature of the people, for here was a decision
taken on one day, in the heat of the moment, and thought better of
the next day, after reﬂection. It showed the extraordinary conﬁdence
and authority which resided in the ﬁfth-century Assembly. In this
case the ship conveying the ﬁrst command had not hurried, and the
command could be rescinded before it was too late.
Towards the end of the war the people took the law into their own
hands and insisted that they, as the people, had the power to try all
eight generals together after the sea battle of Arginusae when they
had failed to pick up the bodies of the dead––and all were con-
demned to death. This was strictly illegal, but who was to say where
exactly were the limits of the people’s sovereignty? As some citizens
claimed, according to Xenophon, ‘it was insuﬀerable that the demos
should not be allowed to do what it wanted’ (Hellenica . ). Decisions
like these led fourth-century democracy to hive oﬀ law-making to a
special body of ‘lawgivers’, who still consisted of ordinary citizens,
but who were separated procedurally and emotionally from the
heightened excitement of the debates in the Assembly. This might not
have prevented war-time decisions like the Mytilene aﬀair, but it gave
away the fact that in the fourth century the democracy was more
wary of the enormous power the people had in the earlier Assembly.
The body of people who came together in the Assembly on succes-
sive days to debate how to punish Mytilene was almost certainly not
identical. The assembly-place on the Pnyx could not actually seat the
whole citizen body of up to ,. Modern calculations suggest that
in the ﬁfth century the Pnyx could seat ,, in the fourth century
slightly more; we hear of quorums of ,, which must have been
attainable, and , seems to be seen as equivalent to a full assembly.
The powers of the People’s Assembly, then, were exercised by a
shifting selection of the whole citizen body.
Most of those attending the Assembly at any one time would pre-
sumably be those who lived nearest, in the city itself or just outside,
who could combine attendance in the Assembly with a visit to the
market-place (about one third of citizens lived within six miles of the
centre of Athens; Attica itself covered , square kilometres). Many
farmer-citizens spread over the rest of Attica probably travelled in to

the classical city
|
63
an assembly less often, perhaps combining it with some crucial buy-
ing and selling. We hear for instance of a barber’s shop near the
Agora where men of Decelea used to meet, which implies that not
many Deceleans were in Athens at any one time. The Assembly at any
one meeting can hardly have been representative but that was the
catch of direct democracy: no direct participation without actual
physical presence.
A further result was that ambitious men who sought to persuade
the Assembly to vote their way had to become orators (rhetores) for
mass audiences. This called for particular techniques of oratory and
greater professionalism, which again tended to exclude those who
had no access to such skills. The major political leaders were those
with the leisure both to deal with democratic business and to perfect
their skills of persuasion: the fourth-century Athenian word for
politician is rhetor (orator). The democracy fuelled the development
of the Greek arts of argument and persuasion.
The Assembly had its agenda prepared by the Council (or Boulê).
The Council ﬁltered business before it went to the Assembly for ﬁnal
decision, vetting proposals for decrees, and also had executive func-
tions; it could act in an emergency and receive ambassadors. Decrees
passed by the Athenians usually start with ‘It has been decided by
the Council and the People [i.e. Assembly]’, (compare the example
above, p. ). Amendments could be proposed in the Assembly, but
the Council’s role in preparing business had a steadying function
before the spirited and often noisy debates in the Assembly.
The Council was made up democratically of  men chosen for a
single year recruited equally from the ten tribes of Athens ( per
tribe); that tribal contingent was made up of set quotas of representa-
tives from each of the demes, the villages or wards of Attica, the quota
being determined by deme size, so that the largest, Acharnae, sent
twenty-two members to the Council each year, whilst the tiniest
demes sent only one every other year. It is sometimes assumed that
the Council was largely composed of the rich, so that the upper
classes were selecting business to go before the lower classes on the
assembly ﬂoor, but it is hard for demographic reasons to see how this
could happen in practice: even if every Council member served
twice––and no one was allowed to serve more than twice––,
councillors (who had to be over ) would be required in the course
of thirty years. There were, by contrast, only about , Athenians

64
|
classical greece
wealthy enough to contribute liturgies (see above, p. ). What is
more, the ﬁnal choice was by lot, election being regarded as an
oligarchic feature, and this was in deliberate contrast to the principle
of the oligarchic council.
For many with a farm to run, a year serving on the Council might
be inconvenient, and we can only presume that Council members
from the distant demes rented or borrowed somewhere to stay in the
city for the frequent meetings. But they were paid, true to the demo-
cratic principle. Unless there was massive disregard for the rules, a
very high proportion of Athenians must have taken a turn on the
Council for a year. As for the ambitious, they will have made the
greatest political capital they could out of their year on the Council,
as any aspiring politician would, which is why we hear about some
very prominent individuals (Cleon, Demosthenes) being on the
Council in years which were important to them as politicians. But the
ambitious also pursued other avenues of political inﬂuence: when
wealthy Athenians prosecuted in court appealed to the people for
favour, they tended to cite their family’s patriotic military zeal and
their liturgies, but not the mere fact of serving on the Council.
It was the jury courts which were regarded as most characteristic-
ally Athenian, and which embodied the principle of accountability to
the people. Juries are addressed by speakers very much as if they
themselves are the people and embody the Assembly, and their power
was often dreaded. Jury members were called in Greek dikastai, liter-
ally ‘judges’, and that is what they were, for there were no presiding
judges as in modern courts and no professional lawyers. Drawn from
a panel of , citizens over , they were sworn in at the beginning
of the year and deployed for separate cases in large and uneven num-
bers (e.g. ,) to avoid a tied vote, again following the principle of
decision by large groups. All oﬃcials were formally scrutinized
before, during, and after their one-year term of oﬃce, and if they
were prosecuted, they would appear before the courts.
Yet there were risks to going to court as a prosecutor, and these
must have deterred many poorer citizens; certain cases carried a
ﬁnancial penalty if they lost and in any case the expenses could be
high. The principle was that of equal access to the law, and justice was
supposed to be in the hands of all citizens, to lie at the heart of the
polis. But with no public prosecutor, the system increasingly
depended on semi-professional prosecutors, the much despised

the classical city
|
65
‘sycophants’, or other citizens who were prepared to take the ﬁnancial
risk of losing a case. Many a speaker in court assured the jury that
they had never been in court before, a profession of legal innocence
which they hoped would secure sympathy.
Speech-making in fact rapidly became professionalized: by the late
ﬁfth century a citizen could pay a skilled speechwriter to write what
he would then deliver in court himself, the nearest Greek equivalent
to hiring a successful lawyer. This too was something that people did
not ﬂaunt, for it too obviously undermined the democratic principle
of equal access to justice. One defendant pleaded, ‘If I make any
mistake in speaking, pardon me and treat it as due to inexperience
rather than dishonesty’, yet he had paid the clever orator Antiphon to
write his defence (Antiphon ). Thus the more prosperous citizens
were better able to use the courts and, unless the jurors were wise to
rhetorical tricks, to use them successfully. Many of the speeches we
still have, written by skilled orators, are speeches delivered by the
wealthy to a jury of ordinary citizens, and they beg for favour on
the grounds that they have helped the city ﬁnancially (as above) or
use the democratic arguments that went down well with the jurors.
Ultimately the conﬂict was often between the ordinary citizen and the
power of the skilled orator, and by the fourth century this division
between the amateur and the skilled orator was increasingly blatant.
Who served on the jury panels––just the poor? the rich? or vicious
old men as in Aristophanes’ comedy Wasps? Their pay was nearer to
maintenance payment than lucrative income; and elaborate measures
were taken in the fourth century to ensure that the composition of
any one court on the day could not be predicted and that the jurors
could not be bribed. The extra work and income, however slight
(courts sat on ﬁve times as many days as the Assembly), would be
most useful to the elderly poor, and others without regular employ-
ment. But perhaps we should not be narrowly functionalist. The par-
ody of Wasps implies that the members of the juries simply enjoyed
their power. The Athenians developed a taste for listening to
speeches: as the demagogue Cleon is made to say bitterly in the
Mytilenean debate by Thucydides, the Athenian people are ‘slaves to
the pleasures of the ear’ and go to hear a speech as if they were
attending a public spectacle (. ).
One underlying preoccupation in democratic Athens was to
limit the power of any individual and make anyone with power

66
|
classical greece
accountable to the people. Oﬃcials served for one year only and were
scrutinized at the beginning and the end. Professionalism was def-
initely not a primary aim: what is evident is the unwavering distrust
and avoidance of any build-up of expertise. Greek states had a long
history of distrust of individuals with oﬃcial power, and we may also
be able to connect this with the fear of the larger danger of an
individual seizing unconstitutional power and setting himself up as
tyrant. The Athenians also developed the weapon of ostracism, by
which the citizens voted a single individual into exile for ten years, an
election in reverse aimed solely at removing one person rather than a
policy or a group. Some of this democratic hesitation about indi-
viduals amassing expertise relaxed in the fourth century: Athens’
continual ﬁnancial problems (see above, p. ) were too great for
excessive democratic purism, and a single ﬁnancial individual was
eventually allowed who could also hold oﬃce repeatedly.
It is all the more striking that, throughout the ﬁfth and fourth
centuries, the generalship could be held repeatedly. Most prominent
ﬁfth-century politicians had oﬃcial power as one of the ten generals
elected annually, as well as unoﬃcial inﬂuence through their ability to
persuade the people in Assembly. Pericles was the most outstanding,
re-elected every year after  until his death in . In formal terms
the generalship is the remaining ‘oligarchic’ element in the midst of
the ﬁfth-century democracy: a general could continue indeﬁnitely as
long as he was re-elected. The Old Oligarch remarks wryly and tri-
umphantly that the Athenian people make an exception to their rule
of choosing oﬃcials by lot––far better for the people to elect their
generals and have some chance of ﬁghting under someone who
knows the job; no one wanted a general selected at random. Generals
were therefore precisely what democratic theory sought to avoid,
popular leaders with the possibility of repeated tenure of oﬃce,
extensive power, very often rich and aristocratic. If the generalship
could be combined, as it was by Pericles, with brilliant powers of
oratory and an ability to instruct, persuade, and lead the demos, then
that general could preside over what was close to rule by one man.
Thucydides described Pericles’ supremacy as ‘in fact rule by the ﬁrst
citizen’ (. ).
The Athenians prided themselves on the freedom of their way of
life, the Spartans on their military discipline and moral superiority.
The Spartan citizens, the Spartiates, in assembly were more obviously

the classical city
|
67
an army at peace than other Greeks. Isocrates called Sparta a military
camp (Isocrates . ), and their kings were called by Aristotle ‘heredi-
tary generals for life’. In Sparta we see not only an oligarchy, but a
political and social system in which the military function of the citi-
zen, present in every city-state, has taken precedence over every other
aspect and governs the very development of the city-state’s social
structure.
The Assembly, for instance, was open to the ‘,’ Spartiates, the
so-called Homoioi or ‘Equals’. We hear of them voting on major
questions after listening to the speeches presented to them: they
voted, for instance, to go to war with Athens in . But there is little
sign that anyone in the Assembly could contribute to the debate, let
alone suggest an amendment from the ﬂoor, and it is likely that the
eﬀectiveness of the Spartiates as a military machine in the hoplite
phalanx, enforced by the hierarchical educational system, discour-
aged ‘insubordination’ of any kind.
The Athenians’ ideal of accountability to the people is con-
spiciously absent. There is no sign that the Assembly in Sparta ever
had any power or control over oﬃcials, or over citizens who were to
be prosecuted. Nor were there any popular courts. Indeed Aristotle
introduces his deﬁnition of the citizen (Politics b) with a com-
ment about Sparta which suggests that he does not think Spartan
citizens are covered by it: admitting that his deﬁnition of the citizen is
‘best suited to the citizens of a democracy’, he adds that ‘in some
states the people are not acknowledged, nor have they any regular
assembly, but only extraordinary ones; and law suits are distributed
in turn among the magistrates’. Later, he adds that an oligarchic
feature of Sparta is that ‘the power of inﬂicting the penalties of death
and exile rests with a few persons’ (Politics b), and this is borne
out by Xenophon’s account of the ﬁrst decades of the fourth century
in his Hellenica. When a Spartiate named Sphodrias made an
unauthorized attack on Piraeus in , he was summoned to trial by
the ephors, but acquitted even though he failed to appear. King
Agesilaus was instrumental in this, declaring that Sparta simply could
not aﬀord to lose a man like Sphodrias (Hellenica . . ). Xenophon,
who was in a position to know, mentions that another factor was that
Sphodrias’ son was having a love aﬀair with Agesilaus’ son, and called
it ‘the most unjust verdict given in a Spartan court’ (Hellenica . . )
(see further below, pp. –).

68
|
classical greece
The ephors, elected annually by the whole citizenry, were the
‘democratic’ oﬃcials of the Spartan state, and in peacetime had great
powers over the kings. They are found, for instance, demanding that
King Anaxandridas, against his own inclination, take another wife
who can bear him children (Herodotus . –). They summoned
Sphodrias to trial. In so far as they were a concession to the ordinary
citizens, they may have helped to keep the state together, but they are
also accused of being open to bribes, since they were poor (Aristotle,
Politics b), and it is uncertain how much inﬂuence they exerted
over the kings. The ephors did dispatch troops in secret during the
Persian Wars, in a moment of acute diplomatic embarassment
(Herodotus . –), but they were ordinary men in a system which
gave them no formal backing from the Assembly.
The kings and the Council of Elders (Gerousia) are relics of an
archaic system. The two kings, each of separate families and often in
rivalry, are an anomaly in a Greek city-state. Accounts of how their
power was limited read as if any restriction upon a king was a
remarkable feature for most Greek audiences, and there clearly were
tensions as we have seen. But the amount of real power and inﬂuence
any one king had seems to have depended greatly on his charisma, his
military qualities, and his relationship with the other king. Certainly
we hear far more about the kings of Sparta than about the ephors,
and when our evidence is particularly full, as it is for the late ﬁfth
century and ﬁrst half of the fourth, it is clear that certain kings, above
all Agesilaus, had profound eﬀects on Spartan policy (see below,
Chapter ). Kings put issues to the vote in the Assembly, at least, but
the Gerousia seems to have been unaccountable. The twenty-eight
elders, who were members for life, seem drawn in practice, if not by
law, from a narrow range of families in the upper echelons of Spartan
society. This was the pure ‘oligarchic’ element and a narrow one at
that: a small council drawn from certain families, with enormous
judicial powers, a ﬁne example of an oligarchic council which never
became more egalitarian.
Yet paradoxically, Spartan society could be an outstanding example
of equality. Certain elements of the Spartan state which may seem to
modern observers to involve excessive state control, were regarded by
some Greeks as democratic. The state-system of education, for
instance, was itself highly aberrant for classical Greece, not only state-
controlled but uniform, at least in theory, for rich and poor. Spartan

the classical city
|
69
society in its later classical form is described by Xenophon, with a
strong input of nostalgia (Constitution of Sparta), and by Aristotle
(e.g. Politics b), as continuing this same equality. In practice, and
especially in the late ﬁfth century and early fourth, we know that rich
Spartiates could ﬂaunt their wealth in numerous ways. But on the
level of principle and polis ideology, the equality of the hoplite phal-
anx, the levelling of the military messes, had been extended to the
whole citizen society.
Spartan society contains many elements which seem reminiscent
of a far older system, and there is always fascination, as there was for
other Greeks, with the more wayward, eccentric, or even bizarre
elements––the emphasis upon physical endurance, the supposed
relics of ancient rituals of fertility and initiation. The constant fear of
revolt from the subjected helots in Messenia and Laconia, who were
the economic basis of the society (see above, p. ), may have had a
far more profound inﬂuence on Sparta’s whole development than
our evidence indicates. The education of the women, and their
apparent freedom, astonished the rest of Greece. Xenophon wrote his
Constitution of Sparta, which describes so much of this system, with
the aim of explaining how Sparta came to be great, but he asserts that
it was (in the early fourth century) no longer like this. His nostalgia
makes it hard to see where either ‘myth’ or ‘reality’ began or ended:
Spartan society lived out its invented traditions, and the rest of
Greece believed them. However, if one looks at the political struc-
tures, the Spartans had a city-state very like many others. Consti-
tutionally Sparta had much more in common with other city-states
than Athens did. It was the control of the inhabitants and territory of
Messenia, making both possible and necessary a highly developed
warrior society, which was truly exceptional.
The polis
Despite the violence of revolution, the ideological antithesis between
oligarchs and democrats, the variety in the activity and size of the
citizen body, we can isolate certain common features which the Greek
city-states shared. Non-citizens and slaves were numerous, and their
exclusion set in relief the privileges of the citizens. The general idea

70
|
classical greece
that a polis was free and that its citizens had freedom was elevated to
a supreme article of faith in Greek superiority over others: this was
just as true in Athens where the citizens had more freedom in more
areas than any other city-state, as it was in Sparta which thought of
itself as the champion of freedom. Sparta freed many cities, including
Athens, from their tyrants, fought bravely for Greek freedom from
the Persians, and then claimed to be freeing Greece from Athens at
the beginning of the Peloponnesian War. The ideal of citizen freedom
and equality, egalitarianism, is found across democracies and oli-
garchies. ‘Freedom’ here was active, political freedom for a com-
munity to run itself, rather than the freedom of individuals to act as
they wished in private life.
Respect for law, the idea that the polis should be run according to
law and the processes of law, also crossed the political boundaries of
oligarchy and democracy. What varied was who or what body admin-
istered that law, and what exactly ‘law’ meant. The primary word for
‘law’, nomos, was signiﬁcantly and conveniently wide, including regu-
lations which were unwritten as well as written, rules, norms, cus-
toms. Athenians prided themselves on being run by ‘law’ and revered
their ancient law-giver Solon. Sparta looked back to her mythical
lawgiver Lycurgus, and kept to the laws of Lycurgus which were in
fact (conveniently) unwritten. Herodotus suggested it was Sparta’s
respect for nomos that gave it its greatness (Herodotus . ), and
here nomos included custom, the enshrined habits of the society, its
system of upbringing, its discipline. Plato could declare that ‘a city
without regularly established law courts would not be a city at all’
(Laws d). One of the most striking characteristics of the emerging
city-states of the archaic period was the way they attempted from
very early on to set up oﬃcial rules for their running, tough laws to
bind their top oﬃcials to the will of the polis and to prevent abuse of
power––even if these laws were primarily produced by the élite to
control their peers.
Each polis was ﬁercely independent and often had a long-running
antagonism to its immediate neighbours, and this does much to
explain the vitality of Greek cultural achievement. But this independ-
ence can be exaggerated: independence in the area of internal law was
not, and could not, always be combined with total independence in
external relations. Smaller places inevitably came under the umbrella
of larger poleis, whether by means of formal alliances or outright

the classical city
|
71
control by the larger city-state. Megara, for instance, on a crucial
route between central and southern Greece, was at various times a
member of the Peloponnesian League of city-states led by Sparta
(which included the powerful Corinth, Tegea, and [at times] Elis, the
other cities of Arcadia, and Boeotia). But she frequently fell under the
control of Athens (see below, pp. , ). Political independence
for Megara, as for many other small city-states, was a mirage.
What smaller city-states tried to do was choose their own allies,
rather than be forced into alliances. Plataea, in southern Boeotia,
tried to enlist Athens as a protector against its large neighbour
Thebes, and became a constant challenge to Thebes’ control over the
cities of Boeotia through the federal Boeotian League. It was
independent enough to be the only city to send troops to help the
Athenians at the battle of Marathon. But placed where it was, its
allegiance was critical. Thebes sought to bring it into the Boeotian
League, seized it at the start of the Peloponnesian war, and eventually
destroyed it ‘in the ninety-third year after its alliance with the
Athenians’, as Thucydides put it (. ) bringing out its sad end and
its long but ultimately unhelpful relationship with Athens.
Just as it is only a half-truth that modern nations are ‘independ-
ent’, so it is only a half truth that city-states were independent: they
were certainly not always as independent as they wished. Internally,
however, along with individual constitutions and laws, each polis had
its own cults, and each was a community of its citizens and could
forge its separate culture. Even the form of alphabet used by each
polis tended to be regional: Athens, for instance, used a form of the
alphabet with only  letters until the latter part of the ﬁfth century
when she moved over to the Ionian alphabet with  letters. The
shared and common Hellenism expressed itself through regional and
polis variations on the theme.
Athens itself, which provides so much of our evidence, and Sparta
were similarly exceptional as city-states. Most poleis had a territory
which gave them only their basic necessities of life: yet Athens had the
large expanse of Attica, (see above p. ), which she may have gained
partly by expansion early in the archaic period. Within this were
many villages (demes), some of which were so large that they could
have passed as small poleis in their own right––Rhamnous,
Marathon, Thoricus, or Acharnae. Sparta, which had conquered the
whole of Messenia in the south-west Peloponnese and Southern

72
|
classical greece
Laconia, had a territory of , square kilometres. This provided her
with a large agricultural territory and the Messenians, enslaved as
helots, to work it. Athens and Sparta both also created large and
powerful leagues, the Athenian maritime league becoming an empire.
In many respects, it is in the less powerful city-states that we see most
clearly the remarkable particularism, individuality, the nature of such
self-regulating, as well as the strengths and tensions, of the classical
city-state.
The conventional translation of polis as ‘city-state’ is an attempt to
convey the fact that all poleis are self-governing, having their own
laws, army (the citizen-body), and decision-making processes. That
is, they had the trappings of a simple state. But for all but the largest,
Athens, the polis was primarily a community, and the sense of com-
munity was as strong as, or stronger than, the elements of state
apparatus. Most city-states were small, and their inhabitants tended
to cluster together in a compressed settlement which a modern
observer might prefer to describe as a village or small market town.
The model of the medieval city visible in late medieval or early
Renaissance paintings, with city-walls, crowded houses within the
walls, a few houses outside perhaps, and ﬁelds beyond, may give a
reasonable parallel, if we add to this a temple to the patron deity,
perhaps a defensible citadel, and the political and military identity of
the ancient citizen-body. If Athens was unusual; Sparta, traditionally
regarded as having ten thousand citizens but in fact declining to little
more than a tenth that number, was more typical. To this moderate
citizen body we would have to add wives, children, slaves, and resi-
dent aliens to arrive at the full population. Luxemburg has a territory
of , square kilometres, almost the same size as Attica; the princi-
palities of San Marino or Monaco would be nearer in size to the
medium to small Greek poleis; and the citizen bodies meeting
together in a small polis might be equivalent to the House of Com-
mons of the British parliament when the House is packed. The
quorum of , of the Athenian Assembly was uniquely large.
The polis was exceptional in the intensity and particularism of its
political life, and above all the emphasis on the citizen body and its
duties. It was a community and a state at once: and the citizens were
subordinated to the common good of the community. As Aristotle
put it, ‘man is by nature an animal ﬁtted to live in a polis’––he is ‘a
political animal’ (Politics a). ‘Citizen-state’ then perhaps translates

the classical city
|
73
‘polis’ more aptly than ‘city-state’: at any rate, while Aristotle oscil-
lated between thinking of the polis as the male citizen body alone, or
as the male citizens plus their families and all the other inhabitants,
the emphasis in other Greek writers was upon the polis as a com-
munity. The general Nicias could say to his dejected army in Sicily,
about to suﬀer overwhelming defeat in , ‘you are a polis wherever
you sit down’ (Thucydides . . ), and ancient writers habitually
talked of the movers of events as ‘the Spartans’, ‘the Athenians’,
rather than the more abstract ‘Sparta’, ‘Athens’. The human citizens
were in ﬁrst place, and in political terms the polis may as well be the
citizen body. If we consider the wider networks and people necessary
to make a workable community, the women, children, slaves, and
metics, then obviously the polis necessarily involves, and therefore
includes, the larger population. But the narrower political deﬁnition
comes ﬁrst.
So central was the nature of the citizen body in Greek thought that
theorists trying to construct the ideal polis or stable polis found it
hard to think beyond the citizen body itself and assumed that the
polis could be reformed by reforming its citizens. Similar assump-
tions lie behind the idea voiced several times in Aristotle’s Politics that
the constitution of a city-state was educational: ‘the polis is the
teacher of men’ as the poet Simonides put it earlier (frag. ). If one
says today that the modern citizen is educated by the state, one would
be referring to state-provided education. But state-controlled or even
state-provided education is conspicuous by its absence in ancient
Greece: it was not until the Hellenistic period that some cities took it
upon themselves to provide free tuition for the children of citizen
birth. Sparta was exceptional in the classical period for ‘making edu-
cation the business of the state’, as Aristotle puts it (Politics a),
though the education in question was mainly athletic, a training with
a clear military purpose. What Greeks normally meant by saying that
the polis was a teacher was that the city itself, its political institutions,
its constitution, and its laws––and we should add the religious cults
(below)––was educational, was crucial to the maturing of the citizen-
body: it was a culture in itself. Similarly when Thucydides has Pericles
say of the Athenians, ‘We are an education to Greece’, the idea
expresses well the subordination of the individual citizens to the
general needs and perceived common good.
Aristotle’s Politics, written in about the s or s, is sometimes

74
|
classical greece
thought to be looking back with nostalgia to a system––the city-
state––that was being overtaken by events, the dominant power of
Macedon and what was to become the new world of the Hellenistic
monarchies. But the very manner in which Aristotle describes the
polis system implies that it was in strong health at the time he was
writing. That period of tension, rapid change, and threats to some
elements of the earlier polis, was an apt time for reﬂection and for
ordering a mass of speciﬁc examples and theories into a clear analysis.
The polis as an institution continued long after Philip of Macedon’s
defeat of the Greek coalition against him in  and after Alexander’s
death––though whether any polis would ever again be so powerful
is another matter.
Religious activity and the polis
Religious cults articulate, reﬂect, and reinforce the bonds of the
city-state. Many ancient historians (most notably Thucydides) and
political thinkers showed little interest in the religious side to polis
existence. Perhaps this is because the paramount preoccupation of
Greek political thought was the attainment of stability and the avoid-
ance of violent revolution. Or perhaps religious cult was too close a
shadow of political secular structures––rather than an alternative
power base––for it to be considered central to any study of politics. At
any rate, the exclusively secular and political deﬁnition and inter-
pretation of the polis in Aristotle’s Politics has been immensely
inﬂuential, and it skates over the religious festivals, processions, cults
heroic and divine, great and tiny religious rituals, which were all as
integral to citizen existence as citizen assemblies. A balanced vision of
the classical period cannot do without attention to religion. There
may be doubts about whether religious duties or pure political
expediency governed any particular political decisions, but the com-
munal life of the city-states was based as much around the rituals of
cults as the political institutions such as Assembly and Council.
Religious festivals were the occasion for competitive performances
of much Greek poetry (including Homer), music, tragedies and
comedies, as well as athletics.
Every city-state had temples to its patron deity and shrines and

the classical city
|
75
altars to many others. Each temple, each deity, received regular sacri-
ﬁces according to a detailed calendar and the high points for citizens,
in a world without weekends, were the festivals held in honour of one
or other deity. Each polis had its own local version of religious obser-
vances for the main great deities, a multiplicity of cults and rituals of
their own which combined observance of the usual gods of the Greek
world with the peculiar details and emphases of each locality. So Hera
was the patron goddess of Samos and had a spectacular temple there,
along with Samian rituals; she also had an important shrine at Argos,
strategically placed on an area of disputed territory, where she was
also patron goddess. The patron deity of Athens, Athena Polias, had a
cult statue in the Parthenon on the Acropolis, and there were other
statues, altars and shrines to Athena.
Athena, Apollo or Dionysus and the other Olympian deities were
honoured all over Greece and with rituals speciﬁc to each city accord-
ing to the particular emphasis of their cults. At Athens, the City
Dionysia honoured Dionysus with competitions of drama (see pp. ,
, , ), and its rituals reﬂected features of the democracy, hence
comedy became political satire. Elsewhere in Greece there were dif-
ferent festivals for Dionysus and even within Attica we ﬁnd the rural
Dionysia and the Lenaea which also included drama. Heroes also had
cults, which were often bound to central myths of the city’s past and
its origins. Sparta had a cult to Menelaus and Helen; Athens revered
Theseus, one of their legendary kings and heroes, recovered his bones
in the s, and established a festival for him, the Theseia, to signal
his importance. The polis particularism visible in other spheres was
equally visible in cult.
Civic status was crucial, as always, and could be determined or
reinforced by whether or not someone participated in certain cults.
Cult was thus the backbone to much civic life, integrated closely with
politics, and taken for granted to such an extent that changes in
political life would be reﬂected in cult practice. Aristophanes makes a
character in his Acharnians () joke about a Thracian prince, newly
granted Athenian citizenship, having the right ‘to eat sausages at the
Apatouria’. The Apatouria was the festival at which the phratries
(brotherhoods) held a sacriﬁcial feast: children were introduced to the
phratry at this festival and the phratries played a part in protecting
entry to Athenian citizenship, guarding against fraudulent attempts
to pass oﬀ illegitimate children. Similarly when an Athenian stood for

76
|
classical greece
oﬃce, he had to specify, as proof of his citizenship, where his family’s
altars were to Zeus Herkeios, ‘Zeus of the front court’, and to Apollo
Patroos, Ancestral Apollo, and where their family graves were ([Aris-
totle] Constitution of the Athenians . ). Some polis cults were cele-
brated only by women. The festival of the Thesmophoria, a fertility
festival in honour of Demeter, was widespread and usually celebrated
solely by citizen women. Wider allegiances, ethnic or tribal, could also
be reﬂected in ritual observances. Herodotus (. ) could declare
that in his view, Ionians were ‘those who participated in the festival of
the Apatouria’. Sparta and other Dorian states marked their claim to
common ancestry by all celebrating the Carneia, in honour of Apollo,
with races, whirling dances, hymns, and musical competitions. Civic
identity, community participation, and membership of sub-groups
within the polis were symbolized and expressed by cult participation.
The grand Athenian festival of the Panathenaea shows the inter-
weaving of cult practice and political hierarchy and division. The
festival took place roughly in August. Every four years it became the
Great Panathenaea, and its athletic and musical festival attracted com-
petitors and spectators from all over Greece. The great Panathenaic
procession progressed to the Agora, then across the Agora along the
designated route up to the Acropolis. The procession included repre-
sentatives of all Athenians (hence the title of Panathenaea), including
old men, Athenian women, young girls from the old aristocratic fam-
ilies. Even some metic women and slaves were apparently present,
though in a clearly subordinate role. Women of Athens wove the
peplos or robe to be presented to the statue of Athena Polias on the
Acropolis, embroidered with a scene of the battle with the Giants. It
was a festival of civic display and pride, the various sectors of the
polis carefully represented in their proper places, foreigners and met-
ics present to admire. When Athens developed her maritime empire
in the ﬁfth century, she began to require her allies to bring a cow and
a full hoplite panoply or set of armour to the Panathenaea (and also
to parade their tribute at the City Dionysia). Allied subordination
and allegiance to Athens was symbolized by these contributions to
her main city cults. Similarly the Athenians demanded that their
colony Brea in Thrace participate in their mother-city’s festivals,
bringing a cow and panoply at the Panathenaea, and a phallos to the
City Dionysia. Political relations were reﬂected in cult participation.
That the precise relationship of colonists to their mother-city in cult

the classical city
|
77
activities should be formally worked out was not unique to imperial
Athens. In a well-preserved early ﬁfth-century law (c.–) about
a colony of East Locrians established at Naupactus at the west end of
the Corinthian Gulf, the Locrians lay down under what conditions
the colonists can go back if their new life does not prosper: they give
up their rights as citizens of East Locris, but they can sacriﬁce in
Locris as foreigners and participate in other ceremonies of the
mother city (Fornara ). Their link with Locris as citizens is cut oﬀ,
but they retain an association through cult.
Various subdivisions and subgroups in Athens also had numerous
other cultic associations––metics from Phoenicia and metics from
Corinth, for instance, had their own cults. Alongside the great city
cults, which included the whole political community, were tribal
cults: the ten new tribal divisions of the citizen body, created by
Cleisthenes, celebrated cults of the ten Attic heroes after whom they
were named. There were deme heroes, deme cults, and the phratry
festival of the Apatouria already mentioned. Cultic activity expressed
participation in one or other group or association as well as piety.
The polis regulated the details of cult as of all else. There was no
clear separation of ‘church’ and ‘state’: the people regulated cultic
ritual, decided who should not attend certain rituals and determined
how priests were chosen and what their pay and perks should be.
Thus the Athenian democracy created new democratic priesthoods
alongside the traditional aristocratic ones. A fourth-century Athenian
law on the Panathenaic procession meticulously speciﬁed how the
sacriﬁcial meat was to be distributed amongst the citizen body
according to cult and status: for example the sacriﬁces at the great
altar of Athena Polias and Athena Nike are to be distributed only to
citizen men, not to the women who had some ritual function, unlike
other sacriﬁces in the festival. When Eretria in Euboea set up a spec-
tacular music festival in honour of the goddess Artemis, in a burst of
civic triumph and conﬁdence (c.), the decree passed by the People
and Council opens with the intention to celebrate the Artemisia ‘as
ﬁnely as possible’; prizes, maintenance payments for competitors,
processions and sacriﬁces are all arranged. In this, the most import-
ant Eretrian festival, they celebrated their liberation by Athens (this is
the period of Macedonian expansion, not Athenian), and the decree
ends triumphantly with the decision, ‘to write up the decree on a
stone stele and stand it in the temple of Artemis, in order that the

78
|
classical greece
sacriﬁce and the musical festival for Artemis happen in this way for
all time, while the people of Eretria are free and prosper and rule
themselves’ (LSCG ).
When metics in the Piraeus wished to set up a cult to one of their
home deities, Bendis the Thracian goddess, or Isis from Egypt, they
requested permission from the Athenian people. The cult to Bendis
became so domesticated that it became an Athenian public cult,
though quite why the Athenians felt such a close aﬃnity to this
Thracian goddess is unknown. The early celebration of the cult to
Bendis forms part of the dramatic setting of the opening of Plato’s
Republic (dramatic date ). Other non-Athenian (but Greek) cults
were introduced by the oﬃcial approval of the Athenians: Pan was
introduced from Arcadia to Athens after he had appeared to the
messenger running from Athens to Sparta at the time of the Per-
sian invasion of Attica in  and had demanded proper recognition
(Herodotus . ); Boreas the North Wind was also established at
Athens in return for his help against the Persians (Herodotus . ).
Asclepius the healing god, who had a large sanctuary at Epidaurus,
arrived in Athens in ––the tragedian Sophocles gave him his ﬁrst
temporary home. It was also possible to set up a shrine to a deity who
was already established, but with a new epithet to create a new shrine
and cult: another innovation of the Persian Wars was the sacriﬁce to
Zeus Eleutherios (Zeus the Liberator) after the great victory of
Plataea (Thucydides . . ).
Matters of cult were a formal item on the agenda of every meeting
of the Athenian assembly. Important decisions might be conﬁrmed
or checked with the oracle at Delphi, but with the exception of that
oracle, we search in vain for religious authority residing in the per-
sonnel of shrines and cults. Citizens not only regulated their own
religious activities; they also punished those who went beyond the
bounds of what was acceptable in religious matters: the formal charge
against the philosopher Socrates was that he was introducing new
gods and corrupting the youth (see below, p. ).
Certain city-states attempted to enforce their will and authority
upon the citizen body by invoking communal curses or religious
sanctions. The city of Teos in Ionia issued communal curses, which
they inscribed on stone (c.) and uttered for the collectivity. They
called down a curse upon any person and his family who used poison
against the Teians, prevented corn imports or exported them again,

the classical city
|
79
damaged Teos, betrayed the city or harboured brigands, ‘or [if any-
one] does harm to the community of Teians and to Hellenes or to
barbarians, let him perish, himself and his descendants’. This curse
was to be uttered at the three main festivals, the spring festival of the
Anthesteria, and the festivals of Heracles and of Zeus. This is an
unusually direct and extreme case, but other cities felt perfectly able
to invoke a speciﬁc god or religious sanctions in order to safeguard
political decisions. This practice may have been more common before
the Persian Wars but it does not die out completely in the classical
period, and is even visible occasionally at Athens. Athenian dem-
ocracy had such elaborate and eﬀective political means to assert its
collective will and authority that it did not need to resort so often to
invoking religious sanctions, but Athens was exceptionally developed
politically.
Amidst such a multiplicity of cults, large and small, there was
bound to be much overlapping. Festivals and rituals point to a series
of crossing and interweaving groups which might be larger or smaller
than the polis to which they belonged. Some cults created an
umbrella over several cities. The Greek traders and settlers given a
privileged settlement at Naucratis in Egypt had individual cults for
certain of the participating cities (Miletus, Aegina, Samos), but also a
shrine called the ‘Hellenion’, which signiﬁed the collective associ-
ation of Greeks together in Naucratis, as opposed to the separate
communities of citizens from each contributing city. The twelve main
cities in Ionia had a ‘Panionion’, a temple where a festival for all
Ionians was held and a place where they met to discuss policy
(Herodotus . –), and it signiﬁed their common Ionian identity
alongside individual polis rivalries and polis cults.
It is within the polis itself that the multiplicity of cults is most
striking. In Attica, an Athenian citizen had his own local deme cults,
as well as associations with cults which crossed larger parts of Attica.
Take an Athenian who came from the village and deme of Marathon,
for instance: Marathon was part of an ancient group of villages called
the Tetrapolis (‘Four cities’), which had their own impressive calen-
dar and sacriﬁces to very ancient cults. But our citizen from
Marathon would also be associated with the cults of his tribe and his
phratry, and with the big city cults in the centre of Athens. In addi-
tion there were various private religious associations, for citizens and
for non-citizens, connected to the cult and shrine of a hero. Even

80
|
classical greece
associations such as drinking clubs often had a ritual element, mak-
ing sacriﬁces or libations to a particular deity, though that was hardly
their central purpose, and they easily turned into provocative polit-
ical groups.
Cults of initiation stood apart, transcending the usual civic, polis,
and even ethnic divisions. They were voluntary, ‘elective’ cults, which
people joined as a positive individual choice rather than participating
automatically as part of a particular polis, tribe, or other group. The
cult of Demeter at Eleusis, one of the most important, accepted as
initiates men and women, free and slave, Athenian and non-
Athenian; the Mysteries of Samothrace, for the Cabiri or ‘Great
Gods’, accepted initiates of any status, though initiates were mostly
male. Other cults, often foreign, like the cults of Isis or Dionysus
(who was perceived to be foreign) attracted a zeal that far outstepped
the bonds of community and polis. But these cults throw into relief
the more usual pattern. Cults and sacriﬁces in classical Greece were
intimately linked to civic distinctions and in their staggering multi-
plicity they also reﬂect the regionalism and particularism of classical
Greek society.

4
The city at war
Hans van Wees
About two dozen city-states were annihilated in the wars of the clas-
sical period. After receiving their unconditional surrender, the enemy
cut the throats of the entire adult male population, made slaves of the
women, children, and elderly, and sold to new masters those who
were slaves already. It counted as an act of humanity to ensure that all
prisoners were indeed sold, however diﬃcult it might be to ﬁnd
buyers for them: normally, the slave traders would simply abandon
the smallest children and the aged by the roadside to die of starvation
and exposure, if they were not killed by dogs or wolves ﬁrst
(Xenophon, Agesilaus . –). Thousands more died in each of the
major battles of the age, which brought together coalition armies of
tens of thousands of soldiers from all over Greece. Soldiers fell at an
average rate of one in seven on the losing side, one in twenty among
the victors. The ﬁnancial cost of war dwarfed all other public expend-
iture, including the most monumental of building projects. Greek
warfare did not usually have such a devastating impact––much of the
time it was conﬁned to brief incursions which did some damage to
farming areas and claimed a few victims but had no lasting social,
economic, or demographic consequences––yet there was always a risk
of escalation into a war threatening the very existence of the state.
The high stakes involved, and the large proportion of men liable
for military service during most of their adult lives, meant that war-
like prowess was regarded as a vital aspect of being a man, a citizen,
and a Greek. So sensitive were Greek men to any slur on their bravery
that the orator Aeschines sought to win points in debate by listing his
own military credentials, as well as those of his brother and brother-
in-law, while accusing his opponent Demosthenes of cowardice: ‘I
dare not call you a real man, since you were prosecuted for desertion’

82
|
classical greece
(. –, –). A sense that Greeks collectively were far better
soldiers than any nation of barbarians developed early: Homer’s Iliad
already contrasted the obedience and solidarity of the legendary
Greek heroes with the chaotic eﬀorts of the Trojans (. –; . –;
. –). In the classical period, Greek successes against the Persian
Empire reinforced such ideas to the point where the historian
Herodotus could represent the Persians as not only inferior in skill
but incapable of grasping the principles which inspired Greek
discipline and courage (Herodotus . , ; . –, –; . ).
War shaped Greek identities no less than Greek political, social, and
economic life.
The causes of war
Armed conﬂict was common: it has been estimated that classical
Athens was at war two years out of three. Representations and
reminders of war were everywhere: in the ubiquitous memorials and
tombs of the dead, in the victory monuments littering sacred pre-
cincts, in the sculptural decoration of temples, in dramatic perform-
ances, in the orations delivered in assemblies, lawcourts, and at public
funerals. Images of war penetrated even the dining-rooms of private
houses, where arms and armour were hung on the walls and many a
bowl or drinking cup bore a painted scene of battle. Yet the Greeks
did not think of war as the normal state of aﬀairs in international
relations. When at the beginning of Laws, Plato’s last dialogue, one of
the speakers declares that ‘what most people call peace is nothing but
a word, and in fact every city-state is always, by nature, in a state of
undeclared war with every other city-state’ (a), this state of war is
purely theoretical. It is an intellectual’s analysis of the underlying
tensions in international relations, not the perception of politicians,
soldiers, or the general public. Plato himself argued that constitutions
should be geared towards peace (de).
A peculiarity of Greek international relations, which might seem to
suggest that peace was indeed seen as an abnormal, temporary condi-
tion, is that peace treaties were usually of limited duration: ﬁfty years,
thirty years, or less. But most of these treaties did more than merely
establish relations of non-aggression: they created alliances, binding

the city at war
|
83
the parties to support one another in war, whether defensive or oﬀen-
sive. It is hardly surprising that states set a limit on such agreements
rather than commit themselves indeﬁnitely to ﬁghting on behalf of
their allies. In the fourth century, many attempts were made to forge a
common peace, embracing all Greeks, and these multilateral treaties,
which did not entail military obligations to any single city-state, were
not limited in time. Throughout classical literature, the virtues of
peace were extolled, and the evils of war denounced. Tragedies such
as Aeschylus’ Persians or Euripides’ Trojan Women brought to life the
terrible consequences of defeat, while comedies such as Aristophanes’
Acharnians and Peace positively gloriﬁed peace as a time of celebra-
tion and abundance. The sense that war was an unnatural state of
aﬀairs was reﬂected in a proverb: ‘in peace, sons bury their fathers; in
war, fathers bury their sons’ (Herodotus . ).
War was nevertheless common because, as Thucydides has an
Athenian say, ‘We believe that it is divine, and know for certain that it
is universally human, by natural compulsion, to rule whatever one
can’ (. . ). The city-states aimed to establish for themselves a
recognized position of leadership as a regional power, as ruler of the
sea (thalassokrator), or as the dominant state in Greece at large. The
Athenians, according to Thucydides, gave three reasons for waging
wars in pursuit of leadership: they wanted honour or respect (timê)
and proﬁt (ophelia), and were motivated by fear (. . , . ). Fear
implies that they built up their military resources in self-defence: ﬁrst
against Persia, later against Sparta. In a climate of ﬁerce competition
for supremacy, suspicion of others’ ambitions was rife and bound to
lead to pre-emptive strikes. Hence Thucydides’ famous claim that ‘the
truest cause’ of the Peloponnesian War was Sparta’s fear of the grow-
ing power of Athens (. . ; . ; see p. ). As for proﬁt, the
outcome of war was usually that the defeated party agreed to become
an ally of the victor, which did not usually involve the payment of
tribute or any other transfer of resources. Even when a city was des-
troyed, a new, independent, community was normally established on
its site; direct annexation of land was rare. Greek armies did eagerly
seize chances to take booty, but, as a rule, the material stakes for
which they fought were small: ‘tiny amounts of not particularly good
land’ (Herodotus . ).
Most remarkable is the desire for honour or respect. Herodotus
imagined that the Persians were deeply impressed to ﬁnd that Greeks

84
|
classical greece
‘competed not for money but for excellence’ (. ). There are strik-
ing instances of wars being attributed to more or less symbolic acts
of disrespect towards communities or their citizens. When the
Corinthians declared war on Corcyra in , according to Thucydides
the dispute concerned primarily the hybris towards Corinth which
the Corcyraeans displayed in refusing to grant Corinth its con-
ventional ritual privileges and signs of respect (. . –). Xenophon
similarly cites Elis’ insults to Sparta among the causes of the Elean
War; they had, among other things, banned Spartans from competing
in the Olympic games, publicly whipped a prominent Spartan for
taking part surreptitiously, and stopped a Spartan king from oﬀering
sacriﬁce at Olympia (Hellenica . . –). Much of the value of
hegemony and domination lay in the prestige or honour it brought,
and a state which felt that it was not being shown the respect to which
it was entitled might respond with force, even if its security or
resources were not at risk.
The soldiers: military roles and social status
Conscript citizen armies were the norm in classical Greece, and liabil-
ity for service was nearly life-long (until the age of sixty). A distinc-
tion between civilian and soldier therefore barely existed. The armed
forces consisted largely of amateur, part-time soldiers, and social and
political statuses within a community were tied to military roles.
Citizen infantry: hoplites and light-armed
In most parts of Greece, the main armed force consisted of hoplites,
heavy infantry, each armed with a single thrusting spear and sword,
and protected by a panoply of bronze armour (see Fig. ). The round
hoplite shield, measuring  ft. ( cm.) across and made of wood
faced with bronze, weighed about  lbs. ( kg.); its weight was sup-
ported by a double grip: a handle at the rim and an arm-band in the
centre. This shield, and a bronze helmet, were the core of the panoply;
less essential items were bronze shin-guards and the corslet, either of
thin bronze sheet metal or thick layered linen or leather, lighter and
cheaper, yet no less eﬀective.

the city at war
|
85
Hoplite service was compulsory for all adult male citizens who met
a certain property requirement. The level of this requirement seems
higher than what one needed in order to aﬀord the armour and
weapons: the hoplite class may have been deﬁned more narrowly than
it need have been because military duty and political privilege were
linked––the right to hold some oﬃces in Athens, and the right to vote
in Sparta, were conﬁned to those who met the hoplite property cen-
sus (see above, p. ). From the ﬁgures we have for the size of
Athens’ general levy, we may tentatively deduce that between a third
and half the population had the means to provide hoplite arms and
armour. Mobilization in self-defence, and for large-scale campaigns
Figure 1 Hoplites in action recovering the body of a dead comrade from the
line of battle, third quarter of the sixth century.

86
|
classical greece
against neighbours was by general levy, and included not only the
hoplite census class, but everyone capable of laying their hands on
any kind of weapon. The presence of light-armed citizens (psiloi) in
the general levy was so much taken for granted that it is hardly ever
mentioned. When the Athenians invaded Boeotia in , ‘numerous
poorly armed men followed, as part of the general levy of available
foreigners and citizens’, a total of many more than , (Thucydides
. . –. ): discounting the foreigners, and the slave attendants
who would also have formed part of the levy (see below), they must
still have been as numerous as the hoplites. The greater mobility and
range of light-armed soldiers gave them certain advantages over hop-
lites, which might have been put to very eﬀective use. Yet the military
potential of the mass of poorer citizens remained untapped, since
institutionalizing their role would have given them a claim to political
power on a par with the hoplites; as a disorganized mob, not obliged
to perform regular service, they could be safely ignored.
As part-time soldiers, citizen hoplites subscribed to a distinctly
non-professional ethos. For most of the classical period, training and
organization remained rudimentary everywhere except Sparta. The
main form of training was exercise in the gymnasia, which may have
included some weapons training but primarily consisted of wrestling,
running, jumping, and throwing the javelin and discus; it apparently
did not include formation drills. Dancing was also seen as a suitable
way to improve one’s co-ordination in battle, and there was indeed a
war-dance, the pyrrikhê, which mimicked combat movements. It was
left to private initiative how often and how hard a man trained, and
whether he took additional instruction in the use of weapons from a
private tutor, as some did (Plato, Laches a–c). Some com-
munities did, however, maintain crack infantry units, such as the
Theban Sacred Band, which consisted of  men organized in
homoerotically-linked pairs (Diodorus . . ; Plutarch Pelopidas
–).
Only in Sparta was training regimented for all male citizens, who
exercised regularly and in organized groups from the age of seven. It
is likely that the Spartans practised some weapons- and formation-
drill, but their training, too, centred on athletics. Tellingly, when king
Agesilaus tried to get his troops in top condition, he oﬀered prizes for
the best javelin-thrower, the best archer, and the best horseman, but
gave the prize for hoplites simply to the man who had the best body

the city at war
|
87
(Xenophon Hellenica . . ). As elsewhere, the main goal of exercise
was clearly general ﬁtness, strength, and agility, rather than more
speciﬁc combat skills.
Both Sparta and Athens ensured that - and -year old youths
gained some military experience by sending them out to patrol the
countryside, before they were eligible to ﬁght in the regular army. In
Sparta, this took the form of the notorious ‘secret service’, the krypteia,
covert patrols which terrorized the helot population (see p. ).
Athens employed regular patrols (peripoloi), which from the s at
the latest consisted of youths known as ephebes. By the s, ephebes
received a full year of training in hoplite ﬁghting, archery, javelin-
throwing, and catapult-ﬁring, followed by a year of patrol duty.
Cavalry
In most parts of Greece, only the rich could aﬀord the expense of
keeping horses. Archaic poetry and art show that those who did own
horses had long been in the habit of riding to battle, but dismounting
to take their place among the hoplites and ﬁght on foot. At the time of
the Persian invasion, the Greek coalition army had no cavalry. Some
of the reasons for this were practical. Much of the terrain was unsuit-
able for horses, which were particularly vulnerable since horseshoes
were not used. Also it was not easy to ﬁnd the steady seat needed to
ﬁght from horseback, without the use of saddle or stirrups. Another
reason for the late development of cavalry was the notion that its style
of ﬁghting––quick charges and retreats, and mostly missile action––
was less demanding and dangerous than heavy infantry combat. The
élite was reluctant to take on a military role which lacked the prestige
accorded to hoplites. This also explains the curious system which
Sparta eventually adopted, whereby the wealthiest citizens provided
cavalry horses but did not ride them. Instead, the authorities assigned
to cavalry service those who were ‘physically weakest’ and ‘least
concerned with honour’ (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ): in Sparta,
which more than any other community cultivated hoplite values, no
self-respecting citizen could be asked to ﬁght on horseback.
The Athenians in the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfth century were ﬁghting
enemies who possessed large cavalry forces, and so, despite these
obstacles to the creation of cavalry, they were compelled to establish a
cavalry of their own. This reached a size of , by the beginning of

88
|
classical greece
the Peloponnesian War, and proved particularly useful in harassing
and containing invading forces which scattered to pillage and burn.
Soon afterwards, the Spartans in turn were forced to create a cavalry
in order to contain raids into Spartan territory (Thuc. . . ). By
the early fourth century, most states had at least a small cavalry
detachment of their own.
Mercenaries
In the fourth century, mercenary forces were so widespread that some
regarded them as a plague threatening the very existence of the citi-
zen soldier (Isocrates . –). Such hostile views were exaggerated: to
the end of the classical age, mercenary forces were used in addition to,
not instead of, citizen hoplites. The conditions which pushed many
Greeks into mercenary service had existed for centuries: general pov-
erty; continual faction ﬁghting and coups d’état within communities
which created large bodies of political exiles looking for new careers;
and a spirit of enterprise which led many young men to seek their
fortunes abroad despite being well-oﬀ and under no compulsion
to leave home. The supply of mercenaries had accordingly been
abundant since the early archaic period.
A rise in demand, rather than supply, explains why mercenaries
played an ever more prominent role in fourth-century Greece. Mer-
cenary troops had two advantages: they could be committed to long
and distant campaigns, unlike citizen soldiers who had families and
farms to look after, and they could provide specialist skills which
citizen soldiers did not possess. Most Greek states had nothing to
match the archers of the Persians or the javelin-throwers known
as peltasts found in the mountains of north-western Greece,
Macedonia, and Thrace. These peltasts could be a serious threat to
hoplites. Equipped with a long javelin and short sword, their only
armour was a light shield of wicker or hide (see Fig. ), which meant
that they were mobile enough to run forward, throw their missiles,
and run back again without giving the heavy-armed an opportunity
to defend themselves. Their eﬀect could be devastating when they
caught hoplites on their exposed ﬂank or when hoplites tried to give
chase, broke rank, and became vulnerable to hit-and-run attacks. The
heavy infantry came to fear peltasts ‘as little children fear the bogey-
man’ (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ).

the city at war
|
89
As with the cavalry, there was a tension between the military need
for such specialist light infantry and the social and cultural obstacles
to its creation. Greek pride in close combat, and contempt for missile
warfare as eﬀeminate, meant that citizens of hoplite status could
hardly be asked to train as archers or peltasts. Employing poorer
citizens in these roles would have meant giving them the kind of
formal military status which hoplites, for political reasons, liked to
reserve for themselves. To play the part that some citizens would not
play, and others could not be allowed to play, a city therefore needed
to recruit outsiders.
In the major wars of the ﬁfth century, the additional manpower
and specialist skills were usually provided by allies rather than
Figure 2 Lightly-armed warrior known as a ‘peltast’ from the shape of his
shield (pelte), shown on a cup of c..

90
|
classical greece
mercenaries, and many distant campaigns, too, could be sustained by
locally mobilizing allied troops. The Athenian general Demosthenes
owed much of his famous victory over the Spartans at Pylos in  to
the presence of allied peltasts and archers (Thucydides . . , . ).
Fifth-century Athens and Sparta had so many allies in so many places
that they rarely needed mercenary support. A minor player such as
Corinth, on the other hand, might well recruit mercenaries even
before the Peloponnesian War (Thucydides . . ). When Athens
lost its allies, it too began to hire troops, establishing a unit of up to
, peltasts under Iphicrates which proved highly successful during
the Corinthian War (see below, pp. –). The prominence of
mercenaries in the fourth century may therefore be explained not
only by the growing length and range of campaigns, and the increas-
ing use of specialists, but also by the attenuated nature of alliances at
the time. With the collapse of Spartan hegemony in , the fragmen-
tation of Greece was such that it became harder to ﬁnd allies than to
hire troops. Mercenaries accordingly featured in just about every war
from the s onwards.
The ﬁghting skills of the professional soldier were universally rec-
ognized. Xenophon, himself once a mercenary commander, went so
far as to claim that the quality of citizen soldiers improved when the
presence of mercenary troops set a high standard of excellence to
emulate (The Cavalry Commander . –). Nevertheless, many felt
that mercenaries would not stand their ground against the odds as
citizens would (Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics b) and, of course,
that mercenaries would desert for better, or more regular, pay else-
where. The employment of professionals thus remained inhibited by
the citizens’ suspicion of their loyalty.
Slaves and the army
Since slaves were not normally allowed to ﬁght as hoplites or horse-
men, their role in warfare is often underestimated. Yet it was not
conﬁned to crisis situations, when the loyalty of slaves might be
bought with a promise of freedom for those who took up arms on
behalf of their masters. Nor was it conﬁned to the armies of freed
helots (neodamodeis) which the Spartans sent to ﬁght all their long-
distance campaigns in northern Greece and Asia Minor. Slaves served
their masters in war just as they did at home.

the city at war
|
91
The personal slave attendants of hoplites and horsemen formed
the bulk of the army’s baggage-train. These ‘shield-bearers’,
‘retainers’, and ‘baggage-carriers’ fetched water, cooked, put up tents,
and carried equipment, food, and other possessions. They also fol-
lowed their masters on active duty. That the attendants were armed is
evident from Herodotus’ claim that at Plataea in  there were as
many light-armed as heavy-armed, since there was ‘one with each
man’ (. ). He can only be thinking of the hoplites’ personal
servants. On the same occasion, in the Spartan contingent seven
light-armed helots were ‘stationed with’ each hoplite, protecting him
(. –). This probably means that, when Sparta mobilized its large
serf population, as it regularly did, these helots were assigned to the
service of individual hoplites. We are never told where they are or
what they do in battle, but Herodotus’ emphasis on their vast num-
bers, their armament, and their closeness to the hoplites, shows that
these men did more than just carry baggage. We can only guess that
such attendants stood close behind the phalanx, launching missiles
over the heads of the hoplites. If so, their loyalty and their impact on
battle must have been greater than our sources care to admit.
Warships and their crews
Citizens, foreigners, and slaves were all found together on board the
classical Greek warship, the technologically highly sophisticated tri-
reme (see Fig. ). Since each trireme had a crew of up to , navies
required vast resources of manpower. In the early years of the
Peloponnesian War, Athens kept  ships on semi-permanent guard-
duty, while it regularly employed a total of up to  ships, or a
complement of up to , men (Thucydides . ).
The captain of the trireme, the trierarch, was not a specialist, but
a wealthy citizen who had volunteered or been appointed to take up
this prestigious position. In Athens, he was allotted a state-owned
ship for a term of one year, during which time it was his responsibil-
ity to hire a crew and keep the ship in a seaworthy condition. Serving
under the captain were the marines (epibatai), normally ten citizen
hoplites and four archers, and the ship’s oﬃcers (a helmsman and a
look-out; a rowing-master, assisted by a pipe-player; a purser; and a
shipwright to make emergency repairs), all specialists, who might be
hired abroad as well as at home.

92
|
classical greece
The bulk of the crew consisted of oarsmen, recruited from among
anyone willing to serve for pay, whether citizen, metic, or slave.
Among citizens, this meant primarily the thetes, the lowest property
class, who needed the money and were not liable to other forms of
military service. A large navy would need to draw not only on citi-
zens, but on metics and on manpower recruited abroad (Xenophon
Hellenica . . ). Rowers might bring their slaves to row on the same
ship and earn them extra wages (Thucydides . . ). Citizen rowers
were usually outnumbered by foreigners and slaves. In the navy of
Corcyra as many as  in  were slaves (Thucydides . . ), and while
the Athenians were in principle capable of manning a ﬂeet with citi-
zens only, their crews, too, were normally ‘bought rather than home-
grown’, and made up largely of metics and slaves (Thucydides . . ,
. –; . , ; . . ).
Even if they formed a minority of the crew, many thousands of
citizen oarsmen were employed by the larger navies: hence the com-
mon people of Athens could be mockingly called to rhuppapai, the
yo-heave-ho, after the rowers’ rhythmic call (Aristophanes, Wasps
–). Many ancient texts express the greatest contempt for the
naval mob. Even the compliments paid to rowers in the earliest
comedies of Aristophanes are back-handed: the risk to life and limb is
Figure 3 The Olympias, a modern reconstruction of an ancient trireme.

the city at war
|
93
ignored in favour of remarks about the sore bottoms and blisters
suﬀered in the battle of Salamis (Wasps –; Knights –, –
). The ideology of infantry warfare thus draws a sharp distinction
between the marines who, despite their low social status, ﬁght as
hoplites and deserve respect, and the rest of the crew who are des-
pised because they do not actually ﬁght. As in the case of light-armed
infantry, there was a political agenda behind this contempt for the
crews of triremes: authors who belittle the rowers do so because they
are hostile to the idea of letting them have a share in power on a par
with the hoplites.
Many, probably most, of the oarsmen, like the ships’ oﬃcers, made
their living primarily from rowing. As individuals, they were profes-
sionals; collectively, however, they had to begin training anew every
time they joined a ship, since crews were not permanent units but
assembled from scratch whenever a vessel was about to be launched.
As a rule, it would take a week or so before the crew of a newly
manned ship had had enough practice of various drills to be ready
for action. The superior quality of full-time rowers became painfully
evident when, in a crisis, the rest of the citizens were mobilized for
service in the navy. With these inexpert crews normal battle tactics
could not be executed (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ), and when
Apollodorus (see above, pp. –) was trierarch he simply dismissed
his levied crew as useless and set about hiring replacements
([Demosthenes] . ).
Waging war
Classical Greek war had two faces. Its ideals and some of its customs
encouraged waging campaigns and battles as if war were a game
played by restrictive rules. In practice, the pursuit of proﬁt and hon-
our knew few restraints and tended towards total warfare. As so often
in a clash of values, people liked to think that the ideal had been
reality in the past, but abandoned by the present generation. Such
nostalgic images have much inﬂuenced modern ideas about tradi-
tional Greek warfare, but, whatever did change in classical warfare,
chivalrous ideals and ruthless violence always coexisted and clashed.

94
|
classical greece
Practical limitations
Demosthenes, in one of his tirades against Philip II of Macedon
(Third Philippic . –), painted a rosy picture of the ‘simplicity’ of
warfare in the days of the Peloponnesian War. His ﬁrst claim, in
which there is some truth, was that war used to be conﬁned to ‘its own
season’ of four or ﬁve months of summer. Most campaigns took place
between the time of the grain harvest in May and the vintage in
September, or the ploughing in November at the latest, when there
were crops to raid for provisions and it was possible to camp out in
the open. Summer was also the only safe season for sailing. Waging
war during the rest of the year was beyond the means of most city-
states. However, the few states which did have the requisite manpower
and money had long since extended the season for war as far as they
could, and, like Philip, ‘made no distinction between summer and
winter’ (Demosthenes . , ).
Demosthenes’ assertion that armies once conﬁned themselves to
ravaging enemy countryside and ﬁghting pitched battles, without
attempting to capture cities, is a half-truth. Although sieges were
not common, they were far from unknown: already in , Athenian
troops laid siege to Aegina, and in  they besieged Paros for 
days (Herodotus . ; . ). The short duration and failure of
such attempts indicate that the relative scarcity of sieges stemmed,
again, from a lack of means rather than a lack of will. Given an
opportunity, Greeks rarely passed up the chance to sack an enemy
city. Throughout the classical period assaults on cities and other
fortiﬁed sites seem to have been about as common as pitched
battles.
Most misleading is Demosthenes’ notion that warfare used to be
‘open and governed by custom’ (. ). The image of battle as a for-
mally arranged duel is an extreme idealization. Tradition knew of a
few archaic battles fought under formally agreed conditions, but even
at the time these were hardly typical. In the classical period, pitched
battles were often fought as if they had been arranged, because wars
tended to follow a predictable sequence: an army would begin ravag-
ing enemy farmland, defenders would march out to stop them, and
the forces would come face-to-face in the open plain. The armies
might remain encamped opposite one another for a few days, or even
a week, waiting for a favourable opportunity to arise, or for the other

the city at war
|
95
to make the ﬁrst move. They might even try to sting the enemy into
action by sending out cavalry to taunt them: ‘Are you planning to
settle here?’ (Thucydides . . ). The conditions thus superﬁcially
resembled those of a duel. But neither time, place, nor conditions
were ever negotiated or formally agreed in classical Greece, and few
felt inhibited by a sense of chivalry from taking an unfair advantage
when they had the chance.
Xenophon urged unequivocally that a commander should ‘himself
devise a ruse for every occasion, since in war nothing is more proﬁt-
able than deceit . . . Think about successes in war, and you will ﬁnd
that most of the greatest have been achieved by means of deceit’ (The
Cavalry Commander . –). We hear of ambushes, sudden descents
on armies still in marching column, and enemies taken by surprise as
a result of sudden forced marches, stealthy changes of position,
deceptive signals, and deliberate misinformation. Such episodes can-
not be attributed to a decline from previously sportsman-like prin-
ciples. It was, after all, back in  that Cleomenes I of Sparta used the
herald’s call for breakfast as the secret signal to attack, caught the
Argive army by surprise, and chased , soldiers into an enclosure
where they were massacred to a man (Herodotus . ; . ). Out-
of-season campaigns, assaults on cities, and deception, then, were not
forbidden by agonal principles. Morally they were perfectly accept-
able, and if they were relatively uncommon, it was because they were
often unfeasible.
Religious and moral constraints
Warfare was, however, subject to certain religious and other norms.
An army could not move without consultation of oracles and omens.
Bad omens were often given as the reason for inaction or retreat, and
earthquakes were interpreted as warning signs, causing more than
one major expedition to be aborted. Religious scruples required the
observance of sacred periods during which warfare was not permit-
ted. Spartans missed the Battle of Marathon because they were not
allowed to start a campaign before the full moon (Herodotus . );
they let the celebration of the Hyacinthia festival interfere with their
conduct of wars (Herodotus . ; Xenophon, Hellenica . . ); and
they did not ﬁght during the Carneia festival, so that most of the
Spartan army missed the Battle of Thermopylae (Herodotus . ;

96
|
classical greece
Thucydides . ). No Greek state was allowed to ﬁght during the
truces proclaimed for the celebration of the Olympic and other
Panhellenic Games. There is enough evidence for these rules being
followed even in the most trying circumstances to show that they
were not cynically invoked only when it was convenient. On the other
hand, there was a good deal of leeway in applying them. In , Argos
invaded Epidaurus on the fourth day before the Carneia, but gave
itself more time by adding a number of interpolated days to its
calendar. Thus Argos was able to ﬁght on while Epidaurus’ allies,
celebrating their festival at the normal time, were unable to intervene
(Thucydides . –).
Moral constraints on classical warfare were few, but signiﬁcant.
One important ideal current in the fourth century was that one
should not enslave or massacre the inhabitants or destroy the build-
ings of a captured Greek city. The most evidently agonal rules applied
to the aftermath of pitched battle. Mutilation of enemy dead was
banned: the victors conﬁned themselves to stripping the bodies of
all possessions, before allowing the naked corpses to be recovered by
their comrades under a truce. The defeated army, in turn, had to
respect the enemy’s tropaion, a trophy of arms and armour attached
to a wooden frame set up to mark the site of a victory, even if this
meant tolerating a memorial of humiliating defeat just outside one’s
own city gates. By custom, the tropaion was constructed with perish-
able materials so that eventually it would collapse and past hostility
could be forgotten.
At the conclusion of pitched battle, then, we at last ﬁnd explicit and
widely observed conventions designed to keep hostility within
bounds. Their importance is not to be denied, but equally one can
hardly escape the conclusion that their scope was limited. Much of
what gave classical warfare the appearance of restraint was the result
of practical limitations, and warring states were happy to overcome
such limitations if they could.
Devastation
Invariably the ﬁrst hostile action after a declaration of war was to
send troops to ravage hostile territory. A war might pass without a
pitched battle or siege, but never without an attempt to wreak
destruction in enemy countryside. Arguably, to exact revenge or pun-

the city at war
|
97
ishment by means of agricultural devastation was the essence of
Greek warfare.
The verb to ravage (deioo) indicates destruction in the form of
trampling down, cutting, or burning crops and trees, smashing agri-
cultural machinery such as olive presses, and destroying farm houses.
This was accompanied by what the Greeks called driving and carry-
ing (agein kai pherein), that is to say, driving oﬀ animals and captives
and carrying oﬀ movable wealth. How much damage would be sus-
tained by enemy territory depended on the invader’s timing,
resources, and intentions. Most often, it seems, an invading army
would ﬁnd little to destroy or plunder, since at its approach the coun-
tryside had been evacuated. The population sought refuge behind
city walls, taking with them ‘even the woodwork of the houses them-
selves’ (Thucydides . . ). Livestock were ferried across to neighbour-
ing islands, or herded together in remote peninsulas and mountain
regions. Even the crops had usually already been harvested. On the
other hand, an invasion could do very great damage if it was entirely
unexpected, like Agesipolis’ invasion of Argos during a sacred month
(Xenophon, Hellenica . . ). If one could time an invasion to inter-
fere with the harvesting or sowing, it might be as eﬀective as a siege in
creating shortages of food (Hellenica . . –. ).
In any case, it took a long time and a large number of men
equipped with axes, swords, and ﬁrebrands to do such extensive dam-
age that a whole community suﬀered economically. Often, cavalry
came out to harass enemy armies as they scattered to plunder, slow-
ing down progress even further. Invasions could last only as long as
the provisions which the soldiers brought along, supplemented with
what they could ﬁnd in enemy country, and normally food and drink
ran out after – weeks, however austere the military diet. As a result,
the capacity for destruction was limited, and only small territories
invaded by large armies were in danger of sustaining structural dam-
age. In order to do serious harm to a large city-state, one needed to
establish within its territory a fortiﬁed position manned by a garrison
that could mount raids all year round as well as encourage the deser-
tion of slaves or serfs. This tactic, known as epiteikhismos, became a
major force during and after the Peloponnesian War.
In certain circumstances, then, agricultural devastation could be
severe enough to force the enemy to surrender, but in most circum-
stances agricultural devastation was much more limited and took on

98
|
classical greece
a more symbolic character, as a challenge to come out and ﬁght. Even
some token ravaging of enemy territory could thus save face after a
major defeat, if the enemy failed to rise to the challenge (Hellenica .
. ; . . –). For the victims, the consequences of not responding
were both loss of resources and loss of prestige; and internal dissen-
sion was bound to break out as some lost their livelihoods while
others were spared (Thucydides . , –). If they did respond, a
pitched battle would decide the issue.
Battle
A key tactical decision in leading out the hoplite phalanx was whether
to make the formation wide but shallow, and try to outﬂank the
enemy, or make it deep but narrow, and aim to break through one
section of the enemy ranks in the hope of causing a general panic.
The Thebans owed their famous victories over the Spartans at
Leuctra in  (see pp. –) in part to exceptional depths of up to
ﬁfty ranks; most armies opted for width and drew up only eight to
sixteen deep.
When the charge was signalled by trumpets, the forces began to
move at walking pace and sang a paian. They gradually picked up
speed and ultimately broke into a run. At this point the battle-hymn
degenerated into a war-whoop, alalê or eleleu. In order to stay in
formation, soldiers tried not to run until they came within the reach
of enemy missiles, at about  yards; experienced ﬁghters might
manage to restrain themselves until they were at a mere  yards
distance (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ). Spartan hoplites did not run
at all, but advanced at a steady pace, singing marching hymns to the
music of pipes. They wore garlands, as one would in a religious
procession, at least up to the point where they halted to perform,
much later than anyone else and deliberately within sight of the
enemy, a pre-battle blood sacriﬁce (Xenophon, Constitution of the
Spartans . ; Plutarch, Lycurgus ). There were practical advantages
to this: music kept the soldiers in step (Thucydides . ) and a last-
minute halt for sacriﬁce provided a chance to dress the ranks again. But
the religious dimension should not be denied. The show of discipline
which caused many opponents to run without oﬀering any resistance
was all the more unnerving for suggesting that the Spartans saw
themselves as serenely advancing to the ritual slaughter of the enemy.

the city at war
|
99
The most illuminating evidence for the nature of classical infantry
combat is found, ironically, in a historical novel, The Education of
Cyrus, a vehicle for Xenophon’s ideas about military practice and
leadership (see p. ). The story’s Persian hero faces the army of a
formidable Asian coalition, drawn up thirty deep, but makes his own
phalanx merely two deep, on the grounds that only the ﬁrst two ranks
of any army are actively involved in the action (. . –; . ). The
rear ranks evidently did not join combat, but merely encouraged
their comrades and stood ready to take their place. The front-line
action described in Xenophon’s novel consisted of a peculiar com-
bination of pushing and ﬁghting, which clearly reﬂects the Greek
style of combat. While the two-deep Persian army easily routs every-
one else, they are slowly driven back by the Egyptians, whose superior
equipment and tactics in many ways mirror those of Greek hoplites:
their large shields, ‘leaning against their shoulders, assisted them in
the pushing’, and so,
joining together their shields, they advanced and pushed. The Persians, who
supported their shields with their hands only, could not resist, but retreated
step by step, while they struck and were struck. (. . –)
What is happening here is clearly what is often represented in Greek
art, too: the shield is carried at a slope, the top tilted towards the body
and the bottom pointing away from the body towards the enemy (see
Fig. ). When hoplites, or Xenophon’s Egyptians, push, they evi-
dently do so with their left arms only, forcing the lower rims of their
shields against the shields of their opponents in order to unbalance
them and force them back. At the same time, they deal blows with the
spears or swords in their right hands.
In this context, one cannot take too seriously the ‘joining’ or ‘lock-
ing’ of shields, which also features in classical battle narratives, most
explicitly in Thucydides’ observation that every hoplite ‘brings his
unprotected side as near as possible to the shield of the man drawn
up on his right and believes that density of formation is the best
protection’ (. . ). The density implied by Thucydides’ ‘as near as
possible’ depends on how much room hoplites needed to wield their
weapons, and we have Polybius’ expert opinion that a soldier using a
cutting or thrusting weapon as well as a shield required at least six
feet of space in every direction (. . –). Most scholars would
object that the hoplite shield by its very nature demands extremely

100
|
classical greece
Figure 4 This bronze statuette of a hoplite, dedicated at the sanctuary of
Zeus at Dodona, reveals how the shield was held. The right hand originally
held a spear which pointed towards the ground at roughly the same ° angle
as the shield.

the city at war
|
101
close ranks, on the assumption that the hoplite stood squarely behind
it and in eﬀect used only the right half of his shield, extending the left
half to provide cover for a comrade close beside him in the ranks (see
Fig. a). In fact, however, a hoplite, in order to wield his spear or
sword with any force at all, would have to adopt a sideways-on stance
in combat and by doing so automatically placed himself behind the
middle of his shield (see Figs. , b). The shield thus did not extend
unnecessarily far to the left, nor did it fall short on the right, and it
was no less suitable for open order combat than for dense formations.
Soldiers in the front line, then, fought essentially as individuals
against individuals, with some assistance from the men in the second
rank, but only moral support from comrades further back. What was
distinctive about hoplites was not so much the density of their forma-
tion as their cohesion in keeping the line, rather than charging or
retreating as they saw ﬁt, and their readiness to engage in extreme
close combat to the point of pushing shield-against-shield.
Battles could be over quite quickly, but might equally last the best
part of a day, reducing desperate men to ﬁghting with hands and
teeth (Herodotus . . ). When an entire army broke, battle was
over. It is almost unheard of for beaten troops to rally and charge
again, as happened at Solygea in  (Thucydides . . ). But often
one part of an army was successful, while another was broken by the
enemy, in which case the successful troops sometimes cut short pur-
suit and turned back to resume combat, inevitably in much disarray.
The victors pursued the ﬂeeing enemy, killing and capturing as
many as they could, until trumpets sounded the retreat. The victory
was marked by singing the paian again. Soon after, the troops gath-
ered to set up the tropaion at the point where the enemy ﬁrst turned.
This, too, was a religious ceremony: pipers performed and all present
wore garlands ‘for the god’ (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ). The dead
were taken up for burial, and victory was sealed when the enemy
asked permission to recover their own dead in turn, thereby formally
admitting defeat.
Sieges
If the enemy did not send out men to ﬁght, or did not give up after a
defeat in battle, the invader might go on to attack the city itself.
Fortiﬁcations were accordingly seen as a precondition of any form of

102
|
classical greece
settled and civilized life by Thucydides (. , , –). Yet there was a
feeling that ideally a city ought to rely on the bravery of its soldiers,
not on the protection of its walls: Sparta proudly did without city-
walls throughout the classical period.
The main siege tactic for most of the classical period was the
blockade. The besiegers surrounded the city with a fortiﬁcation––
anything from a simple ditch or palisade to a double brick wall with
battlements and towers––while the besieged tried to keep their supply
lines open by constructing cross-cutting counter-walls, by sallies
against the siege works, and by covert provisioning expeditions. Even
if these defensive measures were unsuccessful, it would take a long
Figure 5 Diagrammatic presentation of the hoplite rank: (a) as often
envisaged, and (b) as it more probably was.

the city at war
|
103
time before supplies ran out. Once the harvest had been brought in, a
city with a largely agricultural population would have food for a year,
and stocks were often made to last longer still by an early evacuation
of women, children, slaves, and men unﬁt for service. A city might
hold out for over two years, as did Thasos, Potidaea, and Plataea.
Given the length and cost of blockades, besiegers made every
attempt to take fortiﬁcations by assault. Until the early ﬁfth century,
this was a matter of putting up scaling ladders or constructing a siege
mound against the city-wall while bombarding the battlements with
javelins, arrows, and stones. We ﬁrst hear of battering-rams, long
known in the Near East, being used by Greeks during the Athenian
attack on Samos in . Other common assault techniques were min-
ing and setting ﬁre to the defences by means of incendiary missiles
and even an early form of ﬂame-thrower (Thucydides . ). Two
key innovations of the early fourth-century were heavy artillery and
mobile, multi-storied siege towers, designed to provide troops with
an elevated position close to the city wall from which to ﬁre missiles
or lower gangplanks onto the walls. Heavy artillery, generically called
catapults (katapaltai) and ﬁrst mentioned in  (Diodorus . . ,
. ), was the most signiﬁcant invention. By the middle of the century
at the latest, a range of diﬀerent catapults had been developed which,
using twisted sinew or rope, exploited the principle of torsion to
propel massive arrows and stones over great distances. The range of
artillery was further increased by installing it in siege towers. This was
countered by ever more massive defensive walls and towers, often
incorporating artillery positions. Brick superstructures would no
longer do, and it soon became the norm to have double walls with all-
stone inner and outer faces, bonded by a rubble ﬁll, with increasingly
elaborate defensive structures around the gates.
Many, perhaps most, cities and forts were ultimately taken as a
result of treason. The rivalry between political factions was so intense
that patriotism often took second place to the interests of individuals
and groups, and the gates were opened to foreign armies in exchange
for support against opponents at home.
Sieges were the most demanding form of warfare known to the
Greeks. Attackers and defenders needed to be continually on guard,
working in shifts for months or years on end, under harsh and always
worsening conditions. The besiegers suﬀered heavy casualties in every
assault, while the besieged were forced to call on the services of the

104
|
classical greece
old and young who were normally excused military duties. When it
came to house-to-house ﬁghting within the walls, even women joined
in, climbing onto the roofs of their houses to hurl roof tiles at the
enemy (compare pp. –).
Naval warfare
The trireme dominated naval warfare to the almost total exclusion of
other types of warship. Although it had sails, it was primarily a row-
ing ship, powered by its many oarsmen; these, and the rest of the
crew, were squeezed into a vessel just over  feet ( m.) in length
and about  feet ( m.) wide, which left very little space for storage
or amenities. The trireme was fast ( knots per hour) and highly
manoeuvrable, but at the cost of having a short range: it had to make
land at every meal-time and every night, since it could not carry
enough supplies and had no room for cooking or sleeping on board.
Warships played their part in naval blockades, despite being ill-
suited to this role. The wood of the trireme’s hull rotted easily and it
was essential that the ships were regularly taken into dock and dried
out, which was impossible during a lengthy siege. In the absence of
modern surveillance technology, it was in any case extremely hard to
control any stretch of water eﬀectively, except in narrow straits. The
trireme’s speed made it rather more suitable for use in launching
attacks against enemy territory. Maritime raids could exploit the
element of surprise more easily than incursions by land: warships
could rarely be spotted as long in advance as invading armies, and the
crew could disembark, pillage and burn, retreat to the ships, and
disappear again before their victims could muster any resistance.
Athens practised these tactics on a particularly grand scale, sending
ﬂeets of as many as  ships to sail round the Peloponnese and make
a series of lightning raids. The disadvantage of using triremes was
that they carried few soldiers: a ﬂeet of  ships, with up to
, rowers, meant an infantry force of a mere , hoplites and
 archers. Naval expeditions planning more than brief raids
accordingly brought along additional forces and supplies in vessels
converted to troop-, horse-, and grain-carriers.
The use of so much manpower to transport so few ﬁghting men
was less ineﬃcient than it might seem, since the oarsmen did not sit
waiting for the hoplites to return, but themselves joined the raiding.

the city at war
|
105
The sources do not say so explicitly, but every so often mention the
light-armed involved in raiding, who can only be the rowers. On
a few occasions, rowers were provided with light wicker shields so
that they could ﬁght an infantry battle (Thucydides . . , . ;
Xenophon, Hellenica . . ). That ancient authors barely mention any
of this is not surprising: as rowers and light-armed, these men carried
a double stigma.
To prevent an enemy from landing, to contest his control of a
stretch of sea, or indeed to challenge for the title of ‘thalassocrat’
(ruler of the sea), one would have to meet him in a pitched naval
battle. In preparation for combat, triremes deployed in a single line
opposite the enemy. Arranging the ships in two or more lines, or
forming a circle of ships with the sterns in the centre and the prows
facing outwards, were defensive tactics adopted only by those who
felt inferior in manoeuvring skill (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ;
Thucydides . . ). What Thucydides called the old style of ﬁghting
at sea, still practised by Corinth and Corcyra in his day, was eﬀectively
an infantry battle fought from the decks. Once within close range, the
warships lay still while their marines launched missiles and tried to
enter and seize control of the nearest enemy vessel (Thucydides . .
–). The more modern style relied on ramming tactics, and here the
manoeuvrability and speed of the trireme really came into their own.
The sharply protruding lower part of the trireme’s prow was sheathed
with bronze to form a heavy, pointed ram, and the task of the crew
was to outmanoeuvre an enemy vessel so as to approach it from the
ﬂanks, row towards it at ramming speed, crash through its timbers,
and quickly back water to pull out again. The buoyancy of triremes
was such that they would not sink, but of course the damage done to
the hull and the oars, not to mention the loss of life and limb among
the crew, would render a rammed vessel useless. The attacking ship
was in danger not only of being itself disabled by the impact, but, if it
did not extricate itself quickly enough, of being taken over by enemy
marines climbing across (Herodotus . ).
As in an infantry battle, the forces could try either to break through
or to outﬂank the enemy line (tactics known in naval terms as diek-
plous and periplous, respectively). In each case, the result would be to
throw the opposing line into disarray and make it easier to ram
vessels in the ﬂank, where this would do most damage. When one side
broke and ﬂed, it was pursued over some distance. Enemy ships were

106
|
classical greece
seized or disabled, shipwrecked soldiers and sailors were taken pris-
oner or killed: ‘with splintered oars and planks from wrecked ships
they beat them and broke their backs, as if they were tunnies, or ﬁsh
caught in a net; moans and shrieks sounded across the sea’ (Aeschylus,
Persians –). The prows of captured ships might be cut oﬀ to be
dedicated in commemoration of the victory. Finally, the victorious
ﬂeet raised the paian again and set up a tropaion on the nearest island
or headland. The recovery of the dead and shipwrecked was even
more diﬃcult at sea than on land, since the bodies would drift and
sink, and adverse weather might prevent rescue or salvage operations.
Men must often have clung to pieces of wreckage, cursing their
commanders for taking so long to come to the rescue, and drowned
before help arrived (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ).
The economics of warfare
In the archaic period, the cost of campaigns had been borne largely
by private individuals, but wars came to be increasingly funded by the
state, and their outcomes depended more and more on the size of the
belligerents’ treasuries.
The dependence of land-based warfare on private funds in some
respects continued well into the classical period. Hoplites were
obliged to provide not only their own arms and armour, but their
own bedding and a few days rations of bread, cheese, onions, or salted
ﬁsh. By the time the food ran out, the army should have reached
enemy territory where the soldiers could sustain themselves by plun-
der. A man ﬁnding himself short of equipment or money depended
on neighbours, rather than the state, to help him out (Lysias . , .
). As for naval expeditions, the archaic penteconter warship appears
to have been provided by private shipowners. Even some triremes
were privately owned, and manned at the owner’s expense, as late as
the Persian Wars (Herodotus . ; . , ). The limitations of this
economic basis are obvious: very few individuals could aﬀord the cost
of building and manning a ship as large and complex as the trireme,
and not many men could aﬀord to go abroad as soldiers at their own
expense for more than a few weeks. Hence early ﬂeets were small, and
many campaigns were short: the Spartans’ sixth-century siege of

the city at war
|
107
Samos and their longest invasion of Attica during the Peloponnesian
War both lasted only  days (Herodotus . ; Thucydides . . ).
Developments in other states are hard to trace, but the turning-
point in Athens came in , with the decision to spend public
revenue from the silver mines on building  or  triremes
and creating a state-owned navy (Herodotus . ; [Aristotle]
Constitution of the Athenians . ; see p. ). Since rowers and
marines were not normally subject to a compulsory levy, they had to
be oﬀered pay, or at least subsistence, as an inducement to serve. The
normal rate was at ﬁrst two, later three, obols per day, which amount-
ed to a subsistence income; for lengthy and remote expeditions a
double rate of a drachma a day applied. The introduction of pay for
hoplites and their servants (Thucydides . .  ) at the same rate as
rowers soon followed, perhaps in the mid-ﬁfth century. When cavalry
were established, they too received pay, as well as a state loan towards
the cost of buying and feeding a horse. Pay for mercenaries and allies
continued, of course, at the same rates as citizens: normally  obols
(Thucydides . . ), sometimes a drachma (Thucydides . . ).
The introduction of naval and other military pay made possible
larger and longer expeditions and sieges than ever before, which in
turn created a need for additional public expenditure. Provisioning
could not be left entirely to private initiative when great distances and
long periods of time were involved: thus, for the Athenian expedition
to Sicily, in addition to the provisions available from private traders,
the state provided  ships carrying grain, as well as craftsmen and
equipment for the construction of siegeworks (Thucydides . . ).
The navy needed continual, costly maintenance work and new
construction; its expansion also required expensive new harbour
facilities, including ship-sheds in which to haul up the ships for
drying-out and repairs. As sieges became longer and technology more
sophisticated, expenditure on engines, artillery, and fortiﬁcations
spiralled.
The scale of expenses is best illustrated by some of the ﬁgures we
have for Athens. Around , the Athenian treasury contained ,
talents of silver. By , this amount had sunk to , talents,
depleted by amongst other things the nine-month siege of Samos,
which had cost more than , talents (Fornara ). Over the next
two-and-a-half years, the siege of Potidaea swallowed up another
, talents, which, combined with other military commitments,

108
|
classical greece
brought the reserve so low that emergency war taxes had to be raised
(Thucydides . . , . ). If even Athens at its richest struggled to
ﬁnd funds for its campaigns, one can imagine how constrained by a
lack of money were the war eﬀorts of other states.
Among major sources of funding other than taxes, perhaps the
most important was plunder. Sometimes wars could pay for them-
selves––in one instance through the capture of merchant ships, ﬁsh-
ing boats, and passenger ferries (Xenophon, Hellenica . . –).
Captives and cattle seized were usually sold on the spot by the army’s
booty-sellers (laphyropolai). Alternatively, prisoners of war might be
ransomed, a more laborious yet more proﬁtable process (see p. ),
since a standard ransom of  drachmas was a sum which few slaves
would fetch. Despite some success stories, booty was by nature an
unpredictable source of funds, and by no means always suﬃcient.
The main alternative was to draw on the wealth stored in temples. It
was customary to dedicate a tithe (dekatê) from spoils at a chosen
sanctuary, and there were many occasions on which valuable dedica-
tions, public or private, were placed in temples or their treasuries.
States might ‘borrow’ from these funds, vowing to replace them as
soon as possible. Such ‘loans’, however, never oﬀered more than a
temporary solution.
The same is true of a ﬁnal source of money which, when available,
often proved decisive: subsidies of Persian gold. From the start of the
Peloponnesian War, both Spartans and Athenians tried to persuade
Persian governors and generals to bankroll their expeditions, despite
the feeling of some that it was undigniﬁed to suck up and pay hom-
age to barbarians. When in the later phases of the war the Spartans
ﬁnally did obtain large Persian subsidies, their navy grew at a
staggering rate at the expense of Athens’, with dramatic consequences
for the outcome of the war (see p. ). That erratic personal favours
from Persian governors and members of the Persian royal family
could have such an enormous impact on the balance of power in
Greece highlights how weak an economic basis underpinned Greek
warfare. From the middle of the fourth century onwards, Athenians
were suﬃciently aware of this problem to produce a series of pro-
posals and reforms aimed at improving the structure of the state’s
ﬁnances. In the end, however, not even Athens could compete with
the economic resources of the new power on the international stage:
Macedon.

the city at war
|
109
The transformation of classical warfare
The discipline and courage cultivated by Greek hoplites made them
highly eﬀective soldiers, much sought-after as mercenaries. The skill
of Greek sailors and rowers was equally outstanding. The city-states
of Greece nevertheless shrank to a very minor force in international
relations after  because their weaknesses were no less striking. The
hoplite’s amateur ideals inhibited the development of professional
standards of soldiering, while their contempt for all non-hoplite
forms of warfare led to the marginalization of cavalry and light-
armed, as well as the social and political marginalization of naval
personnel. Violent rivalry between and within states prevented the
creation of anything more than temporary coalitions, and exacer-
bated the structural shortage of economic resources.
It was obvious even to the Greeks themselves that their city-states
could attain signiﬁcant power only if they joined forces, and in the
fourth century idealists tried to forge a spirit of Panhellenic unity
against the Persians, while politicians worked to create new entities
such as the Olynthian and Arcadian Leagues, much larger than city-
states and much more integrated than conventional alliances. But
these attempts were overtaken by developments elsewhere. The eco-
nomic and military power of Macedon had been growing since the
late ﬁfth century, but in the s, Philip II’s military successes uniﬁed
a greater territory than ever before, and also brought him gold mines
producing an annual revenue of , talents. By , he could muster
some , infantry and , cavalry, an army which matched in
size the combined forces of all the Greek city-states ranged against
him (Diodorus . . ; . –). Philip put his soldiers through inten-
sive training ‘before they were at war’, often exercising them in all-day
marches in full gear (Polyaenus . . ). Moreover, he improved the
eﬃciency of his troops by allowing only the cavalry to keep personal
attendants: the infantry had to carry their own equipment, and provi-
sions for thirty days. A centrally organized baggage train consisted of
one man for every ten soldiers to carry ‘a ﬂour mill and tent ropes’
(Frontinus . . ). These changes enabled Philip’s armies to move at
speeds which amazed and terriﬁed his opponents. They also made
possible the adoption of a new style of infantry combat.

110
|
classical greece
Philip invented ‘the density and equipment’ of what became known
as the Macedonian phalanx (Diodorus . . –). In the densest
Macedonian formation, the puknosis, each man occupied a mere
three feet ( cm.) of space, both in width and in depth. This was
possible because the Macedonian shield was smaller than the hoplite
shield, and because each soldier, instead of wielding a spear or sword,
used both hands to hold a long pike (sarissa) steady in front of him.
Each man’s sarissa projected  feet (. m.) in front of him, so that
even the weapons of the ﬁfth rank reached a few feet beyond the front
line. In a typical sixteen-deep formation, this left eleven rear ranks
unable to engage directly, and these held their pikes raised diagonally
above the heads of the others (Polybius . . –. ). It took a great
deal of collective training to hold together such an extremely tight
formation in battle, but so long as the Macedonian phalanx stayed
intact it presented a wall of spears that Greek hoplites in their looser
order were unable to penetrate.
The emphasis on cohesion, close combat, and courage in standing
one’s ground which Greek and Macedonian infantry warfare shared
should not obscure the fundamental diﬀerences. On the one hand, we
have the gentlemanly hoplite, training at his leisure in the gym-
nasium, depending on his servant for all daily needs on campaign,
and ﬁghting essentially as an individual, albeit within a cohesive for-
mation. On the other hand, we have the Macedonian infantryman, a
full-time soldier, rigorously trained, self-suﬃcient on campaign, and
equipped in such a way that he can ﬁght only as part of a unit. Athens
went some way towards bridging the social and cultural gap between
these types of ﬁghting men by reforming ephebic training, but the
gulf between Greeks and Macedonians remained wide.
Whether more radical military reform in Greece would ultimately
have made a diﬀerence so long as the city-states remained divided is
doubtful. They simply did not have the resources of Macedon, the
Persian Empire, or the kingdoms created after the conquests of
Alexander the Great. Herodotus’ judgement on the Thracians proved,
ironically, a ﬁtting epitaph for his fellow-Greeks. ‘If they were ruled
by one man, or united amongst themselves, they would in my opin-
ion be invincible and by far the most powerful of all nations. But
there is no way for them to bring this about. It is not going to happen,
and that is why they are weak’ (.).

5
Political conﬂicts,
political debates, and
political thought
Josiah Ober
Introduction: civil war in Corcyra, 427 
In a few harrowing pages of terse prose, Thucydides describes the
unravelling of the great city-state, Corcyra, in a traumatic civil con-
ﬂict (stasis). The conﬂict was exacerbated by the Peloponnesian War,
the protracted struggle between imperial Athens and Sparta’s Pelo-
ponnesian League (see pp. –). Corcyra had made a defensive
alliance with Athens after losing a naval battle to Sparta’s ally
Corinth. After the alliance was struck, certain Corcyraeans, who had
been taken prisoner by the Corinthians and had come to favour the
Peloponnesian side, returned to Corcyra and began to agitate against
the Athenian alliance. When the former prisoners of war were unable
to pass the requisite legislation in the Corcyraean assembly, they tried
another tack and indicted Peithias, a Councillor and the leader of the
pro-Athenian Corcyraean democrats, on a charge of treason. Consti-
tutional politics enter the story at this point: the conﬂict over foreign
alliances was intimately connected to a conﬂict between factions
advocating rival political programmes for Corcyra: democrats striv-
ing for a constitution that would make all native male Corcyraeans,
including labourers and farmers of small plots, into full citizens, ver-
sus oligarchs who sought domination for a few relatively wealthy
property-holders.

112
|
classical greece
Peithias’ oligarchic opponents failed in their prosecution; Peithias
was acquitted, and he retaliated with a ploy that underlines the role
of class antagonism in Corcyrean politics: he charged ﬁve of his
wealthiest opponents with an act of impiety: illegally cutting saplings,
for use as vine-stakes on their private estates, from a tract of state-
owned sacred land. Upon being convicted and faced with enormous
ﬁnes for their act of impiety, Peithias’ opponents ﬂed to a temple,
claiming sanctuary. Unable to pay their ﬁnes despite their great
wealth, they were presumably stripped of their ordinary legal protec-
tions as citizens, but as suppliants in a temple they were under the
protection of the gods. The men in the temple soon learned that
Peithias intended to enforce the full penalty and that he was also
seeking to extend the scope of the Athenian alliance. They rallied
their supporters, burst into the Council Chamber, and murdered
Peithias and  other Councillors. The stasis had begun in earnest
and the stakes were high: the victors would decide what alliances
Corcyra would make (Athenian or Peloponnesian), what constitution
Corcyra would have (democracy or oligarchy), and what classes of
Corcyraeans would enjoy the privileges of citizenship (all native
males, or only the rich).
Peithias’ oligarchic opponents called a public assembly and forced
through a decree repudiating the Athenian alliance. Next, with the
help of the crew of a Corinthian ship, they launched an armed attack
on the surviving democrats. The latter took up defensive positions on
and around Corcyra’s acropolis. Both sides sought assistance from
the unfree population, but it was the democrats who successfully
recruited the bulk of Corcyra’s rural slaves with a promise of free-
dom. Meanwhile, a small Athenian naval force arrived at Corcyra. Its
commander sought to quell the violence, but he was soon confronted
by a large Corinthian ﬂeet. The Corinthian ships were forced to
retreat in turn upon the arrival of a yet larger Athenian force.
The arrival and departure of outside naval forces added fuel to
Corcyra’s internal ﬁghting, which became ever more destructive. To
forestall a democratic counter-attack, the oligarchs set ﬁre to the
buildings around the agora, causing massive loss of property and
risking a general conﬂagration. The ﬁghting soon drew in unexpected
sectors of the population. Thucydides highlights the distortions of
normal Greek society that the conﬂict involved when he notes, ‘The
women also joined in the ﬁghting with great daring, hurling down

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
113
tiles from the rooftops and standing up to the din of battle with a
courage beyond their sex’ (. ). The stasis climaxed in a paroxysm
of killing during which the now-dominant democrats cornered and
slaughtered their less numerous opponents:
There was death in every shape and form. And, as usually happens in such
situations, people went to every extreme and beyond it. There were fathers
who killed their sons; men were dragged from the temples and butchered on
the very altars; some were actually walled up in the temple of Dionysus and
died there.
(. )
Thucydides goes on to say that the stasis in Corcyra was simply the
ﬁrst, and not the worst, of a wave of civil conﬂicts that shattered
many Greek poleis during the long Peloponnesian War.
The drawn-out international war, in Thucydides’ view, worsened
internal conﬂicts:
In times of peace and prosperity cities and individuals alike follow higher
standards . . . but war is a stern teacher; in depriving people of the power of
easily satisfying their daily needs, it brings most people’s minds down to the
level of their actual circumstances.
(. )
The two sides at Corcyra were deﬁned by their preference for a great-
power alliance (Athens vs. Sparta), by their support for a speciﬁc
system of government (democracy vs. oligarchy), and by their eco-
nomic class (poor vs. rich). But the original issues became blurred as
the violence escalated. Thucydides points out that each side adver-
tised the justice of its own position by means of attractive slogans: ‘on
the one side, political equality for the masses, and on the other side
the safe and sound government of the aristocracy’. But behind these
slogans Thucydides detected a brutal lust for self-aggrandizement:
they were deterred neither by the claims of justice nor by the interests of the
state; their one standard was the pleasure of their own side at that particular
moment and so . . . They were always willing to satisfy the hatreds of the
hour.
(. )
Thucydides’ Corcyra narrative concentrates on the doings of citi-
zen men of military age, but it also shows how violent internal strug-
gles drew in women and slaves, persons classical Greeks ordinarily
expected to be neither citizens nor warriors: the civil conﬂict also
became deeply entangled with aspects of the polis life that might not,
at ﬁrst glance, seem political: law, religion, and economic interests.

114
|
classical greece
Thucydides points out to his reader how, under the conditions of civil
war, the various category distinctions that sustained the polis in more
peaceful times––rich and poor, free and slave, male and female,
religious and secular, just and expedient, public and private––were at
once proclaimed with special vehemence in words and suﬀered utter
collapse in practice. It was only when the ordinary social rules were
suspended, and political consensus shattered, that the unitary polis
was revealed in all its diversity: the interests of the citizen men were
seen to be inextricably bound up with those of women and slaves;
religion, politics, and law appeared as part of a single system, driven
by some deeper impulse. Coming to grips with that cryptic impulse
became a central concern of Greek political thinkers.
Thucydides’ account suggests that the driving passion behind the
struggle was political, in the fundamental sense of deciding who
would have the power to establish the rules by which society would be
structured and who would have a share in its governance. The ultim-
ate stake in the Corcyraean conﬂict, as in other Greek civil wars, was
the composition of the citizen body: the key to the question ‘Who will
rule?’ lay in deciding ‘Who will be allowed to be an active, participa-
tory citizen?’ Who would gain the right to stand forth publicly and
proudly, at the centre of society, as its rightful masters? Would it be
the heads of a few wealthy and well-born families? Or should the
privileges and duties of citizenship be extended to a wider segment of
the citizen body? And if so––how much wider? To all landowners? All
soldiers? To craftsmen and traders? To landless day labourers? At
what point would the expansion of the citizenship threaten the basic
categories and distinctions on which Greek culture was predicated––
and so foster revolution? What were the ultimate social boundaries––
gender? residence? birthright?––beyond which citizenship simply
could not be imagined? This complex set of questions had been
raised, in theory and practice, early in archaic Greek culture. It was
never deﬁnitively resolved, despite the oceans of blood spilled in civil
conﬂicts and the pots of ink spilled by classical Greek political
theorists.

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
115
Political theory: the sources of conﬂict and
its prevention
In the course of describing another revolutionary situation, this time
in late sixth-century Persia, Thucydides’ older contemporary, Hero-
dotus, laid out the three governmental options taken seriously by the
classical Greeks. Herodotus reports that a small group of Persian
nobles, when they had violently overthrown a usurper-junta, sat
down to discuss how the Persians ought to be governed. One of them
advocated the rule of a privileged few (oligarchy), another the demo-
cratic rule of the many (democracy, here called isonomia––literally
‘equality in respect to legal standing’), and a third the monarchical
rule of a single individual. Not surprisingly, in the light of actual
Persian political history, Herodotus’ imagined Persians ultimately
decide that monarchy is best. The terms of the debate clearly have
more to do with Greek political thought than with practical Persian
politics. The outcome of Herodotus’ ﬁctional Persian debate points to
a Greek conception that emerged with special force after the early
ﬁfth-century wars with Persia and would remain inﬂuential through
the classical period: the world was seen as divided between slavish
‘barbarians’, naturally suited to being ruled over by an autocrat, and
free Greeks, who willingly accepted the authority of law and custom
but refused to accept any single man as their master. Despite the fact
that tyranny remained common among the Sicilian Greeks, by the
ﬁfth century bc the primary governmental options for mainland
city-states of Greece were various forms of oligarchy and democracy.
And this meant in principle, a choice between the rule of some seg-
ment of the propertied classes or the rule of the entire native adult
male population (the demos).
As Thucydides’ depiction of revolutionary Corcyra suggests, decid-
ing whether political claims based on property-holding were more or
less legitimate than claims based on regional residence and native
ancestry was among the most intractable political problems faced by
the classical Greeks. Just as Herodotus’ Persian debate would lead us
to suppose, the Greek political debate tended to be carried out in
negative terms. Since there were only two legitimate options, dis-
crediting one’s opponent was tantamount to establishing legitimacy

116
|
classical greece
for one’s own political preference. The oligarchs pressed their claim
by contending that democracy was the self-interested rule of a large
faction deﬁned only by lack of wealth––that of ‘the poor’. In the view
of the oligarchs the worst of these were wage labourers, dependent
upon a paymaster; their characters were thought to be corrupted by
the ‘slavish’ conditions of their employment. Since, in the view of
the oligarchs, labourers were not truly free men, they were thought to
be incapable of making independent judgements, and therefore
unworthy of participating in political deliberations. Meanwhile demo-
crats asserted that oligarchy meant the rule of the wealthy in their
own material and excessively cosmopolitan interests. Those whose
loyalty was to their goods could not be true patriots. They preferred
the company of their fellow rich men in far-oﬀ places to their poorer
fellows at home, and they would willingly sacriﬁce their polis’ in-
dependence in order to preserve their wealth. In sum, each side
claimed that the other side ignored the common good of the polis as
a state and as a society. Each claimed that the other was unjustly
seeking to gain control over more than its fair share of the state’s
limited material and political resources.
Thucydides was both a historian and a political theorist. He was
well aware of the long history of Greek intellectual debates over polit-
ical legitimacy, as well as the equally long history of actual political
conﬂicts. As Greek political writers moved between theory and prac-
tice, their careful observation of social practices stimulated the devel-
opment of abstract political philosophy. Thucydides’ account of
events in Corcyra shows that he understood that economic interests
were important in revolutionary activity, but he regarded conﬂicts
between economic interests as an insuﬃcient explanation of the
actual course of events. Like many other ﬁfth-century intellectuals,
especially the so-called sophists (self-styled instructors in political
wisdom, who ﬂocked to Athens in the ﬁfth century), Thucydides was
fascinated by the relationship between existing social conventions
and inherent human nature. A passage in the Corcyra narrative that
may have been added to Thucydides’ text by a later editor states
baldly that it is precisely in periods of civil war that human nature
itself was revealed most clearly, and in all its stark ugliness:
With the ordinary conventions of civil life thrown into confusion, human
nature, always ready to oﬀend even where laws exist, showed itself proudly in
its true colours: as something incapable of controlling passion, insubordinate

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
117
to the idea of justice, the enemy of anything superior to itself; for, if it had not
been for the pernicious power of envy, men would not have exalted ven-
geance above innocence and proﬁt above justice.
(. )
Whether Thucydides wrote this passage or not, his historical-
theoretical argument grimly suggests that when humans are con-
fronted with a potentially unlimited capacity to self-aggrandize, the
conventions of civilized life which ordinarily restrained vicious
behaviour will be swept away and under these conditions the state
cannot survive. Civil conﬂict ﬁnds its logical end in the elimination
of the free, independent state, which either destroys itself or leaves
itself fatally exposed to external domination by the powerful.
The problem of internal conﬂict within the polis was a key issue,
perhaps the single most pressing issue, for classical political thought.
Given that civil war was regarded as an unmitigated evil, how could it
be avoided? Or, if it could not be avoided altogether, could its eﬀects
be somehow softened? Must internal conﬂict lead to the death of the
polis?
In the Republic, Thucydides’ younger contemporary, Plato, oﬀered
a long, eloquent, and uncompromising answer to the problem of civil
conﬂict and its relationship to human nature. Plato claimed that
every existing polis was in fact at least two poleis unhappily coexisting
in the same physical space. The rich and the poor were, in eﬀect,
‘cities’ unto themselves, with their own distinct cultures and values;
hostilities between them were as inevitable as they were undesirable.
For Plato, then, overt civil war was simply a ‘hot’ phase in a chronic
state of social conﬂict that would last as long as there could be any ques-
tion or debate about ‘who should be the rulers’, and, more radically,
for as long as diversity of any sort pertained among the ruling classes.
Plato argued that the social divisions common to every existing
polis reﬂected a profound psychological sickness, what we might
today call a schizophrenic division within each individual human
psyche. The Republic lays the framework for an idealized polis,
Callipolis (Beautiful City), based on the idea that true social harmony
could only be achieved when persons whose souls were completely
free from internal conﬂict were organized into a conﬂict-free polis
and ruled by those possessing true wisdom. Every resident of
Callipolis necessarily accepted the basic premise that each person is
ﬁt for only one task. For example, a shoemaker would limit his

118
|
classical greece
activity to shoemaking. He would not attend a political assembly in
the morning and make shoes in the afternoon (as he might were he
an Athenian citizen) because shoemaking and politics were distinct
and mutually exclusive activities, to be undertaken by diﬀerent per-
sons. Plato’s Callipolis was not an oligarchy, insofar as oligarchy
meant the rule of a propertied class. In Callipolis it is the shoemaker’s
technical engagement in his craft, not his wealth, that precluded
engagement in the political activity of ruling: whether he was a
wealthy owner of a shoemaking factory or just scraping by with
piecework was immaterial. Callipolis was divided into castes based on
vocation, not wealth. A tiny cadre of philosophers served as the
rulers. A more numerous caste of warriors, the Guardians, kept order
and defended the state against its external enemies. And a mass of
free but utterly apolitical producers of goods provided for the polis’
material needs and were the society’s only owners of private property.
Plato tells us little about the productive caste, but much of the
Republic is devoted to the rules by which the philosopher-rulers and
Guardians were to live their lives, to the epistemological question of
absolute knowledge, and to the long and arduous educational pro-
gramme that would prepare them to fulﬁl their strictly deﬁned polit-
ical roles. The most remarkable aspect of the life of Callipolis’ ruling
élite is its radical egalitarianism, and this egalitarianism crossed gen-
der lines: male and female Guardians were to undertake essentially
the same tasks, including military service. There was no private own-
ership of property among the Guardian class, no marriage, and no
family life. Children were raised communally. The Guardians were as
indistinguishable from one another as could be. No one possessed
anything, house, wife, child, apart from all others. The philosopher-
rulers lived by the same social rules and primary upbringing as the
Guardians, but they underwent many additional years of specialized
philosophical training in order to achieve access to the knowledge
that Plato felt was necessary to sustain the society according to its
original and unchangeable founding premises.
Plato’s ideas of what a proper social order might look like were
radical, but not unique. Similar hyper-egalitarian ideas were parodied
by the Athenian comedian, Aristophanes, in a play (The Assembly-
women) presented in c., a few years before Plato’s masterpiece was
written. In Aristophanes’ comedy, the women of Athens, frustrated
by the unpatriotic selﬁshness of their citizen-husbands, contrive to

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
119
take over the government. They immediately institute a regime in
which property is made communal and family life abolished. Even
access to sexual pleasure is equalized via a measure that required the
young and attractive to have sex with the old and ugly before being
allowed access to their preferred partners. Aristophanes’ witty play
challenged its Athenian audience to think about the lack of ﬁt
between the political equality guaranteed by democracy, and per-
vasive distinctions based on class and gender. The women’s egalitar-
ian regime sought to remove the underlying causes of selﬁsh self-
aggrandizement and thereby eliminate the primary source of civil
conﬂict.
Plato’s project went further. His Callipolis was strictly hierarchical
and hostile to change in any form; even the tiniest deviation from the
perfect orderliness of the uniﬁed society could, he supposed, precipi-
tate a downward spiral into a nightmare of dissent and social revolu-
tions resulting in ever-worse forms of government: ﬁrst a sort of
timocracy, then oligarchy, next a democracy and ﬁnally the rule of the
most vicious sort of tyrant. In order to forestall this downward spiral
for as long as possible, Callipolis was sustained by a web of ‘noble
lies’––a systematic set of ﬁctions disseminated by the rulers. These
salutary myths would serve to indoctrinate each member of society
and convince him (and her) that change was literally impossible and
that all really was for the best in the best of all possible worlds. Only
the few rulers with adequate philosophical training could or need
know the truth.
Plato’s vision of a well-ordered society has seemed to many readers
both terrifying and a practical absurdity. Plato’s own attempt to put
some of his ideas into practice, by training sympathetic Sicilian Greek
tyrants to be philosopher-kings, ended in disaster––and very nearly
in Plato’s premature death. He was, ironically, saved from a conspir-
acy of his Sicilian enemies by a timely warning oﬀered by lower-class
Athenian seamen, men who acted on the strength of their common
bond of citizenship with the philosopher who regarded them as
unworthy of that estate. A particularly pungent critique of Callipolis
came from Plato’s own student, Aristotle, who argued that Plato’s
ideal polis was hopelessly impractical when viewed in the light of
natural human impulses. Like Thucydides, Aristotle assumed that
accurate understanding of actual human nature, based on careful
collection of historical evidence, was the key to genuinely useful

120
|
classical greece
political analysis. In his Politics Aristotle argued that humans are by
nature ‘political animals’ – by which he meant that they had a natural
impulse not only to live sociably in groups, but also to contribute
actively to the ﬂourishing of the group by engaging in political life,
ideally by ‘ruling and being ruled in turns’. Although Aristotle
notoriously claimed that children, women, and ‘natural’ slaves were
psychologically unﬁt to be true ‘political animals,’ this still left him
with a large and socially diverse body of adult males as ‘natural’
citizens. Confronting the tumultuous constitutional history of the
Greek city-states, and Plato’s unsatisfactory solution to the problem
of civil strife, Aristotle asked whether there might be room for social
diversity within a just and stable polis. Could fatal levels of social
conﬂict be avoided without resorting to rigid castes, improbable
social practices, and ‘noble lies’? Aristotle believed that it was only in
a well-regulated polis that humans could achieve their highest ends of
engaging in eﬀective political deliberation and philosophical con-
templation. And thus, for Aristotle, the stakes were especially high: by
destroying polis life, civil war rendered impossible that which made
human life worth living.
Aristotle assigned his students to collect comparative political-
historical material from around the Greek world. The evidence sug-
gested to him that there were some important similarities among
many revolutions, but that civil conﬂict ultimately arose from a var-
iety of causes. Like his predecessors, Aristotle recognized that con-
ﬂicts between economic-class interests often motivated revolutionary
activism, but, like Thucydides, he rejected class conﬂict as a mono-
causal explanation:
For just as in war the crossing of ditches, even if they are very small, splits
apart the ranks, so every diﬀerence [between people’s circumstances and
characters], it appears, makes for a factional split. The greatest split is perhaps
that between virtue and depravity, then there is that between wealth and
poverty, and so on, with others in varying degrees.
(Politics b –)
But beneath all destructive conﬂict lay the tendency for men to form
interest groups based on the distinctions among them, for those
groups to seek to gain more than their fair share of available goods,
and their willingness to resort to violence in that undertaking.
Aristotle sketched a broad spectrum of possible regime-types,
based on the political dominance of diﬀerent categories of persons.

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
121
But, again like his predecessors, he acknowledged that, for Greeks
anyway, the two main types of legitimate government remained oli-
garchy and democracy. Aristotle argued that both democracy and
oligarchy were ‘deviant regimes’. Because of their tendency to further
the interests of only one part of the population, both oligarchs and
democrats deviated from the moderate ‘constitutionalism’ that
Aristotle supposed would result from the political rule of a large and
stable middle class. But Aristotle did not regard the very common
(perhaps inevitable) tendency toward ‘deviance’ as necessarily fatal to
civil order. Instead of resorting to Plato’s all-or-nothing approach to
political theory, Aristotle suggested various practical legal reforms
and institutional adjustments––including schemes to weight voting
and to encourage or discourage participation, elaboration of legal
codes, and the promotion of greater levels of trust between classes––
whereby the interests of the poor might be better protected under
oligarchic regimes and those of the rich under democracies.
Democracy at Athens and its critics
When Aristotle began studying civil conﬂict and its potentially peace-
ful resolution, the civil war that raged in Athens in , following
Sparta’s victory in the Peloponnesian War, was available to him as a
particularly vivid and enlightening example. A detailed account was
oﬀered by the Athenian Xenophon, who had inherited both
Thucydides’ historical/theoretical concerns (he wrote a continuation
of Thucydides’ unﬁnished history of the Peloponnesian War) and
Plato’s philosophical interests (like Plato he was a follower of
Socrates). As Xenophon tells the story, the ﬁrst stages of the Athenian
stasis developed along the general lines of the standard ‘Corcyra’
scenario. The Spartans occupied Athens with a military force. Under
duress, the Athenian assembly was forced to pass legislation turning
over eﬀective control of the city to ‘The Thirty’, a group dominated
by extremist Athenian oligarchs led by the soon-to-be notorious
Critias, Plato’s uncle. Like Plato and Xenophon, Critias was an associ-
ate of Socrates. But once in power, Critias and his cronies proved the
very anti-type of selﬂess ‘philosopher-kings’. The Thirty murdered
democratic leaders and exiled thousands of ordinary citizens. They

122
|
classical greece
conﬁscated property at whim, and ordered the execution of anyone
who raised objections. In response, a band of Athenian democrats,
aided by anti-Spartan Thebans, rallied at a hilltop stronghold outside
the city of Athens. The democrats quickly gained adherents and even-
tually captured Piraeus. A pitched battle ended in a victory for the
democrats; Critias was killed in the ﬁghting. The Spartans, divided in
their counsels, declined to support the Athenian oligarchs, and so
democracy was restored.
The surviving oligarchs feared the worst: revenge killings, mass
exile, conﬁscation of property. But the denouement proved far from
the blood-bath that Thucydides deplored in his Corcyraean narrative.
Recognizing that ongoing civil war would leave Athens permanently
crippled, the victorious democrats passed a legislative decree declar-
ing a general amnesty for past revolutionary misdeeds. The oﬃcial
policy of ‘forgive and forget’ was enforced in the re-established
people’s lawcourts. In a work entitled The Constitution of the Atheni-
ans (which combines political history with a description of prevailing
government institutions), one of Aristotle’s students praises this
remarkable amnesty:
on this occasion [the democrats] seem to have reacted to their previous
misfortunes, both privately and publicly, in a manner more noble and public-
spirited than all other people. Not only did they wipe out all prosecutions for
past acts, but they paid back from common funds the money that the Thirty
had borrowed from Sparta.
(. )
The amnesty worked; Athens entered a long period of relative social
harmony which eventually allowed the city to regain much of its
former military clout and a high level of economic prosperity (see pp.
, ).
The amnesty of  marked the end of open oligarchic activism at
Athens––the comparison between the viciousness of the oligarchs
and the generous leniency of the democrats undermined support for
would-be anti-democratic revolutionaries. Yet the amnesty did not
interrupt the long and distinguished tradition of Athenian political
writing critical of democracy. Thucydides, Plato, Xenophon, and
Aristotle each have a place in that tradition. Considering the relation-
ship between that long tradition and practical Athenian politics will
clarify the background to the bloody stasis of , and will also help
to explain why it did not escalate into a polis-destroying maelstrom.

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
123
The best introduction to the critical tradition is a short tract writ-
ten a generation before the Amnesty, in the third quarter of the ﬁfth
century (c.–). Its anonymous author, dubbed by modern
scholars ‘The Old Oligarch’, assumes the persona of an anti-
democratic Athenian instructing a sympathetic foreign friend about
the peculiarities of his native polis. The Old Oligarch seeks to explain
how and why the consistently self-interested behaviour of ‘the demo-
cratic multitude’ has led Athens to a position of international
strength. He ironically praises the Athenian demos, which he identi-
ﬁes as a faction consisting of ‘the poor and many’, for its single-
minded and selﬁsh pursuit of its own advantage, and implicitly urges
his pro-oligarchic readers, the ‘few who are good’, to smarten up and
behave likewise. The Old Oligarch himself seems to regard successful
revolution as next to impossible, given the democracy’s capacity to
deceive, coerce, or overawe its internal and external enemies. But his
conviction that democrats and oligarchs alike would always seek to
promote their own factional interests, rather than the good of the
state, sets the scene for destructive civil conﬂicts like Corcyra’s.
At least some of the Old Oligarch’s ﬁfth-century contemporaries
agreed that the democracy should be done away with, and they were
less pessimistic than he about their chances for success. The two
generations after the popular Athenian revolution of / had wit-
nessed the extension and elaboration of democratic institutions, and
the concomitant development of the political consciousness of the
Athenian people. The conservative politician Cimon had sought to
strengthen Athens’ ties with oligarchic Sparta, but his plans backﬁred
when the Spartans haughtily turned away Athenian military aid in
suppressing a revolt by Sparta’s subject class, the helots of Messenia
(see p. ). Cimon’s political star plummeted. Immediately follow-
ing this débâcle in , a democratic politician named Ephialtes per-
suaded the Assembly to strip from the Areopagus council certain of
its powers of constitutional oversight and to increase the power of the
popular courts. Ephialtes was subsequently murdered, but his young
colleague Pericles was already rising to prominence as a ‘new model’
democratic leader, a master orator, skilful general, and innovative
policy-maker. Pericles publicly rejected the old style aristocratic polit-
ics, which had focused on networking among small bands of trusted
friends (the political clubs know as hetaireiai). Instead of doing polit-
ics in the ‘backroom’ forum of the private drinking party, Pericles

124
|
classical greece
developed a loyal, if informal, mass constituency of ordinary
Athenians through speechmaking in the Assembly. The tight little
world of the political clubs was increasingly regarded with suspicion
by non-élite Athenians, as the primary site of anti-democratic
plotting.
Through the middle decades of the ﬁfth century the possibility of
changing Athenian government to some form of oligarchy continued
to fuel the rivalries among Athens’ politicians. In the best known of
these confrontations Thucydides, the son of Melesias (probably a
relative of the historian, whose father was Olorus), sought to chal-
lenge Pericles in the key public forum of the Assembly. Thucydides
arranged for wealthy and anti-democratic citizens to sit together,
heckle their political opponents, and vote as a block in the Assembly.
It was too little, too late. A series of bold legislative initiatives had left
the Athenian demos in full control of the governmental apparatus,
and the demos was in no mood to be dictated to by the wealthy few.
In  the Assembly elected to hold an ostracism––a remarkable
institution in which the Athenian citizens voted with inscribed pot-
sherds to determine which prominent individual among them should
be sent into exile for ten years. The institution itself, which dates back
to the foundation of popular rule at Athens, is an eloquent statement
about the scope of authority claimed by the demos, in this case to
expel a citizen (although no more than one each year) who was guilty
of nothing other than political notoriety. In  it was the son of
Melesias who won the unpopularity contest; his departure from the
political scene left the pro-oligarchic Athenians leaderless. The polit-
ician Thucydides’ failed attempt to challenge democracy in public
provides the context for the Old Oligarch’s negative assessment of
democracy’s morality and his pessimism about its probable longevity.
After the ostracism of Thucydides the oligarchic movement went
underground and some of the political clubs became centres of revo-
lutionary agitation.
Meanwhile, certain intellectuals challenged the implicit premises
of democracy. Borrowing the sophists’ sharp distinction between
nature (physis) and custom (nomos), they claimed that the rule of the
people was a ﬂimsy social construct, both perverse and artiﬁcial in
that its laws and customary practices were contrary to basic laws of
nature. In a true state of nature, these critics argued, a few strong and
intrinsically excellent men would rule a herd of inferior persons.

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
125
They would use that herd for their own instrumental purposes, just
as a shepherd shears or slaughters his sheep to suit himself. Demo-
cracy, they claimed, only continued to exist because the inferior herd,
rightly fearing the capacity of the élite few, had managed to trick and
coerce them into accepting an understanding of social justice based
on a false notion of equality: the assumption that each citizen, despite
his individual attainments or lack of them, was of equal political
worth, and thereby worthy of an equal vote in the citizen Assembly.
Anti-democratic intellectuals opposed this ‘arithmetical’, one man
one vote, conception of equality with a contrary view of ‘natural’
equality––the idea that each man’s rightful share of social and
political goods should be determined by his strength and inherent
excellence. On this reasoning, democracy was unnatural, and
oligarchy, the rule of the strong and excellent (and, it hardly need be
said, the wealthy), was what nature intended.
Other ﬁfth-century intellectuals provided arguments in support of
democracy. The sophist Protagoras of Abdera, for example, taught
that political capacity (unlike physical strength or even intrinsic intel-
ligence) was not in fact the monopoly of a few, but was distributed
generally among the human race (or at least among adult, male
Greeks). Protagoras developed a form of human-centred pragmatism
that rejected the notion that there was any metaphysical truth to be
known about matters such as justice or truth. If there was no ﬁnal
‘god-approved’ or even ‘natural’ social order, then existing customs
did constitute all the social reality that was accessible to humans, and
consequently customs should be taken seriously. If, in Protagoras’
most famous slogan, ‘man is the measure of all things’, then human
customs have all the force of ‘natural’ laws. If democracy worked well
in practice by producing various material and psychic goods for the
citizens, as, in mid-ﬁfth century Athens it certainly did, then this was
evidence that the political capacity that was widely distributed among
humans was indeed being aggregated eﬃciently. The key to Athens’
material success in the ﬁfth century was its empire, and the empire
was secured by a large and eﬃcient trireme navy (see pp.  and
). The model of the trireme, in which scores of ordinary men
worked towards a common end by aggregating their individually
puny strength, thereby transforming a mass of timber into a devastat-
ingly eﬀective naval weapon (see above, pp. –), was a ﬁtting
metaphor for Protagoras’ understanding of democracy. And, as the

126
|
classical greece
Old Oligarch ruefully recognized, the experience of rowing in the
ﬂeet decidedly reinforced the lower-class Athenian citizens’ sense of
their own worth and their collective power.
Political conﬂict on stage
Serious discussion of political matters was not restricted to intel-
lectual circles. Athenian dramatists reconﬁgured the ideas of the
sophists and other ﬁfth-century thinkers, often in familiar mythic
terms, and presented them annually to huge audiences in the Theatre
of Dionysus. All Athenian dramatic productions were subsidized by
the democratic state, and state oﬃcials were responsible for choosing
each year’s plays. Although Athenian tragedy took account of a great
deal more than political theory and practice, there was obviously a
close relationship between the civic arena and the tragic stage.
Aeschylus’ Eumenides, Sophocles’ Antigone, and Euripides’ Ion (to
take just three examples) explored how human nature related to div-
ine will, man-made laws, and traditional custom, and what all this
meant for the governance of the polis. Brieﬂy reviewing these three
dramatic plots clariﬁes the ways in which large audiences of ordinary
citizens engaged with political-philosophical problems.
The Eumenides begins with Orestes, a prince of Argos, seeking
sanctuary in Athens. Orestes had murdered his mother to avenge his
father. He is pursued by the Furies, grotesque female divinities
charged with the punishment of those who have shed the blood of
kinfolk. Athens’ tutelary goddess, Athena, refuses to grant Orestes
sanctuary on her own authority; instead she creates the Areopagus
Council as a citizen’s court, and bids the Councillors to decide the
justice of the matter. Orestes and the Furies present their cases, the
jury is polled, and the decision goes in favour of Orestes (although
only after Athena herself has cast the tie-breaking vote). Orestes is
grateful, and oﬀers a permanent alliance with Argos. The Furies,
however, are angry and threaten revenge: the outbreak of a dreadful
stasis among the Athenians. But they are eventually persuaded by
Athena’s skilful rhetoric (and veiled threats) to take up residence in
Athens, and to turn their threat of civil conﬂict into a blessing on
Athena’s land.

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
127
In this play, produced shortly after the Assembly voted to reduce
the extra-judicial powers of the Areopagus Council and some  years
before the revolutionary crisis at Corcyra, we ﬁnd a set of issues
remarkably similar to those highlighted by Thucydides: the threat of
stasis, bloodshed among kin, questions about religious authority and
sanctuary, women acting like men, the ambiguous scope of law, for-
eign policy entanglements, and the problematic use of rhetoric. In
this play, however, all turns out well in the end: the state is in eﬀect
founded rather than destroyed.
Sophocles’ Antigone, set in Thebes, oﬀers a darker picture of polit-
ical conﬂict. Antigone has been forbidden by Thebes’ King Creon the
right to bury her dead brother, who had sought to overthrow Creon’s
rule by leading an armed force against Thebes. This sets up a conﬂict
between the demands of traditional religious practice (kin must bury
their dead) and the demands of political authority (the king’s will is
law). Antigone confronts Creon, who responds by asserting both the
legitimacy of his authority and the impropriety of a woman speaking
publicly about matters of political moment. Creon has his way, and
Antigone is sentenced to die for her insubordinate refusal to obey the
royal injunction. But Creon’s house is shattered in the process; his
own son chooses to perish with Antigone rather than live in the world
deﬁned by the unanswerable voice of his autocratic father. Whereas
modern readers might immediately identify Creon as a villain and
Antigone as a heroine, Sophocles’ play stubbornly refuses to demon-
ize any of its characters: all act as they feel they must if the polis is to
survive. This stark confrontation between political authority and
social norms simply cannot be happily resolved. Sophocles’ Thebans
are not yet ﬁghting a civil war, but the Athenian audience recognized
that a city so desperately divided against itself was ultimately doomed.
Euripides’ Ion initially seems to concern speciﬁcally private mat-
ters: Creusa, Queen of Athens and (as she supposes) last surviving
member of the original earth-born royal Athenian family, has come
to Delphi with her non-Athenian husband, Xuthus, to consult the
oracle about her infertility. As the audience quickly learns, however,
Creusa had previously born a child after being raped by the god
Apollo. That son, Ion, spirited away by his father from the cave in
which he was born, now lives as a temple servant in Delphi, Apollo’s
holy seat. In the course of the play, Creusa and Xuthus come to
believe that Ion is Xuthus’ illegitimate son, and Xuthus eagerly

128
|
classical greece
prepares to adopt him as his heir. Creusa, personally aﬀronted and
disgusted at the thought of a non-Athenian gaining a place in the
royal lineage, seeks to kill Ion. Her plan is foiled through divine
intervention, she ﬁnally recognizes her son, and agrees to the adop-
tion. Ion comes to Athens, where, as the audience is informed, he will
father the entire race of the lonians.
This play brings to centre stage the issue of citizenship, the myth of
autochthony, and Athenian imperial ideology. Through its improb-
ably happy ending, the Athenians can retain their special ‘earthborn’
status and claim ancestral authority over all Ionians, which is con-
venient given that speakers of the Ionian dialect made up a large
percentage of Athens’ imperial subjects. As in the other tragedies con-
sidered here, politics, law, religion, bloodshed, foreign policy, and
women’s problematic role in the polis are very much to the fore.
The annual festival of Dionysus also featured a competition for
comedic drama. The plays of Aristophanes, the only classical
Athenian comic playwright of whom complete plays still survive, are
characterized by their biting social and political satire. In Aris-
tophanes’ comic Athens, politicians were invariably corrupt, citizens
often venal and excessively absorbed with getting their dinners, jurors
interested mostly in amusement and asserting their arbitrary power
over hapless litigants, and women overfond of sex and wine. Yet as
with tragedy, contemporary intellectual debates and the concern
about the fragility of civic unity under the stress of external war were
represented by Athenian comedians in dramatic form. Among Aris-
tophanes’ masterpieces is Lysistrata, a fantasy in which women from
across the Greek world decide that they have had enough of the
Peloponnesian War, which keeps their husbands away from their beds
and families. The women decide to end the war by a sex strike: upon
returning home from the year’s campaigning, husbands will ﬁnd
unwilling sexual partners. To drive home their point, the women seize
the sacred Acropolis of Athens, where they are attacked by a body
of aging Athenian hoplites in a comic restaging of the revolutionary
uprising of /. The play ends happily, as comedies must, with
everyone going home to restored domestic bliss. Yet, as in Thucydides
on Corcyra, issues of religious violation and gender-role confusion
are mixed up with the problems of external war and civil strife.
Aristophanes’ Clouds engages a somewhat diﬀerent theme: the
bizarre ideas and practices of ‘Socrates the sophist’ portrayed as

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
129
crackpot natural scientist and teacher of useful verbal tricks that
allow ‘a bad speech to defeat a good argument’. Strepsiades, an ordin-
ary Athenian who has foolishly married an aristocratic woman and is
in debt due to the lavish tastes of their son, sends his son to Socrates
in the hope that he will learn how to trick their creditors in the law-
courts. But instead the son learns to act according to ‘human nature’,
and to scorn the customs that allowed a father to discipline his son
but restrained a son from raising a hand against his father. The play
seems to suggest that sophistic doctrines about nature and custom
were undermining the paternal authority that was one of the bases of
Athenian society. The inter-generational violence and the play’s start-
ling ending, a desperate act of preventative arson in which Strepsiades
sets ﬁre to Socrates’ ‘think-shop’ with the hapless sophist trapped
inside, again recall the deadly serious conﬂicts of Thucydides’
Corcyra.
‘Socrates the sophist’ was Aristophanes’ creation, but he was clear-
ly modelled on the real Socrates, who, by the time of the play’s pro-
duction in , was already known for unorthodox behaviour and
thought. In his Apology, a free version of Socrates’ defence speech at
his trial in  on charges of impiety and corrupting the youth, Plato
portrays him as a pungent critic of Athenian ethical norms and
political practices, including the widespread participation of ordinary
citizens in government that was the deﬁning feature of Athenian
democracy. Socrates spent much of his time in the Agora of Athens,
discussing ethical questions with any Athenian willing to be subjected
to his peculiarly probing conversational style. Socrates had little time
for the sophists’ notions about nature and culture, and equally
little time for popular assumptions about the inherent wisdom of the
citizen masses.
Socrates was not concerned with the theory of politics for its own
sake, but he made analogies from animal nature that had profound
implications for democratic governance. Socrates scornfully dis-
missed the popular idea that the decisions of ‘the many’––as
Assemblymen, Councillors, and jurors––helped to educate the youth
of the city by establishing appropriate norms of behaviour and set-
ting salutary examples. He suggested on the analogy of horse-training
that only a few persons (or maybe just one man) with a highly special
set of talents and specialized knowledge, would be genuinely capable
of improving the youth. Socrates’ preferred analogy for his own role

130
|
classical greece
in the city was that of a gadﬂy, who lit upon his fellow citizens and
sought to sting them into a healthy state of intellectual wakefulness.
Socrates himself seems not to have been interested in any revo-
lutionary implications of his discourse, but they were not lost on
some of the young men who enjoyed watching him dissect the ﬂawed
logic of his interlocutors. The most vicious of the self-styled Socratics
was Critias, not only the leader of the oligarchs who seized control of
Athens in , but a proliﬁc writer on political-philosophical sub-
jects. His grave monument reportedly featured the personiﬁcation of
Oligarchy setting ﬁre to personiﬁed Democracy. His epitaph read:
‘This is a memorial to those excellent men who, for a short time,
restrained the arrogance of the cursed Athenian demos.’ It was in part
because the Athenians supposed that Critias had learned his evil ways
from him, that Socrates was convicted at his trial and executed.
The suppression of Socrates’ critical voice is a stain on the record
of the Athenian democracy. But it is important to keep in mind the
context. By  Socrates had been tolerated for a generation. He was
not prosecuted in the immediate aftermath of the fall of the Thirty.
But by returning to his critical conversations after the democratic
restoration, as if nothing had transpired that concerned him in any
way, Socrates seemingly refused to acknowledge that his highly public
questioning of basic democratic ideals had played a part in precipitat-
ing a frightful stasis. By ancient standards, at least, Athenians were
remarkably tolerant of critical public speech. But it was a funda-
mental tenet of the democratic regime that men who chose to speak
in public on matters of political moment were responsible for the
eﬀects of their speech, whether intended or not. Although Socrates
had studiously avoided speech-making in the Assembly, the Agora
was a public place; speech in the Agora that had public eﬀects was
subject to public censure.
Socrates himself apparently took the point. In Crito, a short but
extraordinarily rich dialogue, Plato describes how some of Socrates’
friends prepared the way for him to escape from prison after the
death sentence had been passed. But Socrates refused their oﬀer,
claiming that he, a man who abjured doing harm in any form, could
not willingly harm the laws of Athens, laws that had done him good
by helping provide for his upbringing. He reasoned that by escaping
from prison he would be rendering the laws under which he was
convicted impotent. By refusing to accept the chance to escape from

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
131
prison Socrates acknowledged his own willing acceptance of the
authority of the Athenian law, even if he was convinced that the law
had been misapplied by a particular jury. If his words had inﬂamed
revolutionary oligarchs, Socrates asserted by his acceptance of the
death sentence that he was a loyal citizen who would die rather than
endanger the legal framework that had sustained his own life.
Spartan oligarchy: the rise and fall of a
political ideal
Greeks like Critias, who were hostile to the idea of democracy, tended
to look to Sparta as a model state: aristocratic in that it was ruled by
the ‘virtuous few’, and oligarchic in that a relative handful of rulers
controlled most of the property. Thucydides the historian was
impressed by Sparta’s remarkable constitutional stability. He noted
that, having survived a protracted stasis in their earlier history, the
Spartans retained a single constitution for over  years. Despite
some superﬁcially democratic features, that constitution was
extremely restrictive in that the great majority of native-born males
resident in the Spartan home territory of Laconia were denied the
chance of citizenship of any sort. Classical Spartan society was
divided into three primary classes based in the ﬁrst instance on
birthright: a warrior élite (the Spartiates), free inferiors (the
perioikoi––‘Fringe-Dwellers’), and a large class of serf-like sharecrop-
pers, tied to the soil and permanently subject to institutionalized
oppression (the helots). The Spartans had, in the archaic era, annexed
the adjacent territory of Messenia and forced the once-independent
Messenians into helotage. Thucydides’ comment about a long Spartan
stasis refers to the ﬁerce struggles which attended the creation of this
‘colonial’ regime.
What other Greeks most admired about Sparta was the education
and discipline of the Spartiate class. The Spartiates called themselves
‘the Similars’ (homoioi). The goal of Spartiate culture was to forge a
citizen body composed of men whose individual characteristics were
submerged in a group identity based on uniformity, discipline,
and military excellence. Young Spartiates were raised in a rigorous
state-organized educational system in which they learned to ignore

132
|
classical greece
physical discomfort and to depend on the members of their assigned
unit. When a Spartiate reached manhood he was initiated into a
social/military unit of ‘Messmates’, and any young man who was not
accepted by an established Mess was permanently dropped from the
ranks of the Spartiates. He became an ‘inferior’ and experienced what
amounted to social death.
Each Spartiate held a state-assigned plot of land, which was farmed
by helots. Although in fact a wealthy Spartiate might own consider-
able estates in addition to this state-plot, all Spartiates were expected
to live according to a strict egalitarian code of behaviour: clothing,
food, houses––every aspect of the public and private life of every
Spartiate was to be ‘similar’. Each Spartiate kept a watchful eye on his
compatriots, suspiciously anticipating any deviation from the estab-
lished norms. Thucydides has Pericles in his Funeral Oration point-
edly contrast Spartan regimentation with the relative liberality of
Athenian society: ‘just as our political life is free and open, so too is
our day-to-day life in our relations to each other; we do not get into a
state with our next-door neighbour if he enjoys himself in his own
way . . . ’(. . ). It was exactly this freedom and openness that
‘Laconophile’ Athenians like Critias despised.
On the battleﬁeld, as at home, no Spartiate was to stand out in any
way from his fellows: the discipline of the Spartan phalanx was the
key to Sparta’s capacity to dominate its neighbours in the Pelopon-
nese. And those states in thrall to Sparta were expected to toe a strict
constitutional line: Thucydides says that the Spartans saw to it that all
member-states of the Peloponnesian League ‘were governed by
oligarchies who would work in the Spartan interest’ (. ). This
overtly politicized foreign policy helps to explain why civil conﬂicts
during the Peloponnesian War were exacerbated by the conﬂict
between the great powers: everyone knew that a state joining the
Peloponnesian League would necessarily adopt a Spartan-approved
oligarchy. Aristocrats living in democratic cities sometimes aped
superﬁcial aspects of Spartan culture––long hair, distinctive ‘Laco-
nian’ shoes and staﬀs, and ‘Laconic’ speech mannerisms. These life-
style choices signalled their hopes for Spartan help in imposing an
oligarchic regime in which the poorer citizens would be
disenfranchised.
Sparta, at least as it was imagined by oligarchic visionaries, bears
some resemblance to Plato’s Callipolis. But beneath the veneer of

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
133
stability Sparta was permanently and literally at war with itself. Each
year the Spartiates formally declared war upon the helot population,
a more-than-symbolic measure that allowed any Spartiate to treat
any helot as a foreign enemy. The Old Oligarch informs his reader
that, quite shockingly in his view, in democratic Athens you were not
allowed to strike slaves or foreigners at will. His apparent reference
was to the Athenian law forbidding acts of deliberate outrage against
any person, whether male or female, adult or child, free or slave. It
was very diﬀerent in Sparta, where individual helots lived with the
fear not merely of being struck, but murdered, by their masters. The
krypteia––a secret society staﬀed by young Spartiates in training––
transformed the sporadic violence against helots into a ritual. Mem-
bers of the krypteia would sneak about at night, selecting victims for
assassination on the basis of any outstanding attribute, from extra-
ordinary physical stature to overt evidence of ambition. From the
perspective of the helot population, at least, the Spartan stasis never
ended; helots lived out their lives in a society governed by the rule
that the stronger will inﬂict their will upon the weak by whatever
means they can contrive, where killing one’s neighbours was an
ordinary fact of life: a society that recalls Thucydides’ description of
human behaviour during a civil war.
Sparta won the Peloponnesian War, and many of Sparta’s
adherents within the Greek world may have anticipated the dawning
of an oligarchic golden age. If so, the reality proved bitterly disap-
pointing (see pp. –). In a gloomy addendum to his work, The
Constitution of the Spartans, Xenophon wrote the political obituary
for a state he had once so admired. Posing the hypothetical question
whether the Spartans of his own day were true to their traditions,
Xenophon demurs. He points out that many Greeks now castigate the
Spartans and seek to prevent their re-emergence as a great power: ‘Yet
we need not wonder if these reproaches are levelled at them, since it is
evident that they obey neither their gods nor their laws’ (. ).

134
|
classical greece
Monarchy revisited
The decline of Sparta coincided with broader horizons for Greek
political writing. Among the most imaginative is Xenophon’s Educa-
tion of Cyrus, a ﬁctionalized biography of the founder of the Persian
Empire, Cyrus the First, the namesake of the usurper under whom
Xenophon served as a mercenary. Xenophon’s ‘Persian’ society owes a
great deal to Greek cultural institutions (see above, p. ). His Cyrus
emerges as a very Hellenized king, concerned with distinctively Greek
conceptions of morality, justice, and fairness in regard to distribu-
tion. Cyrus is portrayed as the worthy leader of a meritocracy, earn-
ing his precedence through superior virtue rather than merely by dint
of his noble bloodline. But Xenophon’s Cyrus is unquestionably a
monarch and founder of a great empire. Xenophon’s choice of a
Persian emperor as the protagonist of his philosophical ﬁction shows
that the old dichotomy of free Greek versus slavish barbarian was
now open to challenge, and with it the exclusion of strong monarchy
as a serious topic for Greek political thinking.
Xenophon’s contemporary and compatriot, the philosophical
rhetorician Isocrates, took monarchy seriously and sought to ﬁt an
idealized vision of the worthy strong man into the political condi-
tions of Greece. Isocrates wrote a series of open letters to rulers on the
fringes of the Greek world, for example to the semi-Hellenized dyn-
asts of Cyprus, Evagoras and his son Nicocles. In these letters Isocra-
tes attempts to square traditional Greek values of citizenship with a
tacit recognition that kings ruled over subjects, not participatory free
citizens. His argument was that a monarch with the right character
might defend individual liberties better than some existing Greek
governments. In  Isocrates wrote a letter to Philip II, the dynamic
king of Macedon who had turned his once-obscure homeland into
the most powerful state in mainland Greece (see pp. –, –).
Isocrates urged the Macedonian to use his power for the good of the
Hellenic world as a whole. He hoped that Philip would unite the
factious Greek cities into a confederacy and then turn to the great
project of invading Persia. Isocrates believed that only a grand
imperialistic project could put an end to the endemic warfare among
the Greeks. Moreover, he saw colonial foundations in new-conquered

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
135
lands of western Asia as a means of permanently exporting the
masses of impoverished and stateless Greeks, victims of civil conﬂicts
and external warfare, who seemed to him a threat to civilized life.
With the riﬀ-raﬀ shipped oﬀ to Asia, Isocrates imagined that a stable
‘ancestral’ regime, an oligarchy hiding behind the name ‘democracy’,
might be established in his native Athens. There is little reason to
suppose that Philip paid much attention to Isocrates, but Isocrates’
political letters were directed less to their ostensible recipients than to
his fellow Greeks. He hoped to teach them that kingship had a place
in the world of the poleis, if not within the government of any par-
ticular polis. Given his enduring inﬂuence as an educator, Isocrates’
writing may have helped pave the way for intellectual acceptance of
the new world that would emerge in the wake of the conquests of
Alexander (see pp. –)
Conclusions: from destructive political
conﬂict to constructive political debate
Although Isocrates’ political preference was oligarchy, his chosen pro-
fession, the teaching of rhetoric, depended on the sort of litigation
especially characteristic of democracy. The trial of Socrates has
helped to give Athenian legal practice a bad reputation, and Athenian
political life after the death of Socrates is often portrayed as falling
into decline. But in fact forensic conﬂicts in the people’s courts, like
dramatic performances in the theatre of Dionysus, played an import-
ant role in sustaining a vibrantly democratic political life that lasted
well beyond the end of the classical period. Indeed, the courtroom
and the theatre had some striking similarities: a litigant, like an actor,
beneﬁted from a strong voice, good memory, and stage presence. At
least one major Athenian politician, Demosthenes’ rival Aeschines,
began his career as a tragic actor.
Every Athenian litigant needed to demonstrate to the ordinary
men of the jury that he was a paragon of democratic virtue. Those
without political ambitions would point to their record of public
service and, if wealthy, to their public and private benefactions. Poli-
ticians would emphasize the proven value to the state of their policy

136
|
classical greece
recommendations. And in all cases, legal disputes provided a forum
for the public expression, testing, and reﬁnement of what might
otherwise remain only implicit and ill-understood political and eth-
ical values. It is in the rhetoric of the lawcourt that Athenian dem-
ocracy and the complex set of sometimes contradictory ideas upon
which it rested (liberty and equality, free speech and consensus,
respect for individual initiative and social conformity) were most
clearly revealed, both to Athenian citizens and to modern readers.
Political and legal disputes, rather than being destructive to the polis
(as Plato had suggested), actually helped to bring the logic of the
democratic polis to light.
When they listened to cases Athenian jurymen tested each
speaker’s self-presentation against their existing standards, but they
could also take the opportunity to revise their standards. The court-
room audience was not limited to the several hundred jurymen;
major disputes between famous litigants often drew large audiences
of bystanders, and thus the Athenian lawcourt took on important
extra-legal functions. It was a forum in which citizens could, in eﬀect,
present their own complex system of values to themselves, and could
decide, almost day by day, whether or not they liked what they saw.
The process of value testing and incremental change allowed demo-
cratic ideology to respond to changes in the social environment and
to external events.
This process of value testing and revision ordinarily remained
implicit and beneath the level of consciousness. But an Athenian
politician might sometimes use the lawcourt as a platform for pre-
senting a speech that combined the usual legal and ethical arguments
with a bolder theoretical meditation on Athenian political ideals. The
legal rules demanded that a litigant discourse at some length.
Although jurymen were not shy about interrupting any speaker they
felt was wandering too far from the point, some litigants were given
considerable leeway for digression. If he saw that he had the jury’s
tacit blessing, a politician might use the occasion of a courtroom
battle to present a fresh take on the nature of democratic leadership,
the duties of citizenship, distributive justice, or the relationship
between political participation and law.
A good example of the use of lawcourt rhetoric to present a ‘theory
of politics’ is Lycurgus’ prosecution speech Against Leocrates. Lycur-
gus contends that by ﬂeeing from Athens in the days after Athens lost

political conflicts, debates, and thought
|
137
the decisive battle of Chaeronea to Philip of Macedon (see p. ),
Leocrates had in eﬀect voted to allow the polis to be destroyed. In this
speech delivered in the last years of full Athenian independence,
Lycurgus developed an austere vision of citizenship as devotion to the
good of the polis. The citizen’s behaviour must, he suggested, be
constrained by civic, religious, and domestic considerations. If every
citizen, like Leocrates, chose to leave the polis when it was at risk, the
polis would cease to exist. It was only if all citizens were willing to risk
their lives and their personal goods for the good of the whole that the
polis would survive. If they did take the risks, Athens could ﬂourish
and would live up to its exalted ancestral traditions. Lycurgus graced
his speech with lengthy quotations from Athenian tragedy, anecdotes
from earlier Greek history, and citations of (sometimes spurious)
public decrees. He assumes that his audience of jurymen share his
conviction that history and drama are sources of ethical instruction
and patriotic inspiration.
The context of the speech, delivered in , is telling: the period
immediately following the defeat at Chaeronea eight years previously
had been a very diﬃcult one for Athens. No one knew Philip’s plans.
Recriminations ﬂew thick and fast, various radical proposals (includ-
ing freeing the slaves to help ﬁght) were considered and rejected.
Some citizens favoured further resistance, others advocated appeas-
ing the Macedonian victor. Athens seemed ripe for civil conﬂict. But
stasis was averted. The citizens united and prepared to resist an inva-
sion that, in the event, did not come. Demosthenes, the architect of
the foreign policy that had led to the lost battle, was given the hon-
ourable task of delivering the annual oration over the war dead. In
the years after Chaeronea Lycurgus became a major Athenian polit-
ician, the central ﬁgure in a programme of public building and moral
reform that helped to deﬁne Athenian civic culture. He was also
reputedly a student of Plato.
It is possible to detect in Lycurgus’ attack on Leocrates’ willingness
to ﬂee the city certain overtones of Plato’s Crito, which portrayed
Socrates as refusing to harm the laws of Athens by abandoning his
polis. And yet the diﬀerences between most of Plato’s political writ-
ing and Lycurgus’ one surviving speech are profound. Plato had
equated dispute with stasis, and conﬂicts between citizens with the
destruction of the polis. Lycurgus accepts the democratic polis as a
space in which ﬁerce debates among the citizens, followed by decisive

138
|
classical greece
judgement, can be expected to produce the best outcome for all
concerned.
In his depiction of the stasis at Corcyra, Thucydides had
emphasized the link between physical violence and the corruption of
ordinary language. He pointed out how ﬁne names were attached to
reprehensible deeds, and how rhetorical ability was employed to gain
the selﬁsh ends of personal revenge and private aggrandizement.
Lycurgus’ speech, like other Athenian courtroom orations, aﬃrms to
the contrary that in democratic Athens rhetorical battles and political
disputes could help create an environment in which political life
ﬂourished. It shows how political theory could transcend its elite
origins and be received in new guise by a discriminating mass audi-
ence. The Greek experience of political conﬂicts between democrats
and oligarchs in the ﬁfth and fourth centuries demonstrated the
potential brutality of Greek political life. Yet attempts to understand
and transcend conﬂict also resulted in the ﬂourishing of the sophisti-
cated ethical and political thought that became the foundation of
much of Western philosophy. Moreover, although oligarchy remained
the preference of many élite Greeks, in the classical period and long
thereafter, it was democracy that proved most resilient, most success-
ful in moving beyond violent political conﬂicts to build a culture
deﬁned by productive political deliberation.

6
Private life
James Davidson
The Athenian wit Stratonicus was with some friends in Maroneia, a
small city on the northern coast of the Aegean. Take me to any part of
the city, blindfolded, he said, and I will still be able to say exactly
where we are. ‘They duly covered his eyes and led him oﬀ. “Where are
we, then?” they said some time later. “Opposite the tavern”, said
Stratonicus, knowing he was bound to be right, since Maroneia had a
reputation for being nothing but a collection of public bars.’
The history of private life is enjoying something of a renaissance in
the later twentieth century, the ﬁeld refertilized by the alluvial
deposits of anthropology and sociology. It is often opposed to the
history of ‘states and dates’, which looks back to a Greek, Thucydides,
as its founder. The great events of political history are often unique
and accessible. The facts of private life are much harder to approach,
consisting of many minor and obscure events, which only become
important when they are extrapolated into broad patterns of
behaviour.
It is not that there are no informants. Anecdotal literature was
already ﬂourishing in the ﬁfth century, when Ion of Chios described
from personal knowledge what famous contemporaries––Sophocles
the tragedian, Cimon the general,––were like in private. In the fourth
century Stratonicus’ jokes were discussed by his contemporary Epho-
rus, and may have been collected ﬁrst by Callisthenes, Alexander’s
historian. Moreover, ancient writers were not shy of generalizing
about the way of life in previous centuries or in other cities or among
other groups: homosexuality in Sparta and Crete compared with
Athens and Persia, the splendour of a Syracusan banquet, the mod-
esty of Milesian women, the shabbiness of the Athenians, their little
cups and little dishes, their fondness for cakes, the superstitiousness

140
|
classical greece
of Egyptians, the white ﬂabbiness of Persians without their clothes,
the fondness of the Maroneians for bars. Critias (see p. ) com-
pared Spartan drinking customs with examples from all over the
Greek world––Attica, Thasos, Thessaly––drawing conclusions about
their social and political character, and at the end of the fourth
century one philosopher made a survey of Bioi (Ways of Life) of
various nations, while another wrote a ‘Life of Greece’ tracing the
development of ways of living through Greek history.
It is diﬃcult to know what to do with such gifts. If other Greeks got
Stratonicus’ joke, then Maroneia’s reputation may have been wide-
spread. If it was widespread, perhaps it was true. There are no rules
which allow us to evaluate claims about private life. There are,
however, a few useful principles. Firstly we can try to assess the
possibilities of knowing. The number of bars in Maroneia was dis-
coverable at least, while statements about a closed society like Sparta
are necessarily more speculative and sometimes contradictory. We
must also, therefore, be awake to patterns of invention. The most
banal statements can be motivated by prejudices of various kinds. It
was an enemy of democracy, the Old Oligarch, who claimed the
Athenians dressed no better than slaves. Pro-Spartans praised Spar-
tan cloaks (camouﬂage for the blood of battle) and long hair (terrify-
ing and aristocratic), indicating that less sympathetic Greeks might
have read diﬀerent meanings (luxury, eﬀeminacy) into such institu-
tions. Some historians argue that what was said about others reveals
nothing of how they were, merely how insiders chose to construct
them. If you can see a motive for invention, however, and a pattern in
representations, it does not follow that an author is making it up.
Perhaps there was some deeper reason, for instance, why Athenians
dressed down. Perhaps Persian ‘luxury’ read diﬀerently to Persians.
To get around these diﬃculties, historians can attempt to discover
stable structures which can be used to generalize. Knowledge of geo-
graphy, climate, crops, and technology might help us deduce what
people ate. Structures of education help us deduce the limits of lit-
eracy. Greek culture itself can be seen as a network of structures––
habitual practices, conventional ways of thinking about the world.
Our experience of wine diﬀers from the ancient Greek experience,
because they used diﬀerent grape-varieties, diﬀerent wine-making
and storage techniques, because they drank it heavily diluted with
water, because they drank from cups whose diﬀerent shapes and

private life
|
141
decoration had cultural signiﬁcance, because they drank according to
a formal set of rules, from the same bowl, in a cramped room, all of
which served to knit the drinkers more closely together, because wine
was linked to Dionysian exuberance and danger.
Language plays an important role in these cultural frameworks,
diﬀerentiating, classifying, and connecting. That they divided food
into sitos, the staple, barley or wheat, and opson, almost everything
else, might tell us a lot about the experience of eating, for instance. If
we can understand what the diﬀerence was between a hetaera (a
courtesan) and a pornê (a common prostitute), we might learn some-
thing about the terms of ancient erotic life. Here too we must be
careful, however. Language is not always neutral and sometimes
reﬂects ideology rather than common usage.
Much of our information––laws, rituals, moral precepts––has a
normative value, attempting to dictate what is normal or right. Such
norms are interesting in themselves and can be used as a guide to
behaviour. Our entire knowledge of the life lived in certain cities
comes from descriptions of peculiar customs, and almost all our
information about Sparta describes a ‘system’, as if life in Sparta ran
like a machine. Some cultures and some parts of culture were more
conformist than others, however, and a description of a society in
terms of ‘rules and roles’ rarely gives a realistic picture of how people
actually behaved. Laws are sometimes used to restrict a widespread
but disapproved practice, or reﬂect an irrational moral panic. The
philosopher Chrysippus claimed shaving was penalized in Rhodes
and Byzantium. Nevertheless, he insists, in both cities, all the men,
without exception, shaved.
Historians of Greek private life must compare impressionistic evi-
dence for what was with evidence for what must have been and what
should have been. In all cases, however, assessing this evidence is
never a science and always a matter of judgement. What we cannot
escape is a bias to what the sources noticed and represented, but that
gaze is an important historical artefact in itself.

142
|
classical greece
The body
The Spartan general Lysander was strolling with the Persian com-
mander Cyrus around the vast park or ‘paradise’ Cyrus had built for
himself at Sardis. Lysander admired the neat rows of plants and trees
and oﬀered his compliments to the man in charge of the design. It
was me, said Cyrus, ﬂattered. I even did some of the planting myself.
Lysander looked at him, running his eye over his splendid perfumed
robes, his beautiful necklaces and beads and the rest of the ﬁnery he
was wearing. ‘Does it surprise you?’ said Cyrus (Xenophon, Oeco-
nomicus . –).
The Greeks seem to have been fascinated by the splendid costumes
of the Persians and the bodies they concealed. In the early years of the
Delian League (see below p. ) the Athenian general Cimon was
said to have stripped his Persian captives, asking his allies to choose
the bodies or the clothes. Considering that slave-buyers would not
pay much for such eﬀete physical specimens, they picked the clothes,
thus missing out on the huge ransoms soon oﬀered by the prisoners’
families (see p. ). Agesilaus found a diﬀerent lesson in the Asiatic
body. Leading the Spartans in war against the Persians once again, in
the early fourth century, he made sure his captives were sold naked,
thus giving courage to his soldiers who realised from the condition of
their ﬂesh that they were really ﬁghting against the equivalent of
women (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ).
The body was the object of intense ideological reﬂection, a reﬂec-
tion that produced two of the classical world’s most conspicuous
legacies: athletics and the nude. Poorer citizens got their muscles and
tans from agricultural labour. Better-oﬀ citizens mimicked their ﬂesh
by exercising naked in a gymnasium. Such outdoor activity came to
be seen as a sign of being truly masculine, free, and Greek. A seden-
tary indoor life, on the other hand, led to a white soft physique which
brought one close to the constitution of barbarians, artisans, or
women. In early vase-painting, Greek men are depicted ‘black-ﬁgure’,
symbolic of their darker skin, while women (and womanish men) are
shown pale and white. This ideal is not only implicit in the countless
images of the naked and well-deﬁned bodies found in sculpture and
painting and in the ﬁne muscled armour worn by the rich, but also in

private life
|
143
the role played by the body in public festivals. Groups of men and
boys stripped to represent their city or their tribe in athletics, torch
races, ‘pyrrhic’ war dances, and competitions for euandria (‘ﬁne
manliness’). In Comedy overweight citizens were viliﬁed, and Plato
suggests that when a poor man, lean and sunburned, ﬁnds himself
ﬁghting alongside a rich man, ﬂabby and pale from a life in the shade,
he will despise the élite and start agitating for a democratic revolution
(Republic ce). In Sparta, according to Xenophon, it was compul-
sory to keep in good physical condition, and one source claims that
the bodies of the citizens were inspected every ten days; any man who
refused to improve his physical condition faced expulsion.
The time of life which was the focus of most attention was the
transitional period, which might extend from the onset of puberty to
the late twenties. This period, or the decisive part of it, was called hêbê
(bloom), and young men at this age were called ephebes or hêbontes
(‘in bloom’), usually characterized in painting and sculpture by a
fully grown body but no beard. Sometimes the body and its images
were talked of as if they were sources of light reaching a peak of
brilliance in early manhood and then fading in old age. Reference to
the dead as ‘shadows’ continues this metaphor beyond the grave.
In Athens, at least, adulthood was decided by a physical inspection
before the deme, the Council, and a body of jurors. Those who failed
were required to rejoin the ranks of boys. This is the age which is
commemorated in those archaic statues known as kouroi and the
famous Hermes by (or after) the fourth-century sculptor Praxiteles,
found in the gymnasium at Olympia. On a more down-to-earth level
it was also considered an irresponsible age, typiﬁed by the character
of Pheidippides in Aristophanes’ Clouds. Young men in their twenties
were the backbone of the army, but were excluded from more respon-
sible positions in the city until they had reached the age of thirty (see
pp. , ). In Athens, men were admitted to the Assembly at the
age of eighteen or twenty, but were not allowed to serve as Council-
lors, magistrates, or jurors for another ten years. In Sparta men in
their twenties were still supervised by the paidonomos, the oﬃcial in
charge of boys.
Many sources point to an ambivalence in Greek attitudes to young
men. Their beardlessness and, especially for those with aristocratic
pretensions, long hair might be seen as feminine, but at bloom-
time these signs of youth were startlingly combined with a sudden

144
|
classical greece
manifestation of masculine strength. The Athenians viliﬁed men who
appeared beardless in comedies, but Alexander approved a beardless
image of himself, leading (or following) a new fourth-century fash-
ion and establishing a link, not with feminine weakness, but youthful
power, represented in images of Apollo, young Theseus, or Achilles.
One story about Achilles encapsulates this juxtaposition of feminine
traits and martial energy, telling how his mother, Thetis, attempted to
save him from certain death in the Trojan War by disguising him as a
girl. Odysseus tricked him by arranging for an alarm to be raised. The
young maiden immediately threw oﬀ his disguise and seized the
weapons nearest to hand.
Dress
Women, in contrast to men, were represented as keeping their bodies
hidden from view, and dress is an essential part of female identity and
property from the time of the ﬁrst woman, Pandora. Although some
sources claimed that in Sparta and Chios girls not only stripped for
exercise, but even wrestled with boys in public, in Athens, at least,
respectable women stayed indoors, cultivating a softer and paler ﬂesh
sometimes enhanced with the white powder scraped from lead left to
corrode in vinegar. In one comedy courtesans are blamed for adjust-
ing their body-shapes too: platformed shoes to appear taller, a band
to ﬂatten the stomach, padding to make their hips look bigger. The
women who gather to take over the government in Aristophanes’
Assembly-women have had to resort to subterfuge in order to escape
from their husbands, having spent the past few weeks secretly sun-
bathing and letting their body hair grow, to appear more like men. In
court-cases, speakers boast of how unaccustomed their womenfolk
are to male visitors, while others stress their reluctance to enter a
house when the husband is not at home. Those who did venture
beyond the threshold might ﬁnd themselves accused of adultery and
threatened with death. According to the same logic, Aristophanes
indicates that women who showed themselves at the door onto the
street were seen as temptresses, while others insist that women who
entered the men’s room (andron) to eat and drink in masculine
company were automatically assumed to be prostitutes.

private life
|
145
Those occasions when women were allowed out, public festivals or
funerals, were seen as moments of danger, when looks and stares
might be exchanged with potential seducers. Perhaps most allusions
to women appearing in public refer to such a context, when the show-
oﬀ Meidias drives his wife to the Mysteries at Eleusis, for instance, in
a chariot driven by white horses (Demosthenes . ), or when
Olympiodorus’ impoverished sister and niece look with envy at his
mistress going out in all her ﬁnery (Demosthenes . ).
Some have balked at this apparently un-European practice of
seclusion, arguing that it must in reality have been a luxury. Poorer
citizens simply could not have aﬀorded to keep their wives indoors all
day. As a compromise, we could give more emphasis to those sources
which talk of how, rather than whether, women appeared in public.
So long as a woman was well wrapped up and inconspicuous, she
might escape censure. Aristotle says some classical cities used oﬃcials
called gynaikonomoi to supervise women and to keep them indoors.
Like paidonomoi, he considers such magistracies characteristic of aris-
tocratic government on the grounds that in poor families women and
children are used in place of slaves and must, of necessity, go out. At
least one source (Hyperides F Blass), however, claims that even in
late classical Athens citizen-women caught on the streets in a state of
indecency (akosmousai) were liable to a ,-drachma ﬁne. A late
anecdote tells how Socrates’ wife Xanthippe refused to wear his cloak
when going out to watch a festival procession. ‘Don’t you see?’ he
said, ‘You are going out to be looked at, rather than to look’
(Aelian, Varia Historia . ). It is perhaps signiﬁcant, however, that
Xanthippe, like Aristophanes’ Assembly-women, does not seem to
possess a cloak of her own. By contrast women who had a role in
ritual––brides, the kanephoroi who carried the sacriﬁcial baskets, and
the arrephoroi who ﬁgured prominently in the Panathenaea––were
splendidly adorned with ﬁne clothes, gold and jewels, sometimes paid
for by public benefactors.
In this context, the act of unveiling carried an erotic charge, and
the unveiling of the bride was a critical moment in Athenian wed-
dings, probably taking place while the groom was entertained at a
banquet by the bride’s family, and followed by the giving of ‘unveiling
presents’, anakalypteria see further pp. –. For the bride to eat with
the groom and to show her face for the ﬁrst time must have had a
powerful symbolic impact.

146
|
classical greece
Greek clothes were very simple in design. There was a pleated shift,
usually sleeveless, called a chiton, which might be long or short. A
simpler version, attached on only one shoulder (exomis), was associ-
ated with slaves. Over the chiton, if you could aﬀord it, a woollen
cloak (himation) was worn, made from an oblong piece of cloth,
usually simply draped around the body, sometimes pinned on one
side. Such clothes were essentially shapeless, taking form from the
body they veiled, revealed, and enhanced––a complete contrast with
the tailored body-suits in which barbarians are often depicted. ‘They
wear trousers and turbans,’ says Aristagoras, seeking Spartan support
for the Ionian revolt against Persia, ‘that will show you how easy they
are to beat’. (Herodotus . ). When Pausanias, the Spartan regent, at
the beginning and Alexander the Great at the end of the classical
period appeared in Persian clothes, it indicated oriental despotism
and luxury. It is signiﬁcant that when foreign fashions, like the Per-
sian coat called kandys, do appear in Athens in the fourth century, it
is women who are wearing them.
Since there was so little tailoring, attention focused on the cloth
itself. Fragments of ancient textiles indicate great proﬁciency and
variety, and at Brauron women’s chitons are distinguished according
to material (hemp, linen, ‘amorgis’ [silk?], carded wool), colour
(yellow––a feminine colour––greens, purple, white), decoration
(striped, spotted, bordered, ‘decorated’, ‘highly decorated’) and style.
Spinning and weaving were women’s work and perhaps much cloth
was home-spun, although cloth-manufacture was also an important
industry in which men too were employed.
In Athens the processing of wool had great symbolic value. A ﬁllet
of wool was ﬁxed to the main door of the house on the birth of a
daughter, and it was through weaving a new dress for Athena Polias
every year that women participated in the Panathenaea. This piece of
cloth (probably) is given great prominence on the Parthenon frieze,
placed right above the temple door under the pediment that shows
the goddess’s birth. Indeed, according to the myth of autochthony, all
Athenians were descended from a piece of wool, fertilized by Hep-
haestus, and dropped onto the Attic soil, to produce the child Erich-
thonius, in whose name both ‘wool’ (erion) and ‘earth’ (chthon)
could be heard.
Dress oﬀered clues to wealth, status, and character. Women of the
brothel were said to wear transparent cloth, and vase-painters paid

private life
|
147
great attention to how much of a woman’s body was visible beneath
her draperies, an indication of her sexual availability and/or the qual-
ity of the material. Men too betrayed a great deal about themselves in
their clothes. The cloak (himation) was the essential man’s garment.
Both sculpture and texts imply that ideally it was worn with no chiton
underneath. One type, called tribon, was a sign of modesty, poverty,
or even Spartan (oligarchic) sympathies, while the chlanis or chlaina
revealed wealth. What diﬀerentiated them is obscure, but con-
temporaries certainly noticed. One character in New Comedy
remarks that now he is poor he has lost all his friends. ‘It was my
chlanis not me they used to approach. Now no one speaks to me’
(Posidippus  K–A). The reverse is true of the just man newly
enriched in Aristophanes’ Wealth. An informer comes sniﬃng
around. ‘Where did you get that cloak?’ he says, threatening prosecu-
tion, ‘Didn’t I see you yesterday in a tribon?’ Other items had signiﬁ-
cance. ‘Spartan shoes’ were gentlemanly, while embades (felt slip-
pers?) were associated with the old and the poor. One Athenian
speaker describes how Dicaeogenes mocked a poor relative, because
he wore a tribon and embades (Isaeus . ). Carrying a staﬀ, on the
other hand, implied pomposity (Demosthenes . ). Given the
importance of appearances in assessing tax burdens in Athens, it is
hardly surprising that some were suspected of disguising their wealth,
wearing a tatty cloak over a ﬁne chiton.
In a speech concerned with the behaviour appropriate to orators
(see above p. ), Aeschines censures Timarchus for leaping around
in the Assembly, exposing his ﬂesh, and Cleon was said to be the ﬁrst
to tie his cloak higher, while addressing the public, so that he could
move around, gesticulating freely. By contrast, Solon and Aeschines
were sculpted with both arms wrapped tightly in the cloak, the way
exemplary young Spartans also dressed. Demosthenes, however,
claimed Aeschines’ cloak reached to his ankles, a ‘cloak-dragging’
style, perceived as foppish or antidemocratic (Fig. ; cf. Fig. ).

148
|
classical greece
Figure 6 The debonair Aeschines in his tunic and cloak needs to be
compared to the more austere statue of Demosthenes (Fig. ).

private life
|
149
Diet and health
Alongside this body presented to the world was the interior body,
conceived as a uniﬁed system of ﬂuids, so that sperm was linked with
marrow and brain-tissue, menstruation with nose-bleeds. Our main
sources for this body are the treatises ascribed to Hippocrates. It is
diﬃcult to say how far their rationalizing ideas about health were
shared by the general populace. Other important traditions looked
more to the inﬂuence of divine powers or to what we would call
‘magic’––on at least one occasion the healing-god Asclepius was
asked to mend a broken pot––and a doctor’s advice had to compete
with messages from oracles and dreams. Images of parts of the body
in clay or stone have been found at a number of Greek temples,
oﬀered in hope of, or gratitude for, a cure. There was a strong trad-
ition, however, that medicine originated in the work of gymnastic
trainers, and it is likely that from the gymnasium, above all, ideas
about health and nutrition spread. Ancient writers on diet talk as if
they are experts in an area where almost everybody has some amateur
knowledge.
This expertise can be sampled by looking at the second book of the
Hippocratic treatise On Regimen or the ancient medical writings
excerpted by Athenaeus. Long lists of food and wine in many diﬀer-
ent combinations, cooked in all manner of diﬀerent ways, are
assessed for their particular ‘power’: ‘moistening’, ‘drying’, ‘heating’,
‘sweet’, ‘fatty’ or, ‘strong’. Such lists are not evidence for the normal
diet, however, and when experts refer to the qualities of puppy-meat,
hedgehogs, and foxes they may be simply showing oﬀ. Food inﬂu-
enced the body’s various ‘juices’ (humours), characterized in terms
of hot and cold, wet and dry, qualities which might in turn be related
to the four elements, climate and the seasons, thus linking the body to
the environment and the world. There was no settled consensus
about which foods had which properties, about the number and
importance of diﬀerent humours or in what ways the biological
woman diﬀered from the biological man, although women were gen-
erally thought to absorb more moisture from their diet which led to a
wetter, wool-like ﬂesh, relieved periodically through menstruation,
and women alone were aﬄicted with various disorders caused by a

150
|
classical greece
wandering womb, cured by coaxing the errant organ back into place.
Despite their disagreements, almost all medical experts worked
according to a theory of balance, taking account also of how the
patient had lived in health. Alcmaeon of Croton in the ﬁfth century
referred to such balance as isonomia, ‘equal distribution’, connecting
the body to the ‘body politic’. Disease could be seen as an imbalance
or ‘monarchy’ of one element over the others which might be rem-
edied by its opposite. A clammy disorder, for instance, might be
alleviated by eating honey, which had the power to heat and dry.
Vomiting, bathing and exercise also had their place in therapy.
When we move from ideas to practices, we are forced to generalize
hazardously. Many classical Greeks probably ate only one meal a day,
the deipnon, which belonged to the evening. Others ate also the aris-
ton, often translated ‘breakfast’, but perhaps better seen as any meal
which was not a deipnon. It carried negative associations for many
authors, and implied, perhaps, daytime drinking. Each meal was
formed around another dualism of sitos, the staple (barley or wheat),
and opson, everything else. Plutarch says that in his time children
were trained to take bread with the left hand, opson with the right.
Taking too much opson led to a charge of opsophagia (unbalanced,
indulgent eating).
Because it was more tolerant of drought than wheat, the mainstay
of the diet of many Greeks was barley, a cereal the Romans considered
chicken-feed. It was with barley that the helots paid their Spartan
masters, and the masters made their contributions to the common
mess––barley cakes were even used as ballots, to co-opt new mem-
bers. In / (a bad year?), tithes oﬀered to the goddesses at Eleusis
indicate a barley-harvest more than ten times that of wheat (see
p. ). Barley was usually soaked and toasted before it was turned
into porridge or cakes (mazai, probably soft, moist agglomerations
rather than baked loaves), and a barley-roasting pan was brought by
the bride to her wedding. Cereal-preparation, like wool-working,
belonged to the sphere of women. The selling and the preparation of
meat and ﬁsh, by contrast, was normally in the hands of men.
Meat was rarely eaten outside the context of sacriﬁces, which regu-
larly concluded with a feast, although portions were sometimes taken
home or sold (usually only inedible parts were burnt for the gods).
The Greek for ‘sacriﬁcer’, mageiros, also means ‘butcher’, and ‘chef’.
Sacriﬁce, an entire city oﬀering many oxen (the most expensive and

private life
|
151
honoriﬁc victims) at an annual festival, a household oﬀering a sheep
or a goat to a favourite divinity, an individual pouring out a libation
of a little wine, was the central religious practice, accompanied by
prayers which directed the gods’ favour in particular directions. Like
other gifts––of robes, property, or statues––sacriﬁce continued a
relationship with the gods which looked backwards (in thanks) and
forwards (in expectation) at the same time. Its eﬀectiveness was
measured in personal or communal success, often of a military or
material nature, and avoidance of disaster. There was nothing
mechanical about this relationship, however. Divine goodwill could
be cultivated or jeopardized but never bought.
Because of the importance of communal sacriﬁce, we can get an
idea of how much meat was consumed annually by an average Athe-
nian from sacriﬁcial calendars and the sale of hides, the perquisite,
usually, of the priest presiding. Although outsiders considered Athens
exceptional for the number of festivals and the quantity of sacriﬁcial
victims, even there meat formed a small part of the diet, less than one
twentieth, perhaps, of the amount consumed by modern Europeans.
Despite the extraordinary variety we ﬁnd in medical writers and
comic fragments, in most cases it would have been lentils or chick-peas
that accompanied the barley cake or bread. Athenian sources treat
milk products as a luxury, although cheese appeared on the tables of
the Spartan mess and was also associated especially with the more
pastoral culture of Sicily. Olive oil, wine and ﬁgs completed the diet.
Oikos: household and house
Houses have been excavated at a number of sites all over the Greek
world (Fig. ). The overall impression is of small unimpressive struc-
tures, made of mud-brick on stone footings, close-packed in city-
blocks with ﬂoors of beaten earth. A Greek cityscape of plain, largely
uniform, housing and conspicuous marble temples must have pro-
duced a graphic image of polis ideology. Demosthenes in the fourth
century talks of houses becoming more extravagant, but given the
humble standard of domestic architecture generally, only a small
degree of embellishment, a couple of pillars by the door, for instance,
would have served to make a house look distinguished.

152
|
classical greece
From the mid-ﬁfth century onwards, a private house or palace
provided the backdrop and an ‘oﬀ-stage’ for the majority of Attic
dramas, and tragedy, in particular, used the physical image of a house
to explore conﬂicts of loyalty between the polis and the household
(oikos), or problems of knowledge in perceiving true character
Figure 7 Plan and two alternative reconstructions by John Ellis Jones of a
house on the Pnyx hill at Athens (A), with two further house plans.

private life
|
153
through public façade (see p. ). Euripides’ Medea, for instance, is
a reasonable character on the outside, but reveals her true ferocity out
of sight and indoors, shouting oaths, and rising through the roof in a
ﬁnal bloody triumph. This was an opposition also between male and
female spheres, which is one explanation for the prominence of
women, who often represent the oikos and epitomize privacy, in trag-
edy’s explorations of these relationships.
Although urban settlement was dense, privacy was ensured by
architecture. Only a few small windows looked onto the street and the
world outside. Light was provided by a small internal courtyard. Lit-
erary sources imply that second storeys were not uncommon, reached
by a ladder or sometimes a staircase. Many had wells or cisterns for
collecting rainwater. It is hard to add much to this bare outline. Few
rooms had speciﬁc functions, although many houses had a large light
room, opening onto the courtyard by means of a verandah or porch,
often south-facing. Even the hearth, which plays an important part in
household rituals, seems to have been nothing more than a portable
brazier, judging from the absence of remains. Household shrines
must also have been movable, since sources mention them but few
traces survive.
One room is easily identiﬁed, the ‘men’s room’ or andron, a small
squarish space with an oﬀ-centre doorway and a raised cement plat-
form around the edge where couches (normally seven) were placed.
Here guests were entertained at banquets and drinking-parties (sym-
posia). Despite its intimate size, it was often rather more splendid
than other rooms. Floors of pebble-mosaic have been found, and
sources talk of frescoes and tapestries. Cups, some of them apparently
too large for convenient use, were also hung up as decoration, the
round picture (tondo) which often contained a more impressive,
shocking, or amusing scene, turned towards the wall, waiting to be
discovered by a curious guest. The andron was less private than other
rooms, often close to the main entrance, with larger windows open-
ing directly onto the street, so that those taking an evening stroll or
carrying torches to light the way home after an evening in a bar could
hear snatches of music and conversation, or drunken boisterousness,
from inside.

154
|
classical greece
Family
An important part of the Greek marriage ceremony was the lead-
ing out of the bride to her new home, ﬂanked by the groom and his
best friend, in an evening procession with musicians and well-wishers
in attendance, the bride’s mother carrying torches (Fig. ). The pro-
cession was not repeated for a second wife, and it was a Boeotian
custom to burn the axle of the cart in which the bride was brought to
mark the ﬁnality of the migration. In Athens divorce could, in theory,
be initiated by the husband, the wife, or the wife’s father, but there is
no sign that marriage was taken lightly or seen as a temporary
arrangement, and comic playwrights sometimes contrasted the com-
placent wife, legally secure, with the vulnerable hetaera who had to
‘buy’ her lover by pleasing him.
The reference to ‘buying’ a man is striking, since a bride brought
with her a dowry which had to be returned if the marriage ended
without issue for any reason. This rule applied even for an adulterous
wife whose husband was forced to divorce her, although it might have
been diﬃcult, in that case, to reclaim the dowry. Faced with possible
ﬁnancial loss, if he complained, or gain, if he took money from the
adulterer instead, husbands sometimes chose the path of lucrative
silence. Callias, the richest man in Greece, was said to have paid three
talents to his lover’s husband to escape the full force of the law. One
man who ended up killing his wife’s lover, invoking the rarely used
Draconian law absolving such murderers, but, predictably, ﬁnding
himself charged by the victim’s family nevertheless, strenuously
denies that a plan to extort money went wrong: ‘I did not do it for
money . . . there was no proﬁt motive at all . . .’ (Lysias . ).
Marriages were arranged by parents and betrothal (enguê) might
have taken place many years earlier, when the girl was still a child. On
her wedding-day, especially if she was an heiress, she might still have
been as young as twelve or thirteen. Her husband was likely to have
been in his late twenties at least. The graves of men and women who
died before marriage were marked with vases used in wedding-ritual.
The women represented on surviving examples are always young, the
men distinctly older.
The husband was often close to the family, a cousin, an uncle, the

private life
|
155
Figure 8 A veiled and crowned bride, to whom a small winged ﬁgure of
Eros (Desire) is oﬀering a garland, being lifted into a wedding chariot on a
ﬁfth-century loutrophoros, a pot particularly associated with the nuptial
bath and with weddings.

156
|
classical greece
father’s best friend. Indeed the law obliged heiresses on their father’s
death to marry his closest available relative, even if it meant divorcing
their current spouse, to keep property intact. Comic poets warned
that young wives of old husbands were more likely to slip their moor-
ings and wander into adultery and Chrysilla, who appears as Ischom-
achus’ exemplary young wife in Xenophon’s Oeconomicus, was still
young enough many years later to seduce her daughter’s husband
(Callias, again) and even bear his child, allegedly.
At betrothal, the bride’s father spoke the formula ‘I give you this
girl for the ploughing of legitimate children’, and the idea that mar-
riages were reproductive alliances above all is common. Romantic
love between couples is rarely on show, and comic poets often por-
trayed marriage as a burden to be postponed as long as possible.
When, in Xenophon’s Symposium, a pageant enacting the marriage of
Ariadne and Dionysus inspires the bachelors in the company to think
of getting married and the married to rush oﬀ home to their wives, it
is clear the author has a moral agenda. On the other hand, tomb-
inscriptions sometimes indicate aﬀection between spouses and it is
gods of Love who dominate wedding-scenes and ceremonies.
Demographers note that the practice of marrying girls young often
leads to high fertility rates, but mortality rates were also high––at
Olynthus about one third of children died before reaching puberty––
and there is little sign of anxiety about overpopulation; unwanted
pregnancies ﬁgure most often in a context not of ﬁnancial embar-
rassment, but of shame. In fact historians and philosophers were
much more concerned with oliganthropia (population-shortage),
which Aristotle suggests was the main reason that Sparta failed to
recover from her defeat at Leuctra in  (see pp.  and ). It is in
Sparta especially that we have the most straightforward evidence for
measures to promote the family, with conﬁrmed bachelors deprived
of citizen-rights and fathers of three or more sons exempted from
military and ﬁnancial obligations. But medical writers too were con-
cerned more to assist conception than to prevent births, and ‘Why am
I childless?’ was a very popular question among visitors to oracles.
Among the inscriptions recording divine cures at Asclepius’ sanctu-
ary in Epidaurus are several which relate to miraculous births after
pregnancies lasting years, sensational demonstrations of the god’s
power in this important area of anxiety. Children were needed not
only to continue the oikos and to look after elderly parents but also,

private life
|
157
crucially, to honour them in death, at the tombs which lined the
streets leading from the city-walls, by pouring liquid oﬀerings
(choai), wine, water, oil, milk, and honey, or burning food, or little
birds, and by tying coloured ribbons around the tombstone. Electra is
shown making such oﬀerings at Agamemnon’s tomb in Aeschylus’
Choephori (‘Bringers of choai’) and in vase-painting women pre-
dominate among grave visitors. In Athens, interestingly, such ﬁlial
devotion would take them to the Ceramicus, the city’s ‘red-light’
district. The dead could bring beneﬁts or even carry instructions
written on lead, requesting Underworld divinities to paralyse
enemies. The murdered or ‘dead before their time’ retained a particu-
lar malicious potency.
On arrival at her new home the bride and groom were met by the
groom’s surviving parents, led to the hearth, and showered with dried
fruit and nuts. The wide disparity in age between them meant the
bride would be entering a distinctly older family dominated by
women, with her mother-in-law still perhaps in her forties and in
most cases already a widow. Later writers thought that there had been
little respect for parents in classical Greece, because the Greek father
lacked the powers of the Roman paterfamilias who could even put his
children to death, and a Greek son became legally competent on
reaching maturity, but Athenians did at least have an obligation to
feed their parents, house them, and tend their graves. If they failed
they could be faced with a law-suit for maltreatment. In addition,
anyone convicted of dishonouring his parents could be struck oﬀ the
citizen-lists and was considered automatically disqualiﬁed from an
archonship, or from the right to address the people. However, we
know of no prosecutions for abuse of parents, and the sanctions
against such abuse are strikingly political, a feature which is con-
ﬁrmed by Plato, who considers physical abuse of parents character-
istic of the ‘tyrannical’ man. On the other hand, as in most modern
European countries, it was very hard to disinherit one’s children. In
fact it was illegal for a father who had surviving children to make a
will at all. On his death the property was simply shared out equally
between his sons or, if he had no sons, the men his daughters married.

158
|
classical greece
Slaves
The rest of the household would be made up of female relatives too
young or too old to (re)marry, slaves and former slaves, the husband’s
widowed aunt, his old nurse, perhaps, a few servants. Household
slaves were very much a part of the oikos, incorporated into the
household through the same ritual that welcomed the bride, often
participating in household sacriﬁces. There is evidence that maid-
servants established close relationships with their mistresses, sleeping
in the same part of the house, sharing domestic space, work, and
secrets, much more like personal attendants attached to an individual
than household staﬀ. So Aethra, Theseus’ mother, who was, accord-
ing to myth, enslaved to Helen in Sparta, elopes with her mistress to
Troy, and the courtesan Neaera (see above, p. ) kept not only the
clothes and jewels she removed from the house of her lover Phrynion
but her maidservants too ([Dem.] . ).
A similar pattern can be seen in relations between men and their
retainers. Slaves worked alongside their masters to build the Erech-
theum, and in Comedy slaves appear as cheeky sidekicks, sometimes
helping errant youths outwit their stingy fathers. Slaves in Athens
were notorious for their lack of deference. In Plato’s Protagoras the
slave who answers the door at the house of Callias is hardly cringing
in his behaviour: fed up with sophistic visitors, he slams the door in
Socrates’ face. We should be careful of underestimating the brutality
which could be meted out to household slaves even in Athens. We
hear of citizens of the democracy beating their attendants and threat-
ening torture; slave-abuse was a popular form of slapstick on the
comic stage. But alongside fear there was trust, an unequal but per-
sonal alliance based on mutual interest and close intimacy; the closest
modern equivalent might be the relationship between a master and
his dog. Xenophon’s Socrates actually complains that men are more
likely to grieve over the death of a slave than of a friend.
The Old Oligarch sees an economic explanation behind the lack of
fear, noting that in Athens slaves working in businesses outside the
house were an important source of revenue, which might be threat-
ened if slaves were nervous of demanding immediate payment or
indiscriminately anxious to please. Together with the freed slaves and

private life
|
159
the large number of resident aliens who had stalls, they must have
lent a distinctly cosmopolitan air to commercial society and allowed
suspicions to be raised about the status of the few citizens who traded
alongside them (see pp. –).
Moreover mass-enslavement was a not unusual occurrence when a
Greek city fell (see p. ). So it was not only Persians and Asians
who found themselves on sale in the market-place, waiting for a last-
minute ransom from home, and although Greek slaves were always a
minority among the Thracians, Anatolians, and Syrians who made up
the bulk of servile bodies, it was always possible for a Greek to hear
tales of Aethra enslaved to Helen, or Eumaeus the prince turned
swineherd in the Odyssey, or to listen to Trojan women contemplat-
ing captivity on the tragic stage, or to look at an Olynthian girl
enslaved by Philip, or Socrates’ friend Phaedo, brought to Athens as a
prisoner-of-war, and to think of him or herself.
The Chians were remembered for introducing the slave trade in the
ﬁrst place. By the classical period their estates were thought to employ
the highest number of slaves outside Sparta. They were punished for
their innovation with revolts, although, at this time, slave-resistance
most often took the form of running away, individually or en masse
(see pp.  and –). But the Greeks had little idea how many slaves
there were and estimates of their numbers seem greatly exaggerated.
The census of Demetrius of Phalerum, for instance, held between 
and , counted , slaves in Athens. Modern scholars consider
even a quarter of this a high estimate. The problem, as the Old Olig-
arch points out, is that it was not always easy to tell the diﬀerence
between slaves and the rest of the population. Sometimes, especially
if they had tried to escape, they were tattooed on the forehead, and
dress, hairstyle, occupation, and accent might raise suspicions, but
they did not stand out because of the colour of their skin. Marks of
slavery were more subtle than that. The courtesan Callistion notices
that a client is scarred with weals. ‘Poor thing’, she says. ‘Where did
you get those from?’ ‘Someone poured hot stew over me’, he says,
‘when I was a boy.’ ‘Bull-whip stew, I’ll bet’, she replies. A comic
ﬁshmonger grows his hair long ‘for the god’, but really it’s to cover
the tattoo on his forehead. In oratory, the charge that a slave or a
former slave is masquerading as a citizen, or alternatively that an
unscrupulous character has falsely accused a free person of usurping
free status is not uncommon. A Greek’s status as a free man was not

160
|
classical greece
absolutely secure but something he had to work at. To show himself
free by avoiding slavish jobs and slavish relationships and attitudes,
avoiding, even, an enslavement to desire, might be the project of a
lifetime.
The Old Oligarch contrasts the situation in Athens with Sparta,
where, he says, a slave (helot) lived in fear of any citizen. Here and in
some other places, Heraclea at the entrance to the Black Sea, Thessaly,
Sicily, slaves formed something much more like an oppressed class or
group, a conquered nation, who could be released from servitude
only by the state, and could not be sold outside the borders of the
territory, men treated as cattle perhaps, rather than man’s best friend.
They were above all agricultural labourers, a self-reproducing popu-
lation of ‘serfs’, who probably lived in families with some property-
rights, paying a ﬁxed portion of their produce to an individual master
who was prevented from extracting more under penalty of a curse.
The Spartans, in particular, used this system to subsidize a distinctive
way of life focused on military training. In this way the helots sup-
ported the militaristic system that oppressed them, feeding the
mouths that bit them.
The Spartans were thought to treat the helots with great cruelty.
Critias claimed Spartiates always carried spears in case of ambush
and even devised special helot-proof keys to protect themselves, and
there was a widespread belief that helots hated the Spartans bitterly
and were simply waiting for an opportunity to revolt, a particular
problem, thought Plato, when slaves shared the same language and
national identity. There was a very dangerous revolt in the s,
although the Athenians who tried to encourage an uprising during
the Peloponnesian War were disappointed.
Friendship
Eating and drinking were intimate activities and were used to develop
a whole range of relationships in the Greek world. By the same token,
neglecting to share a feast indicated an absence of ties, and exclusion
from the feasting community meant rejection. Sacriﬁce was used to
seal marriage-bonds, to incorporate wives and children into Athenian
phratries at the Apatouria (see p. ), to demonstrate, and later, in

private life
|
161
court, to prove, a father’s or grandfather’s recognition of his legitim-
ate heir, while, at Sparta, membership of a mess, paid for in barley,
wine, cheese, and ﬁgs, was a requirement for membership of the
citizen body. A toast seals the conspiracy of women in Lysistrata, and
women seen dining or drinking with men, or handsome youths with
strangers, risked ruining their reputations. On a geo-political level,
truces were ‘libations’ (spondai) and sacriﬁces marked alliances (see p.
), while ambassadors could be compromised if they were seen
drinking a ‘cup of friendship’ with a foreign prince.
At private parties it was normal for guests to bring contributions
which they didn’t always share (Xenophon, Memorabilia . . ).
Those who dined asumbolos (without contribution), the parasitoi,
were placed in a position of dependency and were believed to sing for
their supper in other ways, by assisting their ‘keeper’ with false testi-
mony, or ﬂattering him, or helping to attack his enemies in law-suits
or brawls, by facilitating his seductions, by sleeping with him, or
simply by entertaining the company with jokes.
Friendship was measured very much in terms of friendly acts,
favours, gifts, in terms of reciprocation rather than sentiment. This
does not mean that aﬀection had no place, rather that friendship was
such an involved relationship that pure, disinterested elements were
impossible to separate or discern. Friends who would do things for
you and for whom you would do things in return were a vital
resource economically, socially, politically, and judicially in the Greek
world. It has been argued that Greece had no equivalent of the
client–patron relationship which was so important to the Romans,
but in Greece as in Rome, some friendships were certainly less equal
than others (see p. ).
Socializing was not conﬁned to the andron, and certain shops, the
barber’s, cobbler’s and perfumerer’s, provided an opportunity for
meeting people and exchanging news (see p. ). Indeed, those who
avoided them might be accused of misanthropy. Public bars, however,
though popular and ubiquitous, had a reputation as plebeian institu-
tions. In the old days, claims Isocrates, only the most vulgar servants
would go to a bar, but by the fourth century even a man like
Demosthenes might be seen there. He was caught eating ariston by
the cynic Diogenes. Embarrassed, he withdrew into the interior. ‘You
will still be in a bar’, said Diogenes, ‘only deeper’. Thasos passed
measures to prevent wine-shops becoming bars, while the fact that

162
|
classical greece
taverns were so popular in Byzantium and Athens revealed the essen-
tially vulgar character of democratic societies. There is an edge to
Stratonicus’ joke about Maroneia.
Sexuality
No great gulf separated ‘friendship’ (philia) from ‘erotic’ attachment.
Sexuality has for a long time been viewed as an area in which the
peculiarity of Greek culture is most marked. Some have argued that
‘homosexuality’ was a ‘pseudo-sexuality’ equivalent to adolescent
horseplay, ‘behavioural’ rather than ‘psychological’, with an emphasis
on power and sexual role, ‘dominant active’ or ‘subordinate passive’,
rather than on the gender of the person to whom one was attracted.
Others have argued that homosexuality was a reaction to the seclu-
sion of women or reﬂects a need for relationships with equals that
women could not provide. Still others argue that it was a kind of
induction into adulthood, or a hangover from archaic initiation rit-
uals which leave traces in Plato’s emphasis on education. Such theor-
ies were deployed at ﬁrst to quarantine the Greeks from homophobic
attacks, more recently, to prove the importance of culture in human
sexuality. The kind of evidence which is available, however, makes it
very diﬃcult to draw deﬁnite conclusions about sexual behaviour––an
important point in itself. The facts of any particular relationship were
always a matter of speculation. There were no illegal sexual acts and
no inquisitors to investigate transgression and extract confessions.
Sex was much more ‘private’ before Christian states, nervous of
Sodom’s fate, made it a matter of central public concern.
There is no sign, however, that Greeks were oblivious to sexual
diﬀerences between men and women, or that they were seduced by
the prospect of performing particular roles rather than by someone’s
physical (gendered) form. Apart from some dialogues of Plato, more-
over, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd evidence that women were, somehow, less
important sexual partners than men.
In Athens plenty of women plied the streets or worked in brothels.
Although they were celebrated in Comedy as safety-valves for dis-
charging excess desire, we should not think that such fornication
was socially acceptable. Someone asked Stratonicus why he looked

private life
|
163
around shiftily as he emerged from the gates of Heraclea. ‘It’s like
coming out of a brothel,’ he said. ‘I don’t want anyone to see me.’
Those comic poets were making a satirical point.
At the symposium, women danced and sang and performed on the
double-reeded aulos (like an oboe or shawm), or lyre, having been
hired, sometimes, on the street. Their performances could be elabor-
ate, even creative––Aristophanes claims that Euripides was inﬂu-
enced by ‘whore-songs’––and their instruments were not mere props,
but they were always assumed to be sexually available and ‘aulos-girl’
comes to mean ‘cheap prostitute’. Apart from these hired (mis-
tharnousai) women, we often hear of hetaeras living in a monogam-
ous relationship with men as mistresses, before, after, or during a
marriage to a citizen woman, occasionally as an alternative. Demeas
enjoys such a relationship with Chrysis in Menander’s Samian
Woman. The fact that hetaeras, unlike wives, were easily dispensed
with, if they ceased to please, seems to have been a major attraction of
these relationships.
Transactions between hetaeras and their lovers could be vague.
When the hetaera Theodote is questioned about her income by
Socrates in Xenophon’s Memorabilia, she is coy, talking of ‘friends’
and ‘favours’. When Socrates tries to pin her down she is alarmed.
Hetaeras did not ‘sell’ themselves, they received ‘gifts’. This blurred
arrangement helped to maintain a distance between hetaeras and
women who worked in brothels, the pornai, obliged to have sex
immediately with ‘whoever wanted’ on payment of a standard fee.
The distinction is not merely a question of presentation, but reﬂects
an antithesis between two kinds of relationship: the buying and sell-
ing of a sexual commodity, or a more personal ‘friendship’, based on
persuasion, seduction, and reciprocation. This distinction could be
slippery, but was critical, nevertheless.
Most of these female roles had male equivalents. There are refer-
ences to street-cubicles (oikemata) occupied by men awaiting
clients––Socrates’ friend Phaedo was said to have worked in one––
and to men hired under contract. Youths performed alongside
women in the symposium, and cithara-boys often ﬁgure as objects of
lust. A character called Misgolas was satirized for this particular
passion. By associating with him, Timarchus risked being seen in a
similar role.
Love-aﬀairs between citizens are more diﬃcult to pin down. The

164
|
classical greece
relationship between the admired youth (eromenos) and his, often
plural, admirers (erastai) might be a rather distant one, realized in
pestering, poetry, or stares. Xenophon (Constitution of the Spartans .
–) insists that, at Sparta, relationships between admirers and the
admired were as innocent as those between parents and children. He
acknowledges that contemporaries ﬁnd this hard to believe, but he
demonstrates, at least, that it was possible to contemplate an ‘erotic’
relationship in which sex had no part. Moreover he shows that, for
some, sex between men was controversial.
Relationships were often pursued at exercise-grounds, which also
provide a setting for some of Plato’s dialogues. In Lysis, Socrates goes
there to admire the youths along with Lysis’ blushing suitor. In
Charmides, he is invited to see how Charmides has suddenly blos-
somed while he has been away. As the boy enters, followed by a whole
pack of admirers, he is stunned, as are the younger boys in the room.
Socrates thinks Lysis must be young because he has not yet heard of
him, and it is the transformation of Charmides that causes so much
comment. Along with references to boys ‘selling their bloom’ this
implies that it is the age of hêbê that most impressed. Although the
Greeks always talked of erotic relationships between men as paideras-
tia, texts provide little evidence of an acceptance, let alone the insti-
tutionalization, of sex with pre-pubescent boys. Terms like pais or
even paidion (‘baby’) are used interchangeably with terms like neani-
skos (young man) and meirakion (youth) to refer to the same person
(Lysias ). Boys were also, if their families could aﬀord it, chaperoned
by slaves called paidagogoi, and sheltered by laws restricting access to
training-grounds.
Socrates complains that youths, predictably, tend to prefer youthful
admirers and the fact that Timarchus has been seen with older men
lends cogency to Aeschines’ accusations of prostitution. Whorish
behaviour, surrendering so easily that gifts looked like payments, or
to many diﬀerent men, was condemned, and a man who tried to
seduce too obviously risked being labelled kinaidos, the homosexual
equivalent of the moichos, the beautiﬁed seducer of women. ‘Selling
oneself’ carried political implications, frequently used as a metaphor
for corruption; an Athenian politician convicted of prostitution faced
loss of citizen rights––indeed, references to homosexuality in Athens
usually occur in a political context. A ﬁne line separated proper from
disreputable behaviour, and Plato seems to have concluded that

private life
|
165
homosexual desire and homosexual relationships carried unneces-
sary dangers for personal, moral, and political autonomy and should
be stigmatized.
At the gymnasium two of the most distinctive features of Greek
culture are found side by side, the nude male and Greek Love. ‘Beauti-
ful’ (kalos) also meant ‘noble’ and ‘estimable’, and the physical form
of a youth ‘in bloom’ occupied a central place in Greek imagery and
imagination. Did so much ideological emphasis on physique and its
images ‘homoeroticize’ Greek culture or was desire submerged in a
sea of (other) meanings?
A civic morality
In Athens the ideology of democracy was underpinned by numerous
daily practices of equal participation, the sharing out of sacriﬁcial
meat through lottery, drinking the same wine in the symposium, the
sharing out of the estate equally between heirs or heiresses. An
emphasis on isometry, however, can also be seen in the messes of the
Spartan oligarchy, or in the uniform housing which characterizes the
urban landscape not only of democratic cities. Common assump-
tions about community, solidarity, and equal participation informed
very diﬀerent political ideologies.
Balance was as important in interpersonal relations as in the indi-
vidual. In some cases they are impossible to separate. The regulations
of the symposium served both to restrain individual excess and to
ensure equality between members. An unbalanced individual, like
Alcibiades in Plato’s Symposium, threatened to throw the entire
community of drinkers out of kilter, or, like Plato’s tyrannical man in
the Republic, to tip over the entire state. In this sense private life was
always political: ‘The greatest liturgy one can perform for the city’,
says the speaker in a fragment of Isaeus, ‘is to live day by day a life of
discipline and self-control.’
Self-mastery (enkrateia, sophrosyne) has long been recognized as
the fundamental principle of Greek morality, governing all areas of
behaviour, relations with others and with yourself. It was not a ques-
tion of ﬁnding a limit and keeping within it, but the reverse, a con-
tinual eﬀort to avoid falling into an abyss of uncontrollable desire,

166
|
classical greece
ﬁnancial ruin and loss of autonomy. Limitlessness is vividly and hor-
riﬁcally portrayed in literature, and the fall from probity, traced by
Aeschines’ Timarchus, or Plato’s tyrannical man, is presented as pre-
cipitous. Self-control was a constant eﬀort to maintain balance;
excess a disastrous tipping over.
Myth was full of images of terrifying abysses and inﬁnities. When
Erysichthon dishonoured her, Demeter cursed him with an insatiable
hunger which destroyed his household. At Delphi, the famous motto
‘nothing too much’, was inscribed and, in his lost painting of Hades
for the Cnidian clubhouse there, Polygnotus showed not only
Sisyphus and Tantalus engaged in endless labours and aﬄicted with
endless appetites, but Ocnus, who endlessly plaits a rope which is
eaten by a donkey, and water-carriers endlessly ﬁlling bottomless
jars. These water-carriers, says Pausanias, represented those who
disdained the Mysteries of Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis,
reminding us vividly that the Greeks called initiates ‘fulﬁlled’,
or ‘completed’.
An emphasis on beginnings and ends, and an acute awareness of
progress towards completion, of what remained to be done, were
prominent features of rituals and Greek ideas of life and (‘untimely’)
death and it is not too diﬃcult to link such ideas to the morality of
self-control. Plato uses the image of leaky vessels to describe the
condition of the akolastoi, the ‘uncontrolled’, in Hades, and the same
image could be applied to Erysichthon’s unﬁllable stomach. The Mys-
teries certainly had ‘this-worldly’ aspects––Demeter, according to
Eleusinian myth, was mother of Wealth––but they also guaranteed a
better life ‘there’, in the next world, and, at the very least, these stories
imply metaphysical, eschatological aspects to the Greek horror of
ruination, limitless desire, and loss of self-control.
If the practices of private life informed political ideology, the state
formally and the community informally broke in on personal life at
almost every level. There were the oﬃcials appointed in aristocratic
societies to supervise women and youths, and, in Athens, gymna-
siarchs in charge of ephebes, and magistrates to watch paidagogoi. By
the late fourth century we even get those laws banning shaving. There
were also more general mechanisms which brought private life under
the public gaze. Sparta’s thrice-monthly weight-watching routine
may be apocryphal, but the physical inspection of new citizens and
the numerous ‘scrutinies’ of Councillors and magistrates in Athens

private life
|
167
were all too real. Usually such inspections amounted to nothing, but
for a brief period, in the aftermath of the oligarchic revolutions of the
late ﬁfth century, they seem to have become more anxious; one can-
didate feels it necessary to defend his long hair. There were also penal-
ties for squandering an estate and for ‘idleness’, and any man who got
involved in a property dispute would ﬁnd questions raised about his
lifestyle; litigants were not shy of raising an opponent’s manner of
walking or talking or scowling or carrying a staﬀ. The jurors’ gaze
paralleled a general gaze which was turned on individuals outside the
courtroom, as they walked through the Agora or the streets. Comic
authors made jokes about fat men and thin men, those who drank
too much or seemed womanish, those who were seen at too many
sacriﬁces or were over-fond of dice.
Normative values could also be transmitted through education,
which was divided into music, letters, and gymnastic (Fig. ). But
education was by no means universal and it is probable that less than
a third of Athenian citizens could read and write, possibly only a
tenth. The inscriptions the democracy produced did not lead to lit-
eracy by osmosis, and an ability to write was rarely a necessity. Athens
remained an oral culture; the illiterate would not have been signiﬁ-
cantly disadvantaged. Musical education was perhaps even more
exclusive. An ability to play the lyre is a sign of a wealthy aristocratic
Figure 9 Two aspects of education, music and writing, are imagined here on
this early ﬁfth-century Athenian red-ﬁgure cup.

168
|
classical greece
upbringing. Objections by Plato and others to the innovative and
complex ‘new music’ of the later ﬁfth century arise in part, perhaps,
from the perception that professional technicians were taking over
what had been a patrician accomplishment and writing music that
was beyond amateur skills.
Beyond the basics, there was much rote-learning of the poets, pre-
dominantly Homer, increasingly tragedians. Philosophers, like Plato,
seem to have worried about the impact on piety and morality of all
those gods and heroes behaving badly, but even he concedes that
reminding people of the myth of Oedipus (below, pp. –) helps
prevent incest, and wonders if myths could be deployed in the same
way to discourage homosexuality. However, it was more for detach-
able snippets of wisdom, rather than because their plays were
straightforwardly didactic or their characters exemplary that drama-
tists were seen as ‘teachers’.
Literature also taught the proper use of words, and there is evi-
dence for a normative approach to language in Plato and many other
writers, a concern, that is, with true and correct meanings and proper
terminology rather than just the current or most widely accepted
usage. Discipline was a feature of physical training too. Synchronized
movement, dancing in an oblong phalanx, was a feature of tragic
choruses and also, probably, pyrrhic dances, and the discipline of
working as a single body was a particularly crucial element in the
success of a Greek hoplite army or a crew (see pp. , ). Keeping
time, on almost all occasions, was facilitated by music, particularly
the aulos, which was ubiquitous in ancient society, providing rhythms
not only for tragedy, comedy, and dithyramb, marching armies
and rowing crews (see pp. , ), sacriﬁces and symposia, but for
demolishers of walls and women as they worked.
Conclusion
The historian must be grateful for this intrusive gaze on personal life,
but it makes the polis sometimes seem a somewhat totalitarian com-
munity, which thought nothing was none of its business and left no
room for a truly private life. But the same evidence can lead to an
entirely opposite conclusion. The privacy of the oikos was ﬁercely

private life
|
169
defended by custom and respect for the modesty of women. Without
the resources of a police force or a public prosecution service, with-
out central records of births, marriages, deaths, property, and status,
the polis had few weapons with which to breach this impenetrable
façade (see pp. –). The intensity of the gaze turned on the most
trivial aspects of life when they became visible is a sign of the poverty
of knowledge, a reﬂection of how much was unseen. Modern people,
despite their vaunted individualism and hard-won rights, live far
more highly regulated, state-dominated, homogeneously accultur-
ated, economically interdependent, secure lives.
Moreover, a free Greek was never slavish in his conformity. He was
always a voluntary subject and power would be more familiar to him
as an internal anxiety rather than as fear of an external authority. If
the community was a spectatorship of thirsty eyes, the subject could
choose what kind of character to put on show. He was a performer of
himself.
The world the Greeks moved in is sometimes presented as black-
and-white. But one theme which emerges repeatedly is the fragility of
states of being that we take for granted, the indistinctness in areas
that for us are quite clear, the eﬀort required to construct diﬀerence,
to make stark contrasts out of a ﬁeld of fuzzy grey; what impresses is
the energy continually expended in bodily practices and social prac-
tices, designed to demonstrate most clearly that one was indeed a
decent woman, a good friend, a legitimate heir, a real man, a pious
man, a citizen, a true Greek, not an impostor, not a wastrel, not a
slave.

7
The ﬁfth century:
political and military
narrative
Lisa Kallet
‘These ships were the beginning of evils for both Greeks and barbar-
ians.’ So Herodotus on the departure of Athenian warships in  to
help Ionian Greeks revolt from Persian rule (. . ). Greek history,
especially of the Aegean and mainland, of the classical period (c.–
) is intertwined with Persia. The evils that the Athenian ships
began were wars: during the ﬁfth and ﬁrst half of the fourth centuries
some Greek city or another was ﬁghting some war or other in per-
haps two out of every three years (see p. ). And like major military
engagements in any period, the two ‘great wars’ that opened and
closed the ﬁfth century––the Persian Wars and the Peloponnesian
War––had consequences transcending the strictly military and polit-
ical spheres.
Athens dominates the political and military narrative of the ﬁfth
century, to a far greater extent than that of earlier and later periods of
Greek history (see pp. , ﬀ). The reason is not simply the concen-
tration of sources and information from and about that polis; it is
also due to the Athenians’ creation of the ﬁrst empire in the west,
which gradually aﬀected most of the Greek world (directly or
indirectly), and led to the Peloponnesian War.

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
171
The Ionian Revolt and the Persian Wars
Greeks had settled in poleis on the coast of Asia Minor from the
eleventh to the eighth centuries, but they were not independent, hav-
ing been conquered in the sixth century, ﬁrst by Lydians, and then by
the Persians; moreover, many still were governed by tyrants (indi-
viduals who seized power ‘unconstitutionally’). In  Ionia, the
central region of the coast, revolted from Persian rule but in 
was brought back into the Persian empire. The episode would have
occupied an insigniﬁcant place in history but for the fact that the
Athenians became brieﬂy involved. While in the Lydian capital of
Sardis, Athenians (and Eretrians from Euboea) accidentally set ﬁre to
a temple. When King Darius learned of those responsible, writes
Herodotus, he vowed revenge and instructed a slave to remind
him thrice daily, ‘Master, do not forget the Athenians!’ (. ). The
result was the Persian attack on Athens in .
The Persian Empire had been pushing west since , when Darius
crossed into Europe and subdued Thrace and Macedon. But the
revenge card was useful for the Persians to play (and was always an
acceptable motive for attack): their ﬁrst stop after crossing the Aegean
was Eretria, where they burned temples, sacked the city and enslaved
the inhabitants. Then they landed at Marathon in north-east Attica;
Athens’ victory (with Plataea’s help) could not have been predicted,
given the Persians’ numerical advantage; Herodotus reports that
about  Persians died, against  (out of ,) Athenians.
Aeschylus’ epitaph celebrated his participation in the Athenian vic-
tory without a whisper about his tragic victories, one piece of testi-
mony out of many to the importance of this battle to Athenians.
The Athenians expected renewed attack; it came in , led by
Darius’ son Xerxes; an army and support system crossed the Helle-
spont and marched via the northern land route, while the ﬂeet––
including Ionians––sailed alongside. From the size of the expedition
(Herodotus ridiculously estimates ﬁve million; the truth is probably
closer to ,), it was clear that Xerxes intended nothing less than
the conquest of Greece; other Greeks besides the Athenians now had
reason to fear. The Spartans were committed to resist, though only
prodding and threats prevented them from limiting their defence to

172
|
classical greece
the Peloponnese. The Athenians could be counted on, and their role
would be critical. Their prestige was recent but impressive: the victory
at Marathon for the ﬁrst time made other Greeks sit up and take
notice of a city which, during the archaic period, had had minimal
impact on the larger Greek scene. But Greek unity was untested, and
a mere thirty-one out of around  Greek poleis sent delegates to a
council held at the Isthmus of Corinth to prepare strategy and create
the Hellenic League, an alliance under the leadership of Sparta, the
pre-eminent military power in Greece. In some cases, enmity toward
neighbours, not fear of Persia, dictated choice: Herodotus guessed
that the Phocians joined in because the Thessalians did not, naughtily
adding that had the Thessalians chosen to resist, the Phocians would
probably have collaborated.
In summer , the League prepared a land and sea defence of the
entrance to central Greece, at the pass at Thermopylae, held ultim-
ately by a small force of  Spartans under King Leonidas, and oﬀ
Artemisium in Euboea. When the Persians broke through on land
because of an act of treachery and threatened the poleis of central
and southern Greece (the naval battle oﬀ Artemisium was indecisive),
the Delphic oracle told the Athenians consulting it, ‘ﬂee, ﬂee to the
ends of the earth’, subsequently moderating it slightly: ‘ﬂee, ﬂee, but
if not, take to the wooden walls’ (Hdt. . –).
The Persian army under Mardonius marched into central Greece,
while the ﬂeet sailed alongside. Boeotia promptly ‘medized’––the
term given to those who collaborated with the Persians. The next stop
was Athens. Meanwhile, the Athenians debated whether the ‘wooden
walls’ referred to the walls of the Acropolis, or, as some thought, to
their ships. Themistocles supported the latter interpretation and per-
suaded the Athenians to evacuate the city and to ﬁght the Persians at
sea.
Athens had a navy capable of facing the Persians only because of
the policy of Themistocles. A few years earlier, he had persuaded the
Athenians to use revenue from the silver mines at Laurium to build
a ﬂeet of two hundred warships (see pp. , ); its existence was
crucial for the Hellenic League’s success. Luring the more numerous
Persian ﬂeet to ﬁght in the narrows of Salamis, where numbers would
not be an advantage, the Greek ﬂeet won. Xerxes took what was left of
his ﬂeet and went home.
But Mardonius and his land force were still to be reckoned with,

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
173
and, in , in a battle in a plain at Plataea on the Attic–Boeotian
border, the League army prevailed. Meanwhile, the League ﬂeet sailed
across the Aegean and defeated the remnants of the Persians oﬀ Mt.
Mycale; the Wars were over. While the victory was a League achieve-
ment, Athens and Sparta, chieﬂy, were responsible for the successes at
Salamis and Plataea, respectively––which meant that Sparta would
have to share its position of military pre-eminence among the Greeks
with Athens.
Consequences of the Persian Wars
Panhellenism
Before the Persian Wars, Greeks arguably had little sense of identity as
Greeks; to be sure they spoke the same language, worshipped the
same gods, and shared customs (see pp. –, –). True, their most
cherished tradition was the story of a united Greek expedition under
Agamemnon that sailed to Troy to recover Helen, the background of
Homer’s Iliad. Yet in a fundamental respect they regarded each other
as foreigners and real or potential enemies. The best illustration of
Greek disunity is the pitiful size of the Hellenic League.
The experience of the Persian Wars, however, made Greeks regard
each other as a homogeneous group which shared fundamental
beliefs and values that set them apart from the Persian ‘barbarians’.
At the core of the new Panhellenic spirit were two things: a commit-
ment to political freedom, eleutheria, and an obedience to law, nomos
(see p. ), values they saw as opposed to those of the Persians, who,
living under an autocratic ruler, and owing absolute obedience, were
therefore not free. The words Herodotus puts into the mouth of
Demaratus, an exiled Spartan king who took refuge in the Persian
court and who served as Xerxes’ adviser in the invasion of , sum
up the ideology. When asked by Xerxes whether the Spartans would
stand their ground at Thermopylae against the far more numerous
Persians, Demaratus replied, ‘Yes, they will, for they are free, though
not entirely. For they do have a master over them, Law, and they fear
him much more than your men fear you’ (. . ).
Panhellenic ideology was to have a long history (see p. ). The

174
|
classical greece
slogan, ‘freedom of the Greeks,’ was used and abused over the next
 years: by Greeks against Persians, by Spartans against Athenians,
by the Macedonian king Philip and his son Alexander, and even by
the Romans. This underscores the potency of the ideology; cynical,
and hypocritical, yes, but with enduring value as a justiﬁcation for
aggression and conquest. And it was crucial in shaping Greek history
in the ﬁfth century, as well as for the birth of historiography.
Herodotus and the writing of history 
Herodotus was born c., between the two Persian invasions. A
Greek from the Carian city of Halicarnassus, he had direct experience
of what it meant to live under autocratic rule: Caria, like the rest of
Asia Minor, was part of the Persian Empire and his city had been
ruled by a tyrant, under whom members of his family had directly
suﬀered. He left home as a young man and travelled extensively
throughout Asia, Egypt, and the Greek mainland, residing in Athens
for some time. In writing about the great conﬂict between the Greeks
and Persians he took the ﬁrst step toward what would become the
genre of historiography; he refers to his work as a demonstration of
historia, literally ‘researches’ or ‘inquiry.’
Greeks thought of Homer as preserving their ‘ancient history’
(see p. ). Nothing of their past could rival the legends of Achilles,
Agamemnon, and the other heroes; nothing, that is, until the Persian
Wars. Indeed it may have taken an event like the Persian Wars to
justify writing an account of human achievement. As Herodotus tells
us at the opening of his work:
This is a display of the researches of Herodotus of Halicarnassus, so that
neither the deeds of men fade over time, nor the great and marvellous works
brought forth both by Greeks and barbarians lose their fame; and especially
the reason why they fought one another.
This programmatic statement reveals Herodotus’ aims: above all to
write about the causes and course of the Persian Wars, but also to
preserve traditions about the peoples inhabiting his world; thus the
work contains much folklore. He leads up to his main subject by
charting the rise of the Persian empire, and includes extensive eth-
nographies of those who became Persian subjects.
Herodotus’ ethnographic sections display an underlying concern

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
175
with a fundamental antithesis that pervaded the intellectual climate
of the time and dominated sophistic literature of the late ﬁfth cen-
tury, namely, that between custom and nature, nomos and physis (see
above, p. ). Herodotus explores explicitly and implicitly the ques-
tion of whether people are disposed toward certain behaviour by
nature (physis) or by custom (nomos), a human construct. Despite his
recognition that cultural beliefs and practices were created by
humans in a speciﬁc cultural context, and therefore are neither given
nor absolute, and, by extension, intrinsically neither better nor worse
than foreign customs, Herodotus’ work reﬂects the common Greek
belief in their cultural and moral superiority over non-Greeks. This
brings us back to Panhellenism, a fundamentally chauvinistic outlook
which took for granted the superiority of the Greek virtues of free-
dom and the adherence to law––recall Demaratus’ comment to
Xerxes.
Herodotus believed that on a deep level the aﬀairs of mankind
were controlled by the gods. But his theory of causation was complex,
involving coexisting divine and human, long- and short-term causes,
as illustrated by his comment on the Athenians’ responsibility for the
victory at Salamis: ‘it was the Athenians who, after the god, repulsed
the Persian king’ (. . ). But in trying to answer the big question of
why do powers rise and fall that is central to historical understanding
of all periods, Herodotus found an answer in a concept, hybris, that in
his work mingles human and divine elements. Put in a nutshell,
wealthy and powerful rulers necessarily strive to become greater; their
greatness incites the envy of the gods, and so inevitably leads to their
downfall. As Xerxes’ uncle, Artabanus, warns the King before he
invades Greece, foreshadowing (and not subtly!) the outcome of the
Persian Wars:
Do you see how it is the living things that exceed others in size that the god
strikes with lightning and will not let exalt themselves, while the little ones do
not provoke him at all? Do you see how it is always the greatest houses and
the tallest trees that the god hurls his thunderbolts upon? For the god loves to
thwart whatever is greater than the rest. Thus a great army may be destroyed
by a small one; for once the god feels envy toward the great army . . . it will
perish in a way unworthy of itself.
(. )
Herodotus’ decision to write about the Persian Wars had a profound
impact on historiography. Although the genre as it developed for the

176
|
classical greece
most part cast aside the ethnographic and story-telling elements,
nevertheless Herodotus had so established war as the proper subject
for history, that the Roman historian Tacitus felt compelled to apolo-
gize for being forced to write about events other than war.
The Delian League and the creation of empire
The most visible consequence of the Persian Wars was Athens’ cre-
ation of naval archê, literally ‘rule,’ but usually translated as ‘empire’.
It presents a fascinating paradox: given the ideology of liberty that
was a direct outcome of the Wars, and the Athenians’ role as cham-
pion of that freedom in the recent struggle, how is one to explain
Athens’ archê, or the fact that many Greeks, to a certain extent will-
ingly, gave the Athenians the means to oppress them? The answer lies
in the particular circumstances of the aftermath of the Persian Wars.
With hindsight we know that the Persians would not attempt
another conquest of Greece in the ﬁfth century. To Greeks of the
Hellenic League in the aftermath of war, however, no such outcome
was obvious. The mood at the time would have been a combination
of heady self-conﬁdence and fear: self-conﬁdence at having repelled
the might of the vast Persian empire, and fear that Xerxes would
retaliate, as he had for his father’s failure in . Greeks living in Asia
Minor and on the coastal Aegean islands had the greatest cause for
alarm; they had been freed as a result of the wars of –, but their
proximity to Persia made that freedom precarious.
Accordingly in spring , ﬁfty ships of the Hellenic League set out,
liberating Greek cities in Cyprus, and then besieging Byzantium, a
Greek city still under Persian control. But the Spartan commander of
the ﬂeet, Pausanias, behaved oﬀensively to the Ionians in the League
and he was shortly recalled to Sparta to answer charges against him.
As Thucydides tells it (on whom, more below), the Ionians, out of
hatred toward Pausanias, asked the Athenians to take over the com-
mand, and the latter accepted. Herodotus, alluding in passing to the
event, says baldly, ‘the Athenians stripped the Spartans of the leader-
ship, using Pausanias’ behaviour as an excuse’ (. . ).
Thus was born a new military alliance, called the Delian League
by modern scholars because its treasury was on the island of Delos,

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
177
sacred to Apollo. The alliance was to consist of autonomous Greeks
with equal voting rights under the leadership (hegemonia) of Athens,
with a long-term goal of maintaining the freedom of the Greeks from
Persia and of retaliation against the Persians. It diﬀered funda-
mentally from earlier, mostly land-based alliances such as the League
of mostly Peloponnesian states under Spartan leadership because it
was naval, and this required enormous capital (see pp. –). This
explains the unique feature of the League that allowed the Athenians
to transform the League into an empire: ‘tribute’ (phoros), an annual
ﬁnancial contribution paid by most League members (larger com-
munities initially contributed ships instead of money).
Two factors stand out in the transformation. First, it was Athenians
who staﬀed the board of treasurers which received and administered
the tribute––despite the fact that their title was ‘Greek treasurers’
(Hellenotamiai). Athens therefore controlled League wealth. Second,
gradually all but three allies (Lesbos, Chios, and Samos) paid money
in return for League protection––some ordered to as a result of
attempting revolt, others because they resented the long, annual
service and arranged to pay money instead––and the navy became
increasingly Athenian.
The extent of the economic burden of tribute on the allies is not
altogether clear. Assessments were mostly based on local resources,
and so mainly on land, with the primary burden falling on the rich.
But in the case of cities with busy harbours, port taxes formed at least
part of the source of tribute. Given the relative poverty of most Greek
poleis, however, any sustained expropriation of local resources must
have adversely aﬀected their economic prosperity. The disaﬀection
we ﬁnd, reﬂected in revolts and withholding of tribute, may have
been due to economic hardship as well as political resistance.
Even if League members were enthusiastic at the beginning, things
quickly turned sour. Already in the ﬁrst few years, League campaigns
seemed aimed to a great extent at other Greeks: forcing non-
members like Carystus, at the southern tip of Euboea, into the
League, or, within a few years, ﬁghting against members who tried to
secede, as did Naxos. By mid-century, about  poleis were under
Athens’ rule, controlled by various means. Standard procedure after a
failed revolt included the taking away of walls and ships, imposition
of a military garrison, and payment of money––tribute, in the case of
those not tributary at the time, or in some cases an indemnity. Such

178
|
classical greece
cities were left with little or no means of defence or potential to unite
with other disaﬀected states. More generally, the Athenians placed a
variety of oﬃcials in the poleis to ensure loyalty, and in diﬀering
degrees impinged on local judicial and political autonomy. For
example, allies were forced to come to Athens for suits involving
Athenians, a practice that earned the latter the reputation for being
litigious (Thucydides . . ; Old Oligarch . ).
The Athenians seem to have made no attempt to disguise the
nature of the relationship: they spoke of themselves as ‘ruling over
subjects,’ not euphemistically ‘leading allies’. A public decree speaks
of ‘those over whom the Athenians rule’, and extant regulations for
cities whose revolts had been suppressed, of which the earliest
examples date to the s, invariably contain the phrase, ‘I shall obey
the Athenians’––concise testimony of the deprivation of autonomy.
Or consider the assertion, indeed, boast, of Pericles, Athens’ leading
statesman from around  until his death in , who said, accord-
ing to Thucydides, ‘only in our empire can subjects never complain
that their rulers are unworthy’ (. . ). Pericles is probably contrast-
ing Athens with Persia; that he could do so implies that some Atheni-
ans did not regard their rule as diﬀerent in kind from barbarian
empires, only better. Whether Pericles himself actually uttered these
precise words is less important than the fact that they were thought
appropriate to the occasion by a contemporary. Elsewhere, we get
closer to the truth, when Pericles and Cleon state ﬂatly: ‘we are ruling
like a tyrant over cities which do not like it!’
The economics of empire
Our sources, narrative, epigraphic, and archaeological, tell us much
about the economics of empire. From tribute the Athenians received
about  talents of silver annually, known from inscribed stelae
recording a required dedication, or quota, to Athena, beginning in
 when the treasury was moved to Athens (a decision that had
larger political and religious signiﬁcance). But they also deprived
cities of their wealth in other ways, for example, by appropriating
land and either making it sacred to Athena, to whom rents were then
due, or settling on it Athenian citizens who retained their Athenian
citizenship but lived and farmed the land of the allied city.
That last example shows how Athenians individually could beneﬁt

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
179
from empire––the settlers were probably poor citizens, thetes (see
p. ), whose status now improved. Wealthy citizens bought up land
in the archê, from which they derived income. The increased litiga-
tion from the empire beneﬁted Athenian jurors, who received a daily
wage (see p. ), and landlords in the Piraeus. Greeks within the
archê traded among themselves and with other Greeks, and the
Athenians boasted of the luxury imports they received from the east;
but those poleis and islands not in the empire could suﬀer––this may
partly explain a dramatic gap in Athenian imports in Crete through
most of the ﬁfth century.
So far as they were able, the Athenians created a ‘closed sea,’ con-
trolling grain imports from the Black Sea through the Hellespont,
and levying transit taxes on cargo destined for cities in the empire. As
the Old Oligarch states, ‘where will a city rich in timber . . . in iron,
copper, or ﬂax . . . dispose of its goods without the consent of the
rulers of the sea?’ (. ). Their interest in proﬁting from trade is best
illustrated by their decision during the Peloponnesian War to abolish
tribute in favour of a ﬁve-per-cent maritime tax imposed throughout
the archê, on the assumption that it would increase their revenue. The
measure probably failed in its objectives, but, like the attempt at some
point to impose their own currency and metrological standards on
the allies, which aimed at creating a closed economic system, it attests
to Athens’ acute awareness of the economic potential of archê.
It might be easy to regard Athens’ allies merely as victims and the
Athenians merely as oppressors; but the relationship may have been
complex. Thucydides certainly thought so. He suggested that weaker
parties in a power relationship voluntarily submit to the stronger out
of a desire for material betterment, or, more simply and tenden-
tiously, for proﬁt (the Greek word is kerdos, which means ‘gain,’ and
usually carries a negative connotation). Applied speciﬁcally to the
Athenian archê, the allies in  probably expected a tangible return,
in the form of Persian booty, on their ‘investment’ of tribute.
The Delian League and Persia
We hear of no League campaigns against Persia in the decade follow-
ing , but the Persians recovered Cyprus around . The chron-
ology of the next two decades is controversial, but around  a
League force under Cimon attacked the Persians at the Eurymedon

180
|
classical greece
river in southern Anatolia and destroyed the entire Persian ﬂeet. Fur-
ther campaigns occurred in the following years and around  a
League ﬂeet of  ships sailed to Cyprus and then to Egypt to help
its revolt from the Persian Empire. The revolt failed after six years,
and the ﬂeet was almost entirely destroyed. A few years later, Cimon,
who had been ostracized after a failed attempt to help Sparta with an
internal crisis in  (see below), led  ships to Cyprus; he died in
the course of the campaign, probably in , and the ﬂeet withdrew.
Further attacks against the Persians stopped. No contemporaries
mention it, but in the fourth century it was assumed that Athens had
made peace with Persia, the ‘Peace of Callias’.
Empire, democracy and culture
Empire and democracy were symbiotic, and each developed in tan-
dem with the other. The ‘birth’ of Athenian democracy is tradition-
ally placed around , with Cleisthenes’ reforms; but the form of
government labelled demokratia evolved gradually, based not on an
ideological, but rather on a practical principle that operated in much
of the Greek world: those who contributed militarily to the polis
should have political rights, or even political power.
The men who won Athens its power in the Greek world were not
an élite: they were the hoplites who fought at Marathon, and espe-
cially the thetes who rowed in the navy (see pp.  and ). After
the Persian Wars greater political power was extended to the demos––
the male citizenry––as a whole, so that by the mid-ﬁfth century, the
assembly was sovereign and oﬃces in which power and prestige had
been previously located were now diminished by being open to the
majority of citizens and determined by lot (see pp. , ). Many
received pay for their services, including the  Councillors and
, jurors, the latter on the proposal of Pericles, who thus promoted
the participation and therefore power of the demos. (By contrast,
Thucydides [. . ] refers to government under his leadership as
‘democracy in name, rule of the ﬁrst man in fact’).
Aristocratic opposition to democracy can be found through the
whole of the ﬁfth century (see pp.  ﬀ); so one question is, why was
it allowed to develop in this way? One answer immediately suggests
itself: the archê. The Athenian citizenry collectively wanted the archê
for the power and wealth it gave to the city, and individuals wanted it

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
181
for their private prosperity; the price (to élites) was demokratia. Thu-
cydides tells us that at its height the sacred treasuries (the traditional
repositories of public wealth) held nearly , talents of silver,
much of which must have come from the archê. Obviously the Athe-
nians had generated far more revenue than was necessary for the
military needs of the Delian League; and their overall wealth gave
them the means to spend readily and lavishly at home, in ways that
illustrate further the symbiosis between the archê and the demokratia.
Most conspicuous was a massive public works programme. The
Persians had destroyed the temples on the Acropolis and buildings
and monuments elsewhere, which the city could now aﬀord to
rebuild. The crown was the Parthenon, Athena’s temple on the
Acropolis (built in marble, not, as normal, limestone), housing a
magniﬁcent gold and ivory statue of the goddess, and most of the
city’s wealth. A marble gateway building of unprecedented scale, the
Propylaea, marked the entrance to the citadel. The demos voted and
authorized the funds for the programme, which enhanced both their
power and prestige and those of Pericles, who had proposed it. His
political enemies in Athens attempted to undermine his inﬂuence
by attacking the extravagance of the monuments. In particular,
according to Plutarch (Pericles ), Thucydides, son of Melesias (see
p. ), objected to using money from the archê on domestic building
projects. He lost the battle, and was ostracized; most Athenians did
not agree with him. The nature of the objections suggests that dissent
at that time concerned the uses of imperial wealth, not its acquisition
(or the existence of the archê).
The intertwining of religion, democracy, and empire is reﬂected
in numerous ways: in the dedication of tribute to Athena (and the
stelae recording them, set up in front of the temple); in the Great
Panathenaea (see p. ), in which Athens’ allies or subjects partici-
pated in the procession to the Acropolis; and in the opening cere-
mony of the biggest Athenian festival of drama, the Great Dionysia
(see p. ) when the annual tribute was carried onto the stage of the
theatre of Dionysus, young men whose fathers had died in war were
paraded, and public decrees honouring Athenians and foreigners
who had beneﬁted the polis were read.
Culture and politics were closely linked on the stage, in tragedies,
which reﬂected concerns and issues aﬀecting the polis, and in comed-
ies, which were overtly political and topical (see further pp. , ).

182
|
classical greece
For example, Aeschylus’ Oresteia, produced in , reﬂects the recent
curtailment of the authority and power of the Areopagus by Ephial-
tes. Aeschylus uses the stage not to criticize the development of
Athenian democracy and pine for the good old days, but to address
the theme, among others, of accommodation between tradition and
progress in political, judicial, and religious contexts. Sophocles’
Antigone, performed probably in the s––at the time when the
Parthenon was being built––highlights issues that reﬂect that more
long-term concern, the relationship between state and divine author-
ity (and family and state), and oﬀers a warning that divine justice will
prevail. Sophocles’ play and Herodotus’ Histories share the theme of
the dangers of excessive power; both can be read as warnings to
Athens.
Drama was a purely Athenian cultural form; but as such it was
unusual in terms of the broader cultural and intellectual life of the
city. While the Athenians, like other Greeks, jealously excluded for-
eigners from citizenship, they welcomed outsiders to participate in
the cultural life of the city. The building programme required expert-
ise and labour beyond what could be supplied internally, and brought
foreign craftsmen, artists, and labourers to Athens to put their talents
to work. The city was a magnet for artists and intellectuals from both
east and west, who were attracted by its wealth and opportunities to
beneﬁt from private and public patronage––the architect Hippo-
damus of Miletus, who designed the town-plan of Piraeus, the
philosophers Anaxagoras from Clazomenae and Parmenides of Elea,
the sophists Hippias of Elis and Gorgias of Leontini––so that, with
the exception of drama, the cultural and intellectual history of ﬁfth-
century Athens is a Greek, as much as an Athenian, phenomenon (see
p. ).
Sparta, Corinth, and Athens, 478–446
It is diﬃcult to extract details about Spartan politics, both because of
the lack of Spartan sources and the general secrecy of Spartan
internal life. But whatever the truth behind the diﬀerent, though not
necessarily exclusive, perspectives of Herodotus and Thucydides on
the transfer of leadership of the Greeks against Persia from Sparta to

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
183
Athens, the Spartans did allow the Athenians to emerge and then
develop as a rival superpower.
The Spartan retreat after the Persian Wars is in some respects para-
doxical and obscure, and in others explicable. On the one hand, Spar-
tan strength and inﬂuence had never been higher: its role in the
Persian Wars only enhanced its pre-eminent position as leader of the
Peloponnesian League; its control of most of the Peloponnese eﬀect-
ively muted its chief rival for power, Argos. On the other hand, Spar-
ta’s credit suﬀered abroad after the Wars, due to individuals like
Pausanias, and she became leaderless at home as a result of the vac-
uum which Pausanias’ demise created in one royal house, and the
disgrace of the other in  when a charge of bribery (to retreat from
the conquest of Thessaly) led to King Leotychidas’ exile. Perhaps as a
result, Argos reasserted itself and attempted to chip away at Spartan
control of the Peloponnese. Spartan insecurity is clearly revealed in
its behaviour during the revolt of the helots in Messenia in : when
Cimon and the Athenians showed up to help at the Spartans’ request,
the Spartans sent them home. The consequences were grave.
The Athenians broke oﬀ their alliance with the Spartans (the Hel-
lenic League, still formally in existence) and formed an alliance with
Argos, an unambiguous expression of hostility toward Sparta. During
the so-called First Peloponnesian War that followed (–), Ath-
ens allied with Thessaly and expanded its power on land, in Boeotia.
Sparta, slow to act unless forced, barely ﬁgures in much of the
military activity punctuating the conﬂict. Indeed, to say the war was
between Athens and Sparta, or to put inter-polis rivalry and
aggression over the next thirty years simply in terms of these two
superpowers, is to miss the complexity of regional conﬂict, in which
Athens’ relations with Boeotia, but most of all Corinth, occupy the
centre; ultimately, it was the threats of Sparta’s allies to defect from
the Peloponnesian League that were arguably most responsible for
the Spartan decision in  to go to war in earnest.
Corinth’s Homeric epithet, ‘wealthy,’ was no exaggeration. Its geo-
graphical position at the north–south and east–west axes of the main-
land brought great prosperity to the city through its harbours on the
Corinthian and Saronic gulfs. Corinth and Athens had been friendly
earlier in the century, as is shown by Corinth’s loan of  triremes to
Athens in the mid-s for use in their war with the island of Aegina.
Friendship was often based on common enmity and in this case both

184
|
classical greece
Athens and Corinth hated Aegina. But relations between Athens and
Corinth soured as soon as Athens allied with Megara in , after
Megara left the Peloponnesian League following a border dispute
with Corinth; they did not improve when Athens gained control of
Aegina two years later. This is a ﬁne illustration of the way in which
enmities between two poleis, often arising from border disputes,
could aﬀect inter-polis relations on a much wider scale (see further
pp. –). The Corinthians, not the Spartans, felt most threatened
by Athenian alliances and expansion during the late s and s,
for they removed all northern counterweights to Athenian power.
Without Sparta’s whole-hearted engagement, there was little real
war, and what there was ended in  with the Thirty Years Peace. Its
terms are not altogether clear, but they required Athens to give up its
mainland holdings outside Attica, and stipulated that neither side
should enter into armed conﬂict if one or the other oﬀered arbitra-
tion. They may have included a clause of autonomy for the allies of
each; but in any case, Athens retained its naval empire.
Greeks in the West 
Since the archaic period there had been Greek settlements on the
Mediterranean coasts of what are today France and Spain, but the
greatest concentration of Greeks in the west was in Sicily and south-
ern Italy. Like Greeks in Asia Minor, the Greeks of Italy and Sicily
lived cheek-by-jowl with native peoples, such as the Sicels and Elymi-
ans on Sicily. Tension and conﬂict, as well as vigorous cultural
exchange, were the norm; tensions were probably exacerbated by the
dense mixture of Ionians and Dorians: Dorian colonies from
Corinth, Megara, Crete, and Rhodes existed alongside Ionian settle-
ments from places like Euboea, Samos, and the Ionian coast. Thurii,
an Athenian colony established in / in southern Italy on the site
of Sybaris, constitutes a special case in the colonial pattern, since
individuals from several poleis, both Ionian and Dorian, joined in the
settlement. Among them was Herodotus, who settled there toward
the end of his life.
Sicily and southern Italy had material resources unknown in most
of mainland Greece, speciﬁcally an agriculturally-rich countryside,

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
185
and, in southern Italy especially, abundant timber. The prosperity of
Syracuse and other cities depended on the exploitation of Sicels, who
worked the land as serfs, and allowed the emergence of a wealthy
agricultural class, sometimes with political results. Sources speak of
democracy in Syracuse after the fall of tyranny in , but it was far
from the Athenian type (which itself was unique); political power was
extended to propertied citizens, not to the free landless residents, the
equivalent of the thetes in Athens.
The prosperity of the region attracted outsiders. A Carthaginian
invasion was defeated by Gelo, tyrant of Syracuse, at the battle of
Himera in  (the same year as Xerxes’ invasion of Greece) but the
Carthaginians continued to maintain a presence in western Sicily.
Athens’ colony at Thurii may have been intended not so much to
extend the archê as to gain a foothold in an area rich in the timber
essential for Athenian naval power––economic, not political, motives,
then (though the two are closely related). By the last third of the ﬁfth
century if not before, Athenian interest in the region, especially Sicily,
had become much more conspicuous, as is seen in her willingness to
get involved in Sicilian aﬀairs. This coincided with growing tensions
between Athens and Sparta that would result in the Peloponnesian
War, the subject of Thucydides’ History.
Thucydides and the development of a genre
‘Thucydides, an Athenian, wrote an account of the war between the
Peloponnesians and the Athenians, expecting that it would be great
and more worth writing about than previous conﬂicts.’ These words
evoke the preface of Herodotus, who much inﬂuenced Thucydides,
born c.. But Thucydides’ History (he does not in fact use the
word) reveals the development of a genre, and at the same time
Thucydides exploits, as does Herodotus, the broader intellectual cli-
mate of ﬁfth-century Athens to compose his work: the inﬂuences of
tragedy and of medical and sophistic writings can all be detected. He
restricted his subject rigorously to war (including its social, political,
and moral eﬀects), he sought explicitly to reﬁne methods of gather-
ing and assessing information about not only what was done but
what was said––a task made easier by the fact that, unlike Herodotus,

186
|
classical greece
he was writing contemporary history––and he deﬁned both the pur-
pose of historical writing and the utility of history. ‘I shall be satisﬁed
if those who want to examine the clear truth of past events and of
similar events that will occur in the future––human nature being
what it is––judge my work useful’ (. . ).
Thucydides believed that the constancy of human nature allowed
generalization from the particular, hence the lasting value of his his-
tory of the Peloponnesian War. Underlying his statement is a funda-
mental pessimism about human nature (see pp. –). Writing about
civil war, he comments, ‘many terrible things befell the cities in stasis
(civil strife), which happen and will always happen, as long as human
nature is what it is, though worse or milder and taking various forms,
according to the particular circumstances’ (. . ). It is not that
commendable portraits of cities or individuals do not appear in his
work; the problem, as Thucydides saw it, was that by nature men who
can will attempt to exercise power over others––a view expressed by
the Athenians in his ‘Melian Dialogue’ (. –; see below, p. )––
and to increase it; but the drive for expansion can lead to collapse.
This conception resonates with Herodotus’ notion of hybris. Both
historians share an interest in charting the rise and fall of power;
Thucydides’ treatment, however, diﬀers in one fundamental respect:
human actions and consequences are explicable purely in human
terms. To simplify his complex analysis, power develops through
man’s ability to marshal wealth so as to acquire it, and is exercised
and extended by proper leadership and intelligence, along with
resources; and power falls, not because of divine envy, but by the
inability to combine its ingredients successfully.
Like Herodotus, Thucydides distinguished between types of
causes:
As to why [the Athenians and Spartans] broke the peace, I have written ﬁrst
an account of the grievances and disputes, so that no one may ever wonder
what speciﬁc circumstances produced such a great war. I believe that the real
cause of the war, but the one least articulated openly, is that the growth of
Athenian power and the fear that it provoked in the Spartans, compelled war
to happen.
(. . )
With these words Thucydides begins his account of the origins of the
Peloponnesian War in eﬀect by closing discussion (‘so that no one
will ever wonder’) on its causes. In fact, people have wondered and

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
187
argued about the causes of the war, and Thucydides’ account of them,
ever since.
Thucydides’ primary concern was why war broke out at all. For
him, the ‘grievances and disputes’ did not have to result in open war,
for they did not aﬀect the two superpowers directly. Thus, the war
was really caused by the nature of Athens’ power and the fear it
provoked in the Spartans. His statement on causes and origins is
nuanced and polemical. For, in fact, the Spartans were the ones who
voted to go to war, and later held themselves responsible for refusing
an Athenian oﬀer of arbitration. Thus his claim that the Athenians
were the responsible agents is paradoxical.
Thucydides’ concentration on the ‘grievances and disputes’ is a
further polemic, this time against the popular opinion (in Athens)
that Pericles was responsible for the war by refusing to rescind the
Megarian Decree. Passed probably several years before the events of
, in retaliation for Megara’s revolt in , the decree barred Megar-
ians from using the harbours of the empire and the Athenian Agora.
The decree’s impact is unclear, but the evident vigour of the Megar-
ians’ attempts to get the decree rescinded, leading to a Spartan ulti-
matum to the Athenians to do just that or else, and a possible allusion
to it in Aristophanes’ Acharnians of , suggest that it was eﬀective.
The Peloponnesian War
The ‘grievances and disputes’ which led to a Spartan declaration of
war concerned two minor incidents, each on the periphery of the
Greek mainland. The ﬁrst, conﬂict between Corinth and its colony
Corcyra over Epidamnus, itself a Corcyraean colony on the Illyrian
coast, illustrates the tensions that could exist between colony and
mother city over their relationship and obligations. Stasis in Epidam-
nus led one side to appeal to Corcyra for help. When the Corcyraeans
refused, the Epidamnians approached Corinth. The Corinthians
agreed to become involved, partly from hatred toward Corcyra for
not acting appropriately toward its mother city. Corcyra, determined
that Corinth should not interfere in the aﬀairs of its colony, per-
suaded the Athenians to give military support, though the Athenians
insisted on a purely defensive alliance. But in a minor naval battle, the

188
|
classical greece
Athenians and Corinthians clashed, and thus the Athenians, because
they fought an ally of Sparta, could be accused of having broken the
Thirty Years Peace. In the second incident, Potidaea, in the Chalcidice
in the northern Aegean, an Athenian subject but a Corinthian colony,
received aid from the Corinthians in a revolt from Athens, and the
Athenians besieged the town. (The revolt was quelled, but only after
two years.)
These two episodes, like the Ionian Revolt, would have virtually
disappeared from history had not greater signiﬁcance been placed on
them, in this case, by Sparta’s allies, who intensiﬁed pressure on her
to bring Athens down. In , Spartan envoys issued three sets of
ultimatums to the Athenians (see p. ), but they were clearly pre-
texts, not serious attempts to reach an agreement, for each was fol-
lowed by another more serious. The ﬁnal ultimatum said simply: ‘let
the Greeks be free and autonomous.’ It strains credulity that the
Spartans believed the Athenians would seriously entertain it (at least
at this time; two years later some Athenians advocated giving up the
archê). On the other hand, lest we consider the Athenians’ oﬀer to
arbitrate as completely well-intentioned, we need to recognize that
the possession of their archê was non-negotiable.
We can see, then, how the minor, local events of  were put to use
as cards in a much larger game: should the Athenians be allowed their
empire? The answer was clear to the Corinthians, Megarians, Aegi-
netans and other maritime allies of Sparta; but whether the Spartans
would have responded as they did without the prodding of their
allies––which included threats of withdrawal from the League––is
not clear.
It is a mistake to think of Athenian and Spartan attitudes as mono-
lithic, a point which holds for their history as a whole, and which
reinforces the claim that war at that time was not inevitable. The
Spartan king Archidamus argued that it was premature to attempt
war with Athens (it is thus ironic, then, that we give his name to the
ﬁrst ten years’ war). But his view was in the minority: the majority
were in favour of it, inﬂuenced by the opinion of an ephor, Sthene-
laïdas, that the Spartans would win. The Spartans, acknowledged as
the best hoplites in Greece, whose lives were devoted to intense mili-
tary training (see p. ), had not (as far as we know) fought a major
battle in  years; their vote may be partly explained by eagerness to
put their training to use. Likewise in Athens, Pericles urged the

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
189
Athenians not to give in to Spartan demands, even if it meant war;
Thucydides omits the counter-argument (as usual in the case of
Pericles), but it can be inferred from Pericles’ remarks that not all
agreed.
Thucydides gauges the mood on the eve of war: ‘There was tre-
mendous goodwill toward the Spartans, especially as they proclaimed
that they were freeing Greece’ (. . ). There is more than a touch of
sarcasm in this comment on the Spartans’ mission, for Athens’ allies
soon appreciated the hollowness of the promise: the Spartans did
little liberating until , and what they did then owed most to the
individual energy and initiative of the general Brasidas. Otherwise,
when they tried, they failed. Another general, when presented with a
ripe opportunity to eﬀect revolts in Asia Minor in , instead but-
chered innocent Ionians; ‘an odd way to free Ionians’ was the sar-
castic comment this drew from those accompanying him. Spartan
behaviour after their victory in the Peloponnesian War shows most
clearly their interpretation of liberation, when they placed garrisons
and military oﬃcials in Ionian cities, and subsequently handed them
over to Persia (see below, pp. –).
At the outbreak of war, both sides tried to strengthen their coali-
tions further. Athens wooed the Macedonian king Perdiccas and the
Thracian king Sitalces––acts which demonstrate that they judged
their ability to hold onto the northern Aegean cities critical for suc-
cess, as indeed they were: the north was rich in timber and in silver,
two commodities that underpinned their naval power. They also
cemented alliances in Sicily and southern Italy; the Spartans also sent
requests west to their own allies for money and ships (though in vain;
neither ever came). Ironically, both sides sent embassies to Persia for
assistance. But the Persians stayed out of the war until its ﬁnal stage;
then their role proved decisive.
The Archidamian War (431–421)
The ﬁrst stage of the war provides an instructive case-study in failed
strategy and expectations. In his speech before the Spartans in ,
Archidamus posed the crucial questions:
With what are we to ﬁght a war with Athens? With our ships? There we are
painfully inferior. With money? There we fare even worse, since we have no
public funds and scattered private wealth . . . so unless we can beat them at

190
|
classical greece
sea or deprive them of the revenues which support their navy, we shall
lose.
Thucydides (. . )
Archidamus’ words were prophetic (in the short term) and under-
scored the basic problem: how does a land power win against a sea
power? His words assume the superiority of naval power, but that was
a minority view, for Thucydides says elsewhere that most people
expected the Spartans to win within a few years, given their superior-
ity on land. The failure of Archidamus’ words to have a decisive
impact, and the judgement of most Greeks, reﬂect both Greek lack of
understanding about the nature of sea power and the resources
underpinning it, and a fundamental miscalculation based on ideol-
ogy as well as economics: the invasion of  notwithstanding, most
Greeks evidently thought it inconceivable that the Athenians or any
Greeks, when faced with an invasion of their territory, would not
defend their land and homes (in which case the Spartans would
surely win).
Pericles, however, persuaded the Athenians to abandon the coun-
tryside, as they had in , but this time they moved within the city
walls, which since mid-century had been connected to the Piraeus by
a set of ‘long walls.’ In control of the sea, the Athenians would be able
to provision themselves by imports; they would allow the Spartans to
invade their land and not ﬁght in its defence. Meanwhile they would
attack the Peloponnese by sea.
The test case was the ﬁrst invasion, in summer . The Pelopon-
nesian army under King Archidamus reached the borders of Attica
and encamped at the deme of Acharnae. As the Spartans hoped that
they would be, the Athenians were furious at seeing their land rav-
aged (especially, not surprisingly, the Acharnians); but Pericles was
able to prevent them from marching out to meet the Spartans, only
allowing small units of cavalry to keep the Peloponnesians away from
the city walls. At the same time, they sent a ﬂeet of  ships to the
Peloponnese. This was to be the larger pattern of the Archidamian
war: Spartan invasions of Attica, followed by Athenian naval raids on
the Peloponnese. It was virtually destined for stalemate.
But the war was also punctuated by several important events that
gave each side advantages that could have been more eﬀectively
exploited. In , a plague broke out in Athens, said to have come
from Ethiopia. Thucydides, who caught it, describes its symptoms in

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
191
painful, meticulous detail ‘so that it might be recognized if it ever
broke out again’ (. . ). Another unintentionally ironic statement,
since no modern attempt to identify the disease has been wholly
successful. The disease spread rapidly because of the concentration of
people in the city, lasted two years (with a brief recurrence in ),
and killed oﬀ thousands, including, according to Plutarch, Pericles.
The Athenians were unable to prevent Sparta’s destruction of Plataea
in , a city to which they had been so closely tied throughout the
century.
A revolt in  by most of the cities of Lesbos (one of three islands
which retained a navy, and were, strictly speaking, autonomous) was
timely: the Lesbians banked on Athens’ weakness from the plague
and the hope of Spartan help, but the Athenians were able to put it
down before the Spartans arrived. Two years later, in a brilliant string
of manoeuvres engineered by Demosthenes, the Athenians not only
planted a fort at Pylos in Messenia, but even forced the surrender of
 Spartan hoplites blockaded on the island of Sphacteria. Thucy-
dides commented that nothing in the war surprised the Greeks more
than the surrender, for the Spartans regarded capitulation in battle as
anathema.
The war could have ended then (at least temporarily), but Cleon––
whom Thucydides describes as ‘the most violent and persuasive’ of
Athens’ leaders at the time (. . )––persuaded the Athenians to
reject all peace proposals; the war continued. In the following year,
, the Spartans struck back when Brasidas marched north and per-
suaded many Athenian allies in Macedonia and Thrace to revolt,
including the important colony of Amphipolis––which the historian
Thucydides, the Athenian general in the area, arrived too late to
prevent surrendering (he was exiled in consequence). Brasidas’ suc-
cesses hit the Athenians hard, as did the failure, through an error of
co-ordination, of an intricate strategy to take control of a number of
Boeotian cities on the same day, and the resulting death of nearly
, Athenians at the battle of Delium. Worn down by the years at
war, Sparta and Athens signed a peace treaty in ; that it happened
then owes as much to the deaths of Cleon and Brasidas in  as to
the eﬀorts of the Athenian Nicias, whom, according to Plutarch,
people believed to have been ‘responsible for the peace, as Pericles
had been for the war’ (Nicias ).

192
|
classical greece
The Peace of Nicias
The Peace aimed at ﬁfty years; it lasted six. Technically the Pelopon-
nesian War consisted of two ten-year wars interrupted by this peace;
but its unpeaceful nature––the continued agitation of the Corinthi-
ans, and the battle of Mantinea in , which pitted the Athenians and
Spartans and their respective allies against each other, among other
episodes––led Thucydides to regard the entire period – as a
single war.
Thucydides records that Pericles had warned the Athenians in 
not to expand the empire while they were at war with Sparta. It has
been a subject of great controversy whether the Athenians followed
this advice after the statesman died (or even during his life). Most
questionable during the Archidamian war was an expedition to Sicily
in  in response to an appeal from their ally Leontini (whose
ambassadors included Gorgias, the sophist), which was at war with
the Syracusans. Merely aid to an ally? Thucydides raises doubts when
he comments that the Athenians’ real reason for helping was to ‘pre-
vent the exportation of grain to the Peloponnese and to test the
possibility of conquering Sicily’ (. ).
In  the Athenians conquered the Dorian, though neutral, island
of Melos, killing the men and enslaving the women and children.
Thucydides chooses this episode in the war to illuminate, in his
Melian Dialogue, the relationship between human nature and power
and the moral dilemma accompanying such power in a world in
which freedom has ideological primacy: those who have power will
exercise their freedom to extend it, while the desire for freedom will
make weaker parties resist. (Contrast his claim elsewhere that weaker
parties will willingly submit in the interest of proﬁt.) The unusual
dialogue form prevents the reader from being comfortable or satis-
ﬁed for long with either position; this may be why he uses it, rather
than the standard set speech, in which the rhetorical weight would
ultimately rest on the last speech.
The most audacious attempt to expand the archê came in , when
the Athenians sent a massive expedition to Sicily. As in , they were
answering a call for help, this time from their ally Egesta, at war with
neighbouring Selinus (an ally of Syracuse). But once again Thucy-
dides provides an ulterior motive: ‘the real reason [literally the “truest
explanation,” the same phrase he used in his statement on the causes

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
193
of the Peloponnesian War as a whole] for the expedition was a desire
to conquer the whole island’ (. . ). Athenians at the time may have
recalled another great Greek expedition overseas, to Troy; Euripides’
Trojan trilogy was produced in .
As always, democratic decision-making cannot be understood
without appreciating the role of individual leaders in the process, in
this case the young and ﬂamboyant Alcibiades, pitted against the
older and more cautious Nicias. Nicias tried vainly to dissuade the
Athenians from going, aware of the folly of beginning a major con-
quest while war at home was simmering. Alcibiades pushed for the
expedition, eager for glory and the wealth necessary to sustain a
lavish lifestyle, and persuaded the Athenians. Both Thucydides and
Plutarch portray Alcibiades as a charismatic, fascinating, and ulti-
mately dangerous ﬁgure (from the democratic standpoint). He was
immensely popular among the citizens, but at the same time his
personal excesses caused unease––what was he after? Tyranny? At
least this was the view encouraged by his political enemies.
Shortly before the expedition was to depart in , many Herms,
pillar-like representations of the god Hermes with erect phalluses
that marked and protected boundaries, were mutilated; at the same
time, reports came of mock celebrations of the Eleusinian Mysteries
in private homes. These religious oﬀences were taken as ill omens for
the expedition and threats to the democracy. Alcibiades was accused,
but his complicity was unproven. The expedition sailed, under his
leadership (as well as that of Nicias and Lamachus), but his enemies
took advantage of his absence, played on the Athenians’ fear of tyr-
anny, and recalled him to stand trial; en route home Alcibiades ﬂed to
Sparta. Thucydides (. . –, compare . . ) commented that
Alcibiades’ removal from the scene did more to hurt the Athenians
than any other single factor. An exaggeration, perhaps, but there is
some truth to it.
The expedition ended in disaster for the Athenians in  after their
defeat in a naval battle against the Syracusans, who were aided by the
Spartans. The disaster was not inevitable; it resulted primarily from
over-extension and failures in judgement, especially Nicias’. As
Thucydides put it, ‘the Athenians were beaten at all points and
altogether; all that they suﬀered was great; they suﬀered, as the saying
goes, with a total destruction, their ﬂeet, their army, all was destroyed,
and few of many returned home’ (. . ). The survivors returned to

194
|
classical greece
a polis in crisis, not only because of the disaster. Earlier that year,
on the advice of Alcibiades, turned traitor, the Spartans built a fort in
Decelea in north-east Attica; they were now a permanent presence
and could cause Athens serious economic damage.
The ﬁnal stage (413–404)
The Spartans now attacked the Athenians with vigour and sustained
eﬀort where it hurt: eﬀecting revolts in Ionia and ﬁghting the Atheni-
ans at sea. The roles of Alcibiades, Lysander, a particularly able Spar-
tan general, and Persia were crucial. Alcibiades, ejected from Sparta
(reportedly for sleeping with King Agis’ wife), oﬀered his services to
Persia, advising Tissaphernes, a satrap (governor of a district of the
Persian Empire) on how to end the war to the King’s advantage. But,
as always, he looked out for himself: his real desire was to return to
his native city. Testimony to his personal power and charisma was his
ability in  to return to favour and be elected general––astonishing
not only because of his double betrayal, but also because of his part in
the oligarchical coup of  (see p. ). But, although he won a naval
battle against the Peloponnesians, he again fell out of favour and
withdrew.
The Spartans ﬁnally won through Lysander’s abilities as a general
and his friendship with Cyrus, the son of the Persian King, who
ﬁnanced the Spartan navy more regularly and fully than it had been.
But luck was involved as well: in , the Spartans took the Athenian
navy by surprise oﬀ Aegospotami, on the north shore of the Helle-
spont, and defeated them. Then they sailed to Athens, blockaded the
harbour, and forced the complete surrender of the Athenians.
The Boeotians and Corinthians urged the Spartans to give the
Athenians a taste of their own medicine and do to them what they
had done to others, notably at Melos; instead the Spartans allowed
them to survive, with twelve ships, no city walls, and, it hardly needed
to be stated, no archê. The historian Xenophon records that the
Spartans refused to destroy (literally, ‘enslave’) Athens because of
its role in the Persian Wars; more likely, they saw value in leaving
Athens, between Corinth and Boeotia, as a buﬀer.

the fifth century: political and military narrative
|
195
Athenian culture during the Peloponnesian War
The near-three-decade conﬂict exacerbated tensions between public
and private, polis and oikos, and magniﬁed the impact that individual
self-interest had on the larger political and military spheres. Our best
evidence for this comes from Athens, but it reﬂects a broader phe-
nomenon. These tensions occupy centre stage in the theatre. Both
tragedy and comedy, in diﬀerent ways, present a polis in crisis, unable
to function properly as a political system or to mediate the competing
claims of family and state. The harsh eﬀect of war on the family and
criticism of the political structure inform the treatment of myth in
Euripides’ tragedies (e.g. Suppliants; Trojan Women), by contrast to
Aeschylus’ focus on the community. It is perhaps no accident that
Euripides’ masterpiece, the Bacchae, least reﬂects the problems of the
polis; he wrote it in Macedon at the end of the ﬁfth century, after
leaving his native city.
Aristophanes’ comedies regularly include often vicious attacks on
politicians, especially Cleon, portraying them as corrupt, self-
interested ﬁgures. Other plays feature private individuals who take
matters into their own hands to do what the polis would not accom-
plish. Dicaeopolis, the peasant protagonist of Acharnians of ,
implements a private peace with Sparta; for him the problem was
chieﬂy the corruption of politicians like Cleon. In Lysistrata, pro-
duced in , after the Sicilian disaster and around the time of the
oligarchic coup, the women of Athens seize the Acropolis and with-
hold sex until their husbands (= the polis) reset their priorities and
make peace with Sparta (see p. ).
Figures on the periphery of politics also come in for attack in
Aristophanes. Clouds reﬂects popular, critical attitudes towards the
sophists whose teaching of rhetoric was important in a democracy
which placed a premium on the ability to persuade (see pp. –).
Their emphasis on techniques of argument, caricatured as ‘making
the weaker argument the stronger’, are presented as fostering a
sense of moral relativism, a dangerous development in a city in a
protracted, devastating war.

196
|
classical greece
Conclusion
The war left the Hellenic world weakened economically in the short
term at least, and arguably with a changed perception of the polis.
The increase in mercenaries in the fourth century, often, as in the case
of the Athenian historian Xenophon, in the service of Persians, is one
reﬂection of the economic, political, and social eﬀects (see pp. –).
The war also imparted a lesson: not that archê would not work in a
world which placed primacy on freedom and independence, but that
one had to try to do it better. This lesson is crucial for understanding
the history of the fourth century and the success of the Macedonians
Philip and Alexander in altering forever the political landscape of
Greece. Finally, the decisive role of the Persians in the last stage of the
war is ﬁtting: not only did they, in a sense, close as well as open ﬁfth-
century Greek history, but their role also set a precedent for the
history of the next half-century.

8
The fourth century:
political and military
narrative
Robin Osborne
Discerning a pattern
In  bc a long-running dispute between Phocis and Locris in
central Greece, over border territory and the pasturing of sheep, led
to an armed invasion of Locrian territory by the Phocian army. The
Locrians turned to their Theban allies for help, and the Thebans
invaded Phocis. The Phocians sent an embassy to the Spartans, who
agreed to attack Thebes. So began what has become known as the
‘Corinthian War’, a conﬂict between Sparta and her loyal Pelopon-
nesian allies on the one hand, and the Thebans, Corinthians,
Athenians, and their allies on the other, which was ended by the
threat of Persian intervention.
In a sense, the events of  seem familiar enough. It had, after all,
been action by a third party, Corcyra, that had acted as a catalyst to
the Peloponnesian War (above, p. ). But in other ways the events
of  reveal a changed world. The reason why Corcyra’s approach to
Athens for an alliance in the s was so important was that Corcyra
was a city whose military power had long been far from negligible
(Thucydides [. . ] held that the earliest of all naval conﬂicts had
been between Corinth and Corcyra), whose friendship had long been
courted by other powers, and which occupied a strategically vital
position controlling the route from Greece to Italy. Athens could not

198
|
classical greece
aﬀord to turn down the opportunity of acquiring an ally such as
Corcyra, and the Peloponnesian League could not lightly allow
Corcyra’s might to be transferred to a power about whose ambitions
it was increasingly worried. But Phocis and Locris were not like
Corcyra; the Locrians had no special resources to oﬀer, and the stra-
tegic importance of Phocis, commanding the easiest route north into
Thessaly, had no direct bearing on the inter-city tensions of the s,
which focused heavily on the cities of southern Greece.
Trying to answer the question of why the dispute between Phocis
and Locris led to general war brings us up against another feature
that separates the history of the later ﬁfth from the history of the
fourth century. For better or worse, and most scholars have been
happy to believe it is for the better, we have eﬀectively just one
account of most of the events of the second half of the ﬁfth century,
the account given by Thucydides and copied by later writers. For
events of the fourth century we often have more than one independ-
ent account, and the accounts are frequently not just diﬀerent but
contradictory. In this case, we have one account in the history
(Hellenica) which Xenophon wrote as a continuation of Thucydides,
covering events from  to , and which has come down to us
intact, and another account in the fragments of a history which prob-
ably also took up where Thucydides broke oﬀ (and continued to ),
and which is known as the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia (‘the account of
Greek aﬀairs from Oxyrhynchus’) because recovered from the rub-
bish dumps of that Egyptian town. Xenophon (Hellenica . . –)
says that the Phocian attack was precipitated by the anti-Spartan
leaders at Thebes persuading the Opuntian (i.e. eastern) Locrians to
provoke the Phocians; the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia () says that those
Theban leaders persuaded the Phocians to attack the western Locrians.
When faced with contradictory accounts of the same events, it is
tempting to blame the authors of those accounts. Scholars have
pointed to the frequency with which the surviving fragments of the
Hellenica Oxyrhynchia involve quite complicated stratagems to
suggest bias there, or to Xenophon’s demonstrable errors and simpli-
ﬁcations elsewhere to suggest that he is mistaken here too. But the
signiﬁcance of the disagreement between these two writers, both con-
temporary with the events they describe, goes well beyond the issue
of their personal slants or incompetences. In the ﬁfth century the
major powers, Athens and Sparta, entered upon oﬀensives and

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
199
alliances only after open debate, in the citizen assembly at Athens, in
their own assembly of Spartiates and then in a council of their allies
at Sparta. It was the interests of the major powers that determined the
course of events. Here, however, events are being swung by decisions
taken by small political units, eﬀectively by tiny numbers of indi-
viduals, and on the basis of more or less secret communications. For
the ﬁrst time in Greek history we see a domino eﬀect at work in inter-
city relations, where the changed status of a single piece, however
unimportant in its own right, sets oﬀ a chain of reactions that leads
most of the Greek mainland to almost a decade of sporadic warfare.
The historian who could reasonably discover the lines of the argu-
ment at big meetings in Athens and Sparta, and the decisions taken
there, was in no position to know exactly who had said what to whom
in the private exchanges between individual inﬂuential politicians,
particularly when those politicians had no interest in revealing what
they had been up to. In the absence of ﬁrm information, rumour and
speculation become potent political weapons.
Why had Athens’ defeat in the Peloponnesian War so changed the
nature of inter-city relations? Athens’ ﬁfth-century empire had been
sustained by the power of the Athenian navy, and Sparta’s Pelopon-
nesian League had been increasingly sustained by fear of Athens. The
destruction of Athenian power left Sparta’s most powerful allies feel-
ing that the League had lost its rationale, and worrying about the
power now in the hands of the Spartans, who they considered had
taken more than their fair share of the proﬁts of the war. The Thebans
unsuccessfully advocated turning Athens’ territory into sheep pasture
to prevent Athenian human resources being added to Sparta, and
then deﬁed Spartan prohibitions on helping the opponents of the
puppet government of the Thirty whose installation at Athens was
overseen by the Spartan architect of victory, Lysander. The ﬁrst forty
years of the fourth century were to be dominated by Sparta, Athens,
and Thebes; the acute contemporary observer at the end of the Pelo-
ponnesian War would have had little diﬃculty in working out what
the crucial issues were going to be: could Sparta maintain the domin-
ance that victory had given her? Would Athens recover as a major
power? Would Thebes transform herself from being a thorn in the
side of Sparta and Athens to being a major independent power?
At the moment of victory the Spartans seem to have had no settled
long-term policy. Some Spartans wanted to take over the Athenian

200
|
classical greece
empire and run it to Sparta’s proﬁt. Details are few and far between
in our sources, but garrisons and garrison commanders (who were
called ‘harmosts’) seem to have been quite widely installed, small
groups of men willing to collaborate with the Spartans were
entrusted with the government of cities which had formerly been
democracies under the Athenian empire, and Sparta extracted large
sums of money from her new allies. Other Spartans were worried by
the implications of this policy: Spartiate numbers were not large (see
further below, pp. –), former helots could not always be trusted
when away from Sparta, and unpopularity was not something to be
readily courted. In  the ephors elected at Sparta seem to have all
been advocates of a more conciliatory policy: they removed Spartan
garrisons and puppet governments and when the king Pausanias was
put on trial for eﬀecting such a policy at Athens they voted solidly,
and successfully, for his acquittal.
Those who were opposed to Sparta acquiring new commitments
far from home did not necessarily believe in relaxing the grip on the
old allies of the League. From  to  Sparta engaged in war with
Elis, citing anti-Spartan manipulation of the Olympic games and her
formation in  of an alliance with Mantinea, Argos, and Athens,
and insisting that Elis should allow the other cities in the region to be
autonomous. After invading and ravaging Elis Sparta got its way; Elis
was left seriously weakened, although still in charge of the Olympic
games. Other cities of the Peloponnese waited for their turn: the
small city of Phlius in the north-east Peloponnese was pleasantly
surprised, in the late s, when the Spartan garrison, which it had
been forced to call in because of the danger from Corinth and her
allies, did not take the pro-Spartan side in an internal conﬂict or
interfere with her constitution (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ).
The new century saw a new king in Sparta. The accession of
Agesilaus to the throne of Agis profoundly aﬀected the course of
Greek history, in particular ensuring that relations with Persia were as
dominant an element in the fourth century as they had been in the
ﬁfth. Agesilaus had ambitions of his own, but he was also inﬂuenced
by Lysander, one of those who had worked hardest to secure that
Agesilaus became king and the great advocate of garrisons and foreign
commitments. In  Sparta had agreed to support Cyrus in his bid
to usurp the Persian throne from his brother on the death of his
father Darius, and Cyrus’ death in the attempt had left Sparta

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
201
compromised with the new Persian king, Artaxerxes. The Persian
satrap, Tissaphernes, took this opportunity to open hostilities towards
the Greek cities of Asia Minor, and Sparta responded to their appeal
ﬁrst by sending troops under, successively, Thibron and Dercyllidas.
Then, in , following news of further hostile preparations by Persia,
Sparta launched a major expedition led by Agesilaus himself.
Agesilaus’ expedition gave the other Greeks what they took to be
a clear answer to their last outstanding question. The harmosts,
garrisons, puppet governments, and ways in which Thibron and
Dercyllidas had abused their powers had shown what Spartan inten-
tions were towards the newly liberated cities; the invasion of Elis had
shown Sparta’s attitude to her old allies; now Agesilaus’ expedition to
Asia Minor conﬁrmed that Sparta did indeed have expansionist aims.
When other cities were invited to contribute troops to the expedition,
the Boeotians, Athenians, and Corinthians refused to do so, and
when Agesilaus attempted to suggest that his expedition was like
Agamemnon’s to Troy by sacriﬁcing at the Boeotian town of Aulis,
the Boeotian commanders (Boeotarchs) had the sacriﬁce disrupted
(Xenophon, Hellenica . . –).
Mounting grievances, and the opportunity presented by the
absence of the more aggressive of the Spartan kings, Agesilaus, with a
sizeable army, transformed the mood of the cities. When in / the
Athenian Council secretly dispatched a single trireme to oﬀer support
to Conon, the Athenian who was serving as admiral for the Persian
ﬂeet, there was an outcry as soon as the event became public, and the
Athenian assembly, although in general hostile to the Spartans, was
frightened into disowning the action (Hellenica Oxyrhynchia –). In
the summer of , by contrast, the Athenians voted overwhelmingly
to join the Thebans in war against Sparta (Xenophon, Hellenica . .
).
The domino eﬀect of the Phocian invasion of Locris certainly
depended on particular historical conditions. The nervousness that
Athens displayed over sending help to Conon in / and her con-
trasting willingness to join Thebes in all-out war with Sparta in 
are both products of a world in which Sparta is suﬃciently frighten-
ing that no city will take an initiative, because of the consequences of
isolation, but every city is on the watch for an opportunity to join
others if only they will make the ﬁrst move.
The Corinthian War failed to change those conditions. Sparta

202
|
classical greece
failed to co-ordinate a two-pronged attack on the Boeotians, and
Lysander was killed in a Spartan defeat at Haliartus in Boeotia (King
Pausanias was blamed for not arriving in time, tried and exiled).
Despite the poor performance of their allies, the Spartans redressed
this with a victory at Nemea in the north-east Peloponnese in late
spring ; later that year Agesilaus, recalled from Asia Minor where
he had achieved nothing of moment, was narrowly victorious in a
further battle at Coronea in Boeotia. But shortly before this Conon
and the Persian satrap Pharnabazos had destroyed Spartan naval
power in a battle oﬀ Cnidus. Continued warfare in the territory of
Corinth led to a political crisis there, which ended with some pro-
Spartan Corinthians being killed, others handing over the Corinthian
port of Lechaeum to Sparta, and Corinth joining itself to Argos.
Violent political conﬂict focusing on a foreign policy issue was com-
mon (above pp. –), but the union of Corinth and Argos in  was
unprecedented and indicates the unusually high stakes for which the
anti-Spartan alliance saw itself as ﬁghting. Peace negotiations in 
came to nothing, and the theatres of war diversiﬁed. The Athenians
resumed naval activity in the Aegean, and then in , fatally, allied
themselves with Acoris who was leading a revolt of Egypt against the
Persian King. The Spartan Antalcidas was able to use this action to
persuade the Persian king Artaxerxes that the Athenians, not the
Spartans, were the real threat to him, and in  a combination of
the fear that Persia would once more intervene on the side of the
Spartans, and a blockade of the Hellespont that was starving Athens,
brought about a peace agreement.
A pattern repeated
In the long term the most important feature of the King’s Peace, as it
is called, of  was that it admitted Persian overlordship of all cities
in Asia Minor and Cyprus; in the short term what had most eﬀect
was the stipulation of autonomy for all other cities. Agesilaus saw to it
that, when the Greek cities got together to swear to the Peace, this
autonomy clause was interpreted to mean breaking up not just the
union of Corinth and Argos but also the Boeotian confederacy
(Xenophon, Hellenica . .  ﬀ.). At the end of this ﬁrst round of

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
203
conﬂict, Sparta had apparently succeeded in establishing at least a
sort of dominance; Athens had managed a limited recovery––she was
no longer restricted to a twelve-ship navy––but Thebes was weak-
ened, unable any longer to determine the actions of the other cities of
Boeotia. What happened to Thebes is indeed a clear sign that it was
Spartan rather than Persian interests that determined the nature of
the King’s Peace. Only some Spartans, however, will have welcomed
the position in which the Peace left Sparta. The opportunity, open in
 and taken from  onwards, of pursuing an expansionist policy
in Asia Minor was forgone; Spartan leadership in the Greek world
was now to be limited to the mainland and Aegean islands.
Sparta lost little time in showing that, as in , she intended to
exploit peace to advance her position. In  she complained that her
ally Mantinea had helped Argos and not been prompt in supporting
campaigns; she besieged the city, demolished its walls, and split it up
into the four or ﬁve villages from which it had been formed (Xeno-
phon, Hellenica . .  ﬀ.). In the following year Sparta insisted that
political exiles were restored to Phlius and when they complained
that their property was not properly restored to them, Sparta
besieged that city too and installed a new government. No other city
intervened to resist Spartan action, but as they looked on, all must
have recalled what Sparta had done to Elis less than  years
previously.
If the terms of the peace ruled out opportunities for Spartan glory
in Asia Minor, there were other areas of Greece which oﬀered com-
parable opportunities. In  envoys came from Acanthus and Apol-
lonia in the Chalcidice to complain of aggression from the city of
Olynthus and to warn that the Olynthians were seeking to strengthen
their position by alliance with Athens and Thebes. The Spartans
consulted their allies, who agreed to assist the campaign against Olyn-
thus on condition that they could substitute cash payments for men.
While the full force was being mustered, Sparta sent ahead an
advance force of , made up of freed helots, perioikoi, and light
troops from Arcadia. Further troops were to follow, and eventually a
force led by king Agesipolis, who was accompanied by  Spartiate
advisers, ‘just like Agesilaus going to Asia’ (Xenophon, Hellenica
. . ).
As in the s, so again in the late s, our contemporary sources
claim that the pattern of Spartan disciplining of Peloponnesian allies

204
|
classical greece
and promotion of interests abroad was disrupted by the secret The-
ban initiatives. But, whereas in  it was the anti-Spartan leaders who
ensured the escalation of hostilities between Locris and Phocis, in 
it was, according to Xenophon’s account (Hellenica . .  ﬀ.), the
pro-Spartan leader at Thebes who approached Phoebidas, the
Spartiate taking a second contingent of troops north for the war
with Olynthus, and persuaded him to take advantage of the
occurrence of the women’s festival of the Thesmophoria, to occupy
the Theban acropolis, and secure ﬁrm control of Thebes for the pro-
Spartan faction. This grotesque breach of the King’s Peace divided
Spartan opinion: Phoebidas was tried, but only ﬁned; at Thebes the
pro-Athenian leader, Ismenias, was tried and condemned to death;
the Spartan garrison remained at Thebes. Elsewhere there was no
division of opinion: Spartan action was seen as an impious outrage
inviting (and in due course receiving) divine vengeance.
General warfare did not immediately follow the Spartan seizure of
the Theban acropolis, but diplomatic initiatives increased in intensity.
Already in the middle s Athens had begun to accumulate friends
and allies, oﬀering honours to Hebryzelmis of Thrace in /, tax
concessions to her friends exiled from Thasos, Byzantium, and
Mantinea, and securing alliance with Chios (Harding , ). By the
end of the s, to judge from a pamphlet (the Panegyricus) written
by the Athenian political commentator Isocrates, those who dreamed
of renewing the Athenian ﬁfth-century empire thought that they
could see a route to its restoration in the unpopularity of Sparta and
the resentment at the way that the King’s Peace had conceded control
of the Greek cities of Asia Minor to Persia. Three years later a new
Athenian empire was in existence, and the Greek world was entering
upon another decade of desultory warfare.
In , from an Athenian base and with some support from Athens,
the Theban exiles launched an attack on their home city and ousted
the Spartan garrison. Sparta invaded Boeotia and left a garrison at
Thespiae. Open war seemed imminent. Not certain that she was
ready for war, Athens condemned the generals who had helped expel
the Spartan garrison from Thebes, and stepped up her diplomatic
activity, forming alliances with Byzantium and preparing the ground
for a much more extensive network of allies. Sparta responded by
sending envoys to Athens, but while they were there, another
Spartiate, Sphodrias the garrison commander at Thespiae, decided––

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
205
perhaps because the Thebans bribed him (Xenophon, Hellenica . .
)––to march on the Piraeus. He never got there, but his action (for
which he was tried, but acquitted (see above, p. ), stimulated the
Athenians to seek alliance with Thebes and to launch a new confeder-
acy ‘in order that the Spartans may allow the Greeks to be free’
(Harding . ). The Athenians promised that there would be no
garrisons, no Athenian magistrates, no tribute, and no taking over of
allied land: the old empire without the old abuses.
The history of the s is a history of both Athens and Thebes
vigorously extending their power, and of Sparta posturing ineﬀectu-
ally in response. Aegean cities, many of which can have had no fear of
Sparta but which may have had worries about Persia, joined the new
Athenian confederacy in large numbers: the names of more than ﬁfty
cities were recorded on the confederacy’s charter in the ﬁrst three or
four years. Spartan attempts to resist by force Athens’ recruitment of
further allies in the Ionian sea in the middle of the decade met with
no lasting success, although the Athenians found the ﬁnancial burden
of increased naval activity hard to bear, despite having reorganized
their taxation system at home. In Boeotia cities were one by one
coerced by Thebes into a new confederacy––or completely destroyed
if, like Plataea, they resisted. Sparta kept a permanent garrison in
Boeotia, and both Spartan kings led invasions into Boeotia during
the decade; they achieved little except ensuring that Theban policy
remained single-minded and Theban troops remained well trained:
in  the Theban general Pelopidas inﬂicted a clear defeat on troops
from the Spartan garrison at Orchomenus.
The King’s Peace had been renewed in , without serving as any
brake on Theban aggression, and in , as Thebes began to turn her
attentions north to Phocis, a further congress was held in Sparta.
Agreement to renew the Peace was reached, but at the last minute
Thebes refused to sign unless she could sign for the whole of Boeotia,
comparing the way in which Sparta signed for Lakonia, which as well
as Sparta contained other cities inhabited by perioikoi.Unable to tol-
erate the Theban claim, Agesilaus excluded them from the peace and
diverted the army that was aiding Phocis to attack Thebes. After
initially avoiding conﬂict with the main Theban army, the Spartan
king Cleombrotus gave battle at Leuctra in south-west Boeotia, and
suﬀered a major defeat; novel tactics by the Theban general Epami-
nondas, who massed his troops at one wing, left , of the army of

206
|
classical greece
Sparta and her allies dead, including  of the  Spartiates
present.
The decades of uncertainty
Of all battles in Greek history perhaps only the battles of Marathon
and Plataea in the Persian war (above, pp. –, ) proved compar-
able turning-points. Three factors made this battle crucial: it emascu-
lated Sparta, it opened up a policy division at Thebes, and it showed
up the unreality of Persian intervention.
Leuctra was not the ﬁrst defeat that the Spartans had suﬀered in
the fourth century. They had repeatedly proved unable to command
the sea––from the battle at Cnidus in  to the attempts to expel the
Athenian commanders Timotheus and Iphicrates from the Ionian sea
in the s––and even on land they had suﬀered a shaming defeat at
Lechaeum in  and a further defeat by Pelopidas in . But Leuctra
was the ﬁrst defeat in a full-scale set-piece battle against heavily
armed troops, and, in contrast with the earlier defeats, this time there
were massive casualties, and Spartiate casualties at that. The belief in
Spartan infantry power had been weakened by episodes such as
Cleombrotus’ failure in  even to try to force his way into Boeotia
because of the Theban and Athenian troops holding the passes
through Mount Cithaeron (Xenophon, Hellenica . . ); after
Leuctra that belief could no longer be sustained at all.
Casualties in hoplite battles rarely had demographic signiﬁcance
(see above, p. ). This case was diﬀerent. Because much of Laconia
and Messenia was exploited by helots or Perioikoi (above, p. ), the
proportion of the total adult male population of the area ruled by
Sparta who were full Spartan citizens was tiny. Figures given by
Herodotus for  suggest that there may have been seven times as
many helots as Spartiates at that time. To make matters worse, the
numbers of Spartiates had been in decline since the Persian Wars.
Sparta had been reduced almost to panic by the capture of  Sparti-
ates at Pylos in  (above, p. ), and it seems that by the s
Sparta could ﬁeld only  per cent of the numbers put in the ﬁeld in
. In the early fourth century the decline seems to have become
very much more severe, so that by the time of Leuctra only just over

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
207
, Spartiates were regularly available to ﬁght. To lose  from
such a total was devastating.
Why were Spartiate numbers declining? Sparta had suﬀered a very
severe earthquake in the s in which there may have been extensive
loss of life, but the immediate eﬀect on Spartan army size seems to
have been small, and even if women and children had proved particu-
larly vulnerable, numbers should have stabilized by more than two
generations later. Aristotle, writing in the second half of the fourth
century, remarks on the high proportion of property at Sparta which
was in the hands of women; the right of Spartan women to inherit
land, a right denied to Athenian women, may have led to the rich
marrying only among themselves and to a concentration of wealth in
so few hands that the numbers wealthy enough to support the
expenses required of a full Spartan citizen dropped markedly. Liter-
ary sources indicate the existence in fourth-century Sparta of a group
known as ‘Inferiors’ (hypomeiones), and impoverished freeborn Spar-
tiates may have been so categorized. At the time of the accession of
Agesilaus, a plot was discovered to induce all non-Spartiates (helots,
perioikoi, the various groups of helots freed to ﬁght alongside Sparti-
ates and under Spartiate commanders, the ‘Inferiors’) to combine
against the Spartiates; it was suppressed, but on this occasion, unlike
the occasion in the s when , helots simply ‘disappeared’, news
of the conspiracy could not be suppressed.
Heavy defeat both revealed and exacerbated the problem of
Spartiate numbers. Many of Sparta’s old allies saw that Sparta was
no longer in a position to coerce them; those who had maintained
their political positions because they could claim to be friends of
Sparta lost their power, and political strife, even political revolution,
broke out in many places. The Spartans attempted a military
response, and marched against the leading revolutionary state, Man-
tinea. The Athenians, who had already made an unsuccessful move to
reassert the King’s Peace with themselves as arbiters, refused to help
Mantinea, but the Thebans, when they were invited, saw their
opportunity decisively to alter the traditional balance of power, and
planned to invade the Peloponnese. Agesilaus withdrew from the
territory of Mantinea, but the Thebans led an invasion ﬁrst of Laconia
and then of Messenia, which they liberated from Spartan control,
thereby depriving Sparta of a very large productive area and giving
her a resolutely hostile neighbour. When the Thebans followed this

208
|
classical greece
with encouraging the formation of a new city, Megalopolis––‘the
Great City’––uniting the numerous small communities in western
Arcadia, the geography of power in the Peloponnese had been per-
manently changed.
The destruction of Spartan power might not have made so much
diﬀerence to the Greek world had Thebes simply stepped into Spar-
ta’s role, but she did not. In part this was a matter of geography:
Thebes was not well placed to exercise strong overlordship of the old
Spartan allies in the Peloponnese. Boeotia was agriculturally rich but
had neither Athens’ silver nor Sparta’s helots; the heavy infantry who
had won Leuctra were Boeotian farmers and that sharply limited
their military deployment. There was also a question of politics.
Although the dual kingship at Sparta had generally led to alternative
policies being on oﬀer, and sometimes to bitter political disputes
ending in the exile of a king, the situation at Thebes was yet more
unstable, for the annual oﬃce of Boeotarch gave no ﬁrm base from
which to create a long-term strategy. As the architects of an
unprecedented Theban predominance, Epaminondas and Pelopidas
did enjoy a special status, but even they were taken to court by their
opponents, and Thebes got the reputation for long and stormy meet-
ings of its assembly.
If the King’s Peace had operated according to the letter, the events
after Leuctra would have led to swift Persian intervention in Greece.
Instead it revealed the Persian guarantee behind the Peace to be quite
empty. Persia had been interested in peace in  because she saw it as
a route to secure for herself the cities of Asia Minor. Subsequent
events had not threatened her position there, and her main sub-
sequent interest in renewals of the King’s Peace (e.g. in  and )
was in freeing Greek mercenaries to ﬁght in her own wars (Diodorus
. . ): Persia spent the whole of – preparing for war with
Egypt. From the end of the s Persia also faced a series of satrap
revolts; these revolts particularly involved the western provinces of
the empire, and rebel satraps made various overtures to Greek cities.
The Athenians toyed with assisting the rebels, took advantage of the
anti-Persian momentum to expel a Persian garrison from Samos and
install a settlement of her own citizens there, and even made an
alliance with Strato, king of Sidon in Phoenicia (Harding ). But
when oﬃcially approached by the satraps in the late s, the Greeks
declined to be involved on the rebel side (Harding ), and the

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
209
Athenians were suﬃciently nervous to act very smartly when Persia
complained in  and again in the s about assistance to rebels
from the generals Chabrias and Chares. Short of such active Greek
hostility there was little chance that Persia would interfere against, or
for, any mainland power, but this did not prevent Persia remaining on
the mainland political agenda, waiting for some power to be once
more in a position to exploit on-going Greek hostility to the only
foreign power worth opposing.
With Sparta crushed, Thebes unable to assume her mantle, and
Persia safely out of the picture, the battle of Leuctra took the lid oﬀ
Greek inter-city politics. The tensions which in the s caused the
latest exchange in the long-running conﬂict between Phocis and
Locris to plunge the whole of Greece into war were eased, and the
consequences of any internal revolution or act of hostility to a neigh-
bour ceased to be clear. After the battle at Leuctra southern Greece
entered a decade of turmoil, as individuals and cities jockeyed for
local and regional advantage. The history of some individual cities
during this period reveals very clearly the intensity of political life in
the city-state.
Sicyon had been an ally of Sparta since the sixth century, and
Sparta had intervened directly in her aﬀairs towards the end of the
ﬁfth century to ensure an even more securely pro-Spartan oligarchy.
Now that Spartan backing was no longer a guarantee of political
ascendancy, one Euphron, who had previously exploited Spartan
favour, persuaded the Argives and Arcadians to help him install dem-
ocracy. Euphron then had himself elected as one of ﬁve generals and
his son made commander of the mercenary troops, and established
himself in a position which his enemies regarded as essentially that of
dictator (Xenophon, Hellenica . . –). The former oligarchs pro-
ceeded to call in the Arcadians against Euphron, causing Euphron to
lay claim to his Spartan ties once more and hand over the harbour to
the Spartans. The Spartans were unable to retain a grip on the har-
bour, but the absence of Euphron did not prevent continued disputes
between oligarchs and democrats, and Euphron, who had succeeded
in raising Athenian mercenaries, took advantage of this to install
himself in power in the city as democratic champion once more. All
this time there had been a Theban garrison on the acropolis at
Sicyon, and, in an attempt to secure its support too, Euphron went to
Thebes, only to be murdered there by one of his opponents whom he

210
|
classical greece
had once exiled. The Thebans tried and acquitted the murderer, but
Euphron was given a public burial in Sicyon and honoured as foun-
der of the city (Xenophon, Hellenica . ).
Even before the Theban invasion of the Peloponnese and the liber-
ation of Messenia, Tegea, the Arcadian city nearest to Sparta, over
which Sparta had long kept a close eye, began ﬁghting over a new
political agenda: should there be an Arcadian league, or federation, or
not? When the Tegean council of magistrates initially favoured the
status quo, the advocates of federation looked to armed insurrection,
reckoning to have popular support and to be able to recruit military
help from neighbouring Mantinea (itself in the process of reuniting).
Some of those who favoured the status quo were captured and con-
demned to death,  others ﬂed to Sparta (Xenophon, Hellenica . .
–). Three years later Tegea was one of the communities providing
founders for Megalopolis.
The strengthening of Arcadia as a result of the formation of the
Arcadian League led to further tensions. The Arcadians were now in a
position to pursue old claims to Triphylia, the region of southern Elis
that had been ‘liberated’ from Elean control by the Spartans in .
By the middle of the s Elis and Arcadia were at war; the Eleans
called in Spartan help(!) and Elean democrats joined the Arcadian
cause. In the course of a campaign in which the Arcadians were
consistently the more successful, the sanctuary at Olympia fell into
Arcadian hands. Olympia was a major resource, and some Arcadians
were in favour of exploiting its treasures to reinforce their power and
to support the costs of the Arcadian League’s standing army. The
League’s oﬃcers favoured such use of the treasures, but a movement
initiated by Mantinea led to the Federal Assembly voting against it. To
protect themselves, the League Oﬃcers summoned the Thebans,
claiming that only a Theban invasion would prevent the Arcadians
from aligning themselves with Sparta; the Federal Assembly coun-
termanded this invitation, and instead sought peace with Elis. Peace
was sworn, but the Theban garrison commander at Tegea was per-
suaded to take advantage of the celebrations to arrest those who had
most opposed the League oﬃcers. When Mantinea threatened mili-
tary action in reaction to the arrests, the Theban commander released
the prisoners. The Arcadians sent the Theban commander home,
calling for his execution, but the Thebans in return accused the
Arcadians of treason in making peace with Elis without consultation,

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
211
and invaded. In the succeeding battle at Mantinea in  the Arcadi-
ans were split between the two opposing sides: Tegea and Megalopolis
fought with the Thebans, Mantinea fought with Sparta and Athens
against the Thebans (Xenophon, Hellenica . –).
The history of Sicyon and the history of the Arcadian cities in the
s show how enormously the world of the Greek city had changed.
Oligarchy had once meant favouring Sparta and democracy favour-
ing Athens (and vice versa); now there were multiple possible sources
of outside help available (Sparta, Arcadia, Thebes, Athens), none of
which, given the chance to gain friends and inﬂuence, asked too many
questions about constitutional arrangements. Foreign policy no longer
mapped straightforwardly onto domestic policy. Opportunism gov-
erned the actions of both individuals and cities, and since no one
could expect the situation to stay the same for any length of time, it
was the ability to project a plausible case at a given moment that
came to count for everything––as both Euphron and his assassin
found. Xenophon ended his account of ﬁfty years of Greek history
with the battle of Mantinea, remarking that ‘with regard to accession
of new territory, or cities, or power, it cannot be said that either side
was any better oﬀ after the battle than before it. In fact there was
even more uncertainty and confusion in Greece after the battle than
there had been previously. Let this, then, be the end of my narrative.
Someone else, perhaps, will deal with what happened later’ (Hellenica
. . ).
If anyone rose to Xenophon’s challenge their work has not sur-
vived, and we are particularly badly informed about events in the
Peloponnese in the ﬁfties. This is not entirely mischance, for if in the
sixties the focus remained in the south, determined by the shadow of
the past, in the ﬁfties it moved decisively north.
The rise of Macedon
Southern Greek cities had a close interest in northern Greece ever
since the Euboean foundation of settlements in the Chalcidice in the
early Dark Age. Athens had taken great pains to establish a base there
in the ﬁfth century, and Brasidas’ successful capture of that base,
Amphipolis, in the Archidamian war had caused enormous anxiety

212
|
classical greece
(above, p. ). Although no decisive action can be attributed to
either Macedonians or Thessalians in the ﬁfth century, the potential
importance of these areas was recognized in the eagerness of Athens to
enlist them as allies.
Neither Macedon nor Thessaly was quite like the city-states of
southern Greece. Both controlled large areas of excellent agri-
cultural land. Although long-established towns were at the core of
settlement in both regions, in neither place were independent civic
institutions highly developed: Thucydides is notably reluctant to call
the towns of Macedon ‘poleis’, and the earliest civic decrees date
only from the end of the fourth century. Although the Thessalians
elected a single overlord, political power eﬀectively rested with cer-
tain families who sought to sustain themselves by forming links
outside Thessaly. Family rivalries in Thessaly, and regional rivalries
in Macedonia, prevented either region exercising signiﬁcant or sus-
tained inﬂuence beyond its boundaries. In both places there was a
tension between an old vague sense of ‘national’ unity, which could
not be mobilized, and a move to imitate the cities of southern
Greece, which made eﬀective organisation possible at the expense of
destroying unity.
The potential power of these two large regions, and the diﬃculty of
mobilizing it, is well illustrated by the events of the early fourth
century in Thessaly. Jason began as the joint ruler of a single city,
Pherae, looking to sustain himself with links abroad––in this case
with Thebes. Partly through military reform (including land allot-
ments for soldiers), and partly by dint of good luck in ﬁnding an
outstanding mercenary general to assist him, he managed to extend
his control ﬁrst to the city of Pharsalus and then, in just the years
when Thebes was reunifying Boeotia, to other parts of Thessaly,
including Perrhaebia on the Macedonian border. Jason’s opponents
in Thessaly expected the powerful cities of southern Greece to be
concerned about his increasing power, and one of them went to
Sparta in  to ask, unsuccessfully, for intervention. In fact Jason’s
uniﬁcation of Thessaly was short-lived; he was assassinated in 
when making preparations to raise his proﬁle further by taking over
the Pythian games at Delphi. Thessaly in the s was marked
by internal wrangling and outside intervention by the Thebans.
Thessalian constitutional structures were suﬃcient neither to prevent
a single individual getting into a position to run the whole of

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
213
Thessaly nor to ensure that unity could be maintained other than
through the charm and eﬃciency of such an individual.
The resources of Macedonia ensured that it was never out of the
minds of the cities of southern Greece. The mines of the Pangaeum
mountain range were extremely productive of silver and gold, and
Macedonia was the richest source of the timber that any city aspiring
to control of the sea required. Macedonian manpower, too, was such
that alliance was preferable to hostility. But the Macedonian record of
utilizing its own resources was unimpressive––even after the ‘mod-
ernizing’ policies of Archelaus in the late ﬁfth century, who did more,
Thucydides claims (. . ), to strengthen communications and
oﬀensive and defensive provisions than the eight previous kings
together. Archelaus’ death in  was followed by a period of extreme
instability. Amyntas III retained power for a long period, but his grip
on Macedon was weak, and his death in  was followed by further
trouble, with a regent, Ptolemy, remaining in power for as long as
three years (–) only because he was a puppet of Thebes.
The transformation of Macedon in the decade after the death of
Perdiccas III in battle against the Illyrians in  was not, and could
not have been, foreseen at the time, and it, more perhaps than his
military successes, is evidence of the extraordinary abilities of Philip
II. It is not simply that Philip came to the throne at a moment when
Macedon was under severe military pressure, though the threats from
Illyria and Paeonia were severe, and in reaction to Perdiccas’ support
for the independence of Amphipolls the Athenians were oﬀering
material backing (, troops) to a rival for the throne named
Argaeus. Philip also had to face the long-standing tensions between
upper and lower Macedonia, with their contrasting patterns of agri-
culture and settlement, and between the royal house and would-be
independent cities within lower Macedonia, along with the problem
of the Greek cities in the part of Macedonia east of the river Axios
and their ambitions. Within ﬁve years of his accession, Philip had not
only beaten back the external threats, he had turned the previously
highly regionalized Macedonia into a single political unit whose
resources were at the disposal of a single ruler, himself. With a little
rhetorical embellishment, Philip’s son, Alexander, could be made to
describe this double achievement like this:
Philip took you over when you were poor and wandering, many of you

214
|
classical greece
clothed in skins, pasturing sheep in the mountains, and ﬁghting badly to
protect these from the Illyrians, Triballians, and neighbouring Thracians. He
gave you cloaks instead of animal skins and led you down from the moun-
tains to the plains; he made you ﬁt to stand in battle against your barbarian
neighbours, no longer trusting in the defences aﬀorded by geography but in
your own bravery. He made you dwellers in cities and adorned you with ﬁne
laws and customs.
(Arrian, Anabasis . . )
How did Philip achieve the transformation? He needed to get himself
accepted both by the old nobility of upper Macedonia and by the
cities of lower Macedonia. His very military success against Paeonia
and Illyria created a basis for support, his marriages to Phila and
Olympias, princesses from Elimea and Molossia on the borders of
Macedon, created strong personal allegiances; the cities of lower
Macedonia were allowed a show of civic pride––they could mint their
own coins––but lines of power were more formally laid down. Above
all, Philip recognized the ambitions of all by expanding the body of
Companions, advisers who fought beside the king as cavalry, and
created a common purpose for young men of distinguished ancestry
from all over Macedonia by creating a new body of Royal Pages. In so
doing Philip was building on past practices rather than replacing
them; young Macedonians had long proved their worth by displaying
their mettle in the hunt, and had been expected to rise through a
series of broadly age-related grades until recognized as equals of the
best. Philip now ensured that ambition was focused on joining his
circle, oﬀering his Companions the sort of equality which displayed
itself in a combination of reciprocal services and obedience to the
king. To become a Companion of the King was to acquire a standing
that depended on personal merit and to enter a position from which
inﬂuence could be exercised; but the Companions did not comprise a
formal council––there was no such thing––and the number of
Companions ensured that the relationship between the informal
advice Philip was given and the actions he resolved upon need never
become clear.
And then there was the army. This rightly comes last, not ﬁrst,
because without secure political control a powerful army would have
been as much a threat as an asset. But Philip’s army was a tool of
uniﬁcation within Macedonia, as well as the means by which the rest
of the world could be threatened. Philip built up the army numbers:
in the course of his reign the number of infantry available to him was

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
215
increased threefold from , to ,, the number of cavalry
more than sixfold, from  to ,. Diﬀerential pay rates and the
prospect of becoming a professional salaried oﬃcer encouraged
ambition; estates in newly conquered territories were a ﬁnal reward.
Whether or not these newly numerous troops were newly armed with
the . m. long sarissa or pike, it was certainly under Philip that, used
by troops drawn up very deep, this became for the ﬁrst time an
eﬀective weapon (above, p. ). Similarly it was Philip who made
cavalry, who were only important at the margins of classical hoplite
battles, a battle-winning force, driving in wedge formation into any
breech in the opposing infantry line. These material and tactical
innovations were possible only because Philip created an essentially
professional, rigorously trained army.
Given the extent of Philip’s transformation of Macedon, it is per-
haps not surprising that the cities of southern Greece took a long
time to realize that he posed a threat to them quite unlike the threat
that they had posed to each other. After initial campaigns to deal with
the external threats that he faced from all directions on his accession,
campaigns which involved some rather tricky diplomacy as well as
military action, Philip turned his main attentions to the Greek cities
of the Chalcidice and to Thessaly. Invited by the ruling family from
Larissa to assist them against the ambitions of their Thessalian
neighbour Pherae, Philip contracted yet another marriage; from this
base he was able to take advantage of the conﬂict in central Greece
stirred up by Theban aggression and known as the Third Sacred War.
Philip scored a massive victory in the battle of the Crocus Field in
southern Thessaly in ; from that point onwards he was master, if
not entirely undisputed master, of Thessaly and in a position to put
direct pressure on southern Greece. But even after this, when Philip
further extended his pressure on the Chalcidice, the Athenian politi-
cian Demosthenes (Fig. ), in urging the Athenians to ﬁght against
him, compared him to past dangers faced from other Greek cities.
The conﬂict between Philip and southern Greece has come to be
seen largely through the eyes of Demosthenes. None of the ancient
historical works devoted especially to Philip have survived, and the
account in Diodorus of the years from the mid-s to the end of the
s, although largely culled from fourth-century accounts, does not
focus primarily on Philip. Demosthenes’ view of Philip survives in
the series of speeches given in the Athenian Assembly and lawcourts.

216
|
classical greece
Figure 10 A pensive Demosthenes, whose representation owes much to the
iconographic scheme developed to portray philosophers. Contrast Aeschines
(Fig. ).

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
217
In the former he tried to persuade the Athenians to take action, ﬁrst
to ﬁght for Amphipolis, then to defend Olynthus, and then, from the
end of the s, to seek alliances to defend not just Athens but Greece
as a whole. In the latter he defended his political record against
threats of prosecution. Demosthenes dwells on Athenian failure to
devote adequate resources to warfare and to ﬁght for themselves; he
stresses Philip’s propensity to ﬁght by unfair means, in particular by
trickery and bribery, and sets himself up as the champion of Greek
freedom against a ‘barbarian’. From all this emerges a picture of
Demosthenes himself as the champion of the values of the classical
city-state and of Greek freedom. The speeches of Demosthenes’
opponents, in particular of Aeschines who unsuccessfully prosecuted
him, give a rather diﬀerent picture, suggesting that Demosthenes was
far from consistent in his policies, and driven far more by domestic
political ambitions, and determination to oppose the policies of
others, than by idealism––let alone by good military sense.
Should we regard Athens and the other cities of southern Greece as
victims of their own excessive love of liberty, who failed to see soon
enough that only together could they stand? Many Greeks did not
regard Philip as a threat at all. Some took a pro-Philip line because
they expected their own political position to be improved by so
doing: Philip was the new Sparta, able to help his friends not just with
military power but with money too. Others were happy to see Philip
as a Greek, and as a man who could restore Greece to a position in
which it could face the real barbarians, and in particular the Persians.
The most eloquent expression of this view that has survived comes
from Isocrates (above, p. ). In , the year in which the Athenians
reached a temporary peace with Philip, he published a pamphlet, the
Philippus, in which he called on Philip to be the champion of Greek
concord and leader of an expedition against the Persians.
The varied reactions to Philip, and to the emergence of Macedon as
a political force, bring out well tensions that run through the whole
of archaic and classical Greek history. As the ﬁrst chapter stresses, the
politically diverse cities of classical Greece were in important ways the
product of a common inheritance. It was, in particular, to the same
foundational texts that all Greek cities looked, and upon the same
body of myth that they drew. Athenian tragedy does not concen-
trate on myths local to Athens, and in only a minority of extant
Athenian tragedies are actions at or involving Athens at all crucial; not

218
|
classical greece
surprisingly the plays were enormously popular outside Athens as
well as at Athens itself. The cultural competition visible in the
material record of the eighth and seventh centuries is much less vis-
ible in the ﬁfth and fourth centuries, when Aristotle, from Stagira in
the Chalcidice, could both spend time in Macedonia as tutor to
Philip’s son Alexander and set up his philosophical ‘school’, the
Lyceum, at Athens. The conﬂicts between cities that so dominate clas-
sical political history have to be seen against this background. Ambi-
tious politicians in Greek cities, who so often chose to call in military
intervention, or to use the threat of military intervention, from other
cities, show not so much the readiness of Greeks to act treacherously
as the way in which the independence and liberty of the individual
city could be subordinated to other social, political, or constitutional
ideals. Preservation of those qualities which were considered to con-
stitute Greekness––descent, religion, language, and customs––did not
depend upon absolute autonomy. Liberty was an important slogan
repeatedly used, but its usefulness depended on its always being a call
to freedom from a particular oppressor and upon the state of being
free never being deﬁned. Discussions of liberty in Aristotle’s Politics
are about the liberty of the individual, not the liberty of the city.
The events of the s show Greek cities treating Philip as they had
previously treated Athens or Sparta. His actions in southern Greece
were almost all in response to local initiatives, whether it was agree-
ing to lead an Amphictyonic campaign against Phocis in , accept-
ing alliance with Argos, Messene, and probably Megalopolis, all afraid
of Sparta, in , supporting a coup at Elis in , or sending increas-
ing assistance to those Euboean cities which were trying to free them-
selves from Athenian domination. Like Athens and Sparta, Philip was
not indiscriminate in oﬀering assistance––he turned down the earli-
est appeals from Chalcis; when he agreed to help it was because he
saw that the advantages of doing so outweighed the disadvantages.
Southern Greece was no more the centre of Philip’s concerns in the
s than it had been in the s. He was busy intervening in Illyria
and Epirus, where he put Alexander, the brother of his wife Olympias,
on the throne. From  his military attention was focused eastward,
as he ﬁnally defeated the Thracian rulers Teres and Cersobleptes and
laid siege to Perinthus and Byzantium. All the indications are that by
the latter part of the decade, at least, Philip was seeking ways of
ensuring that neither his old northern neighbours nor the cities of

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
219
southern Greece were in a position to demand his military interven-
tion. But the Athenians managed to spread their fear of Philip so far
that other cities in southern Greece became prepared to contemplate
an alliance against him, and his attack on Byzantium (accompanied
by the capture of a ﬂeet of ships carrying grain) was a direct threat to
Athens, which had regular need for cereals from the Black Sea.
Although two more years of threats and negotiations followed, war
had become inevitable. When it came, the immediate occasion was
once more arguments in the Delphic Amphictyony and a call to
Philip to lead an attack on Amphissa. Philip’s attempt to repeat tac-
tics that had been successful earlier, and to use the presence of his
army to concentrate Theban minds on peace, was unsuccessful. Skil-
ful generalship overcame the initial strategic advantages of the oppos-
ition, and battle was joined at Philip’s choosing at Chaeronea in
northern Boeotia in September . Philip’s cavalry, under the com-
mand of his son Alexander, delivered a decisive victory in which
enemy casualties were enormous. Philip marched on to the Pelopon-
nese, and in the spring of the following year the League of Corinth
was formed. All the signatories were required to enforce, on the basis
of decisions made by them all in synod, a new Common Peace. And
the ﬁrst decision Philip had the synod take was to undertake a war to
punish Persia for her invasion a century and a half before. The eastern
power that had stood in the background of Greek politics through
the classical period was now to be tackled head on.
Greece into Asia
The ﬁrst Macedonian troops crossed into Asia in the spring of 
under the command of Philip’s experienced general, Parmenio. But
the campaign against Persia was not to be the crowning of Philip’s
extraordinary career, it was to be the whole career of his son
Alexander, now aged twenty. For in the autumn of that year, at the
Macedonian festival of the Olympia, which was being celebrated with
particular pomp, Philip was assassinated. His assassin, a young man
from the royal bodyguard, was himself killed, and his motivation
(personal or political?) must remain unknown. Alexander was
promptly presented to, and recognized by, the army as king, all

220
|
classical greece
potential rivals were done away with, and the revolts that broke out in
Thrace, Illyria, Thessaly, Thebes, and Ambracia were quickly and
ruthlessly crushed. In  Alexander crossed the Hellespont, never to
return to Europe.
Only a map can reveal the staggering scale of Alexander’s con-
quests in the next decade as, defeating Darius III, who had seized the
throne only in , in three major victories at the river Granicus in
, at Issus in , and at Gaugamela in , Alexander took over the
Persian empire; he went on outside Persian realms as far as the Pun-
jab before his troops declined to advance further into the unknown.
At his death in  he was certainly planning action in Arabia, and
talk after his death of plans to move west along the north coast of
Africa may not be entirely fantastic. This was revenge on the largest
scale for the Persian conquest: the Persians had failed to incorporate
Greece and Macedonia in the Asian sphere; Alexander made Asia part
of the Greco-Macedonian world.
Alexander took over the loose Persian structures and used them
to run his new empire. Initially, Persian satraps were replaced by
Macedonians and Greeks; after Darius’ ﬁnal defeat he generally used
natives as satraps, often conﬁrming in power those who had previ-
ously served Darius. Alexander also took over some of the trappings
of the Persian monarch, sacriﬁcing to native gods, dressing in Persian
clothes, and expecting to be shown the obeisance for which Greeks
had long ridiculed the subjects of the Persian king, calling them all
‘slaves’. At the same time, however, Alexander planted new Greek
cities across his empire. Though the total number founded by Alex-
ander himself has often been wildly exaggerated––as few as half a
dozen are securely known to fall into that category––these cities were
vitally important. They were important both in themselves––they
include Alexandria in Egypt which became a city second in size in the
ancient world only to Rome––and because they oﬀered a model fol-
lowed by Alexander’s successors. These Greek foundations showed
little sign of ‘going native’ and clung to their Greek links and Greek
culture. They ensured the massive spread of the Greek language,
which now for the ﬁrst time developed a common dialect, and of
Greek cultural values. Identity throughout the Near East came to be
negotiated with reference to being Greek, and ‘Greek’ lost the last
vestiges of any narrow geographical connotation.
In the history of classical Greece it is more what the Greeks

the fourth century: political and military narrative
|
221
believed about Persia than what Persia did that is important; from
Alexander onwards Greek history cannot be told without telling the
history of the whole eastern Mediterranean, and beyond. But there
was still a history of the small and mountainous peninsula that is
Greece today, and arguably the eﬀect of Alexander’s activities on that
history were minimal. It is true that having a centre of power that was
far away and could only act remotely took some getting used to, but
the letters exchanged between Greek cities, particularly those in Asia
Minor, and Alexander that were published on stone show that
Greeks rapidly adapted to the new situation: Alexander’s word was no
less powerful for all that he could act only through messengers and
agents. And cities learned, too, that the man whom Alexander left in
charge in Macedon was quite as useful a source of support, and quite
as dangerous an opponent, as the absent king.
Events in Greece during Alexander’s Asian expedition show how
closely the history of the Greek city-state under Macedonian over-
lordship related to the history of the classical city-state. Sparta had
refused to be party to the League of Corinth, and had not been drawn
into the uprisings that followed the death of Philip. But when Persian
naval successes in the Aegean in / suggested that Alexander might
yet be defeated, the Spartans made overtures to them. Revolt in
Thrace in  distracted Antipater, who had been left in charge in
Macedon (with an army ever more depleted by Alexander’s demands
for additional troops), and Sparta chose this moment to launch a
wholesale attack. Most of the cities of the Peloponnese were per-
suaded to join in, and the Spartans scored some initial successes; but
Athens failed to give support, and Antipater crushed the revolt in a
battle at Megalopolis in  which left , dead.
Sparta’s revolt shows clearly the familiar pattern, in which yester-
day’s enemy becomes today’s friend as the liberator turns into the
new oppressor; the epigraphic record from the city of Eresus on the
island of Lesbos shows how the negotiation of domestic politics with
reference to whatever power might currently be strongest also con-
tinued. Eresus seems to have been under the control of a small group
of men at the time of Alexander’s invasion of Asia Minor. The people
of Eresus seem to have taken advantage of Alexander’s claims to be
liberating the Greek cities in order to depose these rulers. The
deposed rulers themselves then went to Alexander and claimed that
they had been misrepresented, and Alexander ordered that they be

222
|
classical greece
properly tried and that the voting should be by secret ballot. The
former rulers were condemned, but the story does not stop there;
eight years later their descendants went to Alexander again, and got
him to intervene to see that they too were tried, with a view to the
restoration of their civic rights. That intervention still did not settle
things, and in the last decade of the fourth century the descendants
made another attempt to secure their position; but again the people
of Eresus were unmoved.
The story from Eresus is comprehensible on its own, but it actually
forms part of a larger story. For almost certainly the appeal from the
sons of the condemned rulers of Eresus to Alexander was occasioned
by his one decision that directly impinged on all Greek cities, his
order that cities take back all exiles other than those exiled for sacri-
lege. Proclaimed at Olympia in , this measure was a bombshell, for
it covered not simply individual political ﬁgures forced out by their
enemies, but whole populations that had been displaced, and in par-
ticular the Samians who had been removed from the island when the
Athenians established a settlement of their own there (above, p. ).
No city was unaﬀected, for it was not a matter simply of taking back
individuals, but of restoring to them property that had been publicly
sold. This was the only demand made by Alexander that was uni-
versal, applying to all Greek cities. As a demonstration of power it was
a masterstroke: no other move could have had the appearance of
generosity and the eﬀect of throwing existing regimes into turmoil.
What the motivation was is unclear––was Alexander, who himself
may have heard more from exiles than from the cities themselves,
now so ill-attuned to Greek aﬀairs that he did not see that this way of
reducing the number of tedious visitors with sob-stories that he had
to listen to would have such far-reaching eﬀects? or was he all too
aware of the trouble this measure would cause, and deliberately
choosing to keep Antipater busy? If the latter was the motivation, the
plan succeeded: the Exiles’ Decree ensured that on Alexander’s own
death ten months later the Greek city-states, led this time by Athens,
would make another unsuccessful attempt to revolt. But just as
Athens had not joined Sparta in revolt in , so now Sparta, Arcadia,
and the Boeotians oﬀered no support to Athens. It was, and would
continue to be, business as usual among the Greek city-states. What
had changed was that the history of the Greek city-states was now
only a small part of Greek history.

9
Epilogue
Robin Osborne
I saw the beautiful Epicaste, Oedipus’ mother,
who in the ignorance of her mind had done a monstrous
thing when she married her own son. He killed his father
and married her, but the gods soon made it all known to mortals,
But he, for all his sorrows, in beloved Thebes continued
to be lord over the descendants of Cadmus, all through the bitter designing
of the gods; while she went down to Hades of the gates, the strong one,
knotting a noose and hanging sheer from the high ceiling,
in the constraint of her sorrow, but left to him who survived her
all the sorrows that are brought to pass by a mother’s furies.
(Odyssey . –, trans. Lattimore [adapted])
So Odysseus relates seeing one of its most famous inhabitants during
his visit to the underworld. The author of the Odyssey expected the
story of Oedipus to be well known to those who listened to his work
in the seventh century, and he used this short summary to direct that
listener’s attention to yet another famous wife to compare and con-
trast with the faithful Penelope patiently waiting for Odysseus’ return
to Ithaca. In the telling of the story of Oedipus he brings out the
features that allow comparison with the Odyssey’s own plot––the role
of the gods’ ‘bitter designing’, the way that mortals act in ignorance,
the living out of the consequences of past actions.
In ﬁfth-century Athens Sophocles took up the Oedipus story again.
In Oedipus the King he turned the uncovering of mortal ignorance
into a gripping detective story: Oedipus is made to discover the truth
about himself as he searches for the murderer of the last king, Laius,
in order to end the plague that has gripped the city. He discovers not
only that Laius, whose widow he has married, was the stranger he
himself killed in an argument at a road junction, but also that Laius

224
|
classical greece
was his father. His mother, and wife, named Jocasta by Sophocles,
hangs herself at this news; Oedipus blinds himself.
The workings of the gods are still important in this play––‘O Zeus,
what have you designed to do with me?’ is Oedipus’ cry as he begins
to realize that he may have been the killer of Laius. But the cumula-
tive eﬀect of unwitting human actions is made more central than in
the Homeric telling: Sophocles puts not just Oedipus and Jocasta
under the spotlight but also the slaves, who had been told to expose
the baby Oedipus, but did not do so, and who saw to his adop-
tion by the royal family at Corinth. And on top of this is a political
dimension: Sophocles draws attention not just to the fact that
Oedipus is king, but to the very manner of his rule. In the Odyssey
Oedipus’ story is a distant example of how some mortals are
unfortunate victims of the plots of the gods; in Sophocles’ play the
action has become grounded in a city of which an Athenian could
imagine himself to be a member, even though it is by no means a
replica of classical Athens, and the characters have become ﬁgures
rich with familiar human traits.
More or less a century after Sophocles’ play was performed, Aristo-
tle analysed tragedy in his Poetics. Aristotle was interested in what
marks tragedy out from other literary forms, and he was keen both to
classify types of plot or sub-plot (recognition scenes, reversals of
fortune) and the qualities required of the central ﬁgure for that ﬁgure
to be tragic (that the ﬁgure is not perfect). Sophocles’ play was for
Aristotle an exemplary tragedy, both formally, in terms of unity of
action, and in its tragic story. Aristotle lifts the play out of its context
within the city-state and looks at it on the page; he has no doubt
about the profound eﬀect a play has on those who experience it, but
he envisages the theatre audience as a collection of individuals, like
the individual reader, rather than as a community of citizens.
What happens to the story of Oedipus reﬂects and reveals the
broader contours of Greek history, and shows why it is Classical
Greece that stands at the head of this History of Europe. The Oedipus
and Epicaste of the Odyssey live out lives that might be the lives of the
audience of the poem, their interest lies at the level of personal moral-
ity, and it is their fate as individuals that is drawn to the audience’s
attention. As in the Homeric poems more generally, it is the potential
parallels for the lives of members of the audience, and for individuals
known to them, that are important. This and other Homeric stories

epilogue
|
225
are notable for the limited role played by the magical and for char-
acters’ intense emotional investment, but in other respects they are
closely akin to stories of such near-eastern epics as Gilgamesh.
Sophocles’ Oedipus and Jocasta, by contrast, are very far from the
world of Gilgamesh. In Sophocles the lives and actions of the two
starring characters are the product of numerous separate decisions
made not just by them but by those with whom they are involved,
and they are lives whose impact is not just upon individuals but upon
the whole community. Social and political relationships have become
intertwined with personal relationships in a world where human
beings can never know the consequences of their action, not because
what happens is determined by cruel gods but because complete
knowledge is never available. In the hands of Aristotle Oedipus has
changed again, as the relationship between the action on stage and
the reactions of the audience come under analytical scrutiny. The
Oedipus who fascinates Aristotle is neither the man who is the play-
thing of the gods nor the victim of cumulative and inevitable human
ignorance, but the active manipulator of the theatre audience. Aristo-
tle is not concerned to read the play against the cultural context of the
Greek city-state at all, but looks for conclusions about drama that are
universal. For Aristotle the relationship of Oedipus’ character to his
fate is important because it can be treated as exemplary of what even
a disembedded cultural product can do to those who encounter it. In
stepping back to focus on what words do to the people who hear
them, Aristotle took up the analysis of speeches made in political
meetings and law courts, which the need to understand how
decisions could be inﬂuenced in democratic cities had inspired in the
late ﬁfth century, and applied it to ﬁction, so placing himself at the
head of the western tradition of literary criticism.
The world of the classical city was a world where citizens had so
taken charge of their own destinies that the Homeric explanation that
‘it was a plot of malicious gods’ ceased to satisfy, and where the
demand to decide one’s own, and others’, destiny brought home the
inevitability of ignorance and the urgency of ﬁnding ways of restrict-
ing the damage that ignorance could do. It was a world in which the
individual was seen as essentially social, the life of a particular human
being actively and inevitably shaped by the community of which he
or she was part. It was also a world in which the prevalence of mass
debate drew attention to the way in which words do not simply

226
|
classical greece
convey information, they do things, and where analysis and control
of what they do came to be a pressing concern: thinkers managed so
to distance themselves from their own circumstances as to examine
what was going on from the outside, establishing patterns and general
rules.
The Greek city was small and life within it intense. In the archaic
period we see that intensity in the homosocial groups that produced
the poetry of Archilochus, Theognis, and others. In the classical
period the spread of the habit of putting power into the hands of a
wide group of citizens led to the individual life becoming swallowed
up in the life of the wider community, the action of the group being
more than simply the sum of the independent actions of its members.
But the very intensity of city life, and the prominence of the group as
whole and as parts, promoted a self-scrutiny that we cannot ﬁnd
parallels for in earlier history and which has provided the basis for
our own self-scrutiny to this day. In the thirty-three tragedies written
by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides that are still extant today, in
the great sculptural programmes of the temple of Zeus at Olympia or
the Parthenon in Athens, in the monumental enquiries into the
recent past that constitute the histories of Herodotus and Thucy-
dides, and in the thirty-ﬁve surviving philosophical dialogues of
Plato and thirty-two surviving treatises of Aristotle, the classical city-
state has bequeathed to us a wide-ranging and profound exploration
of what it is to be human, what it is to live in a society in which the
individual is autonomous but also dependent, physically and emo-
tionally, upon others, and in which, without ever fully understanding
the consequences of their own actions, human beings exercise a con-
trolling role over fellow human creatures and over the animal and
plant world.
The reader of Greek tragedy, of Herodotus and Thucydides, of
Plato and Aristotle, or of other surviving works of classical literature,
and the visitor to Greek archaeological sites or to the museums in
Greece or around the world in which the products of Greek sculp-
tural or ceramic workshops are displayed, is struck by mixed feelings
of familiarity and estrangement. So much of western art and archi-
tecture, philosophy and literature, both in the past and still today, is
in dialogue with classical Greek culture that a feeling of familiarity is
inevitable. But we have only to face the masked male actor playing
Jocasta, the tragedian Sophocles welcoming a snake to Athens as the

epilogue
|
227
embodiment of Asclepius god of healing, or a water jug with the
image of a satyr masturbating, to be conscious that the Greek city was
no mirror image of the modern western world.
This book has tried to map out that strange and yet familiar world,
to reveal something of the very diﬀerent reality concealed behind
familiar terms, and to make sense of some of the very diﬀerent cultural
values: in short to build a stage on which Greek writers, thinkers, and
artists can play eﬀectively to a modern audience. The Greek world
described here was not full of men exposed at birth, rescued and
brought up by royalty, who had in ignorance killed their fathers,
married their mothers, and only discovered the truth when the city
they ruled was struck by a terrible epidemic. But it was a world in
which crops did fail, in which illness did strike, in which violence did
ﬂare up over petty quarrels which no state body would ever investi-
gate, in which individuals did move from city to city and join com-
munities which were quite ignorant of their past, and in which what
could not be explained rationally was readily ascribed to the direct
and purposive intervention of the gods. We are familiar with the
violence, but expect a murder enquiry, know of epidemic, but expect
a medical reaction, move more or less freely from place to place, but
expect there to be state records. We can still map Oedipus and Jocasta
onto our world and can and do put them eﬀectively onto our stage.
We can and do, indeed, map the concerns and assumptions of our
world onto them, as we have done in putting Oedipus onto the psy-
chiatrist’s couch. But if we want to understand what Sophocles was
doing, we need to be able to map Oedipus and Jocasta onto
Sophocles’ world too, and to put them onto the Greek stage.
Classical Greece belongs to the Third World, but to a third world in
which there is no ﬁrst world. The empires of the Near East had wealth
and manpower resources no Greek city could imagine, but their eco-
nomic base was identical to that of Greece, founded on extorting an
agricultural surplus and exploiting a limited range of minerals,
almost exclusively metals. Massive manipulation of water supplies to
provide crop irrigation that cushioned against the vagaries of rainfall
did, at various periods, make for a much higher degree of social and
political stability in Egypt and Mesopotamia than the Greek world
could ever achieve, but during the period of which we are talking this
stability was a thing of the past, and Egypt a reluctant and rebellious
member of the Persian empire. In times of crisis cities of the Greek

228
|
classical greece
mainland received occasional gifts of grain from Egypt and from
north Africa, but this was by no means ‘aid to developing countries’
and there was no scope for accumulated indebtedness.
Greek cities had to expect to cope with an uncertain food supply
from their own resources. Having to face the prospect of a meagre
harvest was one thing that united rich and poor farmers, and the
disapproval of those who chose to invest their wealth other than in
land stemmed in part from their opting out of this shared experience.
To turn from the land to the sea, and seek a living from trade was not,
however, to avoid risk. In addition to the risks a trader always faces of
not being able to sell the goods he acquired at a price suﬃcient to
produce a proﬁt, ancient risks of shipwreck and, at some periods, of
being intercepted by pirates or forced into the port of another city,
were not small. The prices of staple foods ﬂuctuated by a factor of ﬁve
or more, and the proﬁts to be made were potentially enormous. A
similar gamble aﬀected mining: heavy investment was called for, but
the vein of silver mined might or might not prove a rich one. The
reversals of fortune that Aristotle identiﬁed as a basic plot element in
tragedy were equally familiar in life. And just as tragedies often do not
end with the change of fortune but go on to show how the protagon-
ist and the community of which he or she is part copes with the
reversal, so too in life those reversals bound the individual in to the
family and community without whose support life itself would be
threatened.
Both within city-states and between them there was constantly an
issue of whether co-operation or conﬂict oﬀered the more secure
future. Those whom past lotteries had left on top had reason to join
together and exclude others from a say in the city’s decisions. Often
that meant excluding all the poor from political rights; in some cities
it meant particularly excluding those involved in trade. Those who
had not inherited wealth looked to make up for their lack of personal
security by seeking to play a part in the larger whole. In diﬀerent
cities these opposing interests played themselves out in diﬀerent ways,
and although the Greeks themselves talked about democracy and
oligarchy as if they were poles apart, in fact political power was dis-
tributed in numerous and diverse ways ranging from individual or
collective tyranny at one end to active participation from all adult
males at the other.
Theorists ancient and modern have focused on the constitutional

epilogue
|
229
rules in their classiﬁcation of city governments, but much the same
rules produced diﬀerent political eﬀects in diﬀerent circumstances.
The size of a city had a fundamental eﬀect upon relationships within
it, but so also did the pattern of settlement and the conﬁguration of
religious activity. In some cities religious activity focused on a single
sanctuary, in others it was split; in some the main focus was out of
town, in others within the walls. In some outsiders were regularly
attracted to festivities, in others only citizens were allowed to take
part. In every city the inhabitants grouped themselves into cult units
in various ways, by family, by place, by gender, by their own elective
choice: those various groups might work within a culture of co-
operation or a culture of conﬂict. In Athens, the city we know best,
we can see how the enormous eﬀort put into the Panathenaea and
into the Dionysia, both occurring in the town of Athens itself,
together with the institution of processions which linked the city to
such distant sanctuaries as Eleusis and Brauron, whose cult
groups encompassed non-citizens, made the town the religious
focus even when so much cult activity was taking place outside. It can
be no accident that the great majority of tragedies put on at the
Dionysia dealt with conﬂicts situated in other cities, and not at
Athens itself, playing out Athenian political issues obliquely rather
than directly.
Small cities faced stark choices as to whether they exposed them-
selves to the risk of isolation or to the risk of being engulfed and
eradicated by a larger neighbour. Just as conﬂicts within cities always
carried the threat that they would spill out into conﬂict between
cities, so conﬂicts between neighbouring cities always carried the
threat that they would draw in cities further away. When the distort-
ing eﬀect of having two very powerful cities waiting to welcome allies
against each other, as Athens and Sparta were waiting in the ﬁfth
century, is removed, we see in the early fourth century mainland
Greek cities chronically incapable of deciding whether they are better
oﬀ together or apart, calling in bigger cities or going it alone. Such
decisions were not trivial: the choice of external alliance had implica-
tions for internal government, and small cities were never free of the
threat of total extermination by large neighbours––the history of
Plataea in Boeotia, twice razed to the ground by its Theban neigh-
bours, is a case in point here. Only for members of the largest com-
munities was life less than precariousness: even a city as large and

230
|
classical greece
recently powerful as Thebes was eliminated by Alexander the Great in
 after a revolt.
The need for the member of a small city constantly to reassess his
own and his city’s priorities made for urgent political debate, both
practical and theoretical. It also made for an intensity of observation.
No citizen was free from scrutiny: where group decisions hung in the
balance, and where the individual citizen was constantly reassessing
his interests, there was inevitably a climate of distrust. The company
people kept, the places they frequented, the clothes they wore, even
the way they walked, were constantly reviewed as outward visible
signs of inner disposition. Rules multiplied, and so did tests. When
Plato makes Socrates suggest that the unexamined life is not worth
living, it was not the fact of examination that made this statement
unusual but the nature of the examination. For Socrates the examin-
ation was not of the outward signs or conformity to rules, although
by going barefoot and refusing to seduce Alcibiades he exploited the
rules precisely in his keen disregard for them, but of the relationship
of life’s constant decisions to moral values that could be independ-
ently defended.
The life of the individual, for we can hardly talk of private life at all,
was always life within a group. For most Greek cities we know little of
group dynamics beyond what we can surmise from the laws passed in
order to regulate them. But for classical Athens we can see how those
groups were constituted (every group above the immediate family
constituted itself along the same lines as the city itself, with allotted
oﬃcials in charge and decisions taken at general meetings), we can
see them explored on stage in both tragedy and comedy, we can see
them in action in politics, and we can see them theorized, both in
the popular theory that was constructed in the lawcourts as litigants
presented their rival images of the good citizen and in Plato and
Aristotle’s more esoteric explorations of what it might be to be
virtuous.
This book has tried to throw the spotlight on the individual and
the group within the city, to build up a picture of classical Greece
which gives priority not to the actions of cities, to what the Athenians
said or what the Spartans did, but to what it was to be a member, or at
least a citizen member, of those communities. It has done so out of a
belief that understanding of the cultural products which have
become what Greece is to us can only be achieved against the

epilogue
|
231
background of the situation of the individual citizen, rather than
against a background of glorious Greek victories over Persians,
whether in the Greek mainland in the early ﬁfth century or in Asia in
the s and s. It has also done so from the belief that it is an
understanding of the culture of the Greek city-state that must stand
at the head of every history of Europe, however short. It was the
political and social tensions of the Greek city, and the ways in which
they were described and analysed, that created the legacy with which
subsequent European politics and culture have been in continuous
debate. That debate can be traced into the cities of Hellenistic Asia
that were created by Alexander’s conquests, but what ensured that the
debate was the foundation of modern Europe was the way in which it
was taken up by Rome. It is with the story of Rome, and in particular
the story of Rome from her conquest of and by Greece, that the
history of Europe continues.

Further Reading
Readers may ﬁnd the following books useful sources of further information
about the topics treated here.
Sourcebooks
M. H. Crawford and D. Whitehead, Archaic and Classical Greece: A Selection of
Ancient Sources in Translation (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
).
C. W. Fornara, Archaic Times to the End of the Peloponnesian War, nd edn.
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ).
P. Harding, From the End of the Peloponnesian War to the Battle of Ipsus
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ).
P. J. Rhodes, The Greek City-States: A Source Book (Routledge, London, ).
General
P. A. Cartledge, The Cambridge Illustrated History of Ancient Greece
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ). An introduction to the
whole course of Greek history and to Greek culture, richly illustrated.
J. K. Davies, Democracy and Classical Greece, Fontana History of the Ancient
World, nd edn. (Fontana, London, ). A general history of Classical
Greece which makes extensive use of extracts from original sources.
E. Fantham, H. P. Foley, N. B. Kampen, S. B. Pomeroy, and H. A. Shapiro,
Women in the Classical World (Oxford University Press, Oxford, ).
Covers the Roman as well as the Greek world, with copious quotation of
original sources.
S. Hornblower, The Greek World – bc, Routledge History of the Ancient
World, revised edn. (Routledge, London, ). Particularly full coverage of
the Greek world outside Athens and Sparta.
O. Murray and S. Price (eds.) The Greek City from Homer to Alexander
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, ).
A. Powell (ed.), The Greek World (Routledge, London, ).  chapters by
diﬀerent authors ranging widely over Greek history and culture;
particularly strong on Greek religion.

further reading
|
233
Chapter 1
R. Buxton, Imaginary Greece: The Contexts of Mythology (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, ). An imaginative approach to the Greeks
through their mythology.
J. M. Hall, Ethnic Identity in Greek Antiquity (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, ). A ground-breaking and sophisticated analysis of the
nature of ethnicity in ancient Greece.
R. Osborne, Greece in the Making – BC, Routledge History of the
Ancient World (Routledge, London, ). Uses archaeology, archaic Greek
literature, and later Greek tradition to create a picture of what archaic
Greece was like.
Chapter 2
M. I. Finley, The Ancient Economy, revised edn., ed. I. Morris (University of
California Press, Berkeley, ). A classic, if much debated, account of the
ancient economy.
Y. Garlan, Slavery in Ancient Greece (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY,
). A full treatment of the topic.
P. C. Millett, Lending and Borrowing in Ancient Athens (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, ). Puts commercial transactions into their broad
social context.
R. Osborne, Classical Landscape with Figures: The Ancient Greek City and its
Countryside (George Philip, London, ). Shows the centrality of the
countryside to political, religious, and social aspects of Greek life.
S. von Reden, Exchange in Ancient Greece (Duckworth, London, ). Uses
the insights of economic anthropology and close literary and
iconographical analysis to examine the whole range of exchange
transactions.
Chapter 3
P. Cartledge, P. Millett, and S. von Reden (eds.), Kosmos: Essays in Order,
Conﬂict and Community in Classical Athens (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, ). Explores a wide range of aspects of the Athenian polis as
a community.
M. H. Hansen, The Athenian Democracy in the Age of Demosthenes, nd edn.
(University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, ). A text book coverage of
Athenian democratic institutions.
R. Parker, Athenian Religion: A History (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
). A detailed chronological account of Athenian cult practices with an
important analysis of the trial of Socrates.

234
|
classical greece
S. Price, Religions of the Ancient Greeks (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, ). An introduction to Greek religion with an emphasis on
archaeological evidence and practices.
S. C. Todd, The Shape of Athenian Law (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
). A reliable study of Athenian law informed by modern
anthropological approaches, including sections on personal relations.
For Sparta see under Chapter , below.
Chapter 4
Yvon Garlan, War in the Ancient World: A Social History (Chatto and Windus,
London, ). A classic study of ancient war in its social and cultural
context.
W. K. Pritchett, The Greek State at War,  vols. (University of California Press,
Berkeley, –). Series of exhaustive surveys of ancient evidence for
many aspects of war.
J. Rich and G. Shipley (eds.), War and Society in the Greek World (Routledge,
London, ). Interesting collection of articles, covering several topics not
fully addressed here.
Peter Hunt, Slaves, Warfare and Ideology in the Greek Historians (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, ). Radical new perspective on hoplite
ideals and the role of slaves in war.
V. D. Hanson, Warfare and Agriculture in Classical Greece (; revised edn.
University of California Press, Berkeley, ) and V. D. Hanson, The
Western Way of War (Oxford University Press, ). Two innovative and
inﬂuential studies of vital elements of Greek warfare: agricultural
devastation and pitched infantry battle.
Hans van Wees, Greek Warfare: Myths and Realities (Duckworth, ), and
Hans van Wees (ed.) War and Violence in Ancient Greece (Duckworth/
Classical Press of Wales, ) seek to challenge many aspects of
conventional wisdom about Greek warfare. 
I. G. Spence, The Cavalry of Classical Greece (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
). Thorough study of the organization, uses, and funding of cavalry
forces.
J. S. Morrison and J. F. Coates, The Athenian Trireme (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, ). Detailed account of naval warfare which makes
use of the results of reconstructing a seaworthy trireme, the Olympias.
V. Gabrielsen, Financing the Athenian Fleet (Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, ). Lucid discussion of the economics of naval warfare.

further reading
|
235
Chapter 5
C. Farrar, The Origins of Democratic Thinking: The Invention of Politics in
Classical Athens (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ). A
sophisticated and provocative analysis of democratic theorizing embedded
in the thought of Protagoras, Democritus, and Thucydides.
J. Ober, Mass and Elite in Democratic Athens: Rhetoric, Ideology, and the Power
of the People (Princeton University Press, Princeton, ). A lucid and
inﬂuential exploration of the ideology of Athenian democracy.
J. Ober, Political Dissent in Democratic Athens: Intellectual Critics of Popular
Rule (Princeton University Press, Princeton, ). A thorough survey of
the ancient critics of Athenian democracy.
Chapter 6
J. Burckhardt, The Greeks and Greek Civilization (HarperCollins, London,
). A view of Greek life by one of the greatest modern historians, a
wonderful collection of sources, but some very novel conclusions.
J. N. Davidson, Courtesans and Fishcakes (HarperCollins, London, ).
Eating, drinking, and sex in the context of the Athenian democracy.
K. J. Dover, Greek Popular Morality (Blackwell, Oxford, ). A
comprehensive study of moral attitudes in Athenian comedy and oratory.
M. Foucault, History of Sexuality, ii. The Uses of Pleasure, trans. R. Hurley
(Penguin Books, London, ). An important and inﬂuential analysis of
‘self-mastery’.
R. Garland, The Greek Way of Death (Duckworth, London, ). A useful
study of ideas about death and funeral practices.
R. Garland, The Greek Way of Life (Duckworth, London, ). A survey of
the stages of Greek life and associated rituals.
P. Garnsey, Food in the Ancient World (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, ). A study of diet in the ancient world with an emphasis
on nutrition.
Helen King, Hippocrates’ Woman (Routledge, London, ). A study of
ancient medicine’s approach to the female body, and its modern
consequences.
A. Stewart, Art and the Body in Ancient Greece (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, ). A study of the ideology of physical form.
Chapter 7
D. Boedeker and K. A. Raaﬂaub (eds.), Democracy, Empire and the Arts in
Fifth-Century Athens (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass. ).

236
|
classical greece
Examines the relationship between the culture of Athens and the political
realms of democracy and empire.
A. R. Burn, Persia and the Greeks, nd edn. (Duckworth, London, ). The
fullest treatment of the Persian Wars, with a useful updated postscript by
D. M. Lewis.
P. A. Cartledge, Sparta and Laconia (Routledge, London, ). Contains two
chapters on the ﬁfth century but with much of relevance in other chapters.
D. M. Lewis, Sparta and Persia (Brill, Leiden, ). Deals mostly with Sparta
and Persia in the fourth century but important for the ﬁnal stage of the
Peloponnesian War.
D. M. Lewis, John Boardman, J. K. Davies, and M. Ostwald, (eds.), The
Cambridge Ancient History, v. The Fifth Century BC, nd edn. (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, ). A comprehensive history of the Greek
world in the ﬁfth century from .
Russell Meiggs, The Athenian Empire (Oxford University Press, Oxford, ).
A comprehensive treatment of the Athenian Empire and ﬁfth-century
political and military history as it relates to the empire.
G. E. M. de Ste. Croix, The Origins of the Peloponnesian War (Duckworth,
London ). Includes discussion of a wide range of issues aﬀecting ﬁfth-
century history.
John Salmon, Wealthy Corinth (Oxford University Press, Oxford, ). Treats
the history of Corinth from the Archaic Age to  bc, with much on or
relevant to the ﬁfth century.
Chapter 8
D. M. Lewis, J. Boardman, S. Hornblower, and M. Ostwald (eds.), The
Cambridge Ancient History, vi. The Fourth Century BC, nd edn.
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ). A massive and
authoritative coverage of the whole Greek world.
P. A. Cartledge, Agesilaos and the Crisis of Sparta (Duckworth, London, ).
The fullest treatment of Sparta’s most inﬂuential king.
G. L. Cawkwell, Philip of Macedon (Faber, London, ). A lively treatment
of the man responsible for turning Macedon into a major power.
A. B. Bosworth, Conquest and Empire: The Reign of Alexander the Great
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ). Gives a full narrative
along with close analysis of the most important historical problems.

Chronology
Date
Political and military events
Cultural milestones
c.507
Cleisthenic reforms mark
beginning of democracy at
Athens
Competition for tragedies
instituted at the City
Dionysia in Athens
499–494 Unsuccessful revolt of Ionians
against Persian rule
Temple of Aphaea built on
Aegina
Aeschylus’ ﬁrst tragedy
produced
490
First Persian invasion of Greece
defeated at Marathon
487
Athenians change to choosing
their chief magistrate (archon)
by lot
Competition for comedies
added to City Dionysia at
Athens
481–479 Second Persian Invasion of
Greece defeated after battles at
Artemisium, Thermopylae,
Salamis, and Plataea
Carthaginian invasion of Sicily
defeated at battle of Himera
Euripides born
478
Delian League formed to
continue the ﬁght against
Persia
Aeschylus’ Persians ()
469
Greeks defeat Persians at battle
of Eurymedon (or slightly
later)
Birth of Socrates
Painted Stoa built at Athens
(–)
465
Athenians face revolt of Thasos
Earthquake in Sparta
Aeschylus’ Suppliant Women
()
462
Ephialtes’ reforms mark
beginning of radical democracy
at Athens
458
Battle of Tanagra between
Athens and Sparta
Aeschylus’ Oresteia trilogy
Temple of Zeus at Olympia
completed
454
Athenian expedition to Egypt
defeated
Treasury of Delian League
moved to Athens
Thucydides born
449
Formal or informal peace
agreement between Athens and
Persia
Parthenon begun ()

238
|
classical greece
445
Thirty Years’ Peace marks end
to conﬂict between Athens and
Sparta
Aristophanes born
440
Attempted revolt of Samos
from the Athenian empire
432
Sparta decides to go to war
with Athens
Parthenon completed
430
Plague breaks out at Athens
Death of Pericles ()
Euripides’ Medea ()
Xenophon born
428
Attempted revolt of Lesbos
from the Athenian empire
Euripides’ Hippolytus
Plato born ()
425
Spartan troops on Sphacteria
surrender to Athenians
Aristophanes’ Acharnians
424
Athenians defeated at Delium
Brasidas’ campaigns in
northern Greece
Thucydides exiled for
military incompetence
421
Peace of Nicias ends ﬁrst part
of Peloponnesian War
Death of Protagoras
Aristophanes’ Peace
415
Athenian expedition against
Sicily
Mutilation of Herms
Euripides’ Trojan Women
413
Athenian defeat in Sicily
Athenians replace allied tribute
by  per cent tax on imports
and exports
Aristophanes’ Birds ()
411
Democracy overturned at
Athens, regime of 
Aristophanes’ Lysistrata and
Women at the Thesmophoria
410
Full democracy restored at
Athens
405
Athenian defeat at naval battle
of Aegospotami marks her
defeat in Peloponnesian War
Dionysius becomes tyrant of
Syracuse
Erechtheum completed
Aristophanes’ Frogs
Euripides’ Bacchae
404
Democracy overturned at
Athens, regime of Thirty
installed
399
Sparta begins campaign against
Persia in Asia Minor
Trial and execution of
Socrates
395
Agesilaus attacks Sardis
War breaks out between Phocis
and Locris
392
Athenian Long Walls rebuilt
Union of Corinth and Argos
Aristophanes’ Ecclesiazusae
387
Peace in Greece brokered by
Persia (King’s Peace)
Plato opens Academy
384
Sparta splits up Mantinea
Athens allies with Chios
Demosthenes and Aristotle
born

chronology
|
239
382
Spartans seize Theban
acropolis
379
Liberation of Thebes from
Spartans
Temple of Asclepius at
Epidaurus begun
377
Second Athenian Confederacy
formed
371
Thebans defeat Spartans at
battle of Leuctra
367
Death of Dionysius I of
Syracuse, Dionysius II succeeds
Aristotle joins Academy
Plato visits Sicily
362
Battle of Mantinea
360
Philip II accedes to
Macedonian throne
Birth of Pyrrho, founder of
Scepticism
357
Athenian allies revolt (‘Social
War’)
Theatre at Epidaurus built
352
Mausoleum at
Halicarnassus built
349
Philip II attacks Olynthus
Demosthenes delivers
Olynthiac orations
347
Death of Plato; Aristotle
leaves Athens
346
Athens makes peace with Philip
II
Rebuilding of Temple of
Apollo at Delphi begins
340
Athens declares war on Philip II
Temple of Athena Alea,
Tegea
337
Philip II wins battle of
Chaeronea
336
Philip II assassinated at Aegae
335
Alexander the Great destroys
Thebes
Aristotle returns to Athens
334
Alexander the Great wins battle
of Granicus
Choregic monument of
Lysicrates built at Athens
331
Alexander the Great wins battle
of Gaugamela
Sparta attempts revolt against
Macedon and is defeated
330
Demosthenes and Aeschines do
battle in court in the Crown
trial
327
Alexander invades India
First victory of Philemon,
writer of New Comedy
323
Death of Alexander
322
Lamian war of Greek cities
against Macedonia ends in
Greek defeat
Deaths of Aristotle and
Demosthenes

Glossary
Where technical terms are used in this book they are generally glossed in the
text, but the following may be found useful:
agora: the civic centre and market-place: see pp. –.
Areopagus: the ‘Hill of Ares’ just northwest of the Athenian Acropolis was
the place on which a council met which was made up of Athenians who
had previously served as chief magistrate (Archon). The Council of the
Areopagus chieﬂy had judicial functions, and after the reforms of Ephialtes of
 these were largely restricted to homicide cases and certain religious cases.
helot: the Spartans had basic agricultural labour carried out by a subservient
population who had no judicial rights and were known as helots. In
Laconia itself the helots may have been a native population; in Messenia
the local population were turned into helots when the Spartans conquered
their territory in the eighth century.
hoplites: soldiers, heavily armed with bronze helmet, bronze or leather
breastplate, bronze greaves, and a round shield worn on the left arm, who
fought in massed ranks (see especially pp. –, –).
liturgy: rich Athenians were required to perform a variety of public services
for the state at their own expense. These services included manning
triremes, putting on plays at the Dionysia, and other expenditure related to
the proper performance of religious festivals.
metic: a technical Athenian term for a non-Athenian, whether Greek or non-
Greek, resident at Athens either permanently or at least for a period of
longer than one month. Such a person was obliged to pay a special tax, the
metoikion, of one drachma a month. The orator Lysias and the philosopher
Aristotle are among those whose status at Athens was that of metic.
perioikoi: as well as the Spartan citizens and enslaved helots, there were free
residents of Lakonia known as perioikoi (lit. ‘Fringe-dwellers’). The
perioikoi lived as self-governing communities but were obliged to ﬁght
alongside the Spartans.
polis (plural ‘poleis’), conventionally translated ‘city-state’: see pp. –.
Table of money
 obols =  drachma
 drachmas =  mina
 minas =  talent
Throughout the book all dates given are bc unless otherwise indicated.

List of Ancient Authors
Aelian (c.ad–). Taught rhetoric at Rome and published compilations
of excerpts and anecdotes on a variety of matters, including the historical
collection known as the Varia Historia.
Aeschines (c.–c.). Actor who became an important politician most
famous for his repeated but ﬁnally unsuccessful attacks of Demosthenes in
the courts.
Aeschylus (/–/). The tragedian who dominated the Athenian stage
for the ﬁrst forty years of the ﬁfth century. Six tragedies by Aeschylus
survive, including the only extant set of three plays performed together at a
single festival, the Oresteia trilogy made up of the Agamemnon, Libation-
Bearers (Choephori), and Eumenides, and performed in . His Persians,
the earliest surviving Greek tragedy, dating from , is the only extant
example of a tragedy based on recent historical events.
Andocides (c.–). Athenian orator and politician who was involved in
and informed upon the plot to mutilate the Herms in .
Aristophanes (c.–after ?). Comic dramatist whose earliest recorded
work is the Banqueters of  and latest the Wealth of . The earlier of the
eleven surviving plays are extremely topical and all choose political targets;
the later plays have more timeless plots and more interest in social
problems.
Aristotle (–). Born at Stagira, a pupil of Plato, and for several years
tutor to the teenage Alexander the Great, Aristotle returned to Athens in
, where he founded the Lyceum. His work ranged over the entire ﬁeld of
philosophy and science, including logic, biology, literary criticism, and
ethics. His Politics seems to derive from lectures given by him in the s
and are rich with allusions to particular political incidents as well as
generalized claims about political behaviour. His Nicomachean Ethics is
concerned with the nature of eudaimonia, ‘happiness’ or ‘human
ﬂourishing’. Of his Poetics, the ﬁrst systematic work of literary criticism to
survive from antiquity, we have only the ﬁrst book, concerned with
tragedy, but it has been immensely inﬂuential.
[Aristotle] Constitution of the Athenians (Athenaion Politeia). This work,
largely known from a papyrus purchased by the British Museum in –
and published in , is the only one of the  Constitutions of Greek
states compiled under Aristotle’s direction substantially surviving. Written
in the s, it consists of a history of the Athenian constitution down to the

242
|
classical greece
end of the ﬁfth century, followed by a description of how the Athenian
constitution worked in the later fourth century. The historical section is
compiled from earlier written accounts, particularly those by the local
historians of Athens known as Atthidographers.
Arrian (c.ad–). Born in Bithynia, but became a member of the Roman
senate and governor of Cappadocia before retiring to Athens. He
represented himself as a second Xenophon and wrote about hunting and
how to ﬁght wars, as well as an Anabasis in seven books describing
Alexander’s conquest of the Persian empire.
Athenaeus of Naucratis in Egypt (active c.ad). Known for a single work,
the Deipnosophistai (‘Learned Banquet’) in which a large number of
guests, some with historical names, exchange anecdotes and excerpts from
earlier writings. It is for these excerpts from works that are otherwise lost
that the work is most valued today.
Demosthenes (–). The most famous of all Athenian orators and an
inﬂuential fourth-century politician. From the late s until the battle of
Chaeronea in  Demosthenes urged the Athenians to resist Philip II of
Macedon’s expansion of his powers. One of Demosthenes’ chief persuasive
gambits was comparing the Athenians of the fourth-century with (a rose-
tinted view of) their ﬁfth-century ancestors.
Diodorus (active –bc). A native of Sicily, Diodorus wrote a Universal
History in  books which attempted to give a year-by-year account of
both Greek and Roman history. For much of his account of ﬁfth-century
Greece he seems to have followed the fourth-century historian Ephorus of
Cyme. Ephorus organized his history by topic rather than by year, and
Diodorus is inclined to include under a single year events that spread
across several (he covers almost a decade as a single year at . –). At
his best he conveys the virtues as well as the vices of his sources, at his
worst he garbles even the accounts he has before him.
Euripides (c.–/). The youngest of the three great Athenian
tragedians, ﬁrst competed at the Dionysia in the year that Aeschylus died.
Eighteen of his plays survive complete, of which the earliest is Alcestis of
 and the latest Bacchae written in Macedon in the last year of his life.
His plays explore such things as relationships between men and women (as
in Medea and Hippolytus), myths of Athenian origins and identity (as in
Ion and Erechtheus), and the horrors of war (as in Andromache, Hecuba,
and Trojan Women).
Frontinus (c.ad–/). A prominent general and politician under the
Flavian emperors, who illustrated his book on military tactics, entitled
Strategemata, with examples drawn from Greek as well as Roman history.
Hellenica Oxyrhynchia. The name given to the substantial fragments of an

list of ancient authors
|
243
account of Greek history from  to the King’s Peace of / preserved
on papyrus. The identity of the author is uncertain.
Herodotus (c.–) is the father of Greek history. His Histories provide
an account of the Persian Wars prefaced by a long description of the
Persian empire. Born at Halicarnassus but from its foundation resident at
Thurii, Herodotus seems to have been writing his Histories during the
Peloponnesian War. See further pp. –.
Hesiod (active c.). Boeotian poet responsible for the earliest extant Greek
didactic poems, Works and Days and Theogony. His name is often coupled
with that of Homer by later Greeks and his works had a profound
inﬂuence on Greek views of the gods.
Hippocrates. The most famous of all Greek physicians and eponym of the
Hippocratic ‘school’ of medicine. Numerous and diverse works on medical
topics written in the ﬁfth and fourth centuries are collectively known as
the ‘Hippocratic corpus’.
Homer. The name by which the author(s) of the Iliad and Odyssey, and a
number of other epic poems, was known in antiquity. These poems belong
to an oral tradition which can be traced back to the Bronze Age, and there
is much dispute as to exactly what contribution was made by the poet who
turned them into the form we have them in, or when that poet lived.
Scholars continue to argue about whether or not the Iliad and the Odyssey
were put into their current form by the same poet.
Hyperides (–). Athenian politician bitterly opposed to Philip of
Macedon. He was highly rated as an orator in antiquity, but we owe our
knowledge of his work only to the survival of substantial papyrus
fragments.
Isaeus (c.–c.). An Athenian speech-writer who specialized in
inheritance speeches and was a teacher of Demosthenes. Eleven or twelve
speeches by him survive. He had a reputation in antiquity for ‘wizardry
and deceit’.
Isocrates (–). Although not himself active as a speaker in the Athenian
assembly, Isocrates’ written orations provide an important commentary
on Athenian politics in the fourth century, and he was important enough
as a teacher of rhetoric to be attacked by Plato in Phaedrus. Isocrates
thought that Greek cities should work together, and he urged Philip to lead
the Greek states in a campaign against the Persians.
Lycurgus (c.–/). Athenian politician responsible for Athenian
ﬁnances for more than a decade and author of many Athenian decrees. He
was active in the courts, bringing prosecutions for corrupt practices, and
his speech Against Leocrates is one of the clearest expositions of Athenian
citizen ideology.

244
|
classical greece
Lysias (/ or later–c.). Born in Athens of a Syracusan father, he spent
some time resident at Thurii before returning to Athens in /. As a
metic Lysias could take no part in the Athenian Assembly, but many of the
speeches he wrote for the Athenian courts have a political slant. In his
Funeral Oration he turns his skill at glossing over inconvenient facts to the
service of the encomium of Athens. He is attacked in Plato’s Phaedrus.
Menander (perhaps /–/). The leading Athenian writer of what is
known as ‘New Comedy’, Menander wrote more than  plays. He was
extremely inﬂuential in antiquity and adapted for the Roman stage, but
our direct knowledge of his plays derives from a number of surviving
papyri.
Old Oligarch, Constitution of the Athenians. This short work included among
the pamphlets of Xenophon is distinct from them in style. From its
historical allusions it has been thought to date from the late s or s,
and it is thus the earliest surviving work of Attic prose. The author, who is
often referred to as the ‘Old Oligarch’, explains, as if to oligarchs outside
Athens, how it is that democracy sustains itself in Athens and cannot easily
be overthrown. Although it oﬀers little detailed historical analysis the work
mentions in passing much that we are not told by other literary sources.
Pausanias (active c.ad). Author of a Guide to Greece whose nine books
cover the southern and central parts of the Greek mainland. In describing
classical remains he includes, as well as archaeological and topographical
information, much accurate historical material drawn from both oral and
written sources.
Plato (c.–). Heavily inﬂuenced by Socrates, Plato wrote extensively on
many aspects of philosophy, casting his works in the form of dialogues in
which Socrates is frequently the main participant and in which Plato
himself does not appear. Several of the dialogues (Crito, Phaedo) are set in
the context of the imprisonment of Socrates, whose defence speech Plato
also wrote a version of (Apology). Other dialogues investigate the nature of
various virtues, such as courage or justice. Plato’s analyses of the state in
Republic and blueprint for the ideal city in Laws have been extremely
inﬂuential on political philosophy.
Plutarch (c.ad–). Philosopher and biographer from Chaeronea in
Boeotia who also became a priest at Delphi. He himself insists that his
Parallel Lives, of which we have  pairs (normally comprising one Greek
and one Roman), are not history, and he is interested in character rather
than the analysis of events, but because he was extremely well read these
lives are an important source of information. Most of the Greeks whose
lives Plutarch writes lived in the ﬁfth or fourth century.
Polyaenus (active c.ad). A Macedonian rhetorician who dedicated a

list of ancient authors
|
245
collection of military stratagems (Strategemata) to the emperors Marcus
Aurelius and Lucius Verus.
Polybius (c.–c.). Born in Megalopolis, Polybius played an important
part in resistance to Rome before being taken to Rome as a hostage. In
Rome he wrote an account of the growth of the Roman empire from the
ﬁrst Punic war until his own time, of which a substantial part survives. The
work is notable for its care and accuracy, its acute analysis, and its criticism
of earlier historians.
Posidippus (active c.). Writer of ‘New Comedy’ whose work survives only
in fragments but was adapted for the Roman stage.
Simonides (active ). Writer of celebratory and commemorative epigrams,
some of which survive, and of victory odes and poems for choral
performance, which do not. He is chieﬂy remembered for his epigrams
celebrating Greek victory in the Persian wars. Papyrus fragments of a more
substantial poem, a ‘pocket epic’ celebrating the victory at Plataea, have
recently been discovered.
Sophocles (c.–). Athenian tragedian whose ﬁrst play was performed
in  and his last in the year of his death. He was victorious at the
Dionysia more frequently than either Aeschylus or Euripides and his
winning plays include three of the seven which survive (Antigone,
Philoctetes, and Oedipus at Colonus), but his most famous play, Oedipus the
King, did not win ﬁrst prize.
Theophrastus of Eresus (c.–). Successor to Aristotle as head of the
Lyceum. Among the several works (on plants, on stones, etc.) that survive,
the work most useful to historians is Characters, which displays acute
social observation and is an important source for Athenian social life.
Thucydides (c.–c.). Athenian of aristocratic background with
Thracian connections, whose History of the Peloponnesian War in 
books, with its account in Book  of the years between the Persian and
Peloponnesian Wars, forms the backbone of all subsequent histories of
Greece during this period. See further pp. –.
Tyrtaeus (mid seventh century). Spartan poet, the surviving fragments of
whose work are full of allusions to warfare.
Xenophon (c.–c.). Athenian who wrote Memoirs of Socrates
(Memorabilia), an account of a mercenary expedition into the heart of
Persia (Anabasis), an account of Greek history from where Thucydides
breaks oﬀ down to  (Hellenica), and a number of short works on
Sparta, military matters, and hunting. Exiled from Athens for ﬁghting
against her at Coronea in , he spent some time in Sparta, on an estate in
Elis and at Corinth before returning to Athens after . His historical
works combine accurate detail and perceptive analysis with a certain

246
|
classical greece
economy with the truth. His Poroi, written in the s, advises Athens on
how to improve her economy.
Inscriptions are cited by editor’s name and number from the following col-
lections of translations:
C. W. Fornara, Archaic Times to the End of the Peloponnesian War. Translated
Documents of Greece and Rome, vol. i (Cambridge, ).
P. Harding, From the End of the Peloponnesian War to the Battle of Ipsus.
Translated Documents of Greece and Rome, vol. ii (Cambridge, ).
Inscriptions for which no convenient translation exists are cited from the
following collections by abbreviated title:
LSCG: Lois sacrées des cités grecques, ed. F. Sokolowski (Paris, ).
SEG: Supplementum Epigraphicum Graecum.

Maps

248
|
classical greece
Map 1 The Greek World

maps
|
249

250
|
classical greece
Map 2 Mainland Greece

Index
Acanthus , 
Acharnae , , ; see also
Aristophanes, Acharnians
Achilles , , , , 
Acoris 
Acragas, temples of 
Acropolis, Athenian , , , ,
, , , , 
adultery , , , , , 
Aegina , , , –, 
Aegospotami, battle at , 
Aelian 
Varia Historia 
Aeschines , , , , 
dress of –
on Demosthenes 
() Against Timarchus –,
, , 
() On the Embassy –
Aeschylus , , , 
ﬁghting at Marathon 
Choephori 
Eumenides –, 
Persians , , 
Aethra , 
Africa, Greek settlement in , 
Agamemnon –, , , , 
age, as qualiﬁcation for oﬃce ,
, , 
Agesilaus, king of Sparta , ,
, , –, , , ,

Agesipolis, king of Sparta , 
Agis, king of Sparta , 
agora 
mixed trade and political functions
of 
Plato and Aristotle on 
at Athens , , –, , ,
, , 
at Corcyra 
agriculture, Greek –, –, , , ,
–, , , , –
seasonal labour demands of , ,

slave labour in , , , –, ,

storage of agricultural produce 
eﬀect of war on , –, 
in Macedonia –
in Sicily and Italy –
at Sparta , , , 
Agyrrhius 
Ajax 
Alcibiades , –, 
property of 
Alcmaeon of Croton 
Alexander the Great , , , ,
, , , , , , 
at Chaeronea 
conquest of Asia –
adoption of Persian clothes and
customs 
foundation of new cities 
Alexandria in Egypt 
Alexis, comic poet –
alliances , , , –, , –, ,
, , , , , , , 
alphabet , 
Ambracia 
amnesty, at Athens 
Amphipolis , , , , 
Amphissa 
Amyntas III of Macedon 
Anaxagoras 
Anaxandridas, king of Sparta 
Andocides 
() On the Mysteries 
andron (men’s room) , , 
annexation, of land rare 
Antalcidas, Spartan 
Anthesteria, festival , 

252
|
classical greece
antidosis (exchange of property) 
Antigone ; see also Sophocles
Antipater , 
Antiphon () On the Murder of
Herodes 
Apatouria, festival of , , , 
Apelles 
Apollo , , , , , , , 
Apollodorus, son of Pasion –, 
author of [Demosthenes] ()
Against Polycles , 
[Demosthenes] () Against
Callipus 
[Demosthenes] () Against
Nicostratus –
[Demosthenes] () Against
Neaera , 
Apollonia in Chalcidice 
Arabia 
Arcadia , , , ; see also
Mantinea
and Alexander , 
and Sparta , 
Arcadian League , 
Archelaus, king of Macedon 
archers , , 
Archidamus, king of Sparta –
Archilochus 
architecture, Greek , –, , 
archons, at Athens , , 
Areopagus council, at Athens , ,
, , , , 
Argaeus 
Arginusae, battle at 
Argos , , , , , , 
and Corinth , 
and Mantinea , 
and Sparta , 
Arion 
Aristagoras 
Aristarchus 
Aristophanes –, , 
on Cleon 
on Euripides 
peasant heroes in , 
Acharnians , , , , , 
Assembly-women , 
Clouds –, , 
Knights 
Lysistrata , , , 
Peace 
Wasps , –
Wealth 
Aristotle , , , , , , ,

founder of Lyceum at Athens 
tutor to Alexander 
criticism of democracy 
criticism of Plato 
on causes of civil strife 
on nature of city 
on rhetoric 
on trade , , 
Nicomachean Ethics 
Oeconomica 
Poetics 
Politics , , , , , , ,
, , , –, –, , ,

[Aristotle], Constitution of the
Athenians , , , , –
arms and armour , , , , , 
army; see also hoplites; war
basis of in conscription , 
service of young men in 
payment of 
size of –, 
light-armed troops in , 
Athenian –, 
Macedonian –, –
Spartan –, , –, , , ,
, 
Thessalian 
Arrian 
Anabasis –
Artabanus 
Artaxerxes, king of Persia 
Artemis, festival of at Eretria –
Artemisium, battle of , 
artillery , 
Asclepius, healing deity , , ,
, 

index
|
253
Asia Minor
Greeks in , , –, –, ,
, , 
Spartan campaigns in , –
assembly , , , 
at Athens 
age for participation in 
attendance at ,  , , 
frequency of , 
oratory in , , , –
pay for 
powers of 
as court 
debates foreign policy 
discusses matters of cult –
makes alliances 
rejects action of Council 
votes in Thirty Tyrants 
at Sparta –, –
at Thebes 
Athena , , , , , , , 
sacred olives of –
Athenaeus , , 
Athenogenes –, , 
Athens , , –, 
history:
archaic temples at 
tyranny at 
and Ionian Revolt –
asked to take over resistance to
Persia ; see also Delian
League
in Peloponnesian War , –
oligarchic revolutions at , ,
, , –, , , , 
surrender of in 
in Corinthian War , –
and King’s Peace 
forms new alliances ; see also
Second Athenian Confederacy
in s 
foreign relations:
with Alexander 
with Boeotia , , , 
with Corcyra , , –, –
with Corinth –, 
with Elis 
with Eretria 
with Italy , 
with Macedon –
with Mantinea , , , ,

with Megara , , 
with Melos , , 
with Mytilene –
with north Aegean 
with Persia , , , , –,
–, –, –
with Plataea , 
with Potidaea , , 
with Samos , , , , 
with satraps 
with Sicily , , , –,
, 
with Sparta , , , ,
–, , , , –, ,

with Thurii –
society and economy:
beardlessness in 
dependent on imported food ,
, , 
dress at –, 
economy of –
ﬁnances of , , –, 
festivals at ,  (see also
Dionysia; Panathenaea)
fondness for cakes 
freedom of citizens in 
Homeric performance at , 
homosexuality at 
honouring benefactors 
obligations to parents at 
patterns of residence in –; see
also Attica; demes
population of –, , 
pottery of 
silver mines of –, ; see also
Laurium
slaves at , 
sophists at , 
taverns in –

254
|
classical greece
tolerance in 
wealth distribution in , ,

military aspects; see also navy
sieges by , , 
cavalry of –
hoplites of , 
empire/imperialism of , , ,
, , , –
and democracy , –
based on navy , 
economics of , , –,
–; see also tribute
language of 
oﬃcials of 
infringing allies’ autonomy ,

allied jurisdiction 
allies’ obligations 
allies’ rights 
revolts from , , , ,
, , 
explored in tragedy 
loss of empire in 
desire to renew ; see also
Second Athenian Confederacy
democracy, see democracy,
Athenian
athletics , , , , 
at religious festivals –, ,

atimia 
Atreus 
Attic Stelae , 
Attica , , , 
cults in , 
invasion of , 
resources of , –
sacred olives in 
size of , –, 
Aulis 
aulos 
in hoplite battle 
at symposium 
on trireme 
in victory ceremonies 
autochthony, Athenian tradition of ,
, 
autonomy, of polis –, , ,
, 
Bacchylides 
bankers –, , 
barbarians:
good to think with , 
clothes of 
as slaves , 
barbers , , , , 
barley, see grain
baths, public 
battle, by land, nature of –, –;
see also war
beards , –
Bendis, cult of at Athens 
Black Sea , , , –, , , 
as source of grain –
body , –, ; see also nude;
sculpture
Boeotia , , , , 
resources of 
marriage customs in 
and Alexander 
and Athens , , , 
and Persians 
and Sparta , , , 
Boeotian League/Confederacy ,

booty , , 
borders, conﬂict over , 
Boreas, cult of 
Bosporus –
Boule, see council
Brasidas, Spartan general , , ,

Brauron , 
Brea 
bribery , , , 
Bronze Age, in Greece , , 
bronze:
foundries 
use for armour 
use for sculpture , 

index
|
255
burial , , , , , –, 
monuments , 
of war dead , , , , 
Byzantium , , –
shaving at 
taverns in 
Cabiri, on Samothrace 
Cadmus 
calendar of festivals/sacriﬁces , 
Callias, son of Hipponicus , ,

Callipus 
Callisthenes 
Cambyses 
Caria 
Carneia, festival of , , 
Carthage, invades Sicily , 
Carystus 
cash crops , , 
catapults ; see also artillery
cavalry –, , , , 
use of , , 
of Philip II of Macedon , ,
, 
Ceos 
Cephisia 
Cephisiades, of Scyros 
Ceramicus 
Cercopes 
Chabrias, Athenian general 
Chaeronea, battle of , , 
Chalcidice , , 
Chalcis, and Philip 
Chares, Athenian general 
chariots , , 
Charmides 
children , , ; see also education
Chios , , , 
Chrysippus, philosopher 
Chrysippus, trader –, , 
Cimon , , , , , 
Ciron 
Cithaeron, Mt 
citizens:
at centre of polis –
deﬁnition dependent on
constitution , , , –, 
duties of , –, , ; see also
liturgies
grants of citizenship –
loss of citizenship , , 
masquerading as 
qualiﬁcation to be –, –, ,
, , , –
rights of , –, –
scrutiny of , 
status of , , , 
also soldiers , , , , –, ,
, , 
city particularism , , , , 
cities, Greek , ; see also polis
distribution of 
number of 
cleanliness of 
destruction of in war , 
as residence for farmers –
as market 
class struggle, in Corcyra , ; see
also poor
Cleisthenes , , , 
Cleombrotus, Spartan king , 
Cleomenes I, king of Sparta , 
Cleon , , , , , 
climate, Greek , , , , , , ,

clock, in Athenian Agora 
clothworking , ; see also weaving
clubs, political , –
Cnidus 
battle of , 
cobblers , , , , , –, 
cock-ﬁghting 
coinage:
Athenian , , , , 
of Macedonian cities 
at Sparta 
Colaeus 
colonies, Greek, see settlement abroad
comedy, at Athens , , , , ,
, , , , , 
and lifestyle 

256
|
classical greece
and marriage , 
and Peloponnesian war , 
and politics 
and prostitutes –
and slaves 
communications, within Greece , 
communism:
of Plato’s Republic 
in Aristophanes –
Conon, Athenian admiral , 
constitution, of Greek cities , ,
–, , 
disputes over –; see also stasis
Persian debate over , , 
convention, as opposed to nature ,
–, , 
Corcyra:
and Athens , , –, –
and Corinth , , , , –,

stasis at –, , –, , ,
, 
navy of , 
Corinth , , , , , , , ,

League of 
pottery of 
settlements abroad of 
tyranny at 
use of mercenaries by 
and Argos , 
and Athens –, 
and Corcyra , , , , –,

and Potidaea 
and Sparta , , –, , , 
and trade –, 
Corinthian War , –
council 
of  at Athens , , –, –,
, 
age for participation in , 
scrutiny of 
taking military initiative 
receives ambassadors 
at Corcyra –
at Eretria –
of Elders at Sparta 
courts:
political use of –, , , ,
, , 
at Athens –, , , , –, ,
, 
absence of public prosecutor
in 
age for participation , 
and empire –
testing of values in –, ,
, 
for trading cases 
in Agora 
in comedy 
inspecting youths 
paid 
at Sparta , , , , 
at Thebes , 
cowardice , 
cows, sacriﬁce of , 
craft specialization , –
Creon 
Crete , , , , 
Creusa –
Critias –, , , 
Crocus Field, battle of 
crops, variability in –, , 
cult statues , , , , 
curses –, 
Cyprus , , , , 
Cyrene , , 
Cyrus I, Persian king  see also
Xenophon, Education of Cyrus
Cyrus, son of Darius II , , 
dancing , 
as training for ﬁghting , , 
Darius I, king of Persia 
Darius II, king of Persia 
Darius III, king of Persia defeated by
Alexander 
Dark Age, of Greece , 
debt 
bondage for , 

index
|
257
Decelea, Athenian deme:
meeting place for men of 
fortiﬁed by Sparta , 
dedications, in sanctuaries –,
–, , , , 
Delian League , –, , , 
Delium, battle of , 
Delos 
Delphi , , , , , , , 
Delphic Amphictyony , 
Demaratus , 
demes, at Athens , , , , 
cults in , 
patterns of property-holding in 
Demeter , , ; see also Eleusis
Demetrius of Phaleron 
democracy , 
advantages and disadvantages
of , –
based on social justice 
relativist defence of 
deviant regime according to
Aristotle 
ideals shared with oligarchy 
Syracusan 
Athenian , , , , , 
working of –
critics of , –, –, 
basis of Athenian strength 
decision-making in , –,
–; see also assembly;
council, of 
election by lot in , , , 
and empire , –
ﬁnancing of –
ideology of , , 
magistrates in charge of youths
and women in 
participation of farmers in –,

payment for oﬃceholding in ,

powers of individual in –
scrutiny of magistrates in , ,
, 
temporary end to in 
Democritus , 
demos ; see also democracy
Demosthenes, ﬁfth-century
general , 
Demosthenes, fourth-century political
leader , , , ; see also
Apollodorus
monetary aﬀairs of father , , 
in the bar 
on Council 
accused of cowardice –
dress of , , 
on houses 
on Philip II of Macedon –
() Third Philippic 
() Against Meidias 
() Against Phormio –
() Against Pantaenetus , 
() Against Phaenippus –, 
() Against Stephanus –
() Against Olympiodorus 
() Against Callicles 
Dercyllidas, Spartan 
Dicaeogenes 
diet, see food
Diodorus , , , , , ,

Diodotus, on Mytilene 
Diogenes, Cynic philosopher 
Dionysia, at Athens , , , , ,
, , , , 
Dionysus , , , , , , 
mysteries of 
disabled, pensions for 
divorce , 
doctors –
Dodona 
donkeys, use of in agriculture , 
Dorians , , , , 
dowries , 
Draco, homicide law 
dramatic festival, at Athens, see
Dionysia
dress , , –, , 
earthquake, at Sparta 

258
|
classical greece
economy , –
Greek understanding of , 
politics of , 
rationality of , 
strife over 
education , , –
Isocrates’ inﬂuence on 
in Plato’s Republic 
Socrates on 
at Sparta , –
for warfare –
Egesta 
Egypt , , , , , 
compared to Greece –
inﬂuence of , 
trade with , 
ﬁghting Persians , , , ,

elections, at Athens , , , 
elective cults , , ; see also
Eleusis
Electra 
Eleusis , 
Mysteries at , , , 
Elis , 
and Sparta , , , , , 
Elymians 
Epaminondas, Theban general , 
ephebes, at Athens , , , 
Ephesus, temples of 
Ephialtes , 
ephors, at Sparta –, , 
Ephorus 
Epicrates –, , 
Epidamnus 
Epidaurus , , , 
Epirus 
equality:
as ideal of polis , 
challenges to 
at Athens 
at Sparta , 
in Plato’s Republic 
in Aristophanes’
Assembly-women –
eranos loans 
Erechtheum , 
Eresus, tyrants of 
Eretria –, 
Erichthonius 
Erysichthon 
estates:
of Ciron 
of Phaenippus 
of Stratocles 
Ethiopia 
ethnicity, Greek , , , , 
ethnos, ‘tribal state’ 
Etruria, trade in pottery with 
Euboea , , , 
Eubulus, comic poet 
Eumaeus 
Euphron –, 
Eupolis, comic poet 
Euripides , , , 
Bacchae , 
Ion , –
Medea , 
Suppliants 
Trojan Women , , , 
Eurymedon, battle of , 
Evagoras, of Salamis 
exiles , , , , , , 
family , , , –, ; see also
household
farmers; see also agriculture
basis of hoplite army 
participation of in democracy –,

federal states , , , , 
fertility, cults connected with 
festivals , , –, , , –,
, 
ﬁnes, collection of –
ﬁsh , , , 
ﬁshmongers –
ﬂooding, damage from , 
food , , , –, –; see also
grain
fortiﬁcations , –, , , , ,


index
|
259
fragmentation, of landholding , –
France, Greek cities in , 
frankincense 
freedom; see also autonomy
ideal of , , 
at Athens , , 
of citizens , 
of Greeks, a slogan , 
of polis –, 
of women at Sparta 
from Persians –, 
championed by Sparta –
and Second Athenian
Confederacy 
friendship , –
between cities –; see also
alliances
Frontinus , 
funeral; see also burial
expense of 
women’s role in 
furniture , , 
gardens 
Gaugamela, battle at , 
Gelo, tyrant of Syracuse 
generals, Athenian , ; see also
Alcibiades; Chabrias; Chares;
Cimon; Cleon; Conon;
Demosthenes; Iphicrates; Nicias;
Pericles
Gerousia, see council, of Elders at
Sparta
Gilgamesh 
gods, Greek –, , , 
in Herodotus , 
in Hesiod 
in Homeric poems –, –, 
in Sophocles , 
Gorgias, of Leontini , , 
Gortyn, laws of , 
grain:
cultivation of , , , 
preparation of 
staple food 
for army , 
gifts of , , 
trade in –, –
controlled by Athens 
controlled by curses 
taxed at Athens 
from Sicily 
disrupted by Philip 
Granicus, battle at , 
Greece, geography of –
Greeks, identity of , –, 
gymnasium , , , , , ,
, 
Haliartus, battle of 
Halicarnassus , 
harmosts, installed by Sparta , 
Hebryzelmis, Thracian 
Hector 
Helen , , , , , 
Hellenic League against Persia –,
, 
Hellenica Oxyrhynchia –, ,
–
Hellespont , , , 
helots , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , ,

revolt of , , 
Hephaestus , 
Hera , 
Heraclea Pontica 
Heraclea , 
Heracles 
Heraclitus , 
Hermes , 
Hermippus, comic poet 
herms, mutilation of , , 
Herodotus , –, , , –, 
settles at Thurii 
on dangers of excessive power ,

on Persian constitutional debate ,
–
relationship to Thucydides –
cited , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , ,

260
|
classical greece
, , , , , , ,
, 
heroes , –, , , , 
Hesiod , , , , , , 
theology of , –, 
Himera, battle of , 
Hippias of Elis 
Hippocrates , 
Hippodamos, of Miletus 
history, writing of –, –
Homer , –, , , , , , 
Iliad , 
Odyssey 
performance of , 
learnt at school 
theology of , –, , –, 
homosexual relations , , , ,
, , –, 
honour , –, , , 
hoplites –, –, , ; see also
arms and armour; army
amateur , 
and citizenship , , , ,
–, , , , 
equality of 
payment of 
presentation of panoply to
Athena 
private funding of 
slave attendants of 
training for 
wealth of , 
in Plato’s Republic 
Spartan 
order of battle –
on ships , , 
horses; see also cavalry
sign of wealth , , 
training of 
household , , –, –,
–
houses , , , –, 
size of –
value of , 
security for loans 
Hyacinthia, festival of 
Hyperides , 
Against Athenogenes –
identity, Greek , , , 
illegitimacy 
Illyria , , 
impiety , , , , , , , ,

inheritance , , , , 
inscriptions , , , , , , 
interest rates:
on bottomry loans 
criticized 
Ion –
Ion of Chios 
Ionian Revolt , , –, , 
Ionians , , ; see also , , 
Iphicrates, Athenian commander ,

irrigation , 
Isaeus, orator , , , 
Isis , 
Ismenias, Theban politician 
Isocrates , 
on bars 
() Panegyricus 
() Philippus –, 
() Archidamus 
() On the Peace 
() Evagoras 
() Trapeziticus , 
isonomia ; see also democracy
and health 
Issus, battle at 
Italy , , 
Ithaca 
ivory 
Jason of Pherae 
jewellery , 
Jocasta/Epicaste –, 
kin, loyalty of 
kings, at Sparta , –
King’s Peace , , , 
korai 

index
|
261
kouroi , 
krypteia at Sparta , 
labour , , , 
Laius 
Lamachus 
Lampis, shipowner –
land:
ownership, a condition for
citizenship , , 
leasing of , , , , 
market for 
size of holdings 
redistribution of 
taken from allies by Athens 
sacred , 
landscape, of Greece , 
language, Greek:
variety of 
and education 
spread by Alexander 
Larissa 
Laurium, silver mines of , –, ,
, , 
lawgivers , , –, 
laws:
basis of polis , , , , , 
speciﬁc to individual cities 
codes of , , –
decided by assembly at Athens 
written up , , , –
sacred 
explored of in tragedy –
Socrates on –
regulating relations between city
and settlement abroad –
as evidence for private life 
leaders, political , , –, , ,
–, , ; see also Cleon;
Demosthenes; Pericles
leases:
of land , , , , 
of mines –, 
Lechaeum , 
Lenaea, festival of Dionysus 
Leocrates –
Leonidas, king of Sparta 
Leontini 
Leotychidas, king of Sparta 
Lesbos , , 
Leuctra, battle of , , –, ,

libations , 
Libya , 
literacy 
literary criticism, invention of –
liturgies, at Athens , , , , , ,
, , , , , 
loans:
of household items 
of money , 
purposes of 
for purchase of ship’s cargo ,

interest free 
variety of security for 
secured on slaves , –
Locris , –, , , , 
lot, use of at Athens , , , 
Luxemburg 
luxuries:
available at Athens 
demand for , 
trade in 
criticisms of , 
Lycon 
Lycurgus, Athenian politician , 
() Against Leocrates –
Lycurgus, Spartan , 
Lydia , 
Lysander, Spartan general , , ,
, 
Lysias , , 
() On the Murder of
Eratosthenes , , 
() Against Simon 
() On the Olive Stump 
() For Mantitheus 
() On the Cripple 
() Against Philon 
Lysippus 
Lysis 

262
|
classical greece
Macedon/Macedonia , , , ,
, , , , 
geography of –
resources of , , 
economic and military power
of –
army of –, –
rise to power of –
magic , 
magistracies:
at Athens distributed by lot and
paid 
strictly controlled by law , –,

scrutiny of 
in charge of children , , 
in charge of women , 
Mantinea:
and Arcadian League –
and Argos , 
and Athens , , , , 
and Sparta , , 
ﬁrst battle of 
revolution at following Leuctra 
second battle of , 
Marathon:
battle of , , , , , ,

deme of , 
Mardonius, Persian –
marines , , , 
market:
agora as –
local nature of 
working of 
for pottery and sculpture –
Maroneia , , 
marriage , –, , , 
ceremony , –, 
of Spartan kings 
among elite –
between rich and poor 
to non-Athenian prohibited at
Athens 
meat , –
production of 
division of sacriﬁcial meat between
men and gods , , 
Medea 
medicine –
inﬂuence on Thucydides 
Megalopolis , –, , 
Megara:
and Athens , , 
establishing settlements abroad 
Meidias 
Melos, and Athens , , 
Menander 
Bad Tempered Man 
Samian Woman 
Menelaus , 
menstruation 
mercenaries –, , 
payment for 
Greek hoplites as , 
in Thessaly 
merchant ships , , 
Mesopotamia, civilizations of , , 
Messene, alliance with Philip 
Messenia , , , –, , , ,
, , 
Methana 
metics , , , , , , , 
cult activity of , 
in naval crews 
Miletus , , 
military service, length of 
mines:
Athenian silver , –, 
Macedonian silver and gold , 
other silver mines 
Misgolas, homosexual prostitute 
Monaco 
monarchy –, , , –, ; see
also kings; tyranny
monkey, as pet 
morality:
of Homeric gods –, 
in tragedy 
in warfare 
of past history 
agricultural model for 

index
|
263
music:
part of education –
competition in at festivals , , 
new music 
Mycale, battle of 
Mycenae 
Mystery cults , , , , , 
Mytilene, Athenian debate over
punishment of –
nature, as opposed to convention ,
–, , 
Naucratis 
Naupactus 
naval blockages 
naval warfare –, –
battle at Salamis , , , , 
campaigns against Persians –
battle between Athens and
Corinthians –
battle at Cnidus , 
navy, Athenian –, , 
and democracy 
basis of Delian League 
and empire , 
size of , , 
expense of , 
pay for , , 
funded from silver mines , ,

training of 
use of rowers in land battles –
in fourth century 
Naxos 
Neaera –, , 
Near East:
inﬂuence of , , , –, 
compared to Greece 
neighbours, relations with , , ,
, –, 
Nicias, Athenian general , 
owner of slaves working in
mines , 
Nicocles, son of Evagoras 
Nicostratus, neighbour of
Apollodorus –
nomos, see convention; laws
nude , , , 
Odysseus , , , , , 
Oedipus –, 
as role model , –
oikos, see household
Old Oligarch , , , , , ,
, , , , 
as critic of democracy , ,
–
oligarchy , , , , , 
advantages and disadvantages of ,
–
deviant according to Aristotle 
hostile to traders 
at Athens , , , , 
at Sparta –
olives, cultivation of , , 
olive presses smashed in war 
as food 
non-food uses of ; see also
perfume
sacred –
Olympia , , , , , ,

Olympias, wife of Philip II of
Macedon , 
Olympic games –, , , 
Olympiodorus 
Olynthus , , , , , ,

omens, inﬂuencing warfare 
opson , 
oracles , , , , , 
oral tradition –, –, , , 
oratory, Athenian; see also rhetoric
as historical source , –, 
political role of , , , , ,
–
power of explored in
tragedy –
Orchomenus 
Orestes 
ostracism , , , 
ox, use of in agriculture 

264
|
classical greece
Paeonia 
Paerisades 
painting , , , , –
Pan, cult of at Athens 
Panathenaea , , , –, , 
award of civic honours at 
women’s role in , 
Pandora , 
Pangaeum, silver mines of 
panhellenism , , , –, , ,
–
Panionion 
Paris , 
Parmenides of Elea 
Paros 
Parthenon , , , , , 
cost of 
Pasion –
pastoralism , , 
Pausanias, king of Sparta , 
Pausanias, Spartan regent , , 
Pausanias, writer , , 
pay, political, at Athens , , , 
peace treaties, nature of –
peasants, see small-holders
Peithias, of Corcyra –
Pelopidas, Theban commander ,

Peloponnesian League –, , ,
, , , , , , , ,

Peloponnesian War (First) –
Peloponnesian War , , , , ,
, , –
causes of , , , –, 
nature of warfare in , , , 
consequences of , , , –,
–
peltasts –
Penelope , 
Perdiccas, king of Macedon 
perfume , –, , 
Pericles , , , –, , , ,
–, , , 
citizenship law of 
funeral speech of , , 
strategy of in Archidamian
war 
Perinthus, siege of 
perioikoi, at Sparta , , , ,
, 
Perrhaebia 
Perseus 
Persia:
history of:
crucial role of in Greek
history , –
impact of wealth on Greek
cities 
founding of empire 
rule over Caria 
invasions of Europe by 
and Greeks of Asia –, –,
, , 
Greek collaboration with , 
war against Greece , , , ,
–, , , , , , ,
, –, , , 
war against Greece, aftermath
of –
conﬂict with Delian
League –
and Egypt , , , , 
wooed by Athens and Sparta 
role of in Peloponnesian war ,

failure to induce fourth-century
Greek unity 
and Greece in early fourth
century 
guarantor of King’s Peace –
garrison on Samos 
threat to Greeks in s 
Philip’s campaign against ,

administrative structure taken
over by Alexander 
institutions and practices in:
debate on constitution in –
king of , 
employing Greek
mercenaries 

index
|
265
battle formation of Xenophon’s
Cyrus 
resources of 
bodies of , 
dress , 
homosexuality in 
sold as slaves 
values of , 
carpets of 
Phaeacia 
Phaedo , 
Phaenippus –, 
phalanx, Macedonian 
phallus, presented at Dionysia 
Pharnabazos, Persian satrap 
Pharsalus , 
Pherae 
Phidias 
Philip II of Macedon , , –,
, , , , , –, 
marriages of , 
philosophy, Greek, inﬂuence of , , ,
, 
Phlius, and Sparta , 
Phocis , –, , , , ,
, 
Phoebidas, Spartan commander 
Phoenicia/Phoenicians , , 
Phormio, metic 
Phormio, slave of Pasion 
phratries, at Athens , , , 
Phrynion 
Pindar 
piper, see aulos
piracy , , 
Piraeus , , , , , , , , ,
, , , 
Pisistratus , 
plague , , , 
Plataea:
history of 
at battle of Marathon 
battle of , , , , 
destroyed , , , 
Plato , , , , , , , ,
, 
nephew of Critias 
on abuse of parents 
on democracy 
on education 
on Homer 
on homosexual desire , –,

on language 
on new music 
on slave revolts 
on trade , , 
Apology 
Charmides 
Crito , 
Laches 
Laws , , , 
Lysis 
Protagoras 
Republic , , –, , 
Symposium 
Plutarch 
on eating 
on Nicias and Alcibiades 
Lycurgus 
Nicias –
Pelopidas 
Pericles , 
Pnyx:
assembly place on , 
house from 
poisoners, publicly cursed 
police, absence of , , 
polis; see also cities
deﬁnition of , 
common features of –
as community –
religion in , , –
size of 
subdivisions of 
territory of –
and autonomy –
and freedom –, –
political theory –, –
Polyaenus , 
Polybius , , 
Polyclitus 

266
|
classical greece
polycropping 
Polygnotus 
Polygnotus, painter 
poor; see also thetes
constituting separate city 
invisibility of , –, –
relations with rich , , , 
military role of , , , ,
–
population , , 
of Athens –, 
Poseidon , 
Posidippus, comic poet , 
Potidaea , , 
pottery , , , , , –, ,
–, , –
Praxiteles , 
prejudice, against foreigners 
priests , 
prison –
prisoners, of war 
private life, history of –
Prometheus 
property, conﬁscation of , 
Propylaea, at Athens 
prostitutes –, , , , , ,
, , , –
dress of –
homosexual , –
Protagoras of Abdera , , 
Punjab, Alexander advances to 
Pylos , , 
pyrrhic dance , 
rainfall, in Greece , –
rape, penalties for 
ravaging –, , , 
reciprocity , , , –, 
religion , –, –, , , , ,
–, –, , , ; see also
elective cults; festivals
in household , 
and politics , , –, , ,

Rhamnous 
rhetoric; see also oratory
development of , , , –
dangers of , , 
Rhodes , 
Sacred Band at Thebes 
sacriﬁce, of animals , , , , , ,
, , , , , 
calendar of , 
rights to participate in , 
meat from , –
before battle 
in household 
Salamis, battle of , , , , 
Samos , , , , , 
cult of Hera at , 
and Athens , , , , 
and Sparta –
Samothrace, Mysteries on 
San Marino 
sanctuaries, war memorials in 
sanctuary, Greek , , , , , , ,

Sappho 
Sardis , 
satraps, Persian , , , 
Satyrus, king of Bosporus –, 
sausages, eaten at Apatouria 
sculpture:
archaic , –, 
classical , , , , , , , ,
; see also Parthenon
Scythia, Persian attack on 
sea, Greeks and , 
Second Athenian Confederacy , ,

self-mastery –
self-suﬃciency, ideal of , , , 
Selinus , 
settlement abroad, Greek , –, ,
–, –, , 
sexual relations , , , –, ;
see also homosexual relations;
marriage
shaving , 
shepherds, see pastoralism
shopkeepers , 

index
|
267
Sicels , 
Sicily , 
architecture of , 
cheese from 
climate of 
slaves in 
tyrants in , 
Athens and , , , , ,

Carthage and , 
Sicyon –, 
sieges , , , –, 
silphium 
silver mines , –, , , , ,

silverware, use of by wealthy –
Simonides , 
Siphnos, silver mines of 
Sitalces, king of Thrace 
Scopas 
slaves , , , , , –; see also
helots
barbarian origins of , 
trade in , , 
product of war , , , 
legal rights of 
involved in civil strife , 
numbers of , , , , 
price of 
ritual entry to household 
initiated at Eleusis 
sexual relations with , 
informing on owner , , , 
treatment of , , , , 
torture of , 
revolt of , , 
running away , –, , 
evacuated from besieged city 
attending army , 
in army –, , 
in navy 
in agriculture , , , –, ,

in mines , –
in workshops –, 
working apart , 
public , 
freed , , , , 
small-holders , , 
Smith, Adam:
invisible hand of 
pin factory of 
Socrates , , , –, , –, ,
, , , , , 
trial of , , –, , 
Sodom 
Solon , , , , 
Solygea, battle of 
Sopaeus , , 
sophists , , , –, , ,

Sophocles , –, 
and Asclepius 
theology of , 
Antigone , , , 
Oedipus the King , –
Spain , 
Sparta , , –, , , , ,
, –, –, 
foreign relations:
with Arcadia , 
with Argos , 
with Athens , , , –,
, , 
with Corinth , , 
with Elis , , , , , 
with Lesbos 
with Macedon , 
with Mantinea , , 
with Olynthus –
with Persia , , –, 
with Sicyon –
with Syracuse 
with Thebes 
with Thessaly 
institutions and politics:
army of –, , –, , , ,
, 
assembly at –, –
bribery at , 
citizenship at , , , ; see
also Spartiates

268
|
classical greece
constitution of , , –, 
egalitarianism of , 
ephors at –, , 
champions freedom , , 
Inferiors at 
kings of , –
laws of , 
trials at , , , , 
society; see also helots
closed society 
cults of , 
dress at , 
dogs of 
drinking customs at 
economy of , 
education at , –, 
food at , 
homosexuality at , 
long hair at 
mess contributions at , 
female nudity at 
obsession with physical
ﬁtness , 
population of , , –
property rights of women
at 
resourcelessness of –
shoes and staﬀs of , , 
territory of –
trade at , 
history:
early history of 
war against Tegea 
siege of Samos 
resisting Persian invasion in 
–
earthquake at , 
leader of Peloponesian
League , 
seeking funds from Persia 
in Peloponnesian War 
defeat at Pylos , , 
navy funded by Persia 
garrisons Athens in /
policy at end of Peloponnesian
war , –
behaviour of after Peloponnesian
war , –
installation of garrisons by ,
, , 
campaigning in Asia Minor ,

in Corinthian War –
and King’s Peace , 
in s 
defeated at Leuctra , –
eﬀect of defeat at Leuctra –
feared in Peloponnese
in s 
Spartacus 
Spartiates , , –, 
qualiﬁcations of 
speechwriters, for legal cases at
Athens –, ; see also oratory
Sphacteria , 
Sphodrias, Spartan commander ,
, –
Stagira 
stasis 
at Athens , , , , –, ,
, , 
at Corcyra –, , –, , 
at Epidamnus 
following Spartan defeat at
Leuctra , –
causing men to enlist as
mercenaries 
central issue for political
thought 
explored in comedy 
leading to capture of city in
siege 
lack of moral constraints in 
Thucydides on –, 
status:
importance of 
aﬀecting legal rights 
asserted in Agora 
reﬂected in cult activity , , 
Stephanus , –
Sthenelaïdas, Spartan ephor 
Strato, king of Sidon 

index
|
269
Stratocles , 
Stratonicus , –
Sybaris 
symposium , , , , 
Syracuse , , , –, 
Syria , 
Tacitus 
Taenarum, sanctuary at 
Tanagra, battle of 
Tartessos 
taverns , , , 
taxes , , , , , , ,
, , , ; see also
tribute
Tegea , , –, 
Telemachus 
Teos –
Thasos , 
laws from –, 
revolt of , 
silver mines of 
Thebes , , , 
army of , –, 
excluding traders from
politics 
political instability of 
and Alexander , , 
and Arcadia –
and Athens , 
and King’s Peace 
and Macedon , 
and Plataea , 
and Sicyon –
and Sparta , , 
and Thessaly 
in Corinthian War , 
in s 
in Peloponnese after Leuctra –
Themistocles 
Theodote 
Theognis 
theology –, 
of Herodotus 
of Hesiod , –, 
of Homer , –, , –, 
of Sophocles , 
Theophrastus , 
Characters , , , , 
Thermopylae, battle of , , ,

Theseus , , 
Thesmophoria, festival of , 
Thespiae, garrisoned by Sparta 
Thessaly , , , , , , 
geography of 
penestai of , 
in fourth century –, 
thetes (propertyless) at Athens , ,
, –, , , 
Thibron, Spartan 
Third Sacred War 
Thirty tyrants, at Athens , –, ,
, 
Thoricus , 
Thrace , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , ,

Thucydides, son of Melesias , 
Thucydides, son of Olorus,
historian , –, 
exiled for incompetence , 
on archaic Greece , –
on civil strife at Corcyra –, ,
–, , 
critic of democracy 
as political theorist –
on power 
on Sparta 
little interested in religion 
on human nature 
on the plague –
work continued by Xenophon 
cited , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , ,
, , , –, –, ,
, , 
Thurii , , 
Timarchus –, , , , , ,


270
|
classical greece
Timotheus, Athenian general 
Timotheus, of Miletus 
Tiryns 
Tissaphernes, Persian satrap 
torture, of slaves , 
trade:
control of , , , 
importance of –
nature of , –
risks of , 
in grain –, , , 
and citizenship 
and democracy 
involves deceit 
tragedy, Athenian genre , , , ,
, , , , , ; see
also Aeschylus; Euripides;
Sophocles
an education , 
panhellenic appeal of –
politics of , –, –, ,

theorized by Aristotle –
use of house in –
treason , , , , 
tribes 
at Athens , , , 
tribute 
in Delian League/Athenian
empire , , , , , 
replaced by tax , 
trierarch , , 
Triphylia 
triremes –, , ; see also navy
as model of cooperating
community 
trophies , , , 
Troy, Trojans –, , , , ,
, 
tyranny –, , ; see also
monarchy
at Athens , 
at Eresus –
in Greek cities of Asia , 
at Halicarnassus 
in Sicily , , 
removed by Sparta 
and constitutional change 
tyrannical man in Plato , 
Tyrtaeus, poet , 
veil , 
villages, of Attica ; see also demes
wage-labour , , , 
war , –
changing nature of –, –
casualties in , , , , –,

economics of , , –, –
frequency of , 
memorials of 
moral constraints on –
practical limitations on –
prisoners of , , , , , 
reasons for ﬁghting –
rules of engagement , 
seasonal , , –
training for , , 
and agriculture , –, 
and religion , 
proper subject of history 
wealthy:
at Athens –, , , 
at Sparta , 
bankrolling cities 
less patriotic 
constituting separate city 
relations with poor , , , 
dress of –
exploiting mines –
hiding wealth , , 
property of –, –, 
weaving , , , 
weekends, absence of 
wetlands, of Greece 
wheat, see grain
wine –, , , , –, 
women; see also marriage
creation of , 
biology of –
civic roles of , , 

index
|
271
complexion of , 
dress of –, 
education of at Sparta , 
labour of , , , 
modesty of 
role of in religion , , , 
sculptures of 
seclusion of –
at symposium 
and civil conﬂict –, 
and music 
and politics 
and trade 
and war , , , –
and wine 
in comedy –, 
in Plato’s Republic 
in tragedy –
woodlands, of Greece 
workshops , , –, 
wrestling:
as military training 
by women 
writing  , , 
Xanthippe, wife of Socrates 
Xenophon , –
qualities of as historian –
mercenary commander , 
on civil strife at Athens 
critic of democracy 
on military practice , 
on Spartan attitude to Athens
in 
Agesilaus 
Anabasis 
Cavalry Commander , 
Constitution of Sparta , , ,
, 
Education of Cyrus , , 
Hellenica , , , , –, , ,
, , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , ,
, , 
Memorabilia , , , , 
Oeconomicus , , , 
Poroi , , –, 
Symposium , 
Xerxes, son of Darius I, king of
Persia –, , , 
Xuthus –
youths, inspection of 
Zeus , , , , , , , 
Zeuxis 

