xxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxx
New York q Toronto q London q Auckland q Sydney q Mexico City q New Delhi q Hong Kong q Buenos Aires
15 Greek Myth
Mini-Books
by Danielle Blood
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

xxxxxxxxx
Scholastic Inc. grants teachers permission to photocopy the reproducible pages
from this book for classroom use. No other part of this publication may be
reproduced in whole or in part, or stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without written permission of the publisher. For information regarding
permission, write to Scholastic Inc., 555 Broadway, New York, NY 10012.
Cover design by Josué Castilleja
Cover and interior illustrations by Margeaux Lucas
Interior design by Ellen Matlach Hassell 
for Boultinghouse & Boultinghouse
ISBN: 0-439-21561-7
Copyright © 2001 by Danielle Blood
All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.
For Mom, Dad, and Laura—
with love and gratitude.
Acknowledgments 
Special thanks to the following people:
Sarah Longhi, for editing this book so thoughtfully.
Josué Castilleja and Ellen Matlach Hassell, 
for designing the elegant cover and interior.
Margeaux Lucas, for beautifully illustrating these stories.
Terry Cooper and Virginia Dooley, for supporting this project.
Betsy Yarbrough, Patricia Kenan-Herrmann, 
Kathy Pounds, Elizabeth Aldridge, and Julia Sneden, for
generously sharing their teaching expertise and ideas with me. 
Author’s Note
Many versions of the Greek myths exist as a result of their being
retold through the centuries. The stories in this book are generally
consistent with popular versions for this age group; however, they
have been adapted to fit the mini-book format and differ in parts
from other retellings. For example, the ending of “Curiosity and the
Box” offers a nontraditional interpretation of how hope survives. 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
How to Use This Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Extension Activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Mythology Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Greek Myth Mini-Books
Glossary and Pronunciation Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Welcome to Mount Olympus 
An Introduction to the 
Greek Gods and Goddesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Journey to the Underworld 
The Story of Persephone and Demeter . . . . . . . . . 15
A Tale of Two Spinners 
The Story of Arachne and Athena . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Curiosity and the Box 
The Story of Pandora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
A Trip Around the World 
The Story of Phaethon and Apollo . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Gossip and Vanity 
The Story of Echo and Narcissus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Music Makes the 
Underworld Go ‘Round 
The Story of Orpheus and Eurydice. . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Cupid Falls in Love 
The Story of Cupid and Psyche. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
An Amazing Battle 
The Story of Theseus and the Minotaur . . . . . . . . . 45
Dangerous Heights 
The Story of Daedalus and Icarus . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
The Race for Love 
The Story of Atalanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
The Golden Touch
The Story of King Midas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Carved to Perfection
The Story of Pygmalion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A Petrifying Quest 
The Story of Perseus and Medusa. . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
The Mysterious Horse
The Story of the Trojan War . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
3 q
xxxxxxxxx
q Contents q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Greek mythology was one of my favorite units to
teach because students were always so surprised that
these ancient stories could relate to today’s world—
and, most important, to their own lives. The themes
are timeless: love, courage, power, ambition, loss,
jealousy, fear, triumph, and much more. The
characters show both heroic qualities and common
flaws. They experience both success and failure. Even
the Greek gods and goddesses are far from perfect.
They become angry, they hold grudges, and they even
fall in love. 
The myths served many purposes in ancient
times. Some of them explained natural phenomena,
such as the rising and setting sun or the changing
seasons. The myths also explored philosophical issues
that people continue to grapple with today. Although
these stories are entertaining and fanciful, they deal
with issues of real life—and real life does not always
have a neat, happy ending. This is one of the most
intriguing aspects of mythology, especially since
young readers have come to expect stories to end
happily. A sad ending can be baffling to students, but
it can also lead them think about the stories on a
deeper level. It motivates them to ask questions,
search for answers, discuss ideas, and make
connections to their own experiences.
Once students are familiar with these stories,
they will begin to find references to Greek mythology
all around them. Museums are filled with paintings
and sculptures depicting the gods and goddesses.
Students can even find mythology in the Yellow
Pages! When students have read about Hermes, a
logo of a winged sandal takes on new meaning. After
they’ve learned about gold-loving King Midas, they’ll
understand expressions like “the Midas touch.”
q 4
Students will make connections as they learn
vocabulary words, such as narcissistic, arachnid, and
titanic. Mythology also provides young readers with
an excellent foundation for their future studies, as it
is the basis for so many important pieces of
literature.
These mini-books are short retellings of 15
favorite myths, featuring simple text, lively
illustrations, and speech balloons. The comic-strip
style and mini-book format help make the stories
accessible and inviting to students of all reading
levels. For quick reference, you’ll find a glossary and
pronunciation guide at the back of the book. To
extend learning, suggested activities for each mini-
book are provided on pages 6–9. There are a number
of ways you can incorporate the mini-books into your
studies. Here are some suggestions:
q Enhance language arts or social studies units on
ancient Greece.
q Supplement classroom texts.
q Motivate reluctant readers.
q Support visual learners.
q Introduce myths in a quick, simple way.
q Review myths at the end of the unit.
q Prompt a class discussion.
q Introduce a writing assignment.
q Provide students with take-home materials.
Students sometimes underestimate how much
they’ll enjoy a reading experience, especially if the
material is “ancient.” These mini-books are one way
to help children have fun as they read—and
encourage them to become fans of Greek mythology! 
xxxxxxxxx
Introduction
“I thought the Greek myths were going to be boring!” one
of my students said midway through our mythology unit.
“Why did you think that?” I asked.
“Because they’re so old!” 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Passed down through the centuries, first orally and
later in writing, the Greek myths have evolved into
many different versions. These 15 mini-books are
short retellings of favorite myths, including the
stories of Arachne, Pandora, Daedalus, Atalanta,
Perseus, Odysseus, and more. With engaging text,
lively illustrations, and a comic-book style, the mini-
books appeal to students of all reading levels. The
speech balloons and illustrations help readers identify
and distinguish among characters, whose names are
often difficult to read and remember. 
To introduce each mini-book, first review with
students the characters who appear in it. On page 79,
you will find a glossary and pronunciation guide for
the names of all the characters included in this book.
Write the characters’ names on the board, along with
brief information about each one, and review the
pronunciations with students. Then give each student
photocopied pages of the mini-book and demonstrate
the simple assembly steps at right. With guidance,
students will be able to assemble their own books
without difficulty. 
You can use the mini-books in a number of ways.
They can be enjoyed on their own or used to
supplement other texts. As an inviting introduction,
have students read the mini-book before reading a
longer version of the myth. Reading the mini-book
first allows students to become familiar with the
characters and story; this is especially helpful for
readers who may struggle with longer, more
complicated text. The mini-books can also serve as a
fun way to review the myths at the end of a unit. 
Students will enjoy reading these mini-books
aloud in class. They can play the roles of different
characters by reading aloud the text in the speech
balloons. The mini-books are also suitable for a short
reading assignment at home—and students will be
glad to add something light to their backpacks!
Greek mythology is a wonderful springboard for
all kinds of activities: small- and large-group
discussions, creative writing, short essays, art
projects, classroom plays, and much more. Every
student and class responds differently to the myths. It
is a good idea to generate activities and assignments
based on children’s reactions and interests. The
questions that students raise in class often make
excellent topics for writing assignments and other
projects. You’ll find suggested extension activities and
vocabulary words for each mini-book on pages 6–9.
How to Make the Mini-Books
1.
Make double-sided copies of the mini-book pages.
(Carefully tear along the perforation to remove
the pages from the book.) Most mini-books have
8 pages; some have 12 or 16 pages.
Note: If your machine does not have a
double-sided function, first make copies of mini-
book pages 1/3. Place these copies in the paper
tray with the blank side facing up. Next, make a
copy of mini-book pages 2/4 so that page 2/4
copies directly behind page 1/3. Make a test copy
to be sure the pages are positioned correctly.
Repeat these steps with pages 6/8 and 5/7. (If the
book has 12 or 16 pages, repeat these steps with
pages 9/11 and 10/12, and 13/15 and 14/16.)
2.
Cut apart the mini-book pages along the solid
line.
3.
Place the pages in numerical order and then
staple them along the mini-book’s spine. 
4.
Invite students to color the illustrations. 
5 q
xxxxxxxxx
How to Use This Book
q 5 q
q 7 q
13™
The magic potion made Cronos so sick that he vomited up first
the stone, then the blanket, and finally all five of his children—
now fully grown gods and goddesses. Together with his brothers
and sisters, Zeus battled his father and overthrew him.
q 5 q
nos so sick that he vomited up first
fi
of his children—
h
s
Meanwhile, young Zeus was happy and
healthy, living in the care of nymphs on
the outskirts of Mount Olympus. He
grew into a strong and majestic god,
and soon he yearned to live among 
the other deities. 
Surely it would be safe for
me to go to Mount Olympus.
I’m too big to be eaten now.
q 3 q
q 1 q
11™
Uranus and Gaea fell in love and bore 12 strong
and beautiful children, known as the Titans for
their great size. Cronos, the bravest of the bunch,
decided that Uranus had ruled long enough and
rose up against his father. Uranus fled, realizing
he was no match for his powerful son.
q 1 q
Welcome to 
Mount Olympus
An Introduction to the Greek Gods and Goddesses
and bore 12 strong
f r
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Welcome to 
Mount Olympus
An Introduction to the Greek Gods and Goddesses
This mini-book introduces students to the domains of
the gods and goddesses. For example, Poseidon’s
domain is the sea and Aphrodite’s domain is love.
Invite students to draw a family tree of the gods and
goddesses. Have them write the characters’ domains
beneath their names and draw pictures representing
those domains. These posters can serve as useful
study guides and are especially helpful for visual
learners. To reinforce the concept of domain, invite
students to draw a picture of their own “domains.”
For example, a student might write that her domain
is the soccer field. Students can also decide on the
domains of family members, friends, and celebrities.
VOCABULARY: lofty, deities, overthrow, nectar,
yearned, potion, domain, divine
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Journey to the
Underworld
The Story of Persephone and Demeter
Ask students to imagine that they are Persephone
trapped in the Underworld. Invite them to write
several entries in her diary describing her
observations of the Underworld, her feelings about
being kidnapped, and her feelings toward Hades.
What does she miss about the world above? Does she
have a plan to escape? How does she feel about Zeus’s
decision to make her spend half the year in the
Underworld and half the year on Earth? Encourage
students to add illustrations to their diary entries.
VOCABULARY: whims, embedded, descended,
grieved, barren, pomegranate
q 6
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
A Tale of 
Two Spinners
The Story of Arachne and Athena
Instead of insulting the goddess of wisdom, Arachne
could have learned from Athena. Explain to students
what an apprentice is. Ask them to imagine that they
are applying to be an apprentice to one of the Greek
gods. Have them write a business letter applying for a
job. Which god or goddess would they want to work
for? What might the job entail? If a student loves to
swim or sail, he or she might write to Poseidon. If a
student loves to travel, a job with Hermes would be
ideal. Encourage them to use persuasive writing to
convince the god or goddess that they are right for
the job.
VOCABULARY: loom, swooped, boastful, mortals,
deceitful, scurried
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Curiosity and the Box
The Story of Pandora
The end of this myth is one of the most memorable
moments in Greek mythology: Pandora opens the
forbidden box and all the evils escape to plague
humankind. Students might enjoy a lighthearted
activity after reading this serious ending. Ask
students to think of something that they would like
trapped in the box where it could not bother them.
Encourage them to choose something from their own
lives, such as traffic jams, broken VCRs, homework,
and so on. Have each student write one or two of
these “pesky” things on a small square of paper.
Collect the squares in a small box and then open the
box and read them aloud to the class. Invite students
to imagine and write about the time before Pandora
opened the box and let all these pests escape.
VOCABULARY: inlaid, spite, plague, optimistic,
temporary
xxxxxxxxx
Extension Activities
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
A Trip Around 
the World
The Story of Phaethon and Apollo
Phaethon and Apollo are the subjects of many pieces
of art. Show students paintings and sculptures that
depict Phaethon, Apollo, and other characters from
Greek mythology. Ask them to identify the characters
in each piece of art and describe what is happening in
the scene. What symbols help students identify the
characters? Which point in the story did the artist
choose to show? Why do students think the artist
chose this particular moment in the story? Have
students choose a myth to illustrate. Ask them to
think about the moment in the story that they think
is the most interesting and important. Invite them to
draw that scene, including as much information as
they can about what is happening. Encourage them
to include symbols that will help the viewer identify
the characters.
VOCABULARY: ordinary, boasting, shielded, eager,
veer, bewildered, bolted, plunged, withered, minor 
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Gossip and Vanity
The Story of Echo and Narcissus
Many Greek myths explain natural phenomena:
Apollo’s chariot explains how the sun rises and sets;
the story of Athena and Arachne explains how spiders
became weavers; and the story of Echo and Narcissus
explains why there are echoes and narcissus flowers.
After reading the story of Echo and Narcissus,
students will be inspired to write their own creation
myths. Invite them to write a creative story that
explains how something in modern-day life came into
existence. For example, they can explain why there
are televisions, spaceships, or football.
VOCABULARY: eavesdropping, nymph, chatter,
prattle, impudent, aimlessly, devastated
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Music Makes the
Underworld 
Go ’Round
The Story of Orpheus and Eurydice
In this story, Orpheus travels to the Underworld to
find his wife. Longer versions of this myth provide
wonderful descriptions of the Underworld and its
inhabitants. Share some of these descriptions with
students and then invite them to draw, color, and
label a map of the Underworld. Have them show
Orpheus’s path along with the characters he meets on
the way: Charon, Cerberus, Tantalus, Sisyphus,
Persephone, Hades, and Eurydice. They may need to
use several sources, such as the description provided
in Heroes, Gods, and Monsters of the Greek Myths by
Bernard Evslin.
VOCABULARY: lyre, lulled, eternal, doomed, eternity,
grasp
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Cupid Falls in Love
The Story of Cupid and Psyche
The ending of this myth may perplex students. In
other retellings, Cupid eventually forgives Psyche.
Invite students to write their own ending. They can
either start where the mini-book leaves off, or go
back into the story and start from a different point.
Does Psyche take her sisters’ advice to peek at Cupid
while he’s sleeping? Does Cupid decide that Psyche
deserves a second chance?
VOCABULARY: suitors, devoted, withstand, oracle,
gust, whisked, gnawed
7 q
xxxxxxxxx
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
An Amazing Battle
The Story of Theseus and the Minotaur
The Minotaur, a creature with a man’s body and bull’s
head, is just one of the many unusual creatures in
Greek mythology. There are many other creatures
that are combinations of different animals: centaurs
are half horse and half man; Pan has characteristics
of both a goat and a man; and Pegasus is a beautiful
winged horse. Ask students to invent their own
mythological creature and draw a picture of it.
Encourage them to consider the abilities they would
like their creature to have. Can it fly? Speak? Swim?
Then have students give their creature a name and
write a myth about it. Their myth might explain how
their creature came into existence, or it might
describe an adventure that the creature has. 
VOCABULARY: sacrificed, oppose, devoured, slay,
labyrinth, boarding, haste, horizon
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Dangerous Heights
The Story of Daedalus and Icarus
Ask students to imagine what life was like in ancient
times without the conveniences that we are
accustomed to today. Invite them to imagine that
they are Daedalus, the clever inventor. What would
they invent to make life easier? What materials would
they use to build their contraption? Have students
draw a picture of their invention and write a brief
description of what it does. Encourage them to write
their own myth about Daedalus and his latest
invention.
VOCABULARY: labyrinth, mercy, dismay, clumps
q 8
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
The Race for Love
The Story of Atalanta
Atalanta holds an unusual competition in this story: a
race to win her hand in marriage. Invite students to
come up with different kinds of competitions in
which mythological characters might compete. Ask
students to imagine an Olympics on Mt. Olympus.
What events would they include and whom would
they choose to compete in each one? This is good way
to review the different gods and goddesses. Zeus
might hurl thunderbolts, Athena could enter the
fencing competition, and Poseidon could go for the
gold in surfing. Encourage students to be creative as
they invent their own events. Divide the class into
small groups. Encourage each group to think of an
event, describe the event in a paragraph, and enter
five gods or goddesses. Have the groups share their
events and then the rest of the class can vote on the
winners.
VOCABULARY: fend, panic, ravaging, stingy, cunning,
ferocity, pelt, safeguarded, hearth, consumed,
suitors, vow, potential, delectable, tunic
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
The Golden Touch
The Story of King Midas
Midas learns that it is possible to have too much of a
good thing. Discuss this idea with students. Can they
think of other “good things” that it is possible to have
too much of? How about ice cream, video games, or
television? Invite students to write their own comic
strip about a character who gets too much of a good
thing. Does the character learn a lesson, as Midas
did? Compile students’ comic strips to make a
classroom funny pages.
VOCABULARY: satisfy, standard, appetite, glee,
quench, pathetic
xxxxxxxxx
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Carved to Perfection
The Story of Pygmalion
In this myth, Pygmalion’s wish comes true: The
statue of his ideal partner comes to life. Ask students
to think of an inanimate object that they would like
to come to life. It could be anything: a favorite toy, a
refrigerator, or even a pair of sneakers. Invite them to
write a creative story about this new “being.” What is
its name? Where does it live? What would a day in the
life of this animate object be like? Encourage them to
add illustrations.
VOCABULARY: chiseled, solitary, emerge, exhaustion,
pedestal, witty, altar, flush, embraced
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
A Petrifying Quest
The Story of Perseus and Medusa
This myth is filled with symbols, such as Hermes’
winged sandals and Medusa’s snake-hair. Symbols
from Greek mythology are frequently used today.
Many companies use names or symbols from
mythology to represent their services or products.
For example, several companies use Hermes’ winged
sandal as their logo. Ask students what message this
symbol sends to the consumer. Show students several
examples of Greek references in modern life and ask
them to think about why companies chose to use
these names or symbols. You can also challenge
students to find several examples of names or
symbols from Greek mythology on their own. Or have
students make up their own company and use a
meaningful symbol from Greek mythology as its logo.
VOCABULARY: consulted, oracles, fate, transformed,
suspecting, fend, noble, quest, sickle, territory,
petrifying, sacrificed, swooped, destined, halt,
souvenir, spectator
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
The Mysterious Horse
The Story of the Trojan War
Odysseus convinces the Greek soldiers to hide in a
giant hollow horse as part of his plan to conquer the
Trojans. This clever scheme works in the end, but
how do students think the Greek soldiers felt about it
beforehand? What might have gone wrong? Ask
students to imagine that they are the Greek soldiers
hiding inside the horse. What conversation might
they have? How do the soldiers feel when the horse is
being moved inside the city walls? Invite them to
work in small groups to write a short play. Remind
them to include Odysseus as one of the characters.
The groups can perform their plays for the class.
VOCABULARY: countless, debated, mischievous,
surrendered, reveler, rumbling, swift
9 q
xxxxxxxxx
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Books for Students
Barth, Edna. Cupid and Psyche: A Love Story.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976. Grades 4–6.
Colum, Padraic. Children’s Homer: The Adventures
of Odysseus and the Tale of Troy. New York:
Macmillan, 1982. Grades 6–8.
D’Aulaires, Ingri and Edgar Parin. D’Aulaires’ Book
of Greek Myths. New York: Doubleday, 1962.
Grades 3–6.
Evslin, Bernard. Heroes, Gods, and Monsters of the
Greek Myths. New York: Bantam, 1975. Grades
4–8.
Fisher, Leonard Everett. The Olympians: Great Gods
and Goddesses of Ancient Greece. New York:
Holiday House, 1984. Grades 3–5.
Green, Roger L. Tales of Greek Heroes. New York,
Penguin, 1974. Grades 4–8.
McCaughrean, Geraldine. Greek Gods and
Goddesses. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998.
Grades 3–6.
Williams, Marcia. Greek Myths for Young Children.
Cambridge, MA: Candlewick Press, 1992. Grades 2
and up (older students will enjoy the comic-strip
style). 
q 10
ttttttttttttttttttttttttt
Books for Teachers
Fitzgerald, Robert, trans. The Odyssey. New York:
Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1961.
Hamilton, Edith. Mythology: Timeless Tales of Gods
and Heroes. 1942. Reprint. New York: Warner
Books, 1999.
Lattimore, Richmond, trans. The Iliad of Homer.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951.
Melville, A. D., trans. Metamorphoses. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1986.
Rearick, John. Greek Myths: 8 Short Plays for the
Classroom. New York: Scholastic, 1997.
xxxxxxxxx
Mythology Resources 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 3 q
q 1 q
1™
Welcome to 
Mount Olympus
An Introduction to the Greek Gods and Goddesses
Uranus and Gaea fell in love and bore 
12 mighty children, known as the Titans.
Cronos, the bravest of the bunch, decided
that Uranus had ruled long enough and
rose up against his father. Uranus fled,
realizing he was no match for his
powerful son.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
1´
q 2 q
Mount Olympus was no ordinary mountain. On this
enormous and lofty mountain in ancient Greece, the trees
grew taller, the grass grew greener, and the air smelled
sweeter. The most unusual aspect of Mount Olympus was its
inhabitants—the Greek gods and goddesses themselves. On
this magical mountain, their story began with the first two
deities: Gaea, the earth goddess, and Uranus, the sky god. 
Cronos became the new ruler and married the
goddess Rhea. As powerful as he was, Cronos was
afraid of one thing: babies. He feared that one of
his own children would overthrow him, just as he
had overthrown his father. When Rhea gave birth
to their first child, Cronos snatched the newborn
baby and swallowed it whole. 
After Cronos had swallowed their fifth child, Rhea
came up with a plan. When their next child was
born, Rhea named the baby Zeus and quickly hid
him away. When Cronos demanded the newborn,
she instead handed him a stone wrapped in a baby
blanket. Cronos popped the stone in his mouth
and gulped it down, blanket and all.
Rhea, will you bring
me a glass of nectar
to wash this down?
Of course, husband.
Anything you say.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
3™
The magic potion made Cronos so sick that he vomited up first
the stone, then the blanket, and finally all five of his children—
now fully grown gods and goddesses. Together with his brothers
and sisters, Zeus battled his father and overthrew him.
Meanwhile, young Zeus was happy and
healthy, living in the care of nymphs on
the outskirts of Mount Olympus. He
grew into a strong and majestic god,
and soon he yearned to live among 
the other deities. 
Surely it would be safe for
me to go to Mount Olympus.
I’m too big to be eaten now.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
1´
Rhea missed her son terribly, so she brought him to Mount Olympus
disguised as a royal servant. But this humble position did not satisfy the
young god for long. One morning after Cronos did his daily exercises—
a quick jog around the universe—he called for his new servant to fetch
him a drink. Zeus quickly brought him a golden goblet, filled to the
brim with a potion that he had mixed himself. Cronos slurped up the
potion and then felt a terrible pain in his stomach.
Hmmm . . .
this looks good.
What is it?
Something special 
I made just for you.
Zeus now became the new ruler and chose Hera as his wife and queen.
He then gave each of his siblings his or her own domain of power, so
that he wouldn’t have to look after everything himself. In time they
would have help from their children and other divine relatives:
Aphrodite, the goddess of love; Athena, the goddess of wisdom; Hermes,
the messenger god; and many others. Yet even with the gods and
goddesses in charge, things did not run as smoothly as one might think.
There always seemed to be trouble brewing on Mount Olympus. . . .
Zeus
Sky
Hera
Women and
Motherhood
Demeter
Harvest
Hestia
Hearth and
Home
Hades
Underworld
Poseidon
Sea
q 8 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 3 q
q 1 q
5™
Journey to the
Underworld
The Story of Persephone and Demeter
One day as Persephone was gathering flowers, she wandered away
from her mother and lost all track of time. As she noticed Apollo’s
chariot setting lower in the sky, she turned toward home. Just then
she spotted an unusual flower and bent to pick it. As she pulled up
the flower, the earth suddenly split beneath her and a golden chariot
emerged. The enormous driver wore a long black cape and a crown
embedded with black gems. Before Persephone could scream for
help, he pulled her into the chariot and they descended into the pit. 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

1´
q 2 q
As goddess of the harvest, Demeter blessed the earth with all
growing things. She loved the flowers, the trees, the fields,
and all of her glorious creations, but most of all she loved
her daughter, Persephone. Together they roamed about the
earth, creating new kinds of plants, fruits, and flowers to
suit their whims.
What should we call
this one, Persephone?
How about a skunk cabbage?
It smells terrible!
Demeter searched everywhere for her daughter, but days and weeks
passed with no sign of Persephone. As Demeter grieved, the earth
grew cold and barren. Leaves fell from the trees and nothing grew
from the cracked, dry soil. The humans brought Demeter whatever
sacrifices they could find—dead leaves and branches—hoping that
the goddess would bless them with a harvest.
I can’t be bothered with the harvest.
I must find my daughter!
q 4 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
7™
Persephone was overjoyed to see Hermes and learn that she
would return to her mother. But when she heard the condition,
she knew that all hope was lost. She had refused all of the tasty
treats Hades had tempted her with, but just that morning she
had eaten six tiny seeds from a pomegranate.
As Demeter continued to search, she came across a
shepherd who had news of Persephone. He described
what he had heard from another shepherd: Persephone
had been kidnapped by a god driving a chariot pulled by
four black horses. Demeter knew at once that the culprit
was her own brother Hades, lord of the Underworld.
He has been getting away
with his mischief since we
were kids! Enough is enough!
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
1´
Zeus decided that he would make an exception, just this
once. He ruled that for every pomegranate seed she ate,
Persephone must spend one month in the Underworld
with Hades. During these months, Demeter mourns the
loss of her daughter and nothing grows on earth. Each
year when Persephone returns to her mother, Demeter
rejoices and everything on earth springs into full blossom.
And so spring follows winter year after year, reflecting the
moods of the harvest queen.
Demeter raced up Mount Olympus and demanded
that Zeus return her daughter at once.
Zeus knew that this would not do. He called for
Hermes, the messenger god, to fetch Persephone
and return her to Demeter. 
But sister, they are happily married.
Persephone is queen of the
Underworld and has a doting
husband to look after her.
But if she has eaten anything in
the Underworld, even I cannot
bring her back. It will be too late.
She will be miserable underground. Unless
you return her to me, the earth will remain
a wasteland and the humans will have
nothing to offer you as a sacrifice.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

9™
A Tale of Two Spinners
The Story of Arachne and Athena 
Athena, the goddess of wisdom, thought she heard
someone say her name. She swooped down from
Mount Olympus to listen. When she heard the
boastful girl daring to compare herself to a goddess,
Athena disguised herself as an old woman and
knocked on Arachne’s door.
I hear that Athena has
blessed you with great skill.
q 3 q
q 1 q
My talents are my own. Athena has nothing
to do with it. She may be a goddess, but
her skill is no match for mine.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
2´
q 2 q
Arachne was such a skilled weaver that people traveled
far and wide just to watch her working at her loom.
Eventually, all of the attention went to her head, and
Arachne started to brag about her talent.
No one can weave as well as I—not even
the goddess Athena, who invented weaving!
Forgive me? But I’m telling the truth!
If Athena is insulted, she can pay me
a visit. I’ll be glad to show her a thing
or two about weaving.We’d see who
was the better weaver soon enough.
You may be a talented weaver, but
you are a foolish girl.You should
ask for Athena’s forgiveness.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 7 q
1™
Athena was furious when she saw how Arachne had portrayed the
gods. She was even more outraged when she realized that her own
skill was only slightly better than the girl’s. She shredded Arachne’s
masterpiece and then struck her with the shuttle from her loom. 
With that, Athena threw off her cloak and wig
and stood majestically before Arachne. 
Well then, foolish girl, you’re on.
Let the competition begin!
q 5 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 8 q
2´
Crowds gathered to watch the weaving match. Never
before or since have such creations flowed from the
loom. Athena wove glorious scenes of the gods and
goddesses, more beautiful and striking images 
than mortals had ever seen. Arachne also wove 
scenes of the gods, but she showed them as 
angry, jealous, and deceitful. 
In that moment, Arachne began to shrink
until her whole body was smaller than a
little toe. She started to sprout legs until
she had eight in all, and black hair grew
all over her body. The tiny creature
scurried to the highest spot it could find,
and there it began weaving a delicate
web—a home for the world’s first spider. 
q 6 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

3™
Curiosity and the Box
The Story of Pandora 
He ordered Hephaestus to create a beautiful
woman, and he named her Pandora. Aphrodite
gave her the gift of beauty, Athena taught her
various arts, and Zeus gave her a shiny golden
box inlaid with precious stones and told her
never to open it. Last, he gave her curiosity.
Why, thank you, Zeus.
What’s inside?
q 3 q
q 1 q
That’s for me to know
and you not to find out.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
2´
q 2 q
In the early days, life was very different for humans. It
all changed, however, when they accepted the gift of fire
from one of the less powerful gods, named Prometheus.
Zeus was furious with the humans for not asking his
permission first, so he devised a plan to punish them. 
Hermes guided Pandora down from Mount Olympus and
presented her to Prometheus’s brother, Epimetheus. The
two married and lived happily—except that Pandora
could not forget about the forbidden box. Every night
she lay awake thinking about what could be inside. She
tied the box shut and locked it in a chest in the attic,
but she could not get it out of her mind.
Maybe if I take up a hobby, I’ll
stop thinking about this box.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
5™
Pandora shut the box as quickly as
she could, trapping one last evil
inside. This last evil was Despair—
the total loss of hope.
Pandora tried everything—stomping grapes, designing
togas, playing the lyre—but nothing could get her mind
off of that mysterious present. One night, Pandora lay
awake, once again thinking about the little golden box.
She crept into the attic, unlocked the chest,
untied the string, and—holding her breath—
opened the box.
The suspense is killing me! What’s
the harm in taking one little peek?
Then I’ll just close up the box and
no one will ever know I opened it.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
2´
Suddenly, a swarm of evils exploded from the small
box, filling the air with howls of grief! Disease, Envy,
Vanity, Spite, Old Age, Deceit, Distrust, and other
miseries flew out of the box—evils that would
plague humankind from that moment on. 
If Despair had escaped from the box, people would never expect
anything good to happen. All of their hopes and dreams would
seem impossible, and they would simply give up. But with
Despair trapped in the box, hope would survive. And hope is
what keeps humankind optimistic, always looking at the 
bright side of what is yet to come.
Uh-oh. Now look at what I’ve done! 
But maybe this is just temporary. Surely
I can catch these horrible things and put
them back in their little box where they
won’t bother anyone. . . .
q 8 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

7™
A Trip Around 
the World
The Story of Phaethon and Apollo
Clymene constantly reminded Phaethon that he was the son
of powerful Apollo, and Phaethon reminded his friends of
the fact every day at school. His friends soon grew tired of
Phaethon’s boasting.
Apollo this and Apollo that . . .
you have an awful lot to say
about someone you’ve never
even met!
q 3 q
q 1 q
How do we even know he’s your
father in the first place? You look a
bit scrawny to be the son of a god.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
2´
q 2 q
Although Clymene was a nymph in ancient Greece, she was not
very different from mothers today. Clymene was extremely proud
of her son Phaethon and knew that he was no ordinary young
boy—especially since his father was no ordinary man. Phaethon’s
father was the sun god Apollo, who drove a fiery, golden chariot
across the sky to bring light and warmth to the world.
Phaethon went home very upset that day. He couldn’t
help wondering if what his friends said was true. After
all, he had never met Apollo. And the sun didn’t shine
any stronger on him than on anyone else.
I can’t go back to school until I can
prove that Apollo really is my father!
Well, you can pay him a visit
tomorrow morning, while it is still
dark outside. His palace is just a
short distance to the east.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
9™
Of course I am! And just to prove it, I’ll grant you
one wish.Would you like your very own golden
pony? How about a miniature golden chariot to
show your friends at school? Just name your
heart’s desire, and I promise it shall be yours.
I know how I can prove to everyone that
I am your son. My wish is to drive your
chariot all by myself across the sky, so
that the entire world will see me!
Excited and nervous, Phaethon set out on his short
journey the next morning. He was glad he would
finally meet his father, but he was also scared to come
face to face with a god. Soon he reached a golden
palace that seemed to glow, even though the sky was
still dark. On shaky knees, Phaethon climbed the
steep staircase and opened the enormous front door. 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 8 q
3´
It was not difficult to find Apollo—all Phaethon had to do was follow the
golden light. He shielded his eyes when he entered the throne room.
Recognizing the young boy as his son, Apollo removed his glowing
crown so that Phaethon could look directly at him.
At last you’ve decided to pay your old
pop a visit. Come closer, Phaethon, so
I can see how you’ve grown.
So it’s true.You really
are my father!
Please, Son, not that! You won’t live to tell
about it. I am the only one who can control
those horses. Even Zeus himself could not
do it.
But you said I could have whatever
I wanted, and driving your chariot
is the only thing I want.
q 6 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

1™
On Mount Olympus, Zeus was roused from his sleep by
screams of terror from the earth below. He was shocked
to see Apollo’s chariot swaying out of control—and a
young boy in the driver’s seat.
What was Apollo thinking, letting a minor
drive his chariot—and a mortal, no less!
I’ll have a word with him later.There’s
only one thing to do now.
Apollo tried to change Phaethon’s mind, but the boy stubbornly refused.
The chariot was due to light the sky in minutes, and Apollo was running
out of time. He led Phaethon to the stables where the enormous golden
horses were eager to set out on their daily journey. Placing Phaethon in
the chariot, Apollo gave his best advice.
These horses are fast and powerful, unlike
anything on earth. Hold tight to the reins and
try to keep them on course. Don’t let them
veer too high, or the earth will freeze without
the chariot’s warmth. And don’t drive too close
to earth, or the chariot will burn everything
with its heat.
q 9 q
q 11 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Zeus picked up a nearby lightning bolt and hurled it at
the chariot. The lightning struck Phaethon and sent him
flying from the chariot in a blaze of light. Those who saw
it thought it was a shooting star falling from the sky into
the ocean below. The horses returned to their stable, and
the earth eventually recovered from its terror, but Apollo
never forgave himself for making the foolish promise
that cost his son’s life.
q 10 q
3´
Apollo opened the stable doors and the horses burst into the sky.
Within seconds, Phaethon lost his grip on the reins. Bewildered,
the horses ran off course. First they bolted high into the sky, and
then they plunged straight down toward the earth. They were close
enough that Phaethon could see the destruction left in their path:
Fields withered, oceans boiled, and mountains turned into
volcanoes. The lands closest to the chariot baked and became 
the world’s first deserts.
q 12 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 3 q
q 1 q
3™
Gossip and Vanity
The Story of Echo and Narcissus
Echo continued to distract the powerful goddess with her endless
prattle, while Zeus sneaked away from the scene. Hera turned
around just in time to see her husband and realized that this
impudent nymph was trying to trick her. In her fury, she punished
Echo with a cruel curse: Echo would never be able to speak again,
except to repeat the last words that others spoke to her.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

If you lived on Mount Olympus and wanted to
find out anything about anyone, you would ask
Echo. She made it her business to mind
everyone else’s. One day, as Echo was
eavesdropping on a friendly
conversation between Zeus and a
lovely nymph, she saw Zeus’s wife,
Hera, storming toward them.
Before Hera could get a glimpse of
Zeus, Echo grabbed her arm and
began updating her on the latest
gossip about the gods—leaving
out Zeus, of course.
q 4 q
3´
q 2 q
Stop your chatter, girl! 
Can’t you see I’m in a hurry?
I’m looking for my husband.
I haven’t seen him, but I just
saw Poseidon heading that
way . . . and you’ll never
guess who was with him!
Trying to trick the queen of the gods!
This will serve you right!
Of course I’m right.
I’m a goddess.
You right!
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

5™
Meanwhile, Narcissus had stopped for a drink of water by a pool,
where he saw the most beautiful face he had ever laid eyes on.
And he finally discovered what it meant to be in love. But when
Narcissus reached to touch the fair skin and golden locks, the
face vanished beneath the ripples of water. 
Come back! Don’t leave me!
Can’t you see we’re perfect
for each other?
Echo wandered aimlessly through the woods, where
she came upon Narcissus, the most beautiful young
man ever to grace Mount Olympus. Echo caught
one glimpse—that face, those eyes, that hair!—and
instantly fell in love. She rushed to meet Narcissus,
who was annoyed to be followed by yet another girl.
What do you want?
q 5 q
q 7 q
You want?
I don’t want anything. Don’t tell me
you’re another one of these foolish
girls who think that they love me!
No, I won’t love you. I’ve yet to
find anyone worthy of my love.
Love me!
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
3´
Narcissus turned to leave, and Echo was devastated. First she had
lost her voice and now she was losing her heart to Narcissus. She
hid herself in a cave and wept endlessly, until her body withered
away and all that remained was her voice—an echo.
When the water became still, the perfectly
carved face reappeared. But every time
Narcissus tried to touch it, the face
disappeared in the waves. Narcissus
vowed he would wait there forever for his
beloved to come out. Little did he know
that he had fallen in love with his own
reflection. Narcissus waited day and night
until a god took pity on him and changed
him into a golden flower. And there he
remained, a golden narcissus flower
growing by the water.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 3 q
q 1 q
7™
Music Makes the
Underworld Go ’Round
The Story of Orpheus and Eurydice
The couple soon fell in love, and their wedding day
was filled with music—the most joyful music
Orpheus had ever played. But the happiness ended
suddenly when Eurydice stepped on a poisonous
snake as she was dancing and received a deadly bite.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
3´
q 2 q
The most beloved musician in all of Greece was Orpheus.
When he played his lyre and sang, all who heard him
forgot their troubles. Even animals would stop to listen,
and flowers and trees would turn to hear. His most
devoted fan of all was a young maiden named Eurydice. 
Orpheus grieved for the loss of his wife, but he soon became tired
of feeling sorry for himself. He decided to travel to the Underworld
and bring Eurydice back with him. With his lyre, Orpheus set off.
First he came to the river Styx, where Charon takes spirits
across on his ferry. He asked to be carried across, but the stubborn
boatman refused. Orpheus began to play a song with the rhythm of
ocean waves, and even the hard-hearted Charon could not resist.
Can’t you read the sign? . . .
Hades won’t like this, but I’ll
make an exception, just this once.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
9™
Orpheus was overjoyed and set off at once. He played songs to
distract himself, but he could not stop wondering if Eurydice was
really following. What if Hades had tricked him into leaving the
Underworld without his wife? After all, the gods were known to be
cruel. If he left the Underworld, he might never get another chance
to enter again—and all hope would be lost. As he neared the light
of day, his fears grew stronger and he could not resist turning
around for just one peek. 
When he got off the ferry, Orpheus came face to face
with a fierce three-headed dog. This was Cerberus,
Hades’ guard dog and beloved pet. Before the
creature sank its three sets of fangs into his leg,
Orpheus began to play a soothing song about lamb
chops. The music lulled Cerberus to sleep, and soon
all three of his mouths were drooling.
Orpheus continued playing songs as he made his
way through the Underworld. The spirits who
heard him forgot their surroundings and imagined
they were alive and happy. Tantalus, who was
punished with eternal thirst, forgot about drinking
the forbidden water. Sisyphus forgot about the
boulder he was doomed to push for eternity and
let it slip and roll over his big toe.
q 7 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 8 q
4´
At last Orpheus came to Hades, seated beside Persephone, his
queen. Orpheus begged to have his wife returned to him, but
Hades would not hear of it. Then Orpheus played a song he
had written about his loss, and even Hades could not help
feeling the sadness of the music. Persephone took pity on
Orpheus and whispered to her husband. Hades could not
refuse her request to bend the rules, just this once.
As you are leaving the Underworld,
Eurydice will follow behind you. But there
is one condition: You must not look back.
You must have faith that she is there.
There was his wife, just as happy as she looked
on their wedding day. But as he reached out to
grasp her hand, Eurydice vanished from sight.
q 6 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

1™
Cupid Falls in Love
The Story of Cupid and Psyche 
Psyche was annoyed by her trail of admirers. Meanwhile,
Aphrodite, the goddess of love, watched Psyche and her
devoted following from Mount Olympus. Like Psyche’s
sisters, Aphrodite grew jealous. The goddess of love
called her son Cupid to help.
Cupid, darling, shoot one of your
arrows at that girl who is stealing
all the attention. But make sure
she falls in love with something
ridiculous, like a pig or a goat!
q 3 q
q 1 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

4´
Long, long ago, sisters did not always get along. Psyche
and her two older sisters were no exception. Psyche’s
sisters were envious of her beauty and the number 
of suitors who followed her all over town.
What’s so special
about her?
Cupid had no choice but to obey his mother’s orders, so he flew
down to where Psyche lay sleeping. As he drew his bow and arrow,
Cupid noticed how beautiful she was. He lost his concentration
and accidentally scratched himself with the arrow. Not even the
god of love can withstand the strength of his own arrows, and so
Cupid fell in love for the very first time. From that moment on,
Cupid guarded Psyche and made sure she never married.
Hey, what’s happening to me?
I suddenly feel light-headed
and giddy! 
q 4 q
q 2 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 7 q
3™
Psyche missed her husband during the long hours
of the day. She grew so lonely that she asked if he
could bring her sisters for a visit. The next day, the
two sisters were whisked into the castle by a gust
of wind. They marveled at the splendor of the
palace and at Psyche’s beautiful clothes, but
jealousy gnawed at them.
Psyche made up an excuse, but finally broke down
and told them that she had never actually seen
her husband.
Well, where is this famous husband
who spoils you rotten with riches?
Doesn’t he have the manners to
greet his wife’s sisters?
Never seen him? Then surely he is a
hideous monster! Perhaps he is planning
to gobble you up for dinner! You must
take a peek at him while he is sleeping.
Psyche’s father consulted an oracle to learn why his daughter
had not yet married. The oracle said that Psyche must be left
on a mountainside to be claimed by her future husband.
Fearful and alone, Psyche waited there until it grew dark.
Suddenly, a gust of wind picked her up and carried her far
away to a beautiful castle. She wandered inside and looked
everywhere for her husband, terrified of whom or what she
might find. But the castle was completely empty.
q 5 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
4´
Psyche met her husband soon enough, but only at night when
she could not see him. He was gentle and kind, and she grew to
love him very much. But every day, as soon as Apollo’s chariot
began to light the sky, he fled the castle before she could catch a
glimpse of him. When she asked him why this was so, he replied,
“Trust me, my little valentine. I will let you see me in time.”
That night while her husband slept, Psyche lit an oil lamp
and tiptoed to his side. She beheld the most beautiful
sight—there, peacefully sleeping, lay the god of love. As she
reached to touch his face, a drop of hot oil dripped from the
lamp onto Cupid’s shoulder and he awoke with a start.
When he saw Psyche, he was heartbroken. He knew that she
did not trust him, and that love can be built only upon
trust. He flew out of the castle, never to return.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 3 q
q 1 q
5™
An Amazing Battle
The Story of Theseus and the Minotaur
On your trip home, replace the
black sails with white sails as a
sign that you are returning safely.
King Aegeus protested at first, not wanting to risk his son’s life.
But finally he gave in and made Theseus promise one thing. 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
4´
q 2 q
Every nine years, the cruel King Minos of
Crete demanded that King Aegeus of Athens
send him seven young men and seven
young maidens. These young Athenians
would be sacrificed to the Minotaur, a
dreadful creature with the body of a man
and the head of a bull. No one dared to
oppose King Minos for fear that he would
wage a terrible war in return. When the
time came once again to choose the youths
to be sacrificed, Theseus volunteered to go.
Theseus was the brave and noble son of
King Aegeus. His plan was not to be
devoured by the Minotaur but to slay 
the beast once and for all.
When the Athenians arrived in Crete, they were welcomed by King Minos.
Snack! That’s what you think.
What a fine lot of Athenian men
and women! A lovely snack for
my pet Minotaur.
And what makes you so bold?
The gods favor me.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 7 q
7™
The next day, Theseus volunteered to be
the first to face the Minotaur. As he
entered the Labyrinth, he let the thread
unwind behind him. Theseus made his
way through the twists and turns of the
maze until he reached its center, where
he came upon a hideous snoring
creature. Theseus crept up behind the
bull-man and grabbed his horns—and a
battle began. After a great struggle that
lasted late into the night, Theseus
managed to slay the beast. 
To see if this was true, Minos gave Theseus an impossible task.
He threw his blood-red ruby ring into the sea and ordered
Theseus to fetch it. Theseus dove into the dark depths, praying
to Poseidon for guidance. He swam deeper and deeper until he
saw something glimmering in front of him. He grabbed the
ring and sped back to the surface. Minos was furious, realizing
that the gods most likely did favor this Athenian.
q 5 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
4´
Ariadne, the daughter of King Minos, watched as the Athenians
were brought ashore to Crete. When she saw how proud and brave
Theseus looked, even in chains, she instantly fell in love. That
night she sneaked to his cell and whispered through the window.
Brave Athenian, you will not survive without my
help.The Minotaur is kept in a Labyrinth, a maze
of bushes that no one can find his way through.
Please take this thread. Mark your path with it so
that you can find your way out of the Labyrinth.
Thank you.What can
I do for you in return?
Take me back to Athens with you.
I am miserable here in Crete.
Theseus followed the thread to the entrance of the
Labyrinth and quickly rounded up Ariadne and the
prisoners. Since it was the middle of the night, no
one saw them boarding their ship. But in their
haste, Theseus forgot his promise to his father, and
they set off with black sails instead of white.
Every day King Aegeus watched for signs of his
son’s return. One day as he stood watch, he noticed
a ship on the horizon. As it drew nearer, Aegeus
saw that the sails were black and, in despair, he
stepped off the cliff into the sea below. Since then,
the sea has been known by the name of the grief-
stricken king—the Aegean Sea.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

9™
That night, Daedalus and his son Icarus were led
to the center of the Labyrinth. The guard carried
candles to light the way. Since the guard had a son
about the same age as Icarus, he took pity on them
and left some candles behind.
Dad, it’s so dark in
here. I’m scared.
q 3 q
q 1 q
Please have mercy and
leave us a few candles.
What are we going to do,
Father? Don’t you know
the way out of here?
No, son, not even I know the way
out. And even if we did find our way
by luck, Minos would put us right
back where we started.
Dangerous 
Heights
The Story of Daedalus and Icarus
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

5´
q 2 q
The famous inventor Daedalus spent many years working for
King Minos. In fact, it was Daedalus who designed the maze
of bushes where the Minotaur was kept. After Theseus killed
the Minotaur and escaped from the Labyrinth, King Minos
was furious with Daedalus.
How could he have escaped, Daedalus?
As your punishment, you shall be
imprisoned in the Labyrinth you created!
And take that son of yours with you!
The next morning, Daedalus awoke to the sound of birds
chirping. When he opened his eyes, he remembered with
dismay where he was. He watched a bird gobble up a worm
for breakfast and fly up and away from the Labyrinth.
I know! We’ll fly out of here!
I’ll create wings for us.
It’s our only hope!
q 4 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
1™
Early the next morning they flew up and away, just like the birds.
Daedalus looked back and all he could see of the Labyrinth was a tiny
spot of green, getting smaller and smaller until it was gone. The sky
was bright and beautiful, the air was cool, and the sun shone
pleasantly on him. He began to relax and his eyelids grew heavy.
Daedalus and Icarus spent the next few days
gathering all the feathers they could find. Then
Daedalus fashioned two sets of wings by gluing
the feathers together with hot candle wax.
Dad, are you done yet?
How much longer?
You asked that five minutes
ago. Have patience, Son.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
5´
At last the wings were finished. The father and son
put on their wings and practiced taking off and
landing. Icarus could not wait to take to the sky.
Just remember, if you fly too low, the ocean
water will splash your wings and weigh you
down. And if you fly too high, the sun will
melt the wax on your wings.You must
follow me and stick to the middle course.
Icarus flapped ahead of his father, excited to see everything
the sky had to offer. He wanted to fly right through a fluffy
white cloud, just to see what it felt like. He flew higher and
higher, but the clouds were always above him, just out of
reach. Determined, Icarus flapped even harder. 
Sweat dripped from his forehead, and soon he felt
something drip on his arm. It was the wax, melting from
the sun’s hot rays. Icarus called to his father for help, but
Daedalus was too far behind. Feathers began to fall from
his wings in clumps, and then Icarus himself began to
fall—down, down, down—toward the sea below. 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

3™
The Race for Love
The Story of Atalanta
Many years later in the nearby town
of Calydon, everyone was in a panic.
A wild boar was ravaging the land
and no one could stop it. This was
not an ordinary boar—it was sent by
the goddess Artemis to punish the
people for being so stingy with their
sacrifices. The king of Calydon
gathered all of the best hunters,
including his son Meleager, to tackle
the beast once and for all. They were
ready to set out when an unusual
hunter showed up—a woman!
Sorry, we’re not taking
along any women to cook.
q 3 q
q 1 q
Cook? I can’t help you with that.
I heard you were looking for the best
hunters in the world, and your group
wouldn’t be complete without me.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
5´
q 2 q
Atalanta’s father was not very pleased when she was born. He was
a king who was used to getting what he wanted. He told his wife
he wanted a son, and what did he get? A daughter. He was so
disgusted that he ordered a servant to leave the infant on a
mountainside to fend for herself. There, a family of bears found
the girl and—thinking she resembled a baby bear without any
fur—they adopted her. 
The young woman, strangely dressed from head to toe
in animal skins, looked confident and strong. This was
Atalanta, the once-abandoned baby, who was now grown
up and quite good at fending for herself. The bears had
also taught her a thing or two about hunting. Meleager
admired her courage and made sure she was allowed to
join the hunting party.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
5™
The horrible news soon reached Meleager’s
mother, Althaea. Outraged that her son had
murdered her two brothers, Althaea raced to
the highest tower of the castle and unlocked a
small closet that held only a log. When
Meleager was a baby, the Fates—three old
women who have the power to decide the
future—came to visit Althaea. They placed a
log in the fire and said that Meleager would
live as long as the log remained unburned.
Althaea had pulled the log from the fire and
safeguarded it from that day on. But now she
took out the log and threw it into the 
hearth where a fire blazed.
The group found the boar soon enough—his enormous size made
him easy to spot. But his speed, cunning, and ferocity made him
almost impossible to conquer. The boar raced around the hunters,
throwing them into confusion. Arrows zipped through the air,
catching more hunters than anything else. Finally, an arrow hit
the boar behind the ear, and it fell to the ground.
Well done! 
Who shot that?
It was the girl! 
Lucky shot.
q 7 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
5´
Meleager finished the boar off with his sword and
then offered the prized pelt and tusks to Atalanta.
A heated argument began, and Meleager’s uncles said terrible
things about Atalanta. Insults turned into pushes, pushes into
punches, and—in his fury—Meleager killed his two uncles.
If your arrow hadn’t knocked
the boar down, I wouldn’t
have been able to kill it.
But Meleager, since you killed
the beast, the prize is yours!
At that moment, Meleager and Atalanta
were gazing into each other’s eyes. They
were talking about their future together—
marriage, children, and lots of hunting—
when suddenly Meleager jumped up, ran
circles around Atalanta, and collapsed at
her feet. As the fire consumed the cursed
log, it consumed Meleager’s life as well.
Atalanta vowed that she would never love
again and never marry.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 11 q
7™
When the suitors heard this, many of them gave up. They knew
that Atalanta was faster than anyone—man or woman. But the
rest were too love-struck to leave. They were willing to risk their
lives for the small chance of winning Atalanta as their bride.
After the boar hunt, everyone wanted to find out who this
mysterious huntress was and where she had come from. The
king who had once abandoned Atalanta now apologized and
declared that he was proud of his daughter’s bravery, strength,
and skills. He wouldn’t hear of Atalanta living with the bears
any longer, and soon she was back in the castle.
q 9 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 10 q
q 12 q
5´
Now that she was a princess (and one whose bravery and skill won
many admirers), Atalanta had suitors lining up outside the castle.
But she would not even let them in the door—she had not
forgotten her vow. The king was getting frustrated with his
daughter’s stubborn ways and had a word with her.
Atalanta, there are perfectly good
potential husbands out there!
Certainly one of them would meet
your standards, if you would just
give them a chance.
All right, Father. Let them race
me. He who wins, wins my hand
in marriage. He who loses, dies.
One young man knew it would take more than just luck to outrun
Atalanta. Hippomenes prayed to the goddess of love for her help.
Aphrodite was always in favor of setting up a good match, so she
gave Hippomenes three delectable golden apples and told him the
plan. He hid the apples in his tunic and prepared for the race.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 13 q
q 15 q
9™
Atalanta quickly caught up to
him and dashed toward the finish
line. Hippomenes took out the
third and final apple—his only
chance to win the race and save
his life. Confident that she would
win, as always, Atalanta thought
nothing of stopping for one last
apple. But Hippomenes had
thrown the apple far off the
track, and Atalanta misjudged
how long it would take her to
reach it. Hippomenes won the
race by a few steps, and he also
won the fastest bride in Greece.
Atalanta’s father gave the signal, and the runners were off. They
were neck and neck for the first few minutes, but soon Atalanta left
Hippomenes in the dust. It was time to give Aphrodite’s plan a try.
Hippomenes pulled out one of the golden apples and threw it in
Atalanta’s direction, slightly out of her way.
What an unusual apple!
I can afford a few
seconds to pick it up.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 14 q
6´
Hippomenes caught up, but Atalanta again sped ahead.
Hippomenes threw the second apple farther off to the side.
Atalanta could not resist the second apple either, and she
darted after it. Hippomenes burst into the lead!
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

1™
The Golden Touch
The Story of King Midas
Midas once did a favor for a god, and in return he was granted
one wish—anything he wanted. Midas thought long and hard. 
How could one wish satisfy his countless desires? He
thought he deserved at least three. After all, weren’t three
wishes the standard reward? He felt cheated until an idea
struck him like a flash.
I know how I can get it all!
My wish is that everything 
I touch will turn to gold! 
q 3 q
q 1 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
6´
q 2 q
King Midas was a greedy man—in fact, he was one of the
greediest people who ever lived. All day long he thought
about how much gold he had, and all night he dreamed
about how he could get even more.
Midas could not resist testing his new power immediately.
He reached out and broke off a twig from a tree. To his
delight, the twig became solid gold. He began grabbing
everything in sight—dirt, leaves, grass, flowers—and
everything he touched hardened into pure gold.
I’ll be the wealthiest, most powerful king
in all the world! I’m going to spend every
minute of the day turning things into gold.
I won’t even stop to sleep!
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
3™
The greedy king worked up quite an appetite
rushing about, tagging everything in sight.
After many hours, he returned to the castle
to order a royal feast. As he sat down, the
table and chair turned to gold at his touch.
He noticed with glee that the cup became a
golden goblet in his hand. Midas took a sip
of water to quench his terrible thirst and
suddenly choked on a glob of metal!
Spitting it out, he realized the water had
turned to gold.
Sobbing, Midas collapsed on the floor and begged
the gods for mercy. His tears fell like tiny golden
marbles, which only made him cry harder.
I have learned my lesson! I was too greedy and am
punished for it. Now I know that riches cannot buy
happiness. Please take away all of this gold and let
things return to the way they were!
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
6´
The gods took pity on the pathetic king and took away the
Midas touch—which was, after all, a curse rather than a gift.
But just in case Midas forgot his own foolishness, the gods
gave him a reminder. Two donkey ears sprouted from the
top of his head, and Midas never forgot his lesson.
Midas picked up a piece of bread and shoved it into
his mouth as quickly as he could. But he could not
outsmart his golden touch—as soon as the bread
touched his lips, it turned into a chunk of gold.
What is the use of having more gold than
Apollo if I can’t even eat a piece of bread?
I’ll be the richest, hungriest king in history!
Storming out of the banquet hall, Midas bumped
into a servant. He turned to yell at the servant for
getting in his way but instead came face to face
with a life-sized golden statue.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Travelers came from far and wide to buy Pygmalion’s
masterpieces. Pygmalion wished he could keep all of
his statues, but he needed to earn his living.
He was always sorry to part with a
statue—he felt as if each one held a
little part of himself that he would
never see again. As talented as
Pygmalion was, he could never
make the same statue twice. As
he carved, each statue seemed
to take on its own personality.
q 3 q
q 1 q
5™
Carved to Perfection
The Story of Pygmalion
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
6´
q 2 q
On the island of Cyprus lived a sculptor named Pygmalion. Every
day, Pygmalion awoke before sunrise and carved statues until late
in the evening. He chiseled and polished until the marble forms
looked so lifelike that they seemed ready to spring from his hands. 
Pygmalion spent all of his time by himself, except when people
came to buy his work. Pygmalion didn’t mind his solitary
lifestyle. In fact, he preferred it because it allowed him to get
more work done. But one night he had a strange dream that
changed everything. Pygmalion dreamed that he met a woman
who was more lovely, graceful, and kind than anyone he had
ever known. He was so happy in his dream that when he
awoke, Pygmalion felt lonely for the first time in his life.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
7™
Each year the people of Cyprus celebrated the feast of
Aphrodite, the goddess of love. Pygmalion had never
been interested in this particular feast, but this year
he had an idea. Pygmalion traveled to the altar of
Aphrodite and prayed that she would send him the
woman from his dream, the woman whose image he
had carved so perfectly. 
He wondered about the woman in his
dream. Did she exist? Would he ever
meet her? Sadly, Pygmalion realized
that even if she did exist, the chances
were small that he would ever find her.
When Pygmalion picked up his tools
and began to carve, the image of the
woman was still in his mind. As his
hands chiseled, the face from his
dream began to emerge from 
the marble. 
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
q 8 q
6´
Pygmalion carved for days on end, stopping only
for a quick drink of water or a bite of food. When
he finished, he collapsed with exhaustion and
admired his work. There, standing before him, was
the woman of his dreams. As Pygmalion gazed at
the statue, he felt that she was gazing right back at
him. So lifelike was the statue, it looked as though
it would step off the pedestal at any moment. 
Pygmalion named the statue Galatea and brought
her presents. He slipped golden rings upon her
fingers and draped pearls around her neck, but
she did not smile as she had in his dream. He told
her witty jokes, but she did not laugh. He played
music for her, but she stood as still as ever. He
sadly realized that he could love this statue with
all his heart, but the statue could bring him no
happiness. It would never love him in return.
When Pygmalion returned from the
feast, he held his breath and entered
his home. The statue stood exactly
where he had left it, as still and lifeless
as ever. With a heavy heart, Pygmalion
approached the statue and took her
cold hand in his. He decided it would
be best to part with the statue and
leaned to kiss her hand good-bye.
At that moment, the marble hand
became as soft and warm as his own.
Pygmalion looked up and saw her
cheeks flush with color, her lips curve
into a smile, and her eyes shine with
happiness—she was alive! Still holding
her hand, Pygmalion helped Galatea
step down from the pedestal. 
Aphrodite had heard his prayers 
and blessed the joyful couple as 
they embraced.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

King Acrisius learned some very bad news when he
consulted an oracle: His daughter Danae would bear
a son who would kill him! Acrisius built a brass
tower—with no doors and only a tiny slit for a
window—and imprisoned his daughter
inside. This prison, however, did not
prevent Zeus from visiting Danae. He
simply transformed himself into a ray of
golden light and slipped through the
narrow window. Since there was no way
into or out of the tower, you can
imagine how surprised Acrisius was
when he heard a baby crying
inside! 
9™
A Petrifying Quest
The Story of Perseus and Medusa
What’s that I hear?
A baby? 
It’s impossible!
q 3 q
q 1 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
7´
q 2 q
In ancient times, kings were always worrying about the future.
Would they fall from power? And if so, who would replace them?
To find out the answers to their questions, the kings consulted
oracles. If they learned bad news, they foolishly thought maybe—
just maybe—they could try to change their fates. But fate is fate,
and even the most powerful kings could not change it. 
Suspecting that the gods might be
involved, Acrisius did not dare to harm
the infant. Instead, he placed both
Danae and her baby in a large wooden
chest and pushed them off into the sea
to fend for themselves. But the plan
did not work as Acrisius intended. The
chest floated smoothly through the
ocean and soon landed safely on an
island. The king of the island, named
Polydectes, admired Danae and took
both mother and son into his care.
There, there, baby Perseus, don’t cry.
Your father, Zeus, will make sure that
we are safe and sound.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
1™
Perseus flew north until he reached a bleak, gloomy landscape
that was scattered with unusual rocks. As he flew down for a
closer look, he realized this was Medusa’s territory. He could
see that the strange-looking rocks had once been unlucky
people who had looked in the wrong direction.
Years passed, and Perseus grew into a noble young man.
Unfortunately, King Polydectes was less than noble. He had a
sneaky plan to marry Danae and wanted to get her protective
son out of the picture. Appealing to Perseus’s sense of bravery
and adventure, the king challenged Perseus to fetch the head
of Medusa. Perseus accepted and asked the gods for help.
Yikes! Isn’t Medusa the snake-haired
monster who turns anyone who sees
her into stone? Maybe my father,
Zeus, will help me out.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 6 q
7´
Since the gods favored Perseus, they equipped him for his quest.
Hermes, the messenger god, visited Perseus and brought him gifts:
winged sandals, a sickle-shaped sword, a shiny shield, 
a helmet that would make Perseus invisible, and 
some wise advice from Athena. With his new 
gear, Perseus set off.
Following Athena’s advice, Perseus
looked for Medusa in the reflection
of his shield. This way he would not
view her directly and could resist
her “petrifying” effect. Perseus soon
found Medusa fast asleep on a bed of
stones. He sneaked up quietly, but
Medusa’s snake-hair awoke and
began hissing furiously. As Medusa
began to stir in her sleep, Perseus
raised his sword and swiftly chopped
off her head. Resisting the urge to
look, Perseus placed the still-hissing
head in a sack and headed home.
q 8 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 9 q
q 11 q
3™
And what ever happened to Acrisius, who was fated to die by
Perseus’s hand? Later in life, Perseus became a famous discus
thrower, whom sports fans traveled far and wide to watch. At a
tournament, Perseus accidentally threw a discus into the crowds
where it hit and killed a spectator, none other than Acrisius. As
hard as he had tried, Acrisius could not change his destiny.
As he was flying home, Perseus spotted an unusual sight: a beautiful
woman chained to a cliff beside the ocean. This was Andromeda, who
was being sacrificed to a horrible sea monster in order to save her city.
As he saw the monster emerge from the water, Perseus put on the
invisibility helmet and swooped down for a fight. Perseus killed the
monster with one slash of his sword and then took off the helmet to
introduce himself to Andromeda. Surely this woman was destined to
be his wife, he thought.
Perseus to the rescue!
I wonder if this lovely
lady is single.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

7´
Carrying Andromeda in his arms, Perseus arrived home just
in time to halt the wedding that was planned for that day.
Danae told Perseus how she was being forced to marry
Polydectes. Perseus stormed to the castle and found him.
Before Polydectes could get over his surprise at seeing
Perseus still alive, Perseus pulled Medusa’s head from the
sack and held it right before the king’s beady eyes.
Look, Polydectes! I brought you
a little souvenir from my trip!
q 10 q
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Menelaus was not going to put up
with this. He and the courageous
leader Odysseus gathered forces in
Greece, and they set out to bring
Helen back. The Greeks landed on
the beaches of Troy, and a war
began that would last ten long
years. After countless battles
involving some of the bravest
warriors of the time, and
sometimes even the gods and
goddesses, the Greeks never
made it inside the city walls.
The soldiers longed to return
home, but Odysseus would
not give up.
5™
The Mysterious Horse
The Story of the Trojan War
I’ve got a plan.We won’t even have
to fight our way into the city. In fact,
the Trojans will carry us inside!
q 3 q
q 1 q
What are we going to do
this time, Odysseus?
Hypnotize them?
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 4 q
7´
q 2 q
The most beautiful woman in ancient Greece was the cause
of one of the most terrible wars. This great beauty was Helen,
queen of Sparta and wife of Menelaus. But that didn’t stop
Paris from kidnapping her and bringing her to his home in
Troy. The Trojans welcomed Helen to her new home, and
soon she was known as Helen of Troy.
One morning, the Trojans were amazed to discover that the
Greeks had gone home. The beaches were now deserted.
Strangely enough, all that was left was an enormous
wooden horse! The Trojans were puzzled by the strange
horse and debated about what should be done with it.
Let’s burn it.Those mischievous
Greeks are probably up to one
of their tricks!
Perhaps they built it as a gift
to the gods so they would be
granted a safe trip home.
Let’s bring it inside the city.
Maybe the gods will think
we built it for them, and
we’ll be blessed instead.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 5 q
q 7 q
7™
The Greeks opened the city gates and signaled to
the rest of their army, who were on ships hidden
behind an island. Soon the entire Greek army
poured into Troy, without even one Trojan
awake to stop them.
The Trojans decided to bring the enormous, heavy horse
inside the city walls for their victory celebration. The
horse would serve as a pleasant reminder that the
Greeks had surrendered to the mighty Trojans.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

q 8 q
7´
After a swift victory, Menelaus brought Helen back to
her home in Sparta. Little did the Greeks know that
some of them would not make it home for a long
time. It would take Odysseus another ten years before
he stepped foot in Greece. His return trip home,
called the Odyssey, is a story unto itself.
q 6 q
The joyful festivities lasted late into the night. When the last reveler had finally
gone home to bed, a rumbling was heard in the horse’s belly. A small door opened,
and Greek soldiers popped out of the gigantic hollow horse! The Trojans had
carried the Greeks right into the center of Troy—just as Odysseus had promised.
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Acrisius (a-KRIS-ee-us) Father of Danae;
accidentally killed by his grandson, Perseus
Aegeus (ee-JEE-us) King of Athens; father of
Theseus
Althaea (al-THEE-uh) Mother of Meleager; killed her
son by placing a cursed log in the fire
Andromeda (an-DROM-eh-dah) Maiden rescued by
Perseus from a sea monster
Aphrodite (af-reh-DI-tee) Goddess of love; Venus
(Roman)
Apollo (uh-PAH-loh) Sun god; son of Zeus and Leto;
twin of Artemis; Sol, Hyperion, Phoebus, Helios
(Roman)
Arachne (uh-RACK-nee) Young woman who
competed in a weaving contest with Athena;
turned into a spider by Athena
Ariadne (ar-ee-AD-nee) Daughter of King Minos;
gave Theseus thread to help him escape from the
Labyrinth
Artemis (AR-tuh-mis) Moon goddess and goddess of
the hunt; daughter of Zeus and Leto; twin of
Apollo; Diana (Roman)
Atalanta (at-uh-LAN-tuh) Huntress who helped
Meleager slay the Calydonian boar; married
Hippomenes after he outran her in a footrace
Athena (uh-THEE-nuh) Goddess of wisdom; turned
Arachne into a spider; Minerva (Roman)
Cerberus (SER-ber-us) Three-headed guard dog of
the Underworld
Charon (KAR-on) Boatman who carried souls to the
Underworld
Clymene (KLIM-eh-nee) Nymph; mother of
Phaethon
Cronos (CROH-nus) A Titan; son of Gaea and
Uranus; husband of Rhea; swallowed his children
so they would not depose him; Saturn (Roman)
Cupid (KEW-pid) God of love; son of Aprhodite; fell
in love with Psyche; also called Eros
Daedalus (DED-uh-lus) Inventor; father of Icarus;
designed the Labyrinth and was imprisoned in it by
King Minos; escaped by building wings 
Danae (DAN-ay-ee) Mother of Perseus; daughter of
Acrisius; imprisoned in a tower and visited by Zeus
Demeter (dee-MEE-tuhr) Goddess of the harvest;
mother of Persephone; Ceres (Roman)
Echo (ECK-oh) Nymph and gossip; punished by Hera
to repeat the last words of others; fell in love with
Narcissus
Epimetheus (ep-uh-MEE-thee-us) Husband of
Pandora; brother of Prometheus
Eurydice (yu-RID-uh-see) Wife of Orpheus; died on
her wedding day and was almost rescued from the
Underworld by Orpheus
Gaea (JEE-uh) Earth goddess; wife of Uranus;
mother of Cronos and the other Titans
Galatea (gal-uh-TEE-uh) Statue carved by
Pygmalion and brought to life by Aphrodite
Hades (HAY-deez) God of the Underworld; kidnapped
and married Persephone; Pluto (Roman)
Helen (HEL-en) Queen of Sparta; beautiful wife of
Menelaus; brought to Troy by Paris, starting the
Trojan War
Hephaestus (heh-FEHS-tus) God of fire; son of Zeus
and Hera; married to Aphrodite; Vulcan (Roman)
Hera (HEER-uh) Wife of Zeus; goddess of women
and motherhood; Juno (Roman)
Hermes (HER-meez) Messenger god; son of Zeus;
Mercury (Roman)
Hestia (HES-tee-uh) Goddess of the hearth and
home; Vesta (Roman)
Hippomenes (hip-AHM-ih-neez) Suitor of Atalanta;
won Atalanta’s hand in marriage by winning a
footrace
79 q
xxxxxxxxx
glossary and Pronunciaton Guide
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

Icarus (IK-uh-rus) Son of Daedalus; escaped from
the Labyrinth but fell into the sea when his wings
melted
Medusa (meh-DOO-sah) Snake-haired Gorgon who
turned onlookers to stone; slain by Perseus
Meleager (mel-ee-AY-juhr) Hunter of Calydonian
boar; suitor of Atalanta; died when his mother
placed a cursed log in the fire
Menelaus (men-uh-LAY-us) King of Sparta; husband
of Helen; fought in the Trojan War
Midas (MY-das) Greedy king who could turn
everything he touched to gold
Minos (MY-nahs) King of Crete; father of Ariadne;
demanded Athenians to feed to the Minotaur;
imprisoned Daedalus and Icarus in the Labyrinth
Minotaur (MIH-nuh-tor) Creature with the head of a
bull and the body of a man; kept in the Labyrinth
by Minos; slain by Theseus
Narcissus (nar-SIS-us) Beautiful and vain youth who
fell in love with his own reflection
Odysseus (oh-DIS-ee-us) Wise Greek leader during
the Trojan War; Ulysses (Roman)
Oeneus (EE-nee-us) King of Calydon; father of
Meleager
Orpheus (OR-fee-us) Musician; attempted to rescue
his wife, Eurydice, from the Underworld
Pandora (pan-DOR-ah) First mortal female; wife of
Epimetheus; opened a box and released evils to
plague humankind 
Paris (PAR-is) Prince of Troy; kidnapped Helen and
brought her to Troy, starting the Trojan War
Persephone (per-SEF-uh-nee) Daughter of Demeter;
kidnapped by Hades and brought to the
Underworld; Proserpine or Proserpina (Roman)
q 80
Perseus (PUR-see-us) Son of Zeus and Danae;
grandson of King Acrisius; beheaded Medusa;
rescued and married Andromeda
Phaethon (FAY-uh-thun) Son of Apollo and Clymene;
drove Apollo’s chariot off course and was killed by
Zeus
Polydectes (pol-uh-DEK-teez) King who attempted
to marry Danae; turned to stone by Perseus
Poseidon (poh-SY-duhn) God of the sea; Neptune
(Roman)
Prometheus (pro-MEE-thee-us) God who disobeyed
Zeus by giving fire to humans; punished by having
his liver pecked by an eagle
Psyche (SY-key) Wife of Cupid; disobeyed Cupid by
looking at him while he slept
Pygmalion (pig-MAIL-yun) Sculptor who fell in love
with his statue, Galatea
Rhea (REE-uh) Wife of Cronos; mother of Zeus
Sisyphus (SIS-uh-fus) Man condemned in the
Underworld to push a boulder uphill for eternity 
Tantalus (TAN-tuh-lus) Man punished in the
Underworld with eternal hunger and thirst
Theseus (THEE-see-us) Son of Aegeus; slew the
Minotaur
Uranus (yoo-RAY-nus) The first and oldest god; god
of the sky; husband of Gaea; father of Cronos and
the other Titans; overthrown by Cronos
Zeus (ZOOS) Son of Cronos and Rhea; overthrew
Cronos to become the ruler of heaven and earth;
husband of Hera; Jove or Jupiter (Roman)
xxxxxxxxx
15 Greek Myth Mini-Books © Danielle Blood, Scholastic Teaching Resources

