
Greek and Roman
Mythology
A to Z
Third Edition

African Mythology A to Z
Celtic Mythology A to Z
Chinese Mythology A to Z
Egyptian Mythology A to Z
Japanese Mythology A to Z
Greek and Roman Mythology A to Z
Native American Mythology A to Z
Norse Mythology A to Z
South and Meso-American Mythology A to Z
MYTHOLOGY A TO Z
MYTHOLOGY A TO Z

MYTHOLOGY A TO Z
MYTHOLOGY A TO Z
Greek and Roman 
Mythology
A to Z
Third Edition
8
Kathleen N. Daly
Revised by Marian Rengel

[
Greek and Roman Mythology A to Z, Third Edition
Copyright © 2009, 1992 by Kathleen N. Daly
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, 
 electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or  
retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the publisher. For information contact:
Chelsea House
An imprint of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001
ISBN-13: 978-1-60413-412-4
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Daly, Kathleen N.
  Greek and Roman mythology, A to Z / Kathleen N. Daly ; revised by Marian Rengel. — 3rd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-60413-412-4 (hc : alk. paper) 
1.  Mythology, Classical—Encyclopedias, Juvenile.  I. Rengel, Marian. II. Title.
BL715.D26 2009
292.1'303—dc22            2009008243
Chelsea House books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk quantities for  
businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call our Special Sales Department  
in New York at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
You can find Chelsea House on the World Wide Web at http://www.chelseahouse.com
Text design by Lina Farinella
Cover design by Alicia Post
Maps by Patricia Meschino
Printed in the United States of America
Bang  FOF  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
This book is printed on acid-free paper.

Contents
8
Introduction 
vii
Map of the Greek World, c. 1600–323 b.c. 
xii
Map of Rome and Vicinity, c. 500–200 b.c. 
xiii
A-to-Z Entries 
1
Selected Bibliography 
155
Index 
157


vii
Introduction
8
What Is Mythology?
From earliest times, humans have had a need to explain the origins and wonders 
of the world: the mountains and the oceans, the changing seasons, the earthquakes 
and storms, volcanoes, floods, and the existence of animals, including humans. 
Early humans, in every culture on Earth, made up stories about these phenomena 
and invented gods and supernatural beings to provide comfort and instruction. 
Sometimes people such as the Greeks made up stories just for entertainment; for 
example, the story of Pygmalion and Galatea explains nothing in nature or sci-
ence, but it’s a good story. It is the story in George Bernard Shaw’s play Pygmalion 
(1913) and the musical and movie My Fair Lady.
As the ages passed, and tribes shifted from place to place, broke up, regrouped, 
increased in size, and migrated to different lands, they took their stories with them. 
As the stories were passed on, they changed with the language, climate, and local 
folklore of the people. Eventually people built shrines and temples to their gods 
and heroes. They prayed to them for help, made sacrifices to them and celebrated 
them with festivals. In some countries, such as Rome, rulers took on the status of 
gods. In Greece, we find temples built in honor of Zeus, Athene, Aphrodite, and 
other gods and goddesses. In the Roman empire, there are temples to Jupiter, 
Juno, Quirinus, and other major and minor gods and goddesses. Their names live 
on in place-names, people’s names, and history.
In the early mythologies of most cultures, women were the supreme gods. The 
Earth Mother was the creator of new life. She was also the moon or sun goddess 
who ruled the skies, the seasons, and the harvests. As eons went by, people discov-
ered that the male, as well as the female, was necessary for the procreation of the 
species. The Earth Mother and moon goddess were gradually replaced by male sky 
gods, and sun gods, often typified by Bulls or rams. The queen mother’s decline is 
typified in Greek mythology by the attitude of Zeus toward his sister-wife, Hera. 
He was a mischievous, unfaithful, and disrespectful husband. His indiscretions and 
Hera’s anger may reflect the conservative religious feeling (personified by Hera) 
against marriages or other liaisons (those of Zeus) between the new Hellenic 
chieftains and the local moon priestesses and nymphs.
Other stories were invented to explain new developments such as the intro-
duction of grain cultivation, the making of bread and wine, and the breeding of 
domestic goats, pigs, and cattle.
The Greeks: Where Did They Come From?
Greek mythology is extremely old. The Great Mother was worshiped in 2000 b.c., in 
the land that we now call Greece. Early invaders from Asia Minor brought with them 

an early form of Indo-European language and the worship of Aryan sky gods. They 
settled peacefully in Thessaly and central Greece and intermarried with the natives.
Next came the more destructive and aggressive waves of what Homer called 
the Achaeans and Dorians, tribes from the north. These people were not peace-
loving. In Sparta, in the southern Peloponnesus, they enslaved the entire native 
population, using them to perform menial tasks. The Achaeans called these slaves 
Helots. The Achaeans spoke a dialect of ancient Greek and used a simple type of 
picture-writing scholars now call Linear B.
While savages and barbarians inhabited what we now call Greece, there was 
already a flourishing civilization on the island of Crete, which lies to the south 
of Greece. Crete had long been trading with the even more ancient civilizations 
of Egypt and the East. This culture reached its height in about 1600 b.c., and was 
known as the Minoan culture. In 1400 b.c., the Minoan civilization collapsed, 
probably due to a natural phenomenon such as an earthquake, whereupon the 
Greeks took over Crete.
We find many instances of Cretan myths in Greek stories, such as those of 
the upbringing of the god Zeus in Crete, the story of Europa and the bull, and 
the Minotaur who was vanquished by Theseus. However, the ancient divinities 
gradually took on the aspect of the invaders from Greece.
The Greek myths, as we know them, came from all over the ancient Balkan 
Peninsula: Thrace, Boeotia, Attica, the Peloponnesus, Argos, and Mycenae, 
and many of the islands, including, of course, Crete, and also from Asia Minor 
and places farther afield, such as Babylon and Sumer. Homer, whose work may be 
that of several poets writing between 750 and 700 b.c., is considered the “supreme 
source” of the stories of Greece.
Greek Mythology
Greeks were the first people to create gods and goddesses that looked like real 
human beings: beautiful men and women, old people with humor and dignity, 
and splendidly natural animals (as well as a few monsters). All the art and all the 
thought of Greece centered on human beings and human feelings.
The Greek gods and goddesses usually interacted with humans in towns and 
countries that are still familiar: Mount Ida, on the island of Crete, where the god 
Zeus was brought up, exists to this day; the hero Heracles had his home in the 
city of Thebes; the exact spot where the goddess Aphrodite is said to have emerged 
from the sea can be pointed out near the island of Cythera.
Greek mythology tells of many heroes who defeated their enemies by superior 
wit. Odyesseus, for example, was said to have thought of the wooden Trojan horse, 
inside which were hidden invading Greek soldiers. Greek intelligence went much 
further than clever strategy. The Greeks had a clear-eyed curiosity about them-
selves and all creation. The playwright Sophocles (496–406 b.c.) said, “Wonders 
are many and none is more wonderful than man.”
The Greek Creation Myth
All creation myths the world over have a certain similarity to one another, in that 
they explore the efforts of early humans to explain the origin of the Earth, the Sun, 
the Moon and the stars, and the creatures of the Earth, including men and women.
The best-known Greek creation myth is the one told by the renowned poet 
Hesiod (some time around 800 b.c.). It tells of the original chaos, a swirling, form-
less mass, from which came Gaia, Earth Mother, and her son-consort, Uranus, the 
heavens. These two created all the animals and vegetation that covered the Earth. 
viii  Greek and Roman Mythology A to Z

Introduction  ix
They also created the Titans, and the one-eyed Cyclopes, and other monsters that 
Uranus banished underground.
Uranus was eventually ousted by his son, Cronus. From Cronus and Rhea were 
born the 12 who would become the Olympian Gods, the great Greek pantheon 
of gods and goddesses.
The Romans
Rome, which became one of the world’s largest and most successful empires, 
famous for law-giving and material and cultural achievements, was a small, pastoral 
community when Greece was at its height.
The Romans’ forbearers or ancestors, called Latiums, were simple folk, living 
in close-knit clans, but trading and intermarrying with other clans. For centuries 
they had been overrun by tribes from the north. First were the Ligurians, who 
originally came from North Africa and settled around the land still called Liguria, 
near Genoa. In the third millennium b.c. came the Terramara, people who lived in 
stilt houses and brought with them the art of making bronze artifacts and weapons, 
which ensured them military supremacy. In the 11th century b.c. came the Vil-
lanovans, named after a small town, Villanova, near Bologna, in northern Italy.
Also living on the Italian Peninsula were the Etruscans, who appear to have 
been native to the region but may have arrived early in the first millennium 
b.c. They could not only write, a skill rare in Italy, but they were also skilled in 
Introduction  ix
The great Italian artist Sandro Botticelli (1445-1510) painted Primavera (Spring) in 1478. It captures the 
scene of the birth of Venus (center in red). The goddess is surrounded by (left to right) Mercury, The Three 
Graces, Flora, Chloris, and Zephyrus. The painting is in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, Italy.

metalwork, sculpture, painting, and good living. Nobody knows exactly where the 
Etruscans came from. They may have come from Asia Minor, but their arrival was 
deep in prehistory. It seems certain that they had had contact with Greek culture.
Historians note with interest that the people of Rome were already sophis-
ticated and discerning enough to adopt only those Etruscan morals and values 
that they thought would be useful to them. For instance, they eagerly embraced 
the idea of building temples to the deities; for an increasingly urban population, 
a temple was the logical place to worship, much better than the rocks and turf 
traditionally set up in a field. They also accepted the idea of divination, that is, the 
art of foretelling the future, often by means of animal sacrifice. The Romans of 
Latium ancestry were already a superstitious but cynical people; the idea that the 
future could be influenced by magic rituals, including sacrifices, and the casting of 
spells, fit in very well with their shrewdness and practicality.
The Romans, like all peoples, already had their gods: three chief gods—Jupiter, 
Mars, Quirinus—and many household Gods, such as Terminus and Cloacina. 
The Romans were practical people, not given to fantasizing about the family lives 
of their gods. The Romans paid homage to their gods, in return for which they 
expected protection, prosperity, fertility, good health, and more.
Jupiter started out his mythological life as a lump of stone, known as Jupiter 
Lapis. The worship of stones goes back to the Stone Age or earlier, when knives 
and ax heads were made from flint. Even in the Bronze Age, Jupiter continued to 
be worshiped as a terrifying flint figure.
Mars, who became associated with the Greek god of war, Ares, was at first 
worshiped as a god of fields and crops as well as a god of war. In early societies, 
the time for war came when the crops had been harvested and next year’s growth 
did not yet need tending. The men were free to go to war between autumn and 
spring. In the temperate Northern Hemisphere, March, named after Mars, was the 
ideal month for war.
Quirinus, the third god of this early Roman triad, was also a war god, but 
eventually became known as the patron of citizenship. There were household gods, 
Lares and Penates, who presided over the hearth and pantry.
Greek gods were different from Roman gods. Greek gods were like human 
beings, only bigger and better and more beautiful. Roman gods were often thinly 
sketched characters such as Vulcan, who was feared and placated as the god of fire.
By borrowing mythologies from the Greeks and using the stories and beliefs 
for their own purposes, the Romans brought personalities and vividness to their 
religions. Jupiter took on the glory of the Greek Zeus, and was worshiped in 
Rome as Optimus Maximus (the best and greatest). Temples and statues were 
built to Jupiter and his consort, Juno, and Minerva, a goddess with no apparent 
relationship to Jupiter but important to the Romans. Juno, originally an ancient 
moon goddess, became assimilated with Hera. Minerva became assimilated with 
the Greek Athene. No Roman counterpart was found for Apollo, so he retained 
the same name in both Greek and Roman mythologies.
Roman Names	
Greek Names
Gods:
  Jupiter	
Zeus
  Neptune	
Poseidon
  Mars	
Ares
  Apollo	
Apollo
  Vulcan	
Hephaestus
  Mercury	
Hermes
  Greek and Roman Mythology A to Z

Introduction  xi
Goddesses:
  Juno	
Hera
  Minerva	
Athene
  Diana	
Artemis
  Venus	
Aphrodite
  Vesta	
Hestia
  Ceres	
Demeter
How to Use This Book
The entries in this book are in alphabetical order and may be looked up as in a 
dictionary. Alternate spellings are given in parentheses after the entry headword. 
Spellings given in FULL CAPITAL letters are variations of the names found in 
different translations. Those appearing in normal type with standard capitalization 
are English translations. Within the main text, cross-references to other entries, 
which contain additional information, are printed in small capital letters. The 
index at the end of the book will also help you find your way around.
In case you are not familiar with Greek and Roman mythology, here is a list of 
the principal gods. If you look up the entries concerning these characters, you will 
find a general overview of Greek and Roman mythology. 
The Olympians Gods  The gods and goddesses who lived atop Mount 
Olympus, in Greece, were called the Olympians. As the influence of Greek 
myths grew in Rome and the empire it grew into, the people and their rulers 
adopted and adapted these Greek gods to meet their religious needs. In the 
following list the Greek name of each god is followed by the Roman name.
Zeus/Jupiter  Zeus was the son of Titans. He was primarily a sky and weather 
god, with the thunderbolt as his emblem, but his presence was inescapable 
throughout Greek mythology.
Hera/Juno  An ancient goddess, existing long before the time of the migra-
tions and the new gods, including Zeus. She was the protector of women, 
children, and marriage. Her cult was so strong that the newcomers had to 
acknowledge it and absorb it into their own mythology by making Hera the 
consort of Zeus.
Poseidon/Neptune  The god of seas and of horses, and the cause of earth-
quakes (“The Earthshaker”). In ancient times, long before the appearance 
of Zeus, Poseidon was worshiped as a god of fertility and of herdsmen. His 
symbol, the three-tined trident, was also a symbol for the thunderbolt.
Demeter/Ceres  The goddess of fertility and the mother of Persephone, 
who was carried off to the Underworld by Hades. The winter months 
were dark and unfruitful, for that was when Persephone went underground. 
(See Demeter and Persephone, under Demeter.)
Hades/Pluto  The ruler of the dead and of the underworld. Since he did 
not live in Olympus, his status as an Olympian is in dispute but as a brother 
of Zeus and Poseidon, he was a powerful force among the Olympians.
Athene/Minerva  A goddess of war, but also a patroness of the arts and crafts; 
she was the goddess of wisdom and the patron goddess of the city of Athens.
Apollo  The only god to have the same name in both Greek and Roman 
mythology. He has many functions: He was the god of poetry, music, 

xii  Greek and Roman Mythology A to Z
archery, prophecy, and the art of healing. He was a sun god of great antiq-
uity, just and wise and of great beauty.
Artemis/Diana  The sister of Apollo, goddess of the hunt and of beasts, of 
childbirth and of chastity. She is usually depicted with a bow and arrow.
Hephaestus/Vulcan  The god of fire and of craftsmen, especially the 
smiths who worked in metal. He was known as “the divine artificer.”
Aphrodite/Venus  The goddess of love, Aphrodite was born of the sea foam 
that swirled around the flesh of Uranus that had been cast in the sea.
Dionysus/Bacchus  A Greek fertility god of very ancient origin. He was 
famous for his frenzied festivities.
Hermes/Mercury  The winged messenger of the gods, Hermes was also the 
god of merchants and thieves, roads, flocks, and luck.
N

Introduction  xiii
Reg
Messina
CALABRIA
PICENUM
Tarquinia
Me
dite
rrane
an
Sea
Ad
riatic
Se
a
Ionian
  Sea
Tyrrhenian
 Sea
Ligurian
Sea
Sardinia
Corsica
Sicily
P
adus
R
.
A
r
n
u
s
R
.
Ti
be
r
R
.
ETURIA
UMBRIA
CAMPANIA
SABINI
CALABRIA
BRUTII
LUCANIA
APULIA
FRENTANI
LIGURIA
RUTULI
LATIUM
VOLSCI
PICENUM
SAMNIUM
Naples
Pompeii
Rome
Cumae
Tarquinia
Verona
Messina
Taranto
Brindisi
Aquileia
Siracusa
Ostia
Lavinium
Reggio di
Calabria
Bari
Florence
Genoa
Carthage
Falerii
Vulci
Veii
Padua
Bologna
N
© Infobase Publishing
100 km
0
100 miles
0


Absyrtus  Greek  Son of Aeetes, who was king 
of Colchis; brother of the sorceress Medea.
In various tellings of the story of Jason and the 
Golden Fleece, Absyrtus’ fate varies. In one version, 
Medea takes her brother hostage as she flees the 
kingdom of Colchis with Jason after he has stolen 
the fleece from Aeetes. Medea kills her brother and 
scatters his body parts over the road to delay pursuit 
by her father. 
In another version, Absyrtus and his troops stop 
Jason and Medea at a river they must sail down as 
they flee. Jason breaks a truce with the prince and 
kills him, before making his escape.
Acca Larentia (1)  (Acca Laurentia)  Roman 
A minor divinity, perhaps originating in Etruria, 
honored in Rome during the annual festival of the 
Laurentalia, held on December 23. Known com-
monly as Larentia, this goddess appeared to have 
an association with the world of the dead and the 
early role of the Lares, guardian spirits of the dead. 
Scholars studying Roman writers agree that the god 
existed first and then, as Roman culture developed, 
stories grew up around Acca Larentia to explain her 
role in their culture.
The oldest stories say that Larentia was the wife 
of the shepherd Faustulus, who found and brought 
to her the twins Romulus and Remus, so that she 
could nurse them and raise them as her own. She was 
also believed to have been a prostitute who changed 
her life and became revered as a saint, for the root 
of her name, lupa, means both she-wolf and whore. 
Through these similarities, it became convenient to 
connect this ancient goddess with the mythology sur-
rounding these prominent twins, who, sons of Mars, 
were rescued by a she-wolf from the Tiber River and 
went on to found Rome.
Acca Larentia (2)  (Acca Laurentia)  Roman 
A prostitute with whom the god Hercules spent 
the night in a Roman temple, after the priest of that 
temple played dice with the great hero and god and 
lost. Acca Larentia was the beautiful woman the 
priest found on the street and locked in the temple as 
a prize for Hercules. 
After enjoying the night with her, Hercules told 
Acca Larentia to approach and be friendly with the 
first wealthy man she met upon leaving the temple. 
Some Roman writers say that Hercules influenced 
the man; others say that Acca Larentia used tricks of 
her trade to win his affections. As her role in the story 
of Rome continues, Acca Larentia married the rich 
man, and when he died, leaving her all of his wealth, 
she gave the fortune to Rome, the city she loved.
Ancient Roman writers and modern scholars are 
unsure of the relationship of the woman in this story 
with the Acca Larentia (1) who became the foster 
mother to Romulus and Remus. Some say it was 
the same woman; others say that familiarity with her 
name made it an easy one to give to the woman in this 
story from the Hercules legends. 
Acestes  Roman  Son of the Trojan woman 
Egesta and the Sicilian river god Crimisus; founder 
of Segesta, a city in Sicily.
Acestes welcomed to Sicily Aeneas, the hero 
from Troy, near the end of the hero’s great journey 
following the Trojan War. Aeneas’ father, Anchises, 
died in Sicily. Acestes helped the hero bury his father, 
and a year later, helped Aeneas celebrate the games 
commemorating Anchises’ death. 
Acestes also provided a home in Sicily and founded 
cities there for the Trojan women who, after years of 
travel, refused to go any farther. According to some 
accounts, Acestes, who was born in Sicily, traveled to 
A
8
1

Troy to fight in the great war with the Greeks, but 
returned to Sicily before the end of the war.
Achelous  Greek  A river god who turned him-
self into a serpent to overcome his rival, Heracles, 
for the hand of Deianira. Heracles finally subdued 
Achelous and won the maiden. Rivers and their gods 
were worshiped by the Greeks, who believed them to 
be the offspring of the gods Oceanus and Tethys.
Alcmaeon, one of the Seven Against Thebes, 
cursed by his mother, finally found refuge on an 
island newly formed from silt carried down by the 
river Achelous.
Acheron  (River of Sadness)  Greek  The “woe-
ful river” of the Underworld (1) into which flowed 
the Phlegethon and the Coctyus. Acheron was the son 
of Gaia. He had quenched the thirst of the Titans 
during their war with Zeus, who then changed 
Acheron into a river. To cross the river Acheron, it 
was necessary to seek the help of Charon, the ancient 
ferryman of the underworld.
Acheron is sometimes used as a synonym for 
Hades, the underworld.
Achilles  Greek  The son of Peleus and Thetis; 
married to Deidamia; father of Neoptolemus. Achil-
les is the central figure of Homer’s Iliad, the story of 
the Trojan War, a 20-year battle between the Greeks 
and the Trojans after the abduction of Helen by Paris. 
Writers after Homer further developed the story of 
Achilles, and around this figure grew a series of great 
legends. A soothsayer prophesied that without the aid 
of Achilles the Greeks would never defeat the Trojans. 
Achilles went bravely into battle and indeed the 
Greeks won the war. Achilles was a hero in battle, and 
he has become a symbol of the fighting man doomed 
to die in war but glorying in the fulfillment of heroism 
and achievement. He is a vivid character, given to 
rages and revenge, such as his barbarous treatment of 
the body of the slain Trojan hero Hector.
The Childhood of Achilles  Thetis, the mother 
of Achilles, was a sea Nymph who had been wooed by 
Zeus and Poseidon. She reluctantly married Peleus and 
left him soon after the birth of Achilles. Knowing that 
Achilles was destined to be a hero who would win glory 
but also die in battle, she bathed the infant in the river 
Styx, trying to make him invulnerable to wounds. But 
the heel by which she held the child remained dry, and 
it was from an arrow wound in that heel that Achilles 
eventually died. The arrow was shot by either Apollo 
or Paris, in a battle near the end of the Trojan War.
As Achilles grew, Thetis put him in the care of 
Chiron, the gentle and wise Centaur. Chiron fed 
the lad the entrails of lions and the marrow of bears 
to make him brave, and taught him the arts of riding 
and hunting as well as of music and healing.
When the Greek leaders began to prepare for war 
with Troy, Peleus, knowing that Achilles faced certain 
death in Troy, hid his son in the court of Lycomedes, 
king of Scyros, and disguised him as a girl. However, 
since the seer Calchas had prophesied that without 
Achilles the Trojans would never be defeated in the 
war, the Greeks were determined to seek out the young 
man. Odysseus, another Greek hero, sent presents to 
the “girl,” among them a superb spear and shield. When 
Achilles promptly and expertly took up these objects in 
a battle alarm, the Greeks recognized him for the man 
that he was and they led him off to the battlefield.
Achilles at War  Achilles had early training in the 
art of war (as well as of music and healing) from Chi-
ron. When he went to war against the Trojans, Achilles 
led his own army, unlike the rest of the Greeks, who 
acknowledged Agamemnon as their leader. It had been 
prophesied that without Achilles the Trojans would 
triumph over the Greeks. Therefore there was much 
dismay when Agamemnon and Achilles quarreled over 
the beautiful captive Briseis, who had been stolen 
away from Achilles by Agamemnon. In a fury, Achilles 
withdrew his army from the war, with disastrous results 
for the Greeks. This is the quarrel from which the 
events described in the Iliad commence.
When the Greeks began to lose ground in the 
battle against the Trojans, Achilles finally sent his 
troops back into war under the leadership of Patro-
clus, his dearest friend. Patroclus was killed by the 
Trojan hero Hector. Achilles then went back into the 
war and routed the Trojans. He slew Hector. Despite 
the anguished pleas of Priam (king of the Trojans and 
father of Hector), Achilles dragged Hector’s body 
around the wall of Troy and the tomb of Patroclus. 
Achilles finally gave Hector’s mutilated body to Priam 
in return for the warrior’s weight in gold.
Actaeon  Greek  A hunter and the son of Autonoe 
and grandson of Cadmus. He aroused the anger of 
the goddess Artemis when he saw her bathing naked 
in a river. Artemis changed Actaeon into a stag. His 
own dogs set upon him and tore him to pieces.
Admetus  Greek  King of Phera in Thessaly; one of 
the Argonauts. Admetus was a kind master to Apollo, 
who had been his slave as a punishment for killing the 
Cyclops. When Apollo heard that Admetus was soon 
2  Achelous

to die, Apollo went to the Fates and persuaded them 
to prolong Admetus’s life. They agreed, on condition 
that someone else should be sent in his stead. Not 
even the parents of Admetus would give up their 
lives. His faithful wife, Alcestis, agreed to do so. She 
took a drink of poison and went down to Hades, but 
Persephone refused to let her stay. She sent her back 
to her husband and children. Another version of the 
story says that Heracles went to the Underworld 
and wrestled with Hades for the life of Alcestis.
The story is the subject of a play, Alcestis, by 
Euripides, and an opera, Alceste, by the German 
composer Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714–1787).
Adonis  Greek  The beloved of Aphrodite and 
the personification of masculine beauty. His mother 
was the beautiful Myrrha; his father, King Theias, 
king of Syria, was the father of Myrrha. The strange 
parentage of Adonis came about because Aphrodite 
was jealous of Myrrha’s beauty and caused the girl 
to unite with her own father. When Cinyrus found 
out that he had been tricked, he chased Myrrha with 
a sword, intending to kill her and her unborn child. 
Aphrodite, repenting of her deed, quickly turned the 
girl into a myrrh tree. The king’s sword split the tree 
and out stepped the beautiful child Adonis.
Aphrodite hid the baby in a box and gave it to 
Persephone, queen of death, to look after. Persephone 
reared Adonis in the Underworld (1). He grew to be 
a handsome young man, whereupon Aphrodite claimed 
him back. Persephone refused to give him up. Appealed 
to by the two goddesses, Zeus decreed that each should 
have him for half of the year. When he stayed in the 
underworld, it was winter. When he returned, the 
Earth blossomed into spring and summer.
In some versions of the story, when Ares hears that 
Aphrodite loves the youth Adonis, he changes himself 
into a wild boar and gores the boy to death. Anemones 
spring from the blood of Adonis and his spirit returns 
to the underworld. In response to the two tearful 
goddesses, Zeus determines that Adonis should stay 
with each of them in turn for half the year.
According to scholars, the death and resurrection 
of Adonis represents the decay and revival of the 
plant year. He was worshiped as a corn god, a god of 
grain crops, which were much more important to the 
ancient inhabitants of the Mediterranean lands than 
the berries and roots of the wilderness that nourished 
their primitive, pre-agrarian ancestors.
Adrastia  (Inescapable One)  Greek  Daughter 
of Melisseus, king of Crete; sister of Ida (1). With 
Ida and the goat-Nymph Amalthea, Adrastia tended 
the infant god Zeus on Mount Ida (2), in Crete. Later 
mythology identified Adrastia with Nemesis, the 
goddess of vengeance.
Adrastus  Greek  King of Argos; the leader of 
the warriors known as the Seven Against Thebes 
according to the tragedy written by the Greek poet 
Aeschylus. The attack on Thebes by rebels who sup-
ported Polynices in his attempt to force his brother, 
Eteocles, off the throne of Thebes was a disaster. Of 
the seven champions, only Adrastus lived, escaping 
on his winged horse, Arion.
Later, Adrastus made another attempt to gain 
Thebes, when the children of the Seven, called the 
Epigoni, were old enough to become warriors. This 
time the battle was a success, but it was a sad victory 
for Adrastus because his only son, Aegialeus, was 
killed in the conflict.
Aeetes  Greek  King of Colchis on the island of 
Rhodes; his father was the sun god Helios and his 
mother the Nymph Rhodos; brother of Circe, the witch 
goddess, and Pasiphae; father with Eidyia, a daughter 
of the god Oceanus, of Medea and Absyrtus.
Aeetes provided shelter to Phrixus when the 
youth arrived on Rhodes on the back of the ram with 
the Golden Fleece, and Aeetes became the guardian 
of that treasure. When Jason and his Argonauts 
arrived in search of the fleece, Aeetes set challenges 
before the hero, who completed each one, but the 
king did not keep his word and would not give Jason 
the fleece. Jason, with the help of Medea, who was 
gifted in magic and prophecy, stole the fleece and fled 
on ship. Aeetes sent his navy after them. 
According to one version of the story, Medea took 
Absyrtus hostage, then killed him and scattered his 
body over the road so that Aeetes would stop and pick 
up the pieces and allow Jason time to escape. Accord-
ing to the version in the Argonautica, Absyrtus led 
Colchian troops to a river the Argonauts would need 
to travel down to escape. Jason broke a truce, killed 
Absyrtus, then made his escape with Medea and the 
Argonauts. Aeetes never captured them nor retrieved 
the fleece.
Years later, Aeetes was deposed by another brother, 
but Medea returned to restore her father to the 
throne of Colchis.
Aegeus  Greek  King of Athens and father of the 
hero Theseus, with Aethra, daughter of King Pittheus 
of Troezen. Some say that the sea god, Poseidon, was 
AeGEUS  3

the father of Theseus, and that possibly Aegeus and 
Poseidon were one and the same.
When Aegeus left Troezen, Aegeus told Aethra 
that if a child should be born of their union, it was to 
be reared quietly in Troezen, with King Pittheus as 
guardian. Aegeus then hid his sword and sandals under 
a rock, telling Aethra that she was to lead the child, 
when it became old enough, to the hiding place so that 
he or she could recover the tokens of its identity.
When Aegeus thought that Theseus had been 
killed, he threw himself into the sea that today bears 
his name—the Aegean Sea.
Aegina  Greek  An island in the Saronic Gulf, 
south of Athens; in Greek legend, named after 
Aegina, a lover of the god Zeus. When plague 
struck the island, Zeus repeopled it by turning the 
ants of the island into humans, who were known as 
Myrmidons. The ancient Cretan deity Britomartis 
took refuge here from the attentions of King Minos; 
the Aegeans called her Dictynna. Aegina was the 
birthplace of Peleus, son of King Aecus.
Aegis  (Goat Skin)  Greek  The shield of Zeus 
made by the smith-god Hephaestus and covered with 
the skin of the goat-Nymph Amalthea. The shield 
had the power to terrify and disperse the enemy. 
When Zeus shook it, the shield produced tremendous 
thunder and lightning storms. It also had the power to 
protect friends. The aegis was also worn by Athene, 
when it bore the head of the Gorgon, Medusa, in its 
center. The aegis is a symbol of divine protection.
Aegisthus  Greek  Son of Pelopia and Thyestes. 
Aegisthus became the lover of Clytemnestra, the 
wife of King Agamemnon, after the king had gone 
off to the Trojan War. Aegisthus and Clytemnestra 
killed Agamemnon when he returned from the war 
and were in turn murdered by Orestes and Electra, 
Agamemnon’s children.
Aegisthus was one of the descendants of Pelops 
and a victim of the curse laid upon the family by the 
murdered charioteer, Myrtilus (see Pelops and the 
Charioteer, under Pelops).
When Pelopia realized that Aegisthus was the son 
not of her husband, Atreus, but of her own father, 
Thyestes, she placed the infant on a mountainside 
to die. But the baby survived, suckled by a goat, and 
grew up to play his part in the tragic story of the 
house of Pelops. (See Atreus and Thyestes.)
Eventually Aegisthus killed his supposed father, 
Atreus, and acknowledged Thyestes as his real father.
It was only at the death of Aegisthus and Clytem-
nestra that the Furies were satisfied and put an end to 
the tragedies and atrocities that had stained the house 
of Atreus (the Atreids) and the descendants of Pelops.
There are several versions of the genealogy of this 
accursed family, involving further incest, murder, and 
intrigue.
Aegle (1)  (Brightness)  Greek  Daughter of As-
clepius, the god of medicine, and Lempetia, a 
daughter of Helios, or of Epione. The origin of her 
name is unclear, though it may refer to the health of 
the human body. Her sisters had names that related 
to their father’s role: Panacea, which means all heal-
ing, and Iaso, whose name means healthy.
Aegle (2)  (Dazzling Light)  Greek  A Dryad, or 
wood Nymph; one of the sisters known as the Hesper-
ides; either the daughters of Erebus (Darkness) and 
Nyx (Night) or the daughters of Atlas and Pleione 
or Hesperis. Aegle’s sisters, those named by people 
writing during the classic age of Greek mythology, 
were Erytheia, Arethusa, and Hesperia.
Aegle (3)  Greek  The most beautiful of the Naiads, 
fresh water Nymphs who guarded springs, wells, brooks, 
and small bodies of water; daughters of Zeus.
Aeneas  Greek and Roman  Son of Anchises, a 
prince of Troy, and the goddess Venus; husband of 
Creusa; father of Ascanius; a hero of Homer’s Greek 
epic the Iliad, and, perhaps more importantly, of the 
Roman poet Virgil’s the Aeneid. 
In the Iliad and other Greek writings, Aeneas is 
the leader of the Dardanians, descendants of Dar-
danus, the founder of Troy. King Priam, for whom 
they were fighting, was Aeneas’ uncle. Aeneas fought 
many battles against the Greeks who had declared 
war against Troy in an effort to rescue the beautiful 
woman Helen. Venus and the god Apollo frequently 
helped Aeneas in his battles, as did other gods. 
As the Greeks were about to sack Troy, Venus warned 
Aeneas and insisted that he leave. Aeneas gathered up his 
family, carrying his lame father on his back. Aeneas also 
gathered up the family gods, including the Penates, and 
his father carried them as his son carried him. Warriors 
and friends fled the city with Aeneas. Creusa, however, 
was killed in the crush of people. Aeneas returned for 
her but found only her ghost, who told him to journey 
forward, to fulfill his destiny of founding a new city in 
Italy. Aeneas fled Troy, taking with him shiploads of 
refugees, including many women and children.
4  Aegina

Their journey to Italy took years and included 
many adventures. Though they were beset with 
turmoil and hardship, the great gods Jupiter, Juno, 
Neptune, and Mercury watched over them, often 
intervening on their behalf. 
Eventually, Aeneas and a small group of the stron-
gest and bravest of his followers landed on the shores 
of Italy in the kingdom of Latium. (The rest of the 
group that had fled Troy had stayed on the island of 
Sicily.) There Aeneas was welcomed by King Latinus, 
who, fearing the might of the Trojan hero, betrothed 
his daughter Lavinia to Aeneas. This angered Turnus, 
the king of the nearby Rutuli people, to whom Lavinia 
had been betrothed. A war ensued which lasted years. 
Gods supported both sides and many heroes died in the 
combat. Eventually, Aeneas killed Turnus in one-on-
one combat and the war came to an end.
Aeneas married Lavinia and founded the city 
of Lavinium, which he named after her. Years later, 
Aeneas died, and his mother, Venus, asked Jupiter 
to make him a god. The Roman people worshiped 
Aeneas as a founding figure and protector long before 
Virgil wrote the Aeneid in the first century b.c.
Aeneid  Roman  The epic poem composed by 
Latin poet Virgil between 30 and 19 b.c. It is divided 
into 12 books and was considered unfinished by 
Virgil when he died. Nevertheless, the Aeneid is one 
of the cornerstones of world literature. It had enor-
mous influence on Roman thought, for it centered 
on a genuinely Roman myth, glorifying Rome and 
foretelling its future prosperity. People of all classes 
knew it by heart and often quoted it.
Virgil was greatly admired in his own lifetime, for 
his contemporaries at once understood his greatness 
and the relevance of his epic to their own culture.Like 
the Odyssey, written by Greek poet Homer between 
the eighth and the ninth centuries b.c., the Aeneid is the 
tale of a hero who fought in the Trojan War. 
Aeneas fought on the Trojan side. He fled the burn-
ing city carrying his father, Anchises, on his back. Part 
of his story is told in flashback to Queen Dido of Car-
thage, who falls in love with him. Ever the favorite of 
the gods, Aeneas learns from Jupiter (via his messenger, 
Mercury) that the hero must leave Dido, for his destiny 
is to establish an empire on the west coast of Italy.
When Aeneas deserts her, the lovelorn Dido kills 
herself with his sword. When Aeneas reaches the king-
dom of Latium, at the mouth of the river Tiber, King 
Latinus gives him the hand of his daughter Lavinia in 
marriage. However, Lavinia has already been promised 
The story of Aeneas arriving with his son Ascanius on the shores of Latium is recounted in this marble relief 
carved in the second century A.D. The marble sculpture is in the British Museum in London.  (Photograph by 
Marie-Lan Nguyen.)
Aeneid  5

to Turnus, king of the Rutuli. War is declared between 
the rivals. Helped by Evander, leader of the Arcadians, 
and the goddess Venus (who brings Aeneas a shield 
crafted by Vulcan) Aneas and his troops defeat Turnus. 
Turnus and Aeneas agree to end the war in single com-
bat. Despite the aid of the warrior maiden Camilla, 
Turnus is defeated and Aeneas is victorious.
Aeolus  Greek  God of the winds, also king of 
the winds. In Homer’s Odyssey, Aeolus helped the 
hero Odysseus by imprisoning the winds in a huge 
leather bag, leaving only the west wind free to blow 
the ships of Odysseus homeward to Ithaca. When 
the ships were near home, Odysseus fell asleep from 
exhaustion. The restless, curious crew of the ship 
opened the bag. The winds escaped and blew all the 
ships away from Ithaca and back toward the island 
of Lipara, where Aeolus lived. Aeolus was angry and 
refused to help Odysseus further.
Aerope  Greek  Wife of Atreus, a member of the 
Pelops family, mother of Agamemnon and Menelaus, 
and possibly of Anaxibia and Pleisthenes. Atreus threw 
Aerope into the sea for her adultery with his brother. 
(See The Golden Fleece, under Atreus and Thyestes.)
Aeschylus  (525–456 b.c.)  Greek poet and drama-
tist, held by many to be the founder of Greek tragedy. 
His plays preserve some of the stories of Greek 
mythology. Aeschylus was the first dramatist to 
introduce a second actor onto the stage; before him, 
drama had only one actor appearing at a time. The 
innovative use of dialogue between the actors brought 
vividness to the stage. Aeschylus also developed the 
use of costumes and special effects. Only seven of his 
many plays survive, among them The Seven Against 
Thebes, Prometheus Bound, and The Oresteia, a trilogy 
that tells the epic drama of King Agamemnon and 
how his murder was arranged by his son Orestes.
Aeson  Greek  King of Iolcus (in Thessaly); with 
Queen Alcimede, father of Jason; half-brother of 
Pelias, who usurped the throne of Iolcus.
Aetolia  District of the southern Greek main-
land. One of its chief towns was Calydon, site of the 
Calydonian Boar Hunt. It was named after Aetolus, 
son of Endymion.
Agamemnon  Greek  King of Argos and Myce-
nae, regions in the northern Peloponnesus; son of 
Atreus and Aerope. He was the grandson of Pelops 
and the last member of a family doomed to one trag-
edy after another. He was the brother of Menelaus 
and Anaxibia; and the husband of Clytemnestra, with 
whom he fathered Chrysothemis, Electra, Iphigenia, 
and Orestes. King Agamemnon was the leader of the 
Achaean (Greek) forces in the Trojan War. He was 
eventually killed by Clytemnestra and Aegisthus.
Driven from Mycenae after the murder of their 
father, Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus fled to 
Sparta. There Agamemnon wed Clytemnestra, and 
Menelaus wed Helen. Agamemnon was chosen to 
lead the Greeks in the expedition to rescue his sister-
in-law, Helen, after Paris abducted her. The expedi-
tion was stalled when Agamemnon offended the 
goddess Artemis. A soothsayer, Calchas, said that 
only the sacrifice of Iphigenia would appease Artemis 
and Aeolus, the wind god. Agamemnon tricked his 
wife into sending their daughter to her death.
In another act of treachery, Agamemnon stole 
Briseis, the beloved of the hero Achilles, who then 
laid down his arms and withdrew from the Trojan 
War (though he later rejoined it).
When Agamemnon returned in triumph from the 
war, 10 years later, accompanied by the princess Cas-
sandra as booty, both he and she were murdered by 
Clytemnestra and her lover, Aegisthus. Agamemnon 
was trapped in a net and drowned in a bathtub, an 
ignoble end for a hero.
Agamemnon was one of the principal characters 
in Homer’s Iliad. He was a brave and successful 
warrior but a selfish and treacherous man.
Historians believe that there was a real King 
Agamemnon in Argos or Mycenae, since Agamem-
non appears often in Greek mythology and there 
were many cults of Agamemnon in various places in 
ancient Greece.
Agdistis  Greek  A Phrygian mother-goddess, 
sometimes known as Cybele, goddess of fertility, 
and associated with Rhea, Greek Earth mother and 
mother of the Olympian gods.
Agenor  Greek  King of Tyre (in Phoenicia); son 
of the sea god Poseidon and Libya; father of Europa, 
Cadmus, Phoenix, and Cilix; husband of Telephassa. 
After the god Zeus carried off Europa, Agenor sent 
his three sons in search of their sister. The sons 
did not find her, and settled down elsewhere to 
found new nations. Phoenix was the ancestor of the 
Phoenicians; Cilix of the Cilicians; and the celebrated 
Cadmus, who settled in Boeotia and built the Cadmea  
(a fortress), was the founder of the city of Thebes.
6  Aeolus

The dispersal of Agenor’s sons seems to refer 
to the westward flight of the Canaanite tribe (early 
Phoenicians) in the second millennium b.c., under 
pressure from Aryan and Semite invaders.
agricultural gods  Roman  Agriculture was 
critical to the success of ancient Rome. Growing crops 
and herds to feed the people was essential not only to 
individual health but, almost more importantly, the 
success of a growing society.
The earliest cultures of central Italy recognized a 
multitude of gods and goddesses who watched over 
almost every aspect of growing plants and raising ani-
mals to feed the growing communities. As they did with 
their personal gods, these ancestors of the Romans 
recognized forces beyond their control and gave these 
forces names. They then performed rituals to either 
ask for the deity’s help for a good growing season, or to 
implore the deity to not harm their fields or animals.
Gods and goddesses oversaw the food supply as 
well. People asked them to keep the harvest safe from 
storms, volcanoes, and bad workmanship, to help 
turn grapes into wine and grain into bread, and to 
bring crops to market.
Agricultural gods  7
Principle Roman Agricultural Gods
This chart includes only the agricultural characteristics that pertain to the gods. Many of them,  
particularly those that became more important in Roman culture, had other functions in society 
than overseeing the production of food.
God/Goddess	
Gender	
Area of agricultural influence
Bacchus	
m	
Grape vines, wine
Bubona	
f	
Protected oxen and cattle
Ceres	
f	
Grain crops, cereals (She had many assistants.)
Consus	
m	
Grains and full storage bins
Dea Dia	
f	
Growth
Epona	
f	
Protected horses
Eventus Bonus	
m	
Success in agriculture
Faunus	
m	
Fertility
Faustitas	
f	
Protected herds and livestock
Flora	
f	
Fertility, especially associated with flowers
Fornax	
f	
Bread and baking, to prevent burning
Lactans	
m	
Promoted the growth of young grain crops
Liber	
m	
Fertility and healthy growth of vines
Lupercus	
m	
Protected livestock
Nodutus	
m	
Harvesting wheat
Ops	
m	
Wealth of the harvest
Pales	
f	
Guarded shepherds and their flocks
Pomona	
f	
Fruit orchards and gardens
Porus	
m	
Abundance
Priapus	
m	
Fertility of all gardens and flocks
Puta	
f	
Guided the pruning of vines and bushes
Robigo	
f	
Protected crops, particularly corn, from diseases
Robigus 	
m	
Protected crops from diseases
Runcina	
f	
Weeding and harvesting the crop
Saritor	
m	
Hoeing and weeding
Saturn	
m	
The sowing of seeds
Semonia	
f	
The sowing of seeds
Silvanus	
m	
Fields, forests, and woods
Spiniensis	
m	
Protected farmers from thorns when they weeded
Verminus	
m	
Protected cattle from disease, especially worms
Vertumnus	
m	
The ripening of fruit with the changing of seasons

The rituals began as private acts, small prayers 
or sacrifices conducted by the head of a family. 
Over time, some of the gods grew in importance 
and became major deities in Roman culture. By the 
eighth century b.c., the rituals of the growing season 
had become so much a part of early Roman culture, 
which by then included influences of the people 
from Etruria, Latium, and much of Central Italy, 
that the Roman calendar already contained the great 
seasonal festivals centered on agriculture. The most 
prominent were on April 19, the Cerealia, celebrating 
the goddess of grains, and on April 25, the Robigalia, 
asking the god of mildew to spare the crop. These 
days of honoring the gods were celebrated by special 
clergy and involved the entire Roman community in 
their pageantry and sacrifice.
See also household gods; indigetes; personal 
gods; State Gods
Ajax (1)  Greek  Son of Telamon, king of Sala-
mis. He was one of the heroes who sailed with the 
Greeks to the Trojan War. He is represented in 
Homer’s Iliad as second only to Achilles in bravery. 
Ajax is described as tall and strong, though perhaps 
slow-witted, prone to rages and madness. He lost 
the contest for the armor of Achilles and in a fit of 
despair took his own life.
Ajax (2)  (“The Lesser”)  Greek  Son of Oileus of 
Troy; Greek warrior in the Trojan War. Unlike Ajax 
(1), he was a small man, but swift-footed and a skilled 
spearman. Ajax the Lesser drowned on his way home 
to Greece after the fall of Troy. Some say he was a 
victim of the sea god, Poseidon. Some claim that he 
was the victim of the goddess Athene.
Alba Longa  A city of ancient Latium, southeast 
of Rome. It is the site of the modern Castel Gondolfo. 
Tradition has it that Romulus and Remus were born 
in Alba Longa, thus making it the mother city of 
Rome.
Alcestis  Greek  Daughter of Pelias. Married 
to Admetus, she was the symbol of wifely devotion. 
Alcetis willingly gave up her life for Admetus so that 
he could live a little longer. But Persephone, queen 
of the Underworld, refused to admit Alcestis and 
sent her back to Earth.
In another version of her death, Heracles wrestles 
with Hades for the life of Alcestis, and wins the 
battle. Alcestis and Admetus are the subjects of a play, 
Alcestis, by Euripides.
Alcinous  Greek  King of the Phaecians on the 
island of Scheria. In Homer’s Odyssey, Alcinous and 
his daughter, Nausicaa, entertain the Greek hero 
Odysseus, who has been shipwrecked on his way 
home from the Trojan War.
Alcippe  Greek  Daughter of the war god Ares 
and the nymph Aglauros. Halirrhothius, a son of 
the sea god Poseidon, ravished Alcippe. Ares killed 
Halirrhothius for this crime.
Alcmaeon  Greek  The son of Amphiaraus (one 
of the Seven Against Thebes) and of Eriphyle; 
brother of Amphilochus. The sons of the seven fallen 
champions who had fought at Thebes were called the 
Epigoni (descendants). They swore to avenge their 
fathers, and Alcmaeon rather reluctantly became 
their leader. He had been persuaded by his mother, 
Eriphyle, who in turn had been bribed with the cov-
eted magic robe and amber necklace of Harmonia.
When he learned that his mother had been similarly 
bribed to send his father off to war, Alcmaeon killed 
Eriphyle. Her dying curse was that no land would ever 
shelter Alcmaeon. Alcmaeon wandered from place 
to place, pursued by the Furies, who gave him no 
rest. Finally, he found an island newly formed from 
silt brought down by the river Achelous. Since the 
island had not existed when Eriphyle uttered her curse, 
Alcmaeon was able to find peace, at least for a while. 
He married Callirhoë, the daughter of Oeneus, 
king of Calydon. Callirhoë heard about the fabulous 
robe and necklace that had been given to Eriphyle, and 
as the wife of Alcmaeon, demanded that the treasures 
be given to her. She did not know that in his unhappy 
wanderings her husband had married Arsinoë, daughter 
of an Arcadian king, and given the treasures to her. Alc-
maeon returned to Arcadia and begged King Psophis 
to give him the treasure, as he wanted to place it in the 
shrine of Apollo at Delphi. The king could not refuse 
such a request; but when he heard the truth from one 
of Alcmaeon’s servants, he had Alcmaeon killed.
Princess Arsinoë witnessed the death of her hus-
band and, knowing nothing of his treachery, vowed 
vengeance on her father. The king sent the treasure 
to Delphi, in the hope that no further harm would 
come of it, but the treasure of Harmonia was accursed. 
Eventually King Phegeus and all his family died at the 
hands of the vengeful sons of Alcmaeon and Callirhoë.
Alcmene  Greek  Daughter of Electryon, king of 
Mycenae; granddaughter of the hero Perseus; wife 
8  Ajax (1)

and cousin of Amphitryon; mother of Heracles (by 
Zeus) and of Iphicles (by her husband).
While her husband was at war, the god Zeus 
disguised as Amphitryon, visited Alcmene. According 
to Hesiod, Alcmene was a most virtuous woman and 
would not have entertained Zeus had he appeared 
as himself. Zeus realized this, and wanting to sire 
a champion for both gods and humans, he wooed 
Alcmene as if he were her husband. It is said that the 
experience was so enjoyable that Zeus, with his magic, 
made one night last the length of three. The next 
morning, Amphitryon returned from war and mated 
with his wife, who then also conceived a mortal son, 
Iphicles. Alcmene bore the hero Heracles, son of 
Zeus on one day and his twin brother the next day.
When Alcmene died, many years later, Zeus had 
her taken to the Islands of the Blessed, where she 
married Rhadamanthus.
Aloeids  (Aloadae)  Greek  Giant sons of Iphi-
media by Poseidon. Their names were Ephialtes 
and Otus; they were called the Aloeids after Aloeus, 
the husband of Iphimedia. The brothers grew at an 
enormous rate. By the time they were nine years 
old, they were 36 feet tall. These giants declared 
war on Olympus, the home of the gods. Ephialtes 
determined to capture Hera, wife of the great god 
Zeus. Otus swore he would capture Artemis, goddess 
of the hunt. First they seized Ares, god of war, and 
confined him in a bronze vessel, where he remained 
for 13 months until he was rescued by Hermes.
Then their siege of Olympus began: The giants 
piled Mount Pelion atop Mount Ossa (in Thes-
saly) to create a ladder to the heavens. They were 
not afraid of the gods, for it had been prophesied 
that neither gods nor men would kill them. Artemis 
tricked them by turning herself into a white doe 
and prancing before them. The brothers threw their 
spears at the doe, who skillfully darted away, and 
they accidentally killed each other with their spears. 
Thus the prophecy was fulfilled, for neither gods nor 
humans had killed them; they had killed each other. 
The souls of the Aloeids went down to Tartarus, 
where they were tied back to back on either side of a 
pillar, with cords that were living vipers.
The story of the Aloeids symbolizes the revolt of 
the giants against the gods. The imprisonment of Ares 
may symbolize a 13-month truce between two warring 
tribes of ancient Greece, when warlike tokens of both 
nations were sealed into a bronze jar to ensure peace.
In another version of the myth, in Homer’s 
Odyssey, it is said that the brothers would have suc-
cessfully stormed Olympus if the god Apollo had not 
slain them with his arrows.
The Aloeids were worshiped on the island of 
Naxos (where Artemis had appeared to them as a 
doe) and in the city of Ascra, in Boeotia, where they 
were regarded as founders of the city.
Myths of the Aloeids also appear in Homer’s Odys-
sey and in Virgil’s Aeneid.
Aloeus  Greek  Son of Poseidon; husband of 
Iphimedia. Iphimedia had two sons, Otus and Ephi-
altes, by Poseidon. After she married Aloeus, the sons 
were known as the Aloeids (sons of Aloeus).
Amalthea  (Tender)  Greek  The goat-Nymph 
that suckled the infant Zeus on Mount Ida (2) in 
Crete. Zeus was grateful to the goat-nymph. When 
he became lord of the universe, he set Amalthea’s 
image among the stars as Capricorn (the goat). He 
also borrowed one of her horns, which were as large 
Amalthea  9
The nymph Amalthea helped nurture the infant Zeus 
(known by the Romans as Jupiter) with the milk of a 
goat. Her story is portrayed in this statue by French 
artist Pierre Julien (1731-1804). The statue, known 
as Amalthea and the Goat of Jupiter, is in the Musée 
de Louvre in Paris.

and full as a cow’s, and gave it to Adrastia and Ida 
(1), the ash nymphs who, with Amalthea, had tended 
the infant Zeus, as a Cornucopia, horn of plenty. The 
horn would always be filled with food and drink for 
its owners. The Aegis, the shield worn by Zeus, was 
covered with the skin of Amalthea.
Amazons  Greek  A legendary race of female 
warriors, supposed to live in Asia Minor or possibly 
Africa, or, as Greek navigators explored farther, “at 
the edge of the world.” The Amazons were some-
times associated with Artemis, goddess of the hunt, 
but no close connection exists except that the name 
of one Amazonian leader was Artemis. Some scholars 
say that the legend of the Amazon warriors may be 
connected with the invasion of beardless nomads 
from the Russian steppes.
The Amazons appear in several legends, includ-
ing those of the hero Heracles. The most famous 
queen of the Amazons was Hippolyta, whose girdle 
Heracles stole, and who was vanquished by Theseus, 
to whom she bore a son, Hippolytus. Penthesilea, 
an Amazon queen, fought valiantly for the Trojans in 
the Trojan War. She was slain by Achilles.
The Greeks cited the conquest of the Amazons 
as a triumph of civilization over barbarism. Scholars 
have cited it as a triumph of male dominance over 
female independence.
Some say that the Amazon warriors cut off one 
breast in order to facilitate use of the bow. However, 
there are no known depictions of this phenomenon 
in ancient art.
Amphiaraus  Greek  Known as the seer of Argos, 
he was the brother-in-law of King Adrastus, leader 
of the Seven Against Thebes. Amphiaraus foresaw 
that the war would be a disaster but was reluctantly 
persuaded to join the warriors by his wife, Eriphyle, 
the sister of Adrastus. Amphiaraus would have been 
killed by the Thebans but for the intervention of Zeus. 
He vanished into a cleft in the Earth made by Zeus. 
The spot became famous as a shrine and oracle.
Amphion  Greek  Son of Zeus and Antiope; 
twin brother of Zethus; husband of Niobe. The twin 
brothers captured Thebes and decided to build a wall 
around it. Zethus found the stones and Amphion, 
who had been given a lyre by the messenger god 
Hermes, played so sweetly that the stones assembled 
themselves into a wall. Amphion married Niobe, with 
whom he had many children.
Amphitrite  Greek  A sea goddess; daughter of 
Nereus or Oceanus; wife of Poseidon; mother of 
triton, Rhode, and Benthescyme. She was a female 
personification of the sea.
Amphitrite was not pleased when Poseidon tried 
to woo her. She fled into the Atlas Mountains, in 
North Africa. Poseidon sent delphinus to win her and 
eventually she consented to become Poseidon’s wife. 
She bore him three children.
Amphitrite discovered that Poseidon was a faith-
less husband. One of his lovers was the beautiful 
nymph Scylla, whom Amphitrite changed into a 
terrible monster.
Amphitryon  Greek  Grandson of the Greek 
hero Perseus; husband of Alcmene; father of Iphi-
cles and foster father of the hero Heracles, who was 
the son of Alcmene and the supreme god Zeus. His 
brother, Electryon, was the father of Alcmene, and 
king of Mycenae. The brothers quarreled and Amphi-
tryon accidentally killed Electryon. Amphitryon and 
Alcmene fled to Thebes and were given refuge by 
King Creon. In gratitude, Amphitryon helped to rid 
Thebes of a monster known as the Teumessian vixen, 
a fox that had terrorized the country by demanding 
the sacrifice of a child every month. With the help of 
Zeus and the marvelous hound Laelaps, which could 
catch anything it hunted, Amphitryon rid the country 
of the dreaded fox.
Ananke  Greek  An ancient goddess or personi-
fication of the absolute fate of all things, a force 
that even the great gods could not resist. According 
to some versions of her story, Ananke was formed 
independently from the forces of the cosmos, at the 
same time as Cronus; together they formed all the 
parts of the cosmos. In other stories, Ananke was a 
daughter of Cronus. 
Ananke was the mother of the Moirae or the 
Fates, and also the mother of Ether, Chaos, and Ere-
bus, the primeval forces of nature. She was part of the 
elaborate mythology that developed around Orpheus, 
a mythical hero from Thrace on the northern shores 
of the Aegean Sea, and the traditions of the origins of 
the cosmos that centered on this character.
The Roman goddess Necessitas eventually took 
on the origins and stories of Ananke.
Anaxarete  (Excellent Princess)  Greek  The cen- 
tral villain in a popular love story from Greek mythol-
ogy. Anaxarete was a rich and beautiful but cruel 
maiden who lived in a city on the island of Cyprus. 
10  Amazons

The handsome young man Iphis loved Anaxarete, but 
she only laughed at his pledges of devotion. In final 
desperation, Iphis hanged himself in her doorway. 
Even that act brought no feelings of sadness to Anax-
arete. The citizens of her city, though, were so touched 
by his unfulfilled love and his sad ending that they 
gave him a huge funeral procession. The crowd wound 
through the streets and passed the home of Anaxarete’s 
family. Curious, and believing the crowd was honoring 
her, Anaxarete leaned out of the window. When she 
realized the people were honoring Iphis, she only 
laughed and scoffed at the dead young man.
Aphrodite, goddess of love, watched the pro-
cession, too. She knew of Iphis’s unrequited love 
and shared the pity the crowd felt for him. When 
Aphrodite heard Anaxarete’s callous laughter, the 
goddess grew furious and turned the maiden to stone 
in the very position of leaning out of the window. 
Discovering Anaxarete, the people of Cyprus placed 
the statue in a temple at Salamis, where it stood as a 
reminder of the girl’s cruelty.
Anchises  Greek  A Trojan prince or king loved 
by the goddess Aphrodite, who bore him a son, 
Aeneas. When Anchises boasted that a goddess had 
loved him, the great god Zeus struck him blind or 
lame (stories differ). His son, Aeneas, carried him 
away from the burning city of Troy on his shoulders. 
This story is told in Virgil’s Aeneid and is the subject 
of works of art by Italian artists Giovanni Bernini 
(1598–1680) and Raphael (1483–1520).
Androgeus  Greek  Son of Minos and Pasiphaë; 
brother of Ariadne and Phaedra. Androgeus was a 
great athlete. He beat all his opponents at the olympic 
games in Athens, whereupon the jealous King Aegeus 
had him assassinated. Subsequently, King Minos of 
Crete declared war on Athens.
Andromache  Greek  A touching, tragic figure 
in the Trojan War. She was the daughter of King 
Thebe of Cilicia; wife of the Trojan hero Hector; 
mother of Astyanax. Andromache lost her father and 
brothers at the fall of Troy and was given as booty to 
Neoptolemus. Her son Astyanax was murdered by 
the victorious Greek hero Odysseus. Andromache 
was cruelly treated by Hermione, the wife of Neop-
tolemus, but finally found peace with her fellow Tro-
jan captive, Helenus. Her story is told in Andromache, 
a play by Euripides, and in Homer’s Iliad.
Andromeda  (Ruler of Men)  Greek  The daughter 
of Cepheus and Cassiopeia of Ethiopia, a country 
in northeast Africa; wife of the hero Perseus; mother 
of many sons, including Perses, who is said to have 
founded the land of Persia.
The fates of Andromeda and Perseus became 
entwined. Cassiopeia had boasted of her daughter’s 
beauty, claiming that it was greater than that of the 
sea Nymphs, daughters of the god Poseidon. Greatly 
angered, Poseidon sent a sea monster to ravage 
Ethiopia. Ammon, the Oracle, declared that only 
the sacrifice of Andromeda to the monster could 
appease Poseidon and save the Ethiopians from flood 
and plague, so Andromeda was chained to a rock in 
the sea to await death. She was rescued by Perseus, 
who turned the monster into stone with the head 
of Medusa and claimed Andromeda in marriage. 
The wedding feast was interrupted by the arrival of 
Phineus, brother of Cepheus, to whom Andromeda 
had been promised in marriage. In the ensuing battle, 
Andromeda  11
The hero Perseus rescues Andromeda from her 
seashore captivity in this painting by Flemish artist 
Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640). The painting is now 
in the Museo del Prado in Madrid. 

Perseus again used the Medusa’s head to turn Phineas 
and his soldiers into statues of stone.
The dramatic rescue of Andromeda by Per-
seus inspired many artists, among them Peter Paul 
Rubens (1577–1640), the foremost Flemish painter 
of the 17th century; Titian (c. 1490–1576), a Venetian 
and one of the greatest painters of the Renaissance; 
and Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres (1780–1867), 
a French painter. An ancient fresco still surviving at 
Pompeii (near Naples, Italy) also shows the rescue.
The gods placed, Andromeda, Cassiopeia, and 
Cepheus among the stars as constellations. That 
constellation has been Andromeda for so long that 
some believe the Greeks invented the story to explain 
the stars.
Angerona  Roman  An ancient goddess in Italy 
about whom little is clearly known. Scholars have 
sought since the late 1800s to understand this god-
dess and the statute of her that stood in Rome in 
classical times. 
Most agree that in her earliest form Angerona was 
a goddess of winter, specifically of the winter solstice. 
The people of Rome celebrated her on December 
21, the beginning of winter. It was on this day, people 
believed, that Angerona brought back the sun, for 
on this solstice, daylight hours began to increase and 
nighttime hours began to decrease.
In later years, Angerona became associated with 
secrets and quiet, though scholars today do not agree 
on this interpretation. Because the statue that stood 
in a temple near the Roman Forum showed her 
blindfolded and holding her finger to her mouth, 
some experts say Angerona encourages people to 
be silent and keep secrets. Other experts say that 
interpretation is simply a guess. 
Some passages in the surviving histories of the 
time suggest Angerona was a goddess of fear and 
anguish, particularly as related to illness, though 
scholars today argue that her connection with disease 
is a modern misinterpretation of her name.
Anna Perenna  Roman  An ancient fertility 
goddess, worshiped in a sacred woods north of Rome. 
Anna Perenna is the central deity in several stories 
from Roman mythology.
In the earliest stories, Anna Perenna took on the 
form of an old woman who made and sold cakes to 
starving Romans who had fled to the country to avoid 
political strife in the city. When they returned home, 
these people paid homage to Anna and celebrated in 
her honor.
In another story, she is the sister of Dido, Queen 
of Carthage, whom the Trojan hero Aeneas had 
loved but left on his journey from Troy to Italy. Some 
time after Aeneas had married Lavinia and founded a 
city in her name, Anna Perenna arrived. Lavinia was 
jealous of the newcomer and threatened to kill her. 
Anna fled into the woods where she met Numicius, a 
Roman river god, who carried her off as his wife and 
transformed her into a Nymph.
Her name means both the new year, Anna, and the 
whole year, Perenna, and Romans paid her honor in 
the great New Year’s festival on March 15, the first 
day of the new year in the ancient Roman calendar.
Anticlea  Greek  Daughter of Autolycus; wife 
of Laertes; mother of Odysseus. Autolycus was a 
son of the god Hermes. Anticlea died of grief when 
her son went off to the Trojan War.
Antiope  Greek  Mother of Amphion and Zethus, 
whose father was Zeus; daughter of a prince of the 
city of Thebes or perhaps of the river god Asopus.
Zeus desired Antiope, and, disguised as a Satyr, 
raped her. She became pregnant. Fearing her father, 
Nycteus, Antiope fled Thebes, but, according to 
some stories, Epopeus, king of Sicyon, abducted 
her. In the meantime, Nycteus, in anguish over his 
missing daughter, killed himself after commanding 
his brother, Lycus to either punish or rescue Antiope. 
Lycus attacked Sicyon, rescued Antiope, and began 
the journey back to Thebes. 
On the way, Antiope gave birth to her twin sons. 
Some sources say both were the children of Zeus, 
others say only Amphion was a god and that Zethus 
was the mortal son of Epopeus. Antiope left the 
children on the hillside to die, but shepherds found 
them and raised the boys. 
Antiope then became the slave of Lycus’ wife, 
Dirce, who treated her badly. Eventually, Zeus helped 
Antiope escape. She found her sons, now grown men, 
who avenged her treatment by conquering Thebes, 
and punished Dirce by tying her to the horns of a 
bull. The god Dionysus, angry at the death of Dirce, 
punished Antiope by driving her mad and causing her 
to wander, insane, across Greece. Eventually, she was 
discovered by Phocus, grandson of Sisyphus, who 
cured her then married her.
Antigone  Greek  In Greek mythology, the 
daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta; sister of Eteocles 
and Polynices. Antigone accompanied her blind 
father when he went into exile. Her two brothers 
12  Angerona

killed each other in the war of the Seven Against 
Thebes. King Creon of Thebes forbade the burial of 
the rebel Polynices. Antigone disobeyed the king’s 
order and performed her brother’s burial service 
herself. In one version of the myth, Antigone finally 
hanged herself after Creon ordered her to be buried 
alive. In another version, Antigone was rescued by a 
son of Creon and sent to live among shepherds.
Antigone was one of Sophocles’ greatest plays. The 
tragic heroine appears also in Sophocles’ Oedipus at Colo-
nus, in Aeschylus’ Seven Against Thebes, in Euripides’ 
The Phoenician Women, and in Antigone by Jean Cocteau 
(1889–1963), which has a 20th-century setting.
Aphrodite  (Foam Born)  Greek  Goddess of 
love, beauty, and fertility. One of the 12 Olympian 
Gods; identified with the Roman Venus and, much 
earlier, with the Near Eastern fertility goddesses 
Astarte and Ishtar. Aphrodite was an ancient deity, an 
Earth Mother whose domain embraced all creation, 
vegetable and animal as well as human. She repre-
sented sacred love and marriage as well as sensuality 
and desire. Aphrodite was so beautiful that all men 
who saw her loved her.
The origins of Aphrodite are obscure. She is called 
“Foam Born” in an attempt to make her the offspring 
of Gaia (Earth) and Uranus (Heaven), who was cast 
into the sea after being mutilated by his son, Cronus. 
She was supposed to have emerged from the sea foam 
that had formed around the remains of Uranus.
The myth of Aphrodite as a descendant of the 
Titans probably refers to a goddess who preceded 
the peoples later called Greeks. When the migrating 
tribes settled in Greece, they adopted Aphrodite into 
the Olympian family by making her the daughter of 
Zeus and Dione.
According to Homer, in the Iliad, Aphrodite was the 
daughter of Zeus and Dione. Also according to Homer, 
Aphrodite was married to the smith god, Hephaestus. 
But Aphrodite was faithless and had many lovers.
Antigone leads her father, Oedipus, from Thebes after his banishment from the city. The painting by French art-
ist Charles François Jalabert (1819-1901) is in the Musée des Beaux Arts in Marseilles, France.
aphrodite  13

The Loves of Aphrodite  Aphrodite, goddess of 
love, was married to Hephaestus, but she had many 
other loves, among them Ares, god of war. She bore 
him Phobos (Fear), Deimos (Terror), Harmonia 
(Peace or Concord) and, in some accounts, Eros 
(Love).
Although Hephaestus was a god, he proved him-
self capable of subtle revenge on Aphrodite and Ares 
by snaring them in a skillfully crafted golden net.
Poseidon, god of the sea, fell in love with Aph-
rodite when he saw her entrapped in the golden net. 
With Poseidon, the goddess had two or three sons, 
Rhodus and Herophilus, and, some say, Eryx.
With Hermes, a son of Zeus, Aphrodite bore 
Hermaphroditus and, some say, Eros. With Diony-
sus, god of the vine, another son of Zeus, she bore 
Priapus. With the Trojan mortal Anchises, she bore 
Aeneas.
With another mortal, the beautiful Adonis, Aph-
rodite spent the months of the year that symbolized 
fruitful spring and summer. Some accounts say that 
she bore him a son, Golgos, and a daughter, Beroe. 
From the legend of Aphrodite and Adonis comes the 
word aphrodisiac, meaning a potion or other agent 
that induces love.
Aphrodite was also beloved by Pygmalion, who 
created a statue of her so beautiful that he fell in 
love with it. And there were many other lovers, for 
Aphrodite inspired love in all who saw her.
Aphrodite and Eros  Aphrodite was often 
depicted with the infant god, Eros (Love), who some 
said was her son with Hermes. However, mytholo-
gists believe that Eros was an ancient god, an adult 
rather than a child. He was to become the plump, 
babyish Cupid (his Roman name), companion or son 
of Aphrodite, only in later times.
Aphrodite and Paris  The tale of Aphrodite 
and the young mortal hero Paris is told in Homer’s 
Iliad. Paris was supposed to choose the fairest among 
three Olympian gods: Hera, Athene, and Aphrodite. 
Each goddess offered Paris a bribe. Aphrodite offered 
him the love of the most beautiful woman in the 
world, and Paris awarded Aphrodite a golden apple 
as reward. The beautiful woman turned out to be 
Helen of Troy. The love affair of Paris and Helen 
was the leading cause of the Trojan War.
Aphrodite and Art  Aphrodite was worshiped 
as a great beauty as well as a goddess of fertility. She 
is the subject of some of the world’s art masterpieces, 
in which she is usually known by her Roman name, 
Venus. The most famous statue of her was by the 
Greek Praxiteles (c. 350 b.c.). The original has been 
lost but there is a Roman copy in Athens, and the 
Venus de Milo, at the Louvre, in Paris, France.
Apollo  One of the greatest Olympian Gods and 
the only one to appear with the same name in both 
Greek and Roman mythology. 
In Greek mythology, he was the son of Zeus and 
Leto, brother of Artemis, half brother of Hermes, 
and father of many, including Aristaeus and Ascle-
pius. Apollo had many functions: he was the god of 
poetry, music, archery, prophecy, and healing. Associ-
ated with the care of herds and crops, Apollo was a 
sun god of great antiquity, yet he is represented as an 
ever-youthful god, just and wise and of great beauty. 
He has been the subject of many great paintings and 
statues throughout the ages; perhaps the most famous 
is the Apollo Belvedere, an ancient statue that now 
stands in the Belvedere Gallery at the Vatican.
This marble head of Aphrodite was found in the 
remains of an ancient gathering place in Athens. It 
may be a replica of a statue by the Greek sculptor 
Praxiteles, who worked in the fourth century B.C. 
The head is now in the National Archaeological 
Museum of Athens.
14  Apollo

Apollo was well loved among the gods. Only his 
half brother, Hermes, dared to play a trick on him 
when he stole Apollo’s cattle.
As well as physical beauty, Apollo represented the 
moral excellence that we think of as civilization. His 
cult at Delphi had enormous influence on matters 
of state and religion, as well as on everyday law and 
order. The influence of Apollo at Delphi helped to 
spread tolerance in all social ranks. Apollo was, above 
all, a god of justice, law, and order.
The many and varying functions of Apollo sug-
gest that the god had many personalities derived 
from various origins. Some mythologists say that he 
was a sun god from Asia who merged with a pastoral 
god from the countries north of Greece, known as 
Hyperborea, that is “the Far North.”
The Birth of Apollo  According to the poet 
Hesiod, Apollo was the son of the great god Zeus and 
Leto, the gentle Titan. Hera, the wife of Zeus, was 
jealous of her rival; familiar with the rages of Hera, 
no land would give Leto sanctuary in which to bear 
her child. At last Leto found refuge in the floating 
island of Ortygia, later called Delos, which became 
firmly anchored only after the birth of her first child, 
Artemis. Artemis assisted Leto in the birth of her 
twin brother, Apollo.
Apollo was fed on nectar and ambrosia and 
quickly grew to manhood.
Apollo and Python  Apollo grew to manhood 
very soon after his birth. Supplied with arms by the 
smith god Hephaestus, an expert metalworker, the 
young Apollo set off in search of the serpent Python, 
who had tormented Apollo’s mother, Leto, during her 
homeless wanderings. Apollo tracked down Python 
at Delphi and killed her, thus defiling a sacred place 
with blood. Zeus sent Apollo to be purified at the 
Vale of Tempe. After his purification, Apollo returned 
to Delphi and took the shrine for himself. Python, 
or Pythia, was to be his Oracle. The dramatic battle 
between Apollo and Python was later celebrated in 
the festival Septaria.
The Loves of Apollo  Apollo was one of the 
foremost gods of Olympus and supremely handsome. 
Like all the gods and goddesses, Apollo had many 
loves, not all of them happy. The nymph Daphne 
fled from the god and turned herself into a laurel tree 
rather than submit to him. Apollo made the laurel 
tree his sacred tree and emblem.
With Coronis, Apollo begat Asclepius, god of 
healing and medicine, but Coronis deserted Apollo 
for love of Ischyus. Apollo’s sister, Artemis, killed 
Coronis with her arrows. Apollo snatched the infant 
Asclepius from the funeral pyre and gave him to 
Hermes, or, some say, to Chiron, the Centaur.
Apollo fell in love with Cassandra, daughter of 
King Priam. He conferred on her the gift of proph-
ecy, but Cassandra was untrue to Apollo who then 
breathed a kiss into her mouth that took away her 
powers of persuasion. From then on, no one believed 
the prophecies of Cassandra.
With the nymph Cyrene, Apollo begot Aristaeus, 
who was worshiped as a protector of flocks and crops 
and especially of the art of beekeeping.
Among Apollo’s male loves was Hyacinthus, 
a beautiful youth after whom the spring flower 
hyacinth is named.
Arachne  (Spider)  Greek  The 
daughter 
of 
Idmon of Colophon in Lydia (Asia Minor). Arachne 
was a skillful weaver. Marveling at her work, people 
The god Apollo stands tall and strong in this Roman 
copy, created in the second century A.D., of a Greek 
statue which was made in the fourth century B.C. 
This statue is in the Vatican Museum.  (Photograph 
by Marie-Lan Nyugen.)
Arachne  15

said that she must have been taught by Athene 
herself. Arachne denied this and rashly invited the 
goddess Athene to come and compete with her. 
Athene was annoyed but accepted the invitation. She 
became angry when she could find no fault in the 
maiden’s clever weaving and amusing, if disrespectful, 
depictions of the antics of the gods and goddesses. 
Athene tore the work apart and destroyed the loom. 
Terrified, Arachne tried to hang herself. Athene 
turned Arachne into a spider, doomed to forever 
show off her artful weaving of cobwebs.
This story was told by Ovid in Metamorphoses. 
Some scholars think that the explanation of this myth 
can be found in the commercial rivalry between the 
Athenians, represented by Athene, and the Lydians, 
represented by Arachne, for the export of textiles. 
The spider emblem was frequently found on the seals 
of sea lords and weavers.
Arcadia  Greek  In ancient Greece, the central 
plateau of the Peloponnesus, surrounded by and 
dissected by mountains. It was inhabited mostly by 
shepherds and hunters who worshiped Pan and other 
nature gods.
In the myth of Demeter, the corn goddess turns 
herself into a mare and hides in a herd owned by 
King Oncus of Arcadia. Nevertheless, the amorous 
sea god Poseidon discovers her.
Arcas  (Arctos; Bear)  Greek  Son of Callisto 
and Zeus, married to the Dryad Erato, father of many. 
Arcas was king of Arcadia, an isolated, mountainous 
area in the Peloponnesus peninsula. He had been 
taught his skills by triptolemus, a favorite of the god-
dess Demeter. Arcas taught the Arcadians agriculture 
and attendant arts, such as those of spinning wool.
Arcas was also a great hunter. In one story, he 
almost killed the she-bear Callisto, who was his mother 
in another guise. Zeus, to prevent Arcas from killing 
his own mother, turned Arcas into a bear and set him 
and his mother up in the stars as the Great Bear (Ursa 
Major) and Arcturus (Guardian of the Bear).
Arcturus  (Guardian of the Bear)  Greek  The 
brightest star in the constellation Boötes. It is named 
after Arcas (Bear), who in Greek mythology is the 
Little Bear, son of Callisto (the Great Bear).
Ares  Greek  The god of war; son of Zeus and Hera. 
Eris (Discord) was his sister and constant companion.
Ares was not a popular god. A vicious crowd 
followed him, among them Pain, Panic, Famine, 
and Oblivion. His sons, Phobos (Fear) and Deimos 
(Terror), prepared his chariot. Thus were the horrors 
of war symbolized.
Although usually identified with the Roman god 
of war, Mars, Ares bore little resemblance to the 
noble Mars.
The grisly followers of Ares, Zeus’s hatred of him, 
and the humiliation and defeats that plagued him all 
symbolized the horror that the Athenians felt toward 
Ares, the personification of senseless war and brutal-
ity. For them, war was to be waged only for a good 
and noble reason. For Ares, war did not have to have 
any reason at all for he liked battle and violence for 
their own sakes.
Ares, the Unloved God  Ares, god of war, was 
bloody and brutal. Even his father, Zeus (in Homer’s 
Iliad), declared that he hated his son for his perpetual 
violence and aggression.
Ares was not always successful in battle and was 
often thought of as cowardly and inept. Helped by 
the wisdom of the goddess Athene, Diomedes (1), 
one of the heroes at the siege of Troy, defeated Ares. 
Athene, although a goddess of war and half-sister of 
Ares, despised Ares’s behavior. She wounded him so 
that he was forced to leave the field, bellowing with 
rage and pain. On another occasion, Ares was severely 
wounded by Heracles, with whom he fought in 
defense of his son, Cycnus.
The brother of Ares was Hephaestus, the smith 
god. Hephaestus defeated Ares not in violent battle, 
but by using his subtle cleverness.
Otus and Ephialtes, known as the Aloeids, also 
despised Ares. They managed to imprison him in a 
bronze jar, where he remained trapped for 13 months 
until the god Hermes found him and released him. 
This myth is thought to symbolize a historical 13-
month truce between two warring tribes of ancient 
Greece when warlike tokens of these nations were 
sealed in a bronze jar and kept inside a temple.
Ares and Aphrodite  Ares was not a popular 
god, but Aphrodite, fickle goddess of love, perversely 
favored the warlike god over her gentle husband, 
Hephaestus. Helios (the Sun), who saw everything, 
discovered that Ares and Aphrodite were lovers, and 
informed Hephaestus of this. Hephaestus, famous 
for his skills and artistry in metal-working, created a 
golden net so fine that it was invisible. He placed it on 
the couch where he knew Aphrodite and Ares would 
lie; then he announced that he was going for a few 
days to Lemnos, one of his favorite retreats. As soon as 
he had gone, Aphrodite summoned Ares, and the two 
16  Arcadia

lay upon the couch. Then Hephaestus, with a crowd 
of the Olympian Gods and goddesses, burst in upon 
them. Ares and Aphrodite tried to leap up but became 
hopelessly entangled in the invisible golden net. The 
gods and goddesses delighted in this scene, laughing 
and pointing and making crude remarks. Thus was Ares 
made to look ridiculous to all. It was a subtle revenge 
for Hephaestus. This story is told in Homer’s Odyssey.
Arete  (Virtue)  Greek  The goddess, or perhaps 
only the personification, of virtue or excellence 
of character. She was said to have lived high on a 
mountain, close to the gods themselves.
Arete was depicted as a tall woman standing 
straight and wearing a white robe. Some ancient 
Greek writers suggest that battle and wars were 
fought by men trying to prove their worth in the eyes 
of this minor goddess.
Her counterpart was Kakia (Cacia), the personifi-
cation of vice and weak morals. In the few depictions 
of her in Greek literature, Kakia is plump, vain, and 
self-centered, and strives to entice people away from 
the influence of Arete.
Arethusa (1)  Greek  A Naiad or Nymph of 
fountains and rivers. In one legend, told by Ovid 
in Metamorphoses, the nymph is pursued by the river 
god Alpheus. Arethusa calls to the goddess Artemis 
for help; Artemis turns Arethusa into a fountain at 
Syracuse on the island now called Sicily, where the 
Fontana Arethusa still exists.
Arethusa (2)  Greek  One of the sisters known 
as the Hesperides; either the daughters of Erebus 
(Darkness) and Nyx (Night) or the daughters of Atlas 
and Pleione or Hesperis. Her sisters, those named by 
people writing during the classic age of Greek mythol-
ogy, were Aegle (2), Erytheia, and Hesperia.
Argo  Greek  The ship in which Jason and the 
Argonauts sailed in quest of the Golden Fleece. 
Argus (2), son of Phrixus, built the vessel, with the 
help of the goddess Athene. Within the ship was a 
beam cut from the divine tree at Dodona (an oak or 
a beech), a shrine to the god Zeus and the Dodona 
Oracle. It was said that the beam could help foretell 
the future.
Argonautica  Greek  A major epic poem by 
Apollonius Rhodius (Apollonius of Rhodes) a Greek 
scholar at the Library of Alexandria in Egypt. Argo-
nautica tells in four books the story of Jason’s quest 
for the Golden Fleece, the treachery of Medea, who 
possessed the fleece, and the journey of the Argo-
nauts to return home. It is the best known version 
of the story of Jason and the Argonauts.
Apollonius composed the poem in the 200s b.c. 
and based his story on the works of other Greek poets 
as well as the stories he knew. Apollonius relied on 
the understanding of his audience of the stories of 
Greek myths and legends.
Argonauts  (Sailors of the Argo)  Greek  The 
crew gathered by the hero Jason to sail on his ship, 
the Argo. There were 50 oars and 49 men and one 
woman, Atalanta. It is said that never before or 
since was so gallant a company gathered together. 
Their quest was to capture the Golden Fleece, and 
this they did, after many adventures.
Names of the Argonauts  Many different names 
have been included in the muster roll of the Argo, 
the ship sailed by Jason in his quest for the Golden 
Fleece. The following 50 names are those “given 
by the most trustworthy authorities,” according to 
scholar Robert Graves (1895–1985).
Acastus, son of King Pelias
Actor, son of Deion, the Phocian
Admetus, prince of Pherae
Amphiaraus, the Argive seer
Ancaeus of Samos
Ancaeus of Tegea, son of Poseidon
Argus (2), the builder of the Argo
Ascalaphus, son of Ares
Asterius, a Pelopian
Atalanta of Calydon, the great huntress
Augeias of Elis
Butes of Athens
Caeneus the Lapith
Calais, winged son of Boreas
Canthus the Euboean
Castor, one of the Dioscuri
Cepheus, son of the Arcadian Aleus
Coronis the Lapith
Echion, son of Hermes
Erginus of Miletus
Euphemus of Taenarum
Euryalus, son of Mecisteus, one of the Epigoni
Eurydamus the Dolopian
Heracles of Tiryns, the strongest man who ever 
lived
Hylas, companion to Heracles
Idas, son of Aphareus of Messene
Idmon, the Argive, son of Apollo
Argonauts  17

Iphicles, son of Thestius
Iphitus, brother of King Eurystheus of Mycenae
Jason, the captain
laertes, son of Acrisius the Argive
Lynceus, brother of Idas
Melampus, son of Poseidon
Meleager of Calydon
Mopsus, the Lapith
Naupilus the Argive, son of Poseidon, a noted 
navigator
Oileus, father of the hero Ajax (2)
Orpheus, the poet
Palaemon, son of Hephaestus
Peleus, the myrmidon
Peneleos of Boeotia
Periclymenus, son of Poseidon
Phalerus, the Athenian archer
Phanus, the Cretan son of Dionysus
Poeas, son of Thaumacus the Magnesian
Polydeuces, one of the Dioscuri
Polyphemus, son of Elatus, the Arcadian
Staphylus, brother of Phanus
Tiphys, the helmsman of the Argo
Zetes, brother of Calais
Argos  (Argolis)  A district in Greece, part of 
the northern  Peloponnesus, today known as the 
Argive Plain. For many centuries Argos dominated 
the Peloponnesus, rivaling Athens, Sparta, and 
Corinth. It was known as Hera’s city from the 
magnificent temple built in her honor. In mythology, 
Argos was known as the place where the 50 daughters 
of Danaus killed their bridegrooms, except for 
one, who became the ancestor of Perseus. Another 
descendant of these women was the hero Heracles. 
Agamemnon was the famous king of Argos and 
Mycenae who fought in the Trojan War.
Argus (1)  (Argos)  Greek  A giant with 100 
eyes. He was set by the goddess Hera to watch over 
the maiden Io, who had been transformed into a 
beautiful white heifer by the god Zeus. Zeus sent 
Hermes to rescue Io. Hermes played upon his lute 
and sang songs until all the eyes of Argus closed in 
sleep. Then Hermes slew Argus and set Io free. Hera 
placed the eyes of Argus on the tail of the peacock, 
where they remain to this day. The peacock was 
sacred to Hera.
Argus (2)  (Argos)  Greek  The builder of the 
ship Argo and one of the Argonauts.
Argus (3)  (Argos)  Greek  The faithful old 
dog of Odysseus, who alone recognized his master 
after 20 years of absence.
Ariadne  Greek  Daughter 
of 
Minos 
and 
Pasiphaë of Crete; sister of Androgeus, Phaedra, 
and others.
Ariadne fell in love with the hero Theseus when 
he came to Crete to kill the Minotaur, a monstrous 
creature, half human, half bull, that lived in the tortu-
ous labyrinth. The labyrinth had been invented 
and built by Daedalus so that no one, once inside, 
could find the way out. Ariadne gave Theseus a ball 
of string to trail behind him so that he could follow it 
and escape. After Theseus had done battle and slain 
the dreaded beast, he emerged triumphantly from the 
Labyrinth and carried Ariadne off.
Some stories say that Theseus deserted Ariadne 
on the island of Naxos. Other stories say that it was 
the god Dionysus who commanded Theseus to leave 
because he wanted the beautiful Ariadne for himself. 
Scholars think that the second version of the tale is 
an attempt to make the great hero Theseus less of a 
scoundrel for deserting Ariadne. Still other versions 
of the story say that Ariadne was slain by the goddess 
Artemis; or that she was pregnant and died in child-
birth. All of the different stories seem to indicate that 
part of the original story of Ariadne was lost.
In any case, it is said that Zeus gave her a crown 
and set her among the stars.
Arion  Greek  The swiftest of all horses, possibly 
winged. He was born from the union between Deme-
ter (who changed herself into a mare) and the sea 
god Poseidon, who changed himself into a stallion. 
Arion belonged first to the hero Heracles, and then 
to Adrastus, king of Argos. In the war called the 
seven against Thebes, Adrastus was the only one to 
survive, thanks to the wonders of Arion.
Aristaeus  Greek  An ancient rural deity, native 
to Thessaly. Son of Apollo and the Nymph Cyrene. 
Aristaeus was brought up by the nymphs of the god 
Hermes (half brother of Apollo), who taught him 
beekeeping, cheese-making, and the cultivation of 
olives. Later, the Muses taught him healing, hunting, 
and the care of herds and flocks.
Aristaeus tried to force his attentions on the Dryad 
Eurydice. The gods punished him by destroying his 
bees. Aristaeus sought the advice of Proteus, who 
advised him to sacrifice cattle to the gods. Aristaeus 
followed the counsel of Proteus and was rewarded 
18  Argos

when swarms of bees emerged from the rotting 
corpses of the slain cattle.
Aristaeus was honored as a god in ancient Greece 
because of the great knowledge of his crafts that he 
passed on to humans.
Artemis  Greek  Goddess of the hunt and of 
childbirth and chastity; also associated with the 
moon; daughter of Zeus and Leto; sister of Apollo; 
one of the Olympian gods. Her origins are very 
old, probably derived from the Earth Mother 
mythologies. She is identified with Diana in Roman 
mythology.
Artemis was armed with a bow and a quiver of 
arrows made by the smith god, Hephaestus. Like 
Apollo, she had many sides to her nature—she could 
be wild and destructive with her arrows; she could 
cause deadly disease in animals. Artemis was a deity 
of sudden death. On the other hand, Artemis could be 
benevolent: with ilithya, she was helpful to women in 
childbirth. Like Apollo, Artemis loved music, song, 
and dancing.
Artemis was worshiped throughout Greece, espe-
cially in Arcadia, and also in Crete, Asia Minor, and 
Magna Graecia.
Artemis, the Vengeful One  Artemis was not 
only pure and virginal herself; she punished any of 
her attendant Nymphs who fell in love and she pun-
ished any man who approached her or her nymphs 
with amorous intent.
After Zeus fell in love with Callisto, who bore 
him a son, Arcas, Artemis grew angry at her departure 
from chastity. Artemis changed Callisto into a she-
bear.
Acteon, a hunter, saw Artemis bathing and gazed 
at her with admiration. Outraged, Artemis changed 
Acteon into a stag, then set his own pack of hounds 
upon him; they tore him to pieces.
The Aloeids, two giants who were determined 
to overthrow the Olympian Gods, swore to capture 
both Hera and Artemis. In one legend, Artemis 
turned herself into a white doe and pranced between 
the brothers. The Aloeids aimed their darts at the doe 
and inadvertently killed each other, and thus were 
punished for lusting after the goddesses.
Niobe, the mother of 12 children, was foolish 
enough to boast that she was superior to Leto, the 
mother of Apollo and Artemis, who had borne only 
two children. Enraged, Apollo and Artemis killed all 
Niobe’s children.
When Artemis at last fell in love, it was with 
Orion, another great hunter. One day Orion went 
swimming and swam so far from shore that his head 
looked like a rock in the sea. Jealous of his sister’s love 
for Orion, or perhaps wanting to preserve his sister’s 
chastity, Apollo challenged Artemis to hit the rock 
with her arrow. The arrow of Artemis pierced Orion’s 
head, killing him. Another legend says that Artemis 
sent a scorpion to sting Orion, as a punishment for 
having gazed upon her amorously.
See also “The Birth of Apollo” under Apollo
Artemis (2)  Greek  A prominent leader of the 
Amazons, a mythical race of female warriors, wor-
shiped at Ephesus, in Ionia, part of Asia Minor 
(today’s western Turkey). The temple built to Artemis 
(c. 550 b.c.) was considered one of the Seven Won-
ders of the Ancient World.
Ascanius  Roman  The son of Aeneas and his 
wife, Creusa (2). When Troy fell (see Trojan War), 
Ascanius fled with his parents and his grandfather, 
Anchises. He is said to have founded Alba Longa, a 
city of ancient Latium near Lake Albano, southeast 
of Rome. Since he is also called Iulus or Julus, the 
family of Julius Caesar, the mighty Roman emperor, 
claimed descent from him. The story of Ascanius is 
told by the Latin poet Virgil in the Aeneid.
Asclepius  Greek  God of medicine and healing; 
son of Apollo and Coronis; father of Hygeia and oth-
ers. The Roman spelling of his name is Aesculapius. 
According to legend, Asclepius learned the art of 
healing from Chiron, the wise and gentle Centaur. 
He mastered his craft so well that eventually, it 
was said, Asclepius could raise the dead. The great 
god Zeus, afraid that mere humans might become 
immortal, struck Asclepius with a thunderbolt, but 
then made him a minor god in charge of medicine 
and healing.
The center of his cult was Epidaurus (northeast 
Peloponnesus), but there were many others, includ-
ing Cos and Pergamum, where treatments were given 
to the sick. Snakes, symbols of renewal because of the 
frequent shedding of their skin, to reveal glossy new 
skin underneath, were his emblem, usually depicted 
as twined about a wand called a Caduceus.
Asia Minor  The peninsula at the extreme tip 
of western Asia, usually synonymous with Asian 
Turkey or Anatolia. It is washed by the Black Sea in 
the north, by the Mediterranean in the south, and by 
the Aegean Sea in the west. It was the intersecting 
point between East and West in ancient times: to 
Asia minor  19

the east lay Mesopotamia and China, to the west, 
Europe, especially nearby Greece. It was the site of 
the ancient kingdoms of Lydia and Phrygia. At the 
entrance to the Dardanelles, the sea passage that led 
from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea, stood the 
city of Troy.
Asteria  (Astrios; Of the stars)  Greek  A sec-
ond-generation Titan goddess; daughter of Coeus 
and his sister Phoebe; mother with the Titan Perses 
of the goddess Hecate. Asteria was the goddess of 
prophecy, or night dreams, and of communication 
with the spirits of the dead (necromancy).
After the Olympian Gods defeated the Titans, 
Asteria was not sent to Tartarus, as were most of the 
Titans. Instead, Zeus, the greatest of the Olympians, 
pursued her, but she resisted his advances. To hide, 
she changed herself into a quail, then threw herself 
into the sea. Some say she became the island that was 
later known as Delos, the island where her sister, 
Leto, came to give birth to her twins, Apollo and 
Artemis (1).
Asterion  (Asterius; Starry)  Greek  King of 
Crete who married Europa and adopted her three 
sons: Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon.
Astraea  (Astria; Starry night)  Greek  The 
virgin goddess of justice and fairness; daughter of 
Zeus and Themis, who was also a goddess of justice. 
When her father brought the gods to Earth to 
dwell among mankind, Astraea often walked through 
towns and cities, smiling at people, helping them to 
treat each other well. After Zeus, frustrated with how 
poorly people treated the gods and themselves, took 
the gods back up to the heavens, Astraea lingered 
behind, always hopeful.
Eventually, though, as people became more evil 
and meaner to each other and stopped listening to her, 
Astraea, too, rose up to the heavens where she sat at 
her mother’s right hand, still watching mankind, still 
trying to help them be just and fair. Some sources say 
Zeus transformed Astraea into the constellation Virgo, 
with the famous scales she always carried placed next 
to her in the sky as the constellation Libra.
Some modern experts equate Astraea with Dike, 
the personification of justice, while others see these 
as two separate beings in Greek literature and his-
tory. Also, a few writers from the classical period 
say that Astraea was the daughter of the Titans 
Astraeus and Eos.
Astraeus  (Starry)  Greek  A second-generation 
Titan god and father of the winds and the stars. His 
wife was Eos, goddess of the dawn. Astraeus was the 
son of the Titans Crius and Eurybia.
Atalanta  Greek  A renowned huntress, daugh-
ter of Iasus, king of Arcadia, and Clymene. Disap-
pointed at the birth of a daughter, Iasus put the infant 
on Mount Parnassus and left her to die. (This was a 
common fate for female infants in ancient Greece.) 
Artemis, goddess of the hunt, sent a she-bear to 
suckle the baby. The child was then reared by a band 
of hunters who found her on the mountainside.
Her hunting skills were so great that Atalanta 
dared to join the all-male group of hunters who were 
going after the Calydonian Boar at the request of 
Meleager, prince of Calydon. Atalanta scored the 
first thrust at the ferocious boar. Meleager killed 
the boar and presented its coveted hide and tusks to 
Atalanta, thus causing anger and strife among the 
men. (See Calydonian Boar hunt.)
Now that she was famous, King Iasus recognized 
Atalanta as his daughter. He insisted that she must 
marry. Atalanta, having been warned by an Oracle 
that she would find no happiness in marriage, set a 
condition on her marriage. Her suitor must be able to 
beat her in a foot-race, or else die. Many tried to win 
her but failed and died. Finally Melanion, a prince 
from Arcadia, sought the help of Aphrodite, goddess 
of love. She gave him three golden apples that he 
dropped, one at a time, throughout the race. Atalanta 
could not resist picking them up and lost the race. 
Atalanta bore Melanion a son, Parthenonpaeus.
In some versions of this legend it is said that 
Atalanta and Melanion were turned into lions by 
Aphrodite and forced to pull the chariot of Cybele, a 
goddess of Earth and nature.
It is said that Atalanta was one of the Argonauts, 
a fabled crew of sailors who sought the Golden 
Fleece.
Athamas  Greek  One of the sons of Aeolus; 
brother of Sisyphus and Salmoneus; king of Orcho-
menus in Boeotia. With Nephele he had two sons, 
Phrixus and Leucon, and a daughter, Helle.
Athamas tired of the phantomlike Nephele and 
took Ino, daughter of Cadmus, to be his second wife. 
It was this marriage and the subsequent flight of 
Phrixus and Helle that brought about (a generation 
later) Jason’s quest for the Golden Fleece, for the 
20  Asteria

two youngsters had fled from Boeotia on the back of 
a winged ram that bore a Golden Fleece.
Athamas and Ino looked after the infant Dio-
nysus, son of Zeus and Semele. For this they 
earned the gratitude of Zeus but also the wrath of 
his wife, Hera, who visited madness upon Athamas 
and Ino.
Athamas and Ino had two sons, Learchus and 
Melicertes. In a fit of madness, Athamas killed 
Learchus and ate his still-warm flesh. Stricken with 
grief, Athamas left his kingdom and wandered from 
country to country. After many years, he founded 
a city called Alos, in Epirus, an ancient country of 
Greece, on the Ionian Sea.
The conflict between the two wives of Athamas, 
Nephele (made by Zeus in the likeness of Hera) and 
Ino, may represent the conflict between early Ionian 
farmers (who worshiped the corn goddess) and later 
Aeolian invaders, who reared sheep and worshiped 
the thunder god Aeolus, represented by the cloudlike 
Nephele.
Athene  (Athena)  Greek  Daughter of Zeus 
and Metis. One of the most important Olympian 
gods. Identified with Minerva by the Romans.
Athene was a deity of many different functions 
and attributes. On the one hand, she was a goddess 
of war, the female counterpart of Ares. However, she 
Athene  21
The goddess Athena hovers behind Prometheus as the Titan passes fire to humans, an act for which he was 
later punished. The scene was painted in 1802 by Jean-Simon Berthélemy (1743-1811) in a ceiling mural in 
the Louvre in Paris.  (Photograph by Marie-Lan Nyugen. Used under a Creative Commons license.)

was also associated with peace and compassion. She 
was a patron of the arts and crafts, especially spinning 
and weaving (see Arachne); a patron of cities, notably 
Athens, which was named after her; and a goddess 
of wisdom.
The cult of Athene went back to the Cretan 
civilization, which predated that of classical Greece 
by about 1,500 years. In Crete and Mycenae, she 
was an Earth goddess. However, the Athenians firmly 
claimed her as their own, and dedicated the Parthe-
non, the temple on the Acropolis in Athens, to her. 
Athens acknowledged Athene as the ancestor of their 
first king, Erichthonius (1).
Athene appears in innumerable myths, but none 
better displays her unique intellectual qualities than 
her role in the Odyssey as the constant friend and 
adviser of the clever and imaginative Odysseus. 
She also offered help to heroes, such as Jason and 
Diomedes (1). Other myths associated with Athene 
include those of Bellerophon; Perseus and the 
Medusa; Argus and the ship Argo; Cadmus and the 
dragon’s teeth; and heroes Heracles, Diomedes (2), 
and Tydeus.
The Birth of Athene  There are many different 
stories about the birth and parentage of Athene. In 
the most familiar story, she sprang fully armed from 
the head of Zeus when Hephaestus split it open with 
an ax. Zeus had previously swallowed his consort, 
Metis, on learning that she would soon bear a child 
who would rule the gods. Metis was renowned for her 
wisdom. The myth may be a way of saying that when 
Zeus came to power he absorbed wisdom (Metis), and 
from this wisdom came the knowledge from which 
the arts (Athene) developed. This myth in some 
tellings develops the story of Zeus having violent 
headaches that made him howl with pain and rage. 
Hermes found him on the banks of the Triton River 
and summoned Hephaestus to help relieve his pain.
In Crete, they said that the goddess Athene had 
been hidden in a cloud and that by striking the cloud 
with his head, Zeus had caused Athene to emerge. 
This event was supposed to have happened beside a 
stream called the Triton.
According to the Pelasgians (prehistoric peoples 
inhabiting Mediterranean lands), Athene was born 
beside the lake or river Triton, and nurtured by 
three Nymphs. As a girl, Athene accidentally killed 
her playmate, Pallas. In a token of her grief, Athene 
set the nymph’s name before her own, and is often 
known as Pallas Athene. This legend probably dates 
to pre-Hellenic times.
Athene and Poseidon  In this myth, Athene 
challenges the sea god Poseidon over who should 
reign over Athens. Zeus judged Athene the winner 
because she bestowed upon Athens the olive tree, 
while Poseidon produced only a salty stream. The 
rivalry for the possession of Athens may have been 
a folk memory of the collision between new people 
(migrants) with their new gods, and the ancient 
people (symbolized by Athene, Earth goddess). The 
triumph of the ancient Earth Mother figure over 
the male god Poseidon shows that the myth goes 
back to archaic times, long before the Hellenes 
(Greeks) and other migrants arrived on the peninsula 
(the Peloponnesus), bringing with them a belief in 
dominant male gods.
Athens  Greek  Capital of modern Greece 
situated in Attica. It was named after the god-
dess Athene. Athens was inhabited even before the 
Bronze Age (2000–1000 b.c.). It is the site of many 
architectural and archaeological wonders, such as the 
Acropolis, an ancient fortress, and the Parthenon, one 
of many temples surviving from antiquity. Athens was 
(and is) the cultural center of the Greek world.
Atlas  Greek  A Titan, the son of Iapetus and 
Clymene. He was the leader of the Titans in their 
battle against the Olympian Gods. (See The War with 
the Titans, under Zeus.) The Titans were defeated 
and all but Atlas were confined to Tartarus, a 
section of the Underworld. Atlas’s punishment 
was to carry the sky upon his shoulders throughout 
eternity.
During one of his 12 famous labors, the great hero 
Heracles took the burden from the shoulders of 
Atlas so that the Titan could fetch for him the golden 
apples of the Hesperides. When Atlas returned, 
Heracles tricked him into taking back the weight 
of the heavens. In another myth, the hero Perseus 
turned the Titan into stone by showing him the head 
of Medusa. Because of his gigantic size, the petrified 
Atlas became a mountain range.
Atreus and Thyestes  Greek  The sons of 
Pelops and Hippodameia. The Pelops family, of 
which they were a part, was doomed to tragedy 
and bloodshed through the generations until the 
fall of Mycenae and the death of their descendants, 
Agamemnon and Menelaus. The stories concerning 
the tragedies of the house of Pelops are sometimes 
called the Atreids, after Atreus. One of the stories 
tells how Atreus became king of Mycenae.
22  athens

The Golden Fleece  The people of Mycenae 
had been advised by an Oracle to choose a ruler 
from the house of Pelops. They considered Atreus 
and Thyestes, the sons of Pelops and Hippodameia. 
The brothers had been rivals since childhood.
Atreus laid claim to the throne, being the older 
brother and also the owner of the lamb with the 
Golden Fleece that had been given to the brothers 
by the god Hermes. Atreus sacrificed the lamb to the 
gods but kept the valuable fleece for himself.
Thyestes then persuaded Aerope, the wife of 
Atreus, to steal the Golden Fleece for him. Because 
he possessed the valuable fleece, the elders of Myce-
nae chose Thyestes as their ruler, but Zeus revealed 
to them that Thyestes had obtained the fleece by 
treachery. Thyestes fled in terror of punishment, 
leaving his home and children behind. The throne of 
Mycenae was awarded to Atreus.
Not content with his victory, Atreus plotted 
revenge on his brother. He invited his brother back 
from exile, pretending forgiveness, and served him 
a banquet that consisted of Thyestes’ own children. 
When he found out what he had eaten, Thyestes went 
mad with grief. He threw a curse upon the house of 
Atreus, thus compounding the one already laid upon 
it by the charioteer Myrtilus, who had been tricked 
by Pelops. The children of Atreus, Agamemnon and 
Menelaus, would suffer greatly from these curses.
Thyestes then consulted an oracle and was advised 
to beget a child upon his own daughter, Pelopia, the 
only one not cooked in the stew served up by Atreus. 
Thyestes, in disguise, seduced his daughter, who 
managed to wrest his sword from him. Years later, 
when Thyestes was a captive of Atreus, a boy of 
seven appeared before him bearing a sword. Thy-
estes recognized the sword as his own, and the boy, 
Aegisthus, as his son with Pelopia. Aegisthus, upon 
learning the truth of his ancestry, was persuaded to 
acknowledge Thyestes as his true father and to turn 
the sword upon Atreus.
Thyestes then reigned as king of Mycenae, with 
Aegisthus as his heir. But this being the accursed 
house of Pelops, Agamemnon (the eldest son of 
Atreus) drove Thyestes out of Mycenae and deposed 
Aegisthus. Only at the death of Aegisthus and Cly-
temnestra were the Furies and Fates satisfied. They 
removed the curses, stopping the atrocities of murder 
and incest that had plagued the house of Pelops and 
of Atreus.
Attica  Greek  A triangular area at the eastern 
end of central Greece. Its capital is Athens.
Attis  Greek  A Phrygian vegetation god, the 
beloved of the great goddess Cybele. Attis was born 
of a virgin mother, Nana, by springing from a ripe 
almond or pomegranate that she had placed on her 
bosom. As a young man, he was beloved by Cybele, 
but Attis reneged on his vows to the goddess and 
fell in love with the daughter of a river god. In some 
accounts, Cybele struck Attis in jealous anger, and 
in the ensuing frenzy Attis wounded himself and 
bled to death, whereupon Cybele (or Zeus) turned 
him into a pine tree. Around the tree grew masses of 
violets, nourished by his blood. According to another 
tradition, Zeus set a wild boar upon Attis, and Attis 
was gored to death.
In any case, Attis went to the Underworld. 
All through the dark months of winter, Attis was 
mourned. Then, in the spring he returned to the 
Earth and was worshiped, only to be sacrificed again 
at the end of the season.
In ancient times, the birth, death, and resurrection 
of Attis were celebrated with wild music and bloody 
rituals in the shrines sacred to Cybele. The cult 
flourished in Rome, where Attis was regarded as a 
supreme deity.
The myth of Attis, like that of Adonis, is plainly 
the development of an ancient fertility festival that 
celebrated the corn god, born anew each year, then 
killed and planted underground, only to reappear the 
following spring.
Aurora  (Dawn)  Roman  The Latin word for 
“dawn” and the name the Romans gave to Eos, 
who was the Greek goddess of that time of day. 
Aurora’s history in Italy may include early Etruscan 
influences, but this goddess appears to have had no 
following in Rome before the arrival of the Greek 
religions.
Aurora returned the gift of sight to the giant god 
Orion after he traveled to the dawn on the advice of 
an Oracle.
The bands of light that can be seen in the 
night sky of far northern and far southern latitudes 
when electrically charged particles hit the Earth’s 
atmosphere take their name from this goddess. The 
aurora borealis are the northern lights and the aurora 
australis are the southern lights.
Autolycus  Greek  Son of the god Hermes and 
Chione, described by Ovid as a “wily brat”; father, 
with Amphithea, of Anticlea, who was the mother 
of Odysseus. 
Autolycus  23

Autolycus was known as a master thief and an 
expert liar. He would steal goats and sheep and offer 
them to Hermes as sacrifices, a tribute which the god 
then rewarded. Hermes gave his son the ability to 
transform objects to help disguise them. Autolycus 
would change the color of cattle, or put horns on 
animals that had none or remove horns from horned 
animals. He could also, some say, make himself and 
the things he stole invisible. 
In one story, he stole cattle from his neighbor, 
Sisyphus, by changing their spots. At first Sisyphus 
could not understand how his herd could be shrink-
ing, but since he never saw the cattle wandering off, 
he decided to carve a mark in the hooves of the cattle 
he still had. The next time Autolycus came to steal 
cattle, he changed their color but not their hooves and 
Sisyphus caught the thief. In revenge, Sisyphus slept 
with Anticlea shortly before she married Laertes, and 
therefore some say he is the father of Odysseus. 
Autolycus is said to have taught the hero Heracles 
to wrestle and to have joined Jason and become one 
of the Argonauts. Some sources, however, say this 
Autolycus came from Thessaly and was not the son 
of Hermes.
24  Autolycus

25
B
8
Bacchanalia  Roman  The Latin name for the 
orgiastic rites of Bacchus (see Dionysus). The 
excesses of drunken and violent behavior of the 
people who followed this cult led to a senatorial 
decree banning them in Italy in 186 b.c. In spite of 
severe penalties, people continued to celebrate these 
rites for centuries. Numerous paintings depict the 
bacchanalia; among the most famous are those by 
Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens (1577–1640) and 
French painter Nicolas Poussin (1594–1665).
Bacchants  (Bacchantes)  Roman  The women 
(also called Maenads) who followed the god Diony-
sus. In their ritual orgies, the Bacchants were said 
to sacrifice wild animals and humans, tearing them 
apart and eating their flesh. The Bacchae, a tragedy by 
Euripides, deals with the cult of the Bacchae.
Bacche  Greek  One of the five Nymphs who 
looked after the infant Dionysus on Mount Nysa. The 
other nymphs were Macris, Nysa, Erato, and Bromie. 
Nymphs celebrate a Bacchanalia, or wild party in honor of the god Bacchus, in front of a bust of the god Pan in 
this 1635 work by French painter Nicolas Poussin (1594-1665). It is located in the National Gallery in London.

The Italian painter Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio (1571-1610) painted his vision of Bacchus, the Roman 
god of wine and excess, in the late 1500s. The painting hangs in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, Italy.
26  Bacchus

Collectively they were called the Bacchants; later their 
name was used to describe followers of Dionysus.
In gratitude for the nymphs’ service in rearing 
Dionysus, Zeus placed their images among the stars, 
naming them the Hyades, a cluster of stars in the 
constellation Taurus.
Bacchus  Roman  The name for the Greek god 
Dionysus. He was also known as Liber. Dionysian 
religion spread across Italy in the second century b.c., 
causing alarm to the Romans. The rites were sup-
pressed in 186 b.c., but the cult of Bacchus continued 
for many years.
Bacchus was portrayed by many artists, including 
the Italian painter Caravaggio (1571–1610), who por-
trayed him in The Young Bacchus as a sensual youth, 
the god of wine and revelry.
Roman Bacchanalia were festivals in honor of 
Bacchus, characterized by wild and drunken revelry.
Bellerophon  Greek  Son of the Corinthian 
king Glaucus (2); grandson of Sisyphus. In one 
story, Bellerophon, a very handsome young man 
loved by many women, is sent on a seemingly impos-
sible mission to kill the Chimera, a fire-breathing 
monster with the head of a lion, the body of a goat, 
and a serpent’s tail. The seer Polyeidus advises the 
young hero to capture the winged horse, Pegasus. 
Bellerophon succeeds, with the help of the goddess 
Athene, who gives him a golden bridle. Pegasus and 
Bellerophon kill the monster.
Bellerophon and his fabulous horse have many 
adventures, but the young man makes a mistake when 
he decides to ride Pegasus up to Olympus, the home 
of the gods. Stung by a gadfly sent by Zeus, Pegasus 
throws his rider and Bellerophon falls to Earth. He 
spends the rest of his life as a cripple and an outcast.
Bellona  (War)  Roman  The goddess of war, pro- 
minent in ancient Rome from the 300s b.c., but likely 
originally a goddess of the Sabines, a neighboring 
people who eventually became part of the Roman 
culture.
In the earliest references to Bellona, she appears to 
be a personification of powerful force and determina-
tion, the force needed to lead an army into a successful 
battle and war. During the early years of the Roman 
Republic, Bellona was recognized as a powerful deity, 
known to be fearsome and unrelenting against her 
enemies. Some Roman historians and poets described 
her as having snakes for hair, and carrying a bloody 
whip in one hand and a lance in the other. 
Bellona was considered a companion, lover, or 
wife of the war god Mars. Eventually, as Greek 
mythology gained influence in Rome and Italy, her 
traits and powers merged with those of Enyo, the 
Greek goddess of war, a companion of Ares, the 
Greek god of war. 
In 296 b.c., a military leader of the Roman Repub-
lic, Appius Claudius Caecus, vowed to build a temple 
honoring Bellona and thanking her for her support 
in defeating the Etruscans, a people who lived to the 
north of Rome. He built the temple outside of the 
city proper, so the goddess could help Rome fend off 
invaders. Outside stood a pillar. In memory of Bel-
lona, and to summon her help, Roman leaders threw 
a lance over the pillar as a formal declaration of war 
against an enemy.
Bia  (Force)  Greek  The personification of bodily 
force; a demigod or lesser goddess; daughter of the 
Titan Pallas  and the water Nymph Styx; sister of 
Nike (Victory), Cratus (Strength), and Zelus (Zeal).
When their mother sided with Zeus in his great 
battle against his father, Cronus, and the Titans, Styx 
brought Bia, Nike, Cratus, and Zelus into service with 
her, though their father was a Titan. After that war, 
the sisters and brothers, often portrayed as winged 
beings, lived with Zeus and stood beside his throne, 
fulfilling his commands. 
With her brother Cratus, Bia received the assign-
ment to carry out the punishment of Prometheus, the 
god who brought fire to humans. They chained him to a 
rock high on a mountain and each day a vulture plucked 
at his liver and each night the organ grew back.
Bia’s Roman equivalent was the goddess, Vis, a 
name that appears to be a mere translation.
Boeotia  An ancient region of central Greece 
north of Attica and west of Megara and the Gulf of 
Corinth. The early inhabitants were from Thessaly. 
The city of Thebes dominated the region. Delphi, the 
most celebrated Oracle of antiquity, had her abode 
in Boeotia, on Mount Parnassus. Mount Helicon, 
sacred to the god Apollo, was home to the nine 
Muses. It was from Boeotia that the children of King 
Athamas fled, leading to the quest for the Golden 
Fleece. See Jason and the Argonauts under Jason.
Bona Dea  (The good goddess)  Roman  A prom- 
inent goddess of women, ultimately seen as a version 
of Mother Earth. 
The goddess was known for her influence over 
good health, fertility, and fecundity, which is the abil-
bona  dea  27

ity to have many offspring. People called upon Bona 
Dea to influence these aspects of life in agriculture 
and in the family. Bona Dea also brought strength to 
slaves and was a goddess of freed slaves. 
Some historians and poets equated her with the 
goddess Fauna, which would have made Bona Dea 
the sister or daughter of the god of fertility, Faunus. 
In this role, she was also known as Fenta Fatua.
Bona Dea was honored in a ceremony in early 
December, where the female head of a household 
would gather the other women of the family and they 
would close themselves in a room, away from the 
men, where they would conduct the ritual.
A temple to the goddess stood on the Aventine 
Hill. Here, Vestal Virgins worshipped Bona Dea 
and in May, a special priestess offered sacrifices to her 
for the protection and service she would provide to 
the state of Rome. Men were not allowed to partici-
pate in these services.
Boreas  Greek  The North wind, son of the 
dawn goddess, Eos, and the Titan Astreus. He was 
the father of the fleet footed Calais and Zetes, who 
sailed with Jason and the Argonauts.
Briseis  (Hippodaemia)  Greek  The daughter of 
a Trojan priest, Briseus. A captive and lover of the 
Greek hero Achilles, she was stolen from him by 
Agamemnon, the leader of the Greek army, by an 
act of trickery. Furious, Achilles withdrew his troops 
from the battle (see Trojan War), causing the Greeks 
to lose ground to the Trojans. These acts marked the 
beginning of Homer’s Iliad, his great epic about the 
Trojan War.
Britomartis  (Sweet Virgin)  Greek  An an-cient 
Cretan deity, later said to be a daughter of the god 
Zeus. A huntress, Britomartis pursued wild beasts in 
the forests of Crete. King Minos of Crete fell in love 
with her and pursued her for nine months though she 
always fled to avoid his advances. Finally Britomartis 
flung herself off a cliff into the sea, but fishermen 
caught her in a net and rescued her. She escaped to the 
island of Aegina, where she was given the name Dic-
tynna (Lady of the Nets). The goddess Artemis (also 
a virgin huntress) rewarded her chastity by making 
her immortal. Legends say that Britomartis appears at 
night to navigators to guide them. In Greek mythology, 
Dictynna-Britomartis is called the Cretan Artemis.
bull  A common animal featured in Greek and 
Roman mythology. 
Bulls were sacred to Zeus, the supreme Olympian 
God. He turned himself into a snow-white bull to 
enchant Europa, the daughter of the king of Phoe-
nicia. Zeus had fallen in love with the maiden and he 
carried her away in his disguise.
The vicious monster of Crete, known as the 
Minotaur, was said to have the body of a man but 
the head of a bull. He consumed the young Athenians 
brought to him as sacrifices until the hero Theseus 
killed the monster.
In Roman mythology, Mars, a god of war, was 
known as the “bull god” and often portrayed as hav-
ing the ears and horns of a bull.
Ancient artists from Greece and Etruria, a 
region in north-central Italy, often painted bulls 
on pottery. The bull was a powerful symbol for the 
farming societies that preceded the development of 
the cities of Athens and Rome. People commonly 
sacrificed bulls to the gods and goddesses. They also 
used bulls as a way to torture other people.
The Sumerian word for bull was taurus. The 
Greeks used this as a surname, or last name, for some 
of their gods. Poseidon, for example, was given the 
last name of Taureus because he gave green pastures 
to bulls. The constellation Taurus is the second sign 
of the zodiac.
28  Boreas

29
C
8
Cacus (1)  Greek  A halfhuman lesser god, a 
maneating ogre, the son of Hephaestus.
Cacus (2)  Roman  First an early god of the 
people of Etruria, perhaps a household god of the 
hearth, or a Penate. In his earliest representations, 
Cacus was a beautiful young man, a shepherd, and 
singer with the gift of seeing into the future. His 
image survives on an early Etruscan mirror made of 
bronze.
Over time and in various stories, Cacus was also the 
villain in the Roman story of Hercules’ adventures 
with the cattle of Geryon. Two important Roman 
poets portray Cacus differently as they tell the story 
of Cacus’s theft of the cattle as Hercules rested near a 
river. According to Livy, Cacus, a local shepherd, was 
a strong, fierce man. According to Virgil, Cacus was a 
dangerous, evil monster who ate humans and littered 
his cave with their skulls and bones. In both versions, 
Hercules kills Cacus while rescuing the cattle. The 
traditional site of this conflict became Rome’s famous 
cattle market, the forum Boarium.
In another story, Cacus was the slave of King 
Evander. Cacus stole the sheep of a Greek colonist.
Cadmus  (From the East)  Greek  The founder 
of the city of Thebes in Boeotia. He was the son of 
King Agenor and Telephassa; brother of Europa, 
Cilix, and Phoenix; married Harmonia; father of 
Ino, Agave, Antonoë, and Semele (daughters), and 
Polydorus (a son). After Zeus, disguised as a white 
bull, carried off Europa, Agenor sent his three sons 
to search for her, warning them not to return home 
without their sister. Not being able to find Europa, 
each of the brothers settled down elsewhere. Cad-
mus, on the advice of the Delphic Oracle, eventually 
founded Thebes and married Harmonia.
Cadmus and the Delphic Oracle  When 
Cadmus searched for his sister after she had been 
stolen away by a white bull, he and a few companions 
crossed the sea to Delphi to consult the Oracle who 
resided there. The pythoness-oracle told Cadmus 
that he would found a city, and that he should give up 
the search for his sister and follow the tracks of a cow 
that would show him where to build the city. After a 
battle with a dragon and years of slavery under the 
war god Ares, Cadmus established Thebes.
Cadmus and the Dragon  Cadmus, with a few 
companions, followed a cow that had moon-shaped 
markings on its head. The cow went deep into 
Boeotia before she rested. Cadmus knew that her 
resting place was to be the site of the citadel, or 
fortress, of the city that the oracle had told him 
he would found. He decided to sacrifice the cow 
to Athene, goddess of wisdom. He sent his com-
panions to get some purifying water from a nearby 
spring. A dragon, the guardian of the spring, killed 
them all before Cadmus could reach them. Cadmus 
crushed the dragon’s head with a rock. He sacrificed 
the cow and Athene rewarded him a visit. She told 
him to pull out the dragon’s teeth and plant them 
in the ground. Cadmus did this, and in a very short 
time a host of fully armed men sprang up eager to 
fight, for the dragon was sacred to Ares, the god 
who loved to fight. The men were called the Spartoi 
(Sown Men).
Cadmus threw a stone into the midst of the Spar-
toi and at once the men started to attack each other, 
bellowing, until all but five were dead.
Ares was angry with Cadmus for killing his 
serpent-dragon and a divine court sentenced Cadmus 
to become the slave of Ares for “a Great Year,” which 
may mean as much as eight years.
Cadmus Builds the Citadel  Cadmus served 
many years of slavery under Ares, who was angry 
because Cadmus had killed one of his dragons. When 
the term of bondage ended, Cadmus and the Spartoi 
(the warriors born from the dragon’s teeth) built the 

great citadel, or acropolis, called Cadmea in honor of 
Cadmus. Around the fortress rose Thebes. The Spar-
toi were to be the ancestors of the Theban nobility.
Cadmus Marries Harmonia  After Cadmus 
founded Thebes, he married Harmonia, the daughter 
of Ares and Aphrodite. This was the first wedding 
of mortal beings ever attended by all 12 of the 
Olympian Gods. Cadmus had 12 golden thrones set 
up for them in his house. All the gods brought gifts: 
Aphrodite gave Harmonia a golden necklace made by 
Hephaestus that would make her irresistibly beauti-
ful; Athene gave her a golden robe that would make 
her wise; Hermes gave her a lyre; and all the gods 
blessed Harmonia.
Cadmus and Harmonia had four daughters; Ino, 
Agave, Antonoë, and Semele, and a son, Polydorus.
In their old age, the royal house of Thebes was 
destroyed and Cadmus and Harmonia made their 
way to Illyria, an ancient region of the Balkan 
Peninsula, generally taken to mean the Adriatic Coast 
north of Albania and west of the Dinaric Alps. There 
they eventually turned into serpents.
Cadmus and the Alphabet  Cadmus, founder 
of Thebes, is said to have introduced the alphabet, 
and therefore writing, into Greece from his native 
Phoenicia. It is known that early Greek alphabets 
were derived from the Phoenician alphabet.
Caduceus  Greek  The wingtopped staff with 
two snakes winding around it, carried by Hermes 
and, in Roman mythology, Mercury. Two snakes 
intertwined is an ancient symbol, associated since 
Babylonian times (third millennium b.c.) with fertil-
ity, wisdom, and healing. Greek heralds and ambas-
sadors carried this staff as a symbol of peace and 
neutrality. 
In later times, the staff became the emblem of 
Asclepius, god of healing. Today the caduceus is the 
insignia of the medical profession in many countries, 
including the United States and Great Britain.
Calchas  Greek  The sinister seer who proph-
esied doom throughout Homer’s Iliad. He was a 
priest of Apollo and was called the son of Thestor. 
Calchas accompanied the Achaeans (Greeks) on their 
expedition to Troy during the Trojan War. It was 
Calchas who advised Agamemnon to sacrifice his 
daughter Iphigenia to gain fair winds for the expedi-
tion to Troy, and it was Calchas who asserted that 
there would be no victory for the Greeks without the 
help of Achilles.
Calliope  (Beautiful Voice)  Greek  One of the 
Muses, generally considered as the first and most 
important. Calliope was the patron of epic (heroic) 
stories and poems. She was the daughter of Mne-
mosyne and Zeus and, some say, the mother of 
Orpheus. She is portrayed in art with a tablet and 
stylus and sometimes with a trumpet.
Callirhoë  Greek  Daughter of Oeneus, king of 
Calydon. Callirhoë married Alcmaeon, not knowing 
that he was already married to Arsinoë, a princess 
of Arcadia. However, Callirhoë learned about the 
fabulous treasure of Harmonia, a necklace and a 
robe, that Alcmaeon had inherited from his greedy 
mother, Eriphyle. As Alcmaeon’s wife, Callirhoë 
demanded that the treasure be given to her.
Callisto  Greek  The handmaiden of the god-
dess Artemis and the lover of the god Zeus, with 
whom she bore a child, Arcas, the ancestor of 
the Arcadians. Artemis, angry at Callisto’s loss of 
virginity, changed her into a she-bear. One day, as 
the grown-up Arcas was hunting in the woods, he 
saw the she-bear and was about to kill her. Zeus, to 
prevent the young man from killing his own mother, 
changed them both into stars. Callisto became Ursa 
Major, the Great Bear. Arcas became Arcturus, 
Guardian of the Bear.
Calydon  A town of Aetolia, in western Greece. 
In Greek myth, it was founded by Aetolus and was 
the site of the Calydonian Boar Hunt.
Calydonian Boar Hunt  Greek  The boar 
was a ferocious creature sent by the goddess Artemis 
to ravage Calydon, an ancient city in Aetolia, in 
western Greece. Oeneus, the king of Calydon, 
had offended the goddess by failing to offer her 
proper sacrifices. She sent the boar as punishment. 
Meleager, the son of Oeneus, sought to kill the 
boar. He sent messengers far and wide asking princes 
and sportsmen to come to his aid. Among those that 
came were the hero of Athens, Theseus; his friend 
Peirithous; Jason; and Atalanta. Atalanta, the only 
woman in the hunt, was the first to wound the boar, 
which was finally killed by Meleager. He presented 
the boar’s hide to Atalanta, thus causing anger and 
quarrels among the men.
The Calydonian Boar Hunt is a heroic saga that 
first appears in Homer’s Iliad.
30  Caduceus

Calypso  Greek  In Homer’s Odyssey, the 
Nymph-queen of the island of Ogygia in the Ionian 
Sea. Calypso detained the shipwrecked Odysseus for 
seven years but finally, at the command of the god 
Zeus, helped him on his way home to Ithaca.
Camenae  Roman  Spirits or Nymphs who tended 
the freshwater springs that supplied water to Rome, 
and specifically to the Vestal Virgins. 
Part of their story is that King Numa, who suc-
ceeded Romulus as king of Rome, dedicated a grove 
of trees to the Camenae after they inspired him to 
develop wise laws for the young kingdom. A spring 
arose in this grove and it is here that the Camenae 
are said to have made their home. 
Once Greek mythology began to strongly influ-
ence Roman religion, the Camenae merged into the 
stories of the muses, daughters of Zeus who brought 
inspiration to humans.
Camilla  Roman  A heroine of an ancient 
Roman legend. Camilla’s father, Metabus, the king 
of the Volscians, saved his daughter’s life as they 
were being pursued from their city by his enemies. 
Stories conflict as to Camilla’s age—an infant 
or a little girl?—but as the father and child fled, 
they came to the river Amesenus in Latium. To 
save Camilla, Metabus fastened her to either a 
large stake or an arrow. He said a prayer for his 
daughter’s safety to Diana, goddess of the woods 
and hunting, and threw or shot Camilla across the 
river. Metabus swam across the river and found that 
Diana had granted his prayer: his daughter was safe. 
Together they hid in the woods, where they lived 
for years.
Later, Camilla became a warrior, very fast, very 
strong, and devoted to Diana. She fought against 
Aeneas, the Trojan hero, in his battle with Turnus, 
a prince of the Rutuli people. Camilla died in 
battle.
Virgil tells the story of Camilla in the Aeneid, 
where he described her as so swift that when she 
ran over a field of corn, not a blade bent, and when 
she ran over the sea, her feet did not get wet. Some 
experts, however, believe Virgil based his story on an 
ancient legend, popular in central Italy before writing 
became common.
Capricorn  (The Goat)  A constellation between 
Sagittarius and Aquarius; the 10th sign of the 
zodiac. Capricorn is named after the goat-Nymph 
Amalthea who, in Greek mythology, tended the god 
Zeus when he was an infant. In gratitude, Zeus set 
Amalthea among the stars.
Cardea  Roman  Goddess of door hinges, a pro-
tective deity who helps watch over the family. 
Cardea was first a virgin huntress or perhaps a 
Nymph who tricked suitors by sending them to a 
cave and telling them that she would soon follow, 
while she turned and went the opposite way. Janus, 
a principle god in the Roman pantheon, could see 
forward and backward and marked the beginnings 
and ends of things. When he fell in love with 
Cardea, she pulled her trick on him, but he saw her 
flight and pursued her, catching her and making her 
his lover. 
In return, Janus bestowed on Cardea the power 
to watch over and influence door hinges and door-
ways. He also gave her power over the whitethorn, 
or hawthorn bush, which had a reputation for 
protecting children against witches and vampires. 
In this way, Cardea became a prominent household 
goddess.
Carmenta  (Carmentis)  Roman  Originally, a 
goddess of childbirth, particularly of the position of 
the child, who could be born head first, prorsa, or feet 
first, postversa. Romans celebrated a festival to Car-
menta on January 11 and 15, during the first month of 
the year, a symbol, perhaps of the beginning of life.
As Roman religion changed under the influence of 
Greek mythology, Carmenta’s stories shifted. From a 
goddess, she became a Nymph of fresh waters, one 
of the Camenae of Roman mythology. In this role, 
Carmenta was known as the mother (perhaps the 
wife) of the hero Evander, which would have made 
her a Greek nymph. She and her son fled Arcadia, a 
region of Greece, and sailed for Italy. Through her 
powers of prophecy, Carmenta advised her son to 
settle on the Palatine Hill, one of Rome’s seven hills. 
She was also known for giving the gift of writing to 
the people of Central Italy.
While the events of Carmenta’s story were 
believed to have taken place long before Aeneas 
arrived in Italy after the Trojan War, some scholars 
suggest that Roman writers developed this story to 
explain the connection between Greek and Roman 
religions.
Carthage  An ancient city on the north shore 
of Africa, near modern Tunis. In mythology, as told 
in Virgil’s Aeneid, Dido established Carthage and 
became its queen.
Carthage  31

Cassandra  Greek  Daughter of King Priam 
of Troy and of Queen Hecuba; sister of Helenus, 
Paris, and Hector. The god Apollo gave Cassandra 
the gift of prophecy, but when she rejected his 
advances, he ordained that no one would ever believe 
her prophecies (which were always accurate). Before 
the fall of Troy, Cassandra warned the Trojans that 
the gift-horse of the Greeks was a trick, but no one 
believed her, and the Trojans suffered defeat (see 
Trojan War). At the fall of Troy, Cassandra was given 
as booty to the victorious Agamemnon, king of Argos 
and Mycenae. Cassandra warned the king that his 
wife, Clytemnestra, would kill him, but Agamem-
non would not believe her. He took Cassandra back 
to Mycenae. Clytemnestra murdered Agamemnon 
and Cassandra.
The word Cassandra has come to mean someone 
who is a prophet of doom.
Cassiopeia  Greek  Wife of King Cepheus of 
Ethiopia; mother of Andromeda and of Atymnius, by 
Zeus. Cassiopeia boasted that she and her daughter 
were more beautiful than the sea Nymphs, or Nere-
ids, daughters of the god Poseidon. This aroused 
the wrath of Poseidon, who sent a monster to punish 
Ethiopia. An Oracle declared that only the sacrifice 
of Cassiopeia’s daughter, Andromeda, would appease 
the monster and save the country. Cassiopeia, along 
with Cepheus and Andromeda, became constellations 
visible in the Northern Hemisphere.
Castor and Pollux  (“The Heavenly Twins”) 
Greek and Roman  The twin gods known to the 
Greeks and Romans as the Dioscuri (Sons of Zeus).
The story of these brothers began in Greece, 
where Pollux was known as Polydeuces, and where 
they are the subjects of many popular stories. The 
Romans, as they became familiar with the twins, 
developed a strong liking for these two characters. 
Castor, as a warrior and horseman, and Pollux, 
as a boxer, represented traits important to the 
Romans, who eventually created a powerful empire 
throughout much of Europe and the Mediterranean 
region.
One Roman story tells of people seeing the twins 
riding on magnificent white horses and fighting on 
the side of Rome in the battle at Lake Regillus (496 
b.c.), although this was after Zeus had made them 
immortal and placed them in the heavens as the 
constellation Gemini. They disappeared from the 
battlefield as mysteriously as they had arrived.
In a story dating from 300 years later, they 
are said to have appeared on their horses and 
announced to a citizen on a road in Rome the 
victory of a Roman commander fighting across the 
sea in Macedonia, north of Greece, on the day of 
the battle. Again, the twins disappeared from the 
roadside, though their message proved, days later, 
to have been true.
Romans celebrated the twins on July 15 and built 
splendid temples in their honor.
Celeus  Greek  Legendary king of Eleusis; father 
of Demophon and Triptolemus; husband of Meta-
neira. He and his wife were hosts to the goddess 
Demeter when she wandered the Earth in search of 
her daughter Persephone. Celeus is described as the 
first priest and his daughters as the first priestesses of 
Demeter at Eleusis.
centaurs  Greek  These were creatures half 
human and half horse, sons of Centaurus. Ixion, a 
Lapith of Thessaly, loved the goddess Hera, wife of 
Zeus, who became jealous. Zeus fashioned a likeness 
of Hera out of a cloud and called her Nephele. Ixion, 
convinced that the beautiful cloud-woman was Hera, 
mated with her. Nephele produced a son, Centaurus. 
This son mated with the mares of Thessaly, produc-
ing creatures that were half man and half horse—the 
centaurs.
Usually depicted as unruly, the centaurs are 
notorious in legend for their disorderly behavior 
among the Lapiths, the mythical people of Thessaly. 
The result was a battle. The centaurs were expelled 
from their native Thessaly and took refuge on 
Mount Pindus, on the frontiers of Epirus. Centaurs 
are often associated with the Satyrs and Sileni, 
followers of the wine god, Dionysus. However, 
Chiron, the most famous of the centaurs, was wise 
and gentle.
The myth of the centaurs probably stems from 
the time of the migrations and the coming of the 
horse to Greece in about 2000 b.c. The horse was 
enormously important to migratory people and was 
a cult animal in many parts of the world. In remote 
regions where wild horses lived, there must have been 
primitive peoples who were so skilled at catching, 
taming, and riding the horses that the sight of them 
awed all who saw them. Many may have believed that 
they were looking at a single, magical creature, with 
the head and trunk of a human and the hindquarters 
of a horse.
32  Cassandra

Centaurus  Greek  Son of Ixion and Nephele; 
father of the Centaurs, which were created after 
Centaurus mated with the mares of Thessaly. Centau-
rus is a constellation of the Southern Hemisphere.
Cephalus  Greek  Son of Hermes; husband of  
Procris, who was a daughter of Erechtheus; love inter-
est of the dawn goddess Eos. Eos tricked Cephalus into 
leaving his beloved wife. The unhappy Procris sought 
the protection of Artemis, goddess of the hunt. By the 
devious methods of Artemis, Cephalus was presented 
with two magnificent gifts, a spear that never missed 
its mark and a hound named Laelaps that never lost 
the scent of its quarry. Cephalus inadvertently cast the 
spear at Procris and killed her. He then killed himself 
by leaping from a cliff into the sea.
Cepheus  Greek  King of Ethiopia, husband of 
Cassiopeia; father of Andromeda, who was to marry 
the hero Perseus. After their deaths, Cepheus, Cas-
siopeia, and Andromeda were all set among the stars 
as constellations.
Cerberus  Greek  The hound of Hades, guardian 
of the Underworld (1). Cerberus was the offspring 
of Typhon and Echidna. In some accounts, Cerberus 
had three heads; in others, as many as 50. He was a 
fearsome creature, but music and offerings of food 
calmed him.
For Heracles, bringing Cerberus from Hades to 
the upper world was his 12th and most difficult labor. 
When he was captured, the monstrous dog dripped 
venom from his fangs and thus infected certain herbs, 
A female centaur decorates this first century A.D. metal cup which is in the National Library of France in Paris. 
(Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen. Used under a Creative Commons license.)
Cerberus  33

including aconite, called wolfsbane. Evil magicians 
then used these herbs to prepare poisonous brews.
The idea of a fearsome guardian dog probably 
had its origin in the custom of the Egyptians, who 
guarded the graves of the dead with large, dangerous 
dogs. Cerberus is associated with Hecate, an ancient 
goddess of death.
Cercopes  Greek  Twins, sons of the Titans Ocea-
nus and Theia. They were mischievous, clever thieves, 
sometimes depicted as monkeys. The Cercopes teased 
the great hero Heracles, who took them captive 
and tied them onto a pole that he carried across his 
shoulders. Heracles was so disarmed by the jokes and 
good humor of the twins that he set them free.
Ceres  Roman  An ancient goddess of living things, 
of grains and other plants. The cult of Ceres appears to 
predate 600 b.c. when she was likely seen as a founda-
tion goddess, a variation of the Earth Mother. Ceres 
provided protection for the life cycle of plants, a very 
important function in an agricultural society. Legends 
give Ceres credit for being the first to harvest grains.
Romans celebrated Ceres during the festival of 
Cerialia on April 19, which was part of the oldest 
Roman religious calendar.
Despite her ancient popularity, Ceres was one of 
the first deities of Italy to be influenced and finally 
absorbed by Greek mythology (see Hellenization).
According to one prominent story, the citizens of 
the young city of Rome were under attack by their 
neighbors from Etruria. The leaders consulted an 
oracle, who advised them to bring to Rome wor-
ship of the Greek goddess Demeter and the god 
Dionysus. The worship of those two deities would 
save Rome from the attackers.
In about 496 b.c., the Romans built a temple 
on the Aventine Hill and dedicated it to Demeter 
and Dionysus, whom they came to call Bacchus. 
From that time on, the identity of Ceres, her 
responsibilities, and her cults merged into those of 
Demeter. Most of the myths of Ceres, the stories and 
family relationships, were those of Demeter using the 
Roman names for the Greek gods. In this form, Ceres 
was the mother of Proserpina.
The word cereal, which in its broadest sense means 
grass or edible grains, comes from the name of this 
Roman goddess.
In astronomy, Ceres is the largest known Earth-
orbiting asteroid, 1,000 kilometers in diameter, which 
was discovered in 1800.
Ceto  (Whale)  Greek  An ancient Greek sea god-
dess. Ceto was a daughter of Gaia and Pontus, the 
earliest personification of the sea. Some scholars sug-
gest that the Greeks considered Ceto a sea monster 
or a whale.
She is most famous for her monstrous children. 
With Phorcys, one of her many brothers, Ceto 
conceived and gave birth to the gorgons, three 
female monsters, of whom Stheno and Euryale were 
immortal and Medusa became mortal; the three sisters 
known as the Graea, who represented old age; and 
Ladon, the dragon who guarded the apples of the 
Hesperides.
As one of the many original children of Gaia, 
Ceto was also sister and aunt to many ancient 
mythical creatures, including Thaumus, father of 
the Harpies, and Nereus, father of the Nereids, or 
Nymphs of the sea.
Chaos  Greek  The empty, unfathomable space 
at the beginning of time. Gaia, the original Earth 
Mother, sprang from Chaos, as did Nyx (Night) and 
Erebus (Darkness). Eventually chaos came to mean 
a great confusion of matter out of which a supreme 
being created all life.
Charon  Greek  The ferryman of the Under-
world (1). Son of Erebus (Darkness) and Nyx (Night). 
The hideous old man ferried the shades, or spirits, of 
the dead across the rivers Acheron and Styx. If not 
presented with an obolus, a small coin, or bribe, the old 
man would drive away the dead soul, who was then 
condemned to wander the bleak shores of Acheron 
and Styx. Hence comes the custom of the Greeks (and 
others) of placing a coin on the mouth or eyelids of the 
dead.
Chimera  (She-Goat)  Greek  A fire-breathing 
monster with a lion’s head, a goat’s body, and a 
serpent’s tail; the offspring of the monsters Echidna 
and Typhon. Bellerophon destroyed the Chimera by 
riding his winged horse, Pegasus, and shooting the 
monster with arrows or lumps of lead. The origin of 
this creature may be a volcano in Lycia, Asia Minor, 
whose eruptions created as much havoc as did the 
mischief of Chimera.
The word chimera is used in English for an illusory 
fantasy or a wild, incongruous scheme.
Chione  Greek  Daughter of Daedalion who was 
the son of Phosphorus (Lucifer), mother of Autoly-
cus by Hermes and of Phillamon by Apollo.
34  cercopes

Chiron  Greek  A Centaur of great wisdom and 
kindness, friend of both humans and gods. Possibly the 
son of Cronus and Phylira, Chiron lived on Mount 
Pelion in Thessaly. He received his education from 
the divine twins, Apollo and Artemis. In turn, the 
gods entrusted him with the education of Asclepius, 
god of healing, and the heroes Jason and Achilles.
Heracles inadvertently wounded Chiron during 
a brawl with the centaurs, who were mostly wild 
and unruly. Heracles rushed to the side of Chiron 
but there was nothing either he or Chiron could do, 
for the arrow of Heracles had been dipped in the 
poisoned blood of Hydra, the many-headed water 
serpent. Since Chiron was immortal, he was doomed 
to suffer eternal pain. Zeus solved the dilemma 
by allowing Chiron to confer his immortality on 
Prometheus in return for the peace of dying. Zeus 
then placed Chiron in the heavens as part of the 
Sagittarius or Centaurus constellations.
Chiron, half human and half horse, represented 
ancient wisdom. He was the symbol of the wild horse, 
full of strength, tamed to be of enormous help to 
humans.
Chryseis  Greek  The daughter of Chryses, a 
priest of Apollo. During the Trojan War, the Greek 
war hero Achilles took her prisoner. Considered as 
war booty, Chryseis was then seized by Agamemnon, 
leader of the Greeks. Her father, Chryses, came to the 
Greek camp to rescue his daughter, but Agamemnon 
defended against the attack. Thereupon Apollo sent a 
plague among the Greeks. Many died and Agamem-
non at last released Chryseis to her father to appease 
Apollo’s anger.
Cilix  Greek  Son of Agenor and Telephassa, brother 
of Cadmus, Europa, and Phoenix. When Zeus stole 
Europa, King Agenor sent his three sons to search for 
her. The brothers could not find her, and not daring 
to return to their father, settled down elsewhere. Cilix 
is said to have founded the nation of the Cilicians, 
an ancient region of southeast Asia Minor. Modern 
Cilicia is an area of southern Turkey lying between the 
Mediterranean Sea and the Taurus Mountains.
Circe  Greek  Daughter of the sun god Helios, 
sister of Phaeton and Aeetes. The witch-goddess 
of Homer’s Odyssey, Circe cast powerful spells. She 
turned all Odysseus’s men into swine. Odysseus 
escaped the curse with the help of an herb called moly 
and spent a year with the enchantress. Eventually he 
persuaded Circe to restore his men to their former 
shapes and they all escaped from the witch. Circe also 
appears in the story of Jason.
In post-Homeric stories, Circe bore Odysseus a 
son, Telegonus.
Claudia Quintas  Roman  A heroine of con-
siderable fame. As the poet Ovid told her story, Clau-
dia had a bad reputation among the citizens of Rome 
for wearing too much makeup and fancy hairdos. 
People spread rumors that she was not a virgin. She 
was a follower of Cybele, a Greek goddess of fertility. 
When the citizens of Rome decided to bring the cult 
of Cybele to Italy, they sent a ship to Greece to bring 
back a statue of the goddess. When the ship returned, 
it became caught in the mud of the riverbank. Claudia 
stepped out of the waiting crowd, prayed loudly to 
Cybele to bring her strength, but only if Claudia was 
innocent of the accusations people made and worthy 
of the goddess’s love. Then Claudia gave a great tug at 
the rope fastened to the ship and freed the ship from 
the mud. She became the leader of a new Roman cult.
Cloacina  Roman  A specialized goddess who 
presided over and protected the sewers of Rome. As 
Rome became the home to more people, they needed 
to move more and more significant amounts of waste 
out of the city. They invoked Cloacina and her power 
to help them build and maintain the great sewer 
system to clean the city. The greatest of these sewers 
was the Cloaca Maxima. People built and dedicated a 
temple to her in the Roman Forum, an area that grew 
in prominence in part due to the sewer system there 
and Cloacina’s protection of that resource.
Eventually, Cloacina’s traits merged with those 
of the goddess Venus, whom the Romans fashioned 
after the Greek goddess Aphrodite.
Cloelia  Roman  A heroine of early Rome. Her 
story is told by many historians and poets, though 
some of the details vary.
Cloelia was a Roman citizen taken hostage with 
a group of others by Lars Porsenna, the legendary 
leader of the people of Etruria who laid siege to 
Rome in 509 b.c. One day, Cloelia gathered a group 
of young women together and went to bathe in the 
river. She convinced the guards to turn their backs 
while the women unclothed. Then the women hur-
ried into the water and swam across the river while 
the guards hurled spears at them. The women safely 
reached the shore held by Roman forces and Cloelia 
received great honors for her courage. Lars Porsenna 
protested the escape as a violation of the truce and 
Cloelia  35

the Romans returned all of the women. However, 
Porsenna changed his mind and admitted that Cloe-
lia was very brave and granted freedom to her and a 
group of hostages (whom she would choose). Cloelia 
chose the boys who had not yet reached puberty, 
arguing that her reputation and their safety at the 
hands of their captors made them the only group she 
could take with her. The Romans honored Cloelia’s 
loyalty to the city and its people by dedicating in her 
honor a statue of a horse.
These events supposedly happened early in 
Rome’s history, but the story of Cloelia survived for 
centuries as a symbol of loyalty and courage as the 
city-state expanded into an empire. Some scholars 
and historians said the Romans invented the story 
to explain the dedication of the equestrian statue 
after people had forgotten why it was dedicated to 
someone named Cloelia.
Clymene  Greek  An Oceanid, or ocean nymph; 
one of the eldest daughters of the Titans Oceanus 
and Tethys, and, as such, considered a second-
generation Titan; married Iapetus and with him was 
the mother of still more Titans: Atlas, Prometheus, 
Epimetheus, and Menoetius.
Clymene was also considered by some sources to 
be the mother of Phaeton and his weeping sisters, 
the Heliads, whose father was Helios, the Olympian 
god who drove the sun across the sky.
Clymene was known as the goddess of both fame 
and infamy. In some sources, she is named Asia, and 
considered a goddess of the region Asia Minor, also 
known as Anatolia.
Clytemnestra  Greek  Daughter of Tyndareus, 
king of Sparta, and of Leda, sister of Helen and 
Castor and Pollux. Clytemnestra was the mother 
of Chrysothemis, Iphigenia, Electra, and Orestes.
Clytemnestra married Agamemnon, king of Argos 
and Mycenae, of the accursed house of Pelops. When 
Agamemnon went to the Trojan War as commander 
of the Greek forces, Clytemnestra became the lover 
of Aegisthus, another descendant of Pelops. Clytem-
nestra hated Agamemnon, for he had sacrificed their 
daughter Iphigenia to Artemis, and to the wind god, 
Aeolus, in order to get fair winds for the Greek fleet 
to sail to Troy and many years of war.
When the victorious Agamemnon returned from 
Troy, he brought with him Princess Cassandra as 
one of the spoils of war. He and Cassandra were 
murdered by Clytemnestra and Aegisthus, who were 
themselves murdered by Electra and Orestes.
Although Clytemnestra has little mythology of 
her own, she is a major tragic figure in the plays of 
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides.
Coeus  Greek  A first-generation Titan; son of 
Uranus and Gaia; father, with his sister Phoebe, of 
Asteria and Leto, who would become the mother of 
Apollo and Artemis (1).
While best known in his role as a parent, Coeus was 
considered the god of intelligence and thinking. He was 
also the pillar of heaven around which the constellations 
evolved and, as such, the keeper of heavenly oracles.
With his siblings, Coeus was banished by Zeus, 
the greatest of the conquering Olympian gods, to 
Tartarus, the depths of the Underworld.
Comus  Roman  A god of joy and mirth, of feast-
ing and revelry. Comus was often represented as 
a young man with wings, who was rather sleepy, 
perhaps drunk, after a large meal. Romans associated 
him with Dionysus, the Greek god of fertility, wine, 
and pleasure. Comus loved wine, dance, and song.
Concordia  Roman  The goddess who personi-
fied concord, or harmony, particularly between citizens 
and the state or government. The oldest temple to her 
was built in 367 b.c. at the foot of the Capitoline Hill, 
and represented an agreement between the com-
moners and the members of the ruling families. The 
Roman Senate often met in Concordia’s temple. She 
is pictured on coins, which were usually minted after 
a rebellion or civil war, as a matron, sitting, wearing a 
long cloak, and holding a saucer, cornucopia, or olive 
branch. Concordia was known as Harmonia in Greek 
mythology, and she had a temple in Olympia, site of 
the Olympic Games. (See also Pax and Eirene.)
Consus  (The Storer)  Roman  An ancient but 
little-known Roman god of storage who protected 
the harvest once it was placed in silos, which were 
underground chambers in ancient Rome; an important 
god during the early agricultural days of Central Italy.
The cult that worshiped Consus faded from 
importance as Rome became a major city and empire. 
Consus was also known as the consort of Ops, an 
ancient goddess of plenty.
Rome celebrated Consus during horse races and 
during an annual harvest festival known as the Con-
sualia when horses, mules, and other draft animals 
were decorated with flowers and allowed to rest.
Worshipers built an altar to Consus underground, 
beneath the middle of the Circus Maximus, a huge 
36  Clymene

stadium with seating for 150,000 people. Here Rome 
held very popular horse races. Another temple to 
Consus stood between the Palatine and the Aventine 
hills.
Corinth  Greek  A city in the northeast Pelo-
ponnesus, strategically situated on the isthmus con-
necting Peloponnesus with central Greece. Corinth 
was one of the largest and most powerful cities of 
ancient Greece, a rival of Athens and traditionally 
allied with Sparta. Corinth traded with east and west 
and established numerous colonies.
Cornucopia  (Horn of Plenty)  Greek  The 
horn of the goat-Nymph, Amalthea, who had 
tended the infant Zeus. The horn was as large and 
full as that of a cow’s, and would remain forever 
filled with food and drink for its owners. Zeus gave 
the horn to the ash nymphs, Adrastia and Ida (1), 
who, along with Amalthea, had tended him when 
he was an infant. The cornucopia remains a symbol 
of plenty, generosity, hospitality, and general well 
being.
Coronis  Greek  Daughter of Phlegyas, king of 
the Lapiths of Thessaly; mother of Asclepius, with 
the god Apollo.
Apollo fell in love with Coronis when he saw her 
bathing in a lake. Coronis seemed to accept the love 
of Apollo. He left a white crow to watch over her, but 
Coronis then fell in love with Ischus. The crow sped 
off to tell the news to Apollo, who struck the crow in 
his anger and turned its white feathers to black.
Artemis, the sister of Apollo, shot her arrows at 
the faithless Coronis and killed her, but Apollo man-
aged to snatch the infant Asclepius from the funeral 
pyre. The child was brought up by the god Hermes, 
or, some say, by Chiron, the gentle centaur, to 
become a god of healing and medicine.
Corybantes  Greek  The worshipers of Cybele 
who celebrated their goddess with wild dances and 
loud music. They were identified with the Galli and 
later with the Cretan Curetes.
cow  The cow, like the bull, was a common farm 
animal found in Greek mythology. It was an animal 
A corner of the Temple of Apollo in Corinth, Greece, probably built in the sixth century B.C., still stands on a hill-
top. It is now a prominent tourist attraction.
Cow  37

important to the worship of some gods and used in 
ceremonies or initiation rites.
Zeus, the supreme Greek god, fell in love with Io, 
the daughter of a river god and a priestess to Hera, 
wife of Zeus. Furious at her husband’s infidelity, Hera 
threatened Io, so Zeus turned the maiden into a white 
cow or heifer, who then wandered and grazed over 
the Earth.
Cadmus, son of King Agenor and founder of 
the city of Thebes, took the advice of the Oracle 
he consulted and followed a specific cow until she 
stopped. On that spot, Cadmus built a fortress that 
would become the center of Thebes.
In some cult ceremonies, girls being initiated 
into service as priestesses to Hera had their hair cut 
short and their skin painted white and were sent to 
wander in the hills. This was to re-create the story 
of the three young girls, known as the Proetides or 
Proitids, whom Hera had turned into cows after they 
had made fun of a statue of her.
Followers of Zeus, Pan, Demeter, and Athene, 
often sacrificed cows to these deities.
Cratus  (Cratos; Kratos; Strength)  Greek 
The personification of strength; a demigod or lesser 
god; son of the Titan Pallas and the water Nymph 
Styx; brother of Nike (Victory), Bia (Force), and 
Zelus (Zeal).
Cratus and his siblings, winged creatures who 
moved very quickly, served as guards and attendants 
to Zeus. Their mother had sided with the great god 
in his battle with Cronus and the Titans, and had 
brought her children, Cratus, Nike, Bia, and Zelus, 
to serve with her. 
To Cratus and Bia fell the task of carrying out the 
punishment of the god Prometheus, who had given 
fire to humans. They chained him to a rock high in 
the mountains, where each day a vulture plucked at 
his liver and each night the organ grew back.
The Roman counterpart to Cratus was Potestas.
Crete  Greek  An island southeast of Greece in the 
eastern Mediterranean. Crete had one of the world’s 
earliest civilizations, and one of the most brilliant: the 
Minoan civilization, named after the legendary king 
Minos. It is believed to be the birthplace of classical 
Greek language and literature. In mythology, Minos 
was the son of the god Zeus and Europa. He married 
Pasiphaë, who fell in love with a bull. Pasiphae gave 
birth to the Minotaur, half human and half bull. In 
order to hide the Minotaur, Minos had Daedalus 
build the famous labyrinth. Young men and maidens 
were said to be sacrificed to the bull. In the great 
palace of Knossos, beautiful murals depict these 
young people vaulting over the back of the Minotaur. 
Minoan culture was at its prime between 2200 and 
1450 b.c.
Creusa (1)  (Glauca)  Greek  Daughter of King 
Creon of Corinth. Creusa married the hero, Jason. 
In jealous revenge, Medea, Jason’s first wife, used her 
magic powers to kill Creusa. Medea sent Creusa a 
wedding dress soaked in poison. When Creusa put on 
the dress, it burned into her flesh and killed her. Creon, 
Creusa’s father, also perished from the poison.
Creusa (2)  Roman  Wife of Aeneas, a hero of the 
Trojan War who went on to become a founding 
figure in Roman mythology, and mother of his 
son, Ascanius. When Aeneas was fleeing Troy as it 
burned, Creusa was lost in the crush of people. When 
he discovered this, Aeneas went back to find her, but 
only her shade, or ghost, appeared to him. Creusa’s 
spirit told Aeneas that he would embark on a great 
journey before establishing a great city, which would 
be Lavinium, near Rome. Creusa begged her husband 
to raise their son well.
Crius  (Krios)  Greek  A first-generation Titan; 
son of Uranus (Heaven) and Gaia (Earth); with 
Eurybia, a daughter of Pontus and Gaia, the father of 
Astraeus, Pallas, and Perses.
Little is known of Crius other than his role as 
a father. However, hints in the writings of ancient 
Greeks suggest that he was a god of leadership and 
domestic animals and is associated with the ram, or 
male sheep. Some suggest that Crius became the 
constellation Aries, the ram.
Cronus  (Kronus)  Greek  A Titan, the son of 
Uranus (Heaven) and Gaia (Earth). With his sister-
wife, Rhea, Cronus fathered daughters: Demeter, 
Hestia, and Hera, and sons: Hades, Poseidon, and 
Zeus, who became Olympian gods. Cronus dethroned 
his father, Uranus, and was in turn dethroned by his 
son, Zeus.
Cronus was probably a corn god in ancient 
times and is often depicted holding a sickle or 
scythe—the same weapon that he used to render 
Uranus impotent. The Roman Saturn is identified 
with Cronus.
Cronus Overthrows Uranus  Uranus and Gaia 
had many children, including the Titans, the Cyclopes, 
and the Hecatoncheires (Hundred-Handed Ones). 
38  Cratus

Uranus grew jealous of his children and had them 
confined under the Earth. Gaia was very unhappy 
about losing all her children. Finally, she gave a sickle 
to her bravest son, Cronus, and encouraged him to use 
it on his father. This Cronus did, mutilating his father 
horribly so that Uranus became impotent. From his 
blood were born the furies and the giants; from parts 
of his flesh, which Cronus had cut off and thrown into 
the sea, arose the goddess Aphrodite. The defeated 
Uranus left his realm to Cronus, but warned that one 
of his sons would in turn overthrow him.
The Children of Cronus  Cronus married his 
sister, Rhea, with whom he fathered daughters Deme-
ter, Hestia, and Hera and sons Hades, Poseidon, and 
Zeus. Remembering the prophecy of his defeated 
father, Uranus, Cronus swallowed his children as 
soon as they were born so that none could overthrow 
him. In despair, Rhea sought the advice of Gaia, who 
advised her to give Cronus a stone to swallow the 
next time a child was born to her. When Zeus was 
born, Rhea hid him away and presented Cronus with a 
large stone wrapped in baby clothes. Cronus promptly 
swallowed the stone, thinking it was his child.
When Zeus grew to be a young man, he tricked 
Cronus into coughing up all the siblings—and the 
stone—that he had swallowed. Then the siblings 
gathered together with Zeus, the Cyclopes, and the 
Hecatoncheires to fight a long war with Cronus 
and finally defeat him. The era of the Titans ended 
and Zeus and his brothers and sisters founded the 
Olympian dynasty.
There are various versions of the story of Cronus. 
The oldest and most often cited is found in the writ-
ings of Hesiod.
Cupid  (Desire)  Roman  God of love, son of 
Venus and possibly of Vulcan, the fire god. Cupid is 
usually represented as a winged boy or fat baby, often 
blindfolded to denote his irresponsible nature, and 
carrying a bow and arrows, used to shoot his victims. 
Cupid is a Roman adaptation of the Greek god Eros. 
He was of no great importance except to writers such 
as Virgil (in the Aeneid) and to many artists.
Curetes  (Young Men)  Greek  The young Cre-
tan warriors, possibly sons of Rhea, who guarded 
the infant Zeus when he was hidden on Mount Ida 
(2) in central Crete. The young men danced wildly 
and clashed their weapons together to drown out the 
sound of the infant’s crying. Some sources suggest 
that there was a cult in Crete devoted to the god 
Zeus as a youth (kouros) and that its devotees were the 
Curetes. There is further mention of the Curetes in 
several Greek myths, including that of Zagreus.
The Curetes were sometimes identified with the 
Corybantes who performed with dancing, shouting, 
and clashing of armor at the rites of the goddess 
Cybele. 
See also Galli.
Cybele  Greek  A Phrygian (Asiatic) goddess of 
fertility who found favor in Greece (in the fourth 
or fifth century b.c.) and Rome (in the third century 
b.c.). She was sometimes associated with Rhea, the 
ancient Titan, as she, too, personified the Earth in 
its primitive state. Cybele was sometimes known as 
Agdistis, who had some of the attributes of both 
a male and a female. Her attendant god was Attis; 
her priests were the galli. The cult of Cybele had 
a strong appeal for women. With Gordius, king of 
Phrygia (Asia Minor), Cybele bore a son, Midas.
Cybele and Attis  Attis was a lesser god with 
whom the great goddess Cybele fell in love. He is 
represented as a young, handsome shepherd. Cybele 
chose Attis as her priest and imposed upon him a vow 
of chastity. Attis broke his vow and in a fit of rage, 
Cybele changed him into a pine tree, or an almond 
tree. The death of Attis and his rebirth as a tree were 
celebrated every year in ancient Greece, and later, in 
Rome. This myth of Attis obviously has its origins in 
ancient fertility rites, based on the belief that Cybele 
or Agdistis, as a personification of the Earth, kills and 
then resurrects vegetation.
Cybele and Midas  The goddess Cybele mated 
with Gordius, king of Phrygia, with whom she bore 
a son, Midas. Midas inherited his father’s throne. By 
the god Dionysus, Midas was granted the wish that 
everything he touched should turn to gold.
Cyclopes (1)  (Singular: Cyclops; Round-eyed) 
Greek  Three sons of Uranus and Gaia, large 
and strong, each with one eye in the middle of his 
forehead; siblings of the Hecatoncheires, hundred-
handed giants, and the younger Titans. Their names 
were Brontes (Thunder) Steropes (Lightning), and 
Arges (Thunderbolt); they were best known most for 
making lightning and thunder. 
Their father, Uranus, hated them, and banished 
them to Tartarus, the deepest pit below the under-
world, but Gaia convinced Uranus to free their sons. 
However, after Cronus, a Titan and the youngest of 
their siblings, revolted against and defeated Uranus, 
he once again banished back to Tartarus these three 
Cyclopes (1)  39

fearsome brothers, sometimes referred to as the 
Uranian Cyclopes. 
When his time came to overthrow Cronus, Zeus, 
having learned in a prophecy that he could not win his 
battle against his father and the Titans unless he had 
the aid of the Cyclopes, freed Brontes, Steropes, and 
Arges. In return, they helped Zeus defeat Cronus. The 
three then forged great treasures for the Olympian 
gods: thunder and lightning, which they gave to Zeus; 
a helmet of invisibility, which they gave to Hades; and 
a great trident, which they gave to Poseidon. From 
that time forward, these one-eyed brothers were 
greatly admired and respected by the Olympians.
Brontes, Steropes, and Arges died at the hands of 
Apollo, who killed them for making the thunderbolt 
which Zeus had used to kill Appolo’s son Asclepius.
Later Greek mythology tells of a group of one-
eyed beings who lived under Mount Aetna and 
helped the smith god Hephaestus forge thunder, 
lightning, and armor for the gods. Some sources 
consider these to be the three sons of Uranus and 
Gaia. Other sources suggest that they are a separate 
group of Cyclopes.
Cyclopes (2)  (Singular: Cyclops)  Greek 
The poet Homer describes the Cyclopes in the 
Odyssey as a tribe of gigantic, one-eyed shepherds 
who lived on an island in the Mediterranean Sea. 
Some sources suggest the tribe is made up of the off-
spring of the sea god Poseidon and a water Nymph. 
These Cyclopes are cannibals, wild and ruthless, 
and pose a great threat to humans stranded on 
their shores. The most famous among them was 
Polyphemus, who captured Odysseus and his men 
and held them in a cave, then began eating some 
of them each day. (See “Odysseus and the Cyclops” 
under Odyssey).
Cyclopes (3)  (Singular: Cyclops)  Greek  A 
race of very strong men, who were known to be 
master builders, perhaps having come from Thrace, a 
region on the northern shores of the Aegean Sea. 
These Cyclopes served King Proetus of the 
city Tiryns. For him, they built the great walls of 
the city. They built similar walls around the city 
of Mycenae and the famous Lion Gate there. The 
stones they used were so massive that the term 
“cyclopean” has come to mean gigantic. They were 
also called “belly-hands” for they worked for their 
livings. 
Cycnus  Greek  Son of Ares by Pelopia or by 
Pyrene. Cycnus was cruel and aggressive like his 
father, the god of war. Cycnus attacked and killed 
travelers in the region of Tempe, in Thessaly. He 
used their bones to build a temple for his father. One 
day he challenged Heracles. In the fearsome battle 
that followed, Heracles killed Cycnus and severely 
wounded Ares, who had tried to help Cycnus.
Cyrene  Greek  Thessalian Nymph, carried off 
by the god Apollo to the country that came to 
be called Cyrenaica. There she bore Apollo a son, 
Aristaeus.
40  Cyclopes (2)

41
D
8
Daedalus  (Cunningly Wrought)  Greek  A leg-
endary Athenian, descendant of the god Hephaestus, 
who was known as “the divine artificer.” Daedalus was 
a great craftsman, architect, sculptor, and inventor. His 
nephew, Talus, was also a gifted craftsman and became 
the apprentice of Daedalus. When the boy invented the 
saw, Daedalus became jealous, murdered his nephew, 
and fled from Athens to the island of Crete.
Daedalus entered the service of King Minos of 
Crete, for whom he constructed the amazing laby-
rinth, or maze, in which the Minotaur lived, The 
Minotaur, or monster, was half human, half bull,  and 
was the offspring of Minos’s wife Pasiphaë and a bull.
Once the Labyrinth was completed, Minos kept 
Daedalus prisoner so that he could not reveal the 
secret of the maze to anyone. Daedalus made wings 
from the feathers of birds and wax and escaped from 
Crete with his son, Icarus. Icarus ignored his father’s 
advice and flew too near the Sun, which melted the 
wax and rendered the wings useless. Icarus fell into 
the sea and drowned.
Daedalus landed in Sicily and entered the court 
of King Cocalus, where he constructed beautiful and 
imaginative toys for the king’s daughters.
Minos went in search of Daedalus. He carried 
with him a triton shell and a piece of linen thread, 
saying that he would reward the person who could 
thread the linen through the shell. Minos knew that 
only the talented Daedalus could find a way to do this 
impossible task. Sure enough, when he reached Sicily, 
King Cocalus boasted of the wonderful inventor at 
his court and asked Daedalus to perform the task. 
Daedalus did this by boring a minute hole in the 
triton shell, smearing it with honey, and sending an 
ant, harnessed to the thread, through the hole and all 
the way through the shell’s spirals to its opening.
Minos demanded the surrender of Daedalus, 
but with the help of Cocalus’s daughters, Daedalus 
contrived for Minos a horrid death in a hot bathtub.
The story of Daedalus ends there. Scholars do not 
know whether there was a real Daedalus, so skillful 
that legends grew around his memory, or whether he 
was purely fictitious.
Danae  Greek  Daughter of Acrisius, king of 
Argos; mother of Perseus, who would one day kill 
his grandfather in fulfillment of a prophecy made 
by an Oracle. The oracle had told Acrisius that he 
would be killed by a son of Danae. Acrisius impris-
oned Danae in a tower or chamber of bronze, safe 
from the advances of men, but the great god Zeus 
was undeterred in his amorous pursuit of Danae. He 
appeared to her in her prison as a shower of gold, 
which impregnated her. She bore a son, Perseus.
Scholars think that the story of Zeus and Danae is 
a pastoral allegory, in which water is the “gold” of the 
Greek shepherd or farmer. Hence Zeus was thought 
to send thunder and showers onto the Earth (Danae) 
to make her fertile.
Danaus  Greek  A king of Egypt who had 50 
daughters who were demanded by their cousins in 
marriage. Danaus fled with his brood to Argos, where 
he became king. The cousins came in pursuit. Danaus 
gave a dagger to all of his daughters so that they could 
murder their bridegrooms. Only one of the yong men, 
Lynceus, survived. He became the king of Argos after 
he had killed Danaus, and he became the ancestor of 
Perseus. As for the daughters, according to legend, 
they were punished in Tartarus by being compelled 
to try and fill a sieve with water for all eternity. The 
daughters are sometimes known as the danaids.
Daphne  (Laurel)  Greek  A Dryad or tree Nymph, 
daughter of the river god Ladon, or of Peneus, and 
Gaia. Pursued by the god Apollo, Daphne begged her 
mother for help. Gaia opened up the Earth and Daphne 
disappeared. In her place, a laurel tree sprang up. Apollo 

embraced the tree and adopted it as his sacred tree and 
emblem. The poet Ovid tells Daphne’s story.
In some legends, Leucippus, a mortal man, loved 
Daphne. He disguised himself as a girl to pursue the 
nymph, but she discovered him to be a man when he 
went bathing with the maidens. The angry nymphs 
tore Leucippus to pieces.
Daphnis  Greek  The son of Hermes and a Sicil-
ian Nymph; inventor of simple, countrylike poetry. 
In one account, Daphnis was untrue to the nymph, 
Nomia, who loved him, so she blinded him in revenge. 
After that, Daphnis sang the sad but beautiful songs 
that are associated with pastoral music. His father, 
Hermes, at last took pity on his son and led him up 
to Olympus. Another account has it that Daphnis 
was incapable of love, a fact that made Aphrodite, 
goddess of love, so angry that she afflicted him with 
everlasting sadness and longing.
Some say that Pan taught Daphnis to play the 
pipes, and that Daphnis was a love interest of Apollo 
and hunted with Artemis, though other accounts 
have it that it was Daphnis’s father, Hermes, who 
enjoyed these privileges.
Dardanelles  Greek  The strait between Europe 
and Asian Turkey, connecting the Aegean Sea with the 
Sea of Marmara. It is 40 miles long and one to five miles 
wide. In ancient times, it was called the Hellespont, 
which means “bridge to the Hellenes,” or Greece.
Dardanus  Greek  The founder of the city of 
Troy, according to Homer. Dardanus was the son of 
Zeus. His son was Erichthonius (2), the richest king 
on Earth, who owned thousands of horses. The son 
of Erichthonius was Tros, who had three sons: Ilus, 
Ganymede, and Assaracus. King Priam of Troy was a 
descendant of Ilus.
Deianira  Greek  Daughter of Oeneus, king of 
Calydon, sister of Meleager. She became the second 
wife of the hero Heracles and unwittingly caused his 
death. Deianira killed herself in despair at what she 
had done to Heracles.
Deidamia  Greek  The wife of the Greek hero 
Achilles, though some experts suggest the two were 
never married.
Deidamia was the daughter of King Lycomedes, 
of the island of Skyros. When Achilles’ mother, The-
tis, a sea nymph, asked Lycomedes to hide her son to 
protect him from having to fight in the Trojan War, 
the king dressed Achilles as a girl and hid him among 
his daughters. Deidamia and Achilles fell in love, and 
while he was still in hiding, she bore him a son, Pyr-
rhus, who came to be known as Neoptolemus.
The couple sailed away together but were blown 
back to the island kingdom.
Deification  In mythology, the process of bes-
towing upon a mortal the status of a god; also, the 
process a mortal goes through to transform into a god. 
Deification could be granted by a god, such as Zeus or 
Jupiter, to a worthy mortal or to a hero who was half 
mortal and half god, such as Heracles. It could also be 
granted by members of a culture, such as the Romans, 
who in their mythology believed that Romulus, the 
founder of Rome, became a god after he died. In 
Roman history, emperors were also deified after their 
deaths. People would then build temples to these new 
gods and worship them in formal ceremonies.
Deiphobus  Greek  Son of Priam and Hecuba. 
He married Helen (or took her by force) after the 
death of Paris, his brother. Deiphobus died at the 
hands of Menelaus at the fall of Troy (see Trojan 
War), or, some say, Helen killed him.
Delos  Greek  The smallest of the Greek islands 
known as the Cyclades, in the Aegean Sea. One 
legend says that Delos was a drifting island until Zeus 
anchored it so that Leto could comfortably give 
birth to their children, Artemis and Apollo.
Delphi  Greek  The most venerated shrine in 
ancient Greece and probably the oldest. It lies on the 
remote slopes of Mount Parnassus, high above the 
Gulf of Corinth, which separates mainland Greece 
from the Peloponnesus. The oldest objects found at 
Delphi date from 1600 b.c., but archaeologists believe 
this cleft in the hills was sacred long before that time. 
The ruins of the temple of Apollo, the presiding 
god, still stand on the hills. Nearby is the stadium 
where the Pythian Games were held in honor of the 
ancient Python whom Apollo vanquished.
The Origins of Delphi  According to one myth, 
Zeus set two eagles free, one from each end of the 
Earth. Where they met, he established Delphi as the 
center of the world. A stone (Omphalos in Greek) 
marked the place from which the Oracle—a wise 
being, capable of speaking words of the gods and 
foretelling the future—would speak.
Long before that, the site of the shrine was sacred 
to Gaia. At that time, Delphi was called Pytho. A 
42  Daphnis

female serpent-dragon, Python, guarded the shrine. 
The young god Apollo slew Python and commanded 
her spirit to be his oracle at Delphi.
Delphi was in fact Apollo’s chosen land. Having 
killed the serpent Python, he built an altar in the 
sacred grove. According to one legend, Apollo was 
looking for priests to minister to his shrine when he 
saw a ship manned by Cretans, an ancient race (see 
Crete). Apollo turned himself into a dolphin and sped 
after the ship. He captured the ship and persuaded 
the sailors to guard his temple, which they then called 
Delphi in honor of the dolphin (Greek delphin).
The decline of Delphi and its oracle is paralleled 
by the decline of Greece and of the justice and moral 
excellence represented by Apollo. Some efforts were 
made to restore Delphi’s influence but finally, in a.d. 
385, the Emperor Theodosius, a Christian, closed the 
site in the name of Christianity.
Demeter  Greek  Daughter of Cronus and Rhea, 
one of the 12 great deities of Olympus. With her 
brother Zeus, she became the mother of Persephone. 
Demeter was goddess of Earth, agriculture, and 
crops, especially corn, who, in ancient rites, presided 
over the harvest. Her Roman name is Ceres.
Demeter and Persephone  Demeter is most 
famous for her suffering over the loss of her daughter 
Persephone. Unbeknownst to Demeter, Zeus had 
promised Persephone to Hades, god of the Under-
world. One day, when the maiden was gathering 
flowers in the fields of Nysa, the Earth opened and 
Hades seized Persephone and dragged her under-
ground.
Demeter suffered great grief at the loss of her 
daughter. She wandered the Earth, searching for 
her child, until at last Helios (the Sun, who sees 
everything) told her what had happened. In anger and 
grief at the treachery of Zeus, Demeter left Olympus 
and went to live among mortals, disguised as an old 
woman. Demeter’s sojourn at Eleusis was the chief 
episode in the course of her wanderings on Earth.
Meanwhile, the Earth suffered from Demeter’s 
grief and bore no fruit. Finally Zeus sent Hermes 
into the kingdom of Hades to bring Persephone 
back to her mother. Before leaving the underworld, 
Persephone had been persuaded to eat four seeds of a 
pomegranate. In ancient mythology, to eat the fruit of 
one’s captor meant that one would have to return to 
that captor or country, so Persephone was doomed to 
return to the underworld for four months of the year. 
She was allowed to spend the remaining two-thirds of 
the year with her Earth Mother, Demeter.
There was great rejoicing on Earth at Persephone’s 
return, for now Demeter allowed the Earth to bear 
crops once again.
This myth has its basis in the four seasons of the 
Northern Hemisphere. The time when Persephone 
goes underground is winter; the time when she 
returns is spring, which leads to the fruit of summer 
and the seeds of autumn, which in turn lead inevitably 
to the new growth of the next spring.
Demeter’s Suitors  Demeter, the corn goddess, 
was loved by Zeus and bore him a daughter, Perse-
phone. The sea god, Poseidon, pursued her even 
after she had turned herself into a mare and hidden 
in a flock owned by King Oncus of Arcadia. Demeter 
bore Poseidon a daughter, Despoena.
Demeter, in turn, loved Iasion, and bore him a 
son, Plutus. Zeus, jealous of Iasion, struck him with a 
thunderbolt. Some say that Iasion lived for a long time 
with Demeter and introduced her cult into Sicily.
Demeter at Eleusis  Demeter wandered the Earth 
in search of her daughter, not knowing that Hades had 
carried her off into the underworld. One day Demeter 
arrived in Eleusis, at the palace of King Celeus. Deme-
ter disguised herself as an old woman, wearing a hood. 
The king’s wife, Metaneira, welcomed Demeter and 
asked her to look after her newborn son, Demophon.
Demeter nourished the infant on ambrosia (food 
of the gods) and each night placed him in the fire in 
order to destroy all that was mortal in him, so that he 
would grow up like a god. One night, Metaneira spied 
upon her nurse and saw her place the child in the fire. 
Metaneira screamed with terror. Demeter was angry 
at the intrusion. Demeter threw back her hood and 
revealed herself as the goddess. She demanded that a 
temple be built for her in Eleusis. In some accounts 
Metaneira’s screams broke the magic spells and the 
child was destroyed in the flames.
Before she left the palace of Eleusis, Demeter 
showed her gratitude to Celeus and Metaneira by giving 
Triptolemus, Celeus’s elder son, the first grain of corn. 
She taught him how to sow it and harvest it. In some 
accounts Triptolemus is identified with Demophon.
Demeter and the Eleusinian Mysteries  Accord-
ing to legend, Persephone was the embodiment of the 
corn seed that hides underground until its rebirth in 
the spring, when it returns to Demeter, Earth Mother.
The disappearance and the return of Persephone 
were the occasions of great festivals in ancient Greece, 
among them the Eleusinian rites, whose secrets were so 
closely guarded that little is known about them today. 
Some experts believe the rites, or mysteries, fostered the 
Demeter  43

idea of a more perfect life after death, and thus helped 
to lay the groundwork for the coming of Christianity, 
which upholds the idea of everlasting life.
Demons of The Kilns  (Daimones Kerami-koi; 
Ceramics Demons; Potter’s Demons)  Greek  Potters 
were very important in Greek culture, for the func-
tional ware they produced as well as for the artistic 
pottery they crafted that celebrated the gods and the 
stories of their interactions with human cultures.
So important was success to these artisans that 
they recognized a separate group of pesky semi-gods, 
or demons, that they prayed to before firing a new 
batch of pottery. When things went wrong, potters 
blamed these demons for the damage to the pottery 
and then appeased them with more prayers to ensure 
that the next firing went well. 
Each demon was named for the damage he cre-
ated in the kiln. They were:
Asbetus (Asbetos) – Char – who burned pottery;
Sabactes (Sabaktes) – Crash – who broke pottery;
Smaragus (Smaragon) – Smash – who dropped 
pottery;
Suntrobus (Suntrobos) – Shatter – who exploded 
clay;
Omodamus (Omodamos) – Crudebake – who 
caused pottery to harden poorly.
As a wild force from the heavens, this troop of 
demons would also come to destroy the kiln of an 
unfair, unworthy potter.
The daimones keramikoi are best known from the 
poetry of Homer, who wrote a prayer for potters, 
calling upon Athena, who, among other things, was 
the goddess of pottery. He asked her to help potters if 
they were fair and honest, but he threatened the pot-
ters with destruction by these demons if the potters 
cheated customers or acted unfairly.
Demophon  Greek  The son of Metaneira and 
King Celeus of Eleusis. Demeter, the sorrowing 
mother of Persephone, found refuge at the court 
of the king and his wife, who asked her to look after 
their infant son, Demophon. This Demeter did, 
performing some goddesslike magic along the way.
Deucalion  Greek  A son of Prometheus, the 
Titan champion of humankind. Prometheus warned 
Deucalion that Zeus was so angry with the evils of 
humanity that he was plotting its annihilation. Deu-
calion, the Greek equivalent of the Old Testament’s 
Noah, built an ark. After nine days of rain, the ark 
landed safely on Mount Parnassus. Deucalion and 
his wife, Pyrrha, gave sacrifice to Zeus. The spirit 
of the Titan Themis told them to repeople the Earth. 
This they did by casting stones (the bones of Gaia) 
behind them. Those cast by Pyrrha became women; 
those cast by Deucalion became men. Hellen, the 
eldest son, was the patriarch of the race of Hellenes, 
later called the Greeks.
Scholars say that the deluge in this myth is undoubt-
edly the same as the flood quoted in the Old Testament 
and the Gilgamesh epic of Babylon, and reflects a dim 
memory common to the peoples of the Mediterranean.
Diana  (Bright)  Roman  An ancient Roman, per-
haps Etruscan, goddess of the Moon. In the Roman 
pantheon, Diana was the daughter of Jupiter and 
the twin sister of Apollo.
Diana’s name means “bright” and comes from 
the Latin word for “god.” With such a name, she 
was also considered the goddess of light, woodlands, 
women, and childbirth. Diana also protected wild 
animals. Women worshiped her in groves and woods, 
in temples on the Aventine Hill in Rome, and in 
Ephesus, an ancient city in Asia Minor. Slaves and 
members of the lower classes of Roman society were 
particularly attracted to the worship of Diana.
With her special attachment to wild areas, Diana 
was portrayed carrying a bow and arrows and in the 
company of hunting dogs.
As early as 600 b.c., Diana, though keeping her 
Roman name, took on the stories and characteristics 
of the Greek goddess Artemis.
Dictynna  (Lady of the Nets)  Greek  An ancient 
Cretan goddess, perhaps the goddess of Mount Dicte, 
which was later known as the birthplace of the Greek 
god Zeus. She was the Earth Mother of Crete, 
later associated with Britomartis, the huntress and 
patron of navigators.
Dictys  Greek  The fisherman, some say the 
brother of Polydectes, who rescued the hero Perseus 
and his mother, Danae, from the sea. Dictys took the 
mother and child to the court of King Polydectes of 
the island of Seriphos, in the Aegean Sea. Later he res-
cued Danae once again, this time from the unwelcome 
attentions of Polydectes. Perseus turned Polydectes 
into stone with the head of Medusa as his weapon, and 
Dictys became the new king of Seriphos.
Dido  Greek  The founder and queen of Carthage, 
also known as Elisa. She was the daughter of the Tyrian 
44  Demons of the Kilns

king Belus, and sister of Pygmalion. According to the 
Roman poet Virgil, Anna Perenna was also Dido’s 
sister. Dido was married to her wealthy uncle Acerbas. 
After Pygmalion murdered Acerbas, Dido fled to 
Carthage. Here she was allowed to purchase as much 
land as could be enclosed with the hide of a Bull. Dido 
cleverly had the hide cut up into narrow strips so that 
the area they enclosed was great. Her citadel was called 
Byrsa, and the city of Carthage arose around it more.
The best-known story about Dido is Virgil’s 
account of her love for the hero Aeneas, told in the 
Aeneid. In it, she hears tales of the adventures of the 
hero and falls in love with him. Aeneas deserts her to 
pursue his destiny and Dido kills herself. The story of 
Dido, dating back at least to the second century b.c., 
is much older than the Aeneid, which was written in 
the first century b.c.
Dike  (Dice; Justice)  Greek  The personification 
of justice, particularly under the law. Dike was a 
daughter of Zeus and Themis. As one of the three 
Horae, guardians of the seasons, Dike was the sister 
of Eirene (Peace) and Eunomia (Order). She was the 
mother of Hesychia (Quiet, Tranquility). 
Dike was the avowed enemy of falsehood and 
protected the fair treatment of people by the laws 
of society. She often served as an emissary and 
counselor for the great god Zeus. He would send her 
among mankind to watch them closely and report 
back to him on their crimes, their poor behavior, and 
their injustice to one another. After hearing of their 
indiscretions, Zeus would punish them. Dike watched 
judges very carefully and sought the help of Zeus in 
punishing them for acts of unfairness. She carried a 
sword with which to pierce the hearts of the unjust. 
Her counterpart was Adicia (Injustice), whom Dike is 
often portrayed as beating with a club.
As a member of the Horae, Dike helped watch over 
the four seasons, aiding farmers, helping them meet 
the agricultural needs of society, bringing prosperity to 
mankind. The sisters’ names all relate to social order 
and the development of lawfulness, a concept that 
was closely related to farming in classical mythology, 
showing the importance of agriculture to society.
Some modern scholars identify Dike as the same 
as the goddess Astraea, for both ruled over justice. 
However, others see Dike as distinct from Astraea, 
with distinct stories for each in Greek mythology.
One of the many sculptures in the gardens of the royal palace in Caserta, Italy, near Naples, shows the 
Roman goddess Diana (center) frolicking with her attending nymphs.  (Photograph by Japiot. Used under a Cre-
ative Commons license.) 
Dike  45

Diomedes (1)  Greek  Son of Tydeus and suc-
cessor of Adrastus as king of Argos. Diomedes 
sailed against Troy in the Trojan War, and was, next 
to Achilles, the bravest of the Greeks. The war god-
dess Athene favored him.
Diomedes (2)  Greek  A son of Ares; king of the 
Bistones in Thrace. Diomedes raised maneating 
mares, which Heracles carried off and tamed after 
he killed Diomedes and fed him to the mares.
Dione  Greek  An obscure, ancient divinity of 
prehistoric Greece, said to be a daughter of Oceanus 
and Tethys, closely associated with the cult of the god 
Zeus. Scholars point out that her name is a feminine 
form of the name Zeus. Homer said that she was the 
mother, with Zeus, of the goddess Aphrodite, though 
most sources say that Aphrodite, goddess of love and 
fertility, was born from Uranus and Gaia. Dione was 
venerated at Dodona as the consort of Zeus.
Dionysus  Greek  A fertility god, god of vegeta-
tion, especially the vine, god of wine and later of the 
pleasures of civilization. Son of Zeus; his mother is 
variously thought to be Semele, Demeter, Perse-
phone, or Io, Dione, or Lethe. The most common 
myth identifies his mother as Semele. The Romans 
called him Bacchus.
In early times, Dionysus was associated with orgi-
astic rites and generally wild behavior. As the cultiva-
tion of grape vines spread throughout Greece, so 
did the worship of Dionysus and the ensuing orgies, 
called Dionysian or Bacchic festivals. Later, however, 
Dionysus was also celebrated as a cultivator of the soil, 
a lawgiver, a peacemaker, and a patron of tragic art.
Among his followers were the centaurs, mae-
nads, satyrs, and sileni, all of whom were depicted in 
ancient art as enthusiastically—sometimes frighten-
ingly—demented, carrying staffs and wearing animal 
skins and crowns of ivy and grape leaves.
The young Dionysus was not honored as a god 
and he was forced to flee from Greece. He traveled 
through Europe, Asia Minor, and North Africa. 
Many adventures marked his passage as he spread 
his knowledge of the cultivation of the vine and the 
making of wine. Dionysus learned to use the divine 
power he had inherited from his father, Zeus. He 
inspired devotion, especially among women, and 
finally returned to Greece in triumph as a true god. 
Apollo, the beautiful god of the arts, admitted Dio-
nysus to his shrine at Delphi. Thus Dionysus joined 
the Olympian gods.
The acceptance of Dionysus into Greece after 
many struggles may refer to the conflict between 
old and new religions in the ancient world. Dionysus 
represents the ancient cult of the spirit of nature and 
fertility. It found expression in human sacrifice, nature 
worship, and orgiastic rites. Apollo represents the 
Dorians and other migrants who invaded peninsular 
Greece. These newcomers brought with them their 
own gods and cults but learned to accept the ancient 
deities and rites.
Dionysus was often depicted as a seminude, youthful 
god, his head crowned with vine leaves and grapes, and 
carrying a goblet of wine in one hand and a staff topped 
with a pinecone in the other. In earlier art, he was 
shown as a mature, bearded man crowned with ivy.
The Birth of Dionysus  Though the identity 
of Dionysus’s mother is in doubt, the most common 
myth identifies her as Semele. Zeus had come down 
to Earth disguised as a mortal. He wooed and won 
Semele. Hera, the wife of Zeus, was jealous. When 
Semele was six months pregnant, Hera, disguised as an 
old nurse, persuaded Semele to ask Zeus to reveal him-
self in his true form. This she did. At first Zeus refused 
Semele’s request, but he finally presented himself in 
all his glory as a mighty god, flashing lightning and 
hurling thunderbolts. No mortal could withstand such 
power, and Semele perished in flames. Zeus snatched 
the unborn child from the fire and sewed it into his 
thigh so that it could mature for another three months. 
In due course, Zeus gave birth to a boy, Dionysus, 
who is sometimes called Dithyrambus (Child of the 
Double Door), referring to his two births, once from 
his mother’s body and again from his father’s body.
Some scholars believe that this myth represents 
Zeus asserting his power over mortals by killing 
Semele and taking her child under his protection.
The Childhood of Dionysus  Zeus entrusted 
the care of his newborn child to Semele’s sister, Ino, 
or perhaps to the Nymphs or Mount Nysa. Although 
her rival, Semele, was dead, Hera was still jealous; 
she transferred her hatred to Dionysus. Hera caused 
the child’s foster parents to become insane, but 
Dionysus survived their madness, and Zeus gave him 
to Hermes to take to the nymphs of Nysa, which 
may have been a mountain near Helicon, the highest 
point in Boeotia, or a purely imaginary spot. The 
nymphs were bacchants. They took good care of the 
child and Dionysus grew to manhood in Nysa.
Hera’s hatred of Dionysus and his mother may 
reflect conservative opposition to the ritual use of wine 
and the extravagant orgies of the Bacchants and Mae-
nads. Dionysus was eventually admitted to Olympus.
46  Diomedes (1)

Dioscuri  (Sons of Zeus)  Greek  A title used in 
Greek and Roman mythology for the twin brothers 
Castor and Polydeuces, whose Roman name was 
Pollux. They were the sons of the mortal woman, 
Leda, who was married to Tyndareus, king of Lace-
daemonia (Sparta).
There are several legends about the parentage 
of these two favorite characters. One says that Zeus 
seduced Leda and conceived Polydeuces on the same 
night that she and her husband conceived Castor. 
Polydeuces was thus a god and immortal and Castor 
was a mortal. In some of the legends, Castor and 
Polydeuces are the brothers of Helen of Troy and 
Clytemnestra. In others, neither Leda or Zeus is 
their parent.
In Greek myths, the twins rescued Helen from 
the hero Theseus and took part in the expeditions of 
Jason and the Argonauts. Poseidon, god of the sea, 
is said to have given Castor and Polydeuces special 
powers, after which mariners and sailors honored the 
twins as their guardians.
One story, told by the Greek poet Pindar, says 
that Castor was mortally wounded in battle. Poly-
deuces begged his father, Zeus, to allow him to share 
his brother’s suffering. Zeus granted them a single 
life, to be shared and lived on alternate days. To keep 
them together forever, Zeus put them in the sky as 
the constellation Gemini in the northern celestial 
hemisphere. Castor and Pollux are the two very 
bright stars that form the heads of the constellation.
The Dioscuri do not enter into the stories of the 
Trojan War, though the abduction of their sister Helen 
started the conflict, for Zeus had made them divine and 
placed them in the heavens before the war began.
Dis  (Dis Pater, Dispater)  Roman  The richest 
of the ancient Roman gods; a god or king of the 
Underworld (2), the realm of the dead. Dis’s wealth 
came from his possession of the precious metals and 
gemstones hidden beneath the Earth’s surface, part of 
the kingdom of the underworld.
Dis was the husband of Proserpina, goddess or 
queen of the underworld. They were honored together 
in hymns, songs, and ceremonies that featured singing 
by 27 virgins. The people of Rome held athletic games 
once a century to honor Dis and to bring protection 
against pestilence, plague, and death.
One popular story tells of a father who went out in 
search of the gods to help his children, who had fallen 
seriously ill from a plague. In his journeys, the father 
found a hot spring flowing near the Tiber River. When 
he searched for the source of the water, he found a cave 
in which stood an altar to Dis and Proserpina.
Dithyrambus  (Child of the Double Door) 
Greek  A name for the god Dionysus, referring to 
the legend that he was born twice.
In literature, a dithyramb is a Greek song or chant 
of wild character and irregular form, originally sung 
in honor of Dionysus, god of wine. Verse described as 
dithyrambic is most irregular in form.
Dodona  Greek  The oldest and most famous 
sanctuary of the god Zeus, situated in Epirus, in 
northwestern Greece. Since the times of the Pelas-
gians, the most ancient peoples of the land that is now 
called Greece, people had come here to consult the 
Oracle who was said to live in a sacred oak tree (some 
said it was a beech tree) and to represent Zeus. People 
also worshiped the ancient goddess Dione at Dodona. 
Her presence at Dodona suggests that the oracle of 
Dodona was of greater antiquity than Zeus himself.
Doris  (Bounty)  Greek  An Oceanid, or ocean 
Nymph; one of the eldest daughters of the Titans 
Oceanus and Tethys; herself considered a second-
generation Titan. Doris, as a sea nymph, married the 
Titan sea god Nereus and with him was the mother 
of the group of sea nymphs known as the Nereids.
Doris was sometimes associated with the bounti-
ful fishing grounds commonly found at the mouths 
of rivers.
Dryads  (Nymphs; Tree)  Greek   The lives of 
some were entwined with specific trees; they lived 
and died with that tree. Others were connected with 
groves of trees or specific types of trees.
The main categories of Dryads are: 
•	 The Meliai, Nymphs of the ash tree. They were 
born from the drops of blood from Uranus 
which Gaia caused to spill on the Earth after 
Cronus killed his father.
•	 The Hamadryads, nymphs of poplar and oak 
trees. According to some stories, the Hamadry-
ads were born with and died with specific trees.
•	 Meliades, nymphs of apple trees. The Hesper-
ides, who guarded Hera’s golden apples, were 
Meliades.
•	 Daphnaie, nymphs of the laurel tree, who were 
named after Daphne, whom her father, a river 
god, transformed into a laurel tree to rescue 
her from the pursuits of the god Apollo.
Dryads  47

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
48
Earth Mother  A symbol in many ancient 
myth systems of the Earth, the source of all life and 
the power to create life. In Greek mythology, Gaia 
was the personification of the Earth Mother. She 
was born out of Chaos and herself gave birth to the 
races of gods, giants, monsters, and other creatures. 
Several Roman goddesses have elements of the Earth 
Mother in their characteristics. Tellus and Fauna 
both represented the fertility of nature.
In many ancient myth systems, women were the 
supreme gods and the Earth Mother ruled over them 
all. Over time, however, mythologies with supreme male 
gods gradually replaced these older systems. In Greece, 
Gaia represents this older system and Zeus represents 
the younger, patriarchal ruling family. Scholars see 
remnants of Earth Mothers in most mythologies.
Echidna  Greek  A monster-child of Gaia and 
Tartarus or, in some tellings, of Ceto and Phorcys. 
Echidna was half human and half serpent. She once 
lived in a cave where she ate the flesh of men. With 
Typhon, another monster, she had a brood of fright-
E
8
The Roman goddess Egeria mourns the passing of her love Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome, in 
this painting by French artist Claude Lorrain (ca. 1600-1682). The painting is in the Museo di Capodimonte 
in Naples, Italy.

ful children. In one story, the hundred-eyed Argus 
killed her while she slept.
Among the offspring of Echidna and Typhon 
were Cerberus, the Hound of Hell; Hydra, the 
many-headed serpent of Lerna; and the Chimera, a 
fire-breathing goat with a lion’s head and a serpent’s 
body. By Orthos, a two-headed hound, Echidna 
begot the Sphinx and the Nemean Lion (see The 
Twelve Labors of Heracles, 1. The Nemean Lion, under 
Heracles).
Echo  Greek  An Oread, or mountain Nymph, 
daughter of Gaia. The goddess Hera, in a fit of 
jealousy, deprived her of speech, except for the 
ability to repeat the last words spoken by somebody 
else. Echo fell in love with Narcissus, but Narcissus 
loved only his own reflection. Echo faded away until 
there was nothing left of her except her voice, which 
may still be heard in the mountains and caves of the 
world.
The story of Echo and Narcissus is told in Ovid’s 
Metamorphoses. It belongs to later Greek mythology.
Egeria  (Aegeria)  Roman  A goddess of springs, 
perhaps originally a goddess of the Babine people; also 
considered a deity that protected pregnant women 
and helped them bring their babies safely into the 
world. Egeria had the gift of prophecy. She was later 
considered by the Romans as one of the water Nymphs 
known as the Camenae. Followers paid tribute to 
Egeria at a site near the Caelian Hill in Rome. 
The dominant myth surrounding Egeria says that 
she was either an advisor to Numa Pompilius, ruler 
of the Sabines and the second king of Rome, or his 
lover or wife. According to some versions of her story, 
Egeria favored Numa, so she would answer his every 
summons. Numa would invite her to public gather-
ings, where Egeria appeared in great sumptuousness, 
bringing with her great feasts. Other stories describe 
Egeria and Numa meeting secretly at night in a 
grove near the spring that would later be her site of 
worship. There she taught him how to honor the 
gods and properly ask for their help. Some sources 
suggest that Egeria’s gift of prophecy allowed her to 
help the king develop the just and fair laws for which 
he became famous.
After Numa died, Egeria, the nymph, was said to 
have despaired so much that the goddess Diana took 
pity on her and turned her into the spring that was so 
important to her.
Eileithya  (Ilithya)  Greek  Goddess of childbirth. 
Daughter of Hera and Zeus. Eileithya is met in accounts 
of the births of Heracles and of Leto’s delivery of her 
divine twins, Apollo and Artemis. Eileithya is probably 
a pre-Olympian goddess whose function was to take 
care of women in childbirth. She was sometimes identi-
fied with Hera, sometimes with Artemis.
Eirene  (Irene; Peace)  Greek  Goddess of peace. 
Eirene was the daughter of Zeus and Themis, a Titan 
goddess. According to the Greek poet Hesiod, she 
was one of the Horae, goddesses of the seasons. 
The Greek goddess of peace, Eirene, holds the 
infant Plutus, god of wealth, in this Roman copy 
of a Greek statue sculpted by Kephisodotos about 
370 B.C. The statue is in the Glyptothek in Munich, 
Germany.  (Photograph by Bibi Saint-Pol.)
Eirene  49

Eirene was also considered the goddess of health. 
She is often pictured on coins holding a Cornucopia, 
shafts of wheat, or an olive branch. A burning pile 
of weapons and armor represents Eirene on some 
artifacts. In Rome, she was worshiped as Pax.
Electra (1)  Greek  Daughter of Agamemnon 
and Clytemnestra; sister of Iphigenia and Orestes. 
Agamemnon was the leader of the Achaean (Greek) 
forces in the Trojan War. While her husband was 
gone to war, Clytemnestra took a lover, Aegisthus. 
When Agamemnon finally returned, he brought 
with him the lovely Cassandra. Aided by Aegist-
hus, Clytemnestra murdered both Agamemnon and 
Cassandra. To avenge their father’s death, Electra 
and Orestes murdered Clytemnestra and Aegisthus. 
Electra eventually married Pylades.
Many great playwrights tell the story of this tragic 
mythical family, including Aeschylus, Sophocles, 
and Euripides, and in modern times Eugene O’Neill 
(1883–1953) in Mourning Becomes Electra.
Electra (2)  Greek  One of the Pleiades; 
daughter of Atlas and Pleione; mother, by Zeus, 
of Dardanus, the founder of Troy. Some say that 
Electra was the lost Pleiad, who faded away with grief 
after the Trojan War and the destruction of Troy.
Electra (3)  (Amber)  Greek  A sea Nymph, or 
Oceanid, daughter of Oceanus and Tethys; one of 
the eldest of this group of nymphs, which numbered 
in the thousands; considered one of the second- 
generation Titans. She married Thaumus, a son of 
Gaia and Pontus, and with him was the mother of Iris 
(Rainbow) and the Harpies (Winds). 
Electra was considered a bright shining nymph 
who shone with an amber glow and was thought to 
live among the clouds, which would be appropriate 
since she was mother of rainbows and the spirits of 
sharp strong winds.
Eleusis  Ancient city in Attica, in ancient Greece, 
famous for being the site of the Eleusian Mysteries (see 
Demeter and the Eleusinian Mysteries, under Demeter).
Elysium  Greek  A conception of afterlife, the 
pre-Hellenic paradise that the Greeks identified with 
their mythical Islands of the Blessed, located at the 
ends of the Earth—“the far west.” People, or their 
shades, who were transported there led a blessedly 
happy life rather than remaining in the oblivion of 
the truly dead of the Underworld. Rhadamanthus 
and Cronus were joint rulers of this paradise. In 
Homer, Elysium was a place for elite heroes; in 
Hesiod, it was a place for the blessed dead; and from 
the time of Pindar, it was believed that admission to 
Elysium was the reward of a good life. Elysian, which 
means “in Elysium,” still refers to paradise in the 
phrase “Elysian fields.”
Endymion  Greek  According to various sources, 
the son of Zeus and Calyce or the shepherd son 
of Aethlius; prince or king of Elis, a region of the 
Peloponnesus; he was a beautiful young man, loved 
by Selene (Moon).
In one myth, Endymion begged Zeus to give him 
immortality so that he could be with Selene forever. 
Zeus granted his request with the condition that he 
remain eternally asleep. Another myth has it that 
Selene herself imposed eternal sleep on Endymion 
so that she might enjoy his beauty forever. In another 
story, it is said that Selene had 50 daughters by 
Endymion. Selene visited Endymion on many nights 
of the month, personifying the gentle radiance of the 
Moon that caresses the sleep of mortals.
Enyo (1)  Greek  A goddess of war, specifically 
known for sacking cities and towns of the enemy; 
daughter of Zeus and Hera; depicted as the sister, 
daughter, or mother of the war god Ares, often 
included as a companion of Ares when he went into 
battle.
Enyo was most known for her terrifying war cry 
and was portrayed carrying a lance and torch with 
which she incited troops to do battle. She was known 
to be the force sent to destroy cities. In Roman 
mythology, she took on the traits of Bellona, an 
ancient goddess of warfare. 
Enyo (2)  Greek  One of the three graea, who 
were daughters of Ceto and Phorcys; sister of 
Pemphrado and Dino and of the Gorgons. Between 
them, the three Graea shared one eye and one tooth, 
which they passed to each other as they needed it.
Eos  (Dawn)  Greek  The goddess of dawn. She 
was the daughter of Helios (Sun), or, some accounts 
say, the sister of Helios and Selene (Moon), begotten 
by the Titans, Hyperion and Theia. The Romans 
called her Aurora. Eos was married to Tithonus, 
but she had many other lovers. Eos is depicted as a 
beautiful young woman, sometimes riding the dawn 
skies on the winged horse, Pegasus, sometimes in a 
chariot drawn by two horses.
50  Electra (1)

With the Titan Astraeus as their father, Eos 
was mother to the winds Zephyrus and Boreas and 
various astral bodies.
Memnon was one of her sons with Tithonus. 
Cephalus was one of her partners in a tragic love affair.
Epaphus  Greek  The son of the god Zeus and Io. 
Epaphus was born in Egypt. Hera, wife of Zeus, was 
jealous of Io and tormented her endlessly until Io, in 
the shape of a young white cow, eventually escaped 
to Egypt, where Zeus restored her to her human 
shape. There, Io bore her son. Hera, still jealous, 
ordered the Curetes to kidnap Epaphus. This they 
did, but Zeus destroyed the Curetes and rescued the 
child. Epaphus later became king of Egypt, where he 
built the great city of Memphis, capital of the Old 
Kingdom of ancient Egypt.
Ephesus  Greek  An ancient Greek city of Asia 
Minor (today, Turkey, south of Izmir). Once a wealthy 
seaport, Ephesus was the site of a temple to the goddess 
Artemis (Roman Diana); the temple was considered 
one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.
Epidaurus  Greek  A city in southern Greece 
(northeastern Peloponnesus) celebrated in ancient 
times as the sanctuary of Asclepius, god of medicine 
and healing. Epidaurus is also famous for its magnifi-
cent theater, dating from the fourth century b.c.
Epigoni  (Descendants, the younger generation) 
Greek  The sons of the Seven Against Thebes, an 
expedition launched by Adrastus and Polynices to 
capture the throne of Thebes. The effort failed and 
Adrastus was the only survivor. When the sons of the 
Seven, the Epigoni, were old enough to bear arms, 
Adrastus rallied them to make a second attack. This 
one succeeded. Thebes was destroyed. It was a bitter 
victory for Adrastus, for his son Aegialeus was killed.
Epimetheus  (Afterthought)  Greek  Brother of 
Prometheus, a Titan. Epimetheus accepted Pan-
dora as his wife, in spite of the warnings of his wiser 
brother. Pandora had been created by the gods to 
punish humankind for accepting the forbidden gift of 
fire from Prometheus.
Epirus  Greek  An ancient country of Greece on 
the Ionian Sea, west of Macedonia and Thessaly. 
Epirus was the home of the Oracle at Dodona and 
refuge of the Centaurs when they were expelled 
from their native Thessaly.
Epona  Roman  A goddess who protected horses, 
donkeys, and mules, and paid special attention to 
foals and mares during the birthing process.
Epona was most popular among the soldiers of 
the Roman armies, who placed images celebrating 
her, often small statues, in their stables. Epona was 
said to be the daughter of a mare and a human.
The name, Epona, which is the source of pony, 
comes from the Celtic language of the British Isles. 
Some scholars suggest that Epona was a goddess of 
those northern people and later became a favorite in 
Rome after the Empire expanded into England in the 
first century. Epona is credited as the only Celtic god 
to be welcomed into the Roman pantheon. 
Other scholars, however, argue that a Roman 
goddess of horses was a very old deity in Central 
Italy and only her name changed after contact with 
the British Isles.
Erebus  (Darkness)  Greek  The personification of 
darkness. Erebus sprang from Chaos at the begin-
ning of time. He was the father of Charon, Nemesis, 
and others. His name was given to the gloomy under-
ground cavern through which the dead had to walk 
on their way to the Underworld.
Erechtheus  Greek  The son of Dardanus, the 
founder of Troy. Erechtheus was said to be the richest 
king on Earth. He owned thousands of magnificent 
horses, the offspring of Boreas, the North Wind. He 
was the father of Tros and the grandfather of Ilus, 
Ganymede, and Assaracus. King Priam of Troy was a 
descendant of Ilus.
Erichthonius  Greek  Legendary king of Ath-
ens. According to Homer, Erichthonius was the son 
of the lame god, Hephaestus, and Gaia. He grew 
out of semen spilled by Hephaestus when he tried 
to force his attentions on the goddess Athene. Earth 
nourished the seed and the child, Erichthonius, was 
born.
In a later story, Athene placed the child in a basket 
and gave him to the daughters of Cecrops, legendary 
first king of Athens, to look after. She forbade them 
to open the basket but the women could not resist. 
When they saw what was inside, they ran off scream-
ing, for the child was half serpent. It is common in 
Greek mythology for men born of the soil to be rep-
resented as half serpent, for serpents were regarded as 
the essential Earth creatures in ancient times.
After Erichthonius became king, he established 
the worship of Athene in Athens.
Erichthonius  51

Erigone  Greek  Daughter of King Icarius of 
Attica in ancient Greece, the area of the southeast-
ern mainland where modern Athens now stands. 
Drunken shepherds killed her father and buried him. 
Erigone and her faithful dog, Maera, set out in search 
of the vanished king. When Erigone discovered the 
tomb of Icarius, she was grief-stricken and hanged 
herself from a nearby tree. The gods transformed 
her into the constellation Virgo, and Maera became 
Procyon, the brightest star in Canis Minor.
Erinyes  Greek  The three avengers of wrong, 
generally known by their Roman name, the Furies. 
They were also called Eumenides (Good-Tempered 
Ones) by the wise and tactful Greeks, who feared 
their wrath.
Eriphyle  Greek  Wife of Amphiaraus mother of 
Alcmaeon, sister of Adrastus. Eriphyle was given the 
magic necklace of Harmonia, a guarantee of unfading 
beauty, for persuading her husband, Amphiaraus, and 
her brother, Adrastus, to join in the disastrous rebel-
lion known as the Seven Against Thebes. Alcmaeon 
killed Eriphyle but his mother’s dying curse was that 
no land would ever shelter her son.
Eris  (Discord)  Greek  The spirit or goddess of 
strife; the sister of Ares, Eris accompanied him into 
battle and helped to cause quarrels and lawlessness. In 
Hesiod’s poems, she is the daughter of Nyx (Night). 
Later legends say that Eris helped to cause the Trojan 
War by flinging her “apple of discord” among the 
guests at the wedding of Peleus and Thetis. Three 
jealous goddesses competed for the golden apple. 
Paris awarded the prize to Aphrodite, goddess of 
love and beauty.
Eros  (Erotic Love)  Greek  God of love and fertil-
ity, called Cupid by the Romans. In ancient times, Eros 
was a force to be feared. He represented the havoc and 
misery that could be brought about by love and desire. 
In later times, Eros was depicted as an overweight baby, 
winged, and carrying a bow and a quiver of arrows, 
which he would shoot off randomly. The parentage 
of Eros is confused and obscure. He is often thought 
of as the son of the goddess of love, Aphrodite. His 
father may have been the great god Zeus; the god 
of war, Ares; or the god of fertility, Hermes. Older 
traditions say that he is the son of Gaia, and therefore 
almost as old as the Earth. Though he appeared in 
many legends, Eros was never considered important 
enough to be set among the 12 great Olympian Gods. 
Nevertheless he is depicted as the constant companion 
of Aphrodite. The most famous tale about Eros is Eros 
(or Cupid) and Psyche.
Eros and Psyche  Eros was a Greek god of love, 
perhaps the son of Aphrodite, goddess of love. Psyche 
was a mortal princess. She was so beautiful that Aph-
rodite, in a jealous rage, ordered Eros to punish the 
maiden. Eros fell in love with Psyche and carried her 
off to a magnificent palace and married her. He did not 
reveal his identity to her and commanded her never to 
try to see his face. Psyche fell in love with the man she 
could not see and vowed never to look at him. Eventu-
ally, Psyche’s sisters persuaded her to break her vow, 
and as Eros lay asleep next to her, Psyche lit a lamp and 
beheld her husband’s beautiful face. Eros and all the 
beautiful surroundings immediately disappeared.
From then on, an angry Aphrodite pursued and 
tormented the maiden. She survived terrible ordeals, 
Eros, the winged god of love, pulls at the hair of an 
old centaur. This marble statue is a Roman copy 
made in the first century A.D. of an original from 
Greece made in the second century B.C. It stands in 
the Louvre in Paris.  (Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen.)
52  Erigone

helped by a mysterious force, Eros. Finally Eros 
pleaded with Zeus to put an end to her suffering. Zeus 
consented and conferred immortality on Psyche. The 
wedding of Psyche and Eros was celebrated on Olym-
pus, and Aphrodite, it is said, joined in the festivities.
Erytheia  (Erythia; Dazzling Light)  Greek  A 
Dryad, or wood Nymph; one of the sisters known 
as the Hesperides; either the daughters of Erebus 
(Darkness) and Nyx (Night) or the daughters of Atlas 
and Pleione or Hesperis. Her sisters, those named by 
people writing during the classic age of Greek mythol-
ogy, were Aegle (2), Arethusa, and Hesperia.
Ether  (Aether; Bright upper air)  Greek  Son 
of Nyx (Night) and Erebus (Darkness); brother of 
Hemera (Day). 
Ether was the personification of the upper air, the 
pure, bright, and good realm where the gods dwelled. 
He stretched between the dome of the sky, which 
was the realm of Uranus, and the air close to the 
Earth that humans breathed. Each night, his mother 
blocked the mortal view of Ether, and each day Hem-
era revealed his brilliant blue to the people below. 
Some Greek poets and writers claimed that Ether was 
the source of all life, the soul of the universe.
Ether was said to be the father, with his sister 
Hemera, of the sea goddess Thalassa, and of many 
natural forces, such as anger, lies, sorrow, and pride. 
Ethiopia  A country in northeast Africa. In Greek 
mythology, Andromeda was the daughter of Cepheus 
and Cassiopeia of Ethiopia. Memnon, a hero of the 
Trojan War, was a king of Ethiopia.
Etruria  Roman  An ancient culture that thrived 
in west central Italy from as early as the eighth to the 
fourth centuries b.c. Etruria was northwest of Rome. 
Archaeologists and historians have concluded that 
Etruria was not a kingdom or nation as much as a 
people who shared a culture and a language and lived 
in what are now the regions of Tuscany and Umbria.
The history and development of the Etruscans, 
who joined their cities into a loose confederation or 
cooperative, overlaps with that of their neighbors, the 
people of the city of Rome. The last three kings of 
Rome, the Tarquins, were immigrants from Etruria. 
They ruled in the 500s b.c. Some scholars believe the 
stories of their reign are as much a part of legend and 
mythology as of history.
After expelling the last of these kings in about 
509 b.c., the Romans formed their first republic and 
elected their first leaders. Eventually, the Romans 
conquered the cities of Etruria and absorbed that 
culture into their own.
The ancient gods of the Etruscans influenced the 
formation and development of the classical Roman 
religion. Many Roman gods and goddesses, such as 
Saturn and Diana, were first Etruscan deities.
The Estruscans were highly regarded for the ability 
of some of their people to see into the future. This gift, 
known as divination or divining, involved elaborate 
ceremonies and rituals that enhanced their ability to 
read in the signs of the Earth the intentions of the 
gods. This knowledge helped the Roman leaders make 
major decisions. Divination was a key element in help-
ing the Romans determine when to bring the power of 
a Greek god or goddess into their own culture.
Eumenides  (Good-Tempered Ones)  Greek  The 
ironic name Greek people used for the Erinyes, fear-
some creatures whose name means Furies. Eumenides 
is the term writers and poets generally used for them 
in literature.
Eunomia  (Order)  Greek  A goddess of order and 
lawful conduct and one of the three Horae, guardians 
of the seasons, with her sisters Dike (Justice) and Eirene 
(Peace). She was the daughter of Zeus and Themis.
Eunomia involved herself in the law-making 
process, helping mankind establish wise laws that 
allowed societies to prosper. Cities would lay claim 
to her, bragging that she chose to dwell within their 
walls. Eunomia had specific duties over springtime 
and the greening of nature.
Euripides  (480–406 b.c.)  One of the great Greek 
tragedians, ranked with Aeschylus and Sophocles, 
though his attitudes were very different from theirs. 
He found it hard to believe that the gods and god-
desses, with their capricious, all-too-human ways, 
were the creators of the universe. To him, mortal 
men and women were more interesting and noble, 
and their triumphs and tragedies more worthy of 
notice and of compassion. Among his surviving plays 
are Andromache, The Bacchae, Electra, Hecuba, Heracles, 
Medea, and The Trojan Women.
Europa  Greek  Daughter of Agenor, king of 
Tyre (a seaport in Phoenicia) and Telephassa, and 
the sister of Cadmus, Phoenix, and Cilix. Mother of 
Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon with Zeus; 
and of Euphemus with Poseidon; wife of Asterion, 
king of Crete.
Europa  53

Europa was famed for her beauty. Zeus fell in love 
with her and, knowing that the maiden liked to wan-
der on the shore, devised a plan. He turned himself 
into a snow-white bull and grazed peacefully on the 
grass near the shore. The beautiful animal enchanted 
Europa. She caressed him and twined garlands of 
flowers upon his horns. When the bull gracefully 
knelt before her, she climbed upon his back, where-
upon the bull dashed into the sea and swam with 
Europa to the island of Crete, which lies south of 
Greece. There he turned himself into an eagle and 
mated with Europa. She bore him three sons: Minos, 
Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon. Later Europa married 
Asterion, the king of Crete, who adopted her sons. 
She was worshiped as a goddess after her death.
The story of Europa and the bull is very old. 
It probably refers back to a time when the bull, a 
symbol of strength and fertility, was the principal 
cult animal of the eastern Mediterranean. It seems 
possible that the figure of Zeus was grafted onto an 
ancient Cretan story.
Zeus’s capture of Europa may refer to an early 
Hellenic raid on Phoenicia by Hellenes from Crete, 
when Taurus, king of Crete, assaulted Tyre during 
the absence of Agenor and his sons. The Hellenes 
took the city and carried off many captives, including 
the king’s daughter. The story also represents the 
contribution of Phoenician civilization to that of 
Crete, which is symbolized by the bull god.
Euryale  (Wide-Stepping)  Greek  One of the 
three gorgons, female monsters; daughter of Ceto, 
an ancient sea goddess, and Phorcys; her sisters 
were Stheno and Medusa. Euryale and Stheno were 
immortal, while their sister, Medusa, was mortal. 
Euryale and Stheno shared with Medusa the power 
to turn people to stone when the mortals looked into 
a gorgon’s eyes.
The hero Perseus was sent by Polydectes to 
retrieve the head of a gorgon; of course, he chose 
to cut off Medusa’s because she was mortal. Euryale 
and Stheno chased Perseus after his theft, raking the 
air with their great claws. As she flew after Perseus, 
Euryale screamed an agonized shriek that echoed 
after him. The gods turned that shriek into lamenting 
music and gave the song to humans. 
Euryale may also mean “the wide sea,” which 
would fit her role as a daughter of sea gods. 
Eurybia  Greek  A Titan; daughter of the Earth 
Mother Gaia and her son Pontus, an early sea god. 
This heritage gave Eurybia power over the seas, 
perhaps even over the tides and the rise and fall of 
the constellations. She married the Titan god Crius 
and with him had three children, Astraeus, Pallas, 
and Perses.
Eurydice  Greek  A beautiful Dryad (tree 
Nymph) who became the wife of Orpheus. While 
pursued by Aristaeur, she was bitten by a serpent 
and died. Stricken with grief, Orpheus charmed his 
way into the Underworld (1) and persuaded Hades 
to release his wife. Seduced by the beautiful music of 
Orpheus, Hades let Eurydice go, on the condition 
that Orpheus would not look back to see if she was 
following. The pair had almost reached the entrance 
to the world when Orpheus looked back. Eurydice 
disappeared instantly and he never saw her again. 
The tragic story of Orpheus and Eurydice is the 
subject of many plays and operas.
Eurylochus  Greek  One of the crewmen on 
the journey of Odysseus and, apart from Odysseus 
himself, the only one to escape the spell of Circe, the 
witch who turned men into swine. (See the Odyssey.) 
Eurylochus, who had been the head of the party 
exploring Circe’s island, hid, saw what happened to 
his shipmates and fled to warn Odysseus. Later, when 
Odysseus and his crew had escaped both Circe and 
the Underworld, Eurylochus led the crew to feast 
on the sacred cattle of Hyperion, god of the Sun, 
thus bringing about the destruction of the entire 
crew, except for Odysseus.
Eurynome  Greek  One of the eldest Oceanids, 
or ocean Nymphs, daughters of Oceanus. Counted 
among the Titans. She became a sea goddess after 
falling from power on Mount Olympus. Eurynome 
and Ophion, also a Titan, ruled the realm of these 
early gods after Gaia and Uranus until Cronus and 
Rhea, the most powerful Titans, seized power and 
threw them into the sea. Eurynome’s place in mythol-
ogy diminished as people turned to the Olympian 
gods.
Eurynome was also a love interest of Zeus, the most 
powerful Olympian god. With him, she became the 
mother of the three graces and the river god Asopus.
Eurynome helped Thetis rescue and raise Hep-
haestus, the Greek god of craftsmen, after one of 
his parents, Zeus or Hera, threw the infant into 
the ocean. Eurynome was portrayed in statues as a 
mermaid.
54  Euryale

Eurystheus  Greek  The king of Argos and 
Mycenae who imposed the Twelve Labors upon 
his cousin, Heracles. Eurystheus was the son of 
Sthenelus, a descendant of the hero Perseus, and 
Nicippe. Eurystheus became king because of the 
wiles of Hera, the angry and jealous wife of the 
god Zeus. On the day that Heracles was to be born, 
Zeus proclaimed before the Olympian Gods that 
the descendant of Perseus born on that day would 
become ruler of Greece. Zeus fully expected that 
his son with Alcmene, to be named Heracles, would 
qualify for the role of ruler. But Hera, knowing that 
Nicippe was about to give birth, caused her child, 
Eurystheus, to be born ahead of Heracles. Thus it 
was Eurystheus, not Heracles, who became ruler of 
Greece.
The chagrined Zeus decreed that if Heracles 
could perform the Twelve Labors imposed by Eurys-
theus he would become a god.
Eurytus  Greek  King of Oechalia, father of iole. 
Eurytus was a renowned archer. He promised his 
daughter Iole, to anyone who could shoot better than 
he. The great hero Heracles won the contest, but 
Eurytus accused Heracles of using poisoned arrows 
and furthermore of being a slave of Eurystheus and 
therefore unworthy of a king’s daughter. Eurytus 
refused to honor Heracles’ right to the hand of Iole. 
For this Eurytus died at the hand of Heracles, but 
Heracles was also to die because of Iole.
Evander  Roman  Evander was the name of a 
minor Greek deity from Arcadia whose history took 
on mortal details when he fled Greece for Italy.
Evander was the son of the Greek god Hermes 
and the Nymph Carmenta. He and his mother were 
banished from Greece for killing his stepfather. They 
settled in Italy long before the Trojan hero Aeneas is 
believed to have arrived there. Evander built a palace 
on the hill on the Tiber River that would become 
the Palatine Hill. He was a kind ruler and taught 
the native people music, religion, and, most notably, 
writing.
Some scholars believe Roman poets of the second 
and first centuries b.c. invented Evander to create a 
link between Roman and Greek traditions.
Evander  55

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
56
F
8
Fama  Roman  A minor goddess who spread 
rumors, mixing truth and lies, and who also spread 
strife and disagreement. She was perhaps only the 
personification of the human trait of spreading rumor 
and gossip. When Fama, speaking in many voices, 
spread her rumors in the realms of the gods, Jupiter 
cast her out, sending her to live among humans 
where she found it easy to spread harm and evil. The 
Greeks knew her as Ossa, or Pheme.
The Roman poet Virgil described Fama in great 
detail. He said she had thousands of eyes and mouths 
and that she could fly between the Earth and the 
heavens. Her palace had many openings through 
which the false messages she spoke could pass to be 
spread over the Earth. Scholars suggest that Virgil 
himself, or Greek poets too, may have created this 
goddess, basing her features on little more than their 
ideas for the forces that cause rumors.
Fauna  Roman  An ancient goddess of healing 
and productivity of the Earth. Fauna was also a god-
dess of chastity and of fertility in women. Fauna was 
either the sister or the wife of Faunus, an equally old 
Roman god of nature and fertility.
As a prophetess, she was called Fatua, and as a 
goddess she was also known by some as Bona Dea, 
which means “good goddess.” In some stories, Fauna 
and Hercules, the Roman version of the Greek 
Heracles, fall in love when the hero arrives in Italy. 
Together they are the parents of Latinus, who 
becomes the king of the people of the Latium region 
of central Italy.
Faunus  Roman  One of the oldest gods; god 
of nature and fertility, protector of farmers and 
shepherds. He also had the gift of prophecy. Faunus 
probably evolved into a single deity from the original 
idea of the fauni, spirits of the countryside. He was 
usually depicted as a young man with the horns and 
legs of a goat, similar to the Satyr of Greek myth. 
His female counterpart was Flora. Faunus was 
identified with the Greek god Pan.
In natural history, the word fauna is used to 
denote the animals of a region or specific area, as the 
word flora denotes vegetation.
Faustulus  (Faustus)  Roman  The shepherd 
who found the twin infants Romulus and Remus 
being suckled by a wolf and took them to his home to 
give them shelter. His wife Acca Larentia (1) nursed 
them and raised the boys as her own. 
Faustulus was, according to some versions of the 
story of these twins, a shepherd to King Amulias, 
who had ordered that Romulus and Remus be put 
into the Tiber River to die just after they were born. 
Having overheard the king’s plan, Faustulus followed 
the servants who were going to destroy the boys and 
rescued the infants. Later, Faustulus made the boys’ 
parentage known to the kingdom and helped them 
restore their grandfather, Numitor, as king of Alba 
Longa, thus ensuring their inheritance. 
Faustulus died trying to stop one of the many 
fights between the adult Romulus and Remus. He 
was known in classical Roman times to have been 
buried on the Aventine Hill. 
Favonius  (Favorable)  Roman  The god of the 
gentle west Wind. Favonius announced the coming 
of spring and helped vegetation grow. 
According to the Roman poet Ovid, Favonius 
beheld Flora, the goddess of flowers and plants, 
as she wandered in a field. He fell in love with her, 
carried her off, and married her.
Febris  (Fever)  Roman  The goddess of fevers. 
The people of ancient Rome and the tribes and 
people who lived nearby feared fevers for they 
spread quickly and often caused epidemics. Writers 

during the age of the Roman Republic and Empire 
recognized that the people, fearing fevers, created 
a goddess to whom they could offer sacrifices in an 
attempt to ward off fevers and to protect loved ones 
from illness and death. 
In honor of Febris, ancient Romans built three 
temples, all in heavily populated areas, where they 
could offer such sacrifices. One stood on the Palatine 
Hill, one on the Esqualine Hill, and one at the top of 
a valley near the Quirinal Hill, which was one of the 
most populated areas of Rome, and a part of the city 
most threatened by diseases.
Feronia  Roman  Ancient deity thought to be a 
goddess of fertility and childbirth. Although little is 
known about her, inscriptions show that Feronia was 
popular in central Italy. Her most famous shrine, near 
Terracina, was used for the ceremony of bestowing 
freedom on slaves. Terracina is an ancient town on the 
Tyrrhenian Sea, midway between modern Rome and 
Naples.
Fides  (Fides Publica)  Roman  The goddess or 
personification of honor, honesty, and good faith, 
particularly as displayed publicly in support of Rome. 
People called upon Fides to protect contracts and 
commerce, in private lives as well as in affairs of the 
government. Her origins in Roman religion were 
ancient, and she was held by some to be older than 
the great god Jupiter. Fides was pictured as a white-
haired old woman.
Fides was worshiped at a temple on the Capito-
line Hill in Rome, built in 282 b.c., which was also 
a place where the Roman Senate met. Here, too, 
leaders of Rome welcomed emissaries from other 
countries.
flamen  Roman  In ancient Rome, a special priest 
ordained to offer daily tributes to particular gods in 
the Roman pantheon. The flamens were responsible 
for organizing daily sacrifices to the gods, and were 
exempt from taxation and military duty. It was a 
peculiarity of Roman dictators and emperors that 
they accepted deification during their lifetimes, and 
so were allowed to have their own flamens who 
would honor them. Thus Mark Antony was a flamen, 
or priest, of Julius Caesar.
The flamens are historical, rather than mythologi-
cal people, but they carried on some of the traditions 
of ancient peoples, such as the ritual sacrifices to 
particular gods.
Flora  Roman  The ancient goddess of flowers 
and plants, budding fruit, youth, and springtime. 
Flora’s worship may have begun among the Sabine 
people, one of the many central Italian cultures, who 
brought her cult to Rome when they settled on the 
Quirinal Hill, one of the city’s seven famous hills.
Flora was often honored with Ceres, goddess 
of corn and Earth, and Tellus, a fertility goddess. 
Together, these three goddesses represented features 
of the more ancient Earth Mother, creator and 
guardian of all on Earth.
Flora was also considered the female counterpart 
of Faunus, Roman god of fertility and nature. Her 
festival, the Floralia, arrived in the end of May in 
the Roman calendar. She was shown in statues and 
paintings wearing flowers.
The word flora refers to the vegetation native to 
a region or area.
Fons  (Fontus)  Roman   The god of springs and 
fountains. Little is known today about this god, 
though an important festival, the Fontinalia, was 
celebrated on October 13 in the ancient Roman cal-
endar. Archaeologists have uncovered several temples 
dedicated to Fons in Rome. Juturna, an ancient 
Roman goddess of springs and fountains, was Fons’ 
mother, according to some Roman historians.
Fornax  (Furnace)  Roman  A goddess of bak-
ing, who oversaw the ovens used for baking so that 
they did not become too hot and burn the roasting 
corn or bread. She was the patroness of bakers.
Fornax presided over the festivals of the Fornaca-
lia, which were celebrated in early February, certainly 
before the 17th. During these feasts, often celebrated 
in households or small groups, people toasted corn, 
preparing it to be ground into flour and used for 
bread. Some scholars suggest that the festival is older 
than the name of the goddess and that the story of her 
influence developed as a way to explain the festival. 
The traditions of Fornax eventually merged with 
the stories and duties of Vesta, goddess of the 
hearth. 
Fors  Roman  The god of fortune. Fors was 
closely connected with Fortuna, goddess of destiny 
and chance. The two were often considered a pair in 
religious practices and were frequently linked in one 
phrase as Fors Fortuna. Some scholars say that Fors 
and Fortuna merged into one god that incorporated 
both male and female characteristics.
Fors  57

Fortuna  (Fate)  Roman  Goddess of destiny and 
chance, of great antiquity. She was identified with 
the Greek Tyche. Fortuna was represented with a 
horn of plenty (a horn or basket filled with fruit 
and flowers, a symbol of fruitfulness), and a rudder, 
because it is Fortune that “steers” people’s lives as 
a rudder steers a boat. Fortuna’s most important 
temple was at Praeneste Palestrina, where she was 
called Primigenia (Firstborn, possibly of the god 
Jupiter, though there is some confusion about this). 
The Praeneste Palestrina in Latium, founded about 
800 b.c., was one of the largest sanctuaries in Italy. 
Crowned with the round temple of Fortuna, it was 
visible for miles around. 
See also Fors.
Furies  (Furiae)  Greek and Roman  The Roman 
common name, now used almost exclusively, for a 
group of Greek goddesses of vengence. The proper 
Greek name for these goddesses is Erinyes. They 
were said by the poet Hesiod to be the daughters 
of the Earth Mother, Gaia. They sprang from 
the blood of Uranus. In other accounts, they were 
the daughters of Nyx or of Erebus. Their numbers 
varied but there were generally thought to be three 
Furies: Alecto (She Who Rests Not), Megaera (Jeal-
ous One), and Tisiphone (Avenger of Blood).
The Roman Furies were merciless avengers of 
any crimes committed, especially those that involved 
bloodshed in a family or among kin. It is said that 
their punishment continued even after death and 
descent into the Underworld.
Furrina  Roman  A nymph, or an ancient god-
dess, about whom little is known, even though people 
celebrated a feast to her each year on July 25. As a 
nymph, or water spirit, Furrina is said to have lived 
in a woods near a stream that flowed into the Tiber 
River in Rome, a place known as the Grove of Fur-
rina. By the first century b.c. her name was included 
in a list of the Roman Furies, goddesses of vengeance 
and fate.
58  Fortuna

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
59
G
8
Gaia  (Gaea, Ge; Earth)  Greek  The personi-
fication of the Earth Mother in Greek mythology; 
known to the Romans as Tellus. She was born out 
of Chaos at the beginning of time and in turn bore 
Uranus, the starlit sky.
Gaia was the mother of the seas, the mountains 
and valleys, and all the other natural features of the 
Earth. Once the Earth formed, Gaia mated with her 
son Uranus and produced the Titans, the first race on 
Earth. Then came the Cyclopes and the Hecaton-
cheires (Hundred-Handed Ones). Uranus was hor-
rified by his monstrous offspring and banished them 
all to the Underworld. At first, Gaia mourned her 
children but then she became angry with Uranus. She 
fashioned a sharp sickle and gave it to Cronus, her 
youngest and bravest Titan son, bidding him to attack 
Uranus. Cronus mutilated his father’s body and cast 
its parts into the ocean. From the blood that dropped 
upon the Earth sprang the Furies, the Gigantes 
(Giants), and the ash Nymphs (the Meliae).
According to the Greek poet Hesiod and others, 
the primitive Greeks worshiped the Earth, which they 
pictured as a bountiful mother. She was the supreme 
deity not only of humans but of gods. Later, when the 
Olympian Gods were established, people still held 
Gaia in reverence. She presided over marriages and 
was honored as a prophetess. They offered her gifts 
of fruits and grains at her many shrines. Gaia was 
represented as a gigantic, full-breasted woman.
Galatea (1)  (Milk White)  The most famous 
Galatea in Greek mythology was a Nereid, or sea 
Nymph, daughter of Nereus and Doris. This Galatea 
was a prominent character in the stories of Sicily, the 
huge island off the tip of the “boot” of Italy, which 
was home to early Greek colonies. The one-eyed 
giant sea monster, Polyphemus, fell in love with this 
fair creature, but she did not return his love, for she 
loved Acis, son of the god Pan. One day, Polyphemus 
discovered Galatea and Acis as they lay together on 
the banks of a river. In a fit of jealousy, the giant 
hurled a boulder at them. To protect Acis, Galatea 
turned him into a river. This story was told by the 
first-century Roman poet Ovid and has been retold 
by poets and musicians. The English composer 
George Frederick Handel based his musical masque 
Acis and Galatea on this love story.
Galatea (2)  Greek  In a story from Crete, a 
young woman named Galatea was married to a good 
man from a poor family. When she became pregnant, 
he told her he wanted only a son, and if a daughter 
should be born, Galatea was to leave her out in the 
wilds to die. While her husband was away on a trip, 
Galatea gave birth to a girl, but the mother could not 
expose her daughter. Instead, Galatea sought the help 
of soothsayer, who told her to dress the girl as a boy. 
This trick worked until the daughter reached early 
womanhood. In great fear, Galatea prayed for help 
from Leto, a kind, gentle Titan goddess who took 
pity on Galatea and changed her daughter into a son.
Galatea (3)  Greek  The name given to the 
ivory statue of a maiden, loved by Pygmalion, a king 
of Cyprus, after the goddess of love, Aphrodite, 
brought the statue to life.
Galli  Greek  Priests of the goddess Cybele. They 
celebrated her with wild dances, loud music, and the 
clashing of shields and swords. These priests were 
akin to the Corybantes, who also worshipped Cybele, 
and were later identified with the Curetes of Crete.
Ganymede  Greek  A Trojan prince, great-grand-
son of Dardanus, the founder of Troy. The god 
Zeus, enraptured by the beauty of young Ganymede, 
carried him off to Olympus to be a cupbearer to the 
gods. Some say that Zeus took the form of an eagle 

for this exploit; others that the god came as a wind 
storm. There are many famed depictions of this 
event. Ganymede is also the name of a moon of the 
planet Jupiter.
Genius  (plural: Geniti)  (Creative Force, Guard-
ian Spirit)  Roman  The spirit that attended a man 
from birth until death. (A Juno spirit accompanied 
a woman.) The genius determined the person’s 
character, happiness, and fortune.
The genius was the source of creativity; hence 
the word genius is used to describe an exceptionally 
talented person. In some accounts, each person was 
thought to have both a good and a bad genius. Bad 
luck was the work of the evil genius. The plural of 
genius is genii.
(The genie of Eastern mythology were jinns 
[fallen angels] and had nothing to do with the genii 
of Roman mythology.)
Geryon  Greek  A monster with three heads, 
three bodies, and six hands. Geryon owned red cattle, 
which were guarded by the two-headed dog, Orthrus, 
and the herdsman, Eurytion. In his Tenth Labor, the 
hero Heracles slew the dog and the herdsman. After 
a fearsome battle, Heracles defeated Geryon.
From Geryon’s blood sprang a tree that produced a 
stoneless, cherrylike fruit that yielded a blood-red dye.
Gigantes  (Giants)  Greek  The offspring of 
Gaia and the blood of the wounded Uranus. Gaia 
prompted the giants to attack the Titan gods, and 
the War of the Giants began. The gods finally won, 
with the help of the hero Heracles, who used his 
bow to good effect. Zeus killed Porphyrion with a 
thunderbolt, Athene killed Enceladus, and Hepha-
estus hurled red-hot iron. Dionysus tripped up the 
giants with his vines. Apollo, Hermes, and Poseidon 
also joined in. The giants were completely defeated. 
Scholars say that the battle represented the conflict 
either between barbarism and order, or between 
humans and the forces of nature.
Glaucus (1)  Greek  The most famous Glaucus 
was the grandson of Bellerophon, a hero in the 
Iliad. Glaucus fought on the Trojan side during the 
Trojan War. He and the Greek hero Diomedes (1) 
discovered that their grandparents had been friends, 
so the two exchanged armor and vows of friendship. 
Another of Glaucus’s friends was Sarpedon. When 
Sarpedon was killed, Glaucus appealed to the god 
Apollo to help him retrieve the body. This he did, 
with the help of the hero Hector. Ajax (1) eventually 
killed Glaucus in battle.
Glaucus (2)  Greek  The son of Sisyphus and 
father of Bellerophon and owner of a famous herd 
of mares. However, Glaucus refused to let them 
breed, thus incurring the anger of Aphrodite, god-
dess of love. Aphrodite drove the mares mad and they 
tore Glaucus to pieces in their frenzy.
Glaucus (3)  Greek  This Glaucus was born a 
human but by chance ate an herb that made him 
immortal. He became a prominent sea god, pictured 
as a merman, his top half human and his lower half 
a fish tail. Glaucus was a lesser god, but he had the 
power of seeing into the future, and this gift made 
him a favorite deity of sailors and fishermen, who paid 
him special attention. Glaucus is said to have traveled 
the entire coast of the Mediterranean Sea each year, 
visiting each of its ports on that journey. Glaucus was 
either the son of a fisherman from Anthedon or the 
son of the great sea god Poseidon.
Golden Bough  Roman  The Sybil of Cumae 
sent the hero Aeneas to obtain the Golden Bough, 
which would give him safe passage to the Under-
world. The Golden Bough is thought to be the 
mistletoe, a plant that appears in many mytholo-
gies.
Golden Fleece  Greek  This fabled fleece was 
worn on the back of an extraordinary ram. The ram 
could talk and think, it could move through the air as 
easily as on land, and it had a fleece of gold. The god 
Hermes sent the ram to rescue Phrixus and Helle, 
children of Athamas, king of Boeotia. The hero 
Jason and his companions, the Argonauts, overcame 
enormous obstacles to capture the precious fleece 
and return it to King Pelias of Iolcus, in Boeotia.
Many scholars think that the “golden fleece” 
represented either gold amber or perhaps the alluvial 
gold found in riverbeds near the Black Sea and col-
lected by the natives in fleeces laid on the river beds.
Gordian knot  Greek  A puzzling and intri-
cate knot tied by Gordius, king of Phrygia, in Asia 
Minor, in a rope linking the yoke and the pole of the 
ox-cart that had carried him to the temple of Zeus. 
Zeus, obeying the words of an oracle, made the 
peasant Gordius the new king of Phrygia. It is said 
that the ox-cart remained for centuries at Gordium, 
the capital city of Phrygia founded by Gordius.
60  GEnius

A superstition grew up around the knot: whoever 
could untie the knot would become the ruler of Asia. 
No one ever untied the knot, but in legend, Alexander 
the Great slashed through the knot with his mighty 
sword and did indeed become the ruler of Asia. The 
legend of the Gordian knot seems to demonstrate 
that, in some cases, the power of the sword is greater 
than that of superstition. “To cut the Gordian knot” 
has come to mean resolving a difficult problem with 
one decisive, forceful step.
Gorgons  (Grim Ones)  Greek  Three female 
monsters (the Euryae); daughters of Ceto and Phor-
cys; sisters of the Graea. Their names were Euryale, 
Stheno, and Medusa. They had the bodies of 
women, brass claws for hands, and snakes for hair. 
Two were immortal, but Medusa was not. The hero 
Perseus killed her and cut off her head.
Graces, The Three  Greek  Goddesses of beau-
ty and charm, they were themselves embodiments 
of both. The Graces are usually thought to be 
the daughters of the god Zeus and Eurynome. 
The poet Hesiod named them: Thalia (Flowering), 
Euphrosyne (Joy), and Aglaia (Radiance). The Three 
Graces were the personification of joy and well being. 
They were present at human and divine marriages, 
and constantly attendant upon the goddess of love, 
Aphrodite. They were also associated with the god 
Apollo.
The Three Graces are often depicted as mingling 
with nymphs in joyous dances celebrating the boun-
ties of nature.
Graea  (Gray Women)  Greek  Daughters of 
Phorcys and Ceto; sisters of the Gorgons. Their 
names were Dino, Enyo, and Pemphredo. The per-
sonification of old age, they had only one eye and one 
tooth to share among themselves. Perseus stole the 
eye as they passed it from one to another. He gave it 
back to them after they had told him the whereabouts 
of their sister, Medusa, and where to find the helmet, 
winged sandals, and magic wallet he needed to 
complete his quest.
Greece  Today, a nation in southeastern Europe, 
part of the Balkan Peninsula. This country’s official 
name is the Hellenic Republic, and the people who 
live there call their country “Ellas” or “Hellas.” These 
names reflect images of the ancient past of this part of 
the Mediterranean world. Greek comes from Graeci, 
the name the Latin-speaking people of Italy gave 
to colonists from across the Ionian Sea. The word 
Hellenic refers to the god Hellen, ancestor of the 
ancient peoples of the southern Balkan Peninsula 
and the name the people of this land gave themselves 
from ancient times.
People have inhabited the land that is now Greece 
from prehistoric times. Archaeologists have discov-
ered Stone Age farming settlements on this peninsula 
from as long ago as 6500 b.c. The ruins of towns and 
villages built during the early and middle Bronze Age 
(3000 to 1600 b.c.) are also quite common. Evidence 
from all of these sites shows that, during the Bronze 
Age, the people of Greece began trading extensively 
with neighbors on Crete and in Asia Minor and the 
Middle East.
In the late Bronze Age (1600 to 1150 b.c.), the 
first true cities and small kingdoms appeared, many 
of them on the southern part of the peninsula, an 
area known as the Peloponnesus. Here and in this 
age, the first significant power centers of ancient 
Greece developed. The city of Mycenae grew into a 
major trading and military center on the northeastern 
side of the Peloponnesus, not far from the Isthmus 
of Corinth. Agamemnon, one of the great heroes 
of Greek legends, was king of this city, according to 
Homer’s Iliad and other ancient sources. This city 
also gave its name to the first great age of Greece, the 
Mycenaean Age.
Homer, the Greek poet credited with writing the 
Iliad and the Odyssey, lived and wrote, according to 
the best scholarly evidence, around 1050 to 700 b.c., 
a time known as the Archaic Age of Greek history. 
His subject matter, though, was the Mycenaean Age 
and the heroes and warriors of that time. The first 
people who worshiped the gods and goddesses that 
Homer wrote about lived in a time that left few if any 
written records, but their stories were preserved by 
the developing Greek culture. More than a century of 
archaeology has revealed much about this mythology 
and about the lives of the people who believed in 
these gods.
The great Classical Age of Greece began about 
490 b.c. It was separated from the Mycenaean Age by 
a dark age of conflict and by the Archaic Age, includ-
ing the time of Homer, from 750 to 490 b.c. During 
the Classical age, people built great temples to the 
gods, poets and dramatists drew upon the myths of 
the Greek religion to write their great works, and 
artists carved statues and fashioned jewelry to com-
memorate the gods. The Classical Age was the height 
of cultural development.
Greece  61

During all of its history, Greece was a collection 
of city-states, or small communities, rather than a 
nation. These communities organized around indi-
vidual political ideals, but the people of this peninsula 
shared a great deal of culture and trade. They shared 
a common language and common beliefs in the great 
pantheon of Zeus and the Olympian Gods. Though 
city-states waged war with one another as well as 
the people of other lands around the Mediterranean, 
the people found it easy to travel between cities and 
towns to visit religious sites such as Apollo’s Oracle 
at Delphi, and to conduct business.
The Hellenistic Age followed the Classical Age. 
It began with the conquests of Philip III and his son 
Alexander the Great. This age represented the spread 
of Greek culture from Spain in the west to Pakistan 
in the east. People living in Greek colonies around 
the Mediterranean Sea helped spread the concepts of 
civilization to other people, greatly influencing the 
lives of people of other cultures. By the end of this 
period, the Romans had spread their political and 
military influence to this neighboring peninsula and 
made Greece part of the Roman Empire.
The Ages of Greece
Name	
Time period
Early and mid-Bronze Ages	
3000–1600 b.c.
Mycenaean Age	
1600–1150 b.c.
Dark Ages	
1150–750 b.c.
Archaic Age	
750–490 b.c.
Classical Age	
490–323 b.c.
Hellenistic Age	
323–30 b.c.
62  Greece

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
63
H
8
Hades  Greek  God of the Underworld, associated 
in Roman mythology with Pluto, Orcus, and Dis. 
Hades was the son of Cronus and Rhea, and like his 
sisters, Demeter, Hera, and Hestia, and his brother 
Poseidon, was swallowed by Cronus. His brother Zeus 
escaped and eventually rescued his brothers and sisters 
from Cronus.
After the defeat of Cronus, Zeus, Poseidon, and 
Hades drew lots to see who should rule the various 
parts of the universe. To Hades fell the Underworld.
Hades seldom left his underground realm—or if 
he did, no one knew about it, for he had a helmet 
that made him invisible. When he fell in love with 
Persephone, however, Hades traveled above ground 
to pursue her as she gathered flowers in a field. He 
carried her off into the dark Earth, and there she 
lived for four months of the year.
On another occasion, Hades came above ground 
to woo the Nymph, Minthe. In a fit of anger, 
Persephone, or perhaps Demeter, trod the maiden 
underfoot. A sorrowful Hades transformed her into 
the fragrant mint plant.
As he was essentially a god of terror and inexorable 
death, there were few temples built to Hades and he 
had few worshippers. The cypress and the narcissus 
were sacred to Hades.
The word Hades is often used as a euphemism for 
Hell.
Harmonia  (Peace)  Greek  Daughter of Aphro-
dite and Ares; wife of Cadmus, king of Thebes. All the 
Olympian Gods attended the wedding of Harmonia 
and Cadmus. The gods blessed Harmonia with many 
gifts, including a golden necklace from Aphrodite, 
made by the smith-god, Hephaestus. The necklace 
had the power of giving unfading beauty to its wearer, 
but it would also bring misfortune in the later history 
of Thebes (see Eriphyle and Seven Against Thebes).
While Harmonia, which means “peace,” may 
seem a strange name for a daughter born of Aphro-
dite, the goddess of love, and Ares, the god of war, 
some scholars note that then, as now, more than 
usual affection and therefore harmony are generated 
among people in times of stress such as war.
The children of Cadmus and Harmonia were daugh-
ters Ino, Agave, and Semele, and Polydorus, a son.
Harpies  (Swift Robbers)  Greek  The storm winds; 
daughters of Electra (3), a sea Nymph, and an ancient 
sea god, Thaumus; sisters of the goddess of rainbows, 
Iris.
In early stories, the Harpies were shown as 
beautiful winged women. They were said to appear 
suddenly and snatch up people and objects and were 
blamed for sudden disappearances. The Harpies 
served the great god Zeus, who wielded thunder and 
lightning as his weapons, and sent them along with 
storms to do his bidding.
The poet Hesiod wrote that there were two 
Harpies and that their names were Aello and Ocypete. 
Homer names a third Harpy, Pordage, and says she was 
married to the western wind Zephyrus, and gave birth 
to the two great horses of Achilles. In later mythology, 
particularly the stories of Jason and the Argonauts, 
authors described the Harpies as vicious bird-like 
creatures with sharp talons that carried off food and 
precious treasures and gave off a terrible stench.
In Roman mythology, Harpies attack Aeneas and 
his Trojan crew in Virgil’s Aeneid. This poet names 
a yet another Harpy, Celaeno.
Hebe  Greek  Daughter of the gods Zeus and 
Hera and cupbearer to the gods. She became the 
wife of the hero Heracles after he was deified and 
transported to Olympus. Later Hebe was represented 
as the goddess of youth, with the power to rejuvenate, 

that is, bring back youth. In Roman mythlogy she is 
called Juventas (Youth).
Hecate  Greek  A goddess with ancient origins 
whose traits changed significantly over time; daugh-
ter of Perses and Asteria. In her earliest form, Hec-
ate was a goddess of goodwill who gave prosperity 
and victory to people. She was originally a Titan. 
In her later forms, Hecate was a powerful goddess 
of magic and witches. She presided over sorcery and 
had the power to send spirits of the dead up to the 
human world. She was honored and summoned at 
crossroads, which were, in ancient times, believed to 
be the best places to perform witchcraft.
Hecate became associated with Persephone, the 
queen of the Underworld, and was often linked 
to Selene, a Titan moon goddess, and Artemis, an 
Olympian moon goddess. Hecate was often portrayed 
as a woman with either three heads or three bodies.
Hecatoncheires  (Hecatonchires)  Greek 
The hundred-handed giants, offspring of Gaia and 
Uranus. Their names were Briareus, Cottus, and 
Gyges. They helped Zeus in the war against the Titans. 
The Hundred-Handed Ones are thought to represent 
early bands of warriors, who were organized in groups 
of 100 men. In Latin poetry, their name is Centimani.
Hector  Greek  A great hero of the Trojans (see 
Trojan War); eldest son of Priam, king of Troy, and 
of Hecuba; brother of Paris, Helenus, and Cas-
sandra; husband of Andromache; father of Astyanax. 
Hector has very little mythology except in Homer’s 
Iliad. His death, the violation of his body by Achil-
les, and his magnificent funeral bring the Iliad to 
an end. There are references to Hector in Virgil’s 
Aeneid, and Ovid’s Metamorphoses.
Hecuba  Greek  Wife of King Priam of Troy; 
daughter of the king of Phrygia; mother of many, 
among them Hector, leader of the Trojans in the 
Trojan War, and Paris, whose abduction of Helen 
was a leading cause of the war. Hecuba was a char-
acter in Homer’s Iliad and in Euripides’ tragedies 
Hecuba and The Trojan Women.
Helen  Greek  Daughter of Zeus and Leda, said 
to have been born from an egg, since Zeus came to 
Leda and mated with her disguised as a swan. Often 
called Helen of Troy, Helen was in fact from Sparta. 
She was the sister of the Dioscuri (Castor and 
Polydeuces) and of Clytemnestra. She became the 
wife of Menelaus, king of Troy. Helen was said to be 
the most beautiful woman in the world, a symbol of 
womanly beauty. Her abduction by the Trojan prince 
Paris was a leading cause of the Trojan War.
There are varying accounts of the end of Helen. 
Some say that after the fall of Troy she was reconciled 
with her husband, Menelaus. Others say that she 
married Deiphobus, that she was hanged by a venge-
ful queen, or that she hanged herself from a tree. She 
was venerated as a goddess of beauty on the island 
of Rhodes in the eastern Mediterranean under the 
name Dendritis (Tree).
It seems likely that Helen was an ancient goddess 
of fertility in Laconia, which may account for the 
halfhuman, halfdivine stories that feature her.
Helenus  Greek  Son of Priam and Hecuba; 
brother of Paris, Hector, and Cassandra. With his 
sister, Helenus shared the gift of prophecy. In Homer’s 
Iliad, Helenus gives good advice to Hector, leader of 
the Trojans in the Trojan War. In the play Androm-
ache, by Euripides, Helenus weds his fellow captive 
Andromache after the fall of Troy. In some accounts, 
Helenus becomes king of Epirus. In Virgil’s Aeneid, 
he warns the Trojan hero of Scylla and Charybdis 
and urges him to consult with the Sibyl of Cumae.
Helicon, Mount  Greek  The highest mountain 
in Boeotia, in the southern part of the Greek mainland. 
It was celebrated in Greek mythology as the haunt of 
the nine muses. The poet Hesiod lived on the slopes 
of Mount Helicon. In later mythology, the spring of 
Hippocrene, created when the winged horse Pegasus 
stamped his hoof, flowed just below the summit.
Helios  (Helius)  (The sun god)  Greek  Helios 
was husband to Rhodos, the Nymph of the island of 
Rhodes, which he chose as his favored abode. Their 
children—Circe, Acetes, and Phaeton—were the 
first inhabitants of Rhodes. Helios is usually depicted 
as a charioteer who drove the Sun across the Earth 
from east to west each day. Helios was all-seeing and 
often called upon as a witness (see Demeter and Perse-
phone, under Demeter). Helios (called Hyperion by 
Homer) appears in both the Iliad and the Odyssey; in 
the latter, the cattle of Helios (Hyperion) are victims 
of Odysseus and his crew of hungry mariners.
In later times, Helios was identified with Apollo, 
and, in the late Roman empire, with Sol, one of the 
principal gods of the Romans.
64  Hecate

Helle  Greek  Daughter of Athamas and Neph-
ele; sister of Phrixus. Helle and her brother fled 
from Ino, their stepmother, on the back of the 
winged ram with the famed Golden Fleece, which 
Hermes sent to them. One story has it that Helle fell 
from the air and drowned at a place in the ocean that 
came to be called the Hellespont in her honor, but 
Phrixus was rescued by Aeetes.
Hellen  Greek  The son of Deucalion and Pyrrha, 
survivors of the Flood. He was the father of Aeolus, 
Dorus, and Xuthus and through them the patriarch of 
all the Hellenes, who were also known as Greeks.
Hellenes  Greek  The name given to the people 
now known as Greeks. The name was derived from 
Hellen, the son of Deucalion, who became, after 
The goddess Venus (reclining above) gives Helen, the most beautiful woman in the world, to Paris in this 
painting by Scottish artist Gavin Hamilton (1723-1798). The painting hangs in the Museum of Rome.
Hellenes  65

the Flood, the ancestor of all the Greeks. There is 
no good explanation of why the people of ancient 
Greece should be called Hellenes, rather than Achae-
ans, Argives, or Danaans.The word Greek comes from 
the Latin Graecia, the country from which many 
“Greek” settlers came to live in Italy.
Hellenization  Greek  The processes of spread-
ing the influence of Greek mythology, philosophy, 
language, and culture to societies and cultures that 
came in contact with the people of ancient Greece. In 
Greek and Roman mythology, Hellenization refers to 
the process by which the people of Rome and central 
Europe, and eventually the Roman Empire, adapted 
and adopted the myths of Greece as their own, though 
often giving different names to the gods and goddesses 
and modifying the stories to meet Roman needs.
Greek colonists living in southern Italy and on 
the island of Sicily before 800 b.c. were the first to 
influence the younger civilizations developing in 
central Italy. A period of widespread exploration and 
colonization of Italy by the people of Greece took 
place from 800 to 650 b.c., beginning, according 
to archaeological and linguistic evidence, with the 
people of Etruria. By 650 b.c., Rome came under 
Greek influence through trade and through the 
arrival of Greeks as residents of Rome. By the first 
century b.c., Greek culture had deeply influenced the 
thought, culture, literature, and mythology of Rome.
The early people of central Italy believed in gods 
and spirits closely connected to the needs of everyday 
life, but those beings appear not to have developed 
stories of their own. The Romans, over time, applied 
the stories of Greek gods to the names of their gods. 
The Romans, however, did not simply adopt the 
Greek myths. They transformed the gods and their 
legends to meet the social, personal, historical, and 
religious needs of their own culture.
Ancient histories and poetry as well as archaeology 
suggest that Apollo was the first Greek god to have a 
strong influence on Rome. A temple dedicated to him 
was built at Cumae, on the western shores of Italy in 
the Bay of Naples. Greeks settled this location, about 
120 miles southeast of Rome, as early as 730 b.c. The 
neighboring people may have gone there, too, to 
worship the gods. (See Sibyl of Cumae.)
Roman religious and civic leaders introduced 
more Greek gods into Roman life during emergen-
cies. For example, leaders brought to Rome in about 
295 b.c. the cult of Asclepius, the Greek god of 
healing, to help stop a devastating plague.
Even after the Romans made Greece part of 
their empire in the first century b.c., the Greek 
religions continued to have a strong influence on 
the cultures of Rome. Scholars of Rome’s religious 
history suggest this Hellenization period was, in 
large part, due to the Roman characteristic of 
incorporating the cultures of conquered lands into 
the Roman culture. Other experts suggest that the 
Romans, having never developed a full mythology 
of their own, sought out the myths of other lands, 
including those of the Far East as well as Greece, to 
meet cultural and personal needs.
Hellespont  (Dardanelles)  Greek  The long 
narrow channel or strait leading from the Aegean 
Sea into the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea. It was 
an important trade route for ships traveling between 
Asia and Europe. There were many battles and wars 
for control of this channel, the most famous of which 
was the Trojan War.
The Hellespont got its name from legends that 
say Helle, the sister of Phrixus, drowned there when 
she and her brother, who were fleeing from their 
stepmother, Ino, flew over the water on the ram with 
the Golden Fleece.
Hemera  (Day, Daylight)  Greek  The daughter 
of Nyx (Night) and Erebus (Darkness); sister of 
Ether (Air). Mother and daughter lived in the same 
dwelling. At sunset, Hemera met her mother in the 
distant West, the realm of Atlas, where that god held 
up the Earth. There they exchanged places, Hemera 
entering the home they lived in and Nyx spreading 
her darkness over the world. At dawn they traded 
places once again.
Hephaestus  Greek  The god of craftsmen, espe-
cially smiths, and of fire; called “the divine artificer.” 
In some accounts, Hephaestus was the son of Zeus 
and Hera, in some of Hera alone. The Romans gave 
his attributes and stories to Vulcan.
Hephaestus was lame from birth and not as hand-
some as the other gods on Olympus. Some myths 
say Zeus or Hera flung him from Mount Olympus 
in anger. He landed on the island of Lemnos, where 
the sea goddesses Thetis and Eurynome rescued him 
and looked after him until he was grown.
Although lame, Hephaetus had strong shoulders 
and was an excellent craftsman, the patron of all 
smiths, and perhaps something of a magician.
In Homer’s Odyssey, Hephaestus was married to 
the beautiful goddess of love, Aphrodite, but she was 
66  Hellenization

unfaithful to him, and had many lovers, including 
Ares, the god of war. Hephaestus used his craftsman-
ship to get the better of Ares.
Another story has it that Hephaestus cracked 
open the head of Zeus in order to release the goddess 
Athene.
In other accounts (including Homer’s Iliad) Aglaeia, 
one of the three graces, is the wife of Hephaestus.
Hephaestus is an ancient god whose origins are 
probably in Asia Minor, and who was kindly and 
peace-loving. His smoky, flaming workshop was sup-
posed to be located beneath Mount Etna, the volcano 
in Sicily, an idea that the Romans adapted for vulcan. 
With Athene, the cult of Hephaestus was important 
in the life of the city of Athens.
Some scholars say that every Bronze Age (c. 3000 
b.c.) tool, weapon, or utensil was believed to have 
magical properties and that the smith who made 
them was thought to be a sorcerer.
Hera  (Lady)  Greek  Queen of Olympus, sister 
and wife of Zeus, daughter of Cronus and Rhea. 
Known as Juno by the Romans. Mother of Ares, 
Hebe, Hephaestus, and Eileithya. The patroness of 
marriage, Hera was the goddess most concerned with 
the welfare of women and children.
Hera was an ancient goddess, existing long before 
the new gods, including Zeus. Her original name is 
unknown: Hera is a title, meaning “Lady.” Her original 
cult was so strong that the newcomers to the Greek 
peninsula from the North had to acknowledge it and 
absorb it into their own religion by making Hera the 
consort of Zeus, the king of the Olympian Gods.
Hera was depicted as a young woman, fully clad and 
of regal beauty, sometimes wearing a high, cylindrical 
crown. Her emblems include a scepter topped with a 
cuckoo and a pomegranate, symbol of married love 
and fruitfulness. The peacock is sacred to Hera, testify-
ing to the services of the hundred-eyed Argus (1).
The marriage of Hera and Zeus was not a happy 
one, because Zeus was unfaithful to his wife and 
Hera was angry and jealous. She sought to avenge 
herself on Zeus and his loves in various ways. The 
many quarrels between Hera and Zeus may reflect 
the conflicts between the old gods, where woman was 
the Earth Mother and Queen, and the new male-
dominated religion of Zeus and the Olympians.
Hera and the Cuckoo  There are several leg-
ends about how the marriage of Zeus, chief god of 
the Olympians, and Hera, queen of Olympus, came 
about. The writer Pausanius tells the most famous 
one. In this story, Zeus appears before Hera in the 
shape of a cuckoo, a small, shivering bird, drenched 
with rain. Tenderhearted Hera takes the poor crea-
ture to her bosom to warm it. Zeus at once resumes 
his normal form and Hera finally agrees to become 
his wife. The gods solemnly celebrated the marriage 
on Olympus, but the ceremony did not put an end 
to the amorous adventures of Zeus. With Zeus, Hera 
had two sons, Ares and Hephaestus, and a daughter, 
Hebe. Some legends say that Hera conceived and 
gave birth to Hephaestus without any help from 
Zeus. Some say that she was also the mother of 
Eileithya, about whom little is known.
Hera and Ixion  Hera was ever faithful to her 
fickle husband, Zeus. However, she was very beautiful 
and men found her desirable. Ephialtes, one of the 
Aloeids, was determined to capture Hera and make 
her his wife. Thus he and his brother started a war 
with the Olympians. Another admirer, King Ixion of 
Lapith, fell in love with Hera at a banquet at Olym-
pus. When Zeus found out about Ixion’s advances, he 
was angry and jealous and used his magic to shape 
a cloud in the likeness of Hera. Ixion made love to 
the cloud, whose name was Nephele, and from this 
union was born Centaurus, father of the Centaurs. 
Ixion was bound to a fiery wheel and doomed to whirl 
perpetually through the sky.
Hera and Io  One of the loves of Zeus was the 
maiden Io. Zeus turned Io into a beautiful white cow 
to protect her from Hera, but Hera was not deceived. 
She demanded to be given the heifer and Zeus could 
not refuse her. Hera then tied up the heifer and the 
hundred-eyed Argus guarded her. The god Hermes 
rescued Io by using songs and stories to close all the 
eyes of Argus in sleep, and then killing him. But Io 
remained a heifer, relentlessly pursued by a gadfly 
sent by Hera, until she reached Egypt. Hera trans-
ferred the eyes of Argus onto the magnificent tail of 
the peacock, where, legend has it, they remain to this 
day. Some scholars believe that Io was a form of Hera 
as an ancient goddess dispossessed by the Olympians. 
In Homer’s work, the goddess Hera is often described 
as “ox-eyed.”
Heracles  (Herakles; Glory of Hera)  Greek  The 
greatest hero of Greek mythology, he was called 
Hercules by the Romans. Heracles was the son of 
the god Zeus and of a mortal, Alcmene, who was the 
wife of Amphitryon of Thebes. Both Alcmene and 
Amphitryon were descendants of the hero Perseus. 
Heracles was a superman and demigod and a supreme 
athlete but at the same time a man of many human 
weaknesses. He performed seemingly impossible 
HEracles  67

tasks, fought in battle, loved many women including 
Deianira who would eventually cause his death, and 
was afflicted by murderous madness and sudden rages. 
Zeus snatched Heracles from his funeral pyre and 
took him to Olympus, where Heracles was worshiped 
like a god, became immortal, and married Hebe.
Heracles’ name, Glory of Hera, suggests an origin 
among ancient people who worshiped the goddess 
Hera, wife of Zeus. The myth of Heracles is based 
perhaps on a historical figure, possibly a lord of tiryns 
(in Argos) whose military prowess led to the Homeric 
legend of his having met and conquered death. Later, 
invaders of the Peloponnesus, the southern peninsula 
of what is now called Greece, adapted the cycle of the 
Heracles hero myths to fit their own ancestry.
The Childhood of Heracles  Heracles’ mother, 
Alcmene, was married to Amphitryon, also a descen-
dant of Perseus. While Amphitryon was at war, Zeus 
visited Alcmene disguised as her husband. He wished to 
father a son that would be a champion of both humans 
and gods. This son was Heracles. When Amphitryon 
came back the next evening, he, too, fathered a son 
with Alcmene. His name was iphicles.
Hera, the wife of Zeus, was, as usual, jealous and 
angry at the dalliance of her husband. Using her 
magic arts, she contrived the premature birth of 
Eurystheus, another descendant of Perseus. Eurys-
theus was born a few minutes before Heracles and 
therefore became ruler of Argos. Heracles was obliged 
to serve him, and this he did most heroically.
One legend has it that Hera sent two serpents 
to the cradle of the infant Heracles to kill him, but 
the baby managed to strangle both serpents with 
his supernormal strength. Another legend holds that 
Amphitryon sent the serpents, knowing that one of 
the twins belonged to Zeus. Thus, while his own son, 
Iphicles, cried pitifully, the son of the god was able to 
vanquish the serpents.
Amphitryon made sure that his godlike stepson 
was trained in all the arts of fighting, wrestling, and 
boxing. Heracles became a supreme athlete.
Heracles, The Young Hero  Heracles was the 
greatest of the Greek heroes. When Heracles was 
a boy, his stepfather sent him to tend his cattle in 
the mountains and to develop athletic skills. A fero-
cious lion came from Mount Kithaeron to devour 
Amphitryon’s cattle. Heracles killed the lion and ever 
after wore its pelt (though some say that the pelt 
worn by Heracles was that of the Nemean lion; see 
The Twelve Labors of Heracles, right).
Heracles then did battle with Erginus, King 
of Orchomenos, who attacked Thebes. Amphi-
tryon died in this struggle. The victorious Heracles 
became the idol of Thebes. Creon, the new king of 
Thebes, gave his daughter Megara (2) to Heracles 
in marriage. The marriage was not a happy one, and 
in later years, in a fit of madness sent upon him by 
the goddess Hera, Heracles killed his children and 
possibly his wife as well. He went to the oracle at 
Delphi for advice. As atonement for the dreadful 
killings, the oracle put Heracles into the servitude 
of his cousin, King Eurystheus, who would impose 
upon the young hero the Twelve Labors, seemingly 
impossible tasks.
The Twelve Labors of Heracles  Like many a 
hero in mythologies from all over the world, Heracles, 
the greatest Greek hero, fought and won battles with 
extraordinary creatures that represented man’s ancient 
strife with evil and the forces of darkness. Because of 
a fit of madness, in which he killed his children and 
his brother’s children, Heracles, son of the god Zeus 
and the mortal Alcmene, was put into the service of 
King Eurystheus, a descendant of Perseus and ruler of 
Argos. To atone for his sins, Heracles had to perform 
12 almost impossible tasks over the course of 12 years. 
In all of them, he emerged as a victorious hero against 
unbelievable odds. The order of the Twelve Labors 
varies in some sources but they are thought to begin 
with the killing of the ferocious Nemean lion and end 
with either the stealing of the apples of the Hesperides 
or the vanquishing of the dog Cerberus.
  1.	 The Nemean Lion  The lion was gigantic, 
an offspring of Selene. It lived in a cave 
with two entrances. After many futile battles, 
Heracles sealed off one mouth of the cave and 
strangled the trapped lion with his bare hands. 
Ever afterward, he wore the pelt and head of 
the lion. The two mouths of the lion’s cave 
perhaps symbolize the entry of Heracles into 
the battles (the Twelve Labors) from which 
he would eventually escape, after death, into 
rebirth and immortality.
  2.	 The Hydra of Lernaea  The Hydra was a 
many-headed monster who grew a new head 
each time Heracles lopped off the previous 
one. With the help of his companion iolaus, 
who burned the stumps of the heads and 
prevented them from growing again, Heracles 
vanquished the monster. He dipped his arrows 
in the blood of the Hydra, which contained 
a deadly poison. Most mythographers are 
68  heracles

still puzzled as to the exact meaning of the 
Lernaean Hydra.
  3.	 The Wild Boar of Erymanthus  The boar 
was a huge beast that Heracles hunted through 
deep fields of snow. He captured the boar and 
delivered it to Eurystheus. The king was so 
terrified at the sight of the beast that he hid 
himself in his bronze jar.
  4.	 The Hind of Ceryneia  This beautiful 
Arcadian deer had feet of bronze and antlers 
(surprising for a hind) that shone like gold, 
and ran so swiftly that it took Heracles a year 
to capture it. He carried it unharmed to King 
Eurystheus.
  5.	 The Stymphalian Birds  These monstrous 
birds had wings, beaks, and claws of bronze. 
They fed on human flesh and were so numerous 
that when they took flight their hordes blotted 
out the Sun. Heracles terrified them with the 
shattering noise from a bronze rattle that the 
goddess Athene helped him make. The birds 
flew away and were never seen again.
This legend may refer to Heracles’ reputa-
tion as a healer, expert at getting rid of fever 
demons. In ancient times, fevers were little 
understood and often proved fatal. Since they 
occurred frequently in marshy places, they 
were identified with marsh birds such as 
cranes and ibises, large birds on which the 
Stymphalian birds may have been modeled.
  6.	 The Augean Stables  The Sixth Labor of 
Heracles was to clean, in one day, the pestilent, 
dung-filled stables of the cattle of King Elis 
of Augeus. Heracles did this by diverting the 
courses of two nearby rivers and sending their 
cleansing waters rushing through the stables. 
“Cleaning the Augean stables” has come to 
mean getting rid of noxious rubbish in any area, 
whether physical, moral, religious, or legal.
  7.  The Cretan Bull  Heracles captured the 
Bull that had been terrorizing the island 
of Crete and returned with it to Greece. 
Theseus later killed the bull. The combat of 
a man with a bull was one of the ritual tasks 
imposed on heroes (see the stories of Theseus 
and Jason).
  8.	 The Horses of Diomedes  Heracles cap-
tured the horses (some say they were wild 
mares) of Diomedes (2) of Thrace. It was said 
that Diomedes fed the horses on human flesh 
Heracles killed Diomedes and gave his flesh 
to the horses, after which, it is said, the beasts 
became quite tame. The taming of wild horses 
was an important rite in many ancient cultures.
  9.	 The Girdle of the Amazon  Eurystheus 
asked Heracles to obtain the girdle of Queen 
Hippolyta of the Amazons, for his daughter. 
Some versions of the legend say that Hip-
polyta fell in love with Heracles and gave him 
her girdle. Other versions say that Hippolyta 
was later abducted by Theseus.
10.	 The Cattle of Geryon  Geryon was a three-
headed monster whose fine red cattle were the 
envy of everyone, including Eurystheus, who 
ordered Heracles to capture them. Heracles 
did this on the way erecting the Pillars of Her-
cules (now known as the Straits of Gibraltar), 
where Africa and Europe face each other at the 
western end of the Mediterranean Sea. Stealing 
another man’s cattle was an ancient custom; a 
prospective husband bought his bride from the 
proceeds of a successful cattle raid.
11.	 The Stealing of Cerberus  Cerberus, the 
fearsome three-headed dog, guarded the gates 
of the Underworld. Eurystheus ordered Her-
acles to bring him the monster, never expecting 
the hero to return to the land of the living. 
However, with the help of the gods Hermes 
and Athene, Heracles overcame both Hades, 
god of the underworld, and the monstrous 
dog. When Eurystheus saw the huge creature, 
he jumped into his bronze jar in terror.
The three heads of Cerberus may have 
represented the three seasons vanquished by 
the demigod who became immortal.
12.	 The Apples of the Hesperides  Heracles’ 
final task was to bring some of the golden 
apples of the Hesperides (daughters of Atlas) 
to Eurystheus. The apples belonged to Hera 
who set the dragon Ladon to guard them. 
Only the Titan Atlas, who carried the sky on 
his shoulders, knew where the apple orchard 
was. Heracles took the sky from Atlas and 
persuaded him to fetch some apples. He then 
tricked the Titan into taking back the weight 
of the sky.
The explanation for this labor may lie in 
the primitive ritual in which the candidate for 
a kingship or immortality (Heracles) had to 
overcome a monster (Ladon) and rob it of its 
treasure (the golden apples).
The Exploits of Heracles  There is no clear 
chronology for the exploits of Heracles, but rather 
heracles  69

a patchwork of events, with some confusion about 
the order in which they took place. For example, 
it is not clear at what point the goddess Hera, wife 
of Zeus, angry at the dalliance of her husband with 
Alcmene, took revenge upon Heracles by sending 
him fits of murderous madness. Among his crimes 
were the killing of his own children and, some say, his 
wife Megara, and the killing of Iphitus, a guest in his 
house. Such deeds were unforgivable. Even the oracle 
at Delphi refused to help Heracles after the killing of 
Iphitus. In another fit of madness, Heracles ravaged 
the oracle’s shrine and attacked his halfbrother, the 
god Apollo. As a result of this outrage, Heracles 
became a slave to Omphale, queen of Lydia.
Among his exploits for Omphale was the capture 
of the clever thieves called the Cercopes. Heracles 
also killed Syleus, the king of Aulis, who had forced 
strangers to work in his vineyards and then, instead 
of paying them, cut their throats. Heracles rid the 
banks of the Sagaris from a gigantic serpent and then 
killed Lityerses, another evil man who forced people 
to work for him and then killed them. Omphale so 
admired Heracles that she set him free.
After his servitude to Omphale, Heracles offered 
his services to Laomedon, king of Troy. Laomedon 
had incurred the wrath of the sea god, Poseidon, who 
sent a monster to ravage Troy. The oracle told Laom-
edon that only the sacrifice of his beautiful daughter, 
Hesione, would appease the monster and save Troy. 
Laomedon chained the girl to a rock to await her fate. 
Heracles agreed to rescue the maiden in return for two 
magical horses that had been a gift from Zeus to Laom-
edon. But Laomedon, his daughter now safe, reneged 
on his agreement and Heracles killed him. Heracles 
then gave Hesione to his friend Telamon in marriage. 
Priam, now king of Troy, demanded the return of his 
sister, Hesione. The Greeks refused to return her. The 
subsequent ill-feeling between the nations of Troy and 
Greece was one cause of the Trojan War.
Heracles, Deianira, and the Centaur  Heracles, 
the mortal hero, spent his life engaging in one heroic 
exploit after another. Sometimes Heracles sought 
adventure, sometimes he sought revenge for injustice, 
and sometimes he had to flee from the punishment 
due him for acts committed in madness.
After many bold deeds, Heracles came to Caly-
don, in Aetolia, whose king, Oeneus, had a beautiful 
daughter, Deianira. Deianira was constantly plagued 
by the attentions of Achelous, who appeared to her 
in the form of a river, a dragon, and a bull. After a 
furious contest, Heracles vanquished Achelous and 
won the hand of the beautiful Deianira, with whom 
he bore a son, Hyllus.
Heracles, Deianira, and Hyllus fled from Calydon 
after Heracles, again afflicted by rage, killed an 
innocent cupbearer, Eunomus.
When they came to the river Evenus, a Centaur, 
Nessus, offered to carry Deianira on his back, while 
Heracles swam across. When they reached the other 
side, the centaur tried to carry Deianira off. Heracles 
shot him with his arrow. As he lay dying, Nessus told 
Deianira to collect some of his blood and use it as a 
love potion if she ever thought that her husband was 
straying. Deianira respected the wishes of the dying 
beast and took his blood in a vial that she carried. This 
potion would eventually cause the death of Heracles.
The Death of Heracles  The last expedition 
of Heracles was against his old enemy Eurytus. 
Heracles slew Eurytus and carried off his daughter, 
iole, with whom he had been in love before he had 
met his present wife, Deianira. When Deianira heard 
about the beautiful maiden, she remembered the vial 
of blood that she had taken from Nessus. Innocently 
thinking that the potion would bring Heracles back 
to her, she soaked a shirt in a liquid made from the 
blood in the vial and sent it to her husband with his 
messenger, Lichas.
As soon as Heracles put on the fateful shirt, he 
began to writhe with pain, for the potion was a deadly 
one, and proved fatal to Heracles. He commanded a 
funeral pyre to be built and laid himself upon it. His 
son, Hyllus, told him that Deianira had not intended 
his death and had killed herself in despair. Heracles, 
in his last throes of agony, gave Iole to his son in 
marriage. No one wanted to light the funeral pyre, 
but at last, Philoctetes (or his father, Poeas) set the 
wood on fire. Immediately, a cloud descended from 
the sky, and in a display of thunder and lightning, 
Zeus snatched his son from death and bore him to 
Olympus, where he would become immortal.
herbs  Greek  The mythic power of herbs to 
transform people and to restore life to the dead fea-
tures prominently in several Greek myths. Gaia, the 
Earth Mother, the oldest goddess in Greek mythol-
ogy, found an herb that would protect the Gigantes 
(Giants), some of her children, in their war with 
the Olympian gods. Zeus, the supreme god among 
the Olympians, who were themselves descendants 
of Gaia, obtained that herb and used it to help him 
defeat the giants in their war against the gods.
The herb moly helped Odysseus resist the efforts of 
the goddess-sorceress Circe to turn him into a swine 
70  Herbs

when he landed on the island of Achaea. The heroine 
Moria used an herb known as balis to restore her 
brother to life after he had been bitten by a snake.
Dittany, a creeping herb of the mint family that 
is native to Greece, was known as the herb of Venus 
and was also the sacred herb of Artemis, goddess of 
childbirth and chastity. Some historians suggest that 
women in ancient Greece used dittany, also known as 
ditamy, to bring on menstruation.
Hercules  Roman  A god, closely associated with 
the Greek hero Heracles. Ancient Romans also saw 
Hercules as the patron and guardian of merchants 
and soldiers. He was a helper to those in need and 
protected men at sea from danger and disease.
A shrine to Hercules stood on the edge of the 
Palatine Hill in Rome. He was honored in the Roman 
festival calendar on August 12, when men held a great 
celebration that included slaughtering oxen. Women 
were not allowed at this festival.
The cult of Hercules arrived early in Italy from 
Greece, about the second century b.c. and soon 
developed a very strong following. Greek colonists 
who settled in communities on the eastern shores 
of Italy brought the stories of this much-loved deity 
with them when they traveled across the Ionian Sea. 
Hercules’ cult grew until he commanded a wide fol-
lowing throughout the Italian peninsula.
Many of the stories of Hercules traveled across 
the seas with his religious celebrations, but Roman 
poets shared details their own people added to the 
mythology.
Hercules and Cacus  According to Livy, a 
Roman historian of the first century b.c., Hercules 
arrived at the Tiber River in central Italy on his way 
back to Greece after capturing the cattle of Geryon, 
which was the 10th labor he undertook for King 
Eurystheus. The hero stopped to rest by the river. 
As he slept, a strong, fierce local shepherd named 
Cacus (2) stole the finest cattle in the herd. Cacus 
tried to disguise his theft by dragging the cattle by 
their tails. He hid his treasure in a nearby cave.
When Hercules awoke, he was confused at the 
disappearance of so many cattle. Unable to find the 
missing animals, he began to drive the remaining 
cattle on their journey. As these cows bellowed, the 
cows hidden in the caves began to moo in reply. Her-
cules, hearing this evidence, discovered the cave, killed 
Cacus with a club, and continued on his journey.
Virgil, a Roman poet who lived at the same time 
as Livy, told a much more dramatic version of this 
story in the Aeneid.
In astronomy, Hercules is a large constellation in 
the northern celestial hemisphere. It is also the name 
of a large crater on the Moon.
Hermaphroditus  Greek  The son of Aphrodite 
and Hermes, brought up by nymphs on Mount Ida 
(2), in Crete. One of the nymphs, Salmacis, fell in 
love with Hermaphroditus but he scorned her. Salma-
cis prayed to be joined with him forever in one body. 
The gods answered her prayers, for when she finally 
clasped him to her their two bodies became one.
In terms of mythological and religious concepts, a 
young man with womanish breasts and long hair may 
represent the transition from matriarchy (the Earth 
Mother) to patriarchy (the rule of males).
Hercules stands tall in this second century B.C. 
bronze statue, which was found in the Roman 
forum in the 15th century. It now stands in the 
Musei Capitolini in Rome.
Hermaphroditus  71

Hermes  Greek  The winged messenger of the 
Greek gods; son of Zeus and Maia (1). Hermes is also 
associated with fertility, and is god of flocks, roads, 
trading, and thieves. Hermes was the inventor of the 
lyre and the guide of souls on the way to Hades. He 
was the father of many, including Autolycus, Daph-
nis, and Hermaphroditus. In Roman mythology, he 
is known as Mercury.
Archaic artists portrayed Hermes as a bearded man 
wearing a broad-brimmed hat and winged sandals, 
and carrying a herald’s staff. From the fifth century 
b.c. on, artisans showed him as a nude and beardless 
young man, typical of an accomplished athlete.
The earliest center of Hermes’ cult was Arcadia, 
where he was worshiped as a god of fertility with 
phallic images called hermae (hermai). These were 
heaps of stones set up by the ancient Greeks to mark 
boundaries or distances along roads. With the devel-
opment of artistic taste, in the fifth century b.c. these 
crude piles became pillars crowned with the head of 
Hermes. In cities the hermae were erected at street 
corners and at the doors of houses.
The Childhood of Hermes  Hermes, son of 
Zeus and Maia, was born in a cave in Mount Cyllene, 
in Arcadia. He grew miraculously fast, and soon after 
his birth he was able to walk out of the cave, kill a 
tortoise, and make the first lyre from its shell.
To complete the lyre, Hermes needed strings. He 
stole a herd of cows belonging to Apollo by making 
them walk backward so that their tracks would lead 
Apollo in the wrong direction. He killed the cows and 
made strings for the lyre from their guts.
When Apollo finally discovered the thief (now 
back in his cradle), he brought Hermes before his 
father, Zeus. Zeus was more amused than angry at his 
infant son, and when Hermes produced the lyre and 
played it, even Apollo was charmed and offered the 
rest of his flock to Hermes in return for it.
Apollo also gave Hermes his Caduceus, a herald’s 
staff of gold. Hades instructed Hermes to lay the 
golden staff on the eyes of the dying and lead them 
gently to the realm of the dead.
Some accounts say that Apollo taught Hermes 
how to prophesy, Artemis taught him to hunt, 
and Pan taught him to play the pipes. Hermes was 
undoubtedly a favorite with the gods.
Hero and Leander  Greek  The subjects of a 
tragic love story. Hero was a priestess of Aphrodite. 
Leander, a young man from Abydos, Mysia, in Asia 
Minor, was her lover. He swam across the Hel-
lespont every night, guided by her light. One stormy 
night, the flame blew out and Leander drowned. In 
her grief, Hero cast herself into the waves to be with 
him and perished. The story has been the subject of 
many literary works, including a long poem, Hero and 
Leander, by Christopher Marlowe (1564–1593).
Hesiod  Greek  Poet whose work is usually dated 
between 800 and 700 b.c. Hesiod was a poor farmer. 
His poem Works and Days gives us a vivid picture 
of everyday life in ancient Greece as it was lived by 
ordinary people, as opposed to the adventurers and 
courtiers of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. Hesiod’s 
Theogony is concerned with mythology; it describes the 
Greeks’ beliefs about creation, the universe, and the 
genealogy of the gods and goddesses. Hesiod also tells 
about sinister aspects of religion, such as witchcraft and 
human sacrifices. Both poems are invaluable sources 
for the study of Greek religion and mythology.
Hesione  Greek  Daughter of Laomedon, king of 
Troy; sister of Priam. Laomedon offered Hesione as 
sacrifice to a sea monster to appease the gods Posei-
don and Apollo. Heracles slew the monster and gave 
Hesione in marriage to Telamon, with whom she bore 
a son, Teucer. Hesione’s brother, Priam, now king of 
Troy, demanded her return. The refusal of the Greeks 
to return Hesione to her Trojan home was said to have 
caused some of the ill feeling that eventually led to the 
war between Greece and Troy (see the Trojan War).
Hesperia  Greek  A dryad, or wood Nymph; one 
of the sisters known as the Hesperides; either the 
daughters of Erebus (Darkness) and Nyx (Night) 
or the daughters of Atlas and Pleione or Hesperis. 
Her sisters, those named by people writing during 
the classic age of Greek mythology, were Aegle (2), 
Arethusa, and Erytheia.
Hesperides  (Daughters of the West)  Greek  The 
Dryads, or wood nymphs; sisters, who lived in the 
beautiful garden on the western edge of the world 
and helped guard the tree that grew the golden apples 
of the goddess Hera. They were the daughters of 
Erebus (Darkness) and Nyx (Night) or the daughters 
of Atlas and Pleione or Hesperis. Some sources 
say there were seven sisters, others three or four. 
Those who are named in Greek poetry are Aegle (2), 
Erytheia, Hesperia, and Arethusa. 
Hera suspected the Hesperides of being as likely 
to steal the apples as guard them, so she also put the 
dragon Ladon in the garden to guard her treasure. 
72  Hermes

In his 12th labor, the hero Heracles stole the 
apples either himself or by sending Atlas to do the 
work. 
Hestia  (Hearth)  Greek  Goddess  of the hearth 
and fire; eldest daughter of Cronus and Rhea; 
sister of Zeus and Hera; one of the 12 Olympian 
gods. Gentle, peace-loving, and pure, Hestia kept 
away from all disputes. She was the embodiment of 
a sacred principle—the household fire—and much 
honored as such, though there are few surviving 
stories about her.
Hestia and the Hearth  It was a difficult task 
for primitive people to make and preserve fire. 
They tended the hearth with care and honored it 
as a source of power. When a member of the family 
left home, he or she carried a glowing ember from 
the hearth, thus symbolizing the continuity of the 
family. When groups of people began to form vil-
lages and then towns, each community had a public 
hearth (prytaneum) where the fire was maintained. 
In later days, the fire of the public hearth was used 
in religious sacrifices and took on a sacred character. 
Eventually, the character of the hestia was personified 
as the deity Hestia.
Hestia and Priapus  The hearth was the center 
of domestic life in early Greece. Hestia represented 
personal security and happiness and the sacred duty 
of hospitality. One story emphasizes the importance of 
the hearth as a symbol of hospitality and protection.
One day, at a rustic feast, the drunken god Priapus 
assaulted Hestia. The guests were extremely angry 
and drove Priapus away. This anecdote represents 
a warning against the ill-treatment of guests, par-
ticularly women, who are under the protection of the 
domestic or public hearth.
Hippodameia  Greek  The daughter of King 
Oenomaus, who lost her in a chariot race to Pelops. 
Hippodameia and Pelops became the parents of 
Atreus and Thyestes.
Hippolyta  Greek  Queen of the Amazons; daugh-
ter of Ares; wife of Theseus; mother of Hippolytus. 
A centaur, a creature that was half horse and half human, tries to carry off Hippodameia, who was also 
known as Laodamia, at her wedding party. The scene is painted on ancient Greek red-figure pottery. This 
piece is in the British Museum in London.  (Photograph © Marie-Lan Nguyen.)
Hippolyta  73

The hero Heracles stole her girdle as part of his ninth 
great labor. Heracles had been accompanied on this 
exploit by Theseus, king of Athens. Hippolyta and 
the Amazons attacked Athens, but Theseus defeated 
them and made Hippolyta his wife. She bore him a 
son, Hippolytus. According to some legends, however, 
Heracles murdered Hippolyta.
Homer  Greek  The great poet of ancient Greece 
to whom the epic poems the Iliad and the Odys-
sey are usually attributed. Although he is Greece’s 
most famous name, hardly anything is known about 
Homer. His birthdate is estimated between 1050 
and 750 b.c. His birthplace is not known, though 
the island of Chios, off the coast of Ionia, in Asia 
Minor, is a likely location according to references in 
the poems. Some say that the work of Homer may 
have been a kind of anthology of ancient writings 
that Homer gathered together with great genius and 
poetical unity. Other scholars say that the Iliad and 
the Odyssey were the work of a single poet, developed 
from older legendary material.
Whatever the origins of the poet, the poems had a 
tremendous influence on the Greeks, providing them 
with an elementary education in their mythology. 
Homer’s works have been of enormous value to his-
torians, archaeologists, and students of comparative 
religion. His stories preserve the social and religious 
customs of the late Bronze Age Achaeans who invaded 
Troy (3000 b.c.). After the fall of the Achaeans, there 
were three or four centuries of “darkness” until the 
great flowering of culture in the fifth century b.c. 
known as Classical Greece.
Honos  Roman  God of honor, chivalry, and 
justice, particularly as displayed by soldiers. Honos 
was often called upon for support in military conflicts, 
often in prayers also offered to the goddess Virtus. 
Temples were built in his honor by leaders after 
successful battles against enemies. One stood in the 
city of Pompeii. On coins, Honos was often pictured 
as a young man carrying a spear and a cornucopia.
Horae  Greek  Daughters of Zeus and Themis; 
goddesses of the seasons. According to Hesiod, there 
were three Horae: Eirene (Peace), Dike (Justice), 
and Eunomia (Order). The names and numbers of 
the Horae differed from place to place in ancient 
Greece. The Horae, goddesses of flowers and fruits, 
controlled the four seasons, watched over agriculture, 
and had many names, including Thallo (flowers) and 
Carpo (fruits). Artwork showed them as beautiful 
maidens, often in the company of the graces in the 
retinue of the love goddess Aphrodite. They were 
especially tender toward children.
household gods  Roman  Throughout an-
cient Rome, people believed in a variety of gods 
that influenced their home lives. In their homes 
were small altars to these gods. They performed 
small rituals to honor the household gods. In fact, 
some modern scholars suggest that the Roman 
cultures maintained familiar rituals from generation 
to generation without remembering their origins 
and in later times developed myths to explain these 
practices. The stories of these lesser gods may have 
been borrowed from nearby cultures to explain these 
Roman domestic rituals.
The most prominent among the household gods 
were the Lares and the Penates. Each home had 
its own Lar, a spirit, originally a revered ancestor, 
that watched over the house and brought prosperity 
to the family. Homes typically had small shrines in 
them which included a statue that represented the 
A second century B.C. Greek artist sculpted a bust 
of a man believed to be Homer, and a Roman artist 
copied the bust in the second century A.D. It stands 
in the Louvre in Paris.  (Photograph by Hay Kranen.)
74  Homer

Lar. Family members placed a portion of each meal 
on this shrine, a token of thanks for the protection 
the Lar brought.
Two Penates dwelled in each home, protecting 
the storeroom or food cupboard from pests, molds, 
and thieves. Families recognized a certain spot on 
the hearth, near the family’s fire, where the Penates 
lived, and believed that these two spirits joined them 
at their table for every meal.
Doorways were particularly important to Roman 
citizens. The comings and goings of the family and 
the community represented opportunities for both 
success and danger. The greatest god of the doorway 
was Janus, the two-faced god who could see forward 
and backward, in toward the home and out toward 
the community. He eventually became a prominent 
god in Roman society. Janus was joined in his service 
to the threshold by Limentinus, Lima, Cardea, and 
Forculus.
Vesta, the goddess of the hearth and protector 
of the fire, like Janus, became a prominent Roman 
deity. In the home, Vesta watched over baking and 
food preparation. Here it was the younger daughters’ 
responsibility to watch over the fire. A portion of 
each meal was also dedicated to Vesta.
Even the tools of the household had forces pro-
tecting them and watching over their users. Devera, 
for example, was the goddess of brooms, who was 
called upon to help clean the home for rituals and for 
welcoming a new child. 
Hyacinthus  Greek  A young man loved by 
the Greek god Apollo; son of Amyclas, a Spartan 
king, and Diomede, or of Pierus and Clio, the Muse. 
Zephyrus, the West Wind, killed him with a flying 
disc. Apollo created a fragrant flower, the hyacinth, 
in honor of his friend.
Hyacinthus was an ancient, pre-Hellenic fertility 
god, whose worship was absorbed by Apollo’s cult 
in later years when the Hellenes were invaded by 
migratory tribes. Followers held a three-day festival, 
the Hyacinthia, at Sparta in honor of the god, where 
boys and girls participated in games, competitions, 
sacrifices, and various entertainments.
Hydra  (Water Creature)  Greek  A many-headed 
serpent, the offspring of Echidna and Typhon. When 
one head was chopped off, another grew in its place. 
The second labor of Heracles was to kill the dreaded 
serpent. Hydra’s blood was venomous. Arrows or 
garments dipped in it killed Chiron, the centaur; 
Nessus; and Philoctetes.
Hygeia  (Hygieia; Health)  Greek  Goddess of 
physical and mental health. According to some leg-
ends, Hygeia is a daughter of Asclepius, god of 
medicine, and granddaughter of Apollo. Her sisters 
were Aegle (1) (Brightness), Panacea (All-healing), 
and Iaso (Healthy). Her brothers were Machaon, 
a surgeon, and Podalirius, a general practitioner. 
Hygeia is most often portrayed in the company of 
her father or her sisters. Sculptors show her wearing 
a long robe and feeding a huge snake from a cup. 
The word hygiene derives from this goddess’s name, 
and the symbol of Hygeia’s snake combined with 
her father’s scepter form the modern symbol of the 
medical profession, the caduceus.
See also Salus.
Hyperion  (The One Above)  Greek  One of the 
Titans; son of Uranus and Gaia; father with Theia 
of Helios, Selene, and Eos (the Sun, the Moon, and 
Dawn). Hyperion is sometimes used as the name for 
the Sun itself. Earlier mythologies name Helios as 
the Sun. In some accounts, Hyperion, like Helios, is 
identified with Apollo. 
See also Eurylochus and Odysseus.
Hypnos  (Sleep)  Greek  The personification of 
sleep and the twin brother of Thanatos (Death); the 
son of Nyx (Night) and Erebus (Darkness).
Hypnos had power over mortals and gods and 
put them to sleep by sprinkling over them water 
from a twig or juice from a horn. Poets, such as the 
Greek Homer and the Roman Virgil, gave him more 
characteristics than he has in records of religious 
practices.
The Romans gave Hypnos the name Somnus as 
Greek mythology influenced Roman religion.
Hypnos  75

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
76
Iapetus  Greek  A first generation Titan; son 
of Uranus and Gaia. Iapetus married Clymene, a 
daughter of his brother Oceanus, and with her was 
father of four brothers, second-generation Titans: 
Atlas, Prometheus, Epimetheus, and a lesser known 
son, Menoetius. The Greeks considered Iapetus the 
primary ancestor of the human race since it was his 
son, Prometheus, who was the primary supporter of 
humans. 
When the Olympian gods fought the Titans, 
Zeus threw Iapetus down to Tartarus, a realm even 
deeper down and farther away from the Earth than 
was Hades, the realm of the dead. According to one 
Greek poet, the gods put an island on top of Iapetus 
to keep him from escaping.
Icarus  Greek  Son of the great inventor Dae-
dalus. When Daedalus wanted to escape from the 
island of Crete, where he was being held prisoner by 
King Minos, he invented and crafted wings from the 
feathers of birds, held together by wax. He and Icarus 
took flight, but Icarus ignored the warnings of his 
father and flew too near the Sun. The heat of the Sun 
melted the wax, and Icarus’s wings fell apart. Icarus 
plummeted into the sea and drowned.
The Icarian Sea, a part of the Aegean Sea between 
Turkey and the Greek islands of Patmos and Leros, is 
named after him.
Ida (1)  Greek  The Nymph who with her sister, 
Adrastia, and the goat-nymph, Amalthea, tended 
the infant god Zeus on Mount Ida (2) in Crete.
Ida (2)  Greek  Mountain in the center of Crete, 
associated with the childhood of Zeus.
Ida (3)  Greek  A mountain range in Mysia, north-
west Asia Minor. It was from here that Zeus seized the 
beautiful youth Ganymede and took him to Olympus 
to be a cupbearer to the gods. It was the scene of the 
Judgment of Paris (see under Paris). From here, the gods 
watched the battles of Troy during the Trojan War.
Iliad  Greek  The name of the epic poem by 
Homer, who is thought to have lived during the 
eighth century b.c. The name derives from Ilion, 
one of the names for Troy, an ancient city on the 
northwestern tip of Asia Minor.
The 24 books of the Iliad tell of the last few days 
of the Trojan War, focusing especially on the Greek 
hero Achilles, who withdrew from the conflict, 
causing severe setbacks to the Greeks. However, 
Achilles rejoined the war, and slew Hector, the hero 
of the Trojans. The Iliad also tells of other leaders of 
the Greeks, such as Odysseus, Diomedes (1), Ajax 
(1), and Menelaus, who was the leader of the Achae-
ans. It does not tell of the beginning of the Trojan 
War, which was supposed to have been caused by 
the abduction of Helen, a Spartan princess, by the 
Trojan Paris. Homer never calls the victors of the 
Trojan war “Greeks.” That was a name the Romans 
later gave to the people of the peninsula in southern 
Europe that would eventually become the nation of 
Greece.
The Iliad tells not only of the war but of the peace-
ful lives of shepherds, fishermen, and woodcutters of 
an era that is now supposed by historians and archae-
ologists to have been between 1200 and 1300 b.c.
According to many scholars, the Iliad is one of the 
greatest works of literature, and certainly the earli-
est. Achilles is the first hero of Western literature. 
The poem tells of petty rages and jealousies, but 
also speaks of heroism and nobility in a memorable 
narrative.
Ilium  (Ilia)  Greek  Another name for Troy. In 
Greek legend, Ilus, son of Tros by Callirhoë, was 
the founder of Ilium, which was also called Tros or 
I
8

Icarus  77
Nymphs mourn over the fallen body of Icarus, whose great wings melted when he flew too close to the sun. 
British artist Herbert James Draper (1863-1920) created this Lament for Icarus, an award-winning painting, 
in 1898. It hangs in the Tate Britain in London.

Troy after his father. The Iliad by Homer, means 
“about Troy.”
incubus  Roman  In folklore and very early reli-
gious beliefs, an evil spirit or devil that came out at 
night and sat on the chests of sleeping people. People 
believed an incubus caused nightmares and had 
intercourse with sleeping women.
indigetes  (dii indigites)  Roman  Apparently, 
lesser gods of the many people who inhabited Central 
Italy in the seventh and early sixth centuries b.c. These 
gods were numerous and responsible for specific 
aspects of life, some governing the individual, some 
the household, some the land and farming, and some 
the city of Rome itself. Many of these deities received 
names that indicated their functions, usually verbs in 
the original languages of the people who first wor-
shipped them. Others were referred to on monuments 
by group names or functions, but these collective gods 
appear to have been as important to the early Romans 
as the gods who received names.
The worship of these gods continued for centu-
ries, their names and functions carried on as cultures 
merged. Centuries after the earliest surviving men-
tions of them were created, Roman historians, such 
as Virgil, who lived from 70-19 b.c., early Christian 
writers, such as Augustus of Hippo (Saint Augustine), 
who lived from a.d. 354-430, and writers from Near 
East cultures, mention them, by name or as indigetes, 
but in ways that do not make their origins or func-
tions clear to modern audiences. That references 
to so many of these minor gods survived indicates 
to many experts the importance of the roles these 
gods played in daily life and the development of the 
Roman society.
Modern scholars have worked to sort out the 
origins of these gods. They disagree over the meaning 
of the term indigete as it would have been used in the 
sixth century b.c. That disagreement has been taking 
place since at least the 1920s. Using linguistics and 
language studies, some scholars have tried to decipher 
the meaning of the word indigete itself. Other scholars 
have used the works of the poets and historians and 
carvings on monuments and markers from across the 
Roman Empire to decipher just who these gods were 
and the roles they played in people’s lives.
Today, scholars seem to agree that too little is known 
to state absolutely who the indigetes were. Beyond that 
agreement, though, there are differing opinions. Some 
experts say the indigetes were ancestors that people 
worshipped after their deaths. Others modify that and 
say that the indigetes were the great heroes who people 
later deified, or worshipped as gods, such as Aeneas, the 
hero from Troy, who settled in Italy. 
Others argue that the indigetes were household 
gods or personal gods who directed the daily lives of 
individuals. In this view, even the greater Roman gods, 
such as Janus and Ceres, began as personal gods. 
As the Roman society grew and merged with other 
cultures, many, but not all, of these gods took on more 
roles and prominence and moved from their influence 
on individuals to influence on all of society. 
Still others argue that classical Roman authors 
used the term dii indigites to distinguish the many 
personal gods from the dii novensiles, or newcomer 
gods, particularly those brought to the Italian penin-
sula by Greek colonists. Some argue more specifically 
that the indigetes were the group of gods named 
in one of the oldest recovered calendars of Roman 
festivals, inscribed in a stucco wall sometime in the 
sixth century b.c. and discovered by archaeologists in 
the early 20th century. 
See also agricultural gods; household gods; 
personal gods; state gods.
Ino  Greek  Daughter of Cadmus and Harmo-
nia; sister of Agave, Antonoë, and Semele; wife of 
Athamas. Ino was a moon goddess and a corn god-
dess. She is important in the legend of Jason and the 
Argonauts as the second wife of Athamas.
Ino hated her stepson Phrixus, the firstborn of 
Athamas and Nephele. Ino, as a corn goddess, per-
suaded the women of Boeotia to roast the corn seeds 
secretly before sowing them, so that no new corn 
would grow from the dead seeds. She then bribed an 
oracle to tell Athamas that Phrixus must be sacrificed 
to the corn goddess to make the barren fields fertile. 
Terrified, Athamas agreed to the sacrifice. The winged 
ram that wore a Golden Fleece rescued Phrixus.
Ino and her husband, Athamas, took care of the 
infant Dionysus (son of Ino’s sister Semele), which 
earned them the gratitude of Zeus (father of Diony-
sus) but the wrath of Hera (wife of Zeus), who visited 
madness on both Ino and Athamas.
Io  Greek  The beautiful daughter of the river god 
Inachus, and a priestess of Hera. Hera’s husband, the 
great god Zeus, fell in love with Io. To protect Io 
from the wrath and jealousy of Hera, Zeus changed 
Io into a pretty white heifer (a young cow). Hera was 
not deceived. She asked Zeus for the heifer and Zeus 
was forced to hand over Io. Hera put Io under the 
78  incubus

care of the hundred-eyed Argus (1), who watched her 
night and day, for his eyes never closed.
Stricken with remorse, Zeus sent the god Hermes 
to rescue Io. Hermes told long stories and sang songs 
until all the eyes of Argus closed in sleep. Then Hermes 
cut off the monster’s head and released Io. Io fled, but 
Hera, still jealous, sent a gadfly to torment her. Io 
eventually reached Egypt, where at last she became a 
woman again and bore Zeus a son, Epaphus.
It is said that the Ionian Sea is named after Io, 
for she swam across it. The Bosporus, a narrow strait 
between the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara, is 
also named after her. (Bosporus means “cow ford,” a 
crossing for cows.)
Some say that the strange story of Io had its 
origin in pre-Hellenic religion, when perhaps Io was 
a moon goddess. It is said that moon goddesses wore 
horns, as Io did as a heifer. Some accounts say that 
Io was but one aspect of the goddess Hera, ancient 
Earth Mother, often described as “ox-eyed.”
Iolaus  Greek  The son of Iphicles (halfbrother 
of Heracles). Iolaus was the constant companion 
of Heracles and also his charioteer. Iolaus helped 
Heracles slay the Hydra.
Iolcus  Greek  A town in Magnesia, a region of 
Thessaly. In Greek mythology, it was the home of 
Pelias and Jason, and the starting point for the expe-
dition of the Argonauts in search of the Golden 
Fleece.
Iole  Greek  Daughter of Eurytus, king of 
Oechalia. Heracles loved Iole. It was because of this 
love affair that Deianira, Heracles’ wife, unwittingly 
caused her husband’s death by administering to him 
what she thought was a love potion but which was 
actually poison. After Heracles’ death, Iole married 
his son, Hyllus.
Iphicles  Greek  Halfbrother of the hero Hera-
cles; son of Amphitryon, a prince of Tiryns, and his 
wife, Alcmene, who was a daughter of the king of 
Mycenae; husband to Automedusa, and later, to the 
youngest daughter of King Creon of Thebes. 
Heracles’ mother was also Alcmene but his father 
was the great god Zeus. The brothers were born on 
the same day, leading some writers to call them twins. 
However, the boys were conceived a night apart, after 
Zeus disguised himself as Amphitryon and slept with 
their mother, the night before Amphitryon returned 
from war and conceived Iphicles. 
Iphicles proved himself mortal when, in his first 
test in life as an infant, he was frightened, unlike his 
brother. One night, as the two babies slept, Hera, 
wife of Zeus, or according to some, Amphitryon 
himself, put a snake in their room. Iphicles cowered 
in terror and Heracles fought and killed the snake.
Iphicles was with Heracles when the hero went mad 
and began killing family members. Iphicles managed to 
save his eldest son, Iolaus, and Heracle’s wife, Megara 
(2), but two of Iolaus’s children and two of Heracle’s 
children died at Heracle’s hands. Iphicles accompanied 
his brother on several of his 12 great labors. He 
also fought in the Calydonian Boar Hunt and at 
Heracle’s side in Troy, when the hero rescued King 
Laomedon’s daughter, whom the ocean god Poseidon 
had demanded as a sacrifice. Iphicles died in Troy.
Iphigenia  Greek  Daughter of Clytemnestra 
and Agamemnon, king of Mycenae and leader of the 
Greek forces in the Trojan War; sister of Electra 
and Orestes. Agamemnon sacrificed Iphigenia to 
placate the goddess Artemis, whom he had offended, 
and to ensure by this sacrifice fair winds on the voyage 
to Troy. Greek tragedians, notably Sophocles and 
Euripides, cited the death of Iphigenia as as motive 
for the murder of Agamemnon by Clytemnestra.
Iris  Greek  Messenger of the gods, especially of 
Zeus, and a devoted attendant of Hera. Iris personifies 
the rainbow, a path, it was said, that she often trav-
eled. Daughter of the Titan Thaumus; sister of the 
Harpies.
Ixion  Greek  King of the Lapiths in Thessaly, 
the largest ancient region of north-central Greece. 
Ixion fell in love with Hera, wife of the god Zeus. 
Angry at the advances of Ixion to his wife, Zeus 
tricked Ixion by creating a cloud, Nephele, in the 
likeness of Hera. Ixion made love to the cloud and 
from the union was born Centaurus, the ancestor 
of the Centaurs. Zeus then hurled a thunderbolt at 
Ixion and had him tied to a fiery wheel, condemned 
to whirl forever through the heavens.
The poet Ovid saw Ixion as symbolic of sensuality.
Ixion  79

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
80
J
8
Janus  (Ianus)  Roman  One of the principal 
Roman gods and one of the oldest. Janus was the 
guardian of gates and doors, and as such his name is 
used in the name of the month of January, the gate-
way to the year. He is depicted as being two-faced or 
two-headed: One of his faces looks forward, into the 
future; the other looks backward, into the past. Janus 
was the opener and closer of all things. His name was 
mentioned in prayers even before that of Jupiter.
The people of Rome dedicated a shrine to Janus 
in the Forum. The doors to this shrine were opened 
only in time of war to allow the warriors to march 
forward into battle.
The chief festival of Janus was on New Year’s Day.
Jason  (Iason)  Greek  The hero of one of the 
most famous Greek legends, often known as “Jason 
and the Golden Fleece,” or “Jason and the Argo-
nauts.” Jason was the son of Aeson, king of Iolcus, in 
Thessaly, and of Queen Alcimede. When Pelias, the 
half-brother of Aeson, deposed Aeson and claimed the 
throne of Iolcus, threatening to kill any who disputed 
his claim, Jason, the heir to the throne, was smuggled 
away from the kingdom and put into the care of 
Chiron, the gentle Centaur.
After many years, Jason made his way back to Iol-
cus to regain his kingdom. On his way, he helped an 
old woman by carrying her across a river. He lost one 
of his sandals in the stream but earned the gratitude 
of the woman, who was the goddess Hera in disguise. 
Hera would always be an ally of Jason.
Pelias had been warned by an Oracle to beware 
of a man wearing one sandal. When Jason appeared 
with one bare foot, Pelias sent him on an expedition 
to find the Golden Fleece, knowing it was unlikely 
that Jason would ever return. However, Jason came 
back triumphant. As well as the fleece, Jason also 
brought with him the sorceress-queen Medea, who 
brought him disaster after he deserted her for Glauca. 
Jason lived a lonely and unhappy life, wandering 
about from place to place, until he finally died under 
the prow of his ship, the Argo.
Jason and the Argonauts  Jason was the hero 
of this, one of the most famous Greek myths. Pelias, 
who had usurped the kingdom of Iolcus, sent Jason 
to capture the Golden Fleece, a quest from which he 
thought Jason would never return.
However, Jason had won the favor of the god-
desses Hera and Athene. With their help, Jason 
built the fabled ship Argo, which had 50 oars. He 
recruited 50 remarkable people called the Argonauts. 
They included one woman, Atalanta; Heracles, 
the strongest man who ever lived; Orpheus, the poet 
from Thrace who could sing more sweetly than the 
Sirens; and Castor and Pollux, brothers of Helen. 
They set sail for the Black Sea where legend said the 
Golden Fleece was hidden.
After many adventures, the Argonauts reached the 
kingdom ruled by Aeetes. The king, whose help the 
Argonauts needed, imposed seemingly impossible tasks 
upon Jason. One was to harness fire-breathing Bulls 
with brazen feet and plow a field. Then he was to sow 
the plowed field with dragons’ teeth, from which would 
spring fully armed warriors. Fortunately for Jason, 
Medea, daughter of Aeetes, had fallen in love with him. 
She used her powers as a sorceress to help him. Jason 
mastered the bulls, and when the armed men sprang 
from the dragons’ teeth, Jason did what Cadmus had 
done before him: he threw a stone into the midst of the 
warriors, who accused each other of throwing the stone. 
They fought among themselves until all were dead.
Medea then led Jason to the place where the 
Golden Fleece hung, guarded by a terrible dragon. 
Using a magic potion, Medea put the dragon to sleep, 
allowing Jason to secure the precious trophy.
Jason and the Argonauts went to sea, accompanied 
by Medea, and pursued by King Aeetes. Medea slew 
her brother, Absyrtus, who had accompanied them. 

She cut his body into pieces and flung them into the 
sea and onto the surrounding land, knowing that 
Aeetes would gather up the dismembered pieces of 
his son’s body to give them a ceremonial burial. Thus 
the Argonauts escaped with the Golden Fleece, and 
returned it to Iolcus.
Juno  (Iuno)  Roman  An old goddess among the 
Roman people who became one of the principal dei-
ties of ancient Rome. In her earliest traditions, Juno 
was a goddess of the Moon and seen as the queen 
of the heavens. She was very important to women 
and protected them during childbirth. Married and 
unmarried women celebrated her great festival, the 
Matronalia, on March 1. Juno developed great status 
in Roman society and, with Jupiter and Minerva, 
became part of the supreme trio of the state religions. 
(Juno and Minerva replaced Mars and Quirinus, who 
were part of an older supreme trio with Jupiter.) In 
509 b.c., the people of Rome dedicated a great temple 
to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva on the Capitoline Hill. 
As the empire grew, people built temples to them 
throughout the conquered territories.
Juno developed great cult status in Rome. Her 
name is joined with a variety of titles that show 
her special functions in society. Juno Lucina was 
the bringer of light. Juno Moneta was the goddess 
of helpful counsel to whom the Romans dedicated 
a mint; the word money comes from this name for 
Juno. Rome’s leaders turned to her to support their 
wars and to help them on diplomatic missions. Juno 
accompanied colonists as they moved into new lands 
behind the Roman armies.
The month of June is named after Juno.
Jupiter  (Iupiter; Jove)  (Jove)  Roman  The 
supreme god of the Roman pantheon; son of Saturn 
and Ops; husband of Juno. Jupiter was an ancient 
sky god of Latium, in central Italy, before the rise of 
Roman power. He was master of thunder, lightning, 
rain, and light, and also the giver of victory and peace. 
Jupiter was the special protector of Rome. Eventually, 
he became the supreme god of the Romans.
Jupiter was the principal god of the two divine 
trios worshiped by the Romans. The older trio, Jupi-
ter, Mars, and Quirinus, were worshiped in the early 
years of Rome as a regional power. As Rome grew to 
a republic and a great military power in the Mediter-
ranean, the religion changed and people worshiped 
Jupiter as the most powerful member of the supreme 
trio that included Juno and Minerva.
Romans built great temples to Jupiter on the 
Capitoline Hill.
Jupiter is also the name of the largest planet in our 
solar system.
Justitia  (Iustitia; Justice)  Roman  The goddess 
of justice; some say a mere personification of the legal 
concept of fairness. Justitia was often portrayed as 
blindfolded so that she was not swayed by what she 
saw, and carrying scales in her hands to weigh each 
side of a disagreement. 
Some sources say that the Roman emperor Augus-
tus introduced a cult to Justitia in Rome in 13 b.c., 
at the same time that he introduced the goddesses 
Salus (Public Welfare), Concordia (Harmony), and 
Pax (Peace), to inspire in his people the traits he wanted 
society to have. Other sources say that Justitia, like the 
Greek goddess Astraea, was the last of the great gods to 
dwell among humans, but when their conflicts became 
too fierce and her influence too weak, Justitia fled to the 
heavens where she became the constellation Virgo. 
Juturna  (Iuturna)  Roman  An ancient goddess 
of springs and fountains. In her earliest forms, Juturna 
was worshiped most notably on the banks of the river 
Numicius, which flowed near the city of Lavinium, 
founded by the Trojan hero Aeneas after he settled in 
Italy. She also provided protection against fire.
According to some legends, Juturna was the sister 
of Turnus, king of the Rutuli people, and fought 
with her brother against Aeneas for the love of 
Lavinia. In her own story, Juturna became the love 
interest of Jupiter, supreme Roman god, who granted 
her immortality and reign over small bodies of water.
Some early historians say Juturna was the wife of 
Janus, one of the oldest Roman gods, and by him the 
mother of Fons, the Roman god of springs. Juturna’s 
cult moved to Rome as the city became an urban 
center. A famous spring dedicated to her flowed in 
the Roman Forum near the temples to Vesta and the 
divine twins, Castor and Pollux.
Juventas  (Juventus, Iuventus)  Roman  The 
goddess of youth, especially of youths who had 
reached the age of wearing adult clothing, which 
usually began at age 14. Juventas also protected 
young men who had reached the age of preparing for 
active military duty, which was typically 17. Juventas 
appears to be a very old deity in Rome’s religions, 
for hers is one of the oldest temples built on the 
Capitoline Hill, a center for religious activities in the 
oldest part of the city.
Juventas  81

In this portion of a huge mural painted by Luca Giordano (1634-1795) in the Palazzo Medici Riccardi in 
Florence, Italy, the Roman goddess Justitia (with scales) reaches toward the heavens. 

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
83
K
8
ker  (plural: Keres)  Greek  Female spirits that 
represented a person’s death or perhaps destiny. Each 
person had one ker as a companion through life. The 
keres were portrayed as black, winged beings with long, 
pointed tails. According to stories, they tore at dead 
bodies to drink the blood. Homer, the great Greek poet 
credited with writing the Iliad, indicated that the keres 
accompanied heroes and determined not only their 
deaths but the ways in which their lives would unfold. 
According to Hesiod, a Greek poet who wrote in the 
800s b.c., the keres were the daughters of Nyx (Night) 
and the sisters of Thanatos (Death) and the Fates.

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
84
L
8
labyrinth  Greek  The word labyrinth means any 
intricate building full of chambers and passages, or 
a maze of paths bordered by high hedges. In Greek 
mythology, the labyrinth designed by Daedalus for 
King Minos to house the Minotaur may have been 
patterned on the design of the palace itself, which had 
a complex of rooms.
Laconia  Greek  A region in the southeast 
Peloponnesus whose capital was Sparta. In Greek 
mythology, Helen, wife of Menelaus and legendary 
cause of the Trojan War, was sometimes said to have 
been an ancient goddess of fertility in Laconia. She 
was worshiped there as a goddess of beauty.
Ladon  Greek  The dragon who guarded the gar-
den where the apples of the Hesperides were kept. 
In this garden, on Mount Atlas, there was a tree that 
bore golden fruit. The tree was a present from Gaia 
to Hera on her marriage to Zeus. No mortals knew 
the whereabouts of this sacred tree. It was the last 
task of the hero Heracles to find and collect some of 
the apples. This Heracles did with the help of Atlas, a 
Titan. Heracles then killed the dragon, incurring the 
wrath of Hera.
Laelaps  (Lelaps, Lalaps)  Greek  A hound that 
could catch whatever he chased. The god Zeus gave 
the dog to the Nymph Procris, who then gave him 
to her husband, Cephalus, the hunter. Cephalus 
inadvertently killed Procris. Laelaps lay forlorn at the 
feet of the slain nymph. Laelaps was later sent out to 
hunt the Teumessian fox, which had been destined 
by the goddess Hera never to be caught. To end the 
seemingly impossible, unsolvable chase, Zeus turned 
both animals to stone.
Laertes  Greek  King of Ithaca husband of 
Anticlea, father of the hero Odysseus. Laertes was 
one of the Argonauts, the gallant crew who helped 
Jason find the Golden Fleece. He was also present 
at the Calydonian Boar Hunt. Laertes was still 
alive when his son, Odysseus, returned from the 
Trojan War.
Laestrygonians  Greek  A race of giant can-
nibals who devoured many of the crewmen of the 
ships of Odysseus when the hero anchored near their 
island. Only Odysseus’s own ship escaped this terrible 
fate, since Odysseus had the foresight to anchor his 
vessel outside the harbor. In Book 10 of the Odyssey, 
Homer describes how the giants threw rocks on the 
ships from the top of the cliffs and then harpooned 
the screaming men as if they were fish, and carried 
them off to be eaten.
Laocoön  Greek  A priest of Apollo and Posei-
don; son of Priam, king of Troy, and of Hecuba. 
Laocoön made Apollo angry by marrying and beget-
ting children, breaking his priestly vow of celibacy. 
The Trojans had chosen Laocoön to make sacrifices 
to Poseidon, whose priest they had murdered nine 
years earlier. Before he went to the altar with his two 
sons, Laocoön warned Priam to beware of the Trojan 
horse. (See The Wooden Horse of Troy, under Trojan 
War.) Laocoön said that he feared the Greeks, 
especially when they brought gifts. From this, “a 
Greek gift” has come to mean a treacherous gift. As 
Laocoön and his twin sons, Antiphas and Thymbreus, 
stood at the altar of Poseidon, two gigantic serpents, 
sent by a vengeful Apollo, coiled about them and 
crushed them to death.
A famous statue of Laocoön and the serpents was 
discovered in Rome in 1506. It is believed to date 
from the second century b.c., and now stands in the 
Vatican Museum.
The story of Laocoön is told in Virgil’s Aeneid.

Laomedon  Greek  First king of Troy; father of 
Priam, Hesione, and others. He was slain by the hero 
Heracles.
The gods Apollo and Poseidon had displeased 
Zeus. As punishment, he sent them to work for 
Laomedon for wages. Poseidon built the walls of 
Troy, while Apollo tended the king’s flocks on Mount 
Ida (2). After the two gods had completed their tasks, 
Laomedon refused to pay them. In revenge, the gods 
sent a sea monster to ravage Troy. Only the sacrifice 
of a maiden would appease the monster. One of the 
maidens chosen was Hesione, the daughter of the 
king, but Heracles rescued her. Again Laomedon 
refused to pay his debt, and Heracles killed him.
Lapiths  (plural: Lapithae)  Greek  Mythical people 
of Thessaly, in north-central Greece. Their king, Ixion, 
fathered with Nephele (a cloud that Zeus had formed 
in the likeness of Hera) the half-human, half-horse 
creatures called Centaurs. Pirithoüs, half-brother of 
the Centaurs, became the ruler of the Lapiths.
Lar  (plural: Lares)  Roman  Ancient Roman 
spirits of the dead. A guardian spirit who in its earliest 
The Trojan hero Laocoön (center) and his two sons struggle against the giant serpents sent by the Greeks in 
this Roman marble sculpture, a copy of a Greek original from the second century B.C.  (Photograph by Jean-
Christophe Benoist. Used under a Creative Commons license.)
Lar  85

form seems to have watched over the places where 
roads met. Over time, the Lares became associated 
with the home and each household had its own Lar 
Familiaris. A home featured a shrine to its Lar, which 
stood near the hearth, the center of family life, and 
included a statue of this spirit. Families trusted their 
Lares to provide for their posterity. Eventually, cities, 
too, had their own watchful spirits.
The Lares are closely related to the Penates, 
spirits of the storeroom, and the goddess Vesta, the 
Roman goddess of the hearth. Aeneas, the Trojan 
hero who settled in Italy, was sometimes known as 
Lars Aeneas, a title that meant honored ancestor.
Lara  (Lala; Larunda; The talker)  Roman  Ori-
ginally, a Sabine goddess who presided over houses. 
Later a nymph, a daughter of the river Tiber or the 
river Almo, known for her inability to keep a secret. 
Little information remains about the Sabine goddess, 
but her story as a nymph lives on in the works of 
Roman poets.
Lara suffered a price for her chatter. When 
Jupiter, who was married to Juno, wanted the help 
of the nymphs to seduce the goddess Juterna, he 
swore them all to silence then told them of their roles 
in his plans to capture Juterna, who kept avoiding 
him. Since childhood, Lara had been unable to keep 
a secret, so she spread word of the great god’s plans. 
She told Juno and Juterna. Some sources say that 
telling both the wife and the love interest was a sign 
of Lara’s great disapproval of Jupiter’s actions. Others 
say she was essentially a gossip. 
Jupiter avenged himself against Lara by pulling 
out her tongue and sentencing her to life in the 
silence of the Underworld. He charged his son 
Mercury with delivering the nymph, but Mercury 
fell in love with her on the way and made love to 
her—some sources say he raped her—and hid her in 
a grove of trees where she bore him twin sons.
Latinus  Roman  A legendary, perhaps historical, 
king of the Latini or Latins, an original people of 
central Italy, and the hero from whom that people 
got their name.
Several traditions surround Latinus and the role he 
played in the history of Rome. In one tradition, he was 
the son of the god Faunus and the Nymph Marica. In 
another, he was the grandson of Hercules. Over the 
centuries, as the influence of Greek mythology over 
Roman religion grew, the story of Latinus changed 
and he was seen as the son of the Greek goddess 
Circe and the hero Odysseus. Scholars believe that 
Latinus was an actual person, but most of his history 
is lost within the myths of the founding of Rome. He 
is prominent in the poet Virgil’s story of the Aeneid, 
which tells of the arrival of Aeneas in Italy.
According to different versions of Latinus’s 
story, he had consulted an oracle and learned that 
his daughter, Lavinia, would marry a foreigner. 
When Aeneas arrived in Italy, he fell in love with 
Lavinia, and Latinus and his wife, Amata, agreed to 
a marriage. In another version, Latinus formed an  
alliance with Aeneas to defend against the Rutuli 
people, with whom the Latins were at war. Both sto-
ries end with Aeneas going to war with and defeating 
Turnus, prince of the Rutuli, who claimed Lavinia 
in marriage, and Aeneas winning the hand of Lavinia 
and naming the city of Lavinium after her.
Latium  Roman  In ancient times, a region in 
west-central Italy, south and east of the Tiber River on 
the shores of the Tyrrhenian Sea. The people of this 
region were known as Latins. Archaeological evidence 
shows that Latin communities first developed around 
1200 b.c. in the Alban Hills, 12 miles southeast of 
the hills of modern Rome. As communities grew and 
shifted from herding flocks of animals to farming, they 
eventually spread as far north as the Tiber River, by 
850 b.c. Latium’s largest city was Lavinium, but by the 
700s b.c., Rome became the principal city of Latium. 
In ancient Roman and Greek writing, authors 
sometimes refer to the people who would become 
Latins as “Aborigines,” which modern scholars 
understand to mean “mountain people.” Scholars 
also agree that the Latin people came originally from 
east central Europe.
Because Rome is located in this ancient region, 
all of the myths of the founding of this great city tell 
either of the founding of Latium or of the conquest 
of the Latin people by newcomers. Early myths say 
that it was in Latium that Saturn hid after his son 
Jupiter attacked him in the Roman version of the 
Greek story about the overthrow of the Titans by the 
Olympian Gods. Here Saturn established a society 
and reigned over a Golden Age of the people.
Here, too, Romulus and Remus found land 
suitable for establishing their own kingdom and on 
the great seven hills on the east banks of the Tiber, 
18 miles north of Lavinium, they founded Rome. 
Romulus, after killing Remus and declaring himself 
king, made war on the people of Latium to find wives 
and to grow his kingdom.
Greek colonists who had settled on the Italian 
peninsula as early as 1000 b.c. also developed stories 
86  Lara

of the founding of Rome and the role the Latins 
played in the development of the early city. Their 
stories were centered on Greek myth. The first of the 
Greeks to build a community on what would become 
Rome was the hero Evander, who fled Greece and 
settled with his mother on the Palatine Hill. Sixty 
years later, the Trojan War hero Aeneas arrived 
in Italy. With the help of Latinus, king of Latium, 
Aeneas defeated the nearby Rutuli people and 
established the neighboring city of Lavinium, which 
he named after his wife, Lavinia, daughter of Latinus. 
Thus Evander and Aeneas united the Latin people as 
one great community over which Rome ruled.
Laverna  Roman  A goddess of the Underworld 
of ancient Italian origins. Laverna was known as 
a goddess to whom thieves, cheats, imposters, and 
frauds would pray when they were trying to hide. 
They would ask Laverna to make them look innocent 
and law abiding. Near a temple to Laverna on the 
Aventine Hill grew a grove of trees in which thieves 
would hide and ask for her help. She became known 
through Roman poets as the goddess of trickery.
Lavinia  Roman  The daughter of Latinus and 
Amata. She had been betrothed to her relative Tur-
nus, but Latinus gave her instead to the hero Aeneas, 
who founded a city and named it Lavinium in her 
honor. Her story is told in Virgil’s Aeneid.
Leda  Greek  The daughter of King Thestius of 
Aetolia; wife of Tyndareus, king of Sparta. She was 
the mother of the twin brothers Castor and Poly-
deuces (Pollux in Latin; see Castor and Pollux), 
known by the joint name of the Dioscuri; and of 
Helen and Clytemnestra. According to one myth, 
Leda mated with the god Zeus, who had disguised 
himself as a swan. Leda then laid an egg from which 
Helen and Polydeuces emerged. Castor and Clytem-
nestra arrived by normal delivery and were said to be 
the children of Tyndareus.
Lemures  Roman  Ghosts of the dead, malignant 
or mischievous spirits who returned to Earth to ter-
rify the living. People rid themselves of these spirits 
during the Lemuria, a feast held on three nights 
in May with odd numbers, the 9th, 11th and 13th. 
Families went through an extraordinary ritual at the 
Lemuria: Every father rose from his bed at midnight, 
snapped his fingers to scare away the spirits, then 
washed his hands three times. Next he filled his 
mouth with black beans, then tossed the beans behind 
him, chanting words of atonement. He repeated 
this performance nine times. Finally he washed his 
hands again, struck a gong and bade the evil spirits to 
depart. After that he could safely go back to bed. 
See also Manes.
Lethe  (Forgetfulness, Oblivion)  Greek  One of the 
rivers of Hades. The souls of the dead were obliged 
to drink the waters of Lethe so that they could forget 
everything they had said or done when they were 
alive. Lethe is sometimes associated with Dionysus, 
god of the wine that encourages forgetfulness.
Leto  Greek  A Titan; daughter of Coeus and 
Phoebe; mother, by Zeus, of the twin deities, Arte-
mis and Apollo. The Romans called her Latona.
According to Hesiod, Leto was noted for her 
gentleness. Hera, the jealous wife of Zeus, relent-
lessly pursued Leto, who wandered from place to 
place, finally resting at Delos, where she gave birth 
to the divine twins. It is said that Artemis was born 
first and immediately became mature enough to help 
her mother with the birth of Apollo. At one time, 
Delos was a floating island in the Aegean Sea. In 
recognition of its being a haven for Leto and the chil-
dren, Zeus made the island immovable and decreed 
that no one should be born or die there.
Liber  (Free)  Roman  An ancient god of fertility and 
procreation, particularly of seeds and plants. Liber was 
the husband or perhaps brother of Libera, an ancient 
fertility goddess, and closely connected with her to 
Ceres, the Roman goddess of plants and grains.
Romans prayed to Liber and Libera to bring them 
many children and good crops. They celebrated a 
festival in Liber’s honor, the Liberalia, on March 17. 
By the first century b.c., Liber was closely identi-
fied with the Greek god Dionysus at which point 
he became a protector of grapevines. Then vintners 
prayed to him for good wine.
Libera  Roman  An ancient goddess of fertility, 
especially of grape vines; wife or sister of Liber. 
In most surviving information, her name is tied to 
Liber and Ceres, the goddess of grains and cereals. 
Together this trio signified food and drink, as well as 
liberty and law. Some suggest that Liber and Libera 
also presided over the selection of brides for young 
men, a symbol of their connection with fertility. 
Early in Roman history, Libera was connected 
with the Greek goddess Persephone, who was also 
known as Kore.
Libera  87

Libertas  Roman  The personification of liberty, 
considered by some a goddess who protected the free-
dom and liberty of Roman citizens, even from despots 
and dictators, and who granted liberty to freed slaves. 
A temple in honor of Libertas, built in the third 
century b.c., stood on the Aventine Hill. Her profile, 
with the goddess wearing a cap that signified this free-
dom, was commonly featured on Roman coins during 
the Roman Empire to commemorate conquests by 
the Roman army and by the Roman emperors.
Libitina  Roman  Ancient goddess who presided 
over funerals. Her name is often synonymous with 
death. Originally she was an Earth goddess or 
agricultural deity.
Undertakers in ancient Rome were called libitina-
rii. They had their places of work within Libitina’s 
temple. Here deaths were registered and the bereaved 
paid money to honor the goddess.
Libitina was sometimes identified with the Greek 
goddess Persephone.
Libya (1)  Greek  Mother, with sea god Poseidon, 
of Agenor, king of Tyre. 
See also Europa.
Libya (2)  The Greek name for North Africa, ex- 
cluding Egypt and Ethiopia. In Homer’s Odyssey, 
Odysseus and his crew make landfall in Libya in 
the land of the Lotus-Eaters. In Virgil’s Aeneid, 
Aeneas and his crew reach the coast of Libya, where 
Aeneas is visited by his mother, the goddess Venus.
Lityerses  Greek  Son of King Midas of Phrygia. 
Lityerses prided himself on his skill in the harvest. He 
challenged all to compete with him and was brutal to 
those who lost in the contest. In some legends, the hero 
Heracles defeated Lityerses, cut off his head with a 
sickle, and threw his body into the Meander River.
Livy  (59 b.c.–a.d. 17)  Roman  A Roman historian 
born as Titus Livius, in Padua, Italy. Livy is best 
remembered for his 142 books on the history of Rome. 
Livy was most concerned with showing Rome’s des-
tiny as the greatest power in the Mediterranean world. 
Modern scholars point out Livy’s reliance on legend 
to tell the earliest histories and the inaccuracies in 
his works. However, Livy’s histories, of which only 36 
complete volumes have survived, were highly regarded 
during his time and by medieval European scholars.
Lotus-Eaters  (Lotophagi)  Greek  In Homer’s 
Odyssey, people who lived on the fruit or the roots of 
the lotus plant. The food made them forget their pasts, 
their families, and their futures, so that they lived in 
a state of dreamy bliss. Odysseus and his crew made 
landfall in the land of the Lotus-Eaters on their way 
home to Ithaca. Several of the crew became addicted 
to the food of the lotus plant. They had to be dragged 
back to the ship by force.
“Lotus Land” was probably Libya (2), in North 
Africa.
Lua  (Lua Mater)  Roman  An old goddess who 
was called upon in war to destroy the enemy’s weap-
ons. At the end of a victorious battle, early Roman 
soldiers gathered the swords and shields of the enemy 
in a pile and dedicated those spoils to Lua.
She also had the task of protecting the city of 
Rome, but people were not allowed to speak Lua’s 
name, and she is known as the “ineffable” or unnam-
able patron goddess of that city and kingdom. One 
of Lua’s responsibilities was to protect people from 
plagues and to bring to enemies illnesses that might 
destroy them.
Lua was sometimes known as the wife of Saturn, 
the ruler of a golden age said to have existed long 
before the beginning of Rome. In that role, she was 
known as Lua Saturni.
Lucina  Roman  An ancient Italian goddess of 
light and childbirth. Poets tell of Lucina presid-
ing over the birth of animals and plants as well as 
humans. Women called upon her while struggling 
through labor pains.
The stories of Eileithya, the Greek goddess of 
childbirth, were attributed to Lucina. Her traits and 
responsibilities in Roman religion were eventually 
blended into the goddess Juno, who was also associ-
ated with light and childbirth.
Luna  (Moon)  Roman  An ancient Italian goddess 
of the Moon, probably of a lesser rank than the great 
Roman goddesses, such as Minerva and Juno. Very 
early in Roman religion, Luna took on the stories and 
myths of the ancient Greek moon goddess, Selene, 
and even some of the mythology of the Roman god-
dess Diana, the huntress. A temple to Luna stood on 
the Aventine Hill in Rome.
Lydia  Greek  A wealthy kingdom of western 
Asia Minor (now northwestern Turkey). In Greek 
mythology, Lydia was the home of Arachne, the 
skillful weaver who rashly pitted her talents against 
those of the goddess Athene.
88  Libertas

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
89
M
8
Maenads  Greek  The crazed women who fol-
lowed the god Dionysus. (See also Bacchants, 
which was their Latin name.)
Magna Graecia  (Great Greece)  Greek  The 
collective name given to Greek colonies founded 
by settlers in southern Italy and the island of Sicily. 
The cult of the Greek hero Heracles, and of other 
personages in Greek mythology, found their way into 
Roman mythology through the Greek colonists of 
Magna Graecia. This influence of Greek culture on 
other cultures is called Hellenization.
Maia (1)  Greek  Daughter of Atlas and Pleione, 
the eldest and most beautiful of the Pleiades (the Seven 
Sisters). Maia was the mother of Hermes, whose father 
was Zeus. She bore Hermes in a grotto on Mount 
Cyllene in Arcadia. Maia’s only appearance in Greek 
mythological writings is in the works of Hesiod.
Maia (2)  (Maiesta)  Roman  A very early and 
now little-known Roman goddess of agriculture and 
fertility. People made sacrifices to her to ensure the 
fertility of their crops. Maia was a supporter of and 
perhaps assistant to Vulcan, the Roman god of fire.
Manes  (Good Ones)  Roman  The spirits of the 
dead. They were greatly feared and were called 
“Good Ones” to placate their anger. (Similarly, the 
Greek Furies were called the Eumenides, “good 
ones” or “good-tempered ones.”)
Whenever a town was founded, people first dug a 
pit at the site and then covered the pit with a stone. The 
hole represented a gateway to the Underworld (2) 
through which the Manes could pass when the citizens 
removed the stone, which they did three times a year.
Mars  Roman  The god of war who, in his earliest 
forms, was a god of agriculture and prosperity. Mars was 
the second most powerful god in early Roman mythol-
ogy, after Jupiter. With Jupiter and the god Quirinus, 
Mars shared a position of prominence in the religious 
lives of the people of rome. While Mars remained a 
prominent god, he and Quirinus were replaced as part 
of the supreme trio by Juno and Minerva.
Mars has old origins. Some suggest he was an 
agricultural god of the Sabine people. As a god who 
watched over their food supply, Mars was seen as 
the primary protector of their society. Mars was also 
known as the father of Romulus and Remus, the twin 
brothers, who according to some legends, founded the 
city of Rome. He was referred to as “Father Mars” and 
Romans believed themselves to be his descendants.
As Rome expanded from a city into an empire 
through military power, Mars evolved into the god 
who protected the nation by protecting its army. In 
that way, he became the god of war. When Roman 
armies conquered peoples and lands across Europe 
and the Mediterranean, the soldiers and colonists who 
followed them built temples to Mars to thank him for 
their success. They built most of their temples outside 
of cities, where Mars could watch over the land.
In time, Mars became associated with Ares, the 
Greek god of war, and took on some of his attributes. 
Unlike many other Roman gods, however, Mars 
retained most of his ancient reputation and mythol-
ogy despite the influence of Greek culture.
The month of March, the first in the Roman cal-
endar, received its name from Mars, for that was the 
beginning of the growing season and the beginning 
of the season to wage war. He was often portrayed 
carrying a shield and spears or lances. The oak and fig 
trees and the woodpecker were sacred to Mars.
In astronomy, Mars is the fourth planet from the 
Sun in the solar system. It was well known to the 
ancient Romans as the star that shone red in the sky. 
Its color, the color of blood, strengthened the con-
nection between Mars and war.

Medea  Greek  A sorceress; daughter of King 
Aeetes of Colchis (Asia Minor); niece of Circe, the 
witch of the Odyssey. In his quest for the Golden 
Fleece, Jason fell in love with Medea, who helped 
him capture the precious fleece.
As Jason and Medea fled with the prize, they 
were pursued by Aeetes, the father of Medea and her 
brother, Absyrtus. In one version of the story, Medea 
killed her brother and threw pieces of him behind 
them on the road, knowing that Aeetes would stop 
to pick up his dismembered son. Thus she and Jason 
escaped from the angry king.
Medea returned to Iolcus (Thessaly) with Jason. 
Her first deed was to destroy Pelias, the king who 
had taken over the throne of Iolcus from Jason’s 
father. Medea suggested to the daughters of Pelias 
that, if they killed him, cut him up into small 
pieces, and cooked him in a stew, he would then be 
rejuvenated. She demonstrated her idea by cutting 
and cooking a ram and, by the use of magic, making 
a lamb spring forth from the pot. The daughters did 
as she suggested but, of course, Pelias did not survive. 
The people were so horrified at this deed that Jason 
and Medea had to flee the country.
Jason and Medea settled for a while in Corinth. 
Jason deserted Medea for Glauca, daughter of the 
Corinthian king Creon. Medea killed Glauca by send-
ing her a wedding dress saturated with poison. Medea 
also killed the two sons she had borne with Jason, then 
fled to the court of King Aegeus of Athens.
When the hero Theseus arrived at his father’s 
court, Medea tried to murder him with a goblet of 
poisoned wine. Just in time, Aegeus recognized his 
son and dashed the cup from his hands.
Medea fled from Athens and there is no record of 
where she went next. Some legends say that her son, 
Medus, was the ancestor of the Medes, an ancient 
people of Asia Minor.
The poet Euripides wrote a famous tragedy about 
Medea, first produced in 431 b.c. Medea has been the 
subject of numerous plays and operas.
Medusa  Greek  One of the three Gorgons, the 
only one who was not immortal; her sisters were 
Stheno and Euryale. Medusa was once a beautiful 
maiden, wooed by the sea god, Poseidon, in a temple 
of Athene. The goddess was angry at the violation 
of her shrine and turned Medusa into a monster 
so hideous that anyone who looked upon her was 
turned to stone. Perseus cut off Medusa’s head and 
used it to turn his enemies into stone. From the 
blood of Medusa sprang the children of her union 
with Poseidon: Pegasus, the winged horse, and 
Chrysaor, father of the monster Geryon (see The 
Twelve Labors of Heracles, 10. The Cattle of Geryon, 
under Heracles).
Megara (1)  Greek  A Greek city-state on the 
Greek mainland, between Attica and Corinth.
Megara (2)  Greek  Daughter of King Creon of 
Thebes; first wife of the hero Heracles.
Melampus  Greek  A descendant of Aeolis and a 
cousin of Jason. Melampus was a seer, taught by the 
god Apollo, and perhaps the first mortal in Greek 
mythology to possess prophetic powers.
One story has it that Melampus saved the lives of 
a nest of young snakes. In gratitude they “cleaned out 
Italian artist Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1598-1680) cre-
ated this bust of the witch Medusa and the snakes 
that form her hair. It is in the Musei Capitolini in 
Rome.  (Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen.)
90  Medea

his ears” with their forked tongues so that he could 
hear and understand the languages of birds and other 
animals. Melampus used this special knowledge to 
win a bride for his brother, Bias. The desired maiden 
was Pero, daughter of King Neleus of Pylos, in the 
kingdom of Messene on the west-central coast of 
the Peloponnesus. Neleus asked as bride-price, or 
dowry, the cattle of a neighboring king, Phylacus. 
The cattle were guarded by a dog that never slept. 
Melampus was caught trying to steal them and 
thrown into a prison cell. During the night, he heard 
worms gnawing at a beam and saying that the beam 
would fall by dawn. Melampus demanded a new cell. 
When the roof of his old cell crashed down, Phylacus 
was so impressed that he released Melampus.
Phylacus then begged Melampus to cure the 
sickness of his son, Iphiclus, with his magic powers. 
Melampus heard two birds talking to each other 
about a knife that had been stuck into an oak tree for 
many years. By finding the knife and scraping its rust 
onto Iphiclus, Melampus cured the boy’s affliction. 
As a reward, Melampus was given the cattle and his 
brother Bias got the bride.
In Argos, another kingdom of the Peloponnesus, 
Melampus helped rid the king’s daughters of madness 
by immersing them in a holy well. As a reward, he 
won part of the kingdom of King Proetus and took 
one of the now sane daughters as his bride.
Melanion  Greek  A prince of Arcadia who won 
the hand of the renowned virgin huntress Atalanta. 
Atalanta did not want to get married, but she could 
not disobey the command of her father, Iasus, king 
of Arcadia, in the central Peloponnesus. A great 
athlete, Atalanta put a condition on her acceptance of 
a suitor: he must beat her in a footrace, or die. Many 
died before Melanion sought the help of Aphrodite, 
goddess of love. She gave him three golden apples. 
These he dropped, one at a time, throughout the 
race. Atalanta could not resist stopping to pick up the 
beautiful apples, and so she lost the race and married 
Melanion. The two had a son, Parthenopaeus. In 
some versions, it is said that Aphrodite turned the 
couple into lions who were forced to pull the chariot 
of Cybele, a goddess of Earth and nature.
Meleager  Greek  Son of King Oeneus of Caly-
don, and of Althea. A great javelin thrower, Meleager 
is most famous for killing the Calydonian Boar (see 
under Calydonian Boar hunt).
A few days after his birth, the three Fates appeared 
before Althea. They told her that the child would die 
when a certain log in the fireplace burned. Althea at 
once snatched the wood from the fire, quenched its 
flame, and hid it away.
When Meleager was a young man, he was sent 
to kill the Calydonian Boar that was ravaging the 
countryside. Heroes and princes came from all parts 
of Greece to hunt the boar. Among them was one 
woman, Atalanta, the great huntress. She scored the 
first thrust at the boar. Meleager dealt the death blow 
and awarded the coveted pelt and tusks to Atalanta, 
with whom he had fallen in love. The other men were 
jealous and angry, and fighting ensued, during which 
Meleager killed both his uncles, brothers of Althea.
When Althea saw the corpses of her brothers and 
learned that Meleager had killed them, she retrieved 
the wood from its hiding place and angrily cast it into 
the fire. Meleager died soon thereafter.
Menelaus  Greek  King of Sparta; brother of 
Agamemnon; husband of Helen. The Trojan prince 
Paris stole the beautiful Helen from Menelaus. This 
act was a leading cause of the Trojan War. In some 
accounts, Menelaus and Helen were happily reunited 
after the fall of Troy.
Menoetius  Greek  A second-generation Titan; 
son of Iapetus and Clymene, who was a daughter 
of Oceanus; brother of Atlas, Prometheus, and 
Epimetheus.
Menoetius was said to be the god of anger and 
harshness and was himself said to be brutal and 
arrogant. During the battle between the Titans and 
the Olympian Gods, Zeus hurled a lightning bolt 
at Menoetius. Some sources say he was killed, others 
that he was just stricken and then sent with most of 
the other Titans into Tartarus, the deepest pit in the 
Underworld.
Mephitis  (Mefitis)  Roman  A goddess who 
protected the people of Rome and surrounding cities 
in Italy from the dangerous fumes of sulphur that 
spewed from the many volcanoes and the gaseous 
vents surrounding them. People believed that these 
fumes caused illness and plagues, as well as damage 
to their homes and cities, and called upon Mephitis 
to protect them from these evils. She became more 
commonly known as the goddess of plagues. A temple 
in her honor stood on the Esquiline Hill in Rome.
Volcanic eruptions were, and still are, a promi-
nent threat to the people of Italy. Mount Vesuvius, 
which overlooks the Bay of Naples, erupted in a 
famous explosion in a.d. 79, destroying Pompeii and 
Mephitis  91

Herculaneum. It had been more mildly active for 
hundreds of years before then, frequently spewing 
sulfur and other gases into the atmosphere. Mount 
Etna (Aetna), on the island of Sicily off the tip of the 
Italian peninsula, was very active during the classical 
era of Rome. Mount Stromboli, on an island north 
of Sicily, has been active for more than 2,000 years, 
spewing forth gases in frequent explosions.
Mercury  (Mercurius)  Roman  The god of 
trade and commerce and the supporter of success. 
Evidence of a cult to Mercury in Rome goes back 
to the sixth century b.c., and there is some evidence 
that he was a figure in early Etruscan mythology. 
According to Italian myth, Mercury was the father 
of Faunus, one of the oldest Roman gods. However, 
Mercury was one of the earliest Roman gods to 
come under the influence of Greek mythology (see 
Hellenization) and very little information on him 
survives from before the 400s b.c.
As Rome grew and became prosperous, the people 
needed a god for the merchants and business class 
in their growing society. They knew of the Greeks’ 
Hermes, who, with many other responsibilities, was 
the god of trade and commerce, of travelers, and of 
the marketplace. The Romans gave Mercury these 
traits and adapted for him many of the stories about 
Hermes. Mercury, however, was given no responsibil-
ity over fertility.
Mercury was the god of travelers by land and 
sea and of good luck, music, astronomy, weights and 
measures, and trade. He was also the god of thieving. 
Merchants honored Mercury more than any other 
Romans did and celebrated a festival to him at his 
temple on the Aventine Hill. The word Mercury 
comes from the Latin word for “merchandise.”
Mercury, as he took on the details of the stories of 
the Greek Hermes, became known as the son of Maia 
(1) and Jupiter, whom he served as a messenger. He 
was also known as the father of Evander, an early 
king in central Italy, and of the Lares, who were 
lesser gods of crossroads. (See lar.) Artists portrayed 
Mercury wearing a broad-brimmed hat and winged 
sandals and carrying a purse, the symbol of profit.
In astronomy, Mercury is the closest planet to the 
Sun in the solar system. Visible to the ancients as a 
rapidly moving star, it received its name for the speed 
with which it traveled around the Sun.
Merope  Greek  Daughter of Atlas and Pleione; 
wife of Sisyphus; one of the “Seven Sisters” called 
the Pleiades. Merope was sometimes named “the 
lost star,” the one invisible to the naked eye. It is said 
that she hid her light in shame for having married a 
mortal, and a disreputable one at that.
Metis  (Wisdom)  Greek  A Titan, daughter of 
Oceanus and Tethys, an Oceanid, or ocean Nymph, 
who was counted among the Titans. According to 
Hesiod, Metis was the first wife of the god Zeus. She 
was the wisest of all among both mortals and gods. 
It was Metis who advised Zeus to give his father, 
Cronus, a drink that would make him cough up the 
siblings of Zeus that Cronus had swallowed.
When Metis became pregnant by Zeus, Uranus 
and Gaia advised Zeus to swallow Metis, lest her 
offspring overthrow him. This Zeus did, thus uniting 
his power with her wisdom. In due time his daughter 
Athene was born from his head, fully grown and clad 
in armor.
The god Hermes—Mercury in Roman myths—gives 
an apple to the Greek hero Paris, the gift that even-
tually led to the Trojan war. The painting is by Ital-
ian artist Donato Creti (1671-1749).  
92  Mercury

Midas  Greek  A mythical king of Phrygia, an 
ancient region of central Asia Minor; son of the god-
dess Cybele and Gordius, from whom he inherited 
the throne. In Greek mythology, there are two well-
known stories about Midas: one in which everything 
he touches turns to gold and another in which an 
angry god gives King Midas donkey’s ears.
Midas and the Golden Touch  Midas, king of 
Phrygia, was a devotee of the god Dionysus. The 
followers of Dionysus were well known for their wild 
behavior. One of them, an old man called Silenus, 
could not keep up with the revelers. Some peasants 
captured him, tied him up with garlanded ropes, and 
presented him to their king. Midas knew at once that 
Silenus was a follower of Dionysus and treated him with 
respect. When Midas returned Silenus to Dionysus, the 
grateful god offered Midas any gift he wished.
Midas asked that everything he touched should 
turn to gold. Dionysus granted the wish and Midas 
became very rich. However, he almost died of hunger, 
for who can eat gold? He begged to have his gift 
taken away. Dionysus answered his desperate prayer, 
bidding the king to bathe in the river Pactolus, in 
Lydia, Asia Minor. This Midas did. He lost the 
“golden touch” in the river, where legends say that 
gold was found in historical times.
Midas and the Donkey’s Ears  Midas lost his 
taste for riches and luxury after his unfortunate expe-
rience with “the golden touch,” in which everything 
he touched, including food, turned to gold. Now 
Midas preferred the simple life, spending more time 
in the woods and fields, listening to the pipes of 
Pan, an ancient deity. One day, Pan boasted that he 
could make better music than the god Apollo, great 
Olympian god of music. The mountain trembled and 
Apollo appeared. After Pan had played on his pipes, 
Apollo played the lyre. The assembled nymphs and 
mountain spirits declared Apollo the winner, but King 
Midas declared for Pan. Apollo promptly conferred 
on Midas a pair of donkey ears as punishment.
Midas covered his embarrassing ears with a turban 
of royal Phrygian purple. Only his barber knew his 
secret. The barber whispered the secret into a hole 
in the Earth. This spot of Earth immediately became 
covered with reeds that are said to whisper the secret 
whenever the wind blows.
Minerva  Roman  A Goddess of Etruscan or per-
haps Sabine origins. Over time, the Romans elevated 
Minerva to a high-ranking position and she joined 
with Jupiter and Juno to form the main triad of 
Roman worship, replacing an earlier triad of Jupiter, 
Mars, and Quirinus.
In her earliest form, Minerva was a goddess of 
education and business worshiped by the Etruscans and 
neighboring peoples of central Italy. She then devel-
oped into a goddess of war, battle, death, and sexuality. 
Numa Pompillius, the second king of Rome, who 
ruled from 715 to 673 b.c., introduced the worship of 
Minerva to the citizens of that city-state. Artisans and 
well-educated people paid special honor to Minerva.
In about 509 b.c., the Romans built a majestic 
temple on the Capitoline Hill to honor Jupiter, Juno, 
and Minerva. The chamber to Jupiter, the supreme 
god, stood in the middle, with smaller chambers to the 
two goddesses on either side. As the Roman Empire 
grew in the first and second centuries b.c., people 
built temples to Minerva across the conquered lands.
Minerva lost many of her warlike, savage attri-
butes as Greek influence on Roman culture increased 
(see Hellenization), and she became the goddess 
of domestic skills, industry, culture, and arts and sci-
ences. Though her name was used in place of Athene 
in the Greek stories of that goddess, some scholars 
believe Minerva was a much more warlike goddess 
than her Greek counterpart.
Minerva wore a helmet and held an owl, her sacred 
animal, in most images of her, including statues and 
coins. Romans celebrated her during the Quinquatria 
festival on March 19.
Minos  Greek  Son of Zeus and Europa. When 
Europa arrived in Crete, she married the King 
Asterion, who adopted her children, including Minos, 
Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon. With Pasiphaë, Minos 
was the father of Androgeus, Ariadne, and Phaedra.
Minos succeeded Asterion to the throne of Crete. 
He became so well known for his wisdom and sense 
of justice that after his death he was made a judge in 
the Underworld (1).
Minos was eventually drowned in a bathtub of 
boiling water at the court of King Cocalus of Sicily.
The adjective minoan, means “pertaining to 
Crete.” The Minoan period is the Cretan Bronze 
Age, roughly 2500 to 1200 b.c.
Minos and the Minotaur  Minos, king of Crete, 
was married to Pasiphaë. Minos incurred the wrath 
of the sea god, Poseidon, by refusing to sacrifice 
a magnificent bull to the gods. Poseidon took 
cruel revenge on Minos by making Pasiphaë fall in 
love with the bull, with whom she bore a strange 
offspring—half human, half bull. This monster was 
called the Minotaur.
Minos  93

American artist Elihu Vedder (1836-1923) portrayed the Greek goddess Minerva in this mosaic at the  
landing of one of the staircases in the Thomas Jefferson Building at the Library of Congress in Washington D.C. 
(Photograph by Carol M. Highsmith, from the Library of Congress.)

Wishing to hide the Minotaur from the eyes of the 
world, Minos asked the renowned inventor, Daedalus, 
to construct a prison that no one could penetrate. The 
ingenious Daedalus designed the labyrinth, a tortu-
ous maze. Once inside the labyrinth, no one could find 
a way out. Only Daedalus knew how to escape.
Minos made war on Athens, where his son, Andro-
geus, was killed. The people of Athens were made to 
pay for this crime by sending an annual tribute of seven 
men and seven maids to Crete. It would fall to the hero 
Theseus, with help from Minos’s daughter, Ariadne, to 
put an end to the Minotaur and the yearly sacrifice.
Meanwhile, Daedalus made his escape from Crete, 
where Minos had wished to hold him prisoner. Minos 
pursued him and eventually found him at the court of 
King Cocalus of Sicily, an island in the Mediterranean 
off the coast of Italy. Here the great King Minos died 
an undignified death in a bathtub of boiling water.
Minos and Scylla  Scylla was the daughter of 
Nisus, the king of Megara (1) (southeastern Greek 
mainland). Nisus had a lock of hair that made him 
invulnerable and thus protected him and his city 
from enemies. Scylla fell in love with Minos, who was 
laying siege to the city. She cut off the magic lock of 
Nisus while he slept, thus enabling Minos to capture 
Megara. Minos had promised Scylla love in return for 
her deed but he despised her for her treachery to her 
father and reneged on his promise. He allowed Scylla 
to drown as she swam after his ship.
Minotaur  Greek  A mythical monster, half-
human, half-bull, the offspring of Pasiphaë and a 
bull. Pasiphaë was the wife of King Minos of Crete. 
Minos wanted to keep the Minotaur hidden from 
the world. He asked Daedalus, the great inventor, 
to design a hiding place that would remain forever 
secret. Daedalus designed the labyrinth, a maze so 
full of tortuous passages that no one who entered 
could find a way out. Here the Minotaur lived, feed-
ing on the flesh of young men and girls sent to him 
as sacrifices from Athens. At last, the hero Theseus, 
with the help of Ariadne, found his way into the 
center of the labyrinth, where he slew the Minotaur 
and emerged to tell the tale.
Minthe  (Menthe)  Greek  A naiad, or river 
nymph of the Cocytus, a river that flowed to the 
underworld. She was beloved by Hades (or Pluto). 
In jealous rage, the wife of Hades, Persephone (or 
perhaps her mother, Demeter), stamped the nymph 
into the ground. Hades then transformed her into a 
fragrant herb, mint.
The legend of Minthe was probably the result 
of the use of herbs, especially mint, rosemary, and 
myrtle, to sweeten the air during funeral rites in 
ancient times.
Mnemosyne  (Memory)  Greek  A Titan, daughter 
of Gaia and Uranus; with Zeus, mother of the Muses.
Moirae  (Moirai)  Greek  Greek spirits; personi-
fication of fate and destiny in an individual’s life. Each 
person had his or her own Moirae. The spirits repre-
sented a law of nature, a sense of determination. No 
mortal human could overcome their power. Even the 
gods could not break the ruling of the Moirae without 
seriously jeopardizing all of existence. In Roman 
mythology, these spirits were known as the Parcae.
Eventually, the concept of a spirit ruling over 
life evolved from individual fate to influence all of 
humanity. After the time of Homer in the ninth 
century b.c., the Moirae took on personalities and 
were seen as three daughters of Zeus and Themis 
who regulated birth, life, and death.
Moria  (Folly)  Greek  The heroine of a story of 
overcoming death. Moria was a woman from Lydia, 
a kingdom in Asia Minor. One day, as her brother, 
Tylus, was walking along a river bank, a snake bit 
him. Tylus died instantly. Moria, seeing the tragedy, 
called upon the powers of the giant Danasen, a son 
of Gaia, an ancient Greek Earth Mother. The giant 
answered Moria’s plea. He pulled up a huge tree and 
crushed the snake with this club. The snake’s mate 
had been nearby and, seeing her mate dead, hurried 
away but quickly returned carrying an herb in her 
mouth. She put the herb in the dead snake’s mouth, 
he revived immediately, and both slithered away to 
safety. Moria hurried to where the female snake had 
plucked the herb, took some herself, and put it in 
the mouth of her dead brother. Tylus, too, revived 
immediately. The herb, some experts say, was known 
as balis.
Mors  (Death)  Roman  The goddess or personi-
fication of death. Little is known about this goddess, 
and scholars suspect that she was more an idea than 
a personality. The Greek equivalent was the god 
Thanatos.
Muses  Greek  Originally deities of springs, later 
designated as goddesses of various human inspirations. 
In later mythologies, the Muses were the daughters 
of the god Zeus and Mnemosyne (Memory).
muses  95

The Muses sang and danced, led by the god Apollo, 
at celebrations given by the gods and heroes. They 
were the personifications of the highest aspirations 
and intellectual minds and represented a remarkable 
and attractive conception in Greek mythology. Their 
separation into fields of inspiration was a Roman fancy 
of a later date. The word museum denotes a place of 
education and research, named after them.
The Muses and their various attributes are listed 
below.
Calliope: Muse of epic poetry. She carried a sty-
lus and tablet and sometimes a trumpet.
Clio: Muse of history. She carried a trumpet and 
scrolls.
Erato: Muse of lyric poetry, or love poetry, and 
hymns. She carried a lyre.
Euterpe: Muse of flute-playing.
Melpomene: Muse of tragedy. She carried the 
mask of tragedy.
Polyhymnia: Muse of mime. She had a pensive 
attitude.
Terpsichore: Muse of dance. She carried a lyre 
and plectrum.
Thalia: Muse of comedy. She carried the smiling 
mask and a shepherd’s crook.
Urania: Muse of astronomy. She carried a globe 
and compass.
Mycenae  Greek  An ancient city of Greece situ-
ated in Argos, in the northern Peloponnesus. It was 
the center of the important Mycenaean civilization, 
which was roughly contemporary with that of the 
Minoan civilization of Crete. In mythology, Myce-
nae was the royal city of Agamemnon.
Myrmidons  Greek  Warlike people of ancient 
Thessaly, in the eastern part of the Greek mainland, 
who accompanied the hero Achilles into battle in 
the Trojan War. According to some legends, the 
Myrmidons were ants turned into people by Zeus 
to increase the population of Thessaly after a plague 
sent by his wife, Hera, had killed thousands.
Myrtilus  Greek  Son of the god Hermes and 
a mortal woman. He was the charioteer of King 
Oenomaus of Pisa in Elis, in northeast Pelopon-
nesus. When Pelops came to compete in a chariot 
race with Oenomaus for the hand of the king’s 
daughter Hippodameia, Pelops persuaded Myrtilus 
to fix Oenomaus’s chariot so that it would overturn. 
Myrtilus did as Pelops asked; Pelops won the race 
and the hand of Hippodameia. Oenomaus was killed 
when his chariot overturned. Pelops then killed 
Myrtilus. With his dying breath Myrtilus placed a 
curse upon Pelops and all his descendants.
The nine Greek muses decorate the sides of a sarcophagus found in excavations of an ancient site near 
Rome. The muses are (left to right): Calliope, Thalia, Terpsichore, Euterpe, Polyhymnia, Clio, Erato, Urania, 
and Melpomene. The ancient coffin is now in the Louvre in Paris.  (Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen.)
96  Mycenae

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
97
N
8
Naiads  (Naiades)  Greek  Nymphs of fresh 
bodies of water, such as springs, wells, brooks, 
streams, lakes, and marshes. One of the three clas-
sifications of water nymphs. The others were the 
Oceanids, nymphs of the oceans, and the Nereids, 
nymphs of the Mediterranean Sea. The Naiads were 
daughters of the Greek river gods.
Each Naiad presided over her own body of water 
and was worshiped for her ability to help and protect 
people with her water. The Naiads had the power of 
Naiads of all ages play among river rocks in this portrayal of the Greek water nymphs by Swiss painter 
Arnold Bökclin (1827-1901). He called the painting “Game of the Naiads” or “Naiads at Play” and gave his 
nymphs mermaids’ tails. It is in Kunstmuseum in Bonn, Germany.

prophecy, to be able to see into the future. Because of 
this, the Naiads were said to inspire people who drank 
from their fountains or streams. They were also the 
protectors of young girls as they became women.
Naiads were very popular with both gods and 
humans. Many had affairs with the Olympians. Many 
married human kings and rulers and became mothers 
to the heroes of mythology. 
Some of the more prominent of the thousands of 
Naiads were Minthe, who was loved by Hades, god 
of the underworld; Styx, loved by the Titan Pallas; 
and Arethusa, whom Artemis turned into a fountain.
98  narcissus
Narcissus stares at his reflection in a pool of water in this painting by Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio 
(1571-1610). The painting hangs in the Palazzo Barberini in the National Gallery of Ancient Art in Rome.

Narcissus  Greek  The son of the river god 
Cephissus and Liriope. He was a beautiful man. When 
he rejected the love of Echo, a Nymph, Nemesis, the 
goddess of vegeance, condemned Narcissus to reject 
all love except that of his own image reflected in 
a pool. Narcissus pined away and changed into a 
beautiful flower that bears his name. The story of 
Echo and Narcissus is told by Ovid in Metamorphoses. 
It belongs to later Greek mythology.
Nausicaa  Greek  Daughter of Alcinous, king of 
the Phaecians. It was she who discovered Odysseus 
when he was shipwrecked on the island of Scheria on 
his way back to Ithaca after the Trojan War. She took 
him as a guest to her father’s court, a place of peace 
and luxury. The location of Scheria and the Phaecian 
kingdom is unknown.
Naxos  Greek  An island in the Aegean Sea south-
east of Greece. It is famous in Greek mythology 
as the place where Theseus abandoned Ariadne, 
daughter of King Minos, after she helped him find 
his way out of the labyrinth. Naxos was a center for 
the worship of Dionysus.
Necessitas  Roman  A goddess of destiny or 
fate, of that which is necessary; or perhaps merely 
the personification of necessity. With the goddess 
Fortuna, Necessitas ruled over or influenced the 
future of men and women. The two are often 
pictured together, with Necessitas, carrying nails 
and wedges, walking before Fortuna. Necessitas was 
equated with Ananke, the Greek personification of 
absolute destiny. 
Neda  Greek  One of the oldest of the Oceanids, 
sea Nymph daughters of the Titan gods, Oceanus 
and Tethys; considered by many Greek writers to 
be a second-generation Titan. With help from her 
younger sisters, Theisoa and Hagno, Neda nursed 
the infant Zeus.
According to ancient stories, the Titan goddess 
Rhea found no water with which to cleanse herself 
and her son after giving birth to her youngest child, 
Zeus. In frustration, she struck her scepter against 
a boulder, or a mountain, and called on her mother, 
Gaia, to bring forth water. A spring gushed forth and 
Rhea named the spring Neda, after the nymph, her 
niece, who would soon help keep this son safe from 
the anger of his father, the Titan god Cronus.
Nemesis  Greek  Goddess of vengeance; personi-
fication of the wrath of the gods toward those who 
had hubris, a Greek word meaning exaggerated pride 
in one’s achievements or good fortune. Nemesis 
rewarded virtue and punished wickedness. At first, 
Nemesis was an abstract concept. In later mythology 
she was personified as a daughter of Nyx (Night) and 
Erebus (Darkness), a powerful force.
Neoptolemus  (Pyrrhus)  Greek  Son of Achil-
les and Deidamia. Neoptolemus played no great part 
in Homer’s epics, except as one of the heroic Greek 
warriors who brought about the fall of Troy. He was 
hidden with the others inside the cunning wooden 
horse (see The Wooden Horse of Troy, under Trojan 
War). However, as the son of the great hero, Achilles, 
Neoptolemus is mentioned in many myths. Some say 
that it was he who killed Priam, the vanquished king 
of Troy; others say that he won the Trojan princess, 
Andromache, as one of the prizes of victory. One tra-
dition has it that he was killed at Delphi by Orestes. 
For many years there was a hero-cult dedicated to 
Neoptolemus at Delphi.
Nephele  Greek  Wife of Athamas; mother of 
Phrixus, Leucon, and Helle. Nephele had started 
her life as a cloudlike form created by the god Zeus 
to trick Ixion, who was making advances to Zeus’s 
wife, Hera.
Neptune  (Neptunus)  Roman  Originally, a 
Roman god of freshwater. Neptune became associ-
ated with the Greek sea god Poseidon early in 
Roman history.
Unlike the people of Greece, the people of 
Rome were not seafarers, so Neptune played only a 
small role in their lives. He did, however, keep many 
of his freshwater characteristics as he took on the 
stories of Poseidon, who inhabited the saltwater seas 
around Greece. The Romans celebrated the festival 
of the Neptunalia on July 23, the height of summer, 
when freshwater often was scarce. They would make 
sacrifices to Neptune in hopes of easing those water 
shortages.
A sanctuary to Neptune stood between the Aven-
tine and Palatine hills in Rome on the spot where a 
stream once flowed.
Neptune, like Poseidon, is often portrayed carry-
ing a trident and riding a dolphin.
The eighth planet in the solar system was named 
Neptune after its discovery in 1846.
Neptune  99

Nereids  Greek  The Nymphs of the sea, specifi-
cally the Mediterranean Sea; the daughters of Nereus, 
an ancient sea god, and Doris, a daughter of Oceanus. 
The Nereids lived in their father’s palace at the bottom 
of the sea and came up often to play in the waves. They 
rode dolphins and other sea creatures and gathered 
on shore to play games and dry their long hair. Greek 
legends consistently report that there were 50 of these 
lesser goddesses and name all of them. These sisters 
had the power to change their shape, and some of 
them could see into the future. They aided sailors in 
distress and were generally friendly to mortals.
The Nereids take the role of observers in many 
Greek legends and myths, but several of them played 
prominent roles. Thetis was the mother of the hero 
Achilles. Amphitrite was the wife of Poseidon. 
Galatea fatefully rejected the love of the sea monster 
Polyphemus.
Nereus  (Old Man of the Sea)  Greek  A sea god 
depicted as a very old man. His special dominion 
was the Aegean Sea. Nereus had 50 daughters, the 
Nereids, or sea Nymphs.
Nerio  (Nerine; Neriene; Nerienis; Valor) 
Roman  A traditional and legendary wife of the war 
god Mars. She personified valor and bravery in life and 
in war. Nerio’s name seems to come from the Sabines, 
100  Nereids
Neptune rides four horses on the left of this grand mythological painting by French artist Nicholas Poussin 
(1594-1665). Art experts debate whether the woman in the middle is supposed to be Venus or Galatea. The 
painting is in the Philadelphia Museum of Art. 

and there is disagreement among Roman historians 
and modern scholars of how to spell her name. 
The fragments of her stories that remain suggest 
Nerio was a goddess connected with war and with 
taking prisoners and confiscating their weapons. 
This was the feature that survived into the Roman 
Empire, when the goddess took on many of the traits 
of Minerva, who was a prominent goddess of war. 
Nessus  Greek  The Centaur who caused the 
death of the hero Heracles. Nessus carried Deianira, 
the wife of Heracles, across the river Evenus when the 
couple were escaping from Calydon. Nessus tried to 
force his attentions on Deianira, and Heracles shot 
him with an arrow. As he was dying, the centaur told 
Deianira to take some of his blood and use it as a love 
potion if Heracles ever seemed to be straying from 
her. Deianira used the potion when Heracles became 
interested in Iole, not knowing that the centaur’s 
blood would poison and kill Heracles.
Nestor  Greek  King of Pylos (on the west coast 
of Messenia, in the Peloponnesus) and, at 60 years 
old, the oldest and most experienced of the chieftains 
who fought in the Trojan War. Nestor was greatly 
respected for his strength and wisdom. He was also 
famous for being garrulous. He was one of the few 
heroes of Troy who returned safely to his kingdom 
in Greece. In Homer’s Odyssey, Nestor tells Telema-
chus, son of Odysseus, of some of the adventures of 
the Greek leaders.
Nike  (Nice; Victory)  Greek  The spirit of vic-
tory; a demigod or lesser goddess; daughter of the 
Titan Pallas and the water Nymph Styx; sister of 
Bia (Force), Cratus (Strength), and Zelus (Zeal). 
Nike had wings and flew very quickly. 
When Styx sided with Zeus in his great battle 
with his father, Cronus, and the Titans, she brought 
her children into service with her, though their father 
was a Titan. After that war, as a reward for their loy-
alty, Nike, Bia, Cratus, and Zelus lived with Zeus and 
stood beside his throne, carrying out his commands. 
When Zeus granted victory to a warrior, he sent 
Nike to deliver the message and bestow the honor. 
She also awarded victory to winning athletes. Nike is 
often portrayed on Greek pottery holding a wreath 
over the victor’s head. 
Nike’s Roman counterpart was Victoria. The most 
celebrated statue of Nike is called The Nike (or Vic-
tory) of Samothrace and is in the Louvre in Paris.
Niobe  Greek  The daughter of Tantalus; wife of 
Amphion, king of Thebes. She was the mother of 12 
children and the personification of maternal sorrow. 
She was unwise enough to boast about her numerous 
children and was heard by the goddess Leto, who 
had only two children. Those children were the 
formidable twins Apollo and Artemis, however, and 
they punished Niobe by slaying all of her children. 
Niobe wept herself to death and was subsequently 
changed into a rock, from which water eternally 
flowed, symbolizing Niobe’s tears. This story is told 
in Homer’s Iliad.
Numa Pompillius  Roman  The legendary sec- 
ond king of Rome, who succeeded Romulus to the 
throne; eventually seen as an agricultural deity. 
Upon the death of Romulus, the legendary 
founder of the city of Rome, the citizens and senate 
of the city invited Numa to be their king. At that 
time, Numa, who was about 40 years old, was living 
a life of seclusion in a Sabine town, mourning the 
death of his wife. He had established himself as a man 
of peace, fairness, and justice. After the warlike begin-
ning of their city under the powerful and military 
influence of Romulus, and a year of oppression under 
the alternating rule of the senators, the people sought 
a leader to establish order and justice. Numa, legend 
tells, had the traits they needed. In addition, his birth 
as a Sabine would help unite the different peoples 
living in the expanding city at that time. 
Numa’s first objective was to establish order in 
Rome. He divided conquered lands equitably among 
people and established boundaries. He introduced 
the people to the god Terminus, who helped them 
learn to respect borders and property lines. 
Then Numa turned his attention to establishing 
religious rites. In this work Numa received magical 
help from the Nymph Egeria, with whom he had a 
close relationship. Egeria was his teacher and mentor. 
She provided Numa with the ceremonies he would 
need to give to his people and taught him how to 
properly worship the gods and goddesses. 
Numa also had magical powers. He could sum-
mon gods, contain them at his feasts and festivals and 
coerce them into helping him. At one feast, he mixed 
wine with water and used it to summon and trap 
Faunus and Picus, two rural gods, who then taught 
him how to summon the great god Jupiter. Once 
Numa had Jupiter in his grasp, the king persuaded 
the god to stop requiring human sacrifices. 
Numa Pompillius  101

The influence of these powers and his role in 
establishing formalized religion itself eventually led 
to Romans regarding Numa Pompillius as even 
greater than a king. They came to regard and worship 
him as the foundation of their society, the primary 
guiding principle of all they stood for. 
nymphs  (young maidens)  Greek  Minor female 
spirits who were supposed to inhabit various places 
in the natural world. They were beautiful, and while 
not immortal, they lived for a few thousand years 
and thus were supposed to have certain magical and 
oracular powers. Among them were
Dryads (tree nymphs and forest nymphs);
Naiads (nymphs of freshwater springs and lakes);
Napaeae (nymphs of glens and valleys);
Nereids (nymphs of the Mediterranean, or inner 
sea);
Oceanids (nymphs of the great ocean);
Oreads (nymphs of mountains).
Among the best-known nymphs were Amphitrite, 
Arethusa, Calypso, Echo, Oenone, and Thetis.
The name nymphs was also given to the compan-
ions of certain goddesses such as Artemis.
Nyx  (Nox; Night)  Greek  The goddess of night, 
daughter of Chaos and sister of Erebus (Darkness). 
Nyx was the mother of Ether (Air), Hemera (Day), 
and a series of abstract forces such as destiny, sarcasm, 
and deceit. She lived in a realm far to the west, beyond 
the setting Sun and beyond the lands of Atlas. Nyx 
rode in a chariot pulled by two horses. People saw in 
her both good and bad. She was the bringer of rest 
from the worries of the day and the bringer of death 
and darkness.
A water nymph dips a shell into a pool in this statue made in 1685 by French sculptor Antoine Coysevox 
(1640-1720). He based his work on classic Roman marble sculptures. The statue is in the Louvre, Paris. 
(Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen.)
102  Nymphs

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
103
Oceanids  (Oceanides)  Greek  The 
many 
daughters of the two Titan deities, Oceanus, the 
ancient god of water, and his wife and sister, Tethys. 
The Oceanids were the female personalities given 
to the rivers and streams of the lands of ancient 
Greece. They were also known as Nymphs or lesser 
goddesses. Hesiod, the Greek poet whose works 
date to about 800 b.c., wrote that there were more 
than 3,000 Oceanids, but he named only 41, among 
them Styx, Electra, and Calypso. The Oceanids 
were very closely related to the Nereids, nymphs 
of the Mediterranean Sea. They were also sisters to 
the lesser gods of the rivers, after whom many rivers 
themselves were named: the Nile, the Eridanus, and 
the Sangarius.
Oceanus  Greek  The Titan son of Gaia and 
Uranus and the brother and husband of the Titan 
Tethys; father of all the Oceanids and all the rivers 
and seas of the world. Like many ancient peoples, the 
Greeks believed that water encircled the world. They 
called this water Oceanus. Oceanus was represented 
sometimes as a serpent encircling the Earth, its tail 
in its mouth, or as an old man with a long beard and 
with a Bull’s horns upon his head. With the ascen-
dancy of worship of the Olympian Gods, Poseidon 
became the lord of the seas and rivers while Oceanus 
retired into oblivion, though his name was still used 
to denote the vast waters that stretched beyond the 
known world of the ancients.
Odysseus  Greek  Son of Laertes, king of 
Ithaca, and Anticlea. Husband of Penelope; father 
of Telemachus. The Romans knew him as Ulysses. 
Odysseus is one of the most famous characters in 
literature. His adventures on his homeward journey 
to Ithaca after the Trojan War are recounted in 
Homer’s Odyssey.
Odyssey  Greek  The epic poem by Homer that 
describes the adventures of Odysseus on his home-
ward voyage to Ithaca after the Trojan War. The 
action of the Odyssey occurs in no more than six 
weeks, but 20 years’ adventures are related by means 
of flashback episodes told by Odysseus to the people 
he encounters.
Scholars see the Odyssey, divided into 24 books, as 
a collection of folktales to which Homer gave con-
tinuity and coherence by attributing the adventures 
to a single hero (Odysseus) and by reworking each 
incident so that it contributes to a consistent picture 
of the hero.
Some scholars say that the Odyssey is the first 
novel, a fictional story with fictional characters, to 
be read and enjoyed. Homer wrote the Odyssey in 
about the eighth century b.c. after he wrote the Iliad, 
according to most modern scholars.
Odysseus and Polyphemus  On his way home 
from the Trojan War, Odysseus and his crew landed 
on an island that had rich pastures and great flocks of 
sheep. The shepherd turned out to be Polyphemus, 
one of the Cyclopes, one-eyed giants. When he 
discovered Odysseus’s men in his cave, Polyphemus 
immediately killed and ate two of them, then closed 
off the entrance to the cave with a huge rock. While 
the giant slept after his meal, Odysseus and his men 
devised a plan. They made a sharp spear from olive 
wood. After the giant awoke, they gave him some very 
sweet and potent wine that they had brought with 
them from Ismarus. After the giant had killed and 
eaten another two crewmen and fallen into a drunken 
stupor, Odysseus gouged out his one eye, leaving the 
Cyclops blind. The men knew that they could never 
move the rock that closed the entrance. They waited 
anxiously for the giant to awaken. Meanwhile the 
cunning Odysseus helped his men to tie themselves 
under the bellies of the sheep. When the giant awoke, 
O
8

he moved the rock to let out the sheep to their pasture. 
He never suspected that Odysseus’s men were leaving 
at the same time. It was not until the men were safe 
aboard their ship that they learned that Polyphemus 
was the name of the monster. Polyphemus hurled 
rocks after the ship and vowed that his protector, 
Poseidon, the sea god, would avenge him, and that 
the sea would always be Odysseus’s enemy.
Odysseus and Circe  On their way back to 
Ithaca after the Trojan War, Odysseus and his crew 
made landfall on the island of Aeaea, on which 
dwelled the witch-goddess Circe. Circe turned all 
the men into swine, except for Odysseus and Eury-
lochus. Eventually Odysseus persuaded Circe to 
turn his men back into their human forms. Under 
her spell, he dallied for a year on the island of the 
sorceress, who gave him warnings about the perils he 
would encounter on his way home.
Odysseus in the Underworld  After suffering 
under the spell of the witch-goddess Circe for a year, 
Odysseus and his crew grew restless and wanted to 
leave. On the advice of Circe, Odysseus and his crew 
visited the Underworld (1) to consult the ghost of 
the blind seer Tiresias. Tiresias had many warnings for 
Odysseus and his men, particularly about the danger of 
offending the gods on Thrinacie, the Island of the Sun.
Terrified by the ghosts and the gloom of the 
Underworld, Odysseus and his crew fled.
Odysseus and the Sirens  Circe had warned 
Odysseus about the Sirens, beautiful nymphs who 
lured sailors to their destruction by singing so sweetly 
that the men would be driven mad and would be 
shipwrecked on the rocky coast where the Sirens 
lived. Always resourceful, Odysseus plugged the ears 
of his men with wax so that they would not hear the 
singing. Then, because he himself wanted to hear 
the songs, Odysseus had himself tied to the mast of 
the ship while the men rowed on. They could hear 
neither the singing nor the pleas of their captain to be 
released so that he might join the Sirens.
Odysseus (helmet) and his men are discovered by the giant cyclops Polyphemus who is driving his sheep 
into his cave for the night. Flemish artist Jacob Jordaens (1593-1678) captured the moment in this painting, 
which now hangs in the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts in Moscow. 
104  OdyssEY

Odysseus and Scylla and Charybdis  One of the 
many dangers Odysseus encountered on his way home 
after the Trojan War was the narrow strait guarded 
by the monsters Scylla and Charybdis. Odysseus 
steered his ship close to Scylla to avoid being sucked 
into the boiling whirlpool of Charybdis. He lost six 
men to Scylla, the many-headed monster who lived 
high up on a cliff and sent down six long necks armed 
with ferocious teeth to devour any who came close.
Odysseus on the Island of the Sun  Both Circe, 
the witch-goddess, and Tiresias, the blind seer, had 
warned Odysseus about the Island of the Sun, which 
belonged to the sun god, Hyperion; but in a state of 
despair and exhaustion, Odysseus and his crew went 
there. While Odysseus rested, his crew disobeyed 
his orders and killed and ate the cattle of Hyperion. 
Odysseus was horrified when he awoke to the smell 
of roasting meat, but it was too late. Hyperion was 
furious and asked Zeus to punish the men. This Zeus 
did, by causing the wreck of Odysseus’s ship in a ter-
rifying storm. Only Odysseus escaped alive. He was 
cast up on the island of the nymph Calypso, where 
the hero stayed for seven years.
Odysseus Returns to Ithaca  Odysseus and his 
men struggled for 10 years and through many adven-
tures before they got back to their kingdom of Ithaca. 
By this time Odysseus, who had been shipwrecked 
many times, looked like a poor old man rather than a 
king. Only his old dog, Argus (3), and his loving old 
nurse, Eurycleia, recognized him. Odysseus chose to 
remain silent as he observed what was happening at 
his court. His wife, Penelope, who had waited for him 
faithfully for 20 years (10 years for the war, and 10 years 
for the return), was besieged by a host of aggressive 
suitors who wanted to rule Odysseus’s kingdom. The 
son of Odysseus and Penelope, Telemachus, guided 
by the goddess Athene, had gone off in search of his 
father and come back to Ithaca convinced that he was 
still alive and was nearby. At last Penelope, in despera-
tion, put her suitors to the test by asking them to string 
the magnificent bow of Odysseus and shoot an arrow 
straight through a double row of axes. The suitors 
failed. The old man took up the challenge. He strung 
the bow with ease and shot it straight and true. After 
that, with the help of his son, Odysseus slew all the 
greedy suitors and reclaimed his wife and his throne.
Oedipus  (Swollen Foot)  Greek  Son of Laius, 
king of Thebes, and of Jocasta. Father of Polynices, 
Eteocles, Antigone, and Ismene.
An oracle had warned King Laius that Oedipus 
would kill him, so Laius abandoned his infant son on 
a hillside (a fate common to many unwanted children 
in ancient times), having first pierced the child’s feet 
and bound them together (hence the name Oedipus, 
meaning “Swollen Foot,” or, some say “Clubfoot”).
A shepherd rescued Oedipus and took him to the 
king of Corinth, who raised Oedipus. Years later 
another oracle told Oedipus, now a young man, 
that he would kill his father and marry his mother. 
Believing that his foster parents were his real parents, 
Oedipus fled from them.
On his journey, he met Laius, his real father. The 
two had a skirmish at a crossroads and Oedipus killed 
Laius. In Thebes, Oedipus correctly answered a riddle 
set by the Sphinx and in so doing won the hand of 
Jocasta, whom he married not knowing she was his 
mother. Thus the oracles’ prophecies were fulfilled.
When Oedipus learned the truth about his parents 
and his relationships with them, he blinded himself 
in agony and was either killed in battle or exiled to 
Colonus in Attica, while his sons battled for the 
throne of Thebes (see Seven Against Thebes). His 
loving daughter, Antigone, guided Oedipus in his 
blind wanderings.
Sophocles, Aeschylus, and Euripides all wrote 
plays based on the story of Oedipus. The one by 
Sophocles, known as Oedipus Rex, has been called the 
greatest and most powerful of the Greek tragedies.
Oeneus  (Oeneous; Vintner)  Greek  King of 
Calydon; husband of Althea, father of Meleager, 
Tydeus, Gorge, and the beautiful Deianira, who 
eventually married Heracles. Oeneus was deprived 
of his kingdom by his nephews, and though his 
grandson, Diomedes, avenged him, two remaining 
nephews, who hid in Argos when he went there with 
Diomedes, killed the old king.
Oenomaus  Greek  King of Pisa in Elis, in 
northeast Peloponnesus; father of Hippodameia. 
Many suitors contended for the hand of Hippoda-
meia in chariot races with Oenomaus. The penalty 
for losing was death, and Oenomaus made sure that 
they all lost. Thirteen suitors had died by the time 
Pelops came along and won the race. Oenomaus 
died in a final chariot race with Pelops, who won 
Hippodameia and Pisa itself.
Oenone  Greek  A Nymph, daughter of the river 
god Cebren. She was loved by Paris when he lived 
among the shepherds on Mount Ida (2). Paris deserted 
Oenone when the goddess Aphrodite promised him 
the love of the most beautiful woman in the world, 
Oenone  105

Helen. Oenone prophesied that this voyage to Greece 
to claim Helen would only bring ruin for him and his 
country, Troy. Her prophecy came true.
Olympian gods  Greek  The 12 (sometimes 13) 
major deities who lived atop Mount Olympus; the pri-
mary gods of the Greek pantheon of classical Greece. 
Here they are listed in alphabetical order, with their 
attributes, and their Roman names opposite.
Greek names	
Roman names
Aphrodite (love and beauty)	 Venus
Apollo (music; poetry)	
Apollo
Ares (war)	
Mars
Artemis (Moon and 	
Diana 
hunting)
Athene (wisdom)	
Minerva
Demeter (fertility;	
Ceres 
corn goddess)
Hades* (underworld)	
Pluto
Hephaestus (fire; blacksmith)	 Vulcan
Hera (marriage; women)	
Juno
Hermes (messenger;	
Mercury 
commerce; travelers;  
rogues)
Hestia (hearth)	
Vesta
Poseidon (ocean; 	
Neptune 
earthquakes)
Zeus (light; the heavens)	
Jupiter
* Since Hades did not live on Mount Olympus, he is 
not always counted as an Olympian.
Olympic Games  Greek  The principal athletic 
meeting of the ancient Greeks held every four years. 
In mythology, it is said to have been instituted by 
Pelops to honor the god Zeus. According to tradi-
tion, the first games were held in 776 b.c.
Only Greek men were allowed to compete and 
the rivalry was ferocious, for while no gold medals 
were awarded, the winners received great honor and 
prestige.
The site of the games, on a flat plain at the meet-
ing of two rivers, is in northwest Peloponnesus, part 
of the territory of Elis.
Olympus  Greek  A mountain range in northern 
Greece. Its highest peak is Mount Olympus (about 
9,600 feet high). The Olympic range stretches along 
the border between Thessaly and Macedonia, near the 
Aegean coast. The range overlooks the Vale of Tempe, 
a valley in northern Thessaly famous for its beauty.
In mythology, Mount Olympus was regarded as 
the home of the Olympian gods. Within its mysteri-
ous heights, higher even than the visible mountain, 
were the abodes of the gods; there lived Zeus, Hera, 
and all members of the Greek pantheon. They 
feasted on ambrosia and nectar and listened to sweet 
music. No harsh winds, rain, or snow disturbed their 
heavenly peace.
Omphale  Greek  The queen of Lydia who took 
the hero Heracles as her slave after he had des-
ecrated the temple of Apollo. Heracles performed 
many services for the queen, including ridding her 
kingdom of the two mischievous cercopes.
Omphalos  (Navel)  Greek  The stone swal-
lowed by Cronus, one of the Titans, thinking that 
it was his son Zeus. The stone was set up at Delphi 
and people came to worship it as the center, or navel, 
of the Earth.
Ops  (Opis: Abundance)  Roman  Goddess of 
plenty, of the harvest, and of wealth. Her name refers 
to the bounty of the Earth and the riches of a plenti-
ful harvest.
Surviving evidence suggests to scholars that the 
people of Rome worshiped Ops as the consort or wife 
of Consus, the god of storage, or as the cult partner 
of Saturn, the Roman god of agriculture. Ops was, 
perhaps, the mother of Juno, Roman goddess of 
childbirth and queen of the heavens.
Ops was honored with Consus in the harvest 
festivals of August 21 and 25 and in a celebration on 
December 19. Eventually, Ops took on the character-
istics and stories of the Greek goddess Rhea.
Oracle  Greek  The spokesperson of the ruling 
deity of a shrine. The oracle answered people’s ques-
tions about the future or the past. These utterances 
were regarded as profoundly wise and authoritative, 
since they were supposed to come from the gods. 
The answers of the oracles were often obscure, 
ambiguous, and misleading, yet kings and peasants 
alike eagerly sought their advice. Priests, who were 
paid for their services, tended the shrine. It was in 
their interests to make sure that the words of the 
oracle were vague. In this way, the priests would not 
be blamed for disastrous events that occurred from 
following the advice of the oracles.
There were many oracles in ancient Greece. The 
most famous was the oracle at Delphi, who spoke 
the words of the god Apollo through the mouth of 
106  Olympian Gods

Python. The oracle at Dodona spoke the words of 
Zeus.
Other oracles include those of Artemis at Colchis, 
Asclepius at Epidaurus, Heracles at Athens, Ares 
in Thrace, Athene at Mycenae, Pan in Arcadia, and 
Aphrodite at Paphos, in Crete.
Orcus  Roman  Either an ancient Roman god of 
the Underworld (2) or an alternative name for Dis, 
the primary Roman god of this land of the dead.
Some scholars believe that Orcus had no indi-
vidual identity. Others argue from existing evidence 
that Orcus was the bringer of death, rather than a 
king of the dead, as was Dis. Orcus was sometimes 
shown as a reaper, cutting down the corn with his 
scythe, in sculptures and paintings on pottery.
Pluto was a euphemism, or name that was safe to 
speak, that was sometimes used to refer to Orcus and 
Dis in Rome and to Hades in Greece.
Oreads  (Oreiades)  Greek  Mountain Nymphs; 
like most nymphs, daughters of Zeus. 
Some sources say the Oreads were, specifically, 
the nymphs of mountain conifers, since nymphs were 
often associated with specific trees. The Oreads were 
the special companions of the goddess Artemis, who 
liked to go hunting in mountains. Other sources, 
however, associate them with specific mountains: for 
example, the Idae were nymphs of Mount Ida. 
The most famous Oread was Echo, who was 
punished by the goddess Hera for helping her sister 
nymphs, who were dallying with Zeus, to escape from 
the great god’s wife. Hera made Echo fade away, 
except for her voice. 
Cynosure, an Oread of Mount Ida, nursed the 
infant Zeus when his mother, Rhea, hid him from his 
father Cronus. Pitys, an Oread who vowed never to 
marry, was loved by Pan, who pursued her relentlessly 
though she discouraged him. The gods turned her 
into a pine tree to help her escape. Britomartis, a 
guardian of fishermen, was also said to be an Oread, 
but only in later Greek stories; in earlier stories, she 
was a Cretan goddess. 
Orestes  Greek  The only son of Agamemnon 
and Clytemnestra; brother of Electra, Iphigenia, 
and Chrysothemis. Orestes killed his mother, who 
had killed her husband, Agamemnon. According to 
some accounts, the Furies drove Orestes mad for the 
unforgivable crime of matricide. He took refuge in 
Athens. He was tried and acquitted at the court of 
Areopagus, a tribunal of Athenian judges. He then 
took possession of his dead father’s kingdom and 
married Hermione, the daughter of Menelaus and 
Helen.
Matricide had always been regarded as a terrible 
crime, but in this myth, a court finds the son, Orestes, 
innocent. Zeus, Apollo, and Athene had championed 
his cause in this trial. Orestes absolution represents the 
final triumph of patriarchy over the old pre-Hellenic 
religions and customs.
Orion  Greek  Best known as a mighty hunter 
and as a constellation of stars. Orion was the son of 
Poseidon and Euryale. He was a Boeotian giant, 
with the power to walk on the seas. Orion loved 
Merope, daughter of King Oenopion of Chios, an 
island off the coast of Asia Minor. In a fit of anger, 
the king made Orion blind and left him to die on the 
seashore. Orion met a boy, Cedalion, who guided him 
east toward the Sun, where he found Eos, goddess of 
the dawn. She restored Orion’s sight. Many women 
and goddesses loved Orion, including the goddess of 
the hunt, Artemis, and Eos.
In one story, Apollo, brother of Artemis, was jeal-
ous of his sister’s affection for Orion. He sent a giant 
scorpion to sting Orion to death. In another story, 
Apollo had a fight with Orion and flung him into the 
sea. Orion swam away. Apollo asked Artemis to shoot 
the object in the sea with her arrow. This Artemis 
did and unknowingly killed her lover. She set the 
constellation Orion in the heavens, with the scorpion 
(Scorpio) at its feet. His faithful hunting dog, Sirius, 
is part of the constellation, seen high in the winter 
sky in the Northern Hemisphere.
Orpheus  Greek  A famous poet and singer; son 
of Oeagrus, king of Thrace, and of Calliope, the 
Muse; husband of Eurydice.
The god Apollo (some say he was the father of 
Orpheus) gave Orpheus a lyre, which he played so 
beautifully that even the rocks were moved to tears, 
trees bent to listen, flowers bloomed, and rivers 
changed their courses.
As an Argonaut, Orpheus distracted the crew-
men from the sweet singing of the Sirens (see Jason 
and the Argonauts, under Jason).
When Eurydice died from a serpent bite, Orpheus 
charmed his way into the Underworld and per-
suaded Hades to release her. Hades did so, on the 
condition that Orpheus would not look back until he 
had reached Earth. Orpheus failed in his promise and 
Eurydice disappeared instantly.
Orpheus  107

Ovid  (43 b.c.–a.d. 17)  Roman  Poet. According 
to some literary historians, Ovid was the most popular 
Roman poet. Ovid was born Publius Ovidius Naso 
near Rome to a middle-class family. He studied in 
Athens and traveled widely in Asia and Sicily. Ovid, 
as he was commonly known, began writing poetry as 
a young man and soon developed a strong following 
and reputation among the citizens of the Roman 
Empire. Ovid’s greatest work is Metamorphoses, a 
collection of 15 books that used Greek and Roman 
mythology, particularly those stories of lovers who 
are transformed into other objects, to trace the history 
from the beginnings of Chaos to the rule of Julius 
Caesar. He also wrote Fasti, a poetic description of the 
Roman religious calendar and the myths and legends 
behind each festival. Rome’s first emperor, Augustus, 
banished Ovid from Rome in a.d. 8. The poet died in 
exile in Tomi, a city on the Black Sea.
In Europe’s Middle Ages, Ovid’s poetry was a 
primary source of knowledge of Greek and Roman 
mythology. It is still a prominent source of the stories 
of these ancient cultures.
108  Ovid

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
109
Palamedes  Greek  Son of Nauplius, a king of 
Euboea, and his wife Clymene, a granddaughter of 
King Minos of Crete. One of the Greek heroes 
who fought against Troy in the Trojan War. When 
Odysseus feigned idiocy, in his attempt to avoid 
joining the Greek army on its way to Troy, Palamedes 
put Telemachus, son of Odysseus, in the path of his 
father’s plow. Odysseus avoided running down his 
infant son, showing that he was sane, and was forced to 
join the army. In revenge, Odysseus concocted a plot 
against Palamedes, accusing him of treachery against 
the Greeks. The army stoned Palamedes to death.
Palamedes is described as a sage, and he is 
credited with inventing certain letters of the Greek 
alphabet and for inventing dice, measures and scales, 
lighthouses, and the discus.
Pales  Roman  An ancient spirit of agriculture and 
of flocks and herds. Pales is sometimes referred to as a 
god, sometimes as a goddess. Belief in this spirit existed 
in central Italy even before 752 b.c., when Romulus 
is said to have founded the city of Rome. The festival 
of Parilia on April 21 honors Pales. This celebration 
by shepherds exists in the oldest records of Roman 
religious festivals. It fell on the same day in later years 
when people celebrated the founding of Rome.
Palladium  Greek  The sacred statue of Pallas 
Athene that was said to have fallen from heaven. It 
stood in the temple of Athene in Troy. According 
to legend, Zeus sent the statue to Dardanus, the 
founder of Troy. Trojans believed that the preserva-
tion of the city depended on possession of the 
Palladium. During the Trojan War, two Greeks, 
Diomedes (1) and Odysseus, stole it, and Troy fell 
to the Greeks. In another legend, Ajax (2) the Lesser 
carried it off. The Romans said that Aeneas took the 
statue to Italy. In fact, many cities claimed to own the 
statue, among them Athens, Argos, and Luceria.
A rare metallic element is called palladium. It was 
named after an asteroid, Pallas, discovered in 1803 at 
about the same time the element was found.
Pallas  (Warrior)  Greek  A second generation 
Titan; considered by some to be the god of warfare 
and of the springtime battle season. 
Pallas was the son of Crius and Eurybia and the 
brother of Astraeus and Perses; He married Styx, a 
daughter of Oceanus; and with her had four children, 
Zelus, Nike, Cratus, and Bia, whose names meant, 
respectively, zeal, victory, strength, and force, all 
terms of warfare.
His children and wife fought against him when 
they joined the great Olympian God Zeus in his 
battle against the Titans.
Pallas Athene  Greek  One of the many names 
of the goddess Athene. In some traditions, Pallas was 
the name of a youthful playmate of the goddess.
Pan  Greek  An ancient deity from the mountain-
ous region of Arcadia, in Greece. Pan was a deity of 
herds and flocks, fertility, forests, and wildlife. He is 
usually depicted as half man, half goat. The Romans 
called him Faunus.
Pan was a notable musician, playing the syrinx 
(panpipes, or Pipes of Pan), a seven-reed flute still 
played by Arcadian shepherds. In one myth, Pan chal-
lenged the god Apollo to a musical contest (see Midas 
and the Donkey’s Ears, under Midas). Some sources say 
Pan is the son of the god Hermes and of the Nymph 
Penelope. People worshiped Pan as a fertility symbol 
and thought of him as lusty and playful, though at 
times a little sinister. They believed Pan was the cause 
of a sudden, terrifying, unreasoning fear in humans 
and beasts, a feeling given the name panic, from Pan.
Almost every region in Greece had its own Pan, a 
primitive, ancient deity. (See Aristaeus and Priapus.)
P
8

Panacea  (Panaceia; All-healing)  Greek  A 
daughter of the god of medicine, Asclepius. Panacea 
symbolizes universal healing, particularly through 
the power of herbs. A temple to her stood at Oropus, 
in the region of Oropia, north of Attica. Panacea’s 
sisters were Hygiea and Iaso, and her brothers, both 
doctors, were Machaon and Podalirius.
Pandora  (All-giving)  Greek  The first woman to 
appear on Earth, according to Greek mythology. The 
gods created her and sent her down to release upon 
the world all the misfortunes that could occur. At the 
command of the great god Zeus, the smith-god Hep-
haestus crafted her out of clay and the other gods and 
goddesses breathed into her surpassing beauty, charm, 
graciousness, and cunning. They also gave her a vase to 
take with her to Earth and told her never to open it.
Prometheus (Forethought) resisted the beauty of 
Pandora, but his brother, Epimetheus (Afterthought) 
at once took the beautiful creature to be his bride. 
After the wedding, Pandora opened the sacred vase, 
sometimes called Pandora’s Box, and released upon 
the world all the ailments that it contained. Only Hope 
remained inside the vase, and it was Hope who enabled 
humankind to go on living despite all adversity.
Some legends say that Zeus released Pandora 
upon the Earth because he was angry with Pro-
metheus, champion of humankind. Pandora was to be 
humankind’s punishment for having learned the use 
of fire from Prometheus.
“Pandora’s Box” has come to mean a gift or 
opportunity that at first seems valuable but turns out 
to be a source of troubles.
pantheon  Greek and Roman  In mythology, 
pantheon refers to all the gods of a people, particularly 
those considered to be the most prominent or most 
powerful. The Romans used different names for many 
of the Greek Olympian Gods whose cults they brought 
to Italy, but the stories of the gods and goddesses, as 
told by the poets and historians, are very similar.
Greek gods/	
Roman gods/ 
goddesses 	
goddesses
Zeus	
Jupiter
Hera	
Juno
Apollo	
Apollo
Ares	
Mars
Artemis	
Diana
Aphrodite	
Venus
Poseidon	
Neptune
Hermes	
Mercury
Athene	
Minerva
Hestia	
Vesta
Demeter	
Ceres
Hephaestus	
Vulcan
Parcae  Roman  The origins of the Parcae in 
Roman mythology are unclear. By the time the 
influence of Greek mythology on Rome’s religions 
reached its strongest, the Parcae had become the 
equivalent of the Greek Fates, three women who 
watched over a person’s destiny. Their Roman names 
at this time were Nona, Decuma, and Morta. One 
presided over birth, one over marriage, and one over 
death. Scholars see some evidence that these three 
may have been part of a larger group of Roman god-
desses, perhaps as many as nine, who watched over 
and guided many phases of a person’s life.
Paris  Greek  Son of Priam, the king of Troy, and 
of Hecuba. Before he was born, soothsayers proph-
esied that Paris would cause death and destruction. 
Accordingly, his parents placed him upon a moun-
tainside (Mount Ida [2]) and left the infant to die. 
Shepherds rescued and raised Paris. He fell in love 
with Oenone but was later to abandon the nymph in 
favor of Helen. He became a fine athlete and a very 
handsome man. Paris competed at the games at Troy 
and won many prizes, gaining the attention of King 
Priam, who recognized him as his son. In spite of the 
soothsayers’ warnings, Priam welcomed Paris back 
into the household. The prophecies came true. Paris’s 
abduction of Helen became one of the leading causes 
of the Trojan War.
In some versions of the story, Paris kills the hero 
Achilles, and is himself killed by Philoctetes.
The Judgment of Paris  This is how Paris’s 
abduction of Helen, wife of King Menelaus came 
about. Eris (Discord) was present at the wedding of 
Peleus and Thetis, the parents of Achilles. She made 
the goddesses quarrel among themselves by throwing 
a golden apple (“the apple of discord”) among the 
guests. The apple was inscribed, “To the fairest.”
Hera, the chief goddess and wife of Zeus; Artemis, 
goddess of the hunt; and Aphrodite, goddess of love, 
each claimed the apple. Asked to make the choice 
among the three goddesses, Zeus wisely declined and 
sent his messenger, Hermes, to ask Paris, the most 
handsome of men, to make the decision. Each of the 
goddesses offered Paris bribes. Aphrodite offered him 
love of the most beautiful woman in the world: Helen 
of Sparta. Paris awarded the apple to Aphrodite. On 
110  Panacea

that day, Hera and Artemis became enemies of Paris 
and of Troy.
Parnassus  Greek  A mountain in south-central 
Greece, a few miles north of the Gulf of Corinth 
which separates mainland Greece from the Pelopon-
nesus. At the foot of the mountain stands Delphi, the 
shrine sacred to Apollo, whose seer, the Python, was 
renowned throughout the ancient world. Mount Par-
nassus was sacred to Apollo, Dionysus, and the nine 
muses. Bacchanalian rites took place in its caves and 
gorges, where, it was said, people could hear the pipes 
of Pan. On the slopes of Mount Parnassus the Ark 
landed after the flood in the myth of Deucalion.
Pasiphaë  Greek  Daughter of Helios (the Sun); 
wife of Minos, king of Crete; mother with Minos 
of Ariadne, Androgeus, and Phaedra. From her 
strange union with a bull, Pasiphaë brought forth the 
Minotaur, a monster that was half human half bull.
Patroclus  Greek  The close friend of the hero 
Achilles. When Achilles withdrew from the Trojan 
War, Patroclus assumed command of the Myrmi-
dons, the troops of Achilles. Hector killed Patroclus 
in battle. Determined to avenge the death of his 
friend, Achilles went back into the war, killed Hector, 
and dragged his body around the tomb of Patroclus.
Pax  (Peace)  Roman  The divinity who repre-
sented peace. Her feast day was January 3. While Pax 
was often called upon during civil wars, historical 
evidence suggests that people worshiped her far more 
after Augustus became the first emperor of Rome in 
27 b.c. He built a temple to Pax in 13 b.c. on the 
Campus Martius, a large, flat open space between the 
Capitoline and Quirinal hills in the center of Rome. 
In a.d. 75, Emperor Vespasian dedicated a temple to 
her in the Roman Forum. Pax was shown carrying a 
Caduceus or wing-topped staff, a horn of plenty, or 
an olive branch. The Greeks knew her as Eirene.
Pegasus  Greek  The famous winged horse of 
Greek mythology. He was born from the blood of 
the Gorgon Medusa, when the hero Perseus cut 
off her head. Pegasus carried Perseus to the rescue 
of Andromeda. He carried Bellerophon to the 
triumphant fight with the monster Chimera. When 
Bellerophon decided to ride his magical steed up 
to the home of the gods, Olympus, the god Zeus 
sent down a gadfly to annoy Pegasus, who threw off 
his master. Bellerophon fell to Earth. Pegasus went 
Mercury rides the great horse Pegasus (left) and the Fame of France’s King Louis XIV (right) rides the mythi-
cal winged horse in this pair of marble statues carved by sculptor Antoine Coysevox in 1701-02. The pair 
was designed for the king’s stables and then moved to the Tuileries Gardens in Paris. Replicas of the statues 
replaced them in the Tuileries in 1986 when the originals were moved to the Louvre.  (Photographs by Marie-
Lan Nguyen)
Pegasus  111

on to Olympus, where he helped Zeus launch his 
thunderbolts.
Legend said that Pegasus brought forth the 
fountain of Hippocrene on Mount Helicon with a 
stroke of his hoof.
Winged animals were common in Near Eastern 
mythology.
Peleus  Greek  Son of King Aecus; brother of 
Telamon; husband of Thetis; father, with Thetis, of 
the hero Achilles.
Peleus and Telamon murdered their younger half-
brother, Phocus, the king’s favorite. Peleus fled from 
the kingdom of Aegina to Phthia. There, he acciden-
tally killed the king’s son in the Calydonian Boar 
Hunt and had to flee once again. He came to Iolcus in 
Thessaly, but bad luck followed him. There, the wife of 
King Acatus, Astydameia, fell in love with Peleus. When 
Peleus spurned her love, she accused him before the 
king of molesting her. King Acatus took Peleus hunting 
on Mount Pelion. He stole Peleus’s sword while the 
young man slept and left him to die on the mountain, 
which was famous for its savage Centaurs. However, 
Chiron, their wise leader, took pity on Peleus. Chiron 
found his sword for him and sent Peleus back to Iolcus, 
where Peleus killed the treacherous Astydameia.
Eventually Peleus married Thetis, a sea Nymph. 
All the gods attended their wedding, for Thetis was 
a favorite of Zeus. However, the couple neglected to 
invite Eris, the goddess of strife, and this oversight 
was one of the causes of the Trojan War, in which 
Achilles, son of Thetis and Peleus, was a leading 
figure and hero. (See also The Judgment of Paris, under 
Paris.)
Pelias  Greek  Son of Tyro, a half brother of Aeson, 
from whom Pelias stole the throne of Iolcus, in Thes-
saly. When his nephew, Jason, son of Aeson, reached 
manhood and demanded his share of the kingdom, 
Pelias sent him on what was thought to be a hopeless 
quest—to find and bring back the Golden Fleece. 
Jason returned, triumphant, bringing with him Medea, 
the sorceress-queen. Meanwhile, Pelias had put Aeson 
to death. To avenge his father, Jason urged Medea to 
use her magic powers. Medea persuaded the daughters 
of the aging Pelias to slay their father and cook him in 
a stew, promising that he would arise, rejuvenated. Of 
course, Pelias did not survive. Acastus succeeded his 
father as king.
Pelion  Greek  A mountain in the north of Thes-
saly, connected with Mount Ossa on the northwest. 
In Greek mythology, the giant brothers Ephialtes 
and Otus, known as the Aloeids, “piled Pelion upon 
Ossa” in an attempt to reach the heavens (Olympus). 
The phrase has come to mean adding difficulty upon 
difficulty. Mount Pelion was the home of Chiron, the 
gentle Centaur.
Peloponnesus  (Peloponnese)  Greek  The 
peninsula that lies south of the Greek mainland, con-
nected to the mainland by the Isthmus of Corinth. 
It is named after Pelops, in Greek mythology the son 
of Tantalus and the founder of the Atreid dynasty. 
In the ancient world, the chief divisions of the 
Peloponnesus were Elis, Achaea, Argos, and Corinth 
in the north; and Laconia and Messenia in the south. 
Sparta, Corinth, Argos, and Megalopolis were the 
chief cities.
Pelops  Greek  Son of Dione and Tantalus; 
brother of Niobe. He married Hippodameia and 
became the father of Atreus and Thyestes.
Pelops’s first appearance in mythology was an 
unfortunate one. He was served up in a stew made 
by his wicked father to test the gods. All the gods and 
goddesses realized what was happening, except for 
Demeter, who was distracted with grief from losing 
her daughter, Persephone. Demeter ate a shoulder 
of the infant, but it was later restored when the 
gods brought the child back to life. The gods had to 
remake the missing shoulder from ivory.
Though Pelops became the rich and successful 
king of Pisa in Elis, he and his descendants were 
forever followed by the dreadful curse of the chari-
oteer Myrtilus. Pelops’s descendants were called the 
Atreids after his son, Atreus.
Pelops and the Charioteer  When Pelops, son 
of the wicked Tantalus, grew up, he set off to look 
for a kingdom of his own. On his way he met the 
sea god, Poseidon, who befriended the youth and 
presented him with a fine chariot and a marvelous 
team of horses. These gifts led Pelops to challenge 
Oenomaus, king of Pisa in Elis, in a chariot race.
King Oenomaus had a passion not only for 
fine horses, but for his daughter, Hippodameia. 
Whenever a suitor asked for his daughter’s hand in 
marriage, Oenomaus challenged him to a chariot 
race, which the suitor invariably lost. The penalty for 
losing the race was death. By the time Pelops arrived 
on the scene, 13 suitors of Hippodameia had died. 
Their heads were hung around the gates of the palace 
of Oenomaus.
112  Peleus

Pelops bribed the king’s charioteer, Myrtilus, 
asking him to loosen the wheels of Oenomaus’s 
chariot. (The king always drove his own chariot 
in the competitions for his daughter’s hand.) This 
Myrtilus did, on the condition that Pelops would 
allow him to spend one night with Hippodaemia, 
whom he loved.
Pelops won the race, Oenomaus was killed, and 
then Pelops killed Myrtilus. With his dying breath, 
the charioteer cursed Pelops and all his descendants. 
The curse took hold, for Myrtilus was the son of the 
god Hermes, and the gods knew how to make curses 
work. (See also Agamemnon and Menelaus, the 
descendants of Atreus and grandchildren of Pelops.)
Penates  Roman  Each household had two Pena-
tes, spirits or gods who protected the family storeroom. 
These were family gods, honored at dinnertime when 
people gave part of every meal to them, pushing part 
of the dinner—not merely the leftovers—into the 
family fire. Guarding the pantry was a critical job 
in the early Roman agricultural society, and people 
worshiped their Penates in private, often around 
the hearth where they cooked their food. While the 
Penates watched over the food supply, the Lares 
watched over the general well-being of the house.
Penelope  Greek  The daughter of Icarius and 
Periboea; the wife of the hero Odysseus; mother of 
Telemachus. During the long absence of Odysseus 
during the Trojan War and his long voyage home 
to Ithaca (see Odyssey) many men saw Penelope as a 
wealthy and desirable widow. Suitors overwhelmed the 
palace and Penelope was obliged to entertain them at 
great cost. Penelope held them off by claiming that she 
had to finish weaving a shroud for her father-in-law, 
laertes, before she could choose a husband. She wove 
all day and secretly undid her work by night. Her 
secret was disclosed by one of her servants, but Odys-
seus arrived in time to kill the suitors and reclaim his 
bride. Penelope’s name has come to personify wifely 
virtues such as patience and faithfulness.
Penthesilea  Greek  Amazon queen who led her 
female warriors to Troy to help the Trojans in the 
Trojan War. Penthesilea fought bravely against 
Achilles, the Greek hero. It is said that she was so 
brave and beautiful that Achilles fell in love with her 
even as he killed her. King Priam of Troy gave her a 
magnificent funeral.
In some accounts Penthesilea inadvertently killed 
her sister, Hippolyta, and was forever after pursued 
by the Furies.
Persephone  (Kore)  Greek  Daughter of Deme-
ter and Zeus; called Proserpina by the Romans.
Persephone was stolen from her mother by Hades, 
god of the Underworld (1). Demeter went mad with 
grief and caused drought and famine on Earth while 
she searched in vain for her daughter. At last, Zeus 
sent Hermes to bring Persephone back to her mother, 
but Persephone was obliged to spend one-third of the 
year underground. Persephone personified the corn 
seed that lies underground in winter and springs up 
in the warm months.
Persephone is considered by many scholars to be 
the same person as Demeter. Ancient Greek artists 
pictured them as being identical.
Perses  (Destroyer)  Greek  A little-known second-
generation Titan, the son of Crius and Eurybia. He 
married the Titaness Asteria, and together they were 
the parents of the goddess Hecate.
Perses was considered by some ancient Greek 
writers to be a god of wisdom and by others a god of 
war, as was his brother Pallas. Perses was credited 
with laying waste to battlefields. A different Perses 
was the son of Perseus.
Perseus  Greek  Son of the god Zeus and Danae; 
husband of Andromeda; father of Perses; slayer of 
the Gorgon Medusa. After many exploits, Perseus 
may have become king of Argos, but legends differ 
about what actually happened. Some say that Perseus, 
Andromeda, and their son, Perses, went to Asia and 
founded the land of Persia; others say that Perseus 
accepted the throne of Tiryns and founded the city of 
Mycenae.
The Childhood of Perseus  Danae, daughter 
of King Acrisius of Argos was mother of Perseus. 
An Oracle had predicted that Acrisius would die at 
the hands of a son of Danae. Acrisius locked Danae 
in a bronze tower or chamber. The great god Zeus 
entered the tower and covered Danae with a shower 
of gold, after which she bore the son that she named 
Perseus. Acrisius put mother and son into a wooden 
chest and cast them upon the sea, hoping thus to 
avoid the fate the oracle had foreseen.
The fisherman Dictys spotted the chest and 
rescued the pair. He took them to the court of King 
Polydectes on the island of Seriphos.
Perseus  113

Some years later Polydectes fell in love with 
Danae and wanted to marry her. Perseus, now a 
robust young warrior, knew that his mother did not 
want the attentions of the king. To get the young man 
out of the way, Polydectes contrived to send him on 
a dangerous and impossible quest. Polydectes asked 
Perseus to bring back the head of Medusa.
Perseus and Medusa  Perseus and his mother 
had been cast away from Argos by King Acrisius, the 
father of Danae. They found shelter at the court of 
King Polydectes on the island of Seriphos. When 
Perseus became a young man, Polydectes sent him on 
a quest: to bring back the head of Medusa, the sight 
of whom turned men to stone.
Fortunately, Perseus had allies among the gods. 
Athene, who had turned Medusa from a beautiful 
maiden into a hideous monster with snakes for hair, 
still hated Medusa for defiling one of her temples. 
Athene warned Perseus never to look directly at 
Medusa lest he be turned to stone, and gave him a 
burnished shield to use as a mirror. Hermes gave him 
a sickle, a leather bag in which to carry the severed 
head, and a pair of winged sandals so that he could 
fly. Hermes also told Perseus where to find the Graea 
and how to borrow the helmet of Hades, which 
would allow him to become invisible.
The Graea (Gray Women) were the sisters of 
the Gorgons. They had only one eye and one tooth 
among the three of them, which they used in turn. 
Perseus snatched away the eye and gave it back only 
when the Graea told him where to find Medusa.
Now well protected by the weapons of the gods, 
Perseus slew Medusa and cut off her head, which 
he carefully stowed in his leather bag. From the 
blood of Medusa sprang Chrysaor and the winged 
horse, Pegasus, children of Medusa and the sea god, 
Poseidon.
Perseus and Andromeda  With Medusa’s head 
in his leather bag, Perseus set off on his winged san-
dals to take the head to King Polydectes of Seriphos.
As he flew along the coast, he saw a beautiful woman 
chained to a rock, weeping. She was Andromeda, 
daughter of King Cepheus of Ethiopia, in northeast 
Africa, and of Cassiopeia. Perseus saved Andromeda 
from being devoured by a sea monster. He uncovered 
the head of Medusa and turned the monster to stone.
Perseus and Andromeda fell in love and decided 
to marry. At the wedding feast, Perseus defeated 
another suitor of Andromeda, Phineus, by using the 
Gorgon’s head to turn Phineus and his soldiers into 
an army of stone.
Perseus and Polydectes  When Danae and her 
infant son Perseus were cast adrift in a wooden box 
on the Aegean Sea, they were rescued by a fisherman, 
Dictys, and taken to the court of King Polydectes.
Polydectes and Dictys (who may have been the 
brother of the king) took good care of the mother 
and child. As the years went by, Polydectes became 
enamored of Danae. To get the son out of the way, 
Polydectes sent Perseus on the quest to bring back 
the head of Medusa. Danae was protected from the 
amorous king by Dictys. They took refuge in a temple. 
Polydectes amassed an army and went after them. 
Perseus came to the rescue and turned the king and his 
soldiers into stone, again using the head of Medusa.
Dictys became the new king of Seriphos. Perseus, 
Danae, and Andromeda returned to Argos, the birth-
place of Perseus.
Perseus and Acrisius  After Perseus had killed 
Medusa and turned Polydectes to stone, he and his 
wife, Andromeda, and his mother, Danae, returned 
to Argos.
The now aging King Acrisius, who had long ago 
set his daughter and her infant son adrift, fled the 
arrival of Perseus, the young hero, remembering an 
ancient prophecy that said a son of Danae would kill 
Acrisius. But he could not escape his fate. Acrisius 
went to Larissa, where games were being held. Per-
seus also attended the games. Perseus threw a discus 
that went awry and hit Acrisius, who died from the 
blow. Thus the prophecy that Acrisius would be killed 
by a son of Danae was fulfilled.
personal gods  Roman  The earliest Romans, 
those living on the hills that would eventually form 
the center of the great city and those living in nearby 
regions in the 700s and 600s b.c., believed in a large 
number of spiritual forces that guided their individual 
lives. As Rome grew from a small community to a vast 
empire, the culture adopted the beliefs of the many 
people who became part of first the kingdom, then 
the republic, and finally the empire. This multitude 
of personal gods influenced family life throughout 
the empire until the coming of Christianity in the 
fourth century. 
From conception to death, these gods and god-
desses influenced almost every detail of life. People 
called upon these deities to protect them, guide them, 
and advise them and their loved ones. People prayed 
to them to help with the happiest, saddest, and, at 
that time, some of the most dangerous times in life, 
pregnancy, childhood, and illness. 
114  Personal gods

Many of these personal gods had only one function in protecting the person. Some, such as Concordia, 
developed broader roles and took on functions across Roman culture. Below is a partial list of some of these 
gods and goddesses who reigned over the stages of life, including illness.
Another group of divine beings influences the emotions and the thought process, keeping them in balance 
and helping those whose lives were in turmoil. Among the gods and goddess of the emotions and the abstrac-
tions of life were:
God/Goddess	
Gender	
Area of influence
Domiducus	
m	
Bringer of the bride to the husband’s household
Cinxia	
f	
Marriage; bride’s attire
Concordia	
f	
Marital harmony
Viriplaca	
f	
Restored harmony between married people
Mena	
f	
Menstruation
Alemonia	
f	
Children in the womb
Vitumnus	
m	
Gave life to the child in the womb
Pilumnus	
m	
Proper growth of child in the womb
Partula	
f	
Length of pregnancy
Candelifera	
f	
Childbirth
Carmenta	
f	
Childbirth and midwives
Deverra	
f	
Women in labor and midwives
Lucina	
f	
Childbirth, particularly easing pain
Porrima	
f	
Birth of children who came from the womb head first
Postverta	
f	
Birth of children who came from the womb feet first
Orbona	
f	
Orphans; brought children to childless couples
Cuba 	
f	
Infants, particularly in cribs and as they fall asleep
Levana	
f	
Infants, particularly the father’s acceptance of the child
Cunina	
f	
Guarded the cradle
Nundina	
f	
Naming of children, which took place on ninth day of life
Rumina (Rumilla)	
f	
Breastfeeding mothers and infants
Volumna	
f	
Nursery
Statanus (Statinus)	
f	
Child’s first attempt to stand
Fabulinus	
m	
Taught children to speak
Sentia	
f	
Child’s mental development
Edusa (Edula)	
f	
Children learning to eat solids
Potina	
f	
Children’s drinks
Cardea	
f	
Protected children from vampires and witches
Abeona	
f	
Children leaving home
Domiduca	
f	
Children on their way to their parents’ home
Angerona	
f	
Keeping secrets
Angita	
f	
Healing through magic
Febris	
f	
Protection from fevers and malaria
Viduus	
m	
Separated the soul from the body after death
Libitina	
f	
Corpses and funerals
Naenia	
f	
Songs of lamentation, particularly at funerals
God/Goddess	
Gender	
Area of influence
Abundantia	
f	
Good luck, fortune
Clementia	
f	
Forgiveness, mercy
Disciplina	
f	
Discipline
Honos	
m	
Honor, chivalry
Personal gods  115

The belief in gods and goddesses with distinct 
functions in life permeated all aspects of the lives of 
early Roman citizens. In addition to personal gods, 
there were Household Gods who cared for the 
hearth and the threshold, Agricultural Gods, who 
watched over the details of the crops, and State Gods, 
who influenced a person’s relationship to Rome itself.
See also Indigetes.
Phaedra  Greek  Daughter of Minos of Crete 
and of Pasiphaë; sister of Ariadne and Androgeus; 
wife of Theseus, king of Athens. The love goddess 
Aphrodite caused Phaedra to fall in love with her 
chaste young stepson, Hippolytus. The youth fled 
from her in horror and Phaedra killed herself, leaving a 
letter to her husband accusing Hippolytus of trying to 
violate her. Theseus then caused the death of his son. 
This episode, where Theseus lost both his wife and his 
son, seemed to mark the end of his heroic life.
Phaeton  Greek  Son of Helios, the sun god, 
and the Nymph Clymene. The companions of Pha-
God/Goddess	
Gender	
Area of influence
Invidia	
f	
Envy and jealousy
Liberalitas	
m	
Generosity
Mens	
f	
Right or proper thinking 
Sors	
m	
Luck
Spes	
f	
Hope
Strenua	
f	
Endurance
Suadela	
f	
Romance, seduction, love
Veritas	
f	
Truth
Phaeton (in blue) asks his father Helios, god of the Sun, if he may drive the Sun’s chariot across the sky. Saturn 
(wings) is in attendance, as are the four seasons. Nicolas Poussin (1594-1665) painted this scene. It is now in 
the National Museum of Berlin. 
116  Phaedra

eton would not believe that he was the son of 
Helios. Phaeton went to his father and demanded 
that he be allowed to drive the Sun’s chariot across 
the skies. With great misgivings, Helios agreed. 
Young Phaeton could not control the high-spirited 
horses and plunged the chariot to Earth, causing the 
devastation of the land now called Libya, in North 
Africa. Zeus hurled a thunderbolt at Phaeton to stop 
the destruction. Phaeton instantly turned into a swan 
and lived out his life on the legendary river Eridanus, 
surrounded by his sisters, the Heliades, who had 
been transformed into weeping willow trees forever 
mourning the death of their brother.
The most complete version of this story is told by 
the Roman poet Ovid in Metamorphoses.
Philoctetes  Greek  The most famous archer in 
the Trojan War. The hero Heracles had bequeathed 
his poisoned arrows to the archer. On the voyage to 
Troy, Philoctetes was bitten by a venomous snake or, 
some say, wounded by one of the poisoned arrows 
and left on the island of Lemnos to die. But it had 
been prophesied by an Oracle that Troy could not 
be taken without Philoctetes. In the 10th year of 
the siege of Troy, Odysseus sent for Philoctetes. 
Philoctetes was brought to Troy, where his arrows 
slew Paris, and Troy thereafter fell to the Greeks.
Phineus  Greek  Brother of Cepheus, the king of 
Ethiopia; uncle of Andromeda, whom he wished to 
marry. The hero Perseus rescued Andromeda and 
claimed her as his bride. Phineus and his soldiers 
appeared at the wedding feast but were transformed 
into stone by the sight of the head of the gorgon 
Medusa, wielded by Perseus.
Phoebe  (Bright)  Greek  A Titan, one of the 
daughters of Uranus and Gaia. Phoebe was the 
wife of Coeus, also a Titan, and the mother of Leto 
and Asteria. Her name, which means “bright” or 
“shining,” was sometimes given to the Moon and was 
associated with Artemis and Diana.
Phoenicia  (Purple)  Greek  An ancient kingdom 
on the eastern Mediterranean, in the region of 
modern Syria, Lebanon, and Israel. Phoenicia was a 
major trade center of the ancient world. In Homer 
and in the Old Testament, its people were known as 
Canaanites. In the ninth century b.c., the Greeks gave 
the name Phoenician to those Canaanites who lived on 
the seacoast and traded with the Greeks. It is said that 
the name came from Phoenix, brother of Cadmus, 
Cilix and Europa.
The Phoenicians were famous as traders, naviga-
tors, and artisans. They obtained a purple dye, 
“Tyre purple,” from shellfish. However, their greatest 
contribution to Western civilization is thought to be 
the alphabet, an idea later adopted by the Greeks. 
The use of symbols for sounds in place of more 
cumbersome cuneiform and hieroglyphic images was 
a tremendous advance to learning.
Tyre was the best-known seaport of Phoenicia, 
lying between Sidon to the north and Acre to the 
south.
Phoenix  Greek  Son of Agenor brother of Cad-
mus, Cilix, and Europa. After Zeus stole Europa, 
King Agenor sent his three sons to search for her. 
The brothers could not find her, and not daring 
to return to the king, they settled down elsewhere. 
Some accounts say that Phoenix traveled westward, 
beyond Libya, to what is now Carthage, in North 
Africa. After Agenor’s death Phoenix returned to 
Canaan, since renamed Phoenicia in his honor.
Phorcys  (Phorcus; Old man of the sea)  Greek 
An ancient sea god; son of Gaia and Pontus; husband 
to his sister Ceto.
Phorcys and Ceto lived together in the sea, most 
likely the distant western sea at the edge of the 
world. They were the parents of the following: the 
Gorgons, three monstrous women; the Graea, two 
or three sisters who were the gray foam of the sea; 
and, some sources say, the three sisters known as 
the Hesperides and the dragon Ladon, all of whom 
guarded the golden apples of Hera.
Phorcys was also the father of the Nymph Thoosa, 
one of the Nereids, and of Scylla, a monster with the 
body of a woman but with six long necks growing 
from her waist each ending in the head of a dog. (See 
Scylla and Charybdis.)
Some sources say the Phorcys and Nereus were 
brothers, while others say they were different names 
for the same god.
Phrixus  Greek  Son of Athamas and Nephele; 
brother of Helle. His stepmother, Ino, demanded that 
Phrixus be sacrificed to the corn goddess to ensure 
good crops. Phrixus and his sister, Helle, escaped on 
the back of the winged ram that had a fleece of gold. 
When Phrixus reached Colchis, he sacrificed the ram 
to the god Zeus and gave the fleece to Aeetes, king 
of Colchis. The flight of Phrixus and Helle on the 
Phrixus  117

winged ram was important in the myth of the Golden 
Fleece (see Jason and the Argonauts, under Jason).
Phrygia  Greek  An ancient region of central 
Asia Minor (now central Turkey). The goddess 
Cybele was worshiped there (as well as, later, in 
Greece and Rome). With Gordius, legendary king of 
Phrygia, Cybele bore a son, Midas, who became king 
of Phrygia after Gordius.
Picus  (Woodpecker)  Roman  An ancient Ital-
ian god of the wild country, perhaps a satyr. In 
this very early mythology, Picus was said to be the 
son of a laborer whose name meant “dung heap.” 
He had the power to see into the future and to 
change his shape. He often chose to be a wood-
pecker, an animal sacred to the god Mars. Picus, 
the woodpecker, was believed to have helped the 
she-wolf protect the infants Romulus and Remus, 
who would start the city of Rome, after they were 
abandoned in the wild.
Over time, the myths surrounding Picus changed. 
Eventually, he evolved into an early legendary king of 
Latium. In this role he was the son of King Saturnus, 
who would be deified as the god Saturn; father of 
the Faunus, another ancient god whose story evolved 
in a way to give him human ancestry; and grandfather 
of Latinus, king of Latium when Aeneas arrived 
from Troy.
In this version of his story, Picus was a great 
warrior with the power to see into the future, a gift 
that helped him in battle. He used his skills to his 
advantage. He kept as a pet a green woodpecker, 
for woodpeckers also had the gift of prophecy. 
Eventually, the king fell victim to jealousy. Though 
Picus was married to the Nymph Canens, he loved 
the goddess Pomona, but the goddess Circe also 
fell in love with Picus. When he did not return 
her love, Circe, in a fit of rage, turned Picus into a 
woodpecker. 
Pindar  (518–438 b.c.)  Greek  The great lyric poet 
of ancient Greece. He was born near Thebes into a dis-
tinguished family. When he was 20 years old, another 
noble family commissioned Pindar to write a poem in 
honor of one of their sons, who won the footrace at the 
Pythian Games held at Delphi. Pindar’s fame dates 
from then. He was asked to write more poems to cel-
ebrate similar events. In all of them, he alluded to the 
mythology of Greece and is therefore a most valuable 
source of knowledge of the ancient religion.
Pirithoüs  Greek  Son of Zeus and Dia, the 
wife of Ixion; king of the Lapiths, a mythical people 
inhabiting the mountains of Thessaly; friend of the 
hero Theseus. Pirithoüs married Hippodameia. At 
the wedding feast, to which the Centaurs had been 
invited, a great fight broke out between the Lapiths 
and the Centaurs, wild creatures that were half man 
and half horse. The Lapiths and Theseus, who was 
among the guests, defeated the centaurs and drove 
them from their home on Mount Pelion.
Theseus accompanied Pirithoüs to the Under-
world (1), where the two attempted to steal away 
Persephone, the reluctant bride of Hades, god of 
the underworld. Hades trapped both Theseus and 
Pirithoüs in deep chairs from which they could not 
arise. Heracles rescued Theseus, but Pirithoüs was 
trapped in his chair for all eternity.
Pleiades  (Sailing Ones)  Greek  Seven daughters 
of Atlas and Pleione, one of the Oceanids; sisters 
of the Hyades. Their names were Alcyone, Asterope, 
Celaene, Electra, Maia (1), Merope, and Taygete. 
They were placed among the stars to save them from 
being pursued by Orion. They are sometimes called 
“the Seven Sisters.”
Astronomically, the Pleiades is a cluster of stars 
easily seen in the Taurus constellation. One of the 
stars is invisible to the naked eye. Some say that the 
“Lost Pleiad” is Merope, who married a mortal and 
hides herself in shame. Others say that the lost star is 
Electra, who fades away from grief at the fall of Troy.
The ancients believed that when they could see 
the cluster of stars (“the Sailing Ones”) the weather 
was auspicious for sailing.
Pleione  Greek  Daughter of the Titans Oceanus 
and Tethys; a nymph, one of the eldest among the 
thousands of daughters born of this union who were 
themselves considered by many writers to be Titans. 
Pleione and her sisters were guardians of bodies of 
water. She was the consort of Atlas and with him the 
mother of the Pleiades.
Pleione means “to increase in number.” Some 
scholars think she may have been a nymph of flocks 
and herds. Her grandson, Hermes, one of the Olym-
pian gods, was the god of animal husbandry.
Pluto  Greek and Roman  A name used to refer 
to the god of the underworld. Pluto was a euphe-
mism, a substitute name, for this much-feared god. 
In Greece, Pluto referred to Hades. In Rome, after 
Greek mythology came to strongly influence its 
118  Phrygia

religions, people used Pluto to refer to Dis or Orcus. 
People developed this alternative name to protect 
themselves from this dangerous god who was not eas-
ily influenced by the actions or offerings of humans.
In Roman mythology, Pluto was the son of Saturn 
and brother to Jupiter, Juno, Neptune, and Vesta.
Plutus  Greek  Son of Demeter and Iasion, son 
of Zeus and Electra (2); god of wealth and of the 
Earth’s abundant harvests. (He is not to be confused 
with Pluto, god of the Underworld.) Plutus was 
believed to be blind because he distributed wealth 
to good and bad alike. Plutus appears in Hesiod’s 
Theogony, Aristophanes’ Plutus, and the Divine Comedy 
of Italian poet Dante (1265–1321).
Polydectes  Greek  King of the island of Seri-
phos, protector of Danae and her son, Perseus. 
Polydectes sent Perseus on a dangerous mission, 
asking him to bring back the head of the Gorgon 
Medusa, which turned men to stone. While Perseus 
was away, Polydectes pursued Danae, trying to win 
her love. Danae was protected by Dictys, who was 
possibly the brother of Polydectes. Perseus returned 
with the head of Medusa and turned Polydectes into 
stone. Dictys then became king of Seriphos.
Polyphemus  Greek  The savage, one-eyed giant 
of Homer’s Odyssey. Polyphemus entraps the hero, 
Odysseus, and his companions, and devours six of 
them. Odysseus blinds Polyphemus’s one eye and 
with great cunning escapes. Homer’s Polyphemus 
is identified with the Cyclopes, who were supposed 
to have one eye in the middle of their foreheads and 
live on the island of Sicily. Polyphemus appears also 
in Virgil’s Aeneid as a threat to the hero Aeneas and 
his crew.
Pomona  Roman  The young, beautiful Roman 
goddess of fruit trees and fruit. Her Latin name means 
“fruit” or “apple.” Little is known of Pomona. She is 
considered one of the lesser goddesses, but she did 
have her own priests who were responsible only for 
her care and worship. Romans also dedicated to her a 
sacred grove that lay 12 miles outside of the city.
In Metamorphoses, the Roman poet Ovid told the 
story of how Vertumnus, the ancient Roman god of 
fruit and fruit trees, fell in love with Pomona. Though 
she resisted his courting, Vertumnus disguised himself 
as a harvester and then as an old woman and finally 
won this goddess’s love.
Together, Pomona and Vertumnus influenced the 
growing season of spring and the changing of the 
trees in autumn.
Pontus  (Pontos)  Greek  An ancient sea god; 
the first sea god. 
Pontus was the son of the great Earth goddess 
Gaia. Some sources say he had no father, but came 
forth from his mother through her own will. Others 
say that Ether, the god of the pure upper air, was his 
father. Gaia mated with Pontus. Their children were 
Ceto, Phorcys, Thaumas, Nereus, and Eurybia, 
though some sources say Nereus was another name 
for Phorcys. These children are known more for who 
they married and for their children than for any other 
role they played in the Greek myths.
With his female counterpart, the female personifi-
cation of the sea, Thalassa, Pontus was the father of 
the fish and animals of the sea.
Poseidon  Greek  Sea god and one of the Olym-
pian gods; son of Cronus and Rhea; brother of 
Zeus, Hades, Demeter, Hera, and Hestia; husband 
The Roman goddess Pomona displays her fruits 
of plenty in the painting by French artist Nicholas 
Fouche (1653-1733). 
Poseidon  119

of Amphitrite. The Romans identified Poseidon 
with Neptune, an Italian water god.
Although Poseidon is best known as a sea god, in 
ancient times among migrating people he had been 
a god of fertility and of herdsmen. His emblem, the 
trident, was a symbol for the thunderbolt, which 
would make Poseidon a sky god of very ancient 
times. Some legends say that Poseidon could cause 
earthquakes.
Like all of his siblings except Zeus, Poseidon was 
swallowed by his father, Cronus, and then, thanks to 
Zeus, later disgorged unharmed. In other legends, to 
save Poseidon, Rhea hid him in a flock of lambs near 
Mantinea, in Arcadia, in the care of a nurse named 
Arne. In yet another story, Rhea put Poseidon in 
the care of Capheira, a daughter of Oceanus, who 
brought up the child in Rhodes.
Poseidon and Amphitrite  Amphitrite, a nereid 
(sea nymph), was wooed and won for Poseidon, god 
of the sea, by Delphinus. In gratitude, Poseidon 
set the image of Delphinus among the stars as the 
Dolphin.
Amphitrite bore Poseidon three children: Tri-
ton, Rhode, and Benthescyme. They lived in an 
underwater cave in Eubol, off Aegae. In its spacious 
stables, Poseidon kept white chariot horses with 
golden manes. Some people call large, white-capped 
waves “white horses” in memory of Poseidon’s 
horses.
Poseidon and Athene  Poseidon was greedy 
for earthly kingdoms. He tried to claim the city of 
Athens from the goddess Athene, saying that he 
could do more good for the city than she could. The 
two appeared before a court of gods and goddesses. 
Poseidon struck his trident into a rock, and water 
immediately gushed forth, but it was seawater, salty 
and therefore not very useful. Athene planted the first 
olive tree, which gave fruit, oil, and wood. The court 
decreed that Athene’s gift was the more beneficial and 
that she thus had more right to the land. The olive 
branch became a symbol of peace.
Poseidon and Horses  Poseidon created the 
horse, according to some ancient writers, with a blow 
of his trident. He also invented the bridle, which 
The ruins of the temple to Poseidon, built around 440 B.C., still stand overlooking the sea on the Cape of 
Sounion, 67 kilometers (about 42 miles) south-southeast of Athens.  (Photograph by Frank van Mierlo. Used under 
a Creative Commons License.)
120  Poseidon

controls a horse. He probably started horse racing 
too. The horse was sacred to Poseidon. One myth 
has it that Poseidon changed himself into a horse to 
capture the love of the goddess Demeter, who had at 
one time transformed herself into a mare.
Priam  Greek  King of Troy during the Trojan 
War, though too old to take an active part in the 
war. He was the son of Laomedon and, some say, the 
father of 50 children, some of them with his second 
wife, Hecuba. Among them were the Trojan heroes 
Hector and Paris and the prophetess Cassandra.
The death of Hector and the lack of respect paid 
to his body were severe blows to King Priam. Alone, 
he went to the Achaean (Greek) camp to bargain 
with the hero Achilles for his son’s body. There, 
Neoptolemus, one of Achilles’ sons, killed Priam.
Priapus  Greek  An ancient god of fertility, pro-
tector of herds, bees, fish, and the vine. Priapus was 
a latecomer to Greek mythology. In most accounts, 
Priapus was the son of Dionysus and Aphrodite. In 
others, his mother was Chione and his father Diony-
sus, Adonis, Hermes, or Pan. Though his parentage 
may be in doubt, it is certain that Priapus was associ-
ated with the ancient Greek worship of Dionysus, 
the wine god. Many scholars think that Priapus was 
another name for Pan, an ancient pastoral deity.
Prometheus  (Forethought)  Greek  One of the 
Titans, descended from the Earth Mother (Gaia) 
and the Sky Father (Uranus); son of Iapetus and 
one of the daughters of Oceanus, possibly Clymene; 
brother of Atlas and Epimetheus; father of Deuc-
alion.
Prometheus was a remarkable figure in Greek 
mythology. Some stories say that he was the creator of 
man. He was certainly the main champion of human-
kind, bringing the gift of fire and teaching people how 
to use it. He also taught humans astronomy, medicine, 
navigation, metalworking, architecture, and writing.
Zeus grew angry with Prometheus for stealing fire 
and giving it to people. He had Prometheus chained 
to a rock on Mount Caucasus, where an eagle or a 
vulture plucked at his liver all day. Prometheus healed 
every night, so that his suffering seemed destined to 
go on for all eternity. Heracles eventually rescued 
Prometheus, and Chiron, the centaur gave his own 
immortality to Prometheus.
To revenge himself on humankind, Zeus sent 
Pandora into the world and with her all the troubles 
and sicknesses of humankind.
Some scholars say that in earlier mythologies 
Prometheus remained chained to his rock through all 
eternity. But to the fair-minded ancient Greek poets 
who recorded the myths, it was unthinkable that 
the champion of humankind should be so punished, 
hence the story of Heracles, the hero who broke the 
bonds of Prometheus, and of Chiron, the gentle cen-
taur who conferred his immortality on Prometheus 
to end his own suffering.
The story of the enmity between Zeus and 
Prometheus may represent the antagonism between 
an ancient god, Prometheus, and the more modern 
Olympian Gods, personified by Zeus.
References to Prometheus are found in most of 
the classical poets, such as Hesiod and Aeschylus 
(Prometheus Bound). In the 18th century, German 
poet and scholar Johann Wolfgang von Goethe saw 
Prometheus as a symbol of humanity’s creative striv-
ing and rebellion against the restraints of society. The 
19th-century English poet Percy Bysshe Shelley, in 
Prometheus Unbound, glorified the Titan who dared to 
revolt against the gods and triumph over tyranny.
Prometheus, Fire-bringer and Champion of 
Humankind  Stories say that on one occasion Pro-
metheus, a Titan, made two bundles out of the 
remains of an ox that had been sacrificed. One bundle 
contained the meat, the other, the bones. He wrapped 
the bones in succulent-looking fat; the meat he 
placed inside the stomach sac of the ox.
Asked to choose which package he preferred, the 
god Zeus chose the package that looked succulent but 
contained nothing but bones. In his anger at being 
tricked, although some say that the great god surely 
knew he was being tricked, Zeus decided to keep the 
knowledge of fire-making from humankind.
Prometheus, undaunted, stole fire from heaven, 
or from the forge of the smith-god, Hephaestus, and 
took it to Earth hidden in the hollow stalk of the fen-
nel plant. He then began to teach people all the uses 
of fire—how to make tools and fashion metal, how to 
build, and how to cook. He also taught people how to 
sow and reap, and how to use herbs for healing.
Prometheus, Bound and Unbound  Prome-
theus, the champion of humankind, had thwarted the 
great god Zeus in his attempt to conceal knowledge 
of fire from humans. To punish the law-breaker, Zeus 
chained Prometheus to a rock on Mount Caucasus, 
where an eagle or a vulture plucked at his liver all 
through the day. Prometheus healed every night, so 
this torture would go on through all eternity.
Eventually, the hero Heracles slew the bird and 
unbound Prometheus. The gentle centaur, Chiron, 
Prometheus  121

The god Prometheus, chained to a rock by Zeus for giving fire to humans, suffers each day as an eagle plucks 
at his liver. Flemish artist Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640) portrayed the scene in this oil painting which now 
hangs in the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
122  Prometheus

then conferred his own immortality upon Prometheus, 
so that he would die but Prometheus would live.
As well as being punished for bringing fire to 
men, Zeus held Prometheus captive because he 
knew a secret to which Zeus wanted an answer: The 
sea nymph Thetis was soon to bear a child that 
would be greater than its father. The father could 
be either Zeus or Poseidon; the child could cause 
chaos among the Olympian Gods. Prometheus 
would not reveal his secret as long as he was held 
captive.
Prometheus and Pandora  Prometheus was a 
cause of great anger to Zeus. Prometheus had tricked 
Zeus in the matter of sacrifices made by humans and 
he had eventually escaped from the terrible torture 
inflicted by Zeus as punishment. Zeus decided that 
humankind must be punished for having received the 
forbidden gift of fire.
Zeus ordered Hephaestus, the smith-god, to make 
a woman out of clay. The gods breathed life into her 
and made her irresistibly beautiful. She was named 
Pandora (All-giving) and sent to Earth, bearing a 
sealed vase, of which she was forbidden to know the 
contents. In spite of warnings from Prometheus, 
Epimetheus, his brother, immediately took Pandora 
to be his wife. Then Pandora opened the vase, 
sometimes called Pandora’s Box, and every disaster 
that humans were ever to know was released upon 
the world. Only Hope remained in the vase, giving 
humankind the will to go on living.
Proserpina  Roman  Queen of the Under-
world (2) and the consort or wife of Dis, the Roman 
god of the underworld. The Romans believed 
Proserpina had power over growing plants and hon-
ored her as a springtime goddess. Proserpina was 
an ancient goddess of Italian origins. The people 
of Rome honored her and Dis in games held about 
every 100 years.
Some scholars see Proserpina as the simple trans-
lation of the name Persephone, a Greek goddess, 
daughter of Demeter and Zeus, whom Hades, the 
Greek god of the underworld, abducted to become 
his wife. Other scholars identify Proserpina with 
the ancient Greek goddess Hecate, who, in some 
stories, becomes Persephone’s companion in the 
underworld.
Protesilaus  Greek  A hero from Thessaly, son 
of Iphicles; husband of Laodamia. Protesilaus was 
the first of the Greeks to spring ashore at Troy (see 
Trojan War) and the first to die. Laodamia begged 
the gods to allow Protesilaus to return to Earth so 
that they might spend three more hours together. 
The gods granted her wish and the lovers were 
reunited. Then Laodamia committed suicide and 
went to the Underworld with her husband.
Proteus  Greek  A minor but ancient sea god who 
served Poseidon. Proteus had enormous knowledge 
and the ability to change his shape at will if he did 
not want to stay around to answer questions. When 
finally cornered, he advised Menelaus, whose ship 
was becalmed off the coast of Egypt, that to escape he 
should pay proper honor to the god Zeus. Menelaus 
listened to the advice of the sea god and was eventu-
ally able to sail home to Sparta.
In another story, Aristaeus, the son of Apollo, 
sought the advice of Proteus, who advised him to 
sacrifice cattle to the gods. Aristaeus did, and was 
rewarded by seeing swarms of bees emerging from 
the corpses of the slain cattle. (Aristaeus was an 
expert in the art of beekeeping.)
Psyche  (Soul)  Greek  A mortal woman so beauti-
ful that the goddess Aphrodite was jealous of her and 
ordered Eros to punish her.
Pygmaei  (Pygmies)  Greek  A mythological race 
of very short people, only 13.5 inches tall, found 
mostly in ancient Greek folklore but also mentioned 
often in the stories of the great gods. The pygmaei 
lived by a stream which most sources say was in 
Egypt, though others say it was in Thrace or India. 
They wore their hair very long and did not wear 
clothes. These farmers waged war against the cranes, 
sometimes called storks, that came each year in the 
late summer to eat the crops.
A beautiful woman was born among the pygmaei. 
Her name was Gerana or Oenoe. As she grew, 
Gerana became very vain and believed she was even 
more beautiful than Hera, queen of the Olympian 
gods and the wife and sister of Zeus. Hera finally 
realized that the only way to correct Gerana’s vanity 
was to punish her, and Hera turned the pygmaei 
woman into a crane. By that time, Gerana had a son 
and wanted desperately to be reunited with him. 
As a crane, she flew back to the pygmaeis but they 
rejected her and beat her off with sticks. In some 
versions, Gerana was a human woman who married 
a pygmaei.
The pygmaei also tried to capture Heracles after 
he fell asleep in their lands while on his famous jour-
Pygmaei  123

neys. He awoke and laughed at their efforts, scooped 
up several pygmaei, and carried them off.
Pygmalion  Greek  Son of Belus, a sculptor from 
Cyprus who despised women but adored the goddess 
Aphrodite. He made an ivory statue of her of such 
extraordinary beauty that he fell in love with it. As he 
embraced the statue, Aphrodite answered his prayers 
and made the statue come to life, giving it the name 
Galatea (3). This story, from Ovid’s Metamorphoses, 
enhances the legendary power of Aphrodite over all 
creation. It has been told many times, most famously 
in the play Pygmalion by George Bernard Shaw 
(1856–1950), the source of the musical My Fair Lady 
by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe.
Pyrrha  Greek  Daughter of Epimetheus; wife of 
Deucalion. Together Pyrrha and Deucalion repeo-
pled the Earth after the great rain sent by Zeus.
Pythian Games  Greek  A sacred rite enacted 
in ancient Greece to honor the ancient serpent-
monster, Python, slain by the god Apollo. It was one 
of the great Hellenic festivals celebrated in Delphi, 
second only to the Olympic Games in importance.
Python  Greek  A female serpent born of the 
Earth. The goddess Hera sent Python to torment 
her rival Leto, one of the many loves of Zeus, and 
the mother of Apollo. The young Apollo slew the 
Python and bid the serpent to rot where it had 
fallen. The spot where this encounter took place 
was called Pytho, from the Greek word pytho, “to 
rot.” The name was later changed to Delphi. The 
site became the most venerated shrine in ancient 
Greece, sacred to Apollo. The Pythian Games 
were held every four years in honor of the ancient 
Python and were next in importance to the famous 
Olympic Games.
124  Pygmalion

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
125
Quirinus  (Quirinius)  Roman  An ancient 
god, perhaps of warfare or of citizenship. The 
surviving information on Quirinus is confusing and 
sketchy. Roman historians and poets and modern 
scholars disagree over just what role he played in 
Roman society.
Quirinus was the third most important god in the 
pantheon of early Rome, behind Jupiter and Mars. 
These three were honored together as a trio of the 
most powerful deities, though Juno and Minerva 
eventually replaced Quirinus and Mars. Much informa-
tion remains about Jupiter and Mars, including their 
connection to Greek mythology, but Quirinus was not 
associated with a Greek counterpart. The details of his 
origin faded from popularity, and much has been lost.
A cult to Quirinus centered on the Quirinal Hill, 
one of the seven hills in Rome, named in his honor. 
A huge temple to Quirinus stood on that hill. The 
people of Rome celebrated his festival, known as the 
Quirinalia, on February 17.
Some scholars and stories suggest that Quirinus 
was the peaceful side of the Roman god of war, Mars: 
not the soldier, but the citizen. The name Quirinus may 
have come from the Roman word for citizen, quirite.
Like Mars, Quirinus may have begun as a god 
of the Sabine people (see Sabines). Some histories 
of Rome say that Quirinus was the name given to 
Romulus, the twin brother of Remus and founder 
of Rome, when he transformed from a mortal into 
a god.
Q
8

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
126
Rhadamanthus  (Rhadamanthys)  Greek 
Son of Europa and the god Zeus; brother of Minos 
and Sarpedon. According to Homer in the Odyssey, 
Rhadamanthus was the ruler of the Elysian Fields, 
where fortunate shades, or spirits, of mortals went 
after death. Later legends say that he was one of the 
judges of the Underworld (1).
Rhea  (Earth)  Greek  A Titan, the mother of the 
great ruling gods of Olympus. She was the daughter 
of Gaia and Uranus (Heaven); the sister-wife of 
Cronus; and the mother of Demeter, Hades, Hera, 
Hestia, Poseidon, and Zeus.
The story of Rhea is a near-repetition of that 
of her mother Gaia. Her father, Uranus, jealous 
of Gaia’s children, had them confined under the 
Earth, but with Gaia’s help the bravest son, Cro-
nus, overcame his father and banished him. When 
Cronus became the husband of his sister Rhea, they 
had many children, of whom Cronus was so jealous 
that he swallowed them. Rhea managed to save 
Zeus, who rescued his siblings and went to war with 
Cronus.
Rhea was identified with the Earth Mother and 
goddess of fertility. Her cult was strongest in Crete, 
which some say was the birthplace of Zeus. She was 
identified with Cybele and also known as Agdistis. 
In Roman mythology she was identified with Ops, 
goddess of the harvest. Rhea, though a shadowy 
figure herself, was widely worshiped under various 
names as an Earth goddess.
Rhea Silvia  (Ilia)  Roman  A Vestal Virgin. 
Rhea Silvia was raped or loved by the god Mars, 
which resulted in her becoming the mother of 
Romulus and Remus, twin brothers who became the 
legendary founders of Rome. She was the daughter 
of King Numitor of Alba Longa a city in Latium, or 
according to some legends, the daughter of the hero 
Aeneas, who was honored by people of Rome as the 
founder of their race.
Not knowing who had fathered the twins, Rhea 
Silvia’s uncle, King Amulius, who had taken the 
throne from his brother, Numitor, ordered that the 
children be taken from their mother at their birth 
and thrown in the Tiber River and left to die. One 
legend has it that Amulius imprisoned Rhea Silvia 
before the birth and kept her there after the birth. 
Another says that he tried to kill her by throwing 
her into the Tiber, too, but the god of that body of 
water rescued her and made her his wife. Meanwhile, 
a she-wolf found the babies and nursed them until a 
shepherd, Faustulus, found them and raised them 
with his wife, Acca Larentia (1).
Rhodes  Greek  The easternmost island of the 
Aegean Sea. In Greek mythology, it was the favored 
abode of the sun god Helios, whose wife was the 
Nymph Rhodos. Their children were the first inhab-
itants of Rhodes.
Robigo and Robigus  Roman  Two deities, a 
goddess and god, who watched over growing fields of 
wheat and grain and who, if not treated well, brought 
rust or mildew to crops. Robigo, which means blight or 
mildew in Latin, was female, and Robigus was male.
Each year, on April 25, the time when mildew 
most commonly attacked young plants, the Romans 
held the festival of the Robigalia. Worshipers, led by 
their priest, sacrificed a dog to Robigo and Robigus, 
preferably a rust red dog to symbolize the color of 
mildew on plants. Their ceremony was held five miles 
north of Rome, next to the city’s fields. Races and 
games followed the ceremony.
Roma  Roman  A legendary figure who came to be 
worshiped as a goddess, Roma was the personification 
of the city of Rome. According to modern historians 
R
8

and archaeologists, she was first worshiped as a deity 
in about 195 b.c. when a popular cult to her devel-
oped outside of the city and in Greece, which was, 
by then, a part of the Roman Republic. Rome had 
become an important city in the lives of the people 
in these outlying areas, and they developed a worship 
of this goddess as an expression of that importance. 
Augustus, the first emperor of Rome, became associ-
ated with Roma. After Augustus died in a.d. 14, 
people believed he became a god and worshiped him 
with Roma. In a.d. 118, Emperor Hadrian built a 
temple to Roma within the city.
The legends of Roma are much older than her 
worship as a goddess. According to some ancient 
sources, she was a Trojan prisoner of Aeneas who 
took her and other captives with him when he left 
Troy. After years of wandering the seas, Aeneas’s ship 
finally reached the western shores of Italy. The cap-
tives were tired of the journey and Roma convinced 
them to set fire to the ship so Aeneas could not leave. 
Eventually, the community they created became so 
prosperous they named the city after her in thanks 
for her courage.
In other legends, Roma was sometimes named 
as the granddaughter of Aeneas, as the wife of his 
son, and even as his wife. She was also said to be the 
daughter of Heracles. Some say she was also the 
sister of Latinus, legendary king and founder of the 
Latin people.
Still another tradition says that Roma was the 
daughter of Evander, the legendary king who fled 
Greece and formed a community on the Palatine Hill 
before Romulus founded Rome. Evander, stories say, 
named the city that grew up around that hill and its 
six neighbors after his daughter.
Rome  Roman  A city on the Tiber River in west 
central Italy, which by the first millennium b.c., had 
grown into a major urban center and the seat of 
an empire that surrounded the Mediterranean Sea 
and reached as far north as the British Isles. Rome’s 
beginnings are hidden behind many myths and 
legends. According to the most common myth, Rome 
was founded by Romulus on April 21, an event cel-
ebrated in ancient times by the festival of Parilia, the 
festival of Pales. The year of that event is reported 
by some ancient sources as between 772 and 754 b.c. 
Other legends tell of the founding of the city by the 
descendants of Aeneas, the Greek hero who settled in 
central Italy after the end of the Trojan War.
Archaeological evidence shows very early settle-
ments built by farming people on or near the seven 
famous hills that formed the center of the city that 
became Rome. The first hill people settled appears 
to have been the Capitoline Hill. Archaeologists have 
discovered some of the oldest temples to the supreme 
Roman god, Jupiter, on this hill. According to legend, 
it was on this hill that Romulus founded his city.
The next hill that settlers developed was the 
nearby Palatine, 1,250 yards to the southeast of the 
Capitoline Hill. Legend says that Evander, a leader 
from the Arcadia region of ancient Greece, settled 
this hill even before Romulus was born.
Rulers, citizens, and cult followers also built sites 
of worship on the Quirinal Hill, 2,100 yards to the 
north-northwest of the Capitoline Hill, and the 
Aventine Hill, 2,500 yards to the south of Capitoline 
Hill. Rome’s other three hills are the Viminal, Esqui-
line, and Caelian.
The community of Rome grew surrounded by 
the lands of many different cultures which, over time, 
interacted with and then became part of the Roman 
culture. No more than 20 miles to the northwest 
was Etruria, a region more than a kingdom, whose 
religions strongly influenced the people of Rome. The 
Sabines lived about 25 miles to the northeast. Twenty-
five miles to the southeast lived the Latini people who 
gave their name to the language that came to dominate 
central Italy, Latin. Rutuli lay 20 miles to the south.
According to legend, Rome’s earliest rulers were 
kings, some of them rulers of nearby regions, who 
were honored over time as great heroes. One such 
was Latinus, king of the Latini people. The last king, 
Tarquinius Superbus, who ruled from 534 to 510 
b.c., at first refused the books of prophecy offered 
him for sale by the Sibyl of Cumae. After she had 
destroyed the first six books, he realized the worth 
of the last three and bought them at the price of the 
original nine. During this time, also, Greek mythol-
ogy began influencing the religions of the people of 
Rome and the surrounding areas, primarily through 
contact with Greek colonies in southern Italy and on 
the island of Sicily. This process of influence by the 
cultures of Greece is known as Hellenization.
After this era, the people of Rome rejected 
kingship as a form of government and turned to 
a representative republic, whereby each year the 
people chose two chief executives to govern the city. 
At this time, too, Rome’s history becomes a matter of 
authentic records available for modern study. During 
the Republic era (510 to 264 b.c.), Rome extended its 
rule to most of central Italy through military force. 
Romans also conquered many of the Greek colonies 
and brought those lands into their nation.
Rome  127

Rome became a world power in the third and 
second centuries b.c., expanding its rule to North 
Africa, Spain, and the eastern Mediterranean. Rome’s 
conquests included Greece. In the Macedonian Wars 
of the third century b.c., Roman armies defeated the 
ruler of the northern portion of the Greek peninsula 
and then took over rule of the southern portion, 
home to the great Greek myths and the philosophical 
and cultural center of that part of the world.
Rome became an empire after the reign of Julius 
Caesar in the first century b.c. As the Romans spread 
their influence, they colonized many lands and built 
temples to their gods, as well as civic and cultural 
buildings, across the region. Temples to Jupiter, 
Minerva, Juno, and Mars stood on hills across the 
lands of the Mediterranean and western Europe. The 
ruins of many still stand today and provide evidence 
of the widespread influence of the Roman empire.
Today, Rome is the economic, cultural, and politi-
cal center of Italy. Monuments to the ancient societ-
ies stand amid modern buildings. Archaeologists 
continue to discover the past of this city and its 
influences, including evidence of its religions and 
myths. New discoveries continue to contribute to the 
understanding of the nature of Rome’s great beliefs.
Romulus and Remus  Roman  The twin sons 
of the god Mars and Rhea Silvia. They were the 
legendary founders of Rome, the greatest city of 
the ancient world. Their mother, Rhea Silvia, was 
a Vestal Virgin. In the most common story, she 
was condemned to death for losing her virginity. 
Her uncle, King Amulius, commanded that the two 
infants be thrown into the Tiber River. A she-wolf 
who had just given birth found the boys and fed them 
with her own milk. Some sources say that Mars, the 
divine father of Romulus and Remus, sent the wolf, 
his sacred animal, to watch over his sons. A shepherd 
of the king, Faustulus, found the boys and took them 
home where his wife, Acca Laurentia (1), raised 
them. After they grew up, they founded the city of 
Rome on the Palatine Hill. They quarreled over the 
Ruins of an ancient temple to Saturn (foreground) remain today in the Roman Forum, which stood between the 
Capitoline and Palatine hills.  (Photograph by Marcok. Used under a Creative Commons License.)
128  Romulus and Remus

plans for the city, and Romulus slew Remus. Romulus 
became king of Rome and ruled for 40 years. He 
provided wives for the new settlers of Rome by 
capturing Sabine women. Romulus was at last taken 
up to the heavens in a mysterious whirlwind, said to 
be sent by Mars.
The best-known artistic representation of Romu-
lus and Remus is the bronze sculpture of a she-wolf 
nursing the two infants, now in the Capitoline 
Museum Rome.
Rutuli  (Rutulians)  A people of ancient Italy 
inhabiting Ardea and the land surrounding Latium. 
Their king was Turnus, who was killed in battle with 
the Aeneas, a hero of the Trojan War, who settled 
in Italy.
Rutuli  129

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
130
S
8
Sabines  (Sabini)  Roman  One of the oldest 
peoples of central Italy. In a famous Roman legend, 
the new Roman settlers, subjects of Romulus, needed 
wives, so they abducted the Sabine women. War 
immediately broke out between the Sabine men 
and the Romans. The Sabine women helped to 
make peace by placing themselves and their infants 
between the warring tribes. The Sabines and the 
Romans became united as one people.
The seizure, or rape, of the Sabine women is fre-
quently portrayed in art. One of the most famous is 
the painting by the Flemish artist Peter Paul Rubens 
(1577–1640) in the National Gallery, London.
Sagittarius  (The Archer)  Greek  A constella-
tion in the night sky of the Northern Hemisphere 
between Scorpio and Capricorn; the ninth sign in 
the Zodiac. Star charts show Sagittarius wielding a 
bow and arrow, pointing as if to shoot at Scorpio.
Experts debate the mythological identity of Sagit-
tarius. Some scholars believe that Sagittarius, who is 
often shown as human from the waist up and horse 
from the waist down, represents a Centaur, and 
conclude that he was a symbol of Chiron, the wise 
centaur of Greek mythology. Because Chiron was 
skilled at archery and hunting, they believe Zeus 
placed him in the night sky in this position to make 
him immortal.
However, other scholars and the Latin poet Hygi-
nus, who lived in the first century b.c., argue that Sagit-
tarius is not half horse but half goat, which would make 
him a Satyr and a servant of the god Dionysus (known 
as Bacchus to the Romans). These experts suggest that 
Chiron’s constellation is Centaurus, which shines in 
the night sky of the Southern Hemisphere.
Salacia  (The salty one)  Roman  A goddess of the 
sea, usually associated with the sea god Neptune, 
likely his wife. Salacia personified salt water and was 
said to have fled from Neptune to the Atlantic Ocean, 
which became her domain. Eventually, she married 
the great sea god. Salacia took on many of the stories 
of the Greek goddess Amphitrite.
Italian Renaissance sculptor Giambologna (1529-
1608) portrayed Roman men carrying off a Sabine 
woman in this statue, which now stands in Florence, 
Italy.  (Photo by Yair-haklai. Used under a Creative Com-
mons License.)

Salus  Roman  The goddess of health and preserva-
tion, also of success and good fortune. Salus was more 
of an abstraction than a character in myths and became 
closely associated with the Greek goddess of health, 
Hygeia. In 302 b.c., the Romans dedicated a new 
temple on the Quirinal Hill to Salus. People celebrated 
her feast on April 30. Salus was often shown standing 
on a globe and pouring liquid from a cup onto an altar 
around which curled a snake. Her name was part of the 
popular phrase “Salus Publica,” referring to the public 
health, or well-being of the state and society of Rome.
Sarpedon  Greek  A son of Zeus and Laodemia 
or Europa. In the Trojan War, Sarpedon was a hero, 
the ally of King Priam. His particular friend was 
Glaucus (1), who mourned his death (in Homer’s 
Iliad) at the hands of Patroclus. Zeus had Apollo 
carry the body of Sarpedon from the battlefield to be 
buried in Lydia, his homeland.
In an earlier legend, Sarpedon was the son of Zeus 
and Europa, and the brother of Minos and Rha-
damanthus. He became king of Lydia. Zeus granted 
him the privilege of living for three generations.
Saturn  (Saturnus)  Roman  Originally a god 
of agriculture, of the sowing of seeds and corn; also 
the god of the passage of time. Saturn may have been 
an early Etruscan family god who grew in importance 
in the culture of Etruria before developing a larger 
following.
To the Romans, Saturn represented a primitive 
golden age, a time of great happiness that myths 
say existed before people needed to farm to survive. 
Saturn was king of that longed-for mythical time. 
Lua was his wife in that wonderful land.
Eventually, the characteristics of Saturn merged 
with those of the Greek god Cronus, and Saturn was 
honored as the father of Jupiter, Neptune, Juno, 
and Pluto. The role of Saturn’s wife shifted to Rhea. 
Saturn, whose symbol was the scythe, also served as 
the keeper or guardian of the treasury in Rome, and 
because of that responsibility people saw him as the 
god of money.
The Saturnalia, the week-long feast in honor of 
Saturn, began on December 17, the time of winter 
sowing. People celebrated with riotous feasting and 
exchange of gifts. This festival eventually influenced 
the Christian celebration of Christmas.
In astronomy, Saturn is the sixth planet from the 
Sun and the second-largest planet, after Jupiter, in 
this solar system. This gas giant is surrounded by 
as many as 21 moons. The largest, Titan, is named 
for the first race of Greek gods. Other Saturn moons 
named after Greek and Roman gods include Tethys, 
Dione, Rhea, Hyperion, and Phoebe.
satyrs  Greek  One of a class of woodland and 
mountain spirits attendant on Dionysus. They are 
usually shown as part human and part goat or monkey. 
The satyrs were noted for riotousness and mischief, 
terrifying herdsmen and shepherds, and chasing after 
Nymphs. One legend relates that the satyrs were 
originally men, sons of Hermes and Iphthima. The 
goddess Hera turned them into half human beasts 
to punish them for neglecting to keep watch over 
Dionysus. They were ever after faithful to the god 
and accompanied him to all his festivals. Medieval 
Christian art used the satyrs as images of the devil.
Scylla  Greek  Daughter of Nisus. She was cru-
elly treated by Minos. This Scylla has no connection 
with the monster named Scylla (see Scylla and 
Charybdis).
Scylla and Charybdis  Greek  Two mythi-
cal characters who inhabited the Straits of Messina, 
between mainland Italy and the island of Sicily. On 
the Italian side lived the monster Scylla. She had 
the body of a woman, but around her waist grew six 
long necks with the heads of dogs armed with three 
rows of teeth, who emitted ferocious and terrifying 
barks. On the Sicilian side lived Charybdis, who 
dwelled under a great fig tree. Three times each day, 
Charybdis swallowed up the sea and then spat it out 
again in a boiling whirlpool.
Although the witch Circe had warned the hero 
Odysseus of the dangers of Scylla and Charybdis, 
Scylla managed to devour six of Odysseus’s crewmen. 
The legend represents the dangers of navigation 
faced by early mariners in those waters, where there 
are treacherous currents akin to whirlpools.
The expression “to fall between Scylla and Cha-
rybdis,” similar to the more modern “to jump from 
the frying pan into the fire,” means to be caught in 
a dilemma—that is, to have to choose between two 
unsatisfactory alternatives.
Selene  (Moon)  Greek  An ancient moon goddess. 
Daughter of the Titans Theia and Hyperion; sister 
of Helios (the Sun) and Eos (the Dawn). Selene is 
also called Phoebe. She is Luna in Roman mythol-
ogy, and sometimes identified with Artemis.
Selene was a beautiful woman, usually depicted 
with long wings and a golden crown that shed a 
Selene  131

gentle light in the darkness of night. White horses 
pulled her chariot across the skies. She was the 
mother of three daughters by Zeus: Pandia, Erse (the 
Dew), and Nemea. It is said that the Nemean Lion 
was born to Selene and Zeus, and that it fell from the 
Moon to the Earth (see under Heracles). Selene was 
also loved by Pan. The best-known legend of Selene 
was that of her love for the youth Endymion.
Semele  (Moon)  Greek  Daughter of Cadmus and 
Harmonia, lover of Zeus, mother of Dionysus. After 
her death in the flames created by Zeus, Semele was 
conducted from the underworld to Olympus, home 
of the gods, where she became immortal under the 
name Thyone. Semele was worshiped in Athens 
during the Leneitai (Festival of Wild Women), when 
every year a Bull representing Dionysus was sacri-
ficed to her.
Some say that Semele is a form of Selene, an 
ancient moon goddess.
Seriphos  (Serifos)  Greek  An island in the 
Western Cyclades group in the Aegean Sea. This was 
the island where the infant Perseus and his mother, 
Danae, came to rest after escaping from Acrisius.
Seven Against Thebes  Greek  The name given 
to the conflict between the rulers of the kingdom of 
Thebes and the rebels who challenged the king for the 
throne. It was the subject of a tragedy by Aeschylus.
At the death of their father, Oedipus, Eteocles 
and Polynices (who were probably twins), had made 
a pact to rule the kingdom of Thebes jointly, each one 
taking over the kingdom for a year at a time. How-
ever, Eteocles refused to give up his kingship at the 
end of his year. Polynices appealed to King Adrastus 
of Argos for military help and the war began. The 
seven were the champions Adrastus brought together 
to help Polynices gain the throne.
The city of Thebes had seven gates. Eteocles set 
a champion to guard each one. Adrastus delegated a 
champion to capture each gate. It was fated that, at 
the end of the battle, the two brothers, Eteocles and 
Polynices, should meet in one-to-one combat and kill 
each other.
Creon, the new king of Thebes, ordered that 
Eteocles be left to lie on the battlefield rather than 
be buried. He was opposed by Antigone, the sister 
of Eteocles and Polynices, who herself performed the 
forbidden burial service.
The Epigoni, sons of the Seven, continued the 
war years later.
Sibyl  (Sibylla)  Greek  Originally, a young girl, 
the daughter of a Trojan, who had the gift of prophecy. 
Her name was Sibylla, and she dedicated her gift to 
Apollo, who inspired her to make predictions. Over 
time, people shortened her name to Sibyl. Eventually, 
her legend came to identify Sibyl as the daughter of 
Zeus and Lamia, a daughter of the sea god Poseidon.
People then began using the name Sibyl for any 
woman who had the same gift of foretelling the future. 
The most famous Greek woman given this name was 
the Sibyl of Erythia in Lydia, a region of Greece. 
The most famous Roman prophetess was the Sibyl of 
Cumae, who lived in a cave on the Bay of Naples.
Selene, the Greek goddess of the moon, watches 
over the sleeping Endymion, a shepherd boy whom 
she loves. Sabastiano Ricci (1659-1734) captured the 
scene in this painting, which now hangs in Chiswick 
House in London.
132  SEmele

Sibyl of Cumae  Roman  A prophetess who lived 
in a cave below a temple to Apollo in Cumae, a port in 
the Bay of Naples on Italy’s western coast on the shores 
of Lake Averna.
Some historians believe the Sibyl of Cumae was 
first known as the Sibyl of Erythrae, a city in Greece. 
This Sibyl, which was the woman’s name and came to 
identify a female prophet, is said to have left Greece 
and settled in Italy after the god Apollo promised her 
as many years of life as the grains of sand she could 
hold in her hand if she left her homeland and never 
returned.
In Italy, the Sibyl of Cumae is said to have offered 
to sell nine prophetic books to one of the last kings of 
Rome, Tarquinius Superbus, but, not recognizing her 
or her power, he refused to pay the price. The Sibyl 
left, burned three of the books and returned to offer 
Tarquinius six for the same price as nine. He refused. 
She burned three more and returned again to offer 
him three books for the price of nine. Having learned 
who she was, Tarquinius bought the three, and then 
and there the sibyl vanished.
Her written words of prophecy, which came to 
be known as the Sybilline Books, gained a powerful 
influence over the development of Roman religion, 
particularly as it was influenced by Greek religion.
Sibylline Books  Roman  A collection of 
prophecies written by the Sibyl of Cumae, perhaps 
brought with her from Greece, which contained 
advice for fortune-telling, predictions of the future 
of Rome, and a set of instructions that influenced 
Roman religion for centuries.
In the mid-500s b.c., this sibyl offered the original 
nine volumes of her predictions to the last Roman 
king, Tarquinius Superbus, but he refused twice 
to buy them, not knowing their worth. With each 
refusal, the sibyl burned three books. Then the king, 
having learned of her reputation as a prophetess, 
bought the three remaining books at the same price 
as the original nine. The sibyl vanished and Tarquin-
ius had the manuscripts preserved in a lower chamber 
of a temple of Jupiter. Special priests guarded the 
books. In times of strife and conflict, Roman leaders 
consulted these prophecies. Often they instructed the 
people of Rome to bring a new cult or worship of a 
specific Greek god to Rome.
In 83 b.c., the temple in which the books were 
kept burned and they were destroyed. The Roman 
leaders sent for copies of the verses from across 
the empire, which included all of Italy and Greece, 
stretched from Spain to Turkey, and included por-
tions of northern Africa. The last known time Rome 
consulted the Sibylline Books was in a.d. 363.
Silenus  (Selini)  Greek  Son of Hermes or of 
Pan; tutor of Dionysus. An immensely wise old man, 
Silenus knew both past and future. He is often shown 
as a hairy, plump old man with the ears and legs of a 
horse, seated astride a wine cask or a donkey.
In its plural form, the Sileni denoted a category of 
rural divinities, personifying the genii of springs and 
rivers. As such they were associated with the satyrs 
who followed Dionysus in his revels.
Silvanus  Roman  An ancient god of northern 
Italy and then of the Romans. Silvanus was, in his 
earliest form, a god of uncultivated lands, of forests 
and woods, fields and flocks. People believed that he 
either lived among the mysterious forces of these 
places or was himself one of those mysterious forces. 
Later, people came to worship Silvanus as a god of 
agriculture, a rural god. Artists portrayed him as a 
peasant or a man of the country.
Silvanus was often worshiped with Faunus, 
another Roman god of rural life, who was seen as a 
protector of farmers and shepherds. As the Romans 
adopted many of the stories of the gods of classical 
Greece (see Hellenization), the characteristics of 
Silvanaus and Faunus merged with those of Pan, the 
god of fields and forests whom artists portrayed as 
half man, half goat.
Sirens  Greek  The Nymphs whose sweet song 
lured sailors to destruction by making them go mad 
and therefore become shipwrecked on the coast 
where the Sirens lived. In Homer’s Odyssey, Circe 
warned the hero, Odysseus, about the Sirens. He 
plugged the ears of his crewmen with wax, then had 
himself tied to the mast of the ship, while the crew 
rowed out of danger. In the myth of the Argonauts, 
the sailors were able to sail safely by the nymphs 
because the poet Orpheus was on board and sang 
more sweetly than the Sirens.
Sisyphus  Greek  Son of Aeolus; brother of 
Athamas; husband of Merope. Although Sisyphus 
is described as a cunning rogue in Homer’s Odyssey, 
he is most famous for a terrible punishment visited 
on him by Zeus. He was condemned to push an 
enormous boulder to the top of a hill. Once at the 
top, the boulder would come crashing down, and 
Sisyphus had to begin his task all over again. Thus, 
Sisyphus  133

Sisyphus has become the symbol for a fruitless task. 
It is not known for what crime Sisyphus was being 
punished in this manner.
Another story about Sisyphus tells how he outwit-
ted Thanatos (Death). Zeus had sent Thanatos to seize 
Sisyphus. Sisyphus asked Thanatos to demonstrate 
how the manacles that he carried worked. During the 
demonstration, Sisyphus managed to lock up Thana-
tos. Zeus had to send Ares from Olympus to release 
Death upon the Earth again, for no one was dying.
Meanwhile Sisyphus asked his wife, Merope, to 
leave his body unburied when he died—for he knew 
that Thanatos would come for him a second time. 
When Sisyphus died, he went straight to Hades, god of 
the Underworld (1), and complained that his corpse 
had not received a proper burial. Hades, a just god, 
sent Sisyphus back to Earth to arrange a decent burial. 
Sisyphus had a joyous reunion with his wife, broke his 
word to Hades to return, and lived to an old age.
Sol  Roman  In the earliest Roman religion, a sun 
god worshiped by the Sabines, who introduced the 
cult of Sol to the Roman people when a Sabine king 
ruled over that city. As Greek religions gained influ-
ence over the religions of Rome, people identified Sol 
with Helios, the Greek sun god, and with Apollo, 
who also had attributes of the Sun in his myths.
Later, the Roman emperor Aurelian (a.d. 270–275) 
introduced the worship of Sol Invictus (Invincible 
Sun) to Rome, but this Sol is known to have been of 
Syrian origins and is not the Sol of the older religions 
of Rome. The worship of Sol Invictus was one of the 
last cults introduced into Roman culture before the 
emperor Constantine converted to Christianity in 
the a.d. 300s.
Sol is the name given to the Sun at the center of 
our solar system that is 98 million miles from Earth. 
It is 109 times the diameter of Earth and has been 
shining for more than 4 billion years, according to 
scientific estimates.
solar system  The Sun, known also as Sol, named 
after a Roman god, and the astronomical bodies that 
orbit it. In modern times, the English names for six 
of the planets are Roman gods and the names for 
two of the planets are Greek gods. (Earth is an Old 
English word that refers to the planet we live on.) 
These gods are
Mercury—The Roman god of trade and  
merchants
Venus—The Roman goddess of the productive 
power of nature
Mars—A Roman god of fertility and war
Jupiter—The supreme Roman god
Saturn—A very old Roman god of agriculture, 
father of Jupiter
Uranus—A very ancient Greek deity, husband 
of Gaia
Neptune—An ancient Roman sea god
Pluto (no longer considered a planet)—A ritual 
title for Hades, Greek god of the Under-
world and Roman god Dis
Many of the moons of these planets were discov-
ered since about a.d. 1500. They, too, were given 
mythological names, most of them from the Greek 
stories. Some of Jupiter’s 16 moons are Ganymede, 
Europa, Io, and Callisto. Some of Saturn’s 20 
moons are Tethys, Prometheus, Pandora, and 
Atlas. Neptune’s moons, too, have been named 
after beings from Greek mythology. Triton is the 
largest, discovered soon after the planet in 1846. 
Most of the moons were discovered in 1989, but also 
received Greek names, including Proteus, Galatea 
and Thalassa.
The first known asteroid, Ceres, named after a 
Roman goddess, was discovered in 1801. Since then, 
many asteroids have received mythological names. 
Juno, Vesta, and Icarus, as well as Eros, the first 
asteroid to be orbited by a humanmade probe, are 
also named after Greek and Roman gods and god-
desses.
Sophocles  (496–406 b.c.)  Along with Aeschy-
lus and Euripides, one of the great tragic poets of 
ancient Greece. Not much is known about his life. 
Sophocles was born at Colonus, near Athens. He 
died at the age of 90, having written more than 100 
plays, only seven of which survive. These include 
Ajax, Antigone, Oedipus, and Electra, all of which are 
concerned with Greek mythology and are important 
sources of our knowledge of that subject. Surviving 
scraps of evidence from the fifth century b.c. show 
that Sophocles was an actor and a dancer. Drama 
took a great stride forward when he increased the 
number of actors from two to three, and made the 
chorus a more integral part of the play. Sophocles 
was active as an Athenian citizen, serving in the army, 
in the treasury, and as a priest. He seems to have 
possessed serenity and he lived a long life.
Sparta  (Lacedaemon)  Greek  City and capital 
of Laconia in the southern Peloponnesus. The 
ancient Spartans were famous for their cruelty to 
slaves and for their rigorous military training.
134  Sol

Sphinx  Greek  A monster, half woman, half beast, 
the offspring of Echidna and Orthos. She lived near 
Thebes and was supposed to set impossible riddles, 
one of which went something like this:
What goes on four feet, on two feet, and three, 
But the more feet it goes on, the weaker it be?  
The answer is a human being, who as an infant 
crawls on all fours, as an adult walks on two feet, and 
in old age supports both legs with a walking stick. 
It is said that Oedipus solved this riddle and thus 
delivered the Thebans from the curse of the Sphinx.
The Greek Sphinx has nothing to do with the 
Egyptian Sphinx, except that both creatures were half 
beast, half human.
Stata Mater  (Statua Mater; Statis Mater) 
Roman  A goddess called upon to help protect 
against fire. Specifically, people placed a statue to this 
lesser goddess in the Roman Forum, located between 
the Palatine and Capitoline hills, and a central area in 
the ancient city. Here the goddess could protect the 
city from the threat of fire and other damage at night. 
Stata Mater also guarded a city fire that burned there 
on the community hearth. 
Stata Mater was closely associated with Vulcan, 
Roman god of fire and blacksmiths, and Vesta, god-
dess of the home and the household hearth.
State Gods  Roman  As the city of Rome grew 
into a regional power and then into the center of 
a vast empire, rulers and members of the Senate 
brought into the culture gods and goddesses to pro-
tect society. Often these deities had been honored and 
worshipped first in the home, but rulers saw for them 
roles they could play in society. Many of these deities 
were originally influential in the cultures of Central 
Italy, such as Latium and Etruria. By broadening 
the scope of the deities’s influence from the family to 
society, the rulers, and eventually the citizens, believed 
they would be protected in all walks of life.
These state gods included the major pantheon of 
Roman gods. They also included lesser known gods 
and goddesses who influenced a citizen’s responsibil-
ity to the state or government, to Rome’s ability in 
warfare and success at conquering enemies, and to 
the physical city itself.
First among the gods and goddess who protected 
all of Rome and its power was Quirinus, who repre-
sented the good citizen and a person’s responsibility 
to society. The goddess Pietas, whose name means 
devotion, represented duty to the family and to the 
state of Rome. Fides was the goddess who helped 
citizens remain trustworthy and faithful to Rome. 
Securitas was the goddess who, as her name suggests, 
protected the state. Eventually, the people of Rome 
adopted a goddess named Roma who represented the 
very essence of Rome itself.
Some divine beings watched over the physical 
aspects of life in Rome. Cloacina, for example, pro-
tected the great sewers of Rome, and Stata Mater 
protected the city from fire. The goddess Vesta 
watched over communal hearths in cities across the 
Roman Empire and kept their fires burning, and 
Janus protected the gates of cities across the empire.
Mars was the greatest of the war gods by the 
time of the Roman Empire, which began in the 
first century b.c. He was supported in his work by 
The marble statue known as the Sphinx of Naxos, 
which dates back to 560 B.C., was a gift from the 
island nation to the temple at Delphi in Greece. 
The half woman/half lion stands on the top of a col-
umn and now fills a room in the Delphi Museum in 
Greece.  (Photo by Fingalo. Used under a Creative Com-
mons License.)
State Gods  135

a retinue of goddesses, who were themselves called 
upon by Roman soldiers of all ranks for protection 
and success. Bellona, a frequent companion of Mars, 
brought a warlike spirit and enthusiasm to hearts 
of soldiers. Virtus gave soldiers courage and skill. 
To Lua and Nerio soldiers dedicated the weapons 
captured from their enemy, often burning those 
weapons as a sign to the goddesses that the soldiers 
appreciated their help and desired more help as they 
continued their conquests. The goddess Victoria, 
who may also have been called by the name Vica 
Pota, represented victory over the enemy.
In commerce as well as in patriotism and warfare, 
Romans had special gods that they called upon for 
help. This aspect of their public lives was influenced 
by their principle gods and gods of specific tasks. 
Mercury oversaw merchants, and Minerva was the 
patroness of craftsmen and manufacturers. The god-
dess Felicitas brought success to all in business, and 
the Dei Lucrii, a group of early gods, ensured profit 
and good trade. Aequitas helped merchants to be 
honest and fair in their dealings with customers. 
See also agricultural gods; household gods; 
indigetes; personal gods.
Stheno  (Strong)  Greek  One of the three Gor-
gons, female monsters; daughter of Ceto, an ancient 
sea goddess, and Phorcys; her sisters were Euryale 
and Medusa. Stheno and Euryale were immortal, 
while their sister, Medusa, was mortal. 
The hero Perseus was sent by Polydectes to 
retrieve the head of a Gorgon. Of course, he chose 
Medusa because she was mortal. Her sisters shared 
with Medusa the power to turn people to stone when 
the mortals looked into the Gorgon’s eyes. The sis-
ters chased Perseus after his theft of Medusa’s head, 
raking the air with their great claws.
Styx  Greek  One of the eldest Oceanids, or water 
Nymphs, of which there were thousands, all daughters 
of the Titans Oceanus and Tethys. Styx, like many 
of the oldest Oceanids, was often counted among the 
Titans. She guarded the river in the Underworld (1) 
that carried her name, Styx.
The god Pallas fell in love with Styx and together 
they had four children: Zelus (Zeal), Nike (Victory), 
Cratus (Strength), and Bia (Violence). An ardent 
follower of Zeus, the great Olympian god, in his 
battle with the Titans, Styx persuaded her children to 
fight with the Olympians in the battle against their 
father and the rest of the Titans. Zeus rewarded her 
by granting all of the oaths made in her name.
Styx, River  Greek  The principle river, or sys-
tem of rivers, in Hades, the Greek Underworld (1); 
named for the goddess who carried the same name, 
Styx. The river formed the boundary between Earth 
and the land of the dead. 
The Olympian Gods made oaths to the waters of 
the Styx River. Whenever the gods wanted to make 
a strenuous, binding oath, they sent the goddess Iris 
to the Styx and Iris brought back a sacred cup of the 
river’s water. The god would make the oath then 
drink the water. If the god or goddess broke that oath, 
he or she would fall into a deep sleep or lose his or 
her voice, for nine years. Sources very on the details 
of the penalty for breaking the oath.
The River Styx contained magical powers, good 
and bad. It was the river in which the goddess Thetis 
dipped her infant son Achilles in an effort to make 
him invulnerable to all weapons, though she missed 
his heel and it was there that an arrow later struck 
and killed the great Trojan hero. The waters of the 
Styx corroded gold and, when sprinkled on the island 
of Rhodes, turned Rhodes barren.
Summanus  Roman  God of the night; specifi-
cally, the god who sent thunder and lightning during 
the night, as opposed to Jupiter, who sent these 
forces of nature during the day. Perhaps one of the 
many gods of the dead. Summanus was most likely 
a god of the Sabines who was later brought into the 
religions of the people of Rome. 
A temple on the Aventine Hill, or perhaps in 
the Circus Maximus, was dedicated to him and his 
feast day was June 20. Little is known of Summanus, 
and some modern scholars believe he was merely a 
representation of Jupiter.
Syrinx  Greek  A Nymph, daughter of Ladon. 
When she was being pursued by Pan, Syrinx called 
upon her father for help. He turned her into a reed. 
Pan consoled himself by fashioning the syrinx reeds 
into a seven-reed pipe. The syrinx, or panpipes, is an 
instrument still played by shepherds in Greece.
136  Stheno

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
137
Talus  (Talos)  Greek  The nephew and appren-
tice of the great inventor Daedalus. Talus, who is 
said to have invented the saw and also the compass, 
incurred the jealousy of Daedalus, who murdered him. 
Some stories say that Daedalus threw the boy from the 
top of the Acropolis and that the gods changed Talus 
into a partridge (“perdix”). Perdix was a nickname for 
Talus or his mother, Polycaste, or for both.
Tantalus  Greek  A king of Lydia in Asia Minor; 
father of Pelops and Niobe. Tantalus stole food from 
the gods and served it to mortals. He even attempted to 
serve up his son, Pelops, in a stew at a banquet for the 
gods but the gods rescued Pelops. Tantalus was pun-
ished for his misdeeds by the downfall of his kingdom 
and eternal hunger and thirst. It is said that he stands in 
a pool of water, but whenever he bends down to drink, 
the water recedes, and that over his head hang branches 
laden with fruit, but they are just out of reach.
Tartarus  Greek  A realm of eternal darkness, 
the deepest, most terrible part of the underworld, 
the opposite of the dome of the sky. Tartarus was even 
deeper below the Earth than Hades, farther below 
Hades than the Earth was below the sky, a realm of 
darkness and death. The Olympian gods exiled the 
Titans to Tartarus after the great war between the 
two generations of gods. 
The Olympians sent other supernatural beings 
there as well, such as the Cyclopes. Humans were 
also sent there for punishment, including Tantalus, 
Sisyphus, and the 50 daughters of Danaus, known as 
the Danaides. Some poets said that evil men who had 
nothing to do with the gods and their stories were 
also punished in Tartarus. In later stories, the realm 
was more closely associated with Hades.
Taygete  Greek  A nymph, born on Mount Cyl-
lene, one of the Pleiades, who served the goddess 
Artemis; daughter of Atlas and Pleione, who was a 
nymph and one of the Oceanids. 
Taygete was, like other nymphs, coveted by the 
great god Zeus. She refused his advances and, afraid 
of the god, begged Artemis to help, and the goddess 
changed her into a doe. In that form, Zeus made love 
to Taygete. Back in human form, Taygete gave birth 
to Lacedaemon, who became the founder of Sparta, 
a prominent city in ancient Greece.
Telamon  (Telemon)  Greek  Son of King Aecus 
of Aegina; brother of Peleus; father, with Hesione, 
of Teucer, the great archer.
Telamon and Peleus killed their half-brother, Pho-
cus. After the murder, Telamon fled the country. He 
lived a heroic life, taking part in the Calydonian Boar 
Hunt, sailing with the Argonauts, and accompanying 
Heracles on his expedition against Laomedon of Troy.
Telegonus  Greek  In some accounts, the son of 
hero Odysseus and the witch Circe. Circe sent her son 
to find Odysseus in his kingdom of Ithaca. Telegonus 
killed his father (the two were unknown to each other) 
with a poisoned spear given to him by Circe. Later 
Telegonus married Penelope, the widow of Odysseus.
Telemachus  Greek  Son of Odysseus and 
Penelope. As an infant, Telemachus was placed in 
the path of his father’s plow as a test of the father’s 
pretended madness. When the Trojan War ended, 
Telemachus searched unsuccessfully for his father, 
returned to Ithaca, and recognized Odysseus; together 
he and Odysseus slew all the would-be usurpers to 
the throne who had been imposing upon Penelope 
to choose a husband from among them. (See Odysseus 
Returns to Ithaca, under Odyssey.)
Telephus  Greek  The son of Heracles and 
Auge, a Tegean princess. Telephus became the king 
T
8

of Mysia, in Asia Minor, where the Greeks landed 
on their way to Troy. The Greek hero Achilles 
wounded Telephus in an ensuing scuffle. He was told 
by an Oracle that his wound could be cured only by 
the one who had inflicted it. Telephus went to the 
Greek camp and sought out Achilles. Since another 
oracle had told Achilles that only Telephus could 
show him the way to Troy, Achilles obligingly scraped 
some rust from his spear into the wound of Telephus, 
curing him. Telephus showed the Greeks the way to 
Troy, where they were victorious.
Tellus  (Terra Mater)  Roman  A goddess of 
fecundity, or the ability to produce young. People 
sought her protection and help even before they 
developed formalized religion in Italy. Many scholars 
see Tellus as an equivalent of the Greek Gaia, the 
Earth Mother. Tellus means “Earth,” as the name 
of the third planet from the Sun, though the word 
“Terra” in her alternative name refers to soil or land. 
Tellus was also the divinity who watched over wed-
ding ceremonies and whose goodwill couples sought 
before their marriages.
On April 15, people gathered to sacrifice a preg-
nant cow to Tellus. They cut the unborn calf from its 
mother and burned it, too. In this ceremony, people 
sought protection of their own fertility.
Romans seem to have worshiped Tellus in con-
junction with the goddesses Ceres and Flora, both 
Roman goddesses of fertility, though Tellus is more 
ancient. All three were feared as goddesses of the 
dead, Tellus as their queen. This image seems to have 
evolved from people’s understanding that death was 
the opposite of birth and the belief the goddess of 
one function must have an influence over the other. 
On December 13, people honored Tellus, Ceres, and 
Flora together.
Tempe  Greek  A valley in Thessaly, famous for its 
beautiful scenery. There are many references to the 
Vale of Tempe in Greek mythology. It was the scene 
of Apollo’s purification after the slaying of Python. 
It was the scene of the metamorphosis of Daphne 
(from Nymph pursued by Apollo into laurel tree). It 
was also where Cycnus, son of Ares, killed unwary 
travelers and used their bones to build a temple to 
his father.
Terminus  Roman  God of boundaries and fron-
tiers. Specifically, Terminus was the god of the sacred 
boundaries of pieces of land that were dedicated to 
Jupiter, the supreme god in Roman mythology. In 
Latin, “terminus” means boundary.
In daily life, Terminus protected the good rela-
tionship between owners of neighboring proper-
ties. He supported and encouraged harmony among 
neighbors, a task that was very important in an 
agrarian or farming culture such as ancient Rome.
New neighbors would dig a hole at the boundary 
of their properties and consecrate that hole with 
wine, offerings, and the blood of a sacrificial animal. 
They then took a large stone, coated it in oil, added 
garlands of plants to it, and buried it in the hole. Each 
year after that first ceremony, the neighbors met at 
the stone and offered a sacrifice to Terminus to seek 
his help in protecting their land.
Terminus also guarded boundaries in time and 
marked the end of events as well as pieces of property. 
His festival in the Roman calendar of festivals, Termi-
nalia, on February 23, marked the end of the year.
Tethys  Greek  The daughter of two Titans, 
Uranus and Gaia; sister-wife of Oceanus. With him 
she bore the Oceanids (sea Nymphs). She was also 
the mother of Styx, and, some say, the mentor of the 
goddess Hera.
Teucer  Greek  The son of Telamon and Hes-
ione; half-brother of the great Ajax (1). He was the 
best archer among the Greeks and played an impor-
tant part in the Trojan War, fighting alongside Ajax. 
Teucer founded the town of Salamis in Cyprus.
Thalassa  Greek  An ancient sea goddess; daugh-
ter of Ether, the upper air, and Hemera, day. With 
Pontus, an ancient god of the sea, Thalassa was the 
mother of the fish and animals of the sea.
Thalassa is featured in the stories of classical 
Greek writers as the form of a woman, made of water. 
She rises out of the sea and talks with humans who 
become stranded on her shores. Some say Thalassa 
was the mother of Aphrodite, for, as the sea, Thal-
assa carried the goddess out of the ocean after she had 
formed from the dismembered parts of Uranus.
Thanatos  (Death)  Greek  The personification 
of death (Mors in Latin). The son of Nyx (Night), 
with no father (according to Hesiod); twin brother 
of Hypnos (Sleep). The only mortal who managed to 
outwit Thanatos (at least for a while) was Sisyphus.
Thaumus  (Wonder)  Greek  An ancient sea god, 
ranked among the second-generation of Titans; son 
138  Tellus

of Gaia and Pontus; brother of Ceto, Phorcys, 
Nereus, and Eurybia.
Few stories are told of this god. He is known most 
for being the father, with the Oceanid Electra (3), 
of Iris, the goddess of rainbows, and of the strong 
storm winds known as the Harpies.
Thebes  Greek  A city of ancient Greece, in Boeo-
tia, reputedly founded by Cadmus. Thebes was also 
associated with other Greek myths, such as those 
of Oedipus, the Seven Against Thebes, and the 
Epigoni.
Theia  (Radiant)  Greek  A first-generation Titan 
goddess of sight and the shining light of the blue 
sky; daughter of Gaia and Uranus; mother, with 
Hyperion, of the gods who brought light to humans: 
Helios (Sun), Selene (Moon), and Eos (Dawn). She 
was known also as the female counterpart of Ether, 
the upper air.
Theia’s association with the concept of brilliant 
light made her also the goddess of gems and gold, 
because she gave to them their great value. She had 
the ability to see into the future. The people of Thes-
saly built a temple in her name.
Themis  Greek  A Titan, daughter of Gaia and 
Uranus; one of the many loves of Zeus. Mother of 
the Horae (Seasons) the Moirae (Fates), Astraea, 
and, some say, of Prometheus. Themis presided over 
law and order, justice, hospitality, and prophecy. One 
legend has it that Themis communicated with the 
Oracle at Delphi before Delphi became the favored 
shrine of the god Apollo. Another says that she 
appeared before Deucalion and told him to repeople 
the Earth after the deluge.
Theseus  Greek  Chief hero of Athens, the major 
city of Attica. Son of Aegeus, king of Athens, and 
Aethra, daughter of King Pittheus of Troezen. The-
seus was brought up under the protection of Pittheus 
and Aethra until he was 16. Then he set off to Athens 
to claim his birthright. On his way and afterward, he 
had countless adventures, of which the most famous 
was the slaying of the Minotaur. Upon the death of 
Aegeus, Theseus became king of Athens and was the 
hero of many battles. At the end, he retired to Skyros, 
an island in the Aegean, where he was murdered by 
Lycomedes.
Scholars believe that the character of Theseus 
may have been based on a real person, a hero of 
ancient times, similar in many ways to the demigod 
Heracles. Mythologists may have adapted the char-
acter of Theseus to make him a suitable hero for their 
city of Athens.
Some Adventures of Theseus  Theseus, the 
great hero of ancient Athens, had countless adven-
tures. Among them were some showing that he let 
the punishment fit the crime.
Periphetes was crippled and used a huge bronze 
club to kill wayfarers. Theseus, on his way to Athens, 
killed Periphetes with the club, which he carried ever 
afterward as one of his weapons.
Sinis, “The Pinebender,” was so strong and mon-
strously cruel that he bent young pine trees down to 
the ground, then lashed his victim, a hapless traveler, 
to the trees so that the victim would be killed by hav-
ing his limbs torn apart after Sinis let the trees loose. 
Theseus inflicted the same punishment on Sinis.
Procrustes, also called Polypemon, was the father of 
Sinis. He was another scourge of travelers. He would 
invite them into his house, where he had an iron bed. If 
the victim did not fit the bed, Procrustes would either 
chop off the victim’s overhanging parts or stretch his 
limbs to fit the bed. Theseus forced Procrustes to lie in 
his own bed, where Theseus slew the villain. The word 
procrustean has come to denote any cruel attempt to 
reduce people or ideas to fit one arbitrary standard.
In Eleusis, a city northwest of Athens, Theseus 
defeated the king in a wrestling match. Theseus is 
said to have perfected the art of wrestling. Eleusis 
had no king from that day on and came under the 
leadership of Athens.
Theseus and Aegeus  Theseus, the great hero of 
Athens, was the son of King Aegeus, king of Athens. 
His mother was Princess Aethra, the daughter of 
King Pittheus of Troezen. Before he left Troezen, 
Aegeus lifted a heavy rock and hid his sword and 
sandals beneath it. He instructed Aethra to bring his 
son to this rock when he became a young man and to 
remove the sword and sandals. If Theseus succeeded 
in doing this, he was to bring the items to Athens to 
claim his birthright from his father, the king.
Aethra took Theseus, when he was 16, to the rock, 
which the lad lifted easily, and sent him on his way 
to Athens.
Theseus had many adventures on his journey and 
entered Athens as a hero. Warmly welcomed by his 
father, Theseus then went on to his greatest adven-
ture, the slaying of the Minotaur, the dreaded bull-
monster of King Minos of Crete. Every year, Minos 
demanded seven men and seven maids from Athens 
to be sacrificed to the Minotaur, thus bringing great 
sorrow to the people of that city. Theseus determined 
Theseus  139

to put an end to this tragedy. In spite of his father’s 
protests, he went aboard the fateful ship that took the 
victims to Crete. Theseus promised Aegeus that if he 
succeeded in killing the monster, he would bring the 
ship back flying white sails in place of the black sails 
it left with. Theseus did indeed defeat the beast, but 
he forgot to hoist the white sails. Aegeus, watching 
anxiously from the top of a cliff, saw the black sails 
and cast himself into the sea in despair. That sea—the 
Aegean—today bears his name.
Theseus, Ariadne, and the Minotaur  The 
slaying of the Minotaur was Theseus’s greatest and 
most famous deed, in which he was helped by 
Ariadne, daughter of King Minos of Crete. Minos 
demanded a yearly tribute from Athens because of 
the murder of his son, Androgeus, by the Athenians. 
Each year, seven Athenian men and seven maidens 
were sent to Crete to feed the Minotaur.
Theseus determined to end the yearly tragedy 
suffered by the Athenians. He boarded the ship 
that bore the victims to Crete. When she saw him, 
Ariadne fell in love with the hero. She gave him a ball 
of string that would help him find his way out of the 
labyrinth where the bull lived. Theseus unwound 
the string as he followed the tortuous mazes that led 
him to the Minotaur. He slew the bull after a fero-
cious battle and then made his way triumphantly back 
to the entrance of the labyrinthine palace. When he 
went back to Athens, Theseus took the lovely Ariadne 
with him, but he abandoned her on the island of 
Naxos and went on his way.
Theseus and Medea  When Theseus was a 
young man, he set forth to claim his birthright from 
Aegeus. Aegeus had married the sorceress Medea, 
who knew at once that Theseus was the king’s son. 
She tried to poison the lad; just in time, Theseus 
revealed the sacred sword that his father had left 
behind in Troezen. Aegeus dashed the poisoned cup 
from the boy’s hand and embraced his son. Medea 
fled from Athens with her son, Medus.
Theseus and Pirithous  Theseus was also famous 
for having a deep and enduring friendship with 
Pirithoüs, king of the Lapiths, a mythical people of 
Thessaly. The friendship originated when Pirithoüs 
mischievously stole some of Theseus’s cattle. Theseus 
went in pursuit, but the two young men were so filled 
with admiration for each other that they forgot their 
quarrel and swore eternal brotherhood. The young 
heroes had many adventures together.
In a fight that started at the wedding feast of Pir-
ithoüs and Hippodameia, Theseus helped his friend 
to drive the Centaurs, wild creatures that were half 
human, half horse, out of Thessaly.
Pirithoüs later helped Theseus carry off Helen. 
In return, Theseus descended to the Underworld 
(1) to help his friend in his attempt to abduct Perse-
phone, reluctant bride of Hades. Hades caught the 
two friends and they had to remain in the underworld 
until the hero Heracles came to attempt their rescue. 
Theseus was freed, but Pirithoüs had to remain a 
captive for eternity.
Theseus and the Amazons  Theseus, great hero 
of Athens, accompanied the demigod Heracles on his 
ninth labor, which was to capture the girdle of Hip-
polyta, queen of the Amazons. Heracles captured the 
girdle, whereupon Hippolyta made war on Athens. 
Theseus vanquished Hippolyta and made her his 
wife. She bore him a son, Hippolytus.
After the death of Hippolyta, Theseus married 
Phaedra, with disastrous consequences. Phaedra fell 
in love with her young stepson, Hippolytus, and killed 
herself in despair, whereupon Theseus invoked the help 
of the sea god, Poseidon, in causing his son’s death.
The Death of Theseus  Theseus led a life full of 
triumphant adventures. His most famous exploit was 
the killing of the dreaded Minotaur. But his end was 
a sad one. He lost both his wife, Phaedra, and his son, 
Hippolytus, and finally was driven out of Athens by 
Menesthius, of the ancient line of Erechtheus.
Theseus set sail for Crete, now ruled by Phaedra’s 
brother, Deucalion, who had promised him refuge. 
Theseus’s ship was blown off course and he took 
shelter on the island of Skyros, where he had a small 
estate. King Lycomedes of Skyros seemed to welcome 
the sad and aging king, but he treacherously pushed 
Theseus off a cliff. Thus the great Theseus died. Later 
his bones were taken to Athens and enshrined there.
Thessaly  Greek  The largest division of Greece, 
located in the eastern mainland, encircled by moun-
tains except for the valley of Tempe in the northeast 
corner. Thessaly’s mythical inhabitants were the 
Lapiths, whose king, Ixion, had fathered the Cen-
taurs, creatures that were half human and half horse. 
It was also the home of the mythical Myrmidons, 
created by Zeus to increase Thessaly’s population.
Thetis  Greek  One of the nereids, sea nymph 
daughters of Nereus; wife of Peleus; mother of Achil-
les. Both Zeus and Poseidon had pursued Thetis, but 
on being told by the seeress Themis that a son borne by 
Thetis would overthrow the Olympian gods, Zeus per-
suaded Thetis to marry Peleus. When her son, Achilles, 
140  Thessaly

was born, Thetis wanted to make him invulnerable. 
She dipped the baby into the river Styx, holding him 
by one heel. Since that heel did not touch the magical 
water, it remained vulnerable. It was this heel that later 
caused Achilles’ death in the Trojan War.
Thyestes  Greek  Son of Pelops and Hippoda-
meia; brother of Atreus; father of Aegisthus by his 
own daughter, Pelopia.
Thyestes and Atreus, rivals since childhood, were 
the victims of the curse made upon their house by 
the actions of their father, Pelops. (See also under 
Atreus and Thyestes.)
Thyestes ruled for a short time as king of Mycenae, 
one of the most important cities of ancient Greece, 
with Aegisthus as his heir, but he was eventually driven 
out by Agamemnon and Aegisthus was deposed.
Tiberinus  Roman  The god of the river Tiber, 
upon which the city of Rome was founded. The river 
was vital to the fortunes of Rome. Numerous festivals 
were held in honor of its god. Some say that Rhea 
Silvia, the mother of the twins Romulus and Remus, 
was thrown into the river and became its spouse. In 
Virgil’s Aeneid, Tiberinus visits Aeneas, who is asleep 
on the banks of the river, and tells him in a dream that 
his destiny is to found a city on the banks of the river.
Tiresias  Greek  The blind seer of Thebes, a figure 
who appears several times in Greek mythology.
According to some legends, Athene struck Tire-
sias blind because he saw her bathing. Another legend 
says that it was Hera who struck Tiresias blind.
Some scholars think that the figure of Tiresias as a 
wise man is a mythological embodiment of the person 
who is out of the ordinary (blind, lame, or otherwise 
afflicted), endowed with special gifts such as those of 
Tiresias and Hephaestus, the lame smith-god.
Tiryns  Greek  A town in the Argos region of 
the northern Peloponnesus. Proetus, brother of 
Acrisius, founded the city and built massive walls with 
the help of the Cyclopes.
Titan  Greek  The race of Greek gods that pre-
ceded and gave birth to the Olympian gods; the 
children of Gaia (Earth) and Uranus (Heaven), who 
were the first gods of Greek mythology. According 
to most Greek writers, there were 12 Titans, six male 
and six female. The sons were Oceanus, Hyperion, 
Coeus, Cronus, Iapetus, and Crius. The daughters 
were Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Rhea, Tethys, Theia, and 
Themis.
Some scholars, however, rank Gaia’s children by the 
ancient sea god Pontus among the Titans. They were 
Ceto, Phorcys, Thaumas, Eurybia, and Nereus.
The children of Gaia’s children were also known 
as Titans, or second-generation Titans. Hyperion had 
three children, Eos, Helios and Selene. Coeus had two 
daughters, Leto and Asteria. Iapetus had four sons, 
Atlas, Prometheus, Epimetheus, and Menoetius. 
Crius three children, Astraeus, Pallas, and Perses.
Also commonly counted among the Titans were 
the eldest of the Oceanids, a group of water Nymphs, 
daughters of Oceanus and Tethys. They were Styx, 
Dione, Neda, Metis, Clymene, Eurynome, Doris, 
Electra (3), and Pleione.
The children of Cronus and Rhea became the first 
and perhaps most prominent Olympian Gods. They 
were Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, Hera, Demeter, and 
Hestia.
The Titans were the primary gods of Greece 
during the Golden Age, before the rise of the Hel-
lenes as the dominant culture. The Hellenes brought 
their Olympian gods to the peninsula and supplanted 
the gods of earlier peoples. In the mythology, of the 
Hellenes, Zeus led the battle of the generations and 
defeated the Titans, sending most of them to Tarta-
rus, the deepest pit of the underworld.
Tithonus  Greek  The son of Laomedon, king 
of Troy, and brother of Priam. Eos, goddess of the 
dawn, loved him. She bore him a son, Memnon, one 
of the heroes of the Trojan War. Eos begged Zeus to 
make her husband immortal. Zeus granted her wish 
and Tithonus lived for a very long time. However, 
eternal youth was not given to him, and the young 
man became a shriveled old thing with little more 
than a strident voice. At last the gods took pity on 
him and turned him into a cicada.
Triptolemus  Greek  Son of Celeus and Meta-
neira, brother of Demophon. A favorite of the goddess 
Demeter, Triptolemus received from her the secrets 
of corn and of agriculture. It is said that he invented 
the plow and the science of agriculture and was thus a 
pioneer of civilization. He was a central figure in the 
Eleusinian Mysteries.
Triton  Greek  A water god; the son of Poseidon 
and Amphitrite. He was often represented as a mer-
man, with the head and body of a man and a fishtail 
instead of legs.
Triton  141

It is said that he blew on a conch shell trumpet to 
calm the waves for Poseidon. Sometimes Poseidon is 
depicted as being escorted by many Tritons.
Triton was a benevolent, helpful deity. During the 
Olympian war with the Titans, Triton used his conch 
shell to terrify the giants. In Homer’s Odyssey, Triton 
saved the Argonauts from a storm and helped them 
find the Mediterranean Sea.
In astronomy, Triton is one of the moons of the 
planet Neptune.
Trojan War  Greek  A legendary war fought 
between Achaean (Greek) invaders and the defenders 
of Troy, a seaport at the northwestern tip of Asia 
Minor, around 1200–1300 b.c. (See below for an 
account of recent archaeological discoveries that 
make it certain that such a war, or series of wars, took 
place.) The events of this war and the return to their 
homes of some of the Greek generals make up a body 
of myth that was recounted over the centuries and 
eventually reshaped and written down by the great 
poet Homer in two epics: the Iliad, which describes 
the end of the Trojan War, and the Odyssey, the 
journeys of one of the Greek heroes, Odysseus.
The story of the 10-year struggle between the 
Greeks and Trojans is complex. The cause of the 
war, according to Greek mythology, was said to be a 
beauty contest between three goddesses. The silver-
footed sea Nymph, Thetis, and the king of Aegina, 
Peleus, neglected to invite Eris, goddess of strife, to 
their wedding. In her anger, Eris threw “the apple of 
discord” into the midst of the wedding throng. The 
apple was inscribed “To the Fairest.”
Three goddesses immediately claimed the apple: 
Hera, the chief goddess and wife of Zeus; Athene, 
goddess of war; and Aphrodite, goddess of love and 
beauty. When asked to make a choice among the 
three goddesses, Zeus wisely declined and gave the 
task to a young Trojan prince, Paris, who was said to 
be exceedingly handsome.
The three goddesses wooed young Paris, tempt-
ing him with bribes. Paris succumbed to the offer of 
Aphrodite, who promised him the love of the most 
beautiful woman in the world in return for the apple.
At that time, the most beautiful woman in the 
world was Helen, the young queen of King Menel-
aus of Sparta. Paris went to the court of Menelaus, 
won Helen, and carried her away to Troy.
King Menelaus immediately rallied around him 
all the former lovelorn suitors of Helen, who had 
promised to fight anyone who might try to steal 
Helen away from Greece. Menelaus chose his 
brother, Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, as leader of 
the army. Agamemnon soon had a fleet of 1,000 ships 
ready to sail for Troy. (In later literature, Helen’s face 
was described as “the face that launched a thousand 
ships.”) Among the first victims of the war was one 
of Agamemnon’s daughters, Iphigenia, sacrificed in 
order to gain fair winds to Troy.
Achilles was the principal hero of the Greeks 
who took part in the Trojan War. His contingent 
numbered about 50 ships and he led his own army, 
unlike the other Greeks who acknowledged the 
leadership of Agamemnon and his huge fleet. Achilles 
captured a number of towns on the coast near Troy. 
Among his prizes was the beautiful slave girl Briseis. 
Agamemnon stole Briseis away from Achilles. Furi-
ous, Achilles withdrew from the war, causing a serious 
setback to the Greeks. The quarrel between Achilles 
and Agamemnon was one of the starting points of the 
events of the latter part of the Trojan War described 
by Homer in the Iliad. Later, Achilles would rejoin the 
war and help bring the Greeks to victory, this time 
under the leadership of his dear friend Patroclus. 
Hector killed Patroclus. Achilles then slew Hector 
and dragged his dead body around the ruins of Troy.
Led by the hero Hector, the Trojans were suc-
cessful in many major engagements, especially when 
Achilles temporarily left the conflict after the quarrel 
with Agamemnon. Eventually, the Trojans lost the 
war when the Greek hero Odysseus had the cunning 
idea of hiding troops within a huge wooden horse 
delivered as a gift within the walls of Troy. The 
selected troops broke out of their hiding place in the 
dead of night, slew the Trojans, and looted and set 
fire to their city.
The gods themselves took sides in the Trojan War 
and played an active part in the hostilities. Apollo 
and the war god Ares supported the Trojans, as did 
Aphrodite, the champion of Paris. Athene, Hera, and 
Poseidon backed the Greeks, and Hephaestus, the 
smith-god, made armor for Achilles.
The Trojan War was the last great communal 
enterprise of the Greek heroes. Although it succeeded 
in its aim to rescue Helen, the difficulties were great 
and long, and an air of failure and defeat seemed to 
hang over the enterprise. Few of the heroes returned 
to find their homes secure.
The Trojan War: Fact or Fiction?  The Trojan 
War of Greek mythology lasted for 10 years, ending 
in the sack of Troy and a victory for the Greeks.
Scholars now think that such a war did indeed take 
place, around 1200–1300 b.c. Recent archaeological 
finds confirm that there was a city of Troy. Extensive 
142  Trojan war

Bronze Age burial grounds and many crematory urns, 
perhaps some of slain heroes, have been excavated. 
In addition, caches of food have been found buried 
beneath the walls of the city, very likely by people from 
the countryside who were taking refuge within the city 
walls during a lengthy siege by marauding tribes.
It seems certain that there were numerous trade 
routes common to the Greeks and the Trojans. Troy, 
at the northwestern tip of Asia Minor, controlled the 
seaway between the Aegean and the Black seas, through 
the narrow inlet called, in ancient times, the Helles-
pont, now known as the Dardanelles. This strait led 
to the Sea of Marmara, which in turn led to the Black 
Sea via the passageway known as the Bosporus.
Once Troy had fallen, the Greeks were able to 
establish colonies along the coast of Asia Minor. They 
dealt in gold, silver, iron, cinnabar, timber, linen, hemp, 
dried fish, oil, and Chinese jade. In fact, the return 
of Helen to the Greeks may have symbolized the 
restoration of Greek rights to enter the Hellespont. 
The Iliad may be an assemblage of folk memories of 
a series of raids by the Greeks against the shores of 
Anatolia (Asia Minor)—and, in particular, Troy, the 
guardian of the Dardanelles—to ensure vital passage 
to the Black Sea and its valuable trade.
The Wooden Horse of Troy  The Trojan War 
came to an end when the Greek hero Odysseus had 
the idea of building a huge wooden horse, inside 
which would be hidden hundreds of Greek soldiers. 
The horse was given as a gift to the Trojans and 
dragged within their walls. In the dark of night, the 
Greek soldiers burst forth from their clever hiding 
place, fought the unprepared soldiers and citizens of 
Troy, and destroyed the city, thus winning the war.
Many explanations for the Trojan horse have been 
put forth. The most likely is that it was a battering 
ram, a device used to knock down walls since ancient 
times. The massive walls of Troy, with their sloping 
bases, presented an almost unsolvable problem to 
enemy forces. It seems likely that the Greeks con-
structed a towering “ram” that would be capable of 
attacking the more vulnerable upper structure of the 
walls. The “legs” raised the battering ram up to the 
level of the superstructure. The tool would be moved 
up to the wall on rollers. To the soldiers, the battering 
ram may have looked somewhat like a gigantic horse. 
In the ancient world, it was common for soldiers to 
give animal nicknames to pieces of equipment. For 
example, the Romans called their catapults scorpions. 
The word ram comes from the name for a male sheep 
or goat, which has a solid, sturdy shape.
Troy  Greek  One of the most famous cities in 
Western literature and the site of the 10-year-long 
siege and battle of Troy (see Trojan War). Excava-
tions during the 19th and 20th centuries prove that 
there were no fewer than nine cities built—one after 
and on top of the other—on the mound of Hissarlik, 
a strategic position overlooking the Dardanelles, 
the strait that leads to the Black Sea. The founder 
of Troy was Dardanus, a son of Zeus. Priam, king 
of Troy, was a descendant of Dardanus. Troy com-
manded the trade routes between the Mediterranean 
and the Black Sea. It was, in fact, at the crossroads 
between east and west. In mythology, the Trojan War 
was caused by the abduction of Helen, wife of the 
king of Sparta, by the Trojan prince Paris. Many 
scholars think the abduction was a metaphor for 
the rivalry between the Greeks and Trojans over the 
lucrative trade route to the Black Sea.
The city discovered by the archaeologists was in 
fact only about 200 yards across, more of a citadel 
than a city. Excavations in 1984 and 1985 revealed 
many burial urns. They have also revealed caches of 
food buried beneath the walls of the citadel, perhaps 
the supplies of the people from the neighboring 
countryside who came inside the walls of the citadel 
for refuge from the marauding tribes.
Turnus  Roman  King of the Rutuli people, who 
lived in a region 20 miles southeast of the hills of 
Rome, at the time that Aeneas arrived in Italy after 
the Trojan War; son of Daunus and his wife, the 
Nymph Venilia, and sister of Juturna. 
Turnus was betrothed to Lavinia, daughter of 
Latinus, king of neighboring Latium, but when 
Aeneas arrived on the shores of Italy, he fell in love 
with Lavinia. Facing pressure from Aeneas and his 
army, Latinus and his wife Amata broke their promise 
to Turnus and betrothed their daughter to the Trojan 
hero. This led to a war between the Rutuli king and 
the Trojan hero that involved the great gods who 
watched over Aeneas. 
Near the end of the war, which caused many 
deaths on both sides, Aeneas fought Turnus in one-
to-one combat. The Trojan finally defeated Turnus, 
and was about to spare his life, when Aeneas noticed 
that Turnus was wearing the belt of Pallas, a fallen 
Trojan. In vengeance, Aeneas killed Turnus.
Tyche  Greek  A goddess, the personification of 
plenty, also of chance and fate, both good and bad. Very 
few stories surround Tyche, but she was an important 
Tyche  143

concept and figure in the lives of Greek citizens and, 
later, in the lives of Romans as the goddess Fortuna. 
People recognized the power of good and bad luck in 
their lives and considered Tyche the provider of that 
luck. Her influence was so great that each individual 
had his or her own Tyche. Over time, people believed 
she had power over the fates of entire cities and each 
city had its own Tyche. A wheel symbolized her ever-
changing nature and a balance showed her power to 
weigh the good and bad events in a person’s life.
The Greek poet Hesiod, who wrote in the 800s 
b.c., named her as one of the Oceanids, daughters of 
the sea Titans Oceanus and Tethys.
Typhon  (Typhoeus)  Greek  A hundred-headed 
monster whose parents were Gaia (Earth) and Tarta-
rus. Although it was the largest monster ever born, 
according to Greek mythology, with coiled serpents 
for legs, Zeus defeated the monster and threw it into 
Hades.
Another version of the Typhon myth was that 
Typhon did mighty battle with Zeus, hurling rocks 
and mountains against the thunderbolts of the god 
and eventually capturing Zeus. Typhon cut the sinews 
from the hands and feet of Zeus, thus rendering him 
powerless. He thrust Zeus into a mountain cave, 
and stuffed the precious sinews into a bearskin sack 
or leather bag. Hermes and Pan found Zeus and 
managed to steal back the sinews and restore them to 
Zeus’s appendages.
The struggle between Typhon and Zeus contin-
ued. Delicious food given to Typhon by the Fates 
weakened him. He made a final stand on Mount 
Haemus (Blood Mountain) in Thrace, where Zeus 
injured him so severely that his blood made the 
streams run red, giving the mountain its name. 
Typhon was able to flee to Sicily, but Zeus caught 
up with him and finally crushed him into the Earth 
under a volcano, Mount Etna, which is one of the 
most active volcanoes in the world.
Before he was imprisoned Typhon fathered with 
Echidna a host of monsters, among them Cerberus, 
the Chimera, the Lernaean Hydra, the Nemean 
Lion, Orthos, and the Sphinx.
144  Typhon

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
145
Ulysses  Roman  The Latin spelling of Odysseus, 
the Greek hero whose stories are told by Homer in 
the Odyssey. The Roman spelling was Ulixes.
The Romans and other peoples of central Italy 
apparently had no unique stories to add to the 
legends of this hero. They learned of him from the 
Greek colonists who settled on the southeastern 
shores of the Italian peninsula.
underworld (1)  Greek  The black abyss known 
as Hades and the dwelling place of the dead. The lord 
of the Greek underworld was Hades or, sometimes, 
Pluto. The consort of Hades was Persephone, who 
lived in the underworld for four months of the year. 
(See Demeter and Persephone, under Demeter.)
In Greek mythology, the location of the under-
world changed over time. In ancient times, it was 
supposed to be in “the Far West,” the place that lay 
beyond the sea that encircled the Earth, which then 
was thought to be flat. The Far West was thought to 
be barren and uninhabited. However, as geographic 
knowledge progressed, it became evident that other 
lands lay beyond the ocean and were fruitful and 
peopled. Consequently, the underworld was placed 
under the Earth, a region of dark shadows and 
mystery, where the dead were buried.
Travelers seeking access to the underworld had 
first to cross the Grove of Persephone. At the gate 
to Hades waited the dog Cerberus, who had at 
least three heads, in some accounts as many as 50. A 
monstrous watchdog, Cerberus had a roaring bark to 
terrify all, but he could be appeased by a “sop,” a piece 
of honeyed bread.
Surrounding Hades and leading to its subter-
ranean depths were many rivers: Acheron (River of 
Sadness), Cocytus (River of Lamentation), Lethe 
(River of Oblivion), and Styx (River of Hate).
To cross the Styx, a soul needed to pay old 
Charon, the miserly ferryman. Once in Hades the 
souls of the dead drank from the Lethe to obtain 
forgetfulness of their former lives and thoughts.
The fortunate few who had won the favor of 
the gods went to Elysium, a special section of the 
underworld, or perhaps that magical place called “the 
Far West.” Here the shades, or spirits, of the dead 
lived in great happiness until eternity.
Those who were truly evil were sent to Tartarus, 
the deepest, darkest, vilest section of the underworld.
underworld (2)  Roman  While most strongly 
influenced by Greek mythology, the Roman view of 
an underworld, was, in the earliest ages, simply a 
realm below the Earth, a realm of riches, a place 
where gods and goddesses awaited the spring. 
Dis Pater, originally an Etruscan god of riches, 
became the early Roman god who ruled over the 
underworld. He was the god of the precious gems 
and metals found deep below the surface of the 
Earth. Proserpina, an ancient goddess of fertility 
and of the germination of seeds, was originally asso-
ciated with Dis. Over time, however, the underworld 
became connected with death, not only of people 
but of nature, as winter settled in and people awaited 
spring. Dis Pater and Proserpina emerged from the 
underworld to plant seeds and return life to the 
Earth.
By the middle of the third century b.c., Dis Pater 
and Proserpina had also become the rulers of the realm 
of dead spirits. Together they became an official part 
of the Roman religious ceremonies. Beginning in 249 
b.c., Romans held games known as the Ludi Tarentini 
or Tarentine Games, to recognize, honor, and appease 
these two gods. Much of the mythology of Dis Pater 
and Proserpina had by this time taken on the stories 
of the Greek gods Hades (or Pluto) and Persephone, 
who ruled over a realm also known as Hades.
However, Roman mythology also included spirits 
of the dead who did not appear to inhabit this under-
U
8

world. The Manes, beneficial spirits of the dead, were 
called upon in ceremonies held over graves in Febru-
ary to watch over and protect the living. They were 
in turn ruled over by the goddess Mania, an ancient 
goddess of crossroads. The Lares, household gods, 
were believed to be the spirits of a family’s ancestors 
who watched over the home.
Romans also deified their founders, Aeneas and 
Romulus and Remus, and their emperors, without 
associating them with this underworld.
By the first century b.c., Roman historians and 
poets were describing the underworld as a rugged, 
craggy, gloomy place inhabited by the spirits of the 
night and the souls of the dead. According to Virgil, 
in his masterpiece the Aeneid, the entrance to hell 
was located on the edge of Lake Averna, a lake in the 
center of a dormant volcanic crater near Naples, and 
also near the cave of the Sibyl of Cumae. 
Uranus  (Ouranos; Heaven)  Greek  The per- 
sonification of heaven and the starlit sky. Uranus was 
the son of Gaia (Earth) and with her the father of 
the Titans, the Cyclopes, and the Hecatoncheires. 
Uranus did not care for his offspring and banished 
them to the underworld. Gaia, mourning for her 
children, bade her son Cronus to wound and muti-
late Uranus. This Cronus did, with a flint sickle made 
by Gaia. From the spilled blood of Uranus sprang 
the Furies, the Gigantes (Giants), and the goddess 
Aphrodite. Uranus, defeated and wounded, left the 
Earth to the Titans. Before he died, he prophesied 
that Cronus, in his turn, would be overthrown by 
one of his sons. His prophecy came true when Zeus 
deposed Cronus.
The Greek poet Hesiod tells the story of Uranus.
Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun in the 
solar system. The English astronomer Sir William 
Herschel discovered the gas giant in 1781. Uranus 
was the first planet to receive the name of a Greek 
god. Uranus has five moons, none of which is named 
after a Greek or Roman deity or hero, unlike the 
moons of other planets.
146  Uranus

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
147
Venilia  Roman  A spirit of the sea and wind, 
most likely a Nymph, known for her kindness. Some 
ancient sources identify her as the wife of the god 
Janus. Others say she was the wife of Daunus, an 
early king of the Rutuli, and with him the mother of 
Turnus and Juturna. Venilia’s sister, Amata, was the 
wife of Latinus, an early king of Latium, a kingdom 
in Central Italy near Rome.
Venus  Roman  An ancient goddess originally of 
springtime, crop cultivation, and gardens. By the end 
of the third century b.c., the Romans had given Venus 
the characteristics of the Greek goddess Aphrodite, 
and Venus became the goddess of love and beauty.
The name Venus means desire, charm, and grace 
in Latin, though the name is much older than the 
Roman civilization.
In some accounts, Venus was the daughter of 
Jupiter and Dione, who was a Nymph. Venus became 
the wife of Vulcan and the mother of Cupid. Accord-
ing to the Roman poet Virgil, Venus was also the 
mother of the hero Aeneas. Though scholars believe 
that people in Italy worshiped Venus long before the 
Greek influence arrived, one story says that Aeneas 
V
8
Venus rises from the sea on a shell, the zephyrs blowing her to shore, in the masterpiece of Italian art by San-
dro Botticelli (1445-1510). The painting now hangs in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, Italy. 

brought her cult with him when he arrived there after 
fleeing Troy.
The Romans regarded Venus as one of the founders 
of their people. Julius Caesar, who ruled Rome from 49 
to 44 b.c., and Augustus, who became emperor in 27 
b.c., both considered her their patroness and guardian.
Many artists chose this goddess of beauty as 
their subject. The Venus de Milo, now in the Louvre 
museum in Paris, is one of the most famous statues 
in the world. It was sculpted in the second or first 
century b.c. and was found on the island of Melos in 
a.d. 1820. The 15th-century Italian painter known as 
Botticelli (Alessandro di Mariano Filipepi) portrayed 
her as rising from the sea and standing on a half scal-
lop shell in Birth of Venus, which hangs in the Uffizi 
Gallery in Florence, Italy.
Venus is the name of the second planet from the 
Sun in the solar system. It is the brightest object to 
appear in the night sky, shining as either the morning 
star or the evening star, depending on the season and 
the planet’s position relative to Earth. Early Greeks 
and Romans believed they saw two different planets 
until Pythagoras (c. 500 b.c.), a Greek philosopher 
and mathematician who settled in Italy, demonstrated 
that they were the same object.
Vertumnus  Roman  An ancient god of fertility 
and harvest to the people of Etruria, but a lesser god 
among the Romans; the protector of harvests and 
vegetation. Vertumnus is best known for his ability 
to change shape and for using that ability to woo and 
win the love of Pomona, a goddess of fruit trees and 
harvest.
He was portrayed as both handsome and youthful 
and old and gray-bearded, symbols of the chang-
ing seasons which he also represented. A statue of 
Vertumnus stood at the entrance to the Etruscan 
district of Rome during the days of the republic and 
the empire.
Vesta  Roman  Goddess of the hearth, worshiped 
in every household of ancient Rome. She was identi-
fied with the Greek goddess Hestia, one of the 
Olympian gods.
Primitive Roman religion was a domestic affair, 
concerned with the welfare of the family, house, and 
farm. The focus of the home was the hearth. (The 
Latin word focus means “hearth.”) The caretakers 
of the hearth were the young females of the family 
(the males of the family being out in the fields, the 
mother and older females working at the loom or 
in the kitchen). As families became more extended, 
richer, and more sophisticated, the caretakers of the 
hearth became young women (see Vestal Virgins) 
who were designated to guard the fires of the goddess 
Vesta rather than their own family hearths.
Vestal Virgins  Roman  Priestesses who guard-
ed the temple of the goddess Vesta. They were 
guardians of the hearth who kept the sacred fires of 
Vesta burning. Vestal Virgins served for 30 years. If 
one was found to be unchaste, she was buried alive or 
otherwise punished.
Victoria  (Victory)  Roman  An ancient goddess 
of agriculture.
Victoria had the power to bring military success 
to Rome and was a favorite of soldiers. She was the 
humanlike representation of the concept of victory. 
Victoria was also a favorite of many of the ruling 
families in Roman history and was often pictured as a 
winged figure holding a wreath with which to crown 
the conqueror. She became a prominent symbol of 
the growing Roman Empire. Victoria was worshiped 
at a temple on the Aventine Hill.
Very late in Roman history, Victoria became asso-
ciated with the Greek goddess Nike and was made a 
member of the Roman pantheon.
Virgil  (Vergil)  (70–19 b.c.)  A great Roman 
poet, born Publius Vergilius Maro near present-day 
Mantua (now Italy, then Cisalpine Gaul). Virgil’s 
education took him to Cremona, Milan, and Rome.
Virgil’s first works were the Eclogues, short pasto-
ral poems. Later he wrote the Georgics, more poems 
about country life. His final work was the Aeneid, 
an epic poem that took him the last 11 years of his 
life to write and remained unfinished, as far as he 
was concerned. People consider it one of the great 
literary works of the world.
Virgil enjoyed admiration and a great reputation 
during his lifetime. The Aeneid became a school text-
book almost as soon as it appeared. It was known and 
quoted by people of all classes. The Aeneid had great 
influence on worldwide thought but particularly on 
Roman thought, since it was a uniquely Roman myth 
that glorified the city and inspired all with pride 
and patriotic fervor. Furthermore, Virgil’s fame and 
popularity continued into the Christian era, for the 
Christians saw his poetic epic as having foretold the 
birth of Christ and the advent of Christianity, which 
occurred only 40 years after Virgil wrote the fourth 
Eclogue.
148  Vertumnus

Virgil’s influence on Roman thought derives more 
from the Aeneid than the Eclogues or the Georgics, for 
it foretells the glory of Rome, expressing the feelings 
of the time and the country of Virgil.
Virgo  (Virgin)  Greek  One of the constellations; 
sixth sign of the Zodiac, named for the maiden Eri-
gone, who hanged herself from a tree after finding 
the grave of her murdered father, Icarius of Attica. 
The gods took Erigone up to the heavens and trans-
formed her into the constellation Virgo.
Virtus  Roman  Goddess of courage and bravery, 
called upon by soldiers in battle. While her origins 
appear to be very old, Virtus was often worshiped in 
more recent Roman times with Honos, the god of 
honor. Military leaders also built temples to Virtus 
near the sites of successful battles and conquests. 
Virtus appears frequently on Roman coins, wearing a 
helmet and carrying a sword. 
She eventually took on the characteristics of 
Arete, a minor Greek goddess of virtue.
Vulcan  Roman  Ancient god of fire, worshiped 
by the Romans throughout their early history. Vulcan 
was associated with volcanoes and volcanic fire. Later, 
he was identified with the Greek god Hephaestus 
and therefore supposed to have workshops under 
Mount Etna and other volcanoes, where he was 
assisted by the Cyclopes in forging thunderbolts for 
Jupiter. However, while the Greek Hephaestus was 
“the divine artificer,” a great craftsman, Vulcan was 
only a fire god. He was also called Mulciber (Softener 
or Smelter).
Vulcan’s parents were Jupiter and Juno. His wife 
was Venus, with whom he fathered Cupid.
Virtus  149

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
150
W
8
winds  Greek and Roman  Both Greek and 
Roman cultures in classical times personified the 
winds, recognizing the power of these forces. 
In Greek mythology, the four principle winds 
were known as the Anemoi, and were the children of 
the Titans Astreus and Eos, goddess of the dawn. 
However, the god Aeolus was known as the father of 
the winds and was said to have kept them in a bag to 
protect people from their power. 
In Rome, the winds were called the Venti, and 
their characteristics often varied depending on the 
storyteller.
Winds were described by their moods—anger for 
a cold north wind, pleasant for a warm west wind. 
Some Greek winds, such as Boreas and Zephyrus, had 
important roles to play in stories. Boreas, for example, 
was the father of two of the fastest Argonauts, Calais 
and Zetes, and of the marvelous horses that belonged 
to King Erichthonius, which could gallop across 
water without causing a ripple. Zephyrus carried 
Psyche to Cupid and pushed Apollo’s discus off 
course, causing it to kill Hyancinthus. People invoked 
the names of the other winds when they needed favors 
related to those winds or their fates.
The wind gods were among the oldest invoked 
by the Romans and the people of Central Italy who 
preceded them. The oldest was, according to some 
writers, the god of the northwest wind Corus (Cau-
rus) or perhaps Africus, a warm wind from across the 
Mediterranean Sea.
Surviving documents, from poets, historians, 
and scientists, provide a jumbled picture of the 
importance of the winds in mythology and in 
explaining the world around them. However, the 
frequency with which the eight winds are named 
shows scholars that the people of classical Rome 
and Greece had significant respect for the power of 
these natural forces.
Direction	
Greek name	
Roman name	
Attributes
North	
Boreas	
Aquilo	
Winter, cold
South	
Notus	
Auster	
Summer, stormy, wet
East	
Argestes/Eurus	
Vulturnus	
Autumn
West	
Zephyrus	
Favonius	
Spring, warmth
Northeast	
Kaikias	
Caecius/Caicias	
Bad, evil, harsh
Southeast	
Eurus/Euros	
Apeliotes/Subsolanus	
Refreshing rain, help to farmers
Northwest	
Skiron	
Corus	
Signaled the coming of winter
Southwest	
Lips/Livus	
Africus/Afer ventus	
Quickly brings clouds and clears skies

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
151
Z
8
Zagreus  Greek  The son of Zeus and his own 
daughter, Persephone. In order to save his child from 
the Titans, Zeus repeats his own history by hiding 
Zagreus on Mount Ida (2) and setting the Curetes 
to clashing their armor and shouting, just as they 
did for the infant Zeus. However, Zagreus slips away 
as the Curetes sleep and in spite of brave efforts to 
save himself by magical transformations into various 
animals, the Titans seize Zagreus and eat him. This 
myth represents the annual sacrifice of a boy, which 
took place in ancient Crete in honor of Minos, the 
Bull king.
Zelus  (Zelos; Zeal, Strife)  Greek  The per-
sonification of rivalry, envy, jealousy, and eagerness; 
a demigod or lesser god; son of the Titan Pallas and 
the water Nymph Styx; brother of Nike (Victory), 
Bia (Force), and Cratus (Strength).
With his sisters and brother, Zelus stood beside 
the throne of Zeus, carrying out the great god’s 
commands and guarding his home against intruders. 
When their mother, Styx, sided with Zeus in his 
battle with his father, Cronus, and the Titans, she 
brought Zelus, Nike, Cratus, and Bia into service 
with her, though their father was a Titan. 
Zelus was seen as a force, often a negative influ-
ence, that encouraged rivalry, that separated families 
due to envy and that caused an almost blind drive by 
some people to surpass the abilities and successes of 
others. People used his name as an oath, sometimes 
almost a curse. He was seen as a companion to the 
spirits of competition, jealousy, and strife.
Zelus’ Roman counterpart was Invidia, the god-
dess of envy.
Zephyrus  (West Wind)  Greek  The personifica-
tion of the West Wind. Zephyrus was the son of Eos, 
goddess of the dawn, and of Astraeus, a Titan, or 
Aeolus, the king of the winds.
Zephyrus was a balmy, gentle wind. Among his 
many adventures, he blew Aphrodite to the shores 
of Cyprus after she was born full grown in the foam 
of the sea. He helped Cupid protect Psyche from 
the anger of Aphrodite. With the one of the Harpies, 
Zephyrus fathered the divine horses of Achilles and 
the white horses of the dioscuri.
Zethus  Greek  Son of Zeus and Antiope, who was 
the daughter of a prince of Thebes; twin brother of 
Amphion; husband of Thebe. Zethus was an impor-
tant character, with his brother, in the story of the 
founding of the Greek city of Thebes.
After growing up in a shepherd village, unaware 
that their grandfather had been king of Thebes, the 
brothers gathered an army to claim Thebes as their 
birthright. They captured the city and decided to 
build a wall around it. While Zethus, a strong war-
rior, struggled to move the great stones, his brother, 
a gifted musician, played beautiful music on the 
lyre given to him by Hermes and moved the stones 
easily. 
Zethus was a great hunter and herdsman, well 
practiced in the art of war. According to the Odyssey, 
Zethus’s wife killed their only son in a fit of madness 
and Zethus died of heartbreak.
Zeus  (Day, Bright Sky)  Greek  The chief god 
of Greek mythology. He was the son of Cronus 
and Rhea, both Titans; brother of Hades, Hestia, 
Demeter, Poseidon, and Hera, who was also his 
wife. Over time the Romans attributed many of the 
legends of Zeus to their own supreme god, Jupiter.
Zeus was a sky and weather god, having authority 
over the sky, the winds, the clouds, rain, thunder, 
and lightning. His name has a close connection with 
the Latin word for day, dies. Zeus was also the god 
of battle, the patron of games and agriculture and 
protector of the state. He was called the father of both 

gods and humans. After defeating his father, Cronus, 
Zeus reigned supreme over the gods of Olympus, the 
home of the gods. He was the father of many children 
by Titanesses, goddesses, Nymphs, and mortal women. 
Among his offspring were Apollo, Ares, Artemis, 
Athene, and Dionysus. (See The Loves of Zeus, below.) 
His most famous sanctuary was at Dodona.
Zeus is often depicted as wearing a crown of oak 
leaves (the oak tree was sacred to him), and bearing 
a scepter in one hand and a thunderbolt in the other. 
Often he wore his shield, called an Aegis, and had an 
eagle at his feet.
The Childhood of Zeus  Cronus the Titan, 
father of Zeus, learned that one of his children would 
kill him, so he swallowed his children as soon as they 
were born. Thus Hades, Hestia, Demeter, Hera, and 
Poseidon disappeared into his mouth. But Rhea, wife 
of Cronus and mother of Zeus, saved her last child by 
wrapping a stone in swaddling clothes and presenting 
it to Cronus, who promptly swallowed it. The stone 
was called the Omphalos, later set up at Delphi as 
the “navel of the Earth.” Rhea hid Zeus in a cave on 
Mount Ida (2), in Crete. There he was nursed by the 
she-goat Amalthea and the Nymphs Adrastia and 
Ida (1). Young warriors known as the Curetes clashed 
their weapons together to disguise the infant’s cries.
Zeus Rescues His Siblings  After young Zeus 
grew to manhood, he left Mount Ida, where he had 
been sheltered by Nymphs, and went to visit the 
Titaness Metis. Metis was very wise. She advised 
Zeus how to get Cronus, the Titan father of Zeus, 
to disgorge his brothers and sisters, whom Cronus 
had swallowed. Zeus was to disguise himself as a 
cupbearer and offer Cronus a drink so vile that the 
Titan would immediately vomit and his offspring 
would reappear. This Zeus did and all went according 
to plan. His brothers and sisters, Hestia, Demeter, 
Hera, Hades, and Poseidon were expelled alive and 
well from the body of their father. The stone, which 
Cronus had been made to believe was Zeus wrapped 
in baby clothes, was also expelled and later set up at 
Delphi as the Omphalos, or navel, of the Earth.
The War with the Titans  Once Zeus had 
induced Cronus into releasing his brothers and 
sisters, the siblings decided to go to war against Cro-
nus and the Titans. For 10 long years, Zeus fought 
against the Titans, who were led by the mighty 
Atlas, for Cronus was now old. Finally Zeus enlisted 
the help of Gaia (Earth), who advised him to release 
the Cyclopes and the Hundred-Handed Ones (the 
Hecatoncheires), who had been imprisoned in the 
Underworld. Zeus did this, and in gratitude the 
Cyclopes gave Zeus the thunderbolt as a weapon. 
They gave a helmet of invisibility to Hades, and to 
Poseidon, a trident. With these weapons and the help 
of the Hundred-Handed Ones, Cronus and all the 
Titans were overthrown, and never troubled Greece 
again. Atlas was ordered, as punishment, to carry the 
sky on his shoulders forevermore.
When the war was over, the three brothers, Zeus, 
Poseidon, and Hades, drew lots to see who should 
rule the universe. To Poseidon fell the rule of the seas 
and rivers; to Hades, the Underworld; and to Zeus all 
the rest of the universe, except for Olympus, which 
was to be the realm of all the gods and goddesses.
The war between the Titans and the Olympian 
gods may have been a symbolic description of the 
invasion of the land now called Greece, by the 
migrating tribes who became the first Greeks. They 
brought their gods with them, including Zeus. The 
This ancient Roman copy of a Greek bust of Zeus was 
made in the third century and found in 1775 in exca-
vations of the ancient site at Otricoli, north of Rome. 
It is now in the Vatican Museums in Vatican City. 
(Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen.)
152  Zeus

ancient gods were displaced or absorbed by those of 
the conquerors.
Zeus and Hera  The wife of Zeus was his sister, 
Hera. One of the most famous myths about their 
coming together was that Zeus took the form of a 
cuckoo, who appeared before her wet and shivering. 
Touched by pity, Hera wrapped the bird in her arms 
to warm it. Then Zeus resumed his usual form and 
persuaded Hera to become his wife. They were 
solemnly married on Mount Olympus. Although 
Hera remained the official consort of Zeus, the god 
continued to court goddesses, nymphs, and mortal 
women, so that Hera lived in constant anger and 
jealousy.
By Hera, Zeus had two sons, Ares and Hephaes-
tus, and one daughter, Hebe. Some versions of the 
myth say that Hera gave birth to Hephaestus, the 
smith god, without any help from Zeus. Hera and 
Zeus were also the parents of Eileithya, according 
to some sources.
Zeus and Metis  According to the Greek poet 
Hesiod, Zeus’s first wife was not Hera, but Metis, 
the wise one. She conceived a child by Zeus. Warned 
by Uranus and Gaia that the child would pose a 
threat to him, Zeus swallowed Metis, thus absorbing 
wisdom into himself. The child was born, neverthe-
less. It was the great goddess Athene, who sprang 
fully grown and clad in armor from the forehead of 
Zeus.
The Loves of Zeus  Zeus was a wise and just ruler 
but, in spite of the anger and jealousy of his wife, Hera, 
he was inclined to have numerous love affairs. Scholars 
explain the amorous exploits of Zeus as symbols of 
the new and powerful religion taking over lesser 
religious traditions and merging with them, which is 
what happened in ancient Greece as various migrating 
tribes overcame and sometimes absorbed the ancient 
inhabitants and their cults. Perhaps, more simply, the 
ancient Greeks were trying to create for themselves 
the noble ancestry that would have come from the 
union of the great god Zeus with their ancestors.
To make a conquest, Zeus sometimes assumed a 
different shape. He became a cuckoo for Hera, a swan 
for Leda, a bull for Europa, and a quail for Leto.
The few remains of the great temple known as the Olympian Temple of Zeus stand on a huge block of land in 
Athens, Greece. Begun in the seventh century, B.C. the temple was completed in the second century A.D. It was 
the largest temple in Athens, but only a small portion of its pillars still stand. One pillar, which fell in 1852, lies 
in pieces in the foreground.  (Photograph by Chris Fleming. Used under a Creative Commons License.)
Zeus  153

Among the supernatural females Zeus dallied with 
were
Electra (2), daughter of Atlas, mother of Har-
monia (though some say that Harmonia was 
the daughter of Ares and Aphrodite)
Eurynome, daughter of Oceanus and Tethys, 
who bore The Three Graces
Leto, who became the mother of Apollo and 
Artemis
Maia (1), daughter of Atlas and Pleione, mother 
of Hermes
Mnemosyne (Memory), who gave birth to nine 
daughters who were the Muses
Taygete, daughter of Atlas, mother of Lacedaemon
Themis (Law), who bore the Horae (Seasons); 
Eunomia (Wise Legislation); Dike (Justice); 
Eirene (Peace); and the Fates, who are the 
daughters of Nyx (Night)  
Among the mortal women Zeus mated with were
Antiope, daughter of King Nycteus of Thebes, 
who bore twin sons Amphion and Zethus. 
Danae, daughter of Acrisius, who bore Perseus
Europa, daughter of Agenor and Telephassa
Io, sister of Phoroneus, who bore Epaphus
Leda, wife of Tyndareus, who bore Pollux and 
Helen by Zeus and Castor and Clytemnestra 
by Tyndareus
Niobe, daughter of Tantalus and the nymph 
Laodice, who bore Argos, founder of the city 
of Argos.
Semele, daughter of Cadmus, who bore Dionysus
Among the Olympian goddesses was Demeter, 
who bore Persephone. He also had an affair with 
Lamia, a queen of Libya, whose children Hera killed 
as they were born. Lamia became a demon who 
devoured children.
154  Zeus

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
155
Selected 
Bibliography
8
Aken, Andreas R. A. van. The Encyclopedia of Classical Mythology. Trans. R. Welsh. Engle-
wood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1965.
Barber, Richard A. A Companion to World Mythology. New York: Delacorte Press, 1979.
Bell, Robert E. Dictionary of Classical Mythology: Symbols, Attributes & Associations. Santa 
Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1982.
Burn, Lucilla. The Legendary Past: Greek Myths. Austin: University of Texas Press, 
1990.
Bulfinch, Thomas. Bulfinch’s Mythology. New York: Crowell, 1970.
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. New York: Pantheon Books, 1949; 
paperback, Bollingen Series, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Press, 1968.
———. The Power of Myth, with Bill Moyers. New York: Doubleday, 1988.
Cotterell, Arthur. A Dictionary of World Mythology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1979, 1986.
Dixon-Kennedy, Mike. Encyclopedia of Greco-Roman Mythology. Santa Barbara, Calif.: 
ABC-CLIO, 1998.
Dowden, Ken. The Uses of Greek Mythology. London: Routledge, 1992.
Eliot, Alexander, ed. Myths. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976.
Flaum, Eric. The Encyclopedia of Mythology: Gods, Heroes, and Legends of the Greeks and 
Romans. Philadelphia: Courage Books—Running Press, 1993.
Frazer, James G. The Golden Bough. London: Macmillan, 1912; abridged edition, 1922; 
paperback, 1957.
Gardner, Jane F. The Legendary Past: Roman Myths. Austin: University of Texas Press, 
1993.
Gaster, Theodore H., ed. The New Golden Bough: A New Abridgement of the Classic Work 
by Sir James Frazer. New York: Criterion Books, 1959.
Gayley, L. M. The Classic Myths in English Literature and Art. Boston: Ginn & Co., 
1983.
Grant, M. Myths of the Greeks and Romans. Cleveland: World Publishing, 1962.
———. Roman Myths. New York: Scribner, 1972.
Graves, Robert. The Greek Myths. Mt. Kisco, N.Y.: Moyer Bell, Ltd., 1988.
———. Greek Gods and Heroes. New York: Dell (Laurel Leaf Library), 1965.
Grimal, Pierre. The Dictionary of Classical Mythology. Trans. A. R. Maxwell-Hyslop. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986.
Guthrie, W. K. C. The Greeks and Their Gods. Boston: Beacon Press, 1954.
Hamilton, Edith. Mythology. Boston: Little, Brown, 1942.
Hawkes, Jacquetta. The Dawn of the Gods. London: Chatto & Windus, 1968.
Heyden, A. Van Der, ed. Atlas of the Classical World. London: Nelson, 1963.
Howe, George, and G. A. Harrer. A Handbook of Classical Mythology. New York: F. S. 
Crofts & Company, 1947. Reprint, Detroit: Gale Research Company, 1970.
Jobes, Gertrude. Dictionary of Mythology, Folklore and Symbols. 2 vols. New York: Scare-
crow Press, 1961.

Leach, Marjorie. Guide to the Gods. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1992.
Mercatante, Anthony S., Facts On File Encyclopedia of World Mythology and Legend. New 
York: Facts On File, 1988.
Otto, Walter. The Homeric Gods. New York: Pantheon Books, 1954.
Oswalt, Sabine G. Concise Encyclopedia of Greek and Roman Mythology. Glasgow: Collins, 
1969.
Perowne, Stewart. The Archaeology of Greece and the Aegean. London: Hamlyn Publish-
ing Group, 1974.
———. Roman Mythology. New York: Peter Bedrick Books, 1974.
Pinsent, John. Greek Mythology. New York: Peter Bedrick Books, 1983.
Pomeroy, Sarah B., Walter Donlan, Stanley M. Burstein, and Jennifer Tolbert Roberts. 
Ancient Greece: A Political, Social, and Cultural History. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1999.
Powell, Anton. Ancient Greece, Cultural Atlas for Young People. New York: Facts On File, 
1989.
Room, Adrian. Room’s Classical Dictionary: The Origins of the Names of Characters in Clas-
sical Mythology. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1983.
Stapleton, Michael. The Illustrated Dictionary of Greek and Roman Mythology. Introduc-
tion by Stewart Perowne. New York: Peter Bedrick Books, 1986.
Wiseman, T.P. The Myths of Rome. Exeter, UK: University of Exeter Press, 2004.
Woodward, Roger. The Cambridge Companion to Greek Mythology. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2007.
156  SElected bibliography

Achelous  In Greek mythology, 
A
8
157
Index
8
Boldface page numbers indicate main entries. Page numbers followed by f indicate figures.
A
Absyrtus 1
Medea’s slaying of  80
murder of  3, 90
Acca Larentia (1) (Acca Lauren-
tia)  1, 126, 128
Acca Larentia (2) (Acca Lau-
rentia)  1
Acestes  1–2
Achelous  2
Acheron (River of Sadness)  2, 
34, 145
Achilles  2, 110, 151
childhood of  2
Chryseis and  35
heel of  141
loved by Briseis  28
mother of  136, 140
Myrmidons and  96
as principal hero  142
Telephus and  138
at war  2, 75, 113
Achtaeon  2
Admetus  2–3
Adonis  3, 14
Adrastia (Inescapable One)  3, 
37, 152
Adrastus  3, 46, 51, 52, 132
Aeetes  3, 65, 80, 117
Aegeus  3–4, 139–140
Aegina  4
Aegis (Goat Skin)  4, 10, 152
Aegisthus  4, 36
Aegle (1) (Brightness)  4, 75
Aegle (2) (Dazzling Light)  4, 72
Aegle (3)  4
Aeneas  4–5, 5f, 63, 118, 129. 
See also Aeneid
Camilla and  31
children of  19, 126
deification of  146
Dido and  45
Golden Bough and  60
as Lars Aeneas  86
mother of  147
Roma and  127
Turnus’ murder by  143
wife of  38
Aeneid (Virgil)  5–6, 45, 146, 
148–149. See also Aeneas
Aeneas in  141
Aloeids in  9
Anchises in  11
Ascanius in  19
Camilla in  31
Harpies in  63
Hercules and Cacus in  71
Lacoön in  84
Latinus in  86
Polyphemus in  119
Aeolus  6, 150, 151
Aerope  6
Golden Fleece and  23
Aeschylus  3, 6, 13, 50, 105, 132
Prometheus Bound 121
Aeson  6
Aetolia 6
Calydon in  30
Agamemnon  2, 6, 22, 35
Briseis and  6, 142
Cassandra and  32
murder of  6, 79
Thyestes and  141
wife of  36
Agdistis  6, 126
Agenor  6–7
agricultural gods  7–8, 116
Ajax (1)  8, 75, 138
Ajax (2) (“The Lesser”)  8, 109
Alba Longa  8, 126
founder of  19
Alcestis  8
Alcinous  8
Alcippe  8
Alcmaeon  8
Alcmene  8–9, 67
husband of  10
Aloeids (Aloadae)  9, 19, 67
Aloeus  9
alphabet
Cadmus and  30
of Phoenicia  117
Amalthea (Tender)  9–10, 9f
Cornucopia and  37
Zeus nursed by  152
Amazons  10
leader of warriors of  19
queens of  69, 73, 113, 140
Theseus and  140
Amphiaraus  10, 52
Amphion  10
Amphitrite  10, 130
Poseidon and  100, 
119–120, 120
son of  141–142
Amphitryon  10, 67, 68
Ananke  10
Anaxarete (Excellent Princess)  
10–11
Anchises  11
son of  4
Androgeus  11, 140
Andromache  11, 99
Andromeda (Ruler of Men)  
11–12, 11f
husband of  113
parents of  32, 33
Perseus and  11–12, 114
rescue of  12
Angerona  12
Anna Perenna  12, 45
Anticlea  12
Antigone  12–13, 13f, 132
Antiope  12, 151, 154
Aphrodite (Foam Born)  viii, xii, 
13–14, 14f, 39, 110, 142, 151 
Anaxarete and  11
Ares and  16–17, 67
art and  14
Eros and  14
Galatea (3) and  59
loves of  14
Adonis  3
Anchises  11
Ares  67
Hephaestus  66
mother of  138
origin of  146
in Pantheon  110
Paris and  14, 52, 105
Pygmalion and  124
son of  121
Venus associated with  147
Apollo  xi–xii, 14–15, 15f, 35, 
66, 142 
birth of  15, 20, 42, 49
Cassandra and  32
cattle of  72
children of  18, 40, 123
Daphne and  42
Delphic Oracle and  
106–107, 139
father of  152
Helios identified with  64
Heracles and  70
Hermes and  72
Hyachinthus and  75, 150
Hyperion identified with  75
Lacoön punished by  84
Laomedon and  85
loves of  15, 75
Coronis  37
Hyachinthus  75
Melampus taught by  90
Midas punished by  93
mother of  36, 101
Muses and  96
Niobe punished by  101
Orion punished by  107
Orpheus and  107
in Pantheon  110
Parnassus sacred to  111
Python slaying by  15, 124, 
138
Sibyl and  132
temple of  37f
twin sister of  44
Arachne (Spider)  15–16
Lydia home of  88
Arcadia  16, 43, 89, 91, 109, 127
Arcas (Arctos; Bear)  16
Arcturus (Guardian of the 
Bear)  16
Ares  x, 16–17, 46, 63, 73, 134, 
142
Aphrodite and  13, 16–17, 67
Athene and  21
father of  152
Mars associated with  89
in Pantheon  110
son of  138
as the unloved god  16
Arete (Virtue)  17, 149
Arethusa  98
Arethusa (1)  17
Arethusa (2)  17
Argo  17, 80
builder of  18
Argolis. See Argos
Argonautica  17
Argonauts (Sailors of the Argo)  
17–18, 24, 60
Boreas and  150
Golden Fleece and  79
Harpies and  63
Jason and  80–81
Laertes as  84
names of the  17–18
Orpheus and  107, 133
Sirens and  133
Telamon as  137
Triton and  142
Argos (Argolis)  18, 41, 46, 96, 
132, 141
Argus (1) (Argos)  18, 67, 79

158  Index
Argus (2) (Argos)  18
Argus (3) (Argos)  18, 105
Ariadne  18
and Theseus and the Mino-
taur  140
Arion  18
Aristaeus  18–19, 40, 123
art
Aphrodite in  14, 14f
Venus in  147f, 148
Artemis  xii, 19, 33, 35, 51
Actaeon punished by  2
Aloeids and  9
Amazons identified with  10
Arethusa (1) changed by  17
Atalanta saved by  20
birth of  20, 42, 49
Britomartis rewarded by  28
Callisto punished by  30
Coronis and  37
Diana identified with  44
father of  152
Hecate identified with  64
mother of  36, 101
Niobe punished by  101
Orion loved by  107
in Pantheon  110
Paris and  110
Phoebe identified with  117
Selene identified with  131
Artemis (2)  19
Ascanius  19, 38
Asclepius  19, 35, 37, 51, 75
cult of  66
mother of  37
Asia Minor  vii–viii, 19–20, 34, 
44, 67
Asteria (Astrios; Of the stars)  
20, 113, 117, 141
Asterion (Asterius; Starry)  20, 93
Astraea (Astraia; Starry night)  
20, 45, 81
Astraeus (Starry)  20, 150
son of  151
Atalanta  20, 80, 91
on the Argo  17
Athamas  20–21, 117, 133
Athene (Athena)  xi, 21–22, 21f, 
29, 44, 109, 142
Arachne punished by  16
Ares and  16
Bellerophon and  27
birth of  22, 67
Diomedes (1) and  46
father of  152
Heracles helped by  69
Medusa punished by  114
Minerva associated with  93
Palladium statue of  93
in Pantheon  110
Perseus helped by  114
Poseidon and  22, 120
Tiresias punished by  141
Athens  22, 37, 139
Atlas  22, 66, 141
daughters of  69, 118
golden fruit of  84
as Titan leader  152
Atreus and Thyestes  22–23,  
141
Attica 23, 52, 149
Athens in  139
Eleusis in  50
Attis  23, 39
Aurora (Dawn)  23, 50
Autolycus  23–24
B
Bacchanalia  25, 25f, 27
at Parnassus  111
Bacchants (Bacchantes)  25, 46
Bacche  25, 27
Bacchus  xii, 25f, 26f, 27, 34,  
130
Bellerophon  27, 60
Chimera and  34
Pegasus and  111
Bellona (War)  27, 50
Bia (Force)  27, 101, 151
mother of  136
Boeotia  27, 46, 64, 78
Bona Dea (The good goddess)  
27–28
Fauna identified with  28
Boreas  28, 51, 150
Briseis (Hippodaemia)  28
Agamemnon and  6, 142
as captive  2
Britomartis (Sweet Virgin)  28, 
107
Dictynna associated with  44
bull 28, 41, 45, 70, 80, 151. See 
also Minotaur
male gods typified by  vii
Pasiphaë and  38, 93
sacrifice of  132
Zeus as  54
C
Cacus (1)  29
Cacus (2)  29, 71
Cadmus (From the East)  29, 
38, 117, 132
alphabet and  30
builds the citadel  29–30
Delphic Oracle and  29
and the dragon  29
grandson of  2
marries Harmonia  30
Thebes founded by  139
Caduceus  19, 30, 72, 75
of Pax  111
Calchas  30
Calliope (Beautiful Voice)  30, 107
Callirhoë  8, 30, 75
Callisto  16, 30
son of  16
Zeus and  19
Calydon  6, 30, 70, 101
Calydonian boar hunt  20, 30, 
79, 84, 91, 112, 137
Calypso  31, 105
Camenae  31, 49
Camilla  31
Capricorn (The Goat)  31, 130
Cardea  31, 75
Carmenta (Carmentis)  31
Carthage  31, 117
founder of  44
Cassandra  32, 36
Agememnon and  50
Apollo and  15
Cassiopeia  11, 32, 114
husband of  33
Castor and Pollux (“The Heav-
enly Twins”)  32, 47, 81
mother of  87
Celeus  32, 43
son of  141
centaurs 19, 32, 33f, 46, 51, 52f, 
73f, 79, 130. See also Chiron
father of  67, 140
Heracles, Deianira, and  
70, 101
Centaurus  33, 67, 79, 130
sons of  32
Cephalus  33
Cepheus  33, 114
wife of  32
Cerberus  33–34, 68, 144
at gate to Hades  49, 145
stealing of  69
Cercopes  34, 70, 106
Ceres  xi, 34, 43, 78, 138, 
asteroid named after  134
Liber associated with  87
in Pantheon  110
Ceto (Whale)  34, 48, 50, 141
Phorcys and  117, 136
Chaos  34, 102, 108
Erebus and  51
mother of  10
Charon  34, 51, 145
Chimera (She-Goat)  27, 34, 49, 
111, 144
Chione  34, 121
Chiron  32, 35, 130
Asclepius and  19
Peleus and  112
Prometheus and  121
Chryseis  35
Cilix  35, 117
Circe  35
Eurylochus and  54
Odysseus and  104, 131, 
133, 137
Picus and  118
son of  137
Claudia Quintas  35
Cloacina  35
Cloelia  35–36
Clymeme  36, 141
husband of  109
mother of  116
Clytemnestra  36, 47, 64
Agamemnon murdered by   
79
Cassandra and  32, 50
Coeus  36, 117, 141
Comus  36
Concordia  36, 81, 115
Consus (The Storer)  36–37
Corinth  37, 105
Cornucopia (Horn of Plenty)  
10, 37, 50, 74
Coronis  37
Apollo and  15
Corybantes  37, 59
Curetes identified with  39
cow  37–38
Cratus (Cratos; Kratos; 
Strength)  38, 101, 151
mother of  136
creation myth  viii–ix
Crete  viii, 22, 38, 61, 151
Earth Mother of  44
vicious monster of  28
Creusa (1) (Glauca)  38
Creusa (2)  38
Crius (Krios)  38, 141
son of  109
Cronus (Kronus)  ix, 38–39, 50, 
131, 141
children of  39, 119, 152
sister-wife of  126
Uranus overthrown by  
38–39, 146
cuckoo, Hera and  67, 153
Cupid (Desire)  39, 52
mother of  147
Psyche and  150, 151
Curetes (Young Men)  39, 51, 1 
51
Corybantes identified with  
37
Galli identified with  59
Cybele  39
Attis and  39
Claudia Quintas and  35
Corybantes and  37
Midas and  39
Rhea identified with  126
Cyclopes (Singular; Cyclops)  
ix, 38, 59, 137, 141, 146, 149
killing of  2
Polyphemus identified with  
119
Underworld release of   
152
Cyclopes (1) (Singular; Cyclops; 
Round-eyed)  39–40
Cyclopes (2) (Singular; Cyclops)  
40
Cyclopes (3) (Singular; Cyclops)  
40
Cycnus  40, 138
Cyrene  40
Apollo and  15
son of  18
D
Daedalus (Cunningly Wrought) 
18, 41
apprentice of  137
labyrinth and  38, 84, 95
Danae 41, 44, 132,  154
protector of  119
Danaus  41
daughters of  137
Daphne (Laurel)  15, 41–42, 
47, 138
Daphnis  42
Dardanelles  20, 42, 143
Trojan War and  143
Dardanus  42, 51, 59
descendants of  4
Palladium and  109
as Troy founder  143
Deianira  42, 79
Heracles and  68
and Heracles and the 
Centaur  70, 101
Deidamia  42
deification  42, 146
Deiphobus  42
Delos  15, 42, 87
Delphi  42–43, 111, 124
Apollo cult at  8, 15
Cadmus at  29
Omphalos at  106, 152
Oracle at  62, 68, 106–107
origins of  42–43
Pythian games at  118
Themis at  139
Demeter  xi, 18, 43–44
Arcadia and  16
and the Eleusinian myster-
ies  43–44
mother of  126, 141
in Pantheon  110
Persephone and  32, 43, 
112, 154
suitors of  43
Triptolemus and  141

Demons of the Kilns (Daimones 
Keramikoi; Ceramics Demons; 
Potter’s Demons)  44
Demophon  44
father of  32
Deucalion  139, 140
wife of  124
Diana (Bright)  xii, 44, 45f, 49 
Camilla and  31
in Pantheon  110
Phoebe identified with  117
Dictynna (Lady of the Nets)  44
naming of  28
Dictys  44, 113, 119
Dido  44–45
Dike (Dice; Justice)  45
Diomedes (1)  16, 46, 60, 75, 109
Diomedes (2)  46
horses of  69
Dione  46, 47, 141, 147
Dionysus  xii, 32, 46, 130. See 
also Dithyrambus
Antiope punished by  12
Aphrodite and  13
Bacchus identified with  27
birth of  46
childhood of  21, 46, 78
Comus associated with  36
father of  152
Lethe associated with  87
Liber identified with  87
Parnassus sacred to  111
satyrs and  131
son of  121
tutor of  133
Dioscuri (Sons of Zeus)  32, 47, 
64, 151
Dis (Dis Pater, Dispater)  47, 
63, 107, 119
Prosperina and  123
Underworld ruled by  145
Dithyrambus (Child of the 
Double Door)  46, 47
Dodona  17, 46, 47, 51, 152
Oracle at  107
Doris (Bounty)  47, 100, 141
Dryads (Nymphs; Tree)  41, 47, 
53, 102
E
Earth Mother  48, 121
Aphrodite as  13
Ceres and  34
Demeter as  43
meaning of  vii
Rhea identified with 126
Tellus associated with 138
“Earthshaker, The”. See Nep-
tune; Poseidon
Echidna  33, 34, 48–49
Orthos and  135
Typhon and  144
Echo  49
Narcissus and  99
punished by Hera  107
Egeria (Aegeria)  48, 49, 101
Eileithya (Ilithya)  49, 153
Lucina and  88
Eirene (Irene; Peace)  45, 
49–50, 49f, 111
Electra (1)  50
Electra (2)  50, 119, 154
Electra (3) (Amber)  50, 139, 141
Eleusis  43, 50, 139
Elysium  50, 145
Endymion  50, 132
Enyo (1)  50
Enyo (2)  50
Eos (Dawn)  50–51, 141, 150
Epaphus  51, 79
Ephesus  44, 51
Epidaurus  51
Asclepius and  19
Epigoni (Descendants, the 
younger generation)  3, 51, 132
Epimetheus (Afterthought)  51, 
124, 141
Pandora and  110
Epirus  32, 47, 51
Epona  51
Erebus (Darkness)  17, 34, 51, 
72, 99
mother of 10
Erechtheus  33, 51, 140
Erichthonius  22, 51, 150
Erichthonius (2)  42
Erigone  52
Erinyes  52
Furies as  58
Eriphyle  52
Eris (Discord)  16, 52, 110, 142
Eros (Erotic Love)  39, 52–53, 52f
Aphrodite and  14
Psyche and  52–53
Erytheia (Erythia; Dazzling 
Light)  53
Ether (Aether; Bright upper air)  
53, 119
mother of 10
Ethiopia  33, 53, 114
Etruria  34, 35, 53, 66, 127, 131, 
135, 148
Eumenides (Good-Tempered 
Ones)  52, 53, 89
Eunomia (Order) 45, 53
Euripides (480-406 b.c.)  13, 
50, 53, 79, 105. See also 
Andromache
Alcestis  3, 8
Andromache  11, 64
plays of  53, 64, 90
Europa  viii, 53–54, 117, 154
children of  38, 131
husband of  20
Zeus and  6, 28, 35, 54, 153
Euryale (Wide-Stepping)  34, 
54, 136
Medusa and  90
son of  107
Steno and  136
Eurybia  54, 141
son of 109
Eurydice  18, 54
husband of  107
Orpheus and  54
Eurylochus  54
Eurynome  54, 61, 141, 154
Eurystheus  55, 71
birth of  68
Eurytus  55
Evander  31, 55, 87, 92, 127
F
Fama  56
Fauna  56
Bona Dea and  28
Faunus  28, 56, 101, 109, 133
father of  118
Flora and  56, 57
Faustulus (Faustus)  56
wife of  1, 126, 128
Favonius (Favorable)  56
Febris (Fever)  56–57
Feronia  57
Fides (Fides Publica)  57, 135
Flamen  57
Flora  ixf, 57, 138
Fons (Fontus)  57
Fornax (Furnace)  57
Fors  57
Fortuna (Fate)  58
Fors associated with  57
Necessitas and  99
Tyche associated with  
143–144
Furies (Furiae)  52, 58, 89
Orestes and  107
origin of  59, 146
Furrina  58
G
Gaia (Gaea, Ge; Earth)  13, 34, 
38, 46, 48, 59, 152, 153
in creation myth  viii
sons of  39–40, 117, 119, 
121, 141, 146
Typhon and  144
Galatea  vii,100f
Galatea (1) (Milk White)  59
Galatea (2)  59
Galatea (3)  59, 124
Galli  39, 59
Corybantes identified with  37
Ganymede  51, 59–60
Genius (Plural; Geniti)  60
Geryon  60
cattle of  29, 69, 71
father of  90
gigantes (giants)  60, 70
origin of  59, 146
Glaucus (1)  60, 131
Glaucus (2)  27, 60
Glaucus (3)  60
goddesses, Roman/Greek 
names  xi
gods, Roman/Greek names  x
Golden Bough  60
Golden Fleece, the  23, 60, 78
Argonauts and  79
Helle on  65, 66
Jason and  80, 112
quest for  17, 20–21, 27
Gordian Knot  60–61
Gorgons (Grim Ones)  34, 61
Medusa as  90, 111
parents of  117
sisters of the Graea  61
Steno as  136
Graces, The Three  ixf,61
Graea (Gray Women)  34, 50, 61
parents of 117
sisters of the Gorgons 61, 114
Great Mother vii
Greece 37, 61–62, 127, 133
ages of Greece 62
coming of horse to 32
Eleunsinian rites in 43
Titans overthrown in 152
truce, warring tribes 9, 16
H
Hades  xi, 63, 134
hound of  33
Minthe and  95, 98
mother of  126, 141
Persephone in  118, 140
Tartarus and  137
Typhon in  144
Harmonia (Peace)  8, 63, 132
Callirhoë and  30
magic necklace of  52
marries Cadmus  30
Harpies (Swift Robbers)  34, 50, 
63, 79, 139
Zephyrus and  151
Hebe  63–64, 68, 153
Hecate  64, 113
identified with Prosperina  
123
Hecatoncheires (Hecatonchires)  
38, 39, 59, 64, 146
Underworld release of  152
Hector  64
Patroclus murder by  2, 
111, 142
slaying  of 75
Hecuba 64, 110, 121
Helen  64, 65f, 140
husband of  91, 107
Paris’s abduction of  2, 47, 
64, 75, 110, 143
Trojan War and  14, 142
Helenus  64
Helicon, Mount  46, 64, 112
Helios (Helius)  16, 35, 50, 64, 
116f, 126, 141
Demeter and  43
Sol identified with  134
son of  116
Helle  65
Hellen  44, 65
Hellenic term and  61
Hellenes  44, 65–66, 75
Hellenization  66, 127
Magna Graecia and  89
Hellespont (Dardanelles)  42, 
65, 66
Trojan War and  143
Hemera (Day, Daylight)  66
Hephaestus  xii, 13, 15, 40, 63, 
66–67, 141, 142
Ares and  16
Artemis and  19
Pandora and  110
in Pantheon  110
Prometheus and  121
Vulcan identified with  149
Zeus and  22, 153
Hera (Lady)  xi, 15, 67, 142
Argos and  18
children of  49, 50
and the cuckoo  67, 153
golden apples of  47, 117
Io and  51, 67
Ixion and  67
Leto and  87
mother of  126, 141
in Pantheon  110
peacock and  18, 67
Satyrs punished  by 131
Tiresias punished by  141
Zeus and  vii, 21, 38, 123, 153
Heracles (Herakles; Glory of 
Hera)  viii, 46, 63, 67–70, 127
Amazons and  10
Autolycus and  24
birth of  9, 49
childhood of  68
Chiron and  35
cult of  89
death of  70, 101
and Deianira and the 
Centaur  70
exploits of  69–70
Index  159

foster father of  10
Hercules associated with  71
Hippolyta and  69, 74
Iole and  79
Laomedon slain by  85
Philoctetes and  117
Prometheus and  121
Pygmaei and  123–124
son of  137
Theseus and  118
twelve labors of  22, 33, 55, 
60, 68–69, 75
Apples of the Hesperides  
69
Augean Stables  69
Cattle of Geryon  69
Cretan Bull  69
Girdle of the Amazon  69
Hind of Ceryneia  69
Horses of Diomedes  69
Hydra of Lernaea  68–69
Nemean Lion  68
Stealing of Cerberus  69
Stymphalian Birds  69
Wild Boar of Eryman-
thus  69
in Underworld  3
as young hero  68
herbs  33–34, 70–71
Hercules  71, 71f
Cacus and  71
Hermaphroditus  13, 71
Hermes  xii, 10, 18, 30, 43, 67, 
72, 92, 92f, 113, 144, 151
Aphrodite and  13
Caduceus and  30
childhood of  72
Golden Fleece and  65
in Pantheon  110
son of  33, 42, 109, 133
Hero and Leander  72
Hesiod  viii, 15, 39, 49, 50, 58, 
63, 64, 72, 83, 121, 153
Theogony  119
on Tyche  143–144
on Uranus  146
Hesione  70, 72
Hesperia  72
Hesperides (Daughters of the 
West)  17, 22, 47, 53, 72, 72–73
apples of  34, 68, 69, 84
parents of  117
Hestia (Hearth)  73
and the hearth  73
mother of  126, 141
in Pantheon  110
Priapus and  73
Vesta identified with  148
Hippodameia  73, 73f, 96
father of  105
Pirithoüs and  140
son of  22, 141
wife of  118
Hippolyta  73–74
girdle theft of  69, 74, 140
Heracles and  10
Hippolytus  140
Homer  viii, 44, 50, 51, 67, 74, 74f, 
75, 83, 117. See also Iliad; Odyssey
Honos  74
Honus  149
Horae  74
Dike as  45
Eirene as  49
Eunomia as  53
mother of  139
household gods  x, 74–75, 116
Hyachinthus  75
Apollo and  15, 150
Hydra (Water Creature)  35, 49, 
75, 144
Hygeia (Hygieia; Health)  75, 110
Salus associated with  131
Hyperion (The One Above)  
75, 141
Hypnos (Sleep)  75
twin brother of  75, 138
I
Iapetus  76, 141
Icarus  41, 76, 77f, 149
Ida (1)  37, 76, 152
Ida (2)  71, 76, 85, 110, 151, 152
Ida (3)  76
Iliad (Homer)  11, 28, 76, 83, 
103, 142, 143
Agememnon in  6
Ajax (1) in  8
Aphrodite and Paris in  14
Aprodite in  13
Ares in  16
Bellerophon in  60
prophesy of doom in  30
Ilium (Ilia)  76, 77
Incubus  78
Indigetes (Dii Indigites)  78
Ino  46, 78
Io  18, 38, 51, 78–79, 154
Iolaus  79, 79
Iolcus  60, 79, 90
Iole  79, 101
Iphicles  79
father of  10, 68
son of  123
Iphigenia  50, 79
sacrifice  of 30, 142
Iris  50, 79, 139
Ixion  79
Centaurs and  140
Hera and  67, 99
J
Janus (Ianus)  75, 78, 80, 135
Cardea and  31
Jason (Iason)  35, 38, 80–81
and the Argonauts  20, 47, 
60, 78, 80–81
Golden Fleece and  112
Medea and  90
Juno (Iuno)  xi, 5, 67, 81, 86, 88, 
89, 93, 125, 128, 131
mother of  106
in Pantheon  110
son of  149
Jupiter (Iupiter; Jove)  xi, 5, 81, 
86, 128, 131, 136, 138
as chief Roman god  x, 89, 
93, 101, 125, 127
children of  44, 92, 147, 149
father of  152
Ganymede and  60
moons of  134
in Pantheon  110
temple of  133
wife of  86
Zeus and  151
Justitia (Iustitia; Justice)  81,  
82f
Juturna (Iuturna)  57, 81, 86, 
143, 147
Juventas (Juvenus, Iuvenus)  
64, 81
K
Ker (plural: Keres)  83
L
Labyrinth  84, 99
Daedalus and  18, 38, 41, 95
Theseus helped in  140
Laconia  64, 84, 112
capital of  134
Ladon  34, 41, 69, 84, 117, 136
Laelaps (Lelaps, Lalaps)  84
Cephalus and  33
Laertes  84
son of  103
Laestrygonians  84
Laocoön  84–85, 85f
Laodamia. See Hippodameia
Laomedon  70, 79, 85
son of  121, 141
Lapiths (plural: Lapithae)  37, 
85, 118
king of  140
Lar (plural: Lares)  x, 74–75, 
85–86, 146 
Penates and  113
Lara (Lala; Larunda; The 
talker)  86
Latinus  56, 86, 118, 127, 143, 
147
Latium  ix, x, 19, 56, 86–87, 
118, 129, 135, 143, 147
Aeneas at  5
Laverna  87
Lavinia  86, 87, 143
Leander. See Hero and Leander
Leda  47, 87, 154
Zeus and  153
Lemures  87
Lethe (Forgetfulness, Oblivion)  
87, 145
Leto  59, 87, 117, 141
twin sons of  20, 42, 49, 101
Zeus and  153, 154
Liber (Free)  87
Bacchus identified with  27
Libera  87
Libertas  88
Libitina  88
Libya  117, 154
Libya (1)  88
Libya (2)  88
Lityerses  88
Livy (59 b.c.-a.d.)  29, 88
Lotus-Eaters (Lotophagi)  88
Libya (2) and  88
Lua (Lua Mater)  88, 131
Lucina  88
Luna (Moon)  88, 131
Lydia  15, 20, 88, 95, 131, 132
king of  137
queen of  70, 106
M
Maenads  46, 89
Magna Graecia (Great Greece)  
89
Maia (1)  72, 89, 92, 154
Maia (2) (Maiesta)  89
Manes (Good Ones)  89, 146
Mars  89, 128
Bellona and  27, 136
as chief Roman god  x, 125, 
135
in Pantheon  110
Picus and  118
Rhea Silva and  126, 128
wife of  100
Medea  38, 90
Golden Fleece and  17
Jason and  80, 112
Theseus and  140
Medusa  34, 90, 90f, 117
Perseus and  44, 114
slaying of  113
Megara (1)  90
Megara (2)  79, 90
Heracles and  68
Melampus  90–91
Melanion  91
Meleager  30, 91, 105
Menelaus  22, 42, 75, 91, 107
Proteus and  123
wife of  64, 84
Menoetius  91, 141
Mephitis (Mefitis)  91–92
Mercury (Mercurius)  ixf, xii, 5, 
92, 92f, 111f, 136
Caduceus and  30
Lara and  86
in Pantheon  110
Merope  92, 107, 133
Metis (Wisdom)  92, 141
Zeus and  22, 152, 153
Midas  93, 118
and the donkey’s ears  93
and the golden touch  93
son of  88
Minerva  xi, 89, 93, 94f, 101, 
125, 128, 136
Athene identified with  21
in Pantheon  110
Minos  38, 93, 95, 109, 126, 
131, 151
Minotaur of  41, 93, 95, 
139–140
Scylla and  95, 131
Minotaur  38, 41, 95, 140
Adriadne and  18
Minos and  41, 93, 95, 
139–140
Pasiphaë and  111
Theseus’ slaying of  viii, 139
Minthe (Menthe)  63, 95, 98
Mnemosyne (Memory)  95, 
141, 154
Moirae (Moirai)  95
mother of  10, 139
Moria (Folly)  71, 95
Mors (Death)  95
Muses  95–96, 96f
Apollo and  96
Camenae and  31
list of, attributes and  96
Mount Helicon and  64
Parnassus sacred to  111
Zeus and  31
Mycenae  22, 79, 96, 141
Lion Gate of  40
Myrmidons  96, 140
Myrtilus  23, 96, 112, 113
N
Naiads (Naiades)  97–98, 97f, 102
Arethusa (1)  17
Minthe as  95
Narcissus  98f, 99
Echo and  49
Nausicaa  99
Naxos  99, 140
Necessitas  99
Neda  99, 141
160  Index

Nemesis  51, 99
Neoptolemus (Pyrrhus)  42, 99
Nephele  67, 78, 79, 99, 117
Neptune (Neptunus)  xi, 5, 99, 
100f, 130, 131
moons of  134, 142
in Pantheon  110
Poseidon identified with  120
Nereids  34, 47, 100, 102, 117
Naiads and  97
Nereus (Old Man of the Sea)  
34, 100, 100, 141
Nerio (Nerine; Neriene; Nerie-
nis; Valor)  100–101, 136
Nessus  70, 101
Nestor  101
Nike (Nice; Victory)  101, 148, 
151
mother of  136
Niobe  19, 101, 154
father of  137
Numa Pompillius  49, 93, 
101–102
nymphs (young maidens)  vii, 
47, 102, 102f, 141. See also 
Bacche; Sirens
Arethusa (1)  17
Athene and  22
best-known  102
origin of  59
of the sea  100
Nyx (Nox; Night)  17, 34, 52, 
72, 83, 99, 102
O
Oceanids (Oceanides)  36, 102, 
103, 118, 138, 141
Doris as  47
Eurynome as  54
Naiads and  97
Neda as  99
Styx as  136
Tyche as  144
Oceanus  46, 103, 141
children of  34, 100, 118, 
136, 141
sister-wife of  138
Odysseus  75, 103, 104f, 109, 
117. See also Ulysses
father of  84
mother of  12
Nausicaa discovered by  99
Polyphemus and  119
Scylla and Charybdis and  131
sons of  137
Trojan horse and  viii
Odyssey (Homer)  5, 84, 
103–105, 104, 119, 133, 142. 
See also Odysseus
Aeolus in  6
Aloeids in  9
Athene in  22
Calypso in  31
Cyclopes in  40
Hephaestus in  66
Nestor in  101
Odysseus and Circe  104
Odysseus and Polyphemus  
103–104
Odysseus and the Sirens 
104, 133
Odysseus in the Under-
world  104
Odysseus on the Island of 
the Sun  105
Odysseus returns to Ithaca  
105
and Scylla and Charybdis  105
Triton in  142
Zethus in  151
Oedipus (Swollen Foot)  13f, 105
death of  132
Sphinx’s riddle and  135
Oeneus (Oeneous; Vintner)  
30, 105
Deianira and  70
Oenomaus  73, 105, 112–113
Oenone  105–106, 110
Olympian gods  ix, xi–xii, 17, 
59, 106, 109, 140, 148. See also 
Poseidon; Zeus
Dionysus and  46
Hermes as  118
king of  67
names of  110
queen of  123
Styx River and  136
Tartarus punishment by  137
Titans and  20, 141, 152
wedding attended by  30, 63
Olympic games  106, 124
Olympus  106
queen of  67
war declared on  9
Omphale  70, 106
Omphalos (Navel)  42, 106, 152
Ops (Opis: Abundance)  106
Consus and  36
Rhea identified with  126
Oracle  41, 47, 86, 106–107, 117
Ammon  11
Cassiopeia and  32
Delphic Oracle  29, 68, 
106–107
house of Pelops and  23
Orcus  107, 119
Oreads (Oreiades)  102, 107
Echo as  49
Orestes  50, 107
Agememnon slain by  6
Orion  107
Artemis and  19
Aurora and  23
Orpheus  107, 133
Eurydice and  54
Ovid (43 b.c.-a.d.)  23, 79, 108
Metamorphoses  16, 17, 49, 
64, 99, 117, 119, 124
P
Palamedes  109
Pales  109, 127
Palladium  109
Pallas (Warrior)  98, 101, 109, 
113, 136, 141
belt of  143
son of  151
Pallas Athene  109
Pan  107, 109, 133, 144
Daphnis and  42
Faunus identified with  56
Selene loved by  132
Panacea (Panaceia; All-healing)  
4, 75, 110
Pandora (All-giving)  51, 110
Prometheus and  123
Zeus and  110, 121
Pantheon  31, 44, 110, 125, 
135, 148
Parcae  110
Moirae as  95
Paris  65f, 110–111
abduction of Helen by  2, 
64, 75, 91, 142, 143
Aphrodite and  14, 52
judgment of  110–111
slaying of  117
wooing of  142
Parnassus  20, 42, 44, 111
Pasiphaë  38, 41, 111
Minotaur offspring of  38, 93
Patroclus  111, 131
murder of  2, 142
Pax (Peace)  50, 81, 111
Pegasus  50, 90, 111–112, 111f
Bellerophon and  27, 34
Peleus  112
Thetis and  52, 110
Pelias  60, 80, 90, 112
Pelion  112
Peloponnesus (Peloponnese)  
37, 42, 50, 51, 61, 112, 134
enslavement in  viii
invasion of  68
Pelops  112–113
and the Charioteer  112–113
father of  137
Myrtilus and  96
sons of  22, 141
Pelponnesus  91
Penates  x, 74–75, 113
Lares and  86
Penelope  109, 113
husband of  103, 137
son of  137
Penthesilea  10, 113
Persephone (Kore)  112, 113, 123
Hades and  63, 145
Libera associated with  87
Libertas identified with  88
mother of  154
son of  151
Underworld and  xi, 8, 64, 118
Perses (Destroyer)  113, 141
Perseus  22, 41, 113–114, 132
Acrisius and  114
Andromeda and  11–12, 
33, 114
childhood of  113–114
Dictys and  44
Medusa and  90, 111, 114
Polydectes and  54, 114, 
119, 136
wife of  11
personal gods  7, 114–116
Phaedra  116
Phaeton  116–117, 116f
Philoctetes  70, 117
Phineus  114, 117
Phoebe (Bright)  36, 117, 131, 
141
Phoenicia (Purple)  117
raid on by Hellenes  54
Phoenix  117
Phorcys (Phorcus; Old man of 
the sea)  48, 117, 141
Ceto and  34, 50
Phrixus  78, 117–118
Phrygia  20, 60, 88, 118
Midas king of  93
Picus (Woodpecker)  101, 118
Pindar (518-438 b.c.)  50, 118
Pirithoüs  118
Lapiths ruled by  85
Theseus and  140
Pleiades (Sailing Ones)  50, 118
Maia (1) of the  89
Merope in  92
Taygete as  137
Pleione  118, 141
daughters of  118
Pluto  xi, 107, 118–119, 131
Underworld and  145
Plutus  43, 119
Pollux. See Castor and Pollux
Polydectes  44, 119
Perseus and  54, 114, 136
Polyphemus  104f, 119
Galatea (1) and  59
Odysseus and  103–104
Pomona  119, 119f
Picus and  118
Vertumnus and  148
Pontus (Pontos)  119, 138, 141
son of 117
Poseidon  xi, 18, 47, 72, 79, 112, 
119–121, 123
Athene and  22, 120
and horses  120–121
Laomedon and  85
last name of  28
lovers of
Aphrodite  13
Demeter  43
Nymph Scylla  10
Medusa and  90
mother of  126, 141
Neptune associated with  99
in Pantheon  110
Polyphemus and  104
son of  107, 141–142
temple to  120f
wife of  10, 100, 120
Priam  42, 51, 121, 131
daughter of  15
king of Troy  143
son of  110
Priapus  121
Hestia and  73
Prometheus (Forethought)  21f, 
35, 121–123, 122f, 141
bound and unbound  121, 123
and fire-bringer and cham-
pion of humankind  121
Pandora and  110, 123
punishment of  27, 38
son of  44
Proserpina  123
Dis Pater and  145
husband of  47
mother of  34
Protesilaus  123
Proteus  18, 123, 141
Psyche (Soul)  123
Cupid and  150, 151
Pygmaei (Pygmies)  123–124
Pygmalion  vii, 45, 124
Galatea (3) and  59
Pyrrha  44, 124
Pythian games  42, 118, 124
Python  15, 42, 111, 124
Apollo slaying of  15, 124, 138
Q
Quirinus (Quirinius)  89, 125, 135
as chief Roman god  x
R
Remus. See Romulus and Remus
Rhadamanthus (Rhadamanthys)  
50, 93, 126, 131
Rhea (Earth)  39, 126, 131, 141
son of  119
Index  161

Rhea Silva (Ilia)  126 128, 141
Rhodes  64, 126
Robigo and Robigus  126
Roma  126–127
Roman agricultural gods  7–8
Romans  ix–xi
chief gods of  x
Rome  127–128, 148
agriculture and  7, 138
Fons and  57
founding of  109, 118, 126
Jupiter protector of  81
Numa Pompillius and  93
personal gods and  114–116
status of rulers in  vii
Romulus and Remus  86, 109, 
127, 128–129, 130
birthplace of  8
deification and  42, 146
father of  89
Faustulus’ finding of  56
foster mother of  1
King Numa and  31
mother of  126, 141
Numa Pompillius and  101
Picus and  118
Quirinus name and  125
Rutuli (Rutulians)  31, 81, 86, 
87, 127, 129, 147
king of  143
S
Sabines (Sabini)  89, 100, 125, 
127, 129, 130, 130f, 136
Sol worship of  134
Sagittarius (The Archer)  35, 130
Salacia (The salty one)  130
Salus  81, 131
Sarpedon  60, 93, 126, 131
Saturn (Saturnus)  86, 106, 116f, 
118, 131
Cronus identified with  38
moons of  134
son of  119
temple to  128f
wife of  88
satyrs  46, 118, 131
Centaurs associated with  32
Nymphs and  131
Silenus associated with  133
Scylla  131
Scylla and Charybdis  131
Odysseus and  105
Selene (Moon)  50, 131–132, 
132f, 141
Endymion and  50
Hecate identified with  64
Luna and  88
son of  21
Semele  154
Seriphos (Serifos)  113, 132
Seven Against Thebes  13, 132. 
See also Thebes
Arion and  18
leader of warriors of  3, 10
sons of  51
“Seven Sisters.” See Pleiades
Sibyl (Sibylla)  132
Sibyl of Cumae  127, 132, 133, 
146
Sibylline Books  133
Silenus (Selini)  133
Silvanus  133
Sirens  107, 133
Odysseus and  104
Sisyphus  27, 133–134, 137
outwitting of Thanatos  134
smith god. See Hephaestus
Sol  134
Helios identified with  64
solar system  81, 89, 92, 99, 131, 
134, 146, 148
Sophocles  viii, 50, 79, 134. See 
also Antigone 
Oedipus Rex  105
Sparta (Lacedaemon)  37, 47, 
75, 112, 134, 143
enslavement  in viii
Sphinx  49, 135, 135f, 144
Stata Mater (Statua Mater; 
Statis Mater)  135
state gods  116, 135–136
Stheno (Strong)  34, 136
Medusa and  90
Styx  98, 101, 136, 141
mother of  138
son of  151
Styx, River  2, 34, 136, 141, 145
Summanus  136
Syrinx  136
T
Talus (Talos)  41, 137
Tantalus  112, 137
Tartarus  20, 22, 36, 39, 41, 75, 
137, 141, 145
Typhon and  144
Taygete  137, 154
Telamon (Telemon)  70, 137
Telegonus  137
Telemachus  101, 109, 137
father of  103
Telephus  137–138
Tellus (Terra Mater)  138
Tempe  106, 138, 140
Terminus  101, 138
Tethys  36, 118, 136, 138, 141
Teucer  138
Thalassa  119, 138
Thanatos (Death)  83, 95, 138
twin brother of  75, 138
Thaumus (Wonder)  34, 
138–139, 141
Thebes  viii, 51, 79, 139, 151. 
See also Seven Against Thebes
blind seer of  141
founder of  6, 38
Theia (Radiant)  139, 141
twin sons of 34
Themis  20, 45, 49, 139, 141, 154
Theseus  47, 139–140
Adriadne and  140
adventures of  18, 139
Aegeus and  139–140
Amazons and  140
death of  140
father of  3
Heracles and  118
Medea and  90, 140
Minotaur and  139–140
Pirithoüs and  140
wife of  73
Thessaly  viii, 33, 90, 96, 140
mythical people of  140
Tempe in  138
Thetis  42, 123, 136, 140–141
Peleus and  52, 110
Thyestes. See Atreus and 
Thyestes
Tiberinus  141
Tiresias  141
Tiryns  141
Titan  ix, 21f, 34, 141
Astreaus as  51
Coeus as  36
Golden Age, in  141
Olympian gods and  20
Saturn and  131
Tartarus exile of  137
Titans Oceanus  36
war against  64, 86
Tithonus  50, 141
Triptolemus  43, 141
father of  32
Triton  120, 141–142
Trojan War  35, 42, 46, 50, 75, 
127, 142–143
Achilles and  96
Aeneas in  129
Andromache in  11
as fact or fiction  142–143
Hellespont and  66
leading cause of  14, 64, 
84, 91
warriors in  113, 131, 138, 
141
wooden horse of Troy  in 
viii, 99, 143
Troy  20, 70, 75, 143
fall of  91, 99
founder of  42, 143
invasion of  74
king of  110, 121
wooden horse of  99, 143
Turnus  81, 129, 143, 147
Tyche  143–144
Fortuna associated with  58
Typhon (Typhoeus)  33, 34, 
48, 144
U
Ulysses  103, 145. See also 
Odysseus
Underworld  50, 51, 146
Attis in  23
dog at gates of  69
ferryman of  34, 145
Hades and  63
Heracles in  3
Laverna, goddess of  87
Persephone queen of  8, 64
Pluto and  118
Tartarus in  22, 36, 39, 137, 
141
Underworld (1)  104, 126, 136, 
145
Adonis reared in  3
Cerberus and  33
Minos in  93
Odysseus in  104
Orpheus and  54
Persephone in  118, 140
Sisyphus in  134
Underworld (2)  107, 145–146
Dispater and  47
Manes passing to  89
queen of the  123
Uranus (Ouranos; Heaven)  13, 
38, 46, 146, 153
in creation myth  viii–ix
Cronus overthrowing  38–39
Ether and  53
sons  of 39–40, 121, 141
Thalassa’s formation and  138
V
Venilia  143, 147
Venus  ixf, xii, 35, 65f, 100f, 
147–148, 147f
in Pantheon  110
son of  4, 39, 149
Vertumnus  119, 148
Vesta  75, 86, 148
Fornax and  57
in Pantheon  110
Stata Mater associated with  
135
Vestal Virgins  148
Bona Dea and  28
Camenae and  31
Rhea Silva as  126, 128
Victoria (Victory)  101, 136, 
148
Virgil (Vergil)  39, 45, 75,  
78, 147, 148–149. See also 
Aeneid
on Cacus  29
on Fama  56
Virgo (Virgin)  20, 149
constellation  of 52, 81
Virtus  136, 149
Vulcan  x, xii, 39, 66, 149
Maia (2) and  89
in Pantheon  110
Stata Mater associated with  
135
wife of  147
W
Winds  150
Z
Zagreus  151
Zelus (Zelos; Zeal; Strife)  101, 
151
Zephyrus (West Wind)  ixf,51, 
150, 151
Hyachinthus killed by  75
Zethus  151
Zeus (Day, Bright Sky)  xi, 47, 
122f, 151–154, 152f
Aegis shield of  152
Antiope and  12
childhood of  10, 152
children of  16, 20, 21, 38, 
49, 50, 95–96, 118, 119, 
131, 132, 143, 151
Europa and  6, 35, 54
loves of  153–154
Callisto  19
Io  78–79
Themis  139
Metis and  153
mother of  126, 136, 141
Myrmidons created by   
140
Olympic games and  106
Pandora and  110, 121
in Pantheon  110
Persephone and  151
Prometheus and  121, 123
rescue of siblings  152
shapes assumed by  153
sister-wife of   67, 123, 153
Taygate coveted by  137
temple of  153f
Typhon and  144
war with Titans  152–153
162  Index

