
3D Printing Designs: 
The Sun Puzzle
Create a fascinating 3D printing-ready puzzle 
in no time!
Joe Larson
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

3D Printing Designs: The Sun Puzzle
Copyright © 2016 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: June 2016
Production reference: 1140616
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78588-889-2
www.packtpub.com

Credits
Author
Joe Larson
Reviewer
Marcus Ritland
Commissioning Editor
Edward Gordon
Acquisition Editor
Vinay Argekar
Content Development Editor
Shweta Pant
Technical Editor
Vishal K. Mewada
Copy Editor
Madhusudan Uchil
Project Coordinator
Kinjal Bari
Proofreader
Safis Editing
Indexer
Hemangini Bari
Graphics
Kirk D'Penha
Production Coordinator
Shantanu N. Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu N. Zagade

About the Author
Joe Larson, known online as "the 3D Printing Professor," is one part artist, one part 
mathematician, one part teacher, and one part technologist. It all started in his youth, 
doing BASIC programming and low-resolution digital art on a Commodore 64. As 
technology progressed, so did Joe's dabbling, eventually taking him to 3D modeling 
while in high school and college, and he momentarily pursued a degree in computer 
animation. He abandoned that and instead became a math teacher, and then moved 
to software development for 10 years before returning to education, teaching 
technology in college.
When Joe first heard about 3D printing, it took root in his mind, and he went back 
to dust off his 3D modeling skills. In 2012, he won a Makerbot Replicator 3D printer 
in the Tinkercad/Makerbot Chess Challenge, with a chess set that assembles into 
a robot. Since then, his designs on Thingiverse have been featured on Thingiverse, 
Gizmodo, Shapeways, Makezine, and other places. He currently produces weekly 
videos about design for 3D printing on his YouTube channel, http://www.youtube.
com/user/mrjoesays.

About the Reviewer
Marcus Ritland is a designer and 3D printing consultant at his small business, 
Denali 3D Design. Since 2008, he has provided 3D modeling and 3D printing 
services, as well as moderating the SketchUcation 3D printing forum.
He has volunteered at a local makerspace, teaching SketchUp classes and leading 3D 
printing meetups. As an author of 3D Printing with SketchUp, he is currently on a 
quest to eliminate design-for-3D printing illiteracy.

www.PacktPub.com
eBooks, discount offers, and more
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
TM
https://www2.packtpub.com/books/subscription/packtlib
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via a web browser

[ i ]
Table of Contents
Preface	
v
Chapter 1: 3D Printing Basics	
1
What is 3D printing?	
2
What defines 3D printing?	
2
What to design for?	
3
How do FFF printers work?	
3
The anatomy of a print	
4
FFF design considerations	
5
Overhangs and supports	
6
Supportless 3D printing	
6
Y – gentle overhangs	
7
H – bridging	
8
T – orientation	
9
Wall thickness	
10
Holes in models	
10
Summary	
11
Chapter 2: Beginning Blender	
13
Why Blender?	
14
The price is right	
14
Blender is comprehensive	
14
It's getting better all the time	
14
But Blender isn't perfect	
14
Downloading and installing Blender	
15
The default view	
16
The 3D View	
17
The 3D cursor	
18

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
The best settings	
19
A scroll-wheel mouse and number pad	
20
A laptop with a touch pad and no number pad	
22
Object creation	
23
Navigating the view	
24
Rotating the view	
25
Jumping to rotation	
26
Panning the view	
26
Zooming the view	
27
Orthographic versus perspective view	
27
Wireframe and solid view	
28
Transforming the object	
29
Controlling transformations	
30
Controlling the view	
31
Axis locking	
32
Precise transformation	
34
Origin manipulation	
35
Duplicating objects	
36
Object selection	
37
Shift select	
37
Border select	
38
Circle select	
39
The Edit mode	
40
Parts of objects	
41
Incremental saving	
42
Blender to real life	
42
Exporting an STL	
43
Summary	
44
Chapter 3: Sculpting the Face of the Sun	
45
Creating the base object	
46
Setting up sculpt	
48
Drawing the face	
51
Smoothing the edges	
57
Adding the nose and eyes	
60
Pulling out the rays	
65
Sharpening the details	
70
Summary	
76

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Chapter 4: Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle	
77
Resizing the model	
78
How big should it be?	
78
Scaling with properties	
78
Building a puzzle piece	
80
Building the basic shape	
80
Sizing the puzzle piece blank	
87
Turning a shape into an object	
89
Adding some tolerance	
91
Putting it all together	
94
What if the Boolean modifier doesn't work?	
98
Exporting and printing	
99
Summary	
100
Index	
101


[ v ]
Preface
Sometimes, 3D printing needs to be precise and practical, and sometimes, it just 
needs to be fun. Like the wood-cut puzzles your grandpa may have made in his 
garage, 3D printing lets you make similar toys, but with a whole new dimension. 
Perhaps more than any other tool available, only Blender provides the combination 
of organic sculpting and robust geometric shape modeling together that makes such 
projects possible.
You will begin by learning the basics of designing for modern, economic, home 
3D printers. Then, you'll learn what you need to know about the 3D modeling and 
animation tool, Blender, to get you started. Then, we'll start using Blender's sculpting 
tools to create a shape with actions as simple as drawing. Finally, we'll use Blender's 
shape-editing tools to make the basic puzzle shape and combine that with the 
sculpted model to create the final piece.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, 3D Printing Basics, will help you understand 3D printing basics, types of 
3D printing, and how FFF printers work.
Chapter 2, Beginning Blender, will introduce Blender, how to set it up, and some basic 
and mid-level functionality. Knowing the content of this chapter will get you over 
Blender's famous learning curve and provide the basic knowledge and reference 
necessary for following along with future projects.
Chapter 3, Sculpting the Face of the Sun, teaches you how to use the sculpting tools in 
Blender to transform a basic shape into a complicated design.
Chapter 4, Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle, helps you prepare the model, followed 
by creating the puzzle space and then applying that to the model to create the 
individual pieces.

Preface
[ vi ]
What you need for this book
A computer with at least a 2-GHz CPU, 2 GB of RAM, and, of course, Blender.
Who this book is for
This book is for anyone with an interest in home 3D printing and a desire to learn the 
basics of design along with the tools that can make their ideas a reality.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different 
kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of 
their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
Now, find Ch10 Scanned Image.jpg, and right-click to save the image.
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: Start 
Blender and, as usual.
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it 
helps us develop titles that you will really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail feedback@packtpub.com, and mention 
the book's title in the subject of your message.

Preface
[ vii ]
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/
diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the 
changes in the output. You can download this file from https://www.packtpub.
com/sites/default/files/downloads/3DPrintingDesignsTheSunPuzzle_
ColorImages.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form 
link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website or 
added to any list of existing errata under the Errata section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to https://www.packtpub.com/books/
content/support and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required 
information will appear under the Errata section.
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all 
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.

Preface
[ viii ]
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at 
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

[ 1 ]
3D Printing Basics
As cool as 3D printing is, there is a lot of hype around it, which sometimes causes 
confusion. Before starting to design for 3D printing, it's best to know a little bit about 
3D printing technologies.
3D printing is a limitless technology in the sense that there is no end to the things it 
can make. Still, that doesn't mean that it can make anything without limitations. 3D 
printing can make things that no other manufacturing method can, but it has rules 
that need to be followed to ensure success. There are different types of 3D printing 
as well, and each type comes with its benefits and drawbacks:

3D Printing Basics
[ 2 ]
In this chapter, we'll discuss:
•	
What is 3D printing?
•	
What types of 3D printing are there?
•	
How do FFF printers work?
•	
The anatomy of an FFF print.
•	
Supportless 3D printing and YHT.
•	
Wall thickness and tolerances.
What is 3D printing?
3D printing is cool. It seems as if not a day passes without another mention of 
3D printing online in the news and media. Everyone is getting excited about 3D 
printing. But when you look deeper, it seems as if everything is being 3D printed, 
and anything could be. Does 3D printing something make it better? What exactly is 
3D printing?
In many ways, 3D printers are just tools, the same as any that you'd find in a wood 
shop or garage. These tools make cool things, but not on their own, and just because 
something is made with, say, an electric drill press, that doesn't automatically make 
it better than something that isn't. It's the things that people, like you, are doing with 
these tools that make them cool.
I'm not saying that 3D printing isn't cool by itself. 3D printing lets you create things, 
test them, change their design, and try something new quickly until you get it right. 
It makes things of incredible complexity and, because it's additive manufacturing, 
generates comparatively little waste. The availability of cheaper and faster 3D 
printers means that there's a chance that there's a 3D printer near you.
What defines 3D printing?
There are many different types of 3D printers, but what makes them all similar is 
that they build solid shapes from layers of materials, starting with an empty build 
area and filling it with the print. This is called additive manufacturing, and it 
produces less waste than other techniques, such as starting with a base material 
that is cut away to make the thing.

Chapter 1
[ 3 ]
3D printers also benefit from being computer-controlled machines, also known as 
computerized numerical control (CNC) machines, meaning they do what they do 
with minimal human interaction after the design work is done. They can make many 
identical copies of a thing one right after the other, and the design can be shared 
online so that others can make their own copies.
While all 3D printing shares come common features, there are several distinct types 
of 3D printing that vary in how they produce the print. Fused filament fabrication 
(FFF), powder bed, or light polymerization, for example, all accomplish 3D printing 
in very different ways, and each with their own strengths and weaknesses. What 
works in powder bed 3D printing might not work with FFF 3D printing, and the part 
you get from light polymerization might not be suitable for the same usage as those 
made with the other techniques.
What to design for?
It is the best practice to always design towards the strengths and weaknesses of the 
medium you'll be using. The projects in this series of books will focus on designing 
for FFF 3D printers, because they're inexpensive and more readily available than 
the others, and the parts made with FFF 3D printers are suitable for a wide variety 
of functional uses. Also, many of the techniques for FFF design transfer to the other 
types of 3D printing. But because FFF 3D printers have limitations, there will be 
some things you need to know first.
How do FFF printers work?
There tends to be a lot of variation within the family of FFF 3D printers. Some 
have their mechanisms exposed to the environment so that they're easy to repair, 
while some are protected with fancy covers so that they look good. Some have one 
extruder, while some have two or more. Some have fancy interface screens, and 
some require you to use a computer to access even the most basic functions. Yet, 
for all their variations, there are many similarities that all FFF printers share which 
define their type. Being familiar with how FFF 3D printers work will help you guide 
yourself while designing for them.

3D Printing Basics
[ 4 ]
For FFF 3D printers, a computer takes a 3D model and translates it into commands 
that the printer can follow. The printer then takes a roll of plastic filament on a spool 
and uses a feeder mechanism to feed it into the hot end, where the plastic filament 
is melted and squirted out at a controlled rate onto the print bed, where the print 
is built up. The extruder head and print bed are moved relative to each other in 3 
dimensions, using some sort of movement system in order to create the 3D model:
Drawing a print layer by layer like this takes, as might be expected, a little bit of 
time. The larger the object, the longer a print will take. FFF 3D printing isn't a fast 
process. But once the process is done, a new thing will have been created.
The anatomy of a print
Now that the mechanics of FFF 3D printing are clear, it's time to take a look at how 
a print is built. If an FFF print is stopped partway through, or observed during 
printing, the following can be seen:

Chapter 1
[ 5 ]
The following are the different parts shown in the preceding image:
•	
Layers: FFF prints in layers, with each layer sitting on the one below it. Prints 
can be made with thicker layers so that they print faster or thinner layers so 
that they look better.
•	
Outlines: When starting a layer, the outline of that layer will usually be 
printed first. FFF prints often have two or more outlines so that the outside 
of the print is strong.
•	
Infill: once the outline is done, the rest of the layer is filled in. If an area of 
the print will not be seen from the outside when the print is done, a loose 
infill is used to save material and give layers above something to sit on. 
Top layers are filled in completely. Most FFF prints are largely hollow.
FFF design considerations
The basic limitations of FFF printers stem from the fact that most FFF 3D printers 
are developed by people who have very little accountability. To the people creating 
and manufacturing these printers, if the printer can print a thing most of the time, 
then that's probably good enough. In this way, FFF printers are more like garage 
tools than desktop machines. For those unfamiliar with FFF printers, there are 
some drawbacks that need to be taken into account.

3D Printing Basics
[ 6 ]
Overhangs and supports
FFF 3D printers have to worry about overhang. Overhang is when a part of the 
design, when it prints, will not have anything between it and the build platform. To 
compensate for this, the 3D printer can build a lattice of support material up to the 
overhanging part. After the print, the support material will have to be removed. But 
since for most FFF 3D printers the support material is made of the same material as 
the object, it can rarely be removed without a trace that is sometimes difficult to clean 
up completely and can leave a mess on more complex prints:
Because of the troubles with supports, it's a good idea to design for 
supportless 3D printing.
Supportless 3D printing
Think about building a snowman or sand castle. There's a lot that can be done with 
the medium of sand or snow, but try to get too fancy with the design and it will fall 
apart. As long as every part is sitting on top of something, chances are it will hold 
together. You could even slope gently outwards, as long as you don't push it too far.

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
It's the same with 3D prints. Because it prints in layers, each layer needs to have 
something to lay down on. If a design is made so that a part has nothing underneath 
it and is dangling in the air, then the printer will still extrude some plastic to try 
to print the part, but with nothing to print on, the plastic will just drool from the 
extruder until it gets wiped off on some other part, making an ugly mess and 
ruining the print.
As long as you put some thought into it, you can make designs that will succeed in 
most cases. There are a few rules that can help, and these rules can be illustrated with 
the letters Y, H, and T.
Y – gentle overhangs
Think about 3D printing a capital letter Y, standing up on the build platform—
something like this:
As the print gets to the part where the arms of the Y branch out, the change is 
gradual. It is possible to have the current layer slightly larger than the previous one, 
provided the overhang is gentle. Generally, a 45-degree overhang is safe. Hence, 
a shape like the letter Y will successfully print standing up.

3D Printing Basics
[ 8 ]
However, if the overhang is too great or too abrupt, the new layer will droop, 
causing a print to fail. Some 3D printer owners pride themselves in pushing their 
overhang and have seen success with angles as steep as 80 degrees, but to be safe, 
keep your angles no more than 45 degrees.
H – bridging
If a part of the print has nothing above it but has something supporting it on 
either side, like a capital letter H standing up, then it may be able to bridge the 
gap when printing:
Use caution when bridging. The printer makes no special effort when making 
bridges; they are drawn like any other layer: outline first, then infill. As long as the 
outline has something to attach to on both sides, it should be fine. But if that outline 
is too complex or contains parts that will print in midair, it may not succeed. Being 
aware of bridges in the design and keeping them simple is the key to successful 
bridging. Even with a simple bridge, some 3D printers need a little bit more 
calibration to print it well.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Hence, a shape like the capital letter H will successfully print most of the time 
because of bridging.
T – orientation
If you were to try to print a capital letter T standing up on the build platform, 
you would surely run into problems:
The top arms have far too much overhang to print successfully. Of course, the 
solution to this is simple: when designing, flip the T over or lay it down. In fact, 
every letter of the alphabet will print successfully if laid on its back, but the letter T 
illustrates this best. Sometimes, when designing a part for 3D printing, it's good to 
turn it around and orient it so that it prints well. Not every print needs to be printed 
in the same way it's going to be used.

3D Printing Basics
[ 10 ]
Wall thickness
There is a minimum size of things that a 3D printer can print. This size is determined 
by the size of the hole in the nozzle, called the nozzle diameter. The most common 
nozzle diameter is 0.4 mm; however, most printers will not print a wall with a single 
extrusion thickness. They require that a wall be at least as thick as two nozzle widths, 
which in most cases means walls need to be at least 0.8 mm. However, because of 
the way slicers calculate outlines, 0.8 mm isn't just a minimum wall thickness—it's 
a target. For instance, if the wall is 1 mm thick, it won't be able to fill in the gap 
between the outlines, and there will be an air pocket. And while 0.4 mm is a very 
common nozzle diameter, it is not the only nozzle diameter, so a 0.8 mm wall may 
still be too thin for some 3D printers.
For thickness, it's best to err on the side of caution. A 2 mm wall is thick enough that 
slicers can use one or two outlines without conflict and still have room for a little 
infill, no matter the nozzle diameter. This will make solid prints that will succeed in 
almost all cases, and 2 mm is still fairly thin, allowing for considerable detail. Unless 
you are designing for a specific printer or planning to share your model with others, 
always make your walls a minimum of 2 mm thick to be safe.
Holes in models
Models for 3D printing must be closed, that is to say, they must have no holes in 
them. In a classic cartoon, there was a scene where bubbles were blown, but they 
were not bubble shaped. They were square, squiggly, and pink-elephant shaped. 
But no matter their shape, they were still bubbles. If a hole developed in them, 
they popped. In the same way, models for 3D printing cannot have holes:

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
In mathematical terms, holes in models are included in a family of errors called 
non-manifold. Models for 3D printing must be manifold or else the slicer will have 
trouble telling what is supposed to be the inside and outside of the model.
In the same vein, a wall by itself, without an inside or outside, isn't printable because 
a 2D wall has no thickness and doesn't describe a shape that can exist in real life. 3D 
prints must be part of a three-dimensional shape with a thickness, as described in the 
previous section.
Summary
3D printing is cool and allows the creation of fantastic and detailed objects without 
needing much interaction with people after the design is done. But designing for 3D 
printing is a lot like designing for any other type of manufacturing. It helps to know 
a bit about the process involved and design with that process in mind.
Fused filament fabrication 3D printing, or FFF for short, is one of the oldest, most 
mature, and cheapest forms of 3D printing, so this series will focus on designing for 
it. It involves melting a plastic filament and drawing the object layer by layer, with 
each layer sitting on top of the one below it.
Designing for the most effective FFF printing means thinking about overhangs and 
supports and about the parts of the prints that don't have anything underneath them 
when they print. To avoid needing supports when printing, it can help to remember 
the letters Y, H, and T when designing, in order to remember to consider gradual 
overhangs, bridging, and orientation. In addition, it's important to remember that 
details should be, generally, about 2 mm thick.
Now that the mechanics of 3D printing and how they affect design have been 
covered, the next chapter will deal with the specific software that will be used 
in this series.


[ 13 ]
Beginning Blender
3D printers need 3D models to print. Those models don't just come out of nowhere. 
You will need imagination, a little time, and software to create 3D models for the 
things you want to print. Never have there been more software options for creating 
3D models—professional and free options. In this series, the software of choice is 
called Blender.
This chapter will introduce Blender, how to set it up, and some basic and 
mid-level functionality. Knowing the content of this chapter will get you over 
Blender's infamous learning curve and provide the basic knowledge and reference 
material necessary to follow along with future projects. We'll cover these topics:
•	
Why Blender?
•	
Downloading and installing Blender
•	
The default view
•	
The best settings
•	
Object creation
•	
Navigating the view
•	
Transforming
•	
Controlling transformations
•	
Selecting
•	
The edit mode
•	
Blender to real life
•	
Exporting an STL

Beginning Blender
[ 14 ]
Why Blender?
With so many options for 3D modeling software, why would Blender, a software 
designed to make 3D animations, be the most popular choice?
The price is right
First things first: you don't have to pay for Blender. It is offered free of charge. 
If it works for you, you always have the option to donate, but Blender doesn't 
do anything to force this point. It is free now and forever.
Blender is comprehensive
While it's true that Blender is designed for animation because it covers everything 
from a blank canvas to a finished animation, it contains the ability to model objects, 
and it's one of the most robust suites of modeling tools anywhere. Learning Blender 
means that you may never need to learn another 3D modelling software.
It's getting better all the time
Blender is in constant development. If it doesn't have a feature you need, chances 
are that it may one day. Blender's developers are constantly responding to 
their audience.
But Blender isn't perfect
Despite Blender's advantages, it has a well-earned reputation for having a 
difficult-to-overcome learning curve. It's had a long and organic development 
cycle, which left it with a default user interface that isn't intuitive compared 
to most other software.
But Blender is also very configurable and, with a few simple settings, it can be made 
much easier for the beginner to use. The rest of this chapter will help get you past 
Blender's short comings so that you can start developing awesome 3D models.

Chapter 2
[ 15 ]
Downloading and installing Blender
The first thing that needs to be done is downloading and installing Bender. 
Follow these steps:
1.	 On your PC or Mac, open a your web browser and go to 
http://www.blender.org.
2.	 Locate the Blender download button on the main page for the latest version 
of Blender and click on it:
3.	 Scroll down and find Download under Blender and click on it. If you're on 
Windows and unsure, just choose the MSI package option.
4.	 When the installer finishes downloading, run it.
5.	 Follow the prompts to install Blender.
6.	 When the installer is finished, run Blender. Click anywhere to close the 
splash screen.
Blender is now installed and ready to use.

Beginning Blender
[ 16 ]
The default view
Blender's interface is made up of many smaller windows called panels. There are 
many different panels available in Blender. Like most things in Blender, the panels 
are completely configurable. Panels can be added or removed as needed, and 
panel layouts can be saved and switched among easily. For simplicity, the default 
view—the way Blender is presented the first time it loads up—will be used 
throughout this series. It provides most of the necessary functionality:
For the most part, the screens shown in this book series will look 
similar to the default Blender screen. The major change will be to 
the background color of the 3D View, a choice made to make the 
illustrations more compatible with printing.
Here's an explanations of the different panels in the default view:
•	
The Info panel: Located across the top of the window, the Info panel has 
many of the menu options in most programs, such as File, Window, and 
Help. It also has Layout settings, Scene settings, and Renderer options, but 
we won't be using them much. Finally, there are specific details about the 
version of Blender, the current scene, and selected objects. If the Info panel 
is cut off, bringing the mouse pointer over to the panel and using the scroll 
wheel will bring the information into view.

Chapter 2
[ 17 ]
•	
The Outliner: Located in the upper-right section of the window, the Outliner 
contains the list of all objects.
•	
The Properties panel: Located in the lower-right section of the window, 
the Properties panel is broken into many tabs related to the currently selected 
object. Which tabs and properties are available will change depending on 
what is selected. If the tabs are cut off, bringing the mouse pointer over them 
and using the scroll wheel will bring them back into view.
•	
The Timeline: This panel is largely unnecessary for the purposes of this book 
series, so it can be removed or ignored.
•	
The 3D View: Taking up most of the screen, the 3D View is where most 
things will be happening, and it consists of many smaller parts itself.
Each of the panels has its own keyboard shortcuts. In order to use them, the mouse 
pointer must be over the panel. If a keyboard shortcut isn't working, it's probably 
because the mouse pointer isn't in the right place.
The 3D View
Because it's so complex and important, the 3D View will be given some 
special attention.
The 3D View is where most of the action takes place, and it has the most visual 
feedback of the work. The 3D View has its own menus and panels:

Beginning Blender
[ 18 ]
Here's what the panels do:
•	
Menu: At the bottom of the 3D View is its Menu. It contains options and 
commands specific to the 3D View. If the menu is cut off, bringing the 
mouse pointer over the panel and using the scroll wheel will bring the 
cut-off information into view.
•	
Tool Shelf: On the left-hand side is the Tool Shelf. It contains a tabulated set 
of buttons that can be used to do many useful things and change depending 
on the object selected. The bottom half of the Tool Shelf contains operator 
options. Any time an operation is performed, this area will be populated 
with options for that operation that can be edited until the next operation is 
performed. The Tool Shelf can be hidden or revealed by using the 3D View 
menu and selecting View | Tool Shelf or by pressing T key on the keyboard.
•	
Properties: On the right-hand side is the Properties panel. Hidden by 
default, this panel contains information about the currently selected object as 
well as other options about the scene in general. The panel can be hidden or 
revealed by using the 3D View menu and selecting View | Properties or by 
pressing N key on the keyboard.
•	
Main View: Of course, in the middle is the view of the current scene with all 
the visible objects.
The 3D cursor
In the 3D View, there is a little red-and-white circle that starts in the middle of the 
3D space. New objects will be created wherever the 3D cursor is located, and it's 
very easy to move the 3D cursor accidently, so it'd be good to know how to put the 
3D cursor back in the middle and how to move it on purpose. The 3D cursor can be 
manipulated by:
1.	 Clicking the right mouse button in the 3D View to move the 3D 
cursor wherever it is clicked in a plane relative to the view, which 
can be unpredictable.

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
2.	 Navigating to View | Align View | Center Cursor and View All or pressing 
Shift + C on the keyboard while in the 3D View to put the 3D cursor back 
in the middle quickly. This is the easiest way to fix the 3D cursor if it gets 
moved unexpectedly.
3.	 Typing the 3D cursor's X, Y, and Z coordinates in the 3D View properties.
The best settings
Blender has a reputation for being difficult and unintuitive to use. This is true for the 
default settings. However, Blender is also very easily adjustable with a few settings 
and can be made much easier to use. How you set up your instance of Blender will 
depend on what your setup is like.

Beginning Blender
[ 20 ]
To access the settings, in the top menu select File | User Preferences. In the Blender 
User Preferences panel that comes up, select the Input tab button:
A scroll-wheel mouse and number pad
The recommended setup for Blender is to use your keyboard and a mouse with 
a scroll wheel. In this case, there is only one setting that is recommended to be 
changed from the default:
1.	 Click on the button that says Left under the words Select With.
2.	 Click on the button that says Save User Settings:

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Changing this one setting will make Blender much more intuitive to use.
Because the default is for the right mouse button to be the select button, and some 
may prefer to keep this default, this book will refer to whatever option is chosen 
as the select mouse button, and the other button as the not-select mouse button. 
While still a bit confusing, it will help users who miss this section.
With a scroll-wheel mouse, the scroll wheel can be depressed for a middle mouse 
button click. Blender uses this middle mouse button to manipulate the view.
If you have a Numpad but no scroll-wheel mouse, it is still recommended to use 
these settings because the interface will be much more intuitive, although you will be 
sacrificing some functionality that the middle mouse click offers. The choice is yours 
whether it's worth having a more intuitive interface.

Beginning Blender
[ 22 ]
A laptop with a touch pad and no number pad
On a laptop with a touchpad (with no middle click) and no number pad, both very 
important for navigating the view, select the following settings:
•	
Emulate 3 Button Mouse
•	
Emulate Numpad
•	
Click on the button that says Save User Settings
With this setup, most of Blender's functionality is available to laptop users, although 
these settings are less intuitive. With these settings, you will need to use the right 
mouse button to select objects, Ctrl + right mouse button as a middle mouse button 
to change the view, and the number keys across the top will perform the function of 
the number pad on a regular keyboard.

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
With Blender set up, it's time to start learning to use it. Close the User 
Preferences window.
Blender users tend to use keyboard shortcuts for almost everything. 
It's recommended that you use Blender with one hand on the mouse 
and the other on the keyboard. Learning and using keyboard shortcuts 
will speed up your process and, with just a little practice, will become 
second nature. Going forward, all methods of accessing commands will 
be taught. Try to practice using the keyboard shortcuts.
Object creation
Most tutorials for Blender start with navigating the 3D View. But in Blender, the 
default scene is kind of boring for this, just a cube that looks the same from every 
angle. Instead, let's make something more interesting to look at.
First, let's look at how to clear the default scene:
1.	 Select all the objects in the scene by going to the 3D View menu and choosing 
Select | (De)select all twice or pressing the A key twice. Everything in the 
scene should have an orange line around it. If not, do it again.
2.	 Delete everything by going to the 3D View menu and choosing 
Object | Delete or pressing the X key.
Your 3D View should now have nothing but the grid, which can be thought of as the 
floor of the scene.
To create an object, go to 3D View menu, choose Add or press Shift + A.
In the menu that pops up are all the basic objects that can be inserted into the scene. 
Blender offers many basic shapes that can serve as a starting point for anything you 
want to create. Sometimes, a basic object is all you need, and sometimes, the basic 
object needs to be modified.

Beginning Blender
[ 24 ]
In this case, add a Monkey object to the scene:
1.	 In the 3D View menu, choose Add or press Shift + A.
2.	 Select Mesh | Monkey in the menu that appears.
The Monkey object is good when learning to navigate the view because it's easy to 
see which way it's facing, no matter how the view changes. So, with a monkey object 
in the scene, it's time to learn how to change your perspective.
Navigating the view
Because Blender is all about working in 3D, but computer screens are flat, it is 
important to know how to change how you're looking at something in Blender.
All of the following commands can also be found in the 3D View 
menu under View | View Navigation; however, since adjusting the 
view happens so frequently, it is recommended to learn the mouse and 
keyboard shortcuts instead of navigating menus to do this.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
Rotating the view
In Blender, you can change the angle of the view by:
•	
Clicking and holding the middle mouse button and moving the 
mouse pointer.
•	
Pressing 2 or 8 on the number pad to rotate the view up and down.
•	
Pressing 4 or 6 on the number pad to rotate the view left and right.
The point at which the view is rotating can change. Follow these steps to center the 
view rotation on a specific object:
1.	 Select the object.
2.	 Press the . (period) key on the number pad.
The selected object will fill the view and all view rotations will now center 
on that object:

Beginning Blender
[ 26 ]
Jumping to rotation
Blender has six set views that can be quickly jumped to at any time:
•	
Press 1 on the number pad to jump to the front view
•	
Press 3 on the number pad to jump to the right view
•	
Press 7 on the number pad to jump to the top view
•	
Press Ctrl + 7 or 9 on the number pad to jump to the bottom view
•	
Press Ctrl + 1 on the number pad to jump to the back view
•	
Press Ctrl + 3 to jump to the left view
Panning the view
Panning the view means moving without changing the rotation, like moving 
your head while it's still pointed in the same direction. To pan the view, 
follow these steps:
•	
Press Ctrl + 4 on the number pad to pan left
•	
Press Ctrl + 6 on the number pad to pan right
•	
Press Ctrl + 8 on the number pad to pan up
•	
Press Ctrl + 2 on the number pad to pan down
•	
Hold Shift while clicking and holding the middle mouse button and 
move the mouse

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Panning the view is one of the functions that changes the center of 
rotation. Remember: you can reset the center of rotation by selecting 
an object and pressing . (period) on the number pad.
Zooming the view
Zooming the view is moving closer to or farther from the object. To zoom the view, 
do one of the following:
1.	 Turn the scroll wheel.
2.	 Press Ctrl + middle mouse button and move the mouse.
3.	 Press + or – on the number pad.
Orthographic versus perspective view
To toggle between orthographic and perspective views, press 5 on the number pad.
The words Persp or Ortho can be seen in the upper right-hand corner of the 3D 
View, indicating which view is being used:

Beginning Blender
[ 28 ]
There are two ways of looking at the 3D View on a computer. Perspective is the 
default, and more closely resembles how things will look when viewed through 
a camera or our eyes: closer objects look bigger; farther objects look smaller. 
Orthographic makes everything the same size, no matter how close or far it is. This 
makes it easier to compare objects and determine their location relative to one another.
Because a lot of 3D modelling requires precision, orthographic is generally preferred; 
however, it can be confusing when two objects overlap exactly. For this reason, it's 
good to adjust the view frequently and be sure that the action you're preforming is 
the action you think you're performing.
Wireframe and solid view
With 3D modelling tools, it helps to be Superman. Being able to see through 
objects can help when selecting and modelling things. You can switch between 
the Wireframe and Solid views using one of these methods:
1.	 Press Z to toggle between Solid and Wireframe view.
2.	 On the 3D View menu, click on the Method to Display popup and choose 
Solid or Wireframe.
Wireframe mode is very powerful, especially in Edit mode, but it can be very 
confusing, especially as objects get more complex. Wireframe mode allows objects 
behind the objects in the foreground to be selected without adjusting the view. 
Get used to switching between Solid and Wireframe mode frequently.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
Transforming the object
In Blender, transforming an object changes the size, direction, or location of a thing 
without changing its shape. There are three basic transformation commands that are 
used frequently: Grab and Move, Rotate, and Scale.
To transform an object, be sure the object is selected, and then, from the 
3D View menu:
•	
Select Object | Transform | Grab/Move or press G on the keyboard to move 
the object
•	
Select Object | Transform | Scale or press S on the keyboard to scale 
the object
•	
Select Object | Transform | Rotate or press R on the keyboard to rotate 
the object
Then, move the mouse or use the arrow keys to transform the object. When the 
transformation has been accomplished, press Enter or the select mouse button 
to end the operation, or the transformation can be cancelled by pressing the 
not-select mouse button or the Esc key. The following diagram shows these 
object transformations:

Beginning Blender
[ 30 ]
Transformations can also be undone after they're completed by pressing Ctrl + Z.
Transform the Monkey added to the scene by moving, rotating, and 
scaling it. Get a feel for how these commands work. Then, try to move 
the Monkey to a specific place in the scene. When you think you have it, 
change your view to see whether it's really where you think it is.
Controlling transformations
By default, operators in Blender operate on a 2D plane tangential to the view. This is 
a fancy way of saying that without any additional controls, it can be hard to predict 
how a movement or rotation operation will work. For instance, moving something 
in a random view can include moving up and down more than expected. This effect 
won't be clear until the view is changed and the transformation is inspected from a 
different angle, as shown here:
If you can't predict how operations will work, it can be hard to make the things 
you want. So it is very important to be able to control transformations.
There are two main ways of controlling operators: controlling the view and 
axis locking.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Controlling the view
The first way to control the operation is by controlling the view. By default, operators 
depend on the view, so by controlling the view, you can control the action. For 
instance, an object, when added to a scene, is exactly halfway through the grid plane 
of the world by default. If you want to make sure the object stays halfway through 
the grid plane when moving, follow these steps:
1.	 Select a newly added object.
2.	 Switch to Top Ortho view by pressing 7 on the number pad.
3.	 Grab and move (G) the object around.
Adjust the view to see how exactly how the object moved. When moved while in 
the top view, the object stays on the grid plane. This is because from the top view, 
only forward, backward, and side-to-side motion is possible.
In the same way, moving objects while in the side views will only move them 
forward and back and up and down, and while in the front or back view, they 
will only move side to side and up and down.

Beginning Blender
[ 32 ]
Likewise, rotating depends on the view. When viewing from the top, rotation will be 
like, a top spinning around its middle. If viewed from the side when doing rotation, 
it will flip over its middle, and if viewed from the front, it will roll side to side 
around its middle.
Controlling the view is a quick and easy way of controlling movement and rotation, 
but always be sure to adjust the view to make sure things are happening the way 
you expect. However, to control scaling, as well as to control movement and rotation 
independent of the view, there is another way.
Axis locking
Blender has special commands for changing the behavior of operations. 
These commands are available while performing transformations.
The first thing to understand is about the three axes that we'll be locking along. 
3D refers to the three dimensions, or unique directions, that things happen in. The 
dimensions are called by the letters X, Y, and Z. There is an illustration in the corner 
of the 3D View that shows which way is which, and is always pointing in the 
right direction:
In Blender, and generally in 3D printing, X is side-to-side motion, Y is 
back-and-forth motion, and Z is up and down. In the previous screenshot, 
the X axis is red, Y is green, and Z is blue.
When performing a transformation, you can lock the transformation to the axis you 
want by starting the transformation as mentioned previously, and while moving the 
mouse or using the keyboard, doing the following:
•	
Pressing X, Y, or Z on your keyboard to lock the transformation to the 
desired axis
•	
Pressing Ctrl + X, Ctrl + Y, or Ctrl + Z to lock the transformation to all but 
the chosen axis

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
•	
Holding the middle mouse button and moving the mouse to choose an axis 
to lock the transformation to
Try out axis locking with movement, rotation, and scaling, and adjust 
the view to see what effect it has. Notice that with axis locking, the 
scale function has some additional abilities that aren't possible just by 
controlling the view. It actually only scales in the chosen axis. This can be 
very powerful while adjusting the shape of objects.

Beginning Blender
[ 34 ]
Precise transformation
Finally, under the category of controlling transformations, during transformation 
operations, the transformation can be precisely controlled by typing in a number that 
will relate to the operation being performed or edited afterwards in the operation 
properties in the tool box, on the left side of the 3D View. In other words, to move 
something exactly two units up, for example, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the object.
2.	 Start the movement transformation (G).
3.	 Type Z to lock the movement to the Z axis.
4.	 Type 2 on the keyboard.
5.	 Press Enter or click the select mouse button to finish the operation.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Typing commands has different effects for different commands, as follows:
•	
When moving, typed commands are used to state the number of units an 
object will move along the selected axis. For example, 2 along the Z moves it 
two units up, and -2 along the Z moves it two units down.
•	
When scaling, typed commands specify the scale factor. 1 means no change, 
2 means twice as big, and 0.5 means half size.
•	
When rotating, typed commands specify clockwise degrees. For instance, 
180 turns it around backwards.
Typed commands can include negative numbers and decimals and can be edited 
with the Backspace key. While performing a transformation, the menu for the 3D 
View changes to a description of the transformation, including the typed units, 
which can be useful when editing your typed commands.
Origin manipulation
Objects in Blender have an origin. Origins are depicted as a dot and start out in the 
middle of the object. Individual object transformation commands take place relative 
to the object's origin. It's possible that the origin can be moved as a result of editing, 
which can cause unexpected results when rotating or scaling the object. The origin 
can also be moved on purpose to control the effect of modifiers.
The origin can be reset using the origin controls. The origin controls can be found by 
one of the following methods:
1.	 In the 3D View menu, choose Object | Transform and find the 
origin controls.
2.	 In the Tool Shelf, find the Set Origin dropdown and choose the 
desired option.

Beginning Blender
[ 36 ]
3.	 On the keyboard, press Ctrl + Shift + Alt + C.
These are the commands to manipulate the origin:
•	
Geometry to Origin: Move the object so that its middle is now wherever the 
origin was located.
•	
Origin to geometry: Move the origin to the middle of the object. This is the 
most common option chosen.
•	
Origin to 3D Cursor: Relocate the origin to where the 3D cursor is.
•	
Origin to Center of Mass: Calculate the center of mass of the object and 
move the origin there.
Duplicating objects
Blender can duplicate existing objects. This is very useful and can speed up making 
things. To duplicate an object, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the object to be duplicated.
2.	 In the 3D menu, choose Object | Duplicate or press Shift + D.
3.	 Move the mouse or use the arrow keys to place the duplicate (axis-
constraining commands also work at this point).

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
4.	 Press Enter or the select mouse button.
Object selection
Naturally, Blender is capable of selecting more than one object at a time. Blender has 
many tools to help when selecting objects. With multiple objects, the transformation 
commands work on all the selected objects at once. This is a powerful way of 
controlling transformations while keeping objects in relative positions to each other.
To practice selection, there need to be multiple objects to select. Create a 
scene, add an object, and then use the duplicate (Shift + D) command to 
create many objects from the one. Spread them around the scene so that 
they can be selected with the following tools.
Shift select
One way to select multiple objects at once is to hold down the Shift key while clicking 
on the desired objects one at a time. To deselect an object, it must first be made 
active. The active object is highlighted in a different color. Then it can be clicked 
again while holding the Shift key, and it will be removed from the selection.

Beginning Blender
[ 38 ]
Border select
Another way to easily select multiple objects in a scene is to use the border select 
command and draw a box around the objects you want to select. To border select, 
choose Select | Border Select from the 3D View menu or press B on your keyboard. 
Then, click and hold down the select mouse button, move the mouse pointer, and 
release the mouse button:
If even a small part of an object is included in the box, it will be added to 
the selection.
To deselect objects with border select, use the middle mouse button when 
drawing the box.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Circle select
Circle select is another powerful tool for selecting multiple objects. To circle select, 
choose Select | Circle Select from the 3D View menu or press C on the keyboard. 
A circle will appear around the mouse pointer. Use the scroll wheel or + and – on the 
Numpad to increase or decrease the size of the circle. Then, click or click and hold 
the select mouse button, and everything inside the circle will be selected. Use the 
middle mouse button to deselect:
Circle select only adds or removes an object from the selection if its center or origin is 
inside the circle when selecting.

Beginning Blender
[ 40 ]
The Edit mode
In Blender, the Edit mode allows more access to the shape of a single object so 
that it can be manipulated in order to change its shape. To enter Edit mode, 
use this method:
1.	 Select an object.
2.	 In the 3D View menu, locate the mode pop-up menu and select Edit Mode 
or press Tab on your keyboard.
In Edit mode, the 3D View menu, Tool Shelf, and Properties all change, adding new 
functionality only available in Edit mode:

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Parts of objects
In Edit mode, objects are broken down into three parts:
•	
Vertices: Points in three-dimensional space. Vertices don't have any shape 
by themselves
•	
Lines: Two points are connected with a straight line between them
•	
Faces: Three or more lines can be connected to make a face
There are many ways to think about vertices, lines, and faces. For instance, if making 
a kite, the vertices are the joints, the lines are the sticks, and the bits of paper are the 
faces. If the location of the vertices is moved, the shape of the kite will change. It's the 
same with a 3D object. Editing by vertices, lines, or faces will affect the rest.
The Edit mode is by default in vertex select mode, meaning any selection or 
transformation is applied to vertices, but it's easy to switch by locating the vertex, 
line, or face select buttons in the 3D View menu or by pressing Ctrl + Tab and 
selecting the desired option from the menu that pops up:
Try out Select mode. Select groups of vertices, edges, and faces, using circle and 
border select. Try moving, rotating, and scaling them and see how it effects the shape 
of the object. Try simple basic shapes such as cubes and circles. See how Wireframe 
mode affects selection. Notice how the other objects in the scene can't be accessed.
A lot of what happens in the projects will happen in Edit mode. But the individual 
projects will better teach you how to use it.

Beginning Blender
[ 42 ]
Incremental saving
It is always a good idea to save your work frequently. To save your work in Blender, 
choose File | Save from the info panel or press Ctrl + S. Then, navigate to a chosen 
folder or directory, give the file a name, and click on the Save As Blender File button 
or press the Enter key.
It is recommended that each Blender project gets its own folder and that all projects 
be saved in a location that will be easy to find later.
It is also a good idea, while learning especially, to give each version of the file you 
save a slightly different name. This way, there is a history of the work done and it's 
easy to go back in the case of a mistake that isn't discovered immediately. This is 
called incremental saving and is simple to do in Blender. Simply choose File | Save 
As or press Ctrl + Shift + S to get to the save menu. If the project has been saved 
previously, it should already have a name. Next to the filename, there are plus and 
minus buttons:
By clicking on those buttons, the filename will have a number attached to it, and that 
number will be increased every time the plus button is clicked. Then, click on Save 
as Blender File or press the Enter key to save the file with a new filename.
Blender to real life
By default, Blender units don't make any attempt to relate to real-life measurements. 
However, after exporting a mesh, the slicing software will interpret the Blender units 
as millimeters, generally. So, it is good to think of Blender units as millimeters. This 
means that default objects in Blender are 2 mm across when they're added, which is 
fairly small.
Remember that one blender unit will be 1 mm when the file is used to 3D print 
an object.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Exporting an STL
Before they can be used in a 3D printer, 3D models created in Blender have to 
be changed to a file that the 3D printer can use. Blender's default file format isn't 
readable by 3D printers and can sometimes contain additional information that the 
3D printers don't need.
Most 3D printers use a file format called STereoLithography (STL), which contains 
just the final shape of the object. To export a finished model to an STL for 3D 
printing, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the model or models to be exported.
2.	 From the Info panel, choose File | Export | Stl (.stl).
3.	 Navigate to a chosen folder or directory.
4.	 Give the file a name.
5.	 Click on the Export STL button or press the Enter key:
Now, the STL file will be available to send to a 3D printer or printer service.

Beginning Blender
[ 44 ]
If multiple objects are selected, the exported STL will have the objects in the same 
relative orientation to each other; therefore, it's important that they don't overlap 
and are printable as oriented. It's often preferable to save separate objects in 
separate files.
Summary
A recent poll of online social sites about 3D printing showed Blender was the most 
popular choice for creating models for 3D printing. The reason is obvious, taking 
into account Blender's vast functionality. However, it could just as well be that more 
people were talking about Blender because of its challenging learning curve.
Blender is capable of creating simple primitive shapes, viewing them from any angle, 
transforming them with precision, and manipulating their individual vertices, edges, 
and faces in the powerful editing mode. The model can then be exported to a file, 
ready to be 3D printed.
Blender has many functions not even covered in this chapter, such as sculpting, 
skeletal manipulation, and how to use individual modifiers to achieve specific 
results. As these functions become important for individual projects, they will 
be covered.
Hopefully, this chapter served to introduce how powerful and comprehensive 
Blender is. However, Blender's comprehensive nature comes at the cost of being 
complex, which can be overwhelming. But don't worry. Keep this chapter at hand 
to act as a reference and a crutch in future projects until Blender's functions become 
second nature. It usually only takes one project before Blender becomes second 
nature. Once Blender is familiar, no other 3D modelling software will be necessary.

[ 45 ]
Sculpting the Face of the Sun
Sometimes, 3D printing needs to be precise and practical. And sometimes, it just 
needs to be fun, like the wood-cut puzzles your grandpa may have made in his 
garage. We'll be making similar puzzles but with a whole new dimension in order 
to take advantage of the power of 3D printing.
In addition to the basic 3D editing tools you've already learned about, Blender also 
includes some robust sculpting tools that enable editing objects with actions similar 
to drawing or building up clay. Because of its nature, sculpting facilitates a very 
organic modeling process.
There are a lot of sculpting tools available, and each one has a special use. The project 
in this book will use the most popular and useful of them to sculpt a simple model. 
This model will then be combined with basic editing outside of sculpt mode to 
create a 3D puzzle.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 46 ]
Creating the base object
Since the editing tools can only work on existing objects, the first thing to do is create 
a new object:
1.	 Start Blender and select all objects (A) and delete them (X).
2.	 Then, add an icosphere (Shift + A) through Mesh | IcoSphere.

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
Icospheres differ from normal spheres in that they don't bunch up at the poles. 
This will work out better for sculpting. But if viewed from the top (Numpad 7), 
the icosphere is not symmetrical from left to right. To fix this, follow these steps:
1.	 Rotate (R) the icosphere 90 degrees along the Y axis (Y).
2.	 To make the icosphere into a disk, scale it (S), constraining to the X and Y 
axes (Shift + Z), to about a factor of 5.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 48 ]
3.	 When the disk is the right shape, apply (Ctrl + A) Rotation & Scale.
Applying rotation and scale doesn't have any visible effect on the 
model, but it will affect other things, particularly those related to 
the sculpt tools. Before applying rotation and scale, the object you 
see was actually another object modified with rotation and scale 
and could be undone. After applying it, the object you see is what 
the object actually is. It bakes in the changes. This is important 
because some actions, such as sculpting and some modifiers, are 
actually applied to the base object.
Setting up sculpt
When entering sculpt mode for the first time, it's worth knowing the settings 
available to you and becoming acquainted with a few commonly changed defaults:
1.	 In the menu bar at the bottom of the 3D View panel, click on the Object 
Mode dropdown and select Sculpt Mode.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
2.	 Once you enter Sculpt Mode, the tool shelf to the left of the 3D View panel 
will change. In the Tools tab, there are a number of sections. The most 
common settings are in the Brush, Symmetry/Lock, and Dyntopo sections. 
Like most things in Blender, these can be customized and rearranged, so it 
might be desirable to change the order of these sections to move them to 
the top.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 50 ]
The Dyntopo, or dynamic topology, section has settings related to a 
relatively new feature for sculpting in Blender. Dynamic topology will 
increase or decrease the complexity of the model in whatever local area needs 
it in order to make the details we want to add. In other words, if we want a 
lot of detail on the top of the model where we'll be doing all our work, but 
not the bottom, which is mostly going to be ignored, we don't have to worry 
about making the whole model more or less complex. Dynamic topology will 
handle all that for us. But it needs to be turned on.
3.	 Open the Dyntopo section and click on the Enable Dyntopo button.
4.	 Change the Detail Size setting to 5.00 px.
The Detail Size value is how big the polygons will be made when sculpting. 
Notice that this setting is in px or pixels. This is a setting based on the 
view, not any actual measurements. If the view is zoomed in closer to a 
model, there will more detail added. When you zoom out, the detail may be 
reduced, eliminating some smaller details.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
If you find that your computer isn't able to handle as much 
detail as is being added to the models, you can adjust the 
Detail Size setting to a bigger number. If you decide you 
want more detail, you can set the Detail Size setting to a 
smaller number.
5.	 In the Symmetry/Lock setting, make sure the button marked X under Mirror 
is highlighted.
We're now ready to start sculpting our disk to make it a sunny face.
Drawing the face
In this section, we will make the face for our puzzle. Under the Brush tool, there is a 
whole palette of tools to use:

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 52 ]
The default brush, F SculptDraw, is the most common and is already selected, so 
we'll start with it. Switch to the Top view (Numpad 7) and follow these steps:
1.	 From the middle, nearer to the bottom, click and drag in a curve to make 
a smile:

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
2.	 Repeat the action a little lower down to finish the lips:
Remember, you can undo (Ctrl + Z) until the lips look the way 
you want them to.
Because of the symmetry setting, anything done on the left is 
repeated on the right, reducing work and making it easy for you 
to make a pleasing shape.
Because of dynamic topology, the rough polygons of the original 
shape are smoothed out so that all the details of the drawn shapes 
show through. This effect is easier to see if the view is switched to 
wireframe mode (Z).

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 54 ]
Dynamic topology will continue to add detail where we need it as we sculpt:
1.	 In the Tool Box, increase the Radius setting under the SculptDraw tool to 
about 70 px:
2.	 From the outside edge, draw a downward curve towards the middle and go 
back along the same curve to the place the motion started for the cheek.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
By repeating the motion back and forth, you can make the line taller than the 
lines for the lips if viewed from a different angle.
3.	 From the outside edge again, a little higher, draw an upward curve toward 
the middle for the eyebrows.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 56 ]
4.	 Now, set the Radius value to about 20 px. Click on the Subtract button to 
switch the drawing mode to Subtract:
5.	 Draw a little oval for the eye hole.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
Smoothing the edges
At this point, the rough shape of the face is starting to develop, but now we need to 
smooth some things out. For this, we have the smoothening tool. Follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Brush tool icon to pull up the sculpt tools.
2.	 Now, click on the F Smooth tool icon.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 58 ]
3.	 Draw back and forth along the curve above the lip to smooth out the 
upper lip.
4.	 Draw back and forth along the curve under the lip to smooth out the chin.

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
As with most things in Blender, it pays to know the keyboard shortcuts for this 
process. With sculpting, the easiest one is this interactive way to change the radius:
1.	 Hover the mouse pointer over the model and press F on the keyboard.
2.	 Move the mouse until the circle and brush shown are a little bigger than the 
space between the eye and the middle of the cheek.
3.	 Click to finish the action.
4.	 Draw back and forth along the top of the cheeks to smooth them.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 60 ]
Adding the nose and eyes
To add the details of the nose and eyes, we'll use the Inflate tool. We'll also explore a 
few more keyboard shortcuts to simplify the process. The steps are as follows:
1.	 On the keyboard, type I to switch to the Inflate tool.
2.	 Use the F key to size the brush for drawing the nose.
3.	 Size the brush and click to complete the action:

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Strength is another setting that can effect sculpting tools. You 
may have noticed it under the Radius setting. Setting Strength 
closer to 1 makes the effect of the tool stronger, while setting it 
closer to 0 makes it weaker, with 0.5 being a happy medium 
setting between them. For drawing the nose, a dramatic change 
by setting the Strength to 1 will save time and effort and, 
fortunately, there is a keyboard shortcut for doing that.
4.	 Press Shift + F on the keyboard to change the Strength setting of the tool.
5.	 Move the mouse pointer toward the middle of the Radial tool to increase the 
strength to 1.00.
6.	 Click to set the strength.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 62 ]
7.	 Draw little circles around the nose area to build up the nose.
8.	 Hold down Shift while drawing in a line from the nose to where the 
eyebrows meet to quickly smooth out the bridge of the nose.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
9.	 Adjust the view to be looking up at the nose from below.
10.	 Adjust the Brush size (F) to be about the size of a nostril.
Holding down Ctrl while using a sculpting tool toggles the 
effect, switching add to subtract or inflate to deflate.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 64 ]
11.	 Hold down Ctrl while drawing in little circles to deflate the nose holes into 
the nose.
12.	 View from the top (Numpad 7) and zoom in the view to one of the eye holes.
13.	 Resize the Brush (F) to be a little smaller than the eye hole.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
14.	 Draw little circles in the eye hole to build up an eye.
Pulling out the rays
We'll add more details to the face in a minute. First, let's finish out the main shape 
of the sun by pulling out the rays of the sun. The goal here is to make something 
curvy and artistic to look at, so for these parts, symmetry needs to be turned off first. 
Follow these steps:
1.	 On the left-hand side of the 3D View, navigate to the the Symmetry/Lock 
part of the Tools tab in the Tool Shelf and click on the X button under 
Mirror to toggle X-axis symmetry off.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 66 ]
2.	 Switch to the Snake Hook brush (K).
3.	 Adjust the view and change the Radius (F) so that the brush is about big 
enough to cover about an eighth of the edge of the face.

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
4.	 Adjust the strength of the Brush (Shift + F) to between 0.75 and 0.9.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 68 ]
5.	 From the top of the head, being sure the center of the brush catches at least a 
little bit of the edge of the head, start drawing while moving the mouse in a 
curve away from the body.
If the rays are being pulled out too far, undo the action, adjust the strength, 
and try again. If the brush is grabbing too much of the face, undo the action, 
adjust the radius, and try again.

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
6.	 Continue around the edge of the face, pulling out rays with the Snake 
Hook tool.
The Snake Hook tool is a useful tool because it quickly creates new areas that can 
be further sculpted. It can be used to make arms, tentacles, horns, or other shapes. 
Usually, it's preferable to generate a basic shape that is approximately shaped like 
the object to sculpt, but with Snake Hook, this doesn't necessarily have to be 
the case.
Sculpting is a more organic process than other modeling, so as you become 
comfortable with the tools, be sure to experiment with them and make the 
design your own.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 70 ]
Sharpening the details
At this point, the general shape of the face is set, but there can be more detail added. 
Keep in mind that with 3D printing, there is such a thing as too much detail, since 
some of it won't come through. Then again, details tend to be the most impressive 
part, so spending some time sharpening some edges may be of benefit. Here's how:
1.	 In the Tool Shelf, under Symmetry/Lock, click on the X button under Mirror 
so that it is highlighted in order to toggle mirroring back on.
2.	 Switch to the Crease tool (Shift + C).

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
3.	 Make sure the Add button in the Tool Shelf is highlighted. If not, click on it 
so it is highlighted.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 72 ]
4.	 Adjust the view and change the Radius (F) until the brush is big enough to 
cover the bridge of the cheek.
5.	 Draw a line following the bridge of the cheek to sharpen it a bit.

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
6.	 Draw in a line around the eyebrows and down the bridge of the nose.
7.	 While holding down Ctrl, draw a line following the curve of the mouth.

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 74 ]
8.	 Adjust the view to zoom in on one eye.
9.	 While holding down Ctrl, deepen the crease around the eyes and maybe add 
some smile lines.
The Crease tool is great for adding small details such as lines or ridges to the 
model and can really give your design some style. But use caution—additive 
creases can create undesired ridges if overused. Be sure to adjust your view 
to make sure that isn't happening. If it does, remember that you can undo 
or smooth quickly without switching brushes by holding down Shift while 
drawing at any time as well. If elements aren't where you want them, the 
Grab brush (G) will allow you to reposition things to a certain degree.

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
10.	 Continue to adjust the look of the model until you're satisfied with the look.
For the next steps, we'll be using the Object Mode tools, so after sculpting is done, 
switch back to Object Mode and click on the Sculpt Mode dropdown in the menu of 
the 3D View and select Object Mode:

Sculpting the Face of the Sun
[ 76 ]
Here is a handy guide for easy reference to some of the keyboard 
shortcuts used in sculpt mode. For a complete set of shortcuts, be sure to 
check the Blender manual online.
•	
F: Change brush size
•	
Shift + F: Change brush strength
•	
Shift while drawing: Quick smooth
•	
Ctrl while drawing: Toggle brush direction.
•	
X: The SculptDraw brush
•	
I: The Inflate brush
•	
Shift + C: The Crease brush
•	
G: The Grab brush
•	
K: The Snake Hook brush
Summary
In this chapter, we used the sculpting tools in Blender to transform a basic shape 
into a complicated design. Dynamic topology managed the issues of resolution, 
automatically adding geometry where it was needed to create the effect we wanted. 
With tools such as SculptDraw, Smooth, and Inflate, the model quickly took shape. 
Hotkeys sped up the process. The Crease brush added some style and if it was 
required, the Grab brush gave us the power to adjust the placement of things, 
all with movements as natural as drawing.
In the next chapter, we'll take the model created here, combined with some more 
traditional modeling, and divide this model into a puzzle.

[ 77 ]
Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
The sculpting was done in the previous chapter; it's now time to cut the model 
into pieces suitable for 3D printing. This is accomplished with Blender's traditional 
object-editing tools, as opposed to the sculpting tools used in the last chapter. 
Blender's combination of organic and more rigid object modeling is one of the things 
that makes it so powerful and versatile. In this chapter, we'll prepare the model, 
create the puzzle space, and apply that to the model to create the individual pieces:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 78 ]
Resizing the model
While sculpting the sun face, there was very little effort made to make the model 
conform to a particular size. However, this is an important consideration when 
building the model for 3D printing because of tolerance considerations, which 
will be covered in more detail later.
How big should it be?
Every 3D printer has a range of print areas that it can handle. Naturally, if designing 
for a particular 3D printer, this should be taken into account.
For this project, the model is going to be sized so that it will be too big for any 
printer to print. The smallest popular 3D printer on the market has a print bed 
of 120 mm squared, or about 4" on each side, so that one will be what this model 
will be resized for.
Scaling with properties
At the end of the previous chapter, the sculpted face was left in Object Mode. Before 
continuing, make sure that the project is still in Object Mode, or some later steps 
may get confusing.

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
Follow these steps to scale the model:
1.	 In the Properties panel (N), to the right of the default view, locate the 
Dimensions pane:
2.	 Change the X dimension to 100.
3.	 Now, locate the Scale setting, just above Dimensions, and make note of the 
X scale necessary to make this model 100 mm wide:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 80 ]
4.	 Round the scale value off to something easy to type (such as 6.5 in this 
example) and type this value in for the scale for X, Y, and Z:
Building a puzzle piece
Now, let's build a basic puzzle piece that can be used to turn the sun into a puzzle.
Building the basic shape
Let's get started with the basic shape of a puzzle piece:
1.	 On the menu at the bottom of the 3D View, locate the layers pane, which 
looks like an array of connected boxes. Each box is a separate layer.

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
2.	 Click on an empty layer:
The sun will disappear, but that's simply because it's on another layer, the one with 
the orange dot in it. Organizing objects in different layers in Blender is a great way to 
ensure that things don't quickly get out of hand and to ensure that there is no need to 
hide or unhide individual objects. In addition, multiple layers can be viewed at once 
if desired, so you can work on related objects. For now, we'll use this empty layer to 
start building our puzzle object:
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a Grid object:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 82 ]
2.	 Under the Tool Shelf to the left of the 3D View are the properties of the new 
Grid. Before clicking on anything else, change the X Subdivisions and Y 
Subdivisions values to 6:
The Grid subdivisions won't be visible until you check its geometry by 
toggling Edit Mode quickly. For later steps, though, this piece needs to be 
positioned in the back-right quadrant of the 3D grid that we're working on. 
In other words, one corner of this grid needs to be sitting on the origin.
In Blender, you can transform things with exact precision by 
typing the number to transform it by on the keyboard while 
executing the command, instead of moving the mouse.
3.	 Move (G) the grid along the X axis (X) 1 unit.
4.	 Then, move (G) the grid along the Y axis (Y) 1 unit.

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
5.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab) and deselect all points (A):

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 84 ]
6.	 From the origin, select the second and third vertices to the right:
7.	 Delete (X) the selected Edges:

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
8.	 From the origin, select the second and third vertices in the Y direction:
9.	 Extrude (E) the selected edge -0.4 units. Be sure to type the amount to 
extrude on the keyboard, remembering to hit the - key when you do.

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 86 ]
10.	 Scale (S) the selected edge by a factor of 1.5. Again, be sure to type the scale 
factor in.
11.	 Select the two vertices at the top of the hole made when deleting the 
edge earlier:
12.	 Scale (S) this edge by a factor of 1.5 as well:

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
13.	 Leave Edit Mode (Tab).
This creates the basic, but flat, shape of an interlocking puzzle piece. Because both 
the tab and hole are made with complementary actions, they will mate perfectly.
Sizing the puzzle piece blank
Now to make the puzzle piece the appropriate size for the sculpted part:
1.	 In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View, locate the Pivot Center drop-
down menu, which looks like two overlapping circles by default:
2.	 Click on the Pivot Center dropdown and select 3D Cursor:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 88 ]
3.	 Be sure the 3D Cursor is still at the origin by re-centering the view (Shift + C) 
if necessary.
Changing the Pivot Center allows control of the point 
that the scale and rotation actions occur around. In this 
case, because the puzzle shape has been moved so that 
its corner is at the origin, the scale operation will keep 
that corner where it is as the rest of the piece grows. 
Notice how this works in the very next step.
4.	 Scale (S) the puzzle shape up some to make the next step easier.
5.	 With the puzzle shape still selected, hold down Shift and click on the layer 
that has the sun model in it:
6.	 Scale (S) the puzzle up until it is bigger than the sculpted shape, along the X 
and Y axes:

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
Adjusting the view and switching to Wireframe view (Z) can help with this 
step. The puzzle piece should completely cover a quarter of the sun model 
with the tab and blank completely inside the face without getting too close 
to the edge so that it can be a solid connection. If the rays of the sun reach 
too far to make this possible, the puzzle piece may have to be edited in Edit 
Mode to extend the edges along the X and Y axes until it fits.
7.	 Apply (Ctrl + A) the scale operation.
It is important to apply the scale operation because the modifiers we'll be using work 
on the object before scaling, and this project requires some precise control on the 
final model.
Turning a shape into an object
Let's get started with the shaping of the piece into an object:
1.	 With the puzzle shape selected, in the Properties Panel, locate and click on 
the Modifiers tab (the one that looks like a wrench):

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 90 ]
2.	 Click on the Add Modifier button and select the Solidify modifier:
3.	 From the Solidify modifier properties, change the Offset value to 1.
The Offset property tells the Solidify modifier where 
the newly solid shape should be created relative to 
the original flat shape. An offset of 0 creates a solid 
shape with the original shape in the exact middle. An 
offset of -1 makes the original shape the top of the 
solid shape, relative to the normal of the flat shape. An 
offset of 1 makes the original flat shape the bottom of 
the solidified shape.

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
4.	 Change the Thickness property to something high enough that makes the 
puzzle piece thicker than the sun model:
If the view is adjusted to look up from below, it can be seen that the puzzle shape, 
now a puzzle blank, doesn't extend to the bottom of the model. This is perfect 
because 3D prints need a flat bottom, and the puzzle blank will define a perfectly 
flat bottom, essentially cutting the bottom flat. This is nothing to worry about.
Adding some tolerance
When trying to make two objects that will interact with each other, such as the pieces 
of a puzzle, having pieces that are mathematically perfectly aligned is actually a 
bad thing. Edges in the design software that overlap perfectly will be too tight when 
made real to be able to slide past each other. So, the puzzle piece needs to be shrunk, 
just a little bit, to make it a suitable puzzle piece. Here's how you do it:
1.	 From the Solidify modifier, click on the Apply button:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 92 ]
2.	 Click on the Add Modifier button and again select the Solidify modifier. 
On a flat object, the Solidify modifier turns it into a solid. On a 3D object, 
the Solidify modifier can be used to create a shell of controlled thickness.
3.	 Make sure the Offset value is -1.
4.	 Adjust the Thickness value to 0.2.
5.	 Select the checkbox options for Even Thickness, High Quality Normals, 
and Flip Normals (leave Fill Rim checked):
Besides the model getting darker in the 3D View, there's no real indication 
of what the Solidify modifier did. Why did the model get darker? It is 
because its outside shell's normals are now pointing in the wrong direction 
as the Flip Normals option was checked. That's just a fancy way of saying 
that mathematically, the shape is now inside out, but that's okay because the 
inside-out shape is eventually going to be thrown away, with the inner shell 
being kept.
In Wireframe view (Z), on zooming in a bit on the edge of the piece, it can be 
seen that inside the puzzle piece is what looks like another, slightly smaller 
puzzle piece.
The next step is to get rid of the old, inside-out shell and keep just the slightly 
smaller puzzle piece.
6.	 Apply the Solidify modifier.
7.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
8.	 In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View, go to Mesh | Vertices | Separate 
| By loose parts, or press P on the keyboard and choose By loose parts in the 
menu that pops up:
9.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).
There are now two puzzle shapes, one slightly smaller than the other. This can be 
confirmed by looking at the outliner, like this:
1.	 Deselect everything (A) and select just the outside puzzle blank.
2.	 Delete (X) the outside puzzle blank, leaving just the smaller inside one. 
You should see something like this:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 94 ]
Putting it all together
We're nearing the end now. The puzzle blank has been built and been shrunk a little 
bit so that it works in the real world. Now to shape it like the sun model and make 
three more. Fortunately, this is going to be very easy:
1.	 Select the puzzle blank.
2.	 From the Modifier tab, click on the Add Modifier button.
3.	 Choose the Boolean modifier:
4.	 Be sure that the Operation option is set to Intersect.
5.	 Click on the Object dropdown and select the Icosphere object:

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
After a moment, the puzzle piece should effectively disappear. Where did 
it go? It's still there, but it's now shaped exactly like the part of the sun face 
it covered.
6.	 In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View, click on just the second layer 
button to see the piece by itself:
See? There it is—perfectly printable flat bottom and everything. Now, to make the 
other three pieces, continue with the following steps:
1.	 Click on the eye button in the Boolean modifier to temporarily disable it:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 96 ]
2.	 Duplicate (Shift + D) the puzzle piece and Rotate (R) it around the Z axis (Z) 
90 degrees:
Because the Pivot Center was switched to the 3D Cursor earlier, the rotation 
happens around the middle. Also, because the pieces were designed well, 
they should interlock perfectly with just a little gap between them.
If the rotation is askew, it may be because the 3D Cursor has moved. Undo 
(Ctrl + Z) the duplication, recenter the 3D Cursor (Shift + C) and try again.

Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
3.	 Repeat duplicating and rotating the puzzle blank two more times:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 98 ]
4.	 For each puzzle blank, click on the eye button in the Boolean modifier to 
re-enable it:
What if the Boolean modifier doesn't work?
In Blender, the complex math behind the Boolean modifier sometimes fails to work 
properly. Sometimes, it's because there are errors in the geometry of either object 
or the geometry is too complex. A sculpted object has very complex geometry. So, 
it's possible that the Boolean modifier doesn't perform as expected. If that happens, 
here's a list of things to try to fix it:
1.	 Apply (Ctrl + A) the rotation and scaling of both objects.
2.	 In Edit Mode, select all vertices (A) and Recalculate Normals (Ctrl + N).
3.	 Use the Decimate modifier to simplify the geometry of a complex part—in 
this case, the sun model. Add a Decimate modifier and adjust the Ratio 
down as far as it will go before a noticeable difference in the geometry of 
the model is seen.

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
4.	 Slightly modify the geometry of the shapes. In this case, try editing the piece 
blank in Edit Mode (Tab). Select all the vertices on the bottom of the puzzle 
piece with a Box Select (B), and Scale (S) them along the Z axis (Z) by 0 to 
reflatten the bottom. If this works, remember to edit the other pieces so that 
they all match.
Usually, one of these actions, or a combination of them, will kick the Boolean 
modifier into working, and your model will be complete.
Exporting and printing
Now that the pieces are all properly shaped, select each piece and, in the Info panel 
at the top of the screen, go to File | Export | STL. Give each piece a unique name, 
and they'll be ready for 3D printing and playing with:

Cutting a 3D Jigsaw Puzzle
[ 100 ]
Summary
In your grandparents' or parents' garage, they might have had a jigsaw and tools 
that they made cute wooden puzzles with—clunky shapes that vaguely resembled 
an elephant or truck. But nowadays, we can do so much more with 3D printing. It's 
not difficult to see how this project can be applied to a puzzle of any shape, just as 
complex or robust as a loved one's favorite thing:
Blender's unique collection of tools seems eclectic to some, but in the end, they 
enable robust interactions that result in us being able to make projects such as this 
puzzle without having to switch tools to finish. Models can be sculpted and then, 
without switching tools, combined with rigid shapes to create complex but useful 
and fun objects for 3D printing. This project also taught you about tolerances in 
3D-printed parts and how they can be adjusted to make parts that interact with each 
other. While different 3D printers may require different tolerances, the skills learned 
in this chapter can be applied to adjust those tolerances.

[ 101 ]
Index
Symbols
3D Jigsaw puzzle
Boolean modifier, troubleshooting  98, 99
cutting  77
exporting  99
implementing  94-98
model, resizing  78
printing  99
properties, scaling with  78-80
puzzle piece, building  80
3D printing
about  1
defining  2, 3
A
additive manufacturing  2
axis locking  30
B
Blender
downloading  15
installing  15
URL  15
using  14
Blender units
defining  42
C
computerized numerical control (CNC)  3
D
default view, Blender
3D cursor  18, 19
3D View  17, 18
defining  16, 17
E
Edit mode
about  40
object parts  41
F
face of sun, sculpting
base object, creating  46-48
details, sharpening  70-76
edges, smoothing  57-59
face, drawing  51-56
nose and eyes, adding  60-65
rays, pulling out  65-69
sculpt, setting up  48-51
FFF 3D printers
designing for  3
FFF design considerations
about  5
H, bridging  8
holes, in models  10, 11
overhangs and supports  6
sand castle, building  6
snowman, building  6
supportless 3D printing  6

[ 102 ]
T, orientation  9
wall thickness  10
Y, gentle overhangs  7
FFF printers
working  3, 4
fused filament fabrication (FFF)  3
I
incremental saving
defining  42
L
light polymerization  3
O
object
duplicating  36, 37
transforming  29, 30
object selection
Border select  38
Circle select  39
defining  37
Shift select  37
P
panels
3D View  17
Info panel  16
Outliner  17
Properties panel  17
Timeline  17
powder bed  3
print
anatomy  4, 5
puzzle blank
implementing  94-98
puzzle piece
basic shape, building  80-86
building  80
puzzle piece blank, sizing  87-89
shape, turning into object  89-91
tolerance, adding  91, 92
S
settings, Blender
defining  19
laptop, with touch pad  22, 23
object creation  23, 24
scroll-wheel mouse and number pad  20, 21
STereoLithography (STL)
about  43
exporting  43
T
transformations
axis locking  32, 33
controlling  30
origin manipulation  35, 36
precise transformation  34, 35
view, controlling  31, 32
V
view
jumping, to rotation  26
navigating  24
orthographic, 
versus perspective view  27, 28
panning  26, 27
rotating  25
solid view  28
wireframe  28
zooming  27


