
3D Printing Blueprints
Design successful models for home 3D printing, using a 
Makerbot or other 3D printers
Joe Larson
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

3D Printing Blueprints
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: August 2013
Production Reference: 1160813
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84969-708-8
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Joseph Larson  (joealarson@gmail.com)

Credits
Author
Joe Larson
Reviewers
Henry Garner
Andrew Mazzotta
Thomas P.McDunn
Erwin Ried
Acquisition Editor
Edward Gordon
Lead Technical Editor
Arun Nadar
Technical Editors
Shashank Desai
Dennis John
Chandni Maishery
Sanhita Sawant
Project Coordinator
Shiksha Chaturvedi
Proofreader
Mario Cecere
Indexer
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Production Coordinator 
Shantanu Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu Zagade

About the Author
Joe Larson is one part artist, one part mathematician, one part teacher, and one 
part technologist. It all started in his youth on a Commodore 64 doing BASIC 
programming and low resolution digital art. As technology progressed, so did Joe's 
dabbling eventually taking him to 3D modeling while in high school and college, 
momentarily pursuing a degree in Computer Animation. He abandoned the  
track for the much more sensible goal of becoming a Math teacher, which he 
accomplished when he taught 7th grade Math in Colorado. He now works  
as an application programmer.
When Joe first heard about 3D printing, it took root in his mind and he went back to 
dust off his 3D modeling skills. In 2012, he won a Makerbot Replicator 3D printer in 
the Tinkercad/Makerbot Chess challenge with a chess set that assembles into a robot. 
Since then his designs on Thingiverse, have been featured on Thingiverse, Gizmodo, 
Shapeways, Makezine, and others. He currently maintains the blog joesmakerbot.
blogspot.com, documenting his adventures in 3D printing.
Dedicated to my wife, who I've seen far too little of during the 
process of making this book.
Thanks to the people at Packt Publishing who reached out to help 
me write this book.
Special thanks to the awesome people at Makerbot.

About the Reviewers
Henry Garner started 3D printing in 2010 after buying a MakerBot Cupcake CNC 
kit as a present for himself. Then a professional software developer with no 3D 
modeling skills, the obvious next step was to learn the printer's wire protocol and 
control the print head directly with his own code. The result was the open source 
Ruby library called Cupcake and many tangled knots of extruded plastic.
It was whilst studying for a Fine Art degree years earlier that he first became 
interested in programming as a means to create interactive installations and reactive 
sculptures. The combination of technology and tangible objects remains his passion, 
and he thinks 3D printing offers a fantastic new way to bring ideas out of the 
confines of a computer screen into the physical world.
Henry is now Chief Technologist at Likely, a big data analytics company based in the 
heart of East London's Tech City. When not working, he is often to be found at his art 
studio by the Tate Modern, floor still littered with extruded plastic tumbleweed.
You can follow him on Twitter at @henrygarner.
Andrew Mazzotta started his career in finance with an MBA. After recently 
traveling the world, 70 countries in three years, he changed his career for engineering 
and is now working on three degrees in mechanical engineering, electrical 
engineering, and computer science. He is currently (August 2013) building  
RepRaps in Albania for undeveloped areas. The project is in collaboration  
with Printers for Peace.
He started www.3dhacker.com, a free site dedicated to 3D printing. Members can 
showcase 3D printers, extruders, printer upgrades, STL model designs, software, 
printing tutorials, and so on. Additionally, there is a forum for members to support 
their products/services and a blogging platform for all members to use as well.
I would like to thank all the people that have made 3D printing 
available to the less fortunate!

Thomas P. McDunn is an engineer and tinkerer and finds 3D printing fuels 
an ever growing list of projects and experiments. Though formally trained in 
Mechanical Engineering, receiving a Bachelor's and a Master's Degree from 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, his interest in computers pulled him on the 
fence between Mechanical and Electrical Engineering. He constructed his own 
microcomputer for home experimenting and cut his teeth on electromechanical 
applications of microprocessors at a time when memory was expensive and code  
had to be small, not only for memory considerations but for execution speed and 
hand coding sake. Applying knowledge of mechanical and electrical systems with 
servo control theory he developed a career in motion control in the Machine Tool 
Industry and was granted a patent in 1992 for a microprocessor-based transfer line 
control. He experimented with robotics with a Hero 2000 robot and worked briefly  
in the industrial robotics industry. Thomas enjoys education and has developed 
many hands-on curricula for quick immersion of technical concepts. More recently, 
Thomas has applied his managerial and marketing experience and consults with 
small businesses in leveraging social media as a marketing tool. Frustrated with 
the hodge-podge of image sizes used in social media he self-published a book, "72 
Pixels" that details the image size requirements of the most popular social media 
applications. Spurred by an episode of "The Shark Tank", he started a blog to pass 
along lessons learned in inventor and investor relations. Thomas spends a lot  
of time online and is enamored with the growth and accomplishments of open  
source projects.
The open source movement has paved the way for many innovations and more to 
come. Thomas studies open source applications in a wide arena including Arduino, 
GIMP, Inkscape, REPRAP, and Drones to name a few. Thomas has experience of 
many types of 3D printing and rapid prototyping models, setting up a design, and 
prototyping bureau including SLA, SLS, FDM, Zprint, and PolyJet machines. He has 
a Makerbot and has recently added a Rostock Max to his personal 3D printer arsenal. 
Thomas is constantly on the lookout for world changing applications of 3D printing 
technology. He recently registered with Robohand, a website and organization that 
makes affordable prosthetics available for children who are born without fingers 
using 3D printing technology. He catalogs his personal printing projects at  
www.tpmtech.biz/Makerbot.
I'd like to thank my wife Holly for her encouragement and patience 
in supporting my technological passions.

Erwin Ried has been enjoying computers and electronics since the age of seven, 
when he first received his Atari 800 XE. Playing with the buggy coding examples 
from the Atari booklet always sparked something special in his mind; the idea of 
governing the machine.
In 2009, HP and Microsoft chose his website as one of the top 50 world best blogs 
in the HP Magic Giveaway. Later in 2011, LG electronics selected his invention 
SinStandby as the best green energy related solution for "Casa Eficiente del  
Siglo XXI".
Now, he is a Computer Civil Engineer (Bachelor) from Chile who loves any kind 
of challenge including electronics, mechanics, and coding in particular when they 
involve 3D Printing, electronics, robotics, automation, games and/or programming.

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online  
digital book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire 
library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Design Tools and Basics	
5
Design basics	
6
The working of 3D printing	
6
Building for supportless prints	
7
Designing for dual extruders	
8
Designing supportless – overhangs and bridges	
8
Branching out with overhangs	
9
Building bridges	
9
Choosing a modeling tool	
10
Installing Blender	
11
Getting acquainted with Blender	
12
The 3D View panel	
13
The Outliner panel	
15
The Properties panel	
15
The Info panel	
15
The Timeline panel	
16
Proper stance	
16
Blender customization	
17
Setting up for Mac OSX	
17
General Blender tips	
18
Suggested shortcuts	
18
The blueprints	
19
Summary	
19

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 2: Mini Mug	
21
Getting started	
22
Creating the first shape	
23
Creating a save point	
25
Adjusting the view	
26
Adding a handle	
28
Shaping the handle	
30
Smoothing the rough edges	
36
Shaping the body of the mug	
38
Joining the shapes	
49
Flattening the bottom	
52
Exporting for print	
54
Extra credit	
55
Summary	
55
Chapter 3: Face Illusion Vase	
57
Getting a profile	
58
Tracing the silhouette	
61
Creating a vase from the lines	
66
Using Solidify to make walls	
69
Making a solid base	
73
Printing the vase	
77
Extra credit	
77
Summary	
78
Chapter 4: SD Card Holder Ring	
79
Taking measurements	
80
Modeling the finger	
82
Putting the ring on the floor	
84
Making a test ring	
85
Resizing the test ring	
87
Adding an SD card holder	
89
Adding the SD holder to the ring	
93
Extra credit	
97
Summary	
97
Chapter 5: Modular Robot Toy	
99
Making the connector	
100
Splitting the connector	
106
Building a printable peg	
110
Putting a hole in our pocket	
112
Constructing a robot	
114
Engineering the body	
116

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Creating the torso	
121
Making an arm	
123
Shaping the leg	
125
Forming the head	
128
Assembling the parts to print	
133
Printing and assembly	
138
Extra credit	
139
Summary	
139
Chapter 6: D6 Spinner	
141
Extracting the spring	
142
Starting the project	
143
Modeling the spring	
143
Defining the boundaries	
144
Building the spinner	
146
Extending Blender with gears	
146
Adding a gear to the spinner	
150
Spinning on a peg	
152
Adding the numbers	
154
Building a rack	
161
Adding the trigger	
164
Docking the spring	
168
Modeling the case – lid	
171
Modeling the case – bottom	
177
Preparing for print	
182
Printing and assembly	
184
Extra credit	
186
Summary	
186
Chapter 7: Teddy Bear Figurine	
187
Making a stick figure	
188
Putting the skin on the bones	
193
Smoothing the skin	
199
Adjusting for the third dimension	
202
Making an armature	
206
Drawing the details	
210
Simplifying the model	
220
Fixing the armature weights	
221
Posing the bear	
225
Inspecting before print	
231
Extra credit	
233
Summary	
234

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Chapter 8: Repairing Bad Models	
235
Downloading a 3D scanned file	
236
Trimming the fat	
236
Orienting the scan	
239
Trimming more fat	
239
Making a flat base	
242
Detail work on the back	
246
Cleaning up bad geometry	
251
Deleting an extra edge	
252
Merging the problem away	
253
Finding hidden points	
254
Uncrossing the lines	
254
Repeat until clean	
256
Final cleanup	
256
Making it a book end	
256
Summary	
259
Chapter 9: Stretchy Bracelet	
261
Modeling the bracelet 	
261
Refining the shape	
265
Printing the bracelet	
267
Editing the settings in ReplicatorG	
268
Editing the settings in MakerWare	
271
Summary	
274
Chapter 10: Measuring – Tips and Tricks	
277
Using a caliper	
278
Grid paper method	
279
Using the grid paper method with Blender	
282
Summary	
289
Index	
291

Preface
A new industrial age is here. Machines designed to build useful and interesting 
objects have moved from the factory to the home. But these 3D printers can't make 
things without a design. Whether you have a 3D printer or not, designing things for 
3D printers to make is the best way to become a part of the 3D printing movement. 
Learn to design successful models for home by 3D printing on a Makerbot or other 
3D printer with cool hands-on lessons.
If you've ever won a round of Pictionary you've got all the artistic skill it takes to get 
started. If you've ever gotten past level 1 on Tetris then you've got spatial reasoning. 
If you've ever played with modeling clay then you know all about designing in three 
dimensions. You can learn and practice the rules of design that will take your virtual 
models to real life prints you can hold in your hands as well as enable your creations 
to stand out on popular websites such as Thingiverse.
This book uses blueprints; simple, fun projects that teach Blender modeling for 3D 
printing in hands-on lessons. First you'll learn basic modeling and make a small 
simple object. Then each new project brings with it new tools and techniques as well 
as teaching the rules of 3D printing design. Eventually you'll be building objects 
designed to repair or replace everyday objects. Finally, you'll be able to even tackle 
other people's models and fix them to be 3D printable.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Design Tools and Basics, will start with the rules of designing objects for 
successful 3D prints and then introduce the software that will be used.
Chapter 2, Mini Mug, introduces the most common modeling tools to make a  
simple object.
Chapter 3, Face Illusion Vase, uses a reference image, a picture, to help create the shape 
of a 3D object.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 4, SD Card Holder Ring, takes measurement of real-life objects and translates 
them to the design space. Success is measured by how closely the print matches  
the real life object.
Chapter 5, Modular Robot Toy, combines separate parts with joints to make a  
single object.
Chapter 6, D6 Spinner, uses the add-on functionality to allow Blender to create new 
objects and using that to model a new way to choose a number from 1 to 6.
Chapter 7, Teddy Bear Figurine, introduces a different method of modeling that can be 
used to make appealing organic shapes.
Chapter 8, Repairing Bad Models, is a good skill to have when working with other's 3D 
models, particularly those that might not have been made for 3D printing.
Chapter 9, Stretchy Bracelet, shows how advanced 3D printing options can change the 
way a model is printed.
Chapter 10, Measuring – Tips and Tricks, are important to know when translating real 
life into the design space.
What you need for this book
This book uses only Blender for 3D modeling available at www.blender.org, a free, 
open source program. The first chapter covers downloading and installing Blender.
If you have a Makerbot or other brand of 3D printer you will need software 
to prepare models for print. Either Slicer or ReplicatorG is recommended for 
Makerbots. No other software will be necessary for this book.
An account on Thingiverse (www.thingiverse.com) to upload your own models is 
recommended but not required.
Who this book is for
This book is for anyone with an interest in 3D printing and the slightest bit of 
computer skill. Whether you own a 3D printer or not you can design for them. All it 
takes is some free software, this book, and a little creativity and someday you'll be 
able to hold something designed on a computer in your hands. No special computer 
skills are necessary beyond simple file and directory navigation. No previous 3D 
modeling experience is necessary at all.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"Type in MakerbotBlueprints as the name for the new directory."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Click  
on the Download link".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams 
used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the changes in 
the output. You can download this file from: http://www.packtpub.com/sites/
default/files/downloads/7088OT_ColoredImages.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we  
can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Design Tools and Basics
Owning a Makerbot 3D printer means being able to make anything you want at 
a push of a button, right? 3D printer owners quickly find that while 3D printers 
have no end of things they can produce, they also are not without their limitations. 
Designing an object without 3D printing in mind will result in a failed print that 
more resembles a bird nest or a bowl of spaghetti.
Making a 3D printable object requires learning a few rules, some careful planning, 
and design. But once you know the rules the results can be astounding. 3D printers 
can even produce things with ease that traditional manufacturing cannot, for 
example, objects with complex internal geometry that machining cannot touch.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 6 ]
There are many places online such as Makerbot's own Thingiverse that hosts a 
daily growing library of printable objects. Printing out other people's designs is all 
well and good for a while, but the most exciting part about 3D printing is that it 
can produce your designs and models. Eventually, learning how to model for 3D 
printing is a must.
Can you learn 3D modeling? If you've ever won a round of Pictionary you've got 
all the artistic skill it takes to get started. If you've ever gotten past level 1 on Tetris 
then you've got spatial reasoning. If you've ever played with modeling clay then you 
know all about designing in three dimensions.
Design basics
There are some design rules and basic ideas that will be true regardless of the 
modeling software used.
The working of 3D printing
3D printing has come a long way in terms of technology and cost allowing home 
3D printers to be a reality. In this process there have been choices that will limit 
what can be printed. Seeing a 3D printer in action is the best way to learn about the 
process. Fortunately there are many 3D printing time lapse videos online of printers 
in action that can be found with a simple search.
3D printers build an object layer-by-layer from the bottom to the top. Plastic filament 
is heated and extruded, and each layer is built upon the last one. Usually the outside 
of the object is drawn and sometimes additional shells are added for strength. Then 
the inside is usually filled with a lattice to save plastic and provide some support 
for higher layers, however the inside is mostly air. This continues until the object is 
complete as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
Because of this layer-by-layer process, if a design is made so that any part has 
nothing underneath it, dangling in the air, then the printer will still extrude some 
plastic to try to print the part which will just dangle from the nozzle and be dragged 
into the next area where it will build up an ugly mess and ruin the print:
Building for supportless prints
One way of fixing the dangling object problem is to configure the preparing software 
to build the model "with supports". This means the slicer will automatically build a 
support lattice of plastic, up to the dangling part so that it has something to print on. 
Higher-end printers can actually print with a different material that can be dissolved 
away, but so far most home printers only use break-away supports. Either way after 
the print is complete it is left to the user to clean up this support material to extract 
the desired part.
While supports do allow the creation of objects that would be impossible any 
other way, the supports themselves are a waste of material and often don't remove 
cleanly leading to a messy bottom surface where they contact the print. If a part 
is designed needing supports that are hard to remove, such as if they're internal 
and partially obscured, it can be difficult and frustrating to completely remove the 
support material (this can be true for even the higher-end 3D printers). The process 
of removing it may actually damage the print.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 8 ]
It is possible and very easy with just the slightest application of cleverness to make 
designs that are printable without the need for any supports. So the blueprints in this 
book focus on making designs that print without supports. The limitations imposed 
by this demands just a little more effort but allow for the teaching of principles that 
are generally good to know.
Designing for dual extruders
Some models of Makerbot and other 3D printers have the ability to print in 
multiple colors at once using two different extruder heads feeding plastic from two 
different spools. There are some fun prints that come from this process. But as most 
Makerbots and other brands of home 3D printers do not have dual extruders at this 
time this book will not explore this process in detail. The basic idea of the process is 
creating two files that are aligned to print in the same space and combining them in 
the slicer.
Designing supportless – overhangs and 
bridges
When designing for supportless printing the rules are simple: Y prints, H prints 
okay, T does not print well.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Branching out with overhangs
It is possible to have the current layer slightly larger than the previous layer 
provided the overhang is not more than 45 degrees. This is because the current layer 
will have enough of the previous layer to stick to. Hence a shape like the capital letter Y 
will successfully print standing up.
However, if the overhang is too great or too abrupt the new layer will droop causing a 
print fail, hence a shape like the capital letter T does not print. (If the T is serif and thus 
has downward dangling bits, it will fail even worse, as illustrated previously.) So it is 
important to try to keep overhangs within a 45 degree cone as they go upwards.
Building bridges
If a part of the print has nothing above it, but has something on either side that it can 
attach to, then it may be able to bridge the gap. But use caution. The printer makes 
no special effort in making bridges; they are drawn like any other layer: outline first, 
then infill. As long as the outline has something to attach to on both sides it should 
be fine. But if that outline is too complex or contains parts that will print in mid-air, 
it may not succeed. Being aware of bridges in the design and keeping them simple 
is the key to successful bridging. Even with a simple bridge some 3D printers need a 
little bit more calibration to print it well. Hence a shape like the capital letter H will 
successfully print most of the time.
Of course this discussion is purely illustrative of the way overhangs work or fail. 
In real life if a Y, H, or T needed to be printed the best way to do it would be to lay 
them down. But for purposes of illustration it still stands that Y prints, H prints okay, 
T does not.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 10 ]
Choosing a modeling tool
There are many choices of modeling programs that can be used to produce 3D 
printable objects. There are many factors including versatility, simplicity, and cost 
to take into account. A tool with too steep a learning curve can turn off new users to 
the idea all together. A tool with too limited a set of tools can frustrate a user when 
they hit the limit. Investing a lot of money into something that doesn't end up going 
anywhere can be extremely disappointing. So it is important to explore the options.
SolidWorks (www.solidworks.com) and other drafting oriented programs can 
do technical shapes with extreme precision. They include the necessary tools to 
accurately describe a shape that can be brought into the real work with high fidelity. 
However these sorts of tools tend to be costly and don't do artistic or organic shapes 
very well. Their highly technical nature also gives them a steep learning curve.
OpenSCAD (www.openscad.org) is free and famous among the people who make 
3D printers and can make technically accurate models as well. OpenSCAD also 
allows the models to be parametric, meaning that by changing a few variables and 
recalculating a new shape is generated. But OpenSCAD is difficult to use unless the 
user has a very technical and programmatic mind since the shapes are literally built 
from lines of code.
Zbrush (pixologic.com/zbrush), Sculptris (pixologic.com/sculptris), or 
Wings3D (www.wings3d.com) are great tools for modeling organic shapes like the 
kind used in video games or animation. Sculptris and Wings3D are free and are  
very easy to pick up and use. But these tools lack when precision is necessary.
Sketchup (www.sketchup.com) is a great free program with a library of shapes 
built in ready to import and play with. Its modeling tools are great for precise or 
architectural models. Sketchup doesn't do organic shapes well either and it can 
be tricky loading the plug-ins necessary for Sketchup to export their models to 
something printable. Even then models from Sketchup often have to go through  
an extensive clean up phase before they'll be ready to print.
Autodesk 123D (www.123dapp.com) is not one but a whole suite of free programs 
designed around 3D modeling with specific focus on 3D printing. There are 
programs to design creatures or precise shapes. There is even an app for converting 
pictures of real life objects into 3D models. Some are programs that run in browser, 
some are downloads and some are apps for Apple devices. It's an eclectic and 
powerful group of programs. The Autodesk 123D suite's weakness is in its general 
immaturity. Autodesk is making great efforts to make modeling for 3D printing 
accessible for everyone but its tools still need to mature somewhat before they'll be 
ready to explore in depth.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Blender (blender.org) is a 3D animation program that features a robust set of 
modeling tools. Good for artistic and organic shapes, it can also be used when 
precision is needed. On top all that it is free and open source, so it is still in constant 
development. If Blender doesn't have a particular feature it is only a matter of time 
until it will be added. If fact by the time this book is published chances are the 
version of Blender used to make it will already be out of date, but most of Blender's 
functionality remains unchanged version-to-version. Blender is also completely 
customizable so that every feature, from the key strokes used to the overall look, 
can be changed. The downside of Blender is that its user interface is somewhat 
unintuitive. This causes Blender to have a famously difficult learning curve
Because of Blender's versatility and availability it is the tool of choice for the 
beginning 3D designer and this work.
Installing Blender
This will be the first project in the book. Fortunately downloading and installing 
Blender is as easy as 1-2-3-4.
1.	 Go to www.blender.org.
2.	 Click on the Download link.
3.	 Choose and download the installer for your system: Windows, Mac,  
or Linux, 32 bit or 64 bit.
4.	 Run the installer.
The installer will guide the process of loading Blender and adding icons to the system.
Windows Blender.org offers installer executable and ZIP files. The zip files are for 
advanced users who want a portable version of Blender. When in doubt choose the 
executable since it will set up icons making for easy access. If in doubt whether to use 
the 32 or 64-bit versions picking the 32-bit will insure compatibility, but it is a good 
idea to find out what type of system it is being installed on as 64-bit offers significant 
performance improvements.
Windows 7 or greater will confirm that the installer should be run. Click on Yes to 
assure Windows that it's okay to install Blender.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 12 ]
Then the installer will run. The install wizard's defaults are fine for most users. 
Simply put the mouse over the Next button and click on every button that appears 
under it. On the second screen read over the Blender Terms of Service and click on I 
Agree to proceed. Unless you manage your installed programs directories yourself 
it is best to leave the defaults on the third screen as it is. Then click on Next and the 
install process will start.
 
When the install process finishes leave the check box check and click on Finish to exit 
the installer and run Blender.
Getting acquainted with Blender
When Blender starts up, the Splash Screen can be dismissed by left-clicking outside 
the screen.
The screenshots in this book use a custom color palette for print and 
a smaller window to minimize wasted screen space. Customizing the 
color palette will be discussed briefly later but these cosmetic changes 
will not affect the instructions presented at all.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The Blender interface is broken into several different customizable panels to keep 
things organized.
Each panel has resizing widgets in the upper-right and lower-left corners. By  
clicking on these widgets the panels can be split to add more panels or expanded  
into the territory of another to collapse panels at the user's preference. However, 
for now the default panels will be discussed as they provide the most common 
functionality for beginners.
The 3D View panel
The main window where things will be happening is the 3D View panel. The largest 
portion of the 3D view consists of the viewport where most of the work will take place.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 14 ]
On the left-hand side of the 3D View panel is a tool bar that consists of tools relevant 
to the selection and mode. If the tool bar is ever not visible it can be revealed  
(or hidden again) by pressing T or by clicking on the plus icon on the right-hand  
side that will appear when the toolbar is hidden. The specific tools in this bar will  
be explored as they are needed in the projects.
There is another plus icon on the right that will bring up the viewport properties 
with properties relevant to the current selection or the viewport. This can also be 
revealed or hidden by pressing the N key. Again, the specifics will be explored 
further as needed.
At the bottom of the 3D View panel is the 3D view menu bar with additional options 
followed by menus and icons related to editing and views. Hovering the mouse over 
each button will show what they are for.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
The Outliner panel
The Outliner panel contains a hieratical view of all the objects in the scene. Each 
object can be selected by clicking on their name or the object can be hidden, locked, 
or excluded from rendering.
Rendering means making a high quality picture from a scene for things 
such as animation or presentations. Doing a proper render includes 
setting up scene lights, cameras, textures, material properties, and many 
other functions that will not be explored in this book as it does not do 
anything that helps produce models for printing. However, exploring 
this functionality outside of this book can be good when trying to show 
off the models if printing them is not an option.
The Properties panel
The Properties panel is broken up into many tabs indicated by small icons. Hovering 
over the icons will show the name of the tab. For modeling the two tabs that will 
be used the most are the object and modifier tabs. Specific exploration of the tools 
contained therein will be done as needed.
The Info panel
On the top of the Blender windows is the Info panel. On the left-hand side of the Info 
panel there is an easy to navigate menu similar to the menu in most applications. 
This menu can be collapsed by clicking on the + button next to it and expanded by 
clicking the same. On the far right of the Info panel there is data about the current 
scene. If the data cannot be seen, hover the mouse over the panel, and use the middle 
scroll wheel or click-and-hold the middle mouse button (pressing the wheel like a 
button) and moving the mouse to pan the panel until the desired data is visible.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 16 ]
The Timeline panel
The Timeline panel is only relevant to doing animation and can be effectively 
ignored or collapsed for the purposes of this book.
Because this book is only using a limited subset of Blender's 
functionality some things such as the Timeline panel could be 
customized away. However, since it is not the focus of this book 
to tell the reader how to customize their version of Blender, and 
because Blender has a much broader application, the screenshots 
that follow will have the Timeline panel visible. The reader is 
encouraged to explore Blender's other functionalities such as 
rendering and animation at their leisure and desire.
Proper stance
While all of Blender's functions are available from buttons and menus on the screen, 
typical Blender users rely heavily on hotkeys and shortcuts. Already the T and N 
keys have been discussed to bring up or collapse the Tools and Properties tabs in the 
3D view. For this reason it is recommended that to use Blender have one hand on the 
mouse and the other hand on the keyboard at all times. This tends to be a common 
stance for many people but is mentioned for the few for whom learning this will be 
of great help.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Blender customization
One of Blender's strengths is its customizability. Almost every feature from the look 
and color, right down to the keystrokes and hotkeys are used for every action in 
Blender. Customization is accomplished in the Properties menu accessed from the 
File | User Preferences menu.
The buttons across the top, switch to the various categories. Each category is packed 
with options. A full exploration of these options is beyond the scope of this book but 
the reader is encouraged to explore these options and make Blender their own.
For instance if the reader is using a setup where a middle mouse button is 
unavailable, Blender contains an option to emulate the middle mouse button by 
pressing Alt along with left-click. Other systems may require other accommodations 
many of which are available in this menu.
Setting up for Mac OSX
Mac OSX users require special consideration. Blender is made for a three button 
mouse. If a single button mouse is all that is available, click when the instructions say 
Left-Mouse Button, use Alt with click for Middle-Mouse Button, and press command 
with click for Right-Mouse Button.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 18 ]
General Blender tips
Blender employs some conventions that are unique to its environment and as such 
getting acquainted with its most common quirks early can avoid frustration.
First and perhaps most importantly, Ctrl + Z for undo works in Blender will undo 
a multitude of mistakes. Undo in Blender remembers many past steps allowing 
backing up to a point before a grievous error was made. Remembering this when 
following along with the blueprints that follow will save the reader much frustration.
Next, the location of the mouse pointer is important when using hotkeys. For 
example the T and N keys for the Tools and Properties tabs do not bring up those 
tabs if the mouse pointer is not hovering over the 3D View. If the mouse is hovering 
over a different panel the reaction could be unpredictable. Pressing the A key with 
the mouse over the 3D View will toggle selection of all objects in the scene. Pressing 
the A key with the mouse over the Object Tools tab will collapse the expandable 
menu hiding all the options of that menu.
Blender uses the right-click on the mouse to select objects by default. This is perhaps 
the most counter intuitive thing for first time users, particularly because it will 
be encountered so frequently. But not everything has been swapped, just object 
selection. This behavior can of course be customized. If the reader would like to 
customize selection to the left mouse button then it is left to them to adjust the 
instructions accordingly.
Finally, the relation of Blender units to real life units is not by default defined in 
Blender. Generally it is just easier to remember that 1 grid point will translate to 1 
millimeter in the printed object. As the scale is increased Blender inserts darker grid 
lines every 10 grid lines by default which correlate to centimeters. So the default cube 
in the default scene would measure 2 mm on each side, which is less than 1/10 of an 
inch, which is very small.
Suggested shortcuts
In the projects in this book, when a new idea is introduced it will first be introduced 
with detailed steps. Once a process is taught the next time the name of the operation 
and the shortcut for that process will be all that is given. For instance the first time 
the scale operation is introduced in Chapter 2, Mini-mug, the process is laid out 
including how to start, modify, and end the operation, but later an instruction like 
"scale (S) the object" is all that will be given. This does not mean that the keyboard 
shortcuts are the only way to do an operation but they are often the preferred 
method for experienced Blender users. The reader is free to accomplish the  
operation in any way that is comfortable for them.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
The blueprints
This book has been designed to teach 3D printing design in a hands-on approach. 
A series of projects or blueprints will be presented and each one will introduce new 
tools and techniques. Each one builds on the last. Despite being a "virtual" process, 
3D modeling has a surprisingly muscle memory aspect to it. The movements and 
processes need to be more than a mechanical process being executed, they need to 
be practiced so they can be fluid and eventually seamless. To that end the reader is 
advised not to skip any of the blueprints and follow along actually doing each one.
The objects being designed in this book are, most of them, very small so that they can 
be printed without taking too much time or producing too much waste. The reader can 
make larger versions if they like but that is left for their own challenge activities.
Summary
3D printing is cool. Learning to design your own models is the best way to take full 
advantage of 3D printing today. This book will teach 3D modeling by a series of 
hands-on activities so it's a good idea not to skip and actually follow along with  
each blueprint.
While home 3D printers have the capability to do break away supports these are 
messy and wasteful. It is possible to design things to be able to print without the 
need of any supports. When designing things for support-less 3D prints remember  
Y prints, H prints okay, T does not print. Keep outward inclines gradual and no 
more than 45 degrees to be safe.
There are many 3D modeling programs to choose from. Some are expensive, some 
are free. Some are better for technical works, others do artistic or organic shapes 
better. Some are easy to learn, some take more practice. This book will use Blender 
since it is free and open source, has tools for modeling technical and organic shapes 
and is not too difficult to learn if you learn by doing.
Blender can be a bit tricky to get started with since it employs some conventions 
unique to its environment. Blender can be customized but this book will stick with 
the defaults so everyone is on the same page. Generally remember that Ctrl + Z 
undoes a multiple mistakes and can get Blender back to the state it was before, useful 
in tutorials to get back on track. The location of the mouse pointer is important when 
using Blender's hotkeys, which is the best way to learn to use Blender. Blender uses 
the right-click on mouse for selection by default. Finally, Blender's units translate to 
real life by 1 Blender grid space = 1 millimeter.

Design Tools and Basics
[ 20 ]
The next chapter will be a proper tutorial, teaching the most common modeling tools 
in Blender by inserting common shapes and manipulating them to the desired shape. 
Then that shape will be automatically smoothed to make it more appealing. Finally, 
the model will be edited and prepared for printing, utilizing the rules taught in  
this chapter.

Mini Mug
Blender has a variety of exciting tools for 3D modeling. This chapter will cover 
navigating the file system, adding objects, adjusting the view, selection tools, 
modification operators, object modifiers, and exporting an object ready for print. With 
so many things to learn on such a simple first project, by the time you finish you'll 
want to toast your success. So why not create something for that very purpose?
Our mug will be a miniature one, almost thimble-sized: 24 mm wide by 20 mm tall 
with a wall thickness of at least 2 mm. We'll put a handle on our mini mug to give 
it some character and give you something to hold on to. We'll also give it a little bit 
of body shape to make it more stable and printable. Beside from these we'll take 
advantage of its size to keep the details to a minimum.

Mini Mug
[ 22 ]
Getting started
Blender opens with a default scene that contains a cube, a light, and a camera, none 
of which are necessary for this project. So to begin, the virtual work area will need to 
be cleared and a new file will be created for this project. Saving early is a good idea 
to name the project area. Saving often is a good idea in case anything bad happens; 
there is always a risk with any computer project. Saving incrementally is a good idea 
as a kind of back-up undo memory. And as this is the first project, a basic directory 
for the projects to follow will be set up. Carry out the following steps to create a new 
file in Blender:
1.	 Open Blender.
2.	 In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel choose Select | (De)Select 
All or press A to toggle the selection. As the cube was selected before this, 
the toggle will switch it so nothing is selected.
3.	 Choose Select | (De)Select All or press A again to select everything in the 
default scene.
4.	 Choose Object | Delete or press X to start the delete operation.
5.	 Click on Delete or press Enter to confirm the operation.
6.	 On the top menu click on File and choose Save As....

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
7.	 On the left-hand side bar under System Bookmarks click on Documents.
8.	 On to top, click on the Create New Directory button and click on Create 
New Directory in the menu that pops up.
9.	 Type in MakerbotBlueprints as the name for the new directory.
10.	 Click on the MakerbotBlueprints directory.
11.	 Click on the Create New Directory button and click again on the menu that 
comes up.
12.	 Type in Ch 2 MiniMug as the name for this directory.
13.	 Click on the Ch 2 MiniMug directory.
14.	 Click on the untitled.blend in the name bar and type in Mini Mug as the 
name of the project.
15.	 Click on the Save As Blender File button.
Creating the first shape
With this project's file created it's time to begin creating the mug. The mug will be 
made up of two different shapes, so the first thing to do is to add the shapes we need 
into the scene:
1.	 In the Info panel (top menu) click on Add or press Shift + A to add a  
new shape.
2.	 Mouse over Mesh.

Mini Mug
[ 24 ]
3.	 Select Cylinder from the sub-menu that comes up.
Whenever you add something you have a chance to edit its options. 
Once these options are gone, you can't go back and change them. 
The new object is now just a collection of points, same as any other 
object to Blender so edit those options while you can.
4.	 On the left-hand sidebar under the Add Cylinder option, click on the 
number in Vertices and change that number to 8.
5.	 Press Tab to advance to the next option, Radius. The mug is designed to be 24 
mm wide, so enter a radius of 12 and press Enter.
6.	 Press Tab to advance to Depth. Enter a depth of 20.
7.	 Choose File | Save or with the pointer over the 3D View panel press Ctrl + S 
and press Enter to save.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
It is good practice to name the objects to avoid a bunch of nondescript objects such 
as "Cylinders" and "Cubes" in scenes. To name an object use the Object menu on the 
right-hand side bar and carry out the following steps:
1.	 On the right-hand side bar click on the icon that looks like an orange cube to 
switch to the Object tab.
2.	 Click on the word Cylinder in the text box to select it.
3.	 Erase the word Cylinder and type Mug Body followed by Enter to name  
the object.
4.	 Select File | Save or with the pointer over the 3D View panel press Ctrl + S 
and then press Enter to save.
At this point the 3D view will turn into a field of gray. This is expected and will be 
addressed later after creating a save point.
Creating a save point
Incremental saves are when a new save file is created; leaving the old one in the state 
it was in. This serves as a sort of extended undo if anything goes wrong. In the case 
of following a tutorial like this these incremental saves can provide a way back if the 
reader ever goes astray and doesn't realize it at first, as opposed to having to start all 
over, avoiding frustration.

Mini Mug
[ 26 ]
Blender contains a powerful shortcut to make incremental saving easy. Carry out the 
following steps for incremental saving:
1.	 Select File | Save As… or press F2.
2.	 With the pointer over the file list press + on the number pad to add a number 
to the file name.
3.	 Click on Save As Blender File to create the new file.
The next time this set of actions are followed the number in the file name will be 
incremented by 1 automatically.
Adjusting the view
In the main view there should be nothing but a gray field. This is because the mug is 
bigger than the current view so now is a good time to list the many ways to change 
the view in Blender.
•	
Rotate the view: Use the 8, 2, 4, and 6 keys on the number pad  
to rotate the view. Use the 7, 1, and 3 keys on the number pad  
to jump to the top, front, and right-hand side views. Use  
Ctrl + Numpad 7, Ctrl + Numpad 1, and Ctrl + Numpad 3 to jump to 
the bottom, back, or left-hand side view. Pressing 5 on the number 
pad toggles orthographic/perspective view which means the 
view is either rendered with perspective like in real life or without 
like on a grid that is usually easier to do editing in. These options 
are also available in the View menu at the bottom of the 3D View 
panel. Click-and-hold the middle mouse button (or your mouse 
wheel) and move the mouse to rotate the view.
•	
Zoom the view: Use Numpad + and Numpad –, Ctrl + and Ctrl –, 
or spin the mouse scroll wheel to zoom in and out. Automatically 
center the view and zoom on all objects by pressing Shift + C. 
This also resets the 3D cursor to the origin. Center the view and 
zoom on the selected objects by pressing the .(period) key on the 
number pad.
•	
Pan the view: Shift + click-and-hold the middle mouse button 
to pan the view, or in other words, to move the view without 
changing the direction you're looking at the scene. Alternately 
you can press Shift + F to begin the "Fly Camera" operation. In Fly 
Camera move the mouse pointer towards the edge of the screen 
to turn the camera. The mouse wheel or + and – on the number 
pad will let you move forward or backwards. Left-click or press 
Enter to exit the Fly Camera operation and leave your view where 
it is at the end. Right-click or press Esc to cancel the Fly Camera 
operation and return to where you started.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Using the view commands adjust the view. In future projects, there will be less 
emphasis on the specific keys to press to change the view, but for now the steps  
to carry out are as follows:
1.	 In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel choose View | Align View 
| Center Cursor and View All or press Shift + C to center the view on  
the cylinder.
2.	 Select View | Front or press Numpad 1 to switch to front view.
3.	 Select View | Orthographic or Perspective or press Numpad 5 to switch 
between them.
4.	 In the bar at the bottom of the 3D View panel click on the combo box with an 
icon like a white ball and choose the Wireframe option or press Z to switch 
to wireframe view.
In Wireframe view the object is presented as though it were 
just made of wire. All edges, even hidden ones, become visible.

Mini Mug
[ 28 ]
Adding a handle
Do an incremental save (Press F2, Numpad +, and then click on Save As Blender File).
Whenever a new object is added, it will appear wherever the 3D cursor 
is. If the 3D cursor has accidentally moved by a stray, left-click is good to 
center the view and reset the 3D cursor to the origin by pressing Shift + C 
before adding a new object.
Carry out the following steps to create a new cube:
1.	 Select Add in the Info panel menu or press Shift + A and select Mesh | Cube 
in the menu.
2.	 Click on the Object tab in the right-hand sidebar and rename this Cube  
to Handle.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
The newly created cube is being seen from the front orthographic view so it looks 
like a box, but it does have depth. Rotate the view to confirm this. The cylinder is 
also entirely inside the mug body but it is visible because of wireframe mode. Press 
Z to toggle back to solid view and the cube will be hidden by the body. Remember 
to undo any view changes by pressing Numpad 1 or choosing View | Front and 
toggling to Wireframe mode (Z) before continuing. The steps for the grab operation 
are as follows:
1.	 From the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel choose Object | 
Transform | Grab/Move or move the mouse pointer over the handle  
cube and press G to begin the grab operation.
2.	 Move the mouse until the handle is inside the lower-right corner of the  
mug body.
3.	 Press Enter or left-click to end the grab operation.
4.	 Press Ctrl + S and Enter to save.
Object manipulation such as movement, rotation, or scaling are all 
done by default relative to the current view. As the current view is 
the front view, the grab operation will only move up and down or left 
and right, or along the x and z axes.
Carry out the following steps for the rotate operation:
1.	 Choose Object | Transform | Rotate or press R to begin the  
rotation operation.
2.	 Type in 45 to rotate the handle.

Mini Mug
[ 30 ]
3.	 Press Enter or left-click to end the rotate operation.
4.	 Press Ctrl + S and Enter to save.
Shaping the handle
Pan and zoom the view as explained before to adjust the view to focus on the right 
half of the mug with plenty of space to make the handle in.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Blender allows direct manipulation of the individual points or vertices that make 
up an object in Edit Mode. Many things that you can do in terms of selection and 
manipulation work similarly in and out of Edit Mode.
1.	 On the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel click on the combo box with 
the option for Object Mode visible and select Edit Mode or press Tab to enter 
Edit Mode.
2.	 Choose Select | (De)select all or press A so that no points are selected.
3.	 Choose Select | Circle Select or press C to begin the circle select operation.
4.	 Scroll the mouse wheel to adjust the circle select tool size.
5.	 Hold left mouse button and to move the selection area to select the vertices 
shown in the next screenshot.
6.	 Right-click or press Enter to end the circle and select operation.
In Wireframe mode selecting the vertices one at a time (with the right-click 
on mouse ) cannot be done in confidence as the vertex selected may be 
any of the overlapping vertices, if overlapping vertices there are, as in this 
case. Using the circle select operation selects them all.
The extrude operation creates a new points based on the selected points and allows 
you to extend or move these shapes away from where they started. This is a quick 
and easy way to change the geometry of the shape.
1.	 Select Mesh | Extrude Region or press E to begin the extrude operation.
2.	 Move the mouse to move the extruded selection away from where they started.

Mini Mug
[ 32 ]
3.	 Left-click or press Enter to end the extrude operation.
4.	 Select Mesh | Transform | Rotate or press R to begin the rotation operation.
5.	 Left-click or press Enter to end the rotation operation.
6.	 Select Mesh | Transform | Grab/Move or press G to begin the grab operation.
7.	 Use the mouse to set the location similar to the illustration.
8.	 Left-click or press Enter to end the grab operation.
9.	 Move the mouse to rotate the points similar to the illustration in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
Building the rest of the handle is as easy as; Extrude (E), Rotate (R), Grab/Move (G), 
repeat. At each stage be sure that the points you created approximately match what 
you see in the illustration in the following screenshot. Keep it rough at this point. 
Smoothing out the mesh comes later.
Make sure to remain in front view (Numpad 1) when doing the operations or the 
handle may not remain straight in space. If that occurs remember repeatedly 
selecting Mesh | Undo or pressing Ctrl + Z undoes many mistakes. In the  
worst case reload the last incremental save and back up to that point.

Mini Mug
[ 34 ]
Once the rough shape of the handle is complete, exit Edit Mode either by selecting 
Object Mode from the combo box at the bottom of the 3D View panel, or by pressing 
the Tab key. Then either choose Solid from the display combo box or press Z to switch 
to solid view, adjust your view to see how the handle looks in three dimensions.
Before proceeding do another incremental save (press F2, then Numpad +, and click 
on Save As Blender File).
The handle is in the right shape, but too thin. This is what the scale operator is for. 
Carry out the following steps for scale operation:
1.	 With the handle selected, navigate to Object | Tranform | Scale or press S 
to begin the scale operation.
2.	 Move the mouse and you will notice that the whole handle grows bigger  
and smaller.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
3.	 Press Y to lock the scale to only the y axis.
4.	 Move the mouse and notice the handle is only scaling in the y axis.
5.	 Move the mouse until the handle is about three times thicker than it was 
or type 3. There's no text box to type this into. Simply typing during the 
operation will define the parameters of the operation in Blender.
6.	 Press Enter or left-click to end the scale operation.
7.	 Save (Ctrl + S).

Mini Mug
[ 36 ]
Smoothing the rough edges
Blender provides a number of object modifiers that can be used to quickly alter 
objects in the scene. In this project only two modifiers, namely Multiresolution and 
Boolean, will be used. Modifiers can be stacked, turned on and off, and their settings 
can be changed on the fly. The modifiers are accessed in their own menu in the right-
hand side bar.
Begin with an incremental save (Press F2, then Numpad +, and click on Save As 
Blender File) to set a save point. Then carry out the following steps to create a  
new modifier:
1.	 In the right-hand side bar, click on the icon that looks like a wrench to open 
up the modifier tab.
2.	 Click on the Add Modifier button.
3.	 Select from the second column (Generate) the Multiresolution modifier from 
the menu.
4.	 In the Multiresolution options box click on the Subdivide button twice.
Multiresolution smoothes the mesh out by adding more vertices between existing 
vertices and putting them in a location that rounds the shape. In this case the final 
result looks good except that the top of the handle is too rounded so it doesn't 
join the body of the mug well. To flatten these curves out more points will need to 
be added to the original mesh. Fortunately modifiers do not change the original 
geometry until you click on the Apply button, so you can still modify the shape in 
Edit Mode.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
To further modify the shape carry out the following steps:
1.	 Enter the Wireframe view (Z).
2.	 Enter Edit mode (Tab).
3.	 The Loop Cut and Slide operation is accessed either by finding the button in 
the left-hand side bar under Add or by pressing Ctrl + R.
4.	 Move the pointer with the mouse to the lines near the top at the end of the 
handle, as shown in the next screenshot.
5.	 Left-click to select this subdivision.

Mini Mug
[ 38 ]
6.	 Move the pointer closer to the end of the handle, to slide the loop cut closer 
to the end of the handle, but not overlapping the existing points.
7.	 Left-click to end the loop-cut operation.
8.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).
The top end of the handle is now blunter and will sit inside the mug better. Save the 
work done so far before continuing further.
Shaping the body of the mug
Finishing the handle taught many operations and modifiers that will now be applied 
to the mug body:
1.	 Begin by setting another save point (Press F2, then Numpad +, and click on 
Save As Blender File).
2.	 Right-click to select the mug body or choose the mug body in the  
Outliner panel.
3.	 Jump to the front view (Numpad 1) and center and zoom (Numpad .) on the 
mug body.
The border select operation is another way to quickly select multiple objects or, in 
this case, points for editing. Like the circle select tool while in wireframe mode, the 
border select tool selects all vertices that it surrounds, even if they're overlapping 
other points on the screen. The following are the steps for border select operation:
1.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Clear the selection (A).
3.	 Select | Border Select or press B to begin the border select operation.
4.	 Hold left-button on mouse and move the pointer to draw a box around the 
vertices at the top of the mug body.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
5.	 Release the left-button on mouse to end the box select operation.
With the top of the mug body selected, press Scale (S) the selected points. Make 
the top of the mug slightly wider than the bottom. By default the center of the scale 
operation is relative to the points selected. In this case that works out so the top of 
the mug widens evenly all around. (This can be a problem for less regular shapes.)
As with most operations, where the mouse is at the start of the scale 
operation, can affect the outcome. If the mouse pointer is too close to the 
center, there may not be a high enough degree of control, too close to the 
edge of the screen and there may not be enough room to move outward. 
This idea of pointer placement before an operation may take some getting 
used to but is a powerful reason to use the hot keys because that is not 
possible with menu select operations. If the pointer placement is ever 
undesirable simply press Esc to cancel the operation and try again.
Do a 1 millimeter extrusion (E) of the points at the top of the mug by typing 1 during 
the extrude operation. The next operation will use extrude in a different way to 
create points for scaling.

Mini Mug
[ 40 ]
Following are the steps for extrude operation:
1.	 Do not touch the mouse.
2.	 Begin the Extrude (E) operation.
3.	 Do not move the mouse.
4.	 Press Enter to end the extrude operation.
It is not immediately apparent but the newly extruded points are exactly in the same 
place as the points they were copied from. Generally having duplicate points like this 
isn't a good thing, but the new points aren't going to stay where they are.
Pan (Press Shift + middle-click on mouse) and zoom (using mouse wheel) the view to 
look closely at one of the upper corners of the mug body. Put the mouse pointer close 
to the corner of the selected points and Scale (S) them until they are approximately 2 
mm inside the mug body.
By adjusting the view, the result of this operation becomes apparent. This is how the 
lip of the mug is created.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Jump back to the Front view (Numpad 1) and adjust the view to include the whole 
mug body. Extrude (E) again, but this time move the extrusion downwards into the 
mug body until the extrusion is nearly 2 mm, or 2 grid blocks, from the bottom of the 
mug on the inside. Then save (Ctrl + S).

Mini Mug
[ 42 ]
Zoom (using mouse wheel) and pan (Press Shift + middle-click) to adjust the view to 
look closely at a lower corner of the mug to fine tune the last extrusion operation.
Carry out the following steps for the grab operation:
1.	 Begin the Grab/Move (G) operation.
2.	 Lock movement to the z axis by pressing Z.
3.	 Move the mouse until the bottom is closer to exactly 2 grid blocks (2 mm) 
from the bottom.
4.	 Scale (S) until the bottom of the mug is approximately 2 mm inside the wall 
of the mug.
5.	 Save (Ctrl + S).

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
On a Makerbot it is possible to make things with details as small as 0.4 
mm thick because that is the size of the nozzle. However, such small 
things tend to break easily. Even details as much as 1 mm can be too 
fragile. The general rule to follow is anything you don't want to break 
needs to be at least 3 mm thick or more and walls should never be 
made thinner than 2 mm.
The mug is looking very mug-like now, but it's still very rough and the handle is 
peeking through the body. First thing to do is in the right-hand side bar switch 
to the modify tab (the one with the wrench) and hit the Add Modifier to add the 
MultiResolution modifier to the mug body.

Mini Mug
[ 44 ]
Click on the Subdivide button three times. Now the mug body looks more like a 
cup, but it doesn't have a stable base for printing. This is an excellent opportunity to 
give the mug an interesting shape.
Carry out the following steps to give an interesting shape to the mug:
1.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Clear the selection (A).
3.	 Jump to Bottom view (Ctrl + 7).

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
4.	 Right-click to select one of the vertices on the bottom of the mug.
5.	 While pressing the Shift key, right-click on every other vertex on the bottom of 
the mug body.
6.	 Move the mouse pointer close to any of the selected points.
7.	 Begin the Scale (S) operation.
8.	 Move the mouse pointer away from the middle until the bottom of the mug 
body takes on a more-or-less square shape.

Mini Mug
[ 46 ]
9.	 Press Enter to end the scale operation.
If you exit Edit Mode at this point the Multiresolution modifier will still be making 
the bottom of the mug too rounded. This is the same as what happened with the 
handle and is fixed in the same way.

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
Rotate the view upwards slightly to be able to see the side of the mug. Use the loop 
cut operator (Ctrl + R) to add extra points around the bottom of the mug near the end. 
Remember with the loop cut operator the left-selects the edges to be cut, then move the 
mouse to adjust the location of the cut, then left-click to again set the loop cut.
Exit Edit Mode (Tab) and adjust the view. The mug now has an interesting shape and 
more importantly a flatter base.

Mini Mug
[ 48 ]
It is time to fix the handle. This is a good time to set a save point (Press F2, then 
Numpad +, and click on Save As Blender File). Select the handle jump to the front 
view (Numpad 1) and pan (Shift + middle-click) the view. Enter Edit Mode (Tab) and in 
Wireframe view (Z) select the points on the top of the handle that are extending too 
far with either the Border (B) or Circle (C) select tools.
Move the points with the Grab/Move operator (G) until they are inside the wall of 
the mug and exit Edit Mode to see if the handle stays within the walls of the mug 
after the modifier is applied. Then save (Ctrl + S).

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
Joining the shapes
Most of the modeling is done, but this mug is not quite ready to print. The body 
and handle are still two separate pieces and the bottom of the body, while flatter, 
isn't quite flat enough to trust to printing. We will be making some changes that will 
make further editing difficult so first we will make a duplicate of the mug's body 
easily modifiable objects.
Even though it's only been a while set another save point (Press F2, then Numpad +, 
and click on Save As Blender File) now.
Carry out the following steps to make a duplicate of the mug:
1.	 Center the view on all visible objects (Shift + C).
2.	 Select the mug body (right-click).
3.	 Do not touch the mouse.
4.	 Object | Duplicate or press Shift + D to begin the duplicate operation.
5.	 If the mouse is moved the duplicate will move which can be useful at times 
but do not move the mouse this time.
6.	 Press Enter to end the duplication operation.
With two identical shapes in the same location it can get confusing to select the 
correct one, so we're going to hide everything but the duplicate object that we're 
working with. The objects will still be in the scene there, but they'll be invisible and 
not selectable. In the menu select Object | Show/Hide | Hide UnSelected or press 
Shift + H to hide all objects but the selected one.

Mini Mug
[ 50 ]
Use the Object tab (with the orange cube) to change the name of Mug Body.001 to 
Mug Final. Remember to save.
The Mug Final will be the version that will be prepped for printing. The body of 
the handle will be merged into this version before some minor edits to the mesh will 
make it ready to print. To begin, click on the Mesh tab in the right-hand side bar  
(the one with the wrench) and click on Apply.
After applying the modifier, if you go to Edit Mode you will notice 
that we can now only modify the high resolution mesh. This is good 
to do to prepare the mesh for printing but as it cuts off some editing 
options so it is best to save this step until the end.

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
Now a new modifier, Boolean, will be used to put the handle on the mug. The two 
objects will have their geometry combined and any geometry that would be "inside" 
the final object will be eliminated:
1.	 Click on the Add Modifier button.
2.	 Select the Boolean modifier.
3.	 In the Boolean options click on the button below the word Operation which 
reads Intersect.
4.	 Choose Union from the menu that pops up.
5.	 Click on the box under the word Object.
6.	 Choose Handle from the menu that pops up.

Mini Mug
[ 52 ]
7.	 Click on the Apply button to finalize the Boolean modifier.
The handle is now a part of the Mug Final object. If you switch to wireframe view 
(Z) and change your views you will notice the parts of the handle that were inside 
the mug aren't there. They are joined so that the whole shape is one continuous shell 
without hidden vertices inside the shape. This is a best practice for making objects 
for 3D printing. Remember to save.
Flattening the bottom
The bottom of the mug, while flatter than before, is not perfectly flat and is therefore 
not suitable for printing yet. However, there is a way to use the scale operator in Edit 
Mode to make a flat bottom, by carrying out the following steps:
1.	 Jump to the front view (Numpad 1).
2.	 Enter Edit mode (Tab).
3.	 Clear the selection (A).

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
4.	 Use the Box Select operation (B) to select the bottom few layers.
Without touching the mouse carry out the following steps:
1.	 Begin the Scale (S) operation.
2.	 Press Z to lock the scale operation to the z-axis.
3.	 Type 0 (zero) to scale by a factor of zero.
4.	 Press Enter to end the scale operation.
Rotate the view and notice that all the points that were there before are still there, 
they are all just on the exact same z level making a perfectly flat bottom for printing.
Remember to save (Ctrl + S).

Mini Mug
[ 54 ]
Exporting for print
All editing of a model done. The mug isn't placed on the platform it's true, it is just 
kind of floating in space, but it is properly oriented so the 3D printer software will 
take care of positioning it. All that is left is to export the model in a format that can 
be sent to the 3D printer.
With the final mug selected (right-click) and when not in Edit Mode (Tab), carry out 
the following steps:
1.	 Click on File on the top menu.
2.	 Click on Export on the menu.
3.	 In the menu that pops up click on Stl (.stl).
Standard Tessellation Language (STL) is a file format that is used to 
describe the geometry of a shape. It doesn't store much else but the 
shape which is perfect for 3D printing. Almost every 3D printer can use 
a STL file.
By default the name of the STL will be the name of the project, which is perfect  
in this case. Just check to be sure the name is as you like it and click on the Export 
STL button.
Then open either MakerWare or ReplicatorG, open the STL, and prepare it for 
printing in the usual way.

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
Extra credit
Now that you've learned the basic modeling tools challenge yourself to make your 
own mug shape, either by modifying the existing model or starting from scratch. 
Make a mug that is more of a goblet or make a mug with extruded tentacles. Perhaps, 
something that is more irregular and less symmetrical. The possibilities are endless.
Summary
And that's it. This thimble-sized mug taught a majority of the basic tools that will 
continue to be used in future 3D modeling projects. Some of those tools are:
•	
File operations such as saving and creating new directories
•	
Adding basic objects (Shift + A)
•	
View rotation with the number pad
•	
Scene navigation with the middle-button on the mouse
•	
Wireframe and Solid view modes (Z)
•	
Selection operations such as Circle (C) and Box (B) select
•	
Manipulation operations such as Grab/Move (G), Rotate (R), and Scale (S)
•	
Edit mode (Tab) for manipulation of the individual elements that make  
up a shape
•	
The Extrude (E) operation
•	
The loop-cut (Ctrl + R) operation
•	
Object modifiers such as Multiresolution and Boolean operations
•	
Exporting STLs for print

Mini Mug
[ 56 ]
That is a long list. Have a drink.
The next chapter will teach a different tool set for modeling similar objects using 
lines and lathes, but the skills of vertex selection and manipulation learned in this 
chapter will still come in useful!

Face Illusion Vase
There is an old illusion where the silhouette of two faces are shown towards each 
other with their noses close together, but if you look at the space between the faces, 
the image shifts in your eyes and appears to be of a single ornate vase. With 3D 
printing, it is possible to make this illusion a reality. More than just a reality, it is 
possible to use a real face to make the illusion.
In the previous chapter, a number of topics including manipulating the view, and 
creating and manipulating objects were introduced. Also, the habit of making 
frequent saves and using incremental saves were taught, practiced, and enforced.  
In this chapter and in all the following chapters, saving will be left to you. It's 
generally a good idea to make an incremental save at every major section marked  
by a heading, and doing smaller saves as much as possible.

Face Illusion Vase
[ 58 ]
This chapter will focus on importing an image to help guide modeling, the tools that 
can be used to trace that image with a single line, and the tools that can be used to 
turn a single line into a solid shape.
Getting a profile
Before opening Blender, the first thing to do is get a side profile image of a face. 
With a camera you can take an image of yourself or someone you know. Alternately, 
searching online for side profile picture can turn up something usable. A good 
picture will be as side-on as possible and will have a clear outline of the face. Save 
the image to the local disk and make note of its location. If no other image can be 
found, the following image can be acquired at http://www.thingiverse.com/
thing:90754. Locate the following image, right-click on it and choose Save Image 
As… (or Save As… depending on the browser) and save the image in a directory, 
where it can be found later:
Now, just like last time, open up Blender and clear the scene. Start a new project, 
Select All objects (A) and Delete (X). In the menu bar, navigate to File | Save As... 
and navigate to the MakerbotBlueprints directory we created in the first project, 
then create a new directory for this project and in that directory name this file  
Face Vase.

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Importing an image for reference in Blender is done through the Properties menu, a 
special menu which is usually hidden. First that menu will be revealed and then the 
image will be imported to be used as reference:
1.	 Open the Properties menu either by selecting from the bottom menu of the 
3D view's window View | Properties or by pressing N:
2.	 Scroll down the Properties menu and check the checkbox next to the 
Background Images submenu.
3.	 Expand the Background Images section by clicking on the arrow next to the 
checkbox.
4.	 Click on the Add Image button:

Face Illusion Vase
[ 60 ]
5.	 In the options box that opens up, click on the Axis combobox that currently 
reads All Views and click on Front:
6.	 Click on the Open button:
7.	 Navigate to where the profile image is saved.
8.	 Double-click on the image or select the image and click on the Open  
Image button.
The image will not be immediately visible because it is only set to appear in the  
front view so switch to the Front view (Numpad 1) and switch to Orthographic  
view (Numpad 5) and the selected image will appear:

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Now in the Properties menu under Background Images, this image will have some 
new options to manipulate the image. This project is more easily done with the 
opacity set near to or at 100 percent, making a very dark and clear image, so raise 
the Opacity option by either clicking and dragging on the slider or clicking on it and 
typing the value you want. (Remember that saving is always a good idea.):
Tracing the silhouette
In Blender, an object can be just a single-shaped line that can later be turned into 
a 3D object. Blender doesn't have a single-line object, so instead the simple objects 
if possible will be added and a single line will be extracted from it. Perform the 
following steps to trace the silhouette:
1.	 Add (Shift + A) an object.
2.	 Under the Mesh menu, click on Plane:

Face Illusion Vase
[ 62 ]
3.	 Begin the Rotation (R) operation.
4.	 Press X to lock the rotation around the x axis.
5.	 Type 90 to rotate exactly 90 degrees.
6.	 Press Enter or left-click to end the rotation operation.
7.	 In the Object tab (the one that looks like an orange cube) on the left-side bar, 
name this object Face Line.
Unlike before, when we added a cube that only looked like a square because of 
our viewing angle, a plane really is just a square and has no depth. A plane isn't 
enough to define a printable shape but it can be used as a starting point for making a 
printable shape with depth.
All 3D shapes are comprised of some basic building block. Vertices 
(single vertex) are the smallest part and are nothing more than a point, 
no shape or depth, and are not printable on their own. Two vertices can 
be connected with a line. Lines also aren't printable on their own. When 
three vertices are connected with lines the result is a face, sometimes 
called a polygon in other applications. Faces are 2 dimensional objects. 
In Blender, there are fGons, polygons with more than three vertices and 
lines. Blender often treats these fGons just like faces, but really they are 
collections of polygons that all act together. The plane is nothing more 
than a four-sided fGon sometimes called a quadrangle.
Finally, with a collection of faces a 3D shape can be created. Shapes are 
3-dimensional objects and may be printable.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
With the plane selected, a single point will be isolated from it and that point 
extruded into a line to trace the face with:
1.	 Enter the Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Select one of the vertices on the right side of the plane with the right-click.
3.	 Press and hold Shift while selecting the other vertex on the right side of the 
square with the right-click.
4.	 Delete (X) the selected vertices:
The remaining line will be the starting point for the traced silhouette.
5.	 Select (right-click) either remaining vertex.
6.	 Grab/Move (G) and move it to a point on the edge of the face.
7.	 Select (right-click) the other point and Grab/Move (G) and move it to a 
different point on the edge of the face:

Face Illusion Vase
[ 64 ]
8.	 Select (right-click) the top vertex and Extrude (E) to create a new point. Place 
it on a point higher on the edge of the face:
9.	 Repeat this process as many times as necessary to trace the top of the face. 
Zoom and pan as necessary:
Remember the rules about overhang. Do not go over the top of the head.  
Stop before the overhang become too steep; about 45 degrees should be the 
max. It is not necessary to place the points at exactly the same distance from 
each other. As a general rule, the fewest points necessary to catch all the 
details is best.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
Now continue tracing the bottom of the face:
10.	 Select (right-click) the lowest vertex and repeat the extrusion and placement 
process to trace the bottom of the face:
11.	 Exit the Edit Mode (Tab).
12.	 Turn down the opacity in the Properties panel on the Background Image 
options to inspect the traced silhouette:

Face Illusion Vase
[ 66 ]
If it is necessary, enter the Edit Mode again and move points around until they are 
where you want them. If you need to add a point between two points don't use 
extrude. Instead, select the two points you want to add a point between and click  
on the Subdivide button in the Object Tools section on the right side bar.
If the trace looks good, open the Properties menu again and under the Background 
Images options click on the icon shaped like an eye near the top to hide the 
background image entirely:
Creating a vase from the lines
It may not be immediately evident from its name, but the Screw modifier is the tool 
that will be used to turn this line into a 3-dimensional shape:
1.	 Switch to the Modifier tab (the one with the blue wrench) in the  
right-side bar.
2.	 Click on the Add Modifier button.
3.	 Click on the Screw modifier in the second column:
4.	 Uncheck Smooth Shading.
5.	 Change the Render Steps field to 32.
6.	 Change the Steps field to 32:

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
Like many modifiers in Blender, Screw can be used for many more things than 
making vases, and experimentation outside of this exercise is encouraged.
Why 32 steps? Those who are new to 3D modeling or computer science may wonder 
why such a seemingly arbitrary number like 32 is used. There are two reasons for 
choosing 32.
The first reason is because 32 is divisible by 4, so that the vertices line up with 
the four axes directions nicely. If 30 were used, there would be vertices that lined 
up nicely with the horizontal axis, but on the vertical axis there would be points 
straddling it, which might be complicated if you have to do any vertex editing along 
the axis later. It's not a hard-and-fast rule, but generally speaking it's best to choose 
numbers which are divisible by 4 and have small prime roots, hence 8, 16, 32, and 64 
are common.
The second reason is because 32 is sufficiently high to make the shape seem round. 
For smaller objects, 16 may be enough and generally it's good not to overdo it. In 
the following screenshot, the effect of 8, 16, 24, and 32 steps are shown. By 24 the 
object is pretty round, and 24 is a pretty good number of steps to choose. But for the 
reason given before, 32 is better and not that much more. However, there is a point 
of diminishing returns and 64 steps (not shown) has hardly any visible benefit.

Face Illusion Vase
[ 68 ]
The Screw modifier options indicate that the rotation should be happening around 
the z axis, but this rotation appears to be happening around the y axis instead. This 
is because the rotation is happening around the object's z axis, not the world's z axis. 
Objects have orientations independent of the world's orientation and often modifiers 
use an object's orientation for their transformations. The plane that this object started 
as was rotated 90 degrees around the x axis at the beginning, so it's personal z axis is 
now oriented along the world's y axis. It is sometimes desirable, like in this case, to 
apply an object's rotation to fix it's orientation to match the world's orientation:
1.	 Be sure Blender is in the Object Mode (Tab), not the Edit Mode.
2.	 In the Object Mode from the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel 
navigate to Object | Apply or press Ctrl + A.
3.	 Click on Rotation from the menu:
Now the object's orientation matches the world's orientation and the rotation 
automatically spins around the z axis as desired.
But the rotation is still not quite right. The outline is rotating around the middle with 
the nose out, when it should be nose in. The easiest thing to do is move all the points 
until they rotate in the desired way:
1.	 Enter the Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Select all the points (A).
3.	 Grab/Move (G) and move them to the other side of the z axis.

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
4.	 While in the Edit Mode, zoom out and Scale (S) the vertices until the vase is 
approximately 40 mm tall.
5.	 If necessary move (G) the points again to keep the thinnest point of the vase, 
where the noses are, about 10 mm thick.
6.	 When satisfied with the shape of the vase, exit the Edit Mode (Tab).
Using Solidify to make walls
The vase looks good from this angle, but if the view is rotated it becomes apparent 
that this it is just the shell of a vase. If this were to be printed as it is, nothing might 
get printed. The shape needs to be solidified into a shape, and fortunately there's a 
modifier for that. Solidify can be applied to this shell to make a printable object.
Just a quick reminder that constantly saving (Ctrl + A) and incremental saves (F2, +) 
is always a good idea.

Face Illusion Vase
[ 70 ]
Before using Solidify in the Modifier tab (blue wrench), press the Apply button to 
finalize the Screw modifier. Then add and adjust the settings of the Solidify modifier 
as follows:
1.	 Press the Add Modifier button.
2.	 Select the Solidify modifier in the second column from the pop-up menu:
3.	 Change the Thickness field to 2 for a 2 mm wall:

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
There is something very wrong. The Solidify modifier seems to work properly for 
the bottom half of the vase, but not for the top. The reason for this is another very 
important concept in 3D modeling; Normals.
A collection of vertices and edges makes a face as discussed. But there 
is also another very important piece of information contained in a 
face, which direction it is facing or the face's normal. In the past, this 
information was used to inform the computer when they could ignore a 
polygon. If a polygon is facing away from the view, then the computer 
could save a few cycles and not draw that polygon. Now, computers are 
more powerful so polygons are drawn no matter which direction it is 
facing, but the normal is still used in 3D modeling to assist modifiers and 
operations. The normal is used by the extrude operation and now by the 
Solidify modifier.
The normal on the vase needs to be inspected and corrected before the Solidify 
modifier will work properly:
1.	 Enter the Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 If the Properties panel was closed, press N to open it.
3.	 Under the Mesh display, find the Normals section and click on the Display 
Face normal button, which looks like a cube with one orange face:
Part of the vase is now covered with visible blue hairs, and the other part, the trouble 
area, is hidden behind the effects of the Solidify modifier. These blue lines are the 
normal indicators and show which direction the face's normal points. Switching to 
Wireframe view (Z) and zooming in on the trouble area, it becomes apparent that the 
normals on the bad part are all pointing in. Normals should always point out.

Face Illusion Vase
[ 72 ]
On the left-hand side bar in the Mesh Tools section, there is a Normals section. 
There are two buttons there: Recalculate and Flip Direction
To practice selecting faces the Flip Direction button will be employed to selectively 
fix the normals:
1.	 On the bottom menu of the 3D View window, click on the Face select button:
2.	 If not in the Wireframe view, toggle it on (Z).
3.	 Border Select (B) the faces, whose normals are facing inwards:
Since face select is on any face whose center point is within the border 
select box will be selected. It is okay to over select slightly as long as 
the center points of the good faces are not within the selection area.

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
4.	 Click on the Flip Direction button in the left side bar of the 3D View window.
5.	 In the bottom menu bar of the 3D View window, click on the Vertex  
select button.
6.	 Exit the Edit Mode (Tab).
Now, Solidify works as expected and the vase has a 2 mm wall with the traced 
outline on the outside.
Making a solid base
Before continuing, now is a good time for another gentle reminder about saves.  
Use saves (Ctrl + S) and incremental saves (F2, +) from time to time.
A proper vase will hold water, so this vase will have to be modified so the base 
instead of having a 2 mm wall will be solid, and the bottom of the body and foot 
closed so it can hold water and print. This involves selecting the internal walls of the 
vase, which can be difficult to do without selecting the external walls as well, so a 
new selection operation will the used; Select More:
1.	 Apply the Solidify modifier.
2.	 Toggle to the Wireframe view on (Z).
3.	 Enter the Edit Mode (Tab).
4.	 (De)select All (A).
5.	 In the front view, zoom in on the base and identify a line of vertices, where 
the noses meet which are on the inside and carefully Border Select (B) the 
whole line. Try to identify a line that is not so close to external lines in this 
view to make the selection easy:

Face Illusion Vase
[ 74 ]
6.	 From the menu at the bottom of the View Panel, click on Select More or 
press Ctrl and the + key on the number pad:
7.	 Keep expanding the selection (Ctrl + NumPad +) until the line of vertices on 
the very bottom of the vase is selected:
8.	 Begin the Border Select operation (B).
9.	 Click and hold the middle-mouse button and draw a box around the bottom 
few selected layers to deselect those points.
Using the middle-click to deselect, works with the Circle Select 
operation (C) as well.

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
10.	 Continue to select more (Ctrl + Numpad +) and box deselect (B, middle-click) 
the points on the bottom or top of the selection area to avoid over selecting 
until all the vertices inside the base are selected, not including the vertices at 
the foot of the vase or the bottom of the inside of the body.
11.	 Delete the selected vertices (X).
The Select More option has an opposite in the Select Less operator, which  
intuitively is accessed from the same menu or by pressing Ctrl and the NumPad - key 
on the keyboard.

Face Illusion Vase
[ 76 ]
Switch to Solid View mode (Z) and rotate the view with the keys on the number pad 
to inspect the bottom of the vase. The shape has a big hole in it that will need to be 
closed to make this object printable:
There is a trick for selecting whole loops like this very quickly, which will make 
filling in the hole easy:
1.	 With the view adjusted so that the hole in the bottom is visible, press Alt and 
right-click on an edge of the hole to select the whole loop.
2.	 Press F to create a new face with the selected vertices:
There is another hole inside the body that can be filled in the same way, but will need 
to be done in Wireframe mode (Z). Once in Wireframe mode, zoom in where the noses 
meet and look for the loop of points inside the body. Then, same as for the other area, 
loop select (Alt + right-click) the hole and make a face from the selection (F).
Whenever vertices, lines, or faces are deleted, there will likely be holes 
in the shape. It is important to catch and close these holes or there is a 
chance the shape will not print. Exploring how to find these problems 
in files downloaded online will be explored in a later chapter.

Chapter 3
[ 77 ]
Printing the vase
The vase is now complete and can be exported. Exit the Edit Mode and with the final 
vase selected navigate to File | Export | Stl (.stl) in the menu bar. Then process in 
the usual way for printing. The example model had some overhang in the mouth 
area but printed okay:
Extra credit
There are often many techniques that can be employed to make the same thing. In fact, 
there is another way that this sort of vase could have been created using mostly just the 
techniques learned in the previous chapter. Starting with a cylinder at the bottom of 
the reference image, extrude the top slightly, and scale each extruded segment:

Face Illusion Vase
[ 78 ]
The disadvantage of this method is that it is difficult to get the same level of detail, 
and the wall inside the body may not be exactly 2 mm the whole way. It is left to the 
modeler to verify tolerances. The advantage of this method is that a clever modeler 
could take a picture of two different people facing each other and make a vase that 
looks different on each side. It requires some clever manipulation of the reference 
image to line up the features and could make an excellent gift.
Summary
Creating this vase taught many important 3D modeling skills and principles  
as follows:
•	
Importing a reference image
•	
The Screw modifier
•	
The Solidify modifier
•	
Normals, viewing, and fixing
•	
Deleting vertices
•	
Creating new faces from selections
The next chapter is another cool project that involves making something to match the 
dimensions of a real-life object, a useful, if somewhat silly, ring that can hold an SD 
card on a finger.

SD Card Holder Ring
Some 3D printers can print directly from an SD card instead of being hooked up to 
a computer all the time. But what if the computer used to prepare files is not close 
to the 3D printer? Some sort of SD card holder can be used in order to keep the card 
safe, but not to tie your hands up (in case you don't have any pockets available). A 
ring that you can put an SD card in is just the thing.
In this chapter an object will be modeled to real-life specifications. The challenges of 
matching real-life measurements with plastic shrinkage will be explored as well. In 
the end, a functional real-life useful object will be created, even though some would 
claim Blender isn't suited for CAD-like precision work.

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 80 ]
As precise placement of new objects is important in this project, remember that if 
the 3D cursor is ever moved with an accidental left-mouse click, navigate to View 
| Align View | Center Cursor and View All or press Shift + C to put the 3D cursor 
back at the origin.
Taking measurements
This would be a very simple build using the tools taught in previous chapters. So 
this set of instructions will focus on using a different paradigm of designing. In this 
build, the Apply button in the modifiers will not be used so that the object remains 
modifiable until the end. This technique works well for simple shapes but can be a 
problem when the geometry of the model becomes increasingly complex.
Before opening Blender, some measurements must be gathered. Careful 
measurements need to be taken of the finger that the ring will be on and of  
the SD card. A digital caliper is an excellent tool to take measurements with:

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
My middle finger measures 19.3mm at the widest point. If a digital caliper is not 
available, another way to measure a finger is to wrap a piece of paper around the 
finger, mark where it overlaps, and use a ruler to find your finger's circumference. 
Then consult the next chart to find out the standard ring size and diameter:
Circumference 
(mm)
Circumference 
(in)
Diameter (mm)
Radius (mm)
US 
Standard 
Ring Size
1.94
49.3
15.7
7.85
5
2.04
51.9
16.51
8.25
6
2.14
54.4
17.32
8.66
7
2.24
57
18.14
9.07
8
2.34
59.5
18.95
9.47
9
2.44
62.1
19.76
9.88
10
2.54
64.6
20.57
10.28
11
2.65
67.2
21.39
10.69
12
2.75
69.7
22.2
11.1
13
2.85
72.3
23.01
11.50
14
2.95
74.8
23.83
11.91
15
3.05
77.4
24.64
12.32
16
If all else fails, there is always trial and error. Make several test rings of various sizes, 
print them out, then see which one fits best. An adult male generally has a size of 
around 10; an adult female around a size 8, a child is around a size 5. If the test rings 
are made in the standard sizes and are marked, they could be kept for the future to 
model rings for friends and family.

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 82 ]
Next, a standard SD card needs to be measured. Fortunately SD cards are all the 
same: 2.2 mm x 24 mm x 32 mm:
Modeling the finger
Now that all the measurements have been taken, it is time to go to Blender. Start  
a new scene; (De)select All (A) objects and Delete (X) them. Then save the scene 
(Ctrl + S) in a new directory under the Makerbot Blueprints directory called Ch4 
SD Card Ring and name the project file as SD Card Ring.
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cylinder. In the side bar to the left, change the options for 
the cylinder. Change the value of Vertices to 64 so the cylinder is smoother 
than default. Change the value of Radius to half the diameter of the 
measured finger. Change the value of Depth to 10:
Blender can take simple equations in these boxes, so instead of dividing 
the diameter in half to get the radius, simply type the diameter followed 
by /2 and it will divide it by 2 for you. So, in the preceding example, 
typing 19.3/2 resulted in the value of Radius being shown.

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
2.	 Select the Object tab (orange cube) from the properties on the side bar to the 
right, rename this cylinder to Finger as this cylinder represents the finger in 
the build space:
3.	 Add (Shift + A) another cylinder. Blender remembers the settings that the 
last object was created with, and if another object is created of the same type, 
those settings will be applied to it. So the new cylinder is of the same radius, 
depth, and number of vertices as the Finger cylinder and is therefore in the 
same exact place until the settings are changed. Increase the value of the 
Radius by 2 of the Finger cylinder and change the value of Depth to 4:

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 84 ]
Again, adding a value of 2 to the existing diameter is as 
simple as clicking on it and appending +2 to the end and 
then pressing Enter.
4.	 In the Object tab rename this cylinder to Ring.
The XY plane is the logical floor of the build space that passes 
through the origin. Blender places a (small) XY plane in the 
view space to help visualization. It is, of course, completely 
imaginary and objects can be built through this floor. In fact, 
by default, new objects are placed somewhat under the XY 
plane. However, respecting the XY plane can provide a solid 
base of reference for building objects if needs be, especially 
when multiple objects will be placed with precision.
5.	 Jump to the Front (Numpad 1) orthographic (Numpad 5) view. Notice that the 
ring is sitting half above and half below the origin.
Putting the ring on the floor
The goal of this section will be to place the important objects so they sit on the XY 
plane without going below it.
1.	 With only the ring object selected, begin the Grab/Move (G) operation.
2.	 Press the Z key to lock the ring's movement along the z axis.
3.	 Type 2 to move the ring up half its depth.
4.	 Press Enter to end the grab operation.
Like scaling, you can lock movement to a single axis. 
This works regardless of the view and ensures that the 
movement is predictable.

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
This puts the Finger cylinder in an odd place, but as it is still both above and below 
the ring cylinder, it is not important and can just be left where it is.
Making a test ring
1.	 Similar to what has been done in other projects, add a Boolean modifier  
to the ring and difference the Finger object from it. The Finger object 
obscures the effect of this operation, so hide it. One way to do this is to select 
(right-click) the Finger object and navigate to Show/Hide | Hide Selected 
from the menu at the bottom of the 3D View Panel Object or press the H 
key. Another way is to click on the icon that looks like an eye in the Outliner 
on the line for the Finger object:

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 86 ]
2.	 The ring is now perfectly serviceable, but there's no harm in making it a 
little more appealing. Enter the Edit Mode (Tab). Again, notice that without 
applying the modifier, its effects are undone while in Edit mode. Loop 
Cut (Ctrl + R) the cylinder around the middle-click and left-click twice when 
selecting, so the slice does not slide up or down:
3.	 Scale (S) the newly sliced ring slightly outwards. The scaled ring of 
points should not extend more than 1 mm (one small grid square in the 
background) larger than the top and bottom disks of the ring shape:
Scaling is an operation for which precise measured adjustments like this are 
very difficult to accomplish. This is one of the places where Blender falls 
short as a CAD tool. Just something to keep in mind when designing.

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
4.	 Exit the Edit Mode (Tab). This is a good time to save (Ctrl + S) the changes. 
Export an STL of the ring by navigating to the File | Export | Stl (.stl) menu 
options. Name the exported file Test Ring.stl. Then print the test ring and 
try it on:
It might come as a surprise that the ring probably doesn't fit. If printing in ABS, the 
plastic shrinks, as that is one of the properties of ABS. Or there may be a print setting 
such as filament diameter that isn't correctly set. Also, internal rings are known to 
be a little small. Whatever the reason, this ring size isn't going to work; so it's a good 
thing that it was tested while the ring was still small.
Resizing the test ring
Now we are back to Blender to make a new test ring. This time, instead of starting 
from scratch, reload the project and resize the existing ring. Care has to be taken 
when resizing the ring to insure that it doesn't extend below the XY plane.
1.	 Unhide the Finger cylinder by clicking on the eye icon in the Outliner on the 
line for the Finger object.
2.	 Select All (A) objects.
3.	 Begin the Scale (S) operation.
4.	 Press Shift + Z to lock the scale operation to all but the z axis.
5.	 Type 1.03 to scale the selected object just slightly larger.
6.	 Press Enter to end the scale operation.

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 88 ]
Pressing Shift and X, Y, or Z key when in an operation such as 
scale or grab, locks the operation to everything but the selected 
axis, regardless of view. With rotation, however, the effects are 
less predictable.
The logic behind using 1.03 as a scaling factor is that past 
experimentation has proven this to be the right amount to 
overcome ABS shrinkage. It also coincidently brings the new 
ring very close to the next ring size. For completeness, it will 
be mentioned that scaling by 0.97 will approximately undo a 
scale of 1.03, if making the object smaller is desired. If a more 
exact measurement is desired, the exact amount of scale can be 
calculated by measuring the ring after printing with the calipers, 
calculating a ratio of the differences, and solving for the corrected 
scale factor. This is an exercise left for the reader.
7.	 Save (Ctrl + S) and export the model again. Print it out and test again. If it is 
still too small, repeat the process of scaling the ring up until it can be worn and 
removed comfortably. If during the process of printing, the printing software 
displays a message to the effect that the ring is not touching the bottom of the 
build platform, it is an indication that at some point locking the scale operation 
to all but the z axis was skipped and the ring now is falling below the XY 
plane. It is not a good idea to let this happen. It would be preferable to go back 
to an earlier iterative save and use a larger ring size to start with.
When a comfortable ring has been achieved, continue with the project.

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
Adding an SD card holder
1.	 (De)select All objects (A) and press Shift + H. Remember that Shift + H hides  
all but the selected object; however, as no objects are selected, all objects  
will be hidden to clear the way for what is to come. Add (Shift + A) a cube  
to the scene.
It is interesting to note that the default cube created by blender is not a unit, 
that is to say, its sides are not all 1 mm. They are in fact 2 mm each. This 
makes the default cube less desirable for precise scaling. Fortunately, it is an 
easy thing to make this cube a unit cube; however, first its dimensions can 
be used to move it on to the XY plane easily. Only this time a trick will be 
employed to control how the cube scales in the future. Instead of moving the 
whole cube up, the individual points will be moved up in the Edit Mode so 
that the object's origin is left where it is.
Object origin was a problem in the last project causing the object's 
axes to be skewed in relation to the world orientation. In that 
project, the rotation was corrected to fix it. In this project, the 
origin will be intentionally skewed to produce a desirable result.
2.	 Enter the Edit Mode (Tab).
3.	 Select all of the (A) points.
4.	 Begin the Grab/Move (G) operation.
5.	 Press the Z key to lock the movement in the z axis.
6.	 Type 1 to move the selected points up 1 unit.

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 90 ]
7.	 Press Enter to end the grab operation.
8.	 Exit the Edit Mode (Tab).
The cube now sits nicely on the XY plane, but more than that, its origin is also on the 
XY plane on the bottom face of the cube. Experimentally Scale (S) the cube and move 
the mouse. Notice that with the cube's origin where it is the scale operation is only 
scaling the cube above the XY plane. Undo (Ctrl + Z) any experimental scaling  
before continuing.
It is now time to make the cube unit a unit cube. This consists of simply scaling (S) 
the cube by 0.5. Now all the sides of the cube are exactly 1 unit long. A unit cube is 
very useful for making precise objects such as a virtual model of an SD card.
1.	 Begin the Scale (S) and press Enter to end it without changing anything.
2.	 In the Resize options in the side bar to the left, edit the dimensions of the 
scale operation based on the measurements of the SD card taken earlier.
3.	 Change the value of X to 2.2, the value of Y to 24, and the value of Z to 32.
4.	 Select the Object tab (orange cube) from the properties on the side bar to the 
right and rename this cube to SD Card.

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
5.	 Add (Shift + A) a new cube. Repeat the procedure of entering the Edit Mode 
(Tab) and moving (G) its vertices 1 unit along the z axis (Z), then exit the 
Edit Mode (Tab). Scale (S) the cube by .5 to make it a unit cube. Then use 
the Scale (S) operation again and type in the dimensions X: 6.2, Y: 28, Z: 12. 
Rename this cube to SD Holder:

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 92 ]
6.	 This makes the holder 2 mm thicker than the SD card all around and short 
enough to easily remove the SD card while tall enough to hold it securely. 
Add a Boolean modifier to the SD holder and difference the SD card from it. 
Hide (H) the SD card and rotate the view to check the SD holder.
7.	 A hole all the way through was not the desired effect, as the card might fall 
out of the ring. Since the Boolean operation has not been applied yet changes 
can still be made. Unhide the SD card by clicking on its eye icon in the 
Outline panel. Select the SD Card object and move (G) it 2 units along  
the z axis (Z). Hide the SD Card object again and check the SD holder:
This looks much better.

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
Adding the SD holder to the ring
Unhide the ring by clicking its eye icon in the Outline panel. Select SD Holder and 
Grab/Move (G) it in the x axis (X) until it is at the front of the ring. Depending on the 
view when the last operation was done, a problem may have been observed:
What happened to the hole for the SD card? Because the Boolean modifier was not 
applied, the hole stayed right where it was where the hidden SD Card object resides:

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 94 ]
As amusing as this can be, this is an undesired behavior. There are two options. 
Either the Boolean operation can be applied before moving, or both objects can be 
moved together. As the stated goal of this project was to not use the Apply button, 
the choice is clear. Undo (Ctrl + Z) the move operators until the hole is where it 
belongs, in SD Holder. Then unhide the SD Card object by clicking on its eye icon 
in the Outliner view. Select both SD Holder and SD Card by right-clicking on 
one, then holding Shift and right-clicking on the other. Then Grab/Move (G) and 
move them both in the x axis (X) until they are at the front of the ring with the 
ring intersecting SD Holder. Make sure there is a good connection here without 
interfering with the finger hole.
Hide the SD Card object now that everything is in place. Select the ring and add 
a Boolean modifier to union the ring and SD Holder together. Once the Boolean 
modifier is added, Hide (H) SD Holder to make inspecting the new object easier. 
Rotating the view, a blemish will be discovered. Inside the holder for the SD card, 
the ring is invading the hole for the SD card. If it isn't clear, switch to the Wireframe 
view (Z) and look at the ring in Front (Numpad 1) orthographic view.

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
The solution is to change around the various Boolean operations that are being done. 
Right now, the SD Card object is being differenced from SD Holder; the resultant 
shape is being united with the ring. The correct order is the SD Holder being united 
with the ring, and then the SD Card being differenced from the resultant shape. 
Because these are modifiers that haven't been applied, they can be changed while the 
objects are still hidden using only the Outline and Properties panel, both of which 
are in the side bar to the right.
1.	 In the Outline view click on SD Holder.
2.	 With SD Holder selected, click on the X button on its Boolean modifier to 
remove it.

SD Card Holder Ring
[ 96 ]
3.	 In the outline view click on Ring.
4.	 Add a Boolean modifier and Difference the SD Card.
The Ring now has three Boolean modifiers on it, all at the same time creating the 
desired object.
Through careful planning, the bottom of the model is flat and ready to go. All that is 
left now is to export (File | Export | Stl (.stl)), print out, and use the new SD Card 
holder ring.

Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
Extra credit
Leaving modifiers unapplied becomes undesirable when the object's geometry 
gets too complex. Simply performing Boolean operations on cubes together may 
not cause a crash, but adding Boolean operations to multiresolutioned objects and 
moving them around or changing the order of their modifiers has been known to 
slow down or even crash even the heartiest of systems.
Try to see how quickly Blender will slow down by making several cubes, adding 
multiresolution modifiers to increase their polygon count and Boolean them together 
all without pressing the Apply button. Add more and more multiresolution cubes 
and move them around to see when performance becomes choppy. It may be 
surprising how little time it takes.
With the measurements of an SD card available, any object can be turned into an SD 
card holder. Why not make an SD holder key chain or an SD holder that clips to a 
breast pocket? Add an SD holder to a mini mug or vase to turn decorative items  
into something functional. Measure pencils and pens and create a desk organizer as 
well. Locking the SD card may also be needed in some applications—an exercise left 
to the reader.
Summary
Leaving modifiers in place is a technique that allows for a high degree of flexibility 
that is particularly desirable for something that stands a good chance of being 
customized. If someone else wanted their own SD card holder ring, it would be 
trivial to resize the ring and adjust to position of the SD Holder.
Also in this chapter, Blender's tools for precise placement were employed to make 
an object match real-life measurements. Blender may never be able to compete with 
other CAD programs for precision, nevertheless with some careful planning and 
clever manipulation, Blender is capable of extremely precise modeling.
The next chapter is a huge challenge where the tools and techniques learned so 
far will be applied to making a modular multi-part toy with moving parts. The 
modeling will be simple, but the result will be impressive as the ways that parts  
can be joined together and designing those joints to be printable will be explored.


Modular Robot Toy
3D printers can make a number of useful and practical things. But what's the point if 
you can't have fun too? This blueprint is for a 3D printed poseable robot in multiple 
parts that connects together with 3D printed connectors. It will be connected with 
two types of connectors, a pin connector that will do the majority of the joints, and a 
ball and socket connector for the head.
Before this project begins a lot of planning has to be done. Often projects list this 
start long before the modeling program opens up. This should be considered normal 
for any design project. Fortunately in this case the planning is already done and the 
modeling can begin.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 100 ]
The straight pin connector used here is loosely based on a connector created by Tony 
Buser on Thingiverse; modified to fit this project. This connector relies on the flexible 
nature of the plastic to get the head into a smaller hole, until it is past the opening, 
and can spring back to hold the part in place. When designing this sort of connectors 
it is generally a good idea to lay them down so that the arms flex along the printed 
layers and not across them, which might cause the layers to separate. Hence, instead 
of trying to incorporate the pegs into the body, they'll be printed separately and 
added afterwards. This increases the bulk of the robot because there needs to be 
holes on both sides of the connections, but it does improve the reliability of the print.
This blueprint will rely heavily on exact object placement. This is also the largest 
project in the book, so remember to save frequently, and do incremental saves at 
every new header section.
Making the connector
Start a new blender project, clear the workspace, and save the file. Create a new 
directory under the Makerbot Blueprints directory in Documents called Ch 5 
Robot Toy. Enter the directory and save this file as Peg.blend.
Instead of designing everything in one file in this project, multiple 
files will be generated. This is a good way to keep parts organized, 
and keep the outliner from being overrun with objects. This is 
especially a good idea when the parts being designed might be 
reusable in future projects.

Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a Cylinder to the scene. Change the cylinder's Radius to 3.5 
to bring it to a total diameter of 7mm.
2.	 In the Properties pane under the Object tab change the name of the cylinder 
to PegBody.
3.	 Rotate (R) the PegBody around the y axis (Y) 90 degrees.
If the rotation is accomplished with the key sequence R, Y then 
type 90 and press Enter to end the rotation action, it doesn't matter 
what view it is done in, the result will always be the same.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 102 ]
4.	 In the Front (Numpad 1) Orthographic (Numpad 5) view, enter Edit Mode 
(Tab). With all points selected grab and move (G) all the points in the x axis 
(X) 1 unit by typing the number 1.
5.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab). Then in the Object Modifiers tab in the Properties 
pane press the Add Modifier and choose the Mirror modifier. The mirror 
modifier makes a mirror copy of the object through its own origin. Same is 
the case with the SD card holder, moving the points in edit mode kept the 
object origin, and moved all the points to one side of that origin so that the 
mirror reflection won't overlap.
6.	 Looking at the default options for this modifier it looks like the mirroring 
should be happen along the x axis, which is exactly what is desired, but there 
is no visible effect to the PegBody. What is happening? This is the same 
problem that the screw modifier had before. The object has been rotated so 
its local axis is out of line with the global axis. The procedure for fixing this 
is the same as well. Apply (Ctrl + A) Rotation and Scale to normalize the 
object's axis again, and the mirror modifier will work as expected.

Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
7.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab) and then switch to Wireframe mode (Z). Deselect all 
points (A). Border Select (B) all the points on the right side of the PegBody. 
Then Grab/Move (G) and in the x axis (X) enter 5 units.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 104 ]
8.	 The next few steps will be to build a geometry that will be modified to match 
the plan. First Extrude (E) a 0.75 length, then Extrude (E) another 0.75 
length, and finally Extrude (E) a 1.5 unit length.
Blender will let you type any number in when doing an operation. 
However there are a few caveats that may confuse the new user. First of 
all there is no obvious prompt echoing what is being typed. The Backspace 
key will reset the typing portion of the action so the user can retype his 
parameter, but it will not undo the movement until something else is 
typed in.
Fortunately there are a few tricks that will help. First of all along the 
bottom of the 3D view during any operation the default menu is replaced 
with some information about the current operation being performed. 
Next, if things get really unmanageable pressing the right-click or Esc will 
cancel the operation. However, if the Enter key or left-click is clicked on 
completing the operation, there is always undo (Ctrl + Z).
9.	 With the right-most end of the PegBody still selected Scale (S) it down until 
it is only about 6 units tall. Remember with the scale operation the exact 
measurements are difficult, so use the mouse and estimate. Changing the 
view and zooming in on the area being worked on can help.

Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
10.	 Deselect all point (A) and Border Select (B) the points on the second and 
third column of point from the right. Scale (S) them in all but x axis (Shift + 
X) until they are about 8 units across total.
There is one last thing to do. Because this shape is being mirrored, the 
leftmost face of the shape is not necessary however; it will not be removed by 
the mirror modifier. Leaving it in won't do much harm, it will simply cause 
the peg to have an internal wall that won't be seen, but may interfere with 
Boolean operations later so it's best to get rid of it.
11.	 Border Select (B) the points on the right side of the body, in the middle 
where the mirror happens, press Delete (X) and select Faces from the menu.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 106 ]
12.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab) and the general shape of the PegBody is complete.
13.	 Remember to Save (Ctrl + S) frequently and to do incremental saves once  
in a while.
Splitting the connector
Now for splitting the connector perform the following steps:
1.	 Add (Shift + A) another Cylinder. Change the cylinder's radius to 1.5 (so it 
is 3 units across). In the Properties panel under the Object tab rename the 
Cylinder to PegSplit.

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
2.	 Rotate (R) the PegSplit around the y axis (Y) 90 degrees. Enter Edit Mode 
(Tab) and with all points selected Grab/Move (G) and move the points along 
the x axis (X) 3 units.
3.	 Deselect all points (A) and Border Select (B) the points on the right side of 
the PegSplit. Grab/Move (G) and move them 7 units along the x axis (X).
4.	 Jump to the right view (Numpad 3). Clear the selection (A) and use the Border 
Select (B) to select the points at the top of the PegSplit that are within 1 unit 
on either side of the z axis line. See following illustration:

Modular Robot Toy
[ 108 ]
5.	 Extrude (E) these points to 4 units. Do the same on the bottom of the 
PegSplit. The result will be a shape that sticks out of the top and  
bottom of one side of the PegBody.
6.	 Hide (H) the PegSlice. Select (right-click) the PegBody and in the Properties 
panel, Modifiers tab, add a Boolean modifier to the PegBody. Change the 
Operation to Difference and select the PegSlice from the menu.
The mirror modifier is still active, its effect hasn't been made permanent with the 
Apply button yet, so why is the split only appearing in one side of the peg? The 
reason is because the order of the modifiers matter. Here, the main shape is being 
mirrored first, and then Boolean is applied. Actually it should be the other way 
around. It is very easy to change the order of modify operations.

Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
In the Modifier options press the button with a triangle pointed upwards on the 
Boolean modifier to move that modifier up the stack. Then the Boolean will be 
applied first, and the peg will be split on both ends after the mirror.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 110 ]
Building a printable peg
Theoretically this is a perfectly functional peg. However it lacks two things that 
are important for 3D printing; a flat surface and little overhang. This can be easily 
fixed by flattening the top to be symmetrical at the bottom of the peg. Some of 
its roundness will be lost, however that's not important since it will still fulfill its 
function, and it will also be hidden inside the objects it is holding together, so it will 
never be seen.
1.	 Create (Shift + A) a Cube. Rename the cube to Peg.
2.	 Scale (S) the peg by 0.5 to make it unit.
3.	 Scale (S) again and immediately press Enter to end the scale operation, and 
modify the options on the left side bar to scale the box by 22 in the X, 10 in 
the Y and 6 in the Z. This will produce a box that is slightly wider and longer 
than the peg but slightly shorter. The peg will be sticking out of the top and 
bottom of the cube shape slightly.

Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
4.	 Hide the PegBody either by selecting (right-click), and using the hot key to 
Hide (H) it or clicking the eye icon on the PegBody line in the Outliner view.
5.	 Select (right-click) the cube shape and add a Boolean modifier to it. Change 
the operation to Intersect and select the PegBody.
There are only three types of Boolean operations with intersection being the 
last one to be introduced. Boolean operations take two objects and combine 
them in different ways. Union joins both of the shapes into one shape, which 
was used on the Mini Mug and SD card holder ring. Difference, used earlier 
in this blueprint and in the SD card holder, as well takes the second object 
and subtracts its shape from the first one. Intersection produces a shape from 
where the two shapes overlap. In this case the resulting shape was the shape 
of the PegBody minus the top and bottom where the cube didn't go.
With Difference it is important, which object is being modified and which 
object is being used as a parameter. If your difference object A from object B 
the results will be very different than if you difference B from A. However, 
with union and intersection, the order of the shapes doesn't matter. You can 
add a Boolean modifier to either shape with the other one as a perimeter, and 
the result will be exactly the same. In this case the cube was intersected with 
the PegBody because the PegBody already had several modifiers on it and 
the cube would have had no purpose but to be a parameter otherwise.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 112 ]
6.	 With the peg complete this is the right time to export it. In the File menu in 
the InfoBar panel choose File | Export | STL. Make sure the Ch 5 Robot 
Toy directory is the active one and name the file Peg.Stl.
Putting a hole in our pocket
The peg is done and printable, but the shape of the hole for the peg will need to be 
defined. This hole will be Boolean differenced from other shapes later to make a hole 
the perfect size and shape for the peg.
1.	 With the peg visible add (Shift + A) a Cylinder.
2.	 Change its Radius to 3.7 so that there is 0.2mm of clearance around the peg 
in the hole.
3.	 Rename this cylinder to PegHole.
4.	 Rotate (R) it 90 degrees around the y axis (Y).
It is a good idea to make your holes just slightly bigger than 
the object that is fitting into them. 0.2mm tends to be a good 
tolerance to design for.
Shaping the PegHole is going to be very similar to making the PegBody.
1.	 Apply (Ctrl + A) Rotation and Scale.
2.	 Jump to the top view (Numpad 7).
3.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).

Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
4.	 With all (A) points selected Grab/Move (G) all the points in the x axis (X) 1.
5.	 Without exiting edit mode add the Mirror modifier.
Adding modifiers while in the edit mode has always been possible, but many 
modifiers have no visible effect until edit mode is exited. However mirror is  
not one of those modifiers.
1.	 Deselect all points (A).
2.	 Border Select (B) all the points on the left side of the PegHole.
3.	 Delete (X) the Faces.
4.	 Border Select (B) the point on the right.
5.	 Grab/Move (G), and move them along the x axis (X) 5 units.
6.	 Then, extrude (E) 0.75, extrude (E) 0.75 length, and extrude (E) 2.
The breaks will link up with the peg and the hole will extend just past the 
end of the peg.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 114 ]
7.	 Scale (S) the end to about 6 units across.
8.	 Deselect (A) and border select the second and third rows of points and  
Scale (S) them in all but the x axis (Shift + X) until they are approximately 
0.2mm wider than the bulges in the peg. The slopes of the shapes should  
run parallel.
9.	 When the shape is complete exit Edit Mode (Tab).
If at this point the peg or peg hole is less than perfect, and since this project is so 
expansive, a version of the Ch5 - peg.blend can be downloaded from Thingiverse at 
http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:90754 so that the rest of the project can be 
completed without needing to backtrack.
Constructing a robot
The peg is done and its hole is defined. Now, to build something that will use them. 
This new build will need the PegHole from the other project.
1.	 Start a new project (Ctrl + N). Clear the scene and Save (Ctrl + S) this project 
in the same directory as Peg.blend but name it Robot1.blend.
2.	 In the Info panel on the top of the screen select File | Append or press  
Shift + F1.

Chapter 5
[ 115 ]
3.	 Select the Peg.blend file. Select the Object directory and select the  
PegHole. The PegHole from the previous project will be brought into  
the Robot1 project.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 116 ]
The robot as planned will need four pegs. Two at the shoulders, one at the torso, and 
one at the hips. To make things easier the one at the hips will be this peg at origin so 
it doesn't have to move and the robot will be built around it. Rename this PegHole  
to PegHip.
Engineering the body
1.	 Hide (H) the PegHip for now.
2.	 Jump to the front (Numpad 1) orthographic (Numpad 5) view.
3.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube.
4.	 Scale (S) it 0.5. Scale (S) again and press Enter to end the scale operation, 
then type in the following dimensions in the resize operation options:  
X: 40, Y: 20, Z: 24.
5.	 Name this cube Body.
6.	 Grab/Move (G) the body along the z axis (Z) 40 units. (Remember to type 40 
in to get the units exact.)
Because of the neck joint's location in the print it can be made with a ball joint 
without causing an overhang problem.
1.	 Begin by adding (Shift + A) a UV Sphere.
2.	 Change the sphere's Size to 4 (which is the radius, so the sphere will actually 
be 8 units across).

Chapter 5
[ 117 ]
3.	 Rename the sphere to Neck.
4.	 Grab/Move (G) the neck along the z axis (Z) 64 units.
5.	 In Edit Mode (Tab), Wireframe view (Z), Border Select (B) all the points on 
the bottom four rings of the sphere.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 118 ]
6.	 Extrude (E) these points 10 units. Scale (S) the extrusion by about 1.2 to give 
the neck a stable base.
7.	 With the neck complete exit Edit Mode (Tab). In the outline view find the 
PegHip and unhide it by clicking on the eye icon on its line.
8.	 Select (right-click) the PegHip.
After starting a duplicate action it behaves like a grab 
operation on the new object. As long as the duplicate action is 
not completed with the Enter key or left-mouse button the new 
object can be moved in the same way as with a grab.
9.	 Duplicate it (Shift + D) and move it along the z axis (Z) 28 units.

Chapter 5
[ 119 ]
10.	 Rotate (R) it 90 degrees around the y axis (Y).
11.	 Rename this new object PegTorso.
12.	 Select (left-click) the PegHip again.
13.	 Duplicate (Shift + D) it again and move it along the z axis (Z) 12 units.
14.	 Complete the action with the Enter or left mouse button.
15.	 Rotate (R) this peg 90 degrees around the y axis (Y). This peg will be made 
into two and placed in the left and right shoulder.
16.	 Duplicate (Shift + D) the peg and move the new duplicate 20 units along the 
x axis (X).
17.	 Select (right-click) the original peg that is still in the middle of the body, and 
Grab/Move (G) it (not duplicate this time) -20 units along the x axis (X).

Modular Robot Toy
[ 120 ]
18.	 Name the left peg PegLeft and the right peg PegRight.
19.	 Select (right-click) the Body and begin to add Boolean modifiers to it.
20.	 First add a Boolean to Union the Neck to the body.
21.	 Then add Booleans to Difference the PegLeft, PegRight, and PegTorso from 
the body.
22.	 Finally, hide everything but the body (Shift + H) and admire the completed 
body shape.

Chapter 5
[ 121 ]
Creating the torso
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cylinder. Change its dimensions to Radius: 10, Depth: 16. 
Rename this cylinder Torso.
2.	 Grab/Move (G) it 20 units along the z axis (Z).
3.	 Add (Shift + A) another cylinder, this time with dimensions Radius: 8, 
Depth: 4. Rotate (R) it 90 degrees around the y axis (Y). Rename this to Hips.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 122 ]
4.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab) and in the front view (Numpad 1) in Wireframe mode 
(Z), Box Select (B) all the points on the top half of the hips including the 
points at the midpoint.
5.	 Extrude (E) these points 14 units. They should go into the torso.
6.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).
7.	 Hide (H) the hips.
8.	 Select (right-click) the torso, and add a Boolean modifier to Union the torso to 
the Hips.
9.	 Then add another Boolean modifier to Difference the PegHip.
10.	 Lastly, add one more Boolean modifier to Difference the PegTorso.

Chapter 5
[ 123 ]
The torso is complete:
Making an arm
Because of the symmetry of the arms and legs it will be possible to model only one of 
each, and use the mirror modifier to make the other. As a result, only one arm will be 
modeled at this time.
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cylinder, edit its parameters to Radius: 8, Depth: 14.
2.	 Rotate (R) it 90 degrees around the y axis (Y).
3.	 Rename the cylinder Arm.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 124 ]
The move operation can be used with a technique similar to the way the scale 
operation has been used before; start the operation, end it without changing 
anything, then edit the parameters. Since most of the movements before this were 
done in only one axis, there wasn't much advantage to this technique, but since the 
arm has to be moved in the y and z at the same time, placement will be accomplished 
easier using this technique:
•	
Begin the Grab/Move (G) operation.
•	
Press Enter or the left-click to end the operation without moving the mouse.
•	
Edit the values in the left sidebar to X: 27, Y: 0, Z: 44.
The arm will be properly placed in one quick move.
1.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab) and switch to Wireframe view (Z).
2.	 From the right side view (Numpad 3) select only the vertices at the bottom of 
the arm being sure to select at least 2 units width of points.

Chapter 5
[ 125 ]
3.	 Extrude (E) these points 20 units.
4.	 Again, Extrude (E) another 4 units.
5.	 Rotate (R) the selected points 20 degrees.
6.	 Grab/Move (G) them -1 unit along the y axis (Y).
7.	 Extrude (E) the points another 20 units and then Extrude (E) another  
15 units.
8.	 Move (G) the points along the y axis (Y) 3 units.
9.	 Lastly add a Boolean modifier to Difference the appropriate shoulder peg 
(PegLeft or PegRight) from the arm. Use Wireframe mode (Z) to check that 
the Boolean operation worked as expected.
Shaping the leg
Now to model a simple leg:
1.	 Start by adding (Shift + A) a cylinder. Radius: 10, Depth: 12.
2.	 Rotate (R) it 90 degrees around the y axis (Y) and name the cylinder leg.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 126 ]
3.	 Move (G) the leg along the x axis (X) 8 units.
4.	 In Edit Mode (Tab), Wireframe view (Z), right side view (Numpad 3) select all 
the points on the bottom half of the leg.
5.	 Extrude (E) 15 units.
6.	 Scale (S) the selection along the z axis (Z) by 0 units to flatten the bottom.

Chapter 5
[ 127 ]
7.	 Extrude (E) the selection by 4 units. Extrude (E) again 20 units, then Extrude 
(E) again by 10 units.
8.	 Select only the points on the knee (see the illustration below) and Grab/Move 
(G) them along the y axis (Y) by -5 units.
9.	 From the side view it is not apparent how flat all the points on the side of the 
leg are, but adjusting the view it becomes clear.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 128 ]
10.	 Select the points on the front of the foot and Extrude (E) those by 10 units. It 
might be easier to select these points by switching back to solid view mode 
(Z) for a moment and selecting (right-click) them one at a time while holding 
the Shift key (remembering to clear the selection (A) before starting).
11.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).
12.	 Add a Boolean modifier to difference the PegHip from the leg.
13.	 Check in Wireframe mode (Z) that the Boolean modifier was correctly applied.
Forming the head
When the head is made it will need a hole in the back of it so the neck can be pushed 
in but that will hold the joint snugly. Unlike the peg holes a tighter fit is preferable 
for ball joints. To avoid stressing the part there must also be a way to guide the ball 
joint in that starts wide and narrows before the ball. Because of the importance of 
planning the hole properly the hole will be the first thing made.
1.	 For the neck hole Add (Shift + A) a cube.
2.	 Rename it Neckhole and Grab/Move (G) it 64 units along the z axis (Z).
3.	 Scale (S) the cube by 3.

Chapter 5
[ 129 ]
Since this cube was not unitized (scaled by 0.5) firstly, this brings its size to sized 6 
cube in the middle of the neck.
The next couple of moves will shape the cube around the neck hole. The shape will 
be irregular so it will be accomplished with a series of discrete moves.
1.	 In the right side view (Numpad 3) in Edit Mode (Tab), use Wireframe view 
(Z) to select all the bottom points.
2.	 Grab/Move (G) them -10 units down the z axis (Z).
3.	 Select the back points and move (G) them 6 units along the y axis (Y).
4.	 Select the front points and move (G) them along the y axis (Y) -2.
5.	 Finally select the top points and move those 2 units in along the z axis (Z).

Modular Robot Toy
[ 130 ]
6.	 While still in edit mode and wireframe view jump to the front view  
(Numpad 1).
7.	 Select all the bottom points.
8.	 Scale (S) them along the x axis (X) about 1.2 so that the neck is mostly inside 
the box with only a little bit of the sphere up top sticking out on both sides.
9.	 Jump to the top view (Numpad 7).
10.	 Select all the points on the back and Scale (S) them along the x axis (X) 1.2.
11.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).

Chapter 5
[ 131 ]
12.	 Add a Boolean modifier to Union the NeckHole to the Neck.
13.	 Now that the NeckHole is complete Hide (H) it for later.
14.	 Add (Shift + A) a cylinder and change its dimensions to Radius: 8, Depth: 24. 
Name it Head.
15.	 Start and end a move (G) operation and edit the parameters to X: 0, Y: -2,  
Z: 68.
16.	 Add (Shift + A) a cylinder that has radius 3 and depth 8.
17.	 Name it Eye.
18.	 Rotate (R) it 90 degrees around the x axis (X).
19.	 Using similar steps to the movement of the head start a move operation (G), 
end it, and edit the parameters to X: 3, Y: -6, Z: 68.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 132 ]
20.	 Duplicate (Shift + D) the eye and move the duplicate along the x axis  
(X) -6 units.
21.	 Finally Add (Shift + A) a cube.
22.	 Name it Mouth.
23.	 Start and end a move operation and edit the parameters to X: 0, Y: -10, Z: 60.
24.	 Scale (S) it by 0.5. Start and end another Scale (S) operation and edit the 
parameters to X: 4, Y: 2, Z: 2.

Chapter 5
[ 133 ]
25.	 Hide (H) the LeftEye, RightEye, and Mouth.
26.	 Select (right-click) the head and begin to add modifiers to the head.
27.	 Boolean Union the Eyes. Boolean Difference the Mouth and NeckHole.
Assembling the parts to print
A gentle reminder to Save (Ctrl + S) and perform incremental saves is in order. 
Hopefully, frequently saving is a habit at this point.
Building the parts like this is good for getting proportions and alignment correct, but 
is not appropriate for printing. Each part will be prepared for printing individually 
using a new view mode called Local, accessed from the View | View Global/Local  
menu options at the bottom of the 3D View panel or by using the slash on the 
number pad (Numpad /).
1.	 Select the head and Duplicate (Shift + D) it.
2.	 Name the duplicate PrintHead.
3.	 Enter local view (Numpad /).

Modular Robot Toy
[ 134 ]
The only object visible will be the PrintHead that was the last object selected. 
This is different than hiding all other objects. This can be confusing since 
any attempts to modify other objects won't work as expected until local view 
is exited. Always look for the label (Local) on the view description in the 
upper-left of the 3D View panel.
4.	 Apply all the modifiers to the PrintHead, so it can be manipulated alone.
Because of the neck hole the current orientation isn't the best for printing. 
Fortunately it was designed with a flat printable surface on the top of the head.
5.	 Rotate (R) the PrintHead 180 degrees around the y axis (Y).
6.	 Choose File | Export | STL and save this part in the Ch 5 Robot Toy 
directory as Head.STL.
7.	 Hide (H) the PrintHead and exit local view (Numpad / ).
8.	 Select (right-click) the body.
9.	 Same as with the head duplicate (Shift + D) it and rename the duplicate 
PrintBody.
10.	 Enter local view (Numpad /) with the PrintBody.

Chapter 5
[ 135 ]
11.	 Apply all modifiers.
12.	 Fortunately this piece is printable as it is. In fact any change in orientation 
would make it less printable. So simply File | Export | STL this part as 
Body.STL.
13.	 Hide (H) the PrintBody and exit local view (Numpad /).
14.	 Select (right-click) the torso.
15.	 Repeat the steps of duplication (Shift + D), renaming PrintTorso, applying all 
modifiers, and entering local mode (Numpad /) to analyze it.
16.	 The torso clearly won't print the way it is, but rotating (R) 180 degrees 
around the y axis (Y) will fix it.
17.	 Do the manipulation, and File | Export | STL the Torso.STL.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 136 ]
18.	 Then Hide (H) the PrintTorso and exit local view (Numpad /).
If it is not clear why the naming convention of putting "Print" first is 
being used find the PrintHead, PrintBody and PrintTorso in 
the Outliner view. The Outliner view organizes things alphabetically 
so giving these parts all the same beginning makes them easier to 
find in the Outliner. It is a simple little trick to keep things of like type 
organized though it is somewhat backwards of English conventions.
Next is the arm:
1.	 Duplicate (Shift + D), name it PrintArm.
2.	 Apply all the modifiers and bring into local view (Numpad /).
3.	 Rotate (R) -90 degrees around the y axis (Y).
4.	 Before this part can be exported it needs to be mirrored for the other arm. 
Add a Mirror modifier.
After doing the mirror operation instead of having two arms there will be a double 
sided arm joined at the shoulder. To fix this:
1.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Select all points (A) and move them in the x and y (Shift + Z), until there are 
two arms.
3.	 However the arms are rather spread out, and will be difficult to print on 
most printers. So Rotate (R) all the points 90 degrees around the z axis (Z)  
as well to make the result a little more compact.

Chapter 5
[ 137 ]
4.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab) and File |Export |STL this as Arms.Stl.
5.	 Then hide (H) PrintArm and exit local view (Numpad /).
Finally, the leg in a similar fashion to the arm:
1.	 Duplicate (Shift + D), rename Printleg, and view the new leg locally 
(Numpad /).
2.	 Apply modifiers.
3.	 Oriented for print by rotating (R) -90 degrees around the y axis (Y).
4.	 Finally, the mirror modifier is added, and edited (Tab) to make the  
separate parts.
Potentially the legs could be printed standing up since they have a flat bottom.  
It would be printable but tall, and the layers would line up differently. In the end 
whether the legs are laid down or stood up can be a matter of preference for the reader.

Modular Robot Toy
[ 138 ]
Printing and assembly
Print Head.STL, Body.STL, Torso.STL, Arms.STL, Legs.STL, and four copies of Peg.
STL. Snap three of the pegs into the holes in the body. Snap the torso onto the peg at 
the bottom of the body. Push the last peg through the hole in the bottom of the torso.
Snap the legs into the hip peg on either side. Snap the arms. Press the head into the 
neck, join firmly being careful not to break the neck joint. If it does break remove it 
with a pair of needle nosed pliers and glue it back in place with superglue. Allow it 
to dry and then try again. Then pose and play with the new robot.

Chapter 5
[ 139 ]
Extra credit
Making a robot toy was a huge undertaking. But now that it's done why not go off 
the pattern and make a new style that is compatible with the old? There's a reason 
this project was named Robot1.blend. Your own robot doesn't need to follow the 
strict alignment that this one did, that was just for tutorial purposes. Make a rounder 
robot based on a sphere or one that's all cubes. Make a robot with spikes and blades 
for hands. Just be sure to plan a flat surface for printing and remember the overhang.
If multiple robots are made to use the same sized connectors, then the parts can be 
mixed and matched between them. With only four different robots trading heads, 
bodies, arms, and legs there are a potential 256 different robot combinations that 
could come from them. That's a lot of play for a little bit of modeling.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned a new way of connecting printed objects with custom 
connectors. Peg and ball joints were taught and their utility was demonstrated.  
The tolerances, or how much space needs to be in-between printed parts,  
was also explored.
In the next chapter another way of making parts interact using gears will be explored.


D6 Spinner
Imagine you're playing a board game, but can't find a six sided die. Printing one is 
no good, since printed dice haven't been proven to be balanced. A dice is not the only 
way to choose a number from one to six. With 3D printing a custom enclosed spinner 
can be printed, so you'll never be at a loss for a random number.
The toy robot in the last chapter isn't the only way a 3D printed object can be made to 
move. In this chapter we'll explore the creation of an object designed to move in the 
manner of a simple machine, with a simple gear powered by a common spring, as 
found in a pen or mechanical pencil.

D6 Spinner
[ 142 ]
Blender does not, by default, have the tools that allow it to make gears with ease. But 
one of Blender's strengths is that it is modular, and can easily have its functionality 
extended. Some of these extensions are included in Blender's installation, and just 
waiting to be activated. One of them adds gears to the objects that can be created.
This project will start by extracting the spring from a mechanical pencil or pen. Then 
the spring will be measured, and a model will be built around it using an add-on for 
Blender that allows the creation of gear shapes.
Extracting the spring
Small springs suitable for jobs like this can be found inside spent mechanical pencils 
or ball point pens. Some mechanical pencils may need to be broken to get to the 
spring inside.
Once a spring is acquired it will need to be measured carefully. Measure the outside 
and inside diameter of the spring, as well as its length when fully extended and fully 
compressed. Most springs of these kinds will have similar measurements to the one 
in the illustration. If the spring used is different, then the dimensions in the project 
will have to be adjusted.

Chapter 6
[ 143 ]
Starting the project
Start a new scene and clear it. Save (Ctrl + S) the scene in a new subdirectory of the 
Makerbot Blueprints directory named Ch 6 Dice Spinner. Name the new project 
Dicespinner.Blend. Remember while working to Save (Ctrl + S) frequently and do 
incremental saves occasionally.
Modeling the spring
Perform the following steps for modeling the spring:
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cylinder and change its dimensions to the dimensions of 
the measured spring when extended (remembering the measured by typing 
the diameter followed by a /2, and blender will divide it by 2 and give the 
radius.) In the example the diameter was 3.8mm or 1.9mm for the radius and 
the depth was 13.2mm.

D6 Spinner
[ 144 ]
2.	 Add (Shift + A) another cylinder changing the depth to the length of the 
compressed spring, 5.3 in the example. Name these objects Springextended 
and Springcompressed. The internal measurement will be important later 
but unused in this step.
3.	 Hide (H) the spring shapes for later.
Defining the boundaries
This chapter will employ a new method for changing the dimensions and placement 
of objects that is perhaps simpler than methods in the previous chapters, but less 
natural. In the Properties side bar, usually hidden on the right side of the 3D View 
panel, the location and dimensions of objects can be directly manipulated.
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube. Name this cube BoxExterior. Bring up the properties 
sidebar either by clicking on the tab with a plus on the right of the 3D View 
panel or by pressing N. Locate the Dimensions under the Transform section. 
Change the Dimensions to X: 70, Y: 70, Z: 16.

Chapter 6
[ 145 ]
2.	 Add (Shift + A) another cube. Name it BoxInterior. In the Properties 
sidebar (N), change the dimensions to X: 62, Y: 62, Z: 13.

D6 Spinner
[ 146 ]
Building the spinner
Let's build the spinner:
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cylinder. Name the object Spinner. In the Properties 
sidebar (N), change the dimensions to X: 58, Y: 58, Z: 2.
2.	  In the properties the location can also be altered so change the Z-location to 
3 to move the spinner up a bit.
Now is the time to add the gear. There is a plug-in that adds gear primates packaged 
with Blender, but it is not activated by default so we will need to take care of it.
Extending Blender with gears
1.	 In the menu bar navigate to File | User Preferences. Click on the  
Addons tab.

Chapter 6
[ 147 ]
2.	 On the left-hand side click on the Add Mesh button to filter the add-ons.

D6 Spinner
[ 148 ]
3.	 On the right find the Add Mesh: Extra Objects and click on the check box to 
enable it.
4.	 Then click on the Save Settings button to make this change default so  
the next time Blender is opened it will be remembered and close the  
User Settings window.
5.	 Now under the Add Object (Shift + A) Mesh menu there will be a new 
submenu for Extra Objects presenting many different new objects one of 
which is Gears. Add a Gear object now.
In the right sidebar, the newly added gear has many options, more than any 
other object used before. But as usual these must be set before any other action is 
performed or they'll be gone. The best thing to do at this point, as with any new tool, 
is to experiment with each setting. Change them to 0 and change them to 10. Make 
predictions and test them. Learn how this tool works.

Chapter 6
[ 149 ]
If the gear seems somewhat inconsistent or incomplete that is one of the problems 
of working with an add-on, and the reason why add-ons like this are not enabled by 
default. The gear generated has a hole in the middle; it is not a closed object. To fix 
that the addendum setting can be set so that the points all converge in the middle. 
However, there is something about this that isn't right. Try to predict what the 
problem might be before it shows up later.
Another oddity of the gear add-on is that its width is not its total height, but rather is 
only half its height. This will just have to be accounted for.
Finally, it should be mentioned that this add-on does not make the ideal shape  
for a gear, known as an involute gear. This gear will work fine for this application, 
but is not necessarily suitable for more technical applications. Other modeling 
programs have better modules for doing all sorts of gears including involute gears.  
A search on Thingiverse will also reveal many different gear projects and is worth 
the exploration.
1.	 Change the settings of the gear so it is 5mm tall and has six 10mm long teeth 
with the following settings:

D6 Spinner
[ 150 ]
2.	 When the gear is the desired shape name it SpinnerGear. The SpinnerGear 
should overlap into the spinner above it slightly, which will make them 
Boolean together.
Adding a gear to the spinner
1.	 Select the spinner and add a Boolean modifier. Union the SpinnerGear to  
the spinner. At first it may look good, but hide all but the spinner (Shift + H),  
and apparently something is wrong. In fact the Boolean modifier gives a 
warning message:
(Emphasis added.) The problem is that the gear has some bad geometry 
preventing the Boolean modifier from functioning. Particularly the junction 
where the points meet in the middle is still not technically closed. It is just a 
bunch of overlapping points. This is bad because technically there is still a 
hole in the mesh. Fortunately this is an easy one to fix.

Chapter 6
[ 151 ]
2.	 Unhide the SpinnerGear and in Edit Mode (Tab) select all the points (A). 
Then in the left-side bar find and click on the button to Remove Doubles.
A prompt along the top should indicate that some amount of duplicate pixels were 
removed, and when returning to object mode the spinner's Boolean modifier will 
automatically update, the error message will go away, and the gear and spinner will 
be united into one piece. If the SpinnerGear is hidden (H), apparently it will mean 
that the Spinner now has six gear teeth attached to its base.

D6 Spinner
[ 152 ]
Spinning on a peg
In order for the spinner to spin, it will need a peg to spin on. The problem is that a 
traditional joint wheel and peg doesn't allow the object to lay flat for 3D printing 
no matter how it is turned. So making something like this work requires a little bit 
of creativity. Instead of a peg through the spinner a peg can exit out one side of the 
spinner and a hole can be made in the other side for another peg to mate into it.
The trick is that any time two objects are connected after printing, the goal 
is to think about friction. Since this spinner needs to spin the goal will 
be to build something that will hold the spinner in place enough that it 
will not shift position too much but loose enough to minimize friction so 
it can spin freely. Later on the box will be designed with extremely tight 
tolerances to increase friction since no movement is necessary.
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a UV Sphere and adjust it so it has a radius of 2 and is moved 
(G) -4 down the z axis (Z) so it is sitting somewhat below the main spinner. 
Name this sphere SpinnerPeg.

Chapter 6
[ 153 ]
2.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab), select the vertices on the top half of the sphere 
including the equator and Extrude (E) it 2.
3.	 Then select the spinner and Boolean union the SpinnerPeg to the Spinner.

D6 Spinner
[ 154 ]
Now a hole needs to be made in the top of the spinner for a similar peg 
that will come from the top of the box to keep the spinner in place. As was 
mentioned earlier this hole will need to keep the peg in place but not stop it 
from spinning freely.
4.	 Add (Shift + A) a Cylinder. Set its radius at 2.4, its depth at 5, and move (G) 
it 4 along the z axis (Z).
5.	 Select the Spinner and Boolean Difference the SpinnerHole from it.
Adding the numbers
The last thing to add are numbers to the surface of the spinner using Blender's Text 
object. The text object operates slightly different than other mesh objects. Add (Shift 
+ A) a Text object.

Chapter 6
[ 155 ]
1.	 With a text object Edit Mode (Tab) changes to a text edit mode, similar to a 
word processor, instead of editing the points, edges, or faces. The tools on the 
left-side bar change to be text related as well.
2.	 In edit mode Backspace to clear the default Text and type "1 2 3 4 5 6" (The 
numbers 1 through 6 with a space between each). Then rename this object to 
Numbers. Then exit Edit Mode (Tab).
3.	 On the Properties panel on the right-side there is a new button option for text 
that has an icon like the letter F. This will allow the manipulation of the text 
object in ways suitable for 3D, all while retaining the ability to edit the text.

D6 Spinner
[ 156 ]
4.	 Adjust the view so that the Spinner and BoxExterior and BoxInterior are all 
visible so that the text can be modified in context. In the Properties panel, 
Font tab, locate the Font section. Change the font size to about 15. Scroll 
down and locate the Paragraph section and select the Center button  
(under Align) so the numbers are nicely oriented.
5.	 Higher on the Font tab locate the Geometry section. Change the Extrude 
setting to 1 to give the numbers some depth.

Chapter 6
[ 157 ]
6.	 Move (G) the Numbers along the z axis (Z) 4 units so they sit half-way in  
the surface of the spinner, at the right depth to be differenced out when the 
time comes.
7.	 But that time has not yet arrived because the numbers need to be put in 
a circle around the wheel. First the circle needs to be added so that the 
numbers will be curved around. Add (Shift + A) a Curve | Circle.
There is a significant difference between curves and meshes. 
With a mesh any curve perceived is the result of having a lot of 
straight lines in a small space, but zoom in close enough and the 
illusion is broken. With curves on the other hand the lines are 
mathematically defined, and thus remain smooth at all zoom 
levels. Curves can be used to do modeling if a curve surface is 
calculated, but curve modeling cannot take advantage of many 
modifiers, such as Boolean that make modeling easier without 
first being converted into a mesh. Additionally when exported 
to an STL some resolution will have to be decided on since STLs 
do not use curves.

D6 Spinner
[ 158 ]
8.	 The BezierCircle may not be obvious, but it is there in the middle with a 
radius of 1 (diameter of 2). Select (right-click) the numbers and in the font 
menu in the Properties panel locate Text on Curve (under the Font  
section). Click on the option and select BezierCircle from the menu.
9.	 Select (right-click) the BezierCircle again and Scale (S) it up until the numbers 
are near the outside edge (about a scale factor of 17).

Chapter 6
[ 159 ]
10.	 Select (right-click) the Numbers object locate the Spacing options in the Font 
menu (under Paragraph), and adjust the Char spacing until the numbers are 
evenly distributed around the spinner (about 1.4).
11.	 Finally Rotate (R) the numbers until they are lined up with the spokes of  
the gear.

D6 Spinner
[ 160 ]
If an attempt is made at this point to Boolean Difference the Numbers from the 
Spinner it will be discovered that the Numbers are not available on the list of objects 
that can be used. This is because the numbers are defined as curves and Boolean only 
works with meshes. The numbers must first be converted to a mesh but in doing so 
they will become uneditable except as a mesh with points and lines and faces.
1.	 In case a future edit is necessary, select (right-click) the Numbers and 
Duplicate (Shift + D) them. Press Enter without moving the mouse to create 
the duplicate on top of the original. Convert the duplicate to a mesh by 
pressing Alt + C and selecting Mesh from Curve/Meta/Surf/Text.
2.	 Then select (right-click) the Spinner and add a Boolean modifier to Difference 
the Numbers.001 object from the spinner.
Because the numbers were converted from a curve object, they are complex, so 
this operation might take quite a while, and Blender may be unresponsive while 
calculating and from time to time after this. If it ever needs to recalculate this 
operation, which will be frequent. To prevent this it is best; once the operation 
completes the first time, and it's known that the operation will work, to turn off  
real-time rendering of this modifier by clicking on the eye icon in this modifier's 
settings. This means that while the modifier will still be on the stack it will not be 
active until it is turned back on.

Chapter 6
[ 161 ]
Building a rack
There needs to be something inside the spinner that will flick the gear teeth to 
make the spinner spin. This will be accomplished with a part that will slide past the 
spinner with a finger sticking out to catch the gear teeth as it goes by. The spring 
attaches to this part and returns it to its resting position when released to catch the 
gear after spinning, and hold the numbers still. This piece could extend from the 
back of the spinner as a simple button that is pressed to accomplish the spin, but to 
make things more stylish this piece will curve around the bottom of the spinner box 
with a finger hole.
1.	 Begin by revealing the SpringExtended and SpringCompressed objects 
created earlier and rotating (R) them 90 degrees around the x axis (X). Move 
(G) them about 23 along the x axis (X) and move (G) them again along the 
y axis until they are both resting against the bottom of the box. This doesn't 
have to be exact, it's just a guide for future building.

D6 Spinner
[ 162 ]
2.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube, and using the Properties sidebar (N) set its location 
and dimensions according to the following illustration:
3.	 Name this cube Rack.
A rack is a sort of straight-line gear. This gear will only have 
1 tooth in the end so calling it a rack may be a bit of a stretch, 
but it needs a name.
4.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab). Loop cut (Ctrl + R) the rack and place the new points 
at about one-third and two-thirds of the way between the gear teeth. Border 
Select (B) the points on the left hand side and Extrude (E) about 5 units out 
to make the tooth that will spin the gears.

Chapter 6
[ 163 ]
5.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab) and move (G) the Rack along the y axis (Y) until it rests 
at the point where the compressed spring ends to simulate depressing the 
button to spin the Spinner. The Spinner won't actually react but this will 
provide some important information.

D6 Spinner
[ 164 ]
6.	 It is clear that with the rack depressed the spinner cannot spin freely, the 
tooth gets in the way. Re-enter Edit Mode (Tab) and modify the tooth  
so it is out of the way while the spinner spins.
7.	 Out of Edit Mode (Tab) the modifications can be tested by Rotating (R) the 
Spinner being sure to Undo (Ctrl + Z) the rotation when testing is complete. 
The Spinner's gear teeth should be able to rotate freely without touching any 
part of the Rack.
8.	 Then move (G) the rack back up along the y axis (Y) until it rests where the 
extended spring sits, and test to be sure that the gears are intercepted when 
the rack is in this position. There will, naturally, be some wiggle but for the 
most part it should hold one number still for long enough for the number to 
be viewable.
Adding the trigger
1.	 To add the switch so a finger can spin the spinner in Edit Mode (Tab) select 
the top vertices, move (G) them along the y axis (Y) 6 units then Extrude (E) 
them 6 units.

Chapter 6
[ 165 ]
When possible this method of moving then extruding 
can be a more accurate way to do geometrically similar 
operations to a loop cut.
2.	 Loop cut the body of the rack in half, vertically. Then from a view  
looking up from below, select the face in the corner of the bottom.  
(This can be accomplished simply by selecting the 4 vertices that  
comprise the desired face.)

D6 Spinner
[ 166 ]
3.	 Extrude (E) this face 3 units, then Extrude (E) again 4 units.
4.	 Deselect (A) the current face, then select the face on the front of the newly 
extruded arm, around the corner from the last selected face. Extrude (E)  
this face 24 units.

Chapter 6
[ 167 ]
5.	 Deselect (A) the current face then select the face on the bottom of the newly 
extruded arm, around the corner from the last selected face again. Extrude 
(E) this face 20 units.
A significant amount of planning goes into making anything 
for 3D printing, particularly when printing without supports. It 
may not be obvious, but the spinner was designed to be printed 
on its face and the trigger can be turned 90 degrees and printed 
on its side with the tooth sticking up.
6.	 With the basic shape of the rack in place a hole for the finger needs to 
be made. Exit Edit Mode (Tab) and Add (Shift + A) a cylinder. Name it 
RackFingerHole.

D6 Spinner
[ 168 ]
7.	 In the Properties (N) sidebar set the dimensions to X: 20, Y: 20, Z: 15, set 
the location to X: 27, Y: 13, Z: -21, and set the rotation to X: 0, Y: 90, Z: 0. 
(Some adjustment in the y axis may be necessary after placement based on 
where the rack may be sitting after the simulated presses. Try to make the 
RackFingerHole so it is approximately 2mm from the edge of the rack's 
finger space all around.)
8.	 Add a Boolean modifier to the rack to Difference the RackFingerHole  
from it.
Docking the spring
The rack is almost complete with the exception of something to hold the spring in 
place. For this a small protrusion small enough for the spring to go around should 
do. Refer back to the measurements of the spring taken at the beginning. The inside 
of the spring was approximately 3mm in diameter.
1.	 This connection should be snug so Add (Shift + A) a cylinder with a radius of 
1.5 and a depth of 3. Name it RackPeg. Move (G) it 23 along the x axis (X) 
and move (G) it along the y axis (Y) until it sticks just below the bottom of the 
rack, or about -18 if the rack is exactly where it started.

Chapter 6
[ 169 ]
2.	 Switch to Front view (Numpad 1) and move (G) the RackPeg along the z axis 
(Z) 2.5.
3.	 Select the Rack and Boolean Union the RackPeg into it.

D6 Spinner
[ 170 ]
Doesn't the peg violate the 45 degree rule? Unless this object is printed with the peg 
sticking up, the 45 degree rule is going to be violated, and if it's printed up then it 
will be violated elsewhere on this object. It seems that there is no escaping that this 
peg violated the rule set out in Chapter 1, Design Tools and Basics.
It's true that this peg does, strictly speaking, violate that rule however it is a very 
minor violation of it. Also, it will allow any sufficiently well calibrated 3D printer to 
mess up, very slightly, when printing it, build on that mess and correct itself before 
too many layers pass. If when the final print is done, it's found that one side of this 
peg is too messy than one corner it can be cut off, cleaned up, and there will still be 
enough of the peg remaining for the spring to hold on to.
Make sure the other objects are visible, and take a moment to check in wireframe 
mode (Z) to be sure that the rack is sitting below the main disk of the Spinner and 
not intersecting with it. Also, the main body of the rack should be entirely inside the 
BoxInterior. If the view is adjusted the finger hole should extend outside the body 
but only at one small part and the majority of the finger hole should be outside the 
BoxExterior.

Chapter 6
[ 171 ]
Does the location in the virtual space really matter? When 
designing an object that will be separated, reoriented, printed 
in multiple parts its location in relation to other objects doesn't 
really matter. As long as the dimensions are correct according to 
a well laid out plan the result will be the same. However, keeping 
the objects in relation to each other in virtual space does have 
its advantages. No plan is perfect and troubleshooting potential 
problems before printing is easier if all the objects are aligned. 
Fixing these problems is also easier. Does this catch and fix 
all problems and ensure prints will be perfect? No, but it does 
eliminate one chance for error.
Modeling the case – lid
The case will be split into two parts. The lid will contain a window for viewing the 
number and a peg to hold the spinner in place. The bottom will have a place for the 
spinner's peg to rest, something to hold the rack in place securely, and a slot for the 
rack to slide.
First a box will be defined that will show the space that the lid will occupy, which 
can be used for both the top and bottom.
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube. Name it LidSpace and change its Location  
and Dimensions in the Properties (N) sidebar according to the  
following illustration:

D6 Spinner
[ 172 ]
2.	 Add (Shift + A) another cube. Name it LidLip and change its Location and 
Dimensions accordingly:
3.	 Select (right-click) the LidSpace and Boolean union the LidLip to it.
4.	 Select (right-click) the BoxExterior, duplicate (Ctrl + D) it and name the 
duplicate BoxLid. On the BoxLid add modifiers to Boolean Intersect with 
the LidSpace and Boolean Difference with the BoxInterior.

Chapter 6
[ 173 ]
5.	 To make a window for viewing the numbers, Add (Shift + A) a Cylinder. In 
the Properties (N) sidebar change its Dimensions to X: 54, Y: 54, Z: 5. Move 
(G) it up 7 along the z axis (Z) so it intersects the BoxLid. Name this object 
ViewWindow.
6.	 Add (Shift + A) another Cylinder and change its Dimensions to X: 30, 
Y: 30, Z: 6. Move (G) it up 7 along the z axis (Z) too so it intersects the 
ViewingWindow and BoxLid. Name this object ViewHole.
7.	 Select (right-click) the ViewWindow and Boolean Difference the ViewHole 
from it.

D6 Spinner
[ 174 ]
8.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube. Rename the cube Viewwedge. Move (G) it along the z 
axis (Z) by 7 and along the y-axis (Y) by 20. Scale (S) along the z axis (Z) by 
3. Scale (S) it in the x and y axis (Shift + Z) by 8.
9.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab). Select all the points on the right and Rotate  (R) them 
30 degrees.

Chapter 6
[ 175 ]
10.	 Select all the points on the left side and Rotate (R) by -30 degrees.
11.	 Select (right-click) the ViewWindow again and Boolean Intersect it with the 
ViewWedge.
12.	 The select the BoxLid and Boolean Difference the ViewWindow from it.

D6 Spinner
[ 176 ]
13.	 It is probably helpful at this point to be sure that the BoxExterior, 
BoxInterior, BoxLid, Spinner and SpinnerPeg are all visible. Select  
(right-click) the SpinnerPeg. Duplicate (Shift + D) it and move the  
duplicate along the z axis (Z) 8 units. Name the duplicate Lidpeg.
14.	 The top of the LidPeg doesn't quite fit inside the wall of the BoxLid entirely 
so in Edit Mode (Tab) select all the points on the top and scale them by 0 
along the z axis (Z) to flatten it. All the points should be inside the top wall  
of the BoxLid.

Chapter 6
[ 177 ]
15.	 Select the BoxLid and Boolean Union the LidPeg to it.
Modeling the case – bottom
1.	 Select (right-click) the BoxExterior, Duplicate (Shift + D) it and rename the 
duplicate BoxBottom. Boolean Difference the BoxInterior and Difference 
the LidSpace from the BoxBottom.

D6 Spinner
[ 178 ]
2.	 Like before, having a few other objects visible for reference will help with 
this step. Be sure that the BoxExterior, BoxInterior, BoxBottom and Spinner 
at least are all visible. Add (Shift + A) a cylinder. Make its Radius 2.4, its 
depth 5, and move it along the z axis -6. Name it BoxBottomPegHole.
3.	 Add (Shift + A) another cylinder with Radius 6, Depth 3, and move it along 
the z axis -6. Name it BoxBottomPegHolder.
4.	 Boolean Difference the BoxPegHole from the BoxBottomPegHolder. 
Then select (right-click) the BoxBottom and Boolean Union the 
BoxBottomPegHolder to it. Be careful to do these steps correctly or  
there may end up a big hole through the bottom of the BoxBottom.

Chapter 6
[ 179 ]
Make the Rack visible. As the rack slides up and down it is possible that it 
might wiggle left and right, getting in the way of the gear and stopping the 
Spinner. It is therefore necessary to add something to keep the rack in place.
5.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube, name it BoxBottomRackGuide and change its 
location and dimension accordingly:
6.	 Select (right-click) the BoxBottom and Boolean Union it with the 
BoxBottomRackGuide.
Many of the illustrations in this book employ tricks to simplify what's seen on 
the screen. This is done for clarity, but it has masked the fact that when using the 
Boolean modifier, the screen can be filled up with extra geometry that can clutter 
the view. For the most part this extra geometry can be ignored however, sometimes 
simplifying this geometry is a desirable goal.

D6 Spinner
[ 180 ]
In this case there is an opportunity to simplify the geometry of the BoxBottom 
using a very simple trick. With the order of the Boolean operations as it is when the 
BoxBottomPegHolder is added extra edges must be created from the inside corner 
to the various points where the cylinder intersects the inside bottom. Then the 
BoxBottomRackGuide is added and it cuts through most of those extra edges, but 
there is no attempt by Blender to remove the superfluous geometry. However, if the 
order of these two Boolean operations is switched, so the BoxBottomRackGuide is 
done first, then the extra edges aren't there when it's added, and the extra edges for 
the BoxBottomPegHolder starts at the corner of the BoxBottomRackGuide.
This has absolutely no impact on the object's printability. Occasionally, complex 
geometry can cause Boolean operations to fail so a simpler geometry might be 
necessary in those cases. But for now the only difference is that it looks better  
when editing. Do not feel any obligation to worry about this step.

Chapter 6
[ 181 ]
1.	 Make visible the RackPeg, select (right-click) it, and Duplicate (Shift + D) it. 
Move the duplicate along the y axis (Y) until it is sticking out the inner wall 
of the BoxBottom, about -13 (depending on where the rack was). Name the 
duplicate BoxBottomSpringPeg.
2.	 Add another Boolean modifier to the BoxBottom and Union the 
BoxBottomSpringPeg to it.
3.	 Lastly, a slot needs to be made in the BoxBottom for the Rack to slide. The 
slot needs to be long enough to accommodate the extension of the spring.

D6 Spinner
[ 182 ]
4.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube. In the Properties (N) modify its Location and 
Dimensions as in the illustration and name it BoxBottomSlot.
5.	 Select (right-click) the BoxBottom and Boolean Difference the 
BoxBottomSlot from it.
Preparing for print
Finally all the parts are ready, and all that's left is to orient them for print, similar to 
the way it was accomplished for the modular toy robot.

Chapter 6
[ 183 ]
1.	 Select (right-click) the BoxBottom, Duplicate (Shift + D) it, name the duplicate 
PrintBoxBottom, and view in Local View (Numpad /) apply all modifiers 
in order. This part is ready to print as oriented so File | Export | STL, and 
name the exported file SpinnerBottom.Stl. Then Hide (H) PrintBoxBottom 
and exit Local View (Numpad /).
2.	 Select (right-click) BoxLid, (make it visible if it is not). Duplicate (Shift + D) 
it, name the duplicate PrintBoxLid, and view in Local View (Numpad /). 
Apply all modifiers in order. Rotate (R) 180 around the y axis (Y). File | 
Export | STL and name the exported file SpinnerLid.Stl. Then Hide (H) 
PrintBoxLid and exit Local View (Numpad /).
3.	 Select (right-click) the rack, (make it visible if it is not). Duplicate (Shift + D) 
it, name the duplicate PrintRack, and in Local View (Numpad /) apply all 
modifiers in order. Rotate (R) 90 around the y axis (Y). File | Export | STL 
and name the exported file Spinnerrack.Stl. Then Hide (H) PrintRack and 
exit Local View (Numpad /).
4.	 Finally select (right-click) spinner, (make it visible if it is not). Duplicate (Shift 
+ D) it, name the duplicate PrintSpinner and view in Local View (Numpad 
/) apply all modifiers in order. Remember with this one the last modifier 
for the letters may take a while. Be patient because once it's applied it won't 
cause any more pauses. Rotate (R) 180 around the y axis (Y). File | Export | 
STL and name the exported file Spinner.Stl. Then Hide (H) PrintSpinner 
and exit Local View (Numpad /).

D6 Spinner
[ 184 ]
Printing and assembly
1.	 Print Spinner.stl, SpinnerLid.stl, SpinnerBottom.stl and 
SpinnerRack.stl. Also have the spring ready.
2.	 Take the rack and carefully wedge it around the bottom at its slot. There may 
be some flexing necessary to get it to work but be gentle.

Chapter 6
[ 185 ]
3.	 Place the spring around the peg on the base and as the rack gets pushed in 
around the peg at the base of the rack. Test the connection a few times by 
compressing and releasing the rack.
4.	 Place the spinner on top of the rack mating the spinner's peg into the holder 
for it in the bottom.
5.	 Firmly attach the lid, being sure that the lip goes in to the bottom all the way 
around. The fit will be tight which should prevent the need to use any glue to 
hold the parts together.
At last the spinner is ready to use to generate random numbers.

D6 Spinner
[ 186 ]
Extra credit
Is having the numbers in sequence the best idea or should they be scrambled on 
the wheel? When making dice, the pips are placed in such a way that they balance 
themselves. Balance isn't a problem with this spinner, but perhaps it would "feel" 
better, if they were in a more random order. And why do they have to be numbers? 
Pips or even pictograms could be used instead.
Could the spring be replaced with something that is printed in 3D? Plastic is flexible 
and printed springs have already been proven effective. Perhaps one of them could 
be incorporated into this project?
This project could be extended in other ways. A D6 roller is fine, but how would a 
different number of options work out? The gear is designed to stop the numbers in 
specific places. Eight numbers and hence eight teeth on the gears would probably 
work fine, but how could a D20 be implemented?
What about a 2D6, spinning two disks simultaneously and outputting two different 
numbers. Perhaps the finger switch underneath would have to be abandoned, but 
more than that how could both spinners be spun at slightly different rates so they're 
not just spinning in tandem, always returning the same pairs, or something close 
to them? The answer to this might be to make gears slightly different sizes, and 
have them interact with the teeth at different radial depths. How would this be 
implemented? Is there a different way to spin both spinners at different rates?
Summary
In this chapter, we came across gears from an add-on in Blender, parts designed  
to move freely within constraints, and a print inserted to create motion. This has 
been an interesting project. Also, hopefully its application to useful devices  
should be obvious.
While Blender's gear add-on may not be the best, the gears it produces can 
be perfectly serviceable. There are other gears that can be downloaded from 
Thingiverse, if something of a more technical sort is desired, which can then  
be imported into Blender, and incorporated into any project.
The creation of mechanical interactions is never easy, but it can be one of the best 
uses for 3D printers. Blender has proven to be adequate at this task.
In the next chapter, new modeling tools will be introduced and explored that will 
open up new modeling possibilities. Skinning a mesh and sculpting tools will be 
combined to make a detailed, organic model.

Teddy Bear Figurine
Basic shapes, vector manipulation, and Boolean modifiers aren't the only way to 
model in Blender. One of Blender's strengths is the eclectic blend of tools that it 
offers. In this project a simple organic shape will be modeled and posed for printing. 
Starting with a basic stick figure, then fleshing the stick figure out and giving it 
proper form and shape. And that shape will be of a Teddy bear!
The rules of 3D modeling like overhang and bridges are still important, even if the 
tools that were used have changed. But for the most part, those rules can wait until 
the end where they will be applied, with a little finesse.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 188 ]
Making a stick figure
Begin this project like all the rest. Clear the scene and save it in a new  
directory under MakerbotBlueprints called Ch 7 Teddy Bear and name  
the file Teddybear.Blend.
In the beginning all that is needed is a single point. Unfortunately Blender doesn't 
have an object that is just a single vertex. Fortunately it does have many basic shapes 
from where a single point can be taken.
1.	 Begin by adding (Shift + A) a Plane.
2.	 Rename this plane Bearskin.
3.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).
4.	 Select all but one vertex and Delete (X) them so there is only one left.
5.	 Select and Move (G) the one remaining vertex to the origin.

Chapter 7
[ 189 ]
It is important that this point ends up exactly at the origin for the 
next step to work. With a plane whatever point is left is exactly 1 
unit in two axes away from the origin, so the best way to ensure it is 
at the exact origin; this is where we should type the commands and 
not use the mouse. For the earlier illustration, typing the following 
keys will center the point perfectly: G, X, 1, G, Y, 1.
6.	 Jump to front Orthographic view (Numpad 1, Numpad 5).
7.	 Extrude (E) this point along the z axis (Z) approximately 10 units. The exact 
distance doesn't matter but locking this point to the z axis is important. This 
line will form the body of the stick figure.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 190 ]
8.	 Extrude (E) again along the z axis (Z) about 6 units to form the neck.
9.	 Then select (right-click) the point at the base of the neck and Extrude (E) 
again, this time moving freely to position a shoulder.
10.	 From the shoulder Extrude (E) to an elbow and again to a wrist.
11.	 From the wrist Extrude (E) a thumb and palm. Don't bother with all the 
fingers, just one big one will do for this project.

Chapter 7
[ 191 ]
12.	 Select (right-click) the point at the origin. This will be the tummy point.
13.	 Extrude (E) a hip, thigh, calf, and a little extrusion for the foot. Don't worry 
too much about placement at this point, since it will be adjusted later when 
there's skin on the bones.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 192 ]
Finally form the head:
1.	 Select (right-click) the point at the top where the neck is present.
2.	 Extrude (E) a long stick along the z axis (Z) for the head about 10 or 15 units.
Instead of repeating the process for the other side of the body let the Mirror modifier 
do the hard work.
1.	 In the modifiers tab add a Mirror modifier.
2.	 In the modifier panel click on the button that looks like a triangle with the 
vertices highlighted.

Chapter 7
[ 193 ]
That button will show the effects of the modifier even in the edit mode. This is 
sometimes undesirable for modifiers that will slow down the computer, but in  
this case it is a very good idea to turn that option on.
Putting the skin on the bones
This stick figure will be the bones of the figure. Blender has a very cool modifier 
that will thicken any stick mesh into a full bodied mesh. It is called, appropriately 
enough, Skin.
•	
Add the Skin modifier to the mesh

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 194 ]
It might not be immediately apparent, but now every stick has a 3-dimensional shape 
wrapped around it. To make the effect more apparent, use the Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) 
operator. This will be a temporary step to see the effect first:
1.	 Select all points (A).
2.	 Move the mouse pointer to a point closer to the center of the skeleton.
3.	 Press Ctrl + A to begin the Skin Resize operation.
4.	 Move the mouse pointer away from the skeleton until the mesh thickens up.
5.	 Left-click to complete the operation.
The skin resize operator can alter each point independently so the shape does not 
have to be uniform.
1.	 Undo (Ctrl + Z) the previous operation back to a thin sticks all around.
2.	 Select (right-click) the vertex where the legs meet and Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) 
to make a nice big belly.

Chapter 7
[ 195 ]
3.	 Select (right-click) the hip joint.
4.	 Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) it to add some volume to that joint.
Since the mirror modifier is still active changing one side will change the  
other automatically.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 196 ]
Even though the points are hidden behind the skin, they are still selectable. 
Wireframe view (Z) will make them visible if desired.
•	
Select (right-click) and Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) the knees and feet giving the 
teddy bear big broad feet to stand on
The skin plug-in has built into it a concept of a root vertex, or a vertex from which 
the object flows out. If this root is not set properly, it can cause problems, particularly 
with symmetrical objects, such as the mirrored skeleton. This is why the feet are not 
uniform. The root vertex is the one with a circle around it, in this case the foot. As a 
general rule it is a good idea to be aware of the root and choose a central vertex for it.
1.	 Select (right-click) the vertex at the origin, the belly vertex.
2.	 In the skin modifier setting click on the Mark Root button.

Chapter 7
[ 197 ]
Now the skin is uniform on both sides. Continue fleshing out the skin.
1.	 Select (right-click) and Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) the chest vertex, shoulder vertex 
and elbow vertex.
2.	 Select (right-click) and Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) the wrist.
It is possible when skin resizing on the wrist to have the wrist entirely 
envelope the thumb. If this is the case simply move (G) the thumb vertex  
so it continues to stick out from the palm.
3.	 Select (right-click) and Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) the finger tips to finish the  
hand shape.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 198 ]
At this point it becomes apparent that the joint of the shoulders would be better, if it 
weren't included in the skin calculations, so the skin went from shoulder to shoulder. 
The skin plugin has a function for this.
1.	 Select (right-click) the vertex where the shoulders join to the body.
2.	 Click on the Mark Loose button in the skin modifier properties, and the skin 
will go from shoulder-to-shoulder without trying to fit around that point 
making a more natural body shape.
3.	 Select (right-click) and Skin Resize (Ctrl + A) the neck to give the head the 
suggestion of a bulbous shape.

Chapter 7
[ 199 ]
Smoothing the skin
At this point things are a little too blocky. It's time to smooth these rough edges. In 
past projects the Multiresolution modifier was applied to smooth things out. In this 
project that is not an option, because the Multiresolution modifier cannot be applied 
after the skin and mirror modifier on the modifier stack. Instead use the Subdivision 
Surface modifier, a similar modifier to the Multiresolution modifier without some of 
the restrictions and functionality.
•	
Add a Subdivison Surface modifier
•	
Change the settings in the modifier's properties to three subdivisions for 
view and render
View and render in subdivision and Multiresolution refer to what is seen 
in the edit panel (view) and what is used when making a 3D render of an 
object. The idea is that while working the object can be low resolution so 
the computer isn't over taxed, and the resolution can be turned up when 
looks matter. But when exporting the STL it is the view setting that gets 
applied to the mesh.
If Blender is only being used for modeling for 3D printing does the render 
setting even matter? Not really. However it is good practice not to ignore 
a setting when it is that close to the important one, just in case.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 200 ]
What comes next is officially known as "fiddling". To this point the model was 
intentionally made different from the final shape it will take. This is how 3D 
modeling is often done; less science, more art.
Take some time and move (G) vertices around, re-skin resize (Ctrl + A) them, adjust, 
push, prod, and generally mess with it until it looks right. Make it personal. There is 
no right or wrong in art.
One thing to be careful of in this process is the bad fold. Sometimes a vertex's area of 
influence overlaps one next to it and the program can't tell where the points should 
go so it makes a bad judgment and the result is a bad fold:
Try to avoid bad folds. There will be plenty of bad geometry generated later when 
the model is posed, it is best to avoid it here. Make sure at this point that the mesh is 
nice and smooth all around. The way to fix it is simply to fiddle until it goes away. 
Pull vertices apart or decrease their skin resize area of influence.

Chapter 7
[ 201 ]
Give this process some time and feel free to experiment. At the end of the fiddling 
process the final model can be very different from where it started.
Extruding (E) additional vertices at the extremities allows for finer control over the 
contours shape, but don't deviate too much from the established skeleton. Finer 
details can be added later; at this point it is somewhat important that the skeleton 
"make sense" for posing purposes and that won't happen if the arm has three elbows.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 202 ]
Adjusting for the third dimension
As it is so far this is a fine gingerbread man with its stance so flat. To add some life 
to this model, simply adjust it in all three dimensions. And to aid in this a new view 
will be introduced; Quad View.
•	
In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel select View | Toggle Quad 
View or press Ctrl + Alt + Q.
The utility of this view is to simultaneously view the model from many different 
angles. The disadvantage is that each of the views is a quarter the screen size making 
details hard to see.

Chapter 7
[ 203 ]
In quad view the location of the pointer when using hot keys is more important  
than ever:
1.	 As long as the mouse pointer is over any of the 3D views the number pad 
keys will only adjust the upper-right User Persp view.
2.	 Using the middle-click will only free rotate the view point if the mouse pointer 
starts over the upper-right view and will do nothing in the other views.
3.	 Zooming with the mouse wheel or the Numpad + and Numpad - keys only 
zooms the view that the mouse pointer is over.
4.	 Panning the view (Shift + middle-click) only affects the view where the mouse 
pointer was when it started.
Operators like Grab (G) and Rotate (R) operate according to the view that the mouse 
pointer is over when the operation started. In other words if the grab operation is 
begun while the mouse pointer is over the Right Ortho view then it will be locked to 
the YZ plane. If the mouse pointer is over the Top Ortho view then it will be locked 
to the XY plane.
To add some dimension to the model:
1.	 Select (right-click) the shoulders and Move (G) them back slightly along  
the y axis.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 204 ]
2.	 Select (right-click) the elbow and Move (G) it back slightly further than the 
shoulder moved.
3.	 Select (right-click) the fingers and thumb together and Move (G)  
them forward.
4.	 The wrist can remain where it is.
Now the arm has a more natural look to it.
5.	 Select (right-click) and Move (G) the knees a little forward.
6.	 Select (right-click) and Move (G) and the hips a little backwards.
Notice how this affects the curve of the teddy bear's belly because the angle of the 
points is different.

Chapter 7
[ 205 ]
Adjusting the bear's dimensions in this way may seem like a little thing, but it goes a 
long way to making a more organic looking and three dimensional model.
•	
When complete press Ctrl + Alt + Q to switch out of Quad View

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 206 ]
Making an armature
An armature is used generally in 3D animation to move the model in natural ways. 
The idea and name comes from Claymation where a metal frame, sometimes with 
hinges sometimes just made from bendable material, would be built into the clay 
model like a skeleton to hold it upright and maintain poses, while the animation 
is accomplished frame-by-frame. In computer modeling the armature is used in 
a similar way to define the pose of a complex model by manipulating just a few 
skeleton lines.
Normally when modeling characters the process of building an armature is a 
complicated one involving many steps that would be outside the scope of this  
work. However, by using the skin modifier the process is simplified significantly.
This marks the beginning of another major section so this is a reminder about saving 
(Ctrl + S) and incremental saves.
1.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Open the modifiers panel and Apply the Mirror modifier.
3.	 On the Skin modifier click on the Create Armature button.
Now the original line mesh that the skin modifier was based on will be converted to 
a new armature object and added to the scene.
Then select the original BearSkin and Apply the Skin and Subsurface modifiers in 
that order, but leave the new armature modifier.

Chapter 7
[ 207 ]
An armature is similar to a mesh in that it is a series of edges joined at points. But 
unlike a mesh an armature can be edited or posed. In fact armatures can have many 
poses saved and switch to them at will, but exploring that functionality is outside the 
scope of this work. Also, note that an armature, as mentioned earlier affects many 
points of the mesh to which it is attached.
1.	 Select (right-click) the armature.
2.	 Click on the Object Data tab on the Properties panel on the right. The object 
data for the armature is the one that looks like a little human figure.
3.	 This menu has the options related to the armature.
4.	 At the top of the first menu section, Skeleton, there are two buttons,  
Pose Position and Rest Position.
5.	 Be sure the Pose Position button is active or the skeleton won't be moveable.
Following that are display options for the armature. The default option is Stick 
and makes the bones basically lines with dots at the joints. Octahed changes the 
bones to look like large shapes, and is preferred by some 3D animators because 
they're easier to see on screen. The rest of the options are basically the same for his 
project. If octahed is preferred use it, but the rest of this chapter will use stick in the 
illustrations because it shows up well in print.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 208 ]
An exploration of the rest of the options in the armature object data is encouraged 
outside this project. Seeking out tutorials on the subject of armatures will open 
up many cool options. Unfortunately, the scope of this book only allows a brief 
skimming of their functionally.
With the armature selected, switch the armature to Pose Mode either with the combo 
box at the bottom of the 3D view or by pressing Ctrl + Tab.
With the armature in pose mode individual bones can be moved or rotated and the 
mesh will move along with it.
1.	 Experimentally select (right-click) the bone on upper arm.
2.	 Begin the Move (G) operation.
3.	 Move the mouse.
Notice how the bones of the rest of the arm and hand move with it, and the mesh 
moves with them all too… albeit a little poorly.
•	
In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel select Pose | Clear 
Transform | All or press Alt + G, Alt + R, Alt + S to reset the bone's location.

Chapter 7
[ 209 ]
The reason the mesh didn't move very well is because the effect of the bone on the 
mesh wasn't very well defined by the skin modifier. It did the best it could, but 
sometimes it needs a little help. To see the effect that each of the bones has, select 
(right-click) the BearSkin and switch to Weight Paint mode either using the same 
combo box at the bottom of the 3D View panel or by pressing Ctrl + Tab.
In Weight Paint mode the area of effect of each bone can be observed and edited. 
The red areas are the places that have a 1-to-1 relationship with the bone, matching 
location and rotation. The rainbow of colors from yellow to green to blue are areas 
that have less of a relationship with that bone allowing for smooth transitions.
For now just select the various bones to explore how the skin modifier set the bones 
area of effect. Actually fixing these weights will come later after some more detail is 
added to the mesh.
Note that in Weight Paint mode selecting the bones does not deselect the mesh.  
This is a useful function when editing the weights.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 210 ]
Drawing the details
Blender's sculpting tools allow for organic modeling of objects with simple motions. 
As of version 2.66 those tools were updated with Dynamic Topology, making  
them nearly as good as commercial sculpting tools. In the past sculpt mode worked 
best with very high resolution models, but now the resolution can be automatically 
and dynamically changed in local areas keeping the rest of the mesh a more 
manageable resolution.
Slow down with this part. The tools and techniques taught in this section 
are very much like drawing, only in 3D. Some users may find this more 
suited to their tastes. While there may not be as many steps shown expect 
to take a little extra time doing each step until it looks right. Just like with 
pen and paper good drawing takes time. Slow down, take it easy, and 
enjoy the process.
Another tip for drawing is zooming out frequently. Staying zoomed in all 
the time it becomes difficult to see the whole for the details sometimes. It's 
best to zoom in, do some edits, zoom out, and look at how that edits looks 
as part of the whole, and repeat.
As mentioned previously, this work can only provide a high level look at these tools. 
Exploring the sculpt tools is also encouraged.
1.	 In the outline view select the eye icon on the Armature line to hide  
the armature.
2.	 Select (right-click) the BearSkin.
3.	 Switch to Sculpt Mode with the combo box at the bottom of the 3D  
View panel.

Chapter 7
[ 211 ]
In sculpt mode new tools appear in the left side bar. One of these, dynamic topology, 
is new to Blender, but allows it to adjust the mesh on the fly to put the detail where 
it's needed to make good sculpts.
1.	 Scroll down in the left side bar and find the Topology options.
2.	 Click on the Enable Dynamic button.
3.	 Click on the option that comes up in the pop up menu.
4.	 Turn the Detail Size down to 10.
5.	 Scroll down some more to the Symmetry options.
6.	 Open the options and click on the X button under Mirror.
Now any edits made to the left side of the model will be automatically reflected on 
the right saving work and keeping the model symmetrical.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 212 ]
1.	 Scroll back up in the side bar. Click on the large picture to open up and see 
all the brushes available.
2.	 Select the sculpt draw brush by clicking on the second image of an s-curve 
rising out of the mesh or by pressing the D key.
This brush is the one most like drawing. It can either build up or cut into the mesh 
depending if the Add or Subtract option is selected.
1.	 To build up the muzzle of the teddy, with the sculpt draw brush (D) selected 
in front view zoom in to the face.
2.	 Press F to adjust the size of the brush and move the mouse until the brush is 
big enough to draw a muzzle quickly.

Chapter 7
[ 213 ]
3.	 Left-click and draw smooth circles at the bottom of the head up build up the 
area. Rotating the view makes the effect more apparent.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 214 ]
Dynamic topology has been changing the mesh to make 
the sculpted elements as smooth as possible. Switching to 
wireframe the effect becomes apparent. Anywhere that's been 
sculpted has more points. Dynamic topology is closely related 
to the view. Zooming in more will add more points than 
drawing more zoomed out. Keep this in mind while working.
4.	 Rotate the view, choosing an angle where the cheek is visible but not 
obstructed by the hand.
5.	 Adjust the brush radius (F) a little smaller and sculpt (left-click) to build up 
the cheeks.
6.	 Zoom in on the eye area.
7.	 Adjust the brush size (F) and click on the Subtract button.
8.	 Sculpt a recess for the eye.

Chapter 7
[ 215 ]
9.	 Either click on the brush icon and choose the Inflate brush, the one that looks 
like a protruding bubble, or press the I key.
10.	 Left-click and gently reinflate the eye recess to make an eye.
11.	 Switch to the SculptDraw brush (D).

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 216 ]
12.	 Zoom in on the eyes and adjust the brush size (F) to a smallish point.
13.	 With the SculptDraw brush in Subtract mode repeatedly click in the eye to 
dig a pupil into the eye.
14.	 Switch to Add mode.
15.	 Draw a bear nose.

Chapter 7
[ 217 ]
16.	 With the brush in Subtract mode zoom into the mouth area and draw  
a mouth.
Finally, the bear needs some ears. For this one of the most exciting of Blender's 
sculpt tools will be used, the Snake Hook. The Snake Hook must be chosen from the 
brushes menu by clicking on the current brush and choosing the brush that looks like 
a snake being pulled out of the mesh.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 218 ]
This brush is exciting because with Dynamic Topology it generates whole new  
areas that could be used to build limbs or appendages. For now only ears are 
necessary, though.
1.	 Switch to the Front view (Numpad 1).
2.	 Adjust the brush radius very large.
3.	 With the Snake Hook brush, pull a little bit of the side of the head to make 
bear ears.
4.	 Use the SculptDraw brush (D) with a smaller radius (F) in Subtract mode.
5.	 Put a dent in the ear to give it a more bear ear-like shape.
Keep drawing until the desired shape is achieved. Zoom out and look at it from 
many angles while working.

Chapter 7
[ 219 ]
With that the bear is as complete as it's going to be in this work, however there is 
certainly more that could be done if desired.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 220 ]
Simplifying the model
One of the problems with Dynamic Topology is that meshes can quickly gain a lot of 
polygons making a more complex shape. With high polygon models even powerful 
computers can slow down. Fortunately, it is easy to reduce the number of polygons 
in a model often without making any visible difference in the model, while reducing 
how hard the computer has to work.
•	
In the modifier tab on the Properties panel on the right press the Add 
Modifier button and select the Decimate modifier.
Decimate works by entering a ratio between 0 and 1 and reducing the polygons 
in the model until they match the ratio. So to reduce the polygons to 1/10 of 
their original count a ratio of 0.1 would be entered. Decimate attempts to remove 
polygons that won't be noticed, but if the count is reduced too much it becomes very 
apparent. The following illustration is the teddy bear model at about 100 polygons, 
200 polygons, 500 polygons, 900, and 9000, and 90,000 polygons:
There comes a point of diminishing returns where more polygons have little 
noticeable effect except in the performance of the computer. With a little trial and 
effort, turning the modifier off and on with the eye icon to observe the differences  
the best ratio can be discovered.

Chapter 7
[ 221 ]
In this case that ratio was about 0.50, but individual experience may vary.
•	
Set the ratio and Apply the Decimate modifier
Fixing the armature weights
Sculpting the model added geometry. Decimate took some away. Even if the weights 
attached to the armature were correct to start with it's very unlikely that they would 
still be. In order to make the armature useful again the weights need to be repainted.
1.	 Switch the BearSkin to Weight Paint mode (Ctrl + Tab).
2.	 In the Outliner panel unhide the Armature.
3.	 Select the Armature in the Outliner panel and insure that it is in Pose Mode.
4.	 Insure that the Pose Position button is selected in the armature object  
data tab.
With the BearSkin in Weight Paint mode and the Armature in Pose mode/Pose 
Position, it is time to fix the weights.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 222 ]
Similar to sculpt mode, the weight paint mode has a set of brush tools, but really 
there is only one brush necessary. The draw brush has a blend option that duplicates 
all the other brushes and is considerably easier to find the tool desired.
1.	 Select (right-click) the BearSkin.
2.	 Verify the Weight and Strength are 1.
The procedure is as follows:
1.	 Select a bone. In Weight Paint mode selecting a bone will not deselect  
the mesh.
2.	 With the Draw brush select the Add option in the blend combo box.
3.	 Adjust the brush size with the F key (same as in sculpt mode).
4.	 Left-click on the mesh until everywhere that should move when the selected 
bone moves is red, adjusting the view as necessary.

Chapter 7
[ 223 ]
5.	 Move (G) the bone and adjust the view to look around.
6.	 This will likely reveal some part that was missed or some part that was 
accidently colored.
7.	 Switch Blend Mode to Subtract and paint (left-click) the part that was 
accidently painted. This can be done while the bone is posed, and will  
be instantly applied.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 224 ]
8.	 When only the right parts are painted red, return the bone to its original 
position (Alt + R).
9.	 Switch the Blend Mode to Blur.
10.	 Soften around the edges of the painted area to extend the gradient. This will 
insure the movements are slightly more natural.
11.	 Select another bone and repeat the process until all the bones have  
been corrected.
This is a process that can take a lot of time to do right. Keep at it until the motion is 
sufficiently smooth. Perfection is not necessarily the goal, but complete coverage and 
adequacy is.

Chapter 7
[ 225 ]
Posing the bear
This bear is a great looking model, but it's not printable the way it is. Keeping in 
mind the overhang and bridging rules from Chapter 1, Design Tools and Basics, the 
bear needs to be put in a pose that will print. The legs are a clear problem so the  
bear will be made to sit on a box.
Use the combo box at the bottom of the 3D View panel to switch from BearSkin to 
Object Mode.
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube to the scene.
2.	 Scale (S) and position (G) it so it is under the bear's hips.
3.	 Select (right-click) the hip bone in the armature.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 226 ]
4.	 Rotate (R) the hip bone around the x axis (X) to make the bear sit.
5.	 Select (right-click) the calf bone.
6.	 Rotate it (R) around the x axis (X) to bend the knee.
7.	 Repeat with the other leg.
8.	 Select (right-click) and Rotate (R) the cube around the z axis (Z).
9.	 Position (G) the cube in the xy plane (Shift + Z) to put it properly under  
the bear.

Chapter 7
[ 227 ]
10.	 Select (right-click) the bone through the body.
11.	 Rotate (R) it slightly around the x axis (X) to get the bear to lean back 
a little.
12.	 Rotate (R) it slightly around the y axis (Y) to give the bear some lean.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 228 ]
13.	 Select (right-click) the bear's left upper arm bone.
14.	 Rotate (R) it around the y axis (Y) to bring the arm down to the  
bear's side.
15.	 Select (right-click) the left lower arm bone and Rotate (R) it around the 
x axis (X) to bring the hand to the top of the cube.
16.	 Select (right-click) the left hand bone and Rotate (R) it around the x axis (X) to 
bring it level to the top of the cube.
17.	 Resize (S) the cube along the xy plane (Shift + Z) and move (G) it until the 
bears hand rests nicely on it.
In this position most of the overhang issues of that hand should be fixed.
1.	 Select (right-click) the right shoulder.
2.	 Rotate (R) it to bring the arm up.
3.	 Select (right-click) and Rotate (R) the forearm around the y axis (Y) to position 
the other arm in a waving position. Don't worry if the arm is intersecting the 
head slightly as long as it looks like it will print well.

Chapter 7
[ 229 ]
Technically sticking part of the model into itself makes what 
is called a self-intersecting mesh and for 3D printing that is 
generally regarded as bad. However, when printing most slicers 
will detect and handle the self-intersection gracefully and the 
model will still print. However, the model could be cleaned up 
with a mesh cleaning utility. One of the best is http://cloud.
netfabb.com. Simply upload the model to them and in a 
little while download it back with all the bad geometry and self 
interstations cleaned up ready to print.
4.	 Select (right-click) the neck bone.
5.	 Press the R key twice to enter a special rotation mode called  
trackball rotation.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 230 ]
6.	 Tilt the head back slightly to reduce overhang on the chin and position it to 
look up.

Chapter 7
[ 231 ]
It is perfectly acceptable to go back into weight paint and try to clean up 
some of the weights to make the modified geometry a little cleaner at this 
point. Chances are blur is the only brush necessary. Only fix the bigger 
problem areas. For the smaller problems there will be some clean up in 
the next step.
Inspecting before print
1.	 Select (right-click) the cube.
2.	 Duplicate (Shift + D) it.
3.	 Hide all but the duplicated cube (Shift + H).
4.	 Boolean Union it with the BearSkin.
5.	 Name this cube Finalfigure.
Inspect the FinalFigure from all angles, particularly the side views, looking for 
unprintable areas that violate the 45 degree rule badly. In this case there is at least 
one area that stands out. The back of the head juts out like a shelf. That's going to 
cause problems. The tools to fix this part are already known.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 232 ]
6.	 Before fixing this Apply the Boolean modifier.
7.	 Enter Sculpt Mode using the combo box at the bottom of the 3D  
View panel.
8.	 Use a wide brush (F) and a combination of the SculptDraw brush on subtract 
and smooth brush to reduce the back of the head until it is a better angle  
for printing.
Quad View (Ctrl + Alt + Q) may help here to quickly ensure the changes made here 
are as desired. The feet may also need to be sculpted for print.
While in sculpt mode the Smooth brush can be used to fix any other problem areas 
that result from the armature folding badly. Make the final model as good looking  
as possible.

Chapter 7
[ 233 ]
When all sculpting edits are complete, switch back to Object Mode in the combo  
box at the bottom of the 3D View panel and File | Export | Stl (.stl) the FinalFigure  
for printing. Name the exported file Teddy Bear.Stl.
Extra credit
These tools have application beyond making Teddy Bear figurines. The technique in 
this chapter can be extended to custom game mini-figurines. Also the skin tool can be 
used alone to make a wireframe model suitable for miniatures like a trellis bridge for 
a train set or a half constructed building or a bird cage. Many artistic projects have 
been made using the skin tool over a mathematically interesting mesh that can be 
used as conversation pieces or plant holders.

Teddy Bear Figurine
[ 234 ]
Summary
There's more than one way to create a 3D model. The different tools available allow 
for all kinds of modeling, not just blocky technical parts but clever organic objects 
that are interesting to look at as well:
•	
Using the skin modifier to create a basic body shape
•	
Using the skin modifier to create an armature
•	
Painting weights and posing the model with an armature
•	
Using the sculpt tool to make a model with tools similar to drawing
•	
Using the decimate modifier to reduce the polygon count of a model
At this point all the most common and powerful techniques for creating models from 
scratch in Blender have been introduced. The next chapter will focus on how Blender 
can be used to clean up an existing model to make it ready for print.

Repairing Bad Models
There are many sources for 3D models on the internet, but not all of them were made 
for 3D printing. Even if their tolerances are good for 3D printing, the meshes may have 
holes, flipped normal, or just general bad geometry that will need to be fixed before it 
can be printed. Being able to find and fix bad geometry will ensure good prints.
One of the coolest sources for 3D models is from captures of real life objects. There 
are programs and even online services that can convert a series of photographs into 
a 3D model. However, it is highly unlikely that those scans will be comprehensive. 
Sometimes certain angles are difficult to capture and usually the subject being 
captured is on a surface that cannot be photographed through, such as the ground. 
Consequently, there will be holes in the scan that will need to be fixed.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 236 ]
In this chapter, a model captured from photographic data and processed by a 
desktop application will be cleaned up for print using some new techniques and 
tools. These techniques can be applied to more than just scanned images. Sometimes 
even models made by hand suffer somewhat from bad geometry, and knowing these 
techniques will help.
Downloading a 3D scanned file
Go to http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:90754 and click on the Download 
This Thing! button. Download the CH8_LionCapture.obj file and choose to 
save it in a new folder in the MakerbotBlueprints directory named as Ch. In 
Windows this is accomplished, same as in previous chapters, by right-clicking 
on the link and choosing Save link as..., navigating to Libraries | Documents | 
MakerbotBlueprints, clicking on the New folder button, and naming the new folder 
Ch 8 Scan Repair. Then double-clicking on the new directory and saving the file.
Trimming the fat
After the file is saved, open Blender, clear the scene, and save the scene in 
Documents\MakerbotBlueprints\Ch 8 Scan Repair and name the file Lion 
Cleanup.blend:
Import the file to be cleaned up by clicking on the menu options File | Import | 
Wavefront (.obj):

Chapter 8
[ 237 ]
Double-click on the CH8_LionCapture.obj file. The file is very large and may take 
even a high-end machine a few seconds to process. When imported, it may be difficult 
to find the subject of the scan in all the extra data. The subject will be near the middle. 
Zoom in and adjust the view until the lion in the middle is framed in the view.
When zoomed in, it becomes clear that the lion is at a strange angle to the work plane.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 238 ]
3D scans often capture more than the focus of the scan. All that extra, loose geometry 
needs to be separated and eliminated, which will make the model much easier to 
manage. To do this the Separate command will be used:
1.	 Select (right-click) the scanned object.
2.	 Press Tab to enter Edit Mode.
3.	 In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel, choose Mesh | Vertices | 
Separate or press P to select the Separate command.
4.	 In the pop-up menu, click on By loose parts.
5.	 Press Tab to exit Edit Mode.
6.	 Select (right-click) the lion object in the center.
7.	 Press Ctrl + I to invert the selection.
8.	 Delete (X) all the selected objects. Only the lion will remain.

Chapter 8
[ 239 ]
Trimming the fat in this way will also speed up Blender since there are much fewer 
points to process.
Orienting the scan
The lion is still oriented wrong. By changing the camera view, it becomes apparent 
that this model is oriented to the y axis up and down. This is simple enough to fix by 
rotating (R) the object -90 degrees around the x axis (X).
Trimming more fat
There are extra parts of the model that won't be needed. The easiest thing to do will 
probably be to just trim away the excess.
1.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 From the Front (Numpad 1) or Right view (Numpad 3), the Ortho view 
(Numpad 5) in the Wireframe view (Z), Border Select (B) all the points  
under the pedestal the lion is sitting on.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 240 ]
3.	 Take special care to get all the points under the line. Zoom out if necessary.
4.	 Delete (X) the selected Vertices.
Cleaning up the back will be much easier if the model is lined up with the 
gridline of the XY plane, so line the model up using Rotate (R).
5.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).
6.	 View the model from the Top (Numpad 7).

Chapter 8
[ 241 ]
7.	 Rotate (R) the model until the pedestal lines up better with the gridlines.
8.	 Now to do a little more trimming, switch back to Edit Mode (Tab).
9.	 In the Wireframe view (Z), Border Select (B) the extra geometry behind  
the lion.
10.	 Delete (X) those Vertices.
If there are any loose vertices left, clean them up by selecting (right-click) and deleting 
(X) them.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 242 ]
Making a flat base
While inspecting the lion it becomes clear that all it is right now is a thin shell with 
huge gaps in it which is not very printable. What needs to be done is to clean up the 
mesh so it is closed, manifold, and has a flat bottom suitable for printing.
A solid, printable mesh is closed, or watertight, and manifold.
Closed or watertight is an easy enough concept to get. In cartoons, the 
characters can blow bubbles of any size or shape they want, but if that 
bubble gets a single hole it pops. In the same way, the mesh should be one 
continuous surface no matter the twists and turns it takes.
Manifold is a mathematical term that in general terms can be confusing, 
but in specific turns for our purposes means that every edge sits between 
no more than two faces and no face intersects any other face. (If it's 
watertight as well, each edge will border exactly two faces.) If an edge 
is bordering three faces, then there is an unnecessary face in the model. 
Non-manifold meshes can make it difficult for the slicer to tell what is 
supposed to be "inside" or "outside" the model.
Proper normal orientation is also important, but if the mesh is watertight 
then manifold fixing the normals is no problem at all.
Blender has a special function specifically to select non-manifold portions of  
the mesh.
1.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Select non-manifold points by choosing Select | Non Manifold in the menu 
at the bottom of the 3D View panel or press Shift + Ctrl + Alt + M. The 
following selected points are what Blender identified as being non-manifold 
and therefore need to be fixed:

Chapter 8
[ 243 ]
At the moment there aren't that many non-manifold parts. Most of them are 
simply the edge loops that need to be closed.
3.	 With the non-manifold points selected, use the Circle Select (C) and deselect 
(middle-click) all the points, not on what could be considered the bottom.
4.	 When done the only points that should be selected are the ones that will be 
extruded to form the bottom.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 244 ]
5.	 Extrude (E) the selected points down along the z axis (Z).
6.	 Flatten the bottom by scaling (S) the extruded points along the z axis (Z) by 
zero (0). Now the bottom is flat, but it is still not filled in.
7.	 Extrude (E) the selected points but do not touch the mouse.
8.	 Press Enter so a new set of points is created from the selection in the  
same location.
9.	 In the menu at the bottom of the 3D View panel, navigate to Mesh | Vertices 
| Merge or press Alt + M to merge and click on At Center from the menu 
that pops up.

Chapter 8
[ 245 ]
All the selected points will be brought together and turned into one point at the 
calculated center.
Inspect the new bottom and make sure the connecting lines do not cross the edge 
of the bottom to get to the merged point. Depending on a number of factors, it is 
possible that this has occurred as indicated in the following screenshot:
If this happens, the simple fix is to Move (G) the center point along the XY plane 
(Shift + Z) until it is at a place, where all the connecting lines can reach their 
respective edge point without crossing the edge anywhere else.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 246 ]
There is still a wedge that remains unfilled on the bottom. To fill this wedge, perform 
the following steps:
1.	 Hold the Shift key and select (right-click) the vertices of either edge of the 
wedge to be filled.
2.	 Three points will be selected.
3.	 In the 3D View panel menu, navigate to Mesh | Faces | Make Edge/Face or 
press F to create a face from the selected points.
Detail work on the back
The back of the lion will be extruded and sealed in much the same way, but before 
it can be there is some extra geometry from the scan that needs to be identified and 
cleaned up first.
Zoom in on the posterior of the lion and locate the plate of points that are just 
dangling there, barely attached to anything shown in the following screenshot. 
Because more or less vertices may have been deleted when the part was trimmed 
what is left may differ, but the spurious geometry should be there.

Chapter 8
[ 247 ]
Select these points using any desired method:
1.	 Border Select (B), Circle Select (C), or select (right-click) the points in the 
middle and expand the selection (Ctrl + Numpad +) until the desired points 
are selected.
2.	 Deselect (middle-click) the point at the very tip (indicated in the following 
screenshot) since that point is shared with the main body of the lion and 
should probably be left.
3.	 Then Delete (X) the selected points.
4.	 When those points are deleted, select the spur sticking out of the body next  
to them. It is harder to determine where to stop, so some judgment must  
be applied.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 248 ]
5.	 Again, select in any desired way and Delete (X) the spurious vertices.
6.	 Then, same as with the base, use the Non Manifold command (Shift + Ctrl + 
Alt + M) to identify the edges that need to be sealed off. Circle Select (C) and 
deselect (middle-click) (probably best in the Wireframe view) all, but the back 
edge. This is complicated because the editing done on the bottom has likely 
introduced new non-manifold points. Don't worry about those points for 
now and just deselect all but the back edge.
7.	 Same as before, Extrude (E) the selected points.

Chapter 8
[ 249 ]
8.	 Scale (S) them, this time along the x axis (X) by 0 units to flatten them.
9.	 Extrude (E) again, this time without moving them before pressing Enter.
10.	 Merge (Alt + M) At Center the points to seal the back of the lion.
11.	 Move (G) the merged point along the YZ plane (Shift + X), so that all the edge 
lines reach the edge without crossing the edge anywhere else.
This merge point may be more difficult to align to make all points happy than the 
last time on the bottom. For now, good may have to be good enough.
Now, there is only one hole left to close off, the one on the back of the lion.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 250 ]
To quickly select all the points on the edge of the hole, use the Loop Select command.
1.	 Press and hold the Alt key.
2.	 Select (right-click) any of the lines on the hole, not any of the vertices. Blender 
will attempt to find the loop that the selected line is a part of.
Loop select doesn't always work when the geometry is 
complicated, which is why it wasn't demonstrated earlier 
in this project. But in this case loop select works just fine.
3.	 Click on Make Edge/Face (F) to make a face from the selected points.
Since this hole is simpler and less complicated than the previous ones, Blender will 
fill in the face correctly this time.

Chapter 8
[ 251 ]
Cleaning up bad geometry
Now, the model should be watertight, but it is hardly clean and non-manifold.  
Now is the time to locate, identify, and fix the non-manifold points:
1.	 Clear the selected points (A).
2.	 Select all non-manifold points (Shift + Ctrl + Alt + M).
Unfortunately in sealing the edges, non-manifold geometry was accidently 
introduced into the model. All of the currently selected points represent a  
problem in the model that should be fixed.
The first step is to remove any points that are occupying the exact same spot:
1.	 Select all the points (A).
2.	 Click on the Remove Doubles button in the left-side bar.
3.	 When that is done clear the selection (A).
4.	 Select the non-manifold points again (Shift + Ctrl + Alt + M).

Repairing Bad Models
[ 252 ]
5.	 Choose one of the selected points and zoom in on it.
Deleting an extra edge
The previous screenshot is zoomed in on one such place. The darker grey areas 
indicate that there are multiple surfaces overlapping each other in that area, two 
faces on top of each other. There is some edge on the border of three faces, which is 
one of the checks for non-manifold. The best thing to do is identify the extra edge 
and delete it. In this case, it is fairly simple to guess:
1.	 Select (right-click) the vertex on the left of the dark area.
2.	 Additionally, select (Shift + right-click) the vertex on the right.
3.	 These two points should not be connected by an edge since they would be 
going through the point in the middle. However, the red line connects them 
clearly, so this is the errant edge.
4.	 Delete (X) that edge between these two points.

Chapter 8
[ 253 ]
Unfortunately this introduces a new problem. The lighter triangle that 
appears is a new hole in the geometry. Apparently that edge was a part  
of a face that wasn't covered by the other points. That will have to be fixed.
5.	 Loop select (Alt + right-click on an edge) the hole.
6.	 Create a face (F) from the selection.
Merging the problem away
Another way to fix geometry problems like this is by using the Merge tool.  
The illustrated section is another area identified as non-manifold.
1.	 Select one of the involved vertices that is at the bottom corner of the mesh.
2.	 Select the other five vertices one at a time with the right-click and holding the 
Shift key.
3.	 Then Merge (Alt + M) and choose At First. The position of the first chosen 
vertex will be where the selected points will be merged to.
The At First or At Last options do not appear and are not affected by 
using Box Select or Circle Select. At least one point must be selected with 
right-click for those options to appear. By using this option, more control 
can be exerted over where the merged points will meet.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 254 ]
Finding hidden points
Another situation that may cause problems is unnecessary internal geometry. If a 
certain point is visible in the Wireframe mode that cannot be seen in the solid view 
from any angle, it is safe to assume that the point in question is entirely unnecessary 
and safe to just delete.
Uncrossing the lines
If the problem is, as illustrated in the following screenshot, the edges that pass 
outside their geometry such as the merged points on the back, crossing a concave 
part of the edge loop, the solution is to turn the edges so they connect elsewhere:

Chapter 8
[ 255 ]
1.	 Switch to Edge Select mode by clicking on the cube in the bar at the bottom 
of the 3D View panel or by pressing Ctrl + Tab and then choosing Edge.
2.	 Select an offending edge. It is often best to work from the outside in.
3.	 Open the Edge menu either by choosing Mesh | Edge in the bottom menu of 
the 3D View panel or by pressing Ctrl + E.
4.	 Select Rotate Edge CW.
5.	 If necessary repeat Rotate Edge CW until the edge is no longer crossing the 
concave space.
6.	 Select the next offending edge and repeat the previous steps until all edges 
are properly aligned.
7.	 Switch back to Vertex Select Mode (Ctrl + Tab) if desired.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 256 ]
Repeat until clean
It is difficult to identify all the ways that show that geometry can be bad, but these 
are the most common problems. For knowing these techniques, the steps are simple:
1.	 Use the Non Manifold select (Shift + Ctrl + Alt + M) to locate bad geometry.
2.	 Identify what the problem is.
3.	 Delete, Merge, Move, or otherwise correct the bad geometry.
4.	 Repeat until Non Manifold selects no points at which the model is manifold.
Final cleanup
The last step when the model is manifold is to verify that the normals are oriented 
properly. The last time normals were an issue was in Chapter 3, Face Illusion Vase. 
There they messed up the way the Skin modifier handled its task. Messed up 
normals can also affect the printability of models. Fortunately the fix is often  
simple in Blender:
1.	 Select all points (A).
2.	 Click on the Recalculate button under Normals section in the left-side bar of 
the 3D View panel.
Making it a book end
As-is the back of this model is hardly presentable. One option would be to use the 
sculpt tools from Chapter 7, Teddy Bear Figurine to sculpt the missing parts of the  
lion. An easier option is to throw a cube behind it to hide the blemishes and call  
this project a book end:

Chapter 8
[ 257 ]
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a Cube.
2.	 Scale (S) and Move (G) the cube until it is slightly taller and wider than the 
statue, and thick enough to hide the back of the lion. Try to be as precise as 
possible when positioning the bottom of the cube to the bottom of the statue, 
but don't stress too much about it. The bottom will be re-flattened.
3.	 Add a Boolean modifier to the cube.
4.	 Union the Lion_Capture object to the cube.
5.	 Apply the modification.
6.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab).
7.	 In Right side (NumPad 3) view in the Wireframe view (Z), Border Select (B) 
all the points that make up the bottom of the lion.
8.	 Scale (S) along the z axis (Z) by 0 units to assure the bottom is perfectly flat.

Repairing Bad Models
[ 258 ]
9.	 Exit Edit Mode (Tab).
Before exporting the model, Scale (S) the object to be of desired size. A proper 
book end should be about 15 cm to 20 cm tall and weighted. To just see the model, 
something about 5 cm tall should be fine. (Remember that in Blender, cm are the 
large grid lines, mm are the small ones.) Navigate to File | Export | Stl (.stl) and 
export the model as Lion Statue.stl for print.

Chapter 8
[ 259 ]
Summary
When 3D modeling is focused on the render for a video or image, "if it looks good" 
that's all the criteria the modelers need. However, 3D printing needs to have its 
geometry well defined, or it can't bring something from the virtual to the real world.
Fixing bad geometry may not be the most entertaining part of 3D modeling for 
everyone. But being able to identify the unnecessary edges or vertices, create faces 
to patch holes, and rotate edges when they're in the way, and build a watertight, 
manifold model are valuable skills. And if you think about it like a puzzle to solve, it 
can be quite satisfying. Being able to take a model that wasn't made for 3D printing 
and fixing it, means that entire libraries of ready-made models open up online, so 
you don't have to make everything you want to print from scratch.
There are tools such as netfabb (http://netfabb.com) and meshlab  
(http://meshlab.sourceforge.net/) that can do a lot of these sorts of things  
semi-automatically. They're not complete solutions for every problem, but often can 
reduce the amount of work necessary to do mesh correction. But even with these tools 
models that look good may not always be printing without a little tweaking by hand.
The next chapter will focus less on modeling or model manipulation. Instead, the 
focus will be on learning how the slicer can be manipulated to change the way a 
model prints, sort of 3D printing post-processing.


Stretchy Bracelet
There is more that can be done to make cool 3D prints than just modeling. Settings on 
the slicer can create post-processing effects that can alter the final version of a print.
The modeling in this project will be simple and should be nothing new at this point. 
Instead, the focus will be on the printing process. A bracelet that takes advantage of 
plastic's natural elasticity is a perfect example for this project.
Modeling the bracelet 
It should only take a few minutes to model the bracelet, but don't worry about 
making it hollow. That will be accomplished with the post-processing. Instead, just 
make sure the top and bottom are flat for this to work. Perform the following steps 
for modeling the bracelet:
1.	 As usual begin the new project by clearing the scene and saving it in a new 
directory under MakerbotBlueprints.

Stretchy Bracelet
[ 262 ]
2.	 Name the new directory Ch 9 Stretchy Bracelet.
3.	 Save the project as StretchyBracelet.blend:
4.	 Add (Shift + A) a Cylinder to the scene.
5.	 Change the options of the cylinder to have 24 Vertices, Depth of 6 to 12, and 
Radius about as big as the widest point of the hand of the person who will be 
wearing this, usually around the thumb knuckle. This will be about 25 for a 
child, 35 for an adult female, and 45 to 60 for an adult male.
6.	 Name the cylinder BraceletShape.
7.	 Enter the Edit Mode (Tab).
8.	 Switch to Face select (Ctrl + Tab).

Chapter 9
[ 263 ]
9.	 (De)select (A) all faces.
10.	 Select (right-click) on just one of the faces around the edge.
11.	 Extrude (E) the face by 4 units.
12.	 Scale (S) in all directions but the z axis (Shift + Z) by 2 units.

Stretchy Bracelet
[ 264 ]
13.	 Then skip one face around the BraceletShape cylinder and select (right-click) 
the next one.
14.	 Again Extrude (E) that face by 4 units, and then Scale (S) in all directions,  
but the z axis (Shift + Z) by 2 units.
15.	 Continue around the BraceletShape cylinder by selecting (right-click) every 
other face and extruding (E) by 4 units, scaling (S) in all directions but the z 
axis (Shift + Z) by 2 units.

Chapter 9
[ 265 ]
It is important that the top and bottom are perfectly flat. That is why the 
scale operations were constrained to all but the z axis by pressing Shift 
+ Z. If any scale operation were not constrained by Shift + Z don't panic. 
Simply flatten the top and the bottom as was shown in Chapter 2, Mini 
Mug. In Wireframe view (Z), Border Select (B) the points on top, Scale (S) 
them along the z axis (Z) by 0 units, then repeat on the bottom. The side 
effect of this method is that the height of the bracelet will not be exactly 
what it was set to at the start, but for something like a bracelet precision is 
not necessarily important.
Refining the shape
This is technically all that is necessary for this exercise, the outside edge as defined will 
make a shape that will flex and spring. But it's not as appealing a shape as it could be. 
With a few simple steps as follows, this boring bracelet can be prettied up somewhat:
1.	 Return to Vertex, select (Ctrl + Tab).
2.	 Set Wireframe view (Z) and jump to the Front (Numpad 1), Side (Numpad 3), 
and the Orthographic (Numpad 5) view.

Stretchy Bracelet
[ 266 ]
3.	 Border Select (B) all the points that make up the top of the  
BraceletShape cylinder.
4.	 Rotate (R) the selection around the z axis (Z) by about 5 degrees.
5.	 Loop cut (Ctrl + R) around the middle of the BraceletShape cylinder.

Chapter 9
[ 267 ]
6.	 Scale (S) the loop cut so that the bracelet bulges just a little.
7.	 Exit the Edit Mode (Tab).
8.	 Export the BraceletShape cylinder to a Stl file (File | Export | Stl (.stl)).  
Save the Stl file as Bracelet.stl.
There, that is a much more appealing shape. Just because this project is academic 
doesn't mean it has to be boring. Plus this illustrates the fact that as long as the top 
and bottom are flat, the shape in-between can have all sorts of interesting geometry 
and this will still work.
Printing the bracelet
With the flat top and bottom, the model may not look much like a bracelet as-is. If 
printed with normal settings it certainly wouldn't be. However by manipulating the 
settings on the slicer, the program that prepares models for 3D print, this model can 
easily be made into a bracelet. How the settings are edited depends on the slicer. 
There are many slicer programs, just as there are many 3D printers. Makerbot has 
two official slicers that it recommends, ReplicatorG and Makerware. To keep the 
conversation simple only these two will be discussed, but in general the goal is to 
locate the fill layers and set them to 0 units.

Stretchy Bracelet
[ 268 ]
Editing the settings in ReplicatorG
The following steps help to edit the settings in ReplicatorG:
1.	 In ReplicatorG, first navigate to File | Open and locate Bracelet.stl.
2.	 In the menu, navigate to GCode | Edit Slicing Profiles....

Chapter 9
[ 269 ]
3.	 From the Edit Profiles menu, choose whatever default profile is normally 
used and press the Duplicate button:
4.	 Name the new profile NoFill.
5.	 In the Skeinforge Settings menu, locate the tab for Fill and click on it.
6.	 Scroll down and find the Solid Surface Thickness (layers) option. Set this 
option to 0.
7.	 If the option for Enable automatic solid surface thickness is present, 
uncheck this option as well.
8.	 From the top menu, navigate to File | Save and Close.
9.	 Press the Done button on the Edit Profiles menu.

Stretchy Bracelet
[ 270 ]
With the new settings profile made, simply prepare the model for printing as usual:
1.	 Press the slice to the GCode button on the top bar.
2.	 Allow ReplicatorG to move the bottom of the model to the build surface by 
answering Yes to the dialog box that pops up, and save the model.
3.	 In the Generate GCode menu, make sure the Slicing Profile field is the new 
NoFill profile just created.
4.	 Turn off Use Raft/Support.
5.	 Then change the Object infill (%) field to 0, and increase the Number of 
shells field to 2 or 3.
6.	 Click on Generate GCode and print the model either by sending it to an SD 
card or printing over USB, as usual.
The result will be the model without a top or bottom suitable for a bracelet.

Chapter 9
[ 271 ]
Editing the settings in MakerWare
MakerWare, MakerBot's own slicing program, has many improvements over 
ReplicatorG in how it slices models and the detail level possible. However, since its 
settings are so well dialed-in for Makerbot 3D printers they aren't as exposed as they 
are in ReplicatorG. But they are there and are editable. Perform the following steps to 
edit the settings in MakerWare:
1.	 In MakerWare, navigate to File | Open and locate Bracelet.stl.
2.	 Answer Yes to the prompt to put the object on the platform.
3.	 Click on the M button at the top middle to prepare this model for printing.
4.	 In the menu that pops up, click on the triangle next to Advanced to open-up 
the advanced options.

Stretchy Bracelet
[ 272 ]
5.	 Then click on the Create Profile... button.
6.	 Choose from a Template, the profile that is normally used and name the new 
profile NoFill.
7.	 Click on Create.

Chapter 9
[ 273 ]
8.	 Click on the Edit Profile button.
9.	 Most Windows users will see a prompt about opening a miracle.json file. 
Click on Select a program from a list of installed programs and then click  
on OK. In the menu that comes up, find and click on Notepad and then OK.
Regardless of your system, JSON files are really just text so any 
text editor will do the job.
10.	 Search for a line with infillDensity.
11.	 Edit the number next to it to 0.
12.	 Search for a line with numberOfShells.
13.	 Edit the number next to it to be 3 or 4.
14.	 Search for a line with roofThickness and below that floorThickness options.
15.	 Edit the values next to them to both be 0.
Save and close the file and return to MakerWare. Then click on the Export! button 
and either save to an SD card or print over USB, as usual. The result will be the 
model without a top or bottom suitable for a bracelet.

Stretchy Bracelet
[ 274 ]
Summary
Just like being able to modify the settings on a 2D printer allows for things like 
double-sided prints or printing multiple pages on the same sheet, manipulating 
slicer settings has advantages as well. In this chapter, a simple model was modified, 
not by modeling but by changing the print settings to turn a modified cylinder into a 
bracelet. Alternatively, turning the top and bottom fill layers off, but turning the infill 
on is an interesting way to make a perfect screen with a controlled mesh.
Some slicers used for other 3D printers don't allow access to settings such as the 
slicers for Makerbot but most RepRap based printers do. In that case, it would 
become necessary to remove the top and bottom faces and modify the bracelet to just 
be a minimally thick wall in Blender. The problem with this is that many slicers, even 
professional level ones, have a bug that shows up with walls that are of the wrong 
thickness. A gap appears in the middle of the wall, where the slicer wants to put a 
shell, but it can't, and just gives up on the area instead of filling it in. Maybe one day 
this problem will be solved, but until then using the method described in this chapter 
eliminates worry about wall thickness, since the thickness is a side effect of the 
process and is therefore perfect every time.

Chapter 9
[ 275 ]
Editing the top or bottom options separately makes printing things such as cups 
from cylinder shapes possible. Another setting that is worth exploring is the multiply 
setting that allows making multiple copies of a thing without increasing the time to 
slice it by much. Becoming familiar with and taking control of other slicer settings 
can also improve the quality of prints dramatically. Exploration is encouraged; 
default is not the only option.
The next and final chapter will be explored using the measuring tools and techniques 
to more accurately produce models that match the needs of the real world.


Measuring – Tips and Tricks
When designing things for 3D printing in the virtual space it is sometimes easy to 
forget the relationship they'll have to the real world when printed. And sometimes it 
is exactly how they'll interact with the real world that is the point of the design, such 
as when printing an end cap for a pipe or printing a replacement to a broken part. So, 
it is often very important that accurate measurements must be made when planning 
and making blueprints.
Part of this blueprint requires a physical object to follow along. Later, when the real 
world part is complete, a download will be provided so the reader can follow along 
as in other chapters.
All of the necessary modeling techniques have been covered in previous chapters. 
This chapter will focus on measuring real life things, and will teach an interesting 
technique for transferring those measurements to the virtual space easily.

Measuring – Tips and Tricks
[ 278 ]
Using a caliper
The most common technique for taking accurate measurements is the use of a tool 
called a caliper, a must have for anyone who models for 3D printing. Calipers 
measure distance with a high degree of precision and can measure in three different 
ways; the outside diameter of an object with the outside jaws, the internal diameter 
with the inside jaws, or the depth with the depth probe at the far end. The easiest 
kind of caliper to use is the digital type.
Simply turn on the digital caliper, tare or zero the reading while closed, then open 
the jaws, put the object to be measured between them, clamp it down, and take the 
reading. It's fast and relatively accurate without much effort. Most models even 
have a port that can transfer the measurements directly to the computer. But digital 
calipers have the disadvantage of being more expensive and relying on batteries 
which when run out eliminate the ability to measure accurately.
If budget is a concern then perhaps a Vernier caliper is preferable. These calipers 
operate purely mechanically, but have a clever trick that allows them to be just as 
accurate if read properly.

Chapter 10
[ 279 ]
Again, open the jaws that take the measurements and tighten it to the object to be 
measured. Then take a close look at the little window.
The leftmost tick is between 4.5 and 4.6, so this object is between 4.5 cm and 4.6 cm 
(or 45 mm/46 mm). Then count the tick marks on the outside until one of them lines 
up perfectly with one of the ticks on the inside. In this case, the fifth tick mark on 
the outside lines up with a tick mark on the inside. This is the hundredth part of the 
measurement so this object measures 4.55 cm or 45.5 mm.
Vernier calipers never need to be calibrated so they're never off because they  
weren't properly zeroed, they don't need batteries so they'll always work and they're 
cheaper. But they do take some additional effort to read properly and lack the "cool" 
factor of a seven segment display.
Keep in mind that if printing in ABS plastic, shrinkage after printing as discovered 
in Chapter 4, SD Card Holder Ring, will have to be taken into account. Also, no matter 
how accurately the measurements are taken, if the blueprints being developed 
involve strange angles or shapes there is a chance for inaccuracy translating that  
to the digital space.
Grid paper method
Fortunately, there is a way that a complex shape can be measured accurately no 
matter how strange the curves or turns. All that is needed is an object to measure,  
an ink pad, and some centimeter graph paper.

Measuring – Tips and Tricks
[ 280 ]
First thing to do is get an object that needs to be modeled for printing. In this 
example, a drawer guide that has an arm broken off will be used. If it were fixed, this 
piece should be identical on both sides. This piece has lots of complex shapes and 
measuring it completely would be a challenge.
A good candidate for the grid paper method is a piece that has at least one flat side, 
or that can easily be made to have a flat side. The back of this piece is not flat at all, 
but the front has only two nubs sticking out that would be easy enough to remove. 
Just note their location before removing them since they'll need to be modeled back 
in. Then use a sharp blade and cut them off.
Then to be sure that the surface is perfectly flat, use some fine grit sandpaper on a 
flat surface to sand down the flat side.

Chapter 10
[ 281 ]
Next, take some grid paper, centimeter if available, and an ink pad. Use the flat side 
of the object like a stamp. Try to line the part up with the grid as much as possible to 
make the later modeling process easier. Stamping on a soft surface like a towel can 
help get better coverage in the stamping process.
Finally, scan the stamped part in or if a scanner isn't available use a digital camera. 
Be sure that the grid is as lined up as possible, or some editing of the image will be 
necessary. It is not possible to edit the grid in Blender, so keep it straight horizontally 
and vertically, and avoid skewing and warping of the image as much as possible.

Measuring – Tips and Tricks
[ 282 ]
Using the grid paper method with Blender
To follow along from this point, download the previous screenshot from  
http://thingiverse.com/thing:90754. Perform the following steps to  
use the grid paper method in Blender:
1.	 Start Blender and as usual clear (Ctrl + A, X) the scene and save it to start a 
project. Give it an appropriate name in an appropriate directory such as Ch10 
Measuring and Drawer Guide.blend.
2.	 Then change the view to Top (Numpad 7), Orthographic (Numpad 5).
3.	 Like in Chapter 3, Face Illusion Vase, in the Properties panel (N) locate the 
Background Images section, click on the checkbox next to it, expand it,  
and click on the Add Image button.
4.	 Click on the Open Image button and navigate to where the scanned image of 
the stamped object is stored. Then open the image to place in the scene.
(The location and name of the scanned image may be different for the reader.)
The first thing to note is that if the previous steps were followed carefully the grid 
paper in the image is a centimeter grid, but that at the default zoom the grid lines 
seen are in millimeters. They are 10 millimeters per centimeter so zoom out until the 
major grid lines start to appear, then zoom out some more so that the millimeter grid 
lines disappear.

Chapter 10
[ 283 ]
Adjust the settings in the Properties panel for the background image until the grid on 
the paper lines up with the centimeter grid in the 3D view. A quick way to determine 
the necessary size is to count the number of grid lines in the scan, multiply by 10, and 
divide by 2 (for the radius, which for some reason the size setting is). In the previous 
example, there are 12 grid lines shown so setting the size to 60 gets the view very 
close to the right size.
Continue to fiddle with the X, Y, and Size values until the grid lines in the image line 
up with the grid lines in the view properly.

Measuring – Tips and Tricks
[ 284 ]
Since in this example the object is to be symmetrical it would probably be a good 
idea to use the Mirror modifier, and to use that properly it would be easier if the 
center line of the object was lined up with the world origin, so the X value will be 
adjusted to make that so. The X grid lines may no longer line up with the image,  
but that's less of a concern.
Now let's model the shape:
1.	 In this example, the best way to start is to add (Shift + A) a Plane, enter  
Edit Mode (Tab), and begin mesh editing.
2.	 Selecting and deleting two vertices, then extruding (E) one end of the line out 
to trace the shape, again similar to the way the face was traced for the face 
illusion vase.

Chapter 10
[ 285 ]
3.	 Add a Mirror modifier and click on the use modifier while in Edit Mode  
(the one that looks like a cube in the edit mode) just like in Chapter 7, Teddy 
Bear Figurine.
Once the Mirror modifier is added it is clear that the mesh is slightly off. The original 
image wasn't centered as well as it could have been. One way to fix this is to simply 
move all the points, until the model sticks out on one side as much as it overlaps on 
the other. The shape will be correct, but in the wrong place slightly relative to the 
source drawing.
Once the points are made they will need to be joined into a face and extruded  
to a shape:
1.	 Then exit Edit Mode (Tab), apply the Mirror modifier, and go back into  
edit mode (Tab).
2.	 Then select all the points (A) and create a new face (F).
3.	 If the shape isn't too complex and it seems to have worked, then nothing 
else is necessary to get a good starting shape. If not, then the Create Face 
function may need some help.

Measuring – Tips and Tricks
[ 286 ]
In this example, there are at least two problem areas. One area is where the face 
didn't fill and the other area where the face seems to have filled twice.
To fix this, whenever it comes up, make faces of smaller groups of points at a time.
1.	 Circle Select (C) smaller groups of adjacent vertices and create faces (F)  
for them.
2.	 Then deselect (A) the points and Circle Select (C) more points, including the 
last two of the previous face, and make a face (F) of them until full coverage 
is achieved. If a couple of points are causing trouble, a common problem 
with the Mirror modifier is duplicating points around the middle.
3.	 Circle Select (C) and Merge (Alt + M) them to clean up the mesh like in 
Chapter 8, Repairing Bad Models.

Chapter 10
[ 287 ]
4.	 Once a solid shape is achieved select all (A) the vertices and Extrude (E)  
9 mm to create a 3D shape.
To finish the example in this chapter, the nubs that were cut off had to be added 
to the virtual model, so the cubes were added, then the Boolean modifier was be 
used to union them into the shape. The top of the cubes lined up with the bottom 
of the guide hole, and stood out about 8 mm from the flat surface. The holes were 
not reproduced in the copy since their presence was likely to reduce plastic usage 
in the injection molding process, not as much a problem for 3D printing with infill. 
Originally, the part was held on with wood staples but if necessary mounting holes 
can be drilled into the printed part to use screws.

Measuring – Tips and Tricks
[ 288 ]
Since the scale of the object was determined by lining up the real life grid, the printed 
part should be approximately the same as the original piece, so all that is left is to 
navigate to File | Export | Stl (.stl), export the object and print it out and compare  
it with the original.
The original object is still a little messy after being used as a stamp, but the new one 
will take its place nicely.
Full disclosure, this part is actually too big based on the provided 
grid. Centimeter graph paper was not available, so quarter inch graph 
paper was used instead. In order to make it work after modeling, the 
part simply needs to be scaled (S) down in the x and y axis (Shift + Z) 
by 0.63 units to fit the physical part. The shape is still perfect and the 
technique is sound, just the scale is wrong but fixable.

Chapter 10
[ 289 ]
Summary
This final blueprint explored techniques for modeling 3D objects to fit when 3D 
printed. Measuring tools such as calipers are valuable aids to any 3D modeler, and 
using a scanner and ink pad is a clever technique to capture complex objects' shape, 
provided they have a flat side that can be used like a stamp. The grid paper method 
is a useful method that works in a surprising number of cases.
Perhaps, one day 3D scanners will be as ubiquitous as their 2D counterparts, but 
until that day finding ways to transfer real space into the digital space is a problem 
that will challenge 3D designers. Being creative about making accurate measurement 
will continue to be a rewarding challenge.
With this last technique, there should be nothing we need for designing objects for 
3D printing. Congratulate yourself, you are now a 3D designer. Now the challenges 
are yours. Find objects that you want to make and model them, if you haven't 
already started. Find a need and fill it with a plastic object. Join an online community 
of designers such as Thingiverse and share your designs with others. Learn from 
their projects and models, continue to grow, and happy modeling!


Index
Symbols
3D modeling
tools  21
3D models  235, 236
3D printing  6, 7
3D scanned file
downloading  236
3D View panel  14
A
Add Cylinder option  24
armature, Teddy Bear Figurine
making  206-209
weights, fixing  221-223
arm, modular robot toy
creating  123-125
At Last option  253
Autodesk 123D
URL  10
B
bad geometry
cleaning up  251, 252
extra edge, deleting  252
final cleanup  256
hidden points, finding  254
lines, uncrossing  254, 255
problem, merging  253
base
making flat  242-246
BezierCircle  158
Blender
3D View panel  13, 14
about  12, 13
customizing  17
downloading  11
first shape, creating  23, 25
general tips  18
grid paper method, using  282-284
Info panel  15
installing  11, 12
new file, creating  22, 23
Outliner panel  15
Properties panel  15
setting up, for Mac OSX  17
Timeline panel  16
URL  11
blueprints  19
body, modular robot toy  116-119
Border Select (B)  105
border select operation
steps  38
bottom
flattening  52, 53
boundaries, D6 Spinner
defining  144, 145
BoxBottom  177, 180
BoxBottomPegHolder  180
BoxBottomRackGuide  180
BoxInterior  170
bracelet
modeling  261-265
printing  267
BraceletShape cylinder  264
bridges
building  9

[ 292 ]
C
caliper
using  278, 279
case, D6 Spinner
bottom  177-182
lid  171-176
connector, modular robot toy
creating  100-106
splitting  106-108
cube
creating  28, 29
D
D6 Spinner
about  141, 142
assembling  184, 185
Blender, extending with gears  146-149
boundaries, defining  144, 145
building  146
case, modeling  171-182
gear, adding  150, 151
numbers, adding  154-160
peg, spinning  152-154
printing  184, 185
print, preparing for  182, 183
project, starting  143
rack, building  161-164
spring, docking  168-170
spring, extracting  142
spring, modeling  143, 144
trigger, adding  164-168
digital caliper  80, 81
downloading
Blender  11
Download This Thing! button  236
dual extruders
designing for  8
Dynamic Topology  210-219
E
Extrude (E)  127, 191, 192, 201
extrude operation  
about  31
steps  40, 41
F
face illusion vase
about  57
pot, creating from line  66-69
printing  77
silhouette, tracing  61-66
solid base, making  73-76
solidify, using to make walls  69-73
fat
more fat, trimming  239-241
trimming  236-239
FinalFigure  231
finger
modeling  82-84
G
gears, D6 Spinner
adding  150, 151
Blender, extending with  146-149
grab operation
steps  29, 42
grid paper method
about  279-281
shape, modeling  284
smaller groups, faces creating  286, 287
using, with Blender  282-284
H
handle
adjusting  28
shaping  30-34
head, modular robot toy
forming  128-133
I
Info panel  15
installing
Blender  11, 12
L
leg, modular robot toy
shaping  125-128

[ 293 ]
lion
back  246-250
fat, burning  236-238
fat, trimming  239-241
scan, orienting  239
M
Makerbot 3D  5
MakerbotBlueprints directory  58
MakerWare
settings, editing  271, 273
Merge tool  253
Mirror modifier  192
modeling tool
selecting  10, 11
model, Teddy Bear Figurine
simplifying  220, 221
modular robot toy
about  99, 100
assembling  138
connector, creating  100-106
connector, splitting  106-108
constructing  114
hole, putting in pocket  112-114
printable peg, building  110-112
printing  138
printing parts, assembling  133-137
modular robot toy, constructing
about  114-116
arm, creating  123-125
body, engineering  116-119
head, forming  128-133
leg, shaping  125-128
torso, creating  121, 122
mug
about  21
body, shaping  38-48
border select operation  38
creating  23-25
extrude operation  40
grab operation  29, 42, 43
rough edges, smoothing  36
save point, creating  25, 26
view, adjusting  26, 27
Mug Final  50
Multiresolution  36, 199-201
O
OpenSCAD
URL  10
Outliner panel  15
overhangs
branching out with  9
P
PegBody  104
peg, D6 Spinner
spinning  152-154
Pose Position  207
pot
creating, from line  66-69
print
exporting for  54
printable peg, modular robot toy
building  110-112
PrintHead, modular robot toy  134-136
printing
supportless printing, building for  7, 8
profile
getting  58- 61
Properties panel  15
Q
Quad View (Ctrl + Alt + Q)  232
R
rack, D6 Spinner
building  161-164
RackFingerHole  168
Recalculate button  256
ReplicatorG
settings, editing  268-270
ring
placing, on floor  84
SD holder, adding  93-96
test ring, making  85-87
test ring, resizing  87, 88
rotate operation
steps  29
rough edges
smoothing  36

[ 294 ]
S
Save As Blender File button  23
save point
creating  25, 26
scan
orienting  239
SculptDraw  216
Sculptris
URL  10
SD card holder
about  79
adding  89-92
SD holder
adding, to ring  93-96
Separate command  238
settings
in MakerWare, editing  271-273
in ReplicatorG, editing  268-270
shape
joining  49-52
modifying  37, 38
refining  265-267
silhouette
tracing  61-66
Skin Resize (Ctrl + A)  198
skin, Teddy Bear Figurine
putting on bones  193-198
SolidWorks
URL  10
Spinner  163
SpinnerGear  150, 151
spring, D6 Spinner
docking  168-171
extracting  142
modeling  143, 144
Standard Tessellation Language (STL)  54
Subdivide button  44
supportless printing
building  7
designing  8
T
Teddy Bear Figurine
about  187
armature, making  206-209
armature weights, fixing  221-224
details, drawing  210-219
inspecting, before print  231, 232
model, simplifying  220, 221
posing  225-231
skin, putting on bones  193-198
skin, smoothing  199-201
stack figure, creating  192
stick figure, creating  188-193
third dimension, adjusting for  202-205
timeline panel  16
Top Ortho view  203
torso, modular robot toy
creating  121, 122
trigger, D6 Spinner
adding  164-168
V
view
adjusting  26, 27
commands, using  27
panning  26
rotating  26
zooming  26
W
Weight Paint mode  209
Wings3D
URL  10
Z
Zbrush
URL  10

Thank you for buying  
3D Printing Blueprints
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Blender 2.6 Cycles: Materials and 
Textures Cookbook
ISBN:  978-1-78216-130-1            Paperback: 280 pages
Over 40 recipes to help you create stunning materials 
and textures using the Cycles rendering engine  
with Blender
1.	
Create naturalistic materials and textures - such 
as rock, snow, ice and fire - using Cycles
2.	
Learn Cycle's node-based material systems
3.	
Get to grips with the powerful Cycles  
rendering engine
Blender 3D Basics
ISBN: 978-1-84951-690-7            Paperback: 468 pages
The complete novice's guide to 3D modeling  
and animation
1.	
The best starter guide for complete newcomers 
to 3D modeling and animation
2.	
Easier learning curve than any other book  
on Blender
3.	
You will learn all the important foundation 
skills ready to apply to any 3D software
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Blender Game Engine: Beginner's 
Guide
ISBN: 978-1-84951-702-7             Paperback: 206 pages
The non programmer's guide to creating 3D  
video games
1.	
Use Blender to create a complete 3D  
video game
2.	
Ideal entry level to game development without 
the need for coding
3.	
No programming or scripting required
 
jMonkeyEngine 3.0 Beginner's 
Guide
ISBN: 978-1-84951-646-4            Paperback: 352 pages
Develop professional 3D games for desktop, web, 
and mobile, all in the familiar Java programming 
language
1.	
Create 3D games that run on Android devices, 
Windows, Mac OS, Linux desktop PCs and in 
web browsers – for commercial, hobbyists, or 
educational purposes
2.	
Follow end-to-end examples that teach essential 
concepts and processes of game development, 
from the basic layout of a scene to interactive 
game characters
3.	
Make your artwork come alive and publish 
your game to multiple platforms, all from one 
unified development environment
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

