
3D Printing Designs: Design an 
SD Card Holder
Learn how to design 3D-printed objects that work in the 
real world
Joe Larson
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

3D Printing Designs: Design an SD Card Holder
Copyright © 2016 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: April 2016
Production reference: 1260416
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78588-573-0
www.packtpub.com

Credits
Author
Joe Larson
Reviewer
Marcus Ritland
Commissioning Editor
Edward Gordon
Acquisition Editor
Vinay Argekar
Content Development Editor
Shweta Pant
Technical Editor
Vishal Mewada
Copy Editor
Madhusudan Uchil
Project Coordinator
Kinjal Bari
Proofreader
Safis Editing
Indexer
Priya Sane
Graphics
Kirk D'Penha
Production Coordinator
Shantanu N. Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu N. Zagade

About the Author
Joe Larson is one part artist, one part mathematician, one part teacher, and one 
part technologist. It all started in his youth on a Commodore 64 doing BASIC 
programming and low resolution digital art. As technology progressed, so did Joe's 
dabbling, eventually taking him to 3D modeling while in high school and college, 
and he momentarily pursued a degree in Computer Animation. He abandoned 
the track for the much more sensible goal of becoming a math teacher, which he 
accomplished when he taught 7th grade math in Colorado. He now works as an 
application programmer.
When Joe first heard about 3D printing, it took root in his mind and he went back 
to dust off his 3D modeling skills. In 2012, he won a Makerbot Replicator 3D printer 
in the Tinkercad/Makerbot Chess challenge with a chess set that assembles into a 
robot. Since then, his designs on Thingiverse have been featured on Thingiverse, 
Gizmodo, Shapeways, Makezine, and other places. He currently maintains the blog 
http://joesmakerbot.blogspot.in/, documenting his adventures.

About the Reviewer
Marcus Ritland is a designer and 3D printing consultant at his small business, 
Denali 3D Design. Since 2008, he has provided 3D modeling and 3D printing 
services, as well as moderating the SketchUcation 3D printing forum.
He has volunteered at a local makerspace, teaching SketchUp classes and leading 3D 
printing meetups. As an author of 3D Printing with SketchUp, he is currently on a 
quest to eliminate design-for-3D printing illiteracy.

www.PacktPub.com
eBooks, discount offers, and more
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
https://www2.packtpub.com/books/subscription/packtlib
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via a web browser

[ i ]
Table of Contents
Preface	
v
Chapter 1: 3D Printing Basics	
1
What is 3D printing?	
2
What defines 3D printing?	
2
What to design for?	
3
How do FFF printers work?	
3
The anatomy of a print	
4
FFF design considerations	
5
Overhangs and supports	
6
Supportless 3D printing	
6
Y – gentle overhangs	
7
H – bridging	
8
T – orientation	
9
Wall thickness	
10
Holes in models	
10
Summary	
11
Chapter 2: Beginning Blender	
13
Why Blender?	
14
The price is right	
14
Blender is comprehensive	
14
It's getting better all the time	
14
But Blender isn't perfect	
14
Downloading and installing Blender	
15
The default view	
16
The 3D View	
17
The 3D cursor	
18

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
The best settings	
19
A scroll-wheel mouse and number pad	
20
A laptop with a touch pad and no number pad	
22
Object creation	
23
Navigating the view	
24
Jumping to rotation	
26
Panning the view	
26
Zooming the view	
27
Orthographic versus perspective view	
27
Wireframe and solid view	
28
Transforming the object	
29
Controlling transformations	
30
Controlling the view	
31
Axis locking	
32
Precise transformation	
34
Origin manipulation	
35
Duplicating objects	
36
Object selection	
37
Shift select	
37
Border select	
38
Circle select	
39
The Edit mode	
40
Parts of objects	
41
Incremental saving	
42
Blender to real life	
42
Exporting an STL	
43
Summary	
44
Chapter 3: Measuring Basics	
45
Measuring with a ruler	
46
Measuring with calipers	
46
Manual or Vernier calipers	
47
Digital calipers	
48
Grid paper trace method	
49
Suitable objects	
49
Object preparation	
50
Importing the image into Blender	
52
Increasing reference pictures	
55
3D scanning	
56
Summary	
56

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Chapter 4: An SD Card Holder Ring	
57
Taking measurements	
58
Modeling the ring	
60
Modeling the finger	
60
Putting the ring on the floor	
63
Finishing the ring	
64
Making a test print	
67
Resizing the test ring	
68
Adding an SD card holder	
70
Organizing by layers	
70
Creating a virtual SD card	
71
Putting it all together	
75
Extra credit	
81
Summary	
82
Index	
83


[ v ]
Preface
3D printing makes virtual things real, and sometimes, those things need to match 
back up to an object in the real world. So, it is often very important that accurate 
measurements be made when planning and then be applied to the modeling of a 3D 
object. While most people don't consider Blender up to the task, it is actually capable 
of modeling objects with CAD-like precision. This book will get you up to speed on 
using Blender, then give you a project to follow along with in order to teach you the 
techniques to make objects that satisfy a measured precision.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, 3D Printing Basics, will help you understand 3D printing basics, types of 
3D printing, and how FFF printers work.
Chapter 2, Beginning Blender, will introduce Blender, how to set it up, and some basic 
and mid-level functionality. Knowing the content of this chapter will get you over 
Blender's famous learning curve and provide the basic knowledge and reference 
necessary for following along with future projects.
Chapter 3, Measuring Basics, mentions how it is very important that accurate 
measurements must be made when planning and applied to the modeling of a 3D 
object. In this chapter, we deal with different techniques of taking measurements: 
measuring with a ruler or calipers, the grid paper trace method, and 3D scanning.
Chapter 4, An SD Card Holder Ring, walks you through the process of making a cool 
3D printed project—an SD card holder.

Preface
[ vi ]
What you need for this book
A computer with at least a 2-GHz CPU, 2 GB of RAM, and, of course, Blender.
Who this book is for
This book is for anyone with an interest in home 3D printing and a desire to learn the 
basics of design and the tools to make their ideas a reality.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different 
kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of 
their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
Now, find Ch10 Scanned Image.jpg, and right-click to save the image.
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: Start 
Blender and, as usual.
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it 
helps us develop titles that you will really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail feedback@packtpub.com, and mention 
the book's title in the subject of your message.

Preface
[ vii ]
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/
diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the 
changes in the output. You can download this file from http://www.packtpub.
com/sites/default/files/downloads/3DPrintingDesignsDesignanSDCardHold
er_ColorImages.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form 
link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website or 
added to any list of existing errata under the Errata section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to https://www.packtpub.com/books/
content/support and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required 
information will appear under the Errata section.
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all 
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.

Preface
[ viii ]
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at 
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

[ 1 ]
3D Printing Basics
As cool as 3D printing is, there is a lot of hype around it, which sometimes causes 
confusion. Before starting to design for 3D printing, it's best to know a little bit about 
3D printing technologies.
3D printing is a limitless technology in the sense that there is no end to the things it 
can make. Still, that doesn't mean that it can make anything without limitations. 3D 
printing can make things that no other manufacturing method can, but it has rules 
that need to be followed to ensure success. There are different types of 3D printing 
as well, and each type comes with its benefits and drawbacks:

3D Printing Basics
[ 2 ]
In this chapter, we'll discuss:
•	
What is 3D printing?
•	
What types of 3D printing are there?
•	
How do FFF printers work?
•	
The anatomy of an FFF print.
•	
Supportless 3D printing and YHT.
•	
Wall thickness and tolerances.
What is 3D printing?
3D printing is cool. It seems as if not a day passes without another mention of 
3D printing online in the news and media. Everyone is getting excited about 3D 
printing. But when you look deeper, it seems as if everything is being 3D printed, 
and anything could be. Does 3D printing something make it better? What exactly is 
3D printing?
In many ways, 3D printers are just tools, the same as any that you'd find in a wood 
shop or garage. These tools make cool things, but not on their own, and just because 
something is made with, say, an electric drill press, that doesn't automatically make 
it better than something that isn't. It's the things that people, like you, are doing with 
these tools that make them cool.
I'm not saying that 3D printing isn't cool by itself. 3D printing lets you create things, 
test them, change their design, and try something new quickly until you get it right. 
It makes things of incredible complexity and, because it's additive manufacturing, 
generates comparatively little waste. The availability of cheaper and faster 3D 
printers means that there's a chance that there's a 3D printer near you.
What defines 3D printing?
There are many different types of 3D printers, but what makes them all similar is 
that they build solid shapes from layers of materials, starting with an empty build 
area and filling it with the print. This is called additive manufacturing, and it 
produces less waste than other techniques, such as starting with a base material 
that is cut away to make the thing.

Chapter 1
[ 3 ]
3D printers also benefit from being computer-controlled machines, also known as 
computerized numerical control (CNC) machines, meaning they do what they do 
with minimal human interaction after the design work is done. They can make many 
identical copies of a thing one right after the other, and the design can be shared 
online so that others can make their own copies.
While all 3D printing shares come common features, there are several distinct types 
of 3D printing that vary in how they produce the print. Fused filament fabrication 
(FFF), powder bed, or light polymerization, for example, all accomplish 3D printing 
in very different ways, and each with their own strengths and weaknesses. What 
works in powder bed 3D printing might not work with FFF 3D printing, and the part 
you get from light polymerization might not be suitable for the same usage as those 
made with the other techniques.
What to design for?
It is the best practice to always design towards the strengths and weaknesses of the 
medium you'll be using. The projects in this series of books will focus on designing 
for FFF 3D printers, because they're inexpensive and more readily available than 
the others, and the parts made with FFF 3D printers are suitable for a wide variety 
of functional uses. Also, many of the techniques for FFF design transfer to the other 
types of 3D printing. But because FFF 3D printers have limitations, there will be 
some things you need to know first.
How do FFF printers work?
There tends to be a lot of variation within the family of FFF 3D printers. Some 
have their mechanisms exposed to the environment so that they're easy to repair, 
while some are protected with fancy covers so that they look good. Some have one 
extruder, while some have two or more. Some have fancy interface screens, and 
some require you to use a computer to access even the most basic functions. Yet, 
for all their variations, there are many similarities that all FFF printers share which 
define their type. Being familiar with how FFF 3D printers work will help you guide 
yourself while designing for them.

3D Printing Basics
[ 4 ]
For FFF 3D printers, a computer takes a 3D model and translates it into commands 
that the printer can follow. The printer then takes a roll of plastic filament on a spool 
and uses a feeder mechanism to feed it into the hot end, where the plastic filament 
is melted and squirted out at a controlled rate onto the print bed, where the print 
is built up. The extruder head and print bed are moved relative to each other in 3 
dimensions, using some sort of movement system in order to create the 3D model:
Drawing a print layer by layer like this takes, as might be expected, a little bit of 
time. The larger the object, the longer a print will take. FFF 3D printing isn't a fast 
process. But once the process is done, a new thing will have been created.
The anatomy of a print
Now that the mechanics of FFF 3D printing are clear, it's time to take a look at how 
a print is built. If an FFF print is stopped partway through, or observed during 
printing, the following can be seen:

Chapter 1
[ 5 ]
The following are the different parts shown in the preceding image:
•	
Layers: FFF prints in layers, with each layer sitting on the one below it. Prints 
can be made with thicker layers so that they print faster or thinner layers so 
that they look better.
•	
Outlines: When starting a layer, the outline of that layer will usually be 
printed first. FFF prints often have two or more outlines so that the outside 
of the print is strong.
•	
Infill: once the outline is done, the rest of the layer is filled in. If an area of 
the print will not be seen from the outside when the print is done, a loose 
infill is used to save material and give layers above something to sit on. 
Top layers are filled in completely. Most FFF prints are largely hollow.
FFF design considerations
The basic limitations of FFF printers stem from the fact that most FFF 3D printers 
are developed by people who have very little accountability. To the people creating 
and manufacturing these printers, if the printer can print a thing most of the time, 
then that's probably good enough. In this way, FFF printers are more like garage 
tools than desktop machines. For those unfamiliar with FFF printers, there are 
some drawbacks that need to be taken into account.

3D Printing Basics
[ 6 ]
Overhangs and supports
FFF 3D printers have to worry about overhang. Overhang is when a part of the 
design, when it prints, will not have anything between it and the build platform. To 
compensate for this, the 3D printer can build a lattice of support material up to the 
overhanging part. After the print, the support material will have to be removed. But 
since for most FFF 3D printers the support material is made of the same material as 
the object, it can rarely be removed without a trace that is sometimes difficult to clean 
up completely and can leave a mess on more complex prints:
Because of the troubles with supports, it's a good idea to design for 
supportless 3D printing.
Supportless 3D printing
Think about building a snowman or sand castle. There's a lot that can be done with 
the medium of sand or snow, but try to get too fancy with the design and it will fall 
apart. As long as every part is sitting on top of something, chances are it will hold 
together. You could even slope gently outwards, as long as you don't push it too far.

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
It's the same with 3D prints. Because it prints in layers, each layer needs to have 
something to lay down on. If a design is made so that a part has nothing underneath 
it and is dangling in the air, then the printer will still extrude some plastic to try 
to print the part, but with nothing to print on, the plastic will just drool from the 
extruder until it gets wiped off on some other part, making an ugly mess and 
ruining the print.
As long as you put some thought into it, you can make designs that will succeed in 
most cases. There are a few rules that can help, and these rules can be illustrated with 
the letters Y, H, and T.
Y – gentle overhangs
Think about 3D printing a capital letter Y, standing up on the build platform—
something like this:
As the print gets to the part where the arms of the Y branch out, the change is 
gradual. It is possible to have the current layer slightly larger than the previous one, 
provided the overhang is gentle. Generally, a 45-degree overhang is safe. Hence, 
a shape like the letter Y will successfully print standing up.

3D Printing Basics
[ 8 ]
However, if the overhang is too great or too abrupt, the new layer will droop, 
causing a print to fail. Some 3D printer owners pride themselves in pushing their 
overhang and have seen success with angles as steep as 80 degrees, but to be safe, 
keep your angles no more than 45 degrees.
H – bridging
If a part of the print has nothing above it but has something supporting it on 
either side, like a capital letter H standing up, then it may be able to bridge the 
gap when printing:
Use caution when bridging. The printer makes no special effort when making 
bridges; they are drawn like any other layer: outline first, then infill. As long as the 
outline has something to attach to on both sides, it should be fine. But if that outline 
is too complex or contains parts that will print in midair, it may not succeed. Being 
aware of bridges in the design and keeping them simple is the key to successful 
bridging. Even with a simple bridge, some 3D printers need a little bit more 
calibration to print it well.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Hence, a shape like the capital letter H will successfully print most of the time 
because of bridging.
T – orientation
If you were to try to print a capital letter T standing up on the build platform, 
you would surely run into problems:
The top arms have far too much overhang to print successfully. Of course, the 
solution to this is simple: when designing, flip the T over or lay it down. In fact, 
every letter of the alphabet will print successfully if laid on its back, but the letter T 
illustrates this best. Sometimes, when designing a part for 3D printing, it's good to 
turn it around and orient it so that it prints well. Not every print needs to be printed 
in the same way it's going to be used.

3D Printing Basics
[ 10 ]
Wall thickness
There is a minimum size of things that a 3D printer can print. This size is determined 
by the size of the hole in the nozzle, called the nozzle diameter. The most common 
nozzle diameter is 0.4 mm; however, most printers will not print a wall with a single 
extrusion thickness. They require that a wall be at least as thick as two nozzle widths, 
which in most cases means walls need to be at least 0.8 mm. However, because of 
the way slicers calculate outlines, 0.8 mm isn't just a minimum wall thickness—it's 
a target. For instance, if the wall is 1 mm thick, it won't be able to fill in the gap 
between the outlines, and there will be an air pocket. And while 0.4 mm is a very 
common nozzle diameter, it is not the only nozzle diameter, so a 0.8 mm wall may 
still be too thin for some 3D printers.
For thickness, it's best to err on the side of caution. A 2 mm wall is thick enough that 
slicers can use one or two outlines without conflict and still have room for a little 
infill, no matter the nozzle diameter. This will make solid prints that will succeed in 
almost all cases, and 2 mm is still fairly thin, allowing for considerable detail. Unless 
you are designing for a specific printer or planning to share your model with others, 
always make your walls a minimum of 2 mm thick to be safe.
Holes in models
Models for 3D printing must be closed, that is to say, they must have no holes in 
them. In a classic cartoon, there was a scene where bubbles were blown, but they 
were not bubble shaped. They were square, squiggly, and pink-elephant shaped. 
But no matter their shape, they were still bubbles. If a hole developed in them, 
they popped. In the same way, models for 3D printing cannot have holes:

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
In mathematical terms, holes in models are included in a family of errors called 
non-manifold. Models for 3D printing must be manifold or else the slicer will have 
trouble telling what is supposed to be the inside and outside of the model.
In the same vein, a wall by itself, without an inside or outside, isn't printable because 
a 2D wall has no thickness and doesn't describe a shape that can exist in real life. 3D 
prints must be part of a three-dimensional shape with a thickness, as described in the 
previous section.
Summary
3D printing is cool and allows the creation of fantastic and detailed objects without 
needing much interaction with people after the design is done. But designing for 3D 
printing is a lot like designing for any other type of manufacturing. It helps to know 
a bit about the process involved and design with that process in mind.
Fused filament fabrication 3D printing, or FFF for short, is one of the oldest, most 
mature, and cheapest forms of 3D printing, so this series will focus on designing for 
it. It involves melting a plastic filament and drawing the object layer by layer, with 
each layer sitting on top of the one below it.
Designing for the most effective FFF printing means thinking about overhangs and 
supports and about the parts of the prints that don't have anything underneath them 
when they print. To avoid needing supports when printing, it can help to remember 
the letters Y, H, and T when designing, in order to remember to consider gradual 
overhangs, bridging, and orientation. In addition, it's important to remember that 
details should be, generally, about 2 mm thick.
Now that the mechanics of 3D printing and how they affect design have been 
covered, the next chapter will deal with the specific software that will be used 
in this series.


[ 13 ]
Beginning Blender
3D printers need 3D models to print. Those models don't just come out of nowhere. 
You will need imagination, a little time, and software to create 3D models for the 
things you want to print. Never have there been more software options for creating 
3D models—professional and free options. In this series, the software of choice is 
called Blender.
This chapter will introduce Blender, how to set it up, and some basic and 
mid-level functionality. Knowing the content of this chapter will get you over 
Blender's infamous learning curve and provide the basic knowledge and reference 
material necessary to follow along with future projects. We'll cover these topics:
•	
Why Blender?
•	
Downloading and installing Blender
•	
The default view
•	
The best settings
•	
Object creation
•	
Navigating the view
•	
Transforming
•	
Controlling transformations
•	
Selecting
•	
The edit mode
•	
Blender to real life
•	
Exporting an STL

Beginning Blender
[ 14 ]
Why Blender?
With so many options for 3D modeling software, why would Blender, a software 
designed to make 3D animations, be the most popular choice?
The price is right
First things first: you don't have to pay for Blender. It is offered free of charge. 
If it works for you, you always have the option to donate, but Blender doesn't 
do anything to force this point. It is free now and forever.
Blender is comprehensive
While it's true that Blender is designed for animation because it covers everything 
from a blank canvas to a finished animation, it contains the ability to model objects, 
and it's one of the most robust suites of modeling tools anywhere. Learning Blender 
means that you may never need to learn another 3D modelling software.
It's getting better all the time
Blender is in constant development. If it doesn't have a feature you need, chances 
are that it may one day. Blender's developers are constantly responding to 
their audience.
But Blender isn't perfect
Despite Blender's advantages, it has a well-earned reputation for having a 
difficult-to-overcome learning curve. It's had a long and organic development 
cycle, which left it with a default user interface that isn't intuitive compared 
to most other software.
But Blender is also very configurable and, with a few simple settings, it can be made 
much easier for the beginner to use. The rest of this chapter will help get you past 
Blender's short comings so that you can start developing awesome 3D models.

Chapter 2
[ 15 ]
Downloading and installing Blender
The first thing that needs to be done is downloading and installing Bender. 
Follow these steps:
1.	 On your PC or Mac, open a your web browser and go to 
http://www.blender.org.
2.	 Locate the Blender download button on the main page for the latest version 
of Blender and click on it:
3.	 Scroll down and find Download under Blender and click on it. If you're on 
Windows and unsure, just choose the MSI package option.
4.	 When the installer finishes downloading, run it.
5.	 Follow the prompts to install Blender.
6.	 When the installer is finished, run Blender. Click anywhere to close the 
splash screen.
Blender is now installed and ready to use.

Beginning Blender
[ 16 ]
The default view
Blender's interface is made up of many smaller windows called panels. There are 
many different panels available in Blender. Like most things in Blender, the panels 
are completely configurable. Panels can be added or removed as needed, and 
panel layouts can be saved and switched among easily. For simplicity, the default 
view—the way Blender is presented the first time it loads up—will be used 
throughout this series. It provides most of the necessary functionality:
For the most part, the screens shown in this book series will look 
similar to the default Blender screen. The major change will be to 
the background color of the 3D View, a choice made to make the 
illustrations more compatible with printing.
Here's an explanations of the different panels in the default view:
•	
The Info panel: Located across the top of the window, the Info panel has 
many of the menu options in most programs, such as File, Window, and 
Help. It also has Layout settings, Scene settings, and Renderer options, but 
we won't be using them much. Finally, there are specific details about the 
version of Blender, the current scene, and selected objects. If the Info panel 
is cut off, bringing the mouse pointer over to the panel and using the scroll 
wheel will bring the information into view.

Chapter 2
[ 17 ]
•	
The Outliner: Located in the upper-right section of the window, the Outliner 
contains the list of all objects.
•	
The Properties panel: Located in the lower-right section of the window, 
the Properties panel is broken into many tabs related to the currently selected 
object. Which tabs and properties are available will change depending on 
what is selected. If the tabs are cut off, bringing the mouse pointer over them 
and using the scroll wheel will bring them back into view.
•	
The Timeline: This panel is largely unnecessary for the purposes of this book 
series, so it can be removed or ignored.
•	
The 3D View: Taking up most of the screen, the 3D View is where most 
things will be happening, and it consists of many smaller parts itself.
Each of the panels has its own keyboard shortcuts. In order to use them, the mouse 
pointer must be over the panel. If a keyboard shortcut isn't working, it's probably 
because the mouse pointer isn't in the right place.
The 3D View
Because it's so complex and important, the 3D View will be given some 
special attention.
The 3D View is where most of the action takes place, and it has the most visual 
feedback of the work. The 3D View has its own menus and panels:

Beginning Blender
[ 18 ]
Here's what the panels do:
•	
Menu: At the bottom of the 3D View is its Menu. It contains options and 
commands specific to the 3D View. If the menu is cut off, bringing the 
mouse pointer over the panel and using the scroll wheel will bring the 
cut-off information into view.
•	
Tool Shelf: On the left-hand side is the Tool Shelf. It contains a tabulated set 
of buttons that can be used to do many useful things and change depending 
on the object selected. The bottom half of the Tool Shelf contains operator 
options. Any time an operation is performed, this area will be populated 
with options for that operation that can be edited until the next operation is 
performed. The Tool Shelf can be hidden or revealed by using the 3D View 
menu and selecting View | Tool Shelf or by pressing T key on the keyboard.
•	
Properties: On the right-hand side is the Properties panel. Hidden by 
default, this panel contains information about the currently selected object as 
well as other options about the scene in general. The panel can be hidden or 
revealed by using the 3D View menu and selecting View | Properties or by 
pressing N key on the keyboard.
•	
Main View: Of course, in the middle is the view of the current scene with all 
the visible objects.
The 3D cursor
In the 3D View, there is a little red-and-white circle that starts in the middle of the 
3D space. New objects will be created wherever the 3D cursor is located, and it's 
very easy to move the 3D cursor accidently, so it'd be good to know how to put the 
3D cursor back in the middle and how to move it on purpose. The 3D cursor can be 
manipulated by:
1.	 Clicking the right mouse button in the 3D View to move the 3D 
cursor wherever it is clicked in a plane relative to the view, which 
can be unpredictable.

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
2.	 Navigating to View | Align View | Center Cursor and View All or pressing 
Shift + C on the keyboard while in the 3D View to put the 3D cursor back 
in the middle quickly. This is the easiest way to fix the 3D cursor if it gets 
moved unexpectedly.
3.	 Typing the 3D cursor's X, Y, and Z coordinates in the 3D View properties.
The best settings
Blender has a reputation for being difficult and unintuitive to use. This is true for the 
default settings. However, Blender is also very easily adjustable with a few settings 
and can be made much easier to use. How you set up your instance of Blender will 
depend on what your setup is like.

Beginning Blender
[ 20 ]
To access the settings, in the top menu select File | User Preferences. In the Blender 
User Preferences panel that comes up, select the Input tab button:
A scroll-wheel mouse and number pad
The recommended setup for Blender is to use your keyboard and a mouse with 
a scroll wheel. In this case, there is only one setting that is recommended to be 
changed from the default:
1.	 Click on the button that says Left under the words Select With.
2.	 Click on the button that says Save User Settings:

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Changing this one setting will make Blender much more intuitive to use.
Because the default is for the right mouse button to be the select button, and some 
may prefer to keep this default, this book will refer to whatever option is chosen 
as the select mouse button, and the other button as the not-select mouse button. 
While still a bit confusing, it will help users who miss this section.
With a scroll-wheel mouse, the scroll wheel can be depressed for a middle mouse 
button click. Blender uses this middle mouse button to manipulate the view.
If you have a Numpad but no scroll-wheel mouse, it is still recommended to use 
these settings because the interface will be much more intuitive, although you will be 
sacrificing some functionality that the middle mouse click offers. The choice is yours 
whether it's worth having a more intuitive interface.

Beginning Blender
[ 22 ]
A laptop with a touch pad and no number pad
On a laptop with a touchpad (with no middle click) and no number pad, both very 
important for navigating the view, select the following settings:
•	
Emulate 3 Button Mouse
•	
Emulate Numpad
•	
Click on the button that says Save User Settings
With this setup, most of Blender's functionality is available to laptop users, although 
these settings are less intuitive. With these settings, you will need to use the right 
mouse button to select objects, Ctrl + right mouse button as a middle mouse button 
to change the view, and the number keys across the top will perform the function of 
the number pad on a regular keyboard.

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
With Blender set up, it's time to start learning to use it. Close the User 
Preferences window.
Blender users tend to use keyboard shortcuts for almost everything. 
It's recommended that you use Blender with one hand on the mouse 
and the other on the keyboard. Learning and using keyboard shortcuts 
will speed up your process and, with just a little practice, will become 
second nature. Going forward, all methods of accessing commands will 
be taught. Try to practice using the keyboard shortcuts.
Object creation
Most tutorials for Blender start with navigating the 3D View. But in Blender, the 
default scene is kind of boring for this, just a cube that looks the same from every 
angle. Instead, let's make something more interesting to look at.
First, let's look at how to clear the default scene:
1.	 Select all the objects in the scene by going to the 3D View menu and choosing 
Select | (De)select all twice or pressing the A key twice. Everything in the 
scene should have an orange line around it. If not, do it again.
2.	 Delete everything by going to the 3D View menu and choosing 
Object | Delete or pressing the X key.
Your 3D View should now have nothing but the grid, which can be thought of as the 
floor of the scene.
To create an object, go to 3D View menu, choose Add or press Shift + A.
In the menu that pops up are all the basic objects that can be inserted into the scene. 
Blender offers many basic shapes that can serve as a starting point for anything you 
want to create. Sometimes, a basic object is all you need, and sometimes, the basic 
object needs to be modified.

Beginning Blender
[ 24 ]
In this case, add a Monkey object to the scene:
1.	 In the 3D View menu, choose Add or press Shift + A.
2.	 Select Mesh | Monkey in the menu that appears.
The Monkey object is good when learning to navigate the view because it's easy to 
see which way it's facing, no matter how the view changes. So, with a monkey object 
in the scene, it's time to learn how to change your perspective.
Navigating the view
Because Blender is all about working in 3D, but computer screens are flat, it is 
important to know how to change how you're looking at something in Blender.
All of the following commands can also be found in the 3D View 
menu under View | View Navigation; however, since adjusting the 
view happens so frequently, it is recommended to learn the mouse and 
keyboard shortcuts instead of navigating menus to do this.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
Rotating the view
In Blender, you can change the angle of the view by:
•	
Clicking and holding the middle mouse button and moving the 
mouse pointer.
•	
Pressing 2 or 8 on the number pad to rotate the view up and down.
•	
Pressing 4 or 6 on the number pad to rotate the view left and right.
The point at which the view is rotating can change. Follow these steps to center the 
view rotation on a specific object:
1.	 Select the object.
2.	 Press the . (period) key on the number pad.
The selected object will fill the view and all view rotations will now center 
on that object:

Beginning Blender
[ 26 ]
Jumping to rotation
Blender has six set views that can be quickly jumped to at any time:
•	
Press 1 on the number pad to jump to the front view
•	
Press 3 on the number pad to jump to the right view
•	
Press 7 on the number pad to jump to the top view
•	
Press Ctrl + 7 or 9 on the number pad to jump to the bottom view
•	
Press Ctrl + 1 on the number pad to jump to the back view
•	
Press Ctrl + 3 to jump to the left view
Panning the view
Panning the view means moving without changing the rotation, like moving 
your head while it's still pointed in the same direction. To pan the view, 
follow these steps:
•	
Press Ctrl + 4 on the number pad to pan left
•	
Press Ctrl + 6 on the number pad to pan right
•	
Press Ctrl + 8 on the number pad to pan up
•	
Press Ctrl + 2 on the number pad to pan down
•	
Hold Shift while clicking and holding the middle mouse button and 
move the mouse

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Panning the view is one of the functions that changes the center of 
rotation. Remember: you can reset the center of rotation by selecting 
an object and pressing . (period) on the number pad.
Zooming the view
Zooming the view is moving closer to or farther from the object. To zoom the view, 
do one of the following:
1.	 Turn the scroll wheel.
2.	 Press Ctrl + middle mouse button and move the mouse.
3.	 Press + or – on the number pad.
Orthographic versus perspective view
To toggle between orthographic and perspective views, press 5 on the number pad.
The words Persp or Ortho can be seen in the upper right-hand corner of the 3D 
View, indicating which view is being used:

Beginning Blender
[ 28 ]
There are two ways of looking at the 3D View on a computer. Perspective is the 
default, and more closely resembles how things will look when viewed through 
a camera or our eyes: closer objects look bigger; farther objects look smaller. 
Orthographic makes everything the same size, no matter how close or far it is. This 
makes it easier to compare objects and determine their location relative to one another.
Because a lot of 3D modelling requires precision, orthographic is generally preferred; 
however, it can be confusing when two objects overlap exactly. For this reason, it's 
good to adjust the view frequently and be sure that the action you're preforming is 
the action you think you're performing.
Wireframe and solid view
With 3D modelling tools, it helps to be Superman. Being able to see through 
objects can help when selecting and modelling things. You can switch between 
the Wireframe and Solid views using one of these methods:
1.	 Press Z to toggle between Solid and Wireframe view.
2.	 On the 3D View menu, click on the Method to Display popup and choose 
Solid or Wireframe.
Wireframe mode is very powerful, especially in Edit mode, but it can be very 
confusing, especially as objects get more complex. Wireframe mode allows objects 
behind the objects in the foreground to be selected without adjusting the view. 
Get used to switching between Solid and Wireframe mode frequently.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
Transforming the object
In Blender, transforming an object changes the size, direction, or location of a thing 
without changing its shape. There are three basic transformation commands that are 
used frequently: Grab and Move, Rotate, and Scale.
To transform an object, be sure the object is selected, and then, from the 
3D View menu:
•	
Select Object | Transform | Grab/Move or press G on the keyboard to move 
the object
•	
Select Object | Transform | Scale or press S on the keyboard to scale 
the object
•	
Select Object | Transform | Rotate or press R on the keyboard to rotate 
the object
Then, move the mouse or use the arrow keys to transform the object. When the 
transformation has been accomplished, press Enter or the select mouse button 
to end the operation, or the transformation can be cancelled by pressing the 
not-select mouse button or the Esc key. The following diagram shows these 
object transformations:

Beginning Blender
[ 30 ]
Transformations can also be undone after they're completed by pressing Ctrl + Z.
Transform the Monkey added to the scene by moving, rotating, and 
scaling it. Get a feel for how these commands work. Then, try to move 
the Monkey to a specific place in the scene. When you think you have it, 
change your view to see whether it's really where you think it is.
Controlling transformations
By default, operators in Blender operate on a 2D plane tangential to the view. This is 
a fancy way of saying that without any additional controls, it can be hard to predict 
how a movement or rotation operation will work. For instance, moving something 
in a random view can include moving up and down more than expected. This effect 
won't be clear until the view is changed and the transformation is inspected from a 
different angle, as shown here:
If you can't predict how operations will work, it can be hard to make the things 
you want. So it is very important to be able to control transformations.
There are two main ways of controlling operators: controlling the view and 
axis locking.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Controlling the view
The first way to control the operation is by controlling the view. By default, operators 
depend on the view, so by controlling the view, you can control the action. For 
instance, an object, when added to a scene, is exactly halfway through the grid plane 
of the world by default. If you want to make sure the object stays halfway through 
the grid plane when moving, follow these steps:
1.	 Select a newly added object.
2.	 Switch to Top Ortho view by pressing 7 on the number pad.
3.	 Grab and move (G) the object around.
Adjust the view to see how exactly how the object moved. When moved while in 
the top view, the object stays on the grid plane. This is because from the top view, 
only forward, backward, and side-to-side motion is possible.
In the same way, moving objects while in the side views will only move them 
forward and back and up and down, and while in the front or back view, they 
will only move side to side and up and down.

Beginning Blender
[ 32 ]
Likewise, rotating depends on the view. When viewing from the top, rotation will be 
like, a top spinning around its middle. If viewed from the side when doing rotation, 
it will flip over its middle, and if viewed from the front, it will roll side to side 
around its middle.
Controlling the view is a quick and easy way of controlling movement and rotation, 
but always be sure to adjust the view to make sure things are happening the way 
you expect. However, to control scaling, as well as to control movement and rotation 
independent of the view, there is another way.
Axis locking
Blender has special commands for changing the behavior of operations. 
These commands are available while performing transformations.
The first thing to understand is about the three axes that we'll be locking along. 
3D refers to the three dimensions, or unique directions, that things happen in. The 
dimensions are called by the letters X, Y, and Z. There is an illustration in the corner 
of the 3D View that shows which way is which, and is always pointing in the 
right direction:
In Blender, and generally in 3D printing, X is side-to-side motion, Y is 
back-and-forth motion, and Z is up and down. In the previous screenshot, 
the X axis is red, Y is green, and Z is blue.
When performing a transformation, you can lock the transformation to the axis you 
want by starting the transformation as mentioned previously, and while moving the 
mouse or using the keyboard, doing the following:
•	
Pressing X, Y, or Z on your keyboard to lock the transformation to the 
desired axis
•	
Pressing Ctrl + X, Ctrl + Y, or Ctrl + Z to lock the transformation to all but 
the chosen axis

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
•	
Holding the middle mouse button and moving the mouse to choose an axis 
to lock the transformation to
Try out axis locking with movement, rotation, and scaling, and adjust 
the view to see what effect it has. Notice that with axis locking, the 
scale function has some additional abilities that aren't possible just by 
controlling the view. It actually only scales in the chosen axis. This can be 
very powerful while adjusting the shape of objects.

Beginning Blender
[ 34 ]
Precise transformation
Finally, under the category of controlling transformations, during transformation 
operations, the transformation can be precisely controlled by typing in a number that 
will relate to the operation being performed or edited afterwards in the operation 
properties in the tool box, on the left side of the 3D View. In other words, to move 
something exactly two units up, for example, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the object.
2.	 Start the movement transformation (G).
3.	 Type Z to lock the movement to the Z axis.
4.	 Type 2 on the keyboard.
5.	 Press Enter or click the select mouse button to finish the operation.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Typing commands has different effects for different commands, as follows:
•	
When moving, typed commands are used to state the number of units an 
object will move along the selected axis. For example, 2 along the Z moves it 
two units up, and -2 along the Z moves it two units down.
•	
When scaling, typed commands specify the scale factor. 1 means no change, 
2 means twice as big, and 0.5 means half size.
•	
When rotating, typed commands specify clockwise degrees. For instance, 
180 turns it around backwards.
Typed commands can include negative numbers and decimals and can be edited 
with the Backspace key. While performing a transformation, the menu for the 3D 
View changes to a description of the transformation, including the typed units, 
which can be useful when editing your typed commands.
Origin manipulation
Objects in Blender have an origin. Origins are depicted as a dot and start out in the 
middle of the object. Individual object transformation commands take place relative 
to the object's origin. It's possible that the origin can be moved as a result of editing, 
which can cause unexpected results when rotating or scaling the object. The origin 
can also be moved on purpose to control the effect of modifiers.
The origin can be reset using the origin controls. The origin controls can be found by 
one of the following methods:
1.	 In the 3D View menu, choose Object | Transform and find the 
origin controls.
2.	 In the Tool Shelf, find the Set Origin dropdown and choose the 
desired option.

Beginning Blender
[ 36 ]
3.	 On the keyboard, press Ctrl + Shift + Alt + C.
These are the commands to manipulate the origin:
•	
Geometry to Origin: Move the object so that its middle is now wherever the 
origin was located.
•	
Origin to geometry: Move the origin to the middle of the object. This is the 
most common option chosen.
•	
Origin to 3D Cursor: Relocate the origin to where the 3D cursor is.
•	
Origin to Center of Mass: Calculate the center of mass of the object and 
move the origin there.
Duplicating objects
Blender can duplicate existing objects. This is very useful and can speed up making 
things. To duplicate an object, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the object to be duplicated.
2.	 In the 3D menu, choose Object | Duplicate or press Shift + D.
3.	 Move the mouse or use the arrow keys to place the duplicate (axis-
constraining commands also work at this point).

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
4.	 Press Enter or the select mouse button.
Object selection
Naturally, Blender is capable of selecting more than one object at a time. Blender has 
many tools to help when selecting objects. With multiple objects, the transformation 
commands work on all the selected objects at once. This is a powerful way of 
controlling transformations while keeping objects in relative positions to each other.
To practice selection, there need to be multiple objects to select. Create a 
scene, add an object, and then use the duplicate (Shift + D) command to 
create many objects from the one. Spread them around the scene so that 
they can be selected with the following tools.
Shift select
One way to select multiple objects at once is to hold down the Shift key while clicking 
on the desired objects one at a time. To deselect an object, it must first be made 
active. The active object is highlighted in a different color. Then it can be clicked 
again while holding the Shift key, and it will be removed from the selection.

Beginning Blender
[ 38 ]
Border select
Another way to easily select multiple objects in a scene is to use the border select 
command and draw a box around the objects you want to select. To border select, 
choose Select | Border Select from the 3D View menu or press B on your keyboard. 
Then, click and hold down the select mouse button, move the mouse pointer, and 
release the mouse button:
If even a small part of an object is included in the box, it will be added to 
the selection.
To deselect objects with border select, use the middle mouse button when 
drawing the box.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Circle select
Circle select is another powerful tool for selecting multiple objects. To circle select, 
choose Select | Circle Select from the 3D View menu or press C on the keyboard. 
A circle will appear around the mouse pointer. Use the scroll wheel or + and – on the 
Numpad to increase or decrease the size of the circle. Then, click or click and hold 
the select mouse button, and everything inside the circle will be selected. Use the 
middle mouse button to deselect:
Circle select only adds or removes an object from the selection if its center or origin is 
inside the circle when selecting.

Beginning Blender
[ 40 ]
The Edit mode
In Blender, the Edit mode allows more access to the shape of a single object so 
that it can be manipulated in order to change its shape. To enter Edit mode, 
use this method:
1.	 Select an object.
2.	 In the 3D View menu, locate the mode pop-up menu and select Edit Mode 
or press Tab on your keyboard.
In Edit mode, the 3D View menu, Tool Shelf, and Properties all change, adding new 
functionality only available in Edit mode:

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Parts of objects
In Edit mode, objects are broken down into three parts:
•	
Vertices: Points in three-dimensional space. Vertices don't have any shape 
by themselves
•	
Lines: Two points are connected with a straight line between them
•	
Faces: Three or more lines can be connected to make a face
There are many ways to think about vertices, lines, and faces. For instance, if making 
a kite, the vertices are the joints, the lines are the sticks, and the bits of paper are the 
faces. If the location of the vertices is moved, the shape of the kite will change. It's the 
same with a 3D object. Editing by vertices, lines, or faces will affect the rest.
The Edit mode is by default in vertex select mode, meaning any selection or 
transformation is applied to vertices, but it's easy to switch by locating the vertex, 
line, or face select buttons in the 3D View menu or by pressing Ctrl + Tab and 
selecting the desired option from the menu that pops up:
Try out Select mode. Select groups of vertices, edges, and faces, using circle and 
border select. Try moving, rotating, and scaling them and see how it effects the shape 
of the object. Try simple basic shapes such as cubes and circles. See how Wireframe 
mode affects selection. Notice how the other objects in the scene can't be accessed.
A lot of what happens in the projects will happen in Edit mode. But the individual 
projects will better teach you how to use it.

Beginning Blender
[ 42 ]
Incremental saving
It is always a good idea to save your work frequently. To save your work in Blender, 
choose File | Save from the info panel or press Ctrl + S. Then, navigate to a chosen 
folder or directory, give the file a name, and click on the Save As Blender File button 
or press the Enter key.
It is recommended that each Blender project gets its own folder and that all projects 
be saved in a location that will be easy to find later.
It is also a good idea, while learning especially, to give each version of the file you 
save a slightly different name. This way, there is a history of the work done and it's 
easy to go back in the case of a mistake that isn't discovered immediately. This is 
called incremental saving and is simple to do in Blender. Simply choose File | Save 
As or press Ctrl + Shift + S to get to the save menu. If the project has been saved 
previously, it should already have a name. Next to the filename, there are plus and 
minus buttons:
By clicking on those buttons, the filename will have a number attached to it, and that 
number will be increased every time the plus button is clicked. Then, click on Save 
as Blender File or press the Enter key to save the file with a new filename.
Blender to real life
By default, Blender units don't make any attempt to relate to real-life measurements. 
However, after exporting a mesh, the slicing software will interpret the Blender units 
as millimeters, generally. So, it is good to think of Blender units as millimeters. This 
means that default objects in Blender are 2 mm across when they're added, which is 
fairly small.
Remember that one blender unit will be 1 mm when the file is used to 3D print 
an object.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Exporting an STL
Before they can be used in a 3D printer, 3D models created in Blender have to 
be changed to a file that the 3D printer can use. Blender's default file format isn't 
readable by 3D printers and can sometimes contain additional information that the 
3D printers don't need.
Most 3D printers use a file format called STereoLithography (STL), which contains 
just the final shape of the object. To export a finished model to an STL for 3D 
printing, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the model or models to be exported.
2.	 From the Info panel, choose File | Export | Stl (.stl).
3.	 Navigate to a chosen folder or directory.
4.	 Give the file a name.
5.	 Click on the Export STL button or press the Enter key:
Now, the STL file will be available to send to a 3D printer or printer service.

Beginning Blender
[ 44 ]
If multiple objects are selected, the exported STL will have the objects in the same 
relative orientation to each other; therefore, it's important that they don't overlap 
and are printable as oriented. It's often preferable to save separate objects in 
separate files.
Summary
A recent poll of online social sites about 3D printing showed Blender was the most 
popular choice for creating models for 3D printing. The reason is obvious, taking 
into account Blender's vast functionality. However, it could just as well be that more 
people were talking about Blender because of its challenging learning curve.
Blender is capable of creating simple primitive shapes, viewing them from any angle, 
transforming them with precision, and manipulating their individual vertices, edges, 
and faces in the powerful editing mode. The model can then be exported to a file, 
ready to be 3D printed.
Blender has many functions not even covered in this chapter, such as sculpting, 
skeletal manipulation, and how to use individual modifiers to achieve specific 
results. As these functions become important for individual projects, they will 
be covered.
Hopefully, this chapter served to introduce how powerful and comprehensive 
Blender is. However, Blender's comprehensive nature comes at the cost of being 
complex, which can be overwhelming. But don't worry. Keep this chapter at hand 
to act as a reference and a crutch in future projects until Blender's functions become 
second nature. It usually only takes one project before Blender becomes second 
nature. Once Blender is familiar, no other 3D modelling software will be necessary.

[ 45 ]
Measuring Basics
3D printing makes virtual things real. Sometimes those things need to match back up 
with an object in the real world after they are made, such as a lid for a can or a joint 
between two poles. Sometimes you're printing a replacement for a broken part. So it 
is often very important that, when planning, accurate measurements are made and 
applied to the modeling of a 3D object.
Some measuring tools you may already have around your house. Some may require 
you to buy special tools you don't have but should probably consider getting.
In this chapter, we will cover:
•	
Measuring with a ruler
•	
Measuring with calipers
•	
Grid paper trace method
•	
3D scanning

Measuring Basics
[ 46 ]
Measuring with a ruler
Most homes have a ruler on hand that can, in many cases, provide relatively accurate 
measurements. For irregularly shaped objects, it may be difficult to use a ruler. But if 
the object is flat on at least two adjacent sides, rulers work fine in a pinch:
Simply lay the object on its flat edge, move one side to line up with the 0 mark, and 
measure the other side of the object. It's not the best method for measuring complex 
shapes, but sometimes a ruler can be enough.
Measuring with calipers
The most common technique for taking accurate measurements is the use of a tool 
called a caliper, a must-have for anyone who models for 3D printing. Calipers 
measure distance with a high degree of precision and can measure in three different 
ways: the outside diameter of an object with the outside jaws, the internal diameter 
with the inside jaws, or the depth with the depth probe at the far end. There are two 
common calipers: manual (or Vernier) calipers and digital calipers.

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
Manual or Vernier calipers
If budget is a concern, then perhaps a Vernier caliper is preferable, since they are 
generally less expensive than their digital counterparts. These calipers operate 
purely mechanically, but have a clever trick that allows them to be just as 
accurate if read properly:
Open the jaws to take a measurement and tighten them over the object to be 
measured. Then take a close look at the little window:

Measuring Basics
[ 48 ]
The leftmost tick is between 4.5 and 4.6, so this object is between 4.5 cm and 4.6 cm 
(or 45/46 mm). Then, count the tick marks on the outside until one of them lines up 
perfectly with one of the ticks on the inside. In this case the fifth tick mark on the 
outside lines up with a tick mark on the inside. This is the hundredths part of the 
measurement, so this object measures 4.55 cm or 45.5 mm.
Vernier calipers never need to be calibrated. They don't need batteries, so they'll 
always work, and they're cheaper. But they do take some additional effort to read 
properly and lack the "cool" factor of their digital cousins.
Digital calipers
The easiest measuring tool to use is the digital caliper. Simply turn it on, tare or 
zero the reading while closed, then open the jaws, put the object to be measured 
between them, clamp it down, and take the reading. It's fast and accurate without 
much effort. Some models even have a port that can transfer the measurements 
directly to the computer:
But digital calipers have the disadvantage of being more expensive and relying on 
batteries. They can also go off calibration, reducing their accuracy. However, for 
quick and easy use, a digital caliper is hard to beat.
Whatever calipers you use, familiarize yourself with all parts for measuring different 
things. The large jaws on the front are for measuring the outside of objects. The small 
jaws opposite them are for measuring the inside of objects. At the end of the ruler 
section is a depth sensor that can be used to measuring the depth of something.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Grid paper trace method
There is another trick to measuring complex shapes that involves a common 
household item. An object with a complex shape can be traced on a piece of grid 
paper. That grid paper trace can then be scanned or photographed, uploaded to the 
computer, and imported into modeling software to recreate its shape. By tracing the 
shape on graph paper, there is a scale reference in the modeling software.
Suitable objects
The ideal object for this method of measuring is an object with a complex and 
otherwise difficult to measure shape but with at least one flat side so that it's easy to 
lay flat on a piece of paper. If the object doesn't have a flat side, being able to make 
one side flat will do the trick.
For example, this piece of plastic attaches to the back of a drawer to guide it along a 
rail so that it moves smoothly and straight:
The back of this piece is almost flat, except for 2 nubs sticking out, which would be 
easy enough to remove. Simply note the location of parts that are removed before 
removing them, since they'll need to be modeled back in.

Measuring Basics
[ 50 ]
Object preparation
To begin, use a sharp blade and cut the nubs off the mostly flat surface:
Then, to be sure that the surface is perfectly flat, use some fine-grit sandpaper on a 
flat surface to sand down the flat side:

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
Next, take some grid paper, centimeter if available, and lay the object on the paper. 
Line it up with the grids as best as possible, and trace the object. Keep in mind that 
traces are generally a little bigger than the actual objects.
As an alternative, an ink pad can be used to make an even more accurate shape 
transfer. Just use the flat side of the object like a stamp. Again, try to line the part up 
with the grid as much as possible when making the impression in order to make the 
later modeling process easier. Stamping on a soft surface such as a towel can help get 
better coverage in the stamping process:
Finally, scan the stamped part in, or if a scanner isn't available, use a digital camera—
whatever is possible to get the traced-image-on-graph-paper reference into the 
computer. Try to keep the grid lined up and even in the image, or some editing of the 
image will be necessary. It is not possible to edit the image in the modeling software 
beyond some basic transformations, so keep it as straight horizontally and vertically as 
you can and avoid skewing and warping of the image as much as possible:

Measuring Basics
[ 52 ]
Importing the image into Blender
To follow along from this point, point your browser to http://thingiverse.com/
thing:90754.
Now, find Ch10 Scanned Image.jpg, and right-click to save the image:
1.	 Start Blender and, as usual, clear the scene (Ctrl + A + X) and save it to 
start a project.
2.	 Give it an appropriate name in an appropriate directory, such as Ch10 
Measuring and Drawer Guide.blend.
3.	 Change the view to Top Ortho (Numpad 7, Numpad 5).
4.	 In the Properties panel (N), locate the Background Images section, check the 
box next to it, expand it, and click on the Add Image button:
5.	 Click on the Open button and navigate to where the scanned image of the 
stamped object is stored. Then, open the image to place it in the scene:
The location and name of the scanned image may be different 
for you.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
6.	 The first thing to note is that if the previous steps are followed carefully, 
despite the grid paper in the image being a centimeter grid, at the default 
zoom, the grid lines seen are in millimeters. There are 10 millimeters per 
centimeter, so zoom out until the major grid lines start to appear, and then 
zoom out some more so that the millimeter grid lines disappear:
Adjust the settings in the Property panel for the background image until the 
grid on the paper lines up with the centimeter grid in 3D View. A quick way 
to determine the necessary size is to count the number of grid lines in the 
scan, multiply it by 10, and divide by 2 (for the radius, which for some reason 
the size setting is). In the example, there are 12 grid lines shown, so setting 
the size to 60 gets the view very close to the right size.

Measuring Basics
[ 54 ]
7.	 Continue to adjust the X, Y, Size, and Rotation values as necessary until the 
grid lines in the image line up with the grid lines in the view properly:
8.	 Since the object is to be symmetrical in this example, it would probably be 
a good idea to use the Mirror modifier, and to use it properly, it would be 
easier if the center line of the object were lined up with the world origin. The 
X value can now be adjusted to make it so. It no longer matters if the X grid 
lines line up with the image:

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
Now that the reference image is in Blender and scaled properly, the process 
of creating a shape in Blender around this reference image is simple and left 
to you.
9.	 Since the scale of the object was determined by lining up the real-life grid, 
the printed part should be approximately the same as the original piece:
The original is still a little messy after being used as a stamp, but the new one will 
take its place nicely.
Increasing reference pictures
In the background image settings, the pictures can be limited to specific views: 
top, bottom, front, left-hand side, right-hand side, and so on. Using these settings, 
multiple reference images can be combined to increase the accuracy of the model. 
If the shape is such that it's difficult to trace accurately from the side or front, it can 
be hard to trust the references. In these cases, the other images can be thought of as 
guidelines to be followed, rather than a reference to be trusted.

Measuring Basics
[ 56 ]
3D scanning
Finally, there is a method of capturing complex shapes that can quickly and 
accurately reproduce the shape on the computer, but at a considerably higher 
cost. There are many ways to 3D-scan objects.
Photogrammetry, or building a model from photographic references, captures the 
details of the shape of the object, but doesn't capture the scale very well. It captures 
small or big objects without distinction, but the resulting model can't be used for 
measuring purposes very well.
Structured light scanning can capture the scale pretty well if it's calibrated, but 
depending on a number of factors, the geometry may lack fine details. Often, 
scanners may cover that up by texturing the object, but textures don't print on 
FFF printers, which makes the cover-up obvious.
Some 3D scanners can only scan small objects. Some can only capture larger objects, 
but without any degree of small detail. Some require considerable effort on the part 
of the user to achieve any results. And if a 3D scanner does offer high detail and 
measuring accuracy, chances are it comes at a cost prohibitive to home users.
3D printing has driven up demand for accurate and cheap 3D scanners. There are 
many options available and new ones being developed all the time. As of the time 
of writing this, there is no clear family of winners that can be pointed to yet. Be 
cautious. Many promises are being made; not as many promises are being delivered 
on. But keep an eye out because, one day, a reliable, accurate, and affordable 3D 
scanner is sure to be made.
Summary
Truth is, there's not much practical point to 3D printing if it can't be used to make 
real-life objects that conform to real life. Making measurements and applying those 
measurements to virtual objects is mandatory in 3D design. A ruler will do the trick 
in some cases, but more complex objects will require more robust tools. Calipers are 
a designer's best friend most of the time. Tracing the object onto graph paper can 
help transfer a complex shape into the computer, where it can be recreated. Finally, 
for the professional, a 3D scanner can quickly transfer a complex shape, but at 
considerable cost. The more options you have available, the better designer you 
will be.
In the next chapter, we'll use measurements to create a 3D model that will match a 
real-life object when we're done.

[ 57 ]
An SD Card Holder Ring
Many 3D printers can print directly from an SD card instead of being hooked 
up to a computer all the time. This presents a problem of transporting SD cards 
without tying up your hands. Or pockets. A ring that you can put an SD card in is 
just the thing.
While a ring you can put an SD card in is a slightly silly solution, it's an excellent 
example of modeling based on physical objects. Both a finger and an SD card will 
need to be measured, and the design will have to be modeled too:

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 58 ]
This chapter will walk you through the process of making a cool 3D-printed project, 
going through the following steps:
•	
Taking measurements
•	
Modeling the ring
•	
Testing the ring
•	
Adding an SD card holder
•	
Putting it all together
•	
Extra credit
The challenges of matching real-life measurements to 3D-printed objects is made 
difficult by plastic shrinkage and inaccuracies in 3D printers' operations. I'll comment 
on that when it becomes important.
Some would claim that Blender isn't capable of CAD-like precision, but this project 
will put those naysayers to rest.
Precise placement of new objects is important in this project. 
Remember that if the 3D cursor is ever moved with an accidental 
left mouse click, then navigate to View | Align View | Center 
Cursor and View All or press Shift + C to put the 3D cursor back 
at the origin.
Taking measurements
Before opening Blender, some measurements must be gathered. Careful 
measurements need to be taken of the ring finger and an SD card. A digital caliper 
is an excellent tool to take measurements with, as shown in the following figure:

Chapter 4
[ 59 ]
My middle finger measures 19.3 mm at the widest point. If a digital caliper is 
not available, another way of measuring your finger is to wrap a piece of paper 
around the finger, mark where it overlaps, and use a ruler to find your finger's 
circumference, like this:
Then, consult the following table to find out the standard ring size and diameter:
Circumference 
(mm)
Circumference 
(in)
Diameter (mm)
Radius (mm)
US standard 
ring size
1.94
49.3
15.7
7.85
5
2.04
51.9
16.51
8.25
6
2.14
54.4
17.32
8.66
7
2.24
57
18.14
9.07
8
2.34
59.5
18.95
9.47
9
2.44
62.1
19.76
9.88
10
2.54
64.6
20.57
10.28
11
2.65
67.2
21.39
10.69
12
2.75
69.7
22.2
11.1
13
2.85
72.3
23.01
11.50
14
2.95
74.8
23.83
11.91
15
3.05
77.4
24.64
12.32
16
An adult male is generally around a size 10 mm, an adult female is around a size 
8 mm, and a child is around a size 5 mm.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 60 ]
The next thing to measure is a standard SD card. Fortunately, SD cards are all the 
same: 2.2 mm x 24 mm x 32 mm:
Modeling the ring
Now that all the measurements have been taken, it is time to go to Blender. Start a 
new scene and clear all the default elements (A + A + X). Then, save the scene (Ctrl + 
S) to create a new project in the directory of your choice. Name the project SD Card 
Ring.blend.
Modeling the finger
Let's start the modeling with the following steps:
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a Cylinder.
2.	 In the left-hand side bar, change the options for the cylinder. Change the 
Vertices value to 64 so the cylinder is smoother than default. Change the 
Radius value to half the measured finger diameter. Change the Depth value 
to 10:

Chapter 4
[ 61 ]
Blender can take simple equations in these boxes, so instead of 
dividing the diameter by half to get the radius, simply type the 
diameter followed by /2, and it will divide it by 2 for you. So, in 
the example, typing 19.3/2 resulted in a radius of 9.650.
3.	 In the properties tab in the right-hand side bar, in the Object tab (orange 
cube), rename this cylinder to Finger, since it represents the finger in the 
build space:
4.	 Now, add (Shift + A) another cylinder.
Blender remembers the settings that the previous object was created with, 
and if another object is created of the same type, those settings will be 
applied to it. So, the new cylinder is of the same radius, depth, and number 
of vertices as the Finger cylinder, and is therefore in the same exact place 
until the settings are changed.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 62 ]
5.	 Add 2 to the Radius value of the finger and change the Depth value to 4:
Again, adding 2 to the existing diameter is as simple as clicking on it and 
appending +2 to the end and then pressing Enter.
6.	 In the Object tab, rename this cylinder to Ring.
The XY plane is the logical floor of the build space and passes through 
the origin. Blender places a (small) XY plane in the view space to help 
with visualization. It is, of course, completely imaginary, and objects 
can be built through this floor. In fact, by default, new objects are placed 
somewhat under the XY plane. However, respecting the XY plane can 
provide a solid base of reference for building objects if need be, especially 
when multiple objects are to be placed with precision.
7.	 Now, jump to the front (Numpad 1) orthographic (Numpad 5) view. 
You will notice that the ring is sitting half above and half below the origin:

Chapter 4
[ 63 ]
Putting the ring on the floor
By default, objects in Blender are created centered at the origin, meaning a part of 
them is under the XY plane. The goal of this section will be to place the important 
objects so they sit on the XY plane without going below it. This way, we always 
know where the bottom of the object is and can line everything up to this standard. 
So, with only the ring object selected, begin the grab (G) operation. Press Z to lock 
the ring's movement along the Z axis. Type 2 to move the ring up half its depth. 
Finally, press Enter to end the grab operation:

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 64 ]
The finger cylinder is at an odd place in relation to the ring. But since the finger 
cylinder is just there to help us design the ring, and since it's both above and 
below the ring cylinder, it can just be left where it is.
Finishing the ring
Perform the following steps to complete the ring:
1.	 With the Ring object selected, add a Boolean modifier to it:
2.	 Change the the Operation field of the Boolean modifier to Difference and 
the Object field to Finger:

Chapter 4
[ 65 ]
The Finger object is obscuring the effect of this operation, so it should be 
hidden. This may take the object out of the 3D View, but it can still be 
selected in the Outliner panel and modifications can be made that way. 
Some editing remains impossible, however, until the object is unhidden.
3.	 Select the Finger object and, from the menu at the bottom of the 3D View 
panel, navigate to Object | Show/Hide | Hide Selected, or press H. Another 
way is to click the icon that looks like an eye next to the Finger object in the 
Outliner panel:
Now, the Finger object is hidden and we can see the effect of the Boolean 
modifier on the Ring object. The Finger object is still in the scene, but not in 
the 3D View. You can confirm this because the object is still in the Outliner 
panel, but the eye icon beside it is inactive.
The ring is now perfectly serviceable, but there's no harm in making it a little 
more appealing.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 66 ]
4.	 Enter Edit mode (Tab). For now, loop cut (Ctrl + R) the cylinder around the 
middle and left-mouse click twice when selecting so that the slice does not 
slide up or down:
Without applying the modifier, its effects are undone while in Edit mode, 
and the hole in the middle is gone. This is okay. When we exit Edit mode 
later, the hole in the middle will be back.
5.	 Scale (S) the newly sliced ring outwards slightly. The scaled ring of 
points should not extend more than 1 mm (one small grid square in the 
background) larger than the top and bottom disks of the ring shape.
Scaling is an operation for which precise measured adjustments can be 
difficult to accomplish. This is one of the places where Blender falls a little 
short as a CAD-precise tool. Then again, this is a change made for aesthetics, 
so just eyeball the angle. Anything less than 45 degrees will be fine.

Chapter 4
[ 67 ]
6.	 Now, exit Edit mode (Tab). Notice that the hole is back in the ring:
7.	 Remember to save (Ctrl + S) the project periodically.
Making a test print
If you are just learning to design without access to a 3D printer, then you can skip 
this step. However, since this print is so small, it is cheap, even through 3D-printing 
services. The ability to quickly make things for testing is one of 3D printing's greatest 
strengths, but it's not strictly necessary to learn how to design for them.
It's always good, especially when matching things to real-life objects, to test whether 
the fit is right. Some 3D printers print things smaller or larger than the file dictates. 
So, while the thing is small, and since 3D printers are so good at quickly testing 
things, test the ring you've made.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 68 ]
Export an STereoLithography (STL) of the ring through the Export STL option 
under File | Export. Name the exported file Test Ring.stl. Then, print the test 
ring and try it on:
It might come as a surprise that the ring doesn't fit. If printing in ABS, the plastic 
may have shrunk when it cooled, as that is one of the properties of ABS. Or there 
may be a print setting such as filament diameter that isn't correctly set. Also, internal 
rings created by polygons are known to be a little small sometimes. Whatever may 
be the reason for the ring not fitting correctly, it's a good thing it was tested while the 
project was still simple.
Resizing the test ring
Back to Blender to make a new test ring. This time, instead of starting from scratch, 
reload the project and resize the existing ring. Take care to ensure that while resizing, 
the ring doesn't extend below the XY plane. So, to avoid this, we're going to resize 
the ring (and finger hole) from the Properties panel, like this:
1.	 Start by unhiding the finger. Do this by either clicking the eye icon for the 
Finger object in the Outliner panel or by pressing Alt + H:

Chapter 4
[ 69 ]
2.	 Select the Finger object and, in the Properties panel (N), locate the 
Dimensions area. Change the X and Y dimensions by clicking on the 
number to enter Edit mode and adding a +1 after the number shown. 
Leave the Z dimension exactly as it is.
3.	 Now, select the Ring object. Similarly, change the X and Y dimensions to add 
1 to them as well.
This will make the finger hole 1 mm wider and the ring 1 mm wider as well. 
This way, the ring itself says the same thickness. If you don't feel as if 1 mm 
is enough added space, then add more to your ring. You can also make it 
smaller if it's too loose.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 70 ]
4.	 Save (Ctrl + S) and export the model again. Print it out and test again. 
Keep iterating and resizing the ring until a comfortable fit is achieved. 
When you've got it, hide the finger object and move on.
Adding an SD card holder
Now it's time to mount an SD card holder on the ring. The first step is to make a 
virtual SD card in Blender.
Organizing by layers
When working on a project with multiple parts in Blender, it's possible to organize 
things by using layers. While the idea of layers may not make as much sense in 3D 
as in a 2D graphics editor, the idea is similar. Shapes in different layers may share 
the same space, and they can be looked at and edited separately and independently. 
Layers are found in the menu at the bottom of the 3D View, as shown here:
By default, the ring was created in the first layer, and there is a dot in the first layer 
to indicate that there is an object in it. To switch to an Empty layer, simply click on 
a square on the layer icons at the bottom of the 3D View or type a number from the 
top row of the keyboard.

Chapter 4
[ 71 ]
The number keys across the top of the keyboard (unless you're emulating the 
number pad) from 1 to 0 will switch to the corresponding layer in the top row. 
Holding Alt while pressing a number key will correspond to the rows in the 
bottom, for a total of 20 layers:
Now the scene looks empty, but checking the outliner panel, you can see that the 
ring and Finger objects clearly aren't gone. To see them again, simply click on the 
first layer with the object icon, or press the number key 1 at the top of the keyboard.
Now that you know the things you've created aren't gone, go back to the 
second layer.
Creating a virtual SD card
To create an SD card, perform the following steps:
1.	 Add (Shift + A) a cube to the scene.
We will be employing a trick to keep the cube above the XY plane as we 
change its size. Instead of moving the cube object up, we'll enter Edit mode 
and move all the points of the cube up. By doing this, the origin of the cube 
remains where it is and resizing the object will resize it around that origin. 
This will make more sense when seen practiced.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 72 ]
2.	 Enter Edit mode (Tab) and select all (A) points.
3.	 Then, grab (G) and move them 1 unit in the Z axis (Z + 1). Press Enter to end 
the grab operation:
4.	 Now exit Edit mode (Tab).
The cube now sits nicely on the XY plane, but more than that, its origin 
hasn't moved. So now, the bottom face of the cube is resting on the XY plane. 
Experimentally scale (S) the cube and move the mouse. Notice that with the 
cube's origin where it is, the scale operation is only scaling the cube above the 
XY plane. Undo (Ctrl + Z) any experimental scaling before continuing.
5.	 Now, resize the cube to the size of a SD card. To do this, in the Properties 
panel (N), locate the Dimensions area and change the dimensions to X: 2.2, 
Y: 24, and Z: 32:

Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
6.	 In the Properties pane on the right-hand side, in the Object tab 
(orange cube), rename this cube to SD Card.
7.	 Add (Shift + A) a new cube. Repeat the procedure of entering Edit mode 
(Tab) and moving (G) its vertices 1 unit along the Z axis (Z), and then exit 
Edit mode (Tab).
8.	 Now, in the 3D View's Properties panel, change this cube's dimensions to 
X: 6.2, Y: 28, and Z: 12.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 74 ]
9.	 Rename this cube SD Holder:
This makes the holder 2 mm thicker than the SD card all around, short 
enough to easily remove the SD card, while tall enough to hold it securely.
10.	 Add a Boolean modifier to the SDHolder object and Difference SDCard 
from it. Hide (H) the SD Card object and rotate the view to check the SD 
Holder object.
A hole all the way through was not the desired effect. The SD card might 
fall out! The Boolean operation has not been applied yet, so changes can 
still be made.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
11.	 Unhide (Alt + H) the SDCard object. Select it and move (G) it along the Z axis 
(Z) 2 units. Then, hide it again and check the SDHolder object.
Much better!
Putting it all together
It's now time to bring the SD holder and ring together:
1.	 To start with, both the SDHolder and Ring layers need to be visible 
simultaneously. To make this happen, hold Shift while clicking on the 
other layer or typing the layer number with the number keys at the top 
of the keyboard:

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 76 ]
2.	 Select the SDHolder object and move (G) it along the X axis (X) until it is in 
front of the ring:
Depending on the view when the last operation was done, a problem may 
have been observed. What happened to the hole for the SD card? Well, 
because the Boolean modifier was not applied, the hole stayed right where it 
was, where the hidden SDCard object is. If you undo the last movement and 
redo the movement slowly, you can see the hole stay put as the SDHolder 
object moves.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
This is amusing but undesired behavior. There are two options to fix it. 
Either the Boolean operation can be applied before moving, or both objects 
can be moved together. And since there are plans for that hole that include 
cutting into the ring space, applying the Boolean modifier at this time is not 
the desirable step. So, the hole will have to be moved with the holder.
3.	 Undo (Ctrl + Z) the move operators until the hole is where it belongs 
in SDHolder.
4.	 Then unhide (Alt + H) the SDCard object. Select both SDHolder and SDCard 
by clicking on one and then holding Shift and clicking on the other.

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 78 ]
5.	 Grab (G) and move them both in the X axis (X) until they are in front of the 
Ring object with ring intersecting SDHolder. Make sure there is a good 
connection here without interfering with the finger hole:
6.	 Hide the SDCard object again, now that everything is in place.
7.	 Select the SDHolder object and add a Boolean modifier to Union the Ring 
object to it.
8.	 Once the Boolean modifier has been added, hide (H) the Ring object to make 
inspecting the new object easier.
There is a little problem with the SDHolder ring right now that is not 
immediately obvious. However, if seen from certain angles, for instance, 
looking into the hole from above, it's clear there's a blemish inside the hole. 
Inside the hole for the SDCard, the ring is protruding just a little. If this isn't 
clear, switch to Wireframe view (Z) and adjust the view.

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
The solution is simple: instead of taking the SD card space out of the 
holder and then adding the ring to change around the order of the Boolean 
operations, the correct order is a Union of the SDHolder object with the Ring 
and then the SDCard object being differenced from the resultant shape.
9.	 In the Outline view, click on the SDHolder object.
10.	 With SDHolder selected, click on the move down arrow button on the first 
Boolean modifier to move it down the stack:

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 80 ]
11.	 The SDHolder object is now complete and correct, with the ring attached to 
the holder and a complete hole for the SD card to sit in:
Best of all, by planning carefully, the bottom of the model is flat and ready to print as 
is. All that is left now is to export (File | Export | STL), print out, and use the new 
SD card holder ring.

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
Extra credit
In this project, modifiers were used on simple objects right up to the final object. This 
allowed the creation of a more complex object while retaining the editability of the 
simpler objects. However, leaving modifiers unapplied becomes undesirable when 
objects become too complex. Having to rebuild an object every time an edit is made 
can crash a computer.
For fun, try to see how quickly Blender will slow down, and maybe try to crash it, 
by making several cubes and adding a Subsurf modifier to increase their polygon 
count. Then Boolean the smoothed cubes together, but don't apply the Boolean 
modifiers. Add more and more Subsurfed cubes and add them to the Boolean 
object. Then start moving around and editing the cubes to see when performance 
becomes choppy. It may be surprising how little it takes, depending on your system:

An SD Card Holder Ring
[ 82 ]
Also, with the measurements of an SD card available, any object can be turned into 
an SD card holder. Why not make an SD holder key chain or an SD holder that clips 
to a breast pocket? Add an SD holder to an octopus-shaped pencil holder or any 
model downloaded online to turn decorative items into something functional. 
The possibilities are endless!
Summary
Modeling things to fit real-life objects is one of the best and most common 
applications of 3D printing, and Blender is capable of this. Blender may never be able 
to compete with other CAD programs for precision; nevertheless, with some careful 
planning and clever manipulation, Blender is capable of extremely precise modeling.
Also, leaving modifiers unapplied is a technique that allows a high degree of 
flexibility, which is particularly desirable for something that stands a good chance of 
being customized. If someone else wanted their own SD card holder ring, it would be 
a simple matter to resize the ring and adjust to position the SD holder.
Now that you have the knowledge and skills to measure and design in Blender, 
the world can be at your fingertips.

[ 83 ]
Index
Symbols
3D printing
about  1
defining  2, 3, 45
3D scanning  56
A
additive manufacturing  2
axis locking  30
B
Blender
downloading  15
image, importing into  52-55
installing  15
reference pictures, increasing  55
references  52
URL  15
using  14
Blender units
defining  42
C
calipers
about  46
digital calipers  48
manual caliper  47, 48
using  46
Vernier caliper  47, 48
computerized numerical control (CNC)  3
D
default view, Blender
3D cursor  18, 19
3D View  17, 18
defining  16, 17
E
Edit mode
about  40
object parts  41
F
FFF 3D printers
designing for  3
FFF design considerations
about  5
H, bridging  8
holes, in models  10, 11
overhangs and supports  6
sand castle, building  6
snowman, building  6
T, orientation  9
wall thickness  10
Y, gentle overhangs  7
FFF printers
working  3, 4
Fused filament fabrication (FFF)  3

[ 84 ]
G
grid paper trace
about  49
object preparation  50, 51
suitable objects  49
I
incremental saving
defining  42
L
light polymerization  3
M
measurement
with calipers  46
measurements
obtaining  58-60
modifiers
defining  81, 82
O
object
transforming  29, 30
objects
duplicating  36, 37
object selection
Border select  38
Circle select  39
defining  37
Shift select  37
P
panels  16
powder bed  3
print
building  4, 5
R
ring
completing  64-67
finger, modeling  60-62
modeling  60
placing, on floor  63, 64
ruler
using  46
S
SD card holder
adding  70
organizing, by layers  70, 71
virtual SD card, creating  71-74
SD holder
and ring, defining  75-80
settings, Blender
defining  19
laptop, with touch pad  22, 23
object creation  23, 24
scroll-wheel mouse and number pad  20, 21
STereoLithography (STL)  43, 68
STL
exporting  43
T
test print
creating  67, 68
test ring
resizing  68-70
transformations
axis locking  32, 33
controlling  30
origin manipulation  35, 36
precise transformation  34, 35
view, controlling  31, 32
V
view
jumping, to rotation  26
navigating  24
orthographic, 
versus perspective view  27, 28
panning  26, 27
rotating  25
solid view  28
wireframe  28
zooming  27


