
3D Printing Designs: Octopus 
Pencil Holder
Learn to design and 3D print organic and functional 
designs using Blender
Joe Larson
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

3D Printing Designs: Octopus Pencil Holder
Copyright © 2016 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: February 2016
Production reference: 1240216
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78588-517-4
www.packtpub.com

Credits
Author
Joe Larson
Reviewer
Marcus Ritland
Commissioning Editor
Edward Gordon
Acquisition Editor
Vinay Argekar
Content Development Editor
Shweta Pant
Technical Editor
Vishal Mewada
Copy Editor
Stuti Srivastava
Project Coordinator
Kinjal Bari
Proofreader
Safis Editing
Indexer
Priya Sane
Graphics
Kirk D'Penha
Production Coordinator
Shantanu N. Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu N. Zagade

About the Author
Joe Larson is one part artist, one part mathematician, one part teacher, and one part 
technologist. It all started in his youth when he worked on a Commodore 64, doing 
BASIC programming and low-resolution digital art. As technology progressed, so 
did Joe's dabbling, eventually taking him to 3D modeling while in high school and 
college, and he temporarily pursued a degree in computer animation. He abandoned 
this field for the much more sensible goal of becoming a math teacher, which he 
accomplished when he taught 7th grade math in Colorado. He now works as an 
application programmer.
When Joe first heard about 3D printing, it took root to his mind, and he went back 
to dust off his 3D modeling skills. In 2012, he won a Makerbot Replicator 3D printer 
in the Tinkercad/Makerbot Chess challenge with a chess set that assembles into a 
robot. Since then, his designs on Thingiverse have been featured on Thingiverse, 
Gizmodo, Shapeways, Makezine, and other places. He currently maintains the 
blog http://joesmakerbot.blogspot.in/, documenting his adventures.

About the Reviewer
Marcus Ritland is a designer and 3D printing consultant in his small business, 
Denali 3D Design. Since 2008, he has been providing 3D modeling and 3D 
printing services as well as moderating the SketchUcation 3D printing forum 
(http://sketchucation.com/).
He has volunteered at a local makerspace, teaching SketchUp classes and leading 3D 
printing meetups. As an author of 3D Printing with SketchUp, he is currently on a 
quest to eliminate design-for-3D printing illiteracy.

www.PacktPub.com
eBooks, discount offers, and more
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com 
and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in 
touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on 
Packt books and eBooks.
TM
https://www2.packtpub.com/books/subscription/packtlib
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via a web browser

[ i ]
Table of Contents
Preface	
iii
Chapter 1: Octopus Pencil Holder	
1
Planning the project	
2
The basic shape	
2
Editing the basic shape	
4
Smoothing the mesh with modifiers	
10
Bending the tentacles	
12
Flattening the bottom	
17
Renaming objects	
25
Adding a pencil cup	
27
Adding a face	
34
Finishing touches	
44
Summary	
44
Chapter 2: Prologue	
45
3D printing basics	
45
What is 3D printing?	
46
The right software	
46
Downloading and installing Blender	
46
Setting up Blender	
47
Scrolling the mouse wheel and number pad	
48
Laptops with a touchpad but no number pad	
50
What to design for?	
51
Overhangs and supports	
51
Supportless 3D printing	
52
Y – gentle overhangs	
52
H – bridging	
53
T – orientation	
54
Wall thickness	
54
Summary	
55
Index	
57


[ iii ]
Preface
3D printers have arrived! Complex and beautiful objects are available at the touch 
of a button in our schools, libraries, or even our homes. If you have a 3D printer, 
learning how it works and how to design for it is the best way to be a part of this 
new industrial age. And the best part is that it doesn't cost a penny.
This book will teach you the things you need to know about 3D printers. Then, you 
will use the robust and free software, Blender, to follow step-by-step instructions 
through a planned project. This book is a part of a series of projects that will help you 
acquire the tools, techniques, and skills you need in order to make your own projects 
to print yourself on a 3D printer near you and share them with others online to print 
around the world.
What this book covers
The project in this book, octopus pencil holder, involves simple selection techniques 
that are unique to edit mode, modification commands in edit mode, and applying 
modifiers to soften and combine shapes. This technique alone can be used to create 
an unlimited number of cool things, once mastered.
What you need for this book
Blender's minimum system requirements are as follows:
•	
32-bit dual core 2 GHz CPU with SSE2 support
•	
2 GB RAM
•	
24 bits 1280 × 768 display
•	
Mouse or trackpad
•	
OpenGL 2.1 compatible graphics with 512 MB RAM

Preface
[ iv ]
Who this book is for
This book is for anyone with an interest in 3D printing and some basic computer 
skills. Whether you own a 3D printer or not, you can design for them. You will need 
Blender, a free 3D tool, and this book. With a little creativity, one day, you'll hold 
something designed on the computer in your hands.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different 
kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of 
their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"The first one is going to be the Extrude operator."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "Next, 
add a cylinder and an object to the scene. For this, add (Shift + A) a new object by 
navigating to Mesh | Cylinder."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it helps 
us develop titles that you will really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail feedback@packtpub.com, and mention 
the book's title in the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.

Preface
[ v ]
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/
diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you better understand 
the changes in the output. You can download this file from https://www.
packtpub.com/sites/default/files/downloads/3DPrintingDesigns_
OctopusPencilHolder_ColorImages.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form 
link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website or added 
to any list of existing errata under the Errata section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to https://www.packtpub.com/books/
content/support and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required 
information will appear under the Errata section.
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all 
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.

Preface
[ vi ]
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at 
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

[ 1 ]
Octopus Pencil Holder
3D printing makes it easy to combine forms and functions. Why have just a pencil 
holder when you can have a pencil holder that looks like, say, a cute octopus? This 
project is an excellent starting project because it demonstrates a simple but versatile 
modeling technique that involves editing a simple mesh and smoothing it in order to 
go into more detail.
This project will involve simple selection techniques that are unique to the Edit 
Mode, modification commands in the edit mode, and applying modifiers to soften 
and combine shapes. This technique alone can be used to created unlimited cool 
things once mastered.
In this book, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Planning the project
•	
The first basic shape
•	
Smoothing the mesh with modifiers
•	
Bending the tentacles
•	
Flattening the bottom
•	
Renaming objects
•	
Adding a pencil cup
•	
Adding a face
•	
Finishing touches

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 2 ]
Planning the project
A pencil holder is basically a cup with a sturdy base that can be used to hold objects 
taller than itself, such as pens, pencils, and other items that might otherwise clutter 
up a desk. A cute cartoony octopus' tentacles will provide the perfect base and 
prevent the cup from tipping over.
The hole in the cup should be roughly cylindrical, and about 40-50 mm wide at the 
base. The whole thing should stand at least 80 mm tall. And, of course, it needs a 
cute and friendly face; something like this:
The basic shape
Let's get ready; it's time to get to work:
1.	 Open Blender, select everything (A) in the default scene and clear (X) 
the scene:

Chapter 1
[ 3 ]
2.	 Next, add a cylinder and an object to the scene. For this, add (Shift + A) a new 
object by navigating to Mesh | Cylinder:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 4 ]
3.	 Immediately after adding the cylinder and before clicking on anything else, 
in the Tool Shelf operator, add parameters for Add Cylinder and change 
the number of Vertices from 32 to 8. Change the Radius field to 25 and the 
Depth to 15:
Editing the basic shape
This project is going to take advantage of several powerful editing tools that Blender 
provides. The first one is going to be the Extrude operator. Extruding takes its name 
from the process of creating things in real life, but in 3D modeling, extruding takes 
a selected part of an existing model and creates new geometry on the edge of the 
selected parts so that the original can be moved away but remain attached to where 
it came from. The result is a new shape that can then be edited.

Chapter 1
[ 5 ]
Extruding is a very powerful tool that's used to alter the shape of an object and create 
new faces that can be extruded themselves:
1.	 Enter Edit Mode (Tab) and switch to face the Select Mode (Ctrl + Tab):
2.	 Deselect all faces (A). Then, select one of the vertical sides of the cylinder.
3.	 Extrude it either by navigating to Mesh | Extrude | Region in the 3D View 
menu or pressing E on the keyboard.

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 6 ]
4.	 Extrude the face about 40 mm by moving the mouse or typing 40 on 
the keyboard:
5.	 Press Enter or click on the select mouse button to complete the 
Extrude action.
Like all actions in Blender, if a mistake is made in the process 
of extruding, press Esc or click on the right mouse button to 
cancel the action. If a mistake is made after this, undoing the 
action with Ctrl + Z is always possible.
6.	 Then, scale the face (S) down to about 20% (0.2) in order to create a tentacle:

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
7.	 Repeat the extruding and scaling process with the other seven vertical faces 
of the cylinder to create all eight tentacles:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 8 ]
8.	 Select the top face of the cylinder and extrude (E) it about 30 mm:
9.	 Then, scale (S) it up just a little bit to make the head bulbous:

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
10.	 Extrude (E) the top again—this time, about 20 mm and—and scale (S) it in 
order to give the top a more rounded shape:
Now, the cylinder has been changed into something more of an octopus-like shape. 
And it was mostly accomplished with the Extrude command, a truly powerful tool 
used to modify the shape of an object.

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 10 ]
Smoothing the mesh with modifiers
This blocky octopus is fine for editing, but it needs to be much smoother for the 
final result. Fortunately, there's a way to increase the smoothness of the model 
while retaining the simple geometry, which is easy to edit. This is done by 
adding a Subdivision Surface modifier to the object:
1.	 To add a Subdivision Surface modifier, click on the Modifiers tab in the 
Properties panel (the one that looks like a wrench):
2.	 Click on the Add Modifier button, and in the menu that appears, 
choose Subdivision Surface from the list:

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
With the Subdivision Surface modifier, the shape looks much smoother. 
While in the edit mode, it's clear that the original geometry is still there and 
acts as sort of a cage that defines the shape of the smoothed mesh. As long as 
the modifier isn't applied, the simple geometry can be kept for editing.
Changing the View setting in the modifier will affect how smooth the 
mesh will be. Higher values will create more complex geometry that will 
look smoother, but they will slow down the computer more. There comes 
a point where increasing this setting won't have any noticeable effect. 
Generally, it's best to keep this setting high enough to have a good effect 
on the shape but low enough to not slow down the computer.
3.	 For now, set View to 2; then, the object will look like what's shown in the 
following screenshot:
This isn't the final form, but it will get better. If looking at the smoothed mesh while 
working on the simpler mesh is confusing, the modifier can be temporarily turned 
off by pressing the eyeball icon on the modifier.

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 12 ]
Bending the tentacles
Now, it's time to begin adding some details to the tentacles and give the model 
some personality.
Before moving ahead, let's take a look at another powerful tool when editing meshes, 
which is called loop cut or loop subdivide, which will be used while bending the 
tentacles. Loop cut adds points in the middle of an edge and all around a portion of 
the geometry. These points can then be transformed. Loop cut only works with edges 
or vertexes' select mode and will automatically switch modes when using them.
To perform a loop cut, execute the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Mesh | Edges | Loop Subdivide from the 3D View menu, 
or press Ctrl + R.
2.	 Then, move the mouse pointer near an edge, and the loop cut suggestion will 
be suggested.
3.	 When the loop cut is where desired, click on the select mouse button or press 
Enter. At this point, the loop isn't set and can still be slid back and forth in 
order to decide an exact location.
4.	 When it is where desired, press Enter or the select mouse button again in 
order to finish the operation. At any time, the operation can be canceled by 
pressing the right mouse button or pressing the Esc key.
5.	 Now that we know how to perform a loop cut, let's go for why we are here, 
that is, bending the tentacles.
6.	 While still in the edit mode, switch to the vertex edit mode (Ctrl + Tab). 
Add a loop cut (Ctrl + R) to one of the tentacles. Place the cut at the default 
location in the middle of the tentacle:

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
7.	 After setting the loop cut, change the operator settings at the bottom of Tool 
Box and then change Number of Cuts to 2:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 14 ]
8.	 Deselect all points (A) and select the points at the end of the tentacle. Rotate 
(R) the points around the z axis (Z) and move (G) them along the x and y axes 
(Shift + Z) to bend the tentacle a bit:
9.	 Expand the selection (Ctrl + NumPad + the (+) sign). Again, rotate (R) the 
selection around the z axis (Z) and move (G) it along the x and y axes (Shift + 
Z) to bend the tentacle a bit more:

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
10.	 Expand the selection again. Rotate (R) and move (G) the tentacle, being 
careful to constrain the movement:
11.	 Check your tentacle. Adjust your view and make sure that from the front or 
side views, the twisty tentacle is still on the same level as the other tentacles 
and not twisted up and down. If it isn't, then your movements weren't 
constrained properly:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 16 ]
12.	 If not correct, then undo (Ctrl + Z) your movements and try again. There's a 
way to ensure that the movements are constrained properly. You can do this 
easily by doing all your transformation while in the top view (NumPad 7). 
It may be necessary to select points in the Wireframe view (Z) to get all the 
points and not just the ones on top.
13.	 Move to the next tentacle and cut it through loops. This time, while the loop 
location is being displayed, before clicking on the mouse or pressing Enter 
the first time, try to press the 2 key to quickly change the number of cuts to 2. 
This is a shortcut method that can be used optionally instead of changing the 
parameters after the cut:
14.	 Work around, cutting, selecting, moving, and rotating each tentacle. Give 
each one a different twist, being careful not to overlap them. If the tentacles 
overlap, the model won't print properly when exported:

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Your octopus doesn't need to look exactly like this. Make it your own. When all the 
tentacles have been detailed, it should look much more like an octopus.
Some 3D printers won't be able to print this model if it's too big, so 
keep those tentacles tucked in and don't let them fly too far. The 
smaller 3D printer build areas are about 150 mm or 6 inches across. 
If the total width of your model is more than that, you'll need to 
think about the printer you're designing this for.
Flattening the bottom
A friendly 3D print needs to have a solid, flat base. There is more than one way the 
bottom of a model can be flattened. For one, the geometry can be edited to be flat. 
Alternatively, a floor object can be created and cut out of the object using a Boolean 
modifier. Since this project is using the subdivision surface modifier, editing the 
geometry can be complicated. So, the floor method will be used in this project.

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 18 ]
Looking at the model from the front orthographic view (NumPad 1 and NumPad 5), 
it's clear that the parts of the tentacles that sit below the x and y axes (the red or green 
line depending on the view) is where the model needs to be cut off in order to create 
a flat, printable base:
So, let's get started:
1.	 First, exit the Edit Mode (Tab).
2.	 Ensure that the 3D cursor is at the 3D View origin point (Shift + C). 
Then, create a cube (Shift + A) by navigating to Mesh | Cube:

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
3.	 The cube cannot be seen in the solid view because it's completely inside the 
octopus, so with the cube still selected, switch to the local view (NumPad /) 
to view the cube by itself:
The cube is half above and half below the origin. Fortunately, there's an 
easy way to create a floor and ensure that no matter how it's scaled, the top 
remains on the XY plane.

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 20 ]
4.	 In the Edit Mode (Tab), with all points selected (which should be selected 
by default; A is the hotkey if they're not), move (G) along the z axis (Z) 
by 1 unit (-1).
5.	 Then, exit the Edit Mode (Tab) and scale (S) the cube. Note that the top 
remains on the XY plane. This is because object transformations are made 
in relation to the object's origin. When the points were all moved in the Edit 
Mode, the origin wasn't affected. So now, when scaling the top, because it's 
in line with the cube's origin, it remains on the same plane:

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
6.	 Exit the local view (NumPad /) and scale (S) the cube until it covers the 
bottom of the octopus body:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 22 ]
In the Solid view (Z), it may look like the octopus has a flat bottom, but in 
the Wireframe View, (Z), it is clear that the cube is only hiding the bottom 
part. For the final model, the bottom needs to actually be flat:
7.	 Select the octopus body again, and in the Modifier tab, add a 
Boolean modifier:

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
The Boolean modifier has the option of combining the selected 
object with another object in a number of ways; Intersect, Union, 
and Difference. Union joins the two object, so that they become 
one. Difference cuts the second object out of the first, and Intersect 
leaves only the part where the two objects overlapped. Boolean is a 
powerful tool and it's good to be aware of how to use it.
The following screenshot shows the three ways to combine selected objects with 
other objects:
1.	 Change the Operation value of the Boolean modifier to Difference. Click on 
the Object text field and choose Cube from the list that pops up:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 24 ]
2.	 Now the octopus body actually has a flat bottom that's suitable for 3D 
printing. This can be confirmed in the Wireframe view (Z):
The Boolean modifier is one of the most important tools in Blender that's used to 
create 3D printable objects. However, it can also be one of the most frustrating 
to use. The Boolean modifier demands that a mesh be clean and free from holes 
or problems. Even things that aren't obvious while looking at the mesh, such as 
duplicate points or flipped faces, can cause problems with the Boolean operation. 
If your Boolean operation isn't working, here are a few steps you can perform in 
order to try to fix it:
1.	 In the Edit Mode, select all the points (A), and in Tool Shelf (T), locate the 
Remove Doubles button in the Tools tab and click on it.
2.	 With all points still selected, switch to the Shading/UV tab, locate the 
Recalculate button, and click on it:

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
3.	 Now, exit the Edit Mode, and the Boolean modifier may work in many cases. 
If these fixes don't make the Boolean modifier work, then the best option may 
be to start over again, making sure that you perform all the steps correctly.
Renaming objects
Now that there is more than one object in the scene, leaving the objects' names as 
the names of the basic shapes they started as can be confusing, especially when 
other objects enter the scene. It's best practice to name objects as something more 
descriptive. Let's see how to rename an object.
Objects can be renamed in the Object tab in the Properties panel, the one marked 
with an orange cube icon, as shown in the following screenshot:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 26 ]
1.	 Select Octopus Body in 3D View (or Cylinder in the Outliner panel). 
In the Objects menu, click on the Name, currently Cylinder, and change 
it to Octopus Body:
2.	 Now, select the cube, and in the Objects menu, change its name to Floor.
3.	 Since the floor has served its purpose, in order to avoid it getting in the way 
or getting accidently transformed, hide it from the view by selecting it, and 
then, in the 3D View menu, navigating to Object | Show/Hide | Hide or 
pressing H. The object is still in the outliner view but hidden in the 3D view:

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
Hidden objects can be unhidden by navigating to Object | Show/Hide | Show All, 
pressing Alt + H, or pressing the eye icon next to the object in the Outliner panel.
Adding a pencil cup
The octopus model looks appealing so far, but it can be functional as well. The plan 
for this project was a cup holder, so it needs to have the shape changed so that things 
can be put inside it:
1.	 To start, temporarily turn off the subdivision surface modifier by locating the 
Subsurf modifier in the Modifiers tab and clicking the eye icon in it. Now, 
the simplified geometry is easier to work with:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 28 ]
2.	 Go to the Face Select mode (Ctrl + Tab) in the Edit Mode (Tab). 
Now, select the topmost face of the octopus:
3.	 Switch to Wireframe (Z) and the Front Ortho view (NumPad 1) and extrude 
(E) the top face into the body. Stop just a little above the red x axis line:

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
It may be necessary to scale (S) the bottom of the cup a little 
so that it fits inside the body.
After scaling the body will look this:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 30 ]
4.	 Now, the shape is generally right for a pencil holder. Turn the subdivision 
surface modifier back on by clicking on the eye icon in the Subsurf modifier 
in the Modifiers tab. You'll notice that the cup bottom is a bit too round to be 
a space-efficient cup:
In the Edit Mode, edges can be marked with Crease to indicate to the 
Subsurf modifier that they should be sharpened.
5.	 With no points selected (A) in edge or point, select the mode (Ctrl + Tab), 
hold down Alt on the keyboard, and select and click on one of the edges 
around the top lip of the cup in order to select all the points in a loop 
around the top of the mug:

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
6.	 From the 3D View menu, navigate to Mesh | Edges | Edge Crease or 
press Ctrl + E on the keyboard. Move the mouse pointer up or down in 
order to increase or decrease the amount of crease applied to the edge 
until it looks good:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 32 ]
7.	 Hold Alt and select and click on one of the edges at the bottom of the 
cup to loop and select all the points around the bottom of the cup. It may 
help to switch to the Wireframe mode (Z) or temporarily turn off the 
Subsuf modifier:
8.	 This time, set the crease value by finding the Mean Crease setting in 
Properties (N). This setting can be any decimal number between 0.0 (off) 
and 1.0 (maximum). Click on the setting and enter 1, and then press Enter 
to set the value. Now, the bottom of the cup is flat:

Chapter 1
[ 33 ]
This sort of edge creasing is a powerful way to control the Subsurf modifier. 
Note that the bottom of the cup is still circular even though the original mesh 
is an octagon. Subsuf smoothens out the other edges even if it's told to crease 
others. It's very smart!

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 34 ]
Adding a face
Functionally, the design is complete, but it's the little details that really make it. 
This little octopus would be much cuter with a face:
1.	 To start making a cute face, make sure the Edit Mode is off (Tab) and make 
sure the 3D cursor is at the origin (Shift + C). Now, create a circle (Shift + A) 
by navigating to Mesh | Circle:
2.	 The circle is hidden inside the octopus, so with the circle still selected, 
switch to the local view (Numpad /). Since this circle will become the face, it's 
good to name it Face using the same method to rename the object as the one 
used earlier.
The circle is a flat object that has no face and is just a ring of points and lines. 
That's easy enough to fix:

Chapter 1
[ 35 ]
3.	 Switch to the Edit Mode (Tab). Now, with all the points or edges selected (A) 
from the 3D View menu, navigate to Mesh | Faces | Make Edge/Face or 
press F on the keyboard:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 36 ]
The Make Edge/Face command attempts to make a connected face from the 
selected vertices or lines. It can be quite intelligent, but if the points are not 
all flat, the edges may twist unexpectedly.
4.	 While still in the Edit Mode, switch to the top view (Numpad 7), and with all 
the points still selected, move (G) them to the left of the green y axis:
Duplicating an object outside of the Edit Mode creates a new object. 
However, duplicating points in the Edit Mode doesn't technically create a 
new object. Whatever is selected is duplicated while remaining a part of the 
same object. Objects in Blender can have many parts to them, all inside the 
same object.
5.	 Duplicate (Shift + D) all the points and place the duplicated points on the 
opposite side of the green y axis line:

Chapter 1
[ 37 ]
In this way, objects created while in the Edit Mode are just points, lines, 
and faces added to the existing object, even if they're not connected.
6.	 While still in the Edit Mode (making sure the 3D cursor is still at the origin), 
add (Shift + A) a plane to the face object by navigating to Mesh | Plane:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 38 ]
7.	 Move (G) the plane down along the y axis (Y) about 3 units:
8.	 Deselect all the points (A) and select the two points at the top of the plane. 
Then, scale (S) them up about twice in order to create a smiling mouth:

Chapter 1
[ 39 ]
9.	 The shapes now look like a face but only in two dimensions. To give it the 
additional dimension required, select all the points (A twice) and extrude 
them (E) about 4 or 5 units.
10.	 Exit the Edit Mode (Tab). The face template is now complete, and it just 
needs to be scaled and positioned.

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 40 ]
11.	 Rotate (R) the face object around the x axis (X) by 90 degrees (90):
12.	 Exit the local view (Numpad /). The face is hidden inside the body, so move 
(G) it in the z and y axes (Shift + X) until it's outside the octopus body:

Chapter 1
[ 41 ]
13.	 In front of the Ortho view (NumPad 1), scale the face (S) and move (G) it in 
the z axis (Z) until it's positioned properly:
14.	 In the side Ortho view (Numpad 3), move (G) the face along the y axis (Y) 
until it's partway into the body:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 42 ]
It may help to use the Wireframe view to ensure that the face is deep enough 
but not too deep. About four or five small squares (or 0.4 or 0.5 real-world 
millimeters) is perfect. If the face is too deep, it may cut all the way through 
into the cup space and may create an overhang problem. The top of the 
mouth will rely on some bridging during printing, and that's okay.
15.	 Now, select the body, and in the Modifier tab, add a Boolean modifier. 
Change the settings of the Boolean modifier to be a Difference operation 
with the Face Object.
16.	 The effect of this new modifier won't be visible immediately, so select the 
face object and hide it (H):

Chapter 1
[ 43 ]
Your octopus pencil holder is now complete.
17.	 Select the body, and in the Info panel menu (at the top of the screen), 
navigate to File | Export | Stl (.stl) to view the 3D-print-ready octopus 
holder. Ensure that you choose a directory where you can find the file 
later in order to send it to the printer:

Octopus Pencil Holder
[ 44 ]
Finishing touches
Now, the octopus is done, but don't stop here. Use your imagination to make this 
design your own. Add accessories and personality, change the base shape, and 
come up with your own design to make this something you'll want to share. Just 
remember the rules about overhangs in your design and the sky is the limit:
Summary
This project was functional but also cute. The techniques of vertex editing basic 
shapes in the Edit Mode with extrusion and loop cuts and then using the mesh 
smooth modifier and Boolean modifier in combination to further modify them can be 
used to create endless projects of any type and shape. Not all designs need to be cute, 
but they also don't all need to be purely practical. Combine a practical design with an 
aesthetic element in order to add personality and really take advantage of what 3D 
printing can offer.
Happy designing!

[ 45 ]
Prologue
3D printing basics
3D printing has been called a limitless technology. Still, that doesn't mean that it can 
create anything without any limitations. 3D printing can create things that no other 
manufacturing method can, but it has its rules that need to be followed  in order to 
ensure success:

Prologue
[ 46 ]
In this prologue, we'll discuss the following:
•	
What is 3D printing?
•	
Support-less 3D Printing and YHT (http://joes3dworkbench.blogspot.
in/2014/05/3d-printing-tip-designing-with-supports.html)
•	
Wall thickness
What is 3D printing?
3D printing is cool. It seems like not a day passes without another mention of 3D 
printing in the news and media online. Everyone is excited about 3D printing. But 
when you look deeper, it seems like everything is being printed in 3D, and anything 
could be. Does 3D printing something make it better? What exactly is 3D printing?
In many ways, 3D printers are just tools, the same as any tool that you'd find in a 
wood shop or a garage. These tools make cool things, but they don't do that on their 
own, and just because something is made with, say, an electric drill press, doesn't 
automatically make it better than something that isn't. It's the things that people like 
you are doing with these tools that make them cool.
This is not to say that by itself, 3D printing isn't cool. It allow you create things, test 
them, change the design, and try something new quickly until you get them right. 
It creates things of incredible complexity and, because it's additive manufacturing, 
it generates comparatively little waste. Cheaper and faster 3D printers imply that 
there's a chance that there's a 3D printer near you.
The right software
Creating 3D files requires 3D modeling software. There are many to choose from, 
with many new options appearing all the time, each with their own strengths and 
weaknesses. For this book, our software of choice is Blender because it's free, one of 
the most commonly chosen options for new 3D printing designers, and easily the 
most comprehensive and versatile option available. However, Blender requires 
some practice. The best practice is to use it to create cool things.
Downloading and installing Blender
The first thing that needs to be done is downloading and installing Blender:
1.	 On your PC or Mac computer, open a browser and go to 
http://www.blender.org.

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
2.	 Locate the download button on the main page for the latest version of 
Blender and click on the download Blender button, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Scroll down and find the download appropriate for your system. If you're 
on a Windows system and are not sure what to do, just choose the MSI 
package option.
4.	 When the installer finishes downloading, run it.
5.	 Follow the prompts to install Blender on your system.
6.	 When the installer is finished installing Blender, run the program. 
Click anywhere to close the splash screen.
Blender is now installed and ready for use.
Setting up Blender
The default settings for Blender can be unintuitive. However, Blender is also very 
easily adjusted with a few settings and can be made much easier to use. How you 
set up your instance of Blender will depend on what your setup is like.

Prologue
[ 48 ]
To access the settings in the top menu, navigate to File | User Preferences. 
In the Blender User Preferences panel that comes up, select the Input tab 
button, as shown in the following screenshot:
Scrolling the mouse wheel and number pad
The recommended setup for Blender is to use your keyboard and a mouse with a 
scroll wheel. In this case, there is only one setting that is recommended to be changed 
from the default:
1.	 Click on the button that says Left under the Select With section.
2.	 Click on the button that says Save User Settings, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
Changing this one setting will make Blender much more intuitive to use.
Because the default is for the right mouse button to be the select button, and some 
may prefer to keep this the default, we will refer to whatever option is chosen as the 
select mouse button and the other mouse button as the right mouse button. While 
still a bit confusing, it will help users who miss this section.
With a scroll wheel mouse, the scroll wheel can be used as a middle mouse button. 
Blender uses this middle mouse button to manipulate the view.
If you have a NumPad but no scroll wheel mouse, it may still be recommended that 
you use this setting because the interface will be much more intuitive, though you 
will be sacrificing some functionality that the middle mouse click offers. The choice is 
yours as to whether it's worth having a more intuitive interface.

Prologue
[ 50 ]
Laptops with a touchpad but no number pad
On a laptop with a touchpad (with no middle click) and no number pad, both very 
important to navigate the view, select the following settings:
1.	 Check the Emulate 3 Button Mouse and Emulate Numpad checkboxes.
2.	 Click on the button that says Save User Settings, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
With this setup, most of Blender's functionality will be available to laptop users, 
though these settings are less intuitive. With these settings, you will need to use 
the right mouse button to select objects, press Ctrl and the right mouse button as 
a middle mouse button to change the view, and the number keys across the top to 
perform the functions of the number pad on a regular keyboard.
With Blender set up, it's time to start learning how to use it. Close the User 
Preferences window.

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
What to design for?
It is the best practice to always design according to the strengths and weaknesses 
of the medium you'll be using. The projects in this series of books will focus on 
designing for Fused Filament Fabrication 3D printers because they're inexpensive 
and more readily available than the other methods. And the parts from FFF 
3D printers are suitable for a wide variety of functional uses. Also, many of the 
techniques for FFF design transfer to the other types of 3D printing. But because FFF 
3D printers have limitations, there will be some things you need to know first.
Overhangs and supports
FFF 3D printers have to worry about overhang. Overhang is when a part of the 
design, when it prints, does not have anything between it and the build platform. To 
compensate for this, the 3D printer can build a lattice of support material up to the 
overhanging part. After the print, the support material will have to be removed. But 
since, for most FFF 3D printers, the support material is made of the same material as 
the object, it can rarely be removed without a trace, which is sometimes difficult to 
clean up completely and can leave a mess in more complex prints:
Because of the troubles with supports, it's a good idea to design for support-less 
3D printing.

Prologue
[ 52 ]
Supportless 3D printing
Think of building a snowman or sand castle. There's a lot that can be done with the 
medium of sand or snow, but try to get too fancy with the design, and it will fall 
apart. As long as every part is sitting on top of something, chances are it will hold 
together. You could even slope gently outwards as long as you don't push it too far.
It's the same way with 3D prints. Because they print in layers, each layer needs 
to have something to lay down on. If a design is made so that a part has nothing 
underneath it, dangling in the air, then the printer will still extrude some plastic to 
try to print the part, but with nothing to print on, the plastic will just drool from the 
extruder until it gets wiped off on some other part, making an ugly mess and ruining 
the print.
As long as you put some thought into it, you can make designs that will succeed in 
most cases. There are a few rules that can help, and these rules can be illustrated with 
the letters Y, H, and T.
Y – gentle overhangs
Think about 3D printing a capital letter Y, standing up on the build platform; 
something like this:

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
As the print gets to the part where the arms of the Y branch out, the change is 
gradual. It is possible to have the current layer slightly larger than the previous one, 
provided the overhang is gentle. Generally, a 45-degree overhang is safe. Hence, 
a shape such as the letter Y will successfully print standing up.
However, if the overhang is too great or too abrupt, the new layer will droop, 
causing a print to fail. Some 3D printer owners pride themselves in pushing their 
overhang and have seen success with angles as steep as 80 degrees, but to be safe, 
keep your angles no more than 45 degrees.
H – bridging
If a part of the print has nothing above it but has something supporting it on either 
side, like a capital letter H standing up, then when printing it, we may be able to 
bridge the gap:
 
Use caution when bridging. The printer makes no special effort when making 
bridges; they are drawn like any other layer: outline first, then infill. As long as the 
outline has something to attach to on both sides, it should be fine. But if that outline 
is too complex or contains parts that will print in mid-air, it may not succeed. Being 
aware of bridges in the design and keeping them simple is the key to successful 
bridging. Even with a simple bridge, some 3D printers need a little bit more 
calibration to print it well.

Prologue
[ 54 ]
Hence, a shape like the capital letter H will successfully print most of the time 
because of bridging.
T – orientation
If you were to try to print a capital letter T standing up on the build platform, 
you would surely run into problems:
 
The top arms have far too much overhang to print successfully. Of course, the 
solution to this is simple; when designing, flip the T over or lay it down. In fact, 
every letter of the alphabet will print successfully if laid on its back, but the letter T 
illustrates this best. Sometimes, when designing a part for 3D printing, it's good to 
turn it around and orient it so it prints well. Not every print needs to be printed in 
the same way it's going to be used.
Wall thickness
There is a minimum size for what a 3D printer can print. It's best to err on the side 
of caution. While a 0.8 mm wall will be okay on most FFF 3D printers, a 2 mm wall 
is thick enough for slicers to use one or two outlines without conflict and still have 
room for a little infill, no matter what the nozzle diameter is. This will make solid 
prints that will succeed in almost all cases, and 2 mm is still fairly thin, allowing 
considerable detail.

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
In the same vein, a wall by itself, without an inside or outside, isn't printable because 
a 2D wall has no thickness and doesn't describe a shape that can exist in real life. 3D 
prints must be a part of a three-dimensional shape with a thickness:
Summary
3D printing is cool and allows the creation of fantastic and detailed objects without 
requiring much interaction with people after the design is done. But designing for 3D 
printing is a lot like designing for any other type of manufacturing.
Fused Filament Fabrication 3D printing, or FFF for short, is one of the oldest, most 
mature, and cheapest forms of 3D printing, so this series will focus on designing for 
it. It involves melting a plastic filament and drawing the object layer by layer, with 
each layer sitting on top of the one below it.
Designing for most effective FFF printing means thinking about overhangs and 
supports and about the parts of the prints that don't have anything underneath them 
when they print. To avoid requiring supports when printing, it can help to remember 
the letters Y, H, and T when designing in order to remember to consider gradual 
overhangs, bridging, and orientation. In addition, it's important to remember that 
details should generally be about 2 mm thick.
This was, of course, the most basic of overviews of designing for 3D printing and 
setting up Blender. For more detailed information, let's start with our first project: 
octopus pencil holder.


[ 57 ]
Index
Symbols
3D modeling software  46
3D printing
about  1, 45, 46
reference  46
B
Blender
downloading  46
installing  46, 47
laptops, with touchpad but no 
number pad  50
number pad, scrolling  48, 49
setting up  47
wheel mouse, scrolling  48, 49
F
FFF 3D printers
about  51
overhangs  51
rules  52
support-less 3D printing  52
wall thickness  54, 55
O
Octopus pencil holder
basic shape, defining  2-4
basic shape, editing  4-9
bottom, flattening  17-24
face, adding  34-42
loop cut, performing  12-16
mesh, smoothing with modifiers  10, 11
objects, renaming  25-27
pencil cup, adding  27-33
tentacles, bending  12-17
touches, finishing  44
P
project, pencil holder
planning  2
R
rules, FFF 3D printers
H  53
T  54
Y  52, 53


Thank you for buying 
3D Printing Designs: Octopus Pencil Holder
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book, Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management, in April 2004, and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution-based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern yet unique publishing company that focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. 
For more information, please visit our website at www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order 
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, 
home to books published on software built around open source licenses, and offering 
information to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open 
Source brand also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty 
to each open source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would 
like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, then please contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Blender Cycles: Materials and 
Textures Cookbook
Third Edition
ISBN: 978-1-78439-993-1              Paperback: 400 pages
Over 40 practical recipes to create stunning materials 
and textures using the Cycles rendering engine 
with Blender
1.	
Create realistic material shaders by 
understanding the fundamentals of 
material creation in Cycles.
2.	
Quickly make impressive projects 
production-ready using the Blender 
rendering engine.
3D Printing with SketchUp
ISBN: 978-1-78328-457-3             Paperback: 136 pages
Real-world case studies to help you design models 
in SketchUp for 3D printing on anything ranging 
from the smallest desktop machines to the largest 
industrial 3D printers
1.	
Learn how to design beautiful architectural 
models that will print on any 3D printer.
2.	
Packed with clearly illustrated examples to 
show you just how to design for 3D printing.
3.	
Discover the essential extensions and 
companion programs for 3D printing 
your models.

Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Getting Started with Unity 5
ISBN: 978-1-78439-831-6            Paperback: 184 pages
Leverage the power of Unity 5 to create amazing 
3D games
1.	
Learn to create interactive games with the 
Unity 5 game engine. 
2.	
Explore advanced features of Unity 5 to 
help make your games more appealing 
and successful.
3.	
A step-by-step guide giving you the perfect 
start to developing games with Unity 5.
Building a Game with Unity and 
Blender
ISBN: 978-1-78528-214-0             Paperback: 250 pages
Learn how to build a complete 3D game using the 
industry-leading Unity game development engine 
and Blender, the graphics software that gives life 
to your ideas
1.	
Learn the fundamentals of two powerful tools 
and put the concepts into practice.
2.	
Find out how to design and build all the core 
elements required for a great game - from 
characters to environments, to props.
3.	
Learn how to integrate Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) into your game for sophisticated and 
engaging gameplay.

Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

