Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

3D Printing with SketchUp
Real-world case studies to help you design models  
in SketchUp for 3D printing on anything ranging from 
the smallest desktop machines to the largest industrial 
3D printers
Marcus Ritland
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

3D Printing with SketchUp
Copyright © 2014 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: May 2014
Production Reference: 1140514
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
Livery Place 
35 Livery Street 
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78328-457-3
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Marcus Ritland (marcus@denali3ddesign.com)
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Credits
Author
Marcus Ritland
Reviewers
Bradley Rubin
Chris Thompson
Samson Tiew
Commissioning Editor
Julian Urssel
Acquisition Editor
Nikhil Chinnari
Content Development Editor
Govindan K
Technical Editors
Arwa Manasawala
Anand Singh
Copy Editors
Mradula Hegde
Laxmi Subramanian
Project Coordinators
Sanket Deshmukh
Sageer Parkar
Proofreaders
Simran Bhogal
Stephen Copestake
Maria Gould
Indexers
Hemangini Bari
Tejal Soni
Priya Subramani
Production Coordinator
Adonia Jones
Cover Work
Adonia Jones
Komal Ramchandani
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

About the Author
Marcus Ritland is a designer and 3D printing consultant at his small business, 
Denali 3D Design. Since 2008, he has used SketchUp for architectural rendering 
services, learning it and helping others well enough to be chosen as "Top 
SketchUcator" of the SketchUcation forums. After learning about 3D printing 
through an online contest, he incorporated it into his business, selling 3D-printed 
goods online and helping other small business owners leverage the technology.
He has also volunteered at a local makerspace, teaching SketchUp classes and 
leading 3D-printing meetups. He is currently on a quest to eliminate design-for-3D-
printing illiteracy. When he's not push-pulling a model into shape, he can be found 
shooting photos and enjoying nature.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

About the Reviewers
Bradley Rubin began using 3D printing while getting his Bachelor of Architecture 
degree from the Syracuse University. With a passion for storytelling and design, 
he has worked in both the digital and physical world of film entertainment. Brad's 
credits include working on films such as This is 40, The Internship, The Muppets, 
Real Steel, and The Hunger Games. He has worked on multiple films in the capacities 
of graphic consultant and as an illustrator/3D modeler. Brad spent three years in 
Boston working as an architect, and did volunteer work that promoted design and 
architecture to children and Boston area citizens.
Chris Thompson began his career in 3D printing at Hive76 hackerpsace, where he 
printed his first ever object: a dovetail joint, modeled in SketchUp and printed on a 
Cupcake CNC. He furthered his skills by building a RepRap and running 3D printer 
building workshops for new users.
Prior to this, he was a Technical Supervisor at NextFab Studio in Philadelphia 
and an expert in the field of digital manufacturing. He is also a mildly successful 
entrepreneur with meatcards.com. His previous positions gave him experience  
with laser engravers, fine hand skills, and digital design tools.
I'd like to thank Valeria, without whom nothing is possible.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Samson Tiew is a co-founder of The make lab, an online digital fabrication 
platform servicing the Australian market. Coming from an architecture background, 
he identified a gap in the market to make digital fabrication more accessible to retail 
customers. Within the field of design and fabrication, he is highly interested in the 
idea of experimental practices fused with practical experiments.
The make lab is a platform for designers and enthusiasts to fabricate and 
manufacture customized products. Albeit focusing on laser cutting in the interim, 
the personnel that form The make lab are very much in tune with other digital 
fabrication techniques such as CNC routing and 3D printing.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers 
and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to  
your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up  
for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books  
and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why Subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Concepts Every 3D Printing Designer Needs to Know	
7
A short background of 3D printing	
8
The 3D printing process	
8
Printing support material	
9
Own a printer or use a print service?	
10
Making the most of 3D printing	
11
Designing for prototypes versus finished products	
11
Avoiding the pitfalls of 3D printing	
12
Choosing a 3D modeling program	
13
Summary	
14
Chapter 2: Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing	
15
Downloading and installing SketchUp	
15
The SketchUp interface	
17
Setting up a template for fast modeling and troubleshooting	
18
Using the 3D printer's build volume component	
20
Model units of measurement	
21
Saving our template as the default template	
21
Using other styles	
22
Setting up toolbars	
22
Minimizing dialog boxes	
22
Installing and using extensions	
23
Installing more extensions	
25
A quick exercise	
25
Importing .STL files	
27
Summary	
28
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 3: From 2D Drawing to 3D Model	
29
Starting from a quick sketch	
29
Designing for ease of printing	
30
Modeling in SketchUp from a sketch	
30
Keeping a historical timeline of changes speeds iteration	
33
Exporting the model and printing	
34
Importing vector artwork	
35
Changing the scale of the part	
36
A bonus tip – the 45-degree overhang rule for filament printers	
37
Making the design your own	
38
Summary	
38
Chapter 4: Understanding Model Resolution	
39
Wall thickness	
40
Modeling a vase	
41
Creating a profile	
42
Avoiding missing faces by scaling up your model	
43
Creating wall thickness	
44
Understanding noncircular circles	
45
Making the magic happen with the Follow Me tool	
46
A bonus tip for desktop extrusion printers	
48
Combining solids with the Outer Shell tool	
48
Bonus – more methods to create wall thickness	
51
Summary	
52
Chapter 5: Using Existing Models	
53
Leveraging SketchUp components to save time	
53
Saving a model as a Component	
54
Online 3D model repositories	
55
Thingiverse	
55
3D Warehouse	
56
GrabCAD	
56
Case study – modifying a GoPro wrench	
56
Summary	
61
Chapter 6: Designing a Phone Cradle	
63
Getting started with a 2D sketch	
64
Getting to the third dimension	
64
Adding details to make the model interesting	
65
Using the 3D Text tool	
66
Mirroring symmetrical models	
66
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Combining groups with the Outer Shell tool	
67
Cutting a slot for the cord	
68
Orienting faces for a perfect model	
70
Exporting the model for printing	
71
Testing the printed model	
71
Developing an improved design	
72
Copying and scaling groups to create a complex shape	
73
Finishing up and printing the new model	
74
Testing the second iteration	
74
Summary	
75
Chapter 7: Importing Terrain and Printing in Color	
77
Working with the Google Earth terrain	
77
Printing models with color	
81
Textures versus solid colors	
82
Working with solid colors in SketchUp	
83
Working with textures in SketchUp	
83
Exporting the model for color printing	
84
Summary	
84
Chapter 8: Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing	
85
Using SketchUp for 3D printing versus rendering	
86
Case study – 3D printing a model designed for rendering	
86
Examining the original model	
87
Planning the model	
89
Using groups and layers to organize the model	
89
Creating a standard wall thickness	
90
Editing wall panels to add details	
93
Adding the window grills	
95
Adding interior walls	
96
Modeling the roof	
97
Orienting the parts for printing	
98
Printing the model and bonus commentary	
100
Preparing the model for full color printing	
102
Orienting the parts for printing	
104
Printing from i.materialise	
105
Printing from Shapeways	
105
The full-color printed cabin	
106
Summary	
107
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Appendix: Resources for Your 3D Printing Success	
109
Troubleshooting nonsolid models	
109
SketchUp extensions	
111
Where to find extensions online	
111
Extensions and plugins mentioned in the book	
111
More useful extensions	
112
SketchUp training	
113
Companion programs for 3D printing	
113
3D model repositories	
113
3D print services	
114
Industrial services with a shop platform	
114
Crowdsourced print services	
114
Contact me	
114
Index	
115
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Preface
My journey into the fascinating world of 3D printing began in 2010 when I entered 
a 3D-printing design contest. While I didn't win the contest, I discovered a world of 
democratized manufacturing, where anyone could create nearly any design with a 
technology that was once available only to large corporations.
The new idea that 3D printers could create end-use products instead of just 
prototypes spawned several print-on-demand businesses that drove demand for 
3D printed products and drastically reduced prices. Another important factor in the 
spread of 3D-printing was the expiration of patents that allowed for the development 
of cheap 3D printers.
Along my journey, I discovered that 3D modeling skills are difficult for many 
people to master, but masters of the craft are well rewarded. I also found it nearly 
impossible to get technical help in making printable SketchUp models, and ended 
up figuring out problems on my own. As I learned, I helped others in online 
communities use SketchUp to design their models for printing, and as a result  
my skills improved further.
In these early years of 3D printing for the masses, I see a real need for quality training 
that allows anybody to use the printers to their full potential. 3D modeling skills are 
not common even among the early 3D printer adopters, who are often stuck with 
printing what others make available online.
I sincerely hope this guide saves you from the many difficulties I had when learning 
to design models for printing.
The 3D printed lamp in the cover image was the author's first design made 
specifically for 3D printing. Printed in laser-sintered nylon, the lamp throws a unique 
pattern of light. It was designed entirely in SketchUp, and the complex geometry is 
an excellent example of what 3D printing can accomplish.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Preface
[ 2 ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Concepts Every 3D Printing Designer Needs to Know, introduces different 3D 
printing processes, each with its pros and cons. You will learn how to find material 
specifications and choose based on your needs.
Chapter 2, Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing, explains how to install SketchUp 
and customize a template that will allow you to model for 3D printing efficiently. 
Extensions are introduced, and you make your first 3D printable file.
Chapter 3, From 2D Drawing to 3D Model, shows how to import an image to  
begin modeling from and how to accurately scale your model. You also learn  
about importing vector artwork to start your 3D model.
Chapter 4, Understanding Model Resolution, explains segmented curves in SketchUp 
and how to make your curved models print smoothly. You learn about wall 
thickness and how to minimize print material. Finally, you learn how to use  
the Outer Shell tool to combine simple parts into a complex model.
Chapter 5, Using Existing Models, introduces online 3D model repositories, and 
explains how to make the most of them to save you time. You will learn how to 
adapt existing models to your needs.
Chapter 6, Designing a Phone Cradle, introduces some advanced modeling techniques 
and explains how to save time by drawing only half of your model. You see how 
iterating a model works to gradually improve the final design.
Chapter 7, Importing Terrain and Printing in Color, shows how to import 3D terrain 
from Google Earth and make it solid for printing. You learn about solid colors and 
textures in SketchUp and how that affects packaging the model for the printer.
Chapter 8, Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing, shows how to use existing 
architectural models as a template for making a 3D printable model. You also  
learn how to split a model into parts to minimize support structures on a desktop 
FFF printer.
Appendix, Resources for Your 3D Printing Success, provides troubleshooting help and 
links to other resources to help you make 3D-printable models.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Preface
[ 3 ]
What you need for this book
We need either SketchUp Make or SketchUp Pro. Pro is necessary for commercial 
users, as per the licensing agreement.
You also need at least a basic knowledge of the SketchUp tools. If you are new to 
SketchUp, I recommend the book SketchUp for Dummies, Aidan Chopra, John Wiley & 
Sons, or the video training series at www.go-2-school.com.
Who this book is for
This book is for SketchUp users who need to physically hold their models, hobbyists 
and inventors looking to test their prototypes, and students looking to learn about 
3D printing.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"The 3D model is exported to a format that a slicing program can read, usually 
Stereolithography [.STL]."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "You can 
also smooth the imported models easily by selecting their groups and adjusting the 
slider in the Soften Edges dialog box."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Preface
[ 4 ]
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things  
to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/
diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the 
changes in the output. You can download this file from https://www.packtpub.
com/sites/default/files/downloads/4573OS_Images.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring  
you valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Concepts Every 3D Printing 
Designer Needs to Know
The 3D printer is a favorite tool among product designers. With a 3D printer often 
placed in the same room as the designer, rapid feedback and faster design cycles 
make it a staple in large companies. But corporations are not the only ones making 
use of this increasingly popular technology. Individuals are also increasingly using 
3D printing for work and play.
Where does the attraction to 3D printing come from? Speed and automation of 
manufacturing, accessibility to the masses, and increased complexity of designs  
are some of the reasons.
The hardest part of the 3D printing process is making a 3D printable model. 3D 
printers automate the build process once a 3D model is complete. It's easy to buy  
a printer, but it's much more difficult to make or find good quality models.
Why should you learn how to design for 3D printing? Good designers charge $50 
per hour and up, with complex designs taking dozens or hundreds of hours, so 
learning how to model can save you lots of cash if you're developing a model to 
print. Alternatively, 3D modeling is a skill you can contract out to produce models 
for others.
When designing for 3D printing, it is essential that you understand how the process 
works so that your designs actually work in the printer. Although 3D printers can 
make very complex models, those models must meet a specific criteria to be printable.
In this chapter, we'll discover what 3D printing is, how it works, who uses the 
technology, when it makes sense to use 3D printing, and why SketchUp is a good 
tool for the job.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Concepts Every 3D Printing Designer Needs to Know
[ 8 ]
A short background of 3D printing
What is 3D printing? 3D printing is a common term for a manufacturing process 
where parts are made by adding layers of material one upon other to form the final 
product. The process was developed in the 1980s, and is commonly known in the 
commercial industry as additive manufacturing or rapid prototyping. Prototyping is the 
process of creating a product by improving on a series of designs. Each change in the 
design is called an iteration.
Commercial 3D printers come with hefty price tags ranging from $20,000 to over 
$1 million. With the recent expiration of some 3D printing patents, hobbyists have 
developed small, open source 3D printers. These machines, called desktop 3D printers, 
are cheap enough to allow individuals to own and operate them, which has led to  
an explosion in both sales of the machines and interest in 3D printing in general.
The 3D printing process
A basic overview of the 3D printing process is as follows:
1.	
A 3D model is created with a computer program such as SketchUp.
2.	
The 3D model is exported to a format that a slicing program can read,
usually Stereolithography (.STL).
3.	
The STL file is loaded into the slicing program that creates instructions
(g-code) so that the printer knows how to make the model.
4.	
The printer builds the model, layer upon layer.
5.	
There may or may not be post processing necessary to finish the model.
3D printing can be compared to 2D printing in some ways. In both types of printing, a 
printhead moves back and forth across a printbed, depositing material. The difference 
in 3D printing is that the material has thickness and is repeated layer upon layer. 
Another similarity is print resolution. In 2D printing, this is described as dots per inch 
(DPI), whereas in 3D printing this is typically measured in fractions of millimeters or 
microns. Often 3D printers have settings to print higher or lower resolutions.
There are many different 3D printing processes, including plastic filament extrusion 
or fused filament fabrication (FFF), hardening liquid resin polymers, powder-based 
systems, and lost wax casting from 3D printed wax models. While there are more 
technologies, these are the most common at this point.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Watching videos of different 3D printing processes is one of the best ways to 
understand how the process is unique for each material. I've curated a few of the  
most popular kinds of processes at http://www.denali3ddesign.com/video 
-guide-to-3d-printing-technologies/.
Printing support material
An important function of 3D printing is support material that allows for the printing 
of overhangs. Commercial printers have a system built into the machine for support 
material. Support material can be uncured powder in the case of power-based 
machines, or a separate soluble material printed simultaneously in the case of FFF 
and other machines. Desktop printers are usually limited to printing supports out  
of the same material as the rest of the print, or applying workarounds that eliminate 
the need for support material.
In the following figure, you can clearly see the need for support material in the 
overhanging layers, where the material would otherwise be hanging over open space:
During the design phase, you should think about support material—whether it is 
necessary and how it can be removed. For example, printing a hollow box with a 
powder printer will mean designing escape holes for the uncured support powder 
inside; however, with FFF, escape holes aren't necessary. Often a small tweak in the 
design phase will make for a much better final print.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Concepts Every 3D Printing Designer Needs to Know
[ 10 ]
Own a printer or use a print service?
While it really depends on the situation, I'm in favor of using a print service for  
most folks, especially beginners. The following are the reasons:
•	
Quality is the biggest reason. Print services generally use commercial  
printers with finishes much better than the typical desktop printer.  
These services also offer post processing such as polishing or dying the  
parts with commercial grade equipment.
•	
Owning a printer also means an upfront investment in equipment and 
supplies. Much like computers, the technology is improving quickly, so  
in a few years your system may be outdated and you'll want to purchase  
a new one. With a print service, somebody else is investing their money,  
so you just have to pay for the finished parts.
•	
Print services offer a range of materials and finishes for each material, 
ranging from metal to plastic and ceramics. Each of these materials has its 
own set of equipment to maintain and supplies to have on hand, which is  
too costly for an individual.
•	
Consumer printers have a high learning curve compared to commercial 
printers. Desktop printers, especially those built from kits, are notoriously 
hard to maintain. To get good prints, printers need to be calibrated correctly, 
a time-consuming process.
On the other hand, the following are some very appealing reasons to own and 
operate a desktop printer:
•	
Although not for everyone, building a printer from a kit of parts holds 
outstanding educational value in learning how electromechanical systems 
work and how to maintain your printer.
•	
There are two major advantages to owning a printer, time being the big one. 
If you're developing a product, your cycle will move fastest if you have a 
printer in your office. You can walk over in a few hours and pick up your 
print rather than waiting several days or weeks to receive a part in the mail.
•	
If you have enough print volume, the overall part cost is also going to be as 
much as 95 percent cheaper on your desktop printer. Commercial machines 
are expensive to operate, and when you buy parts from a print service, you're 
paying for the cost of the printer as well as human labor to make that part.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Perhaps the best option, if your budget allows, is to prototype parts on your own 
desktop printer, and then use a print service for final, high quality parts. In this way 
you get the best of both worlds.
Making the most of 3D printing
In what situations does it make sense to use 3D printing technology? Here are a few 
examples of how people are successfully using 3D printing:
•	
Inventors use 3D printers to rapidly create prototypes for testing. When you 
can print an idea and test it a few hours later, your design cycle improves, 
which helps to get the product to market faster.
•	
Inventors may also sell 3D prints as finished products before mass-producing. 
The Glif is a great case study of a design team that 3D printed their first batch 
of iPhone-to-tripod adapters. (http://www.therussiansusedapencil.com/
post/2794775825/idea-to-market-in-5-months-making-the-glif).
•	
Designers can use a 3D print service to make and sell their designs online. 
This works well because you can focus on making more designs, and let 
somebody else take care of producing and distributing the finished products. 
Bathsheba Grossman is a great case study of an artist using a print service for 
manufacturing and selling her designs online (http://www.bathsheba.com/).
•	
Hard-to-find replacement parts can be made with 3D printing. Some 
examples are old architectural hardware, antique car parts, and obsolete 
equipment. This case study explains how a landlord saved hundreds 
of dollars by printing window parts that are not manufactured any 
longer (http://www.denali3ddesign.com/landlord-3d-printing-
replacement-window-parts/).
Designing for prototypes versus finished 
products
When modeling for 3D printing, there are two ways to approach the design—either 
you'll be prototyping before traditional manufacturing or designing products 
specifically for 3D printing and ready-to-use right out of the printer.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Concepts Every 3D Printing Designer Needs to Know
[ 12 ]
If you design for prototyping before traditional manufacturing such as injection 
molding, then you'll want to design as per the injection modeling guidelines and  
find a 3D printing technology to fit the specifications of your model. Do not change 
the design to accommodate a specific 3D printing process, but rather look for a  
3D printing process that will meet your prototyping needs.
If you are designing specifically for 3D printing, then you must understand and 
design around the specific requirements for the material of your choice. For example, 
in SLS printing, no details smaller than 0.2 mm will show on your model, but for 
3D printed ceramic, details must be larger than 2 mm. This is important to know, 
because if you're printing the same model in different materials, you may need to 
tweak the design for each material.
If using a 3D print service, look for guidelines on their website that describe how 
to design for each material. Alternatively, if operating a printer yourself, find the 
manufacturer's guidelines for model specifications.
Avoiding the pitfalls of 3D printing
I have already mentioned some advantages of 3D printing in one of the previous 
sections. While 3D printers can make very complex objects with ease, they're not  
the best solution in other cases for the following few reasons:
•	
No efficiency gain when making multiple prints of the same model
•	
It's expensive for parts larger than your hand, particularly on  
industrial printers
•	
There is often a lot of hands-on processing of the design, both in the  
CAD design as well as finishing off the part
•	
The range of materials is very limited compared to standard manufacturing
Let's discuss these points in more detail. 3D printing is expensive compared to mass 
manufactured parts (but not compared to one-off or hand-made parts). This is because 
each part takes just as long to make as the last—there is no time gained by making  
50 parts versus just one part.
When doubling the size of a 3D print, you're actually increasing the time to 
print as well as the volume of the material by eight times. This increases the cost 
exponentially. For this reason, you'll often see light, airy, almost skeletal designs  
for 3D printing, as these decrease the volume of material needed. Creating holes  
in your design makes the part cheaper to print.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
You can also print lower resolutions for thicker layer heights and a faster print, 
or higher resolutions for thinner, more detailed layers. Making each layer thinner 
increases the overall number of layers printed. Similar to increasing the size of a 
print, print time increases when printing a model at higher resolutions.
Visible layer lines are a fact of life with 3D prints. However, it is possible to get a 
smooth finish on your 3D printed part with some post processing work. Depending 
on the material, it may be tumbled, sanded, painted, or otherwise worked. This is 
typically done by hand—a time-consuming process.
Currently, nearly all printers just use one material. This means that if you need 
multiple materials in one print, you'll have to print them separately and assemble 
them later. Many materials are not compatible with 3D printing processes, limiting 
your choices even further.
Choosing a 3D modeling program
There are dozens of 3D modeling programs available, some are free while others  
cost thousands of dollars. Why use SketchUp?
SketchUp Make is free for non-commercial use, is easy to learn, has a great 
community of users that you can ask for personalized help, and is customizable 
through its extensions system. Concepts learned in SketchUp are transferrable if  
you decide to move on to another modeling program.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Concepts Every 3D Printing Designer Needs to Know
[ 14 ]
SketchUp works best on rectilinear and geometric-type models, but not as well on 
curvy, organic models. For these kinds of designs, there are tools better suited to  
the task.
This book is meant to instruct you in how to use SketchUp specifically for 3D 
printing, but will teach little general SketchUp modeling. If you're new to  
SketchUp, I recommend SketchUp's own video training series that are available  
at http://www.sketchup.com/learn/videos, or refer to Google SketchUp 8 for 
Dummies, Aidan Chopra, December, 2010, or the website http://www.go-2-school.
com/, in addition to using this book for the specifics of 3D printing.
Summary
3D printing is a fantastic new technology that takes many forms. Knowledge of these 
technologies is imperative to help you choose the right one for your application. 
Desktop and commercial printers work very differently and each has its own 
benefits. Use each for its own advantages.
You must understand the limitations of the technology, and play to its strengths.  
You wouldn't use a 3D printer to mass manufacture full size cars (yet), just as it's  
not feasible to manufacture customized phone cases with traditional methods.
Learn about the specifications of your chosen printer/material. Design your model 
around those specs. SketchUp is a good general purpose modeling tool, but it's not 
the only one. Learn about other modeling programs, and use the one that best fits 
your needs.
In the next chapter, you'll learn how to set up SketchUp for 3D printing success.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp  
for 3D Printing
In this chapter, we'll install SketchUp and learn the settings that will make modeling 
for 3D printing faster and easier. We'll learn about SketchUp extensions, which are 
essential add-ons for the work we'll be doing.
Downloading and installing SketchUp
SketchUp works on both Windows and Mac, and comes in a free version called 
SketchUp Make, or a commercial-use version called SketchUp Pro. To download, 
go to www.sketchup.com. You'll be asked how you plan to use the program, either 
for personal, commercial, or educational use, and then will be directed to a page to 
download SketchUp. Make, which is excellent for designing 3D-printable models for 
non-commercial use, comes with an 8-hour trial version of Pro.
This book uses commands and screenshots from SketchUp 2014 for Windows. 
Commands in earlier or later versions of SketchUp and SketchUp for Mac may vary 
slightly from those shown in the screenshots and written commands. All of the 
exercises in this book can be completed with either SketchUp Make or SketchUp Pro.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing
[ 16 ]
Once you've installed the program and opened it, you'll see a splash screen where 
you'll need to choose a default template as shown in the following screenshot. Scroll 
to the bottom of the list and choose the 3D Printing – Millimeters template. After 
the first time, you won't need to choose a template again, but you will see the splash 
screen every time SketchUp opens unless you purchase a Pro license:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 2
[ 17 ]
The SketchUp interface
When opening SketchUp for the first time, you'll see a screen similar to the one 
shown in the following screenshot:
The interface is simple, yet is able to show all the information you need. Let's walk 
through each of the elements in more detail:
•	
Menu bar highlighted as (1): This is your command center, where you can 
access every tool and command in the program.
•	
Toolbar highlighted as (2): This is the Getting Started toolbar. There are many 
more toolbars, and they can be placed around the screen wherever you like.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing
[ 18 ]
•	
Dialog box highlighted as (3): This is Instructor, which shows you what 
each tool does as you choose it. There are more dialog boxes available in the 
Windows menu.
•	
Shortcuts highlighted as (4): This is a mini toolbar to various dialog boxes. 
You cannot move this toolbar.
•	
Status bar highlighted as (5): This area provides you with hints about how to 
use the active tool with modifier keys. Many tools in SketchUp use modifier 
keys, such as Shift, Ctrl, or Command (Mac), and Alt or Option (Mac) to extend 
the functionality of the tool. It's a good idea to keep an eye on this area, 
especially if you're a beginner.
•	
Value Control Box (VCB) highlighted as (6): Also called the Measurements 
toolbar, this provides you with measurement information about the current 
operation, and shows certain commands as you're typing. You don't click on 
it, only watch what's happening in it.
•	
3D Printer Build Volume highlighted as (7): This area is new to SketchUp 
2014 in the 3D Printing templates. It is a dynamic component that you can 
adjust to show the build area of the machine that will be printing your model.
•	
The drawing area: The rest of the window is dominated by the drawing area. 
This is where all the modeling action happens!
Setting up a template for fast modeling 
and troubleshooting
Templates allow you to save settings in your model and quickly access them later. 
Styles in SketchUp affect how your model looks on the screen, and are included in 
templates. With styles, you can add shadows, different color backgrounds, and line 
weights. While the settings are useful for presenting architectural models, they don't 
really help while modeling for 3D printing. Even worse, they make SketchUp run 
slower because the computer has to work harder displaying those extra visuals.
Style settings can be found by navigating to Window | Styles. Play around with 
different styles to see how they change the look of the model. The 3D Printing 
template that we chose when starting SketchUp has good settings such as a plain 
background and shadows turned off, but let's tweak it to help with troubleshooting. 
In the Styles dialog box, choose Default Styles, then 3D Printing Style.
Click on the Edit tab in the Styles dialog box, then click on the Face Settings tab, 
then click on the box beside Back color as shown in the following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
In the window that pops up, choose a nice bright color, say, orange. What this does 
is make it easy to differentiate front and back faces while modeling. This is important 
because all faces in SketchUp have a front side and a back side. The faces need to be 
oriented with the front faces pointing out, and all the back faces pointing inside, or 
the model will not print correctly.
Changing the back face to a bright color will allow you to  
see reversed faces easily, so you can fix them with a simple  
right-click on the screen and clicking on Reverse Faces.
Click on the Update Style with changes button at the top right of the Styles dialog 
box, and then close the Styles window.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing
[ 20 ]
Using the 3D printer's build volume 
component
The 3D printer build volume model included with the 3D printing templates in 
SketchUp 2014 gives you a visual representation of the 3D printer's build platform 
so that you can ensure that your model will fit in the printer properly. The build 
volume model is a dynamic component—a special model whose measurements  
you can define via the Component Options (or Component Attributes if you're 
using SketchUp Pro) dialog box.
This model will be especially useful if you have a desktop printer. If you're using  
a print service, you may wish to delete this component.
To set the size of the build volume to your printer, select the build volume  
component, then go to Window | Component Options. You'll see something  
like the following image.
The drop-down menu lists about 20 of the most popular desktop 3D printers. 
Choosing a printer from the list and clicking on Apply at the bottom automatically 
resizes the build volume component to the precise size for that printer. My printer, 
the Solidoodle 2, was not listed. This was not surprising to me, because there are so 
many desktop printers on the market. In my case, the Printrbot Jr. printer listed is 
very close in size so I simply used that one.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
If your printer is not listed and the available sizes are not close enough, you can 
easily make a similar component by drawing a box of the size of your printer's 
build volume, and deleting all faces of the box except the bottom, leaving all edges 
intact. Make the geometry into a component and delete the original 3D printer build 
volume component when you're done.
Model units of measurement
You can use SketchUp in either imperial (feet and inches) or metric units. To change 
the model units, navigate to Window | Model Info | Units. You can also switch 
back and forth between units in the middle of a modeling session with no negative 
consequences. This is useful when you are modeling in inches, but the 3D printing 
specs, such as wall thickness, are in metric units. You can design in inches, and then 
switch to metric units to check measurements and add details.
Many desktop printers are setup to work with mm as default. For this reason,  
I recommend you use mm for now, and change back to inches later if necessary. 
Using metric units now will likely save you having to convert units later in your 
work. If you mostly work with imperial measurements, you may find it easier to  
go ahead and switch to inches at this point.
Saving our template as the default template
Now that you've gone through all the work of customizing this template, you'll  
want to save it so you don't have to perform the same steps every time. Before 
saving, delete all the geometry from the file except the 3D printer build volume 
component if you want it and perform the following step:
1.	 Navigate to Model Info | Statistics, and click on Purge Unused. This clears 
out any unused styles, components, or other settings that increase the file size.
To save this template as the default that opens every time you 
start SketchUp, navigate to File | Save As Template... and save 
it with the name 3D printing mm. Make sure Set as Default 
is checked before saving. Optionally, fill out the description box 
with the changes you have made.
Later, as you develop a personalized workflow, you can modify this template to 
open with nearly any setting or geometry that you wish to begin modeling with. 
For example, if you model custom Arduino cases, you could start out with a base 
Arduino model already in your window so that you can start building on top of it 
right away.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing
[ 22 ]
Using other styles
Most of the time, your customized style is the best option, but some of the other 
styles will be useful as well. The Architectural Design Style has thicker lines with tick 
marks on each line end. This makes the lines easier to see in cases where you may 
need that option. The other styles are mostly for presentation, and may be useful  
if you're sharing images of your model with others.
Setting up toolbars
Toolbars allow you to access commands faster than using the drop-down menus 
in the menu bar. There are many pre-made toolbars, and you can create your own 
custom toolbars as well.
For starting out, I recommend you turn off the default Getting Started toolbar and 
place the Standard, Styles, and Views toolbars at the top of your screen, and the 
Large Tool Set along the left of your screen. The Large Tool Set has many of the tools 
you'll use while modeling. The Styles toolbar is useful for toggling X-ray mode, and 
turning colors on and off while modeling. The View toolbar is used for aligning the 
model to camera views such as Front, Top, or Iso views.
While toolbars are nice for beginners, I recommend you also learn the keyboard 
shortcuts to speed up your modeling. You can find a one page cheat sheet of 
keyboard shortcuts at http://help.sketchup.com/en/article/116693.
Minimizing dialog boxes
There are a few dialog boxes that you'll use frequently. While you can close them 
to make more drawing space, and get them back from the Window menu when 
needed, I like to keep the commonly used ones minimized on the right side of my 
screen. The ones I keep open are as follows:
•	
Entity Info
•	
Components
•	
Materials
•	
Soften Edges
•	
Layers
To minimize a dialog box, just click on the top of its window once, and it will roll  
up so just its name is visible. This way, it stays out of the way but is easily accessible. 
The boxes stick together, making it easy to keep them looking neat.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
The following screenshot is what my screen looks like when I open SketchUp to 
begin modeling:
You can see how the drawing space dominates the window. The toolbars are 
arranged at the top and left side of the window, and the dialog boxes are neatly 
minimized near the upper right side of the screen.
Installing and using extensions
Extensions, also commonly called plugins or ruby scripts, transform SketchUp from 
a cool program for architects into a super versatile modeling tool that nearly anyone 
can customize to their needs. Extensions in SketchUp 2013 can be installed in a few 
different ways. The easiest way is via the Extensions Warehouse dialog box inside 
SketchUp. The first extension we install will allow importing and exporting of files  
for 3D printing.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing
[ 24 ]
Stereolithography [.STL] is the most common file format used as input for 3D 
printers. SketchUp doesn't natively have the option to export to [.STL], but a couple 
of generous programmers have written an extension that does just that. They 
released it for free, as the vast majority of extensions for SketchUp are, and now 
anybody can generate [.STL] files from their SketchUp models.
To install the extension, navigate to Window | Extensions Warehouse and sign 
in with your Google account. Search for "STL" in the upper-right corner of the 
screen, and click on the link titled SketchUp STL by the SketchUp team. Read the 
description for info on how to use the extension, and look at the pictures for more 
info. Click on the red Install button in the upper-right corner. A warning message 
will pop up as shown in the following screenshot:
Click on Yes. A confirmation will appear and the extension is ready for use.  
The following are two more free essential extensions that you'll want to install  
right away:
•	
Solid Inspector as well as its required component TT_Lib2. See extension 
documentation for the link to TT_Lib2.
•	
CleanUp3.
As with all extensions, read the documentation for instructions on how to use these 
tools. For example, these three extensions are all accessed in different ways. The STL 
export/import functions are found under the File menu. Solid Inspector is found 
in the Tools menu, while Cleanup is in the newly formed Plugins menu. Other 
extensions may be accessed via a toolbar, a menu, or by right-clicking on the screen.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
Installing more extensions
The Extensions Warehouse is relatively new, but extensions have been available for 
several years. How did users install them before the Warehouse? I'm glad you asked, 
because there are many useful extensions available scattered across the Web that are 
not in the Extensions Warehouse yet.
To use these other extensions, you must manually place the files into the  
correct folder on your computer. For more info, visit the help article at  
http://help.sketchup.com/en/article/38583.
The following are the two places to get good SketchUp extensions, besides the 
Extensions Warehouse:
•	
SketchUcation: This can be found at http://sketchucation.com/
resources/plugin-store-download. This extension is much like the 
Extensions Warehouse, but allows installation and management of a huge 
selection of specialty extensions. SketchUcation is also the best help forum if 
you get stuck on installing extensions.
•	
Smustard: This can be found at http://www.smustard.com/.
You can find more extensions by searching online, but you should install them  
only if you trust the source.
A quick exercise
Let's make our first 3D-printable model, a simple box with a hole through it. We'll 
export it as an [.STL], and then import it back to SketchUp to see how the process 
works by performing the following steps:
1.	 Draw a 100 x 100 mm square with the Rectangle tool.
2.	 Using Push/Pull, pull the square into a 100 mm cube.
3.	 Draw a circle on top of the square with a 10 mm radius using the Circle tool.
4.	 Push this circle down to the bottom face so it creates a hole through the cube.
5.	 Select the entire box by triple-clicking on any of its faces.
6.	 Right-click on Make Group. If you look in the Entity Info dialog box, it 
should say Solid Group (1 in model). This is very important! If the model 
isn't solid, it will not print correctly, so you'll need to go back and fix it.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing
[ 26 ]
Use the Entity Info dialog box to ensure your model is solid.
You should have something like the following diagram with X-ray on, so you can  
see the hole goes all the way through:
Select the group, and then select Export STL... under File and save the file with Units 
as mm, and File Format as Binary. Name the file TestCube.stl, making sure to type 
.stl at the end.
Binary and ASCII STL files are identical for the most part, 
but binary files are compressed and therefore much smaller 
and easier to work with.
This file is now 3D printable. You could send this to a printer and have a plastic 
model in hand within minutes.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Importing .STL files
Select Import... under File, set the File type to [.STL] and navigate to where you saved 
the [.STL] file. Under Options, uncheck Merge Coplanar Faces, make sure Units are 
set to mm, and then click on Accept. Click on Open to import the [.STL]. If Preserve 
Drawing Origin is checked in the Import options, it will import directly on the first 
cube you drew, so move it to the side with the Move tool.
Now import the same file again, but this time in Import STL Options, and check  
the Merge Coplanar Faces box. Once again, move it to the side so you can see all  
the three boxes—the original SketchUp model and the two imported [.STLs].  
You should have something like the following diagram:
Notice the differences between the three models. The .STL format triangulates the 
model shown by the extra lines you see on the center model. The Merge Coplanar 
Faces command deletes those extra lines upon import so that you can work with 
imported .STL files more easily. For example, you could easily push/pull the top 
face of the clean imported model, but for the center model it would be much more 
difficult because of the extra faces.
Also, notice the difference between the inside of the hole in the SketchUp model 
versus the imported models. The SketchUp model looks smooth, while the imports 
are faceted, meaning you can see each individual face that makes up the hole. By 
turning on hidden geometry, View | Hidden Geometry; you can see that these are 
the exact faces in the SketchUp model before exporting.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing
[ 28 ]
This is important to know because you can increase the number of sides your  
circle will have in SketchUp to make the final print smoother and more accurate  
if necessary. This is discussed further in Chapter 4, Understanding Model Resolution. 
You can also smooth the imported models easily by selecting their groups and 
adjusting the slider in the Soften Edges dialog box.
The CleanUp extension you installed earlier will also merge coplanar faces.  
This is useful if you're using an older version of SketchUp that doesn't have  
the option to merge coplanar faces in STL Import Options.
Summary
In this chapter, you installed SketchUp and customized a template that will allow 
you to model for 3D printing quickly. You learned what extensions are, how to 
install them, and where to find many more that are not available in the official 
Extensions Warehouse.
You made your first 3D-printable STL file, and imported the file back into SketchUp. 
Finally, you also learned why it's important to merge coplanar faces on imported 
STL files. In the next chapter, we'll learn how to design a 3D-printable model starting 
from a 2D sketch.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

From 2D Drawing  
to 3D Model
One of the simplest kinds of 3D models starts from a simple drawing. Starting with 
pen and paper, a precise, professionally designed graphic or anything in between, 
you can quickly make a 3D-printable model. Logos and cookie cutters are some 
common 3D prints that are made from 2D graphics. In this chapter, we'll create a 
useful household object, starting from a simple hand-drawn sketch.
Starting from a quick sketch
For this exercise, let's start with something useful, and somewhat simple. But since 
we're going to 3D print it, we'll make a fun design.
I started by making a pen and paper sketch of my initial concept—a hook-shaped, 
low-resolution version of a seahorse. I then scanned the image into a JPEG file and 
saved it to my computer. As you can see in the following figure, it's not a great 
drawing, but rather a starting point:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

From 2D Drawing to 3D Model
[ 30 ]
Designing for ease of printing
Let's talk about my thought process for this design. I intend for this hook to be 
printed on a desktop FFF printer. For that reason, I'm going to design parallel lines, 
no overhangs, and no tiny details. Although more complex designs are certainly 
printable, this will ensure an easy print from the start. Now, let's model!
Modeling in SketchUp from a sketch
To get started, we need to import the image into SketchUp. Navigate to  
File | Import...; under Files of type, click on All Supported Image Types;  
and under Options, click on the Use as image radio button.
Double-click on the image or select the image and click on Open to close the  
Import dialog box, as shown in the following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 3
[ 31 ]
Click near the origin in SketchUp to set one corner of the image, and then move your 
cursor towards the upper-right side of the screen to set the size of the image. You 
want the image to be large enough to see but the exact scale isn't important now.
If you draw on the image right now, the SketchUp lines will be hard to see. Let's 
reduce the opacity of the image to make it easier to draw on. To do so, right-click on 
the image and click on Explode. Right away, double-click on the image to select it 
and its bounding edges, and then make it into a Group.
Open the Materials dialog box. Click on the home icon and then click on the In 
Model option. Now, select the imported image. Click on the Edit tab and drag the 
opacity slider down to around 30 percent as shown in the following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

From 2D Drawing to 3D Model
[ 32 ]
Now we'll scale the image to size. I want the printed hook to be 100 mm tall  
overall. For this step, the Tape Measure tool is fast and accurate. With Tape 
Measure, click on the top point of the seahorse's head, then the bottom flat edge 
of the hook. Immediately type 100 mm and hit Enter. As shown in the following 
screenshot, SketchUp will ask, Do you want to resize the model?; click on Yes.
The model will scale to the correct size and may shift out of view. Use the Zoom 
Extents tool to center it back on the screen.
Now we're ready to begin drawing. Using the Line tool, trace the sketch, using the 
sketch as a rough guide, and not as an exact template. Because the sketch lines are 
probably not perfectly vertical and horizontal, be sure your horizontal and vertical 
lines in SketchUp align to the red and green axes, and not necessarily align exactly  
to the sketch.
Start at one point and work your way around the sketch, making sure each line is 
connected to the last one. Using the left and right arrow keys to lock to the green  
and red axes may help you at this point.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 3
[ 33 ]
For the angled lines, I used the Protractor tool to create guides at 45 degrees, and 
traced over the guides. I used the Tape Measure tool to create guides for parallel 
lines. Before you move on to the next step, you should have a continuous outline that 
creates a face. Draw the eye last, then select and delete the interior face of the eye, as 
shown in the following figure:
Keeping a historical timeline of changes 
speeds iteration
Many of the products you use in your daily life are designed in a process where an 
idea is modeled, manufactured as a prototype, tested, analyzed, and then redesigned 
to improve functionality. This process of building a design and improving it over 
time is called iterative design, and each new model in the design is one iteration.
When you use a 3D printer to make the prototype, the process goes dramatically 
quicker, which is where the term rapid prototyping comes from. Saving a history  
of the models made during the design process is a good practice, so you know what 
changes have been made. One way to keep track of changes is by saving the file with 
a new version number, such as DesignV1 and DesignV2.
On a model as simple as this seahorse hook, I simply save copies of the new versions 
inside the original SketchUp model. Taking this idea one step further, I make copies 
at important stages of the model, even before one design is finished. This way, if you 
want to make changes to a part of the model when you're nearly finished, you can 
go back to an earlier stage of the model and work from there, rather than starting 
completely from scratch.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

From 2D Drawing to 3D Model
[ 34 ]
Let's apply this principle to our model now. Using the Move tool + CTRL, create a 
copy of the seahorse outline you just drew a few centimeters away. It's time to go 3D! 
Use the Push/Pull tool and extrude the copied face up. I chose a thickness of 8 mm, 
as shown in the following figure:
The original outline is still available to copy again, tweak the shape, and change it 
into an improved design, thereby saving the time it takes to trace the outline again.
Exporting the model and printing
Group the hook, verify that it's solid using the Entity Info dialog box, and you're 
ready to export it as an .STL file for 3D printing after following the steps outlined  
in Chapter 2, Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing.
If the group is not solid, look for interior faces, missing faces, or stray lines in  
the group. Interior faces and stray lines should be deleted, whereas missing faces 
need to be filled in. The Solid Inspector extension is an excellent tool for finding 
problems in this step. Refer to the Appendix, Resources for Your 3D Printing Success  
for more detailed information about troubleshooting models.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 3
[ 35 ]
In the following screenshot, you can see several iterations of hooks that I 3D-printed 
starting from this exact model:
That completes this exercise. With a little practice, a small project like this will take 
you less than 15 minutes to go from the sketch to the printer.
Importing vector artwork
Sometimes artwork is available in vector format, having already been drawn in 
Illustrator or another 2D drawing program. In this case, you can save a lot of tedious 
tracing work by importing the drawing and using it as a base for your 3D model.
Vector graphics are different from the usual raster images we see that 
are made of pixels. Unlike raster images that look blurry when zoomed 
up close, vector graphics can be scaled, re-sized, and zoomed up 
without any loss of quality. Vector graphics describe the artwork in a 
way that SketchUp can interpret as lines, saving you from tracing the 
image manually. As an analogy, you can think of SketchUp models as 
3D vector graphics.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

From 2D Drawing to 3D Model
[ 36 ]
In your 2D app, save the artwork as a .DXF file. You may need to add anchor points 
before exporting so that curves import smoothly. Please see the documentation for 
your vector graphics app for more info on how to add anchor points. SketchUp Pro 
natively imports .DWG and .DXF files. SketchUp Make imports .DXF with the Dxf_In 
plugin (http://sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.php?f=323&t=31186).
The import process doesn't always work perfectly. There may be tiny gaps between 
lines, short stray lines, or a variety of other problems. The Edge Tools² extension 
helps with those problems (https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/content/
edge-tools²).
After importing, create faces inside the drawing outlines by tracing over an edge. 
For complex models, you may also use the Make Faces plugin to create the faces 
(http://www.smustard.com/script/MakeFaces).
At this point, you can pull the faces into 3D, and manipulate them just as with any 
other SketchUp geometry.
Changing the scale of the part
For printing in different sizes, you can use either the Scale tool or the Tape Measure 
tool just as you learned how to scale the image. The Scale tool works best for even 
increments such as 0.5 size or 3 times larger.
Sometimes you may want to scale along only one axis of a model. This is a job for 
the Scale tool. Learn how the various grips on the Scale tool affect the scaling of the 
model to quickly modify those parts.
The Tape Measure tool is a better choice when you know the exact dimensions  
(for example, 3.5 inches tall) and can measure directly on the part. With Tape 
Measure, pick any two points, and enter the desired dimension. The entire model 
will change scale uniformly. If you want to change just the scale of one group with 
Tape Measure, then open just that definition for editing and perform the scale 
operation. Only that group will change size and the rest of the model will remain  
the same size.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 3
[ 37 ]
A bonus tip – the 45-degree overhang rule for 
filament printers
Filament printers perform best when overhangs are supported or are angled at 45 
degrees or less. This is because the material must be deposited onto something, 
usually the layer below. You can see the difference as shown in the following figure:
This leads to a common design rule called the "45-degree overhang rule". When 
designing for filament printers, keep the slope at 45 degrees or less for best results.
Bridging across a short distance (about 2-3 inches should be no problem) as shown 
in the preceding image, is also a viable solution, but the two sides must be of equal 
heights. The following figure shows how I added mounting holes for screws in the 
seahorse hook:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

From 2D Drawing to 3D Model
[ 38 ]
Notice how the holes are in a diamond shape so they meet the 45 degree overhang 
rule. Holes this small will actually print fine as circles as the filament will bridge  
the small gap, but for larger holes a diamond shape like this is a good idea.
Making the design your own
To take the design further, you can use the Arc tool or Roundcorner plugin to 
smooth out the sharp corners. You could cut a mounting hole at the back for a 
magnet, or add seahorse scales for decoration. How would you customize the  
design to make it your own?
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to import an image and use the Tape Measure 
tool to scale your model. You learned to make a closed loop of edges to form a face, 
which may then be pulled up into a 3D shape. The Tape Measure and Protractor 
tools are useful for making guidelines to model accurately.
We discussed what iterative design is, and how to efficiently save copies of a model 
to create a history of changes.
Importing vector artwork created in a 2D drawing app can save you tedious drawing 
in SketchUp. Export the artwork as .DWG or .DXF to import into SketchUp.
We learned about the 45-degree rule when designing for filament printers. Keeping 
overhangs to 45 degrees or less results in the best prints. Bridging short distances is 
also viable when the two sides are of equal height. These principles are discussed 
further in Chapter 6, Designing a Phone Cradle.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model 
Resolution
In this chapter, we will learn about wall thickness and some different methods to 
create the wall thickness you want. We will explore circles, arcs, and how changing 
the number of segments they are made of affects the appearance of the printed 
model. We'll learn how to overcome the dreaded missing faces problem, which 
happens frequently when faces are not created at the time of modeling at a small 
scale in SketchUp.
So, first a bit of high-level theory, and then we'll get to the fun part—modeling  
the vase in the following figure:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model Resolution
[ 40 ]
Wall thickness
Wall thickness is a very important concept in 3D printing. Although physics plays 
no role when designing on your computer, once the design makes it out into the real 
world, it must abide by the laws of nature.
Because it is so easy to zoom up into any detail of your model and make it fill your 
screen, a very common problem new designers face is understanding the model's 
scale in the real world. When holding your very first print, you'll likely be surprised 
at its size, usually by how small it is. For this reason, even though a design may 
look just fine on your screen, it can break in real life if its wall thickness isn't strong 
enough to support it.
At the same time, you don't want your walls to be too thick, or you'll use more 
material than necessary, costing you more money. Wall thickness is a balance that 
you as a designer will optimize for each model.
Wire thickness measures the diameter of a cylinder, and typically needs to be 
slightly larger than the minimum wall thickness. Some examples of wires are tree 
branches, truss struts, and the arm of a superhero figurine. A tree branch connected 
at one end would be considered a free wire, while a truss strut connected on both 
ends is a supported wire.
Detail size is related to wall thickness. For example, if you're printing a scale  
model of a house, the wall thickness would be the thickness of the structural walls, 
while the detail size would be how far the window trim sticks out from the wall.  
In general, detail size is smaller than wall thickness.
Wall thickness and other related requirements depend on the printing process,  
and vary according to the material choice and printer resolution. If you're using  
a print service, look for technical specifications on their website. If you own  
a desktop printer, print resolution will depend on the nozzle size and layer 
resolution supported by that printer. These specifications will be available  
on the manufacturers' website.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 4
[ 41 ]
As an example, the following screenshot shows a partial list of design guidelines  
for minimum walls, wires, and details in Strong & Flexible Plastics available at  
www.shapeways.com:
As you can see, these are the minimum requirements—you should not design 
any feature smaller than those indicated, and usually should design most features 
somewhat larger.
Now let's model!
Modeling a vase
Modeling a vase can be a simple, rewarding exercise to help us understand wall 
thickness, model resolution (versus layer resolution), and build on our knowledge of 
overhangs. Adding handles will demonstrate how to use the Outer Shell command 
to combine several solids into a single manifold shell. Follow along in SketchUp as I 
walk through the steps and thought process I used when creating this vase.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model Resolution
[ 42 ]
Creating a profile
While there are several ways to model a vase, the easiest is using the Follow Me  
tool. The first step is to create the profile of one half of the vase, as shown in the 
following figure:
Let's break this figure down. The first thing I did was create a temporary rectangular 
box larger than the vase profile and make it into a group. I did this so that I had a 
vertical surface to draw on, making certain the profile is perfectly aligned with the 
red and blue axes. The box is grouped so the new geometry doesn't stick to it, and 
I can also use the edges of the box to assist in drawing the vertical and horizontal 
guidelines in the next step.
The second step was to draw horizontal guidelines (using the Tape Measure tool) 
corresponding to the top edge and the waist of the vase. Then I drew the vertical 
lines corresponding to the top edge, the base, and the waist. The intersections of 
these guidelines create points that allow me to accurately place arcs in the next step. 
The exact size isn't as important at this point as the proportions of the profile but,  
to give you an idea, the dummy box is 150 mm tall.
Using the Arc tool, I connected the intersections for the top, center, and bottom  
of the vase. Then I used the Line tool to draw the top edge, the vertical center 
line, and the bottom edge of the vase, connecting with the arcs to create the face 
highlighted in blue in the previous figure.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 4
[ 43 ]
A face will be created if all connecting edges form an unbroken loop and are on  
a single plane. This is why the dummy box is so useful—it is much easier to draw  
on another face than in midair.
Avoiding missing faces by scaling up  
your model
Often when performing a Follow Me operation on a small model, SketchUp fails 
to form some or all of the tiny faces. The way to prevent this is to scale your model 
bigger by an easy-to-remember number such as 100, and then perform the operation.
While it is possible to scale the entire model or a portion of the model with the Scale 
tool, I find it easy to forget what scale I'm working at, so I use a simple trick to help 
me remember. Notice the 50 mm line in the following figure:
This is a reference line I drew near the origin of the model. Then, I get the Text tool 
by navigating to Tools | Text (not the 3D Text tool) and click on the center of the 
line. By default the Text tool creates a label with the length of the line, helping me 
remember how long it is supposed to be. The length doesn't matter, just so long as 
it's an even number and long enough to see easily.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model Resolution
[ 44 ]
To scale up the model, use the Tape Measure tool and click on one end of the line 
first and then the other. Type in a new measurement, say 5000 mm, and hit Enter. 
SketchUp will ask if you want to resize the model; click on Yes.
Now you can perform your operations without any missing faces. When your model 
is complete, resize the model using the Tape Measure tool again, but this time typing 
in 50 mm, the measurement you created earlier with the Text tool.
Creating wall thickness
For our vase example, we'll create a wall thickness of 2 mm. After saving the original 
vase profile, make two copies of the profile along the red axis. We are making these 
copies as backups because we can't access the previous state of the model without 
using the Undo command. As we discussed in Chapter 3, From 2D Drawing to 3D 
Model, making a copy in the SketchUp file before you perform important actions 
creates a historical timeline that you can access in case you want to branch off and  
try something different.
Select all of the bottom and side arcs; then with the Offset tool, offset the lines 
inward by 2 mm. This creates the wall thickness that we need. Clean up all the extra 
edges, leaving only the nice, even 2 mm-wide profile shown on the right side of the 
following figure:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 4
[ 45 ]
Cleaning up all extra edges is an important step. Zoom up close to see that you erase 
the tiny ones, too, because even these will cause your model to not become solid.
Notice the vertical guidelines passing through the center line of each profile. Create 
and use these guidelines to form a circle that you'll use as a path for the Follow Me 
tool in the next step. The guidelines will pass through each circle's center.
Understanding noncircular circles
To help understand the next step, let's take a short break from modeling for some 
theory. Circles and arcs in SketchUp are made from a number of line segments.  
You can see this for yourself if you draw a circle and zoom up close to it. By default, 
there are 24 segments in a circle and 12 segments in an arc. This is important when 
talking about the resolution of your model.
You can see that, if you draw a circle with radius 50 mm, each of the 24 segments 
comprising the circle will be about 13 mm long. If you made the circle with a 5 mm 
radius, the segments would be 1.3 mm long. If you then extrude the two circles into 
cylinders, the segments form the facets on the cylinder. The 13 mm facets on the 
large cylinder will be very noticeable, but the 1.3 mm facets on the small cylinder 
will not show nearly as much, as shown in the following figure:
You can easily change the number of segments in circles and arcs in SketchUp before 
they are extruded (for more details on changing circle segments refer to a help article 
at http://help.sketchup.com/en/article/94740). Since you cannot change the 
resolution after extruding, you'll want to think about the resolution at the start.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model Resolution
[ 46 ]
The length of line segments on your curves forms what I refer to as model resolution. 
Model resolution affects the appearance of your printed model. If you want a smoother 
looking model, increase the segment count of curves. In general, if your segments 
are 1 mm or smaller, you won't notice them on the printed model; however, for high 
resolution printers, you may want to decrease the resolution to 0.1 mm or even smaller. 
This is because a higher resolution printer will show facets more clearly and therefore 
will require a model with more segments in the curves to look smooth.
Making the magic happen with the Follow  
Me tool
Now for the fun part! Select the circle path first, and then click on the corresponding 
profile with the Follow Me tool. Repeat for the other profile to make two vases as 
shown in the following figure:
You probably noticed that the circular paths in the figure we saw in the previous 
section are labeled differently, although from a distance they look the same. The one 
on the left has 24 segments by default, while I set 96 segments for the one to the right.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 4
[ 47 ]
Notice how the resulting model on the right has many more segments. With its 
much higher model resolution, it will look and feel much smoother after 3D printing. 
Higher segment counts also make more dimensionally accurate curves.
A smart reader will infer that we can also increase the segments of the profile  
curves in addition to the path curves, and you would be completely correct!  
You can completely control the resolution of any curves in your model, as long  
as you adjust them before extruding.
In some cases, you may not want a smoother print for artistic or other reasons.  
In this case, it is perfectly acceptable to use a lower path resolution.
In the following figure, we can observe that each vase used the exact same profile, 
but the number of path segments is denoted by the numeral below each vase. Each 
vase is printable and looks unique from the others:
As with wall thickness, the number of segments you use in an arc should be balanced. 
Too many and you'll increase file size, increase processing time, and have trouble with 
missing tiny faces; too few and your model will look faceted and unpolished.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model Resolution
[ 48 ]
A bonus tip for desktop extrusion printers
Notice how I created one vase with 2 mm wall thickness, while the other vase is 
solid. The solid vase actually prints better on desktop extrusion printers because you 
can tell the printer to make a certain number of passes around the perimeter, and not 
fill the center. Keep reading for a photo of the final vase printed using this method!
Combining solids with the Outer Shell tool
When adding major features to your model, I find it useful to keep the parts separate 
until the end of the modeling process, and then combine them into the final solid 
printable model. This approach makes it easier to edit the different parts of the 
model if you ever want to go back and change something.
For example, let's say we want to add handles to our vase. First, make a copy of  
the vase along the red axis, and make it into a group. Be sure the group is solid 
before continuing.
In the following figure, I have a dummy group running through the center of the 
vase. This creates a surface to draw the path for the handle, as shown:
To draw the path for the handle, I used the BezierSpline extension by fredo6 
http://sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.php?t=13563. This extension 
allows you more freedom than the Arc tool when creating curves.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 4
[ 49 ]
In the previous chapter, we discussed the 45-degree overhang rule for desktop 
extrusion printers. Since I wanted to print this vase at home, I created a guideline at 
45 degrees from the vertical. As long as the handle does not exceed the angle defined 
by the guide, I know it should print fine.
The next step is to draw the profile for the handle. I used a circle with radius 2 mm 
and 6 sides (shown at the bottom of the path in the following figure). I deleted the 
dummy group and used the Hide command (right-click on the object and click on 
Hide, or go to Edit | Hide) on the vase to temporarily isolate the profile and path:
Perform the Follow Me operation, and make the resulting handle into a group. 
Unhide the vase (by going to Edit | Unhide | Last). Move the handle slightly  
so that its ends are completely inside the vase group, as shown in the next figure:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model Resolution
[ 50 ]
Make a copy of the handle on the opposite side of the vase. Right-click on the handle 
and go to Flip Along | Group's Red, to make a mirror image of the handle. Once 
again, move it into place so that the ends are completely inside the vase group.
You should now have three solid groups—the vase and two handles. Make a copy 
of all three along the red axis, helping create that history of important steps in your 
model. All that remains is to combine them using the Outer Shell command into 
a single solid object, as shown in the following figure. Export it as an .STL file, and 
you're ready to print!
The following figure shows the final vase printed on my desktop extrusion printer. 
The settings I used are 50 percent scale, 0.3 mm layer height, 1 shell (perimeter),  
0 percent infill, and no top layer:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 4
[ 51 ]
The print was a success on the very first try! Designing the handles to meet the 
45-degree-overhang rule worked as intended. The printer was able to bridge the 
short distance connecting the top of the handle when it reached that point. The 
bridge could have been even smoother if I had slowed down the printer to allow 
cooling time for the layers below.
Notice the faceting visible on the inside of the vase. By now you know this could 
have been avoided by increasing the number of segments in the path. On a higher 
resolution printer the faceting would be even more noticeable; however, on an 
extrusion printer, the effect is somewhat muted because the bead of plastic slightly 
bends as it travels around sharp corners.
Bonus – more methods to create wall thickness
Perhaps the easiest way to create an even wall thickness is using the offset method 
you learned earlier in this chapter. But that method will not work in all cases. In this 
section, we'll discuss some more methods for creating thickness.
For symmetric shapes, you can copy/paste the shape in place, and use the Scale  
tool to make a smaller version of that part. Scaling from the center or selectively 
using the various grips, you can manipulate the copied shape to form a wall at a 
specified distance.
As a simple example, think of a cube—make it a group to keep the geometry from 
sticking to the copy, copy/paste in place, scale to something less than 100 percent, 
and you have an interior set of walls. You'll need to explode the groups, reverse  
the copy's faces, and connect the walls to the original geometry, and you'll have  
an even wall thickness.
JointPushPull Interactive is a plugin that will also help in creating wall  
thickness. Authored by fredo6, this plugin is available from SketchUcation at 
http://sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.php?p=496773. For more 
information about how to use this plugin to create thickness on complex  
geometry, please refer to Chapter 7, Importing Terrain and Printing in Color.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Understanding Model Resolution
[ 52 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about wall thickness and several methods of creating 
thickness. Balancing wall thickness to create enough strength without wasting 
material is a skill you'll learn with practice.
We discussed how adding segments to your curves improves model resolution, 
and how to balance model resolution with the accuracy of your printer. More curve 
segments = smoother model = bigger file size. Too large a file size makes SketchUp 
run slower.
You learned that SketchUp doesn't work well with tiny faces, and an easy trick to 
scale your model up and back down quickly and accurately. Finally, you saw how 
keeping major features of your model as separate solids allows for ease of editing 
until the end of the modeling process. Later, you can use the Outer Shell command 
to combine multiple solids into one for printing.
In the next chapter, we'll learn how to save and reuse models we create. We also 
discover websites to download 3D models that other designers have made freely 
available, and how to edit and adapt a model to fit our needs perfectly.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Using Existing Models
Copy and paste, one of the best time saving features available in computer programs, 
works just as you'd expect in SketchUp. You can copy and paste inside a model  
or between SketchUp models. Using the power of components, you can also easily 
reuse SketchUp models between modeling sessions.
As you're likely well aware, the Internet has taken copy and paste to the next  
level with file sharing sites. Much like people use social websites like Instagram  
to show off their photos, model sharing websites allow 3D modelers to showcase 
their work. What's more, model sharing sites enable other users to download and 
remix models, keeping track of the model's popularity with features such as likes 
and a download counter.
While it's certainly good to have the skills to model anything you want to 3D print, 
you can often save time by downloading an existing 3D model. Since commonly 
shared .STL models are meshes much like SketchUp models, SketchUp works well 
with them and is one of the best ways to edit existing models in the .STL format.  
You can resize models beyond simple scaling, combine models, or extract a feature  
for using in another project.
In this chapter, we'll look at best practices of reusing our own models, and how  
to work with models downloaded from the Internet.
Leveraging SketchUp components to 
save time
Picture this—Sal has a small business providing customized iPhone cases. He takes 
orders to print customer's names on a phone case in a color of their choice.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Using Existing Models
[ 54 ]
To create a quality case, Sal precisely measured his own iPhone with a pair of calipers, 
noting overall dimensions and locations of features like the power jack, volume 
buttons, and the camera. From this data, he modeled a case in SketchUp, printed it, 
and tested it for fit. The first case was a bit too tight, so he increased the dimensions 
in SketchUp and tested the print again. After 4 iterations between SketchUp and the 
printed part, the case snapped crisply onto his phone, all the openings worked well 
when plugging his phone in and Sal was happy with the case.
Sal's process of printing, testing, and re-designing until getting the 
exact result he wanted is typical in product design. This is where 
having a desktop printer shines, since the wait time for prints shrinks 
to nearly zero. When he needs higher quality prints, he can still order 
from a print service like Shapeways or i.materialise.
Saving a model as a Component
After modeling the original phone case, Sal saved it as a Component. Components 
are similar to Groups in SketchUp, but have a few enhanced properties. These are 
listed as follows:
•	
The ability to save a component as a separate SketchUp model
•	
All the copies of a component in a model are changed when one of them  
is edited
•	
The ability to use the Components window to manage Components
•	
Create and access local collections (on your computer) of components
In the following screenshot, we'll take a closer look at the Components window:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 5
[ 55 ]
Once you've created a Component in your model, it can be accessed in the 
Components browser. From here, you can drag-and-drop another copy into your 
drawing window. In the Components browser, you can also open a second window 
under the first, and drag models between the windows to save a component you've 
created to a local collection on your computer.
To try this yourself, simply perform the following steps with a simple box in place  
of the phone case:
1.	 Make the phone case into a Component and save it with the name  
iPhone 5S Blank Case.
2.	 Click on the In Model button in the Components window to show the  
phone case component.
3.	 Toggle the second window so that it is visible.
4.	 Click on the arrow to the right of the second window, and then open or 
create a Local Collection. Navigate to a folder.
5.	 Now, the second window represents the specified folder. Drag the phone 
case from the top window to the second window. Voilà! The phone is saved 
to a local collection on your computer.
The next time you need that component, you can open that collection from the 
Components window and drop it directly into a model.
Another way to save components to a local collection is to simply right-click on the 
component and select Save as, and navigate to the folder you want to save it to.
Online 3D model repositories
These websites host collections of 3D models that other users have uploaded.  
There are dozens of these sites, some with free models and some with models you 
pay to download. In the following subsections, we will discuss what to expect from 
the three most popular sites.
Thingiverse
Thingiverse (http://www.thingiverse.com/), owned by 3D printer manufacturer 
Makerbot, is by far the most popular 3D printing model site. Most models are free, 
but even on free models the uploader may choose to set restrictions on usage, for 
example, not for commercial use.
Most of the models are in .stl format, ready to download and print. Models can  
be uploaded in nearly any format, including .skp.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Using Existing Models
[ 56 ]
3D Warehouse
The 3D Warehouse (http://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com) is SketchUp's very  
own repository of models. It's astonishingly extensive—everything from Star  
Wars X-Wing models and people in various uniforms and poses, to architectural 
models and useful household objects, and nearly everything in between can be  
found in the 3D Warehouse.
All models are in .skp or another SketchUp compatible format, meaning you 
can open them in SketchUp without converting the file format. Models can be 
downloaded using your web browser or directly into your SketchUp model  
using the Components browser.
Most models in the 3D Warehouse were created for use in visualizations, so they're 
not built with 3D printing in mind. You will either have to fix them to be printable, 
or rebuild them to be printable. Rebuilding the model is often the quicker choice. 
Even if you need to rebuild a model, having a model to start from and use for 
reference geometry can be a time saver. Rebuilding a model using an existing  
model as reference is covered in Chapter 8, Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing.
GrabCAD
GrabCAD (https://grabcad.com/) is popular with professional engineers.  
Most models are high quality, mechanical type items. Relatively few are in a  
format compatible with SketchUp, but if you message the model owner and ask  
nicely, they may convert the model to a format like .stl that you can import  
into SketchUp.
Case study – modifying a GoPro wrench
Kim found a wrench on Thingiverse that she likes for tightening a GoPro  
camera, but wished the handle was longer. The link to the wrench is  
http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:185739.
Simply scaling the model is easy to achieve with other programs like Netfabb  
(www.netfabb.com) or your desktop printer's slicing program. Scaling would  
make the handle longer, but would also proportionally increase the size of the 
wrench head, making it too large for its purpose. Using SketchUp she easily 
lengthened just the handle.
She downloaded the .stl file and opened it in SketchUp. Since she prefers using 
SketchUp 8, she didn't have the option to merge coplanar faces like we discussed  
in Chapter 2, Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing; the model came in triangulated, 
which is normal for .stl files. It looked like the following diagram:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 5
[ 57 ]
Kim checked the dimensions of the imported wrench right away, to see if they made 
sense with the size of her GoPro. Fortunately, they were correct. If not, she would 
have gone back to ensure the units were correct in the Import Options, or scaled the 
model using the Tape Measure tool, as we discussed in Chapter 3, From 2D Drawing  
to 3D Model.
Since it's harder to work with triangulated models, Kim used the CleanUp extension to 
remove the unnecessary lines. The link to CleanUp is http://extensions.sketchup.
com/en/content/cleanup%C2%B3. After running the extension with the Erase Stray 
Edges option checked, the model looks like the following diagram:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Using Existing Models
[ 58 ]
To extend the handle, Kim selected all the edges and faces that form the handle  
end. This is quickly achieved using the Select tool and a left-to-right selection box,  
as shown in the following diagram:
Next, Kim got the Move tool and moved the selected entities along the Green (Y) 
direction until the handle was as long as she wanted. She used the Tape Measure  
tool to check the length. The following diagram shows the lengthened handle:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 5
[ 59 ]
Kim noticed that she can save some weight in the final part by removing some 
material. Using the Offset tool, she creates a new face in the center of the wrench 
head, as shown in the following diagram:
She also used the Eraser tool to clean up the extra lines created by the Offset operation, 
as shown in the following diagram. Leaving the extra lines would prevent her final 
model from becoming solid.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Using Existing Models
[ 60 ]
Using the Push-Pull tool to push the new face through to the back of the model,  
a neat hole is formed as shown in the following image.
Kim noticed the opportunity to reduce material in the handle as well, so she used  
the Rectangle tool to create two faces on top of the handle, and the Push-Pull tool  
to create the holes. Kim was happy at this point, and exported the model as an .STL 
for 3D printing. The following diagram shows how the final model looks:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 5
[ 61 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you have learned some time-saving techniques such as how to save 
components for later use and where to find 3D printable models online. We have  
also discussed the editing of downloaded models to perfectly suit your needs.
In the next chapter, we'll design a phone cradle and use iteration to improve the 
design. We'll also use some advanced modeling techniques to quickly make a 
complex model.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Designing a Phone Cradle
Do you know that feeling when you're watching a video on your smartphone or 
tablet, and you'd like to place it down, but then it's hard to view, so you end up 
holding it anyway? Or you're video chatting and need both hands to show how 
something works, but you can't do so. These are prime examples when a phone 
cradle can come in handy.
In this chapter, we'll design a cartoon jet phone cradle. This one will be a hit  
with the kids and a great learning experience for anyone learning how to design  
for 3D printing.
We will learn about saving time by designing half of a model and then mirroring  
the remaining part to finish quickly. We will discuss iterating the design, printing 
text in the model, and how to use the Intersect with Model command.
The following is a photo of the completed cradle:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Designing a Phone Cradle
[ 64 ]
Getting started with a 2D sketch
The vision for this model is a jet taking off at a steep angle, leaving behind clouds  
of smoke and dust. The clouds will provide a wide base to support the phone in 
either the portrait or landscape mode.
This model is to be printed on an FFF desktop printer, so we should keep in mind  
the 45-degree rule and think about minimizing support structures. We can also  
keep the geometry at a lower resolution to match the capabilities of the printer.
We're going to start by creating a dummy box and drawing on one of its vertical 
sides, just like we did in Chapter 4, Understanding Model Resolution. The following 
figure shows the profile outlines drawn using the Line and Arc tools:
The preceding figure does not show the temporary 45 degree SketchUp guides used 
to ensure that the overhangs are not too steep. For more details on this technique, 
refer to Chapter 4, Understanding Model Resolution. The cloud and jet profiles are 
drawn as separate groups and will be joined after pulling into 3D.
Getting to the third dimension
At this point, you'll want to scale your model to size. Using the Tape Measure tool, 
scale the model to size it to 100 mm in height.
In the following figure, we pull the profiles into 3D, making the cloud base 18 mm 
thick and the jet 12 mm thick. We join the two groups with the Outer Shell tool, 
ensuring the result is Solid:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 6
[ 65 ]
Adding details to make the model interesting
In the following figure, we open the group and draw a wing profile on the existing 
face of the jet. As the wing is not a true arc, the Bezier Curve Tool extension works 
best for drawing the curved portion. To minimize the support needed, we'll just  
pull the wing out by 1.5 mm:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Designing a Phone Cradle
[ 66 ]
Using the 3D Text tool
Next, we'll add some text with the 3D Text tool. I wrote AIR FORCE, but you can 
write anything, even your name if you like!
For 3D printing, non-Serif fonts such as Arial work the best, and bold 
versions print even better. This is because at small sizes, the thinnest 
parts of Serif fonts are too thin to be shown in the final print.
In the Place 3D Text dialog box, the height should be 5 mm. Make sure the Extruded 
box is checked, and set the thickness to about 0.6 mm. For best results, place the text 
close to where you want it to go, and then use the Move and Rotate tools to place it 
precisely. You'll want to keep the text as a separate group for now.
The 3D text will automatically orient itself to align with whatever face you place  
it on, and then is glued to that plane when you let go of the mouse button. If you're 
ever trying to move the 3D text and it isn't cooperating, right-click on the text and 
click on Unglue; the text will come free from the original plane.
In the following figure, the 3D text is aligned with the jet and placed near its nose:
Mirroring symmetrical models
In symmetrical models such as this one, it is good practice to create half of the model 
and then mirror the geometry to quickly finish the model. This practice is a huge 
time saver that we can use now.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 6
[ 67 ]
In the following figure, we copy the model, scale the copy with a -1 factor using the 
Green Scale about Opposite Point grip, and move it adjacent to the first model, 
creating a mirrored version of the model and doubling our efforts very quickly. The 
3D text must be copied and realigned separately—mirrored text is difficult to read! 
Another option to mirror the model is to right-click on it and navigate to Flip Along 
| Group's Green, where Green refers to the green axis:
Combining groups with the Outer Shell tool
In the following figure, we copy all the groups to create a historical timeline. Then, 
we select the 3D text and mirrored groups and use the Outer Shell tool to combine 
everything into one solid model:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Designing a Phone Cradle
[ 68 ]
Cutting a slot for the cord
If we think about the final details of the model, we may want to use the cradle 
with the phone in the portrait mode while charging. On many phones, the charger 
connects at the bottom of the phone, so we'll need to account for that.
Cutting in a slot will allow us to accommodate the charger and take the phone off the 
cradle, without unplugging the cord. There are two ways to create a slot through this 
complex geometry: with the Solid tools (Pro version only) or with the Intersect with 
Model command (Make or Pro versions). For now, we'll discuss the Intersect with 
Model command. The process is nearly the same for Solid tools but without  
the tedious cleanup.
We start by creating a box whose width is 13 mm, centered on the group. I chose 
a width of 13 mm after measuring my phone charger and adding a few millimeter 
units of wiggle room. The length and height are not important so long as they  
extend up to or beyond the parts of the model you want to cut.
In the following figure, you can see the orientation of the box that we'll use to create 
the slot. When complete, the box and everything inside the box will be removed:
For the Intersect with Model command to work, the parts need to be in the same 
context, which means the parts to be intersected must not be in separate groups. 
Select the entire box and go to Edit | Cut to remove the box and copy it to the 
clipboard. Open the cradle group and go to Edit | Paste in Place to put all  
geometry in the same context, keeping the placement of the box intact.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 6
[ 69 ]
SketchUp Pro users should group the box to keep the groups 
separate. To cut the slot, select the box, then go to Tools | Solid 
Tools | Subtract, and then click on the cradle group. The box and 
everything it contains will be removed, leaving a clean slot.
In the following figure, we select everything, then right-click on it and go to Intersect 
Faces | With Model. Depending on how complex your model is, this can take a few 
seconds or even minutes on really big models:
When the operation is complete, you will see that new edges have been created where 
the intersecting geometry meets, as shown in the next figure. Now, you can start 
deleting the excess geometry, taking care not to delete anything you want to keep.
This cleanup can be a tedious process—ensure that you get all the extra geometry, 
but do not delete anything that will make a hole in the good portion of the model. 
Zooming in close will help you to see tiny extra edges. The Cleanup extension can be  
of enormous help in this situation since it deletes any stray edges.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Designing a Phone Cradle
[ 70 ]
In the following figure, some of the excess geometry has been deleted. Clean up the 
rest and ensure that you get extra faces and edges that will prevent the model from 
being solid:
Orienting faces for a perfect model
In the following figure, all the excess geometry has been deleted, which leaves behind 
a perfect slot. Some faces are reversed but are easily corrected by right-clicking on a 
white face and then on Orient Faces:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 6
[ 71 ]
If the Orient Faces command isn't working as you expect it to, the model 
likely isn't a solid. Check the model for interior faces and delete them.
Exporting the model for printing
In the following figure, all faces are oriented correctly and the model is ready to be 
printed. Export it for printing, and you're on your way!
Testing the printed model
The following screenshot shows the printed cradle in use:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Designing a Phone Cradle
[ 72 ]
After printing the model and testing how it works in practice, I noted the following 
changes that would improve the design:
•	
Increasing the height and width of the tabs on the jet's tail fins to keep the 
phone more stable while in the landscape mode
•	
Increasing the height of the base so that the charger cord doesn't bend 
sharply on the table
•	
Making the jet exhaust clouds more realistic
•	
Making the plane wings bigger so it's easier to tell what it is
Developing an improved design
Back to SketchUp we go! We'll make the changes and print an improved model.  
This process of refining the design through a series of iterations is discussed in 
Chapter 3, From 2D Drawing to 3D Model.
Going back in the historical timeline, copy one of the mirrored half groups to  
rework into the improved design. Use the Push/Pull tool and the Line tool to make 
the tabs that hold the phone in place taller and wider. Use the Push/Pull tool to pull 
the bottom face down by another 6 mm, raising the phone up so the charging cord 
doesn't kink.
For changing the wing shape, push the wing back flush with the plane body,  
and use the Bezier tool to create a new, larger wing profile. Erase the old curve,  
and use Push/Pull to set the new wing back out to 1.5 mm. The larger tabs and  
the new wing are shown in the following figure:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 6
[ 73 ]
Copying and scaling groups to create a 
complex shape
For creating more realistic puffy smoke clouds, simply create a sphere and a  
half-sphere and copy them around the base. You'll want to make sure both the  
sphere and half-sphere are grouped and solid before making copies of them The  
half-sphere will create a nice flat base, and the sphere will fill in the top. Use the  
Scale tool to stretch, resize, and deform the copies so that it looks more realistic.  
Try to keep the 45 degree rule in mind so that the spheres are self-supporting as  
shown in the following figure. In this figure, all of the spheres and half-spheres  
are selected so that you can see how many of them make up the new base:
Finally, make a copy of the groups that form your new base. To prevent holes  
in the model when creating tiny faces in the next step, scale the model up by 100 
times using the Tape Measure technique described in Chapter 3, From 2D Drawing 
to 3D Model. Use the Outer Shell tool to combine everything into one solid group. 
I found Outer Shell to work best when used on only two to three groups at a time. 
Selecting everything and running the tool often results in a group that s not solid.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Designing a Phone Cradle
[ 74 ]
Finishing up and printing the new model
Once you have a solid group, make a copy for the historical timeline. Mirror the 
group, align the 3D text, and combine everything with Outer Shell. Cut a slot using 
the same methods we used in the first iteration of the model. Once that is complete, 
you should have a model that looks like the following figure:
Export the part, and you're ready to print the updated version!
Testing the second iteration
The new part worked much better, comfortably holding the phone and even a small 
tablet. The increased height prevents the charging cord from kinking, and the larger 
base looks much better, as shown in the next images. Printing with a red filament 
enhances the appearance as well!
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 6
[ 75 ]
In the following figure, we see that the same stand can be used for a larger device:
The following figure shows the difference between the two printed designs:
Summary
In this chapter, we learned some advanced modeling techniques such as the Intersect 
with Model command and how to use simple shapes to quickly build up a complex 
model. By combining these techniques, you can quickly create very complex models. 
We also used the historical timeline to save time while making a second iteration of 
the design.
In the next chapter, we'll learn about working with terrain data and how to 3D print 
models in full color.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Importing Terrain and  
Printing in Color
With geographical data becoming ubiquitous in our digitally connected world, it is 
now a fairly simple task to use that data in our 3D-printing projects. Include color 
photos from satellite imagery, use a color-capable printer, and you have a useful 
scale representation of any corner of the globe.
Commercial grade printers capable of printing thousands of colors in three dimensions 
are an excellent option for not only terrain models, but also for scale architectural 
models and visualizing product prototypes. In this chapter, we'll dig right in to see 
how easy it is to 3D print terrain and multicolored models from SketchUp.
Working with the Google Earth terrain
SketchUp and Google Earth are integrated together so nicely that it really couldn't be 
easier to import terrain data.
The following are the steps to get Google Earth terrain into SketchUp:
1.	 First, open SketchUp. Navigate to File | Geo-Location | Add Location....
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Importing Terrain and Printing in Color
[ 78 ]
2.	 A dialog box pops up as shown in the following screenshot. You may need 
to log in to your Google account to continue. Find the location you are 
interested in by entering an address, place name, or just navigating the map 
by panning and zooming:
3.	 Choose a location using the Select Region button on the top-right corner of 
the window. Use the four blue corner pins to fine-tune your selection. The 
maximum selection size is 2 km (1.2 mi), minimum is 10 m (33 ft).
4.	 Click on the Grab button at the top-right corner of your screen to finish the 
selection process and import the terrain into SketchUp.
5.	 You'll see a completely flat satellite image in SketchUp. The terrain is also 
there, but hidden on a separate layer that is turned off by default. To access 
it, open the Layers window (Window | Layers) and check the box next to 
Google Earth Terrain. You can turn off the satellite image by unchecking the 
box next to Google Earth Snapshot.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 7
[ 79 ]
6.	 You can see the terrain in 3D now, but it has no thickness. We'll have to add 
thickness and scale it down to make it 3D printable.
7.	 The terrain is in a group, but you can't interact with it yet because it's locked. 
You can tell that it's locked because the group's bounding box is red instead 
of the usual blue color, and you can't open the group for editing. To unlock 
the group, simply right-click on the group and click on Unlock.
8.	 All of the lines of the mesh forming the terrain are soft and smooth by 
default, making it difficult to work with the terrain. To see the lines, either 
turn on Hidden Geometry, as shown in the following screenshot, or unsoften 
the lines by selecting the group and moving the slider in the Soften Edges 
dialog box (Window | Soften Edges) all the way to the left:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Importing Terrain and Printing in Color
[ 80 ]
9.	 Now you need to add thickness to the model. This can be done manually 
by drawing lines down from each corner and connecting them to form a flat 
base. Instead, I suggest you use the extension Add Terrain Skirt (http://
sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.php?p=359903#p359903) to 
complete the task in seconds. Use the Entity Info window to ensure the 
terrain group is Solid before continuing. The result of this step is shown in 
the following screenshot:
10.	 Since the terrain is imported at full size, the last step is to scale it down for 
printing. Use the Tape Measure tool to scale your model down using the 
technique we discussed in Chapter 3, From 2D Drawing to 3D Model. Finally, 
check the thickness of the skirt to ensure that it meets your preferred printer's 
requirements. Export the model as .stl, and you're ready to print!
This method is a good way to make a terrain model for printing on a desktop FFF 
printer because the flat base provides a support structure. However, for an industrial 
printer, you'll want to hollow out the base to use less material. An easy way to do 
this is with the JointPushPull Interactive extension (http://sketchucation.com/
forums/viewtopic.php?p=496773).
JointPushPull can take a collection of connected surfaces and add a precise thickness 
to them. In our case, we want to keep the skirt walls, but remove most of the mass. 
To do this, make a copy of the solid terrain model for your historical timeline, then 
delete the bottom face, as shown in the following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 7
[ 81 ]
Select all, then use the right-click menu and go to JointPushPull | Joint Push Pull. 
Using the default options, make the terrain and walls 2 mm thick. If you encounter 
an error, scale the model up by 100 times and then run the operation. You may have 
to fix some small errors to make the model solid again. In this case, hollowing the 
model reduced the print material required by 85 percent.
Google Earth is one source for terrain data, but the quality is low in many 
places, especially remote locations. There are many more ways to get 
terrain models including survey data and free online resources. SketchUp 
Make and SketchUp Pro import .dem files, which is a common format for 
terrain data.
Since .stl files do not store color data, so far this model can only be printed in a 
single color. For printing the satellite imagery in color, we need to do some more 
work on the model.
Printing models with color
It takes a special machine to 3D print in full color, and at this point there are only 
commercial printers to do the job. This means that unless you're part of a large 
organization, you'll likely use a print service for printing in color, providing them 
your model in a format they can use.
Let's discuss how SketchUp processes color data.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Importing Terrain and Printing in Color
[ 82 ]
Textures versus solid colors
You can color SketchUp models in two different ways—with textures or with  
plain colors (or a mixture of both). Textures are image files such as .jpg, .png,  
or .tif. The satellite imagery from the terrain we imported in the previous  
example is a .jpg texture.
Colors are simply solid colors based on RGB values or color names that cover an 
entire face. Colors are easier to apply than textures in SketchUp, but need more 
model detail to provide a similar appearance.
In the following screenshot, a satellite image texture is applied to the top face,  
while the bottom and side faces have a solid color applied:
The typical file formats used when 3D printing a color model from SketchUp are 
.dae and .wrl. SketchUp Pro exports both of these formats. SketchUp Make can 
only export .dae.
In models using image textures, SketchUp exports the image files separately from the 
3D model file. Both image and 3D model files are placed in a ZIP folder to upload to 
a print service. In models with only colors applied in SketchUp, the 3D model file is 
all that is required as the color data is stored in the 3D model file.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 7
[ 83 ]
Be sure to check the print service of your choice before preparing your model, as the 
file requirements may vary wildly. Some services, such as i.materialise (http://i.
materialise.com/) and Sculpteo (http://www.sculpteo.com/) take SketchUp 
files directly, which may save you a significant amount of work when preparing 
the model. Other print services require a ZIP file containing a specific 3D format, 
such as .wrl, and specific image type, such as .png. Converting files can be a time-
consuming process.
If you need to convert your files to a format SketchUp does not 
support, check out the free program, Meshlab (http://meshlab.
sourceforge.net). With its many import and export options, you 
will find that it can likely provide a solution for you.
Working with solid colors in SketchUp
To 3D print models with solid colors, be sure all faces have a color applied—do not 
leave any faces with the default material. Likewise, check to make sure that there are 
no colors applied to the back of the faces, as this may cause unwanted conflict with 
the printer. To remove color from a back face, simply paint the back face with the 
default material.
View the model in monochrome (View | Face Style | Monochrome), which turns 
the colors off and allows you to ensure that all faces are oriented correctly. If any 
faces are reversed, right-click on that face and click on Reverse Faces to correct the 
problem. For more about face orientation, refer to Chapter 2, Setting Up SketchUp for 
3D Printing.
That's pretty much it. Now simply export the model in a format compatible with the 
printer, and you're ready to roll.
Working with textures in SketchUp
The basic rules for working with solid colors apply to textured SketchUp models as 
well; avoid conflict with front and back face materials, and use Monochrome to check 
for correct face orientation.
Sometimes you may need to scale and rotate textures for precise placement. In this 
case, you use the texturing tools by right-clicking on the screen and navigating to 
Texture | Position, which will only work when clicking on a face with an image 
texture applied.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Importing Terrain and Printing in Color
[ 84 ]
Exporting the model for color printing
If your print provider doesn't take SketchUp files directly for printing, the final step 
is to export the model. In my experience, the file type that seems to work best with 
most service providers is .dae.
Using the Tape Measure tool, make sure the model is at the correct scale. Delete 
your historical timeline and everything else in the SketchUp file except for the model 
to be printed.
You may want to create a folder specifically for this export so that the 3D model and 
corresponding image file can be found easily. Finally, to export the model, go to File 
| Export | 3D Model..., and then click on COLLADA file (*.dae) from the drop-
down menu at the bottom of the screen.
When uploading to your print provider, make a ZIP file containing the DAE and JPG 
files as shown in the following screenshot. Upload the ZIP file to your print provider, 
and you'll be holding a color print shortly.
Summary
SketchUp integration with Google Earth makes it very easy to import terrain data. We 
learned how to make the terrain 3D printable by adding a skirt and scaling to size. We 
learned about an extension that allows us to quickly create a hollow model, reducing 
the model volume by 85 percent. We discussed the difference between solid colors 
and textures in SketchUp, and how that affects packaging the model for the printer.
In the next chapter, we'll learn about preparing architectural models for printing.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture  
for 3D Printing
Architectural rendering is SketchUp's forte. With the many styles available in 
SketchUp, there is no easier program to create beautiful visualizations. With 
extensions and external programs that work with SketchUp files, you can create 
photorealistic renders and augmented reality models. As nice as these outputs are, 
they are still constrained to the two-dimensional confines of paper and digital screen.
Scale architectural models are incredibly useful in a way that 2D representations 
simply can't match. Historically, scale models were painstakingly made by hand 
from foam core board, wood, and the patience of an angel. More recently, laser 
cutters have made the tedious job of cutting easier, but designing the digital files 
and assembling the parts is still time consuming and rarely can the SketchUp files be 
used without major rework.
3D printing alleviates many of these problems. By starting with an existing 
architectural model, you can quickly make a 3D printable model with minimal effort. 
What's more, building on the techniques we discussed in Chapter 7, Importing Terrain 
and Printing in Color, you can even print scale architectural models in full color!
In this chapter, we will cover some advanced techniques that may be difficult if you 
haven't used SketchUp much. If you have trouble following along, please refer to 
Appendix, Resources for Your 3D Printing Success, for SketchUp training resources.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 86 ]
Using SketchUp for 3D printing versus 
rendering
Many of the requirements of a 3D printable model do not apply when modeling 
SketchUp models intended for visualizations. Models can be (and often are) 
designed as quickly as possible, with no wall thickness, with intersecting geometry, 
and without separate groups or components. A quick look at random models 
downloaded from the 3D warehouse can confirm this. While these models work just 
fine for their intended purpose, printing them in 3D proves tricky.
Another problem occurs when scaling the model down. Using the Tape Measure or 
Scale tool, you can easily shrink a model to fit in a 3D printer, but even well-built 
architectural models not designed with 3D printing in mind will need some rework. 
Small features in a rendering model such as door knobs, window trim, and window 
grills (muntin bars), will be much too small for the printer.
For example, a half-inch wide window grill scaled at 1:48 to fit on a small printer 
will only be 0.2 mm wide—much too small for most printers and certainly not strong 
enough to withstand handling. A good rule of thumb for most printers is not to 
include freestanding features smaller than 1-2 mm.
Case study – 3D printing a model 
designed for rendering
The small house movement (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small_house_
movement) is becoming popular with people who want to live simply and have less 
impact on the environment. Also called micro homes, tiny cabins, and a variety of 
other creative names, these dwellings are often built on a trailer for portability.
One of the clients from my architectural rendering business is a tiny cabin  
designer and builder. Jim Wilkins, owner of Tiny Green Cabins, will send me a 
hand-sketched design with measurements, which I'll model in SketchUp and render 
to create photorealistic images that he uses to sell the finished cabins. For folks who 
want to build the cabin themselves, Jim sells a set of construction plans created in 
Layout, which is a part of the SketchUp Pro package. In this chapter, we'll learn the 
steps necessary to convert the actual model I used for rendering a tiny cabin into a 
3D-printable model as shown in the following image. You may follow along with an 
architectural model of your own, or one from the 3D Warehouse. This process will be 
similar for many architectural models:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 87 ]
Examining the original model
The following screenshot shows the original model that was made for rendering:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 88 ]
In the following screenshot, we turn the textures off (View | Face Style | 
Monochrome), so the back faces will show in orange. We can use the Section Plane 
tool to look inside the model. The Section Plane tool creates a nondestructive cut in 
the model, allowing you to look or work inside an enclosed space. By right-clicking 
on the section plane, it can be turned on or off, hidden, and reversed.
At first glance, we can see numerous issues with 3D printing the model. Because 
we're using the style we created in Chapter 2, Setting Up SketchUp for 3D Printing, 
we can see numerous back faces showing in orange that will need to be fixed. The 
panes of glass have no thickness, the cabin is a mass of separate nested groups and 
components of which many are not solid, and some features are too small to print. 
For this model, I will not be printing the trailer wheels and hitch, which will simplify 
the process and make the final print more durable.
For the first print, let's design for FFF printing. I'm going to be using my Solidoodle 
desktop 3D printer that has a maximum build area of 6" x 6" x 6" (150 mm x 150 mm 
x 150 mm). The overall length of the cabin is 24" (7.3 m), so with a little simple math 
(or trial and error) I know that at 1:48 scale, the model will just fit on my printer.
Here's a trick to quickly resize a model to any scale; for example,  
1:48—draw a line in empty space 48 mm long. Using the Tape Measure 
tool, first click on one end then the other end of the line, type 1 mm and 
hit Enter. SketchUp will ask if it's OK to resize the model, just click on 
Yes and voila, the model is scaled precisely. This works with any unit 
of measurement because you're changing the 48-unit-long line to 1 unit 
long and the rest of the model is scaled to match. If you have trouble 
with some of the imported components not scaling to match, simply 
enclose the entire model in a new group before scaling.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 89 ]
Taking into account the requirements of FFF printing, we know that the eaves will 
not print without support. To minimize support, we'll print the roof separately and 
since the roof has two separate pitches, we'll print it in two pieces. For the windows, 
we'll remove the glass and print just the grills for a window-like effect.
Planning the model
Trying to fix this model by making all the components solid, beefing up the thin 
features, and repairing the windows is doable, but would be a tedious and mentally 
painful process. There are extensions that attempt to automate the process, but I 
haven't found any that really work well. One approach that seems to work best is to 
use the original as a guide while constructing a new, printable model around it.
In this process, we'll create solid shapes that are of the correct thickness for printing, 
and assemble them like LEGO pieces into the exact shape needed. For features too 
small to print, we'll exaggerate their size to make them large enough for printing, or 
simply eliminate them. Using the Outer Shell command, at the end we'll combine all 
the pieces into a solid, printable model.
Thinking about the minimum features for this printer, let's plan ahead to print this 
model in full color. To save time then, we'll make sure this model works for both an 
FFF printer and a full color printer as much as possible. In the end, we'll have one 
model for each type of printing, each tweaked with the necessary requirements.
After checking the requirements for full color material (http://i.materialise.
com/materials/multicolor/design-guide), we can see that the minimum wall 
thickness is 1.5-2.0 mm, and minimum detail is 0.8-1.0 mm. FFF printers can also 
work within these guidelines, so we'll keep them in mind while modeling.
The full color printer is powder-based, so we'll want to make the model hollow to 
save on material costs.
Using groups and layers to organize  
the model
The first thing to do is group the entire cabin and place it on its own layer so that we 
can quickly hide and show it as needed. To do this, press Ctrl + A to select all of the 
geometry in the model, then navigate to Edit | Make Group. Open the Layers dialog 
box by navigating to Window | Layers, and clicking on the plus icon to add a layer. 
Name it 0 – original (if there other layers in the model, the 0 makes the new layer 
stay at the top of the layer list, so you can find it easily). Select the group, and in the 
Entity Info window, set the layer to 0 – original. Now, we can toggle visibility of 
the original model using the Layers window.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 90 ]
The following screenshot shows this process:
The Hide and Unhide commands can also be used to toggle visibility of groups in 
the model. Setting these commands to keyboard shortcuts can dramatically speed up 
your workflow.
Creating a standard wall thickness
Let's begin modeling! We'll use the trailer bed as a base to provide most of the 
structural support, so let's make it 5 mm thick. Off to the side, draw a rectangle 
larger than the trailer, extrude it by 5 mm, and make it a group. Paint it with a bright 
color to distinguish it from the rest of the model in the next steps, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 91 ]
Using the Move tool, grab the top-front corner of the new trailer bed, and place it 
on the top-front corner of the original trailer. Zoom in closely during this operation 
to place the geometry precisely as shown in the following screenshot. Notice how 
the top is aligned, but the new geometry hangs lower to increase the thickness of the 
trailer bed for strength in the printed product. We can tell the top faces are aligned 
because of the visible "Z-fighting", which happens when two faces share the same 
plane and both colors fight for visibility as the model is orbited.
Orbit to the other side of the model where the new geometry is much too large. This is 
easily fixed using the Scale tool. Select the new group, click on the Scale tool and using 
only the center-most scale grip on one side, squash the group until it's of the correct 
size. Using the center-most grip will scale the group along one axis at a time, as shown 
in the following screenshot. The Push/Pull tool will work for this operation as well, but 
using the Scale tool saves the extra steps of opening and closing the group:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 92 ]
Use inferencing with the Scale tool to align the new group with the original model  
as shown in the following screenshot, and then repeat for the last side of the new 
trailer bed:
Let's make the exterior walls 3 mm thick. Create a rectangular box 3 mm wide, off 
to one side, as shown in the following screenshot. Make the box into a group. By 
copying this group and using it to create new walls in place of the existing model, 
we'll ensure an even 3 mm wall thickness throughout the model:
Turn off the original model layer so that it doesn't interfere, and position the new 
wall on the new trailer bed. Turning the original model layer on and off as needed 
and using the Scale tool just as we did with the trailer bed, align the new wall with 
the original as shown in the following screenshot. Scale only one direction (length 
or height) at a time and never along the thickness. This way the walls will all be of a 
uniform 3 mm thickness:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 93 ]
Copy the new wall to the opposite side of the cabin and repeat the process for each 
of the remaining walls. Notice that we copy the first wall to create the second, rather 
than drawing another from scratch. Copy and rotate the first wall by 90 degrees for 
the end walls.
The most important thing at this point is to be precise in making sure 
all the walls meet at their respective corners. The walls can overlap, 
but if there is a gap and the walls do not touch, the Outer Shell 
operation and/or the final print will fail.
Editing wall panels to add details
To make the peaked gables on the end walls, scale the end wall up to the top of the 
peak, open that group for editing, and draw lines for the peaks, as shown in the 
following screenshot. Push-pull the excess material away to finish up.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 94 ]
When this step is complete, the walls should look like the following screenshot. 
Windows and doors will be cut in the next step.
To cut the windows, turn the original model layer on and create a guideline 
perpendicular to the wall. Use the Move tool along with CTRL to copy and place two 
guidelines on each window at opposite corners. This creates two points piercing the 
new wall that we can use to draw a rectangle directly on the new wall and push-pull 
it by creating a window as shown in the following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 95 ]
Adding the window grills
The next step is to place the window grills. This is one feature that needs to be 
exaggerated in order to print correctly. At a 1:48 scale, the thickness of the grills 
in the original model is only 0.2 mm thick—much too thin for printing on the 
machines we chose. Since the grills are just spanning a short distance, the minimum 
recommended wall thickness of 1.5 mm should work fine. Draw a square 1.5 mm x 
1.5 mm, extrude it up about the height of a window, and make it a group as shown 
in the following screenshot:
Move it into position, inferencing the midpoint of the grill group to the midpoint on 
the window. Scale only along the long, vertical axis as needed to fit in the window. 
Make a copy and rotate it 90 degrees to create the horizontal portion, and then copy 
these two groups to the other windows, centering them as you go. You'll want to 
be careful to always make sure the window grill groups are abutting or intersecting 
with the wall groups, leaving no gaps that will cause problems with printing.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 96 ]
The following screenshot shows what the walls look like with all the windows and 
doors cut out, and the window grills in place:
Adding interior walls
The interior walls and loft of the cabin are added using the same method we used for 
the exterior. Since these walls will not be handled as much, they don't need to be as 
strong, so we can make them thinner—2 mm will be enough. The interior is shown in 
the following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 97 ]
Modeling the roof
The next step is modeling the roof. First, draw the roof profile, ensuring a minimum 
wall thickness of 1.5 mm in all places. In the following screenshot, the overall 
thickness is 4 mm so that near the eaves the thickness is sufficient. In the following 
screenshot, notice the 0.2 mm clearance between the eaves and walls, so the separate 
roof isn't too tight to place on the top:
Push-pull the roof to match the length of the original model. Perform the same steps 
for the upper roof, and make the vertical walls to connect the space between the 
upper and lower roof, drawing each portion in a separate group, but combining the 
vertical walls and the steep roof with the Outer Shell tool.
In the following screenshot, you can see the completed roof assembly, with the rest 
of the model hidden:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 98 ]
The two roof pitches are kept separate for printing on the FFF printer. Since the two 
roofs overlap in the center of the cabin, I used the Subtract tool in SketchUp Pro to 
cut away the portion that was overlapping. You can perform the same action using 
the Intersect with Model command in SketchUp Make. For more information on the 
Intersect with Model command, please refer to Chapter 6, Designing a Phone Cradle.
Orienting the parts for printing
The model is now nearly complete. In the following screenshot, notice how the roofs 
are positioned for easy printing with no support. The vertical walls connecting the 
upper and lower roofs are able to be placed flat on the print bed, while the rest of the 
roof geometry is self-supporting:
While the roofs are in the printing position, we can add more features. The shallow 
roof on the left has little surface area but a relatively great height. Tall, thin features 
like these can easily be knocked over by the print head during printing. By adding 
temporary feet, we can ensure that the roof will be stable for printing. These feet can 
be cut off with a knife after printing.
Another feature we can add now is stabilizing tabs to the shallow roof. The steep 
roof has ridges that can grip the top of the walls after printing, but the shallow roof 
does not have much to keep it from sliding off the walls. By adding tabs as shown in 
the previous screenshot, the roof is stabilized and the tabs are hidden on the finished 
model. Adding them while in the printing position allows us to be sure the tabs meet 
the 45-degree rule for printing overhangs without support.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 99 ]
Moving on toward the interior, we can see the loft creates a large overhang that 
will require a lot of support if printed in place. Select the interior walls and loft, and 
connect them into one solid with the Outer Shell tool.
By keeping the interior walls and loft separate from the rest of the model, we can print 
them upside down so that no support is needed, as shown in the following screenshot:
The four sections of the model can be printed all at once on the printer with no 
extra support, and assembled immediately afterward with little to no hand work. 
The only thing remaining is to combine the walls, base, and window grill groups 
into one solid for printing. As usual, make a copy of everything for your historical 
timeline before performing the operation. This way, if you need to go back and edit a 
particular part of the model, the separate groups make the job much easier.
In the following screenshot, the model is completed and ready to export for printing 
on a desktop printer:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 100 ]
Printing the model and bonus commentary
In the following three images, you can see the final printed model. All of the parts 
feel strong, and they fit together well. As a communication tool, this model will 
definitely work well:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 101 ]
The interior walls and loft group are snapped tightly into place. As an afterthought,  
I could have printed the interior and the walls with the rest of the model, and printed 
just the loft floor separately.
You probably noticed that the windows' grills are missing—well, after printing the 
model twice without good results, I cut them out with a knife.
Remember how you learned tall, thin prints don't work well? A good example of that 
occurrence is shown in the following image, right after the printer finished making a 
second print of the cabin:
Notice how some of the windows look fine, but most of the vertical parts of the 
grills are missing. The tall thin posts easily get knocked over when the print head 
passes over them. On this second print, I added another horizontal bar across the tall 
windows to shorten the vertical bars. I also increased their thickness from 1.5 mm to 
2 mm, but that still didn't work well. Any larger, and the grill would fill up too much 
of the window, so I felt cutting them out was the best option.
The tall, thin post on the corner of the porch proved troublesome for the same reason 
on the first print. Thickening it up to 4.5 mm worked well on the second print.
To save material, I reduced the base thickness to 2.5 mm in the second print from 
5 mm in the original model. It still has plenty of strength, but saved significant 
printing time and material.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 102 ]
Printing this model challenged my skills on the 3D printer. Operating the printer is 
an art in itself, and having owned my own printer for only a few short months at the 
time of this writing, I have not learned all the printer settings to tweak for different 
situations. It is possible by changing some settings that even the windows would 
have printed well on this model.
Statistics are fun, right? The following are the vitals for this model:
•	
Printed in ABS plastic with a heated bed and enclosure
•	
8 hours of printing time for a complete set of parts
•	
$2.25 of material, not including the re-print
This troubleshooting and reprinting experience is typical in home 3D printers, and is 
the reason why sending a model off to a print service can be a much better use of a 
designer's time. In the next section, this is exactly what we'll do!
Preparing the model for full color printing
To get the full benefit of the original textured model, we can print this model in color 
using the same textures applied to render the model. Refer to Chapter 7, Importing 
Terrain and Printing in Color, for requirements of printing in color.
Because the color printers are powder-based, the prints are self-supporting and we 
can combine the parts into two solids. We want the roof to be removable so that the 
interior layout is visible, as shown in the following screenshot. By combining the two 
roof parts together, and the interior and exterior walls together, we can minimize the 
post-printing assembly work.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 103 ]
Looking at the requirements for this material from the print service i.materialise 
http://i.materialise.com/materials/multicolor/design-guide, we can see 
that multiple parts are allowed in one print file, so this approach will work fine.
The i.materialise service is a good choice for beginners printing color SketchUp 
models because they accept the .SKP format directly. Other print services may 
require you to convert color models to .DAE or .WRL, and to combine all the textures 
in the file into a single texture map containing all of the textures in a model.
The next step will be to apply textures to the new model. Since image textures in 
SketchUp have a real-world scale, for texturing, it's best to scale the model back up 
to life size. Turning on the original model to use as a reference, apply textures and 
colors to the model. In this step, SketchUp's (projected textures) may not work for  
3D printing.
Use the eyedropper Sample tool to quickly select a material from the 
original model. To use the eyedropper, select the Paint Bucket tool, 
then hold down the Alt key [Windows] or Command key [Mac] and 
select the material you want. Release the modifier key to paint the new 
model with that material.
To break a large face such as the floor into multiple textures, simply draw a line 
across the face where you want to change the texture. The line must be connected to 
edges on both ends to break the face. Now you can apply a different material on each 
side of the line.
When you complete texturing, every front face should have a texture applied, and 
no back face should be textured. To easily check this, change the style to show a 
bright color on the front face, as we discussed for back faces in Chapter 2, Setting Up 
SketchUp for 3D Printing. If you see an untextured face, this is the time to fix it. Use 
Section Plane to check the interior walls.
To check the back faces, simply reverse all of the faces; triple-click on the faces to select 
all faces, right-click on the model, and click on Reverse Faces. While all the faces are 
still selected, apply the default material to them to quickly ensure that there are no 
unwanted textures. Applying the default texture to the back faces will not interfere 
with the colored textures on the front faces. Now, you can right-click on the faces and 
click on Reverse Faces a second time to return the textured faces facing out.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 104 ]
Repeat this process for both the roof and walls' groups, making the model look like 
the following screenshot:
Check the model one last time to be sure both groups are solid, and fix them if 
necessary. Now scale the model back down to printing size. Save the model as a new 
file, and delete everything but the two groups that will be printed. Since i.materialise 
accepts SketchUp files directly, this is the model we'll upload for printing.
Orienting the parts for printing
The final step is to make the model compact by positioning the two groups as near 
to each other as possible, minimizing their combined bounding box. (A bounding 
box is the smallest imaginary box the model will fit into.) This will save space in 
the printing tray, and the print service will give us a better price. We don't want the 
parts to touch or intersect though, or else the printer will fuse the two parts together.
Placing the roof in position over the walls will make the smallest bounding box for 
this model. The design guidelines specify a minimum of 0.4 mm clearance between 
two parts to keep them separate. To be safe, let's move the roof 2 mm up and 2 mm 
forward toward the entrance door to keep it separate from the walls, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 105 ]
Printing from i.materialise
You can upload the model to the i.materialise website (http://i.materialise.
com/), or use their extension (http://extensions.sketchup.com/en/content/3d-
print-service) to upload the model directly from inside SketchUp. If you have  
any trouble during the upload and ordering process, you can e-mail customer  
service for help.
The model is ready to print via i.materialise!
Printing from Shapeways
To print this model via Shapeways, we'll have to export the model as .DAE or .WRL. 
Refer to Chapter 7, Importing Terrain and Printing in Color, for a step-by-step process.
More details about Shapeways requirements for color printing can be found at 
https://www.shapeways.com/tutorials/exporting_to_vrml_and_x3d_for_
color_printing.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Modeling Architecture for 3D Printing
[ 106 ]
The full-color printed cabin
To print this model, I chose Shapeways for faster service and a slightly better price. 
The model arrived in about two weeks, and I could not be happier with how it 
turned out. The finish is somewhat rough, like a sugar cube. The colors are bright 
and vibrant, but I'm especially pleased with how the window grills look in the 
following two images:
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Chapter 8
[ 107 ]
In the following image, you can see the crisp detail of the ridge seating the base of 
the roof to the walls. The fit is excellent, and makes the cabin look like one piece 
when in place:
It's nice to place an order and get back a perfect model, printed by professionals. 
This approach allows you as a designer to focus on making models rather than 
troubleshooting failed prints. Of course, if you like the challenge of operating  
a 3D printer, there is nothing wrong with that!
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to use an existing architectural SketchUp model as 
a template for creating a 3D-printable model. You also learned about how to split a 
model into parts to minimize support structures on a desktop FFF printer, and some 
of the adventures of trying to print the model.
We also discussed printing the models in full color from two different print services, 
and how your approach differs for each. Sending out a model to be printed by 
professionals allows you as a designer to focus on modeling and not worry about  
3D printer failures.
In the Appendix, Resources for Your 3D Printing Success, you'll find a troubleshooting 
guide that lists solutions to problems that prevent your models from becoming solid. 
There is also a resource list of programs that will help you with 3D printing your 
SketchUp models.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Resources for Your 3D 
Printing Success
In this reference section, you'll find fast answers to common problems and questions 
that I had while learning how to model in SketchUp, and while learning the specifics 
of 3D printing SketchUp models. There is also a curated list of my favorite programs 
and websites used in relation to 3D printing.
Troubleshooting nonsolid models
These are some common problems that may prevent your model from being solid. 
Use the Solid Inspector extension to help highlight these problems.
In a solid model, every edge is bounded by exactly two faces. 
Any more, and there will be internal faces. Any less, and there 
will be a hole.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Resources for Your 3D Printing Success
[ 110 ]
The following troubleshooting guide table is meant to be printed out for quick 
reference when you need it:
Problems
Solution
Intersecting or 
overlapping faces
Use the Intersect with Model command to create edges at 
the intersections, and then delete the internal faces. If the 
intersecting faces are separate solid groups, use the Outer Shell 
tool to combine them.
Holes in the model
Draw a line over one of the edges bounding the hole to form a 
face. If this doesn't work, use the Line tool to connect the hole's 
open edges. Since a triangle shape will always make a face, try 
stitching the hole together with triangles.
If the edges are very small (less than approximately 1 mm long), 
you will need to scale the model up to fill in the holes.
Duplicate faces
This problem can be tricky to spot because the problem area 
highlighted by Solid Inspector looks perfectly fine. It happens 
when multiple faces form in one place. Simply select and delete 
the faces one-by-one until you make a hole, then Undo one step 
to replace the last face.
Making a copy of the model with the Move tool also corrects 
the problem, and may be faster for models with many duplicate 
faces.
Group inside a 
group
Nested groups or components will not be identified as solids 
by SketchUp, even if all the other requirements are met. Solid 
Inspector does not highlight this problem either.
The solution is to move the nested group outside the context 
of the main group using the Cut and Paste in place commands 
under the Edit menu.
Internal faces
Any geometry that is inside the solid model, not a part of the 
surface, will prevent the model from being a solid. Select and 
delete this geometry.
To see the inside of a model, you can use the Section Plane tool. 
Another good method is to cut a portion of the model, and then 
use Paste in place to replace the Cut geometry when you're done 
working inside.
On models with curved surfaces, use the Soften Edges dialog 
box to make the surface look smooth. If there is a hard edge 
visible where the model should be smooth, check that area for 
internal faces.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Appendix
[ 111 ]
Problems
Solution
Reversed faces
Reversed faces will not prevent SketchUp from showing a  
model as solid, but you'll have trouble trying to print the model. 
Right-click, then click on Reverse faces to correct this problem.
If there are many reversed faces, right-click on a front face, then 
click on Orient Faces to fix all of them at once. If the Orient 
Faces command doesn't work, you probably have internal faces 
in the model that need to be removed.
Stray lines
Stray lines are lines connected at only one end. Simply erase them, 
or use the Cleanup extension to automatically remove them.
SketchUp extensions
Extensions, also called plugins, extend SketchUp's functionality and can be found in 
many places on the Web.
Where to find extensions online
The following websites are the best places to download extensions:
•	
Extensions Warehouse at http://extensions.sketchup.com/ is the official 
extensions site. It is also available directly inside SketchUp and can be found 
by navigating to Window | Extensions Warehouse.
•	
SketchUcation Plugin Store at http://sketchucation.com/resources/
plugin-store-download. This is an extension for downloading and 
managing extensions, having the largest collection of SketchUp plugins 
online, with instant install, plugin sorting, and more useful features.
•	
Smustard at http://www.smustard.com/. It is a collection of free and  
for-pay plugins.
Extensions and plugins mentioned in  
the book
The following extensions and plugins are mentioned in this book:
•	
SketchUp STL at http://extensions.sketchup.com/en/content/
sketchup-stl converts SketchUp models into the common .stl format  
for 3D printing
•	
Solid Inspector at http://extensions.sketchup.com/en/content/solid-
inspector checks for errors preventing solid groups and components
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Resources for Your 3D Printing Success
[ 112 ]
•	
CleanUp³ at http://extensions.sketchup.com/en/content/
cleanup%C2%B3 automatically deletes stray lines and performs other
tedious tasks
•	
Import DXF at http://sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.
php?f=323&t=31186 imports existing artwork in .DXF format
•	
Edge Tools² at https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/content/edge-
tools² cleans up imported .DXF and .DWG files
•	
Make Faces at http://www.smustard.com/script/MakeFaces fills in
imported linework with faces for pushing/pulling into 3D
•	
Roundcorner at http://sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.
php?t=20485 is used to add fillets to your 3D model, making the
corners rounded
•	
BezierSpline at http://sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.
php?t=13563 is used to make complex curves
•	
Joint Push Pull Interactive at http://sketchucation.com/forums/
viewtopic.php?p=496773 is used to make wall thickness; it works best
on models of simple to medium complexity
•	
Add Terrain Skirt at http://sketchucation.com/forums/viewtopic.
php?p=359903#p359903 quickly adds a flat base to terrain models, making
them solid for printing
•	
i.materialise 3D Print Service at http://extensions.sketchup.com/en/
content/3d-print-service uploads a model directly from SketchUp 
to i.materialise
More useful extensions
The following extensions are also useful:
•	
Curviloft at http://forums.sketchucation.com/viewtopic.php?t=28586
is used to create complex curved surfaces.
•	
Bounding box at http://extensions.sketchup.com/en/content/draw-
boundingbox draws faces on the bounding box of a group or component. It is
useful for aligning odd-shaped objects.
•	
Artisan priced $39 at http://artisan4sketchup.com/ adds subdivision
capabilities inside SketchUp for organic modeling.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Appendix
[ 113 ]
SketchUp training
If you're new to SketchUp, use the following resources that I referred to when 
learning how to model:
•	
SketchUp's official training [http://www.sketchup.com/learn]; free  
videos, downloadable step-by-step tutorials, and more, directly from the 
SketchUp team.
•	
Google SketchUp 8 for Dummies, Wiley Publishing at http://www.
aidanchopra.com/book-info, written by one of the SketchUp team 
members for SketchUp 8 in an easy-to-follow format. The vast majority  
of the book still applies to current SketchUp versions.
•	
SketchUp School at http://www.go-2-school.com/, video training from 
experts, also available for free on YouTube at http://www.youtube.com/
user/4sketchupgo2school.
Companion programs for 3D printing
The following programs work with 3D models, providing functionality that 
SketchUp lacks:
•	
Netfabb Basic at http://www.netfabb.com/basic.php is a free program for 
manipulating and fixing errors in STL files.
•	
Netfabb Cloud at https://netfabb.azurewebsites.net/ is a powerful 
free STL repairing hosted online. Use this to clean up models and fix errors 
such as missing faces, and internal geometry.
•	
Meshlab at http://meshlab.sourceforge.net/ is used to convert many files 
to import into SketchUp or convert models exported from SketchUp.
3D model repositories
The following websites host models that others have made. Download them and 
modify for your needs. A huge time-saver if you can find a model close to what  
you need!
•	
Thingiverse (http://www.thingiverse.com/) is the largest collection of 
files for 3D printing online
•	
SketchUp 3D Warehouse (https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com/) is a 
vast collection of SketchUp models, most of which are not printable without 
making them solid
•	
GrabCAD (https://grabcad.com/) are engineering grade models, most of 
which will need conversion to allow import to SketchUp
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Resources for Your 3D Printing Success
[ 114 ]
3D print services
If you don't own a printer, you'll need a print service to have models made for you. 
Even if you do own a printer, you may need a model printed in a material you don't 
have access to. There are a couple of different business models that print services use.
Industrial services with a shop platform
The following services allow designers to order high quality models as well as sell 
designs to the public. The printing and customer service is fulfilled by the print 
service. Designers are paid if someone purchases their model.
•	
Shapeways at http://www.shapeways.com/ usually has the best prices and 
awesome customer service. It has offices in New York and the Netherlands.
•	
i.materialise at http://i.materialise.com/ has an excellent selection of 
materials, good SketchUp support, fast priority service, and cool contests.  
It is based in Belgium.
•	
Sculpteo at http://www.sculpteo.com/en/ can print SketchUp files,  
offers fast printing times, and has innovative tools for designers. It is  
based in France.
•	
Kraftwurx at http://www.kraftwurx.com/ has a huge variety of materials 
available, by far the largest selection—platinum and many more. It is based 
in Texas, USA, with printing hubs around the world.
Crowdsourced print services
The following websites act as a platform allowing anyone to list their printer and 
accept and fulfill printing jobs. You can usually find a local printer using one of these 
services. Most printer listings are for small desktop printers, but there are also many 
small businesses with industrial printers and engineering staff on hand to provide 
personalized help.
•	
MakeXYZ (http://makexyz.com/)
•	
3DHubs (http://www.3dhubs.com/)
Contact me
I sincerely hope this book has brought you value on your SketchUp to 3D printing 
journey. If there is anything else at all that I can help you with, please e-mail me 
directly at marcus@denali3ddesign.com.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Index
Symbols
2D sketch, phone cradle
creating  64
3DHubs
URL  114
3D modeling program
selecting  13, 14
3D model repositories
about  113
GrabCAD  113
SketchUp 3D Warehouse  113
Thingiverse  113
3D printable model
.STL files, importing  27, 28
creating  25, 26
3D printer  7
3D printing
about  8
designing, for prototypes versus finished 
products  11, 12
examples  11
pitfalls, avoiding  12, 13
process, overview  8
support material  9
URL, for processes types  9
3D printing, model designed for rendering 
case study
about  86
full-color printed cabin  106, 107
groups, used for organizing model  89
interior walls, adding  96
layers, used for organizing model  89
model, planning  89
model, printing  100-102
original model, examining  87-89
parts, orienting for printing  98, 99
roof, modeling  97, 98
standard wall thickness, creating  90-93
wall panels, editing for details  
addition  93, 94
window grills, adding  95
3D print services
about  114
crowdsourced print services  114
industrial services, with shop platform  114
3D Text tool
using  66
3D Warehouse
about  56
URL  56
45 degree overhang rule
for filament printers  37, 38
.DXF file  36
.STL files
importing  27
A
additive manufacturing  8
Add Terrain Skirt
URL  80, 112
architectural rendering  85
Arc tool  38, 42
Artisan
URL  112
B
benefits, print service  10
BezierSpline extension
about  48
URL  112
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

[ 116 ]
Bezier tool  72
bounding box
about  104
URL  112
C
case study, 3D printing
URL  11
changes speeds iteration
historical timeline, keeping of  33, 34
changing circle segments
URL, for articles  45
CleanUp³
about  24
URL  112
CleanUp extension  57
color
model, printing with  81
color printing
model, exporting for  84
crowdsourced print services
3DHubs  114
MakeXYZ  114
Curviloft
URL  112
D
desktop extrusion printers
tips  48
detail size  40
dialog boxes
minimizing  22, 23
Dialog box, SketchUp interface  18
dots per inch (DPI)  8
drawing area, SketchUp interface  18
E
ease of printing
designing for  30
Edge Tools²
URL  112
extensions
installing  23-25
using  23, 24
extensions resources, SketchUp
about  111
Extensions Warehouse  111
SketchUcation Plugin Store  111
Smustard  111
extensions, SketchUp
about  111
Artisan  112
Bounding box  112
CleanUp³  112
Curviloft  112
Edge Tools²  112
i.materialise 3D Print Service  112
SketchUp STL  111
Solid Inspector  111
Extensions Warehouse
URL  111
eyedropper Sample tool  103
F
filament printers  37
Follow Me tool
about  42
using  46, 47
full color printing
model, preparing for  102-104
fused filament fabrication (FFF)  8
G
Glif  11
Google Earth terrain
working with  77-81
GoPro wrench
modifying  56
Grab button  78
GrabCAD
about  56
URL  56, 113
H
historical timeline
keeping, of changes speeds iteration  33, 34
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

[ 117 ]
I
image
importing, into SketchUp  30-33
scaling  36
sharp corners, smoothing out  38
i.materialise 3D Print Service
URL  112
i.materialise service
about  103
model, printing from  105
URL  83, 114
Import DXF
URL  112
industrial 3D print services, with shop 
platform
i.materialise  114
Kraftwurx  114
Sculpteo  114
Shapeways  114
Intersect with Model command  68
iteration  8
J
JointPushPull Interactive extension
about  51
URL  80, 112
K
Kraftwurx
URL  114
L
Line tool  32, 72
M
Make Faces plugin
URL  36, 112
MakeXYZ
URL  114
Menu bar, SketchUp interface  17
Meshlab
URL  83, 113
model
exporting  34, 35
exporting, for color printing  84
preparing, for full color printing  102-104
printing, from i.materialise  105
printing, via Shapeways  105
printing, with color  81
saving, as component  54, 55
Move tool  91
N
Netfabb
URL  56
Netfabb Basic
URL  113
Netfabb Cloud
URL  113
nonsolid models
troubleshooting  109-111
O
online 3D model repositories
3D Warehouse  56
GrabCAD  56
Thingiverse  55
Orient Faces command  71
Outer Shell command  41
Outer Shell tool
solids, combining  48-51
using  67
P
Paint Bucket tool  103
phone cradle model
2D sketch, creating  64
designing  63
details, adding  65
exporting, for printing  71
faces, orienting  70
groups, combining with Outer Shell tool  67
printed model, testing  71, 72
profiles, pulling into 3D  64
slot, creating  68-70
symmetrical models, mirroring  66
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

[ 118 ]
text, adding with 3D Text tool  66
plugins  23
plugins, SketchUp
Add Terrain Skirt  112
BezierSpline  112
Import DXF  112
Joint Push Pull Interactive  112
Make Faces  112
Roundcorner  112
printbed  8
printed model, phone cradle
creating  74
groups, copying  73
groups, scaling  73
improved design, developing  72
second iteration, testing  74, 75
printhead  8
printing
parts, orienting for  104
print service
benefits  10
problems, nonsolid models
troubleshooting  110
problems, troubleshooting guide table
duplicate faces  110
holes in the model  110
internal faces  110
intersecting or overlapping faces  110
reversed faces  111
stray lines  111
programs, for 3D printing
Meshlab  113
Netfabb Basic  113
Netfabb Cloud  113
prototyping  8
Protractor tool  33
Push/Pull tool  72, 91
R
rapid prototyping  8
resources, for SketchUp extensions
SketchUcation  25
Smustard  25
Roundcorner plugin
about  38
URL  112
ruby scripts  23
S
Scale tool  36, 86, 91
Sculpteo
URL  83, 114
Section Plane tool  88
Select Region button  78
Shapeways
model, printing from  105
URL  114
Shortcuts, SketchUp interface  18
sketch
preparing  29
SketchUcation  
about  25, 51
URL  25
SketchUcation Forums
URL  113
SketchUcation Plugin Store
URL  111
SketchUp
about  8, 15
downloading  15
Eraser tool, using  59
extensions  111
extensions resources  111
image, importing into  30-33
installing  15
model, exporting for color printing  84
modeling in, from sketch  30-33
Move tool, using  58
Offset tool, using  59
Push-Pull tool, using  60
Rectangle tool, using  60
resources, for learning  113
select tool, using  58
solid colors, using  83
textures, using  83
textures versus solid colors  82, 83
URL, for downloading  15
URL, for video training series  14
using, for 3D printing versus rendering  86
SketchUp 3D Warehouse
URL  113
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

[ 119 ]
SketchUp components
leveraging  53
SketchUp interface
about  17
Dialog box  18
drawing area  18
Menu bar  17
Shortcuts  18
Status bar  18
Toolbar  17
Value Control Box (VCB)  18
SketchUp Make  13, 15
SketchUp Pro  15
SketchUp School
URL  113
SketchUp STL
URL  111
Smustard
URL  25, 111
solid colors
used, in SketchUp  83
versus textures  82, 83
Solid Inspector extension
about  24, 34, 109
URL  111
Status bar, SketchUp interface  18
Stereolithography [.STL]  8, 24
support material, 3D printing  9
T
Tape Measure tool  32, 33, 36, 86
template
setting up, for fast modeling  18, 19
setting up, for troubleshooting  18, 19
template setup
model units, of measurement  21
saving, as default template  21
textures
used, in SketchUp  83
versus solid colors  82, 83
Thingiverse
about  55
URL  55, 113
toolbars
about  22
setting up  22
Toolbar, SketchUp interface  17
toolbars setup
dialog boxes, minimizing  22, 23
training resources, SketchUp
SketchUcation Forums  113
SketchUp School  113
V
Value Control Box (VCB), SketchUp  
interface  18
vase modeling
about  41
Follow Me tool, using  46, 47
missing faces, avoiding by scaling up  
model  43, 44
noncircular circles, understanding  45
profile, creating  42
solids, combining with Outer Shell  
tool  48-51
wall thickness, creating  44, 45
vector artwork
importing  35, 36
W
wall thickness
about  40
methods, for creating  51
wire thickness  40
Z
Zoom Extents tool  32
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

Thank you for buying  
3D Printing with SketchUp
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order  
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand,  
home to books published on software built around Open Source licenses, and offering 
information to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open 
Source brand also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty 
to each Open Source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

3D Printing Blueprints
ISBN: 978-1-84969-708-8            Paperback: 310 pages
Design successful models for home 3D printing, using 
a Makerbot or other 3D printers
1.	
Design 3D models that will print successfully 
using Blender, a free 3D modeling program.
2.	
Customize, edit, repair, and then share your 
creations on Makerbot's Thingiverse website.
3.	
Easy-to-follow guide on 3D printing; learn to 
create a new model at the end of each chapter.
Blender 3D Printing Essentials
ISBN: 978-1-78328-459-7             Paperback: 114  pages
Bring your ideas to life in Blender and learn how to 
design beautiful, light, and strong 3D printed objects
1.	
Design beautiful, colorful, and practical objects 
in Blender to print or export.
2.	
Master Blender's special 3D printing tools to 
maximize print quality and minimize cost.
3.	
Consider requirements unique to 3D printing 
such as structural integrity and stability.
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

3D Printing for Architects with 
MakerBot
ISBN: 978-1-78355-075-3            Paperback: 108  pages
Build state-of-the-art architecture design projects with 
MakerBot Replicator 1, 2, or 2X
1.	
Intelligently design a model to be printed on 
the MakerBot from the scratch.
2.	
Make the MakerBot replicator work for you, 
automating tasks and doing post processing  
on MakerBot output.
3.	
Full of practical tips, tricks, and step-by-step 
instructions to successfully design your model 
with MakerBot.
SketchBook Pro Digital Painting 
Essentials
ISBN: 978-1-84969-820-7           Paperback: 112 pages
Create stunning professional grade artwork using 
SketchBook Pro
1.	
Discover tricks and techniques that will help 
you make the most out of Sketchbook Pro.
2.	
Packed with practical examples that help  
you create expressive sketches ranging  
from cartoons to portraits.
3.	
A step-by-step guide packed with  
supporting imagery.
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
Download from Join eBook (www.joinebook.com)

