
3ds Max Speed Modeling for 
3D Artists
Flex your speed modeling muscles using 3ds Max
Thomas Mooney
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

3ds Max Speed Modeling for 3D Artists
Copyright © 2012 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: October 2012
Production Reference: 1111012
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84969-236-6
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Thomas Mooney (tomofnz@gmail.com)

Credits
Author
Thomas Mooney
Reviewers
Vincent Bourdier
Conor O'Kane
Acquisition Editor
Wilson D'souza
Pramila Balan
Lead Technical Editor
Pramila Balan
Technical Editors
Zinal Shah
Sharvari Baet
Manmeet Singh Vasir
Kedar Bhat
Merin Jose
Copy Editors
Brandt D'Mello
Insiya Morbiwala
Aditya Nair
Alfida Paiva
Laxmi Subramanian
Project Coordinator
Joel Goveya
Proofreader
Jonathan Todd
Indexer
Hemangini Bari
Graphics
Aditi Gajjar
Production Coordinator
Shantanu Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu Zagade

About the Author
Thomas Mooney grew up in New Zealand. He now lives in a jungle with 
squashed frogs, mosquitoes, and regular thunderstorms and power cuts. He is 
a lecturer in design and also works as an artist. You can learn more about his 
work at www.tomofnz.com.
Tom tends to work, play, teach, and sit around all day with computers, and also likes 
to do comics, films, maps, screenplays, novels, storyboards, and iPad doodles.
His book Unreal Development Kit Game Design Cookbook, Packt Publishing was 
published earlier in 2012.
For my mother, a good, kind soul.
I would also like to extend a hearty back slap to all my students for 
being the subject of numerous tests (of patience mostly) during this 
book's development.

About the Reviewers
Vincent Bourdier is a twenty-six year old developer who is French with a passion 
for 3D. After self-learning 3D modeling and programming, he went to the University 
of Technology of Belfort-Montbéliard (UTBM) in 2003 and received an Engineering 
degree in Computer Sciences, specializing in imagery, interaction, and virtual reality. 
Passionate about computer graphics and image processing, he remains curious about 
existing and new technologies in a lot of domains such as AI, CMake, augmented 
reality, and so on.
He has been working as a 3D developer at Global Vision Systems (Toulouse, France) 
since 2008. He is now a Technical Leader on a 3D real-time engine.
Global Vision Systems (http://www.global-vision-systems.com) is a software 
developer and publisher offering innovative human-machine interfaces for 
aeronautics, space, plant, and process supervision.
I would like to thank my parents for their encouragement, even if 
they don't understand a word of my job, and my employers for the 
opportunity to live my passions and giving me challenges to meet.

Conor O'Kane is a game developer and teacher from Dublin. He lectures on game 
development at RMIT University in Melbourne, in courses covering game design, 
low-polygon art, character modeling, and iOS game development. He has worked as 
an Artist and as a Technical Artist for console game developers since 1999, and has 
been producing his own games independently since 2007, primarily with the Torque 
2D engine. He currently develops games for Windows, Mac, and iOS platforms.
Conor lives with his wife and two children in Melbourne. When not making 
(or playing) video games, he enjoys practicing martial arts and learning to play 
the piano. You can download his free games and read articles and tutorials at 
http://cokane.com.

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to 
your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and 
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and 
as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch 
with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up 
for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books 
and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.


Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max	
7
Quick start: Jump into making models	
8
Getting to know the User Interface	
12
Default and custom UI schemes	
17
Switching UI presets	
17
Making changes to hotkeys	
18
Customizing the Quad menu	
20
Making changes to the view layout	
22
Deciding on the best view navigation	
23
Pan, Orbit, and Zoom	
24
Navigation with the ViewCube	
27
Making adjustments to the ViewCube display	
27
Navigation with the Steering Wheel	
28
Using the Steering Wheel	
29
Displaying your model for modeling	
32
Model display	
34
Setting scene units	
37
Searching for content in the scene	
38
Creating your own selection sets with Named Selections	
40
Common changes to 3ds Max default preferences	
42
Determining the hardware shading settings to use	
45
Summary	
45
Chapter 2: Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you	
47
Setting filters in the Display panel	
48
Display panel filters	
48
Hiding and freezing objects	
49
Display Properties	
50

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Object Properties – Show Frozen in Gray	
51
Freezing objects via Object Properties	
51
Object Properties – Animation trajectories	
53
Toggle trajectory	
53
Object Properties – Render properties	
54
Disabling shadow casting	
54
Moving and rotating objects using pivot controls	
56
Pivots	
56
Local, Screen, and Pick spaces	
61
Changing the axis direction of the gizmo	
61
Cloning objects: Instances, References, and Snapshots	
66
Adjusting Instances	
66
Capturing a Snapshot	
69
Adjusting modifiers in the viewport	
70
Assigning a single Turbosmooth to all your models	
70
Selecting objects that have a certain modifier	
72
Setting different modifier attributes for views and rendering	
73
Organizing a scene using Groups	
73
Group functionality	
74
Importing models	
76
Using a template scene including lighting, turntable camera, 
and render settings	
79
NVIDIA iray ActiveShade rendering	
81
Summary	
84
Chapter 3: The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in 
Polygon Modeling	
85
Introducing the project	
86
Adding image reference	
86
Viewport image planes	
89
Forming the base model	
93
The Quad menu's editable poly tools	
94
Setting values with the Autodesk style caddy	
101
Fitting the model to the artwork	
104
Generating round forms from quad-based geometry	
106
Detaching and attaching parts of a model	
114
A preview of a sculpting workflow	
119
Summary	
124

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Chapter 4: Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model	
125
Marking Poly Loops	
126
Soft modeling	
129
Soft modeling with Soft Selection 	
129
Soft modeling with the Shift brush 	
132
Soft modeling with Free-Form Deformations	
134
Relaxation techniques	
136
Using Poly Select to apply modifiers to Sub-Object selections	
136
Generating shapes from edge selections	
139
The Lathe modifier process	
142
Shape construction and interpolation	
146
Comparing the Sweep modifier with the Loft object	
153
Smoothing Groups	
156
Generating model forms using Cloth	
162
Setting up the Cloth modifier parameters	
164
Summary	
167
Chapter 5: The Language of Machines: Designing and Building 
Model Components	
169
A visual language for science fiction machinery	
170
Spare parts	
172
A Greeble factory	
186
Getting started with Greeble	
186
From primitive origins...	
190
…Into outer space	
195
A star ship construction walk-through	
206
Summary	
227
Chapter 6: The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 
3ds Max Polygon Tools	
229
New modeling and UI features in 3ds Max 2013	
230
Camera movement while a Cut operation 
is live	
231
Customizable Workspaces	
231
Tabbed Layouts	
232
A gradient for the viewport background	
234
Interoperability with AutoCad	
234
Sub-Object level editing tools via the Ribbon	
236
Getting started	
237
Edge loop selection and growth	
239

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Loop mode and live select mode	
240
Dot selection, growth, and Step selection	
243
Sub-Object editing in Manipulation mode	
244
Joining objects	
248
Creating and cleaning Booleans	
248
ProBooleans	
254
Ribbon tools	
258
Paint Connect, Vertex, and Distance Connect	
258
Freeform: Shift	
261
Freeform: Optimize	
262
Summary	
264
Chapter 7: The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: 
Mapping Models for Texturing	
265
The goal of UV mapping	
266
Gaining familiarity with the Unwrap UVW editor	
268
Combining texture islands to save draw calls	
275
Just getting on with it...	
282
Additional UV layout tools	
289
Soft Selection	
289
Setting UVW editor hotkeys	
290
Aligning points	
290
A handy script for fixing up UVs	
292
Mirror and Flip commands	
292
Packing the layout	
293
Finalizing the layout	
299
Making a Photoshop texture template	
303
Send to Mudbox	
305
2D View in Viewport Canvas	
306
Summary	
308
Chapter 8: Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas	
309
Direct painting versus indirect painting	
310
Starting a paint session	
310
Channel selection	
312
Shortcuts and 2D View painting	
315
Brush Images and Custom Maps	
319
Using the Clone brush	
320
Direct painting using spherical and depth brush settings	
321
Layers	
322
Loading maps into other channels	
325

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Tablet user's guide	
327
Swapping material types using Slate	
328
Substance procedural textures	
330
Asset texturing walk-through	
334
Summary	
338
Chapter 9: Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max	
339
Introduction	
340
High poly model import	
340
Importing a model into Sculptris	
341
Importing the Sculptris.OBJ mesh in 3ds Max	
341
Retopology	
345
Exploring the Freeform/Polydraw tools	
346
Pinch/Spread	
351
Using Quad Cap Pro to generate meshes to conform	
352
Filling stubborn polygons	
353
Topology concerns for animation	
354
WrapIt by The Pixel Hive	
357
Finalizing the retopologized model	
360
Summary	
361
Chapter 10: Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for 
Animation and Games	
363
ProOptimizer	
364
Creating a low-resolution model prior to skinning	
365
Rigging the creature with CAT	
367
The foreleg	
372
Rig naming and selection	
373
Rig display and access via layers	
375
Skinning the creature	
376
Skin advanced parameters	
377
Adjusting envelopes	
378
Checking skin adjustments	
382
Weighting per vertex	
382
Painting blend weights	
384
Mirror Mode	
386
Transfer of low poly skinning to a high poly mesh	
386
Testing the animation and making a preview	
388
3ds Max 2013 CAT data transfer to MotionBuilder	
390
Kinect motion capture – setting up with Brekel Kinect and MotionBuilder	 390

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Matching a CAT rig to an FBX in MotionBuilder	
391
Matching a CAT rig to an FBX in 3ds Max	
394
Game readiness check	
395
Summary	
396
Index	
397

Preface
This book is aimed at artists who already know essentials of modeling and are 
considering modeling specialization. A big part of specialization involves seeking 
ways to streamline your work flow. Possibly you're a diploma student and want to 
level up your 3ds Max skills after a short course, or possibly you're self-taught 
and want to measure the skills you've obtained. The outcome of reading this book 
would be a thorough knowledge of the modeling pipeline from concept, base 
model, sculpted model, UV mapped model, textured model, to skinned and 
rigged model, allowing for high-quality rendering or export of a game 
engine-ready, animation-ready asset.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, First Launch: Getting To Know 3ds Max, covers starting from scratch with 
3ds Max. This chapter should help you get up to speed. It covers the essential 
starting points for those making their first launch into 3ds Max.
Chapter 2, Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for You, examines model handling 
using readymade assets. The main asset is a rapidly constructed vehicle used for 
testing a prototype game. Our purpose is to cover the necessary model handling 
skills before we undertake actual modeling in the next chapter.
Chapter 3, The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling, covers getting 
started on a model, starting with a reference image. We'll examine the modeling 
skills needed to create a base model. It also introduces the challenge of constructing 
forms that match a design while keeping within the constraints of four-sided 
topology, with an eye towards surface-detailing requirements.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 4, Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model, demonstrates ways in which 
various modifiers can be used to adjust modeled content quickly. The main emphasis 
is to provide alternative designs with little work by modifying existing content. 
We also cover basic concepts for soft-surface modeling, smoothing groups, and 
generating geometric models from shapes or curves.
Chapter 5, The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components, 
demonstrates the usefulness of developing an internal library or vocabulary of visual 
memes for your tech, mech, and hard surface models. It is very difficult to make a 
fictional model of a man-made object without some familiarity with how real man-
made objects get their look, especially in terms of fabricated or manufactured detail. 
In this chapter, we'll analyze some prevalent ideas about depicting 'sci-fi' tech along 
with time-saving methods for constructing parts to reference in models.
Chapter 6, The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools, examines newer 
features related to modeling in 3ds Max 2013 such as the Freeform tools, live 
cutting, edge loop modes, and some of the more peripheral modeling tools that are 
nevertheless really handy to know, such as working with Boolean compound objects.
Chapter 7, The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing, 
demonstrates methods of UV Mapping and stresses the importance of becoming 
fluent in the process of preparing a model for texturing a stage, which bridges 
modeling and texture painting while calling on somewhat different skills. The 
challenge is simply to put a 3D surface onto a 2D image plane. 3ds Max's mapping 
toolset ensures the user is well-armed to meet the challenge.
Chapter 8, Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas, shows how the extensive 
tools in Viewport Canvas can be used to directly paint on a model with texture 
coordinates, with many direct comparisons to Photoshop painting tools. We go 
through material and channel setup, brush settings and hotkeys, and approaches to 
importing layer content, managing custom brushes, and using layer masks to paint 
non-destructively.
Chapter 9, Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max, shows different ways to get a highly 
detail model down to a useable polygon count without losing key detail from the 
original, primarily looking at the brush-based PolyDraw tools.
Chapter 10, Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games, walks 
you through the envelope weighting, paint brush weighting, and vertex weighting 
tools in the Skin modifier, which is used to bind a mesh to a rig. In this case, we use 
CAT to provision a rig and we use SkinWrap to match a low-resolution version of a 
skinned model to a higher resolution version.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Bonus Chapter, Containers and XREfs, discusses Xref and Containers. We will 
learn how to create and edit a Container. We will also learn how to use Xref 
and Xref scene.
You can download the Bonus Chapter from http://www.packtpub.com/sites/
default/files/downloads/Containers_and_ XRefs.pdf.
What you need for this book
The following software are required:
•	
3ds Max 2012 or 2013
•	
Adobe Photoshop or similar 2D image editor
•	
Optional: Pixologic ZBrush, Pixologic Sculptris, or Autodesk Mudbox for 
sculpting detail.
Who this book is for
This book will appeal to anyone interested in 3D modeling who wants to improve 
their speed modeling ability, particularly artists whose work is relevant to industries 
where hard surface modeling or model prototyping is required, such as games, films, 
or visualization.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "You may like to try the 
ModularToolbarsUI, which exposes more than what the default UI does."
While there are very few cases where code is referenced, a block of code is set 
as follows:
FOR batch in selection DO
(
local newUVW = Unwrap_UVW()
addmodifier batch newUVW
newUVW.pack 0 5.0 true false false
)

Preface
[ 4 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on 
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: 
"In the menu  bar at the top of the  screen, go to the Create  menu and choose 
Standard Primitives | Box".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for 
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have purchased 
from your account at http://www.PacktPub.com. If you purchased this book 
elsewhere, you can visit http://www.PacktPub.com/support and register to 
have the files e-mailed directly to you.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


First Launch: Getting to 
Know 3ds Max
This book is aimed at artists who already know the essentials of modeling and are 
considering modeling specialization. A big part of specialization involves seeking 
ways to streamline your workflow. Possibly you're a diploma student and want to 
level up your 3ds Max skills after a short course, or possibly you're self taught and 
want to measure the skills you've obtained. If you are starting from scratch, however, 
this chapter should help you get up to speed. It covers the essential 
starting points for those making their first launch into 3ds Max.
These are the areas covered in the chapter's topics:
•	
Quick start: Jump into making models
•	
Getting to know the User Interface
•	
Default and custom UI schemes
°°
Switching UI presets
°°
Making changes to hotkeys
°°
Customizing the Quad menu
°°
Making changes to the view layout
•	
Deciding on the best view navigation
°°
Navigation with the ViewCube
°°
Navigation with the Steering Wheel
•	
Displaying your model for modeling
•	
Setting scene units
•	
Searching for content in the scene

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 8 ]
•	
Creating your own selection sets with Named Selections
•	
Common changes to 3ds Max default preferences
•	
Determining the hardware shading settings to use
Keywords and 3ds Max Help—A self-learning approach
In this book, we indicate menu, property, and tool keywords in bold. 
Keywords in the book can be explored via the Index of the 3ds Max 
menu Help | Autodesk 3ds Max Help online. Offline documentation 
can be downloaded via an installer from the usa.autodesk.com under 
Home | Support | Support and Documentation | Autodesk 3ds Max | 
Documentation and Help | 3ds Max 2013 Documentation section under 
3ds Max / 3ds Max Design 2013 Help Installer, which you should then 
set active in 3ds Max via the menu Customize | Preferences | Help | 
Local Computer/Network, or you can simply Download it via a 
button there.
Quick start: Jump into making models
This quick start guide is a set of steps to go from a blank viewport to having a simple 
model you can edit at the Sub-Object level (meaning you can access the component 
parts it is made of and change the object directly), and access the Editable Poly tools.
These steps establish a geometric object you can extend upon polygon by polygon:
1.	 In the menu bar at the top of the screen, go to the Create menu and choose 
Standard Primitives | Box.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
2.	 Notice that the Create tab 
 in the Command Panel on the right of 
the screen exposes the parameters for creating a new Box under 
Geometry | Standard Primitives.
3.	 In the Create tab parameters, you can also specify to set the Length, Width, 
and Height values, and also Segments to divide the box up in more detail. 
You can set these prior to creation, but it is easier to adjust them afterward.
4.	 Click in the view labeled Perspective. It gets an orange border to show 
it is active. Now click-and-drag in the Perspective view across the grid 
(G is the shortcut for toggling the grid visibility in any view). A planar shape 
will emerge, then when you drag up, you'll define its height as a box. We've 
created a box by specifying its length, height and depth. You can also, in the 
Creation Method section, click the radio button Cube. This will make a newly 
added box have sides of the same dimensions.
5.	 Having placed an arbitrary box in the scene via the Create tab in the 
Command Panel, we want to adjust or modify the parameters in the next 
tab . There, set the Length Segs, Width Segs, and Height Segs to 3 each 
for the existing box. The settings will be kept for any future boxes made, 
until you restart 3ds Max.
6.	 Press F4. This will display Edged Faces on top of the shaded viewport 
render of the box. While the box is selected, it will have a white, 
highlighted wireframe.
7.	 If you create a box you don't like, click on it to select it and delete it by hitting 
the Delete key, or use the Edit menu and choose Delete.
8.	 To continue editing, right-click on the object to expose the Quad menu and 
go to Convert To: | Convert to Editable Poly. Editable Poly is a good type 
for modeling.
9.	 Don't choose Editable Mesh, which is a TriMesh object format type mostly 
maintained for legacy and compatibility reasons (and sometimes to speed 
up display of objects). There are more editing tools available for an Editable 
Poly than there are for Editable Mesh, and they work faster. Editable Poly is a 
Winged Edge polygon data structure. For the technically inclined, there is an 
exhaustively detailed discussion of what this entails on the CGSociety forums 
(http://forums.cgsociety.org/showthread.php?t=146797), but the 
main thing is the tools we'll be using for this book's lessons are exclusively 
for Editable Poly models.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 10 ]
10.	 Note that when you convert the primitive to Editable Poly, sometimes 
the quad menu extends available commands to the left side or right side, 
depending on where it is activated on the screen. This ensures a fit to the 
view. An example is shown in the following screenshot:
11.	 Right-click over the model and choose Quad menu | Sub-objects | Polygon 
in the Tools 1 section, or press 4. This sets you into SubObject mode, editing 
Polygons, which are the components of the object surface. Now click on 
one of the squares that make up the top of the box. It will be highlighted in 
red. These squares are sometimes called polygons, sometimes quads, and 
sometimes faces (though strictly speaking, a face has three sides and quads 
are inherently composed of a pair of triangles).
12.	 Hold Ctrl and click on one of the polygons on the side of the box. It is added 
to the current selection. In earlier versions of 3ds Max, pressing Ctrl on an 
already selected polygon would deselect it, but lately this has been changed; 
now, only pressing Alt will deselect.
13.	 Right-click and choose Quad menu | Extrude. When you hover the cursor 
over the selected polygons, the cursor changes to show you are in Extrude 
mode. Drag on the faces and they'll push out, generating new geometry. 
Right-click to exit Extrude mode.
14.	 Besides the white wireframe, there is a white bounding box surrounding the 
model. Bounds show the widest range of the model in each dimension. This 
also helps you spot the object that is selected. You can turn it off if you press 
the [+] icon at the top left of the viewport, choose Configure Viewports, then 
turn off the Selection Brackets tickbox in the Selection section of the Visual 
Style & Appearance tab.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
15.	 Now select just the top extruded polygon by clicking on it. Press the icon 
 to enter Move mode (or Transform mode). You can also right-click and 
choose Quad menu | Move. An XYZ gizmo or guide appears. If it doesn't, 
try pressing X, which toggles transform gizmos on and off. Highlight the 
blue Z arrow and then drag the polygon upward.
16.	 The following screenshot, on the left, shows the extrusion results, and 
the image on the right shows the transform results, with the XYZ gismo 
showing the blue Z axis highlighted, which constrains movement to Z. 
17.	 It is a modest start, but you've made an object, converted it to Editable 
Poly for editing, and added to the model and transformed part of it. These 
processes are simple, but you'll have to repeat them many times, and these 
tools alone can help you get a lot done.
18.	 To finish up, right-click on the model and choose Quad | Top-Level from 
Tools 2. This turns off the Polygon editing mode and lets us adjust the entire 
model at the Object level rather than the SubObject level.
19.	 Press W to enter Move mode if you aren't already in it (yet another way to 
do it), and then hold Shift and move the object, which is one way to produce 
a clone or copy of the model. Try using the same tools and processes you've 
just proceeded through to adjust other parts of the model.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 12 ]
20.	 Save your first creation by pressing Ctrl + S and choosing a path and a 
filename (YourName_FirstModel_01.max), which is a good convention 
because it informs us who made the model, what its subject is, and the 
iteration number for the piece. The extension .max is used by 
all 3ds Max scenes. The default path for 3ds Max scenes is 
C:\Users\~\My Documents\3dsMax\scenes\.
21.	 To export the model to a game engine like UDK (.ase or .fbx), or 
a sculpting program like Sculptris (.obj) or Mudbox (.fbx or .obj), 
you can choose the appropriate format under File | Export | Export 
Selected. The default path for 3ds Max to export to is C:\Users\~\My 
Documents\3dsMax\export\.
Getting to know the User Interface
First of all, it is useful to look at some of the conventions of the 3ds Max UI. While 
our goal at the moment is to get used to the patterns that windows, buttons, menus, 
and tabs follow in 3ds Max, some features of 3ds Max will surface along the way that 
we'll have to reserve discussing in depth until later.
For example, to edit objects, you can add Modifiers to them, and these can be 
added on top of each other as a stack. From modifier to modifier, the stack GUI 
arrangement is always the same. Here is what to look out for: any 
 icon like the one 
next to Editable Poly in the following screenshot means you can expand it to view 
further parameters. Other editors in 3ds Max, such as the Curve Editor, share this 
convention. Shown on the Bend modifier in the following screenshot, an  icon will 
collapse an expanded section back again. The little lamp icon  for each modifier 
lets you enable and disable a given modifier temporarily, without losing its settings. 
Right-click on the modifier label (for example, Bend) to get further options such as 
Delete, Rename, Copy, Cut, Paste, and Off in Viewport (which disables a modifier 
in the scene until render time).
A menu item with a + icon, similar to the ones shown in the following screenshot, 
can also be expanded by clicking on its label. Once expanded, it can be closed by 
clicking on its label again. These menu items can be re-arranged by dragging them, 
as can modifiers in the Modifier stack. A blue line will highlight the position they 
will drop into.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The various sections of Command Panel, which can be extensive, can be scrolled 
using a hand cursor 
 that appears when you drag on empty space in the Command 
Panel. You can also use the slider down the right side. This is also true of the Render 
dialog (F10). The slider is quite thin, but is easy to use once you know that it is there. 
On the Editable Poly option, if you expand all the sections, you can see this slider. 
On a modifier such as Bend, which has few parameters, it isn't included.
Any icon that shows a text field with a downward triangle icon  means you 
can expand a rollout list, as is the case with Modifier List in the Command Panel. 
Likewise, any icon with a little black triangle in the corner can be held down to 
expand a fly-out revealing more options or tools that relate to it. An example is 
the Align tool: .
Any numeric field can either accept type or be adjusted using a spinner on the 
right . Most spinners can be right-clicked to drop their value to zero or its lowest 
possible value; for example, a Cylinder primitive's Sides parameter can only go 
down to 3, or it would be a flat object.
Many text buttons and icons in 3ds Max, if you float the cursor over them for a short 
time, will display the name of the tool, and often a tool tip or instruction referring 
to the use of the tool. This is particularly true for the Ribbon tools, which often 
also display illustrations as they expand. An example of a tool tip is shown in the 
following screenshot:

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 14 ]
The icon 
, which resembles a pin in the modifier stack, lets you keep a pinned 
object's modifier stack displayed even if you select a different object in the scene. The 
icon 
, which resembles a pin in the Ribbon UI, lets you keep an expanded rollout 
menu from being reverted closed (while the current object is selected). This seems to 
work when you haven't minimized the Ribbon to one of its three minimized modes. 
In the following example, the Teapot primitive's modifier stack is pinned, so it shows 
even though the Sphere primitive is currently selected. Meanwhile, in the Ribbon UI, 
the extra tools of the Geometry (All) section have been expanded and pinned. This 
would remain so until some object other than the Sphere primitive 
was selected instead.
The Ribbon UI can be collapsed to a minimal set of headings by clicking on 
the upward triangle shown at the top of the following screenshot (and the tiny 
downward arrow next to that indicates there are some options for this collapse 
command). There is a strange redundancy to this set of options, as the option 
Minimize to Tabs seems just fine. While the Ribbon is minimized, all you need 
to do to access the Ribbon tool is click on the tab titles, which then expand out.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Similarly, if you are using the Ribbon, then you can drag the labels of each section 
to re-arrange them, as shown in the following screenshot. The example shows the 
Graphite Modeling tools, where the Loops section is being dragged next to the 
Polygon Modeling section. Note that the Ribbon menus change automatically 
depending on what is selected and the editing mode you are currently in 
(such as the Polygon mode or the Vertex mode).
The next thing to get used to is accessing Settings of tools while editing. Any tool 
with a box icon 
 next to it, or exposed under it in the case of the Ribbon UI, opens 
further settings for the tool. In the Quad menu, shown in the following screenshot, 
many of the editing tools show this.
Right-click in a view with an Editable Poly selected to expose the major editing 
tools (tools 2). Also, a sideways arrow in the Quad menu, as in the case of Convert 
To: | Convert to Editable Poly, reveals options for a command. In the preceding 
screenshot, the Extrude tool is shown in Polygon mode. There are multiple ways 
to access the tool itself and its settings: you can do so via the Ribbon or via the 
Quad menu. You can also access the same Extrude tool and other editing tools 
in the Command Panel in the section Editable Poly | Polygons | Edit Polygons.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 16 ]
Command Panel has a couple of interesting features: it can be floated, and in 
versions from 3ds Max 2012, it can be minimized, a lot like the menus in ZBrush, off 
to the side and out of the way unless needed. By default, Command Panel is docked 
on the right-hand side of the screen. You can widen it to show several columns by 
dragging on its edges. Views can also be enlarged in the same way. You can float 
Command Panel by dragging on its top edge or by right-clicking and choosing Float. 
There is also the option to Dock | Left. There is also the option to Minimize, which 
lets Command Panel slide out of view off to the side when not in use. A vertical strip 
labeled Command Panel, if you roll over it, pops it back out. When the Command 
Panel is floated, you can drag it to either side of the screen to re-dock it there, or you 
can double-click on its label.
The label also has a [  ] icon that lets you turn the Command Panel off. To reveal it 
again, go to the top row of icons—the main toolbar—right-click, and you can enable 
it from the list of menus there. If you happen to disable the main toolbar, you can get 
that back again if you go to the left side of the UI, just under the green 3ds Max logo 
, and right-click to expose a menu that lets you enable it again. Above the main 
toolbar are the main menu entries: File, Edit, Tools, Group, and so on. These can be 
hidden by clicking the down arrow icon  and choosing Hide Menu Bar. To get it 
back, click there again and choose Show Menu Bar. The uppermost icons displayed 
are entries in the Quick Access Toolbar, which you can add your own entries to 
by right-clicking on a tool and choosing Add to Quick Access Toolbar. Here, I'm 
adding Swift Loop, a handy tool, to the Quick Access Toolbar from the Ribbon.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Unfortunately, such additions are per session additions. Next time you load up 
3ds Max, they won't be preserved. The Undo and Redo buttons are there, with 
icons 
 that let you access the available undo and redo history too. If you start 
to customize the Quick Access Toolbar, you will notice the option when you 
right-click to add a separator, which is a little dividing bar to space out menu 
items nicely. These are seen all throughout 3ds Max: in the modifier stack, in 
the various editor icon rows, and in the Quad menu.
If you really get lost with missing windows you've closed, try going to the 
Customize menu and choose Revert to Startup Layout.
Default and custom UI schemes
In the current version, the UI is well-designed and visually appealing. The dark 
tones allow users to work without glare, and the icons are colored for easy spotting. 
There are still some legacy UI presets you can try out, including the 2009 interface 
that is used in many tutorials online. You can also save changes you make to the UI 
in an external file and set it as the default if you wish.
Switching UI presets
This quick demonstration shows two ways to change the presets for the user interface:
•	
One way to switch UI presets is to expand the Customize menu and choose 
Load Custom UI Scheme, which pops up a browsing window to locate 
a .ui file.
•	
Expand the History rollout at the top of this window to expose 
C:\Program Files\Autodesk\3ds Max 2012\UI. This path includes 
several options you can try out. 3Dsmax2009.ui is nearly the same as 
the 2012 default except the views are toned much lighter.
By default, Custom UI files, including small changes you make to the default UI, 
are saved in C:\Users\~\Appdata\Local\Autodesk\3dsMax\2012\64bit\enu\UI 
(supposing you are using the 64 bit version).

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 18 ]
There is another way to access UI presets, which is by going to the Customize menu 
and choosing Custom UI and Defaults Switcher, which has a slight advantage of 
including visual previews of each UI as you select it in the list. Here you can see a list 
of tool-based settings and a list of UI schemes (on the right). You may like to try the 
ModularToolbarsUI, which exposes more than what the default UI does.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have 
purchased from your account at http://www.PacktPub.com. If you 
purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.PacktPub.
com/support and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.
Making changes to hotkeys
Let's change the rather annoying Selection Lock Toggle. When turned on, this 
toggle prevents you from selecting anything else, which can be handy if you intend 
it to be on, but not so nice if you toggle it on by mistake. Since its hotkey is Space, you 
can imagine this to be easy to do. Setting it to Ctrl + Space, which is not assigned to 
a command, would be better, since it is less likely to be accidentally hit.
This is done as follows:
1.	 Go to the Customize menu and choose Customize User Interface. This 
window pops up with the Keyboard tab selected, so all we need to do is 
browse down the alphabetical list of Actions for Selection Lock Toggle, 
which also shows its icon (the padlock 
 found under the time slider).
2.	 First, the hotkey Space will show next to Selection Lock Toggle. On the 
right, press Remove to remove it; then in the Hotkey field press Ctrl + Space, 
and click on Assign to commit it. Don't forget to press Save at the bottom 
of the window. You'll be prompted to save a .kbd file, which you can name 
yourname.kbd. It will be saved with the UI next time you save the UI, and 
3ds Max does this anyway when you end the session.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
3.	 Most commands in 3ds Max let you set a hotkey. You can view the assigned 
keys by browsing the Shortcut list. Or you can go to the Help menu and 
choose Keyboard Shortcut Map, which opens an interactive shockwave 
image that exposes main hotkeys as you roll over a diagram of a keyboard. 
Given the file type, your browser may not permit it to load, but you can find 
it here: C:\Program Files\Autodesk\3ds Max 2012\hotkeymap.SWF. Note 
that this handy utility only shows default hotkeys.
4.	 Not all the default hotkeys are as convenient as they could be.
5.	 The Scale command 
 actually is a flyout with three options. On the 
keyboard Q  stands for Select, W  stands for Move, E  stands for Rotate, 
and R  stands for Smart Scale. Unfortunately, Smart Scale is not very smart, 
and often you'll only want to use the regular scale tool only to find you've 
actually cycled through to the Squash option. So, if we set R as Select and 
Scale, or just Scale, instead of Smart Scale, we avoid this oversight. You can 
always cycle through the three scale options using Ctrl + E, Scale Cycle.
6.	 There's a very handy shortcut called Transform tools. This tool can be found 
in the Edit menu, where it's called Transform Toolbox. It doesn't have a 
hotkey by default. This could be set to Ctrl + T, which is available. We'll 
discuss its functionality later on, and make frequent use of it as we model.
7.	 Another tool that is often used, which doesn't come with a hotkey, is the 
Manage Layers dialog , which is used for organizing scene content by layer 
and also for hiding and freezing content. Since I use this tool often, I've taken 
to setting it to Space, since it doesn't matter if I tap on it by mistake; it is easy 
to notice the dialog when it opens or closes.
As well as using the Layer Manager, you may want to get the free 
script Outliner 2 (which imitates the Autodesk Maya Outliner) 
from http://script.threesixty.nl/outliner. The link 
downloads a .mzp file that you can simply drag from Windows 
Explorer into the 3ds Max viewport to install. Once installed, this 
uses the hotkey H, which overrides the Select By Name tool's 
hotkey, so you may want to set Select by Name to another hotkey 
(or use a different hotkey for the Outliner). Note that content 
hidden by the By Layer option in the Layer Manager can't be 
unhidden by the Outliner if you are in Hierarchy mode . At the 
bottom of the Outliner there is an icon  that enables Layer mode, 
a substitute for the actual Layer Manager.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 20 ]
Customizing the Quad menu
You may have noticed that when you right-click, a menu appears under the cursor 
with shortcuts to many tools distributed elsewhere in the 3ds Max UI. For instance, 
you can press the Select icon  or press Q or you can right-click and choose Select 
from the Quad menu. This menu can be changed to suit your need, though part of its 
utility comes from memorizing its layout for speedy access, so making changes often 
may defeat the purpose. Still, there are a few tools that you'll regularly use that could 
benefit from being in the Quad menu.
Swift Loop is a tool used to add additional edge loops to an Editable 
Poly model. We'll discuss its use later too, but in brief, you can add a box 
to your scene, right-click on it, and choose Quad menu | Convert To: | 
Editable Poly. Then press 2 to enter Edge mode, then go to the Ribbon 
UI | Graphite Modeling Tools and expand the Edit panel to expose the 
Swift Loop icon 
. Clicking this enters a mode whereby clicking on an 
edge will add a perpendicular loop to the model. Using the Swift Loop 
tool is very handy, but accessing it from the Ribbon time and again is 
frustrating. It would be better to add it to the Quad menu, where it is 
always right under the cursor.
The following demonstration shows how to add this commonly used modeling tool 
to the Quad menu:
1.	 Go to the Customize menu and choose Customize User Interface. 
Previously, we changed settings in the Keyboard tab; this time, 
skip over to the Toolbars tab to get the Quads tab.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
If you're disinclined to add these additional tools to the 
menus, you can opt to press Load here and choose 
\Packt3dsMax\Chapter 1\PacktUI.mnu to do so 
automatically. Several common tools are arranged for 
easy, swift access. There is a version for both 2012 and 
2013 version of 3ds Max.
2.	 There are four squares on the right side of the UI, with the transform section 
highlighted in yellow. Click on the lower-left square tools 2. Expand the 
entry [+] Context Edit Poly Tools 2 FLAT.
3.	 Highlight Swift Loop in the Actions list, then drag it over to the top entry 
of the [+] Context Edit Poly Tools 2 FLAT list, where it should be inserted 
above Create (Poly). Of course, you can drop it where you like, but this is a 
reasonable location, and it will show up as shown in the following screenshot 
when you right-click to access the Quad menu. At the bottom of the window, 
press Save and try it out.
A preference you may want to set while in the Quads tab of the Customize User 
Interface dialog is to turn off Show All Quads option, via its tickbox. What this does 
is it only displays the part of the quad box that you highlight with the mouse. It uses 
less screen space as only a quarter of the menu is seen at one time.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 22 ]
Should you want to remove or rename an entry in the Quad menu, right-click on it 
to access a menu showing those options.
Note that there are contextual Quad menus depending on what mode you are 
working in, and you can edit these by expanding the rollout that shows Default 
Viewport Quad. In particular, it is useful to customize the Unwrap UVW Quad 
to access mapping tools faster. See Chapter 7, The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: 
Mapping Models for Texturing, for coverage of mapping processes.
Also, you will notice there are hotkeys to filter the Quad menu. For example, the 
Modeling Quad (Ctrl + RMB) only shows modeling tools. The Snaps Quad (Shift 
+ RMB) lets you set the current snap type. This is quicker than moving the cursor 
up to the Snap icon  to right-click and access the Grid and Snap Settings menu. 
The hotkey for entering Snap mode is S and it uses whatever settings you most 
recently set. Snaps are used for precision modeling, and snapping functionality is 
discussed further in Chapter 5, The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model 
Components.
Making changes to the view layout
The most obvious way to change the viewports is to resize the default 4 x 4 panels 
by dragging their inner frame border. Each viewport has a [+] menu where the top 
entry is the Maximize Viewport or Restore Viewport command, Alt + W.
There are more controls for the view arrangement. If you press [+] in a view and 
choose Configure Viewports or right-click anywhere over the viewport control 
icons at the bottom right of 3ds Max or open the Views menu and choose Configure 
Viewports, you will get a pop-up window, Viewport Configuration, where the tab 
to open is called Layout, as shown in the following screenshot. Click this tab and 
notice the two rows of preset panel layouts. Click on any of them, and then click on 
the large panels that are labeled with the current setting. A list will appear with the 
available options you can set. This method is the only way to swap out a Track View 
option that has been set in a viewport, so keep it in mind if you do any animation.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
Deciding on the best view navigation
3ds Max is over 20 years old. Some of its navigation tools go way back to the early 
days, and over time some replacement navigation tools have been added. If you are 
used to an old navigation method, then a new one sometimes doesn't appear to add 
any advantage, whereas to a new user (or a user familiar with other applications 
using the same method), it can seem obvious to use the newer tool. We're going 
to evaluate all the methods to navigate the views, and you can decide for yourself 
which you prefer. Remember that if you use more than one 3D application, then it 
is always a good practice to use the same method in both cases, especially for scene 
navigation. Unfortunately, few applications share common UI defaults. 3ds Max is 
customizable in terms of hotkeys and menu items, and its navigation tools do have 
keyboard entries you can change.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 24 ]
Pan, Orbit, and Zoom
The quickest way to access Pan Mode in 3ds Max is to hold and drag the middle 
mouse button. You can also press the 
 icon or you can press Ctrl + P to pan. You 
will notice that the Orthographic views pan is less jumpy than the Perspective view.
The quickest way to access Orbit mode is to hold Alt and drag the middle mouse 
button. All the main navigation modes make use of the middle mouse button.
Zoom = Middle Mouse Button (MMB) Scroll. Pan = MMB hold + drag. Orbit = MMB 
+ Alt + drag.
There are, however, other ways to orbit. Ctrl + R is the hotkey for Orbit and the 
equivalent icon is 
, and it gives you a circular yellow manipulator that allows 
some axial control for the orbit.
There are three common viewport navigation methods (Zoom, Pan, and Orbit) 
and some additional ones such as Walk Through, Zoom Extents, and Zoom Extents 
Selected (which equates to a frame object tool), and Field-of-View (FOV), a camera 
control. Their functions will be discussed as we go through this chapter.
Open the .max file \Packt3dsmax\Chapter 1\Begin.max. You will see an assembly 
of un-textured models that form an industrial platform. We'll practice zooming 
around these, as having objects in the scene gives a more visceral feeling to the 
views than an empty scene does.
In the bottom-right corner of the UI there is a panel of viewport control buttons. 
In the following screenshot, these buttons are shown on the left for the Perspective 
view and are shown on the right for the Orthographic views (basically the same 
except for Region Zoom shown by default in Orthographic as FOV doesn't work 
in Orthographic views).
Zoom mode, if chosen here with the magnifying glass icon 
, permits a very smooth 
forward and backward motion of the virtual camera. The default hotkey for Zoom 
mode is Alt + Z. You can also zoom if you scroll the mouse wheel, but that is an 
incremental zoom. Next, we'll talk about how to adjust that increment, but it's handy 
to know that Ctrl + Alt + MMB drag (not scroll) allows you to zoom smoothly. This 
somewhat clunky key combo can be changed to suit in the Customize | Customize 
UI Interface dialog in the Mouse tab in the settings under Category | Navigation.

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
Go to the menu Customize and click on Customize UI Interface. This has several 
tabs at the top. Click on the one called Mouse. There is a panel under this tab called 
Mouse Control where you'll see two tickboxes for Zoom Above Mouse Point 
(Orthographic) and Zoom About Mouse Point (Perspective). The default zoom 
uses the center of the active view. The zoom options just mentioned use the cursor 
location in the view.
Checking these two options lets you zoom into objects under the cursor more 
easily, without having to pan. Below this is a numerical input field for Wheel 
Zoom Increment. The lowest number it accepts is 0.01. Enter 0.01 and click on OK.
This scene has been scaled so that this value works well. In larger scenes, you may 
find the increment doesn't work so well. The thing to do is try out values until 
you're happy.
You can also select everything in the scene (Ctrl + A) and uniformly scale everything 
up or down accordingly, so you get an incremental zoom value that works well.
Notice as you zoom now with the mouse wheel in the Orthographic views (top, 
front, and left) that zoom has a different feel than scrolling in the Perspective view, 
which seems faster. If you over-zoom or get lost, you can use the hotkey Shift + Z to 
undo view changes. To reframe a view, if you are lost, it helps to select an object or 
polygon and press Zoom Extents Selected, discussed next.
Zoom Extents Selected is a command that goes hand-in-hand with Orbit 
(Alt + MMB). When you are spinning around an object, it frames the selection in 
the current view. The default for the flyout with the icon 
 is Zoom Extents, which 
frames the whole scene, but I find that Zoom Extents Selected is much more useful 
because it lets us locate items we've selected by name. Select By Name (H) is a 
command that lets you choose objects from a pop-up list. We mentioned that the 
hotkey for Orbit (besides using the ViewCube compass) is Alt + MMB. You can 
also use the legacy Orbit command via its icon 
 in the view controls panel. 

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 26 ]
This pops up a controller you can use to adjust the view, shown in the 
following screenshot:
If you drag the crossed squares, the cursor changes to indicate that you'll be orbiting 
in one axis, either up and down or side to side. If you drag outside the circle, the 
cursor changes to indicate you'll tilt the view. If you drag within the circle, the cursor 
changes to indicate you'll make a free orbit in any axis based on the direction in 
which you move the mouse, much the same as with Alt + MMB.
The Orbit icon we mentioned, 
, actually has three settings. I find that almost 
always I use just one, but it isn't the default. If you click-and-hold the flyout 
icon, it reveals three options. Any icon in 3ds Max with a black triangle in the 
bottom-right corner has the same flyout options, a convention also seen in many 
other applications. The following screenshot shows the flyout buttons:
The uppermost option is Orbit Scene, the middle option is Orbit Selected, and the 
lowest option is Orbit SubObject. The last option works well when you are editing 
some small part of an object and want to orbit around that part, but it also works fine 
at any level of selection. Usually I set 3ds Max to use this and leave it that way.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
Navigation with the ViewCube
The ViewCube is a tool introduced to many Autodesk products so they share a 
common basis for navigation. It is debatable how many people really use this tool, 
but for new users it is certainly a good way for learning how 3D space works. Power 
users will probably turn it off to save memory. Of course, it is possible many people 
love it.
There are four components in the ViewCube. The first is the Home button, which lets 
you store and return to a bookmarked view that you have set by right-clicking on the 
Home button 
.
The second component of the ViewCube is the cube itself. You can click on its faces, 
on its edges, and on its corners.
The third component is the Tumble tool that appears if you are viewing the face of 
the cube, which rolls the camera 90 degrees at a time when clicked.
The fourth component is the Axial Orbit tool shaped like a circular compass under 
the cube, which lets you spin the scene. It only allows one degree of freedom, unlike 
Orbit mode. If you like the ViewCube but don't like the compass under it, you can 
turn the Compass display off in its configuration.
Making adjustments to the ViewCube display
The following steps walk you through the use of the ViewCube in order to 
familiarize yourself with its settings, so you can decide which to opt for.
1.	 If you have the ViewCube exposed, right-click on the Home button and 
choose Configure or else click [+] in the view and choose Configure Views 
and click on the ViewCube tab.
2.	 There is a checkbox labeled Show the ViewCube, which you can turn off if 
you don't like the ViewCube. If you do like it, but want to work a little more 
efficiently, click the radio button Only in Active View. You can only use the 
ViewCube in the view you are currently in, so it saves a little memory to not 
have four of them spinning around at once.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 28 ]
As shown in the preceding screenshot, you can diminish or increase the 
ViewCube size to taste. The left-hand side example is set to tiny, which is usable 
but problematic because the labels aren't visible, and the normal size is on the right. 
The large size is simply massive, and this is a case where small is probably better. 
No doubt the default size is too distracting to trouble with. You can also adjust how 
visible it is using Inactive Opacity in the same section.
In the viewport configuration options for the ViewCube, it is definitely a good idea 
to check the Snap to Closest View checkbox, to help keep the regular viewing angles 
lined up.
Clicking Fit-to-View on View Change means that whenever you change the camera 
using the ViewCube, you'll be zooming to the scene extents, which is probably not 
desirable unless you are editing only one model.
It definitely speeds up your work flow if you turn off Use Animated Transitions 
options when Switching Views. The transition is snappy, and you won't waste time 
waiting for the camera to animate through its turn.
Having the Keep Scene Upright checkbox checked is a good idea, just for stability in 
the view.
Navigation with the Steering Wheel
The Steering Wheel is an interesting but slightly twitchy tool introduced to 3ds Max 
in an attempt to provide game-like navigation, where you can fly or drive through 
the scene. New users, who will get used to this tool, will probably get a lot out of 
it, but users already familiar with the classic navigation methods already discussed 
will probably avoid it. Strangely, I like it when I remember to use it, but that is only 
in cases when I have to explain how viewport navigation can work. Still, there are a 
few features that are outstanding when using the Steering Wheel, in particular the 
Rewind and Walk tools.
The Steering Wheel shortcut is (supposedly) Shift + W, and I've noticed that Shift + 
W doesn't seem to turn anything on, which explains why I never really took up this 
tool. The reason is the hotkey is set in the context of the Steering Wheel group, not 
the main UI group.
The reliable way to activate the Steering Wheel is to go to the Views menu and 
choose Steering Wheels | Toggle Steering Wheel or choose one of the different 
modes it offers there. It is also possible to assign Toggle Steering Wheel as an entry 
in the Quads menu for speedy access. Look under Group | Steering Wheels in the 
Quad tab of the Customize User Interface menu to find it.

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
Using the Steering Wheel
In the following example, we will open the Steering Wheel and explore the methods 
it offers for scene navigation.
Open the max file Packt3dsmax\Chapter 1\Begin.max. You will see an assembly 
of un-textured models that form an industrial platform. We'll use this scene to 
drive around using the Steering Wheel to compare how it feels in comparison 
to the regular navigation tools.
For a scene like this, which is surrounded on four sides by walls, the Steering 
Wheel actually responds very nicely. The slight lag in getting it started is the 
only drawback.
There are four types of steering wheels. The default is the Full Navigation Wheel. 
The others are streamlined derivations of it. The mini wheels are smaller, and there 
are also the Basic Wheels | View Object Wheels and Mini Tour Building Wheels 
options. All of these can be accessed from the down arrow icon on the lower corner 
of the Steering Wheel, shown in the following screenshot:

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 30 ]
The Look command allows you to orbit around the camera's location, a lot like the 
'look around' control in many 3D games. Try looking around the scene, and notice 
how it differs from the Orbit command, which turns around a pivot. After you 
have looked around, try using the Rewind command. This will present you with 
a filmstrip of prior views that you can slide along to choose among them.
The following screenshot shows the Look control highlighted. Each section of the 
wheel will be highlighted green, and then when you drag the cursor, the camera 
will act accordingly.
A tool tip appears underneath the Look Tool label, and a cursor replaces the wheel 
when it's being used.

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
When you are using the Steering Wheel's Orbit tool, a green pivot displays, and it 
is around this that the camera turns. This can be moved by pressing Orbit while 
holding Ctrl. Once you have moved the cursor where you want the pivot to be, as 
shown in the following screenshot, releasing it will allow you to orbit around the 
new pivot.
If you have set a Home bookmark from the right-click menu of the ViewCube's 
Home icon 
, you can choose the Go Home option from the Steering Wheel's 
menu too, shown in the following screenshot:
While the Rewind tool works very well, if you don't have the Steering Wheel active, 
you can use Shift + Z to undo viewport changes.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 32 ]
Displaying your model for modeling
There are several viewport display modes that can be accessed by the label in each 
viewport, shown in the following screenshot:
If you open a scene such as Packt3dsmax\Chapter 1\Begin.max, you usually see 
four views and the orthographic views are shaded differently to the Perspective 
view. This can be changed. Press F3 in the Perspective view. The view changes to 
Wireframe. Press it again; the view changes back to Shaded mode. In Shaded mode, 
press F4 to turn on and off Edged Faces. The following screenshot shows clockwise: 
Hidden Line, Wireframe, Shaded, and Realistic.

Chapter 1
[ 33 ]
There are several intermediate ways to shade the view, including Hidden Line, 
which shows only the Wireframe directly facing the camera, culling the rest; and 
Flat Shaded, which removes any surface smoothing (so a Sphere's facets would all 
appear flat or faceted instead of round).
3ds Max 2012 introduced a Realistic shading mode that supersedes the Shaded 
shading mode in earlier versions. This is a technology update that allows faster 
shadow computation; therefore, faster view spinning, better texture resolution, 
and better lighting.
By default, views are lit using virtual, hidden lights you can't edit. Once you add 
your own lights (and in this scene there is a Daylight System), you can set the view 
to render those, which helps you design shadow casting and so on. To adjust this, 
go to the View menu and choose Viewport Configuration where the Visual Style & 
Appearance tab should be displayed (or you can swap to it). Look on the right-hand 
side to the Lighting and Shadows section. For the Illuminate with option, click on 
the Scene Lights radio button.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 34 ]
Here you have a few additional options. Turning off Highlights will prevent glare 
from glossy surfaces, so you can always see the edged faces on a surface. Sometimes 
it is nice to model with a glossy surface to help view the form changes, but often it 
means you'll not be able to tell what you are doing as the highlight eclipses the mesh 
wireframe. You can raise or lower the Lighting and Shadows Quality, where lower 
values calculate faster (often without an apparent drop in visual quality). You can 
also tick on Shadows and Ambient Occlusion checkboxes, and set their Intensity/
Fade, which works well around 0.7 so that shadows are not black.
Model display
Neutral, consistent colors tend to be the easiest to look at when viewing un-textured 
models. By default, 3ds Max applies random colors to each new model. The 
shaded surface and wireframe share this color. Sometimes, the viewport lighting 
causes surface shine to obscure some of the mesh edges, as shown in the following 
screenshot on the left-hand side:
In this section, we'll change this so all models get the same wireframe color and have 
a neutral gray material, as shown on the right-hand side in the preceding screenshot:
1.	 Open the Material Editor (M). In 3ds Max 2012, you should see a version 
of the Material Editor called Slate. The legacy Compact Material Editor is 
still available, but for now Slate will do fine. Right-click in the Slate View1 
canvas and choose Materials | Mental Ray | Autodesk Generic. This 
assumes you have iRay set as your renderer, which is also the installation 
default. If not, you can set a Standard Material instead.

Chapter 1
[ 35 ]
2.	 The Autodesk Generic Material defaults to a dark gray color, which is 
possibly a bit heavy. To change this, double-click on the Material node 
and notice that on the right the Default Generic properties display. In the 
Generic section, under Color | Use Color, there is a color picker and you 
can adjust it to a mid-gray: Hue=0, Sat=0, and Value=0.5. Click on OK.
3.	 Now you can assign the Material Model to objects in the scene when you 
press Ctrl + A in the scene, then right-click on the Material node and choose 
Assign Material to Selection or press the icon 
 in the editor icon row. 
Materials that are assigned to a selected object are displayed in the Material 
Editor with white corners around the sample preview, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 In 3ds Max 2013, dotted white edges appear around a node that is showing 
its parameters in the Parameter Editor panel on the right-hand of the 
Material Editor.
5.	 At the top of the Material properties panel, you can name this material 
Model in the text field. We'll discuss more about the Material Editor later 
in Chapter 3, The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 36 ]
6.	 Although this material is a neutral gray, it doesn't affect the wireframe 
displayed; it can if you access the Display tab of Command Panel and choose 
Display Color | Wireframe | Material Color. A better way to display the 
model, however, is to have the surface shaded with the Material color and 
the Wireframe set to the Object Color.
7.	 Click on the color picker to the right-hand of the object name, which is 
Box001, and the following dialog will pop up:
8.	 Choose a dark color, such as the blue color, as shown in the preceding 
screenshot, in the Current Color slot. A light color may reflect scene light and 
make it difficult to tell what is going on, especially when you are zoomed in 
on a model.
9.	 Uncheck the checkbox for Assign Random Colors, so that each newly 
created object gets the same color.

Chapter 1
[ 37 ]
10.	 You can still change colors, but do so in a logical way. Set your own 
classifying criteria, such as all animated objects are dark green and all 
static objects are blue. This is easiest to set after creation.
Setting scene units
The way physical-based lighting performs when your scene renders is scene-scale 
dependent. Setting up scene units helps you to achieve real-world scale to your 
model. Sometimes, you may not want to work in real-world scale, especially if your 
objects have to match to the objects in another application when they are exported.
The following instructions show how to set custom scene units:
1.	 Open the .max file Packt3dsmax\Chapter 1\Begin.max. Every scene is 
saved with its own units of measurement. If your default scene has a unit 
setting different from the scene you're loading, you'll be prompted to choose 
the one that you prefer to use.
2.	 Go to the Customize menu and choose System Unit Setup, which pops up 
the following dialog box:

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 38 ]
3.	 The Generic Units radio button is active by default, and the measurements 
for this are set via the System Unit Setup button at the top of the window, 
shown on the left-hand side. Click this to expose the pop up on the right.
Searching for content in the scene
In a scene with hundreds of models or model components, naming objects is 
probably the best way to keep content easy to access. There are a few ways to 
rename an object. One way is to type in the Modify Panel  the name you 
want in this field:
You can also rename objects by selecting them in the scene or highlighting them in 
the Layer Manager, and choosing Rename Objects from the Tools menu. Another 
way, if you are using the Outliner script we discussed earlier, is to double-click on 
the object label.
In the following steps, we will look for a single object amid hundreds using filters:
1.	 Open the .max file Packt3dsmax\Chapter 1\Begin.max. This scene is made 
of hundreds of objects mostly called Object001 and Part001 and so on.
2.	 You could use the Select by Name tool, and you could use the Outliner to 
browse the scene. Another way is to use Tools | New Scene Explorer.
3.	 In the Scene Explorer window that pops up, you get a list of objects rather 
similar to the Outliner script's Hierarchy mode list. At the top, there is a 
menu called Select. Open this and choose Search from the bottom of the 
menu, as shown in the following screenshot. You can alternatively click 
on the icon Configure Advanced Filter  from the vertical icons.

Chapter 1
[ 39 ]
4.	 Another window will pop up called Advanced Search or Advanced Filter 
(depending on how you opened it), and this lets you filter the scene by 
numerous Property/Condition/Reference value combinations. For instance, 
expand the Property list and choose Hidden, and set the Condition to Is so 
that only hidden objects will be searched. Notice that the object Skydome is 
the only hidden object. It is highlighted in yellow. You can unhide it using 
Outliner or if you right-click in the scene and choose Unhide All from the 
Quad menu, then similarly freeze it.
5.	 In the Advanced Filter window, click on Remove. This clears the 
current filter.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 40 ]
Creating your own selection sets with 
Named Selections
In most scenes, you will have certain objects you select often. Quick access to 
these is very important. Also, some objects can be hard to directly select if they 
are surrounded by or covered by others.
By default, the H key is reserved for the Select by Name 
 option, but if you take 
up the free script Outliner, you may have to change that. You can also use Named 
Selections, which lets you create a hot list of entries of your own. This rolls down 
from the main toolbar, as shown in the following screenshot, where it says Sky:
1.	 Open Begin.max, and go to the expand icon 
 for the Named Selection Set 
list and notice there is an entry Lines and an entry Sky. Click on Sky. This 
is a huge sky dome that provides a background for the scene. When you 
launch, it is hidden and frozen, but when you choose it, you'll see a prompt 
checking whether or not you want to reveal it. This prompt appears because 
its hidden state is set for its layer.
2.	 You can either choose Yes, and the object will be revealed, or No, and the 
object will be selected but remain hidden. Its entire layer will be affected.

Chapter 1
[ 41 ]
3.	 Add to the list of Named Selections by choosing some objects in the scene 
and then typing an entry in the Create Selection Set text field where Sky is 
included. After typing, be sure to press Enter to commit the entry.
4.	 Now you'll want to edit entries in the Named Selections list. Click on the 
icon 
 next to the text field, or go to the Edit menu and choose Manage 
Selections Sets, which pops up the same window.
5.	 Let's add an object in the scene to the existing set of Lines. Select Cylinder01 
by using either Select by Name 
 in the Named Selection Sets window's 
icon row, then press the Add icon 
.
The icons for managing objects include Remove 
 (which removes a list or objects 
from a list; it doesn't remove them from the scene), Select Objects in Set 
 (which 
works if you don't have them selected to start with), and Highlight Selected Objects 
 (which shows in the list the items currently selected in the scene if they belong to a 
given Named Selection Set). They are highlighted in blue.
Using a Named Selection is a good way to add a selection shortcut 
to each joint in a biped when you do character animation.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 42 ]
Common changes to 3ds Max default 
preferences
Changes to preferences are quite subjective. There are many preferences in 3ds 
Max, but only a few that really make a big difference when starting to model. These 
include auto-save settings, the option to increment files when saving, levels of undo, 
whether to use large or small icons, whether to display certain warnings each time 
you take certain steps, and removing some small elements of clutter from the UI.
In the General tab, you can set the number of Scene Undo levels higher if you have 
a lot of RAM and think you might need more undo steps. Alternatively, you can 
reduce the number so your session has less overhead.

Chapter 1
[ 43 ]
When you move objects you can set the transform gizmo to align with either 
the view grid, the local space of the object, or even another object. This is called 
the Reference Coordinate System. By default, when you swap from Move mode 
to Rotate mode to Scale mode, each has its own Reference Coordinate System. 
This can be annoying, since you have to track which system is active for which 
transform mode. The preference Ref. Coord. System | Constant checkbox keeps the 
system you set as current across all the transform types when you switch from one 
transform to another.
It is probably a good idea to turn off the Use Large Toolbar Buttons checkbox; it 
allows a little more screen space for the viewports, and also you can fit more icons in 
the toolbars.
The next few options are for reducing pop-up warnings that, if you know what you 
are doing, are somewhat distracting.
The first is the Display Topology-Dependence Warning checkbox. If it is checked, 
it will tell you whether a Modifier you're collapsing would depend on a SubObject 
selection (points, edges, and so on) from below in the Modifier stack, or when you 
change the SubObject selection while other Modifiers are using that selection.
The next is the Display Stack Collapse Warning checkbox, which occurs when you 
use the option to collapse modifiers, essentially merging their result.
Also, you have three choices for how to deal with unhiding content on layers that are 
hidden. The setting is called Propagate Unhide/Freeze Commands to Layers?. By 
default, you're asked if you want to unhide the layers and the object (Ask). You can 
set it so that the layers are always unhidden too (Propagate), or the layers are never 
unhidden too (Do not Propagate).
In the Files tab, if you are doing modeling work, it is handy to set Increment on 
Save checked, so that every time you press Ctrl + S to save, you won't write over the 
same file but add a new one like this: file001.max, file002.max. It requires some 
housekeeping occasionally but is a safe option, since if you save over your work or 
something else goes wrong (computers!), then you won't lose anything; alternatively, 
you may want to develop a habit to increment the number of file saves using Ctrl + A 
instead of Ctrl + S.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 44 ]
When you save a maxfile, it includes properties, the schematic view, and a thumbnail 
image for the browser. You may feel that this is unnecessary information, and those 
can be turned off individually.
If you are opening a very old maxfile from earlier versions, sometimes an obsolete 
file, a message will appear warning you to re-save. This can be turned off here by 
ticking off Display Obsolete File Message.
In the Viewports tab, there is nothing much to change. Set Display World Axis 
should be unchecked. This gets rid of the tiny, slightly obtrusive axis in the corner of 
each viewport. Of course, if you like it there, you can leave it on, but if you want to 
check which way the world X axis is, for instance, create a Box and enter Move mode 
with the View or World reference coordinate system active.
Finally, the number of auto-backup files and the duration that they are saved is set 
at the bottom of the Files tab, in the Auto Backup section. Backup files are kept 
in c:\users\~\documents\3ds max\autoback. Once you've written the amount 
of files that you've set as the number to save, they'll start saving over each other, 
starting with the oldest. Broadly speaking, if you set 10 backups at 10-minute 
intervals, that is enough to provide you with 100 minutes of continual work 
that you can look back on if you decide you need to go back in time.

Chapter 1
[ 45 ]
Determining the hardware shading 
settings to use
The default views in 3ds Max 2012 and 2013 are driven by a newly introduced 
technology called Nitrous Accelerated Graphics Core, which is designed to 
allow larger sets of assets to be handled in real time with a better quality 
visual appearance.
You can revert your display settings to Direct3D alone, or to OpenGL, or even 
Software, but it depends on what hardware you are using, particularly your 
graphics card. If you are using a laptop with an integrated graphics card, you may 
be best off with Software or OpenGL rendering, but this will likely not be very fast 
or look as good. Nitrous views depend on access to the GPU (graphics card cores) to 
provide a responsive, high-quality viewport shading, and this is what gives you real-
time ambient occlusion (soft shadows) and accurate shadow casting and reflective, 
transparent surfaces in the viewport even with unlimited lights.
You can read more about hardware concerns for 3ds Max in The Area—Discussions 
community—which you can access from the 3ds Max Help menu | 3ds Max on the 
web | The AREA. Also, you can obtain a report on 3ds Max's view of your GPU: 
Help | Diagnose Video Hardware.
Summary
By now you should be progressing with view navigation and have gained a feeling 
for just how much functionality is packed into the menus and dialogs of 3ds Max. 
You'll quickly find that what you're unfamiliar with at first, in the topics we've 
covered in this chapter, becomes intuitive with practice. By the end of the next 
chapter, no doubt you'll be flying around views, panels, tabs, and menus without 
thinking, ready for the next challenge.
We've covered a few niche methods of navigation as well as the main methods, 
and you'll be able to decide for yourself whether you want to use the middle mouse 
navigation method and hotkeys, or ViewCube and Steering Wheel. You may also 
want to experiment with new device-driven navigation, such as the Wi-Fi and 
touch-based CAD Control iPad app for 3ds Max by Maide Inc (and other 
Autodesk products), available on iTunes.

First Launch: Getting to Know 3ds Max
[ 46 ]
Besides navigation, we also considered ways to begin to customize the look of 3ds 
Max and make tools accessible based on your own preferences. It takes time to 
decide which tools are best to use and where to place them. Do you use the Quad 
menu, keyboard shortcuts, a toolbar, or mouse click to the default locations? Each 
user will develop a different preference. I've provided a complete UI preset that I 
like, which has most of the day-to-day modeling tools set in the Quad menu. At first 
it took a while for me to get used to this streamlined layout, since I was more used to 
the regular tool layout, but it didn't take long before I was enjoying a faster working 
speed. The UI preset can be found in Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\PacktUI.ui and 
can be loaded via the Customize menu | Load Custom UI. There is a version for 
2012 and 2013. In later chapters, this UI will be referenced often, but the commands 
are also described in terms of their default layout in case you prefer to work with a 
"fresh install" style UI. One benefit of only using 3ds Max in its default state is that 
whenever you set it up, you're always going to be in a familiar place. However, the 
Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\PacktUI.ui can be set up with one command, and you 
can always revert back to the defaults the same way.
In the next chapter, we will look at general considerations for model handling, 
supposing you may want to work with an already built model. The main thrust 
will be toward ensuring you use 3ds Max's scene organization, visibility, and 
collaboration tools well. The next chapter's topics include importing of content, 
rendering basics, scene transforms, and setting object properties.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds 
Max Work for you
This chapter examines model handling using readymade assets. The main asset is 
a rapidly constructed vehicle used for testing a prototype game. Our purpose is to 
cover the necessary model handling skills before we undertake actual modeling in 
the next chapter.
The following are the topics that will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Setting filters in the Display panel
•	
Object Properties – Show Frozen in gray
•	
Object Properties – Animation trajectories
•	
Object Properties – Render properties
•	
Moving and rotating objects using pivot controls
•	
Local, Screen, and Pick spaces
•	
Cloning objects: Instances, References, and Snapshots
•	
Adjusting modifiers in the viewport
•	
Organizing a scene using Groups
•	
Importing models
•	
Using a template scene including lighting, camera, and render settings
•	
NVIDIA iray ActiveShade rendering

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 48 ]
Setting filters in the Display panel
This topic introduces the Display panel, which lets us filter certain categories of 
objects to prevent clutter in the view. As an example, we will show an air bike for a 
single rider, and toggle the display of elements in the scene to provide a clearer view.
Display panel filters
The Display panel lets you control objects by hiding and freezing them. This section 
shows you how to control display of objects based on their type:
1.	 Open the scene Packt3dsMax\Chapter 2\BikeStart.max.
2.	 Orbit (Alt + MMB) the scene to familiarize yourself with its contents, 
then press Alt + W to restore four views.
3.	 The Command Panel icons are as follows; click on Display 
:
4.	 After clicking on Display, look at the Hide by Category section. Click on 
None, and notice that a few already hidden categories (Shapes and Helpers) 
that were ticked are now not ticked. The All, None, and Invert buttons 
override any of the ticked categories.
5.	 Further down, there is a customizable category panel showing the Bone, IK 
Chain Object, and Point entries. Bone at the moment is blue, which means 
it is hidden.
6.	 Click on Point to deactivate Bone. You will notice that every object in the 
scene that is in the Bone category will be displayed, revealing a biped driver.
7.	 Within Bone, click on Add to add extra entries to the list, including specific 
primitive types.

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
8.	 From the Add Display Filter pop-up list, scroll down to the bottom and 
add mr Sky Portal. This will hide two local lights in the scene linked to the 
HUD elements of the bike. If you press Ctrl + LMB (left mouse button) on the 
entries here, you will append them to the active hidden list.
9.	 You could also click on the preset Lights category to hide those two objects, 
but that will also hide the Daylight system, which we'll import later on.
Importing objects when their category is hidden can be distracting since they 
will be in the scene but not viewable until you enable the category.
10.	 Ensure the biped rig Bip01 is unhidden.
11.	 On the top of the biped's head there is a little green Helper object called 
HeadNub, also called a Dummy. In the Command Panel | Display | Hide 
by Category, toggle the Helpers checkbox to hide it. There are also two 
small helpers on the biped's fingertips.
Helpers are non-rendering objects that can serve many purposes. 
In this case, they are the end of the bone chains and are used 
under the hood by the biped system.
Hiding and freezing objects
This section shows you how you can freeze sets of objects in more than one way.
1.	 Under the Hide by Category section there is a Hide section, which you can 
expand to reveal commands such as Hide By Name, Hide by Hit, Hide 
Unselected, Hide Frozen Objects, Unhide All, and more. These are also 
found if you right-click in the scene via the Quad menu in the display quad.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 50 ]
Similar commands are there for the Freeze section. When I first learned 3ds 
Max, I used this method a lot. Later, I more often used the Quad menu, and 
eventually I got in the habit of using the Manage Layers menu's Hide  
and Freeze 
 commands. It is good to learn all the available routes to 
these commands, and just use the closest, or the most suitable, as the 
occasion dictates.
2.	 In the scene there is a frozen object, which you can't move or see right now. 
It is the glass part of the canopy over the bike rider, and it is linked to the 
Canopy frame. By default, Hide Frozen Objects is disabled, but in this scene 
it is enabled. So expand the Freeze section and click on Unfreeze All 
(or Unfreeze by Name...) to expose Canopy Glass. You could also 
simply toggle off Hide Frozen Objects. The state of this toggle is 
saved with the scene.
Display Properties
The Quad menu lets you access Object Properties. The Display panel also lets you 
access this menu, as given in the following steps:

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
1.	 Under the Hide and Freeze sections is a section called Display Properties. 
This is only active when you select scene objects; so open Layer Manager 
 from the main toolbar, and highlight the Biped layer in the list. This layer 
includes all the Biped components.
2.	 Click on the 
 icon to select all the layer contents at once.
3.	 Go back to Command Panel | Display | Display Properties and check the 
Display as Box option. This substitutes the biped geometry (which itself is 
simplified) for an even more simplified object.
4.	 Observe the difference, then uncheck Display as Box, and instead check the 
See-Through option. This adds viewport only transparency filtering to the 
object. It won't affect rendering. See-Through display is great when you are 
editing objects that are inside other objects. The hotkey is Alt + X. Below this, 
the Never Degrade option is for when you orbit the scene and want to keep 
maximum display fidelity. The hotkey to toggle that is O.
By default, 3ds Max drops out detail on models from highest to lowest display 
quality, in order to keep the display running smoothly. You might want to force 
key objects to display at the best resolution, in which case you'd enable Never 
Degrade. The global icon for toggling Progressive Display 
, also known as 
the Adaptive Degradation Toggle, is in the status bar at the bottom of the UI, 
next to Add Time Tag.
It should be noted that the Display Properties section is mirrored in the Object 
Properties section of every object, which can be accessed in the Quad menu.
Object Properties – Show Frozen in Gray
Object Properties were mentioned in the previous section, in relation to Display 
Properties. In the next few sections, commonly used toggles for Object Properties 
will be discussed.
Freezing objects via Object Properties
This section describes how to access Object Properties to find display controls set for 
each object individually:
1.	 Under Command Panel | Display | Hide By Category, ensure Shapes is 
not turned off, and make sure the toggle previously discussed, Hide Frozen 
Objects, is toggled off.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 52 ]
2.	 Press H to search for the shape called Canopy Guide. This object helps to 
indicate the limits of the canopy's rotation; it is bright pink in color.
3.	 With Canopy Guide selected, right-click and go to Quad menu | Transform 
| Object Properties. In a custom quad entry this will show only as 
Properties... which is how it will appear in PacktUI.ui. You can 
also access it via the Edit | Object Properties menu.
Note that in the Interactivity section, there are Hide and Freeze toggles. These are a 
little redundant unless you already have this window open. What is more important 
is the checkbox Show Frozen in Gray. For the shape, as it is pink, it will turn gray 
when frozen. Usually this is good, as it provides a visual cue to what you can't select. 
What often happens though is you want to freeze objects that are either color coded 
deliberately, like this one, or are displaying a reference texture in the view. In order 
to maintain the pink color, turn off Show Frozen in Gray, click on Freeze (or freeze it 
later), and then click on OK.
The result should be as shown in the previous screenshot, where the shape Canopy 
Guide shows Frozen 
, but is still pink.

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
Object Properties – Animation 
trajectories
A further display property that we can achieve per object is the trajectory or motion 
an object has over time. A trajectory is a 3D curve that visualizes the motion of the 
object in parallel with the keyframes in the timeline.
Toggle trajectory
When an object moves, its path can be traced as a line called a trajectory. The 
following steps show how to expose this in the viewports:
1.	 In the scene, there is a HUD panel in the bike's canopy that follows the 
animation of the canopy itself—they are linked. The canopy simply rotates, 
so it has no trajectory, but the panel, while not animated directly, gets its 
motion from its parent, like chewing gum stuck on the spinning wheel 
of a bike. The trajectory display is already on in the scene.
2.	 Press F3 to view this more clearly in the wireframe:
3.	 The trajectory displays even when the object is not selected. To turn it off, 
use the Named Selections list to select Panel 1. Right-click on it and select 
Object Properties. In the Display Properties section, turn off Trajectory. 
You can also access the Trajectory checkbox in the Display section 
 
of the Command Panel.
4.	 In this case, it doesn't matter if we see the trajectory or not. However, when 
you are animating, it is extremely useful to see it. This works for all moving 
objects, except biped rigs. For biped rigs, joints have their own Trajectories 
toggle 
, found in the biped Key Info settings in the Motion panel 
.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 54 ]
The trajectory in the viewport is a 3D curve, the combined result of the X, Y, Z 
curves. Animators can edit curves in Curve Editor (accessed in Quad menu or from 
the menu bar Graph Editors | Track View – Curve Editor). It's out of the scope of a 
modeling book to discuss the Curve Editor in depth, but it doesn't take very long to 
figure out how it works. A good guide by 3DBuzz is shown at http://youtu.be/
XZMLm0P-KLM.
Object Properties – Render properties
Besides viewport display properties, you can set render properties in the Object 
Properties dialog. We'll look at the following examples: turning off Cast Shadows/
Receive Shadows, and making an object visible or renderable, or invisible to 
the camera.
Disabling shadow casting
This section shows how to turn off the cast shadow displayed at render time for a 
given object selection:
1.	 In the scene, search for and select the Chassis object. This is the largest part 
of the vehicle.
2.	 Right-click and go to Quad menu | Object Properties.
3.	 In the Rendering Control section, set the first channel, Visibility, from 1 to 
0.5. This equates to the See-Through viewport display setting (Alt + X), but 
applies at render time as well as in the viewport. It is not the same as setting 
the object to use a transparent material, which is discussed later. It simply 
fades out the object (in the viewport and at render time).
4.	 Click on OK to view the difference and then set the visibility of the Chassis 
object back to 1. Changes here are not tracked by Undo (Ctrl + Z).
If one object is linked to another, it inherits the visibility (Inherit Visibility) of its 
parent, by default. This can be toggled if needed. A quick way to set Visibility to 
0 is to instead use the Renderable or Visible to Camera toggles; but those can't be 
animated whereas Visibility can be. Renderable works in all cases, and just turns 
off the object. Visible to Camera and Visible to Reflection/Visible to Refraction 
work with MentalRay (which is active in the current scene) and Default Scanline 
Renderer, but do not work properly in iray. Its main feature is that while the object 
won't render, its shadow and reflection will.

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
As an example, a large Sphere primitive was added to the scene up in the air, and its 
Visible to Camera setting was disabled. Then the vehicle had its Cast Shadows and 
Receive Shadows setting disabled. So only the Sphere primitive's shadow hits the 
ground. This makes the plane appear to have a simple blob shadow (a blob shadow 
is often seen in games, where calculating character or vehicle shadows onto the 
environment in real time per polygon would be slow. You can even use a texture 
shadow on a single plane instead of a cast shadow). Of course, the shadow is by 
no stretch adequate for the shape of the plane, but it just illustrates the use of the 
Rendering Control settings in Object Properties. The softness in the shadow casting 
comes from the use of a mr Sun, with Shadow Softness ramped up, and a mr Sky 
with the Haze Driven property set. These are found in the modifier panel with the 
Daylight001 object selected.
Don't be tempted to render yet; that comes a bit later. At present the 
BikeStart.max scene has no lighting, except the two small HUD 
displays; so the scene will render very dark. Later in the chapter, we'll 
import and adjust a background template to achieve a nice look. A 
Daylight system is included with that.
Refer to the following note to know more about lighting:
Lighting isn't extensively covered in this book as our goal is to handle 
modeling; instead we provide a solid, globally lit scene in which any 
model will situate well with minimal adjustment. If you want to light 
and present models, it is worthwhile to check out Marmoset Toolbag, 
an application for focusing on real-time game model presentation 
(www.8monkeylabs.com/toolbag).

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 56 ]
Moving and rotating objects using pivot 
controls
This topic covers a very simple operation that you'll use every day. Selecting 
several objects and moving them around at once presents a few variables, such as 
the location of the selection's pivot, or whether the transform is local to each object, 
or based on the entire selection set. There's no setting that works in every single case. 
You have to flexibly jump back and forth depending on what you are trying to do.
Pivots
A pivot is the point around which, or from which, an object transforms. There are 
three ways to reposition an object's pivot in 3ds Max. You can do so by moving it 
manually in XYZ, or by using the align tools, or by sticking the pivot on an object's 
surface. There's more than one way to align a pivot too, as the steps following the 
next paragraph will show.
3ds Max offers a tool called a Working Pivot. It lets you set, per transform, a 
temporary pivot of an object that you can reset later. It works in 3D space. The 3ds 
Max Working Pivot lets you temporarily stick the pivot on a surface, and has a 
Reset button to send the pivot back home, so let's take a look at how it works:
1.	 Open BikeStart.max and select the editable poly's object Tail_R, which is 
the rearmost part of the vehicle. The nature of the object requires that it rotate 
around a hinge, but right now it has its pivot at its center. You could handle 
this by linking it to a hinge object at the correct location, or you could just 
move the pivot (either permanently or temporarily).
2.	 Right-click and go to Quad menu | Isolate Selection to hide away other 
objects apart from the selected one, Tail_R. The object will be framed in the 
view. A pop up will show Exit Isolation Mode, which releases this mode.
3.	 In the Command Panel, click on the Hierarchy icon 
 and expand the 
Working Pivot section. Click on Edit Working Pivot and you should see 
the pivot of the object highlighted with a special helper, shown in the 
next screenshot.

Chapter 2
[ 57 ]
Note that since this is a helper, if you had the Display 
| Hide By Category | Helpers option checked, it will 
automatically reveal all the scene's helper objects too. If 
you don't want to see the additional helpers, you could 
select Exit Isolation Mode, reselect Tail_R, then right-
click and go to Quad menu | Isolate Selection again.
4.	 When you click on Edit Working Pivot, you can only move the 
Working Pivot.
5.	 In the Place Pivot To: section click on Surface, as shown in the following 
screenshot. Move the cursor over the backend of the object, as shown in the 
following screenshot, and click. Note that the pivot aligns to the view. This 
is because Align to View is ticked. Turn this off, and move the guide gizmo 
over the polygons. Notice that it follows their surface normal (the direction 
they face). Click on the polygon again, and note the pivot aligns to the 
surface, not the view.
6.	 If you turn off Edit Working Pivot, the pivot of the object will jump back to 
its original position. Click on Use Working Pivot, and then it will jump back 
to where you placed it. So, in a sense, you've now got two pivots assigned to 
the object.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 58 ]
7.	 In 3ds Max 2012, you would click on Exit Isolation Mode in the Warning: 
Isolated Selection pop up to revert to normal working mode. In 3ds Max 
2013, you just right-click and toggle off Isolate Selection where you enabled 
it. An optional, legacy-style script is available for those who want it at 
http://www.scriptspot.com/3ds-max/scripts/isolate-selection-
legacy-mode-for-2013. There is also an icon toggle at the bottom of the 
3ds Max UI, as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Ensure Tail_R is selected, then click on Rotate  in the main toolbar. Notice 
that the Ref. Coord. System option at the side is set to Working, not View, 
or Local. Rotate in Y to check the motion of the tail flap.
9.	 The downside of using the Working Pivot is that we can't convert this over 
to be the absolute pivot of the object. If you click on N to enter the Autokey 
mode for animating the tail flap rotation, you'll notice the Working Pivot 
keeps its orientation, but the pivot position jumps back to the center of the 
object until you press N again.
10.	 Undo the rotation of the object and then turn off Use Working Pivot.
11.	 To manually move the absolute object pivot, click on the Hierarchy icon  
in the Command Panel, and go to Adjust Pivot | Affect Pivot Only.
12.	 You can then slide the pivot using the Move gizmo to the location where we 
placed it on the polygon in the previous steps. Remember, we're moving the 
actual pivot of the object, not the temporary Working Pivot.
13.	 Having repositioned the pivot, turn off Affect Pivot Only, then switch to 
Ref. Coord. System | Local, and click on Use Pivot Point Center 
. This 
should mean the pivot is now in the same position and orientation as the 
Working Pivot, though the facing direction of their X axis may differ. 
Rotate either pivot 90 degrees, until their facing axis is the same.
14.	 Now you've set the local pivot of Tail_R, delete the existing Tail_L.
15.	 With the Ref. Coord. System | View option active, select Tail_R, then use 
the Mirror tool  in the main toolbar with its Clone Selection radio button 
set to the Copy option, to create a flipped copy. Name it Tail_L. If Tail_R is 
positioned on the X axis at -10.0, then Tail_L should be positioned on the X 
axis at 10.0.

Chapter 2
[ 59 ]
In the following screenshot, the result shows that you can now rotate either side with 
its Ref. Coord. System | Local option set to active, and suitably reversed.
The previous screenshot shows a rotation over five frames of a rotation around 
70 degree in Y axis. Ghosting has been turned on by going to the Views menu 
and checking Ghosting. This viewing option assists animators by showing a 
representation of onion-skinning. It can be set in the Customize | Preferences | 
Viewports | Ghosting section. You can ghost ahead, backward, or either side 
of the current frame in increments of your own choice.
When you are moving a pivot around by hand, you may want to enable Snap to 
Vertex (which snaps the pivot to a nearby vertex) or Snap Tangent (which helps 
line up the pivot with the side of the object). Also, you can go to Edit | Transform 
Toolbox, and work with the commands in the Align Pivot section. Let's consider the 
following example:
1.	 In the scene, select Stand_Front, one of three objects that make up a proxy 
for the vehicle's landing gear. Open the Transform Toolbox option from the 
Edit menu.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 60 ]
2.	 Click on the Align Pivot | Center button (not the radio button Center). The 
radio button Min means one side of the selection, Center means the middle 
of the selection, Max means the other side of selection, and Origin means 
0,0,0 in the 3ds Max scene. The Center radio button is used when you just 
want to center one axis at a time.
3.	 Click on the Min radio button, then click on the Z button. Note that the pivot 
jumps to the bottom of the stand. This would be good if you wanted to line 
the stand up with the ground:
4.	 Click on the Max radio button, then click on the Z button. The pivot jumps 
to the top of the stand, which would be good if you were going to retract the 
landing gear into the fuselage.
5.	 If you click on Origin, the pivot will move to the world center 0,0,0. You 
can also move the object itself to 0,0,0 by clicking on Object | Center.
6.	 If you want to commit the change of pivot, click on the Size | R (Reset 
XForm) button. After you click on the Reset XForm button, you will also be 
able to set the size of the object numerically using X, Y, Z, or All filters for 
the axis you are setting the size for. The Get button returns the current XYZ 
dimensions for the selected object.

Chapter 2
[ 61 ]
Local, Screen, and Pick spaces
Let's consider the ways in which you can situate and face the axis of the transform 
gizmo. Think of a tree growing on a flat ground, among a row of trees. One tree is 
out of line from the rest, growing at a 45 degree angle. For all the trees, if you scale 
them up in the View space (aligned with the ground), they will grow straight up. If 
you scale them up in Local space (aligned with their own axis), the 45 degree tree 
will shoot upwards at a different angle to the rest.
Changing the axis direction of the gizmo
Sometimes the facing direction of a mesh and its pivot don't agree. Here's how to 
adjust the pivot to face a given direction based on its local space, or view space, 
or to use the facing direction of another object in the scene.
1.	 Changing View, Local, and Working Pivot space only changes the 
orientation of the transform gizmo accordingly.
2.	 In order to change the option that is active, go to the main toolbar, where 
there's a rollout with the Reference Coordinate System tool tip.
3.	 Select Clamp_01 in the scene, a small feature we're going to distribute copies 
of around the cockpit wheel. With View chosen, the transform gizmo aligns 
to the grid (G), and with Local chosen the transform gizmo aligns to the 
object's original length, width, and height space.
4.	 When you create objects, such as Cylinder primitives for instance, their local 
axis often begins aligned to the grid. It is only when you rotate them that a 
difference becomes apparent.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 62 ]
5.	 The following screenshot shows the difference between the View and Local 
space for the object Clamp_01:
Note that in local space the Z axis orients to the object's length.
6.	 Suppose we wanted to place clones of Clamp_01 around the circle, followed 
by the vehicle's canopy when it rotates. We could do so using Move and 
Rotate, if we were patient and didn't mind small discrepancies of angle 
and position.
7.	 We could measure the distance across the circle wherein the canopy rolls 
around, and move the pivot (as discussed in the previous topic) until it 
was halfway across that distance. Otherwise, we could use the Ref. Coord. 
System | Pick option to select the Canopy object, and temporarily borrow its 
pivot while producing copies.
8.	 With Clamp_01 selected, click on Rotate (E).

Chapter 2
[ 63 ]
9.	 In the Ref. Coord. System rollout, select Pick. In the view, a dotted pick 
line will appear, which connects from Clamp_01 to any object you click on. 
We could use this method, but it would be more reliable to click on Select 
by Name 
, with Pick as active and highlight Canopy. After highlighting 
Canopy, click on Pick to close the dialog:
10.	 This next part can be really confusing when you first encounter it. You've 
just set Clamp_01 to rotate around the Canopy object, but the pivot hasn't 
changed. Why? We also need to access the Use Pivot Point Center flyout  
(which is still set on the object) and instead change it to the third option, Use 
Transform Co-ordinate Center 
:

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 64 ]
Having changed this, you'll see the pivot jump from Clamp_01 to the middle 
of the Canopy.
11.	 Press A to enable Angle Snap, which defaults to a 5 degree rotation step.
12.	 Hold down the Shift key and rotate Clamp_01 so it generates a copy of 5 
degrees around the X axis, using the picked pivot of the Canopy.
13.	 When you let go, a pop up will ask you for cloning options. In the Object 
section, click on the Copy radio button. This means that the cloned object 
won't share any changes to the original. Click on OK.
14.	 The new object is selected after creation. Select Clamp_01 again, and in the 
Graphite Modeling Tools in the Ribbon under Geometry (All) or in the 
Command Panel under Edit Geometry, select Attach and click on Clamp_02.
This combines the cloned object into the first object as an element of it.
15.	 Turn off the Attach mode, then hold down the Shift key, and rotate Clamp_01 
exactly 30 degrees in the X axis, using Canopy as the Ref. Coord. System 
(and with Use Transform Co-ordinate Center 
 active).
16.	 When you release the Shift key, you'll be prompted for cloning options, and 
this time select the Instance radio button in the Object section. This means 
that the cloned object will share changes made to it with the original, and 
vice versa.
17.	 Also set the number of copies to 11. Why 11? Since we're making a full 
rotation around the canopy at 30 degree spacing, that divides to 12, but one 
instance, the original, is already there. So if we set it to 12, the final clone 
would overlap the original object.
If you are not good at dividing 360 degrees, in the pink 
Listener field at the bottom left-hand corner of 3ds Max, 
type 360 divided by the angle you want to rotate, and you 
will get the amount of copies you'll need. For example, 
360 / 30 returns 12.
18.	 Some of the clones slightly overlap the cover of the Canopy. To fix this, we 
can scale the objects all together. There are two ways to scale them—one is 
by their own pivot center and the other is by the selection center.
19.	 Click on Select by Name 
, or press H, and type Clamp in the Find: field. 
All the cloned Clamp objects will be selected in the scene.
20.	 Return the Use Transform Co-ordinate Center 
 flyout to the first option, 
Use Pivot Point Center 
. Set the Ref. Coord System option to Local. The 
pivot will appear over whichever member you roll the cursor over. Now 
scale the objects in Z axis so they are a bit smaller. Make sure you keep the 
objects selected.

Chapter 2
[ 65 ]
21.	 Set the Use Pivot Point Center 
 flyout to the second option, Use Selection 
Center 
. Change the Ref. Coord System option to View. 
The pivot will jump to the middle of the selection.
22.	 Scale the objects so they cross the outer lip of the canopy circle, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
The previous example shows how simply switching the active Ref. Coord. System 
option and the center for the transform lets you create diversity when scaling and 
rotating objects based on a flexible pivot. Incidentally, another way to achieve this 
would be to create a Circle shape, use it as the path element in a Path Constraint, 
and then duplicate the Clamp objects at 12 percent steps around the path.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 66 ]
Cloning objects: Instances, References, 
and Snapshots
This section is an extension of the previous section where we made multiple copies 
of a part on the vehicle. You chose between the clone types Copy and Instance. 
In this section we'll explore the ramifications of that kind of choice.
A Copy is independent of its source, but gets all the modifiers and properties the 
original one has. They don't share any changes down the line. An Instance maintains 
a connection between the original and the duplicate, and changes down the line to 
either will be shared. A Reference shares changes, but modifier level changes added 
on top of it aren't shared. A Snapshot is an extracted copy of a mesh, which rebuilds 
it as an editable mesh in its current state. It is used to get the state of a mesh resulting 
from the effects modifiers have on it. A good case for using a Snapshot would be to 
extract the expression or pose the result derived from combined Morph targets 
and Skinning.
Adjusting Instances
Instances are clones that change with the original (and also affect the original if 
changed). The following example shows how to deal with this:
1.	 Under the vehicle, attached to its wing, is a Capsule primitive Tank1. Select 
it and center its pivot (Edit | Transform Toolbox | Align Pivot | Center), 
then press Ctrl + V, which is equivalent to "paste a copy here". In many 
applications, Ctrl + C is often a hotkey for copy, but in 3ds Max that will 
generate a Camera in the scene that matches the current view. Just click 
on Ctrl + V with something selected in the viewport. Of course, to copy 
numerical values and strings of text in fields, copy and paste shortcut keys 
work as usual.
2.	 You'll be prompted to select Copy, Instance, or Reference. Select Instance.
3.	 Move the new object across to the next mounting, TankGrip2.
4.	 In the Command Panel, click on Modify. Then in the Modifier List select 
Taper. Notice that the modifier is added to both Tank objects.
5.	 In the Taper modifier, set the Taper | Amount value to -0.2, and the Taper 
Axis: Primary to X.
6.	 Delete Tank2. We're going to explore other possibilities; this time, select 
Tank1, hold the Shift key, and move it over to TankGrip2.
7.	 Select Reference when prompted for the cloning options.

Chapter 2
[ 67 ]
8.	 For Tank1, add a modifier called Relax and push its Iterations value to 5. 
This will propagate to the reference copy.
9.	 For Tank2, add another modifier called Push. Set its value to 0.55. This 
modifier will not propagate back to the original. Notice how the modifier 
stack looks for the Reference.
10.	 To revert Instances to unique objects, click on Modify | Make Unique 
. Instanced texture maps use the same concept, and there's an equivalent 
command in the Material Editor 
.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 68 ]
A Reference copy with a Symmetry and TurboSmooth modifier is well 
suited for use alongside a low-poly base mesh as you edit it as a half. 
This allows you to work on the easy-to-edit base mesh while viewing the 
extrapolated result of the model with the finishing modifiers on it, without 
having to worry about adjusting the modifier stack. An example is shown in 
the earlier screenshot, with the levels of subdivision noted. The current level 
is the orange cage (on the original), which shows up on the mirrored copy 
as well.
The thick gray divider line below the Push modifier helps demarcate what is 
going on with the Referenced clone in relation to its original. Modifiers below 
this gray divider are shared with the source model, and modifiers above are 
limited to the Reference copy.
11.	 Add an Edit Poly modifier above the Relax modifier, but below the gray 
line. Press 4 to enter the Polygon Sub-Object level, then select the triangular 
polygons on the front of Tank2.
Select just one of the triangle faces and then click on Grow. Then use Alt + 
Marquee to deselect the additional three polygons.
12.	 Right-click over the selected tip of Tank2, and go to Quad menu | Extrude 
to push the selection inwards, generating a cavity. Notice both Tank models 
are affected.
13.	 Turn off the Polygon Sub-Object level, and highlight the Edit Poly modifier 
you added.
14.	 Drag the modifier upward above the Push modifier until a blue guideline 
shows above Push. When you release the Edit Poly modifier, which is now 
appearing above the gray line on the Reference won't be shared anymore 
to Tank1.

Chapter 2
[ 69 ]
15.	 Finally, select both Tank1 and Tank2, click on Mirror, and select Instance as 
the clone option. Then move the copied objects across to the other side of the 
plane so they line up with the TankGrips there.
Capturing a Snapshot
A Snapshot is a model with its modifiers collapsed in its current state. Select a 
model, go to the Tools menu, and click on Snapshot... to open the Snapshot dialog. 
The Clone Method options are the same as in the previous example, with the 
addition of the Mesh option. This is the default method for this tool, and is what 
collapses the existing modifiers in the copied object.
Try this out using Tank1 or Tank2, and verify if the cloned mesh has its modifiers 
collapsed. Note that it is generated as an Editable Mesh, not an Editable Poly. When 
you perform the Snapshot, the clone is produced at the same spot. The original 
model remains selected.
You can also Snapshot the state of a model over the duration of an animation, by 
switching the default Single radio button over to the Range radio button, and then 
setting From, To, and Range parameters.
In the following screenshot, the right-hand side model is a snapshot of the model on 
the left-hand side, which has a Bend modifier set to 90 degrees:

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 70 ]
Adjusting modifiers in the viewport
In the previous section, we dragged a modifier in an object's modifier stack to shift 
its order. In this section we will introduce handling modifiers across several objects. 
Mostly, this is done by right-clicking on a modifier to show its contextual menu, and 
you can use the Copy, Cut, and Paste commands for modifiers from there. We're 
going to examine ways to control a selection of modifiers to affect their active state in 
the view, so that you can toggle one modifier and all its instances in one go, and also 
enable modifiers to perform differently in the view and at render time.
Assigning a single Turbosmooth to all your 
models
In the following steps, we'll look at how to use one modifier to affect many objects, 
for easier toggling of its result while working:
1.	 Open the \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 2\BikeFinish.max scene.
2.	 None of the objects in the scene are smoothed. In the main toolbar, find 
Selection Filter flyout, as shown in the following screenshot, which is 
currently set to All. In the drop-down, change it to Geometry.
3.	 Press Ctrl + A to select all. Only the geometry objects will be selected.

Chapter 2
[ 71 ]
4.	 In the Command Panel go to Modifier List, select TurboSmooth. 
A warning will show about instanced objects receiving the same 
modifier; you can ignore it.
To delete a modifier per object, right-click on the modifier and select Delete, or you 
can click on the trashcan icon 
 at the base of the modifier stack.
Note that there is a black horizontal bar below it that lets you 
resize the stack.
When you right-click on the modifier, you will also see the option Rename, which 
will help you rename a modifier—this is a fairly unusual operation, since if you 
rename a modifier you might forget what its function is. A good solution to ensure 
changed modifier names remain functional is to keep their title and append the 
renamed part.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 72 ]
Selecting objects that have a certain modifier
Once you have more than a handful of objects that share a modifier, removing the 
modifier requires access to all of them at once or you'll be there all day. There is a 
script by Jordan Walsh called Modifier Modifier Zorb, which handles this really well. 
It can be found at http://www.scriptspot.com/3ds-max/scripts/modifier-
modifier-zorb.
Installing it is just a matter of extracting the download file to the 3ds Max main 
folder so the \Script and \UI folders get merged in. Then you go to Maxscript | 
Run Script and browse to C:\Program Files\Autodesk\3ds Max 2013\Scripts\
Zorb\ and click on Zorb-Modifier Modifier 2.mse. You can customize access to 
it by looking for Zorb Tools if you want to assign it a keyboard shortcut or add it in 
the Quad menu.
When you run the script, the following screenshot will be displayed.
Highlight the TurboSmooth entry (given that you had added TurboSmooth 
previously to all the geometric objects in our scene BikeFinish.max). The entry 
now has 47 members. Right-click and select Delete, or one of the other options:

Chapter 2
[ 73 ]
At the top, on the right-hand side of the window, is a U button, which updates 
the list of entries. At the bottom of the window, if you click on the Get Modifier 
Properties button, you can access parameters of the highlighted entry in 
another dialog.
One of the nicest features of Zorb Tools is you can show all the modifiers in the 
scene, independent of what is selected, and even use it as a search tool to select all 
the modifiers with a given modifier. Zorb Tools isn't limited to displaying modifiers. 
It has tabs that filter base objects, materials, controllers for animated objects, and a 
few others.
The major benefit of this tool is that you can work in 3ds Max in a "class-centric" way 
rather than a per-object way.
Setting different modifier attributes for views and 
rendering
Using Zorb Tools | Get Modifier Properties for a selection of modifiers, 
or right-clicking on the modifier in the modifier stack, you can set TurboSmooth 
so the Render Iterations (or subdivision) is higher, say 2, and the Viewport 
Iterations are lower, say 1. You can also right-click and select Disable in viewport 
if you don't want to see the subdivision while working, but still want it active 
during render time.
Organizing a scene using Groups
Groups associate several objects together without actually making them a single 
object. The area where groups are particularly useful is when you clone sets of 
objects that you need to keep together per copy. Groups are managed under the 
Group menu in the main toolbar. There are just a few tools, and if you use groups 
a lot, it is handy to put the Group tools into the Quad menu.
A group can be animated as a root of the objects it collects together. The idea of 
a group precedes the idea of an assembly, which precedes the idea of an XRef, 
which precedes the newer, more elaborate Create | Helpers | Container concept. 
Consequently, groups are simplest. Groups are stored locally in the scene, not 
externally as a file. Containers are saved to a file. You can find a PDF supplement 
on Containers and XRefs in the provided content for this chapter.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 74 ]
Group functionality
This section looks at simple manipulation of objects via a group and ways to control 
the group itself:
1.	 Open the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 2\BikeFinish.max. Press Ctrl + A 
to select all the objects.
2.	 Click on the Group menu in the main toolbar, and select the Group command.
3.	 At the prompt enter a name, such as Vehicle. It can help to append a prefix 
to group names, though groups can be identified by the fact that their names 
are shown in bold in lists. In hierarchical lists, the icon for an object is 
, and 
for a group it is 
. In some cases the latter icon is also used for representing 
Shape objects, such as in the Select by Name dialog.
When groups are created from a selection they are automatically put into 
a closed state where you can't access the individual elements. In order to 
control a group, use the Group menu. The available commands are Open 
and Close, Group and Ungroup, and Explode.
You may also notice Assembly. Assemblies are for 
creating convenient lighting rigs and are not covered in 
this book. The main difference between an assembly and a 
group is that an assembly gets defined with a head object 
to control properties of the lights it includes. Consult 
the online documentation via the Help | Autodesk 3D 
Max Help menu. In that, look up Managing Scenes and 
Projects | Using Assemblies.
4.	 Go to Group | Open, and notice the pink bounding box around the 
grouped object.
This pink box represents the group itself, and can be selected, moved, 
animated, and hidden. It displays even when you have Display Selection 
Brackets toggled off in the viewport configuration options.
With the group open, you can select, manipulate, and edit any component object 
in the group. In order to close the group again, you can select any object and select 
Group | Close.

Chapter 2
[ 75 ]
To extract an object from the group, such as the two mr Sky Portal objects for 
example, select the objects and go to Group | Detach.
You can add objects to an existing group using the script Outliner, by dragging 
them into the group in the hierarchy list. Another way to do this is to ungroup the 
grouped objects, add the objects you want to include in the selection too, and then 
recreate a fresh group with the same name (or a new name).
The Ungroup command will maintain any groups inside the selected one. The 
Explode command will ungroup all groups inside the selected one as well.
Make a group from the two mr Sky Portal objects, and then select everything else as 
well and create another group called Vehicle—you will get a nested hierarchy.
First try using Ungroup, to expose the mr Sky Portal lights again, with the objects 
still grouped. Revert the changes using Undo, then try using Explode to expose 
everything, this time with the objects ungrouped.
The way that groups inside groups form a hierarchy is similar to how linked objects 
work as parent-child using the Link 
 and Unlink 
 commands.
Parent-Child relationships can be viewed in the Schematic view. It is very handy for 
navigating the scene's hierarchical layout. The following steps show how to create a 
Schematic view:
1.	 Click on a viewport's label, for instance, Top, and select Extended Viewports 
| Schematic View | New from the drop-down menu.
The initial appearance of the view gathers the entire scene, so it just looks like 
a bunch of markers.
2.	 Instead of displaying Reference mode 
, switch to Hierarchy mode 
 and 
scroll the mouse wheel to zoom in.
3.	 Open the Schematic view's View menu, and toggle Show Grid (G).

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 76 ]
In Schematic view, groups show as green labels, as in the following example, with 
their contents nested below. Selected items are displayed with white labels and select 
the content in the scene:
Importing models
Quite often you will be working with outsourced models, downloaded models, 
models by colleagues, royalty-free models that come with 3D magazines, or models 
you began in a sculpting application such as Forger (iPad), Pixologic Scultpris (free), 
ZBrush, Autodesk MeshMixer (free), or Mudbox, or even models exported from 
Unreal Development Kit, or another game editor that you might use as reference 
guides for detailing work.
If your content is an .obj, .fbx, .3ds, or .dwg (or another generic model format), 
to import a model go to File | Import | Import.
If your content is another .max scene, to merge a scene go to File | Import | Merge.

Chapter 2
[ 77 ]
If you have a model whereby the content you'll import will replace an existing model 
or selection of models with the same name, go to File | Import | Replace. This could 
be the case if your scene is populated with Cylinder primitives that represent trees 
and you use Tools | Rename Objects... to call them all Tree, without numbering. 
If the target high-resolution tree model is also called Tree, then you can quickly 
repopulate an entire scene.
Different model formats (.obj or .fbx for example) have their own import dialog 
feature in which you can specify the properties of the model you want to preserve, 
such as Texture coordinates, Topology, or Smoothing Groups. In the \Packt3dsMax\
Chapter 2\ content folder, there are two models; import each one and observe the 
options for each:
There are many peculiarities of file imports, in terms of the properties to select, and 
the majority of these are to do with materials that the object had in the original case 
but no longer has. Most models only save their mesh definition, but some can embed 
textures or tag the files alongside during export in a subfolder. Most modeling 
applications apply a default material to the object so you can see what you are 
doing, and this has to be replaced by the user when you swap applications. Textures, 
however, can sometimes be automatically exported with the asset and applied again. 
Normally, doing this yourself will help you verify all the required textures are in 
place once you've assigned a new material. Sometimes, the problems that occur 
when importing are more esoteric.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 78 ]
With Pixologic Sculptris, for instance, handling a model exported from it, when you 
import it to 3ds Max as .obj, you must click on Import as single mesh in the OBJ 
Import Options window, even though only one mesh is listed in the dialog. This is 
because if you don't select the option (and you were using symmetry in Sculptris), 
you get an Invalid Vertex Index error message caused by the symmetry line in the 
source mesh, and it refuses to import.
With many imported OBJ models, the surface smoothing calculation in the original 
application doesn't cross over to the smoothing groups that 3ds Max understands. 
So, it is necessary to add your own or the model surface will be faceted. Adding the 
Modifier Smooth setting to the imported model will usually handle this issue well. 
You just have to set the AutoSmooth option checked, and then set a high smoothing 
threshold value (around 90 degrees is normally fine). The following screenshot 
shows the difference this makes:

Chapter 2
[ 79 ]
With .obj import, you can set the Smooth option enabled in the import options, 
if the mesh has smoothing data. You'll see a green dot next to the data the model 
contains, and a red dot if that data isn't included.
Using a template scene including 
lighting, turntable camera, and render 
settings
When you are modeling, a lot of time is wasted to construct a suitable scene for each 
model to show against, to light the model, and to set up a camera turntable. Using 
a template scene that provides those things is useful as a stand-in until the model 
is totally finished and can be either handed off to a colleague for their tasks, or 
presented professionally in a custom setting.
There is a nice template scene that ships with 3ds Max: C:\…\3dsMax\scenes\ 
Studio_scene_share.max. This reproduces the look of a small photographic 
studio, with moveable light rigs. The ceiling light is fixed in place, but we've 
provided a version where you can move the light rigs and the area lights follow 
at \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 2\Studio_scene_share_mod.max. The rigs can be 
grabbed via the Named Selection entries, and the scene is set up for rendering 
with Mental Ray.
Just import your content from a model or scene file, and align  the content to the 
Dummy01 object positioned on a stand with cameras facing it, then scale it to suit.
For the vehicle used in this chapter, an additional template scene has been created 
for a turntable animation—a 360 degrees spin around the model—which is a classic 
way to show off the asset. The scene includes a slightly reflective ground, a skydome, 
and lighting and exposure settings that work well with both Mental Ray and 
NVIDIA iray.
1.	 Open \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 2\Bike.max, and go to 
File | Import | Merge.
2.	 In the Merge dialog, click inside the History: field, use the drop-down 
list to go to the shortcut \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 02\ folder, and select 
TemplateBackdrop.max.
3.	 In the Merge dialog, click on ALL to select all the objects, then click 
on OK.
4.	 After merging, press C to jump the view to the existing Camera002 
view. Pressing Shift + F shows the actual gate of the film, or the aspect 
ratio of the render.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 80 ]
5.	 There are six selected entities after the merge (unless you click on 
something). Raise these 20 units in Z axis to fit with the vehicle model.
You may want to group them as Backdrop first. If the imported objects don't 
line up to the ground level, then to offset the group, right-click on the Move 
icon  to access the Transform Type-In dialog, which offers XYZ fields for 
absolute word position and an offset position.
6.	 This scene has a turntable animation already animated for Camera002. It 
is currently 100 frames, or about 4 seconds. Click on Play 
 to view it. The 
hotkey for Play is /.
7.	 To scale the animation's duration longer hold Ctrl + Alt + RMB, and drag on 
the frame range of the time slider towards the left. This adds time to the end 
of the frame range.
8.	 Right-click on the timeline and ensure that Configure | Show Selection 
Range is ticked:
You should see a black bar under the selected object's keys.
9.	 Drag a Marquee selection over all the keys in the timeline so that 
they are highlighted in white. Now scale the animation to the end of the 
adjusted timeline by dragging the right-hand end of the black selection 
range bar, which has a white handle:

Chapter 2
[ 81 ]
10.	 Alternatively, you can click on the Time Configuration icon 
, click 
Re-Scale Time, and adjust the Length value shorter or longer to suit.
In order to animate a camera turntable yourself, make sure the camera target, 
as well as the object you want to turn around is centered to 0,0,0. Click on Link 
 to link the camera head to the camera target. Press N for Autokey mode, then 
rotate the camera target in Z to any amount at frame 100. Right-click on the 
key created for it, and select Camera.Target:Z Rotation from the drop-down 
menu. A pop up will appear showing its frame number, rotation value, and 
interpolation type.
Set the rotation value to 360 (and 0 at frame 0), and the interpolation type to Linear 
at the end and first frame, as shown in the following screenshot. There are Go To 
Frame arrows in the top left-hand corner of the dialog:
NVIDIA iray ActiveShade rendering
While final rendering is generally the area for a specialist, you can achieve a 
pretty good idea of the final look of the lighting and materials in your scene using 
ActiveShade, which is getting faster and faster year by year, particularly on 
robust machines (mostly through the uptake of NVIDIA's CUDA technology and 
OpenCL). You can read about this at http://blogs.nvidia.com/2011/08/nvidia-
photorealistic-rendering-technology-demo-at-siggraph-2011/.
In order to enable NVIDIA iray as an ActiveShade renderer, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Press F10.
2.	 Scroll down the Common tab of the Render Setup dialog.
3.	 Click on the … button (select Renderer) next to ActiveShade.
4.	 Select NVIDIA iray renderer from the options available. Do the same for the 
… button (select Renderer) next to Production.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 82 ]
Enabling NVIDIA iray for ActiveShade depends on having a version later than the 
Subscription Advantage service pack 2 for 3ds Max 2012. For 3ds Max 2013 it is in-built.
To start it up, click on Shift + Q, or click on the Camera view label and select 
Extended | ActiveShade. The iray renderer should kick in; you can also select 
the flyout icon 
.
To start with, it is a good idea to set the properties for the ActiveShade renderer, in 
the Renderer tab, so settings are minimal. For example, 30-second time to complete 
and four bounces rather than unlimited bounces.
Find out more, particularly about the iray material plugin, at http://
blog.irayrender.com/, which has been aggressively developed by 
Autodesk, but many users still prefer an external renderer or integrated 
third-party renderer.
For comparison's sake, Arion "real-time photography" by Random Control 
(http://randomcontrol.com/arion) allows you to specify how the 
GPU and CPU will be assigned for rendering frames—a foreshadow of 
NVIDIA's Project Maximus (pushing towards controlled leverage of CPU 
and GPU). It can even offload rendering load to another machine, while 
you keep working on the scene. Recent additions (support for 3ds Max in 
v1.5.1 are participating media (fog and smoke) and real-time sub-surface 
scattering, a feature of materials such as wax, quartz, raspberries, and so 
on), which is generally computationally heavy to achieve.
An expensive alternative to iray is Chaos Group's mature product Vray and 
VrayRT, which have been leading renderers for many years (http://www.
chaosgroup.com/en/2/vray.html).
There are similar products all over the place, and a promising one is the 
relatively cheaper Octane Render, which has recently been released for 
internal 3ds Max rendering too. Refractive Software aims to offer automatic 
translation of materials from different renderers so they parse through 
its renderer (http://www.refractivesoftware.com/forum/
viewtopic.php?f=7&t=9692).
You can use the Studio_scene_share.max scene to try out ActiveShade with 
iray, of which an example using the floating viewport option is shown in the next 
screenshot. You can set it to display in one of the views, but the floating viewport is a 
better option since it allows you to push it off onto a second monitor, and five views 
are better than four.

Chapter 2
[ 83 ]
Don't forget to watch the Render Message: iray Renderer dialog for warnings and 
information about your machine's processing power, and progress reports.

Model Shakedown: Make 3ds Max Work for you
[ 84 ]
Summary
This chapter covered a lot of ground concerning model handling. A key idea that 
was introduced is that using a template for a background in which to place models 
saves a lot of time setting up lighting. It's easier to adjust a preset lighting situation 
than to create a lighting situation from scratch every time you want to preview and 
render a model. Instead, you want to save that time for working on the model.
In our supplementary content, we also cover some collaboration tools such as 
Containers and XRef scenes and objects. Besides enabling content sharing and 
content protection while collaborating, these let you organize large volumes of data 
more efficiently. This is particularly important in scenes where you are using many 
copies or instances of objects (such as scattered trees or buildings) that you don't 
need to display all the time.
I predicted at the end of the previous chapter that you'd become progressively 
more comfortable with the 3ds Max UI and accessing tools. Hopefully, you notice 
this progress too. By now you'll be more familiar with adjusting the pivot of a model 
and transforming it, understanding the model's relation to the world space, and 
keeping content organized within the scene. In the next chapter, we'll begin 
looking at methods to directly edit a polygon-based model.

The Base Model – A Solid 
Foundation in Polygon 
Modeling
This chapter covers getting started on a model, starting with a reference 
image. We'll examine the modeling skills needed to create a base model. 
It also introduces the challenge of constructing forms that match a design 
while keeping within the constraints of four-sided topology, with an eye 
toward surface-detailing requirements.
The following topics are covered in the chapter:
•	
Introducing the project
•	
Adding image reference
•	
Viewport image planes
•	
Forming the base model
•	
Quad menu's editable poly tools
•	
Setting values with the Autodesk style caddy
•	
Fitting the model to the artwork
•	
Generating round forms from quad-based geometry
•	
Detaching and attaching parts of a model
•	
A preview of sculpting workflow

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 86 ]
Introducing the project
In the previous chapter we handled an existing model. The circumstances were akin 
to what you'd expect to deal with when working with another artist's model. In this 
project, we'll make a model from scratch to about the same level of finish as a game 
prototype model for a vehicle.
The design for the vehicle is a cabin that sits atop a robotic six-legged crawler, 
shaped somewhat like a crab or spider. The cabin is all we'll build in this chapter, 
but we'll see the walking crawler later on, provisioned with a CAT rig (CAT is a 
skeletal system that ships with 3ds Max and allows Skin-driven animation of a 
mesh. Skin is a modifier, which binds a mesh to an animation rig or skeleton 
based on vertex weightings).
Adding image reference
The reference images for this project are found in the content files for the book under 
\Packt3dsMax\Chapter 03\, where there is a front view (Front.png) and a side 
view (Side.png).

Chapter 3
[ 87 ]
1.	 Open the \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 03\SceneStart.max scene, which is a 
template scene with NVIDIA iray settings provided. It includes a camera, 
ground Plane primitive with an Autodesk Generic Material, and a Daylight 
system overhead with appropriate exposure applied in the Environment 
settings (press 8). The scene objects are frozen and on a layer  of their own 
called Basic Elements.
2.	 Open the Material Editor (press M) and make sure that Slate Material 
Editor... is the active option through the Modes menu.
In our template scene, NVIDIA iray is set as the renderer for previewing 
what we're going to make. So we need to use appropriate materials. For 
example, NVIDIA iray accepts mental ray materials and not the Standard 
materials designed for the default scanline renderer. A model destined to live 
in a game will have its material asset set in the game editor, but you'll first 
need to preview your work in progress inside of 3ds Max.
3.	 In the View1 area, right-click and go to Materials | mental ray | 
Autodesk Generic.
4.	 Double-click on the material node, and on the right-hand properties panel in 
the top textfield call the material Front (a unique and clear name).
5.	 In View1, from the Generic_Image nub of the material node you added, drag 
a wire out and you'll be prompted to select a map to add. Go to Standard | 
Bitmap. You could also click on the Image | None button on the right-hand 
panel in the properties for the Autodesk Generic node.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 88 ]
6.	 Immediately, you can browse for a file to set in the Image channel. The 
reference images for this project are found in \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 03\ 
where there is a front view (Front.png) and a side view (Side.png). Click on 
Front.png and double-click on the image preview for the map to enlarge it.
7.	 Hold Ctrl and left-click on the Front material node and its Map node to 
select both. You could also drag a rectangular marquee around them to 
select them.
8.	 Hold Shift and drag these to make a copy of them.
9.	 Double-click on the new material node (which was automatically assigned 
a unique name) and call it Side.
10.	 Double-click on the Map node for the Image channel of the material Side. 
In the Bitmap Parameters | Bitmap: channel, change the image file used 
from Front.png to Side.png.
Now you have two materials representing front and side views for which 
we're going to build reference planes next. But first you'll need to know the 
size of the two images.
11.	 Click on the name of the file assigned to the Image channel in its Bitmap 
Parameters entry. This opens a browser to assign a file, and for the selected 
Front.png file, its Statistics and Location are displayed in the dialog, 
including its dimensions. In this case, 460 pixels wide and 374 pixels high.

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
Viewport image planes
For the following steps we'll construct front facing and side facing planes in the 
views and assign and show the materials for the modeling reference, so that as we 
build the model we can closely match the geometry to the design. You can also do 
this directly in the viewport background by pressing Alt + B and assigning an image 
in the Background Configuration dialog. It is debatable as to whether planes offer 
the more flexible approach or background images. In teaching, I've noticed students 
often have some trouble getting used to the view fitting options for the background 
image method.
1.	 Go to Create | Standard Primitives | Plane and drag the cursor diagonally 
anywhere in the Front view (since now we're going to establish a front facing 
reference image). The size doesn't matter now since we'll set it in the Modify 
panel to fit the image dimensions. Name the plane PlaneFront.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 90 ]
2.	 Click on Modify 
 and for the Width parameter of the plane, match the 
width of the Front.png image, which in this case is 460.0. Do the same with 
the Length parameter of the plane to match the height of the image, which 
in this case is 374.0. Also, set Width Segs value to 2 and Length Segs value 
to 1. The default plane has 4 x 4 segments, which we want to simplify down, 
preserving a center line, as shown in the following screenshot:.
3.	 Press A to turn on Angle Snap.... This is because when you rotate a model 
you can hit 90 degrees or 45 degrees quickly instead of shuffling around 
90.03 and 89.92, for example. The default angle snap value is 5 degrees, and 
you can change it by right-clicking on the Angle Snap icon 
 and changing 
the Angle value in the Grid and Snap Settings dialog.
4.	 Press E to enter Rotate mode, and hold the Shift key and turn the plane 90 
degrees in Z to produce a copy (a straight copy not an instance) facing to the 
side. It doesn't matter which direction you rotate it, since you can always 
mirror it using the Mirror tool 
 to find the best axis once the image is 
applied to it. Name the new plane PlaneSide.

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
5.	 In the Material Editor (press M), right-click on the Side material and 
select Assign Material to Selection. Then right-click again and select 
Show Standard Map in View. If you wish, you can instead select Show 
Hardware Map in View. Click on PlaneFront in the view and assign the 
Front material to it in the same way.
If you find your image is showing white, it could be that the view is using 
hardware lighting and the scene is too bright. The fix for this, for each view, 
is to click on the view label [+] and select Configure Viewports..., and click 
on Default Lights in the Lighting and Shadows tab.
On the other hand, if your image plane shows as black, it probably means 
you are facing it from behind. You can flip it with the Mirror tool 
, setting 
the appropriate axis. Also, make sure the side view image does not face 
toward the front image, as shown in the next screenshot. By default, 3ds 
Max shows the Left view in the 4 x 4 views split. It may be more pleasant to 
model with the Right view active instead. While you can switch to the left 
view by pressing L, the right view has no shortcut (since the R key is reserved 
for Scale). So you need to right-click on the view label to swap the view.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 92 ]
6.	 At the moment your planes will be crossed (as shown in the following 
screenshot on the left). Move them so they are spread apart, as shown 
in the following screenshot on the right:
7.	 Also move the planes up so they sit on the ground. The best way to do this 
is to click on Edit | Transform Toolbox and with the planes selected change 
the pivot to Min Z. Then you can change the Z value for both planes to 0.00.
8.	 It is vital to make sure that PlaneFront is centered to X = 0.000 in the 
world also. Symmetry that we'll use later is much easier to control if it is 
mirrored from the world center.
9.	 PlaneSide is too wide, since it is a copy of the front plane, so set its Width 
value to 300 to match the reference image, in the same way we discussed 
earlier. You can get the dimensions for Front.png and Side.png from the 
Bitmap file information after you add it to the material in the Material Editor, 
or in Windows Explorer by highlighting the file and looking at the status bar 
at the bottom.

Chapter 3
[ 93 ]
10.	 Select both planes. Right-click and select Object Properties. Set the Display 
Properties option Show Frozen in Gray such that it is unticked, so when we 
freeze the object it still displays the bitmap assigned to it. Click on OK.
11.	 In the scene, click on the Manage Layers... icon 
 and click on  to add 
the two planes to a new layer. Call the new layer Ref and click on Freeze 
alongside that layer. Note that when you create a new layer it becomes 
the active layer, so if we were to add a new object it would also go on 
the frozen layer Ref. For this reason there is a little tick mark next to the 
layer that is active. Move this to the 0 (default) layer, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
Now would be a good time to save the scene as MyModelStart.max. Our image 
reference is sufficiently prepared, and we can start to concentrate on building the 
basic form of the model.
The method discussed previously will serve for most models, though 
you may need to extend it to include a top or back view. To this end, 
you can grab the free Maxscript Blueprint Manager from Studio 75ive 
at http://75ive.com/tools/#blueprint_manager.
Forming the base model
If you are working to a set scene scale in order to match your model with other 
models, you can scale your reference planes once you have set their relative size. 
Scale using Local transform and set Use Pivot Center  and the two planes will 
scale individually from their pivots.
A starting scene ModelStart.max is provided in the next section, which has been 
scaled down to about one-third of its original size, to better fit the model's export 
scale, to the game level it is intended for. It continues from the point where the last 
section finished.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 94 ]
From this point on I'm going to assume you're using the preset UI \Packt3dsMax\UI 
Settings\Packt2013_UI.ui. You can load it from Customize | Load Custom 
UI Scheme.
To get started on modeling, for this model, we should probably start with a box 
rather than a sphere, even though the general form is spherical, because of the 
way that a sphere's edges gather into triangles at the top and bottom into a pole. 
Triangles, especially those joining into a pole, don't subdivide well compared with a 
grid-like topology. A box with a TurboSmooth modifier applied will tend to smooth 
into a spherical shape while keeping quad polygons.
1.	 In the Front view, create a Box primitive that has 2x2x2 segments. Press F4 so 
you can see the model edges, and in the front and side views toggle F3 so the 
views are shaded. Call the Box VehicleShell.
2.	 Make sure VehicleShell is lined up so its X position is 0.00 in the world, 
to line up with the PlaneFront reference image. Once you have done this 
you may want to set the pivot to Min Z. Also ensure the box lines up to the 
middle of the PlaneSide reference image.
3.	 Add a TurboSmooth modifier to the box, and notice its form rounds off 
considerably and that its segments are subdivided. Each polygon is divided 
into four smaller ones. Within the modifier settings set the Iterations value 
to 2. The modifier also has a Smooth Result setting that removes the six 
smoothing groups on the sides of the box, which keep its edges sharp.
4.	 This soft box is kind of hard to edit, having so many edges. Let's selectively 
remove some edge loops. Right-click on the model and select Convert to 
Editable Poly.
5.	 Press 2 to enter Edge Sub-Object mode or right-click and select the Edge mode.
6.	 Press Ctrl + LMB on the edges shown in the next screenshot. Then right-click 
and go to Quad menu | SelectEdgeLoop.
The steps continue in the next section, now we've selected the edges.  We'll start to 
operate on selections using the Editable Poly modeling tools.
The Quad menu's editable poly tools
The SelectEdgeLoop command is part of the provided preset UI \Packt3dsMax\
UI Settings\Packt2013_UI.ui presets that you can load by choosing Customize 
| Load Custom UI. For this command you can also click on Loop in the Command 
Panel under Modify | Selection, or go to the Graphite Modeling Tools tab on the 
Ribbon and go to Modify Selection | Loop.

Chapter 3
[ 95 ]
This section covers some of the common editing tools that have shortcuts from both 
the Ribbon and the Command Panel in the Quad menu's editable poly region.
1.	 Right-click to expose the Quad menu. Press Ctrl (not beforehand) and then 
click on Remove in the editable poly quad. If you press Ctrl first and then 
right-click, you will expose the Modeling Quad menu variation instead.
You need to press Ctrl because otherwise you will only remove edges, not 
the associated points that go with them. Discarding edges but not points too 
will make it very hard to edit the model. In the preset UI \Packt3dsMax\
UI Settings\Packt2013_UI.ui, I've also added Remove (edge) and 
RemoveLoop to the Modeling Quad menu (press Ctrl + RMB) to alleviate 
any confusion. It is the only Quad menu command that requires holding the 
Ctrl key. Removeloop doesn't require you to select an edge and then click on 
Loop. It selects the loop for you, but it is probably a good idea to select the 
loop yourself to confirm that you'll remove what you intend.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 96 ]
The following screenshot compares the effect of pressing Ctrl + Remove (left) 
and Remove (right) on the model:
2.	 In the side view press 1 to enter the Vertex mode. Now, Marquee select 
around the top part of the model and scale in the horizontal axis so that it fits, 
as well as you can manage, the drawing's outline. See the next screenshot; 
we'll make improvements later. Do the same for the middle section, which is 
the widest, and the lower section. The only tool you need to do this is select 
and scale, selecting groups of points at a time.

Chapter 3
[ 97 ]
You may start to feel as you follow these steps that you can't see much of 
the reference art. There are a few ways to get around this. One way is to 
press Alt + X to toggle See-Through mode for the model, as shown in the 
next screenshot. The other way is to copy out another plane with the image 
reference on it, so you can see it off to the side.
3.	 Continue using the Marquee select tool to select and move parts of the model 
to better fit its profile. Remember not to directly select points. You want to 
select the side of the model facing you, and also the side of the model on the 
far side.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 98 ]
Even though there are not yet enough segments in the model to create edge 
loops that flow perfectly with the drawing's contours, it is always worthwhile 
to try at every stage you've added geometry to get the wireframe as optimal 
as possible before adding still more.
4.	 Right-click and select SwiftLoop, then add three edges as shown in the next 
screenshot. If you hold the Shift key when clicking to add the edge loops, the 
added loops should adapt to approximate the averaged curve better. Without 
pressing the Shift key, the edges will be added in a linear fashion.
5.	 So far the Front view of the model is under-represented. Still, just using 
select and scale and select and move, you can easily adjust the model in 
vertex selections to fit the drawing contours. I have shown using red 
polygon selections the major areas of the model to address.

Chapter 3
[ 99 ]
6.	 A challenge that often arises is when one view's selection appears to be in 
the right place while the same selection in the other view seems out of place. 
This is the case in the previous screenshot with the middle section, which 
looks fine from the front (it covers what will eventually be a hatch in the 
vehicle), while in the side view it doesn't appear deep enough. Let's adjust 
this and then we should be ready to start adding more geometry to flesh 
out the basic form in the area highlighted in the bottom image shown in the 
previous screenshot. Again, as much as possible, when moving edges try to 
find a suitable match with the design's contours. You'll frequently notice 
a ripple-down effect as one change leads to another as you balance the 
mesh up.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 100 ]
7.	 Since we'll start using tools to add geometry, it would be faster to work on 
half the model and then flip our changes across to the other side. To facilitate 
this, select half the model in polygon Sub-Object mode. While in this case 
you could just Marquee select half of the model in the Front view; you can 
also go to the Ribbon and click on the Selection tab. Then under By Half | X, 
click on the Select icon . Hover the mouse over this to get a handy rollout 
usage tip.
8.	 Press the Delete key and then right-click and select Top-level.
9.	 Add a Symmetry modifier.
Generally speaking, if you delete the negative X side of the model, the 
Symmetry modifier will flip the positive content as desired, but sometimes 
the deleted side will flip, in which case you get nothing. You can click on 
Flip in the modifier parameters to fix this.
10.	 You can't edit the model while you have the Symmetry modifier highlighted 
in the stack, but when you go down the stack to the Editable Poly level to 
keep modeling you can't see the symmetry you've added. To resolve this, 
click on the Show End Result icon 
 shown so that you can see both levels 
at the same time.
This icon is mirrored in the Graphite Modeling Tools part of the 
Ribbon interface.

Chapter 3
[ 101 ]
11.	 Now make a polygon selection matching the one shown in the next 
screenshot. Right-click and select Extrude Settings in the Quad menu. 
The selected polygons will grow outward by a default amount.
Setting values with the Autodesk style caddy
When you use polygon editing tools, there's often a caddy that pops up in the view 
allowing you to set variables for the edit. The first bar in the caddy has info about its 
components as you roll over those, and you can drag the top bar to place the caddy 
anywhere in the view.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 102 ]
For an interminable read on "Caddies versus the old Dialog Box" method of editing, 
look at the Area forum threads about caddies after they were introduced. There are 
some hacks to subvert caddies back to the older editing methods, but they come with 
serious caveats.
In essence, the design of the caddy is intended to match related Autodesk products 
to generate better interoperability.
Caddies all follow a similar layout so it isn't too difficult to get used to them. Any 
value will provide a spinner if you mouse over it, and you can click on the number 
to enter it numerically.
You can hold Ctrl to increase or hold the Alt key to decrease the sensitivity of the 
caddy spinners while dragging them to change a value.
Pressing the Enter key will save you from clicking on the OK icon 
, and pressing 
Ctrl + Enter will save you from clicking on the Apply and Continue icon 
, and 
pressing the Esc key will save you from clicking on the Cancel icon 
. Any icon 
with a small downward triangle is a rollout, which lets you choose other states for 
the tool, such as in the case of the Extrude Polygons tool, Group, Local Normal, 
or By Polygon.

Chapter 3
[ 103 ]
If you are unfamiliar with the idea of extruding faces on a model, try out these three 
settings to see the difference. Group extends the polygons out a single angle, while 
Local Normal extends them based on their individual facing directions. By Polygon 
extends every face outward separately, as a unique extrusion.
The following steps continue our modeling task from the previous section:
1.	 For the extrusion's Amount value, what you set will be remembered for 
further use next time. In this case, it doesn't matter what value you enter 
since you can just move the result by hand afterward. Select Group as the 
extrusion type and press the Enter key to commit the result and close 
the caddy.
2.	 Move the extruded polygons until they touch against the reference image, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Also note, at this point it would be good to place an Autodesk Generic material on 
the model with a gray diffuse color, and set the wireframe color to be darker. The 
assigned yellow color in the previous images at some angles has a sheen that makes 
the selection wireframe, which is white, hard to see.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 104 ]
Fitting the model to the artwork
Once again we need to go through the easy but repetitive task of fitting the vertices 
and edges to best match the drawing using select and move. Between the extruded 
faces and the original faces, you can SwiftLoop in another loop. As you tidy the 
point distribution, you'll see opportunities to insert more loops to help match the 
model to the drawing.
The following steps involve extending smaller forms on the model, and to do this, 
in any model, it is helpful if the current base mesh has a wireframe distribution to 
support the part to be extruded outward or cut away:
1.	 Select polygons as shown in the next screenshot, then right-click and select 
Inset. This tool lets you push polygons inward on a surface and is helpful for 
creating a framing prior to extruding. The settings allow you to control the 
amount numerically, which helps prevent unwanted overlap of polygons.

Chapter 3
[ 105 ]
2.	 The shape we inset needs to be adjusted into a more oval shape, prior to 
extrusion, but we want to keep the points stable on the object surface. To 
ensure this we can look in the Command Panel, under Edit Poly, and select 
one of the Constraints radio buttons; in this case Face. This will allow points 
to slide on the current face while you arrange them to fit the oval shape in the 
drawing. You can also access Edit | Constrain to Face in Graphite Modeling 
Tools, as shown in the next screenshot. Don't forget to set this back to None 
when you are done.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 106 ]
3.	 Extrude the oval selection of polys with Group set as the extrusion type. 
Then move and scale them to match the smaller inner oval, and also make 
sure they extend only as far forward as shown in the side.png reference 
image. At the base of the extrusion and at the end, add loops using 
SwiftLoop to keep the projected form sharp.
Generating round forms from quad-based 
geometry
Our model is made of quad-based geometry, but there are several round forms such 
as cylindrical shapes and tube shapes in the design. This section shows ways to 
handle the problem of fitting a square peg into a round hole, so to speak.
It is always best to work from large features to small, so the next important form to 
address would be the chubby circular cylinders that protrude on both sides of the 
chassis. The intention is that these are all similar on the front side and back, so we'll 
just make one, then copy and paste it around where needed, and then weld them 
onto the chassis.

Chapter 3
[ 107 ]
1.	 As we did earlier, start by using inset polygons to make a framing device, 
and adjust the inset polygons to be as circular as possible. The circular shape 
will be best approximated as an octagon, with a clear cross of mesh edges 
through the center, as shown in the next screenshot. Avoid the temptation to 
rotate the circle to line up with the cross drawn in the reference image. This 
can be done after extruding the form. Inset an inner and outer ring.
2.	 To correct the cross through the middle we'll introduce a new tool, Cut. First, 
select the lines crossing the extruded circle and right-click and press Ctrl + 
Remove. Press 1 to enter Vertex Sub-Object mode, and right-click and select 
Cut. Cut by itself works well, but is greatly helped by working in the Snaps 
mode. Press S or click on the Snap icon .

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 108 ]
3.	 The default snap is set to the view grid, but we need to snap to points on 
the model. Therefore, press Shift and right-click and click on Grid and 
Snap Settings (or right-click on the Snaps icon). This exposes options for 
snapping, and in the first tab you can turn off Grid and turn on Vertex. Also 
turn on Midpoint for future convenience. These settings will be conserved 
until you later have cause to change them.
4.	 In Vertex Sub-Object mode (press 1), using Cut, and with Snaps active, 
add edges across the circle, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 109 ]
These cut-in edges introduce triangles into the model for the first time. This 
is not necessarily a terrible thing, but we can easily keep the model in quads 
(which makes for cleaner subdivision later on).
5.	 To do so, in Edge Sub-Object mode (press 2) highlight the four edges as 
shown in the next screenshot. Then right-click and go to Quad menu | 
editable poly | ConnectEdgesOptions (or the options icon next to Connect 
in the default UI). For this case no options need to be set, so you can then 
press the Enter key to commit the edit straightaway. Afterward, scale down 
the resulting edges a bit so the result looks as shown on the right of the 
following screenshot:
6.	 Repeat the same select, Connect, and scale step with the top and bottom 
edges. You may notice that five-sided polygons are created here. A solution 
for this is shown later in this chapter.
7.	 Extrude the circle you've made and the edge content within it forward about 
as far as the shape protruding from the side of the chassis in the previous 
screenshot, about 7.5 units.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 110 ]
8.	 Now we're going to copy and paste this extrusion to save having to rebuild 
the edges where this structure repeats. Enter Polygon Sub-Object mode 
(press 4) and click on the polygon in the middle of the extruded part, 
using Grow selection (Ctrl + Page Up) to expand outward, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
9.	 Add SwiftLoop around the base of this selection, which you can do while 
still in Polygon mode, where it joins to the rest of the model.
10.	 Right-click and select Move, and hold the Shift key and drag on the selected 
polygons to pull a copy of them away from the rest. You'll be prompted to 
select whether you want the copied objects to become a new object altogether 
or a new Element (or part) within the current object. Select Clone to Element 
and click on OK.
11.	 Move, rotate, and scale the new part to fit to the side of the model, and make 
sure it lines up with the details in the drawing you can see in the PlaneFront 
reference. The part may overlap existing polygons, so to fix this right-click 
and select Borders Sub-Object level (press 3), and click on the open edge of 
the new part. Move this out from the side so it doesn't overlap, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 111 ]
12.	 To connect this part back to the main model, we should construct a fitting 
frame of edge loops (again in a circle with eight sides) to fit it neatly. In this 
kind of situation, you'll normally find it necessary to select and move existing 
points and edges to make some room to add additional edges. To add edges, 
right-click and use Cut to add the framing loop, and Connect the corners of 
the added loop so the object maintains a quad-based structure, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 112 ]
Using the Bridge Edges tool will allow you to close the gap between the 
deleted polygons (shown in the previous screenshot on the lower-left).
On the first extruded circle, the one in the Front view, there is a section of 
polygons that is five-sided, which is fixed in the previous example for the 
side circle by blending into the surrounding mesh. Let's fix the front now.
13.	 Navigate to the polygons shown in the next screenshot on the left (the first 
in the sequence of screen captures) and enter the Vertex mode (press 1). 
Holding Ctrl + LMB points to the next image in the sequence. Now right-click 
and select Connect Vertex. Then select edges as shown in the next screenshot 
and right-click and select ConnectEdgesOptions, producing what's shown in 
the middle image in the sequence.
14.	 Click on Graphite Modeling Tools in the Ribbon. Now go to Geometry | 
Relax. This softens the created edge result.
15.	 For the diamond pattern, shown in the next screenshot (second from the 
right), you can dissolve it out in two steps. First, enter the Polygon mode 
(press 4), select the diamond polygons, and press the Delete key. Second, 
enter the Vertex mode (press 1), then right-click and use Target Weld Vertex 
to create a loop, as shown in the following screenshot in the final image of 
the sequence:
16.	 As we did earlier, select the circular protrusion and hold the Shift key and 
drag a copy by selecting the Clone to Element option, and this time fix the 
new part on the back of the model, much the same as it fitted on the side. 
To place it at the back you will need to rotate it 180 degrees.
17.	 The remaining form to complete on the model is the tube on the underside. 
Again we need to create an eight-sided shape that's more or less circular 
to frame the new form, paying attention to its size relative to the 
image reference.

Chapter 3
[ 113 ]
18.	 To span a gap between two polygon islands you can use the Bridge tool. 
This is found under Graphite Modeling Tools | Polygons | Bridge. In the 
preset UI \Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\Packt2013_UI.ui UI, this tool has 
been added to the Quad menu as Bridge Settings.
By default the new polygons will create a direct span, but in the settings you can add 
Segments and even bulge and taper the new geometry. In our case, rather than add 
segments, we can use SwiftLoop to add them selectively, after completing the bridge 
operation, as shown in the Front view of the entire model so far.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 114 ]
Detaching and attaching parts of a model
The model's upper half includes a cockpit and two unfolding engine covers. In this 
section, we'll cover how to isolate and detach polygon sections to generate new 
models based on the existing form.
In the next screenshot, an additional polygon loop has been added with some slight 
vertex nudges to provide a stable frame for the engine cover. To select any loop you 
can click on a polygon and then hold the Shift key, then click on another polygon in 
line with it. This also works for edges and points. A new feature in 3ds Max 2013 
is that you can also simply double-click on an edge to select the loop to which 
it belongs.
The polygons inside of this loop are the ones we'll detach.
1.	 In the Front view, Marquee select the polygons inside the edges shown in 
the previous screenshot. In the Named Selections field, type CoverPolys 
and press the Enter key to commit this selection to memory. For this, in the 
Ribbon, you can also use the buffer tool at Stored Selections | Store 1 in the 
Selection panel.

Chapter 3
[ 115 ]
2.	 With the same bunch of polygons selected, right-click and select Detach in 
the Quad menu (for the preset UI \Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\Packt2013_
UI.ui) or in the Ribbon go to Graphite Modeling Tools | Geometry (All) | 
Detach. In this case we'll keep the original polygons, so in the Detach options 
click on Detach as Clone. Call the detaching piece Cover and click on OK. 
After this you may also want to name the main object Body.
3.	 The original polygon selection should remain selected, not the new object, 
since we're still in Sub-Object mode. For now, right-click and select Isolate 
Selection. This temporarily shows only the current object. You could 
alternatively use Hide Unselected from the Quad menu.
4.	 Right-click and select Extrude Settings. Ensure Group is the active extrude 
method via the caddy and set a fairly small value. The value doesn't matter 
too much since the next step is to Scale the selection and move it down, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 116 ]
5.	 Still with the scaled polygons selected, right-click and select Detach using 
Detach as Clone. Name it CoverInner. This will gives us a second element 
for the Cover piece. Now click on Exit Isolation Mode in 3ds Max 2012 or 
toggle Isolate Selection so that it isn't ticked in 3ds Max 2013 (or Unhide 
All), and right-click and select Top-level.
6.	 Press H and select in the list Cover and CoverInner. Click on Hide 
Unselected, then orbit the Perspective view to show both the pieces clearly. 
Click on CoverInner and enter Polygon mode (press 4) and then press Ctrl 
+ A (Select All). These polygons should face downward, not upward. To flip 
them go to the Ribbon and go to Graphite Modeling Tools | Polygons | 
Flip, as shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 The two pieces, Cover and CoverInner, need to be joined into one. Go to 
Top-level for CoverInner, then click on Cover. Starting from CoverInner 
to Cover means we don't have to change its name, as we would need to if 
we attached Cover to CoverInner. Right-click and select Attach, or from 
the Ribbon go to Graphite Modeling Tools | Geometry (All) | Attach.
8.	 Enter Borders Sub-Object mode (press 3) and drag a Marquee over the 
object to select its open edges. Then right-click and select Bridge Settings 
(\Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\Packt2013_UI.ui) or go to the Ribbon and 
go to Graphite Modeling Tools | Borders | Bridge (for settings, click on 
the rollout below the Bridge icon). In the options, set the Segments value 
to 2 and then press the Enter key.

Chapter 3
[ 117 ]
9.	 In Edge mode (press 2), select the loop you added via the bridge polygons 
segments and select Chamfer from the Quad menu. Push the divided loop 
so it lies closer to the top and bottom of the piece as shown in the next 
screenshot. These additional loops will help keep the edges of the form 
tight when it is later subdivided.
10.	 Right-click and select Top-level editing mode. Right-click and select Unhide 
All, and then go to the Body object and copy Symmetry and TurboSmooth as 
instances one at a time to the Cover object. Being instances, they will toggle 
on and off together. Within the TurboSmooth modifier, tick on Isoline 
Display so that only the structural wireframe of the model is shown, 
not all the subdivided edges.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 118 ]
The process of creating the cockpit hatch on the front of the model would 
be rather similar to what we did for the cover, except for the additional 
challenge of working down the model's Symmetry modifier mirror line. 
Generally, if you extrude a polygon on the symmetry line there will be one 
side of the extrusion facing inward that you should delete. Often an extrusion 
off the center line will have a little drift away from X = 0.00 that you can 
manually check and correct point by point. You can often do this quickly by 
selecting the border on the symmetry line and scaling it flat in X and moving 
it back to X = 0.00 after scaling.
An example model representing the process covered in this chapter is provided in the 
content files for the book under \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 03\FinalBaseModel.max.
The rest of the detail on this model could be added as surface detail by sculpting in 
an application such as ZBrush or Mudbox. Even though it follows our design, this 
base shape can be modified in many ways to generate alternative designs, as we'll 
see in the next topic.

Chapter 3
[ 119 ]
First, very briefly, the next section highlights features of the sculpting steps by which 
we could quickly create a textured detail level to map onto a model derived from this 
one. Some of these steps are expanded upon in later chapters, such as UV mapping, 
assigning a material, and exporting a model.
A preview of a sculpting workflow
The modeling steps we've already been through can be leveraged further to add 
more fine detail to the model, but to demonstrate this all the way through to 
complete realization of the design drawing would take many more pages of rather 
similar operations. Instead, it would be more instructive to show a few features of a 
sculpting workflow, which can be used to obtain detail from a high-resolution model 
for texture mapping onto a low-resolution model.
The steps for sculpting an existing model begins with creating texture co-ordinates.
UV mapping (texture co-ordinates) flatten the model's 3D polygons into a flat 
square. U refers to horizontal texture space, and V refers to vertical texture space. 
This space easily matches the width and height of a Photoshop document. The classic 
concept of UV mapping is to imagine the surface of a dice (3D) being unfolded into a 
single flat surface (2D), so each facet can be painted with unique features. Details of 
the Unwrap UVW modifier in 3ds Max are discussed in Chapter 7, The Mystery of the 
Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 120 ]
Once the model has texture co-ordinates, it can be exported to an .obj file for 
sculpting in ZBrush (or Mudbox or a similar sculpting package). This is not a ZBrush 
tutorial, so if you want to pick up ZBrush, visit www.pixologic.com and Eat3D in 
particular for DVD demonstrations, or see ZBrush 4 Sculpting for Games: Beginner's 
Guide, Manuel Scherer, Packt Publishing. For advanced users, also consult EAT 3D: 
ZBrush Hard Surface Techniques 1 and 2 at http://eat3d.com.
In ZBrush parlance, the object we import becomes a Tool, and once loaded is set in 
the Edit mode (press T) on the canvas, adjusted, and then sent out again as an object. 
There is also a native "ZBrush to 3ds Max" command in ZBrush called GoZ, which 
automatically transfers content between the two applications. You can go both ways 
too, but it must be first initiated from within ZBrush before it installs the GoZ icon in 
3ds Max on the Main Toolbar.
In ZBrush, it is handy to go to Polygroups and click on Auto Groups with UV. 
You can then toggle Shift + F to view the UV islands to confirm they are all good. 
The PolyFrame view of the imported 3ds Max model is shown in the following 
screenshot with one Polygroup unmasked:

Chapter 3
[ 121 ]
With clever masking of areas of the active Tool you can apply Deformations such 
as Inflate to get controlled form changes. Brush and cursor-driven edits can be 
moderated from a powerful Stroke menu. This lets you set perfectly circular or 
square mask. Its Lazybrush and Backtrack options help to ensure your strokes 
follow a curved or straight Path without wobbling. An example is shown in the 
following screenshot:
ZBrush requires geometry to be subdivided to obtain high resolution for brushwork. 
This is done through the Geometry | Divide commands. You can either Smooth 
your subdivisions, which softens the surface, or subdivide exactly. ZBrush's 
dependency on subdividing the entire model means that the base model should 
be composed totally of four-sided polygons or quads.
After detailing the model, you can extract the normal or displacement map using the 
Normal Map or Displacement Map menu. Before you begin, slide the Geometry | 
Sdiv slider to its lowest level. You can also click on the Lower Res button. You can 
only extract textures off the model at the base division level.
In the Normal Map menu, generally it is not a good idea to generate a normal map 
with SmoothUVs and SNormals turned on, since this changes the shape of the UV 
projection. When you click on Create NormalMap the application takes a little time 
to calculate a result. The size of the texture created is determined by the UV Map 
Size set in the UV Map panel. You may want to turn on FlipV for use in 3ds Max 
so you don't have to flip the UVs in 3ds Max later or flip the generated texture in 
Photoshop. Once the normal map has been generated, click on Clone NM so it will 
appear in the Texture library (on the left of the screen). You can then click on the 
Texture library icon and click on Export for the cloned normal map, which saves it 
to the disk. For displacement, it is much the same, except you use the Displacement 
Map options.
1.	 Having generated a normal map containing the sculpted detail, back in 3ds 
Max, go to File | Import and browse to your exported OBJ file. This likely 
differs a lot in form from the original OBJ file you exported to ZBrush. In the 
import options, be sure to set Import as Single Mesh.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 122 ]
2.	 You can test the normal map and displacement map by enabling the mental 
ray renderer. Press F10 and go to the Common tab and scroll down to find 
the Assign Renderer section and there, click on the three dots to the right 
of Production. After that assign a Standard material to the imported OBJ 
model via the Material Editor.
3.	 For a normal map, you should add a standard Normal Bump map to the 
Bump channel of the Standard material. You should set its contribution 
value from 0.3 (or 30 percent) to 1 (or 100 percent) to accurately reflect the 
texture. The Normal Bump map's Normal channel takes a Bitmap map 
in which you can assign the texture file you generated and exported from 
ZBrush. Again, .tga and .png are recommended formats. For displacement, 
you should check the RGB Offset value for the displacement map offset so 
that its black and white values correctly calculate to mid gray, as shown in 
the previous screenshot on the right. ZBrush defaults to a "mid gray equals 
no displacement" setting, where black displaces inward and white 
displaces outward.

Chapter 3
[ 123 ]
If you use a Standard material with NVIDIA iray, it won't 
display a texture, since NVIDIA iray is oriented toward 
materials such as the Autodesk Generic type. You have to 
make sure that Enable is checked in the Generic material's 
parameters dialog for the Bump channel if you want to 
leverage it, even after you assign a bitmap to it. The Generic 
material has no channel for displacement. Instead you can 
use an Arch and Design preset. An example is available 
from CG Cookie at http://vimeo.com/34604143.
Of course, if your goal is to use assets in a game editor, you'll probably wind 
up finalizing settings for bump and displacement in the game editor rather 
than in 3ds Max, or in a specialized real-time asset previewing tool, such as 
Marmoset Toolbag (www.marmoset.co).
4.	 In the next screenshot, I've shown my ZBrush sculpt alongside the 
low-resolution model rendered using only the normal map. You can see 
that the small-scale detail is better preserved than large-scale changes in 
form. For this reason it is better to model large features in 3ds Max and do 
small, surface details in ZBrush. To preserve the large form details faithfully, 
one has to either reduce the polycount in ZBrush using the Decimation 
Master Zplugin or retopologize the mesh by hand, for which there are 
various methods, as we'll see later in Chapter 9, Go with the Flow Retopology 
in 3ds Max.

The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling
[ 124 ]
Summary
In summary, throughout this chapter you've built up fine control of modeling tools 
and should understand the various ways to access those tools, namely the Command 
Panel parameters, the Ribbon, and the Quad menu. We considered the separation of 
processes that contribute to a base model for the processes that contribute to surface 
detail on a model. For the base model, the repeated use of a few tools underlies 
most modeling procedures, and hopefully you'll be able to achieve the insight into 
determining which tools to use in a given situation, and the fluency to work through 
the base modeling process quickly.
In the next chapter, we continue to explore elements of model construction using the 
same Robot Spider we've built, adding legs and other features, particularly focused 
on deriving curved surface geometry from 2D Shape objects.

Mod My Ride: Extending 
upon a Base Model
This chapter demonstrates ways in which various modifiers can be used to adjust 
modeled content quickly. The main emphasis is to provide alternative designs 
with little work, by modifying existing content. We also cover basic concepts for 
soft-surface modeling, smoothing groups, and generating geometric models from 
shapes or curves.
These are the topics covered in the chapter:
•	
Marking poly loops
•	
Soft modeling
°°
Modeling with Soft Selection
°°
Modeling with Shift brush
°°
Modeling with Free-Form Deformation (FFD) modifiers
°°
Relaxation techniques
•	
Using Poly Select to apply modifiers to Sub-Object selections
•	
Generating shapes from edge selections
°°
The Lathe modifier process
°°
Shape construction and interpolation
•	
Comparing the Sweep modifier with the Loft object
•	
Smoothing Groups
•	
Generating forms using Cloth

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 126 ]
Marking Poly Loops
A poly loop is a loop of polygons that can be colored to mark prominent features in 
a model to guide animators or orient the modeler. They can be used to help indicate 
key forms. In our case, we'll isolate some selections in the body of the vehicle:
1.	 Open the downloaded scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 04\BaseLegs.max, 
upon which you'll be confronted with the creepy crawly seen in the 
following screenshot.
The legs were mocked up very quickly and aren't articulated. This will be 
added later. The design of the legs is based on the feet having a flexible, large 
surface area for traction, and spikes that can assist navigation, a feature one 
often finds with insects. In the scene, you will notice gaps between the legs 
and the body, which aren't shown below, because we're going to create a 
model to fill this gap so that the legs can be instances.

Chapter 4
[ 127 ]
2.	 Select the Body object and press F4 to show edged faces. Note that the model 
displays blue Map Seams to landmark the UV islands used for texturing. 
Some of these lines will be convenient to mark with poly loops, as seen in 
the following screenshot:
3.	 Convert the Body object to an Editable Poly object. This will collapse the 
Unwrap UVW modifier into the model data. Press 4 to enter the polygon 
Sub-Object mode. Around the forward bulge of the cockpit, select polygons 
using the left-click on one, then hold Shift + LMB on another one next to it. 
Doing this will select a loop.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 128 ]
4.	 Press M to open the Material Editor and hold Shift + LMB to drag the 
existing Autodesk Generic material in the Slate canvas to produce a clone 
of it. Double-click on the copy and rename it Loops. In its properties, below 
Color | Use Color, change the gray swatch by clicking on it to have a 
different color (refer to the following screenshot). Right-click on the material 
and choose Assign Material to Selection. In the view browser, toggle with 
F4. Repeat this for similar loops that might help define key structural forms 
in the model.
5.	 In the previous screenshot, which shows a wide loop where the cockpit 
bulges from the main body, the top is slightly kinked where the polygons run 
in a loop, but not quite smoothly. This could be a good target for reflowing 
the edges that exist in the model so as to give the loop a better shape.

Chapter 4
[ 129 ]
6.	 The following screenshot shows this alteration, after using the Cut and 
RemoveLoop tools. The colored loop is now a lot better. The changed loops 
and the additional ones can be viewed by opening \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 
04\BaseLegsLoopFix.max.
Soft modeling
There are quite a few ways to deform a section of the model in a way that includes a 
soft falloff from the location of the edit.
1.	 Open \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 04\SoftSelectionStart.max and search for 
Leg01. The other legs for the spidery vehicle are instanced clones, so a change 
to this will affect the others equally. Right-click and choose Hide Unselected. 
In the Front view, press the Zoom Extends icon  to frame the object.
2.	 In the Modify tab 
, disable the TurboSmooth modifier by double-clicking 
on the light bulb icon  for that modifier, or else right-click on it and 
choose Off.
Soft modeling with Soft Selection 
Soft Selection is a method of transforming a Sub-Object selection with a falloff, to 
produce gradual deformations. There are three ways to enable Soft Selection for 
Sub-Object transforms. You can use the Ribbon under Graphite Modeling Tools | 

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 130 ]
Polygon Modeling, where there is a Use Soft Selection icon 
 that displays a help 
illustration if you hover the mouse over it. Clicking this icon opens a section on the 
Ribbon that shows parameters for the tool. This can either be floated or dragged by 
its upper-left corner to where you would like to see it on the Ribbon.
The primary parameter to set a value for is Falloff. This sets the influence, 
via a gradient from red (strong) to blue (weak), of the current selection on 
the surrounding area.
•	
Select a group of vertices on the top part of the leg and toggle Soft Selection 
on and off to see the difference. Also, adjust the Falloff value to see how its 
influence spreads. Move (then undo) the points to see the effect this has.
In the Ribbon, the Soft Selection parameters include an Ignore Backfacing toggle 
 which, if not active, prevents the far side of the model from indirectly following 
the selection transformed, facing the camera. When it is active it highlights in blue. 
This would normally be enabled, but if you were to edit, say, a model of a decorative 
plate, and want to protect the bottom polygons from the changes to the top part, 
it would make sense to turn Use Backfaces off. This option can be found in the 
Command Panel, in a checkbox called Affect Backfacing.
Since the Falloff shape is radial, you may at times want to moderate its effect. To 
do so, you can use the Paint Soft Selection brush in the Ribbon 
 or modify the 
Falloff shape using Pinch or Bubble, which influences the falloff graph's tightness 
and spread. Another option is to use Edit, a mode that lets your mouse movements 
shape the falloff degree. The following screenshot shows how the cursor changes to a 
circle, and dragging it vertically in the view increases or decreases the falloff radius.

Chapter 4
[ 131 ]
Also, as shown here, you can shade the falloff using the Soft Selection parameters in 
the Modify panel 
 within the editable poly itself. The tools already mentioned in 
the Ribbon have analogs there.
By default, the Falloff region spreads over the surrounding geometric structure even 
if the polygons are not contiguous. A good example is fingers, where falloff from 
polygons selected on one finger can affect those of its neighbor. You can use the Edge 
Distance parameter to limit the falloff spread only to the surface contiguous with the 
current selection.
A final way of evoking Soft Selection is by assigning it to the Quad menu; this 
has already been done in Packt3dsMax\PacktUI.ui. Personally, I like to fit the 
floated Soft Selection tools into the empty gray space at the very top of the 3ds 
Max window.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 132 ]
We can transform the selection with falloff and use this method to make adjustments 
more readily to complex curves. Bear in mind that the transform done can include 
rotating and scaling, not just moving. Be sure to check how changes you make to the 
leg look with TurboSmooth turned back on.
Soft modeling with the Shift brush 
You will find the Shift brush menu in the Freeform tab of the Ribbon. The Freeform 
tab is next to the Graphite Modeling Tools tab that is exposed in the UI by default, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
The Shift brush allows you to paint deformations in the view's Screen space. Screen 
space is where the XY axes are aligned with the current view, so no matter how you 
orbit the scene, the XY axes are realigned to the view.

Chapter 4
[ 133 ]
This tool can be used with a Mirror axis via the [
] icon, which turns blue when 
active. Its settings dialog box lets you set the Mirror Axis value.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 134 ]
Soft modeling with Free-Form Deformations
Another way to apply gradual deformations to a model is to wrap it in a bounding 
lattice of control points and adjust the control points—a lot like the Warp tool in 
Photoshop, except in three dimensions. Free-Form Deformations come in the form of 
modifiers either based on boxes or cylinders. For this example, we'll use the FFD(box) 
modifier, which lets us set the number of control points manually for each axis. One 
nice feature of the FFD modifiers is they can be applied to several objects at once.
1.	 Open \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 04\SoftModelingFFD.max, click on the 
Named Selection Sets rollout in the Main toolbar, and choose All Legs from 
the drop-down list. This selects the legs, and you will notice in the Modify 
tab 
 that they are instances of each other.
2.	 Go to the Modifier List menu and choose the FFD(box) modifier with all the 
legs selected. It will apply a default 4 x 4 x 4 control lattice to the selection. 
In the parameters for the modifier, click on Set Number of Points. Length is 
the depth of the model, Width is the distance across the model in the front 
view, and Height is the distance from top to bottom. You could confirm this 
by setting Length = 2, Width = 3, and Height = 4 and observe the result. A 
value of 2 is the minimum value you can enter, and it gives you points at 
each end of the control box, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 To select the control points, expand the + icon next to the modifier's name, 
then click on Control Points. Now you can Marquee select them in the 
viewport.

Chapter 4
[ 135 ]
4.	 Set the FFD(box) to 3x3x4, click on Control Points so you can adjust them, 
and then select the two middle rows of control points in the Front view. Scale 
these inward, and then move them down slightly in Z. After that, Marquee 
select the three lowest rows and scale them inward using the uniform scale, 
as shown in the following screenshot. Turn off Control Points when this 
is done.
5.	 In the Named Selection Sets, choose Body and apply an FFD(Box) to the 
selection. Set the Control Points to 3x3x3, then click on Control Points so 
you can adjust the model. Freely rearrange the lattice to try and make a more 
interesting shape. It usually helps to first select entire rows of control points 
to make broad changes on, and then adjust individual points afterward.
6.	 Don't forget to turn off Control Points when you are done.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 136 ]
Relaxation techniques
What Relax does is average the area of a selection of polygons, so larger polygons 
get small and small polygons get bigger. This often has the effect of smoothing the 
flow of edges in a model. It is a very simple tool, but has a huge impact on workflow.
In 3ds Max, Relax functions tend to shrink the object. To avoid this, it is worthwhile 
to use the third-party TopoRelax plugin, which provides a modifier that relaxes 
an object without changing its volume. It is written by Marius Silaghi and can be 
purchased at www.mariussilaghi.com/toporelax.htm.
An example of using Relax within the Edit Geometry section of an Edit Poly 
modifier is shown in the following screenshot. You can also find it in the Ribbon 
under Graphite Modeling Tools | Geometry (All) | Relax. The Amount value for 
Relax is iterative. Relax can be applied as a modifier too, which is helpful when 
working on multiple objects.
Using Poly Select to apply modifiers to 
Sub-Object selections
Normally, a modifier is applied to an entire object. You can apply a modifier to a 
Sub-Object selection (vertices, edges, or faces). For this to work as you continue 
editing, you have to retain the Sub-Object selection at all times or the result will 
change. This can be a problem if you are going back and forth between objects and up 
and down the layer stack, and in particular it is a problem if you happen to deselect 
the Sub-Object components that the modifiers above were depending on. The Poly 
Select modifier helps avoid this problem, because its only purpose is to demarcate 
a Sub-Object selection for its use up the stack. Poly Select also works on primitive 
objects or shape-based objects that have not been converted to Editable Poly.

Chapter 4
[ 137 ]
A video demonstration by 3DBuzz on topology dependency issues while working 
with Sub-Object selections and modifiers can be found at http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=plhrkCB0GVA. We can add some additional utility to this in 
the modifier.
In the following screenshot, we see that if we add a Relax modifier to a Sub-Object 
selection, it applies only to that selection. Then, if we change the point selection 
below, the Relax modifier is upset by this (unless we reselect the same points again).

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 138 ]
Note that the Show End Result icon 
 is toggled active for the screenshot.
If we keep the vertex option selected and add a Poly Select modifier, we can click on 
either Vertex, Edge, or Polygon mode in the modifier and directly select components 
in the view. As shown in the following screenshot, I chose the Polygon mode and 
then Get Vertex Selection. This acquires the current selection from below in the 
stack. This can be used to convert a selection from one Sub-Object mode to another 
(remember when you collapse the stack to Editable Poly, each Sub-Object selection 
remains current for its type). This is a little complex, so a better way is to right-click 
in the view and from the Quad menu choose Convert to Vertex, Convert to Edge, or 
Convert to Face, respectively.

Chapter 4
[ 139 ]
The previous screenshot shows one benefit of using Poly Select. Once you set a 
selection in the modifier for the Relax modifier to operate upon, you can go down 
to the editable poly level (or some other modifier below, such as Edit Poly) and 
adjust things as you wish without having to worry about messing up the 
Sub-Object dependency.
Generating shapes from edge selections
Any edge selection can be converted to a Spline. Splines have several uses. They 
can be rendered as wire-like volumes. They can be used as guides for animation, 
for polygon extrusions, and even UV mapping. They can be used as profiles for the 
Extrude, Sweep, and Lathe modifiers to generate new geometry. Closed shapes can 
be the base for Garments used with the Cloth modifier, and open shapes can be used 
to define Hair and Fur geometry.
In this example, we'll generate shapes from existing geometry and use it to create a 
model connecting the Body and Legs of the vehicle constructed in the earlier sections.
1.	 Open the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 04\ShapesStart.max.
2.	 Select Body by pressing H (Select by Name) and zoom and orbit so you can 
see the lower part (shown in the following screenshot). Press 2 to enter the 
Edge mode and select the loop shown on the end of the front protrusion.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 140 ]
3.	 If you are using PacktUI.ui, you can right-click on it to access Create Shape 
from Edges in the Quad menu. If not, go to the Edges panel found in Ribbon 
| Graphite Modeling Tools, then click on Create Shape From Selection. 
In the pop-up dialog, for the Shape Type option, click on the Linear radio 
button. This means the generated Spline will look exactly the same as the 
edge loop it is derived from, without smoothing.
4.	 Name the object LegRing, then click on OK. You'll still be editing the Body, 
so right-click and choose the Top-level, then click on the new shape LegRing.
5.	 Press Ctrl + T (Transform Toolbox) and set the object pivot to 
Center | Center.
6.	 Repeat this for an edge loop on the end part of the Leg03 object facing 
the region we're working. 
7.	 Right-click and choose Create Shape from Edges, making sure the Shape 
Type is set to Linear. After creating this object, at Top-level, select LegRing.
We could use a Loft here, but it would be easier to just work with editable 
poly tools.
8.	 Convert both circles to editable poly, which will generate flat objects from the 
two rings. Select LegRing, right-click, and select Attach (PacktUI.ui), or in 
the Modify tab 
 of the Command Panel select Attach and then click on the 
other mesh you just generated to combine it into LegRing. 

Chapter 4
[ 141 ]
9.	 Right-click and choose Hide Unselected. In Polygons mode, ensure the two 
circular end faces are facing away from each other. You can use the Flip 
command to adjust them.
10.	 In Borders mode, select both sets of open edges and right-click and choose 
BridgeSettings (PacktUI.ui). Set the Segments value to 2, then in Edge 
mode, select the middle edge loop and transform it, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
11.	 The ends of the object are single polygons with many points around the 
side. This can be fixed using the maxscript Quad Cap Pro by Marius 
Silaghi (http://www.mariussilaghi.com/products/quad-cap-pro), but 
unfortunately, this is not free. The long way around is to Inset the faces 
slightly, then use Cut, with Vertex Snap (S) active, to construct quads across, 
as shown in the previous screenshot.
Now that we have this bridging object, which touches the body on one end and 
the leg on the other, we need to construct a plausible fulcrum so that when the leg 
transforms (moves or rotates) it seems to be joined to the body. Being a creative 
challenge, there are many ways to achieve this. What we'll do is use the same Create 
Shape from Edges approach to create a profile curve. From that curve we'll generate 
the next part of the model. A profile is a single curve that represents the contour of 
geometry. We'll Lathe or spin the curve into a solid part.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 142 ]
The Lathe modifier process
This section details the most common usage of the Lathe modifier, starting from a 
shape extracted from an existing part of the model:
1.	 Select the Leg01 model, right-click, and choose Hide Unselected. In the 
Edge mode (2), use Ctrl + LMB to select the edge shown in the following 
screenshot. Make sure the edge selection goes to the center point indicated 
on the Leg01 model. Call the shape LatheShape.
2.	 In the Top-level mode (6), select the newly created LatheShape. Press 2 to 
enter the Segment mode and orbit the view so you can see the Spline from 
the top, as seen in the following screenshot. Right-click and choose Refine, 
then click on the line to add a point where indicated. Be sure to work in the 
Top viewport.

Chapter 4
[ 143 ]
3.	 Drag the end point outward a small amount. At the Top-level, Shift + 
move a clone of the line, as shown in the following screenshot. Adjust 
the overlapping part so it lines up as in the lower part of the screenshot:

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 144 ]
4.	 These two lines are unique objects, so attach them together and then close the 
gap. To do so, select one point, then right-click and choose Connect. A dotted 
pick line will be seen as you mouse over the target point, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
5.	 Having created the profile, make sure its pivot is aligned to the world. To do 
so, in the Command Panel, click on the Hierarchy tab 
 and click on Affect 
Pivot Only in the Adjust Pivot tab, then click on Align to World.
6.	 To add the Lathe modifier, go to Modifiers | Patch/Spline Editing and select 
Lathe. Another way to expose the modifier's list rollout is in the Command 
Panel | Modifier tab 
, and press L so the list jumps down to entries starting 
with L, of which Lathe is the first. The result you get will likely be in the 
wrong axis, so set the parameters of the modifier so that it works well, using 
the Direction | X Y Z buttons. You can also expand the [+] to show the Axis 
control of the Lathe and rotate it manually. If the model shows black, tick 
the Flip Normals tickbox. Also tick Weld Core so the center of the Lathe 
modifier doesn't have any small holes. If there are large holes, you can use 
Cap Borders to resolve them the same way we did in the previous section. 
In this case, if the Segments value is set to 16, it matches with the radial 
segments in both the leg model and the bridging model. To avoid a hole in 
the first place, for the Spline the Loft is based on, ensure that its start and end 
points line up well.

Chapter 4
[ 145 ]
7.	 In the following screenshot, we are jumping ahead of the progression 
slightly, but still using the same tools we've already covered (mainly Bridge, 
SwiftLoop, and Relax). Some additional features have been added to the 
joint to complete the fulcrum. You can use Attach to combine the joint mesh 
with the Lathe result.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 146 ]
Shape construction and interpolation
An important aspect of generating geometry from shapes is the Interpolation 
value of the shape. Interpolation is similar to subdivision. In 3D, a curve is really a 
composite of straight segments, and the more you have the rounder your curve will 
look. A 16-sided cylinder, for example, looks quite chunky, but is still recognizably 
round. If you subdivide it once, you get a better idea of its roundness, yet the model 
is still only made of straight lines. Each Spline has an Interpolation parameter, 
which defaults to 6. In most cases the value is too high, especially if you are making 
a low-poly model that will be subdivided later. In the following example, we'll cover 
construction of shapes in more depth and also see how a change in interpolation 
affects the final model result. We'll use the Sweep modifier, which uses a path Spline 
and a profile Spline to generate a rail.
1.	 Open the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 04\SweepDemoStart.max. The 
vehicle we've been working on so far is hidden, except for its one leg. Just as 
in the previous section, a Spline called SweepShape has been generated from 
edges of the model.
2.	 Let's make a profile to be swept along SweepShape. Go to the Top view (T) 
and then go to Create | Shapes and select Arc. An Arc is defined as a line 
from end to end, and then the curvature is added by dragging away from 
the line. Draw the Arc with any size and curve you like.

Chapter 4
[ 147 ]
3.	 Turn off the Start New Shape tickbox, which is shown on in the previous 
screenshot. This means the next Spline you begin will be part of the current 
object. Drag in another Arc under it, facing the other way. 
4.	 You may want to turn the Start New Shape tickbox back on after making the 
second arc under the first. For the lower arc, Marquee select its points and 
convert them to corners using Corner in the Quad menu.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 148 ]
5.	 To join the gaps, right-click and choose Connect, as we did in the previous 
section. Let's add a V-shaped feature. To do this, right-click and choose 
Refine and click mid-way along the added segment to insert a new vertex. 
Move this new vertex down, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 The initial points have handles that influence the curvature between the 
points. Using the XY plane of the transform gizmo (W), adjust the green 
handles so the V shape is straight. Sometimes the handle and the transform 
gizmo overlap, making it difficult to move in XY. To overcome this, shoot 
the handle out in one axis beyond the gizmo, then you can use the XY plane 
easily. Another way to deal with the problem is to mouse over a different 
point in the selection so the one whose handles you are trying to adjust isn't 
overlapped by the gizmo.

Chapter 4
[ 149 ]
7.	 Suppose you want to combine or cut away a separate shape from the existing 
one. This can be done using the Boolean commands in the parameters of the 
Spline. First, we need to create a shape with which to affect the current one. 
Create a Circle shape and place it as shown in the following screenshot. Use 
the X option in the Align window to ensure the two shapes line up nicely.
8.	 Select Arc001 and choose Attach. In order to subtract the circle, we 
have to first add it to the object. Then, in Spline mode (3), select Subtract 
 in Boolean and click on the added circle Spline as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 150 ]
The result you will get is shown below:
Now, we can sweep this profile along the SweepShape Spline on the leg.
1.	 Select SweepShape and add the Sweep modifier. It will automatically apply 
one of ten available preset profiles. We need to swap this with our own. Also, 
we need to set the scale and alignment of the swept geometry.
2.	 To set a custom shape, we first need to make sure the scale of the profile 
is agreeable. It will probably be much too large initially. To avoid that, 
select Arc001 and scale it down to about the scale shown in the following 
screenshot. Also press Ctrl + T to open the Transform Toolbox and click 
on Center | Center in the pivot options and then the Reset Xform button 
R. What this does is commit the scale amount you just set as the new 100 
percent scale for the object.

Chapter 4
[ 151 ]
3.	 Select SweepShape again, and in the Command Panel, in the Modifier tab, 
 set the parameter for the Sweep so the radio button Use Custom Shape 
is ticked.
4.	 Click on Pick and then on the Arc001 shape in the view, or use the Select by 
Name icon 
.
The result you'll get should follow the path given by SweepShape. The 
nice thing is that you can still edit the profile shape and the path up to the 
point where you collapse the model to editable poly. What we'll look at 
now is reducing the polygon count of the generated model by reducing the 
Interpolation value of the profile Spline. It's good to see this as a comparison, 
which is why we haven't set it to the correct value already. Notice that the 
model has a nice curvature but too many lines. Also, the ends are Ngons 
(having more than four sides) because they are simply an open border that 
has been capped.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 152 ]
5.	 Select Arc001, and in its parameters, set Interpolation Steps to 1. This makes 
the swept model suddenly look very chunky, but we can always subdivide 
it later.
For an experiment, toggle on Adaptive and notice the mesh count of the 
swept model leaps skyward, but the curvature is now perfect. The problem 
is, it contains too many polygons. So make sure Adaptive is never ticked in 
this kind of situation. Where you might use Adaptive is when using Splines 
as camera paths.
6.	 Further down in the Sweep modifier parameters, set the Align Pivot location 
using the grid shown in the following screenshot. Using the bottom option 
(highlighted) means the profile will sit nicely on top of the SweepShape path 
and not penetrate the leg model.

Chapter 4
[ 153 ]
7.	 Lastly, as we've done in the previous section, we can use Connect and Cut in 
vertex mode with Snaps (S) on to resolve the open endings into quads. The 
result is shown in the next screenshot.
If you add a Turbosmooth modifier with Smoothing Groups ticked on, 
you'll see how the geometry based on a low Spline Interpolation value 
of 1 subdivides iteratively to be much the same as the version with six 
interpolation steps. An example of the final part, using Sweep, is shown in 
\Packt3dsMax\Chapter 04\SweepDemoFinish.max. Since the legs are all 
instances, choosing Leg03 and attaching SweepShape to it merges into all the 
other legs at the same time.
Comparing the Sweep modifier with the 
Loft object
The Sweep modifier is a simplification of the Loft compound object. What Loft offers 
is a way to project geometry between different profiles along the path Spline. So, you 
can have a square shape at one end of the form, for example, and a round shape at 
the other end. The Sweep modifier cannot do this. The Loft modifier—given it can 
blend between profiles—has topology controls, so the user can achieve both the look 
they are after and a good wireframe to work with. A tool related to the Sweep and 
Loft modifiers is the Hose primitive.
1.	 Open the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 04\LoftStart.max. A new 
LoftShape Spline has been added along the underside of Leg03.
2.	 In the Top view, select Profile01, right-click on it, and choose Hide 
Unselected. Press Shift and move a clone off to the side. Set Copy not 
Instance in the Clone Options. Set the Number of Copies value to 2, 
which will give us three profiles to work with.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 154 ]
3.	 Marquee select all three shapes and right-click and press P; this opens the 
Object Properties dialog for the selection. When the dialog pops up, tick 
Show Vertex Ticks, then click on OK. This means that, in the view, you can 
see where the points are for the objects even when you aren't editing them.
4.	 Adjust the point distribution for the shapes as shown in the following 
screenshot. Don't add or remove any points. Since the topology of the Loft 
we'll create from these depends on the vertex structure of the Spline shape, 
differing vertex counts will make the Loft Skin slightly imperfect.
5.	 Using Select by Name (H), select the Spline called LoftShape, and in the 
Command Panel | Create tab 
 | Geometry 
 section expand the roll-out 
currently showing Standard Primitives. There, choose Compound objects. 
Lofts fall in this category because they are made by combining more than 
one object.
6.	 Click on Loft and note that the Creation Method parameters appear below. 
Since you already have the Path component of the Loft selected, click on Get 
Shape. This will allow you to pick one of the profiles. Use Select by Name 
and choose Profile01.
7.	 Switch to Command Panel. Go to the Modify tab 
, and in the Loft 
parameters, set the Path value to 25.0. This moves a marker along the path. 
Click on Get Shape again and this time choose Profile02. Turn off the Get 
Shape button.
8.	 Set the Path value to 75 and click on Get Shape again, and choose 
Profile03, then turn off Get Shape again. You should notice the 
geometry that's generated changes shape according to the profiles 
placed at each path step.
9.	 At present, your Loft will look fairly similar to the Sweep made in the 
previous topic, except the shapes of the profile are slightly different. Even 
this isn't too noticeable if their orientation is bottom-down. We can adjust 
each shape in the Loft at the Spline Sub-Object level (the source) but also 
within the Loft modifier itself. To do so, expand the [+] next to Loft and 
click on the Shape mode.

Chapter 4
[ 155 ]
10.	 Once you are in the Shape mode, you can select, slide, rotate, and scale the 
profiles used by the Loft. Rotate each one 180 degrees and scale them to suit.
11.	 Slide the Shape to 25 percent along the path. Notice that, as it moves, the 
topology of the Loft adjusts. You can further adjust topology for the Loft 
modifier in the Skin Parameters section of the Top-level Loft parameters.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 156 ]
12.	 Drop the Shape Steps value to 0 and the Path Steps value to 2. Like the 
Interpolation value in Splines, these values regulate how dense the mesh 
will be.
Smoothing Groups
When you begin modeling from a primitive such as a Sphere or Cylinder, it has 
preset smoothing groups that make its surface look good. A smoothing group is 
easiest understood as a group of polygons that share the same smooth curvature. 
We'll look at some examples that show models with and without smoothing groups. 
Where you might notice smoothing groups for the first time is when you extrude 
from a round object and notice the extruded polygons look, by contrast, sharp and 
faceted. The other case is when you apply TurboSmooth to an object like a cube and 
it becomes very round. The TurboSmooth modifier includes an option to conserve 
any smooth groups demarcated within the editable poly object's Smoothing 
Groups settings.
This example runs through the process of editing Smoothing Groups manually.
1.	 Reset 3ds Max and go to Create | Standard Primitives | Tube. Drag it out in 
the view, enter Move mode (W), and hold Shift + LMB and drag it to create 
a clone to one side. In the Clone Options, choose Reference. This means 
the copy will share changes with the original, but you can add additional 
modifiers to it that it won't share.

Chapter 4
[ 157 ]
2.	 For the reference of Tube, go to the Command Panel and click on the Modify 
tab and add a TurboSmooth modifier. Select the original Tube and hold Shift 
+ LMB to drag a further reference copy. Add a TurboSmooth modifier to it 
too, but this time, in its parameters, tick on Surface Parameters | Smooth 
Result | Smoothing Groups. An example is provided in the \Packt3dsMax\
Chapter 04\SmoothingGroupsStart.max.
3.	 Make the Height of the original Tube 100, and set the Height Segments to 6.
4.	 Now we need to adjust the model at Sub-Object level, but we can't collapse 
the model to an Editable Poly because this will remove its relationship with 
the reference copies. Instead, add an Edit Poly modifier.
The Edit Poly modifier gives you access to Sub-Object level tools 
on a layer above the base primitive that you can still adjust. An 
alternative approach would be to collapse the primitive to editable 
poly immediately after creation and then produce clones from it.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 158 ]
5.	 For the original Tube, in the Edit Poly modifier, enter the Polygon mode (4) 
and select the polygons shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 In the Modify tab, under the Edit Poly modifier's Edit Polygons section, click 
on Extrude (shown in the previous screenshot), and in the view, push out the 
Tube slightly. If you were to use Extrude Settings, a Height value of about 20 
would be fine.
Notice that for the Smoothing Groups on in the TurboSmooth 
settings, the end of the extruded part is sharp. Here's why: the 
polygons on the end of the extruded part originally belonged to 
the body of the Tube. They had a smoothing group already set. 
The polygons on the sides of the extruded part are new geometry, 
and they aren't assigned any smoothing value.
7.	 You can verify this by clicking a polygon on the side of the Tube and 
scrolling down the parameters of the Edit Poly modifier to find the 
Smoothing Groups section. You will see an array of numbers. Each one 
represents a smoothing group. The extruded faces and the side of the Tube 
both share the smoothing group 2. This is why the number 2 in the array gets 
highlighted blue.

Chapter 4
[ 159 ]
8.	 If you hold Ctrl + LMB on a polygon on the top of the Tube and add it to the 
current selection, the numbers 2 and 3 will go gray. This means that, from the 
current polygon selection, these two smoothing groups are being used, but 
aren't shared equally. The top uses 3 and the sides of the Tube use 2.
9.	 Press Ctrl + D to deselect all, and then click on the sides of the extruded 
part. Notice that no smoothing groups highlight in the array. Where the 
extruded faces are new, they do not have a smoothing group at all. The edges 
bounding these polygons, therefore, are sharp in relation to the polygons 
adjacent to them. The following screenshot indicates how this works, 
where 0 equals no smoothing group:

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 160 ]
10.	 Assign number 2 to the sides of the extrusion. Notice that the extrusion 
becomes soft around its edges. Assign the sides of the extrusion the number 
3. It becomes sharp again. The 3 side is also used by the top of the Tube, but 
those polygons don't touch the current selection.
11.	 What if we wanted to assign a different smoothing group to the original 
sides of the Tube? There's a quick way to do this. First, press Ctrl + LMB on 
the polygons on the front of the extrusion. Once you've done this, select 4 
in the Polygon: Smoothing Groups array to assign those a different value. 
Also, click on 2 to remove them from that group. Polygons can have more 
than one smoothing group assigned, but we don't want that now.
12.	 Having isolated the front-facing polygons by putting them in group 4 instead 
of group 2, we can now press the Select by SG button (below the numbers in 
the array). This exposes a pop up with the available smoothing groups. Press 
2 to select the outer and inner sides of the Tube.
The ticked Clear Selection toggle will clear what you currently have selected, 
but if you want to add to a selection, you can untick it, which can be handy 
when you want to combine two selections into one group.
13.	 Assign the outer and inner walls to Smoothing Group 3, and turn off 2. Then 
press Ctrl + D to deselect all, click on one of the inner wall polygons, and 
hold Shift + LMB on another inner wall polygon to the side of it. This selects a 
poly loop. You can then assign the inner wall to Smoothing Group 1, which is 
so far unused.

Chapter 4
[ 161 ]
Each time you make changes, track the effect on the reference copy whose 
TurboSmooth has Smoothing on and Smoothing Groups on. The other 
reference copy, which doesn't, will not reflect these changes in any way.
14.	 Select the bottom polygons of the Tube and set their Smoothing to SG 2.
It is good to use as few Smoothing Groups as possible, as it gives the geometry 
calculations further down the line less to do. The state of the smoothed model 
above could be represented using just two smoothing groups. Try it out!
A further challenge would be to examine how adjusting Smoothing Groups 
could enhance the spidery vehicle model we've been building throughout the 
previous topics.
The main benefit of modeling with Smoothing Groups active in the Turbosmooth 
modifier above the Editable Poly is that you can selectively sharpen edges without 
adding geometry. A downside is that when you export a model, smoothing groups 
are not maintained from one software to another sometimes. The commonly used 
.fbx and .obj formats have the option to conserve smoothing groups.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 162 ]
In the following screenshot, the left-hand side has more smoothing groups, but the 
effect is overdone.
Generating model forms using Cloth
The Cloth modifier provides a powerful tool for simulating cloth deformation and 
animation. It can also be used to drape static sheets over other objects, such as a 
tarpaulin over a bike. In this section, we'll drape a cloth object over a Spike extending 
from the vehicle body, and in the end convert it to a net using the Lattice modifier.
1.	 Open the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 4\ClothStart.max. A spike has 
been added to the front of the vehicle, using simple extrudes and insets.
2.	 In the Top view of the ground plane, add a Rectangle (Create | Shapes | 
Rectangle) with Length of 80 and Height of 80 and a Corner Radius of 10, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 163 ]
3.	 Add a Garment Maker modifier to the Rectangle object. What this does is 
generate a mesh from it that is constructed from evenly-sized polygons that 
are slightly irregular in distribution. For cloth simulation, this kind of mesh 
is better for folding than a grid-like polygon distribution (though that also 
works). Set the Density of the Garment Maker to 0.4, raising it a little, so the 
mesh is finer. Higher density meshes will calculate slowly, but should yield 
better curvature as they fold.
4.	 Expand the + of the Garment Maker modifier, and click on the Panels 
Sub-Object mode. Now click on the mesh in the view, which will go red 
like an element in an Editable Poly. You can raise it so that it sits just 
above the Spike sticking out from the body of the vehicle, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
It is very important to construct the shape at Position | Z = 0, on the world 
plane, and then move the garment around the scene only in the Panel mode. 
Otherwise, the cloth simulation that comes next will not work.

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 164 ]
A quick digression: work with an Editable Spline if you want to extend 
the garment to have several panels. To create this, right-click on a shape's 
label in the modifier stack and choose Collapse To: Editable Spline. 
Create some new shapes alongside and attach them together. To join them 
we use Seams. For these to work, first select all the vertices of the shape at 
Editable Spline | Vertex level, and right-click and choose Break Vertices 
so all the Segments are unique in regards to each other. Add Garment 
Maker, and set the Density parameter to suit. To make the pieces join, 
use the Seams Sub-Object mode in the Garment Maker modifier. In the 
Seams mode, there is a Create Seam button that lets you associate two 
selected edges that will bind together during a Cloth simulation. Seams 
that are too far apart in the scene may require a higher Seam tolerance 
value to be set in the Garment Maker modifier. Seams will pull together 
during simulation but won't actually join as one surface unless you turn 
off, prior to simulating, Cloth modifier | Simulation Parameters | Use 
Sewing Springs.
5.	 The Garment Maker modifier only surfaces the Spline into a mesh. To start 
actual cloth simulation, add a Cloth modifier. The following steps involve 
setting up the cloth, then simulating it to create a satisfactory drapery or 
"pose" for the cloth object or an animation, if required. The result is shown a 
bit further on, after the Cloth properties are set and the simulation has been 
performed locally.
Setting up the Cloth modifier parameters
Let's see how to set up the Cloth modifier's parameters:
1.	 The first thing to do is click on Object Properties in the Cloth modifier. 
This opens a window where you can set meshes as either Cloth or Collision 
participants. In our case, the Rectangle001 object is the Cloth and the 
Spike will be used for collision. In the Object Properties panel, click on 
Rectangle001 in the list, click on the Cloth radio button, and then select 
a preset from the Cloth Properties | Presets rollout, such as Cotton. The 
presets provide shortcuts to certain stretchiness and friction properties, 
but you can set your own using the values underneath the preset rollout.

Chapter 4
[ 165 ]
2.	 Next, click the Add Objects... button in the left-hand side of the window. 
This lets you include other objects in the simulation. Select Spike in the scene 
and assign it as a collision object, using the Collision Object radio button 
near the bottom of the window. You don't need to change any of the offset 
values in this case, but sometimes you may find there's a gap between cloth 
and collision, and adjusting the Offset or Depth values may help. Press OK 
to close the window.
If you want the Spike to act like a knife, tick on the Cuts 
Cloth checkbox; then, if the garment contacts it, tearing 
will occur along the contacting surface. It'd probably then 
fall through the floor, which would need to be added to the 
Cloth simulation as a collision object too.
3.	 In the modifier parameters, expand Simulation Parameters and set the 
Subsample value to 10. This forces the cloth measurement to calculate for 
changes 10 times per frame. Tick on Self Collisions and Check Intersections 
and set the Self Collisions value to 3. 

Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model
[ 166 ]
4.	 Next, click on Simulate Local. This is for initially draping or posing your 
cloth into a default state. Not many cloth animations begin with a perfectly 
flat panel. Wait until the panel drops down and interacts with the Spike, and 
then click on Simulate Local again to stop the process. This calculation can 
be undone with Ctrl + Z.
Note how that cloth is one-sided. To fix this, use a double-sided material for 
the cloth, or set a regular material to be two-sided in its properties, or apply 
a Shell modifier to it, which will give it thickness, therefore a back and 
front face.
If you want to record the animation of the cloth, especially if the Spike was 
already key-framed to move, you could use the Simulate button below 
Simulate Local. To remove an already simulated animation, click on Erase 
Simulation below Simulate. To remove everything after the current frame, 
press Truncate.
5.	 To get the state of this mesh, you can use Convert to Editable Poly or Tools 
| Snapshot... (which produces a copy of the mesh without destroying the 
original cloth object).
Vertex groups can be used to pin parts of the cloth together during 
animations. This is useful in the case above to stop the top surface from 
coming off the Spike. To set this up is a matter of assigning Vertex Group 
in the Cloth modifier's Sub-Object mode by selecting points in Group mode. 
Click on Make Group in the Group options list, and then tell the group to 
stick to a surface using the Surface option, for example.

Chapter 4
[ 167 ]
Summary
In this chapter we used modifiers for both modeling new objects and altering 
existing ones. We initially dealt with polygon loops and soft modeling, in 
contrast with the hard surface approach in the previous chapter, which gave 
us our base model.
In the first chapter, I raised the idea that what seemed tricky at first would 
quickly become second nature. By now, in terms of that idea, you should feel 
really at home in different Sub-Object modes, comfortable deriving geometry from 
Shapes, and understand the smoothing structure of polygons. Hopefully, you'll 
recognize that most modifiers, in terms of the stack and their parameters, use a 
very similar interface. You may notice that even in the Help contents the layout for 
UI information, procedures, and interface breakdown always follows a consistent 
format, making it easier to flip through newly discovered tools.
In the following chapters, we will focus more on enhanced working methods rather 
than, as has been the case so far, on essential modeling processes.


The Language of Machines: 
Designing and Building 
Model Components
This chapter demonstrates the usefulness of developing an internal library or 
vocabulary of visual memes for your tech, mech, and hard surface models. It is very 
difficult to make a fictional model of a man-made object without some familiarity 
with how real man-made objects get their look, especially in terms of fabricated 
or manufactured detail. In this chapter we'll analyze some prevalent ideas about 
depicting "sci-fi" tech along with time-saving methods for constructing parts to 
reference in models.
These are the topics covered in the chapter:
•	
A visual language for science fiction machinery
•	
Spare parts
•	
A Greeble factory
•	
From primitive origins...
•	
…Into outer space
•	
A star ship construction walk through

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 170 ]
A visual language for science fiction 
machinery
What design challenges do concept artists confront while planning game vehicles or 
machinery or technology art? It is practical to first consider the tropes and memes of 
art language, its symbols and icons, and its common threads across work.
In this case, what matters is to establish some of the givens, the things you always 
come up against when you try to make a vehicle or spaceship or robot for a game. 
The base idea is that there have already been a lot of these in games, films, comics, 
and books. Therefore, everyone can almost automatically identify certain design 
elements as being more or less appropriate. At least, it is easier to do this when you 
are viewing an artwork – it's not so easy when you have to make the artwork. It is 
possible to break from convention, but with caution. Usually doing so meets with 
the most success when you thoroughly understand the conventions and expectations 
people have.
Most non-specialists don't understand the engineering or manufacturing processes 
of a machine when they look at it, but seeing machines throughout their lives gives 
them a chance to build assumptions about how machines generally should look and 
how a machine should behave. Assumptions evolve too; a PC from the 1980s seems a 
lot more primitive than one from 2012, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 171 ]
Processes and materials of manufacture change, and style follows along with that. 
For instance, in the movies most spaceships have massive rockets on the backend, 
since, from the 1960s, space launch has depended totally on rockets. This year, 
one of the surprising turn ups is teenager Aisha Mustafa from Egypt patenting a 
fuel-less space propulsion method using shaped silicon plates. Possibly what we 
can take from this is that, with regards to technology, while engineering trumps art, 
sufficient visual styling and familiar cues in the art are often enough to orient the 
viewer, but you have to be sensitive to the audience's increasingly savvy "genre kit".
By and large, artists (at least those who want to do vehicles and mech) should 
examine not only existing visual cues in examples from their favorite artists, but 
tropes from engineering and machinery design. Getting out with a camera to collect 
photographic reference of industrially manufactured components is a good start. 
Failing that, tailor your Internet image searches to trawl for tech references. The 
following screenshot is a spaceship orthographic. Along the bottom, I've isolated 
details that indicate some memes of the machine language one tends to see in a 
spaceship model, such as cut-lines, cavities, radial extrusions, mountings, exhaust 
vents, rails, trimmings, and arrays.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 172 ]
Machinery comes in different scales. For example, a panel useful on the side of a boat 
featuring rows of rivets and bolts would not be of much good use for the side of a 
massive orbital space station, as the rivets would be conspicuously out of scale.
In the next section we'll start to examine some of these memes in isolation, to 
start building a library of 'components' that could form the surface detail of 
some machinery.
Spare parts
This topic shows the progression from a 2D graphic component to a 3D component:
1.	 Open the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 5\ShapeLibrary.max. This scene 
shows a set of simple radial forms that could be distributed as components 
on a large model. This kind of presentation imitates sculptors' studies of ears 
and noses presented in an array, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 We'll make some additions using Photoshop's Square Brush in the Default 
Brushes as the motif. Let's start from the idea that most manufactured details 
could first be represented by black and white 2D graphic motifs, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 173 ]
3.	 The first pass on the left-hand side establishes some base shapes. These could 
be interpreted many ways into volumes. Add finer lines over copies to give 
them an additional punch. Duplicate, flip, and overlap selections to generate 
more forms. While doing this kind of built-up you will very likely get some 
fresh alternative ideas. One reason to take this approach is its simplicity 
leads to speed, so you have the chance to try out the tangents you dream 
up as you go.
4.	 Key highlights and cast shadows would enhance the sense of volume for 
the motif. To add these, on a new layer, use 50% transparent gray to reduce 
the whites. Then add another layer on top, and paint highlights with white 
and shadows with black. Gradients masked by selections that are faintly 
washed over the surface will intensify the effect, as indicated in the following 
screenshot, albeit loosely. Obviously it is possible to labor over such work 
endlessly, but we want to move on quickly to modeling the forms:

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 174 ]
5.	 For the circular forms shown in the source file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 5\
ShapeLibrary.max a Circle shape was the starting point for all the examples. 
This time, instead, let's use a ring-shaped cavity in a quarter cylinder, so we 
can wrap the detailing around it using Symmetry later.
6.	 In a new scene, create a quarter cylinder, first starting with a Cylinder 
primitive with 20 Sides, 1 Height Segment, and 1 Cap Segment as well. 
Probably the fastest way to get the quartered form, apart from using the 
parametric Slice On option built into the Cylinder primitive, is to delete 
polygons after converting to Editable Poly, then Cap and Connect the 
open edges, as shown in the following screenshot on the left-hand side:
7.	 Also trim in some additional loops using SwiftLoop, as shown in the 
previous screenshot on the right-hand side.
8.	 Now we'll push the center polygon loop inwards, around the outside 
curve of the object. To do so, delete the polygons shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 175 ]
9.	 Select the top and bottom edges of the part bordering the opened hole, and 
Shift + Scale them inside (refer to left-hand side in the following screenshot), 
then click on Bridge polygons ( right-hand side in the following screenshot):

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 176 ]
10.	  Don't cap the small holes on either side of the bridge. Instead, line them up 
in the top view with the straight sides of the Cylinder.
11.	 Delete the straight side of the Cylinder. This is so we can apply Symmetry to 
the object without having to worry about internally overlapping polygons, 
which sit along the mirror line.

Chapter 5
[ 177 ]
12.	 That may seem like a lot of steps to get a starting point, but it takes under a 
minute. If you want to start from here, load up from \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 
5\ the scene SquareBrushShapes.max.
13.	 There are probably other ways to achieve the same result by doing the steps 
in another order, for instance, starting from a Cylinder primitive with its 
Height Segments set to 5. Then just move and scale the existing edge loops 
and delete the quarters after getting the extrusion inwards right. You could 
even start by making the object profile with a Spline shape and add a Lathe 
modifier on it, with an angle of 90 degrees to create the quarter pipe.
For the way that was shown here, note that the "delete faces and bridge" 
operation we performed makes nice Smoothing Groups ( left-hand side in 
the following screenshot) compared to the same model made by just pushing 
edges inwards (right-hand side). It's a minor distinction, however. In any 
case, we now have a quarter pipe we can build our shapes on.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 178 ]
14.	 To start building the detail on the side of the Cylinder, we can apply the 
image guide as a texture on the surface. So it maps correctly, select the faces 
in the middle of the cylinder and apply an UnwrapUVW modifier, and 
then enter Face mode (3) and click on Planar Map (shown in the following 
screenshot) in the modifier's Projection parameters. This fits the selected 
polygons to the UV square.
15.	 In the scene, open the Material Editor (M) and apply an Autodesk 
Generic material named Base to the entire Cylinder model. Create 
another Autodesk Generic material, this time with \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 
5\SquareBrushRef_01.png as a bitmap in the material's Generic_Image 
channel.
16.	 Assign it to the selected faces as shown in the following screenshot. 
Right-click on the material and choose Show Realistic Material in View.

Chapter 5
[ 179 ]
17.	 Close the Material Editor, and in the Edit menu click on Hold (Ctrl + H). 
This saves a temporary, holding version of your scene. If you need to 
recover it later, press Alt + Ctrl + F or go to Edit | Fetch.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 180 ]
18.	 Zoom into the imagery sitting on the middle of the Cylinder. To build this 
shape out from the model, we can save some time by splitting an edge 
sideways through the middle and just work on half of it. After adding the 
edge, just delete the bottom half of the model. Later, we can add back the 
content and the new detail using Symmetry in Z.
19.	 Start to use the Cut tool to create the outline of the reference image on the 
model. Take care to use as few cuts as possible to represent the contour. 
Watch out for cuts that are close to an existing edge. It may be better to move 
an existing edge than introduce a new edge too close to one that is already 
there. Be aware that as you cut, the added points are automatically mapped 
in UV space based on the current mapping, so moving them around will 
stretch the image. You can turn on Preserve UVs to allow vertices to be 
moved without distorting the texture. If you make a mistake, it's better 
to add new edges and remove old ones than wiggle the edges around.

Chapter 5
[ 181 ]
20.	 Make sure that on either side of the model the vertical points added are at the 
same Z position, as shown in the following screenshot. This is done to ensure 
they'll line up when the model is mirrored later.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 182 ]
21.	 At the top, add end corners in the Vertex mode (1) using Cut so the 
additional edges filter nicely into the main object body, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
22.	 Select the polygons that make up the reference image's shape and right-click 
and choose Extrude Settings. In the settings, set Local as the method, and 
2.5 as the Height amount, then press Enter.

Chapter 5
[ 183 ]
23.	 Here and there you may have to adjust corners on the extrude so they are 
neater. After this, you would delete the polygons along the bottom-most 
edge and on the outer sides. You'd also need to delete the four polygons 
which touch the top part, where they rub against other polygons. The 
corners, at the top, can be closed with Target Weld.
24.	 After the extrusion is tidied, you'll be less dependent on the reference image 
being on the model. You can apply the Autodesk Generic Base material to 
the entire model now from the Material Editor (M).
25.	 Keep the reference handy though, since we still need to chamfer the extruded 
edges and make sure the middle part extrudes out more than the sides.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 184 ]
26.	 To chamfer the edges for longer middle extrusion is probably not as difficult 
as doing so along the two sides. When you use Chamfer on a corner it splits, 
and you will need to use Target Weld in many cases to rebuild the corner 
again. An alternative approach to using Chamfer would be to use Inset 
and then Scale the polygons. An Inset and Scale is shown in the following 
screenshot. The Inset amount that you can set will be limited by the angles 
of the polygon selection, particularly in the small corners. If you overdo it, 
they'll crunch together.
27.	 Where the beveled part of the sides touch the inner beveled part, you can cut 
edges to enable you to close the angular gap so they butte together nicely. 
After cutting in a support edge, delete the faces, then Target Weld to close 
the gap, as indicated in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 185 ]
28.	 Do the same at the bottom of the mesh. After that, the rest of what's required 
would only involve slight clean-up transforms. Here and there you may 
notice square polygons with triangular shading. A fix for this is to select 
the polygons, right-click and choose Make Planar in the Quad Menu 
( \Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\PacktUI.ui) or in the modify panel under 
Edit Geometry. Also, you'll probably see ways to start removing edges from 
the form without changing its overall shape, to be more optimal.
29.	 When you apply Symmetry to the result, remember the Mirror line will be at 
Z = 0 and you can get the Z value of the bottom edge of the model and set the 
Mirror line there in Symmetry | Mirror sub-object mode. Then you can add 
additional Symmetry modifiers in X and Y to complete the cylinder.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 186 ]
An example of the finished modeling is provided in \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 5\
SquareBrushDetailCompleted.max.
A Greeble factory
A lot of fictional technology modeling, particularly on a large scale, would take 
months to make if each detail was unique, followed an engineer's logic, and had 
some underlying function. Sometimes it's more satisfying to generate some random 
detail in the surface, using a script or scatter tool.
Greeble, a term which comes from physical prop modeling, is where various 
components, or nurnies, are jumbled on a surface to create an illusion of complexity 
from random aggregation of the parts. The Death Star in Star Wars is possibly the 
most well known example of an object almost entirely composed of Greeble. Often, 
physical modelers will use model kit parts such as tank treads, or wheels, and 
even the spars of kit plastic that form the scaffold holding the actual model. This is 
known as kitbashing. If you search for "Greeble" on Google images, you'll see many 
examples of complex surfaces made from simple but dense distributed components. 
A lot of city generation programs are based on the idea of targeted greeble, where the 
nurnies are derived from a library of buildings or architectural objects, with clever 
scattering parameters so they don't form strange effects. There is a free plugin for 3ds 
Max called Ghost Town Lite (http://www.kilad.net/GTForum) that works that way. 
A professional city generator with a plugin interface to 3ds Max is City Engine from 
www.procedural.com. If you are bothered to create an entire city at all it is probably 
worthwhile, given the time investment, to go for the commercial tools. However, 
for pure Greeble, on the lighter side, there is a satisfying script called Greeble from 
Klanky the Robot at http://max.klanky.com/plugins.htm.
Getting started with Greeble
In the following section we'll cover the basics of constructing surface Greeble:
1.	 Download the Greeble plugin for your 3ds Max version, and extract to any 
folder. There may be two variants (32-bit or 64-bit). Paste the one you need 
to your C:\Program Files\Autodesk\3ds Max 2013\plugins folder. Then 
launch 3ds Max.
2.	 Add a Tube primitive to the scene with the following parameters: Radius 1 
= 75, Radius 2 = 35, Height = 45, Height Segments = 1. The rest can be left at 
their default values.

Chapter 5
[ 187 ]
3.	 Add the newly added modifier Greeble to the Tube. You'll get some default 
Greeble, just like that, which can then be further adjusted. Let's step back 
and consider how we want the Greeble to work. Deactivate the modifier or 
ensure Show End Result is turned off in the modify panel options.
4.	 Add an Edit Poly modifier above the base Tube primitive, and at Edge level 
(2) add two SwiftLoop edge loops around the inner radius, just under the 
top and above the base.
5.	 Add a PolySelect modifier, and press Ctrl + Shift in polygon mode to loop 
select the inner ring, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Now go back to the Greeble modifier, on top of all that. The first thing to 
understand is that there is a base per-polygon Panels extrusion going on in 
the modifier, and then its Widgets or nurnies are applied to the extrusion. 
Hopefully the next steps show why this matters – the details are applied to 
all new surfaces, even sideways.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 188 ]
7.	 In the modifier parameters, turn off Widgets via the Generate checkbox 
temporarily. Set the Panels values as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 You should see something like the following screenshot, though the random 
Seed value will always produce different results:
9.	 Set the Widgets section as shown in the following screenshot. Obviously, 
there is a lot of scope for settings to be done. This is up to you, however 
you prefer.

Chapter 5
[ 189 ]
10.	 Added Greeble will only face inwards, but you can select the sides and the 
tops of the panels (and the sides and tops of the Greeble) in order to apply 
different materials to them easily when you apply an Edit Poly modifier on 
top of the Greeble modifier and assign the selected faces to Material ID 3. 
This will let you add a Multi-SubObject Material with, for instance, three 
materials within it for use by the Material ID 1 (tube) and Material ID 2 
(sides) and Material ID 3 (tops) polygon groups on the object. The 'tops' in 
this image face inwards and are blue tinted. The "sides" are tinted orange, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
11.	 Add a TurboSmooth modifier and turn on Smooth By | Smoothing Groups 
to round off the Tube sides.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 190 ]
12.	 Finally, you can add another Greeble modifier to the mesh so far, and set it 
to have finer distribution, for a high frequency noise coating effect, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
The file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 5\GreebleDemoExtension.max shows the 
previous screenshot. The image was rendered using Octane Render from Refractive 
Software (www.refractivesoftware.com). If you have this, the example scene is set 
up in GreebleDemoExtension_Octane.max.
From primitive origins...
When you design a ship it's normal to start with the overall shape or form, and 
then noodle down to details, perhaps dividing the work into sections or functions, 
according to the needs of the story. Think of the movie District 9, with its mothership 
floating in the air above Johannesburg. The overall form is a tube, but in the story 
there's a docking port where humans board to find out what's going on, and a 
drop-ship clamped under it that becomes the escape vehicle in the end, so these 
areas got a lot of extra attention from the designers. These are the notes from a 
concept artist who worked on the drop-ship in District 9: "Bevel all angles", "Many 
subdividing panels", "Body work is thin plates over thicker structure", "Far more 
mechanical structure [visible] in transitions and gaps", shown in The Art of District 9, 
a book by Daniel Falconer of Weta Workshop.
Artists who do a lot of 3D tend to get used to explaining the features of a design in 
terms of the tools that'll be used, like bevels, subdivision, layers, extrusions, loops, 
and cuts.

Chapter 5
[ 191 ]
The following is a list of mechanical keywords that can help to pin down the 
features, and therefore, the look of a ship, which you might use as image 
search terms:
•	
Wire, Cabling, Pipes, Hosing
•	
Cladding, Coatings, and Solar panels
•	
Fans, Vents, Ducts, Intakes, Grilles, Radiators, Exhausts, Turbines, and 
Turrets
•	
Buttons, Drilled holes, Fulcrums, and Hinges
•	
Cut-lines, Rails, Scaffolds, Supports, and Corrugations
•	
Joints, Welds, Covers, Shells, and Flaps
•	
Sockets, Radiators, Connections, and Exposed infrastructure
•	
Roundings, Angles (chamfers), Nodes, and Nacelles
•	
Fins, Flaps, Struts, Beams, Gantries, and Conning towers
•	
Tanks, Valves, Interfaces, Anchor points, Clips, and Indicators
•	
Surface reductions, Form-fitting,  Form-Breaking, Bearings, Cams, and Gears
•	
Radial (bushing), Concentricity (circles), and Seal
•	
Brackets, Housings, Connections, Fasteners, Tools, Magnet, and Coupling
•	
Heat sinks, Pistons, Aerial, Array, Spoiler, Pressure plate, and Landing gear
•	
Suspension, Hollow coils, Geospheres, Dishes, Airlocks, Portholes, 
and Blisters 
•	
Landing pads, Docking bays, and Clamps
It also doesn't hurt to learn some metal shop processes, since the engineers who 
manufacture real machines have a terminology to accurately describe every single 
step of their work. A good starting point is http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Machining.
The next section deals with some approaches to establishing the major forms upon 
which you might design a ship, perhaps via a paint over to set the final look for a 
finishing artist.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 192 ]
Typically I will start from a primitive, such as a horizontal Cylinder, but with the 
goal of quickly building away from its extremely regular shape. To get underway, 
I selected the polygons at one end, as well as some strips of polygons down the 
sides. Then I deleted them and applied a Shell modifier to give the thin surface 
some thickness. I added a Spherify modifier to that with an Amount of 25 or 
so to give the straight edges some curvature.
The result seems to have no apparent scale cue, so it could be built up into a massive 
vessel or a small component. Since we're chasing an entire ship, a paint over would 
provide a good guide at this point, bearing in mind that we already have some mesh 
fragments from earlier topics to play around with too.

Chapter 5
[ 193 ]
As in the following screenshot, arrange in a painting program a few screen grabs 
of representative angles, as that will be a good start for the painting. In this case I 
chose the top, side, and the internal part of the object. I figured the front, being a big 
disk, could remain relatively flat. It can be good to render out the object with proper 
lighting, since the viewport lighting tends to give us very dark internal shading, 
which is hard to detail. A renderer would tend to fill the shadows with indirect 
light so we can see every part.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 194 ]
The next stage is to start layering in brush strokes in Photoshop. Most of the time it is 
a good idea to start from the larger surfaces, and think of adding only the forms that 
change the look of the object. Details can come in later. The other important starting 
consideration is to think of what kind of look you might be after, and what kind of 
purpose the ship might have. I really wanted to put engines on the internal disk, 
shielded by the body of the craft. I wanted to use existing loops to guide other edges, 
and have many panels or armor plates to vary the hull thickness. I also thought that 
perhaps the lower part might be dockable with another curved vessel, perhaps a 
habitat, and they'd fit snugly together. I recall Arthur C. Clarke's story The Songs 
of Distant Earth, where the ship requires a bore of ice fitted on the front to absorb 
cosmic dust, so I left the front flat. The key step when adding detail is to think a bit 
about how it might be modeled later on.

Chapter 5
[ 195 ]
The provided content has the layered file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 5\
ShipPaintOver.psd. It's included so you can see the build-up is really 
straightforward. I just used one brush, working at first large size (marker pen), and 
then fine (0.1mm pen) for outlines. I sampled most of the color from the tones that 
came from the 3ds Max screen grab. While painting I was pretty sure that the side 
view would inform most of the upcoming modeling. A lot of details are suggestive. 
Even if the painting doesn't exactly capture the look of the ship, the familiarity with 
the features that you'll get from doing a paint over will help get you close to that 
goal. On a project when the model is constructed up to the level we're going to next, 
an art director would likely do another paint over pass to refine the detail and cues 
to any improvements.
…Into outer space
A particularly undetailed part of my painting is a band going around the top of the 
ship's inside. I didn't detail it much as I already had that part made, from the topic 
earlier in this chapter where we took a 2D shape and made some detailing with it 
on a Cylinder. Duplicated to form a beam, and bent to fit the hull curve, this sits in 
there nicely.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 196 ]
So we can already see an application of some of what's gone before. Similar steps 
could be used to generate a lot of the rest of the detail in the ship. Before getting into 
the details, we need to analyze additional pieces to add, and analyze the larger forms 
to establish those early. It'll involve processes we've already covered, such as adding 
edge loops, cutting, extruding and doing insets. The following screenshots show 
the major steps. You can track the file increments in the working files folder 
\Packt3dsMax\Chapter 5\3dsMax Scenes\Scene Increments.
Here's something we need to avoid doing! If you have your model 
sitting there with TurboSmooth turned on, and Isoline Display is on in 
its parameters, it looks pretty nice, right? So long as you don't collapse 
it to Editable Poly with Isoline Display active. If you do, you'll get 
every single edge segmented with a stray point, or more if you had the 
TurboSmooth subdivision iterations high. This makes it really difficult to 
edit the model, so best turn off TurboSmooth when you collapse down. If 
you want to keep the subdivisions when you collapse, be sure to turn off 
Isoline Display in the modifier parameters.
What follows is an illustrated breakdown of the modeling process for the ship. 
The essential steps that I followed during the modeling task included these notes:
Break the image into sections to work on in isolation before modeling; it may help if 
you identify the function or purpose of each section. Try to find a focal point in the 
design that you expect the viewer will be most likely to watch, and take extra care 
with that area.
Set milestones for each section so you don't overwork one part at the expense of 
other parts; estimate if the first milestone has a day to complete, then how long the 
rest will take based on that.

Chapter 5
[ 197 ]
When attaching parts made separately to the ship hull, build-in supporting edges on 
the hull that will make joining the part on tidy and easy. A circle fits in a square.
When building circles, create a frame of edges to confine it, and favor fewer polygons 
over perfect curves; the circle can always be refined later, as it is harder to edit high 
resolution curves. From the Shape | Splines object list, use a Circle as a guide to the 
polygon circle you want to build.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 198 ]
Look for sections that will be duplicated; manage the border so it is easy to clone off, 
translate, and rejoin elsewhere.
Mark key edge loops with a distinctly different material:
Work on large features first, and leave small details till the end, and decide what 
details could be painted or sculpted and then applied as a texture. In the following 
screenshot, there's still a lot of large, flat, empty space, which could be detailed via 
texture painting.

Chapter 5
[ 199 ]
Do your utmost to keep to the design, but be ready to let it evolve if that's required 
or if it helps the end result – commercially, you'd only go for changes with proper 
approvals. In this case, with the front of the ship, the first idea was to keep it flat or 
cover it with ice, but instead I added a large "particle detector" array. Maybe it helps 
fuel the engines.
Keep turning the model and checking proportion; save view bookmarks for the 
area you are working on using the Home function. A nice, quick way to adjust 
proportions is to select points and apply an FFD 3x3x3 modifier, and then tease 
the control points, as shown in the following screenshot:

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 200 ]
Leave asymmetrical detail to last if your basic model form can leverage symmetry. 
The following screenshot shows the tail detail and the row of blocks under the 
front boosters that have been deliberately left off the model. It can be added once 
the symmetrical part is done. They might even be added as additional models, 
detachable and modular.
Work hard to keep the symmetrical border at 0 and absolutely straight. You can use 
Align | Align X in the Graphite Modeling Tools to do this. Make sure the Mirror 
line is placed at X = 0 as well. Take particular care with Extrusion operations on the 
symmetry line.
Save the scene incrementally so that if a file corrupts or a mistake is made you can 
revert back – this ship has 50 example files showing the workflow. You can set in the 
preferences to automatically save incrementally under Customize | Preferences in 
the Files tab by ticking on Increment of Save. Then each time you press Ctrl + S, 
a new file is created with a 01, 02, 03... enumeration.
Don't do overlong renders of the unfinished model, hoping the rendered lighting 
will improve the look of the viewport shading – it's a creature comfort to render, 
and wastes a lot of time.
You can view a turntable render of the completed untextured model at 
http://youtu.be/Jq9DOo1CMfY?hd=1.
The notes we've just been through show the ship in a state near completion, at least 
the base, symmetrical part. Let's rewind to where we started, from a chopped-up 
Cylinder, the state at which the concept painting was done.

Chapter 5
[ 201 ]
The following screenshot is the next step from there. It has a Symmetry applied, 
which will remain throughout. The holes through the top are added using Bridge 
on a polygon selection, and fortified with supporting loops using SwiftLoop.
A TurboSmooth modifer has been added here temporarily. This gives a quick sense 
of direction, and it can also be used to look for problems with overlapping vertex 
problems (which sometimes occur when using the Cut tool to add edges, even 
with Snap turned on). It's really not common but given hundreds of operations 
are performed, a few slips can pass by that should be checked for.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 202 ]
There are a lot of ways to expose point-over-point mistakes, and looking at the 
topology with TurboSmooth on is one since the points relax apart. Frequently, the 
problem is shown if you select a poly loop and it doesn't select around the loop as far 
as you'd think it would. At the end of modeling, I use the Select By Numeric | >4 
(polygons with greater than four vertices) in the Ribbon tool to look for point-over-
point errors. This is found in the Selection tab of the Ribbon when in Polygon 
Sub-Object mode (4).
When cutting, if the operation doesn't work, there's a chance you're trying to snap 
to overlapping points. To perform a cut accurately, turn on Vertex Snap (S) or use 
Connect with two points instead of Cut. Generally, I fix overlapping points by 
wiggling one out of the way and using Target Weld to click from one to the other, 
which joins them visibly. You can also use the Weld tool with all the points selected, 
but there's less visual feedback.
Pressing 7 shows onscreen statistics, so you track polygon count. If you click on [+] | 
Configure Views, in the Statistics tab you can set either the Total for the entire scene 
or for the selected object, or both.
You can watch the statistics (7) for feedback when welding, or look at the stats in the 
modifier panel under Selection. The caddy also shows the before and after vertex 
count if you choose Weld Settings, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 203 ]
A very useful modifier to apply as a check for problems is the STL Check modifier, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
The STL Check modifier can check for four types of problems. The first is Open 
Edge cases. Looking for this is not necessary since you can just press Ctrl + A in 
Borders mode. The model's symmetry line is usually an open edge, and some models 
are meant to have open edges here and there, such as around the cuffs of clothes or 
around the back of eyeballs. The second problem STL Check finds is Double Face 
cases. Double Face is where two polygons coexist, facing the same way. It's hard to 
spot by eye. To use this mode, in the STL Check modifier click on the Double Face 
radio button in the Errors panel and the Select Faces radio button in the Selections 
panel, and then tick Check. You'll see a counter process to 100 percent and then a 
report in the Status area.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 204 ]
If there are errors, convert the model to Editable Poly, and those faces causing the 
problem will be automatically selected and you can troubleshoot them.
A Double Face problem can be fixed easiest by deleting the polygons in question, 
checking the border to fill, and choosing Cap Borders from the Quad menu, then 
Connect Vertices if you had to rebuild the quads on an N-gon. In the following 
screenshot, the left selection is actually a polygon, even though it looks like an edge. 
A polygon that is ultra-thin is as bad as an overlapping polygon. On the right-hand 
side of the following screenshot, notice that the two polygons selected do not have a 
nice red border all the way round, which is another sign of the problem:
If those polygons are deleted, we're left with the ultra-thin polygon, shown selected 
in the following screenshot on the left-hand side. It's not too hard to select and 
delete, but it is hard to spot sometimes because of what may show behind it. After 
we delete the extra face, and cap the borders, and redo the connecting edge, the face 
selection shows a better-looking boundary, shown in the following screenshot on the 
right-hand side. By the way, if you're not seeing solid shaded polygons, you can set 
this in the [+] | Viewport Configuration dialog, by ticking Shade Selected.

Chapter 5
[ 205 ]
Going back to the STL Check modifier, the third error type we can check for is a 
Spike. Spikes are isolated faces that share only one edge with the rest of the object. 
The fourth error type to check for with STL Check is the Multiple Edge case, 
where you might have edges connected across each other, in parallel but not far 
apart enough to see. Once exposed by the modifier, wiggling the points in the edge 
selection will generally reveal the bad vertices you should dissolve out using Target 
Weld. You can also use the Remove command.
Why is it called STL Check? The term STL is an abbreviation for 
Standard Tessellation Language, a file format that describes only the 
surface of an object and is native to the stereolithography CAD tool by 
3D Systems. It is an Autodesk partner company founded by Chuck Hall 
in 1986 that produced the first rapid prototyping system, which didn't 
require tooling (instead they used a slice-based 3D printing method). 
Some people refer to StL instead of STL, thinking of stereolithography. 
Solid modeling requires fairly tight specifications, in particular to 
be free of the errors the STL modifier detects. Check out the URL 
http://www.3dsystems.com.
Suppose you select a Border and the Border has edges extending from it into the 
surface of the object, as shown in the top frame of the following screenshot. There's 
a good chance you have an overlapping polygon or an unwelded edge. This is best 
fixed by deleting faces and rebuilding the surface. One way to rebuild the surface is 
to hold Shift and move an edge selection, which extrudes a new polygon, and then 
Target Weld its corners. This manual fallback is useful when a Cap operation would 
be tricky, such as when you have a polygon island enclosed by a circular hole.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 206 ]
In the following screenshot the problem face is shown selected in the middle 
frame – the thin red line by the arrow is a polygon without surface area:
We've spent some of our time raising potential problems and suggesting solutions. 
With that resolved, let's get back to the build-up of the spaceship.
A star ship construction walk-through
The following screenshot shows the addition of large form changes and chamfers on 
the tail and some cutting away of the initial primitive, marked by arrows. A drum on 
the side of the tail has been added and marked with yellow poly-loops.

Chapter 5
[ 207 ]
An Extrude outward and inward helps build the hull. Poly-loops help mark 
key areas.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 208 ]
The selected polygons in the following screenshot are where the ship airlock will 
project out. It's good to shape the area where an Extrude will be added so it fits 
well into what surrounds it.
And here's the airlock, as shown in the following screenshot. Its shape is easy to 
make using Extrude, Chamfer, Inset, and Cut, the most common tools we've 
looked at so far.

Chapter 5
[ 209 ]
Similarly, it requires just a series of Extrude and Inset steps to add the panels on top 
of the hull. These are on the center line, so the new polygons facing the Mirror line 
should be removed and lined up to X = 0.0.
The following screenshot shows a close up of the lower edge of the hull, where the 
corner requires more detail:

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 210 ]
Below this we add a similar form change. About now you'll be noticing a lot of 
triangles in the structure. While worrying about the form build-up, I don't really pay 
that much attention to topology (at least not with big triangles – I'll avoid long, thin 
triangles, and N-gons at all times), preferring to check back over the model later in a 
separate "make quads" pass since it can waste time to fix up topology on the fly as it 
might need changing every step of the way as more features are added.
Next, the design requires an extrusion inwards at a 45 degree angle. Also, the 
panels on the lower part of the hull, being the same, are placed using Detach to 
Element and then welded back into the main element, which was touched upon 
earlier in the chapter.

Chapter 5
[ 211 ]
I mentioned avoiding triangles. Let's look at that more closely. Sometimes 
triangles help avoid polygons that have concave angles, like the one in the 
following screenshot:

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 212 ]
The computer will add triangles automatically at render time, but it might add 
the middle triangle from the left corner to the top corner, which would cross the 
middle corner (the concave one) creating an apparent glitch, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
An edge from the middle to the bottom corner wouldn't be a problem at all, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
We could improve on things though by removing the middle edge, as shown in the 
following screenshot, then choose ConnectEdgesOptions:

Chapter 5
[ 213 ]
This lets us create quads, as shown in the following screenshot. Scaling the result, 
with the Face radio button turned on in the Constraints dialog will ensure the 
transformed edges don't affect the surface itself. They'll merely slide around 
on the surface:

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 214 ]
During the ship modeling run through we're constantly highlighting possible 
mistakes and fixes. If you model with a "model step, check step, and fix step" 
ethos, then you'll likely end up making fewer mistakes.
Moving on, the tail of the ship has a repeated "V" motif with horizontal lines across 
it, as shown in the following screenshot:
After noticing it has too many horizontal lines, I went back and matched the design, 
which only has three lines, and then repeated it. It's better to make sure a detail, 
which you'll clone is correct before reproducing it.

Chapter 5
[ 215 ]
Here is the flip-side of the tail detail. The Inset and Extrude inwards is built within a 
2 x 2 grid, as shown in the following screenshot:
Around the curves of the inset are some bunches of triangles, which are redirected 
into quads in the following example. Bear in mind there's a trade off between 
keeping all quads and keeping the polygon count low.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 216 ]
The next part of the ship to add is a large form at the bottom of the hull sides, which 
features spars, possibly gantry clamps that fix to another vessel.
At the bottom, an inset is added where the spars will project down, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 217 ]
A separate floating panel is fixed in the corner of the bottom of the hull. Its outline 
fits into the other shapes, and its surface includes a curved cut-line at 45 degrees, and 
the flow of edges accordingly supports this, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the hull cavity, a cylindrical shape, made separately, is attached via bridging 
borders, as shown in the following screenshot:

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 218 ]
An Extrude on the center line starts off the construction of the engine supports, 
slightly offset from the bulk of the hull, as shown in the following screenshot:
The engine support extends from the top of the hull to the backplate, all done with 
the Extrude and Bridge tools.

Chapter 5
[ 219 ]
On top of this sit boosters (or possibly engine exhausts). These are separate objects, 
and not joined to the ship. They are symmetrical, so first a half cylinder was built, 
then mirrored, and this produced the side one for free.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 220 ]
The following screenshot is the underside of the ship, showing most of the features. 
The second banded tube eventually was thrown out because it contains a lot of detail 
and this seemed to be an overload in such a small area:
The following screenshot shows the bottom of the hull, where "escape pods" will be 
positioned along the curve. The arrows indicate where one piece, a kind of frame 
that the "escape pod" connects to, is defined and reproduced as a new element and 
then attached back on.

Chapter 5
[ 221 ]
The "escape pods" are clones, but each one has to be attached back onto the model, 
so it is helpful that each point of joining is also a cloned part.

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 222 ]
The top section of the ship, at the back, has a series of insets that form an interlocking 
pattern, as shown in the following screenshot. These needed repositioning and the 
Edit Geometry | Constraints | Face and Constraints | Edge options helped a lot 
with that, as the overall surface they sit on is curved.
It can be hard to tell what constraint is active if the modifier panel for the Editable 
Poly isn't exposed, and also a little annoying to mouse over to the radio buttons to 
make changes time after time. It's possible to assign hotkeys like Shift + N = None 
for the Sub-Object transforms, as shown in the following screenshot according to the 
settings in Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\PacktUi.ui:

Chapter 5
[ 223 ]
By now, the modeling methods used in the ship are visibly repetitive. The following 
screenshot shows a familiar cloning of an element, the production of a circle within 
a square, the framing of an extrusion using supporting edges, and the tightening of 
sharp edges with extra loops:
For the circle polygons, additional resolution was added by selecting them and then 
clicking on Meshsmooth in the Editable Poly menu (not the Meshsmooth modifier). 
This subdivides the selection and creates triangles around the border, but those 
could easily be cleared up into quads, as shown in the following screenshot:

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 224 ]
Again, we have a detail that is extracted to a cloned element, but this time it is 
flipped before it is attached again.
These last few screenshots show the concept art alongside angles on the finished base 
model, starting with the top. Remember, details can be painted or sculpted using a 
program such as Pixologic Zbrush or Autodesk Mudbox, and then reapplied as 
a texture.

Chapter 5
[ 225 ]
The following screenshot is the back view:
The side view is shown next, and that takes us through the modeling process based 
on the concept paint over, up to the point where further detailing could be added 
using textures to contain the polygon budget.
Before beginning that process and exporting to another application, it would be a 
good idea to go through the following checklist:
•	
Looking for redundant edge loops that could be removed
•	
Looking for N-gons and then triangles, and fixing the topology to be quads 
using Select By Numeric | >4 and then <4
•	
UV Mapping (it is probably best to map the model as a half, and then 
separate the coinciding texture mapping afterwards rather than collapsing 
the model to an Editable Poly and then unwrap it as a whole)
•	
STL Check (also run this if you've dropped symmetry to check the 
mirror weld)
•	
Reset Xform (which I usually do through the menu Edit | Transform 
Toolbox)

The Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components
[ 226 ]
You can view all the modeling steps in the provided content by opening /Packt3ds 
Max/Chapter 5/3dsMax Scenes/Scene Increments/ShipStart01-TheFront.max 
and so on. Compare this with the pass that is all quads Ship_Quads.max in the 
same folder.

Chapter 5
[ 227 ]
Summary
In this chapter we've covered a lot of polygon modeling procedures, common 
problems, and solutions. Now that we have a base model, in the next chapter we'll 
UV Map it for texturing. There are many avenues for texturing, including Photoshop, 
ZBrush and Mudbox, or even Viewport Canvas within 3ds Max.
UV Mapping and texturing can sometimes take longer than the modeling process. 
It's easy to underestimate the time texturing can take.
Probably for a game asset, you don't want a model that is really as complicated as 
this ship, unless it's a core asset or very large. In this case we needed to show some 
design approaches, diverse modeling procedures, and work out where to keep detail 
in the model, and where to hold it off for the texture painting process, which is 
covered in the future chapters.


The Cutting Edge: 
A Closer Look at 3ds Max 
Polygon Tools
This chapter examines newer features related to modeling in 3ds Max 2013 and some 
of the more peripheral modeling tools that are nevertheless really handy to know.
These are the topics covered in the chapter:
•	
New modeling and UI tools in 3ds Max 2013
°°
Camera movement while a Cut operation is live
°°
Customizable Workspaces
°°
Tabbed Layouts
°°
Interoperability with AutoCad
•	
Sub-Object level editing tools via the Ribbon
°°
Edge loops selection and growth
°°
Loop mode and live select mode
°°
Dot selection, growth, and Step selection
°°
Sub-Object editing in Manipulation mode
•	
Joining objects
°°
Creating and cleaning Booleans
°°
ProBooleans

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 230 ]
•	
Ribbon tools
°°
Paint Connect, Vertex, and Distance Connect
°°
Freeform: Shift
°°
Freeform: Optimize
If you are using 3ds Max 2012 throughout this book, you can follow references to 
Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\PacktUI.ui, which is a state of the 3ds Max UI that is 
saved (including hotkeys and Quad menu items). If you are using 3ds Max 2013, a 
different but identical version is used in Packt2013_UI.ui. As this chapter focuses 
on 3ds Max 2013 functionality, the provided scenes are built in the newer version 
and won't open in 3ds Max 2012. However, an .fbx model from the base scene and 
final scene can be imported into older versions. You can find this in the content 
folder of this chapter, at \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 6\FBX\ScalpelStart.fbx.
New modeling and UI features in 3ds Max 
2013
Most of the new features in this version are either to do with continuing the 
effort to legitimate NVIDIA iray as a physically based GPU renderer or with its 
interoperability with other software (in particular, the CAD importing tools and 
After Effects connectivity). The availability of compositing operations in the Slate 
material editor is an interesting addition, especially given After Effects features 
and that there's already been a bundling of Composite with 3ds Max for a couple 
of versions. So for modeling, by contrast, the changes are fairly small, but they are 
in areas where you'll be using the tools very often. These features are supported 
by videos from Autodesk, coupled with brief descriptions, that can be found at 
http://the-area.com/blogs/maxstation/n118_autodesk_3ds_max_2013_new_
features. What follows is my fairly short summation of what may be beneficial 
about those additions or changes.
To start with, a mention has to be made that in the 2013 release you can double-click 
on an edge to select the edge loop to which the edge belongs. You can still use Shift 
+ LMB on an edge beside an edge, or the Loop icon 
 in the Ribbon, or the Loop 
button in the Command Panel. In future it's likely Autodesk will do legacy 
UI clearance.

Chapter 6
[ 231 ]
Camera movement while a Cut operation 
is live
Shifting (or not being able to shift) the camera while cutting is not something that 
ever caused me concern. One of the few times I worked in a studio exclusively 
working with Maya, one of the artists mocked 3ds Max for not including this feature, 
which to me seemed a trivial argument except perhaps that Cut is one of the most 
commonly used, and repeatedly used, modeling tools. Still, Maya didn't get Soft 
Selection until long after 3ds Max did, so the one-upmanship war still rages on, on 
both sides. Luckily, increased interoperability with Maya 2013 is part of what makes 
3ds Max 2013 charming. You may not immediately notice the improved Cut feature, 
as it simply is built into the existing tool, and you can work with it as before, or try 
out moving the camera and notice that the Cut tool will wait for you to resume. 
It even stays live if you adjust the camera while the Cut tool's dotted Pick Line is 
active. This may float in empty space as you orbit or pan the view, but it repositions 
itself so its origin is where you cut from when you stop adjusting the camera. You 
can also move the cursor across two views (say you start in front and jump to left) 
and Pick Line will follow you accordingly.
Customizable Workspaces
In 3ds Max 2013, you have the option of setting up Customizable Workspaces, 
which are like saved states of the UI (such as the position of various toolbars and 
toggled conditions for the Ribbon, Trackbar, Command Panel, and so on). This is 
probably not a feature of immediate benefit to those starting out with 3ds Max, who 
may not yet know which toolbars are best to associate together. For instance, hiding 
the Timeline and Trackbar is great if you are a modeler, but it would quickly lead to 
an unproductive day if you are an animator. If your job has you wearing both hats, 
these Workspace states may become very handy indeed. The Workspaces are set 
and swapped between the top of the 3ds Max UI, within the Quick Access Toolbar, 
which itself is intended to be a way to customize the UI so you can rapidly access 
any tool that can be dragged to it (except it is restricted to Ribbon tools). To make 
a custom Workspace, you save the Workspace with a different name by clicking 
on Save as New Workspace, and then just change the state of the new Workspace 
(moving a panel here, or docking a floating toolbar there) and save it again by 
clicking on Save Default State. 

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 232 ]
The icon  allows you to remove these saved states from the list, and you can 
double-click on existing states to swap between them. You may also tick the 
checkboxes in the Manage Workspaces dialog, according to what features you 
want the custom workspace to influence. For example, you can exclude changes to 
Hotkeys from your Workspace so you can keep a unified set of keys across all the 
different states you store. After loading a Workspace, it may still say Loading... even 
after it is ready to go, as shown in the following screenshot:
Tabbed Layouts
This lets users quickly swap between preconfigured View Layouts, but it seems 
a tax on viewport space. To effectively use presets, set a new Layout preset, then 
designate which particular views you want the Layout to involve (such as Left, 
Front, or Perspective). Those designated views are then stored for that Layout, which 
you can give a unique name. After that, you can create another Layout. Luckily, the 
panel, which takes up about 1 cm to the left of the screen, can be undocked, resized 
(while undocked), and turned off. One tip is to set up a series of similar presets so 
you can use this tool to quickly swap all views at once between shading modes. This 
is because each view preset remembers the settings for shading for each viewport 
involved. In the following screenshot, I set up an "Animation" Layout preset with 
two versions, one Realistic and one Edged Faces.

Chapter 6
[ 233 ]
Once you've created some Layouts, you can delete them one at a time if you 
right-click on each and choose the Delete tab, or (if you have set at the top of the 
screen the toggle Viewport Layout tab) you can manage them by clicking on the icon 
, and then clicking on the pencil icon 
 next to Saved Layout Presets. The interface 
seems to ape the iPad's method of removing unwanted entries from a list, with 
 
icons alongside the entries so you can delete them quicker in series.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 234 ]
A gradient for the viewport background
You may notice the Perspective viewport has been given a gradient, along the lines 
of Mudbox and other Autodesk software. If you don't like this, you can reset to a flat 
background by going to the Views menu and choosing Viewport Configuration, 
then clicking on the Background tab. Here, there are four options for the background 
color, shown in the following screenshot. They include Gradient, Flat Color, 
Environment Background (Color or Image), and an external file (which can be a 
frame sequence).
Interoperability with AutoCad
For modelers with an engineering bent, 3ds Max 2013 includes the Autodesk® 
DirectConnect family of translators, and users can use these to exchange industrial 
design data with other Autodesk CAD products and certain other applications. 
For the files you import or link (Shift + ] opens the File Link Manager), the data is 
imported as native solids objects that can be interactively re-tessellated as needed. 
For a quick primer on native solids, take a look at http://acad-atc.ic.polyu.
edu.hk/native/design1.htm.

Chapter 6
[ 235 ]
Currently, users are required to have Autodesk DirectConnect installed 
before certain file formats can be imported using DirectConnect, such as 
Catia v4 or SolidWorks. DirectConnect comes with 3ds Max 2013, and 
with Maya, Alias, Showcase, and Opticore Studio. If you consult the Help 
menu for DirectConnect, you'll notice lists of supported OS cases for file 
types in various applications.
Once the installation is complete, the screen should look like the following screenshot:

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 236 ]
In the following screenshot, on the right-hand side, is an untessellated 3-way ball 
valve with a mental ray Arch & Design Glossy Plastic material. On the left-hand 
side of the following screenshot is a DWG import of the same model with the same 
material, also untesselated. Note the higher quality of the native solid object, which 
looks visually a lot smoother with better-curved surfaces. The image was rendered 
using NVIDIA iray and the default Daylight system was used for lighting. The 
model, which is free, can be obtained at TraceParts (www.tracepartsonline.net) 
in various CAD formats.
Sub-Object level editing tools via the 
Ribbon
Getting back to regular modeling tools, in this chapter our project is to make a 
realistic scalpel, the kind used by graphic designers to cut out stencils and by 
psychotic surgeons to cut up patients. This project gives us a great chance to look 
in detail at some of the modeling tools we haven't fully covered, in particular the 
Freeform tools, joining objects, and the Snap tools. There is definitely more than one 
way to begin making an object like a scalpel in 3D, and since the tools we're going to 
look at are largely related to finishing the object, we'll start from an existing state 
of the model, assuming that you can find general Editable Poly process in the 
earlier chapters.

Chapter 6
[ 237 ]
Getting started
You can find plenty of reference images in a Google image search; I chose to use 
a number-10 blade and a number-3 handle as these match in the real world. The 
reference images are included in this chapter's content, at \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 
6\Scalpel Reference. As the metal includes lots of extracted form, you can see 
that there is plenty of scope for creating the shape using Booleans, and we'll also be 
looking at edge loop control using Snaps and the Ribbon Freeform tools. So, our 
starting model is the bulky, unextracted form.
Open the file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 6\ScalpelStart.max or import the FBX 
ScalpelStart.fbx. If you import the model, you will need to apply to the Plane 
object a material with the bitmap \Packt3dsMax\Content\Textures\Scalpel_
Complex.png. Then, set Show Realistic Material in Viewport.
Perform the following steps as set up in the sequence shown in the 
following screenshot.
1.	 In A, the polygons on the facing side of a Cylinder at the base of the handle 
are extruded up the handle neck.
2.	 In B, another smaller Cylinder forms the top of the handle and is extruded 
back towards the tapered neck. These end parts are joined using Attach 
and Bridge.
3.	 In C, because the top Cylinder has a curved edge, added edge loops in 
the neck will curve, as shown in the following screenshot. Instead, use 
QuickSlice to chop a straight edge loop through and use Ctrl + Remove 
to remove the curved ones.
4.	 In D, the negative space of the blade will be created via a Boolean subtract, so 
we need to create an object there that is made in the same way as the handle, 
extruding polygons off the side of a Cylinder and fitting them to the image.
5.	 In E, for the blade, a Spline with points that pair off on either side is a good 
starting point. I set the Interpolation value of Spline to 3.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 238 ]
6.	 In F, after applying an Extrude modifier with a value of 0.5 to the Spline, 
I used Connect Edges to add more vertical segments so the straighter top 
edge of the blade would match the curvier cutting edge of the blade.
7.	 In G, the paired-off points on either side of the blade are connected. At 
the tip and base of the blade there are four unconnected points. This is our 
starting point. You can load the file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 6\Scalpel_
DistanceConnect_Start.max or import \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 6\FBX\
Scalpel_DistanceConnect_Start.fbx to follow on from here.

Chapter 6
[ 239 ]
Edge loop selection and growth
As shown in the following screenshot, the object can be analyzed into a few simple 
operations. The handle can be begun as a Cylinder. The image has been saved with 
a gray backdrop, so that in the 3ds Max viewport it is easier to work over when 
applied as a texture on a plane.
Let's start by beveling the sides of the handle. This is a bevel that is much wider at the 
neck of the handle than at the bottom end. Grow the edge loop using the Grow Loop 
icon 
 under Modify Selection in the Ribbon, and then pull in the sides. The loop 
next to it doesn't need to be pulled in, because later that area will be subtracted out.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 240 ]
Loop mode and live select mode
It's important to arrange loops prior to doing a Boolean operation so that joined or 
subtracted sections don't overlap existing edges unnecessarily. In the Ribbon, you 
can find a Loop Mode toggle that allows you to directly select loops, rather than 
double-click (2013) or use Shift + LMB (2012). Loop Mode will stay active until 
toggled off, and in the viewport there will be a HUD notice when it is on.
With the scalpel, we'll be cutting objects out of both the handle and blade, so take 
care arranging the existing edge loops where the changes need to be made. As 
you are matching it to the back plate image, press Alt + X to view the model in 
See-Through mode, a kind of X-ray shading. If that isn't transparent enough, 
go to Object Properties | Visibility and set the value to 0.2 or 0.3, enough 
that you can read the writing on the scalpel handle.

Chapter 6
[ 241 ]
Rather than using SwiftLoop 
 as we've done so far to add segments, in the Ribbon, 
under the Edit tools, use Quickslice  to add edge loops to ensure they are straight. 
This matters because the end of the handle has a curved loop, which would affect 
other loops if you used Connect Edges or SwiftLoop.
Use SwiftLoop while holding Alt to slide currently selected loops along the handle. 
This is not that convenient if you want to shift multiple edges. In that case, it's easier 
to turn on Constraints | Edge in the Editable Poly parameters in the Command 
Panel so that the loops slide when you move it.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 242 ]
You may want to use the Loop Spacing tools to adjust the distribution of segments 
in the loops for the handle. The Center button will place one loop directly between 
two on either side of it.
You can also use live selection to allow you to dynamically step between Vertex 
selection, Edge selection, and Polygon selection, depending on where you place the 
mouse over the object. In the parameters of the model in the Command Panel, you'll 
find the Preview Selection panel, which features SubObj + Multi modes. We might 
use these modes here to quickly swap between edge loop selection and manual 
vertex cutting. Multi selection is the default in some modeling programs, such 
as Blender and Maya, so you may prefer it to be set on all of the time.

Chapter 6
[ 243 ]
Dot selection, growth, and Step selection
Ring selection is used to select edges that flow perpendicularly between two 
edge loops.
Just as edge loops have a Loop Mode toggle 
, edge rings have a Ring Mode toggle 
. You can also Grow 
 and Shrink 
 a Ring, just as you can grow 
 and shrink 
 a Loop.
There are matching tools—Ring + Loop, Dot Ring + Dot Loop, Ring Mode + Loop 
Mode—but there is no Step Ring. StepLoop and Step Mode help you to select 
edges in a loop between two selected edges. While StepLoop defaults to the shortest 
distance, you can specify the longest distance instead by pressing Alt when you click 
on StepLoop 
. For loops, there is also a Fill Hole option 
, where you click within 
a closed loop to select the enclosed area. This works well when you are turning a 
Polygon selection into its edge outline (hold Shift and click on Outline 
 in the 
Modify Selection tab of the Ribbon). The Ribbon provides pop-up guides to 
these tools. I learned to model before some of these tools were introduced, via the 
merged-in Polyboost scripts that preceded the Ribbon, so I don't habitually use all 
of them. I have noticed, however, that students introduced early to these tools will 
adopt them much more readily, and becoming accustomed to them means they 
get the benefit of the added speed and efficiency that these tools were designed 
to enable.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 244 ]
Sub-Object editing in Manipulation mode
These two shift commands don't shift selected Sub-Objects (like Freeform: Shift 
Brush does), but cycle the selection one way or another, basically stepping. If you 
turn on the Manipulation mode 
 while in Edge Sub-Object level (2) for Editable 
Poly, you will see the caddy for these tools; you will also see the Weight and Crease 
tools for edges. Clicking on the icon for Ring Shift 
 turns it to two arrows 
, and 
you can tap either side to move the selection one step over. If you hold Ctrl while 
pressing the same icon, you'll cumulatively step round the ring. The same goes for 
Loop Shift 
. If Soft Selection 
 is enabled, the Manipulation caddy lets you 
adjust Falloff 
, Pinch 
, and Bubble 
 in the view.
For the next step, the text Stainless and numbers are made with Create | Shapes | 
Text, and their Spline Interpolation is reduced to 2, with the Font choice being Arial. 
The larger text Complex was created using a font called Magneto. The real scalpel is 
branded as Simplex, but the font is a bit curvy, and I wasn't sure if I'd be allowed to 
recreate an actual branded product. I chose a font that is still script-like but has some 
straight edges. As shown in the following screenshot, some of the letters overlap, 
which needs to be fixed manually (center image). Then, Refine lets us add extra 
points so that the quads can easily be made when the Extrude modifier is added to 
the text (sketched in the bottom image), generating a polygon mesh that is used to 
Subtract as a Boolean from the scalpel blade. It's true that if you are going to extrude 
text and don't plan to do anything else to it, you don't need to clean it up into quads, 
but as a matter of good habit, the clean up allows you to do so much more after 
you've generated the extruded model, such as chamfer edges, sculpt the surface, 
subdivide and relax it, and and so on.

Chapter 6
[ 245 ]
Once the Complex text is extruded and converted to Editable Poly, the top face will 
need to be subdivided into quads by hand. It's more accurate to join two points 
using Connect Vertex rather than Cut. If you try to Connect across an existing line, 
it doesn't do anything. In the illustration we encounter, the first case is the upright 
of the letter M. There are a few ways to approach this. As we'll see later, Distance 
Connect is an option. Another way to insert a vertex is using Insert Vertex on the 
middle edge in Edge Sub-Object mode, and then Connect through it. Another, 
shown in the following screenshot, is to Quickslice through the object and then 
Target Weld the new points at the ends to the original points, preserving the shape 
but getting the required internal edge quickly. Quickslice 
 is similar to SwiftLoop 
, but lets you place the edge using a pick line in the viewport.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 246 ]
Distance Connect 
 is easiest to use when the unconnected points you 
are trying to join, where they cross intervening segments, are enclosed 
within quads. This situation doesn't always arise, so it's best to know a 
few different ways to skin a cat!

Chapter 6
[ 247 ]
Use the following method to add an edge:
1.	 In A, the problem is that edges can't be added using Connect across the 
middle segment.
2.	 In B, right-click and choose Quickslice 
 or access it in the Edit section of 
the Ribbon.
3.	 In C, drag-and-release to add an edge, using Quickslice.
4.	 In D, right-click and choose Target Weld to join the added points to the 
original points.
From point to point the previous example would be suitable for Distance Connect 
 to add edges. For the following screenshot, because there are N-gons in between, 
it wouldn't work:

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 248 ]
Joining objects
Concentric tubes will allow us to cut away from the handle the distinctive curves 
in the middle. The distance between the Inner Radius and Outer Radius is 4 in 
each case, but as they get larger, they have more sides segments. Be sure to drop the 
default value of Height Segments from 5 to 1, as fewer segments is better when the 
height of the tube doesn't feature any curvature. A Height value of 5 is enough.
Creating and cleaning Booleans
Once the text objects are extruded and cleaned, we can Boolean them where they 
overlap the scalpel model and then clean up the result.
Usually, Boolean operations triangulate participating edges, and sometimes the 
result is not very tidy. To reduce complications it really helps to frame the part that 
will be joined or subtracted so that connecting edges are contained close to that area.

Chapter 6
[ 249 ]
The previous object is an extruded Spline. Extruding it gives us the 
basis for the first subtract operation. Select the handle and choose 
Create | Compound Objects | Boolean.
In the Boolean dialog , you will notice the options to create a Union, Intersection, 
or Subtraction (A-B or B-A). As we're removing the extruded object from the handle 
and the handle is selected, we want Subtraction (A-B). When the Boolean gets 
calculated, you can choose to leave the original source via a copy, show only the 
result (Move + Result), or show only the operands. In this case, the defaults will 
work best.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 250 ]
After you perform the Boolean, the surface will change and you'll probably see 
serious N-gons around the affected surface, as shown below on the right-hand 
side of the following screenshot. N-gons are multi-sided polygons that, generally, 
you should sort into quads, or at least quads and tris. If you again click on Create 
Boolean, the mesh will triangulate automatically, as shown in the following 
screenshot on the left-hand side. You can then convert the model to editable poly for 
clean up. A good step in this process is to remove triangles from the area so you can 
determine for yourself a better edge distribution. Remember to let the loops flowing 
into the area connect as much as possible.
In the following screenshot, the clean up for the previous Boolean is done primarily 
using Cut and Connect.

Chapter 6
[ 251 ]
Around a negative space, such as in the blade, it is good to add a framing loop so 
that when the points in the subtracted space are connected, they don't wind up being 
overlong, stretched polygons.
The following screenshot is the result of tidying up the blade, again using Cut and 
Connect. Notice that the clean up is contained mostly within the framing edge that 
was just mentioned.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 252 ]
It's useful to bear in mind that a lot of the work involves going from a cluster of tight 
vertices to a broader section with fewer vertices, adding as few edges as possible.
In the case of the number 10, which also began from a well-framed area of the blade, 
an unusual scenario arises, where the number 0 gets capped during the operation, as 
shown in the following screenshot. The reason the capping occurs is because there's a 
closed curve in a closed curve.

Chapter 6
[ 253 ]
Actually, in this case, rather than using Subtract when creating the Boolean, you 
could opt to use the Cut option in the Boolean object parameters. You could also try 
ProCutter. Both of these take the contact edge where the two surfaces overlap and 
create edges on the source object's surface. Then, you could select the polygons and 
Extrude inwards.
In the following screenshot, to handle the inner surface of the number 0, you could 
delete the faces, select the border edge, and hold Shift, then Scale inwards to inset the 
surface, and then use Cap and Connect to finish it up (or the Quad Chamfer script 
discussed in Chapter 9, Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max).
In the following screenshot, the clean up around the number 10 is contained within a 
small area, all quads:

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 254 ]
ProBooleans
With Booleans and ProBooleans you can translate operands (before you convert to 
editable poly), and with ProBooleans you can reorder a series of operands, which can 
change the look of the resulting mesh. The biggest difference between Booleans and 
ProBooleans is their post-tesselation approach and the decimation options available 
after the operation. ProBooleans are given a neat, quick demonstration at www.
mrbluesummers.com/1307/blog/introduction-to-3dsmax-probooleans and at 
http://goo.gl/xeUgn. ProBoolean operations are designed for cases where you 
want to repeatedly drill a series of holes in an object, or append objects, or both, all 
in one go, adding the operands sequentially and then creating the surface in one step 
(whereas Boolean results are calculated incrementally).
In our case, the rings on the handle could easily be done using ProBooleans. As the 
entire surface of the model gets recalculated after picking the operands, a nifty trick 
is to break off the area that will be affected, to preserve the mesh for the area that 
isn't affected. Imagine, on a head, you spend a lot of time on the topology of the nose, 
and then you add ears to the head, and to join them the nose is also recalculated, 
risking a change to your topology.
After this, you can start with the file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 6\BooleanStart.max.
Select the polygons on the blade where the rings are, and Detach them to a new 
object, and with the detached piece selected choose Create | Compound Objects | 
ProBoolean.
In the ProBoolean dialog, Subtraction is default, and that's what needed here, so 
just click on Start Picking. It doesn't really matter in what order you choose the 
tubes. You'll immediately see an intermediate stage result that is not tessellated but 
shows the subtraction for each piece as you pick it. After this, you could convert to 
editable poly and manually Cut and Connect vertices to make the model all quads. 
Or, you could open the Advanced Options parameters of the ProBoolean dialog 
and use the tools there to take you further down that road with less work. To get an 
effective result, tick the Make Quadrilaterals button and then enter a Quad Size of 
30 percent. Too small a value will create more polygons than are needed. Experiment 
with the three radio button settings: Remove All, Remove Only Invisible, and No 
Edge Removal. In this case, Remove Only Invisible gave the best result, that which 
was easiest to tidy up.

Chapter 6
[ 255 ]

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 256 ]
Once the ProBoolean is performed, some of the quads have a concave area, which is 
not a good thing. This is shown in the top part of the following screenshot. Flowing 
the edges in from the left- and right-hand sides, where the detached piece meets the 
rest of the handle, is the easiest way to tidy up the subtracted result into tidy quads, 
shown in the bottom of the following screenshot:
For the text Complex Stainless you could subtract it or use the Cookie Cutter 
function, which leaves only the outline (as an open edge) where the two surfaces 
contact.  You can then extrude inwards, giving you more control over the edge flow. 
The Cookie checkbox has a corresponding Imprint checkbox, and you can toggle 
these to see their effects. In the following screenshot, the subtracted model has been 
removed and an open border for each letter is left:
   

Chapter 6
[ 257 ]
After the Booleans are performed and cleaned up, the model should be UV-mapped. 
Even if it will have a procedural metal texture which looks fairly uniform. For 
reflections to calculate properly the mapping of the surface should be coherent. In 
this case, so long as the upper surface and bottom surface are peeled separately, the 
result will allow the reflections to not present artifacts.
Once the model is cleaned up, you will probably find plenty of loops to reduce, 
shift, and arrange more tidily. For this, I generally use Move, Relax, Target Weld, 
Remove, and Swift Loop. Swift Loop will allow you to tighten some of the sharp 
edges, for instance around the top and bottom of each letter and around the circular 
curves of the handles. In the next topic, we'll look at some additional Ribbon tools 
that can help with final editing.
The following screenshot shows the model after mapping, rendered in the scene that 
comes with 3ds Max called C:\Users\~\Documents\3dsMax\scenes\Studio_Scene_
Share.max. The scalpel has Material Autodesk Arch + Design with the preset Metal 
set to Stainless Steel, and the renderer is set to NVIDIA iray. The light comes from the 
three Sky Portal lights already in the studio scene, slightly color-adjusted.
You can open the content for this project in the \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 6\ folder 
and use Scalpel_StudioFinish2.max. No doubt a scalpel is not typically a major 
model in a game, as opposed to a highly detailed machine gun, but I chose a 
deliberately simple object to focus on the Boolean techniques and also to show 
how even simple forms are often surprisingly detailed.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 258 ]
Ribbon tools
To make it easier to obtain detail in a model, new tools such as Paint Connect 
enable you to speed up editing the mesh. Some newer tools are not found in the 
command panel editable poly tools and only appear in the ribbon. Open the scene 
\Packt3dsMax\Chapter 6\Creature_RibbonEditingStart.max. This shows a 
creature that needs some detail refined around its feet, and we're going to use a few 
tools we haven't looked at yet in the Ribbon, in particular Paint Connect, Shift, and 
Optimize. The creature is also used as the asset to explore retopology in Chapter 9, Go 
with the Flow, Retopology in 3ds Max.
Paint Connect, Vertex, and Distance Connect
Zoom until you are looking at the front of the foreleg, open the Graphite Modeling 
Tools part of the Ribbon, and look in the tab labeled Edit. Here, you'll see shortcuts 
for tools we're fairly familiar with, that you can access in the Quad menu while 
working in the viewport—Quickslice (Qslice), SwiftLoop, Cut—and you'll also 
notice Paint Connect (P Connect) 
, which has a pull-down option Set Flow. 
Turning this on from the start makes new edges position themselves in respect of the 
existing edges. Leaving it off makes the edges insert more like they would if using 
the Cut tool. Set Flow works similarly to turning on the Snap option Midpoint 
(right-click on the 3D Snap icon  and set this in the options). What it does is it 
snaps the newly added points to the center of an edge, as you brush over it.
What we're after is a better split around the hoof of the creature.

Chapter 6
[ 259 ]
To start with, turn on Set Flow and use Paint Connect 
 to add two lines up the 
middle of the hoof, on either side of the center. Note, in the following screenshot, 
that Paint Connect highlights the vertices added where they cross an edge:
If you are in the Vertex mode, switch to Edge mode and you'll notice the new edges 
are added to the current selection. Undo will step back one added segment at a time, 
so if you want to get rid of the entire added loop, use Ctrl + Remove. Make sure 
though, that there aren't other edges already selected. It's probably a good habit to 
use Ctrl + D before using Paint Connect so your selection is clear when you start.
Use Cut to add the corner edges for the added loop, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 260 ]
This introduces two triangles at the bottom, so select those edges and use Paint 
Connect to cross through them. If you hold Ctrl while brushing with Paint 
Connect, you can select and connect vertices too. This is equivalent to using the 
ConnectVertex tool, except you brush through the points, so if you are carrying out 
many operations, it is faster. It helps if you zoom in close to where you are working, 
so you don't miss.
Where the loop turns, the vertices could be placed better. Currently, there are quads 
with four vertices, but a triangular shape. One of the vertices lies directly between two 
others. There are a lot of ways to fix this that we've already looked in previous chapters, 
but lets use a tool from the Ribbon, within the Freeform tab, called Relax/Soften, which 
is brush-based. When you click it, a brush floater shows the Size and Strength of the 
brush. Set the Size to 0.25 so it's much smaller. Then, hold Alt and brush on the surface 
where the loop we added turns (at the top and bottom). Holding Alt preserves the 
shape of the mesh. In this case, it isn't a big deal, but it's worth knowing.
Once you have set up your preferred radius, to speed up your workflow add the tool 
DeformRelax to a hotkey. In Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\PacktUI.ui, it is set to 
Shift + R. This alleviates the need to swap back and forth between the Freeform and 
Graphite Modeling Tools tabs.

Chapter 6
[ 261 ]
You may also want to try the Freeform: Pinch/Spread brush to pull together the 
crease added to the hoof.
Going back to Paint Connect, hold the mouse over the icon , and note that if you 
press Y, the tool tip plays a short demo video. You'll see in particular that you can 
remove points using this tool in combination with Alt, but you'll want to make sure 
the Set Flow checkbox is not ticked for this to be effective. Set Flow is actually not 
needed; instead, use Shift + Paint Connect to make sure the added edges follow the 
midpoints of the edges you brush across. So, with Alt you can remove points while 
brushing, and with Shift you can "flow" them better. Besides removing points, you 
can remove edges or loops, through the combination Ctrl + Shift (removes edge loop) 
or Ctrl + Alt (removes edge). A good case for trying this out would be to go round 
the base of the hoof to make the edge sharper.
Freeform: Shift
The Shift brush 
 is the big brother of the Relax/Soften brush we already looked 
at. It is a screen space aligned transform based on the brush radius. For instance, if 
you set the Full Strength and Falloff values to be very tight, so you can move only 
one point, it is the same as the Move function using the Screen co-ordinates system. 
Along with Relax/Soften and Pinch/Spread, which I mentioned earlier, I suggest 
adding this tool to the Quick Access Toolbar. To do this, open the Freeform tab of 
the Ribbon, right-click on Shift 
, and choose Add to Quick Access Toolbar. This 
places it at the top of the screen, available no matter what state of the Ribbon you 
have showing.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 262 ]
The Shift brush, unlike the others, has a hotkey to control the brush. Drag 
vertically while holding Ctrl to change the Falloff radius, and drag vertically 
while holding Shift to change the Full Strength radius (the inner white circle 
in the following screenshot).
With the creature, a good use for the Shift brush would be to paint inward from the 
ankles, a bit above the hooves.
Freeform: Optimize
If you are familiar with the program Sculptris, which features a brush-based triangle 
reduction tool, you'll be happy to find that 3ds Max has a brush-based reduction tool, 
too. As with other brush tools in the Ribbon, there are a lot of hotkey combinations 
with which to control its effect. You may want to practice on the bottom of the 
creature's hoof—where the surface is relatively flat—to reduce detail there, using 
Freeform: Optimize 
. Note that this shouldn't be confused with the modifier 
Optimize, which reduces the polygon count of an entire mesh (or polygon selection) 
parametrically.
If you hold Shift + Optimize, you're effectively carrying out the same operation as a 
Target Weld, from vertex to vertex. Unlike Target Weld, however, if you continue 
dragging from vertex to vertex in a brush-like manner, from one to another and so 
on, you'll continue dissolving out detail.

Chapter 6
[ 263 ]
Like the Extend brush (just above Optimize), if you hold Ctrl + Shift + Alt while 
brushing, you can move existing points around. The Extend tool is covered in more 
detail in Chapter 9, Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max, which is about retopology. 
You can also use the Optimize brush to remove edges, edge loops, and edge rings 
through the following keyboard shortcut combos:
Optimize keyboard combinations:
Description
None
Click edges to collapse them, combining two 
vertices into one.
Shift
Drag from one vertex to the next, to target 
weld the two, combining the first with the 
second. If you continue dragging to further 
vertices, you can weld several with a single 
stroke.
Ctrl
Drag between vertices to connect them 
with edges.
Alt
Remove a vertex by clicking it.
Shift + Ctrl
Remove an edge loop by clicking an edge 
belonging to the loop.
Shift + Alt
Remove an edge ring by clicking an edge 
belonging to the ring.
Ctrl + Alt
Remove an edge by clicking it.
Shift + Ctrl + Alt
Move a vertex by dragging it.

The Cutting Edge: A Closer Look at 3ds Max Polygon Tools
[ 264 ]
In the Ribbon, there is an icon Constraint to Spline 
, which allows 
you to use the brush-based Paint Deform tools constrained to a Spline 
shape in the scene. It's similar to the Curve tool in Mudbox. You can set 
a custom Spline or generate one in Edge mode using Create Shape from 
Selection off the existing mesh. Either way, to specify the Spline to use, 
click on Pick under the icon 
. Click on Pick again to clear the current 
Spline. This tool works with any mesh, but is more responsive on high-
density surfaces. It works particularly well with the Push/Pull brush type, 
which moves vertices outward based on the surface normal, or inward if 
you hold Alt while brushing. If you don't like the result of the painting, 
you can click on Cancel 
 or Revert 
. You can also Commit 
 changes 
at any point to update the point that Revert will jump you back to.
Summary
In this chapter, we've looked at new tools for modeling in 3ds Max 2013 and methods 
of modeling using the Ribbon, in particular the fine control selection tools and the 
Freeform tools: Shift, Optimize, and Paint Connect. Getting used to these tools takes 
time but is well worth the extra effort.
In the next chapter, we move on from modeling to model preparation for texturing.

The Mystery of the Unfolding 
Polygons: Mapping Models 
for Texturing
This chapter demonstrates methods of UV Mapping and emphasizes the importance 
of becoming fluent in the process of preparing a model for texturing, a stage which 
bridges modeling and texture painting while calling on somewhat different skills. 
The challenge is simply to put a 3D surface onto a 2D image plane. 3ds Max's 
mapping tool set ensures the user is well-armed to meet the challenge.
The following topics are covered in the chapter:
•	
The goal of UV mapping
•	
Gaining familiarity with the UV editor
•	
Combining texture islands to save draw calls
•	
Just getting on with it
•	
Additional UV layout tools
•	
Soft Selection
•	
Setting UVW editor hotkeys
•	
Aligning points
•	
A handy script for fixing up UVs
•	
Mirror and Flip commands
•	
Packing the layout
•	
Finalizing the layout
•	
Making a Photoshop texture template
•	
Send to Mudbox
•	
2D View in Viewport Canvas

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 266 ]
The goal of UV mapping
Turbosquid, a commercial online model repository, recently established guidelines 
that asset contributors should follow so their work meets a common standard of 
production readiness. They call it CheckMate Certification. Having good UVs is a 
key feature of it. It's not nice to buy a great looking model, and then open up the UV 
editor and see a pancake view, where all the polygons are projected from only one 
angle. This is a big risk for anyone who downloads models, because models can 
take a lot of time to map and the whole point of the purchase is that you may 
not have the time for it in your project. For more on the subject, look up 
http://support.turbosquid.com/entries/20210308.
Now that we've made the spaceship mesh we face a similar and daunting problem. 
The following is what we face when we add an Unwrap UVW modifier to the model 
and click on the Open UV Editor button:

Chapter 7
[ 267 ]
By and large the concept of mapping is to neatly pack into the UV mapping square 
all the object's polygons in suitable clusters. A cluster (or texture island) is good if 
it is composed of adjacent polygons that more or less face the same direction and 
therefore can be easily flattened. The green lines drawn on the model represent the 
boundaries of texture islands in the UV editor. At the moment there are far too many 
and they are disorganized and overlapping. Let's show what we're aiming for with 
the model now, to give a sense of direction. The model actually has two mapping 
tasks since it uses two painted textures.
The light edges and, on the right, the dark edges represent two different models 
that share the same texture space. Two textures are required for this combined 
UV mapping.
In the previous example, it looks like there is almost no space between the UV 
islands. This is because of the reduced image size. It is good to keep a little space 
between the islands to allow for image filtering, especially when Normal maps will 
be extracted or MipMaps (texture complexity reductions based on camera distance 
from the object) are calculated.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 268 ]
It is worth noting that there are some mapping tools like Unwrella and UV-Packer 
(http://www.3d-io.com) that automate the steps of mapping; however, for a 
complex model the parts to auto-unwrap still need to be assigned by the artist. 
ZBrush provides a method of deriving UVs from every face of the model, mapped 
to a grid with precise, fragmented packing, but not every model suits this. It also can 
unwrap wholesale via its plugin UVMaster. The Pixar technology PTex provides a 
way to assign a texture per polygon, which is good when working on film content, 
but not so useful (yet) for real-time situations. Having pointed out some additional 
options, the 3ds Max UVW Unwrap editor is robust and, if you know how to use it, 
lets you get the job done quickly enough.
To get started with this topic, you can open the file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 7\
Ship_Quads_UnwrapUVW_Start.max saved out from the end of Chapter 5, The 
Language of Machines: Designing and Building Model Components. The model is shown 
without symmetry, as that'll reduce the initial workload.
Gaining familiarity with the Unwrap UVW 
editor
In this topic we'll walk through the basics of everyday mapping using a section of 
the spaceship model. This simple example sets the scene for mapping the entire ship.
1.	 When you want to add a modifier, you can click on the Modifier List 
rollout and press the first letter of the modifier's name, such as U for 
Unwrap UVW. This jumps you down the list. You can also right-click with 
the model selected to add Unwrap UVW from the upper-right Quad menu 
if you are using the provided Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\PacktUI.ui 
customized interface.
Make sure you are in Top-level mode when you apply 
Unwrap UVW. If you are in Sub-Object mode, particularly 
if you haven't actually selected any polygons, you will only 
unwrap the current selection. Sometimes mapping just a 
part of an object is useful, but if nothing is selected, you'll be 
mapping nothing, which is very difficult since you won't see 
anything in the UV Editor. I've noticed students frequently 
make this mistake, and at first they find it totally baffling.

Chapter 7
[ 269 ]
2.	 In the modifier panel, in the Unwrap UVW | Selection category, you'll see 
three Sub-Object modes: Vertex, Edge, and Polygon, as well as a Select by 
Element XY toggle 
, which is off by default. Don't mix up these modes 
with the similar modes at the base level of an Editable Poly. You can't model 
with the modifier highlighted, only adjust the UVs.
3.	 Moving down the Selection category to Modify Selection, you'll notice 
Grow and Shrink commands, and Loop and Ring commands, designed 
to make it easier to select parts of the model surface.
4.	 Moving down the Selection category to Select By, you'll see there's another 
toggle called Ignore Backfacing 
. While on this, it prevents you from 
selecting polygons that face away from the current view when you do a 
Marquee selection. This is on by default whenever you apply the modifier, 
and that can be a little annoying given that most of the time you'll find it 
easier to work with this off.
5.	 To open the Edit UVWs window, click on the Open UV Editor … button 
in the Unwrap UVW modifier's Edit UVs panel, shown at the bottom of the 
following screenshot. You can also press Ctrl + E with the model selected. 
One of the first things to do is size the window to fit the screen so you have 
sufficient screen real estate for viewing both the model and the UVs. Having 
two screens makes unwrapping more pleasant.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 270 ]
6.	 In the Edit UVWs window, press Ctrl + A to select all, and then click on the 
icon 
, which is a Freeform Mode widget designed to combine the transform 
tools, shown in the following screenshot:
The Freeform Mode widget places a border around the selection with square 
handles you can drag to manipulate. If you drag on the corner handles, it will 
scale in the direction you move the mouse. If you drag on the side handles, 
the mode changes to rotate, and you can turn the selection around. If you 
move the cursor inside of the Freeform widget border, you enter Move 
mode and you can shift the selection in UV space.
7.	 Move the selection upwards, so it sits above the main mapping square. Also, 
scale it down a bit. By the time we're done, this cluster of faces will be pulled 
apart, rearranged, and nicely fitted to the main mapping square. Click the 
icon 
 at the top-right of the editor. This is a toggle that shows the active 
map in the dialog. At the moment we don't want to see the checkerboard, 
but later we'll replace that with our texture and toggle it back on again.

Chapter 7
[ 271 ]
8.	 If you were in a hurry, and your model was simple, you could use Mapping 
| Flatten to set the UVs. In our case, the model has many polygons, a 
complex form, and would not flatten well at all. I find that even with simple 
models I rarely use this tool.
9.	 So instead we need to determine sections of the model to work on. We can 
select polygons in the usual way in the viewport, or select them in the Edit 
UVWs window. You can click on polygons, use Ctrl to add to a selection, 
and use Alt to remove from a selection. You can click-and-drag in the empty 
space to begin a Marquee selection. Right now, we'll have to select in the 
viewport, since the UVs are currently really scrambled up.
10.	 Orbit (Alt + MMB) the Perspective view so you can see the front of the ship, 
make sure the Unwrap UVW modifier is in polygon Sub-Object mode. 
Marquee select the line of polygons shown in the following screenshot:

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 272 ]
11.	 Then click on the Grow selection icon three times 
. This should expand the 
selection to the edge of the front circle.
You'll also see there's a Grow tool with the same icon in the lower icon area 
of the Edit UVWs window. They do the same thing, but this one will only 
grow up to a green UV Map Seam, while the one in the modifier panel will 
grow across the entire mesh.
Note there is a very fine poly loop around the edge of the circle. This helps to 
keep the circle's edge tight should the model be subdivided during a detailed 
sculpt. The loop is shown in the following screenshot:
12.	 To UV map this selection is pretty easy, because it is flat. Notice there is a 
yellow square in the view surrounding the selection. This equates to the main 
mapping square which the polygons are being fitted to.
13.	 If you were to click on Mapping | Flatten now, and go with the default 
values you'd get a reasonable result, but the thin poly loop trim would be 
detached to a different texture island, not kept with the rest. This is because 
it has a slightly different surface angle to the flat part, and the Flatten 
calculation notices this. Instead, we can use a different projection preset by 
going to the Unwrap UVW modifier's Projection panel and clicking on the 
Planar Map 
 icon, which produces a planar mapping. It helps to first click 
on Best Align 
, below that, so the shape we end up with doesn't happen 
to project sideways as a line. The align axis in this case is Y, if you don't 
trust Best Align. You can also press Enter to rapidly apply the Planar Map 
projection to selected faces.

Chapter 7
[ 273 ]
14.	 After using a projection preset like Planar Map, its icon remains toggled on 
(blue). You have to remember to click on it again to turn it off (not blue).
15.	 In the Edit UVWs window, the front circle now fills the whole main mapping 
square. This is because the shape of the selection is not square, and it has 
stretched to fill it. You could scale it sideways so that it closely resembles the 
way it looks in the viewport.
16.	  Instead, we can try out another tool, which will have given us a better result 
anyway, called Reset Peel 
. You'll find this in the Peel panel of the Edit 
UVWs window. This creates a projection equivalent to the Planar method, 
but it keeps the proportional scale of the polygons as best it can, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
17.	 The only downside is it may rotate the selection to a funny angle to fit into 
the main mapping square. This is easy to adjust, using the rotate handle of 
the Freeform Mode transform widget.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 274 ]
18.	 You can avoid the problem in the first place by using the Axis Align tool 
in the Edit UVs panel of the Unwrap UVW modifier, changing the fly-out 
showing X to Y or to Normal 
, and then clicking on the Quick Planar Map 
 next to that. Follow this up by clicking on the Relax Until Flat icon 
 in 
the Edit UVWs window, in the Reshape Elements panel. You will notice a 
slight spreading of the thin poly loop around the edge of the selection, giving 
it a slightly larger area to receive texture.
Because you'll be looking at the spread out polygons quite closely 
while mapping, sometimes you may see errors in the modeling 
that you didn't spot before. There's no need to panic. Just select 
the polygons around the problem area and collapse to editable 
poly. Your mapping is retained; you can fix the issue and then 
add a new modifier. Be aware that small changes like a Target 
Weld or adding an edge loop won't break the UV mapping work 
you've done, but newly created polygons via an Extrude or 
Bridge will need to be mapped freshly.
19.	 If you click on Quick Peel 
, it does the same thing as Reset Peel, but 
doesn't place the result to the mapping square, leaving the polygons where 
they were. It also doesn't automatically break a selection off of any adjacent 
polygons connected to the current selection. We can try this by selecting the 
next set of polygons, a loop, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 275 ]
20.	 Those polygons are contiguous with the first selection, so just click on Grow 
 and they'll be added to the current selection. To select only the added 
polygons, in the Edit UWWs window, hold Alt while dragging a Marquee 
selection around the polygons we already mapped before, which is easy to 
do because we placed them off to the side. This deselects what we don't 
need, leaving us only with a strip of polygons. To map these, click on Quick 
Peel and notice they line up in a straight row but don't move from where 
they were. Also they are still attached to other polygons. To detach them, 
right-click and choose Break. Now when you move them, they don't drag 
the unmapped polygons with them.
Another way to map a strip of polygons, like the single row we just did, is to use 
the Mapping | Unfold command, with its default option Walk to closest face. This 
will place the result into the main mapping square, lined up either vertically or 
horizontally. You can rotate a selection by clicking on the icons 
 and 
.
An important strategy for UV mapping is to decide if you will use just one mapping 
square and one texture, or use several overlapping Material ID channels that split 
up the UV information and can be separately assigned to specific textures, or use 
several mapping squares and multiple textures (supported by Mudbox and Mari, 
for example).
Real-time game engines tend not to support multiple mapping squares, so that 
method should be avoided unless you want to adopt a texture atlas approach, 
something like the one shown at http://www.scriptspot.com/3ds-max/scripts/
texture-atlas-generator.
Combining texture islands to save draw 
calls
The first time I worked on a game doing environments, a programmer came up to 
me one day and gave me, very gravely, some instructions on how a game engine 
renders to the screen. The point of the discussion was that, since I was unwrapping 
models for texturing, I should use fewer UV islands. Every UV island, at least in a 
game engine, tends to represent a draw call, so the more of those you have then the 
more costly assets using the texture becomes. For a tree, for instance, if you have 
two textures (one for the wood and one for the leaves), that's two draw calls. On top 
of that, if your UV mapping has two islands for the front and back side of the tree 
trunk, for example, you're adding more draw calls. Games often have lots of trees, 
so efficiency is the key.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 276 ]
In the following steps we'll look at how to join two texture islands together, 
continuing from where we left off:
1.	 We have a strip of polygons and a flat circle. They are contiguous on the 
model, but at the moment they are separate in the Edit UVWs window.
2.	 There will be a trade-off between having few UV islands and being able to 
pack all of them closely together. Compare the two shapes in the following 
screenshot. On the left-hand side, there is nice use of space, but there are two 
pieces or two UV islands. On the right-hand side, there is one piece, but the 
use of space isn't as nice. Notice that if you select some polygons, contiguous 
polygons on the model show with a blue edge. This will help you navigate 
what Sub-Object components belong together.
3.	 It is entirely optional, but I prefer to set the color for contiguous edges to 
light blue, because the unselected edges in the editor are also dark blue and 
the change makes it easier to see. To change this, in the Edit UVWs window 
click on Ctrl + O (or Options | Preferences) and then click on the color 
swatch under Show Shared Subs.
4.	 In this case, however much the ardent instructions of former colleagues 
echo in my mind, I'd probably keep the two pieces apart. Efficient use of 
space is also very important as it lets you expose more surface area to paint 
in the texture.
5.	 Let's move on to another case, where joining would make more sense, and 
look at some methods on how to join UV islands together. The tools to use 
are Target Weld, Weld (in the Vertex mode), and Stitch, usually used to fill 
small holes.

Chapter 7
[ 277 ]
6.	 Find, on the front part of the ship, the circular form shown previously. In the 
Edge mode, select an edge on the circular green map seam. You can change 
the thickness of seams in the Configure panel using the Thick and Thin 
radio buttons. You can also toggle Map Seams if you don't want them to 
display on the model. Having selected an edge, click on Loop: XY Edges 
 in the Selection panel, as shown in the following screenshot. The hotkey 
to toggle the display of seams is Alt + E.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 278 ]
7.	 Once the loop surrounds a set of polygons you can mark it as a Peel Seams. 
Go to the Peel panel and click on Convert Edge Selection to Seams 
.
8.	 In the Configure panel, tick off Map Seams. Leave Peel Seams ticked. Now 
press 3 to switch to Face mode, and in the viewport select a face within the 
blue circular seam. As before, look in the Peel panel, and this time click 
on the Expand Face Selection to Seams icon, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
9.	 This fills out the selection to the confines of the blue seam. We can now 
unwrap the selection. Click on Open UV Editor and scroll the mouse to 
zoom out and show the current selection, then click on Reset Peel.

Chapter 7
[ 279 ]
10.	 Like the first piece we mapped, this flat circle has an extra loop of polygons, 
which we can easily select. Click on the Grow icon 
 in the modifier panel. 
Then click on Reset Peel 
 again. Notice that the first part we mapped and 
the added part are treated separately. This is because we added the blue map 
seam, which acts like a separator. Right-click in the Edit UVWs window and 
choose Stitch or click on the icon Stitch: Custom 
, which will join them 
together, but with some distortion. Then click on Relax till Flat 
, which will 
sort out the distortion nicely.
11.	 This is quick and easy because the added selection was conducive to joining 
on the first part. Let's look at a situation which will require joining by hand.
12.	 With the same selection active, click on Grow 
 again in the modifier 
Select panel. This adds an additional polygon loop. Click on Reset Peel, 
and notice the first piece and the new piece again break off. Clicking on 
Stitch: Custom will not produce a nice result, even if you add Relax 
Until Flat. So instead, move the two pieces until they overlap, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 280 ]
13.	 We're going to join the edge of the inner part with the corresponding edges 
of the outer part. First, notice the blue line in the last image. This means the 
edges contiguous with the selection are on the outer border, not the inner 
one. Also, though the shape of it looks like things will match up, the outer 
piece is actually rotated 90 degrees.
14.	 To show this, press 1 to enter Vertex mode and then click on one of the 
points on the blue line. Its buddy, a blue dot on the inner piece, will be 90 
degrees offset. To fix this, click on the Select By Element UV Toggle icon 
 
and then click on the outer piece. The whole piece will be selected and you 
can use Rotate mode 
 or Rotate 90 degrees around Pivot to turn it and 
scale to refit it so it matches up well. You may also have to use the menu 
command Tools | Flip Vertical to ensure that the correct Vertex points 
line up, as shown in the following screenshot:
15.	 To solve the problem that the outer edge should be the inner edge, we can 
select loops and scale them accordingly. Enter Edge mode (2) and select 
an edge on the outer piece, on its outer edge, then click on Loop 
 at the 
bottom of the Edit UVWs window. Use Freeform Mode to scale the selection 
outwards. Then deselect, select the outer loop, and scale it inwards.

Chapter 7
[ 281 ]
16.	 In the Vertex mode (1), right-click and choose Target Weld or press Ctrl + T 
to begin joining outer points to inner points. Left-click and drag a vertex to 
its corresponding vertex on the other island. It will take a while to pick your 
way around the gap we need to close up. When you're done, scale the entire 
piece sideways until it has more of a circular shape. The following screenshot 
shows the points that need welding:

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 282 ]
Before the Peel tool was introduced to 3ds Max, the Pelt tool 
 was the 
next best method to quickly unwrapping a complex selection. It works 
like this: imagine a bear pelt stretched on a wood frame, so it is flat. 
It's not good for the bear, but for our UV mapping needs, this concept 
of flattening is perfect. That's what we want with polygon selections. 
The downside is that the pelt can sometimes be a over-stretched, but 
the upside is that it is very fast to use and offers some controls of the 
stretched shape. It works from the same blue Map Seams we used to 
isolate the circular shape in the last example. A great way to assign Map 
Seams is to use the Point-to-Point Seams tool 
, which lets you begin 
and end a seam by clicking on the model in the viewport, and it is fast 
and accurate.
You can check the scene so far in the provided content, in the scene: \Packt3dsMax\
Chapter 7\Ship_Quads_UnwrapUVW_Steps01.max, and subsequent steps in the 
file iterations.
Just getting on with it...
Although only a couple of pieces of the model have been mapped so far, for the 
most part the rest would involve only repetition, up to the time where every part 
is chunked out, each one a non-overlapping UV island. After that, packing will be 
required and there's a new topic coming up on that.
One quick warning is that although you can copy and paste UV selections, quite 
often the polygon matching when pasting is not correct. For the circular shape we 
just mapped and the one next to it, the topology is the same, but copying and pasting 
the UV data is only partially successful (which means not at all in a sense) as some 
parts don't match, as shown in the following screenshot. For this reason, it is best 
to map every part as a unique step. If you have mapped geometry which matches 
geometry in another area of the model, instead of mapping the identical geometry 
again, you can clone an Element from the mapped part at Editable Poly level, delete 
the unmapped target polygons, and Shift + Move a copy of the mapped Element 
where the target part was.

Chapter 7
[ 283 ]
Some artists like to apply a custom mapping texture, usually a checkerboard, 
sometimes numbered and color coded, to help ensure that mapped sections are 
scaled correctly and to spot areas that may be stretched. You can download some 
and read about this concern at http://blog.duber.cz/misc/custom-uv-and-
tracking-maps-for-vfx-professionals. You may also find these easy on the 
eye: http://www.pixelcg.com/blog/?p=146. The arrows and letters in these grids 
identify areas where the texture is mirrored. Also, the desaturated colors in the later 
ones are very easy on the eye while mapping a model. Personally, I like a grayscale 
grid texture. You can add it to the Generic_Image channel of an Autodesk Generic 
material or the Diffuse channel of a Standard material, in the Material Editor (M). 
Don't forget to right-click and choose Show Realistic Material in viewport.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 284 ]
You will need to display the texture on the object as shown in the previous 
screenshot, and also in the Edit UVWs window, so click on the icon 
 that we 
turned off earlier, and choose Pick Texture, and then choose from the list the 
texture assigned to the material the ship model is using.
Having decided on several discrete chunks or groups of polygons that will either 
unwrap easily or all face more or less the same way and are contiguous, the 
repetitive side of using Reset Peel and occasionally Mapping | Unfold becomes 
apparent. To avoid this repetition from slowing you down, it is best not to try and 
start packing or organizing the UV islands using Scale and Move, but just shift them 
out of the way.

Chapter 7
[ 285 ]
For this model, once I'd done the entire front of the ship, I started to arrange the 
results, but mostly just as housekeeping before moving on to the sides of the ship. 
In the following screenshot, you'll notice on the left-hand side that the front part has 
nice-looking checkers; some scaling of the bottom and top halves so their size ratio 
matches is needed, but it looks a lot better than the default mapping on the rest of 
the ship.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 286 ]
Moving on to the ship's sides, a piece like the one in the following screenshot is best 
selected using Ctrl + LMB and is fairly easy to map as it is planar:
You could either use the Planar Map method or Reset Peel or even Mapping | 
Normal Mapping | Left/Right Mapping.

Chapter 7
[ 287 ]
So now we have mapped this key piece, some of the surrounding pieces that we map 
after it could be joined on to its boundary using Target Weld in the Vertex mode.
When you Target Weld one piece to another there will be some parts that stretch 
slightly, and we can use the checkerboard texture on the model to spot this, and 
wiggle each UV vertex as required to set the mapping straight. If you can, use Relax 
to achieve this as it will save time, however, with some layout situations the Relax 
tool can be too aggressive.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 288 ]
Another way to adjust kinked UV mapping like this is to use the Tweak In View 
tool, in the Vertex mode, and you can then click on points in the model and adjust 
them using the cursor in the viewport.
You may want to split part of a UV island with a custom mapping seam to help it lay 
out well. A handy trick for this is to first select the area you want to map, and then 
click on Pelt, and straight away Commit it. This generates a Map Seam around the 
border of the selection. Then you can use the Edit Seams tool 
 or Point-to-Point 
tool 
 to add additional seams within its boundary. The following screenshot shows 
an example where this works well, around the corners so they are split apart to 
remove stretching there:
When you have a mainly cylindrical form to map, in the Projection panel use the 
preset Cylindrical Map. This lines up a cylinder gizmo to the current selection, and 
you can roll it in local space until its seam is positioned optimally. You may want 
to start by clicking on Best Align. The green seam along the length of the gizmo 
represents the split from which the polygons will peel away. Remember that the 
Projection preset modes need to be toggled off once you're happy with the result 
before you can resume editing. 

Chapter 7
[ 289 ]
The cylindrical projection will map to the main mapping square, so if your polygons 
form a thin cylinder you may need to scale the UVs after unwrapping to better 
represent the form. Something to watch out for when using the Cylindrical Map 
method is that sometimes the vertices along the green edge don't weld, even though 
they are in the right place. You just have to select them all and right-click and choose 
Weld in the Edit UVWs window.
Additional UV layout tools
Like modeling, the majority of the mapping process lies in using the same tools 
frequently and fast. There are some additional tools that are worth covering, in 
particular the spacing tools, transforms, and tools to display and hide UVs.
Soft Selection
For more organic models, where you can allow some stretch and may have fewer UV 
islands to handle, there is a Soft Selection tool, which drags with a falloff, a lot like 
the modeling mode with the same name, but in this case it affects selected UV points. 
To use it, click on the Soft Selection toggle 
 at the bottom-right of the Edit UVWs 
window. A colored falloff will be visible around selected points. The falloff is based 
on XY distance, not contiguous points, and you can control the degree of the effect 
using the spinner next to the icon 
. Note the default is 0.0 (which means you have 
to set a value before you'll see any result). There is a Falloff Type fly-out, shown 
in the following screenshot, that lets you set the shape of the falloff. There is also a 
Falloff Space fly-out, switching between XY or UV space, where UV affects only the 
active element.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 290 ]
Setting UVW editor hotkeys
If you open the menu Customize | Customize User Interface, you will see the 
Keyboard tab, and it defaults to the Group: Main UI. If you click this rollout and 
choose Unwrap UVW instead, you'll see there are many commands for the Edit 
UVWs window and mapping processes that can be assigned hotkeys. For example, I 
usually map polygons first, and then use Shift + 2 to swap the selection to the Vertex 
mode (Face to Vertex Select) or Alt + 2 to swap to Edge mode (Face to Edge Select). 
Alternatively, you can swap to the Quads tab, and set up a unique Unwrap UVW 
Quad menu. In the following screenshot, the same subobject conversion shortcuts 
are added to the Quad menu:
Aligning points
For fine-tuning, there are several tools that allow us to make sure rows of vertices 
are lined up. In the following example, to map the polygons, each UV island was 
laid out using Reset Peel, with Map Seams added to the corners so they'd spread 
out nicely. But although they are the same shape, there are slight differences of 
vertex position we can easily fix using align. Assuming the pieces are the same, 
it may prove quicker to map one of them then clone it to create the others with 
identical mapping. If you plan to have the same texture artwork on all the strips, 
then you could overlap the UVs. If you need to have unique artwork on each one, 
you have to lay them out as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 291 ]
After selecting a row of points, even if they are not contiguous, click on the Align 
Horizontal icon 
, or Align Vertical icon 
 if the selection is vertical. Depending 
on the requirements of the model, you can also click on Linear Align 
 which was 
added in 3ds Max 2012, which spaces the points along a line at even distances. In the 
case shown earlier that wouldn't be useful, because the side parts of the selection are 
thinner than the top parts.
In the following screenshot, the rotated parts are aligned straight, and also the three 
segments to the left are spaced equally apart. Such accuracy may be helpful if you 
plan to texture in Photoshop using rectangular Marquee selections and a lot of 
pasted content.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 292 ]
A handy script for fixing up UVs
While spacing UVs using the tools mentioned earlier is fairly easy, you may want 
to try the free Maxscript by GARP called UV Strip Straightener. It is available at 
http://www.scriptspot.com/3ds-max/scripts/uv-strip-straightener, which 
also shows an example. In its options it includes a checkbox for spacing evenly, or 
averaging, the segments in X, Y axis or both.
Setting up the script requires the following steps, after download:
1.	 From the download folder, drag-and-drop the .mzp on the viewport. This 
copies files to their required locations within the 3ds Max installation folders.
2.	 In 3ds Max, from the drop-down menu Maxscript, select Run and browse 
folders to find the UVW Unwrap-straightenUVstrip.MCR file in C:\Users\
Username\AppData\Local\Autodesk\3dsMax\~\enu\UI\usermacros 
(where the ~ symbol represents the version of 3ds Max you are using), 
and select it to run it.
3.	 Restart 3ds Max.
4.	 Go to Customize | Customize User Interface. Select the Keyboard or Quads 
tab and check that Group: Main UI is showing, and set the Category: UVW 
Unwrap using the rolldown list. There you'll find the link Straighten UV 
Strip to launch the script, and you can assign it a shortcut or to a quad.
5.	 You can also launch it within the Edit UVWs window interface. Look under 
the menu Mapping | Straighten UV Strips.
Users have contributed many scripts to Scriptspot.com; here is a free plugin for 
3ds Max by Francis O'Brien that can unwrap UVs available at http://www.pullin-
shapes.co.uk/page8.htm.
Mirror and Flip commands
You can set hotkeys, such as: Shift + H = Flip Horizontal, and Shift + V = Flip Vertical.
There are several ways to flip a selection of UVs besides assigning hotkeys. You 
can use the menu Tools | Flip Horizontal, or the Mirror icon 
, which is a fly-out 
containing variations. You can also access Flip Horizontal and Flip Vertical in the 
Quad menu in the Edit UVWs window.

Chapter 7
[ 293 ]
Packing the layout
When you have picked out and unwrapped all the parts of a complex model, you 
may feel like you have completed a marathon; except a final lap remains, which is to 
fit all the pieces as efficiently as possible into the main mapping square. While 3ds 
Max has an autopacker built into the Unwrap UVW modifier, it is not really useful. 
A human is needed to puzzle out the most compact, optimal arrangement. It's best 
to think of it as a sort of puzzle game. You can quickly get an adequate result, but it 
takes real skill to achieve an optimal result. In terms of method, all you'll need to do 
is turn on Face mode (3), tick Select By Element 
 in the Edit UVWs window and 
use Freeform Mode to start transforming the UV islands. Here and there, you might 
nudge a vertex over a little or break a piece in two (or join two pieces), but there's no 
trick involved.
This is what I ended up with after unwrapping the pieces. At this stage, I wasn't too 
worried about welding together every possible matching pair of UV islands, nor was 
I overly concerned with their relative scale and packing.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 294 ]
There is a handy tool in the Arrange Elements panel of the Edit UVWs window 
called Rescale Elements 
 that does a good job of proportionally balancing the scale 
of all the pieces, though it doesn't notice overlap when autoadjusting, as shown in 
the following screenshot. This isn't a big deal as we have to pack everything we have 
so far into a square anyway.
I haven't found an automatic UV packer I like; you may want to check the 
commercial option UV-Packer 1.11 from 3D IO: http://packer.3d-plugin.com. 
The 3ds Max packer puts a bit too much space around UV islands and tends to fit 
them to a grid, but if you need to batch through a huge number of models, you 
could try it, using this maxscript to fire it up:
FOR batch in selection DO
(
local newUVW = Unwrap_UVW()
addmodifier batch newUVW
newUVW.pack 0 5.0 true false false
) 

Chapter 7
[ 295 ]
The batch will apply the packing settings to a number of models. The settings 
0 5.0 true false false are applied to the settings in the packing dialog in 
the Edit UVWs window, shown in the following screenshot:
For this particular model, it is important to remember it has been mapped as a half 
model, expecting Symmetry to be added. There are also additional meshes which 
could be attached and mapped together with the main hull. Given the model is large, 
it might be beneficial to map to two or three mapping squares (to the right of the 
first). It depends on the goal software for the texturing. To understand this concept, 
check out Mari or Mudbox painting methods; a good source for that is Digital Tutors 
(http://www.digitaltutors.com).
For this example, we'll use two separate 4096 x 4096 textures and the outer surface 
and inner surface will be split. Most of the supplemental meshes are within the 
interior, so those will be added to the inner surface mapping. The process to perform 
that split will be to collapse the model to Editable Poly (which retains the texture 
co-ordinates from the collapsed modifier), and then select the polygons to Detach, 
add a Symmetry modifier to each half, reapply Unwrap UVW and then do the 
packing by hand.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 296 ]
In Chapter 3, The Base Model – A Solid Foundation in Polygon Modeling, we glossed 
over one of the selecting methods, Stored Selections; the commands in the Selection 
tab of the Ribbon are convenient for joining Sub-Object polygon selections together. 
This is especially helpful in this case because the outer and inner surfaces are close 
together, so there's a high risk of selecting the wrong polygons and it would be 
annoying to lose the selection for any reason. So we can store it as we go by 
selecting a set of polygons and clicking on 
, and then selecting some more and 
clicking on , and then joining these 
, and storing them with  and starting over. 
There is a Recall Selection command 
 to paste in the previous selection and a 
Clear command .

Chapter 7
[ 297 ]
After packing the outer shell of the ship, this is what I arrived at:
There's still some room for tweaking but essentially all the pieces are at the right 
scale, arranged to fit the main square, and there's not a lot of empty space. I didn't 
work out how many of the UV islands could be welded together, so there are more 
small pieces than would be ideal. It is important to have a slight gap around each 
island for Normal Mapping padding. To evaluate whether the result is okay, I apply 
a Material on the model, add a 4096 x 4096 .png, and start painting in Viewport 
Canvas to check that the resolution around the smaller details will hold up. If it 
isn't up to scratch, I weigh up splitting the UV islands to more texture sheets, to 
increase the available surface area. Our goal is to create a game asset, not a film 
production asset, so it's better to have fewer textures rather than more. The provided 
checkerboard texture loaded during UV mapping is 1024 x 1024, so an estimate can 
be made from that. If it is clear in the viewport, then a 4096 x 4096 texture should be 
too. To begin to paint using Viewport Canvas, refer to Chapter 8, Custom Body Job: 
Painting using Viewport Canvas, which covers this topic.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 298 ]
For comparison (and this really holds true the more you try to do a complex model 
in one hit), here is the result of using the plugin UV-Packer set to have a Gutter 
Padding threshold of 1. So it's clear that if you want a fast, workable result it could 
be used, especially on low poly count models, but human care and attention will 
often get a better result, although it takes a while longer. The only glaring problem 
with the plugin is that it doesn't successfully detect and fill holes in the UV islands. 
It's important to point out that the UV-Packer takes only seconds to give a result, 
but it will only offer one solution. Some artists use it as a starting point for their 
own packing.
When mapping two objects together at once, they'll share the modifier as an instance. 
You can work on one model at a time, or select both and see their texture coordinates 
in the same view, which is what you need to pack both together into one texture 
space. At any time, you can hit the Make Unique icon 
 under the stack, and break 
the instancing.

Chapter 7
[ 299 ]
Finalizing the layout
A few times I've pointed out the need to determine a mapping strategy according to 
your end goal, be it a self-contained, single game texture or a series of texture sheets 
for high-resolution model painting. In this case, we've wound up with the outer 
and inner parts on two different textures, and the additional meshes mapped with 
the interior. The ship hull has been split into two pieces, so we have to assign a 
unique material to each, to preserve their mapping, before the halves are welded 
back together.
Then we need to prepare the asset for painting, and there are a few different options 
for this. One option is to render a texture template from the Edit UVWs window, 
which is good if you plan to work in Photoshop (for a model that suits this, like a 
low poly prop). Another option is to paint directly on the surface. In this topic we'll 
look at how to prep for Mudbox painting, and at how we can view the UVs while 
painting in Viewport Canvas as well.
To map the supplemental meshes and the larger inner surface, I set a grid in the 
Edit UVWs window using Ctrl + O and then set the Grid Size value to 0.5.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 300 ]
After that, having mapped the small pieces into a square, I used the 2 x 2 grid to scale 
them down to a quarter size, as shown in the following screenshot, and then pressed 
Ctrl + H to hide the selected polygons. You can also do this from the Edit UVWs 
menu Display | Hide Selected, and you'll also find the Unhide All command here.
When using Attach to recombine the two ship halves, the UV layouts from each will 
overlap. Before welding the pieces, add a new Unwrap UVW modifier and in Face 
mode (3), in the modifier panel, click on Select By Element and then click in the 
scene on the outer part. You can then assign it a distinct material, which also gives 
it a Material ID 1, and invert the polygon selection (Ctrl + I) and apply a distinct 
material to that, which gives it another Material ID 2 too, as shown in the 
following screenshot.
If you click on the Pick Material from Object icon  in the Slate Material editor 
(M) and click on the model with it active, you'll thereby expose a Multi/Sub-Object 
material with two ID channels automatically. Name the material components as 
Outer and Inner, and the material name as Spaceship.

Chapter 7
[ 301 ]
A final check to run on your UV layout is to enter Face mode (3) in 
the Edit UVWs window and choose Select | Select Overlapped 
Faces. This exposes any overlap cases so you can manually fix it.
A good way to quickly join two large and complex parts of a mesh that were 
detached earlier is to go to the Editable Poly level of the model's modifier stack and 
enter Border mode (3) and then select the unwelded borders (which should coincide) 
and choose Convert to Vertex. Then you can choose Weld Settings, making sure to 
set the Weld Threshold to its lowest value, 0.0. This would ensure that the weld isn't 
joining points on the border that are close to each other but not exactly touching.
After welding you'll no longer be able to use Select By Element to isolate the 
polygons used by each material. Luckily there's another way, which is to select 
the polygons by their Material ID. This is found in a rollout inside the Edit UVWs 
window, at the bottom, as shown in the following screenshot:

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 302 ]
Clicking on All IDs will restore everything, which currently you'll notice 
is overlapping.
We can now shift the UV selection for Material ID 2 one square to the right, 
using the command line, as detailed next.
In the main 3ds Max scene, right-click on the pink Listener panel and choose 
Open Listener Window.
This exposes a running log of what you've been doing. Make sure that only 
Material ID 2 is showing (via the UV Editor rollout just mentioned) and then 
select all the polygons. Switch the Move mode so it is constrained to X using 
the fly-out shown here:
Then nudge the selection to the right a bit. Notice in the Listener you will see 
feedback on this, which includes an XYZ value. Given this, you can copy the line, 
undo the movement, and then paste the line into the command line (under the pink 
Listener feedback):
$.modifiers#unwrap_uvw.unwrap2.MoveSelected 1,0,0
Before you execute the command, be sure to set the X value to 1. What this does is 
offset the polygons to the next mapping tile along. Relatively the texture space is the 
same. The supplemental meshes, which share the same material as the inner ship 
hull, don't need to be offset.

Chapter 7
[ 303 ]
Making a Photoshop texture template
You can render the texture coordinates and save the result to file as an image, 
which is useful for importing into Photoshop for indirect texturing (as opposed to 
painting on the model itself). In the Edit UVWs window go to Tools | Render UVW 
Template….

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 304 ]
A dialog will then pop up letting you specify the size of the rendered frame, and 
it also helps to turn off the display checkbox for Seam Edges. After that, click on 
Render UV Template, and save the resulting frame to .png using the Save Image 
icon . Note that if you chose a large render size, such as 4096 x 4096 the rendered 
frame will display at 1:8 scale and you can scroll using MMB to zoom in and out if 
you wish.
In Photoshop, conventionally, you would prepare the image for painting by 
highlighting the UV layer and proceeding with the following steps:
1.	 Right-click and choose Duplicate in the Layers dialog (F7). Name the new 
layer as UV.
2.	 On the UV layer, press Ctrl + A to select all, and press Ctrl + I to invert it.
3.	 Set the UV layer's composite mode to Multiply.
Click on the icon  to lock the layer content. You shouldn't try and paint on this 
layer. Select the bottom layer and press Ctrl + A and then choose Edit | Clear. This 
leaves you with a paint layer. Some artists fill the base layer with black and insert 
a new layer above to begin painting on. Using black means that if there are any 
painting holes, especially around edges, the area will simply look dark on the model, 
which is, if nothing else, better than a spot of white, given white tends to catch the 
eye. When the texture is ready to display on the model, click on the icon 
 to hide 
the UV layer.

Chapter 7
[ 305 ]
Send to Mudbox
Mudbox is able to paint on multiple texture sheets at once. So long as they are 
ordered to the right of the main mapping square. To transfer the model to Mudbox, 
go to the File menu and choose Send To | Send to Mudbox | Send as New Scene. 
There are also options to update or replace the content in the current scene, as you 
cross back and forth. Formerly, you would need to choose File | Export | Export 
Selected and save an .fbx file, and then open that in Mudbox. To save memory, 
Mudbox allows the different texture sheets to be exposed individually, although 
more than likely you won't notice this and just paint them all at once. Ctrl + Up 
Arrow is the default hotkey for Load All Texture Tiles, and Ctrl + Down Arrow 
is the hotkey for Unload All Texture Tiles. In the preferences, under Windows 
| Preferences, you can expand the section Paint to find a checkbox for Color 
Unloaded Tiles. Note that when you use Send To or Export it is possible that 
your .fbx model will be triangulated during the transfer. In Mudbox, if you used 
Send To, a connection to your scene will remain in place, with a signal at the 
bottom-right of the screen Connected to 3ds Max, and a button called Update. 
When you update in 3ds Max, any painting you've done in Paint mode will be 
applied to the model. You may have to press Ctrl + Z immediately after the update 
to clear the triangulation back to how your editable poly was before sending 
(the mesh and material are handled separately in the update).

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 306 ]
To view the texture coordinates for the imported model in Mudbox, click on the UV 
View tab. You can't paint here, but the view will reassure you that your UV mapping 
carried across okay. To resume painting, click on the 3D View tab.
Besides being able to paint on multiple texture sheets or tiles at once, an advantage 
of painting in Mudbox over Viewport Canvas (within 3ds Max itself) is that you can 
view multiple material channels at the same time while painting, such as Diffuse…, 
and Specular…, and Bump…. In Viewport Canvas, you can only see the channel 
currently active while painting. Mudbox uses the suffix u1_v1, u2_v1, and so on to 
label texture tiles in the updated material in 3ds Max.
Bear in mind that when sending from 3ds Max to Mudbox and back, the material 
type on the model that Mudbox understands is a Standard material, so if you are 
using, for example, an Autodesk Generic material, that'll get wiped off and replaced.
2D View in Viewport Canvas
In the next chapter, the spaceship painting process is explained in detail. Because we 
are dealing with UV mapping, the foremost concern is to discuss how the UVs can 
be displayed and painted on directly when in the Viewport Canvas painting mode. 
To open Viewport Canvas select the model and choose Tools | Viewport Canvas. 
In the Options panel, about halfway down, you can select the channel you want to 
paint on by clicking on Pick Map. If you simply click on the big paintbrush icon 
 at the top, it will either use the active channel or prompt you to choose one if 
you haven't already.

Chapter 7
[ 307 ]
If you haven't already painted on the texture, you'll need to assign an image to paint 
on, in the following dialog:
This texture is more or less a placeholder, as later it will almost certainly be replaced 
by a multi-layered .psd image. But the dialog won't accept .psd, so we have to add 
a flat format like .jpg or .png. When you add layers in Viewport Canvas, you can 
either flatten on save, or save to a .psd and replace the texture in the active material.
Click on Paint  and notice that under the Color swatches both the 2D View and 
Layers Dialog buttons activate. Click on both. 2D View exposes the UV layout and 
you can paint in here directly, unlike in the UV View in Mudbox. In the Layers 
Dialog, you can set a new layer and in the File menu, save your texture as .psd. 
Actual painting will be discussed in the next chapter, but you can try it out by 
stroking on the model to see how the 2D View updates. Take note of the three icons 
along the top of the 2D View (Toggle UV Wireframe, Fit Texture to View, and Full 
Size or 1:1). You can also manually zoom by scrolling the MMB.

The Mystery of the Unfolding Polygons: Mapping Models for Texturing
[ 308 ]
Summary
In the first few chapters, the goal was to gain familiarity with handling models and 
building them. This time we've looked at preparing a model for texturing. In the 
next chapter, we look at texturing using the same content. You will probably have 
noticed that modeling is an involved process, and so is UV mapping. Also it should 
be no surprise that so is texturing, and the amount of time for each can grow, stage 
to stage, if you are really shooting for high quality.
Actually, UV mapping is not difficult, but there is a lot of repetition and you have 
to be willing to handle the puzzle of UV packing with a light heart and think of it 
as a game. It's not much fun to try it under intense deadline pressure, for example, 
though increasingly there is a move towards automation along the lines of PTex or 
UV-Packer. For instance, both Mudbox and ZBrush include UV mapper tools that 
can do a lot of this work for you. At the end of the day, as a modeler you should 
appreciate how UV mapping works and be able to isolate and fix problems in the 
mapping, be able to transfer models from application to application without losing 
or reverting mapping, and know what method of mapping will work best for your 
intended outcomes.

Custom Body Job: Painting 
using Viewport Canvas
This chapter is about a method of texturing that lets you harness the tool inside 
3ds Max called Viewport Canvas, and also builds upon processes discussed in 
earlier chapters regarding the Slate Material editor, and introduces Substance 
Procedural textures. We'll use highlights from the rather massive task of painting 
the ship constructed and mapped in previous chapters to describe Viewport Canvas 
functionality, and after that show a more progressive view of texturing a character. 
These are the topics covered in the chapter:
•	
Direct painting versus indirect painting
•	
Starting a paint session
•	
Channel selection
•	
Shortcuts and 2D View painting
•	
Brush Images and Custom Maps
•	
Using the Clone brush
•	
Direct painting using spherical and depth brush settings
•	
Layers
•	
Loading maps into other channels
•	
Tablet settings
•	
Swapping material type using Slate
•	
Substance procedural textures
•	
Asset texturing walk-through

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 310 ]
A lot of recently improved functionality in 3ds Max, and many other 3D products, 
involve asset interoperability (think GoZ and Send To Mudbox), so there's no reason 
to stick with 3ds Max for texturing.
However, Viewport Canvas does sit on a powerful engine for real-time interaction, 
has good brushes, layers, and is great for touching up details or marking the model 
for various purposes (such as where you might want to add hair).
Direct painting versus indirect painting
You can import a 3D model into Photoshop (CS4 or better) and paint on it, which is 
very interesting to try out but is not featured in this book. You can view information 
about 3D in Photoshop CS5 Extended in the following documentation from Adobe: 
http://goo.gl/mz0tO. The actual link has been shortened as it contains a very 
long number.
Some kind of models suit being painted in Photoshop, particularly objects with 
largely flat surfaces and straight edges, such as low-poly models of logs, tables, 
shields, or architectural content. A benefit of painting in Photoshop is you can copy 
and paste imagery into a rendered UV mapping template and very easily control 
quality or resolution. In the versions of Photoshop available until now, it was a big 
disadvantage, besides not seeing the update on the model in real time, that for a 
complex model, reading a UV template in 2D was pretty tricky so it could be hard 
to know where to paint. Newer versions allow you to paint with UV and model side 
by side, with instant updating. A few commercial tools exist that connect Photoshop 
2D paint changes to the 3ds Max display, such as Marius Silaghi's Projection Painter 
(http://www.mariussilaghi.com/projection_painter.htm), which is rather 
similar to the discontinued GhostPainter 2.5.1 by Cebas.
In Viewport Canvas it is possible to paint in the 2D View as though in Photoshop, 
which is what we'll explore before looking at the 3D painting process.
Starting a paint session
In this topic, we will be preparing texture folders, checking whether our base 
textures for the paint session are okay, and launching Viewport Canvas' working 
windows, including 2D View, the Layers Dialog, and the Brush Images window.
In the provided scene, \Packt3dsMax\Content\Chapter 8\Ship_Quads_VP_
Start.max two 4096 x 4096 blank textures VP.png and VP2.png have already been 
applied to the two Standard materials used by the ship hull. This can be viewed in 
the Material Editor by pressing M and exposing the Slate canvas. You may have 
to re-path the textures from the provided content by double-clicking on them and 
browsing to locate the texture files.

Chapter 8
[ 311 ]
When working with materials that may have been assigned on a different machine 
or by a different user, it is good to set a texture repository and set an external path 
to it so that loading scenes will search there if any texture assets are missing. To do 
that, go to Customize | Configure User Paths and in the dialog, click on the External 
Files tab. There, click on Add... and browse to your desired texture folder, and click 
on Add Subpaths use subfolders too if you arrange your textures in subfolders. 
Now, this folder will be checked whenever a model uses a texture that has a location 
which can't be found, to see if there is a copy of the texture there. If you develop 
the habit of only having textures in a dedicated Textures folder, then it will avoid 
file path problems. If you use a server folder or a cloud service such as Dropbox 
(provided there's enough space in your subscription), it's easy to manage work 
across multiple computers. An example is shown in the following screenshot:

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 312 ]
Syncing Custom Brushes
On the topic of syncing files, for textures you want to assign as Custom 
Brushes in Viewport Canvas, the default folder path is a local one and 
there isn't a direct method of changing it. It is possible to shift the location 
above by copying the application data for 3ds Max (everything in the \
enu folder in the long path below) to a new location (such as your local 
Dropbox folder) and then editing the original C:\Users\UserName\
AppData\Local\Autodesk\3dsMax\2013 - 64bit\enu\3dsmax.
ini so all the entries including a C:\Users\... path are set to the 
custom Dropbox path; for instance, D:\Dropbox\3dsMax\. Then your 
Viewport Canvas' Custom Brush directory will be located there and will 
be easier to sync.
Once Viewport Canvas is open, you'll probably want to drag it to the left-hand side 
of the viewport to dock it.
Note that even if the model has a material on it with textures assigned, if the texture 
is not found in the correct folder, Viewport Canvas will prompt you for a new 
texture. When you do wish to paint an entirely new texture, you must set a width 
and height value appropriate for the paint session, before setting the directory and 
file format. This can be done by clicking on the (…) button beside the Save New 
Texture To: field.
Channel selection
Simply put, for a model without textures, if you choose a channel to paint, you'll be 
prompted to assign one; if the model has a texture already, to start painting click on 
the icon 
 in Viewport Canvas, then from the rollout list select the texture that will 
show in the channel you want to paint, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 313 ]
Now all the directory and file settings preamble is dealt with, let's move on and 
begin to paint.
In this topic we're interested in the 2D View mode, and this can be set to 
automatically open when you begin to paint by editing the configuration file 
Default.txt in \2013 - 64bit\ENU\plugcfg_ln\ViewportCanvas\Settings 
so the last line reads View2DOpen=true, as shown in the following screenshot:
Otherwise, you can click on 2D View in the Viewport Canvas panel.
In 3ds Max 2013, you can move the 2D View to a second monitor. It's a good idea to 
paint a model in the Isolation mode (right-click in the Quad menu and select Isolate 
Selection) so other models don't obstruct the view as you orbit.
To make the 2D View have more screen real estate, mouse over 
the side border until the cursor changes to an arrow icon and then 
drag it outward.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 314 ]
Apart from having the 2D View window open, it is good to situate the Layers panel 
somewhere unobtrusive, and straight away add a new layer to the paint session. 
Viewport Canvas layers work the same as Photoshop layers, with Composite 
type choices, Opacity slider, and simple Adjustments and Filters. In the Layers 
window, from the File menu you can select Save PSD As... to convert your session 
to a layered file (instead of the flat .psd assigned to begin with) as shown in the 
following screenshot. Once you are painting a layered PSD (Photoshop Document), 
and that's assigned to the model, there's no problem, but you can't assign a .psd 
from scratch when beginning to paint.
When you select the paintbrush icon 
 to complete the session, you'll be prompted 
with a variety of options. Usually, you'll want to select Save as PSD and replace 
texture in material. I usually do this even before I start painting to be sure the .psd 
is placed on the model, since after that it's enough just to go to File | Save as PSD to 
commit changes. The option shown in the following screenshot is also helpful if you 
are saving textures incrementally:

Chapter 8
[ 315 ]
Shortcuts and 2D View painting
So far we've opened and closed a paint session without doing any painting at all. 
Well, we're really just warming up. The next steps show ways to indirectly paint 
the model, adjusting the application of texture, and basic Brush settings.
1.	 Create a new layer by clicking Add New Layer icon 
 in the Layers window.
2.	 Make sure that 2D View is open, and in the Viewport Canvas tools click on 
the color swatch next to Color in the Brush Images section, then select the 
last item in the Mask Presets row, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 With the default brush stroke in the 2D View make sure the model is oriented 
so you can see, for the most part, where the paint is applied. Notice the stroke 
contains the active Brush Image confined within the radius of the brush.
You can adjust the Brush Settings using typed values or the spinners, but you 
will probably find it faster to learn the following shortcuts:
°°
Ctrl + Shift: Hold and drag vertically to change the brush radius. Note 
that the brush is actually spherical, so when painting thin geometry 
you may wind up painting both sides.
°°
Alt + Shift: Hold and drag vertically to change the paint opacity.
°°
Ctrl + Alt: Hold and drag vertically to change the hardness/softness 
of the brush edges. 100 is sharp, 0 is fuzzy.	
°°
Shift: Erases parts of what you have drawn during the current 
activation of the tool. This mode uses the Opacity setting of the Erase 
tool, rather than the standard Opacity setting used by the other tools.
°°
Space bar: Hold and click to draw a straight line from the last painted 
point to where you click. This works with all stroke-type painting 
tools, including Paint and Erase.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 316 ]
°°
Ctrl: If you are not using a Brush Image, just a color value, holding 
Ctrl and clicking the model surface samples color from the pixel 
under the cursor.
°°
RMB: Should you right-click in empty space you will commit the 
paint session to the currently active texture.
°°
MMB: Scrolling the mouse wheel zooms in and out in the 2D View, 
and holding-and-dragging MMB pans, as with any view. You can 
also use zoom shortcuts available at the top of the view.
4.	 Expand the Brush Image Settings section in the Viewport Canvas tool panel, 
and set the values as shown in the following screenshot so that instead of 
being confined to the brush radius, the image is projected onto the canvas 
(the UV mapping square in effect), and again paint in the view with a 
reasonable-sized brush. Notice that this time the texture acts as a kind of 
stencil (something similar to the stencil tool in Mudbox but fitted to the 
entire 2D View).
In particular, what makes a difference here is toggling off Fit to Brush and 
setting the Tiling radio button to Across Screen.
5.	 Paint an area of the model to compare the difference to the first stroke, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 317 ]
6.	 Now set the option for Projection so it uses Hit Normal instead of 
From Screen. Paint again, and compare the look of the stroke, which 
should appear finer.
7.	 Now hold Ctrl + Alt + Shift and drag in either the 2D View or perspective 
view. This moves what you have painted across the surface until you release.
8.	 Now zoom into the 2D View using MMB scroll and paint again. Observe 
that as the UVs scale up, the relative resolution of the brush increases on 
the model surface, while you can still paint on the model without changing 
the brush radius. After each zoom with the scroll wheel, you'll see the brush 
preview ‑ the look of the texture in both the 2D View and the perspective 
view. In the perspective view, since we have Fit to Brush toggled off in the 
Image Brush Settings, a change in brush radius won't change the projected 
texture. Delete the layer you've painted so far and then discard the paint 
session by right-clicking in the Perspective view.
9.	 To paint only on a selection of UVs, a part of the model, or a single UV 
island, add a new Unwrap UVW modifier and click on Open UVW Editor 
…, and in the Edit UVWs window select a likely section, which you might 
want to paint in isolation. Note, you just need to click one polygon in each 
UV island and then you can use the Grow icon 
 in the Edit UVWs window 
to fill the selection out to the green UV seams. Convert the model to editable 
poly, and in polygon mode (the polygons selected in the collapsed Unwrap 
UVW modifier will remain current and you might want to create a Named 
Selection Set using them to keep the selection at hand later) go to Render | 
Render Surface Map in the main menu bar. This will expose a dialog to set 
the size of the rendered map and type of map. In this case, select the 4096 
Size preset, dial down Seam Bleed to 0, and select SelectionToBitmap. A 
render will be produced that you can save to the file as a .png. Now turn 
off polygon mode, and restart your paint session in Viewport Canvas. Click 
on Add a new layer icon 
, right-click on it, and select Add Layer Mask | 
Reveal All.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 318 ]
10.	 This will create an empty mask and automatically make it active (its border 
is highlighted). Click on the left-hand side thumbnail of the layer to make 
that active, then go to File | Load Bitmap into Curent Layer, and browse to 
find the render of the SelectionToBitmap file you made before. An example 
is provided in this chapter's content: UV_SelectionToMap_MaskExample.
png; you can use this if you prefer. Once the image is loaded, right-click 
on the mask thumbnail and select Apply Image. When you start to paint, 
you'll affect either the layer or the mask depending on which is active. In the 
following screenshot, yellow has been painted on the layer, which is active, 
and the mask is only showing the color where the UV islands were rendered.
More about the layer masking features is shown by Louis Marceux in his Autodesk 
Area blog: http://area.autodesk.com/blogs/louis/3ds_max_2011_s_
viewport_canvas_tips_and_tricks.

Chapter 8
[ 319 ]
Note that because the UV mapping of the spaceship mesh used in the example 
actually spans two UV squares, you will see yellow on the second part of the model 
even though it uses a different texture. It will display like that until you hit commit, 
whereupon the display updates to show each texture correctly.
One thing to remember when painting in 3ds Max is that saving the texture used in 
the mesh material is independent of saving the 3ds Max scene. If you save changes to 
a Viewport Canvas texture painting session and then decide to quit 3ds Max without 
saving, next time you load the scene, the model's texture will reflect the newest saved 
from Viewport Canvas.
In this topic, we dealt with SelectionToMap; it's worth noting the Render Surface 
tool (found in the Render tab) can also be used to easily generate cavity and ambient 
occlusion maps from the model, which can then be loaded into a Viewport Canvas 
layer as a reference, mask, or texture content.
Brush Images and Custom Maps
Textures used as Custom Brushes must be .tif files, and you can manage them 
by opening the folder directly from inside Viewport Canvas, after clicking on one 
of the swatches under Brush Images. Click on Browse Custom Maps Dir. If you 
are in Photoshop and want to add an image to the Custom Maps folder, rather 
than ferreting through many subfolders to find the right location using Explorer, 
simply save to the desktop or to your textures folder. You can then copy and paste 
the required file via the 3ds Max Browse Custom Maps Dir route, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 320 ]
Using an added Custom Map Metal_Tile1.tif as a Brush Image, I used the Paint 
Bucket tool 
 to cover the entire ship with an undercoat, and then layered over 
the top an Occlusion map set to Multiply in the layer properties. The AO map was 
derived using Render | Render Surface, as discussed earlier. More or less, the rest of 
the process of painting is a matter of artistic taste, but it is a good approach to begin 
painting with a generalized base texture, and work from larger features of the model 
down to smaller details, just like with the modeling process. It can also be helpful to 
do up a small section of the model to finished quality early on to set some direction 
for the rest.
Using the Clone brush
If you want to clone areas of the texture, the Clone brush 
 is a handy tool, so long 
as you remember to set the Clone Source options in the Paint Behavior section of 
Viewport Canvas. This matters because frequently the area you want to clone is on 
a different layer than the layer you are painting. You can choose either to sample the 
Current Layer or All Layers, much like in Photoshop. You can also use the viewport 
as a source, the entire screen, which helps a lot if you are using the 2D View to paint. 
In the following screenshot, on the left-hand side, is a detail painted by holding 
down Space bar (to get a straight line). Using the Clone brush, sample by holding 
Alt to click the area, which will be the clone source, then brush with the All Layers 
option set in the Paint Behavior options to achieve the strip on the left-hand side 
reasonably quickly. In 3ds Max 2012, a new option to sample from the entire screen, 
the Screen radio button, was added as Clone Source, which is great if you want to 
sample from an image not in 3ds Max.

Chapter 8
[ 321 ]
Keep in mind the default Brush setting for hardness is 0, which is very soft. If you 
want to have sharp lines in your texture, besides using a tiny brush, you can raise 
the hardness so the brush edges are sharper.
Also, to save time while doing the base texture, before detailing the model to have 
unique qualities on both sides, the Mirroring options in the Paint Behavior section 
of Viewport Canvas will allow you to assign X, Y, or Z symmetry.
Configuring Light and Shadows
Viewport shadows are often quite dark, and it is helpful to dial their 
Intensity/Fade value down when painting so the internal or cast shadows 
on objects aren't so strong that you can't see what you are painting. To set 
viewport shadows, go to the Views menu, select Configure Viewports, 
and adjust the Lighting and Shadows values in the Visual Style & 
Appearance tab. This was also discussed in Chapter 1, First Launch: Getting 
to Know 3ds Max. Alternatively, you can set the Ambient color on the 
model's Material to white so the texture appears fully lit everywhere.
Direct painting using spherical and depth brush 
settings
The biggest advantage of painting on the model is that you can paint across a 
mapping seam with perfect paint deposition. In the following example, the two 
joining sections were painted in 2D view, which leaves a visible texture discontinuity 
at the seams. To fix this is just a matter of painting directly in the viewport over that 
area, as shown in the following screenshot, where two stripes converge at the bottom 
of the circular drum on the front of the hull:

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 322 ]
In most painting applications the surface will most accurately receive the 
brushstroke when it faces the camera, and the paint deposition will be less accurate 
as the incident angle is less direct. Viewport Canvas compensates for this by using 
a Spherical Radius default for the brush where surfaces aren't directly facing you. 
The paint projects based on the brush's contact with the surface, not based on the 
camera. Note that the option to switch to a Depth brush type does not create a flat 
brush; it shoots the paint all the way through the model like a kind of energy beam, 
leaving paint wherever the surface is touched. Therefore, by using the Depth brush, 
you will get stretched strokes if your surface has a steep incident angle compared to 
the brush. On a thin-walled model, since the default Spherical Radius brush has a 
volume, you may find paint is deposited on both sides of the model if the radius is 
big. Using SelectionToMap masks, discussed in the 2D View section earlier, removes 
the overlap problem. In the following screenshot, the blue circle on the left-hand side 
is shown projected through the model on the right-hand side because depth brushing 
is turned on.
Layers
Layers can be used in two ways: you can mix the content by overlapping layers with 
reduced opacity or you can separate content cleanly between layers to keep content 
organized. You can use masks or the default transparency of layers to expose content 
below. This is the same as in Photoshop, but let's do an example in case you want to 
rehearse working with layers in 3ds Max.
1.	 Open from the provided content \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 8\Ship_
Quads_VP_Start.max, and in the Material editor (M) assign the texture 
LayersStart.psd to the Bitmap feeding the Diffuse Color channel of the 
Standard material Outer_u1_v1.
2.	 Launch Viewport Canvas from either the Quad menu (PacktUI.ui) or go to 
Views | Viewport Canvas. Make sure you paint on the Material by going to 
Outer_u1_v1 | Diffuse Color: Bitmap texture | LayersStart.PSD.

Chapter 8
[ 323 ]
3.	 Click on the Layers Dialog button. This may be set to automatically turn on, 
shown earlier in the chapter. The Layers window should pop up and show a 
Background layer. Note, you can paint directly on the background layer, but 
you can't erase from it (you have to paint over a mistake on the background 
to fix it or undo). It's generally a good idea to straightaway select Add New 
Layer icon 
 when you paint and merge down the layer when you're done. 
To do so, right-click on the layer and select Merge Down, but there's no need 
just now.
You can also merge all the layers by selecting Flatten Visible 
Layers. This is a simple flatten and is not selective of what 
layers are chosen or currently showing. Unlike in Photoshop 
(which preserves hidden layers when you select Merge 
Visible), layers that are hidden when you select Flatten 
Visible Layers are discarded completely, so it's more akin to 
Photoshop's Flatten Image. It is possible to Undo the deletion 
and collapsing of layers using Ctrl + Z.
4.	 Layer handling is not very difficult. You can drag-and-drop to reorder layers. 
Create four layers above the Background layer and on each right-click. Now 
click on Rename and enter front, back, left, and right respectively. For 
each layer, in a different color paint the words on the ship in the appropriate 
spots as shown in the following screenshot:

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 324 ]
5.	 Next, adjust the colors of the paint strokes layer by layer so they are all 
the same using the Hue option present in the Brightness/Contrast/Hue/
Saturation dialog box of the Adjust tab. Try making them all yellow for 
instance. There are other adjustment types, in the Adjust menu, such as 
Color Balance, Auto Levels, and Invert that you may be familiar with from 
using Photoshop for texturing.
6.	 Set the Opacity value for the layers to 75 so you can see the underlying 
Background layer.
7.	 Select the Background layer and click on Add New Layer. Notice that this 
will appear above the Background layer rather than at the top of the layer 
stack. In this layer, draw in black under the words to create a border for 
them, as shown in the following screenshot:
This simple task will exercise your layer adjusting skills. Let's say you wanted to 
combine the lettering and black border layers all together without combining them 
with the Background layer. From the top layer down, keep choosing the right-click 
option Merge Down until only the merged layers and the Background remain. This 
might present some problems if each layer had very different composite types (such 
as Multiply, Color, and Overlay). You would probably find it more reliable to extract 
the merged layers in Photoshop if you want to kill off the Background layer and 
have an alpha for transparency.

Chapter 8
[ 325 ]
Loading maps into other channels
Textures can be used to map into other channels in the material, for instance, 
Bump, Specular, Opacity, and Self-Illumination, all of which can support colored 
or monochrome bitmaps to drive the intensity of their influence. Normally, where 
the texture is brightest, the effect of the respective channel is strongest. One thing 
to watch for is whether white is 100 percent opaque or 100 percent transparent. 
Standard materials have an Opacity channel, so there white is 100 percent opaque. 
Some materials, such as MentalRay or VRay, have a Transparency channel, so there, 
white is 100 percent transparent. Sometimes you will need to invert a texture's values 
so it works appropriately in these cases.
A critical downside to Viewport Canvas is that you can't paint two channels 
simultaneously (which is why Mudbox has a distinct advantage over Viewport 
Canvas besides its sculpting capabilities). However, you can drop the image from 
one channel into another to use as a reference while painting, and then at least you 
can track where to paint to match the content used in a map in other channels. In this 
example, we paint a bumpy decal on the front of the ship and also give the front disk 
of the ship hull a strong reflective value:
1.	 With the same scene as before opened with Viewport Canvas ready to go, 
select Add New Layer for the Diffuse channel and paint a big, red X on the 
front disk of the ship. Name the layer BigRedX.
2.	 Under the BigRedX layer, add a new layer and fill it with black color.
3.	 In the Layers window, go to File | Save Bitmap (Flattened) As... and name 
the file X.png.
4.	 After saving, delete the black layer, and click on the Paintbrush icon 
 to 
finish painting the Diffuse channel.
5.	 You will notice that in the Options section of Viewport Canvas the Paint On: 
button is available and currently set to Diffuse Color. Click on this and select 
Bump from the list. Set the created image settings to 4096x4096 and Black. 
Save it as ShipBump.png, and once it loads, click on Paint 
, and then click 
on the Layers Dialog button and then on Add New Layer. Highlight the new 
layer and go to File | Load Bitmap into Current Layer, and when prompted 
click on the X.PNG file, which should then display on the front of the ship.
6.	 The red color will give you about 50 percent bump, if converted to gray 
values. There's no point in trying to paint a Normal map in this channel, 
though presumably it is possible. Use the Brightness/Contrast/Hue/
Saturation dialog box (present in the Adjust tab) to set the X to be a 
lot whiter. Watch the black value doesn't bloom up either.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 326 ]
7.	 Save the paint session, and make sure the map you've just adjusted is 
assigned in the Bump channel of the material Outer_u1_v1 on the ship. 
Render to check its influence shows.
8.	 Currently, you would be hard pressed to keep painting more bump, since 
the black value covers most of the ship and you can't see where to paint. To 
reveal ship detail, create a new layer called Reference Diffuse and select 
Load Bitmap Into Current and click on the Flat.png image, which is the 
partial texture for the hull from the content provided for this chapter.
9.	 On a new layer Extra Bump, paint some more bump detail with white and 
shades of gray, then turn off the Flat.png layer so it doesn't contribute. 
Save, making sure you assign the changes in the material channel correctly, 
and render again.

Chapter 8
[ 327 ]
10.	 The following screenshot shows the contribution of the bump. You could 
undertake a similar referenced painting process for the specular contribution, 
or just hook the same map into multiple channels to compare the difference.
In the preceding screenshot, the left-hand side shows the material rendered 
with its Bump channel contribution set to 333, and the right-hand side shows 
a contribution set to nothing. The frames were rendered using NVIDIA iray, 
using default render settings.
Note that black and white bump images are not so much supported in 
real-time engines, which typically use Normal maps for bumpiness. You 
can always convert a black and white bump map to a Normal map using a 
program such as CrazyBump or NDO.
Tablet user's guide
It takes a while to get used to painting with a Wacom tablet, but Viewport Canvas 
does offer some enhancements, making use of the grip-pen pressure. Expand the 
Tablet Pressure options in the Viewport Canvas UI and you'll notice that pressure 
can be selectively toggled between controlling any or all of Brush Radius (size of 
the stroke), Opacity (heaviness of the stroke), Hardness (which controls the brush 
edge falloff), and Scatter (which creates noise in the Brush Image distribution). 
These functions have analogs to Wacom tablet used in Photoshop and most other 
painting programs.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 328 ]
In the following screenshot, the brush stroke examples are as follows:
•	
A: Default moused stroke
•	
B: Wacom pressure, using Radius only
•	
C: Wacom pressure, using Radius and Hardness
•	
D: Wacom pressure, using Opacity only
•	
E: Wacom pressure, using Opacity and Scatter
•	
F: Wacom pressure, using Scatter only and with a Random Scatter 
(22-33) range
The Randomize section allows us to set arbitrary ranges for the brush 
controls. These are useful for creating brush noise.
Swapping material types using Slate
Once you have used Viewport Canvas for a while, you will notice it accepts the 
material channels of other renderers such as NVIDIA iray, Vray, and MentalRay 
(while Mudbox only lets you use a Standard material if you want to transfer 
content back and forth using Send To). In the Material Editor, if you right-click on a 
Standard material such as the ones applied to the ship model we've been examining, 
you can select Change Material/Map Type in order to change the material used on 
an object. The replaced material will keep its name, and it will still participate in a 
Multi/Sub-Object material if it was previously assigned to one, but it will lose the 
maps assigned to it. 

Chapter 8
[ 329 ]
A nice feature of the Slate editor though is that all the previous maps will still be 
present right next to the material for easy reassignment. In the following screenshot, 
the Standard material has been changed to a VRay Mtl and the bitmap is about to be 
rejoined to the Diffuse channel, where it is labeled Replace. Unattached nodes can 
be deleted by pressing Delete.
Using Slate you may notice the Controller Bezier Float nodes that are 
added every time you add a map to the material can be expanded by 
clicking on their + icon. The 1.0 float value is the default contribution 
of the map, akin to the 100 values in the Maps list in the Material's 
parameters. If you don't like to see these, right-click on the Additional 
Params part of a given material node in the Slate editor and toggle Hide 
Child Trees.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 330 ]
Substance procedural textures
In recent versions of 3ds Max, support for Allegorithmic's Substance Ecosystem has 
been included. Substance is a set of procedural texture generation tools that allow 
textures to permeate the surface and volume of an object, driven by a node-based 
creation interface that allows very complex maps to be created. To get started with 
Substance, it's a good idea to look at the Allegorithmic website, which introduces 
users to how it works in 3ds Max http://www.allegorithmic.com/content/
substance-3ds-max.
In Slate, if you right-click you can browse a list of default maps. Selecting 
Substance from this list provides you with the base node for building or 
loading Substance content.
A further product enhancement related to this is B2M, which lets you extrapolate in 
one-click operations seamlessly tiling material elements (normal, specular, height 
map, and so on) from one source image, but it costs $150. Information for this can 
be found at http://www.allegorithmic.com/products/b2m/overview.
The Substance map starts empty, and you can apply content from the parameter 
dialog, which lets you browse assets stored in C:\Program Files\Autodesk\3ds 
Max 2012\maps\Substance\textures or from the massive Internet repository run 
by Allegorithmic (similar to micro-transactions in your 3D editor instead of your 
games). The following screenshot shows our model ship with a Substance preset 
applied to it:

Chapter 8
[ 331 ]
A simple connection between the material and the substance map would be set 
up as shown in the following screenshot. The Map Output nodes are created 
automatically. Also, notice that the Normal connector is fed through the 
intermediary VRayNormalMap map type to the material's Bump map channel. 
This you should do yourself if you are using VRay. The actual textures involved are 
entirely derived within the Substance map's preset, in this case the Aircraft_Metal 
preset, according to the values set in Aircraft_Metal Parameters. For the rendered 
example shown here, the defaults were left alone:

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 332 ]
The previous screenshot shows the node network typical of a substance material, 
and the next screenshot shows the base parameters every Substance map has (not 
including the specific parameters of the preset, which control its look), where the size 
and source for the Substance are defined. The default Engine is Software Rendering, 
changed here to Hardware Rendering.
Clicking in the channel next to Reload lets you browse for local Substance Packages, 
such as Aircraft_Metal.sbsar. In the following example, the resolution was 
cranked up to an absolute setting of 4096 x 4096. Note that when changing between 
Relative and Absolute the preview of the map has to be recalculated and isn't 
always snappy. Be mindful of the fact that the viewport preview of the Substance 
texture will be much less detailed than the rendered frame.
If you wanted to paint on top of a Substance map, you could use the Composite 
material type, whereby the ViewPort Canvas painted material is layered above 
the Substance bearing material using a mask. The following example shows the 
Viewport Canvas texture masked against the Substance map using SelectionToMap 
image present in Render | Render Surface. In the following screenshot, the 
Substance map sits in the Base material of the Composite material, and the Material 
1 layer (a layer above the Base) is the painted and masked texture. The mask sits in 
the Opacity channel of the Material 1 layer. An example of this scene can be found in 
the content provided for this chapter: \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 8\Ship_Quads_VP_
SubstanceDEMO.max.

Chapter 8
[ 333 ]
In the previous chapter, we UV mapped the model in preparation for texturing, 
and now we've followed that up using Viewport Canvas to explore painting 
methods that make use of its layered, multi-channel features. By now you should 
feel comfortable throwing a texture into the Diffuse, Normal, Specular, and Opacity 
channels and using the brushes in Viewport Canvas to paint with color and image 
brushes, clone areas from the object and from the screen, set your own custom 
content as a Brush Image, and render masks and surface properties for use in the 
texture layers.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 334 ]
Asset texturing walk-through
The final section of this chapter shows a walk-through of a texture painted for 
the spaceship model by Ajay Choudhary. Quite often when you work on a project 
you wonder about how it would look if somebody else took your model and 
painted it (as well as your own hopefully if not better). I decided to find someone 
(via the www.udk.com/forums community) who would be available to paint this 
model with game quality in mind. The task I set was to provide diffuse, emissive, 
normal, and specular maps. Ajay Choudhary offered to take this on and came up 
with the following work, during which we exchanged 20 e-mails, discussing the 
direction and features I needed. The following screenshots are available at 4096 
x 4096 with the .max scene in \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 8\Ship\.... Notice the 
textures are named according to their use on each part of the model.
First, here is the final result of combining the maps in Autodesk Generic iray 
materials, through a Multi-SubObject network.
I adjusted the color of Ajay's emissive and also toned down its brightness, then 
added a little noise detail too. Not every creative decision a freelancer makes will 
match your own ideas, so you have to choose what to direct and what to let go. If 
you trust their artistic ability, you can get back some surprising results you wouldn't 
have come up with. Contractually, you can only expect what you specified in the 
project brief, so while the freelancer's work may give you a lot of further ideas, you 
may have to extend the agreement if you want to take things in another direction, 
or be ready to add to the work yourself. Really make sure the folio work of the artist 
shows strong signs that the artist will be able to deliver in excess of your actual 
needs. The following is the original job ad:

Chapter 8
[ 335 ]
This is the artist's early work in progress. It's incomplete but good to show it early 
because they can get valuable direction from the client before they get deep into it.

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 336 ]
The following is some of the feedback to the artist, and after that, their response 
(in the art):
tomofnz: By and large, avoid decals and large areas of bright color 
-- because they reduce scale. Instead, do panels and machinery/
engineering guts -- also try zooming in and noodling more close up 
features.The glowing ring around the front is fine, but maybe make it 
the only glowing part -- all the other glowing parts would be better 
as machinery detail.
Let me show you a version I was working on.
*** tomofnz sent Ajay_detail example.png ***
tomofnz: You know the Millenium Falcon - how its surfaces are covered 
with panels and nothing is flat... sort of along those lines. The 
inner part of the ship looks interesting as being very dark, and the 
little emit lights on the cylinder arch look promising. Negate the 
bright blue LEDs to armor plating - those four disks on the front need 
lots of detail. On top of that, I'd suggest just drawing features 
with a black brush - cut lines, panels, cavities, vents, frames, 
infrastructure, and so on.
The artist took this on board and progressively made some enhancements. When 
I replied, I made sure to focus on the positives and keep the requests brief and 
on topic:
I like how the added panels are vertical/horizontal, which contrasts 
nicely against the big circle on the front... just be mindful of the 
way the two meet or join around the border of the circle. If they just 
butt together it exposes the Photoshop-like nature of the texture; 
a fix is just to paint some extra complication at those points to 
'explain' the join. I marked letters to correspond with areas that 
stood out to me:
A - Make more of this feature. Frame/border the area around it to lead 
into it.
B - Put borders or some other integrating detail around the two 
features where they join.
C - These bolts on the rim are too large, just cover over them or 
'square' them so they look like panels or coverings. Check for 'scale' 
problems.
D - These look shiny, which should be done in the specular layer. 
Also, the blue color pops too strongly given it is surrounded by drab 
tones... so make it drab too. Pick out the edges from the geometry 	
too on the gray rim.
E - Here it would be nice to see exposed engine innards.
F - Too white... just let the front disk have white... I'd suggest 
layering more detail over the top too, kind of like those bits the 
repeat on the underneath of the hull (those are really nice), that I 
marked G.

Chapter 8
[ 337 ]
G - These look good - also detail a border for them using some of the 
mesh edges on the outer part...
H - This is a good base, but I think it needs to be detailed/broken up 
since the geometry there is fairly plain... but it's a good progress.
I - These areas need more detail -- mostly cut lines will probably 
look fine. And the decals are too simplistic. You'll have to noodle in 
closer to the model there I guess. Maybe you just didn't get round to 
that back end as much yet, but it should have about the same level of 
finish as the front does.
A lot more of the vent/scaffold/duct stuff like at G would be good. 
That bottom/front part looks sweet.
Ajay's continued efforts follow. Notice that each time the model is shown from 
several representative viewpoints:

Custom Body Job: Painting using Viewport Canvas
[ 338 ]
The A, B, and C markup is where I added some requests to the work in progress. 
Another option is to paint over the submitted work in progress directly, and then 
mark where the changes are. It's not a good idea to paint in some art direction 
without also stating in writing what changes you made or want. Try not to 
overwhelm the freelancer; it's important to keep them engaged and let them have 
fun while performing the task. A good artist will take ownership of the task and 
invest a lot of their personal energy into making it great. Over time, artists who 
perceive value in the artwork itself and believe in delivering to their utmost 
just to make you happy can be identified among those who are motivated 
only by being paid. You'll just take work in future to those who deliver the 
best. I thought that in this case, I got what I specified, felt my requests were 
acted upon, and had a good time and no difficulties talking to the freelancer, 
Ajay (http://gambitcreativeworld.daportfolio.com/).
The final textures are supplied in the this chapter's content at \Packt3dsMax\
Content\Chapter 8\Ship\Ship_DiffuseOuter1.tga.
Summary
In this chapter, we ran the gauntlet of texturing as a pipeline step in creating 
the game. We covered setting up the document, painting over the UVs, creating 
additional texture channels for use in the model's material, and how different 
renderers tend to take different material types. It takes some time to get used 
to Viewport Canvas, but hopefully you'll find traction with it. Painting with a 
graphics tablet makes texture creation in Viewport Canvas a great deal easier.
In the next chapter, we move on to a different stage of asset creation, which deals 
with reducing the complexity of sculpting models so their polygon count is not so 
high and their wireframe structure is clean. This is known as retopology, and in 3ds 
Max the Ribbon offers several powerful tools for this process.

Go with the Flow Retopology 
in 3ds Max
This chapter shows ways to get a highly detailed model down to a useable polygon 
count, without losing the key detail from the original.
The following topics are covered in the chapter:
•	
High poly model import
•	
Retopology
°°
Exploring the Freeform/Polydraw tools
°°
Pinch/Spread
°°
Using Quad Cap Pro to generate meshes to conform
°°
Filling stubborn polygons
•	
Topology concerns for animation
•	
Manual polygon reduction
°°
End corner building and turning edges
•	
WrapIt by The Pixel Hive
•	
Finalizing the retopologized model

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 340 ]
Introduction
This chapter is about retopology, the process of reducing the polygon count of a 
high-resolution mesh tidily, without losing key detail. Quite often, sculpted meshes 
have polygon counts in the millions and it is messy to decimate or optimize them 
automatically. There are specialist tools for retopology, such as Topogun and 
3D-Coat, but 3ds Max does include its own retopology tools, found in the 
Freeform section of the Ribbon.
High poly model import
Different applications are biased to different file formats and may therefore have 
different import procedures. In the previous chapter, we looked at the Send To 
functionality between 3ds Mudbox and 3ds Max (which is possible as both are 
Autodesk products). This is essentially a .fbx transfer. If you are using ZBrush, you 
will want to get used to the GoZ equivalent transfer feature. Note that GoZ must be 
run from ZBrush to 3ds Max before it can go in the other direction. GoZ also works 
the free, mini-modeler tool from Pixologic (who make ZBrush too) called Sculptris, 
which is available at http://www.pixologic.com/sculptris/. In the following 
example, we'll directly export from Sculptris, a model made from a sphere (so it 
needs retopology to get a clean base mesh). We'll export it as a .obj and import 
it to 3ds Max in order to show a few of the idiosyncrasies of this situation. With 
a model that is sculpted from a primitive base, such as a sphere or box, there are 
no meaningful texture coordinates, so it would be impossible to paint the model. 
Although many sculpting programs, including Sculptris, do automapping, the 
results are seldom optimal.

Chapter 9
[ 341 ]
Importing a model into Sculptris
The following steps detail the instructions on importing a model into Sculptris:
1.	 Install Sculptris 6 Alpha and run it. Note that the default scene is a sphere 
made of triangle faces that dynamically subdivide where you paint. Use the 
brush tools to experiment with this a while.
2.	 Click on Open 
 and browse the provided content for this chapter, and 
open \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 9\Creature.sc1. The file format .sc1 is 
native to Sculptris.
3.	 To get this model to work in 3ds Max, you will need to choose Export  and 
save it instead as Sculptris.obj.
Importing the Sculptris.OBJ mesh in 3ds Max
After we have imported a model into Sculptris, we'll move on to see how we can 
save this file into 3ds Max. The importing part is fairly easy.
1.	 In 3ds Max, choose File | Import and browse to Sculptris.obj, the mesh 
you just exported from Sculptris. You could also try the example .obj called 
\Packt3dsMax\Chapter 9\RetopoBullStart.obj. The import options 
you set matter a lot. You will need to make sure that the options Import as 
single mesh and Import as Editable Poly are on. This makes sure that the 
symmetrical object employed in the Sculptris scene (actually a separate mesh 
that conforms to the model) doesn't prevent the import.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 342 ]
2.	 While importing, you should also swap the Normals radio button from 
the From SM group to Auto Smooth, to avoid the triangulated mesh 
looking faceted. A model begun in Sculptris won't contain any smoothing 
information when sent to 3ds Max and will come in faceted if you don't 
choose Auto Smooth. After importing, another way to do the same thing is 
to apply a Smooth modifier. The Auto Smooth value should be 90 or so, to 
reduce the likelihood of any sharp creases.
3.	 Finally, once the model is imported into the 3ds Max scene, move it in the Z 
plane so it is standing on the ground plane, and make sure its pivot is at 0,0,0. 
This can be done by choosing Edit | Transform Toolbox and clicking on 
Origin in the Pivot section. Note that the model's edges are all tiny triangles. 
This is a result of the way Sculptris adds detail to a model. Retopology will 
help us get a quad-based model to continue working from. The idea of 
retopology is to build up a new, nicely constructed model on top of the 
high-resolution model. The high-resolution model serves as a guide surface.
4.	 If you are curious, apply an Unwrap UVW modifier to the model and see 
how its UV mapping looks. Probably a bit scary. A high-resolution model 
such as this one (250K polys) is virtually impossible to manually UV map, 
at least not quickly. So we need to simplify the model.
5.	 If you can't see the Ribbon, go to Customize | Show UI | Show Ribbon, 
or press the icon 
 in the main toolbar.
6.	 Then click on the Freeform tab.
7.	 With the creature mesh selected, click on Grid 
 in the Freeform tab. This 
specifies the source to which we'll conform the new mesh that we're going to 
generate next. We don't want to conform to the grid, so change this to Draw 
On: Surface and then assign the source mesh using the Pick button below 
the Surface button, shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Each time you relaunch 3ds Max to keep working on the retopology, 
you'll have to reassign the high-resolution mesh as the source surface 
in the same way.
9.	 You could also use Draw On: Selection, which would be handy if the source 
was, in fact, a bunch of different meshes.

Chapter 9
[ 343 ]
10.	 There is an Offset value you can adjust so that the mesh you'll generate next 
will sit slightly above the source mesh that can help reduce frustration from 
the lower-resolution mesh, which is likely to sink in places within the more 
curvy, high-resolution mesh. If you're just starting out, try leaving the setting 
alone and see how it turns out. An additional way to help see what you are 
doing is to apply a semitransparent material or low Visibility value to the 
high-resolution model (or press Alt + X while it is selected).
11.	 Next, in a nested part of the Ribbon, we have to set a new object or model to 
work on (that doesn't exist yet). Click on the PolyDraw rollout at the bottom 
of the Freeform tab.
12.	 Having expanded PolyDraw, click on the New Object button 
 and 
we're ready to start retopologizing. I would strongly suggest raising the 
Min Distance value in the PolyDraw section, so when you create the first 
polygons they aren't too small. When using the Strips brush, usually I set 
the Min Distance to around 25-35, but it depends on the model scale and the 
level of detail you want. Just like with modeling, when you retopologize, it is 
best to move from large forms to small details.
The object will be called something like Box001, an Editable Poly 
beginning in the Vertex mode. You can rename it to Retopo or 
something more memorable.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 344 ]
13.	 Turn on the Strips mode 
 and make sure Edged Faces is toggled on (F4) 
so you can see the high-resolution model's center line. Starting at the head, 
draw a strip of polygons along the symmetry line so that there's an edge on 
either side. As this model is symmetrical, we only have to work on half of it.
If you hold the mouse over the Strips mode icon 
, you'll get 
a tool tip that explains how Strips are made, and if you press 
Y, you can watch a video demo albeit drawing on the Grid. 
Note that the size of the polygons, as you draw, is determined 
by the Min Distance value under PolyDraw. Bear in mind 
that apart from the Min Distance value, the size of the 
polygons drawn also depends on the current viewport zoom. 
This is handy because when working on tighter detail, you'll 
tend to zoom in closer to the source mesh.

Chapter 9
[ 345 ]
Retopology
There's no rush to do everything at once. You can edit what you've done to your 
liking, and then continue adding more strips. Strips can be joined at their ends using 
Step Build or Bridge, or Target Weld. You can also use the Drag brush 
 to slide 
the points of the strip on the high-resolution model surface.
I like to use the Strips method to establish the symmetry line as much as possible all 
the way round the model. You may want to skip over areas of tight detail like the 
mouth, saving them until later. Sometimes the strip's edge distribution will be a bit 
fine, as in the example shown below. Consider using Dot Ring to grab every second 
edge and choose Ctrl + Remove to lighten the mesh.
You will notice that since we're adding the strip along the symmetry line, there isn't a 
good fit to the actual middle as the polygons don't have a center edge. We can add a 
center line by making a Ring, selection around the strip, then ConnectEdges to make 
a new loop. To force this loop to be centered and absolutely flat, use Align | Align X 
found in Graphite Modeling Tools of the Ribbon.
Using Packt3dsMax\PacktUI.ui, right-click and choose Convert to Vertex, which 
makes the edge loop a vertex loop and puts us in the Vertex editing mode. After that, 
using the Conform brush tool 
 provides an easy way to make the edge loop fit to 
the high-resolution mesh's symmetry line. The Conform brush when active shows 
an options palette that, when expanded using the arrow icon , lets you toggle Use 
Selected Verts 
, which in this case makes sure you only affect the added loop. Due 
to the fact that the strip runs around the back and front, you may want to also toggle 
on Ignore Backfacing 
 below Use Selected Verts. Set the Conform value to 100 so 
verts jump immediately to the high-resolution mesh surface.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 346 ]
There are several ways to slap new polygons on top of the source mesh, including 
Step Build, which is a kind of one-at-a-time method that is good for detailed areas 
as you will have the most control. Also, there is the Topology tool that lets you 
draw guidelines on the surface and generates a polygon for each quad the drawn 
guidelines create, as they cross each other. Let's look at both of these methods 
in turn.
While this model isn't so very high poly that it will overtax the viewport, having set 
a strip of polygons to make a loop around the center line, you could now delete half 
the model down to its symmetry axis via Select by Half in the Polygon mode.
Exploring the Freeform/Polydraw tools
Open the scene RetopoStrip.max to begin from here, with the strip already running 
around the symmetry line of the monster.
1.	 The Step Build mode 
 lets you add verts and polys aligned on the surface 
of the high-resolution mesh. There are more hotkey combinations for the 
various possibilities.This tool offers us more hotkey combos then there are 
in Tekken, so it pays to rehearse them. You can view the tool tip list of key 
operations if you hold your mouse over the Step Build icon.
2.	 The basic idea is to click to add points, and then hold Shift and drag the 
mouse within a quad of points to create a polygon. You can create rows of 
points and then drag across them all in one sweep, holding Shift + LMB, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 347 ]
3.	 If you want to check for quads you might have missed, you can apply a Shell 
modifier with a sufficient Outer Amount thickness value, and turn on Show 
End Result  in the modifier stack while working with Step Build at the 
Editable Poly level. Remember that the Shell modifier used this way is 
only meant to provide a visual guide and should be removed later.
4.	 Enter the Drag mode 
 to shuffle points that you've added around on the 
surface, so the edge loops you're creating flow nicely.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 348 ]
5.	 The Topology tool lets you draw a series of interlacing lines in a grid over 
the high-resolution mesh surface, and where the lines overlap to form quads, 
it creates polygons. The nice feature of this tool is that you can explicitly 
control edge loop shapes. In the following screenshot, smaller lines help 
form end corners:
6.	 After creating a lattice of such lines, right-click to commit them. They show 
a surface while you are drawing the lines, but you have to commit them to 
include the result in your object. Once you do so, you'll notice that the Shell 
modifier kicks in (if you are using it). In the following screenshot, the first 
section made with Step Build and the new section made with Topology have 
been joined together. To join the pieces, select the facing edge loops and use 
Bridge Edges. Make sure there's the same number of segments on both sides.

Chapter 9
[ 349 ]
7.	 After joining the pieces, I used the Conform Relax brush, highlighted in the 
following screenshot, to help smooth the edge loops created so far. There's 
also a Conform Scale and Conform Move brush in the same section of the 
Ribbon. If you try them out on a section of your mesh, it'll be clear enough 
how each brush affects the mesh.
8.	 If you want to continue from here, you can open the provided scene at 
\Packt3dsMax\Chapter 9\RetopoExtendStart.max.
9.	 The Extend tool 
, below Step Build, allows you to quickly drag out a new 
strip. The best way to use this is by holding down Shift + LMB and dragging 
an existing edge. The leading edge of each new polygon has the same 
relative shape as the edge you drag it from. It's similar to extruding an edge 
while modeling, by using Shift + LMB in the Move mode, except the points 
conform to the surface of the source mesh. Skewed edges that you drag out 
can be adjusted in the Drag mode 
 or Extend mode  by holding Shift + 
Ctrl + Alt + LMB and nudging the points. This key combination may seem 
a bit annoying at first, but you'll get used to it. Think of it as "mash all the 
command keys at once".

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 350 ]
10.	 Note that there are other shortcut combinations for Extend, which allow you 
to do even more. You can reproduce entire loops in one go by dragging while 
you hold Ctrl + Shift + LMB and then nudge the new polygons around until 
you release. You can effectively bridge between two edges by dragging while 
you hold Ctrl + Alt + LMB.
11.	 Try dragging a strip of polygons using Extend (Shift + LMB and drag an 
edge) along the length of the creature's ear. Also, try it using the Strips tool. 
Note that the Strip mode polygons have an even size and spacing based on 
the tool settings we discussed earlier, whereas the Extend mode polygon 
size is up to you, since each polygon will only be created when you release 
after dragging.
12.	 In the previous screenshot, A was made using Extend (plus nudge), B was 
made using Strip (set to Min Distance = 25), and the join at C was made in 
the Extend mode using Ctrl + Alt + LMB.

Chapter 9
[ 351 ]
Pinch/Spread
When you use Extend, you may notice that the strips you generate may tend toward 
being thinner than they need to be, especially if you're starting from an area of detail 
and moving out towards a broader surface. To solve this quickly, we can use the 
Paint Deform tool Pinch/Spread . To use this, set the brush radius to be a bit 
bigger than the strip you added (around 0.55 was fine for the example in the 
following screenshot), and hold Alt while stroking over the polygons to spread 
them out (not using Alt will shrink them to be even tighter). This is very similar 
to the Scale Conform brush 
 and works well alongside it.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 352 ]
Using Quad Cap Pro to generate meshes to 
conform
The highly worthwhile commercial script called Quad Cap Pro can be used to 
generate a quad-based mesh from an extruded Spline or border. The script is 
available on Marius Silaghi's website at http://www.mariussilaghi.com/
products/quad-cap-pro, and there's a video example there about capping splines. 
The script allows us to fill an area bounded by polygon strips, as shown in the 
following steps:
1.	  In the following screenshot in step A, an open border that frames an empty 
area we want to fill has been selected. Using Packt3dsMax\UI Settings\
UI.ui, you can right-click and choose Create Shape From Edges, or you can 
find it in the Graphite Modeling Tools by expanding Borders. We used this 
tool in Chapter 4, Mod My Ride: Extending upon a Base Model, so you may want 
to review it. Be sure to set Linear in the Create Shape options. After creating 
it, at Top-level select the new Shape01 object and add an Extrude modifier 
with its Amount set to 0.5. You can use Quad Cap Pro directly on the Border 
selection of the model, but I like to break it off to be safe.
2.	 In step B, the extrusion has been created by giving a large single polygon on 
top. If you have the Quad Cap Pro script, you can run it and choose Preview, 
then Apply. The default options should be fine in this case, but you may 
want to use the Rotate function to adjust the result, which works a bit like 
the Twist 1 function in the Bridge Polygons tool. The result is shown in C.
3.	 In step D, finally, the new surface has been detached from the extrusion. 
Since the polygon selection to which you applied Quad Cap Pro remains 
selected, you can press Ctrl + I to invert it and delete the rest of the extruded 
shape. Then you should Attach and Weld the result to the retopology object. 
This should be easy since the border you're rejoining it to is the same. Then 
you can use the Conform Relax brush to ensure the newly added polygons 
fit to the high-resolution source mesh. If you find that the welded borders 
don't join properly, it is probably because the extruded face that gets capped 
needed to be flipped. Also, you will find from time to time that Quad Cap 
Pro asks you for a border with an even number of segments, so you have to 
add an extra edge (or remove one).

Chapter 9
[ 353 ]
Filling stubborn polygons
To fill a quad using Step Build 
, dragging while you hold Shift + LMB, make sure 
you drag it out from the middle of the space you want to fill toward the unclosed 
gap. From time to time when you use Step Build and want to fill a polygon, it may 
not want to be your friend. So, you have to use another mean. In cases like the one 
in the following screenshot, in Step Build mode hold Shift + Alt and glide the mouse 
over the four points you want to surface, and then left-click in the middle of them 
after they're highlighted. If you are working inside of a cavity or on a surface with a 
lot of existing surface behind it (even with Ignore Backfacing 
 turned on), you may 
find that this method is the easiest way to get a result even though it's more or less 
manual polygon building. For this tool to work without glitches, it is best to orient 
the current section you are working on so that there are no polygons behind it, and 
it even helps to hide polygons that you have already constructed from time to time 
while working on a really complex part, such as the inside of a mouth. 

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 354 ]
To hide a polygon selection, use Edit Geometry | Hide Selected in the Command 
Panel or Graphite Modeling Tools | Visibility | Hide Selected  in the Ribbon.
Topology concerns for animation
If you compare the source files Retopo01.max to Retopo12.max and 
RetopoBodyStart.max from \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 9\, you will notice that the 
process first shows the build-up of the quad-based mesh, and then there's a second 
pass where the flow of the edge loops is cleaned up to maximize the potential of the 
model; this is done, in particular, so that deforming areas like the skin around the 
eyes and mouth and neck get tidy, uninterrupted loops.
In the cleaned-up version, the key and secondary edge loops are marked by 
assigning differently colored materials to the polygon selections. Shading the loops 
can help you analyze and clean up the initial pass. It's advantageous also in that it 
helps you isolate edge loops that aren't contributing a lot to the form, which you 
can then remove using Remove.
The following screenshot shows a before and after of the retopology pass and the 
clean-up pass.
In the top frame, an edge loop around the eye is not closed, and in the lower frame 
it has been flowed by using Cut and Target Weld and regular edge editing steps, so 
that it is closed.
Also, in the top frame, the arrow points to an overly dense area. The same area has 
been cleaned up in the lower frame. The arrow in the lower frame shows that the 
cheek edge flow is tidier too.

Chapter 9
[ 355 ]
Around the corner of the mouth, the edge loop flow simulates a muscle flow around 
the lips. Flowing loops are helpful in highly flexible, deformable areas of a model. 
Around joints like the elbow, knee, ankle, and wrists, distribute clean edge loops so 
they are evenly arranged on either side of the rotation point. In an area such as the 
skull, there is no movement of the polygons themselves during animation, so you 
can turn the edges and include less detail.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 356 ]
One of the simplest explanations of edge loop topology that I've come across is 
shown on the Blender forums (okay, it's not 3ds Max but polygons are polygons) at 
http://blenderartists.org/forum/showthread.php?93651-Poles-and-Loops. 
A similar reference is the blog tips compilation at http://gotwires.blogspot.com.
It's worth noting that if you work on the model in parts, you can approximate some 
topology automation using Conform and regular primitives, for example, setting up 
cylindrical meshes for the legs and conforming them into proper place:
1.	 Create a Cylinder on the ground under the leg, as shown in the following 
screenshot in A. Drag this up to the height of the inner part of the leg.
2.	 Add an FFD 4x4 modifier, and turn on the Control Points mode via the 
Command Panel options for the modifier. Select and move the control 
points so the Cylinder better fits the shape of the source mesh, as in B.
3.	 Delete the top and bottom of the Cylinder, as in C. We don't want the 
capped end because we'll be joining the surface to the rest of the 
retopologized mesh later.
4.	 Use the Conform or Relax Conform brush in the Freeform section of the 
Ribbon to quickly wrap the Cylinder mesh to the source mesh, as in D. 
Remember to set the source mesh as the Surface in the Freeform options. 
You may also want to add additional edge loops using Swift Loop.

Chapter 9
[ 357 ]
WrapIt by The Pixel Hive
Unlike in software such as 3d Coat, Modo 601, or ZBrush, there is no automatic 
retopology tool in 3ds Max. It so happens that a third-party company—"The Pixel 
Hive"—has written a commercial plugin WrapIt, which fills this gap. Matt Clark has 
updated the plugin to 3ds Max 2013.
To see what this offers, check out the demonstrations at 
http://www.matt-clark.co.uk.
WrapIt has two primary advantages over the methods we've looked at so far. One 
is QuadGen, which automatically shrink wraps a target quad mesh over the source 
mesh according to user settings. The other is AutoWrap, which gives you a live mesh 
update as you use Branch Paint for new loops around the form, bridging to the 
previous loop or to a border selection. It includes a Spacing tool, which redistributes 
loops evenly, and a Relax tool. There are certain limitations with shrink wrapping 
a mesh onto another. Automatic edge loops may miss nuances in the flow of forms 
that handset loops will allow you to achieve; and more importantly, cavities tend 
to be ignored, so for example, the mouth of our current creature would be a bit 
unresponsive to that approach. Also, extreme spikes in a mesh, such as branching 
horns, tend to stretch the wrapping mesh and are better conformed in parts. A 
logical workflow would be to work on the finely detailed areas of your creature by 
hand, and use WrapIt for larger volumes like the body, tail, and legs to get those out 
of the way quicker.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 358 ]
A quick walkthrough of QuadGen to get a base primitive to wrap to a high poly 
source mesh follows. After you install WrapIt, you can access it via Customize UI 
and assign it to a shortcut or Quad menu entry. Activate it, and a pop-up dialog will 
show the WrapIt options and tools.
1.	 In the scene, create a Box01 primitive with 1 x 1 x 1 segments that fits to 
the bounding box of the high-resolution model. The segments value is not 
at all important, as the final conformed mesh is a freshly generated object 
with segments determined during the procedure; so we just need a starting 
volume, as shown in the previous screenshot.
2.	 Press High Poly and pick the source mesh from the objects list that pops up.
3.	 Press Low and click on the Box01 object.
4.	 There is a vertical slider in the Select Objects panel, shown in the previous 
screenshot, that lets you vary the relative opacity of the high and low 
resolution meshes in the viewport.
5.	 Next to the picker button Low there's a button >, which opens the QuadGen 
dialog. Here, set the Quad Size to be 0.25. This value is much smaller than 
the default 10. A value of 10 gives a quick result, but usually much too 
chunky to be useful. The smaller value means the calculation of the mesh 
will take a while but have better fidelity.
6.	 Make sure the Optimize Quads checkbox is ticked. If you click on Hide 
Target, the high-resolution source mesh will be hidden after calculation. 
You may prefer to leave it unchecked and calculate in wireframe mode to 
see everything, as, after all, all the meshes overlap each other. In this case, 
you don't have to worry about projecting UVs or Materials. Skip down to 
the big Generate button, press it, and wait for the Status bar to complete.

Chapter 9
[ 359 ]
7.	 If you don't like the result and want to try different values, close the 
QuadGen dialog to pop up the WrapIt dialog and start again, and 
adjust the Quad Size value in the QuadGen dialog.
Note in the following example that the quad mesh tends to align vertically and 
horizontally, not at all based on the flow of forms in the source mesh. This is 
particularly evident in the tail, as indicated by the marked lines where the loops 
might be better aligned. Also note that the mouth is not properly concave; rather 
than fussing around trying to get that to work, it would be easier to join the body to a 
better version of the head. Also note that the feet details are a bit smoothed out. You 
can select the mesh faces, delete them, and then go ahead and manually build the 
faces for the detailed areas.

Go with the Flow Retopology in 3ds Max
[ 360 ]
In conclusion, QuadGen is good for quickly deriving a base mesh to sculpt on (a 
mesh made from evenly sized, evenly distributed quads that will subdivide well). 
It isn't so good for a final, animation-oriented retopology mesh, where the flow of 
loops should be sensitive to the possible deformation during animation. Note that 
QuadGen is just one part of the WrapIt toolset, and the plugin does include 
other manual polygon creation tools similar to those in the Freeform tab of the 
3ds Max Ribbon.
Finalizing the retopologized model
Suppose that you have manually reconstructed the head, used Cylinders as the base 
for the legs and tail and conformed those, and used WrapIt for the bulk of the body; 
you could attach the pieces together and use Quad Cap Pro on the borders between 
them to seal up gaps, and then relax the result using Conform Relax. The final check 
on the model is that its symmetry is okay and that there are no stray triangles or 
N-gons, which is easiest to do using Selection | Select by Numeric in the Ribbon. 
An example is provided in \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 9\RetopoBodyWrapItJoins.
max (you don't need the WrapIt plugin or Quad Cap Pro script to open the 
resulting mesh).

Chapter 9
[ 361 ]
As a final note, it is possible to automatically reduce the polygon count in a mesh 
while retaining its texture mapping using the Pro Optimizer modifier. Nice topology 
will generally be tossed out by this modifier, but it can produce a result very quickly. 
The usefulness of this might be to generate a very low-resolution proxy or collision 
mesh, or to create a mesh that's easy to bind to an animation rig using the Skin 
modifier (and then transfer the weights via the Skin Wrap modifier to the original 
mesh automatically). This process is discussed in the next chapter.
Summary
In this chapter, we've examined quad-based mesh retopology, and you should 
understand the difference between retopologizing a sculpted base mesh (for UV 
mapping and for further high-resolution sculpting) and retopologizing for animation 
so the edge loop flow is good for mesh deformation. You should also feel more 
comfortable about using the Freeform tools in the Ribbon, for modeling in general.


Pushing the Envelope – 
Model Preparation for 
Animation and Games
In this chapter, we will complete our modeling round by readying a model for game 
production through level of detail (LOD) creation, rigging, and skinning.
This chapter is not about modeling; instead, it aims to take you one step further 
towards animation. Many people learn modeling with the aim of doing animation, 
but the intermediate steps can prove a daunting obstacle. The first step we'll take 
involves model simplification (as it is easier to skin a low-resolution mesh than a 
highly sculpted one). After that we rig the creature using CAT, skinning the mesh to 
the rig, which is also known as binding or weighting, and examine some animation 
used to test the result.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 364 ]
The following topics are covered in this chapter:
•	
ProOptimizer
•	
Rigging the creature with CAT
•	
Rig naming and selection
•	
Rig display and access via layers
•	
Skinning the creature
•	
Skin advanced parameters
•	
Adjusting envelopes
•	
Painting blend weights
•	
Weighting per vertex
•	
Saving the rig and storing a setup pose
•	
Transfer of low poly skinning to a high poly character
•	
Testing the animation and making a preview
•	
3ds Max 2013 CAT data transfer to MotionBuilder
•	
Game readiness check
ProOptimizer
The model used in the previous chapter will serve our purpose. It has 28K polys and 
could be skinned directly, but it's a nice trick to first skin a low-resolution version 
and then copy the skinned data to the high-resolution model. For this we'll use 
ProOptimizer, which is a modifier that decimates unnecessary polygons according 
to the user's specification.

Chapter 10
[ 365 ]
Creating a low-resolution model prior to 
skinning
This section takes us through the workings of the ProOptimizer modifier, which is 
useful for polygon decimation of a mesh so that you can quickly give it a target 
poly count.
1.	 Open the file \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 10\Creature_SkinStart.max and 
select the main mesh Creature. Press Ctrl + V to paste it in a clone and be 
sure to set the Copy and not the Instance option. Hide the new model.
2.	 Convert the model in the scene to an Editable Poly, and in the Ribbon click 
on the Selection tab, and at the Polygon sub-object level (press 4) click on 
Select by Half (using the symmetry axis). After you have selected half of the 
mesh, press Delete. What working on half of the mesh does for us here is to 
ensure that after reducing the polygon count, both sides are identical despite 
the decimation.
3.	 Go to the modifier list in the Command Panel and select ProOptimizer, 
or go to Modifiers | Mesh Editing | ProOptimizer.
4.	 When reducing polygons you can select Keep Material Boundaries (on 
meshes that use more than one material), and you can also select Keep 
Textures and Keep UV Boundaries (which means there is no reduction in 
mesh density around the mapping seams, so UV islands will still hold their 
intended texture).
5.	 For what we're doing, which is generating a low-resolution mesh to make 
skinning easier, we don't need to worry at all about UV mapping. Eventually 
this model, once we've skinned it, will be discarded as soon as our original 
mesh shares the skin data from the optimized mesh. For now, what's more 
important is to be sure Protect Borders is on, since we've cut the model in 
half and we need to keep a clean symmetry mirror line.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 366 ]
6.	 In the ProOptimizer main parameters, you have to select Calculate before 
you can enter a lower vertex count. How long that takes depends on the 
mesh density. The result returned will at first be 100 percent, and the mesh 
will triangulate. Note that changing the parameters for Optimization 
Options after you have selected Calculate will invalidate the current 
solution, and you'll have to select it again to update the solution.
7.	 Enter 2500 in the Vertex Count field. You could also enter a percentage value 
around 15 to 20 percent, but the result is going to be about the same. That's 
all we need to do, except add a Symmetry modifier and then collapse the 
mesh to Editable Poly.

Chapter 10
[ 367 ]
Rigging the creature with CAT
Character Animation Toolkit (CAT) was originally intended to be a platform for 
developing multi-legged skeletons, as opposed to 3ds Max's native biped tool. It 
was originally written as a plugin for 3ds Max by Phil Taylor, who I worked with 
in my hometown of Dunedin, New Zealand, before it was acquired as a plugin by 
Softimage (since Phil went to work there). Now integrated into 3ds Max, CAT itself 
is still being developed. The newest version of 3ds Max 2013 sees some better CAT 
integration with MotionBuilder. On the Autodesk Area forum, you may notice Louis 
Marcoux in particular has posted some great demonstrations of CAT in action. So 
let's look at how CAT works.
1.	 Open the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 10\Creature_CATStart.max, or 
continue from where you left off. In the provided file, the different creature 
meshes have been set to different layers named after their resolution. Select 
Creature_LowRes and right-click and select Hide Unselected.
2.	 Notice the mesh has its pivot at the origin and it uses X = 0 for its symmetry 
line. This will make rigging and skinning a lot easier.
3.	 Go to the Command Panel and click on Create 
, then Helpers 
, and then 
expand the list, and instead of Standard helper select CAT Objects. This will 
expose the CAT Parent helper object. Highlight it and click in the scene on 
the Grid. Move it to (0, 0, 0) after you have created it.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 368 ]
4.	 CAT comes with a set of provided rig templates, but here we really need 
to start from an empty one, so first off, in the modifier panel give the rig a 
name; Bull, for example. Every bone added to the rig will have this as its 
prefix, so a short, descriptive name is best.
5.	 Set the CATUnits Ratio value to 1 and then click on the Create Pelvis button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 This should give you a box geometry floating above the CAT Parent helper 
object, which contains parameters that let us extend off new limbs. Since 
we're making a custom skeleton, the name of the geometry will be Hub001. 
Rename this in the Command Panel to Pelvis. You can scale the pelvis in the 
viewport or set its Length, Width, and Height parameters in the modifier. 
It doesn't matter much what you set, so long as the pelvis location is at the 
groin (between the hind legs) of the creature, on the center line at about the 
height a pelvis would be for this kind of creature. The last step to making the 
pelvis is to make its width span the distance between the back legs, since the 
leg bones generate with their pivot on the sides of the pelvis. A width of 50 
units should be sufficient.

Chapter 10
[ 369 ]
You may want to select the creature mesh and press Alt + X 
to enable X-ray mesh shading so you can see where bones 
from the rig will certainly be buried inside the model (as is 
the nature of bones).
7.	 With the Pelvis bone selected, click on Add Leg in the modifier panel 
section Hub Setup.
8.	 The created leg will have a square shape called a platform at Z = 0. The leg 
bones are generic, so will probably be overlong. Set the viewport coordinate 
system to Local, as this means when you scale and rotate the bones they 
adjust according to their own space, not the scene grid (View). To do this 
quickly, hold Alt and right-click in the viewport to expose the Animation 
Quad menu. You will have to do it for each of the transform types 
(unless you set the Constant coordinate system in the 3ds Max 
Preference Settings dialog).

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 370 ]
9.	 Scale the leg bones and move the foot platform so the foot sits where the 
mesh back foot is, and also make sure the knee joint is about where the mesh 
knee is located. Besides using Scale to adjust the bones you can also set their 
length in the modifier panel Limb Setup, or just use Move to locate the 
joint where you want it to be. After you're done with the limbs, experiment 
with moving the foot platform to see how the solver for the leg handles its 
overall motion. Don't forget to Undo to reset the location after you move the 
platform. Having taken the trouble of making one leg fit, we can now just 
select the Pelvis bone, and in Hub Setup click on Add Leg again to add an 
identical leg on the flip side of the creature.
10.	 Next, click on Add Spine. This creates a chain of bones with another hub 
at the top. This is vertical, aimed at human-like skeletons, but we can move 
it around however we like. Fit it so the second hub is where the top of the 
creature's ribcage would be, on the center line between the two forelegs. 
Note, you can either move the hub or move each spine bone individually. 
At any time you can set the number of links you want to have in the spine, 
though the default 5 links should be fine in this case. Rename the hub as 
Chest—which will be the chest. Rotate it, and possibly the Pelvis bone as 
well, so the spine follows the right curve for the creature, as shown in the 
next screenshot. The spine of an animal goes just on the inside of the back, as 
shown in the next screenshot. You can move the bones of the spine a bit away 
from the pelvis bone to make this easier; their linking won't change.

Chapter 10
[ 371 ]
11.	 Adding the tail is fairly easy. In the Hub Setup panel, click on Add Tail and 
then rotate the foremost tail bone into position and press Page Down to step 
down the chain of bones and adjust each one to suit. You can also select them 
all together and rotate them in a curling fashion. If you double-click on the 
top of the chain, it automatically selects dependent bones further down as 
well. It doesn't matter what you set as Width and Height of the tail bones so 
long as their Length is the longest dimension, as Skin envelopes tend to align 
to the longest bone.
12.	 Next, click on the Chest hub and again click on Add Spine in its Hub Setup 
panel. Except, we're going to use this as the neck and head. Select one of the 
new spine bones and change the link count for the spine to 2, then rename 
the new hub as Head. Rename these newly added spine bones as Neck.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 372 ]
The foreleg
For the foreleg, it would be handy to add a clavicle bone even though we're making 
another leg. Luckily, there's a checkbox in the leg properties that will insert the extra 
bone into the preset chain. Add the forelegs off the Chest hub.

Chapter 10
[ 373 ]
Rig naming and selection
Remember to appropriately name the joints of your character. In some cases you'll 
want to follow a naming convention established by a TD you're working with, or 
to match the naming convention in another rig type to make retargeting easier. As 
we've seen, CAT doesn't distinguish between a hub used as a pelvis and a hub used 
as a chest or head. Likewise, a leg can be an arm. With many characters you will 
want to add an arbitrary bone, such as the one that is linked to the head, used as a 
jaw. Whether it's a jaw or floppy ears, you'll need to name the bone yourself to make 
the rig easy to parse. To add floppy ears, while we're here, select the head and click 
on Add Bone, and locate the bone where the ear is on the mesh. With the new bone 
selected, click on Add Bone again to extend another link from it. Then, with the 
upper-most ear bone selected, click on Copy Bone Settings and select the head. Click 
on Add Bone, then select the new bone, and also click on Paste/Mirror Bone Settings 
in the Bone Setup panel, which will ensure both the ears are the same on both sides 
of the body, as shown in the following screenshot:

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 374 ]
Once you have named the bones, copy each one's name and paste it in the Create 
Named Selections field, and press Enter to commit it. This will add the bone to a 
list you can pull down to access quickly, where many parts of the rig may overlap 
or be buried inside the mesh, or may be quite small. In the case of the creature we've 
rigged, named selections should be added for Pelvis, Chest, Head, LeftEarUpper, 
LeftForeLegFOOT (platform), LeftHindLegFOOT (platform), and possibly 
LeftForelegShoulder, LeftHindlegShoulder, and so on for the right-hand 
side of the body.
CAT has a shared field in its modifier properties for entering the name of an entire 
limb, which then prefixes each involved joint, and each joint has a field for its own 
specifics. I tend to name bones for their rotation point (putting shoulder and elbow 
rather than upper arm and forearm). You may also want to set a shortcut for the 
selection of the entire spine and the entire tail, as well as the first bones for each. 
While you can Ctrl + LMB click multiple named selection entries, you may find 
it can save time to set a single named selection also for the feet.
Finally, don't forget to name the neck bones as Neck instead of the default Spine they 
get, because they are generated from a hub (the renamed Chest). This is important 
because when you Skin the model, the bones are accessed by their name and it can 
be confusing to have two Spine1 entries in a list.

Chapter 10
[ 375 ]
Rig display and access via layers
The rig is made up of brightly colored boxes. It is possible, though often not worth 
the time, to substitute these with custom meshes (or pieces of the target character 
mesh) so the rig looks more interesting. Animators often use a rig made with 
optimized pieces cut from the mesh that are linked to the bones (or used as bones), 
so they can hide the mesh itself while doing the rough stages of animation. It's just a 
matter of selecting the polygons, clicking on Detach, naming the piece, and hitting 
(in CAT) the Use Custom Mesh checkbox in the Bone Setup panel. You may have to 
set the pivot of the mesh to match the bone you're replacing first.
To change a bone's color, you can use the color picker next to the bone's name. Often, 
animators use blue for the right side of the body, green for the left, and yellow for the 
middle. In some cases, it can be nice to make long chains of bones gradient from one 
end to the other, as is the case with the provided rig's tail bones and spine.
Whether you use custom geometry or the default boxy bones, at times it is handy 
to set them to be less obtrusive. You can do this in a variety of ways. Collectively 
or individually, in their Object Properties you can set Display as Box (which 
makes them display as a box wireframe) or See-Through, or set a low value for 
their Visibility.
Often you'll want to hide the rig entirely. When rendering a viewport preview to 
a file, for example, the bones may be visible even if they have Renderable toggled 
off. A convenient way to do this is to assign a layer to the CAT elements and just 
toggle the layer hidden in the Layer Manager rollout 
. Since all the rig elements are 
prefixed with the same rig name, it's easy to select them and assign them to a layer. 
Select the entire CAT rig by selecting Select By Name (press H) and typing the rig 
name in the select field. Another way to hide the rig is to toggle Bone Objects and 
Helpers in the Hide By Category list in the Display tab of the Command Panel.
Saving the rig to a file
If you want to populate your scene with several versions of the same rig 
and also want to include the mesh with the rig, you can select the CAT 
Parent helper object, and in the modify panel under CATRig Load Save 
click on the Add Rigging button. This pops up a selection dialog, which 
is empty. Select Add in this dialog, then click on Creature_LowRes 
showing in the Pick Extra Nodes window, which pops up after that; then 
click on Pick Nodes and close the Extra Rig Nodes window. Now click 
on Save 
 above Add Rigging and you'll be able to browse to a location 
for your new CAT3 Rig Preset (.rg3). In future, when you create a CAT 
Parent helper, you'll be able to select the new preset, which includes the 
bones, controllers, and the mesh if you have added it.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 376 ]
Skinning the creature
From here you can load \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 10\Creature_SkinStart.max, 
which includes a ready CAT rig and the low- and mid-resolution meshes. Note that 
before you start, it is worthwhile to check for and delete empty objects in the scene or 
stray vertices floating in the model (tiny polygons that aren't attached to anything or 
other weird geometry glitches). This should be done before skinning or it can lead to 
corruptions of the vertex weights.
1.	 Select the Bull CAT Parent, and in the modify panel note the CATUnits 
Ratio value is 1.0. This is important because if the mesh was scaled very 
small and the CATUnits Ratio value was 0.1, for instance, you might get 
problems if you were to load save motions onto the rig (which we'll be doing 
later). It is better to size up the mesh than size it down. Remember to apply 
Reset Xform on the mesh if it does need scaling. You can do this quickly 
from the menu bar by clicking on Edit | Transform Toolbox, and then 
selecting the R button in the Toolbox. In the provided scene at hand, 
this has already been done.
2.	 Select Creature_LowRes, and in the menu bar go to Modifiers | Animation 
| Skin. In 3ds Max you have the option to first add the modifier Turn 
to gPoly, which converts the model to the hardware mesh format used 
internally by 3ds Max, something you couldn't do before 3ds Max 2013. 
It results in a performance improvement when bones deform it. You can 
convert an editable poly object permanently to gPoly format if you right-click 
on its modifier stack and select Deformable gPoly. This might make sense 
for a higher-resolution model, but it won't be a big deal for this case.
3.	 In the Command Panel, you'll see in the Skin modifier's Parameters buttons 
called Add and Remove (currently grayed out) in the Bones commands. 
The Edit Envelopes button at the top doesn't do much until you have added 
bones to the list. Select Add, and from the dialog that pops up filter Helpers 
 to be off, then add everything starting with Bull and then click on Select.

Chapter 10
[ 377 ]
4.	 These should then show up as entries in the list below Add in the modifier. 
In 3ds Max 2013 you can reorder the list using the icon 
. You don't want to 
add Helpers to the bone list because it would include the CAT Parent and 
the foot platform controllers, which would not contribute effectively to the 
skin result.
Skin advanced parameters
Once you've added bones, the mesh will already have some kind of weighted 
solution but it probably will be far from perfect, and we'll examine what needs 
attention and fix it. Work from the larger issues to the smaller ones, and just 
work down one side of the mesh. It's not time to start animating or moving the 
rig around just yet though. First, expand the Advanced Parameters section of 
the Skin modifier parameters.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 378 ]
The main thing to change here is the Bone Affect Limit value. Few parts of a real 
body would be significantly influenced by more than four joints, let alone 20. For 
performance purposes too, the more bones you allow to affect a vertex, the more 
intense the calculation. Some game engines limit this internally, so it's best to 
skin with that in mind so the solution in 3ds Max isn't broken once you export 
for gameplay.
Under the Bone Affect Limit value you'll also notice a section where you can Save to 
file and Load from file your Skin solution, using the .env format. Once you have set 
up the Skin weights successfully, it can be helpful to save it, just in case something 
goes wrong in the .max file and you have to reapply the Skin modifier. Many times 
this has saved me pain; in particular, I suggest saving the .env file before using 
the Mirror vertices tools, which sometimes produces a result you may not like but 
which you can't undo. At the very bottom of the Advanced Parameters section is a 
checkbox Weight All Vertices, which is used to ensure every vertex in the mesh has 
some influence from a bone so it isn't left hanging in space when the rig is animated. 
This is on by default. Below that, there's a button Remove Zero Weights, which 
prevents a vertex having a bone assigned to it with no influence (which can occur if 
you shift the weights yourself from one to another). Normally, I hit this near the end 
of the skinning process.
Adjusting envelopes
To actually start adjusting weights then, it's normal to start with envelopes, which 
are a guide object with controls attached to each bone that you can scale to set how 
much coverage of the mesh the bone will have. To get started, click on the Edit 
Envelopes button in the Skin modifier. You'll see gray lines appear where each bone 
is, and the first bone in the list will have a red wireframe around it that looks like a 
capsule. You can directly select the gray lines in the viewport, but this is often tricky 
if they overlap or if you are not sure whether you're selecting the correct one.
Go to the bottom of the Bones list and select Tail6, and pan the viewport to show 
the end of the creature's tail. A tail is pretty easy to weigh, and the defaults may even 
be fine as they are. For now, let's just look at the structure of the envelope. There are 
two parts, an outer and an inner influence. The inner influence is stronger and bright 
red. The outer influence represents a falloff from the inner influence and is dark red. 
Each of these has, by default, two cross sections that have four small gray handles 
you can move around in the scene, and moving them scales the cross section and 
thus changes the shape and scope of the envelope. When you click on one of these 
handles the cross section involved goes pink, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 379 ]
You can scale the cross sections, which is usually sufficient since most of the time 
you just want to decrease or increase the effect range of the bone. Sometimes though, 
you'll need to reposition the start and end of the envelope itself. There is a thin 
yellow line with gray handles at either end that you can select and move to change 
the envelope length, as shown in the following screenshot:

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 380 ]
Note that you can copy envelope settings for cross sections and paste them to other 
bones, but you can't copy and paste the altered locations of the bone length handles. 
In the current rig, a good case where you might want to move the bone length 
handles is in the neck and head, which are not lined up along the length of the 
bone but instead are perpendicular.
Where two bones connect there's usually an area of the mesh that will share the 
influence of both bones.
Envelope cross sections and properties can be changed in the modifier itself or in 
the viewport. You can Add additional Cross Sections, or Remove them (there's a 
minimum of two). The Radius value is what changes when you move one of the 
cross section handles. From inner to outer falloff there's an interpolation type you 
can set. The default is Falloff SlowOut. Often Falloff Sinual gives a more pleasant 
result, but can be time consuming to set for every bone.

Chapter 10
[ 381 ]
Under the falloff setting there's also an Abs. Effect value and spinner you can use to 
set the weights of selected vertices to the current bone. This is only available when 
you have Vertices mode ticked in the Select parameters just under Edit Envelopes. 
We're not quite at the stage of editing individual vertex weights yet though. It's 
normal to set the weights as much as you can using envelopes first, because it's 
fast, and once you start editing by vertex the envelopes may become unresponsive. 
The order of changes made to skinning is best done as Envelopes, Paint Weights, 
and then per vertex using the Weight Tool dialog 
, then if you want to get really 
granular you can use the Weight Table (but we won't in this case). For information 
on using the Weight Table, refer to http://goo.gl/4Kv7M (link shortened).
While adjusting envelopes, you may wonder what is the difference between 
Absolute weights 
 and Relative weights 
 for each envelope. Relative, which I 
never really use, gives you full weighting within the inner envelope and calculates 
falloff from the inner and outer envelope. Absolute, the default, discards the inner 
strength and just calculates from the middle of the envelope to its outer limit.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 382 ]
Checking skin adjustments
Now you have started changing weights, you'll need a way to see the effect of the 
changes. This is usually done in production by making an animation that tests the 
extreme rotations of the joints through a series of representative key poses. You can 
also rotate, check, and undo each joint bone by bone. As long as you save a Setup 
Pose you can reload on the CAT rig if you overdo the rotations testing things out. 
A weighting animation has been provided for this example called \Packt3dsMax\
Chapter 10\BullAnimTestClip.clp. To load this, select the CAT Parent helper, 
then go to the Motion panel, and in the Clip Manager rollout click on the Browse 
icon 
 at the bottom. Browse for the file, and once you locate it click on Open. 
Go with the default loading options, and then you should see the animation layer 
getting a range of keys from 0 to 100 with distinct joint rotations for testing 
the creature's skinning. If you are in the Setup mode 
, click on the icon to switch 
to Animation mode 
 so you can see the animation playback. Don't test skinning 
in the Setup mode, as you may mess up the base structure of the rig. Using this 
animation you can check the effect of changing the envelopes to the point 
where you'll know what areas will need to be further adjusted by hand 
(using vertex methods).
Weighting per vertex
Typically, I'll skip directly to using the Weight Tool dialog 
 after setting the easiest 
of the envelopes. After that I'll use the Paint Weights brush to blend the weights by 
brushing on the mesh in areas I want to smooth.
The Weight Tool dialog is small but packed with functionality.

Chapter 10
[ 383 ]
Let's have a look at how it works. The first few buttons let you Shrink and Grow 
a vertex selection you make in the viewport. If you use the + button to increase the 
current weight of the selection, then grow it. Now press + again and grow it again, 
and so on; you can easily create falloffs. If you click on a vertex, then by pressing 
Ctrl + clicking on a vertex in the same loop you can select the entire Loop or Ring 
using the respective buttons in the Weight Tool dialog. Underneath, there's a row 
of incrementing preset weights from 0 (nothing) to 1 (fully weighted) that are handy 
time savers. You can also type in a weight in the field under that and click on Set 
Weight. The + and - buttons increment the current value by the value in the Set 
Weight field. So if you enter 0.05 in the field you can fine-tune the vertex value 
up or down after clicking on one of the presets.
You can copy and paste weights from one vertex selection to another using Copy 
and Paste. Also, there's a more esoteric command called Paste-Pos, which according 
to the documentation, "Assigns the weight values currently in the copy buffer to the 
selected vertices based on the distance between them and the copied vertices." 
This is determined by the Paste-Pos Tolerance value defined in a field underneath 
Paste-Pos. Using Paste-Pos would be useful when you need to match weights 
between two superimposed skinned meshes sharing a common bone. I've never 
had a cause to use that command, but I can imagine it might be handy to fix up 
slight discrepancies in a skinning solution that's been created using the Skin Wrap 
modifier, which we'll be looking at shortly. I do use the Blend command right next 
to Paste-Pos all the time. This will more or less relax or smooth the weights of the 
selection among the bones that also affect it, if there are more than one.
Below Blend there's a list of bones involved in the current vertex selection and the 
value for their weighting, which ranges from 0 to 1.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 384 ]
Painting blend weights
Apart from using the Blend tool we just mentioned, you can also brush the model in 
Paint Weights mode to either add or subtract weights using a set value, or else blend 
the weights based on the radius as it captures and averages the currently selected 
bone's influence based on the surrounding area and the other involved bones. The 
brush settings are accessed via a … button next to the Paint Weights button in the 
Skin modifier's Weight Properties section.

Chapter 10
[ 385 ]
It helps to set a radius that's not too massive using Max. Size in the Painter Options 
window. In Display Options, the checkbox Draw Ring shows the radius, Draw 
Normal shows a line representing the surface normal where the cursor is, and Draw 
Trace dynamically draws the trajectory of your brush stroke. Normal Scale sets the 
length of the Draw Normal line. Pressure Options are relevant only if you are using 
a Wacom tablet or equivalent device, rather than a mouse. By default, pressure has 
no influence, but you can set it so Pressure Affects each stroke's Brush Strength, 
Brush Size, or both together, as seen in the previous screenshot. In certain cases you 
may also want to turn on symmetry for the brush by checking Mirror and setting the 
mirror axis.
The primary brush properties to set are Min. Strength and Max. Strength. If you 
set either to 1 then when you paint it's pretty sure your strokes will max out. To 
make the strokes build up less aggressively set the Max. Strength value to 0.05, for 
instance. This would make sense when you have Paint Blend Weights turned off 
and want to paint additive values stroke by stroke over the surface of the model.
The default setting for the Paint Weights tool is that Paint Blend Weights is checked, 
so the Strength value then influences the blending setting if it's on. Essentially you're 
going to be toggling between additive weight painting and smoothing.
Note that while the Paint Weights mode is active, you can't alter the vertex selection. 
The paint weights tool is indifferent to the current vertex selection and uses the 
surface of the model and the currently highlighted bone. You can change bones 
while painting by clicking entries in the bones list, but you can't change bones by 
clicking in the viewport.
When you are painting weights and using the Blend command found in the Weight 
Tool dialog, and setting weights vertex by vertex or adjusting envelope cross 
sections, remember to scrub the timeline to other poses to see how the changes affect 
the actual deformation of the mesh as the bones rotate. Also, if you can't manage to 
select vertices or brush into a tightly folded area of the mesh, try changing frames 
to where the opposite rotations of the bones make the folds less troublesome. The 
test animation poses, since they are focused on checking the range of distortion, 
may include extreme poses for the limbs that are unlikely to be seen in normal 
animation sequences.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 386 ]
Mirror Mode
It pays, if the model is symmetrical, to skin on a primary side of the body and 
then mirror the vertex weights when that side is working well to the other side. 
To do so, save your scene before continuing (or load \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 10\
SkinMirrorStart.max) and expand Mirror Parameters in the Skin modifier for 
Creature_LowRes. Activate Mirror Mode and note that green and blue points 
display on the model on either side of the Mirror Plane field, which defaults to X 
(which is what we want). In the provided scene, the blue vertices should be pasted 
to the green side, though this may differ if you have been doing your own version. 
Click on the appropriate option Paste Blue to Green Vertices  or in the other case 
, if that's what you need. The result should look similar to the following screenshot, 
after which you can deactivate Mirror Mode:
Be sure to check whether this mirror flipping of vertex allocations gives you a nice 
result. An easy way to check this is to grab Feet from the Named Selection list (or 
select all the foot platforms of the CAT rig) and transform them together, and see if 
both sides of the model behave in the same way.
Transfer of low poly skinning to a high 
poly mesh
Once you are happy with the low-resolution mesh skinning, you may want to apply 
it to a high-resolution version. The whole point of skinning a low-resolution version 
of the model is it is more effective than trying to skin the high-resolution mesh, 
because the lighter mesh performs faster and is easier to control while skinning.

Chapter 10
[ 387 ]
In the scene \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 10\Creature_SkinWrapStart.max, go to 
the Manage Layers window 
 and unhide the Mid_Res layer to reveal the mesh 
Creature_MirRes. Click on Creature_MidRes and apply the modifier Skin Wrap. 
In its parameters, click on Add, and directly click on Creature_LowRes in the scene. 
At the bottom of the screen, in the status bar, you'll see a running calculation of the 
skinning solution as it is applied to the new mesh. After this is complete, drag the 
time slider to check everything looks alright. Check the Weight All Points checkbox 
at the bottom of the Skin Wrap parameters, and then click on Convert To Skin.
You will notice a new Skin modifier is added above the Skin Wrap modifier, which 
itself is automatically disabled and can even be deleted. You'll also be able to delete the 
low-resolution skinned mesh if you want to, though you may prefer to animate with 
the low-resolution mesh (saving the animation layers as clips using the Clip Manager 
rollout in the CAT Parent helper object) because the low-resolution mesh will likely 
perform better in the viewport. Remember in the case of the mid-resolution mesh, for 
its Skin modifier, to set the Bone Affect Limit value to 4 in the Advanced Parameters 
section, and as a precaution to Save the weights to an .env file.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 388 ]
Testing the animation and making a 
preview
This isn't a book about animation, but once you add an Absolute animation layer 
 to the CAT Layer Manager rollout in the Motion panel, and press N to turn on 
the Autokey mode, you can readily start setting key poses at different frames in the 
timeline; you'll find it's not hard to get underway.
The provided \Packt3dsMax\Chapter 10\Creature_Walk.max scene shows 
the skinned model ambling along in a 40 frame loop, and even with the medium-
resolution creature model the playback is pretty nice. The model in the provided 
scene has the Turn to gPoly modifier added to it, below the Skin modifier, which 
doubles the frame rate for playback.

Chapter 10
[ 389 ]
Still, playback in the viewport is subject to the performance of the computer you're 
using, and you will want to be able to at least view the real-time playback via a 
preview. In the viewport, go to the + label and from the drop-down list select Create 
Preview | Create Animated Sequence File.... In the dialog that pops up turn off 
Bone Objects. You may also want to hide the CAT layer in the scene via the Layer 
Manager rollout. Set the preview's Image Size to 100 percent. 3ds Max defaults to 
50 percent preview size, since a preview that's smaller renders faster and has a 
default render size of 640 x 480. However, the preview calculation is generally 
fast enough to get a speedy preview at full size. Much of the rest is a matter of 
preference. You want to toggle on Highlights, Textures, and Background, though 
in the current scene there aren't any to worry about. If you are rendering to show 
off your model topology, you might want to turn on Edged Faces. You have a 
choice whether to render a movie file format (AVI) or an image sequence, using still 
image formats such as .jpg or .png. You should also make sure your Playback FPS 
matches your output goal, either 30 fps, 24 fps, 25 fps, and so on.
In the case of an image sequence, you have to specify the output location for the 
frames, while for an AVI preview besides setting the video compression codec you 
prefer, you just have to look in the C:\Users\~\Documents\3dsMax\previews\_
scene.avi folder. If you plan on keeping these, just rename the file and move it to 
another folder of your choice.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 390 ]
3ds Max 2013 CAT data transfer to 
MotionBuilder
If you are the proud owner of a Kinect sensor (an accessory for your Xbox), you 
will be able to use MotionBuilder to record yourself moving around using an 
open source software such as Brekel Kinect, which creates a live capture session 
you can then characterize and save out as an FBX skeleton or apply to a CAT rig. 
MotionBuilder is able to adapt or retarget the different proportions of the captured 
skeleton to a skinned CAT skeleton you need to animate. This is a little bit of fun and 
is documented by Autodesk's Louis Marcoux (http://louismarcoux.com/) on the 
Area website where he conducts a great blog (http://area.autodesk.com/blogs/
louis/3ds_max_and_motion_builder_workflow_and_a_bit_of_kinect), and 
in fact, one of the great new features in 3ds Max 2013 is the better interoperability 
between MotionBuilder and CAT, which can make motion capture data handling 
much speedier than before. All you need to do is select a rig's CAT Parent, and in 
the File menu go to Send To | MotionBuilder, supposing you have MotionBuilder 
2013 installed.
Kinect motion capture – setting up with 
Brekel Kinect and MotionBuilder
For this you need a PC with a DirectX 11 capable graphics card. You will need a 
Kinect sensor (camera), MotionBuilder 2013 preinstalled, and a human actor so 
you can easily operate the software while they perform.
1.	 To install Brekel on a 64-bit Windows 7 machine, plug in your Kinect to a 
USB 2.0 port (not USB 3). It should autoinstall PrimeSense motor and camera 
drivers. Go to http://www.openni.org/Downloads/OpenNIModules.asp. 
Click on OpenNI Packages and then PrimeSense Package Stable Build for 
Windows x64. After completing the download, run the primesense-win64-
fullinstaller-dev.exe installer. This adds OpenNI and NITE.
2.	 Run the web installer for the Brekel Kinect main application at 
http://www.brekel.com/?page_id=160.
3.	 Check Kinect Camera and Kinect Motor in your Device Manager | 
Prime Sense.
4.	 Install the MotionBuilder device plugin from http://www.brekel.
com/?page_id=160.
5.	 Run MotionBuilder and Brekel Kinect (from the desktop icon).

Chapter 10
[ 391 ]
6.	 Ensure the User Tracking panel has PrimeSense NITE checked on. Then ask 
your actor to walk in front of the scene and wait for the app to register you 
with a skeleton. If you are having trouble with the automatic tracking, ask 
the actor to move out of frame. Click on User Tracking | Clear Calibration 
Data and redo.
7.	 If you want to, increase the Smoothing amount to reduce capture jitter. 
Below Clear Calibration Data adjust the NITE Skeleton Smoothing to 
0.6 or so.
8.	 In MotionBuilder, go to the Asset Browser panel and open Devices, 
and you'll see Brekel Kinect. This was installed by the MotionBuilder 
device plugin.
9.	 Drag this into the Navigator panel where it will show up in I/O devices. 
In the BKD panel, click on Online | Live |Model Binding |Create... to 
add a skeleton based on the Brekel Kinect session.
10.	 Ask your motion capture (or mocap) actor to take a stance as close to a T 
pose as possible. In the BKD panel, click on (Re) Create Character Nodes. 
This adds controls for the captured bones.
11.	 In the Character Controls panel of MotionBuilder (the one with the T-shirt 
guy), you'll see nodes for a character called Kinect. In the BKD panel, click 
on Recording.
12.	 In the Transport Controls panel of MotionBuilder, click on the red Record 
icon and also on Play. Ask your mocap actor to do some groovy moves. 
When ready, click on Stop in the Transport Controls panel of MotionBuilder. 
When prompted click on Overwrite Take. In the BKD panel, turn off Live. 
This allows you to play back the take using the Play icon in the Transport 
Controls panel.
13.	 Save the motion as .fbx by clicking on File | Motion File Export … as 
Move01.fbx, for example.
Matching a CAT rig to an FBX in 
MotionBuilder
For this stage you need a PC that has both 3ds Max and MotionBuilder 
installed. What we'll do is to ensure our 3ds Max CAT rig can accept the 
motion captured movement.
1.	 In 3ds Max, assuming you have already made your CAT rig to match an 
existing model's proportions, ensure the CAT rig's hubs are named Hips, 
Chest, and Head.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 392 ]
2.	 Adjust one of the Spine bones (in the modify panel) so it is not set to the 
Procedural mode but set to the Keyframed mode. This sets the whole spine. 
Do this for the neck too since it probably started out as a Spine type.
3.	 Select all the CAT bones, including the CAT parent, and go to File | Export. 
Use .fbx as the output format. There's no need to turn on export animation 
in the .fbx export options. Set the filename as CAT to MB.fbx.
4.	 In MotionBuilder, go to File | Merge and browse to your exported CAT to 
MB.fbx content. Use the default merge options.
5.	 In the Asset Browser panel, grab the Character icon and drag it into the 
Viewer (Perspective = P). The character will show up in the the Navigator 
panel as Characters | Character. Rename it to FBXCAT_, and in the Navigator 
panel click on the Character Definition tab.
6.	 Switch the Viewer from Perspective to Schematic (press Ctrl + W). Go to the 
Navigator panel, and in the Character Definition tab assign the CAT parent 
to the Reference channel using Alt+ LMB, and drag it from the Schematic 
view hierarchy to the Mapping List. Add all bones. The correspondence 
depends on bone names in your CAT rig, but the following table shows a 
general approach for a bipedal rig:

Chapter 10
[ 393 ]
7.	 When done, highlight the FBXCAT_ character, and in the main UI go to File | 
Save Selection. In the options for this, turn off everything except Characters 
in the list. Turn off Export Animation as well. Note that for future work, 
open the Schematic view (press Ctrl + W), select all the CAT bones, and Alt + 
LMB drag them for auto-remapping. So step 6 only needs to be done once for 
a given CAT rig.
8.	 Go to Navigator | Character | Characters | FBXCAT_ | Character Settings. 
Select Characterize and then go to Create | FK/IK. A control rig for the 
imported CAT content shows in the Character Controls panel.
9.	 In the Asset Browser panel, find Move01.fbx you made earlier using the 
Brekel Kinect device capture process. Right-click on it and select FBX Merge.
10.	 On your CATFBX character in Character Controls, go to Edit | Input | 
Move01.fbx. Also in Character Controls, go to Edit | Plot Character. This 
bakes the animation from one to the other. When prompted, select Skeleton. 
And again in Character Controls, go to File | Save Character Animation 
and call it CAT_FBX_ANIM or something similar.
Brekel motion capture tips
A wide-open background behind you, like a gym, won't be detected by the 
Kinect, so you will be tracked better against it. Otherwise, wear dark, tight 
clothes on a light background. The Kinect camera appears to have some 
trouble tracking knees in baggy jeans for example.
Make sure the capture area you'll perform in is clear of clutter, has no 
competing detail in the background, and is large enough for the moves you 
want to perform. Also, ensure the camera is capturing all of the actor.
The Kinect is not very good at registering bone rotations during crunched 
or side-on poses.
Orient your Kinect at a fairly high level off the floor; about chest or 
head height should be fine. Also, make sure the ambient lighting is 
not too bright.
Kinect doesn't capture finger motions or facial expressions. In CAT you can 
adjust fingers into custom or preset poses to make hand animation easier. 
Also, you can use Adjustment Layers in CAT to nondestructively adjust 
the captured animation.
Try to design your character model around the proportions of the mocap 
actor who will be performing during the animation capture sessions.
You can use Reduce Curves in the Curve Editor to simplify captured 
animation data. MotionBuilder also has strong filters to improve common 
problems that occur in mocap animation, such as smoothing and 
spike detection.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 394 ]
Matching a CAT rig to an FBX in 3ds Max
This section covers how to handle the captured animation in 3ds Max on the original 
CAT rig. For this you need a PC with 3ds Max installed and the CAT_FBX_ANIM.fbx 
file from the previous section.
1.	 Import the FBX file. Go to File | Import | CAT_FBX_ANIM.fbx. In the 
import options go to Include | File Content: Add to Scene. Don't click 
on Update Scene Elements, because there's nothing to update the first 
time. Also in the options, tick on Animation. Go to Bone Creation | Bone 
Conversion | Convert as Dummy (although this doesn't seem to matter).
2.	 In the main 3ds Max UI, go to Animation | Animation – CAT | Capture 
Animation. A dialog pops up in which you need to match the original rig 
with the animated bones you imported.
3.	 In the dialog, Set Target as CAT Parent rig. Set Source as FBX rig, starting 
from the Pelvis bone.
4.	 Match Target entries to Source entries in the list by clicking the source entry 
and the appropriate target entry. You can Shift select to chain together a 
bunch of entries in the sequence, such as arms and legs.
5.	 Make sure, as before, that the Spine bones in the CAT rig are set to 
Keyframed and not Procedural. When this is completed, click on Save 
in the Mapping options in the Capture Animation dialog.
6.	 In the Motion panel, under Layer Manager (with a CAT bone selected), 
make sure Available is the highlighted layer (an empty one).
7.	 In the Capture Animation dialog, click on Capture Animation. It transfers 
over the motion and adds a new layer to the Layer Manager rollout. Note 
that as you have already run this process, the next time you import an FBX 
animation from your saved MotionBuilder CATFBX template to this CAT 
rig in 3ds Max, you can choose Update scene element in the import options, 
since all the required mapping has been done.
8.	 In the Layer Manager rollout, next to Add Abs Layer there is a Move icon 
 
you can click that reveals a ghost skeleton for the CAT rig with a controller 
below it. You can drag it to (0, 0, 0) and rotate as required. Note that this 
doesn't generate a walk on the spot effect; it just relocates the start of the 
animation to the origin.

Chapter 10
[ 395 ]
Game readiness check
Throughout the book, we've already covered some ideas that contribute to a model's 
game readiness, such as creating good UVs, and setting a good object location in 
the scene. Since we're wrapping up the whole process we've been through, from 
preparing to model to making a base model to mapping and texturing the model, 
retopologizing it as required and even skinning it for animation, all we have to 
worry about is export. Should your model be required as an asset in a game, you will 
want to confirm all the features it has are correct, so the export and import into the 
game editor go as planned. The following is a list of important points to check over, 
to establish you are indeed done:
•	
For export, the model pivot should generally have its pivot located at 
(0, 0, 0) in the world space. The rig pivot should align with the rig at the 
origin as well.
•	
Before you skin it, your model should have its transforms reset so it doesn't 
scale strangely, for instance. If this wasn't done, you can save the skin data to 
a file, reset the model, then load the skin data back on. Or copy the skin data 
to a cloned version and paste it back after resetting.
•	
The scale of your model should be worked out so it isn't unreasonably tiny or 
huge in the world space of the game editor.
•	
The model might not export properly if it is part of a larger group.
•	
Some modifiers, such as Symmetry, may need to be collapsed to ensure the 
model works well external to 3ds Max.
•	
STL Check should be run on the model to check it doesn't have glitches such 
as doubled faces or unwelded vertices.
•	
Smoothing groups are often discarded during export or not read by other 
applications. If your model depends on them, you may face additional 
modeling work to compensate. General smoothing should also be checked 
so no curved surfaces in the model are faceted where they should be smooth.
•	
Texture coordinates or UV mapping should be checked they are correct, 
have no overlaps, and in some cases have the correct Material IDs.
•	
Morphs applied to the model should be checked, particularly that their 
weights be set to 0.0 before export. Sometimes you will need to export the 
morph targets themselves, and sometimes they'll be interpreted from the 
Morph modifier.
•	
The model's polygons should have appropriate materials assigned to them, 
particularly if you want to have different materials for different polygon 
groups. If the materials are meant for a specific renderer, it can be good to 
note this in file documentation and in the names of the materials.

Pushing the Envelope – Model Preparation for Animation and Games
[ 396 ]
•	
The model and the materials should be named, because once exported and 
imported to another application you may not be able to edit the names.
•	
The model may need to be in its setup pose or bind pose (the pose it has 
before animating). If you are exporting from an animated mesh, make sure 
the time slider is on frame 0, or you can specify the appropriate frame range 
to export.
•	
Hidden parts of the model, particularly if your model combines multiple 
elements or meshes, should be unhidden if you want them exported too.
•	
In most cases you will only export the skinned mesh, not the bones directly. 
Sometimes you will export the rig as a .fbx skeleton and load it separately 
in an editor, then assign it to the exported character geometry. Some editors 
may require animation driven by skin deformations or morph deformations 
to be exported as a point cache file.
•	
Some editors, or more likely sculpting software, can't handle open edges in 
the model; for instance, around eye sockets.
•	
In some cases you may want to save a thumbnail render or even a 
turntable animation of the asset so as to make it easier to stay organized 
when managing many files. If your asset includes a custom rig or custom 
controllers, it can be helpful to write some notes about their usage.
•	
Save a backup file of your completed 3ds Max asset even after it's been 
sent off into the game world and is there working nicely.
Summary
This chapter provides a fairly short overview of how to prepare a model for 
animation in terms of skinning and provisioning a rig. The intention is to round off 
the modeling process so there are no obstacles between modeling and animation. As 
we've observed chapter by chapter, each discrete topic in the model pipeline may at 
first seem bewildering, but practice really is the ingredient that leads to real fluency. 
Most of the processes are repetitive and predictable, and once you understand 
the basic idea you'll no doubt build upon what you know, and as you go you'll 
frequently stumble on a gem of new knowledge that makes your day. Hopefully, this 
book offers you a stepping stone, and I hope before long what we've been concerned 
with and been through step by step is the kind of thing you're taking for granted and 
can whip through without any trouble at all.

Index
Symbols
2D graphic component
progressing, to 3D component  172
3DBuzz  54
3ds Max
about  7
CAT rig, matching to FBX  394
content, searching in scene  38, 39
custom selection sets, creating with Named 
Selections  40, 41
display panel filters  48
game readiness, checking   395, 396
geometric object, establishing  8-11
gizmo axis direction, changing  61-65
hardware shading settings, determining  45
keywords   8
model, displaying  32-37
Object Properties  51
objects, cloning  66
pivot controls, using  56
retopologized model, finalizing  360
retopology  340
scene units, setting  37, 38
Scuptris.OBJ mesh, importing  341-344
shadow casting, disabling  54, 55
user interface  12-15
view navigation  23
Working Pivot  56
3ds Max 2013
Autodesk®, installing  234, 236
blend weights, painting  384, 385
creature, skinning  376, 377
Customizable Workspaces, setting up  231
Cut tool  231
gradient, for viewport background  234
low poly skinning, transfering to high poly 
mesh  386, 387
modeling features  230
modeling tools  229
motion capture data handling  390
objects, joining  248
Ribbon tools  258
skin advanced parameters  377, 378
Sub-Object level editing tools, via Ribbon  
236
tabbed layout  232, 233
UI features  230
3ds Max 2013 CAT data transfer
MotionBuilder, used  390
3ds Max default preferences
changing  42-44
3ds Max Help  8
3ds Max UVW Unwrap editor  268
3ds Max Working Pivot
about  56
working  56-60
A
Absolute weights  381
ActiveShade  81, 82
Affect Backfacing  130
animation
testing  388, 389
Autodesk DirectConnect  235
Autodesk MeshMixer  76
Autodesk style caddy
used, for setting values  101
AutoWrap, WrapIt  357
Axial Orbit tool  27

[ 398 ]
B
base model
creating  86
fitting, to artwork  104, 105
forming  93, 94
image reference, adding  86
model forms, generating with Cloth  
162, 163
parts, attaching  114-119
parts, detaching  114-119
poly loops. marking  126-128
Quad menu's editable poly tools  94-100
round forms, generating from quad-based 
geometry  106-113
sculpting  119-123
shapes, generating from edge selections  
139-141
smoothing group  156
soft modeling  129
Sub-Object selection, modifier applying  
136-139
Sweep modifier, comparing with Loft object  
153-156
values, setting with Autodesk style caddy  
101-103
Basic Wheels  29
blend weights
mirror mode  386
painting  384, 385
Booleans
cleaning  250-253
creating  248-250
Brekel Kinect and MotionBuilder
used, for setting up Kinect motion capture   
390, 391
Bridge Edges tool  112
Brush Images  319
By Polygon  102
C
caddy  101
capping splines  352
CAT
about  367
used, for rigging creature  367
working  367-371
CAT rig
matching, to FBX in 3ds Max  394
matching, to FBX in MotionBuilder  391, 393
CGSociety forums
URL  9
Character Animation Toolkit. See  CAT
CheckMate Certification  266
Clear command  296
Clone brush
using  320, 321
Clone to Element option  112
Cloth modifier
about  162
used, for generating model forms  162-164
Cloth modifier parameters
setting up  164-166
cluster  267
ConnectVertex tool  260
content
searching, in scene  38, 39
Copy  66
creature
skinning  376, 377
creature, rigging with CAT
about  367
foreleg  372
layer manager  375
naming convention  373, 374
rig display  375
selection  373, 374
Customizable Workspaces, 3ds Max 2013
setting up  231
Custom Map
using  320
custom mapping texture
applying  283
custom selection sets
creating, with Named Selections  40, 41
custom UI scheme  17
Cut and RemoveLoop tools  129
Cut tool  180  258
Cut tool, 3ds Max 2013  231
D
default preferences, 3ds Max
changing  42-44

[ 399 ]
default UI scheme
about  17
presets, switching  17, 18
Detach as Clone  115
direct painting
spherical and depth brush settings, used  
321, 322
versus, indirect painting  310
display panel filters
about  48
display properties  50
objects, freezing  49, 50
objects, hiding  49, 50
display properties  50
Double Face  203
Double Face problem  204
E
edge selections
shapes, generating from  139-141
Editable Poly  204
editable poly quad  95
Edit Poly modifier  157
Edit Seams tool  288
Exit Isolation Mode  116
Extend tool  349
Extrude Polygons tool  102
Extrude Settings  115
F
Falloff shape  130
Forger  76
Free-Form Deformations  134, 135
Freeform/Polydraw tools
exploring  346-350
Extend tool  349
Step Build mode  346
Topology tool  348
Freeform tab  132
Full Navigation Wheel  29
G
game readiness
checking  395, 396
Garment Maker modifier  163
geometric object
establishing  8-11
Ghost Town Lite
URL  186
gizmo
axis direction, changing  61-65
gradient, for viewport background  234
Graphite Modeling Tools  101, 258
Greeble
about  186
adding, to Tube  187
constructing surface  186-190
downloading  186
Edit Poly modifier, adding  187
PolySelect modifier, adding  187
Grid and Snap Settings  108
group
about  73, 102
used, for organizing scene  73
group functionality
about  74, 75
Schematic view  76
H
handy script
for fixing up UVs  292
hardware shading settings
determining  45
Hide Unselected  115
high poly model import  340
Home button, ViewCube  27
hotkeys
modifying  18, 19
I
Ignore Backfacing toggle  130
image reference, base model
adding  86-88
viewport image planes  89-93
Instance
about  66
adjusting  66, 68
iray
enabling  82
iray ActiveShade rendering  81, 82
Isolate Selection  115

[ 400 ]
K
Kinect motion capture
setting up, with Brekel Kinect and 
MotionBuilder  390, 391
Klanky the Robot
URL  186
L
Lathe modifier
about  142. 177
usage  142-145
layers  322-324
layout, UV mapping
finalizing  299-302
model, transfering to Mudbox  305, 306
Photoshop texture template, creating  
303, 304
Viewport Canvas painting mode  306
level of detail (LOD) creation  363
Local Normal  102
Local space  61
Loft modifier  153
Look command  30
Louis Marcoux
URL  390
low poly skinning
transfering, to high poly mesh  386, 387
low-resolution model, ProOptimizer
creating  365, 366
M
Map Output nodes  331
maps
loading, into other channels  325, 327
Marmoset Toolbag  55
Material Autodesk Arch + Design  257
material types
swapping, slate used  328
maxscript Quad Cap Pro
URL  141
mental ray Arch & Design  236
Mini Tour Building Wheels  29
MipMaps  267
mirror and flip commands  292
Mirror Axis value  133
model
displaying  32-37
importing  76-79
importing, into Sculptris  341
model forms
generating, Cloth used  162-164
modifier attributes
setting  73
Modifier Modifier Zorb
URL  72
modifiers
adjusting, in viewport  70
applying, to Sub-Object selections  136-139
modifier attributes, setting  73
objects, selecting  72, 73
ModularToolbarsUI  18
MotionBuilder
about  390
CAT rig, matching to FBX  393
used, for 3ds Max 2013 CAT data transfer  
390
motion capture data handling  390
Mudbox  76, 118, 305, 306
N
Named Selections
used, for creating custom selection sets  
40, 41
Nitrous Accelerated Graphics Core  45
nurnies  186
NVIDIA iray  230
O
Object Properties
render properties  54
Show Frozen in Gray  51
Trajectory  53
objects
moving, pivot controls used  56
rotating, pivot controls used  56
objects, joining
about  248
booleans, cleaning  250-253
booleans, creating  248-250
ProBooleans  254
Optimize brush  263

[ 401 ]
Optimize Keyboard combinations  263
Orbit command  30
Orbit Mode
about  26
acessing, in 3ds Max  24
Orbit Scene option  26
Orbit Selected option  26
Orbit SubObject option  26
P
Paint Connect (P Connect)  258
paint session
2D View painting  315-319
Brush Images  319
channel, selecting  312, 314
Clone brush, using  320, 321
Custom Maps  320
direct painting, spherical and depth brush 
settings used  321, 322
layers  322-324
maps, loading  into other channels  325-327
starting  310-312
Pan Mode
acessing, in 3ds Max  24
Pinch/Spread
about  351
using  351
pivot  56
Pixologic Scultpris  76
Point-to-Point Seams tool  282
Point-to-Point tool  288
Polygon Sub-Object mode  202
poly loop
about  126
marking  126-128
Poly Select
used, for applying modifiers to Sub-Object 
selections  136
preview
making  388, 389
ProBooleans
about  254
demonstration link  254
using  254, 256, 257
Projection parameters  178
ProOptimizer
about  364
low-resolution model, creating  365, 366
PSD (Photoshop Document)  314
PTex  268
Q
Quad Cap Pro
used, for generating meshes  352
QuadGen, WrapIt
about  357, 358
walkthrough  358-360
Quad menu
customizing  20, 21
Quad menus editable poly tools
about  94
editable poly quad  95
Graphite Modeling Tools  101
Removeloop  95
SwiftLoop  98
Quickslice (Qslice) tool  258
R
Random Control
URL  82
Recall Selection command  296
Reference  66
Refractive Software
URL  82
Relative weights  381
Relax functions  136
Relax tool  287, 357
RemoveLoop  95
render properties, Object Properties  54
retopologized model
finalizing  360
retopology
about  340, 345, 346
Freeform/Polydraw tools, exploring  
346-350
Pinch/Spread, using  351
Quad Cap Pro, using  352
stubborn polygons, filling  353, 354
Rewind command  30

[ 402 ]
Ribbon tools
about  258
Cut  258
optimize  262
Paint Connect  258
Quickslice (Qslice)  258
Set Flow  258
shift  261
SwiftLoop  258
using  258-261
Vertex  259
round forms
generating, from quad-based geometry  
106-112
S
scene
organizing, Groups used  73
Screen space  132
script
setting up  292
sculpting workflow
about  119
features  119
UV mapping  119
Scuptris.OBJ mesh
importing, into 3ds Max  341-344
SelectEdgeLoop command  94
Set Flow  258
shadow casting
disabling  54, 55
shapes
generating, from edge select  139-141
Shift brush
about  132, 261
Freeform tab  132
Mirror Axis value  133
Screen space  132
Show Frozen in Gray, Object Properties  51
skin advanced parameters
about  377, 378
envelopes, adjusting  378-381
skin adjustments, checking  382
weighting per vertex  382, 383
smoothing groups
about  156
editing  156-161
Snapshot
about  66, 69
capturing  69
soft modeling
about  129
relaxation techniques  136
with Free-Form Deformations  134, 135
with Shift brush  132
with Soft Selection  129-131
Soft Selection
about  129
parameters  130
using  130
Soft Selection tool  289
Spacing tool  357
spare parts
2D graphic component, progressing to 3D 
component  172-185
Greeble factory  186
Standard Tessellation Language. See  STL
star ship
building  192-195
building, from primitive  192
outer space, building  195-206
star ship construction walk through  206-225
Star Wars  186
Steering Wheel
about  28
Basic Wheels  29
Full Navigation Wheel  29
Mini Tour Building Wheels  29
using  29-31
View Object Wheels  29
Step Build mode  346
STL  205
STL Check modifier  203, 205
Sub-Object editing
in Manipulation mode  244-247
Sub-Object level editing tools, via Ribbon
about  236-238
dot selection  243
edge loop control  239
edge loop, growing using Grow Loop icon  
239
live select mode  242

[ 403 ]
Loop Mode  240
Loop Spacing tools  242
Manipulation mode  244, 245
Quickslice  241
Ribbon Freeform tool  237
ring selection  243
See-Through mode  240
Snaps tool  237
step selection  243
SubObj + Multi modes  242
SwiftLoop  241
Sub-Object selections
modifiers, applying  136-139
Substance map  330
Sweep modifier
about  153
comparing, with Loft modifier  153-156
SwiftLoop  98, 201, 258
T
tabbed layouts, 3ds Max 2013  232, 233
tablet user guide
about  327
asset texturing walk-through  334-338
material types, swapping  328
substance procedural textures  330-332
Target Weld Vertex  112
template scene
using  79-81
Topology tool  348
TraceParts
URL  236
Trackbar  231
trajectory
about  53
toggling  53
Trajectory, Object Properties  53
TriMesh object  9
Tumble tool  27
Turbosmooth modifier
about  201
assigning, to all models  70, 71
TurboSmooth modifier  68, 156
Turbosquid  266
Tweak In View tool  288
U
Ungroup command  75
Unwrap UVW editor
Edit UVWs window  269
Freeform Mode widget  270
working with  268-275
Unwrap UVW modifier
about  119, 127, 178
adding, to model  266
Unwrella  268
user interface
about  12-17
hotkeys, customizing  18, 19
Quad menu, customizing  20-22
view layout, modifying  22
UV editor  267
UV layout tools
about  289
Soft Selection tool  289
UV Mapping
about  119, 265
custom mapping texture, applying  283
goal  266, 267
layout, finalizing  299-302
layout, packing  293-298
mirror and flip commands  292
points, aligning  290
texture, displaying on object  284
texture islands, combining  275-282
UV-Packer  268
UV Strip Straightener
URL  292
UVW editor hotkeys
setting  290
V
Vertex mode  96
ViewCube
about  27
adjustments, making  27
Axial Orbit tool  27
cube  27
Home button  27
Tumble tool  27

[ 404 ]
view layout
modifying  22
view navigation, 3ds Max
Orbit mode, accessing  24
Pan mode, accessing  24
Steering Wheel, using  28-31
ViewCube, using  27
Zoom mode, accessing  24
View Object Wheels  29
Viewport Canvas  309
Viewport Canvas painting mode
2D View  307
about  306, 307
viewport image planes  89
View space  61
visual language, for science fiction 
machinery  170, 171
Vray and VrayRT
URL  82
W
Weight Tool dialog  381
Working Pivot. See  3ds Max Working Pivot
WrapIt
about  357
automatic edge loops  357
AutoWrap  357
limitations  357
QuadGen  357
X
XRef  73
Z
ZBrush  76, 118
ZBrush parlance  120
Zoom Mode
acessing, in 3ds Max  24
options  25
Orthographic views  25
Perspective view  25
Zoom Extents Selected  25
Zorb Tools
about  72
features  73

Thank you for buying 
3ds Max Speed Modeling 
for 3D Artists
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. 
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Unreal Development Kit Game 
Design Cookbook
ISBN:  978-1-84969-180-2            Paperback: 544 pages
Over 100 recipes to accelerate the process of learning 
game design with UDK
1.	
An intermediate, fast-paced UDK guide for 
game artists
2.	
The quickest way to face the challenges of game 
design with UDK
3.	
All the necessary steps to get your artwork up 
and running in game
Cinema 4D R13 Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84969-186-4            Paperback: 514 pages
Elevate your art to the fourth dimenstion with 
Cinema 4D
1.	
Master all the important aspects of Cinema 4D
2.	
Learn how real-world knowledge of cameras 
and lighting translates onto a 3D canvas
3.	
Learn Advanced features such as Mograph, 
Xpresso, and Dynamics.
4.	
Become an advanced Cinema 4D user with 
concise and effective recipes 

Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Google SketchUp for Game 
Design: Beginner's Guide
ISBN: 978-1-84969-134-5             Paperback: 270 pages
Create 3D game worlds complete with textures, 
leavels, and props
1.	
Learn how to create realistic game worlds with 
Google's easy 3D modeling tool
2.	
Populate your games with realistic terrain, 
buildings, vehicles and objects
3.	
Import to game engines such as Unity 3D and 
create a first person 3D game simulation
Unity 3 Game Development 
Hotshot
ISBN: 978-1-84969-112-3            Paperback: 380 pages
Eight projects specifically designed to exploit Unity's 
full potential
1.	
Cool, fun, advanced aspects of Unity Game 
Development, from creating a rocket launcher 
to building your own destructible game world
2.	
Master advanced Unity techniques such 
as surface shader programming and AI 
programming
3.	
Full of coding samples, diagrams, tips and 
tricks to keep your code organized, and 
completed art assets with clear step-by-step 
examples and instructions

Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

