
3ds Max 2018 - Getting Started with Standard
Materials and Lights
Ravi Conor
and
Elizabeth VT
3ds Max 2018 - Getting Started with Standard Materials and
Lights
Copyright © Rising Polygon
Book Code: RP14C
ISBN: 978-1975929374
Web: www.risingpolgon.co
Author Email: raveeoc@gmail.com

Acknowledgements
Thanks to:
Everyone at Autodesk [www.autodesk.com].
Everyone at Adobe [www.adobe.com].
Everyone at Microsoft [www.microsoft.com].
Thanks to all great digital artists who inspire us with their innovative VFX,
gaming, animation, and motion graphics content.
And, a very special thanks to wonderful CG artists of London, UK.
Finally, thank you for picking up the book.
About the Author
Rising Polygon, founded by Ravi Conor aka ROC, Elizabeth VT, and
Gordon Fisher is a group of like-minded professionals and freelancers who are
specialized in advertising, graphic design, web design and development, digital
marketing, multimedia, exhibition, print design, branding, and CG content
creation.
ROC has over a decade of experience in the computer graphics field and
although he is primarily a shading and texturing artist, he is also experienced in
the fields of Dynamics, UVMapping, Lighting, and Rendering. Along side
CINEMA 4D, ROC has experience with VRay, Maya, FumeFX, Mudbox, 3ds
Max, Mari, Photoshop, xNormal, UVLayout, Premiere, and After Effects.
Elizabeth is primarily an Android App developer. She is passionate about
computer graphics and has an experience of over 6 years with 3ds Max, Maya,
Photoshop, and Blender.
Gordon Fisher is the back bone of Rising Polygon and handles operations,
finance, and accounts.
You can contact authors by sending an e-mail to the following Email ID:

raveeoc@gmail.com.
Preface
Why this Book?
The 3ds Max 2018 - Getting Started with Standard Materials and Lights
textbook offers a hands-on exercises based strategy for all those digital artists
who have just started working on the 3ds Max [no experience needed] and
interested in learning texturing and lighting in 3ds Max. This brilliant guide
takes you step-by-step through the whole process of texturing, UV Mapping, and
Lighting. From the very first pages, the users of the book will learn how to
effectively use 3ds Max for shading and lighting surfaces.
The strength of this book is that it teaches all of the important concepts in an
easy to understand language. As the readers move from hands-on exercise to
hands-on exercise, they will be building their own portfolio of high quality
artwork. One unit of the book presents a foundation of techniques to help you
build custom textures, maps, and designs using Photoshop. Videos are provided
for the hands-on exercises of this unit.
What you need?
To complete the examples and hands-on exercises in this book, you need
2018 version of Autodesk 3ds Max. Photoshop CC 2017 is used to create hands-
on exercises of Unit MT1.
What are the main features of the book?
The book is written using 3ds Max 2018 and Photoshop CC 2017 in an
easy to understand language.
Shading, texturing, lighting, and UV mapping techniques covered.
49 Hands-on exercises to hone your skills.
Detailed coverage of tools and features.
Additional tips, guidance, and advice is provided.
Important terms are in bold face so that you never miss them.
Support for technical aspect of the book.
3ds Max files and PSDs/textures used are available for download from
the accompanying website.

How This Book Is Structured?
This book is divided into following units:
Unit MT1 - Creating Textures in Photoshop
Understanding non-destructive editing
Creating custom textures and designs
Creating maps
Unit MT2 - Material Editors
Compact Material Editor
Slate Material Editor
Unit MT3 - Standard Materials and Maps
General/Scanline materials
General maps
Unit MT4 - Physical and Autodesk Materials
Autodesk Materials
Physical Material
Unit ML1 - Standard Lights
Basic Lighting Concepts
Creating and placing lights
3ds Max Lights
Light Linking
Shadows
Lighting Effects
Unit ML2 - Photometric Lights
Photometric light types: Target Light, and Free Light
Color temperatures
Shadow generating shapes

Exposure controls
Unit ML3 - Sunlight and Daylight Systems
Sunlight and Daylight Systems
Positioning the Compass
Choosing a location
Sun Positioner and Physical Sky
Unit MBT - Bonus hands-on Exercises
Examination Copies
Books received as examination copies are for review purposes only and may
not be made available for student use. Resale of the examination copies is
prohibited. If you want to receive this book as an examination copy, send the
request from your official e-mail id to us using the Contact page from our
website.
Electronic Files
Any electronic file associated with this book are licensed to the original user
only. These files can not be transferred to a third party. However, the original
user can use these files in personal projects without taking any permission from
Rising Polygon.
Trademarks
CINEMA 4D is the registered trademarks of Maxon Computers. Windows
is the registered trademarks of Microsoft Inc. 3ds Max is the registered
trademarks of Autodesk Inc.
Disclaimer
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior
written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations
embedded in critical articles or reviews. No patent liability is assumed with
respect to the use of information contained herein. Although every precaution
has been taken in the preparation of this book, neither the author, nor Rising
Polygon, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages

caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service
marks have been appropriately capitalized. Rising Polygon cannot attest to the
accuracy of this information. Use of a term in this book should not be regarded
as affecting the validity of any trademark or service mark.
Access to Electronic Files
This book is sold via multiple sales channels. If you don’t have access to the
resources used in this book, you can place a request for the resources by visiting
the following link: http://bit.ly/resources-rp.
Customer Support
At Rising Polygon, our technical team is always ready to take care of your
technical queries. If you are facing any problem with the technical aspect of the
book, navigate to http://bit.ly/contact-rp and let us know about your query.
Reader Feedback
Your feedback is always welcome. Your feedback is critical to our efforts at
Rising Polygon and it will help us in developing quality titles in the future. To
send the feedback, visit http://bit.ly/contact-rp.
Errata
We take every precaution while preparing the content of the book but
mistakes do happen. If you find any mistake in this book general or technical, we
would be happy that you report it to us so that we can mention it in the errata
section of the book’s online page. If you find any errata, please report them by
visiting the following link: http://bit.ly/contact-rp. This will help the other
readers from frustration. Once your errata is verified, it will appear in the errata
section of the book’s online page.
Contact Author
Stay connected with us through Twitter (@risingpolygon) to know the latest
updates about our products, information about books, and other related
information. You can also send an e-mail to author at the following address:
raveeoc@gmail.com.

Unit MT1 - Creating Textures in Photoshop
Photoshop provides intuitive and cutting-edge image editing features. These
features improve your efficiency and artwork as you incorporate them into your
workflow. In this section, I am discussing some techniques, tips, and concepts
that will help you in creating some cool textures and background designs. These
techniques will help you in creating cool looking backgrounds and textures for
your 3ds Max scenes.
In this unit, I will describe the following:
Understanding non-destructive editing
Creating custom textures and designs
Creating custom diffuse, specular, bump, reflection, and normal maps
Non-destructive Editing
Photoshop offers non-destructive editing features. This is the one of the
reasons that it remains an essential part of a texturing artist’s and designer’s
toolset. Non-destructive editing allows you to make changes to an image without
changing pixel data in the original image. There are many ways in Photoshop
that enable you to perform non-destructive editing. Here, I will discuss only
those techniques/concepts that are useful for texturing artists/designers.
Adjustment Layers
The Adjustment layers non-destructively alter underlying tones and colors
[see Figure F1]. These layers apply color and tonal adjustments to the image
without changing the pixel data. The adjustments are stored in the adjustment
layer and applied to the all layers below it. On the other hand, the fill layers fill a
layer with color, gradient, or pattern and do not affect the layers underneath.

Tip: Clipping Adjustment Layers
You can clip an adjustment layer to affect only one layer in the Layers panel.
To clip a layer, hold Alt and move the mouse pointer on the boundary of the two
layers. When the shape of the pointer changes, click to enable layer clipping.
The other advantages of using the adjustment layers are as follows:
You can re-edit the adjustment layer any time.
You can tone down the adjustment layer’s effect by lowering the
opacity of the layer.
You can reset the effect of the layer.
You can perform selective editing by using the adjustment layer’s
mask.
You can apply adjustments to the multiple documents by copying and
pasting adjustment layers between documents.
You can adjust the blending mode to merge their effect with other
layers.
You can toggle their visibility on and off to preview the before and
after comparisons.
You can rearrange, delete, hide, and duplicate the adjustment layers.
Filtering with Smart Filter
Any filter that you apply to a smart object is a smart filter. These filters
appear below the smart objects in the Layers panel. If you select a layer and
then choose Convert for Smart Filters from the Filter menu, the selected layer
is converted to a smart object and then you can apply smart filters onto the smart
object [see Figure F2].

Note: Smart Filters
You can use any Photoshop filter as smart filter except Extract, Liquify,
Pattern Maker, and Vanishing Point.
Like the Adjustment layers, you can re-edit smart filters, change their order,
blending mode, and so forth. To expand or collapse the view of the Smart
Filters, click the triangle next to the Smart Filter icon. If you want to expand
the new effects by default, choose Panel Options from the Layers panel. On the
Layers Panel Options dialog that appears [see Figure F3], check the Expand
New Effects check box.
Tip: Smart Filters
You can apply the Shadow/Highlight and Variations commands as Smart
Filters.

Note: Gallery
If you apply more than one filter using Filter Gallery, they appear as a group
with the name Filter Gallery.
Retouching on a Separate Layer
Clone Stamp Tool (also referred to as Clone Tool) is extensively used by
the texturing artists to retouch the textures. This tool and other retouching tools
such as Healing Brush, and Spot Healing Brush tools let you retouch non-
destructively on a separate layer.
When you are retouching on a separate layer, make sure that All Layers is
selected from the Sample drop-down in the options bar [see Figure F4].
Figures F5 and F6 show the original texture and randomize texture created
using Clone Stamp Tool, respectively.
Tip: Ignoring Adjustment Layers
Click the Ignore Adjustment Layers button to ensure that you won’t sample
from the adjustment layers. This button is available on the right of the Sample
drop-down [see Figure F4].
Tip: Clone Stamp Tool
If you use the default round brushes with the Clone Stamp Tool, you will get
soft and blurred clones. To get rid of this behavior, use a custom shaped grungy
brush.
Nondestructive Crop

After you create the crop rectangle using the Crop tool, ensure that Delete
Cropped Pixels is turned off on the Crop Tool options bar [see Figure F7] and
then crop the image. To restore the cropped data anytime, choose Reveal All
from the Image menu.
Tip: Crop Tool
You can also reveal pixels by dragging Crop Tool beyond the edges of an
image.
Masking
Masks in Photoshop are used to hide portions of a layer or reveal the portions
of the layers below [see Figure F8]. The masks are non-destructive, you can re-
edit them any time. As discussed earlier, the Filter masks allows you to mask
out the effect of the Smart Filters.
Tip: Adding layer mask to the Background layer
If you want to apply a layer mask to a Background layer, you need to first
convert it to regular layer by choosing, New | Layer from Background from the
Layer menu.
Blending Modes
Blending modes control how a layer blends with the pixels in the layers
beneath it [see Figure F9]. You can use the blending modes to generate various
effects that you can use to create cool textures, especially organic textures. The
Overlay, Multiply, and Soft Light modes in particular are very useful and
extensively used by the texturing artists. Blending modes in Photoshop are
grouped category wise.

Here’s is a quick rundown:
Normal Category
The members of this category are Normal, and Dissolve. The resulting color
of the pixels is not affected by the color of underlying pixels unless Opacity of
the source layer is not less than 100%.
Subtractive Category
The members of this category are Darken, Multiply, Color Burn, Linear
Burn, and Darker Color. These modes tend to darken the colors.
Additive Category
The members of this category are Lighten, Screen, Color Dodge, Linear
Dodge (Add), and Lighter Color. These modes tend to lighten the colors.

Complex Category
The members of this category are Overlay, Soft Light, Hard Light, Linear
Light, Vivid Light, Pin Light, and Hard Mix. These modes perform different
operations on the layers. The result depends on whether one of the colors is
lighter than 50% gray.
Difference Category
The members of this category are Difference, Exclusion, Subtract, and
Divide. These modes generate the final color based on the differences between
the values of the source color and underlying color.
HSL Category
The members of this category are Hue, Saturation, Color, and Luminosity.
These modes transfer one or more of the components (hue, saturation, and
luminosity) from the underlying color to the result color.
Specifying a Tonal Range for Blending Layers
The Blend If sliders available in the Blending Options section of the Layer
Style dialog [see Figure F10] give you ability to control which pixels from the
active layer and the underlying layers appear in the final image.
You can remove dark pixels from the active layer or make the bright pixels
visible from the underlying layer. You can also blend the pixels to create a
smooth transition. You can also specify which channel data you want to blend,
the default is Gray which specifies the blending range for all channels [see
Figure F10].
Tip: Defining a range of partially blended pixels
To define a range of partially blended pixels, hold Alt and then drag the one
of a slider triangle [see Figure given next].

High Pass Filter
This filter, that you can access from Other sub-menu of the Filter menu, is
useful for sharpening the image as well as for creating a base image for the
bump maps. For enhancing the images, create a copy of the layer, and then apply
the High Pass filter to it with a relatively low radius. Now, blend the two layers
using the Overlay blending mode.
Note: High Pass Filter
This filter produces an effect opposite to that of the Gaussian Blur filter.
This filter is also useful for extracting line art.
To get the base image for the bump map, apply the High Pass filter with
relatively high radius value to the image [see Figure F11].
Using Channels Data
You can use the channel data to quickly create base images for bump and
reflection maps. To create base image for bump or reflection map, you can use
the red and blue channels, respectively [see Figure F12]. To create base images,
select the red or blue channel from the Channels panel and then press Ctrl+A to

select all channel data. Create a new document and press Ctrl+V to paste the
data. Now, you can use the Levels adjustment to create bump or reflection map.
Brush Engine
The Brush Engine in Photoshop is robust and extremely powerful. You can
create brushes that apply paint to images in a variety of ways. You can select an
existing preset brush, or create a unique brush tip from part of an image.
Creating brushes from any image is extremely easy, make a selection and then
choose Define Brush Preset from the Edit menu.
The Brush panel [see Figure F13] not only allows you to select preset
brushes but also lets you modify (add enhancement) the existing brushes and
design new custom brushes.
There are many options in the Brush panel that you can use to add
enhancements to your brush. Among the most useful are Shape Dynamics,
Scattering, and Smoothing.
When you use brush for painting on your textures, it is recommended that
you use a build-up approach. Always start with low opacity brush settings and
then build up the tone slowly. The end result will depend on how efficiently you
have used the opacity settings.
Hands-on Exercises

Before you start the hands-on exercises, let’s first create a project folder that
will host the exercise files. Navigate to the folder where you want to save the
files and then create a new folder with the name unit-mt1.
Exercise 1: Creating Marble Texture
Let’s start with creating a marble texture [see Figure E1] using filters and
image adjustment commands. In the process, you will learn about equalizing
images in Photoshop. Before tiling your textures, you need to fix problems such
as uneven brightness, visible seams, and shift in colors.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E1: Creating the Marble Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
15 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-1.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-1.MP4
Open Photoshop and create a 1000x1000 px document. Save the document
with the name umt1-hoe-1.psd. Unlock the Background layer and then press D
to set the black and white colors for the foreground and background,
respectively. Choose Render | Difference Cloud from the Filter menu to apply
the filter on the Layer 0 layer [see Figure E2].
Note: Difference Cloud Filter
The Difference Clouds filter randomly generates values between the
foreground and background colors to create a cloud pattern. This filter blends
the colors in the same way the Difference mode blends. The first time you apply

this filter, a cloud pattern is created by Photoshop. If you apply this filter a
subsequent number of times, ribs and veins are created that resembles a marble
texture.
Repeatedly apply the Difference Clouds filter until you get the basic marble
texture you are looking for [see Figure E3]. Duplicate Layer 0 and rename it as
Layer 1. Choose Blur | Average from the Filter menu to apply filter to Layer 1
[see Figure E4].
The Average filter averages color of an image or selection and then fill the
image or selection with that color. It helps in creating smooth looking textures.
Warning: Transparent Pixels
Unexpected results are produced if you average pixels from the transparent
regions.
Place Layer 1 underneath Layer 0 in the Layers panel. Set the Blending
Mode of Layer 0 to Linear Light and then set Opacity to 50%. Make sure
Layer 0 is selected and then choose Other | High Pass from the Filter menu. In
the High Pass dialog that appears, set Radius to 120 and click OK [refer to
Figure E5].
The High Pass filter allows you to retain the edge details in the specified
radius where sharp color transitions occur in the image. It then suppresses the
rest of the image.
Note: High Pass Filter
The High Pass filter creates a smooth version of the image. For example, if
you apply this filter to a grass texture, it will convert the image to a
homogeneous patch of green. 

Note: High Pass Filter
This filter produces the opposite effect that of the Gaussian Blur filter.
Tip: Extracting Line Art
This filter is useful in extracting line art and large black and white areas
from the scanned images.
Choose Adjustments | Shadows/Highlight from the Image menu. In the
Shadows/Highlight dialog that appears, set Amount to 100 in the Shadows
group. Make sure Amount in the Highlights group is set to 0 and then click OK
[see Figure E6].
The Shadows/Highlights command lightens or darkens the image based on
the surrounding pixels. The default values in the Shadows/Highlights dialog are
meant for fixing images having backlight problem.
Note: Shadows/Highlights Command
You can also use this command to correct washed out images because they
were close to the camera flash.
Choose Adjustments | Color Balance from the Image menu. In the Color
Balance dialog that appears, set the values as shown in Figure E7 and then click
OK.

The Color Balance command allows you to change the overall mix of the
colors in the image. You can use this command for a generalized color
correction. Press Ctrl+E to merge the layers. Choose Adjustments | Exposure
from the Image menu. In the Exposure dialog that appears, set Exposure to
0.65 and Offset to -0.0244. Press Ctrl+S to save the document.
Tip: Equalize Command
You can also use the Equalize command from the Image | Adjustment menu.
The Equalize command redistributes the brightness values so that they represent
entire range of the brightness values.
Tip: Hue/Saturation command
Use the Hue/Saturation command if you want to change the color of the
marble.
Note: Exposure Command
The Exposure command is primarily used with HDR images. It adjusts
tonality of the image in the Linear color space.
Exercise 2: Creating Tileable Seamless Texture
Here, you will learn to create a tileable seamless texture in Photoshop [see
Figure E1]. This technique is very useful and often used by texturing/digital
artists if they have to repeat a texture or pattern. In this example, you will use the
Offset filter and some Photoshop techniques.
The following table summarizes the exercise:

Table E2: Creating Tileable Seamless Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
45 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-2.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-2.MP4
Launch Photoshop and then open grungeMetal.jpg. In order to create a
tileable texture, first you will make the texture [that you want to make seamless]
square. Pick the Crop tool from Tool Box and then RMB click on the canvas,
choose 1x1 [Square] from the popup menu that appears [see Figure E2]. Press
Enter to commit the changes.
The Crop tool allows you to remove unwanted portions of an image. It also
gives you ability to straighten the images. The Crop tool is non-destructive tool
meaning you can retain the cropped pixels to optimize the crop boundaries later.
When you perform a crop on an image, Photoshop gives you real-time feedback
to visualize the final result.
Choose Image Size from the Image menu. In the Image Size dialog that
appears, set Width and Height to 496 and then click OK. Save the Photoshop
document as umt1-hoe-2.psd.
Tip: Document Size
The reason we have changed size from 497 to 496 is that we want an even
number [divisible by 2] here because the Offset filter that we will apply later

does not accept decimal values.
Now, let’s get rid of the lines or scratches from the texture [see left image in
Figure E3]. The reason we want to get rid of those scratches is that they might
look odd when texture is tiled. Pick Clone Stamp Tool from Tool Box. Choose a
noise brush [see Figure E4] for Clone Stamp Tool and then get rid of those
scratches [see right image in Figure E3].
Clone Stamp Tool allows you to duplicate objects or remove a defect in an
image. You can use this tool to paint one part of an image to another part of the
same image or over another part. You can also paint contents of one layer to
another layer. This tool also allows you to set a brush tip.
Now, let’s add some more details to the texture. Open oilTexture.jpg and
place it on the umt1-hoe-2.psd’s canvas [see Figure E5]. Set Blending Mode to
Multiply for the oil texture.
Add a Levels adjustment layer and clip it to the oil texture layer. Adjust the
levels [see Figure E6]. Ensure the oil texture layer is selected and then click the
Add layer mask from the Layers panel.
Set the foreground color to black and pick a noise brush. Now, paint black on
the mask to get rid of the seams and unwanted area [see Figure E7].

Press Ctrl+A to select all pixels and then choose Copy Merged from the
Image menu. Press Ctrl+V to paste the data. Ensure the layer is at the top of the
stack in the Layers panel. Rename layer as Base. Press Ctrl+J to duplicate the
layer and then rename the layer as Base1. Choose Other | Offset from the Filter
menu. In the Offset dialog that appears, set the parameters as shown in Figure
E8 and then click OK [see Figure E9].
Note: Offset Command
We have used the value 248 pixels for Horizontal and Vertical because it’s
half the value of 496, the 50% of the original size.
The Wrap Around feature fills the undefined space with content from the
opposite edge of the image.
Ensure the Base1 layer is selected in the Layers panel. Click the Add layer
mask button to add a layer mask. Ensure the Foreground Color is set to Black
and then pick a noise brush. Using the Brush tool, paint on the seams to get rid
of them.
When you paint black, you reveal the layer underneath [see Figure E10].
Tip: Adding randomness to the texture

Paint on some other areas [not just the seams] to get some randomness in
the texture.
Tip: Adding randomness
You can add more randomness by cloning the some area using Clone Stamp
Tool. You can also use Healing Brush Tool to clone some areas. This tool allows
you to preserve the luminosity of the pixels.
Choose Flatten Image from the Layer menu and then unlock the
Background layer. Choose Canvas Size from the Image menu. In the New Size
section of the Canvas Size dialog that appears, set the values as shown in Figure
E11 and click OK.
Pick Move Tool from the Tool Box and then Alt+drag layer on the canvas.
Press Shift to snap the movement [see Figure E12]. Similarly, create two more
copies [see Figure E13]. Select all layers in the Layers panel and press Ctrl+E
to merge all layers.
Tip: Order of the layers
Create and place layers in clockwise direction [see Figure E13].
Note: Flatten Image
The Flatten Image command reduces the file size by merging all visible

layers. Any remaining transparent area is filled with white.
Warning: Flatten Image
When you use this command, the images are merged permanently. You
cannot revert to the unflattened state.
Warning: Flatten Image
Photoshop also flatten the images, if you switch between the color modes.
Therefore, I recommend that you make a backup of your document before
switching the color modes.
If you find some seams in the image or if you want to break the symmetry do
not hesitate in using Clone Stamp Tool.
Exercise 3: Creating custom diffuse, bump, reflection, and displacement
maps
This exercise deals with creating custom diffuse, bump, reflection, and
displacement maps that you can use in any 3D application of your choice. In this
exercise, you will first create the diffuse map by converting an image to a
seamless texture and then you will use various techniques to create other maps
from the seamless diffuse map.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E3: Creating custom diffuse, bump, reflection, and displacement maps
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
60 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-3.MP4
Open Photoshop. Create a 2000x2000 px document. Save the file as
concreteBare_Diffuse.psd. 
Open 
Concrete_L.jpg 
and 
drag 
it 
to
concreteBare_Diffuse.psd Photoshop file. Now, place Concrete_L.jpg as
shown in Figure E1. Rename the layer as Base [see Figure E2].

From the Filter menu, choose Other | Offset to open the Offset dialog. In
this dialog, set Horizontal and Vertical to 1000. Also, make sure Wrap Around
is chosen in the Undefined Areas group.
You will see that the offset is not centered on the canvas even if I have set
Horizontal and Vertical to 1000 units which is half the size of the document. It
happens because Offset filter takes whole image into account not just the visible
area of the canvas [see Figure E3]. Choose Cancel from the Offset dialog. To
overcome this issue, I will select the visible area of the image and then apply the
Offset filter.
Press Ctrl+A to select the visible area of the image and then press Ctrl+J to
create a layer from the selection. Rename the new layer as Base1. From the
Filter menu, choose Other | Offset to open the Offset dialog. In this dialog, set
Horizontal and Vertical to 1000 and then click OK to offset the texture [see
Figure E4].
Create a copy of Base and then move it above Base1 [see Figure E5]. Add a
layer mask to the Base copy and fill it with black [see Figure E6]. Set white as
active color and then make sure the layer mask is selected. Now, use a grunge or

noise brush and paint on the seams using white color [see Figure E7].
Now, choose a different noise brush and randomly paint to reveal some more
texture. Choose Flatten Image from the Layer menu to collapse all layers.
Create clones of holes on their opposite side using Clone Stamp tool [see Figure
E8].
Now, add a Levels adjustment layer and adjust the levels [see Figure E9].
Make sure the layer mask of Level 1 layer is selected. Now, paint black to get
the some of the details back from the state prior to applying levels [see Figure
E10].

Note: Levels Command
The Levels command/adjustment layer allows you to make adjustment to the
tonal range and color balance of an image. This command adjusts the intensity
levels of shadows, midtones, and highlights of an image. The histogram that this
command provides, gives you a visual feed for adjusting the key tones of the
image [see the image on the right].
Tip: Correcting Exposure and Color Balance
You can quickly fix issues like color balance and incorrect exposure using the
Levels command. The shortcut key to invoke this command is Ctrl+L.
Open Grunge_A.jpg and place it on the concreteBare_Diffuse.psd image.
Open the Layer Style dialog and adjust the Blend If options as shown in Figure
E11 and then click OK. Add a layer mask to the grunge layer and make sure it is
selected. Now, paint with black color using a noise brush to get rid of the seams
[see Figure E12]. Save the Photoshop file.

Tip: Adding Contrast to the Image
If any image does not use the full tonal range, you can use the Shadow and
Highlight input sliders inward until they touch the end of histogram. See the
before and after images given next.
Next, you will create the reflection map. You can create this map by
desaturating the image [Shortcut: Shift+Ctrl+U] and then using levels to
exaggerate contrast in the image. However, I like to use the blue channel of the
image to create reflection map as this channel already has some contrast by
default. Let’s do it.
Note: The Desaturate Command
The Desaturate command is responsible for converting color values to the
grayscale values. However, it does not change the color mode of the image. This
command produces results similar to that of the Hue/Saturation command when
you set Saturation to -100.
Warning: The Desaturate Command
If you are working with a multi-layer document, the Desaturate command
converts the selected layer to grayscale values.
On the Channels panel, click the Blue layer. Press Ctrl+A and then
Shift+Ctrl+C to copy the information. Now, create a new Photoshop document

and press Ctrl+V to paste the data. Shift+Ctrl+C is the shortcut key for the
Copy Merged command. This command copies merged data of all visible layers
in the selected area. In contrast, the Copy command copies the selected area on
the active layer. Add a Levels adjustment layer and exaggerate contrast in the
image [see Figure E13]. Save the file as concreteBare_Reflection.psd.
Similarly, to create the bump map, use the red channel information and
adjust levels to lighten the tone [see Figure E14]. If you want more details, you
can use the Brightness and Contrast adjustment to boost the contrast [see
Figure E15]. Save the file as concreteBare_Bump.psd.

To create the displacement map, copy the bump map and paste it in a new
document. Add a Levels adjustment layer and adjust levels until you get the
cleaner holes [see Figure E16]. Keep in mind that the white area will be
displaced on rendering, the black area will be left alone.
Now, blur the image with the Gaussian Blur filter with the strength of 1.3
for 
smooth 
displacement 
map. 
Save 
the 
file 
as
concreteBare_Displacement.psd.
Exercise 4: Creating Door Mat Texture
In this example, you will create a doormat texture [see Figure E1]. You can
use the same technique to create various types of fabrics and special effects. The
following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E4: Creating Door Mat Texture
Skill level
Basic
Time to complete
15 Minutes

Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-4.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-4.MP4
Open Photoshop and create a 960x540px document. Save the document with
the name umt1-hoe-4.psd. Fill the document with 50% gray using the Edit |
Fill command. Choose Noise | Add Noise from the Filter menu and then set the
parameters, as shown in Figure E2. Click OK.
Note: Add Noise Filter
The Add Noise filter applies random pixels to an image. You can use this
filter in a variety of ways. From reducing banding from the feathered selections
to give realistic looks to the heavily retouched areas, from making a texture
realistic to creating special effects.
It provides two options for noise distribution: Uniform and Gaussian. The
Uniform method creates a subtle effect whereas the Gaussian method produces
a speckled effect. You can use the Monochromatic option if you just want to
affect the tonal values leaving the color unchanged.
Choose Blur | Gaussian Blur from the Filter menu and then set Radius to 1
in the Gaussian Blur dialog that appears. Click OK. Choose Stylize | Wind
from the Filter menu and then select Stagger from the Method section. Select
From the Left from the Direction section [see Figure E3]. Click OK.

Note: Wind Filter
The Wind filter applies tiny lines to the image simulating a windblown effect.
It has three types: Wind, Blast, and Stagger. The Stagger is more dramatic than
the other two methods. This method offsets lines in the image [see the imaged
below].
Unlock the Background layer and apply the Color Overlay style to it [see
Figure E4]. Use the following color: #964605.
Pick Crop Tool from Tool Box and then RMB click on the canvas, choose
1x1 [Square] from the popup menu that appears. Press Enter to commit the
changes [see Figure E5]. Now, if you check the size of the image, it should be
540x540px. Notice in Figure E5, the fiber strands not oriented correctly. We
need to change their orientation to vertical. Let’s do it.
Note: High-res Seamless Texture

Use the technique explained in Exercise 1 to create a high-res seamless
texture.
Choose Image Rotation | 90 Counter Clockwise from the Image menu to
change the orientation of the strands [see Figure E6]. Now, let’s add some text
[Welcome] on the texture and apply some styling to it. Pick Horizontal Type
Tool from Tool Box and type “Welcome” using a font of your choice. Set Fill to
0% for the Welcome layer.
Tip: Wide Fonts
Wider fonts will appear good on this texture.
Apply the Inner Shadow layer style to the Welcome layer [see Figure E7].
Now, apply the Stroke layer style [see Figure E8]. Press Ctrl+S to save the file.
Figure E1 shows the end result.

Exercise 5: Creating a Stripes Texture
In this example, you will create stripes as shown in Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E5: Creating a Stripes Texture
Skill level
Basic
Time to complete
15 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-5.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-5.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document and then set the
Foreground and Background colors as follows: #995a00 and #dcab4c. Choose
Render | Difference Clouds from the Filter menu [see Figure E2]. Choose
Filter Gallery | Texture | Patchwork from the Filter menu and then set Square
Size to 5 and Relief to 25. Click OK [see Figure E3].

Note: Patchwork Filter
It breaks the image into squares. These squares are filled with the
predominant color in that area of the image. It randomly reduces or increases
the tile depth to make highlights and shadows.
Choose Blur | Motion Blur from the Filter menu. In the Motion Blur
dialog that opens, set Angle to 0, Distance to 2000 and then click OK [see
Figure E4]. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-5.psd.
Note: Motion Blur Filter
This filter is used to blur pixels in the specified direction. You can specify the
range from -360 degrees to +360 degrees. The range for motion blur intensity is
from 1 to 999.
Exercise 6: Creating Military Camouflage Texture
In this example, you will create a green camouflage texture using various
filters [see Figure E1]. The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E3: Creating Military Camouflage Texture
Skill level
Basic

Time to complete
20 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-6.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-6.MP4
Open Photoshop and create a 1000x1000 px document. Save the document
with the name umt1-hoe-3.psd. Fill the document with the color: #394f25.
Choose Filter Gallery | Texture | Texturizer from the Filter menu and then use
the settings shown in Figure E2. Figure E3 shows the texture.
Note: Texturizer Filter
The Texturizer filter applies a texture to the image. It has four built-in
textures: Brick, Burlap, Canvas, and Standalone [see the imaged below].
You can also load your custom texture by using the drop-down located
next to the Texture parameter [refer Figure E2]. The Light parameter can be
used to change the direction of the light. Figure on the right shows the Brick
texture with Light set to Bottom Right.
Unlock the Background layer and then create a copy of it. Rename the new
layer as Layer 1. Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch | Water Paper from the Filter
menu and then use the settings shown in Figure E4. Set the Blending Mode to

Linear Light and Opacity to 24%. Figure E5 shows the texture.
Note: Water Paper Filter
The Water Paper filter produces blotchy daub that appears to be carelessly
painted on a damp paper.
Duplicate Layer 0 and rename it as Layer 2. Move it to the top of the stack.
Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch | Halftone Pattern from the Filter menu and
then use the settings shown in Figure E6. Click OK.
Note: Halftone Pattern
The Halftone Pattern simulates the effect of a halftone screen. This filter
maintains the continuous range of tones. This filter can produce three patterns:
Circle, Dot, and Line [see images below].
Select Layer 0 and Layer 1 an then press Ctrl+E to merge them. Duplicate
Layer 2 and rename it Layer 3. Make sure Layer 3 is selected and then press
Ctrl+T to transform. Rotate the layer as shown in Figure E7. Also, scale the
image so that it covers whole canvas. Now, press Enter to apply the transform.
Ensure Layer 3 is selected in the Layers panel and then choose Blur | Gaussian
Blur from the Filter menu. In the Gaussian Blur dialog that appears, set

Radius to 1.6 and then click OK [see Figure E8].
Note: Gaussian Blur Filter
The Gaussian Blur filter blurs [add low frequency details] an image by an
adjustable amount. The term Gaussian refers to the bell-shaped curve that
Photoshop generates when it applies a weighted average to the pixels.
Set the Blending Mode for Layer 3 to Linear Light and Opacity to 24%.
Set the Blending Mode for Layer 2 to Soft Light [see Figure E9]. Choose
Flatten Image from the Layer menu. Create new layer and rename it as Layer
4, fill it with 50% Gray. Press D. Choose Render | Difference Cloud from the
Filter menu. Choose Adjustment | Equalize from the Image menu [see Figure
E10].Choose Adjustment | Threshold from the Image menu. In the Threshold
dialog that appears, set Threshold Level to 131 and then click OK [see Figure
E11].

Note: Threshold Filter
The Threshold command converts the images to high-contrast, black-and-
white images. All pixels lighter than the threshold value are converted to white;
all pixels darker are converted to black.
Set Blending Mode to Overlay for Layer 4 and then set Opacity to 18%.
Choose Filter Gallery | Brush Strokes | Simi-e from the Filter menu and then
use the settings shown in Figure E12. Click OK. Figure E1 shows the final
result.
Note: Sumi-e Filter
Sumi-e is a Japanese style filter. It produces effects like a fully saturated
brush applied to a rice paper. This filter creates soft blurred edges with rich
black.
Exercise 7: Creating Abstract Texture - I
In this example, you will create an abstract texture, see Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E7: Creating Abstract Texture - I

Skill level
Basic
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-7.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-7.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document and then set the
Foreground Color to #00aeef. Unlock the Background layer and fill it with the
Foreground color. Apply the Satin layer style and set the values shown in
Figure E2. Figure E3 shows the result.
Press Ctrl+J to duplicate the layer. RMB click on the layer’s name in the
Layers panel and then choose Rasterize Layer Style from the popup menu.
Choose Stylize | Trace Contour from the Filter menu. In the Trace Contour
dialog that opens, set Level to 128, Edge to Upper, and then click OK [see
Figure E4].
Note: Trace Contour Filter

The Trace Contour filter creates a contour map like effect. It finds
transitions between the major brightness areas and then outlines those areas for
each color channel.
Choose Blur | Motion Blur from the Filter menu. In the Motion Blur
dialog that opens, set Angle to -40, Distance to 23, and then click OK [see
Figure E5]. Set Blending Mode to Divide. Choose Distort | Twirl from the
Filter menu. In the Twirl dialog that appears, set Angle to 50 as shown in Figure
E6 and then click OK. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-7.psd.
Note: Twirl Filter
This filter rotates a selection. If you specify an angle, it produces a twirl
pattern.
Exercise 8: Creating Digital Circuit Board Texture
In this example, you will create a digital circuit board texture, see Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E8: Creating Digital Circuit Board Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-8.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-8.MP4

Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document with the white
background. Choose Convert for Smart Filters from the Filter menu. Choose
Noise | Add Noise from the Filter menu to open the Add Noise dialog. In this
dialog, set Amount to 20, Distribution to Gaussian, and the click OK.
Ensure the Monochromatic switch is on. Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch |
Halftone Pattern from the Filter menu and then set Size to 2 and Contrast to 4.
Ensure Dot is selected as Pattern Type and then click OK [see Figure E2].
Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch | Water Paper from the Filter menu and
then set Fiber Length to 45, Brightness to 76, and Contrast to 71. Click OK
[see Figure E3]. Choose Stylize | Trace Contour from the Filter menu. In the
Trace Contour dialog that opens, set Level to 155, Edge to Upper, and then
click OK [see Figure E4].
Press Ctrl+A to select all pixels and then choose Copy Merged from the
Edit menu. Now, press Ctrl+V. Create a new layer and place it below Layer 1.
Fill the layer with the #58712b color. Ensure Layer 0 is selected in the Layers
panel and then press Ctrl+I to invert the layer.
Set Blending mode to Lighten. Save the document with the name umt1-
hoe-8.psd.
Exercise 9: Creating Leather Texture

In this example, you will create a leather texture, see Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E9: Creating Leather Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-9.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-9.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document with the default
background and foreground colors. Choose Filter Gallery | Texture | Stained
Glass from the Filter menu and then set Cell Size to 5, Border Thickness to 4,
and Light Intensity to 2 [see Figure E2]. Click OK.
Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-9.psd. Save as the document
with the name displaceMap.psd. Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop
document and fill it with the #9D7a51 color. Choose Filter Gallery | Texture |
Texturizer from the Filter menu and then set Texture to Sandstone, Scaling to
60, and Relief to 2. Select Light to Top [see Figure E3] and then click OK.

Choose Filter Gallery | Texture | Texturizer from the Filter menu and then
select Load Texture from the Texture options [see Figure E4]. In the Load
Texture dialog that appears, select displaceMap.psd and then click Open. Set
Scaling to 100, Relief to 4, and Light to Top Left [see Figure E5]. Click OK.
Press Ctrl+L and then adjust the levels [see Figure E6]. Save the document.
Exercise 10: Creating Lattice Wire Mesh Texture
In this example, you will create lattice wire mesh texture, see Figure E1. The
following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E10: Creating Lattice Wire Mesh Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes

Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-10.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-10.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document with the default
background and foreground colors. Unlock the Background layer. Choose
Filter Gallery | Texture | Stained Glass from the Filter menu and then set Cell
Size to 10, Border Thickness to 4, and Light Intensity to 3 [see Figure E2].
Click OK.
Note: Stained Glass Filter
This filter repaints the image as single colored adjacent cells. The cells are
outlined in the foreground color.
Pick Magic Wand Tool from Tool Box and then click on the black area of
the layer. Press Ctrl+Shift+I to invert the selection and press Delete to remove
the pixels [see Figure E3]. Apply the Bevel and Emboss layer style to the Layer
0 and then set the values as shown in Figure E4.
Now, apply Inner Glow style, refer Figure E5. Add the Drop Shadow style

with Size and Distance set to 2.
Duplicate Layer 0 and then flip the duplicate layer by choosing Transform |
Flip Horizontal from the Edit menu. Create another copy of the layer and
change its position slightly using arrow keys [see Figure E6].
Remove the unwanted portion of the image using the Crop Tool and then
save the document with the name umt1-hoe-10.psd.
Exercise 11: Creating Brushed Metal Texture
In this example, you will create brushed metal texture, see Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E11: Creating Brushed Metal Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
15 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-11.psd

Video
UMT1VID-HOE-11.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document with the 50% gray
background. Choose Noise | Add Noise from the Filter menu to open the Add
Noise dialog. In this dialog, set Amount to 10, Distribution to Gaussian, and
the click OK [see Figure E2]. Choose Blur | Motion Blur from the Filter menu.
In the Motion Blur dialog that opens, set Angle to 0, Distance to 2000, and then
click OK [see Figure E3].
Save the document with the name metalDisplace.psd. Create a new
1000x1000 px Photoshop document with the 50% gray background. Choose
Noise | Add Noise from the Filter menu to open the Add Noise dialog. In this
dialog, set Amount to 2, Distribution to Gaussian, and the click OK.
Choose Filter Gallery | Texture | Texturizer from the Filter menu and then
select Load Texture from the Texture options. In the Load Texture dialog that
appears, select metalDisplace.psd and then click Open. Set Scaling to 100,
Relief to 13, and Light to Top Left [see Figure E4]. Click OK. Unlock the
Background layer and apply Gradient Overlay style on it, refer Figure E5 for
values. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-11.psd.
Example 12: Creating Reptile Skin Texture
In this example, you will create reptile skin texture, refer Figure E1. The
following table summarizes the exercise:

Table E12: Creating Reptile Skin Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
30 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-12.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-12.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document and then set the
Foreground and Background colors to default values. Choose Filter Gallery |
Texture | Stained Glass from the Filter menu and then set Cell Size to 10,
Border Thickness to 4, and Light Intensity to 3. Click OK. Save the document
with the name repltileSkinTexture.psd.
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document and then fill the
background with the #86441a. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-
12.psd.
Ensure repltileSkinTexture.psd is open and then select the black color using
Magic Wand Tool. Press Ctrl+C to copy the pixels. Switch to the umt1-hoe-
12.psd and then press Ctrl+V to paste the pixels [see Figure E2].
Ensure the Background layer is selected and then choose Filter Gallery |
Texture 
| 
Texturizer 
from 
the 
Filter 
menu 
and 
then 
use 
the
repltileSkinTexture.psd as Texture.

Also, set Scaling to 100, and Relief to 3. Select Light to Top Left [see
Figure E3] and then click OK. Select Layer 1 and apply the Color Overlay
style to it. Use the #542103 color.
Figure E4 shows the result. Apply Bevel & Emboss, and Drop Shadow
layer styles [refer Figures E5 and E6 for settings]. Figure E7 shows the result.
Press Ctrl+A followed by Ctrl+Shift+C to copy the merged pixels and then
press Ctrl+V to paste them. Choose Filter Gallery | Texture | Texturizer from
the Filter menu and then set Texture to Sandstone, Scaling to 100, and Relief
to 2. Select Light to Top [see Figure E8] and then click OK.
Exercise 13 : Creating Sand Texture
In this example, you will create the sand texture, see Figure E1.

The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E13: Creating Sand Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
30 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-13.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-13.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document with and then set the
Foreground and Background colors to default values. Choose Render | Clouds
from the Filter menu.
Note: Clouds Filter
The Clouds filter allows you to create a cloud pattern using the values that
transition between the foreground and background colors.
Tip: Dark cloud pattern
If you want to create a dark cloud pattern, hold Alt and then choose Render |
Clouds from the Filter menu.
Warning: Clouds Filter
When you apply the Clouds filter, the pixels on the active layer are replaced
by the cloud pattern.
Choose Noise | Add Noise from the Filter menu to open the Add Noise

dialog. In this dialog, set Amount to 5, Distribution to Gaussian, and the click
OK. Save the document with the name sandDisplace.psd. Create a new
1000x1000 px Photoshop document and then set the Foreground and
Background colors as follows: #c99754 and #e6c09b. Choose Render | Clouds
from the Filter menu.
Choose Filter Gallery | Texture | Texturizer from the Filter menu and then
use the sandDisplace.psd as Texture. Also, set Scaling to 100, and Relief to 29.
Select Light to Top Left [see Figure E2] and then click OK. Figure E3 shows
the result. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-12.psd.
Open the crumpledPaper.jpg and choose Other | High Pass from the Filter
menu. Now, set Radius to 165 in the High Pass dialog that appears and then
click OK [see Figure E4]. Save the document as crumpledPaper.psd.
Note: crumpledPaper.jpg
Image Courtesy: http://capturedbykc.deviantart.com/
Download Link: http://www.deviantart.com/art/50-Paper-Textures-Bundle-
358150111.
Switch to umt1-hoe-13.psd. Choose Filter Gallery | Texture | Texturizer
from the Filter menu and then use the crumpledPaper.psd as Texture. Also, set
Scaling to 144, and Relief to 46. Select Light to Top Left [see Figure E5] and
then click OK. Save the document.

Exercise 14: Creating Abstract Texture - II
In this example, you will create a line art texture, see Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E14: Creating Abstract Texture - II
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
30 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1

Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-14.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-14.MP4
Open crumpledPaper.psd. Choose Stylize | Emboss from the Filter menu.
In the Emboss dialog that appears, set Angle to -13, Height to 100, and
Amount to 500 [see Figure E2]. Click OK.
Note: Emboss Filter
This filter makes an image raised or stamped. It converts fill color of the
image to gray and traces the edges with the original fill color.
Tip: Fade Command
If you want to retain the color detailing, use the Fade command after
applying the Emboss filter.
Choose Blur | Motion Blur from the Filter menu. In the Motion Blur
dialog that opens, set Angle to 90, Distance to 2000, and then click OK [see
Figure E3]. Choose Distort | Twirl from the Filter menu. In the Twirl dialog
that appears, set Angle to 93 [see Figure E4] and then click OK.
Choose Stylize | Trace Contour from the Filter menu. In the Trace

Contour dialog that opens, set Level to 132, Edge to Upper, and then click OK
[see Figure E5]. Using the Magic Wand Tool, make a selection, refer Figure E6.
Create a new layer and fill it with the black color [see Figure E7]. Apply
Gradient Overlay and Inner Shadow layer styles [see Figures E8 and E9] for
settings. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-14.psd.
Exercise 15: Creating an Organic Texture
In this example, you will create an organic looking texture, see Figure E1.

The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E15: Creating an Organic Texture
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
30 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-15.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-15.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document then set the Foreground
and Background colors to default values. Choose Render | Difference Clouds
from the Filter menu. Apply this filter multiple time by pressing Alt+Ctrl+F,
until you get a nice pattern [refer Figure E2]. Unlock the Background layer.
Create two more copies of Layer 0 and name them as Layer 1 and Layer 2,
respectively.
Turn on Layer 1 and Layer 2. Ensure Layer 0 is selected in the Layers
panel and then choose Filter Gallery | Artistic | Plastic Wrap from the Filter

menu and then set Highlight Strength to 11, Detail to 9, and Smoothness to 6
[refer Figure E3]. Click OK.
Note: Plastic Wrap Filter
This filter wraps the image in the shiny plastic, making the surface detail
more noticeable.
Turn on Layer 1 and select it in the Layers panel. Choose Stylize | Emboss
from the Filter menu. In the Emboss dialog that appears, set Angle to 90,
Height to 4, and Amount to 500 [see Figure E4]. Click OK.
Set Blending Mode to Overlay for Layer 1. Now, select Layer 2 and make
it visible. Choose Filter Gallery | Artistic | Paint Daubs from the Filter menu
and then set Brush Size to 10, Sharpness to 3, and Brush Type to Simple [refer
Figure E5].
Click OK. Set Blending Mode to Lighten for Layer 2. Figure E6 shows the
result.
Note: Paint Daubs Filter
This filter produces a painterly effect using different brushes. The available

brushes are Simple, Light Rough, Dark Rough, Wide Sharp, Wide Blurry, and
Sparkle [refer to images given below].
Select Layer 0 and then choose Blur | Gaussian Blur from the Filter menu.
In the Gaussian Blur dialog that opens, set Radius to 3 and then click OK [see
Figure E7]. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-15.psd.
Exercise 16: Creating Backgrounds - 1
In this example, you will create a background, as shown in Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E16: Creating Backgrounds - 1
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
25 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-16.psd

Video
UMT1VID-HOE-16.MP4
Open carinaNebula.jpg. Choose Calculations from the Image menu. In the
Calculations dialog that opens, set Channel to Blue in the Source 1 section. Set
Channel to Red from the Source 2 section. Set Blending to Overlay. Also,
ensure that New Channel is selected from the Result drop-down [see Figure
E2]. Click OK.
Note: Calculations Command
The Calculations command allows you to blend two individual channels
from one or more source images. You can apply results to a new image, new
selection, or selection in the active image.
Warning: Calculation Command
If you are using two source images, the images must have the same pixel
dimensions.
Switch to the Channels panel. Ensure that the Alpha 1 channel is selected
[see Figure E3]. Press Ctrl+A and then Ctrl+C to copy the channel data. Now,
select RGB channel layer. Now, select RGB channel. Switch back to the Layers
panel and then press Ctrl+V to paste the data [see Figure E4].
Set the Foreground and Background colors to #8f2c00 and #b93904,
respectively. Create a new layer and place it under the pasted layer and then
using Gradient Tool fill the layer. Set Blending Mode to Linear Light for the
Layer 1 [see Figure E5]. Ensure Layer 1 is selected and then choose Lens Flare
from the Filter | Render menu. In the Lens Flare dialog that opens, place the
hotspot as shown in Figure E6, and then click OK. Figure E7 shows the result.
Choose Distort | Wave from the Filter menu. In the Wave dialog that appears,
set the values, shown in Figure E8 and then click OK.

Note: Lens Flare
The Lens Flare filter allows you to simulate the refraction caused by shining
a bright light into a camera lens.
Note: Wave Filter
This filter is like the Ripple filter but it provides better control. It creates an
undulating pattern on a selection.
Press Ctrl+J to duplicate Layer 1 and then choose Stylize | Emboss from
the Filter menu. In the Emboss dialog that appears, set Angle to 135, Height to
3, and Amount to 100 [see Figure E9]. Click OK. Save the document with the
name umt1-hoe-16.psd.

Exercise 17: Creating Backgrounds - 2
In this example, you will create a background, as shown in Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E17: Creating Backgrounds - 2
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
30 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-17.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-17.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document and fill it with black.
Create a new layer and fill it with black as well. Choose Lens Flare from the
Filter | Render menu. Set the values in the Lens Flare dialog that opens, as
shown in Figure E2 and then click OK.

Press Ctrl+J to create a duplicate layer and then choose Transform | Flip
Horizontal from the Edit menu. Set Blending Mode to Screen [see Figure E3].
Merge the upper two layers. Choose Distort | Wave from the Filter menu. In the
Wave dialog that appears, set the values, shown in Figure E4 and then click OK.
Choose Distort | Polar Coordinates from the Filter menu. In the Polar
Coordinates dialog that appears, select Rectangular to Polar and then click
OK [see Figure E5].
Note: Polar Coordinates Filter
This filter can be used to create a cylinder anamorphosis, a form of art
popular in the 18th century. It converts a selection from rectangular to polar
coordinates and visa-versa.
Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch | Chrome from the Filter menu and then set
Detail to 5 and Smoothness to 7. Click OK [see Figure E6].

Note: Chrome Filter
This filter allows you to render the image as if it had a polished chrome
surface. The areas with highlights are raised whereas areas with shadows
appear lower.
Tip: Chrome Filter
If you are using this filter, use the Levels adjustment to add more contrast to
the image.
Add a Curves adjustment layer and adjust the curve [see Figure E7].
Now, add a Hue and Saturation adjustment layer and check the Colorize
check box in the Properties panel. Adjust the Hue slider to give the design some
color [see Figure E8]. Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-17.psd.
Exercise 18: Creating Backgrounds - 3
In this example, you will create a background, as shown in Figure E1.

The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E18: Creating Backgrounds - 3
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-18.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-18.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px Photoshop document. Press D to set the
Foreground and Background colors to default. Choose Render | Clouds from
the Filter menu. Unlock the Background layer.
Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch | Chrome from the Filter menu and then set
Detail to 0 and Smoothness to 10 [see Figure E2]. Click New Effect Layer and
click Sketch | Plaster [see Figure E3] and then click OK.
Choose Distort | Wave from the Filter menu. In the Wave dialog that
appears, set the values, as shown in Figure E4 and then click OK.

Figure E5 shows the result. Press Ctrl+J to create the duplicate of Layer 0.
Choose Distort | Wave from the Filter menu. In the Wave dialog that appears,
click Randomize then click OK. Set the blending mode to Lighten. Add a
Color Balance adjustment layer and then set the values as shown in Figure E6.
Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-18.psd.
Exercise 19: Creating Backgrounds - 4
In this example, you will create a background, as shown in Figure E1. 
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E19: Creating Backgrounds - 4
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
30 Minutes

Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-19.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-19.MP4
Google the following term: stephen quentent hubble, then download the
image. Open the downloaded image in Photoshop. Unlock the Background
layer. Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch | Chrome from the Filter menu and then
set Detail to 0 and Smoothness to 10 [see Figure E2].
Create two copies of Layer 0 and rename them as Layer 1 and Layer 2.
Turn off Layer 2 and then select Layer 1. Choose Distort | Wave from the
Filter menu. In the Wave dialog that appears, accept the default values and then
click OK. Change blending mode to Lighten [see Figure E3].
Select Layer 2 and turn it on. Choose Distort | Wave from the Filter menu.
In the Wave dialog that appears, click Randomize couple of times to get a
different pattern and then click OK. Set blending mode to Screen. Merge the
layers and then apply the Extrude filter to get some interesting results.
Exercise 20: Creating Backgrounds - 5
In this example, you will create a background, as shown in Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E20: Creating Backgrounds - 5
Skill level
Intermediate

Time to complete
30 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-20.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-20.MP4
Start a new 1280x720 px document and then fill the background layer with
black. Create a new layer. Set the Foreground color to white and then choose a
large splatter brush and click once to paint the stroke [see Figure E2]. Apply the
Color Overlay style to the Layer 1 [see Figure E3]. Use the following color:
4eff00.
Press Ctrl+J to duplicate Layer 1 and rename it is Layer 2. Select Layer 2
and choose Blur | Motion Blur from the Filter menu. In the Motion Blur
dialog that appears, set Angle to 90 and Distance to 2000. Click OK [see Figure
E4]. Choose Distort | Twirl from the Filter menu. In the Twirl dialog that
appears, set Angle to 150 and click OK [see Figure E5]. Select Layer 2 and
press Ctrl+J to create a duplicate and rename is as Layer 3. Select Layer 2 and
Layer 3 and press Ctrl+E to merge them.

Select Layer 1 and then choose Distort | Twirl from the Filter menu. In the
Twirl dialog that appears, set Angle to 150 and click OK. Choose Distort |
Wave from the Filter menu. In the Wave dialog that appears, set the values as
shown in Figure E6 and then click OK [See Figure E7]. Duplicate Layer 3 and
rename duplicate as Layer 4. Select Layer 3 and choose Blur | Gaussian Blur
from the Filter menu. In the Gaussian Blur dialog that opens, set Radius to 20
and click OK.
Select Layer 3 and Layer 4. Press Ctrl+E to merge the layers. Apply the
Wave filter to the Layer 4 use the same settings as before [see Figure E8]. Set
Opacity of Layer 1 to 20%. Merge Layer 1 and Layer 4. RMB click on Layer
4 and choose Blending Options. In the Layer Style dialog that appears, click
Styles. Load KS Styles and then click on the forth style [see Figure E9]. Click
OK.
Press Ctrl+A to select all pixels. Press Ctrl+Shift+C to copy the merged
pixels and then press Ctrl+V to paste them. Select Layer 5 and then choose
Blur | Gaussian Blur from the Filter menu. In the Gaussian Blur dialog that
opens, set Radius to 0.5 and click OK. Save the file with the name umt1-hoe-
20.psd.

Exercise 21: Creating Backgrounds - 6
In this example, you will create a background, as shown in Figure E1.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table E21: Creating Backgrounds - 6
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Project Folder
unit-mt1
Final exercise file
umt1-hoe-21.psd
Video
UMT1VID-HOE-21.MP4
Create a new 1000x1000 px document. Choose Render | Fibers from the
Filter menu. In the Fibers dialog that appears, set the values as shown in Figure
E2 and click OK.
Choose Filter Gallery | Sketch | Plaster from the Filter menu. Set the
values as shown in Figure E3 and then click OK. Choose Filter Gallery | Brush
Strokes | Sprayed Strokes from the Filter menu.
Set the values as shown in Figure E4 and then click OK. Choose Blur |
Radial Blur from the Filter menu. In the Radial Blur dialog that opens, set the
values as shown in Figure E5, and then click OK. Figure E6 shows the result.
Make two copies of the Background layer and rename them as Layer 1 and
Layer 2. Select Layer 1 and then choose Distort | Twirl from the Filter menu.

In the Twirl dialog that appears, set Angle to 158 and then clock OK. Select
Layer 2 and then choose Distort | Twirl from the Filter menu. In the Twirl
dialog that appears, set Angle to -158 and then clock OK.
Select Layer 2 and set its Blending Mode to Lighten. Press Ctrl+U. In the
Hue/Saturation dialog that appears, set the values as shown in Figure E7 and
then click OK. Select Layer 1 and set its Blending Mode to Lighten. Press
Ctrl+U. In the Hue/Saturation dialog that appears, set the values as shown in
Figure E8 and then click OK.
Select Layer 1 and press Alt+Shift+Ctrl+L. Repeat the process for Layer 2.
Save the document with the name umt1-hoe-21.psd.
Quiz

Evaluate your skills to see how many questions you can answer correctly.
Multiple Choice
Answer the following questions, only one choice is correct.
1. Which of the following hotkeys is used to change the color of the foreground and background
swatches to their default colors?
[A] F [B] B
[C] D [D] H
2. Which of the following hotkeys is used to merge the layers?
[A] Ctrl+M [B] Ctrl+C
[C] Ctrl+E [D] Ctrl+H
3. Which of the following hotkeys is used to invoke Levels command?
[A] Ctrl+L [B] Ctrl+F
[C] Ctrl+H [D] Ctrl+R
Fill in the Blanks
Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
1. The _________ layers non-destructively alter underlying tones and colors.
2. _________ in Photoshop are used to hide portions of a layer or reveal the portions of the layers
below
3. The __________ filter randomly generates values between the foreground and background colors
to create a cloud pattern.
4. The _________ filter allows you to retain the edge details in the specified radius where sharp color
transitions occur in the image.
5. The _________ command redistributes the brightness values so that they represent entire range of
the brightness values.
6. The _________ command/adjustment layer allows you to make adjustment to the tonal range and
color balance of an image.
True or False
State whether each of the following is true or false:
1. To clip an adjustment layer to affect only one layer in the Layers panel, hold Alt and then
move the mouse pointer on the boundary of the two layers.
2. If you select a layer and then choose Convert for Smart Filters from the Filter menu,
the selected layer is converted to a smart object and then you can apply smart filters onto the smart
object.
3. Photoshop does not flatten the images, if you switch between the color modes.

4. The Threshold command converts the images to high-contrast, black-and-white images.
Summary
In this unit, the following topics are covered:
Understanding non-destructive editing
Creating custom textures and designs
Creating maps

Unit MT2 - Material Editors
A material editor is a window that allows you to create, and edit materials as
well as to assign them to the objects in the scene. A material in 3ds Max defines
how light is reflected and transmitted by the objects in a scene.
In the unit, I will describe the following:
Compact Material Editor
Slate Material Editor
3ds Max offers two material editors, Compact Material Editor and Slate
Material Editor. These editors offer a variety of the functions and features that
allow you to design realistic looking surfaces in 3ds Max. To open an editor,
choose Compact  or Slate  option from the Material Editor flyout on the
Main toolbar. You can also open an editor by choosing Compact Material
Editor or Slate Material Editor from the Rendering menu | Material Editor
sub-menu | Compact Material Editor/Slate Material Editor.
Compact Material Editor
This was the only material editor available prior to the 2011 release of 3ds
Max. It is comparatively a small window [see Figure F1] than the Slate
Material Editor window and allows you to quickly preview the material. If you
are assigning materials that have already been designed, this material editor is
the preferred choice.

Note: Additional Features
Compact Material Editor has some options such as Video Color Check and
Custom Sample Objects that are not available in Slate Material Editor.
The Compact Material Editor's interface consists of menu bar at the top
[see Figure F1], sample slots below the menu bar, and toolbars at the bottom and
right of the sample slots. Now onwards, I will refer to these toolbars as
horizontal and vertical toolbars, respectively. The interface also consists of many
rollouts. The content on these rollouts depends on the active material slot and the
type of material it hosts.
Note: Switching Editors
If you want to switch to Slate Material Editor, choose Slate Material Editor
from the editor's Modes menu.
Sample Slots
The sample slots allow you to preview material and maps. By default, six
sample slots appear in the editor. You can increase the number of slots by
choosing Cycle 3x2, 5x3, 6x4 Sample Slots from the editor's Options menu.
This option cycles through the 3x2, 5x3, and 6x4 slots arrangement. To make a
sample slot active, click on the sample slot. The active sample slot appears with
a white border around it.

Caution: Maximum number of sample slots
Compact Material Editor allows you to edit up to 24 materials at a time.
However, the scene can contain an unlimited numbers of materials. When you
finish a material and apply it to the objects in the scene, you can use the slot
occupied by that material to design the next material.
By default, material appears on a sphere geometry in a sample slot. You can
change the sphere to cylinder or cube by choosing the desired option from the
Sample Type flyout. This flyout is the first entry in the editor's vertical toolbar.
To view a magnified version of the sample slot in a floating window, double-
click on it. You can resize the window to change the magnification level of the
sample slot.
Hot and Cool Materials
A sample slot is considered to be hot if it is assigned to one or more surfaces
in the scene. When you use the editor to adjust properties of a hot material, the
changes are reflected in the viewport at the same time. The corners of a sample
slot indicates whether the material is hot or not. Here’re the possibilities:
No triangle: The material is not used in the scene.
Outlined white triangle: The material is hot and the changes you make to it
will change the material displayed in the scene.
Solid white triangle: The material is not only hot but it is also applied to the
currently selected object in the scene.
Notice the three sample slots in Figure F2 that show three possibilities: a hot
material applied to the currently selected, a hot material is applied to the scene
but not on the currently selected object, and a cool material which is active but
not assigned to scene, respectively. If you want to make a hot material cool, click
Make Material Copy 
 from the horizontal toolbar. You can have the same
material with the same name in multiple slots but only one slot can be hot.
However, you can have more than one hot sample slots as long as each sample
slot has a different material.
Note: Dragging a material

If you drag a material to copy it from one sample slot to another, the
destination slot will be cool whereas the original slot remains hot.
When you RMB click on a sample slot, a popup menu appears. Table 1
summarizes the options available in this menu.
Table 1: Sample slot RMB click menu
Option
Description
Drag/Copy
This is active by default. When active, dragging a sample slot
copies the material from one sample slot to another.
Drag/Rotate
When you select this option, dragging the sample slot rotates the
sample geometry in the slot. This is useful in visualizing the map in the
slot.
Reset
Rotation
Resets the sample slot's rotation.
Render
Map
Opens the Render Map dialog that allows you to render the current
map. You can create an AVI file if the map is animated.
Options
Opens the material editor's options.
Magnify
Generates a magnified view of the current sample slot.
Select 
By
Material
Selects objects based on the material in the sample slot.
Highlight
Assets in
the 
ATS
dialog
This option is typically used for the bitmap textures. It opens the
Asset Tracking dialog with the assets highlighted.
Sample
Windows
Options
You can use these options to change the number of slots displayed
in the material editor.

Managing Materials with the Compact Material Editor
By default, the Standard material is displayed when you select a sample
slot. If you want to use the Standard material, you can choose the desired
shading model from the drop-down available in the Shader Basic Parameters
rollout of the editor and then assign colors or maps to the various components of
the material. For example, if you want to assign a map to the Diffuse component
of the material, click on the button located at the right of the Diffuse color
swatch to open the Material/Map Browser which is a modeless dialog. From
the browser, select the map from the Maps | General/Scanline/Environment
rollout and then click OK.
Tip: Material Map Browser
You can also double-click on a map to select it and close the browser.
For example, if you want to apply a checker map, double-click on the
Checker map from the Maps | General rollout of the browser. Once you select
the map, 3ds Max shows rollouts in the editor that you can use to edit the
properties of the map. To go back to the parent level, click Go To Parent  from
the horizontal toolbar.
You can also copy map from one component to another component. For
example, you have applied a map to the Diffuse component of the material and
you want to copy it to Opacity component. Drag the Diffuse's button onto the
Opacity's button, the Copy (Instance) Map dialog appears. Select the desired
option from the Method group and then click OK to create an instance, a copy,
or just to swap the materials from one slot to another.
Note: Other materials
If you want to use any other material than the Standard material, click on
Type button [labelled as Standard] to open the Material/Map Browser. Double-
click on the desired material from the Materials | General/Scanline rollout; the
Replace Material dialog appears with options to discard the old material or
keep the old material as a sub-material. Choose the desired option and click OK.
The label Standard on the button will be replaced by the type of the new
material. For example, if you have chosen Blend, the Standard label will be
replaced by the Blend label.
By default, 3ds Max gives a name to each material. This appears name below
the horizontal toolbar. If you want to change the name, edit the name in the field.

The name field only displays 16 characters but the material name can be longer
than 16 characters.
If the material you want to change is present in the scene but is not displayed
in any of the sample slots, you can get it directly from the scene. To do this,
select the object in the scene and click a sample slot to make it active. From the
horizontal toolbar, click Get Material  to open Material/Map Browser. Find
the scene material in the Scene Materials rollout and then double-click on the
name of the material. You can also drag the material name to the sample slot.
When you get a material from the scene, it is initially a hot material.
To apply a material to the objects in the scene, drag the sample slot that
contains the material to the object[s] in the scene. If there is only one object
selected in the scene, the material is immediately applied to that object. If there
are more than one objects in the scene, 3ds Max prompts you to choose whether
to apply the material to the single object or to the whole selection. You can also
apply material to the selection by clicking Assign Material To Selection 
 on
the horizontal toolbar. Once you apply material to objects in the scene, click
Show Shaded Material in Viewport 
 on the horizontal toolbar to view the
material on the objects in the scene.
Tip: Hot material
When you apply a material to an object, the material becomes a hot
material.
Tip: Removing material from an object
To remove a material from an object, select the object and then execute the
following command from the MAXScript Listener: $.material=undefined.
Note: Selecting objects that have the same material applied
From the vertical toolbar, click Select By Material . This button will not be
available unless the active sample slot contains a material that is applied to the
objects in the scene. The Select Objects dialog appears. Those objects onto
which the material has been applied appear highlighted in the dialog. Click
Select to select the objects in the scene.
You can also save a material to the library. A material library helps you in
organizing materials. You can use a material from a library in another scene, if
required. To save a material to the library, on the horizontal toolbar, click Put To

Library , the Put To Library dialog appears. In this dialog, change the name
of the material or leave as is. Click OK to save the material. The material is
saved in the currently opened library. If no library is open, a new library is
created. You can save this library as a file using Material/Map Browser
controls.
To get a material from the library, click Get Material 
 to open
Material/Map Browser. Now, open a library group. In the list of the materials
in the library, double-click on the name of the material that you intend to use.
The material you choose from the library replaces the material in the active
sample slot.
Material/Map Browser
The Material/Map Browser [see Figure F3] allows you to choose a material
or map. When you click the Type button or any button on the Compact
Material Editor, a modal version of Material/Map Browser opens.
Note: Slate Material Editor
In Slate Material Editor, Material/Map Browser appears as a panel and
always visible.
At the top-left corner of the browser, the Material/Map Browser Options
button 
 is available. When you click this button, a menu is displayed from
where you can set various options for Material/Map Browser. The Search by

Name field on the right of the button allows you to filter the maps and materials
in the browser. For example, if you type grad in the field and press Enter, the
maps and materials will be displayed below the field whose names start with the
characters grad [see Figure F4].
The main part of the browser is the list of materials and maps arranged in the
rollouts [groups]. You can collapse or expand these groups.
Caution: Materials and maps in the Material/Map Browser
By default, Material/Map Browser only displays those maps and materials
that are compatible with the active renderer.
Note: Material/Map Browser's contextual menu
When you RMB click on the header of a rollout, a popup menu appears [see
Figure F5]. This menu shows the general options related to that particular
group.
Material Explorer
The Material Explorer [see Figure F6] allows you to browse and manage
all materials in a scene. You can open the explorer from the Rendering menu.
You can also open it as an extended viewport. To do this, choose Material
Explorer from the Point-Of-View (POV) Viewport label menu | Extended
Viewports.

Compact Material Editor lets you set the properties of the materials but
there is limitations on number of materials it can display at a time. However,
with Material Explorer, you can browse all the materials in the scene. You can
also see the objects onto which the materials are applied, you can change the
material assignment, and manage materials in other ways.
Slate Material Editor
Slate Material Editor is little complex than Compact Material Editor. In
this editor, the entities are displayed in form of nodes that you can wire together
to create material trees. If you are working on a large scene with lots of
materials, this editor is the preferred choice. The powerful search function
provided by this editor lets you find materials in a complex scene easily.
I mostly use Slate Material Editor as its interface [see Figure F7] is more
intuitive when it comes to designing materials. I have marked various
components of the interface with numbers in Figure F7. Table 2 summarizes
Slate Material Editor's interface.
Table 2: The Slate Material Editor's interface overview
Number
Description
1
Menu bar
2
Toolbar
3
Material/Map Browser

4
Status
5
Active View
6
View navigation
7
Parameter Editor
8
Navigator
There are three main visual elements of Slate Material Editor:
Material/Map Browser, Active View, and Parameter Editor. Active View is
the area where you create material trees and make connections between nodes
using wires. Parameter Editor is the area where you adjust settings of maps and
materials. You can float the components of the editor such as Material/Map
Browser, or Parameter Editor [except view]. For example, to float the
Material/Map Browser, double-click on its title. To dock it back to the editor,
again double-click on its title.
Note: Preview window
By default, each material preview window opens as a floating window. When
you dock a material preview window, it docks to the upper left area of the editor.
When you add materials or maps in Slate Material Editor, they appear as
nodes [see left image in Figure F8] in the active view.

You can then connect these nodes using wires to make material trees. A node
has several components, here's is a quick rundown.
The title bar of the node shows name of the material or map, material
or map type, and a small preview icon of the material or map.
Below the title bar the component of the material or map appears. By
default, 3ds Max shows only those components that you can map.
On the left side of each component a circular slot [marked as 1 in the
right image of Figure F8] is available for input. You can use these
sockets to wire maps to the node.
On the right of the node, a circular slot [marked as 2 in the right image
of Figure F8] that is used for the output.
You can collapse a node to hide its slots. To do this, click on the minus sign
[marked as 1 in Figure F9] available on the upper right corner of the node. To
resize a node horizontally, drag the diagonal lines available on the bottom-right
of the node [marked as 2 in Figure F9].
When you resize a node horizontally, it's easier to read the name of the slots.
To change the preview icon size,double-click on the preview. To reduce the
preview, double-click again. When a node's parameters are displayed in
Parameter Editor, 3ds Max shows a dashed border around the node in the
active view [see Figure F10].

To create a new material, drag the material from Material/Map Browser to
the active view, 3ds Max places a node for the material in the active view. It is a
good habit to change the name of the material immediately. It will make your life
easier if you are working on a complex scene with tons of materials. To rename a
material, RMB click on it and choose Rename. In the Rename dialog, change
the name of the material and click OK. To change the properties of the material,
double-click the node in the active view and then change the properties from
Parameter Editor.
Tip: Renaming materials
The name of a material can contain special characters, numbers, and spaces.
To get a material from the scene, click Pick Material From Object  from
the toolbar. Now, click on the object in a viewport to get the material. To apply a
material to objects in the scene, drag the output socket of the node and then drop
the wire on an object in the scene. As you drag the mouse in a viewport, a tooltip
appears below the mouse pointer showing the name of the object. You can apply
the material even if the object is not selected. If there is only one object selected
in the scene, the material is immediately applied to that object. If there are more
than one objects in the scene, 3ds Max prompts you to choose whether to apply
the material to the single object or to the whole selection. You can also apply
material to the selection by clicking Assign Material To Selection 
 on the
toolbar.
To make a copy of the existing material, drag the material from the
Material/Map Browser | Scene Materials group (or any library) to the active
View. The Instance (Copy) dialog appears. Select Instance or Copy from this
dialog and click OK. To duplicate a node in the active view, select the node[s]
that you want to duplicate and then drag the nodes with the Shift held down.
To select the objects onto which you have applied the same material, in the

active view, select the node and then click Select By Material 
 from the
toolbar. 3ds Max opens the Select Objects dialog with the objects highlighted.
Click Select to select the highlighted objects.
Selecting, Moving, and Laying Out Nodes
To select a node, ensure Select Tool  [hotkey S] is active, and then click on
the node. To select multiple nodes, click on the nodes with the Ctrl held down.
If you want to remove nodes from the selection, click on the nodes with Alt held
down. To select all nodes, press Ctrl+A. To invert the selection, press Ctrl+I. To
select none of the nodes, press Ctrl+D. To select children, press Ctrl+C. To
select a node tree, press Ctrl+T. These functions are also accessible from the
Select menu of the editor.
Note: Selected node
When a node is selected in the view, a white border appears around it. Also,
the background including the title bar is darker. When node is not selected, the
border appears gray and background is lighter.
Tip: Deselecting nodes
To deselect nodes, click on the blank area of the view using Select Tool .
To move a node, drag it in the active view. To create clone of a node, drag it
with the Shift held down. If you drag a node with Ctrl+Shift held down, 3ds
Max clones the node and all its children. These methods also work on multiple
selections.
If you want to move a node and its children, click Move Children 
 from
the toolbar and drag a node. You can toggle this feature temporarily without
clicking Move Children by moving the node with Ctrl+Alt held down. This
feature can be accessed from the editor's Options menu. You can click the Hide
Unused Nodeslots 
 option from the toolbar to hide the unused ports on the
selected material.
The layout buttons on the toolbar allow you to arrange nodes in the active
view. The Layout All - Vertical  and Layout All - Horizontal  buttons on the
toolbar allow you to arrange nodes in an automatic layout along the vertical or
horizontal axis in the active view. These options are also available in the editor's
View menu. The Layout Children button allows you to automatically layout the
children of the selected node.

If you turn on the Show Shaded Material In Viewport  from the toolbar
for a material, a red diagonal shape appears on the node in the active view [see
the left image in Figure F11]. Navigator also shows a red diagonal shape to
indicate this [see the middle image in Figure F11]. This shape also appears in the
Scene Materials rollout of the Material/Map Browser [see the right image in
Figure F11].
Previewing Materials
The Preview window [see Figure F12] of the editor allows you to visualize
how material or map will appear in the scene. The main part of the window is a
rendering of the material or map. You can resize this window like you resize any
other window in 3ds max that is, by dragging its corners. Making a window
larger helps you in visualizing the material, however, larger previews take longer
to render. To open this window, RMB click on a node and then choose Open
Preview Window from the popup menu.
To close a window, click X on the upper-right corner of the window. By
default,a sphere is displayed as a sample geometry in the scene. If you want to
change this geometry, choose Cylinder or Box from RMB click menu | Preview
Object Type sub-menu. You can open any number of Preview windows in the
editor. However, the drop-down available at the bottom of the Preview window
allows you to switch the previews in a single window.
Caution: Preview window
When open a new scene, the Preview window remains open, however, it may
not correspond to any material. I recommend that you close all Preview windows
before creating a new scene. The previews are not saved with the scene.

When the Auto switch is on in the Preview window, 3ds Max automatically
renders the preview again when you make any changes to the properties of a
material or map. When this switch is off, the Update button becomes active. The
render will be displayed only when you click Update. The Show End Result
toggle available on the right of Update allows you to control when the Preview
window displays a map. When off , the Preview window shows the map itself.
When on, the Preview window shows the end result that is, the final result of the
node.
Wiring Nodes
As you already know, wires are used to connect material or map components.
To understand the wiring process, from the Material/Map Browser | Materials
rollout | General rollout, drag Standard to the active view to create a Standard
material node. Similarly, drag Checker from the Material/Map Browser |
Maps rollout | General rollout to the active view to create a Checker node [see
left image in Figure F13]. Click-drag the Standard material's Diffuse Color
socket, a wire appears. Now, drop the wire on the output socket of the Checker
node to make a connection [see the right image in Figure F13]. You can also
connect in reverse. You can connect the output socket of the Checker node to
the Diffuse Color slot of the Standard material.
Now, drag and the Standard material's Bump socket to the blank area, a
popup menu appears [see the left image in Figure F14], choose Standard | Noise
from the menu to insert a Noise node and make connection between the Noise
node and Bump socket of the Standard material [see the right image in Figure
F14].

You can also connect a map directly to a socket without first dragging to the
active view. To do this, drag the Falloff map from the Material/Map Browser |
Maps rollout | General rollout to the Reflection socket of the Standard
material. When the socket turns green, release the mouse to make the connection
[see Figure F15]. Another way to connect a node to a socket is to double-click
on a socket to open Material/Map Browser. Now, select the desired map or
material from the browser. You can also drag a wire on the title bar of a node. A
popup menu appears [see Figure F16] that allows you to select component to
wire.
To delete a connection [wire], select the wire and then press Delete. The
selected wire appears in white color. You can also drag away a wire from a
socket where it has been connected to terminate the connection. To replace one
map with another, drag from the new map’s output socket to the output socket of
the original map.
To insert a node into a connection, drag the node from the Material/Map
Browser and then drop it on the wire. You can also drag from one of the node’s
input sockets to the wire to insert the node. If a node is lying on the active view
and you want to insert it, drop the node on the wire with Ctrl held down. To
disconnect an inserted node, drag the node and then press Alt while dragging.
When you RMB click on a wire, a popup menu appears [see Figure

F17].Choose Change Material/Map Type to open Material/Map Browser and
then choose a different type for the material or map. This option always affects
the child node. The Make Node Unique option makes the child unique if the
child node is instanced. The Make Branch Unique makes the child unique, as
well as duplicates children of the child if the child node is instanced.
Views
The active view is the main area of Slate Material Editor where all action
takes place. The navigating the active view is similar to the navigating a scene in
3ds Max. To pan the view, drag with the MMB. If you drag with the MMB and
Ctrl+Alt held down, 3ds max zooms the view. You can also zoom by scrolling
the wheel. The navigational tools are also available at the bottom-right corner of
the editor's interface.
Table 3 summarized these controls.
Table 3: Slate Material Editor navigational controls
Control
Hotkey[s]
Menu
Zoom percentage drop-down list
-
Pan Tool
Ctrl+P
View | Pan Tool
Zoom Tool
Alt+Z
View | Zoom Tool
Zoom Region Tool
Ctrl+W
View | Zoom Region Tool
Zoom Extents
Ctrl+Alt+Z
View | Zoom Extents
Zoom Extents Selected
Z
Zoom Extents Selected
Pan to Selected
Alt+P
View | Pan to Selected
If you are working on a complex scene, you might face difficulties locating

nodes in the active view. You can use the search function of the editor to locate
the nodes in the scene. Make a habit of renaming the nodes as you create them
so that you can find the nodes using their names. To search a node, click the
Search For Nodes button 
 available on the bottom-left corner of the active
view, 3ds Max expands the search tool. Type the name of the node in the search
field and press Enter to locate the node and zoom on the node in the active view.
By default, Navigator appears on the upper-right corner of Slate Material
Editor. This window is most useful when you have lots of material trees
displayed in the active view. This window shows a map of the active view. The
red rectangle in the navigator shows the border of the active view. If you drag
the rectangle, 3ds max changes the focus of the view.
Named Views
If you are working on a complex scene, you can create named views to
organize materials in a scene. You can create any number of views in the editor
and then make one of them the active view. When you open the editor in a new
scene, a single view is displayed with the name View1. To manage views, RMB
click on one of the tab and then choose the desired options from the popup menu
displayed [see Figure F18].
To cycle through the tabs, use the Ctrl+Tab hotkeys. You can also select a
view from the drop-down available above Navigator. To move a tree from one
view to another, RMB click on the node and then choose Move Tree to View |
Name of the View from the popup menu.
Quiz
Evaluate your skills to see how many questions you can answer correctly.
Multiple Choice
Answer the following questions, only one choice is correct.
1. Which of the following keys is used to invoke Select Tool in Slate Material Editor?
[A] K [B] H

[C] S [D] N
2. Which of the following hotkeys is used to invoke Zoom Tool?
[A] Ctrl+Z [B] Shift+Z
[C] Alt+Z [D] Ctrl+Shift+Z
Fill in the Blanks
Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
1. When the _________ switch is on in the Preview window, 3ds Max automatically renders the
preview again when you make any changes to the properties of a material or map.
2. To delete a connection [wire], select the wire and then press _________.
3. To cycle through the tabs in Active View, use the __________ hotkeys.
True or False
State whether each of the following is true or false:
1. Compact Material Editor allows you to edit up to 36 materials at a time.
2. A sample slot in Compact Material Editor is considered to be hot if it is assigned to one
or more surfaces in the scene.
3. In Compact Material Editor, If you drag a material to copy it from one sample slot to
another, the destination slot will be cool whereas the original slot remains hot.
Summary
The unit covered the following topics:
Compact Material Editor
Slate Material Editor

Unit MT3 - Standard Materials and Maps
The Standard Materials materials are non-photometric materials. Do not
use these materials if you plan to create physically accurate lighting models.
However, these materials are suitable for games, films, and animation. In this
unit, we are going to look at the standard materials and maps.
In this unit, I’ll describe the following:
Standard materials
Standard maps
General/Scanline Materials
Let's explore the Scanline materials.
Standard Material
A surface having a single color reflects many other colors such as ambient,
diffuse, and specular. The Standard materials use a four-color model to simulate
the reflected colors from a surface. However, there may be variations depending
on the shader you use. The Ambient color appears where surface is lit (the
surface in the shadow) by the ambient light only. The Diffuse color appears on
the surface when the lights falls directly on it. The term Diffuse is used because
light is reflected in various directions. The Specular color appears in the
highlights. Highlights are reflection of light sources on the surface.
Generally, shiny surfaces have specular highlights where the viewing angle is
equal to the angle of incident. Metallic surfaces show another type of highlights
called glancing highlights. The glancing highlights have a high angle of
incidence. Some surfaces in the real-world are highly reflective. To model such
surfaces, you can use a reflection map or use raytracing. Filter Color is the color
transmitted through an object. Filter Color will only be visible, if Opacity is
less than 100 percent.
The three color components blend at the edge of their respective regions. The
blend of the Diffuse and Ambient components is controlled by the shader.
However, you can control the blending by using the Standard material’s
highlight controls.

To create a Standard material, press M to open Slate Material Editor. On
the Material Editor | Material /Map Browser | Materials | Scanline rollout,
double-click Standard to add a standard material node to the active view. Figure
F1 shows the Standard material’s interface. If you double-click on the material
node, its attributes appear in various rollouts on Parameter Editor. The controls
on these rollouts change according to the shader type chosen from the Shader
Basic Parameters rollout [see Figure F2].
The controls in this rollout let you choose the type of shader to use with the
Standard material. Wire lets you render the material in the wireframe mode
[see Figure F3]. You can change the size of the wire using the Size control on the
material’s Extended Parameters rollout. Figure F4 shows the render with Size
set to 2. 2-Sided allows you to make a 2-sided material. When you select this
option, 3ds Max applies material to the both sides of the selected faces.
Note: One-sided faces
In 3ds Max, faces are one-sided. The front side is the side with the surface
normals. The back side of the faces is invisible to the renderer. If you see this
other side from the back, the faces will appear to be missing.
The Face Map control allows you to apply the material to the faces of the
geometry. If material is a mapped material, it requires no mapping coordinates
and automatically applied to each face. Figures F5 and F6 show the render with
the Face Map switch is in off and on states, respectively. The Faceted control
renders each face of the surface as if it were flat [see Figure F7].

Tip: Rendering both sides of a face
There are two ways to render both sides of a face. Either you can turn on
Force 2-Sided in the Render Setup dialog | Common panel | Options section or
apply a two sided material to the faces.
The Shader drop-down located at the extreme left of the rollout lets you
choose a shader for the material.
Here’s is the quick rundown to the various material shaders:
Phong Shader
You can use this shader to produce realistic highlights for shiny, and regular
surfaces. This shader produces strong circular highlights. This shader can
accurately render bump, opacity, shininess, specular, and reflection maps. When
you select the Phong shader, the Phong Shader Parameters rollout appears in
the material’s Parameter Editor [see Figure F8].
Phong Shader Parameters Rollout
The controls in this rollout let you set the color of the material, shininess, and
transparency of the material. The Ambient, Diffuse, and Specular controls let
you set the colors for ambient, diffuse, and specular color components,
respectively. To change a color component, click on the color swatch and then
use the Color Selector to change the values of the color component. You can
also copy one color component to another by dragging the source color swatch
to the target color swatch. In the Copy or Swap Colors dialog that appears, click
Swap, or Copy button. Click Cancel to cancel the operation. You can lock or
unlock two color components using the Lock button [see Figure F9].
The buttons located on the right of color swatches can be used to apply
texture maps to the respective color components. On clicking these buttons,

Material/Map Browser appears that allows you to select a map for the color
component. If you want to apply different maps to the Ambient and Diffuse
components, click on the Lock button located to the right of these components
[see Figure F10].
Self-Illumination Group: You can use the controls in this group to make the
material self-illuminated. The illusion of self-illumination is created by replacing
shadows with the diffuse color. There are two ways to enable self-illumination in
3ds Max. Either you can turn on the switch located in this group and use a self-
illumination color or use the spinner.
Note: Self-illuminated materials
Self-illuminated materials do not show shadows cast onto them. Also, they
are unaffected by the lights in the scene.
Opacity Group: You can use the controls in this group, to make a material
opaque, transparent, or translucent. To change the opacity of the material, change
opacity to a value less than 100%. If you want to use a map for controlling
opacity, click Opacity map button.
Specular Highlight Group: The Phong, Blinn, and Oren-Nayar-Blinn
shaders produce circular highlights and share same highlight controls. The Blinn
and Oren-Nayar-Blinn shaders produce soft and round highlights than the
Phong shader. You can use the Specular Level control to increase or decrease
the strength of a highlight. As you change the value for this control, the
Highlight curve and the highlight in the preview changes. The shape of this
curve affects the blending between the specular and diffuse color components of
the material. If the curve is steeper, there will be less blending and the edge of
the specular highlight will be sharper. To increase or decrease the size of the
highlight, change the value for Glossiness. Soften softens the specular highlights
especially those formed by the glancing light.
Extended Parameters Rollout
The Extender Parameters rollout [see Figure F11] is same forall shaders
except Strauss and Translucent shaders. The controls in this rollout allow you
to control the transparency and reflection settings. Also, it has controls for

adjusting the wireframe rendering.
Advanced Transparency Group: These controls do not appear for the
Translucent shader. Falloff allows you to set the falloff and its extent. In
increases transparency towards the inside of the object (like glass bottle)
whereas Out increases transparency towards the outside of the object (like
clouds). Amt lets you adjust the amount of transparency at the outside or inside
extreme.
The Type controls let you specify how transparency is applied. The Filter
color swatch computes a filter color that it multiplies with the color behind the
transparent surface. The Subtractive option subtracts from the color behind the
transparent surface. The Additive option adds to the color behind the transparent
surface.
Index of Refraction allows you to set the index of refraction used by
refraction map and raytracing.
Reflection Dimming group: This group does not appear for the Strauss
shader. These controls dim the reflection in the shadows. Tun on the Apply
switch to enable reflection dimming. Dim Level controls the amount of dimming
that takes place in shadow. Refl. Level affects the intensity of the reflection that
is not in shadow.
SuperSampling Rollout
The SuperSampling rollout [see Figure F12] is used by the Architectural,
Raytrace, Standard, and Ink ‘n Paint materials to improve the quality of the
rendered image. It performs an additional antialiasing pass on the material thus
resulting in more render time. By default, a single SuperSampling method is
applied to all materials in the scene.
Caution: Super Sampling and Scanline Renderer
If you turn off Antialiasing on the default Scanline Renderer rollout,
SuperSampling settings are ignored.
Maps Rollout: The Maps rollout [see Figure F13] is available for all

materials. The controls in this rollout allow you to assign maps to various
components of a material. To assign a map to a component, click the
corresponding map button. Now, choose the desired map option from
Material/Map Browser that opens.
Blinn Shader
This is the default shader. It produces rounder, softer highlights than the
Phong shader. The Blinn and Phong shaders have the same basic parameters.
Metal Shader
You can use the Metal shader to create realistic-looking metallic surfaces
and a variety of organic-looking materials. The metal material calculates their
specular color automatically. The output specular color depends on the diffuse
color of the material and the color of the light.
This shader produces distinctive highlights. Like the Phong shader,
Specular Level still controls intensity. However, Glossiness affects both the
intensity and size of the specular highlights. Figure F14 shows the controls in
Metal Basic Parameters rollout.
Oren-Nayar-Blinn Shader
This shader is a variant of the Blinn shader and can be used to model matte
surfaces such as fabric. It has two additional controls to model a surface with the
matte look: Diffuse Level and Roughness.
[Oren-Nayar-Blinn Basic Parameters rollout | Advanced Diffuse group]:
Diffuse Level controls [see Figure F15] the brightness of the diffuse component
of the material. It allows you to make the material lighter or darker. Roughness
allows you to control the rate at which the diffuse component blends into the
ambient component.

Note: The Roughness Parameter
The Roughness parameter is available only with the Oren-Nayar-Blinn and
Multi-Level shaders, and with the Physical material.
Note: Diffuse Level control
The Blinn, Metal, Phong, and Strauss shaders do not have the Diffuse Level
control.
Strauss Shader
This shader is a simpler version of the Metal shader. It can be used to model
the metallic surfaces.
Strauss Basic Parameters Rollout: The Color control [see Figure F16] lets
you specify the color of the material. The Strauss shader automatically
calculates the ambient and specular color components. Glossiness controls the
size and intensity of the specular highlights. On increasing the value for this
control, the highlight gets smaller and the material appears shiner. The
Metalness control adjust the metalness of the surface. The effect of this control
is more prominent when you increase the Glossiness value. Opacity sets the
transparency of the material.
Anisotropic Shader
You can use this shader to create surfaces with elliptical, anisotropic
highlights. This shader is suitable for modeling hair, glass, or brushed metal. The
Diffuse Level control is similar to that of the Oren-Nayar-Blinn shader, and
basic parameters controls are similar to that of the Blinn or Phong shading,
except the Specular Highlights parameters.
Anisotropic Basic Parameters rollout | Specular Highlight group: The
Specular Level [Figure F17] control sets the intensity of the specular highlights.

On increasing the value for this control, the highlight goes brighter. Glossiness
controls the size of the specular highlights. Anisotropy controls the anisotropy
or shape of the highlight. Orientation controls the orientation of the highlight.
This value is measured in degrees.
Multi-Layer Shader
This shader is similar to the Anisotropic shader. However, it allows you to
layer two sets of specular highlights. The highlights are layered that allows you
to create complex highlights. Figure F18 shows the two specular layers in the
Multi-Layer Basic Parameters rollout.
Translucent Shader
This shader is similar to the Blinn shader but allows you set the translucency
of the material. A translucent object not only allows light to pass through but it
also scatters light within.
Translucent Basic Parameters rollout | Translucency group: The
Translucent Clr control [see Figure F19] sets the translucency color that is the
color of the light scattered within the material. This color is different from the
Filter color which is the color transmitted through transparent or semi-
transparent material such as glass. The Opacity control sets the opacity or
transparency of the material.
Raytrace Material
This material is an advanced surface-shading material. It supports the same
diffuse surface shading that a Standard material supports.
However, it also supports fog, color density, translucency, fluorescence, and
other special effects. This material is capable of creating fully raytraced
reflections and refractions. Figure F20 shows the Raytrace material’s interface.

Architectural Material
The properties of this material [see Figure F21] create realistic looking
images when used with Photometric lights and Radiosity. Therefore, you should
use this material when you are looking for high level of accuracy. If you don’t
need the high detail this material produces, use the Standard material or any
other material.
When you create a new Architectural material, you can choose from a wide
variety of templates that are built into this material. You can use these templates
as starting point for the shading model you wish to create. You can choose
template from the drop-down available in the Templates rollout.
Advanced Lighting Override Material
You can use this material to directly control the radiosity properties of a
material. You can use this material directly. It is a always a supplement to the
base material [see Figure F22]. This material has no effect on the ordinary
renderings. It is used with Radiosity and Light Tracing solutions.

This material has two primary usages:
Adjusting properties of a material used in a Radiosity and Light Tracing
solutions.
Contributing energy to the Radiosity solution with self-illuminating
objects.
General Materials
Let’s explore the General materials.
Blend Material
The Blend material allows you to mix two materials on a single side of the
surface. You can use the Mix Amount parameter [see Figure F23] to control the
way two materials are blended together. You can also animate this control. The
Material 1 and Material 2 controls let you assign the two materials to be
blended. You can also use the corresponding switches to turn material on or off.
The Interactive option specifies which of the materials or mask map will be
displayed in the viewport by the interactive renderer.
The Mask control lets you assign a map as mask. The lighter and darker
areas on the mask map control the degree of blending. The lighter areas displays
more of the Material 1 whereas the darker areas show more of Material 2. The
Mix Amount controls the proportion of blend in degrees. A value of 0 means

only Material 1 will be visible on the surface whereas a value of 100 means
Material 2 will be visible on the surface.
When you assign a mask map for blending, you can use the mixing curve to
affect the blending. You can use the controls in the Transition Zone group to
adjust the level of the Upper and Lower limits.
Note: Interactive renderer and Blend material
Only one map can be displayed in the viewports when using the interactive
renderer.
Note: Blend Material and Noise Map
The Mix Amount control is not available when you use mask to blend the
material. Using a Noise map as mixing map can produce naturally looking
surfaces.
Double Sided Material
The Double Sided material lets you assign two differentmaterials to the front
and back surface of an object. The Facing Material and Back Material controls
[see Figure F24] allow you to specify the material for the front and back faces,
respectively. The Translucency control allows you to blend the two materials.
There will be no blending of the materials if Translucency is set to 0. At a value
of 100, the outer material will be visible on the inner faces and inner material
will be visible on the outer faces.
Composite Material
This material can be used to composite up to ten materials. The materials are
composited from top to bottom. The maps can be combined using additive
opacity, subtractive opacity, or using an amount value. The Base Material
control [see Figure F25] allows you to set the base material. The default base
material is the Standard material.

The Mat.1 to Mat.9 controls are used to specify the material thatyou want to
composite. Each material control has an array of buttons called ASM buttons.
These buttons control how the material is composited. The A button allows you
to use the additive opacity.
The colors in the materials are summed based on the opacity. The S button
allows you to use the subtractive opacity. The M button is used to mix the
materials using a value. You can enter the value in the spinner located next to the
M button. When the M button is active, amount ranges from 0 to 100. When
amount is 0, no compositing happens and the material below is not visible. If the
amount is 100, the material below is visible.
Tip: Composite Material v Composite Map
If you want to achieve a result by combining maps instead of combining
materials, use the Composite map that provides greater control.
Note: Overloaded compositing
For additive and subtractive compositing, the amount can range from 0 to
200. When the amount is greater than 100, the compositing is overloaded. As a
result, the transparent area of the material becomes more opaque.
Morpher Material
The Morpher material is used with the Morpher modifier. For example,
when a character raises his eyebrows, you can use this material to display
wrinkles on his forehead. You can blend the materials the same way you morph
the geometry using the channel spinners of the Morpher modifier.
Multi/Sub-Object Material

The Multi/Sub-Object material allows you to assign materials at the sub-
object level. The number field [see Figure F26] shows the number of sub-
materials contained in the Multi/Sub-Object material. You can use the Set
Number button to set the number of sub-materials that make up the material.
The Add button allows you to a new sub-material to the list. Use the Delete
button to remove currently chosen sub-material from the list. The ID, Name, and
Sub-Material controls allow you to sort the list based on the material id, name,
and sub-material, respectively.
To assign materials to the sub-objects, select the object and assign the
Multi/sub-Object material to it. Apply a Mesh Select modifier to the object.
Activate the Face sub-object level. Now, select the faces to which you will
assign the material. Apply a Material Modifier and then set the material ID
value to the number of the sub-material you need to assign.
Shellac Material
Shellac material allows you to mix two materials bysuperimposing one over
the other. The superimposed material is known as the Shellac material. The Base
Material control [Figure F27] lets you choose or edit the base sub-material. The
Shellac Material control lets you choose or edit the Shellac material. The
Shellac Color Blend control adjusts the amount of color mixing. The default
value for this control is 0. Hence, the Shellac material has no effect on the
surface. There is no upper limit for this control. Higher values overload the
colors of the Shellac material. You can also animate this parameter.

Top/Bottom Material
This material lets you assign two different materials to the top and bottom
portions of an object. You can also blend the two materials. The top faces of an
object are those faces whose normals point up. The bottom faces have the
normals down. You can control the boundary between the top and bottom using
the controls available in the Coordinates group [see Figure F28].
The World option lets you specify the direction according to the world
coordinates of the scene. If you rotate the object, the boundary between the top
and bottom faces remains in place. The Local option allows you to control the
direction using the local coordinate system.
You can specify the top and bottom materials using the Top and Bottom
controls, respectively. The Swap button allows you to swap the material. You
can blend the edge between the top and bottom materials using the Blend
control. The value for this control ranges from 0 to 1. If you set Blend to 0, there
will be a sharp line between the top and bottom materials. At 100, the two
materials tint each other.
The Position control allows you to specify the location where the division
between the two materials will occur. The value for this control ranges from 0 to
1. If you set Position to 0, only top material will be displayed. At 100, only
bottom material will be displayed.
Matte/Shadow Material
The Matte/Shadow material is used to make whole objects or any set of
faces into matte objects. The matte objects reveal the background color or the
environment map. A matte object is invisible but it blocks any geometry behind
it however it does not block the background. The matte objects can also receive
shadows. The shadows cast on the matte object are applied to the alpha channel.
To properly generate shadows on a matte object, turn off Opaque Alpha and
then turn on Affect Alpha.
Ink ‘n Paint Material

The Ink ‘n Paint material is used to create cartoons effects. This material
produces shading with inked borders.
DirectX Shader Material
It is a special material that allows you to shade objects in the viewport using
DirectX (Direct3D) shaders. When you use this material, materials in the
viewport more accurately represent how they will look on some other software
or hardware device.
Tip: Quicksilver hardware renderer
You can use the Quicksilver hardware renderer to render DirectX Shader
materials.
XRef Material
This material lets you use a material applied to an object in another 3ds Max
scene file. This material is typically used with the XRef objects. You can also
use the Override Material rollout to assign a local material to the XRef’d
object.
Physical Material
Physical material allows you to model shading effects of the real-world
materials with ease. This material is the layered material that gives you ability to
efficiently use the physically-based workflows. This material is compatible with
ART and mental ray renderers.
General/Scanline Maps
Maps allow you to improve the appearance of the materials. They also help
you to enhance the realism of the materials. You can use maps in a variety of
ways, you can use them to create environments, to create image planes for
modeling, to create projections from light, and so forth. You can use
Material/Map Browser to load a map or create a map of a particular type. A
map can be used to design different elements of a material such as reflection,
refraction, bump, and so forth.
Maps and Mapping Coordinates
When you apply a map to any object, the object must have mapping
coordinates applied. These coordinates are specified in terms of UVW axes local
to the object. Most of the objects in 3ds Max have the Generate Mapping

Coordinates option. When on, 3ds Max generates default mapping coordinates.
UVW Mapping Coordinate Channels
Each object in 3ds Max can have 99 UVW mapping coordinates. The default
mapping is always assigned the number 1. The UVW Map modifier can send
coordinates to any of these 99 channels.
3ds Max gives you ability to generate the mapping coordinates in different
ways:
The Generate Mapping Coords option is available for most of the
primitives. This option provides a projection appropriate to the shape
of the object type.
Apply the Unwrap UVW modifier. This modifier comes with some
useful tools that you can use to edit mapping coordinates.
Apply the UVW Map modifier. This modifier allows you to set a
projection type from several projection types it provides.
Here’s the quick rundown to the projection types:
- Box projection: It places a duplicate of the map image on each of the six
sides of a box.
- Cylindrical projection: This wraps the image around the sides of the
object. The duplicate images are also projected onto the end caps.
- Spherical projection: This projection type wraps the map image around a
sphere and gather the image at the top and bottom.
- Shrink-wrap projection: This type is like the spherical projection but
creates one singularity instead of two.
Use special mapping coordinates. For example, the Loft object
provides built-in mapping coordinates.
Use a Surface Mapper modifier. This modifier uses a map assigned to
a NURBS surface and projects it onto the object(s).
Here’s quick rundown to the cases when you can apply a map and you don’t
need mapping coordinates:

Reflection, Refraction, and Environment maps.
3D Procedural maps: Noise and Marble.
Face-mapped materials.
Tip: UVW Remove utility
The UVW Remove utility removes mapping coordinates or materials from
the currently selected objects. The path to the utility is as follows: Utilities panel
| Utilities rollout | More button | Utilities dialog | UVW Remove. You can also
remove material from objects using the UVW Remove utility.
Real-World Mapping
The real-world mapping is an alternative mapping method that you can use
in 3ds Max. This type of mapping considers the correct scaling of the texture
mapped materials applied to the geometry in the scene.
Note: Autodesk Materials
Autodesk materials require you to use the real-world mapping.
In order to apply the real-world mapping correctly, two requirements must be
met. First, the correct style of UV texture coordinates must be assigned to the
geometry. In other words, the size of the UV space should correspond to the size
of the geometry. To address this issue, the Real-World Map Size switch is
added to the many rollouts in 3ds Max [see Figure F29].
The second requirement is available in the Coordinates rollout of Material
Editor, the Use Real-World Scale switch. When this switch is on, U/V changes
to Width/Height and Tiling changes to Size [see Figure F30].
Note: Real-world Mapping
The real-world mapping is off in 3ds Max, by default.
Tip: Real-World Map Size check box
You can turn on Real-World Map Size by default from the Preferences

dialog by using the Use Real-World Texture Coordinates switch. This option is
available in the Texture Coordinates section of the General panel.
Output Rollout
The options in this rollout [see Figure F31] are responsible for setting the
internal parameters of a map. These options can be used to determine the
rendered appearance of the map. Most of the controls on this rollout are for the
color output.
Note: Output Rollout
These controls do not affect the bump maps except the Invert toggle, which
reverses the direction of the bumps and bump amount.
2D Maps
The 2D maps are two-dimensional images that are mapped to the surface of
the geometric objects. You can also use them to create environment maps. The
Bitmap is the simplest type 2D maps. 3ds Max also allows you to create 2D
maps procedurally.
Coordinates Rollout
The Coordinates rollout shown in Figure F30 allows you to adjust
coordinate parameters to move a map relative to the surface of the object. This
rollout also allows you to set tiling and mirroring of the texture pattern. The
repetition of the texture pattern on the surface of an object is known as tiling.
The mirroring is a form of tiling in which 3ds Max repeats the map and then
flips the repeated map.

In this rollout, there are two options that you can use to control the mapping
type. These options are Texture and Environ. The Texture type applies texture
as a map to the surface. The Environ type uses map as an environment map. For
both of these options, you can select the types of coordinates from the Mapping
drop-down.
Here’s the list of options available in the Mapping drop-down:
Explicit Map Channel: It uses any map channel from 1 to 99. When
you select this option, Map Channel becomes active.
Vertex Color Channel: This option uses assigned vertex colors as a
channel.
Planar from Object XYZ: This option uses planar mapping based on
the object’s local coordinates.
Planar from World XYZ: This option uses planar mapping based on
the scene’s world coordinates.
Spherical 
Environment/Cylindrical 
Environment/Shrink-wrap
Environment: These options project the map into the scene as if it
were mapped to an invisible object in the background.
Screen: This option projects a map as a flat backdrop in the scene.
Noise Rollout
You can add a random noise to the appearance of the material using the
parameters available in this rollout [see Figure F32]. These parameters modify
the mapping of pixels by applying a fractal noise function.
Bitmap
This map is the simplest type of map available in 3ds Max. This map is
useful for creating many type of materials from wood to skin. If you want to
create an animated material, you can use an animation or video file with this
map. When you select this map, the Select Bitmap Image File dialog opens.
Navigate to the location where the bitmap file is stored and then click Open to
select the file.
Tip: Bitmap and Windows Explorer

You can also create a bitmap node by dragging a supported bitmap file from
Windows Explorer to Slate Material Editor.
Tip: Viewport Canvas
The Viewport Canvas feature allows you create a bitmap on the fly by
painting directly onto the surface of the object. To open the canvas, choose
Viewport Canvas from the Tools menu.
Checker Map
This map is a procedural texture that applies a two-color checkerboard
pattern [see Figure F33]. The default colors used to produce the pattern are black
and white. You can also change these colors with map and it's true for all color
components of the other maps.
Camera Map Per Pixel Map
This map allows you to project a map from the direction of a particular
camera. It is useful when you are working on a matte painting. Figure F34 shows
the Marble map projected on the teapot using the camera [see Figure F35].
Figure F36 shows the node network.
Note: Two maps with the sane name
If a map with the same name exists in two places, only one map is loaded to
save the loading time. If you have two maps with different contents but with the
same name, only the first map encountered by 3ds Max appears in the scene.
Tip: Swapping Colors
You can swap colors by dragging one color swatch over another and then
choosing Swap from the popup menu.

Warning: Camera Map Per Pixel Map
This map cannot be used with the animated objects or animated textures.
Gradient Map
This map type allows you to create a gradient that shades from one color to
another. Figure F37 shows the shift from one color to another. The red, green,
and blue colors are used for the gradient. Figure F38 shows the result when the
fractal noise is applied to the gradient. Figure F39 shows the node network.
Gradient Ramp Map
This map is similar to the Gradient map. Like the Gradient map, it shades
from one color to another, however, you can use any number of colors [see
Figure F40]. Also, you have additional controls to create a complex customized
ramp. Figure F41 shows the node network used to produce the result shown in
Figure F40.
Normal Bump Map
This map allows you to connect a texture-baked normal map to a material.
Figure F42 shows the bump on the surface created using the Normal Bump
map. Figure F43 shows the node network.

Substance Map
This map is used with the Substance parametric textures. These textures are
resolution-independent 2D textures and use less memory. Therefore, they are
useful for exporting to the game engines via the Algorithmic Substance Air
middleware.
Swirl Map
This map is 2D procedural map that can be used to simulate swirls [see
Figure F44].
Tiles Map
You can use this map to create a brick or stacked tiling of colors or maps. A
number of commonly used architectural brick patterns are available with this
map. Figure F45 shows render with the English Bond type applied.
Vector Map
Using this map, you can apply a vector-based graphics, including animation
as textures. You can also use AutoCAD Pattern (PAT) files, Adobe Illustrator
(AI) files, Portable Document (PDF) files, and Scalable Vector Graphics

(SVG) files [see Figure 46].
Vector Displacement Map
This map allows you to displace the meshes in three directions whereas the
traditional method permits displacement only along the surface normals.
3D Maps
3D maps are patterns generated by 3ds Max in 3D space. Let’s have a look at
various 3D maps.
Cellular Map
You can use this map to generate a variety of visual effects such as mosaic
tiling, pebbled surfaces, and even ocean surfaces [see Figure F47].
Dent Map
This map generates a procedural map using a fractal noise algorithm. The
effect that this produces depends on the map type chosen.
Falloff Map
The Falloff map generates a value from white to black based on the angular
falloff of the face normals. Figure F48 shows the Falloff map applied to the
geometry with the Falloff type set to Fresnel.
Marble Map
You can use this map to create a marble texture with the colored veins
against [see Figure F49] a color background.
Noise Map
This map allows to create a noise map that creates the random perturbation
of a surface based on the interaction of two colors or materials. Figure F50
shows the Noise map with the Noise Type set to Fractal.
Particle Age Map

This map is used with the particle systems. This map changes the color of the
particles based on their age.
Particle MBlur Map
This map can be used to alter the opacity of the leading and trailing ends of
particles based on their rate of motion.
Perlin Marble Map
This map is like the Marble map. However, it generates a marble pattern
using the Perlin Turbulence algorithm.
Smoke Map
You can use this map [see Figure F51] to create animated opacity maps to
simulate the effects of smoke in a beam of light, or other cloudy, flowing effects.
Speckle Map
This map [see Figure F52] can be used to create granite-like and other
patterned surfaces.
Splat Map
This map can be used to create patterns similar to the spattered paint [see
Figure F53].
Stucco Map
You can use this map [see Figure F54] as a bump to create the effect like a
stuccoed surface.
Waves Map

You can use this map as both bump or diffuse map [see Figure F55]. This
map is used to create watery or wavy effects.
Wood Map
This map creates a wavy grain like wood pattern [see Figure F56]. You can
control the direction, thickness, and complexity of the grain.
Compositor Maps
These maps are specifically designed for compositing colors and maps. Let’s
have a look at these maps.
Composite Map
You can use this map to layer other maps atop each other using the alpha
channel and other methods.
Mask Map
This map can be used to view one material through another on the surface.
Mix Map
With this map, you can combine two colors or materials on a single side of
the surface. You can also animate the Mix Amount parameter to control how
two maps are blended together over time.
RGB Multiply Map
This map combines two maps by multiplying their RGB values. This map is
generally used as a Bump map.
Color Modifiers Maps
These maps change the color of the pixels in a material. Let’s have a look:
Color Correction Map
This map is allows you to modify color of a map using various tools. This

map uses a stack-based method.
Output Map
You can use this map to apply output settings to the procedural maps such as
Checker or Marble. These maps don’t have the output settings.
RGB Tint Map
This map adjusts the three color channels in an image.
Vertex Color Map
In 3ds Max, you can assign vertex colors using the VertexPaint modifier, the
Assign Vertex Colors utility, or the vertex controls for an editable mesh,
editable patch, or editable poly. This map makes any vertex coloring applied to
an object available for rendering.
Reflection and Refraction Maps
These maps are used to create reflections and refractions. Here’s is a quick
rundown.
Flat Mirror Map
This map produces a material that reflects surroundings when it is applied to
the co-planer faces. It is assigned to the Reflection map of the material.
Raytrace Map
This map allows you to create fully raytraced reflections and refractions. The
reflections/refractions generated by this map are more accurate than the
Reflect/Refract map.
Reflect/Refract Map
You can use this map to create a reflective or refractive surface. To create
reflection, assign this map type to the reflection map. To create refraction, apply
it to the Refraction map.
Thin Wall Refraction Map
This map can be used to simulate a surface as if it part of a surface through a
plate of glass.
Other Maps

Here’s is a quick rundown.
Shape Map
You can use this map to create resolution independent graphical textures that
you can animate. This map uses splines to apply textures to the selected object.
The results can be fully animated. You can set outlines, fill colors as well as the
map boundaries. You can change the shape of the spline even after applying it to
the object in the scene. Also, all adjustment to the shape can be keyframed as a
result you can animate the textures. The functioning of this map is demonstrated
in an hands-on exercise later in the unit.
Text Map
Like splines, you can also create textures using text. You can create creative
textures using the Text map and all adjustments can be animated. The
functioning of this map is demonstrated in an hands-on exercise later in the unit.
TextureObjMask
This texture map allows you to control the textures using a primitive control
object [plane, box, or sphere]. You can use the box or sphere primitive to control
inside/outside color. The plan primitive allows you to control above/below color.
The functioning of this map is demonstrated in an hands-on exercise later in the
unit.
Color Map
This map allows you to create solid color swatches and bitmaps. You can
easily create and instance solid color swatches that allows you to maintain
consistency and accuracy of color choices. You can also use a bitmap as an input
and adjust gamma and gain.
Combustion
You can use this map to interactively create maps using Autodesk
Combustion and 3ds Max simultaneously. When you paint a map in combustion
the material automatically updated in 3ds Max [material editor and shaded
viewports].
Caution: Combustion
This map works only if Autodesk Combustion is installed on your system. 3ds
Max is only available for Windows, as a result, you can not use this map on a

Macintosh system.
Map Output Selector
This map is used with the multi-output map such as Substance. It tells 3ds
Max which output to use. This map is automatically inserted when you assign an
output of multi-output Substance map to input of a material.
MultiTile
This texture allows you to implement support for UDIM, Z-Brush, and
Mudbox compatible multi-tile textures. ZBrush is the default value.
Hands-on Exercises
From the File menu, choose Set Project Folder to open the Browse for
Folder dialog. Navigate to the folder where you want to save the files and then
click Make New Folder. Create the new folder with the name unit-mt3 and
click OK to create the project directory.
Exercise 1: Creating the Gold Material
In this exercise, we are going to create the gold material.
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E1: Creating the gold material
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Gold Material
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe1-end.max
Time to Complete
10 Minutes
Getting Ready

Open the umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max file in 3ds Max.
Creating the Gold Material
Press M to open Slate Material Editor. On Material/Map Browser |
Materials | General rollout, drag the Standard material to the active view.
Rename the material as goldMat. Apply the material to geo1, geo2, and geo3.
Save the scene as umt3-hoe1-end.max. On the Parameter Editor | goldMat |
Shader Basic Parameters rollout, choose Multi-Layer from the drop-down. On
the Multi-Layer Basic Parameters rollout, set Diffuse to RGB [148, 70, 0] and
then set Diffuse Level to 25. Render the scene [see Figure E1].
Now, we will add specularity and reflection to add the detail. On the First
Specular Layer section, set Color to RGB [247, 227, 10]. Set Level to 114,
Glossiness to 32, Anisotropy to 82, and Orientation to 90.
On the Second Specular Layer section, set Color to RGB [192, 77, 8]. Set
Level to 114, Glossiness to 32, Anisotropy to 82, and Orientation to 90. On the
Maps rollout, click Reflection map button.
On Material/Map Browser that appears, double-click Falloff. On
Parameter Editor | Falloff | Falloff Parameters rollout, click the Swap
Colors/Maps button. Also, set Falloff Type to Fresnel. Click white swatch map
button and then on Material/Map Browser that appears, double-click Raytrace
in the Maps | General rollout.
On the Parameter Editor | Raytrace | Raytracer Parameters rollout, select
Reflection from the Trace Mode section. Render the scene [see Figure E2].

On the Falloff | Mix Curve rollout, RMB click on the first point and then
choose Bezier-Corner from the contextual menu [see Figure E3].
Similarly, convert second point to Bezier-Corner and change the shape of
the curve as shown in Figure E4. Now, Render the scene to view the final result
[see Figure E5].
Exercise 2: Creating the Copper Material
In this exercise, we are going to create the copper material. The following
table summarizes the exercise.
Table E2: Creating the copper material
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Copper Material
Skill Level
Beginner

Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe1-end.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe2-end.max
Time to Complete
10 Minutes
Getting Ready
Make sure the umt3-hoe1-end.max file that you created in Hands-on
Exercise 1 is open in 3ds Max.
Creating the Copper Material
Press M to open Slate Material Editor, if not already open. Create a copy of
the goldMat node by shift dragging it [see Figure E1]. Rename the node as
copperMat and then apply it to geo1, geo2, and geo3. Save the scene as umt3-
hoe2-end.max. On the Multi-Layer Basic Parameters rollout, set Diffuse to
RGB [88, 28, 9]. On the First Specular Layer section, set Color to RGB [177,
75, 44]. On the Second Specular Layer section, set Color to RGB [255, 123,
82]. Take the render [see Figure E2].
Exercise 3: Creating the Brass Material
In this exercise, we are going to create the brass material. The following
table summarizes the exercise.
Table E3: Creating the brass material
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Brass Material

Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe2-end.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe3-end.max
Time to Complete
10 Minutes
Getting Ready
Make sure the umt3-hoe2-end.max file that you created in Hands-
on Exercise 2 is open in 3ds Max.
Creating the Brass Material
Press M to open Slate Material Editor, if not already open. Create a copy of
the copperMat node by Shift dragging it. Rename the node as brassMat and
then apply it to geo1, geo2, and geo3.
On the Multi-Layer Basic Parameters rollout, set Diffuse to RGB [49, 38,
14]. On the First Specular Layer section, set Color to RGB [212, 154, 30]. On
the Second Specular Layer section, set Color to RGB [174, 98, 61]. Render the
scene [see Figure E1] and then save the file with the name umt3-hoe3-end.max.
Exercise 4: Creating the Chrome Material
In this exercise, we are going to create the chrome material.
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E4: Creating the chrome material
Topics in this section:

Getting Ready
Creating the Chrome Material
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoes4-end.max
Time to Complete
10 Minutes
Getting Ready
Make sure the hoes1-1to13-start.max is open in 3ds Max.
Creating the Chrome Material
Load umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max in 3ds Max. Press M to open Slate
Material Editor. On the Material/Map/Browser | Materials | General rollout,
drag the Standard material to the active view. Rename the material as
chromeMat. Apply the material to geo1, geo2, and geo3. Save the scene as
umt3-hoes4-end.max.
On the Parameter Editor | chromeMat | Blinn Basic Parameters
rollout,click the Diffuse color swatch. On the Color Selector : Diffuse Color
dialog, set Value to 12 and click OK. On the Specular Highlights section, set
Specular Level to 150 and Glossiness to 80.
On the Maps rollout, set Reflection to 90 and then click the Reflection map
button. On Material Map Browser that appears, double-click Raytrace. On the
Raytrace map | Raytracer Parameters | Background section, click None.
On Material/Map Browser that appears, double-click Bitmap. In the Select
Bitmap Image File dialog that appears, select refMap.jpeg. Render the scene
[see Figure E1].

Exercise 5: Creating the Brushed Aluminum Material
In this exercise, we are going to create the brushed aluminum material using
Photoshop and 3ds Max. The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E5: Creating the brushed aluminum material
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Brushed Aluminum Material
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe5-end.max
Time to Complete
15 Minutes
Getting Ready
Make sure the umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max is open in 3ds Max.
Creating the Brushed Aluminum Material
Start Photoshop. Create a 1000 x 1000 px document and fill it with 50%
gray color. Choose Noise | Add Noise from the Filter menu and then set the
parameters as shown in Figure E1 and then click OK. Choose Blur | Motion
Blur from the Filter menu and then set the parameters as shown in Figure E2
and then click OK. Choose Adjustments | Brightness\Contrast from the
Image menu and then set the parameters as shown in Figure E3 and then click

OK. Save the document as scratch.jpg.
Load umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max in 3ds Max, if not already loaded. Press
M to open Slate Material Editor. On the Material/Map Browser | Materials |
General rollout, drag the Standard material to the active view. Rename the
material as balMat. Apply the material to geo1, geo2, and geo3.
On the Parameter Editor | balMat | Shader Basic Parameters rollout,
choose Oren-Nayar-Blinn from the drop-down. On the Parameter Editor |
balMat | Oren-Nayar-Blinn Basic Parameters rollout, click Ambient color
swatch. On the Color Selector : Ambient Color dialog, set Value to 84 and
click OK. Unlock the Ambient and Diffuse components of the material.
Click the Diffuse map button and then on Material/Map Browser that
appears, double-click Mix. On the Parameter Editor | Mix map, set Color 1 to
the value 127 and assign scratch.jpg to Color 2 using the Bitmap map. Set Mix
Amount to 72%. On the balMat | Oren-Nayar-Blinn Basic Parameters rollout
| Advanced Diffuse section, set Diffuse Level to 81, and Roughness to 80.
Now, render the scene [see Figure E4]. On the Parameter Editor | balMat |
Oren-Nayar-Blinn Basic Parameters rollout | Specular Highlight section, set
Specular Level to 156, Glossiness to 13, and Soften to 0.48. Now, render the
scene [see Figure E5].
On the Parameter Editor | scratch.jpg | Output rollout, set Output

Amount to 0.6. Render the scene [see Figure E6]. Save the file as umt3-hoe5-
end.max.
Exercise 6: Creating the Denim Fabric Material
In this exercise, we are going to create the denim fabric material using
Photoshop and 3ds Max. The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E6: Creating the denim fabric material
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Denim Fabric Material
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe6-end.max
Time to Complete
15 Minutes
Getting Ready
Make sure the umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max is open in 3ds Max.
Creating the Denim Fabric Material
Start Photoshop. Create a 1000 x 1000 px document and fill it with RGB
[41, 67, 102] color. Create a new layer and fill it with 50% gray. Press D to
switch to the default colors. Choose Filter Gallery| Sketch | Halftone Pattern
from the Filter menu and then set the parameters as shown in Figure E1 and
then click OK. Choose Pixelate | Mezzotint from the Filter menu and then set

the parameters as shown in Figure E2 and then click OK.
Duplicate the layer and rotate and scale the duplicate layer [see Figure E3].
Choose Blur | Gaussian Blur from the Filter menu and then apply a blur of
radius 1. Set blending mode to Multiply. Also, set the blending mode of the
middle layer [Layer 1] to Softlight [Figure E4]. Save the file as
denimFebric.jpg.
Choose Flatten Image from the Layer menu to flatten the image. Now,
press Ctrl+Shift+U to desaturate the image and then save it as
denimFebricBump.jpg. In 3ds Max, press M to open Slate Material Editor.
On the Material/Map Browser | Materials | Scanline rollout, drag the
Standard material to the active view. Rename the material as denimMat. Apply
the material to geo1, geo2, and geo3.
Save the scene as umt3-hoe6-end.max. On the Parameter Editor |
denimMat | Shader Basic Parameters rollout, choose Oren-Nayar-Blinn from
the drop-down. On the Parameter Editor | denimMat | Oren-Nayar-Blinn
Basic Parameters rollout, click Ambient color swatch.
On the Color Selector : Ambient Color dialog, set RGB to 50, 53, and 57
and click OK. Unlock the Ambient and Diffuse components of the material.
Click the Diffuse map button and then on Material Map Browser that appears,
double-click Bitmap. Assign denimFebric.jpg. On the denimMat | Oren-
Nayar-Blinn Basic Parameters rollout | Advanced Diffuse section, set Diffuse
Level to 250, and Roughness to 75. Now, render the scene [see Figure E5].

On the Parameter Editor | denimMat | Oren-Nayar-Blinn Basic
Parameters rollout | Specular Highlight section, set Specular Level to 7, and
Glossiness to 10. Render the scene [see Figure E6]. On the Maps rollout, ensure
Bump is set to 30% and then click Bump map button.
On Material/Map Browser that appears, double-click Bitmap. On the
Select Bitmap Image File dialog that appears, select denimFebricBump.jpg.
Take a test render [see Figure E7].
Exercise 7: Creating the Microscopic Material
In this exercise, we’re going to create a microscopic material [see Figure
E1]. The following material(s) and map(s) are used in this exercise: Standard,
Mix, Falloff, and Noise.
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E7: Creating the microscopic material
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Microscopic Material
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe7-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe7-end.max
Time to Complete
15 Minutes
Getting Ready

Make sure the umt3-hoe7-start.max is open in 3ds Max.
Creating the Microscopic Material
Press M to open Slate Material Editor and then create a new Standard
material and assign it to the sphGeo in the scene. Rename the material as
msMat. Connect a Falloff map to the msMat’s Diffuse port. On the Parameter
Editor | Falloff map | Falloff Parameters rollout | Front:Side section, set first
color swatch to RGB [20, 20, 20] and second color swatch to white. Set Falloff
Type to Perpendicular/Parallel. Ensure Falloff Direction is set to Viewing
Direction (Camera Z-Axis) [see Figure E2]. Also, set the Mix Curve to as
shown in Figure E3.
Now, you will create two Noise maps and mix them using the Mix map.
Connect a Mix map to the msMat’s Bump port. On the Parameter Editor |
Mix map | Mix Parameters rollout, set Mix Amount to 37.8. On the Slate
Material Editor, connect two Noise maps, one each to the Color 1 and Color 2
ports. For the Color 1 | Noise map use the settings shown in Figure E4. Figure
E5 shows the Noise map settings connected to Color 2. Figure E6 shows the
node network.
Now, render the scene. Notice that the output is little bit on the darker side.

To address this, on the Parameter Editor | Falloff map | Falloff Parameters
rollout | Front:Side section, set first color swatch to RGB [80, 80, 80]. Render
the scene [see Figure E1].
Exercise 8: Creating Material for a Volleyball
Here, we are going to apply texture to a volleyball [see Figure E1]. Right
image in Figure E1 shows the reference whereas the left image shows the
rendered output. The following material(s) and map(s) are used in this exercise:
Multi/Sub-Object, Standard, and Noise.
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E8: Creating material for a volleyball
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating Material for a Volleyball
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe8-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe8-end.max
Time to Complete
15 Minutes
Getting Ready
Make sure the umt3-hoe8-start.max is open in 3ds Max. Save the file as

umt3-hoe8-end.max.
Creating Material for a Volleyball
Select the VolleyBallGeo in any viewport and then go to the Modify panel.
On the Selection rollout, click Element and then select the elements that make
the yellow part of the volleyball [see Figure E2]. See the right image in Figure
E1 for reference.
On the Modify panel | Polygon: Material IDs rollout, set ID to 1 [see
Figure E3]. Similarly, select the blue and white elements and assign them ID 2
and 3, respectively. Press M to open Slate Material Editor and then create a
new Multi/Sub-object material and assign it to the VolleyBallGeo in the scene.
Rename the material as vbMat. On the Parameter Editor | vbMat | Multi/Sub-
Object Parameters rollout, click Set Number and then set Number of
Materials to 3 in the dialog that appears. Next, click OK. In Slate Material
Editor, connect a Standard material to the port 1 of the vbMat. On the
Parameter Editor | Blinn Basic Parameter rollout, set the Diffuse component
to RGB [242, 140, 8]. On the Specular Highlights section, set Specular Level
to 71 and Glossiness to 28.
Connect a Noise map to the Bump port of the Standard material. Set Bump
to 2%. On the Parameter Editor | Noise map | Noise Parameters rollout, set
Noise Type to Turbulence, Levels to 9, and Size to 0.5. On Slate Material
Editor, select the Standard material and Noise map. Now, create a copy of the
selected nodes using SHIFT. Connect the new Standard material to the port 2 of
the vbMat. Similarly, create another copy and connect it to port 3. Figure E4
shows the node network. Set Diffuse components of the material connected to
the port 2 and 3 to RGB [11, 91, 229] and RGB [236, 236, 230], respectively.
Now, Render the scene.

Exercise 9: Creating Material for a Water Tunnel
Here, we are going to apply texture to a water tunnel [see Figure E1]. The
following material(s) and map(s) are used in this exercise: Raytrace, Standard,
Mix, and Noise.
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E9: Creating material for a water tunnel
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating Material for a Water Tunnel
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoes9-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoes9-end.max
Time to Complete
15 Minutes
Getting Ready

Make sure the umt3-hoes9-start.max is open in 3ds Max.
Creating Material for a Water Tunnel
Press M to open Slate Material Editor and then create a new Raytrace
material and assign it to the waterGeo in the scene. Rename the material as
waterMat. On Parameter Editor | Raytrace Basic Parameter rollout, set
Diffuse to black. Set Transparency to RGB (146, 175, 223). Set Reflect to
RGB [178, 178, 178]. On the Specular Highlight section, set Specular Level to
161 and Glossiness to 29. Connect a Noise map to the Bump port of the
waterMat. Use the default values for the Noise map. Render the scene [Figure
E2].
On Slate Material Editor, create a new Standard material and assign it to
the caveGeo in the scene. Rename the material as caveMat. Connect a Mix map
to the Diffuse port of the caveMat. Connect a Noise map to the Color 1 port of
the Mix map. On the Noise Parameters rollout, set Noise Type to Turbulence,
Levels to 10, Size to 31.7. Set Color 1 to RGB [132, 77, 6] and Color 2 to RGB
[154, 100, 79].
Connect a Noise map to the Color 2 port of the Mix map. On the Noise
Parameters rollout, set Noise Type to Turbulence, Levels to 10, Size to 72. Set
Color 1 to RGB [212, 84, 45] and Color 2 to RGB [181, 99, 54].
On the Parameter Editor | Mix Parameters rollout, set Mix Amount to 40.
On the Mixing curve section, turn on the Use Curve switch and then set Upper
to 0.6 and Lower to 0.53. Render the [Figure E3].
Connect a Mix map to the Displacement port of the caveMat. Set
Displacement to 25%. Connect a Noise map to the Color 1 port of the Mix
map. On the Noise Parameters rollout, set Noise Type to Turbulence, Levels
to 8.4, Size to 21.2. Connect a Noise map to the Color 2 port of the Mix map.
On the Noise Parameters rollout, set Noise Type to Turbulence, Levels to 10,
Size to 81.5. On the Parameter Editor | Mix Parameters rollout, set Mix
Amount to 18.4. Select caveGeo in the scene and then apply Disp Approx
modifier to it. Render the scene [Figure E4]

Similarly, create a material for the floorGeo. If you want to see the values I
have used, open umt3-hoe9-end.max and check the floorMat material.
Exercise 10: Creating Rusted Metal Texture
Let’s now create a rusted metal texture [see Figure E1]. The following
material(s) and map(s) are used in this exercise: Standard, Composite, Bitmap,
Color Correction, and Noise. The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E10: Creating rusted metal texture
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating Rusted Metal Texture
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe10-end.max
Time to Complete
15 Minutes
Getting Ready

Make sure the umt3-hoe1-1to10-start.max is open in 3ds Max. Save the file
with the name umt3-hoe10-end.max.
Creating Rusted Metal Texture
Press M to open Slate Material Editor. In the Material/Map Browser |
Materials | General rollout, double-click on Standard to add a Standard
material to the active view. Rename the material as rustMat and apply it to
geo1, geo2, and geo3.
Connect a Composite map to the rustMap’s Diffuse Color port. Now,
connect rust.jpg to the Composite map’s Layer 1 port [see Figure E2].
On the Parameter Editor | Composite map | Composite Layers | Layer 1
rollout, click Add a New Layer button to add a new layer [see Figure E3].
Notice that a new port with the name Layer 2 has been added to the Composite
map node in the active view. Connect rustPaint.jpg to the Composite map’s
Layer 2 port. On the Parameter Editor | Composite map | Composite Layers |
Layer 2 rollout, set Opacity to 10% and blend mode to Color Dodge [see
Figure E4].
Now, render the scene [see Figure E5]. Connect scratchesMask.jpg to the
Composite map’s Layer 2 (Mask) port using a Bitmap map. Now, check the
Invert checkbox from the Bitmap’s Output rollout. Render the scene [see
Figure E6]. On Slate Material Editor’s active view, create copy of the Bitmap
node connected to the Composite map’s Layer 2 (Mask) node using Shift.
Connect the duplicate node to the Bump node of rustMat. On the Parameter
Editor | rustMat | Maps rollout, set bump map’s strength to 10% and then
render the scene[see Figure E7].

Exercise 11: Shading an outdoor Scene
In this exercise, we are going to apply materials and textures to an outdoor
scene [see Figure E1]. The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E11: Shading an outdoor scene
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Shading the Scene
Skill Level
Intermediate
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe11-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe11-end.max
Time to Complete
30 Minutes
Getting Ready
Make sure the umt3-hoe11-start.max is open in 3ds Max. Save the file with
the name umt3-hoe11-end.max.
Shading the Scene
Select wallGeo from Scene Explorer and then press M to open Slate

Material Editor. Drag Standard from the Material/Map Browser | Maps |
Scanline rollout to Active View. Rename the material as wallMat. RMB click
on the wallMat node and then choose Assign Material to Selection. Again,
RMB click and then choose Show Shaded Material in Viewport.
In Active View, drag the Diffuse Color socket onto the empty area and
release the mouse button. Choose General | Bitmap from the popup menu. In
the Select Bitmap Image File dialog that opens, select redBrick.png and then
click Open to make a connection between the Diffuse Color socket and texture.
Double-click on the Bitmap node and then in the Parameter Editor |
Coordinates rollout, set U Tiling and V Tiling to 4. Similarly, connect the
Bump socket to the redBrickGray.png and set Tiling to 4.
Notice in the viewport the map is displayed on the wall [see the left image in
Figure E2]. Ensure wallGeo is selected in Scene Explorer and then go to
Modify panel and add the UVW Map modifier to the stack. Select the
modifier’s Gizmo and scale the texture so that the size of the bricks appear in
right proportions [see the right image in Figure E2].
Select floorGeo from the Scene Explorer and then in Slate Material
Editor, drag Standard from the Material/Map Browser | Maps | General
rollout to Active View. Rename the material as roadMat. RMB click on the
roadMat node and then choose Assign Material to Selection. Again, RMB
click and then choose Show Shaded Material in Viewport. In Active View,
drag the Diffuse Color socket onto the empty area and release the mouse button.
Choose General | Bitmap from the popup menu. In the Select Bitmap Image
File dialog that opens, select road.jpg and then click Open to make a
connection between the Diffuse Color socket and texture. Notice in the
viewport, the texture appears on the floorGeo [see Figure E3]. Now, we need to
change the direction of the yellow line. We will do so by using the UVW Map
modifier.
Ensure floorGeo is selected in Scene Explorer and then go to Modify panel
and add the UVW Map modifier to the stack. Select the modifier’s Gizmo and
rotate it by 90 degrees by using the Rotate tool. You can also use the Move tool

to position the texture on the geometry [see Figure E4].
Now, we will apply the material to billboard. We will use the
Multi/Subobject material. The ID 1 has been assigned to the screen component
of the board whereas rest of the geometry is held by ID 2. Select billBoardGeo
from Scene Explorer and then add a Multi/Subobject node to Active View.
Rename the material as billboardMat. In the Parameter Editor, click Set
Number. Now, in the Set Number of Materials dialog, set Number of
Materials field to 2 and click OK. RMB click on the billboardMat node and
then choose Assign Material to Selection.
Drag the 1 socket to the empty area of the view and then choose Materials |
Scanline | Standard from the popup menu. Connect the Standard’s materials
Diffuse Color socket to the honda.jpg. Connect another Standard material to
the 2 socket of the billboardMat. In the Parameter Editor | Blinn Basic
Parameters rollout | Specular Highlight group of the Standard material, set
Specular Level and Glossiness to 92 and 33, respectively. Also, set Diffuse
color to RGB [20, 20, and 20].
The material appears on the billBoardGeo in the viewport [see Figure E5].
You need to enable Show Shaded Material in Viewport for the two Standard
materials. Create two Standard materials and assign dark gray and yellow
colors to them. Now, apply these materials to alternate brick from the brickGrp
group [see Figure E6].
Now, create a chrome material as done in Exercise 4. Do not assign the
refMap.jpg to the Raytrace map. In Scene Explorer, select bsGeo11,
bsGeo12, bsGeo15, bsGeo16, bsGeo18, bsGeo19, bsGeo20, bsGeo22,
bsGeo23, bsGeo24, bsGeo26, and bsGeo27. Assign chrome material to the
selected objects [see Figure E7]. Also, assign chrome material to bsGeo3, and

bsGeo6.
In Scene Explorer, select bsGeo04, bsGeo05, bsGeo07, and bsGeo08. Drag
Standard from the Material/Map Browser | Maps | General rollout to Active
View. Rename the material as woodMat. RMB click on the woodMat node and
then choose Assign Material to Selection. Again, RMB click and then choose
Show Shaded Material in Viewport. In Active View, drag the Diffuse Color
socket onto the empty area and release the mouse button. Choose General |
Wood from the popup menu. In the Parameter Editor | Wood | Wood
Parameters rollout, change Color #2 to RGB[106, 25, 0]. The wood texture is
displayed in the viewport [see Figure E8].
In Scene Explorer, select bsGeo21, and bsGeo25 and then drag Standard
from the Material/Map Browser | Maps | General rollout to Active View.
Rename the material as roofMat. RMB click on the roofMat node and then
choose Assign Material to Selection. Again, RMB click and then choose Show
Shaded Material in Viewport. In the Parameter Editor | roofMat | Blinn
Basic Parameters rollout, change Diffuse to RGB[23, 241, 12] and then set
Opacity to 25. Figure E9 shows the roof material in the viewport.
Exercise 12: Working with the ShapeMap
In this exercise, we will create a resolution independent map using the
ShapeMap.
The following Table summarizes the exercise.
Table E12: Working with the ShapeMap

Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Working with ShapeMap
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe12-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe12-end.max
Time to Complete
20 Minutes
Getting Ready
Open umt3-hoe12-start.max in 3ds Max.
Working with the ShapeMap
Press M to open Slate Material Editor and then from the Material/Map
Browser | General | Maps rollout, drag Standard to the active view. Connect
ShapeMap to the Diffuse slot of the material. Select the plane in the viewport.
RMB click on the material node and then choose Assign Material to Selection.
Again, RMB click and then choose Show Shaded Material in Viewport. Notice
only standard logo is displayed in the viewport at this moment [see Figure E1].
On the Parameter Editor | ShapeMap | Shape Parameters rollout, click
None and then click the apple logo spline in any viewport. The shape is now
displayed on the plane in the viewport [see Figure E2]. On the Closed Shapes
section, turn on the Render Outline switch. On the Outlines section, set Width
to 5.
Set Fill Color, Line Color, Background Color to RGB [141, 141, 141],
RGB [252, 255, 0], and RGB [156, 188, 247], respectively. On the Map

Boundary section, select Manual and then set Width and Height to 537, and
300, respectively. The logo is now centered on the plane [see Figure E3]. Take a
render [see Figure E4]. Now, if zoom in on an area of the logo and then render,
you would notice that you will still get a high resolution output [see Figure E5].
Exercise 13: Working with Text Map
In this exercise, we will create a resolution independent map using the Text
Map.
The following Table summarizes the exercise.
Table E13: Working with Text Map
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Working with Text Map
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe13-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe19-end.max
Time to Complete
20 Minutes

Getting Ready
Open umt3-hoe13-start.max in 3ds Max.
Working with the Text Map
Press M to open Slate Material Editor and then from the Material/Map
Browser | General | Maps rollout, drag Standard to the active view. Connect
Text Map to the Diffuse slot of the material. Select the plane in the viewport.
RMB click on the material node and then choose Assign Material to Selection.
Again, RMB click and then choose Show Shaded Material in Viewport. Notice
only standard logo is displayed in the viewport at this moment [see Figure E1].
On the Parameter Editor | Text Map | Text Parameters rollout, click None
and then click the TextPlus object in any viewport. The text is now displayed on
the plane in the viewport [see Figure E2]. On the Characters section, turn on the
Render Outline switch. On the Outlines section, set Width to 5.
Set Fill Color, Line Color, Background Color to RGB [141, 141, 141],
RGB [252, 255, 0], and RGB [156, 188, 247], respectively. On the Map
Boundary section, select Manual and then set Width and Height to 500, and
200, respectively.
The text is now centered on the plane [see Figure E3]. Take a render [see
Figure E4]. Now, if zoom in on an area of the text and then render, you would
notice that you will still get a high resolution output [see Figure E5].

Exercise 14: Working with TextureObjMask Map
In this exercise, we will create a resolution independent map using the
TextureObjMask map.
The following Table summarizes the exercise.
Table E14: Working with TextureObjMask map
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Working with TextureObjMask Map
Skill Level
Beginner
Project Folder
unit-mt3
Start File
umt3-hoe14-start.max
Final Exercise File
umt3-hoe14-end.max
Time to Complete
20 Minutes
Getting Ready
Open umt3-hoe20-start.max in 3ds Max.
Working with the TextureObjMask Map
Press M to open Slate Material Editor and then drag TextureObjMask to
the active view. On the Parameter Editor | TextureObjMask | Parameters
rollout, click Control Object’s None button and then click on the sphere in a
viewport to make it the control object.
Now, drag the Cellular and Noise maps to the active view. Change the color
as desired and then connect the Cellular map to the Texture1 [outside texture]

port of the TextureObjMask and the Noise map to the Texture2 [inside texture]
port [see Figure E1]. In the Parameter Editor | TextureObjMask | Parameters
rollout, set Transition Range to 25.
Now, create a Standard material and connect its Diffuse port to the
TextureObjMask. Select the plane in a viewport and RMB click on the material
node and then choose Assign Material to Selection. Again, RMB click and then
choose Show Shaded Material in Viewport. Take a test render [see Figure E2].
The sphere is obscuring the plane rendering. Create another Standard material
and set its Opacity to 35. Take a test render [see Figure E3].
Quiz
Evaluate your skills to see how many questions you can answer correctly.
Multiple Choice
Answer the following questions, only one choice is correct.
1. Which of the following shading models is used to create realistic highlights for shiny, and regular
surfaces?
[A] Phong [B] Blinn
[C] Metal [D] Strauss
2. Which of the following shading models is used to create surfaces with elliptical, anisotropic
highlights?
[A] Phong [B] Blinn
[C] Metal [D] Oren-Nayar-Blinn
Fill in the Blanks

Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
1. The option in the _________ rollout are used by the Architectural, Raytrace,
Standard, and Ink ‘n Paint materials to improve the quality of the rendered image.
2. You can use the __________ shader to create realistic-looking metallic surfaces and a variety of
organic-looking materials.
3. The __________ shader is a variant of the Blinn shader and can be used to model matte surfaces
such as fabric.
4. The _________ material allows you to mix two materials on a single side of the surface.
5. The __________ material is used with the Morpher modifier.
6. The __________ material allows you to assign materials at the sub-object level.
7. The __________ material lets you assign two different materials to the top and bottom portions of
an object.
8. The __________ material is used to make whole objects or any set of faces into matte objects.
9. The __________ material is used to create cartoons effects. This material produces shading with
inked borders.
10. The __________ utility removes mapping coordinates or materials from the currently selected
objects.
True or False
State whether each of the following is true or false:
1. Self-illuminated materials do not show shadows cast onto them. Also, they are unaffected by the
lights in the scene.
2. The Roughness parameter is available only with the Oren-Nayar-Blinn and Multi-
Level shaders, and with the Physical material.
3. The Multi-Layer Shader has three layers of specular highlights.
4. You can not use the Quicksilver hardware renderer to render DirectX Shader materials.
5. This XRef material lets you use a material applied to an object in another 3ds Max scene file.
Summary
The unit covered the following topics:
General/Scanline materials
General maps

Unit MT4–Physical and Autodesk Materials
The Autodesk materials are only visible in the Material/Map Browser if the
active renderer is ART or Quicksilver Hardware renderer. The Physical
material is physically-based material and it is compatible with both the ART and
Arnold renderers. Autodesk Materials are used to model commonly used
surfaces in the construction, design, and the environment. These materials
correspond to the materials found in other Autodesk products such as Autodesk
AutoCAD, Revit and Autodesk Inventor. So, if you work between these
applications, you can share surface and material information among them.
In this unit, I’ll describe the following:
Autodesk Materials
Physical Material
Autodesk Materials
Autodesk Materials work best when you use them with physically accurate
lights such as photometric lights in a scene, modeled in the real-world units.
Many of the Autodesk materials use Autodesk Bitmaps. The Autodesk Bitmap
is a simple bitmap type. This bitmap type always uses the real-world mapping
coordinates. Therefore, if you have applied a UVW Map modifier to any
geometry, make sure you turn on Real-World Map Size on the Parameters
rollout. You can also change the default bitmap assignment.
Caution: Autodesk Bitmap compatibility
3ds Max allows you to disconnect a bitmap, or replace it with another map.
However, if you disconnect an Autodesk Bitmap in other application such as
Autodesk AutoCAD, you won’t be able to read the Autodesk material. If you are
using other applications, make sure that you do not replace the bitmap with a
map that only 3ds Max understands.
Warning: Autodesk Material Library
If you uninstall or remove Autodesk material library, the materials will no
longer will be available for other Autodesk products such as AutoCAD, Revit, or
Inventor.

Autodesk Ceramic
You can use this material to model the glazed ceramic material including
porcelain.
Open autoMat_begin.max. Open Slate Material Editor. On Material/Map
Browser | Materials | Autodesk, double-click on Autodesk Ceramic to display
the material’s interface in the active view [see Figure F1]. Double-click on the
material’s node in the active view. In the Property Editor | Ceramic rollout,
ensure that Ceramic is selected as Type. The Ceramic type produces look of
earthenware.
Apply the material to teapot in the scene and render the scene[see Figure F2].
On the Ceramic rollout, set Type to Porcelain. Click Color swatch and change
color to blue.
Color sets the color of the material. The other two options available for the
Color control are Use Map and Color By Object. The Use Map option allows
you to assign a map to color component of the material. If you set Color to
Color By Object, 3ds Max uses the object’s wireframe color as the material
color. The Finish control lets you adjust the finish and reflectivity of the
material.
Note: Color by object
When you use the Color By Object option, the color appears on rendering
but not in the viewport or material previews.
Make sure Finish is set to High Gloss / Glazed and render the scene[see
Figure 3]. Make sure Finish is set to Satin and render the scene[see Figure F4].
Make sure Finish is set to Matte and render the scene [see Figure F5]. Now, set
Finish to High Gloss / Glazed.

On the Finish Bumps rollout, check Enable and make sure Type is set to
Wavy and Amount to 0.3. Now, render the scene [see Figure F6].
The options in the Finish Bumps rollout can be used to simulate the patterns
that appear in glaze during firing. You can also create custom bumps by using
the Custom option from the Type drop-down. Amount sets the strength of the
pattern to apply.
On the Finish Bumps rollout, turn off Enable. On the Relief Pattern
rollout, turn on Enable. Click the Image button. On the Parameters rollout,
click Source None button. Select pattern.jpg from the Select Bitmap Image
File dialog and click Open. On the Relief Pattern rollout, set Amount to 1.2
and render the scene[see Figure F7].
The options in the Relief Pattern rollout allow you to model a pattern
stamped into the clay. Amount controls the height of the relief pattern.
Autodesk Concrete
This material allows you to model the concrete material. Figure F8 shows its
interface. The Sealant control of the Concrete rollout, controls the
reflectiveness of the surface. None [see Figure F9] does not affect the surface
finish. Epoxy [see Figure F10] adds a reflective coating on the surface whereas
Acrylic [see Figure F11] adds a matte reflective coating.

The Type control in the Finish Bumps area allows you to set the texture of
the concrete. Broom Straight which is a default type, specifies a straight broom
pattern [see Figure F12]. Broom Curved uses a curving broom pattern [see
Figure F13]. Smooth creates a pattern with speckled irregularities [see Figure
F14].
Polished 
uses 
a 
completely 
smooth 
pattern 
[see 
Figure 
F15].
Stamped/Custom allows you to specify a bitmap for generating the pattern [see
Figure F16].
Weathering applies a slight variation in the brightness on the surface of the
concrete. The default weathering method is Automatic that applies weathering
automatically. You can use Custom to specify a custom weathering pattern.
Autodesk Generic
This material provides a generic interface for creating a custom appearance.

You can convert an Autodesk material to the Autodesk Generic material by
RMB clicking on the node in the Slate Material Editor | Active View and then
choosing Copy as Generic from the popup menu.
Autodesk Glazing
This material allows you to model a thin and transparent material such as
glazing in windows and doors. The Color control in the Glazing rollout lets you
choose the color for the sheet of glass. Figure F17 shows the teapot rendered
with the Blue Green color applied to it.
Autodesk Harwood
This material is used the model the appearance of a wood. The Stain control
in the Wood rollout allows you to choose a stain to add to the base harwood
pattern. Figure F18 shows the wood material with Brown Stain color.
The Finish control lets you choose the surface finish of the harwood. The
Glossy Varnish is the default option [see Figure F18]. The other options
available are: Semi-Gloss Varnish [see Figure F19], Satin Varnish [see Figure
F20], and Unfinished [see Figure F21].
The Used For control lets you adjust the appearance of the wood. Flooring
uses an ocean shader that adds a slight warp to the large surfaces, improving the
realism. When you choose Furniture, the surfaces are not warped. However,
you can use the Relief Pattern map to achieve various effects.
When you check Enable in the Relief Pattern rollout, mental ray generates
a relief pattern like bump map on the wood surface. The Type control lets you

choose the relief pattern. When you choose Based on wood grain, it generates a
relief pattern based on the image map used to create the wood pattern. Custom
allows you to choose a custom map for the relief pattern. Amount lets you
adjust the height of the relief pattern.
Autodesk Masonry/CMU
This material can be used to model masonry or concrete masonry units
[CMUs]. Figure F22 and F23 shows the brick and CMU material.
Autodesk Metal
You can use this material to model various metallic surfaces. The Type
control in the Metal rollout lets you choose the type of material you want to
create. These materials define the base color and texture of the material. Figure
F24 show the brass material. The Finish control lets you choose the surface
finish for the surface. Figures F24 and F25 show the brass material with the
Polished and Brushed finish, respectively.
Autodesk Metallic Paint
This material allows you to model a metallic paint surface such as paint of a
car [see Figure F26].
Autodesk Mirror
This material lets you model a mirror material [see Figure F27].
Autodesk Plastic/Vinyl
This material allows you to model the surfaces that have a synthetic

appearance such as plastic or vinyl [see Figures F28 and F29].
Autodesk Point Cloud Material
This is a special purpose material that is automatically applied to any point-
cloud object in the scene. This material allows you to control the overall color
intensity, ambient occlusion, and shadows.
Autodesk Solid Glass
This material allows you to model the appearance of the solid glass [see
Figure F30].
Autodesk Stone
You can use this material to create the appearance of the stone [see Figures
F31 and F32]. The Type control in the Finish Bumps rollout lets you specify the
bump pattern. Available options are: Polished Granite, Stone Wall, Glossy
Marble, and Custom.
Autodesk Wall Paint
This material can be used to model the appearance of a painted surface such
as paint on the walls of a room [see Figures F33 and F34]. The Application
control in the Wall Paint rollout lets you choose the texture method. In other
words, you can control how paint is applied on the surface. Roller is the default
method. Other two methods are Brush and Spray.
Autodesk Water
This material can be used to model appearance of a water surface [see Figure
F35]. The Type control in the Water rollout lets you choose the scale and

texture of the water.
The available options are Swimming Pool, Generic Reflective Pool,
Generic Stream/River, Generic Pond/Lake, and Generic Sea/Ocean. The
Color control lets you specify the color of the water. This option is only
available for Generic Stream/River, Pond/Lake, and Sea/Ocean.
The following options are available for adjusting the color of the water:
Tropical, Algae/Green, Murky/Brown, Generic Reflecting Pool, Generic
Stream/River, Generic Pond/Lake, Generic Sea/Ocean and Custom.
Physical Material
Physical material allows you to model shading effects of the real-world
materials with ease. This material is the layered material that gives you ability to
efficiently use the physically-based workflows. This material is compatible with
ART and Arnold renderers. Do not use the legacy Scanline renderer with it as
Scanline renderer shows just the approximation of the shader and does not
support many crucial features.
This material is comprised of the following:
A base layer that represents a diffuse color or colored metallic
reflections. There can be an option clear-coat layer at the top. The
clear-coat layer stays at the top of all layers and reduces energy based
on how much energy it reflects and transparency color of the coating.
Transparency layer
Sub-surface scattering/translucency layer
Emission [Self-Illumination] layer. This layer does not participate in
the energy conversation and adds energy.
According to the energy conservation model of this material, the sum of
various shading components can not exceed 100%. One exception is emission, in
this case, energy is added. The energy calculation is based on the weight

parameters instead of color parameters. This material ensures that the light does
not amplify. When the Metalness parameter of the material is set to 1, the
material is opaque. It does not produce any Diffuse, Transparency, or Sub-
surface Scattering effects.
Physical Material comes with number of presets that you can use as a quick
starting point. You can select the presets from the Presets rollout of the material.
The Material mode drop-down also in the Presets rollout, lets you choose a
mode. The two available modes are Standard and Advanced. The Advanced
mode is the superset of the Standard mode with hidden parameters. In most of
the cases, the parameters in the Standard mode are sufficient to make physically
plausible materials. Some of the advanced parameters are: Reflection Color and
Weight, Diffuse Roughness, and controls in the Advanced Reflectance
Parameters rollout.
Hands-on Exercises
From the File menu, choose Set Project Folder to open the Browse for
Folder dialog. Navigate to the folder where you want to save the files and then
click Make New Folder. Create the new folder with the name unit-mt4 and
click OK to create the project directory.
Exercise 1: Creating Glossy Varnished Wood
In this exercise, we’re going to create a varnished glossy wood material
using Physical Material [see Figure E1].
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E9: Creating Glossy Varnished Wood
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Material
Skill Level
Intermediate
Project Folder
unit-mt4
Start File
umt4-physical-mat-start.max

Final Exercise File
umt4-hoe1-end.max, umt4-hoe1-end-2.max
Time to Complete
20 Minutes
Getting Ready
Open the umt4-physical-mat-start.max.
Creating the Material
Apply Physical Material to the geo1, geo2, and geo3 geometries in the
scene. Rename the material as glossyVarnishedMat. On the Parameter Editor |
Presets rollout, select Standard from the Material mode drop-down, if not
already selected. On the Parameter Editor | glossyVarnishedMat | Basic
Parameters rollout | Base Color and Reflections section, click Base Color’s
button. On the Material/Map Browser | Maps | General rollout, double-click
Bitmap. On the Select Bitmap Image File dialog, choose wooden-plank-
1.jpeg. Also, set gamma override to 2.2.
The first spinner in the Base Color section is Weight, the relative
measurement of the base color. The value in this spinner participate in the energy
conversion. You can use the button next to Weight to assign a map to it. The
Color swatch next to the Weight spinner is the base color of the material. For
non-metals, this swatch defines the diffuse color. For metals, it defines the color
of the metal itself. Render the scene[see Figure E2].
Notice the render in Figure E2, the wood is highly reflective, we need to add
some roughness to the reflection and transparency components.
On the Reflections section, set Roughness to 0.9 and then render the
scene[see Figure E3]. Notice that setting Roughness to 0.9, the material has lost
its gloss and looks very flat. Glossiness is the effectively the inverse of the
roughness. If you enable the Inv switch corresponding to the Roughness
parameter, it will yield glossy material. The Roughness parameter lets you
control the roughness of the material. A higher Roughness value yields a

blurrier result. You can lower the Roughness value to make the mirror like
material.
Enable the Inv switch and then set IOR to 1.7.
The IOR parameter controls the index of refraction level of the material. If
defines how much rays bend when they enter a medium. It also affects the
angular dependency of the reflectivity when set to the default Fresnel mode [see
the Advanced Reflectance Parameters rollout]. On the Transparency section,
click the Lock icon and then set Roughness to 1. Also, enable the Inv switch.
Render the scene[see Figure E4].
By default, roughness values of reflectivity and transparency are locked
together. You can unlink them clicking the Lock icon.
On the Anisotropy rollout, select Map channel and then set Channel to 1.
Set Anisotropy and Rotation to 0.4, and 0.3, respectively. Render the scene [see
Figure E5].
The Anisotropy parameter controls the U-direction roughness in relation to
the V-direction roughness. The Rotation parameter controls the anisotropy
angle. This control ranges from 0 to 1 which represents one full revolution. The
Auto option automatically orients the anisotropy whereas the Map channel
option orients the anisotropy based on a given texture space.
Now, we will create a bump map using the Noise map.
Drag a Noise map to the active view. On the Parameter Editor | Noise map |
Coordinates rollout, set Source to Explicit Map Channel and ensure Map

Channel is set to 1. Set Tiling U, V, and W to 0.5, 200, and 100, respectively.
On the Noise Parameters rollout, set Size to 0.2 [see Figure E6]. Set Color #1
to RGB[180, 180, 180]. Drag a Mix map to the active view. Connect Noise map
to the Color 1 port of the Mix map and Bitmap to the Color 2 port. Connect the
Mix map to the Bump Map port of glossyVarnishedMat [see Figure E7]. On
the Parameter Editor | Mix map | Mix Parameters rollout, set Mix Amount to
30.
Take the final render [see Figure E1]. Now, if you want to create a less
glossy satin varnished wood material, you need to lower down the reflection
Roughness and IOR values [see Figure E8].
Check the umt4-hoe1-end-2.max file for the satin varnished material.
Exercise 2: Creating Glass Materials
In this exercise, we’re going to create a glass materials using the Physical
material.
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E2: Creating the Glass Materials
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Materials
Skill Level
Intermediate
Project Folder
unit-mt4
Start File
umt4-physical-mat-start.max

Final Exercise File
umt4-hoe2-end.max
Time to Complete
20 Minutes
Getting Ready
Open the umt4-physical-mat-start.max file.
Creating the Materials
Apply Physical Material to Geo1, Geo2, and Geo3 in the scene. Rename
the material as glassMat. On the Parameter Editor | glassMat material |
Presets rollout, choose Advanced from the Material mode drop-down.
There are two types of modes available for the Physical material: Standard
and Advanced. When you choose the Standard mode, you get access to the
parameters that you can use to create most physically plausible materials. The
Advanced mode gives you access to advanced reflection, roughness, and weight
parameters. You can use these parameters to create advanced materials.
On the glassMat material | Basic Parameters rollout | Base Color section,
set Base Color weight to 0. The material turns black. On the Transparency
section, set the Transparency weight to 1 to make the glass completely
transparent. Render the scene [see Figure E1]. On the Reflections section, set
IOR to 1.7.
The IOR value sets the Index of Refraction level. It controls how much
rays bend when entering in a medium.
Turn on the Thin-walled switch and render the scene [see Figure E2].
When this switch is turned on, the object is considered to be made out of an
infinitelly thin transparent shell. This shell us not reflective. Also, the
transparency depth is disabled and the sub-surface scattering is replaced by
translucency.

Turn off the Thin-walled switch.
You can create tinted glass by specifying a color for Transparency and
specifying a depth. In the Transparency section, set color to Red and then set
Depth to 0.05 and render the scene [see Figure E3].
You can create some interesting effects by using sub-surface scattering
option. On the Sub-Surface Scattering section, set color to yellow and take a
test render. Notice that there is no change in the color of the glass. As discussed
earlier, the sum of various shading components can not exceed 100%, therefore,
you need to reduce weight of other parameter to see the effect of sub-surface
scattering.
On the Transparency section, set weight to 0.85 and render the scene [see
Figure E4].
Exercise 3: Creating Metal Materials
In this exercise, we’re going to create a metal materials using Physical
Material.
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E3: Creating the Metal Materials
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Materials
Skill Level
Intermediate
Project Folder
unit-mt4
Start File
umt4-physical-mat-start.max

Final Exercise File
umt4-hoe3-end.max
Time to Complete
20 Minutes
Getting Ready
Open the umt4-physical-mat-start.max file.
Creating the Materials
Apply Physical Material to Geo1, Geo2, and Geo3 in the scene. Rename
the material as metalMat. On the Parameter Editor | metalMat material |
Presets rollout, choose Advanced from the Material mode drop-down.
First, we will create highly reflective material. On the metalMat material |
Basic Parameters rollout | Base Color section, set Base Color weight to 0. On
the Reflections section, set IOR to 48 and then render the scene [see Figure E1].
The reflection in the material is coming from the gray background. If you want
more reflections in the metal, use a reflection map.
Now, if you want to create a material like aluminium, blur the reflections by
adding some roughness to the metal. On the Reflections section, set Roughness
to 0.3 and then render the scene [see Figure E2]. You can make the metal darker
by darkening the Reflection color. Set it to medium gray and render the scene
[see Figure E3].
If you want to add of the weight of the base color to the material, it will have
no effect because of the high IOR value. If you use low IOR value, you loose
the metal look. To compensate for this, you can use the Metalness parameter. If
you set Metalness to 1, you do not see the base layer, just the colored
reflections.
On the Parameter Editor | metalMat | Basic Parameters rollout | Base
Color section, set base color to RGB [0.82, 0.416, and 0.099] and weight to 0.3.
On the Reflections section, set reflection color to RGB [0.584, 0.584, 0.584],
weight to 0.7, Roughness to 0.3, Metalness to 0.5, and IOR to 6. Render the

scene [see Figure E4].
Quiz
Evaluate your skills to see how many questions you can answer correctly.
Multiple Choice
Answer the following questions, only one choice is correct.
1. Which of the following renderers support Autodesk Materials?
[A] Quicksilver Hardware [B] ART
[C] A and B [D] None of these
2. Which of the following options are available in the Material mode drop-down of Physical
Material?
[A] Standard [B] Advanced
[C] A and B [D] None of these
Fill in the Blanks
Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
1. Physical Material is physically-based material and it is compatible with both the
_________ and _________ renderers.
2. According to the energy conservation model of Physical Material, the sum of various
shading components can not exceed _________ %.
3. The _________ parameter controls relative measurement of the color of the corresponding
component.
4. The _________ parameter controls the index of refraction level of the material.
5. The _________ parameter controls the U-direction roughness in relation to the V-direction
roughness.
True or False
State whether each of the following is true or false:
1. Autodesk Bitmap always uses the real-world mapping coordinates.
2. The Scanline renderer shows just the approximation of Physical Material and does not

support many crucial features.
3. When the Metalness parameter of Physical Material is set to 1, the material becomes
transparent.
Summary
The unit covered the following topics:
Autodesk Materials
Physical Material

Unit ML1: Standard Lighting
To achieve professional-quality, realistic renders in 3ds Max, you need to
master the art of lighting. Lights play an important role in the visual process.
They shape the world we see. The trick to simulate realistic looking light effects
is to observe the world around us. The lights you create in a scene, illuminate
other objects in the scene. The material applied to the objects simulates color and
texture.
In this unit, I will describe the following:
Basic Lighting Concepts
Creating and placing lights
3ds Max Lights
Light Linking
Shadows
Lighting Effects
The reasons to add the light objects to the scene are as follows:
They improve the illumination of the scene.
They enhance the realism of the scene through realistic lighting effects.
They give depth to the scene by casting shadows.
They enhance the scene by projecting maps onto the scene.
They also help in modeling light source such as headlights of a car.
They create lights using files from manufactures [such as IES files].
Note: IES Lights
You can use these lights to visualize the commercially available lighting in
your scene by adding Photometric lights to the scene.
Standard Lights
The standard lights in 3ds Max are computer based lights that simulate lights
such as lamps and bulbs. Unlike Photometric lights, these lights do not have the
physically-based intensity values. To create a light, on the Create panel, click
Lights. Choose Standard from the drop-down available below Lights and then
on the Object Type rollout, click the type of light you want to create. Now, click

on a viewport to create the light. The creation method in the viewport depends
on the type of light you have chosen. For example, if a light has target, you need
to click-drag to set the target.
Whenever you create a light in the scene, the default lighting is turned off. It
will be restored when you delete all lights from the scene. Like all objects in 3ds
Max, lights have name, and color. You can set these options from the Name and
Color rollout.
Note: The color of the light
The color that you set for the light from the Name and Color rollout only
changes the color of the light geometry in the scene. It has no effect on the color
cast by the light.
Note: Default Lighting
When there are no light objects in the scene, 3ds Max illuminates the scene
using the default lighting. The default lighting disappears as soon as you add a
light object to the scene. When you delete all light objects from the scene, the
default lighting reappears.
Now, let's explore the standard lights.
Target Spotlight
The target spotlight casts a focused beam of light. You can use this light to
simulate flashlight, a follow spot on a stage, or the headlights of the car. To
create a target spotlight, click Target Spot from the Object Type rollout. Now,
drag in a viewport to place the light. The initial point of the drag defines the
location of the spotlight whereas the point at which you release the mouse
defines the location of the target. In Figure F1, I have marked light with 1 and its
target with 2.
Note: Light and its target
When you create a light that has a target, two objects will appear in Scene
Explorer: light object and its target. The target name has an extension .target.

For example, if you create a spot light in the scene, the name of the light and its
target will be as follows: Spot001 and Spot001.Target. When you rename a light,
its target object will be automatically renamed accordingly. However, remember
that renaming a target object does not rename its parent light.
Note: Free Spotlight
Free Spotlight is similar to Target Spotlight except the difference that it has
no target. You can move and rotate Free Spotlight to aim in any direction.
To adjust the target, select it in a viewport or from Scene Explorer and then
move the target using the Select and Move tool. The spotlight is always aimed
at its target. The distance of the target from the light does not affect the
attenuation or brightness of the light.
You can also change a viewport to a light view so that the viewport shows
the light's point of view. This feature is immensely helpful in placing the lights
correctly. To change a viewport to a light view, click or RMB click on POV
label. Now, choose Lights | Name of the light from the menu. Figure F2 shows
the point of view of the light that was shown in Figure F1.
You can change the properties of the spot light from the rollouts available in
the Modify panel. Let's explore the controls available in these rollouts.
General Parameters Rollout
This rollout is displayed for the Standard lights. The controls in this rollout
allow you to turn light on or off, exclude or include objects in the scene, and
change the type of light. You can also toggle the shadow casting from this
rollout.
To turn a light on or off, toggle the On switch from this rollout. The drop-
down on the right of the On switch lets you switch between the light types.
When the Targeted switch is on, the light is targeted. When on, the distance

between the light and its target is displayed on the right of this switch.
To toggle shadow casting, use the On switch from the Shadows section.
Turn on the Use Global Settings switch to use the global settings for shadows
that are cast by this light. The shadow parameters defined by the light are shared
with all the lights of same class. When off, the shadow parameters are specific to
that light.
The drop-down in the Shadows group lets you choose the algorithm to be
used by the light to cast shadows. The following table summarizes various
algorithms.
Table 1: The shadow generating algorithms
Algorithm
Description
Shadow
Map
The shadow map is a bitmap that is generated during a pre-rendering
pass of the scene. This map doesn't show the color cast by transparent or
translucent objects. A shadow map can produce soft-edged shadows that
cannot be generated by a ray-traced shadow [see Figure F3]. Also, depth
map shadows take less time to render than the ray-traced shadows. You
can change the shadow map options from the Shadows Map
Parameters rollout.
Ray-
Traced
Shadows/Adv.
Ray-Traced
Shadows
The Ray-traced shadows [see Figure F4] are more accurate than the
shadow-mapped shadows and are generated by tracing the path of the
rays sampled from a light source. They create better results for the
transparent or translucent objects. Only ray-traced shadows can generate
shadows for the wireframed objects. The Adv. Ray-Traced Shadows
are same as ray-traced shadows, however they provide anti-aliasing
controls to fine tune the shadows.
Area
Shadows
This algorithm simulates shadows generated by a light with area of
volume. You can change volume type from the drop-down available in
the Basic Options group of the Area Shadows rollout. Figure F5 shows
the shadows generated by using the Box Light volume.

Tip: Transparent and Translucent objects
If you want convincing looking shadow results for the transparent and
translucent objects, use raytraced or advance raytraced shadows.
Tip: Preventing an object from casting shadows
You can prevent an object from casting shadows in the scene, to do this,
select the object and then RMB click. Choose Object Properties from the Quad
menu and then turn off the Cast Shadows switch from the Rendering Control
group of the Object Properties dialog.
You can also exclude the selected object from the effects of the lights. This
feature is very useful when you want a light to lit specific objects in the scene.
Click Exclude to open the Exclude/Include dialog [see Figure F6].
Now, select the objects that you want to affect from the Scene Objects
section of the dialog. Select Include or Exclude from the right of the dialog.
Now, click >> to add the selected object to the right pane of the dialog. You can
click << to move objects from right pane to the left pane. You have three options
to control the effect: Illumination, Shadow Casting, and Both. You can use
these options to exclude/include illumination, shadows, or both. Now, click OK
to close the dialog and include/exclude objects with the light.
Intensity/Color/Attenuation Rollout
The controls in this rollout let you set the color and intensity of the light.
Also, you can define the attenuation of the light. The Multiplier control
amplifies the power of the light. You can use negative values to reduce the
illumination. High Multiplier values wash out the colors whereas the negative
values darkens the objects. The color swatch next to the Multiplier controls lets
you select a color to be cast by the light.
Tip: Flashing light on and off
Animate the Multiplier value to 0 [0 and 1] in repeated keyframes and then
assign step tangent to the Multiplier's graph.

The controls in the Decay group lets you control the light's intensity over
distance. The following table summarizes the options available in the Type drop-
down.
Table 2: The decay types
Type
Description
None
No decay is applied [see the left image in Figure F7]. The light retains
its full strength.
Inverse
It applies inverse decay [see the middle image in Figure F7]. The
formula used to calculate decay is luminance=R0/R. R0 is the radial source
of the light of no attenuation is used. R is the radial distance of the
illuminated surface from R0.
Inverse
Square
It applies inverse-square decay [see the right image in Figure F7]. The
formula used is (R0/R)2. This decay type is used by the Photometric lights
and it is the real-world decay of the light.
If you don’t use the attenuation settings [discussed next], the Start control
sets the distance at which the light begins to decay. You can use the Show switch

to display the decay range in the viewports. For spotlights, the decay range
appears as lens-shaped section of the cone [see the left image in Figure F8]. For
directional light, it appears as circular section of the cone [see the middle image
in Figure F8]. For omni lights and spot or directional lights with Overshoot
turned on, the range appears as a sphere [see the right image in Figure F8].
Attenuation is the effect of the light diminishing over distance. Far
Attenuation controls the distance at which the light drops off to zero. The Near
Attenuation value controls the distance at which the light fades in. You can turn
on the attenuation from the Near Attenuation and Far Attenuation groups of
the Intensity/Color/Attenuation rollout by using the Use control. The Start and
End controls in these groups define the attenuation distances.
When you set the Far Attenuation value, the light intensity remains at the
value specified by Multiplier up to the distance specified by Start and then
drops off to zero at the distance specified by the End. When you set the Near
Attenuation value, the light intensity remains zero up to the distance specified
by Start and then from the Start to the distance specified by the End, the light
intensity increases. Beyond End, the light intensity remains at the value
specified by Multiplier.
Spotlight Parameters Rollout
The parameters in this rollout controls the hotspot and falloff properties of
the spotlight. The Show Cone switch displays the cone in the viewport. The
cone is always visible when a light is selected. This switch allows you to show
the cone even if the light is not selected. When the Overshoot switch is on, the
light casts light in all directions [not just within the cone] but the shadows and
projections appear within the cone. The Hotspot/Beam and Falloff/Field
parameters control the angle of the light's cone and light's falloff, respectively.
The Circle and Rectangle parameters define the shape of the falloff and
hotspot areas. The Aspect parameter controls the aspect ratio of the rectangular
light beam. The Bitmap Fit button lets you specify the aspect ratio as per the
supplied bitmap.
Advanced Effects Rollout

The parameters in this rollout define how light affects the surfaces. Also, you
can create projector lights. The Contrast parameter adjusts the ambient and
diffuse areas of the surface. The default value is zero for this parameter that
creates normal contrast. The Soften Diff Edge parameter, softens the edge
between the diffuse and ambient components. The Diffuse switch when on,
affects the Diffuse properties of an object's surface. Similarly, the Specular and
Ambient Only switches can be used to affect the specular and ambient
components, respectively.
The parameters in the Projector Map group let you make a light a projector.
To create a projector light, open Material Editor and then create a map. Drag
the map from Material Editor to the None button in the Projector Map section.
Select Instance from the dialog that appears and click OK. The name of the map
appears as button's label. Notice in Figure F9, I have used a Cellular map to
project it on the teapot using a spotlight.
Atmospheres and Effects Rollout
You can use this rollout to assign, delete, and edit parameters for various
atmospheric and rendering effects associated with the light. For example, to
create the volume fog effect, click Add to open the Add Atmosphere or Effect
dialog. Select Volume Light from the list and then click OK to close the dialog.
In the Atmospheres and Effects rollout, select Volume Light and then click
Setup to open the Environments and Effects dialog. Now, you can adjust the
parameters from the Atmosphere rollout. Render the scene to see the effect.
Notice in Figure F10, I have projected the Cellular map and then added volume
effect to it.
Shadow Parameters Rollout
The parameters in this rollout are displayed for all light types expect
Skylight. You can use these parameters to define the shadow color and other
general shadow properties. Use the Color swatch to change the color of the
shadows. You can also animate the shadow color. Dens controls the density
[darkness] of the shadows. You can also assign negative values to Dens that

allows you to simulate the reflected light. Turn on the Map switch to assign a
map to the shadows using the button available on its right. The process to add
the map is the same as discussed with the projector light. Figure F11 shows the
Dent map applied to the shadows. When the Light Affects Shadow Color
switch is on, the color of the light blends with the color of the shadow.
Turn on the On switch in the Atmosphere Shadows section to allows
atmospheric shadows to cast shadows as light passes through them. The Opacity
parameter defines the opacity of the atmospheric shadows whereas the Color
Amount parameter defines the amount of atmosphere color bleed into the
shadows.
Shadow Map Params Rollout
This rollout is displayed when you choose the Shadow Map method for
generating shadows. The Bias parameter moves the shadow toward or away
from the shadow-casting objects. Figure F12 shows the render with Bias set to 1
and 3, respectively. The Size parameter defines the size of the shadow map in
square pixel computed for the light. Higher the value of Size, more detailed map
will be. The Sample Range parameter controls how much area in the shadow is
averaged. This settings effects the edges of the shadow. On increasing this value,
blends the shadow edges and remove the granularity from the shadow.
The Absolute Map Bias switch works with the Bias parameter. If you
specify a low value for Bias, the shadows can leak and if you specify a too high
value, the shadow might detach from the object. Setting an extremes value in
either case might result in no shadows at all. This behavior depends on the
Absolute Map Bias switch. When off, the Bias is calculated based on the scene

extents and then it is normalized to one. This results in similar results regardless
of the size of the scene. When on, the Bias value is treated in 3ds Max scene
units and the result is dependent on the size of the scene.
When 2 Sided Shadow switch is on, blackfaces are not ignored when
calculating shadows. Figure F13 shows the render of the teapot with the 2 Sided
Shadows switch turned on and off, respectively.
The type of renderer you choose will also affect your choice of shadow
algorithm used. The Quicksilver Hardware renderer always casts shadow-
mapped shadows. The following table summarizes the shadow types the
Scanline and mental ray renderers support.
Table 3: The shadow types supported by the Scanline and mental ray renderers
Type
Scanline
mental ray
Advanced Ray-Traced
Yes
No
mental ray Shadow Map
No
Yes
Area
Yes
No
Shadow Map
Yes
Yes
Ray-Traced
Yes
Yes
The following table summarizes the pro and cons of each shadow type:
Table 4: Shadow types comparison
Type
Pros
Cons
Advanced
Supports opacity and transparency. It
It is slower than the

Ray-Traced
uses less memory than the raytraced
shadows. This type is recommended for
complex scenes with lots of light.
shadow map and computed
at every frame. It does not
support soft shadows.
Area
Supports opacity and transparency and
uses very less RAM. It supports different
format for area shadows.
It is slower than the
shadow map and computed
at every frame.
Shadow
Map
Fastest shadow type. It produces soft
shadows. It is computed once if there is no
animated object present in the scene.
Uses a lot of RAM and
does not support objects
with 
transparency 
and
opacity maps.
Ray-
Traced
Supports transparency and opacity
mapping. It is computed once if there is no
animated object present in the scene.
It does not support soft
shadows. It is slower than
the shadows maps.
Ray Traced Shadow Params Rollout
This rollout is displayed when you choose the Ray Traced Shadows method
for generating shadows. The Ray Bias control moves the shadow toward or
away from the shadow casting object. The Max Quadtree Depth control sets
the depth of Quadtree used by the raytracer. Higher the value you specify for this
control, more enhanced the results will be. However, you will be taxed on the
render time.
Note: Quadtree
Quadtree is the data structure used by the raytracer. It represents scene from
the point of the view of the light. The root node of the Quadtree contains all
visible objects in the scene. If there are too many objects available in the scene,
four more nodes [leaf nodes] are generated to hold these objects. This process
continue adaptively until each node has a small number of objects and Quadtree
depth limit is achieved. The maximum size of a Quadtree is the square of two to
the power of the maximum Quadtree depth. For example, at the depth of 7, the
total number of the leaf node generated will be 27 * 27=128 * 128=16384.
Warning: Omni Light and Quadtree
An omni light can generate up to ten Quadtrees, therefore, if you are using
raytraced shadows, it will use more memory and render time.

Tip: The raytraced shadows and renderers
Both the Scanline renderer and mental ray renderer support raytraced
shadows. If you are using the Scanline renderer, the Adv Ray Traced method
gives you more control over the shadows.
Adv. Ray Traced Params Rollout
The parameters in this rollout allow you to control the advanced raytraced
shadows. These shadows are similar to the raytraced shadows, however, they
give you more control over the shadows. The drop-down in the Basic Options
group allows you to select type of raytracing. The Simple type casts a single ray
of light toward the surface. No antialiasing is performed when you select this
type.
Shadow Integrity defines the number of rays cast from an illuminated
surface. This parameter is not available if raytracing mode is simple. Shadow
Quality defines the secondary rays cast from the illuminated surface. This
parameter is not available when type is set to Simple or 1-Pass Antialias.
Shadow Spread defines the radius in pixels to blur the antialias edge. This
parameter is not available when mode is set to Simple. Shadow Bias controls
the minimum distance from the point being shaded that an object must be to cast
a shadow. If you increase the blur value, you should also increase the bias value
to compensate. The Jitter Amount parameters breaks the regular pattern of the
rays and add randomness to the ray positions.
Area Shadows Rollout
This rollout is displayed when you choose the Area Shadows method for
generating shadows. You need to define the dimensions of the virtual light to
fake an area shadow. You can choose the type of fake light from the drop-down
available in the Basic Options group of the rollout. The dimensions can be set
from the Area Light Dimensions area of the rollout.
Tip: Rendering area lights
If you are using area lights, try to match the properties of the light match the
properties in the Area Light Dimensions section.
Optimizations Rollout
This rollout contains additional parameters for fine tuning advanced
raytraced and area shadows. When the On switch in the Transparent Shadows

area is on, the transparent surfaces will cast a colored shadow, otherwise, all
shadows are black. Antialiasing Threshold defines the maximum color
difference allowed between transparent object samples before the antialiasing is
triggered. On increasing the value of the color, the shadow becomes less
sensitive to the aliasing artifacts and rendering speed will also improve.
When the Supersampled Material switch is on, while shading a
supersampled material only pass 1 is used during 2-pass antialiasing. When the
Reflect/Refract switch is on, only pass 1 is used during 2-pass antialiasing. If
these two switches are off, render time can increase without resulting in a better
quality image.
The Skip Coplanar Faces switch in the Coplanar Face Culling group
prevents faces from shadowing each other in curved surfaces. The angle between
the adjacent faces is controlled by the Threshold parameter.
Target Directional Light
This light is used to simulate a distant light source [see Figure F14]that casts
parallel light rays in a single direction [like Sun]. These lights are generally used
to simulate sunlight. Like the Target Spotlight, it has a target object to aim the
light. When you create a Target Directional light, the Directional Parameters
appears in the Modify panel. You can use the parameters to define the shape of
the light. These parameters are similar to the one described in the Target
Spotlight section.
Note: Free Directional Light
The Free Directional light is similar to the Target Directional light except
the difference that it has no target. You can move and rotate the Free Directional
to aim in any direction.
Omni Light
An Omni light casts rays in all directions from a single source like a light
bulb. These lights are specifically used for creating fill lighting or simulating
point source lights.

Skylight
When you use this light, it models a sky as a dome above the scene. You can
use this light to model daylight. You can also use a map to model the sky. When
you add a Sky light to the scene, the Skylight Parameters appear in the Modify
panel.
The On switch allows you to turn light on or off. The Multiplier parameter
controls the power of the light. The parameters in the Sky Color group let you
set the color of the sky. Select Use Scene Environment to color the light using
the environment color set in the Environment dialog. The Sky Color parameter
lets you set a color tint for the sky. You can also assign a map using the Map
switch. Use HDR files such as OpenEXR for best results.
Turn on the Cast Shadow switch in the Render section to cause theSky
light to cast shadows. Figure F15 show a teapot rendered with a skylight. The
Rays Per Sample parameter allows you to set the number of rays used to
calculate the skylight falling on a point in question. The Ray Bias parameter
defines the closest distance at which objects can cast shadows on a given point in
the scene.
Note: Radiosity and Light Tracer
The Cast Shadows switch has no effect when you are using Radiosity or
Light Tracer. Also, the Sky light does not cast shadows in the ActiveShader
rendering.
Note: The Render group
The parameters in this group are not available if you are not using the
Scanline renderer or the Light Tracer is active.
Tip: Sky light and Light Tracer
There are many methods in 3ds Max to model the skylight. For best results,
use the Sky light with Light Tracer.
Note: Light Tracer

The Light Tracer is a lighting plugin that is used to generate soft-edged
shadows in a brightly lit scene such as outdoor scenes. It is typically used with
the Sky light. It does not attempt to create a physically accurate lighting and it is
easy to setup.
Note: Radiosity
It is a rendering technique used to calculate the indirect light in a scene. It
calculates the inter-reflections of the diffuse light and then illuminates the scene.
You can find the Light Tracer and Radiosity options in the Advanced Lighting
panel of the Render Setup dialog.
Hands-On Exercises
From the Application menu, choose Manage | Set Project Folder to open
the Browse for Folder dialog. Navigate to a folder where you want to save the
files and then click Make New Folder. Create the new folder with the name
unit-ml1 and click OK to create the project directory.
Exercise 1: Illuminating an Outdoor Scene
In this exercise, we are going to illuminate an outdoor scene using Standard
lights. We will also use Light Tracer to enhance the scene [see Figure E1].
The following table summarizes the exercise.
Table E1: Illuminating an outdoor scene
Skill Level
Beginner
Time to Complete
45 Minutes
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Adding Lights to the scene
Enabling the LightTracer plugin
Changing the Scanline renderer filter settings

Project Folder
unit-ml1
Start File
uml1-hoe1-start.max
Final Exercise File
uml1-hoe1-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the uml1-hoe1-start.max file in 3ds Max.
Adding Lights to the Scene
You will first add a directional light to simulate the light coming from Sun
and then the Skylight light to model the light coming from the sky. On the
Create panel, click Lights and then select Standard from the drop-down
available below Lights. On the Object Type rollout, click Target Direct and
then in the Left viewport click on the upper-left area of the viewport to place the
light and then drag toward the ladder to aim the light. Now, release the mouse
button to set the aim [see Figure E2].
On the Modify panel | General Parameters rollout, turn on the On switch
from the Shadows section and then select Adv. Ray Traced option from the
drop-down in this group. On the Directional Parameters rollout, set
Hotspot/Beam to 17.58 so that the directional light covers the whole scene [see
Figure E3]. Ensure the Perspective view is active and then press C to activate
the Camera view. Render the scene [see Figure E4].
Now, you will add a Skylight to the scene. This light will provide the
skylight and also it will create nice contact shadows. But, before we add the
Skylight, let’s turn off the directional light so that we can see what effect the
Skylight produces. In the General Parameters rollout, turn off the On switch in
the Light Type group.
On the Create panel | Object Type rollout, click Skylight and then click
anywhere in the scene to place the Skylight in the scene. The position of the

Skylight does not affect the way it illuminates the scene therefore you can place
light anywhere in the scene. Render the scene. You will notice that 3ds Max
rendered a washed out image [see Figure E5]. Let’s adjust some parameters to
get the effect correct.
On the Modify panel | Skylight Parameters rollout, set Multiplier to 0.3,
Sky Color to light blue color, RGB [189, 192, 201]. On the Render group, turn
on the Cast Shadows switch and then set Rays per Sample to 10. Render the
scene [see Figure E6]. Notice that now we have got the better result.
Select the directional light from Scene Explorer and then turn it back on. On
the Intensity/Color/Attenuation rollout, set color to a warm color, RGB [255,
234, 197]. Render the scene [see Figure E7]; notice the render is looking much
better now after both the lights in the scene illuminates the objects in it. On the
Shadow Parameters rollout, turn on the Light Affects Shadow Color switch.
Enabling Light Tracer
Open the Render Setup dialog and then go to Advanced Lightingpanel.
Select Light Tracer from the drop-down available in the Select Advanced
Lighting rollout. Notice that the Parameters rollout appears in the panel. You
can use the parameters available in this rollout to control the effect of the Light
Tracer plugin.
On the General Settings group, set Rays/Sample to 500, Filter Size to 0.7,
and Bounce to 1. Now, render the scene to see the final render [see Figure E8].
Now, save the render as a 16 bit TIF file and farther refine the render in
Photoshop. As you have seen Light Tracer allows you to create soft-shadows
and also helps in producing a smooth render. Table E1.1 summarizes the Light
Tracer parameters.

Table E1.1: The Light Tracer parameters
Parameter
Description
Global
Multiplier
It defines the overall lighting level.
Object
Multi.
It defines the level of the light reflected by the objects in the
scene. The effect of this parameter is more pronounced when Bounces
is set to a value of 2 or higher.
Sky Lights
It scales the intensity of the skylights.
Color Bleed
Defines the color bleed that happens when light is inter-reflected
among the scene objects.
Rays/Sample
Defines the number of rays per sample used by Light Tracer.
Increasing this value produces smooth results at a cost of render time.
Color Filter
It filter all the light falling on the object. Change color to apply a
tint to the scene.
Filter Size
The filter size used to reduce the noise.
Extra
Ambient
The color you set for this parameter [other than black], Light
Tracer adds that extra color to the ambient.
Ray Bias
It controls the position of the bounced light effects.
Bounces
Defines the number of time a ray bounces. On increasing its value,
the color bleed also increases in the scene. Higher the value, more
light will flow in the scene, and better result Light Tracer will
produce at a cost of render time.

Cone Angle
It controls the angle used for regathering.
Volumes
When this switch is on, Light Tracer multiplies the amount of
light it gathers from the volumetric lighting effects.
The controls in the Adaptive Undersampling section let you speed up your
renderings. These controls allow you to specify the settings to reduce the number
of light samples taken. Light Tracer initially takes samples from a grid
superimposed on the pixels of the scene. When it finds enough contrast between
the samples, it subdivide that region and takes farther samples, down to a
minimum area specified by the Subdivide Down To parameter.
If you are rendering a complex scene, Light Tracer can slow down the
rendering. For test renderings or a quick preview, given below are some tips:
To generate a quick render, lower the values for the Rays/Sample and
Filter Size parameters.
Use Adaptive Undersampling to create a quick preview. Set the
Initial Sample Spacing and the Subdivide Down To settings to the
same value and then lower the Rays/Sample value and set Bounced to
0.
If there are some objects in the scene that have negligible impact on the
scene, disable Light Tracing from these objects from the Object
Properties dialog.
To increase the amount of color bleeding, adjust the values of the
Bounces and Color Bleed controls.
If there are glass objects in the scene, increase the value for the
Bounces parameter.
If Skylight is the main light in the scene and you need specular
highlights, create a directional light parallel to the Skylight. Turn on
shadows for the light and turn off the Diffuse switch in the Advanced
Effects rollout of the light. In the render shown in Figure E9, I have
switched off the Diffuse switch for the directional light to create an
overcast sky like effect [see uml1-hoe1-overcast.max].
Tip: Using map with the Skylight
If you are using a map for the skylight, ensure that you completely blur the

image in a program like Photoshop. You can blur the map beyond recognition
and Light Tracer will still fetch the info required for gathering light. Blurring
the image helps in reducing the render time. In the render shown in Figure E10,
I have completely blurred the image and then applied to the Skylight. I have also
set the contribution of the map to 30% using the control on the right of the Map
switch in the Skylight Parameters rollout [see uml1-hoe1-blurredSky.max].
Exercise 2: Quickly Rendering an Architectural Plan
Sometimes, you need to send a quick draft render to your clients to check the
CG assets and other related information in an architectural plan. Once approved,
you can then proceed to produce the high quality render in VRay, or Arnold. In
this exercise, we are going to render an architectural plan using the Standard
lights and the Light Tracer plugin [see Figure E1]. To speed up the rendering, I
have not placed any models in the scene except the walls.
Table E2 summarizes the exercise.
Table E2: Quickly rendering an architectural plan
Skill Level
Intermediate
Time to Complete
30 Minutes
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Illuminating the Plan

Project Folder
unit-ml1
Start File
uml1-hoe2-start.max
Final Exercise File
uml1-hoe2-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the uml1-hoe2-start.max file in 3ds Max.
Illuminating the Plan
Add a Skylight to the scene and then in the Modify panel | Skylight
Parameters rollout, set Multiplier to 0.5 and Sky Color to RGB [184, 184,
255]. Turn on the Cast Shadows switch in the Render section and then set Rays
per sample to 10. In the Top viewport, create a Target Direct light aiming
toward the Camera’s target. Now, in the Left viewport move the light up. You
can use the following values for placing the light and its target: Light [11825,
-7069, 76], and Target [11889, -7097, 0].
Now, change the parameters of the directional light in the Modify panel,
refer to Table E2.1. Figure E2 shows the light in the scene. Now, make sure the
Camera view is active and then render the scene [see Figure E3].
Table E2.1: The parameters of the Target Light
Rollout
Values
General 
Parameters 
|
Shadows
Turn on the On switch. Select Adv. Ray Traced
shadows type.
Directional Parameters
Hotspot/Beam: 72
Intensity/Color/Attenuation
Multiplier: 1.5, Color: RGB [255, 242, and 198].
Shadow Parameters
Dens: 0.5. Turn on the Light Affects Shadow
Color switch.
Adv. Ray Traced Params
Shadow Integrity: 10, Shadow Quality: 5, Shadow
Spread: 20, and Jitter Amount: 0.8

Enable Light Tracing from the Render Setup dialog | Advanced Lighting
panel and then render the scene [see Figure E4].
Adjust the Light Tracer’s parameters using the values shown in Table E2.2.
Table E2.2: The parameters of the Light Tracer
Rollout
Values
Parameters
Global Multiplier: 1.2, Rays/Sample: 500,
Bounces: 2
Parameters 
| 
Adaptive
Undersampling
Initial Sampling Spacing: 32x32
Now, render the scene [see Figure E1]. Experiment with various parameters
of Direct Light and Light Tracer to achieve a different result.
Exercise 3: Illuminating a Night Scene
Here, we are going to illuminate the same scene that we used in Exercise 1
but here we will simulate night lighting by using the Target Spot and Omni
lights [see Figure E1].

Table E3 summarizes the exercise.
Table E3: Illuminating a Night Scene
Skill Level
Intermediate
Time to Complete
30 Minutes
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Illuminating the Scene
Project Folder
unit-ml1
Start File
uml1-hoe3-start.max
Final Exercise File
uml1-hoe3-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the uml1-hoe3-start.max file in 3ds Max.
Illuminating the Scene
Create a Target Spot light in the Front viewport and then align it [see
Figure E2]. Now, select Spot001 from Scene Explorer. In the Front viewport,
drag the light with Shift held down along the X direction to the other light
fixture on the left.
In the Clone Options dialog that appears, select Instance from the Object
group and then click OK to create a clone of the selected light. Now, align the
cloned light with the fixture [see Figure E3].
You can also use the values shown in Table E3.1 to position the spot lights.
Table E3.1: The transform values for spot lights

Object
XYZ Values
Spot001
39.991, -6.159, 116.401
Spot001.Target
-20.628, -6.159, 58.77
Spot002
-38.549, -6.159, 116.401
Spot002.Target
8.85, -6.159, 58.77
Now, render the scene. You will notice [see Figure E4] that spot lights are
illuminating the road as well. We need to confine the illumination to the
billboard only. For that, we will use the Attenuation settings. Ensure a spot light
is selected and then in the Modify panel | Spotlight Parameters rollout, set
Hotspot/Beam 
to 
43.7 
and 
Falloff/Field 
to 
67. 
In 
the
Intensity/Color/Attenuation | Far Attenuation section, turn on the Use and
Show switches and then set End to 116. Now, render the scene to see the area
the spotlights are illuminating [see Figure E5].
Now, add an Omni light to the scene and place it at the following location
[XYZ]: 38.169, -103.246, 117.664.
Change the parameters of the Omni light using the values shown in Table
E3.2 and then render the scene [see Figure E6].
Table E3.2: The parameters of the Omni light

Rollout
Values
General 
Parameters 
|
Shadows
Turn on the On switch. Select Adv. Ray Traced
shadows type.
Intensity/Color/Attenuation
Multiplier: 0.1, Color: RGB [173, 175, and 208].
Shadow Parameters
Turn on the Light Affects Shadow Color switch.
Adv. Ray Traced Params
Shadow Integrity: 10, Shadow Quality: 5, Shadow
Spread: 10, and Jitter Amount: 0.7
In the Modify panel | Intensity/Color/Attenuation rollout of a spot light, set
Multiplier to 2 to make the area illuminated by the spot lights brighter. Render
the scene to view the result.
Quiz
Evaluate your skills to see how many questions you can answer correctly.
Multiple Choice
Answer the following questions, only one choice is correct.
1. Which of the following options are available for controlling the decay of the light?
[A] None [B] Inverse
[C] Inverse Square [D] All of the above
2. Which of the following algorithms are available for controlling shadows?
[A] Ray-Traced [B] Area
[C] Shadow Map [D] All of the above
Fill in the Blanks
Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
1. __________ is a bitmap that is generated during a pre-rendering pass of the scene.
2. The _________ shadows are more accurate than the shadow-mapped shadows and are generated
by tracing the path of the rays sampled from a light source.
3. The __________ formula is used to calculate the Inverse decay type. __________ is the radial
source of the light of no attenuation is used. __________ is the radial distance of the illuminated surface
from __________ .
4. The __________ switch displays the cone of a spot light in the viewport.

5. The __________ control moves the shadow toward or away from the shadow casting object.
6. An __________ light casts rays in all directions from a single source like a light bulb.
True or False
State whether each of the following is true or false:
1. The Standard lights have physically-based intensity values.
2. The color that you set for the light from the Name and Color rollout only changes the color
of the light geometry in the scene. It has no effect on the color cast by the light.
3. When you delete all light objects from the scene, 3ds Max uses the default lighting for
illuminating the scene.
4. Free Spotlight is similar to Target Spotlight except the difference that it has no target.
5. Only ray-traced shadows can generate shadows for the wireframed objects.
6. You cannot prevent an object from casting shadows in the scene.
7. When the Overshoot switch is on for a spot light, the light casts light in all directions [not just
within the cone] but the shadows and projections appear within the cone.
Summary
This unit covered the following topics:
Basic Lighting Concepts
3ds Max Lights
Light Linking
Shadows
Lighting Effects

Unit ML2: Photometric Lights
Photometric lights allow you to accurately define the lighting model for your
scene. They use the light energy [Photometric values, real-world light
measurement values] to create lights that follow the real-world scenarios. You
can create lighting models using various distribution and color characteristics.
You can also import photometric light files [provided by the light manufactures]
into 3ds Max. In this unit, you will learn about photometric lights that 3ds Max
offers.
In this unit, I will describe the following:
Photometric light types: Target Light, and Free Light
Color temperatures
Shadow generating shapes
Exposure controls
Target Light
Target Light has a target sub-object that you can use to aim the light. When
you create Target Light in a viewport, 3ds Max automatically adds a Look At
Controller to it. The target object of the light is assigned as Look At Target.
You can use the Motion panel of Command Panel to assign any object as the
Look At Target.
Note: Light and its target
When you create a light that has a target, two objects will appear in Scene
Explorer: light object and its target. The target name has an extension .target.
For example, if you create first Target Light in the scene, the name of the light
and 
its 
target 
will 
be 
as 
follows: 
TPhotometricLight001and
TPhotometricLight001.Target. When you rename a light, its target object will be
automatically renamed accordingly. However, remember that renaming a target
object does not rename its parent light.
Whenever you create a photometric light, a message box appears,
recommending that the Logarithmic Exposure Control to be enabled. Exposure
controls are plug-in components that are used to adjust the output levels and
color range of a rendering as if you are adjusting the film exposure [tone

mapping]. These controls are useful if you are rendering a scene with Radiosity
or HDR imagery. It is especially useful for compensating the limited dynamic
range of the computer displays. The following table summarizes the exposure
controls available in 3ds Max.
Table 1: Exposure Controls
Control
Description
Automatic
Exposure
Control
This control enhances some lighting effects that would otherwise
be too dim to see. It builds a histogram to give good color separation
across the entire dynamic range of the rendering. Do not use this
control in animation because it causes the animation to flicker. This
happens because different histograms are generated for each frame.
Linear
Exposure
Control
It uses the average brightness of the scene to map physical values
to the RGB values. This is best suitable for scene with fairly low
dynamic range.
Logarithmic
Exposure
Control
It uses brightness and contrast to map physical values to RGB
values. This control is best suitable for scenes with a very high
dynamic range. Also, it is best suited for animation as it does not
generate histograms. If you're rendering to texture, use the
Logarithmic Exposure Control, not the Automatic or Linear
control.
Physical
Camera
Exposure
Control
It sets exposure for Physical Cameras, using an Exposure Value
and a color-response curve.
Pseudo
Color Exposure
Control
It is a lighting analysis tool that provides an intuitive way of
visualizing and evaluating the lighting levels in the scenes.
To create a target light, on the Create panel, click Lights and then choose
Photometric from the drop-down [see Figure F1]. Click Target Light in the
Object Type rollout. Click Yes from the Photometric Light Creation message
box and then drag in a viewport to set the location of the light. The initial point

drag of the mouse pointer defines the location of the light whereas the last drag
point defines the position of the target. Now, you can use the Move transform to
farther refine the position of the light and its target. Adjust the parameters of the
light from the rollouts in Command Panel.
Several of the rollouts for the photometric lights are the same as those for the
standard lights but there are some key controls that are different. Let's now
explore these controls.
Template Rollout
This rollout [see Figure F2] allows you to choose a light preset among a
variety of preset light types. When you choose a template from this rollout, the
parameters in other rollouts updated that you can use to fine-tune the settings of
the light.
The following presets are available in the Template rollout:
(Bulb Lights)
40 Watt (W) Bulb
60W Bulb
75W Bulb
100W Bulb
(Halogen Lights)
Halogen Spotlight
21W Halogen Bulb
35W Halogen Bulb
50W Halogen Bulb
75W Halogen Bulb
80W Halogen Bulb
100W Halogen Bulb

(Recessed Lights)
Recessed 75W Lamp (web)
Recessed 75W Wallwash (web)
Recessed 250W Wallwash (web)
(Fluorescent Lights)
4 ft. Pendant Fluorescent (web)
4 ft. Cove Fluorescent (web)
(Other Lights)
Street 400W Lamp (web)
Stadium 1000W Lamp (web)
General Parameters Rollout
The parameters in this rollout are similar to that of the standard lights that we
saw in Unit ML1 except the Light Distribution (Type) group. The drop-down
in this group lets you choose the type of the light distribution model. The model
defines the method of how a photometric light is distributed. Let's explore these
types.
Uniform Spherical: This type casts lights in all directions [see Figure
F3] like the standard Omni light. The Uniform distribution is
represented by a small sphere in the viewports. The position of the sphere
indicates whether the distribution is spherical or hemispherical. 
Uniform Diffuse: This type casts diffuse light in one hemisphere [as if a
light is positioned along a wall] only according to the Lambert's cosine
law [see Figure F4].
Spotlight Distribution: This type casts a focused beam of light [see
Figure F5] like a flashlight or a car's headlights. The beam angle of the
light defines the main strength of the beam whereas the field angle
defines the spill of the light.
Photometric Web: A photometric web is based on a geometric web that
represents the light intensity distribution of a light source [see Figure F5].

The distribution information is stored in a photometric data file [that can
be obtained from the light's manufacturer] in the IES format using the
IES LM-63-1991 standard file format.
Intensity/Color/Attenuation Rollout
This rollout [see Figure F6] lets you set the color and intensity of the light.
You can also set attenuation form this rollout.
Color Group
The first drop-down in this group allows you to pick a common lamp
specification. Given below are the options available:
D50 Illuminant (Reference White)
D65 Illuminant (Reference White) (the default)
Fluorescent (Cool White)

Fluorescent (Daylight)
Fluorescent (Lite White)
Fluorescent (Warm White)
Fluorescent (White)
Halogen
Halogen (Cool)
Halogen (Warm)
HID Ceramic Metal Halide (Cool)
HID Ceramic Metal Halide (Warm)
HID High Pressure Sodium
HID Low Pressure Sodium
HID Mercury
HID Phosphor Mercury
HID Quartz Metal Halide
HID Quartz Metal Halide (Cool)
HID Quartz Metal Halide (Warm)
HID Xenon
Incandescent filament lamp
Note: HID
HID stands for high-intensity discharge.
Note: D65 Illuminant (Reference White)
The default option in the drop-down approximates a mid day sun in western
or northern Europe. D65 is a white value defined by the Comission
Internationale de l’Éclairage (CIE), the International Lighting Commission.
Figure F7 shows the render with the D50 Illuminant (Reference White),
Fluorescent (Cool White), and HID High Pressure Sodium, respectively.
In addition to the list of lights, you can specify a color based on the
temperature expressed in Kelvin. The Kelvin option allows you to set the color
of the light by adjusting the color temperature spinners located next to it. The
associated color appears on the color swatch on the right of the spinner. Filter
Color allows you to simulate the effect of a color filter placed in front of the

light source. The color temperature defines a color in terms of degree Kelvin
[K]. The following table summarizes the color temperature for some common
types of lights:
Table 2: Color Temperatures
Light Source
Temperature [K]
Hue
Overcast daylight
6000
130
Noontime sunlight
5000
58
White fluorescent
4000
27
Tungsten/halogen lamp
3300
20
Incandescent lamp (100 to 200 W)
2900
16
Incandescent lamp (25 W)
2500
12
Sunlight at sunset or sunrise
2000
7
Candle flame
1750
5
Intensity Group
There are three controls in this group: lm [lumen], cd [candela], and lx at
[lux]. These controls define the strength or brightness of the lights in physically
based quantities. Lumen measures the overall output [luminous flux] power of
the light. A 100 watt bulb has about 1750 lm luminous flux. Candela measures
the maximum luminous intensity of the light, generally along the direction of the
aim. A 100 watt bulb has about intensity of 139 cd. Lux measures the illuminate
caused by the light shining on a surface at a certain distance in the direction of
the source. Lux is the international scene unit and which is equivalent to 1
lumen per square meter. To specify the illuminate of the light first enter the lx
value in the first spinner and then enter distance in the second.
Dimming Group

The Resulting Intensity label shows the intensity caused by the dimming. It
uses the same units that you have defined in the Intensity group. Turn on the
Dimming Percentage switch to control the dimming of the light. At 100%, the
light has full intensity. When the Incandescent lamp color shift when dimming
switch is on, the light simulate an incandescent light. The color of the light turns
more yellowish as it is dimmed.
Shape/Area Shadows Rollout
You can use the parameters in this rollout [see Figure F8] to choose the light
shapeused for generating shadows. Let's explore the parameters.
Emit Light From (Shape) Group
The drop-down in this group allows you to choose the shadow generating
shape for the light. When you choose a shadow generating shape other than
Point, the parameters appear in the Emit Light From section to control the
dimensions of the shape. Also, the Shadow Samples control appears in the
Rendering section of the rollout.
The following table summarizes the shapes.
Table 3: Shadow Generating Shapes
Shape
Description
Point
Calculates shadows as if the light were emitted from a point like a
light bulb. It has no other controls.
Line
Calculates shadows as if the light were emitted from a line like a
fluorescent tube. This shape has a length control.
Rectangle
Calculates shadows as if the light were emitted from a rectangular
area like a bank of fluorescent lights. This shape has length and width
controls.

Disc
Calculates shadows as if the light were emitted from a disc like the
light out of the top of a shaded lamp. This shape has radius control.
Sphere
Calculates shadows as if the light were emitted from a sphere like a
Chinese lantern. This shape has radius control.
Cylinder
Calculates shadows as if the light were emitted from a cylinder. This
shape has length and radius controls.
Rendering Group
When the Light Shape Visible in Rendering switch is on, the shape is
visible in the renderings as a self-illuminated glowing shape. When switch is off,
no shape is rendered. The Shadow Samples drop-down sets the overall quality
of the shadows for the lights that have an area. If the render is grainy, increase
the value for the Shadow Samples control. This setting does not appear for the
Point shadow shape.
Distribution (Photometric File) Rollout
This rollout appears [see Figure F9] when you create or select a light with
aphotometric web distribution. You can use the controls in this rollout to select a
photometric web file and adjust its parameters. After you choose a photometric
file, the thumbnail [also referred to as Web Diagram] shows a schematic
diagram of the distribution pattern of the light [see Figure F5].
The bright red outline shows the beam of the light. In some web diagrams,
you will see a darker red outline that shows the field which is less bright than the
beam. Click Choose Photometric File to select a file to use as a photometric
web. The file can be in one of the following formats: IES, LTLI, or CIBSE.
Once you select the file, this button displays the name of the file. The X
Rotation, Y Rotation, and Z Rotation controls rotate the web about the X, Y,
and Z axis, respectively.

Distribution (Spotlight) Rollout
This rollout appears [see Figure F10] when you select or create a
photometric light with the spotlight distribution. The parameters in this rollout
control hotspots and falloff of the spotlights. Use the Hotspot/Beam and
Falloff/Field controls to increase or decrease the size of the beam angle and
field angle regions. The Cone visible in viewport when unselected switch
toggles the display of the cone on or off.
Free Light
The Free Light is similar to Target Light except it has no target sub-object.
Quiz
Evaluate your skills to see how many questions you can answer correctly.
Multiple Choice
Answer the following questions, only one choice is correct.
1. Which of the following exposure controls is used with the Photometric lights?
[A] Linear Exposure Control [B] Logarithmic Exposure Control
[C] Physical Camera Exposure Control [D] All of the above
2. Which of the following light distribution models are available for the Photometric lights?
[A] Uniform Spherical [B] Uniform Diffuse
[C] Photometric Web [D] All of the above
3. Which of the following file types can be used to assign web diagrams to the Photometric
lights?
[A] IES [B] CIBSE
[C] LTLI [D] All of the above
Fill in the Blanks
Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
1. When you create Target Light in a viewport, 3ds Max automatically adds a __________ to it.
2. __________ controls are plug-in components that are used to adjust the output levels and color

range of a rendering as if you are adjusting the film exposure [tone mapping].
3. __________ stands for high-intensity discharge.
True or False
State whether each of the following is true or false:
1. Physical Camera Exposure Control sets exposure for Physical cameras, using an
Exposure Value and a color-response curve.
2. The Resulting Intensity label shows the intensity caused by the dimming.
Summary
This units covered the following topics:
Photometric light types: Target Light, and Free Light
Color temperatures
Shadow generating shapes
Exposure controls

Unit ML3: Sunlight and Daylight Systems
The sunlight and daylight systems are the built for simulating external
lighting based on the Sun. These systems follow the geographically correct angle
and movement of the sun over the earth at a given location and are suitable for
shadow study for proposed or existing structures. Using these systems, you can
animate date and time, latitude, longitude, North Direction [rotational direction
of the compass rose], and Orbital Scale [the distance of the sun from the ground
plane].
In this unit, I will describe the following:
Sunlight and Daylight Systems
Positioning the Compass
Choosing a location
Sun Positioner and Physical Sky
Using the Sunlight and Daylight Systems
The legacy Sunlight and Daylight systems are similar in how they are used
[they have similar interface] but there are some differences:
Sunlight uses a directional light.
Daylight combines Sunlight and Skylight. The Sunlight component
can be one of the following: IES Sun light or a standard light (a target
direct light). The Skylight component can be one of the following: IES
Sky light or a Skylight.
Note: Standard and Photometric Lights
The IES Sun and IES Sky lights are photometric lights. You can use them if
you are rendering a scene using Radiosity and exposure control. The Standard
light and Skylight are non-photometric. You can use them if you are using
standard lighting or you are using light tracing.
You can access the Sunlight and Daylight systems from the System panel of
the Command Panel. To create either of these systems, go to the Create panel
and then click Systems [see Figure F1]. On the Object Type rollout, click
Sunlight or Daylight and drag the mouse pointer in a viewport [should be Top,

Perspective, or Camera view].
A compass helper object appears on the grid. Click again to create a Direct
light representing the sun and drag to set its height above the ground plane.
Figure F2 shows the compass created using the Daylight system.
When you first create a Daylight system, the Daylight System Creation
message box appears [see Figure F3], recommending to enable the Logarithmic
Exposure Control for external light. Click Yes to enable the exposure control.
Upon creation, you will have two objects in the scene. The compass rose,
which is a helper object and provides the world directions for the sun. The light
itself which is child of the compass and is always targeted at the center of the
compass rose. If you have created a Daylight system, you can choose the type of
sunlight and skylight from the Modify panel. The Sunlight drop-down list lets
you choose IES Sun or Standard (directional). The Skylight drop-down list
lets you choose IES Sky or Skylight. You can also choose <No Sunlight> or
<No Skylight> from the drop-downs.
The controls for adjusting the geographic location of the sun can be accessed
from the Motion panel of Command Panel. The default time is noon whereas
the default date and time is dependent on the settings of the computer you are
using. The default location is San Francisco, CA.

Once you create a Daylight system, the parameters appear in the
Modify panel. Let’s explore the parameters that are unique to the Daylight
system:
Daylight Parameters Rollout
The controls in this rollout [see Figure F4] lets you define the sun object of
the Daylight system. You can use these controls to set the behavior of the
sunlight and skylight. The Sunlight drop-down lets you choose the sunlight for
your scene. You can use one of the following options: IES Sun, Standard, and
No Sunlight. The Active switch lets you toggle the sunlight on or off. The
Skylight drop-down lets you choose the skylight for your scene. The available
options are: IES Sky, Skylight, and No Skylight.
The controls in the Position section lets you define the correct geographical
angle of the sun. The Manual control lets you manually adjust the location of
the daylight. The Date, Time and Location control uses the geographically
correct angle and movement of the sun over the earth at a given location. The
Weather Data File control allows you to derive the angle and intensity of the
sun from a weather data (EPW) file.
When you choose the Weather Data File and then click Setup, 3ds Max
opens the Configure Weather Data dialog. You can choose which weather data
you want the daylight system to use. When you choose the Manual or Date,
Time And Location control, clicking on Setup button opens the Motion panel
[see Figure F5] from where you can set the time, location, and site of your
daylight system.

Control Parameters Rollout
The Azimuth and Altitude controls display the azimuth and altitude of the
sun. Azimuth is the compass direction [North=0, East=90] of the sun in
degrees. Altitude is the height [Sunrise/Sunset=0] of the sun above the horizon
in degrees. The controls in the Time group let you define the time, date, and
time zone. When the Daylight Savings Time switch is on, 3ds Max calculates
daylight savings by adjusting azimuth and altitude during the summer months.
The controls in Location group let you define location of your scene in the
world. You can manually enter location based on the latitude and longitude. You
can also specify location by using the Geographic Location Dialog which
opens [see Figure F6] when you click Get Location. You can define the
longitude and latitude values by selecting a location on the map or from a list of
cities. The North Direction control sets the rotational direction of the compass
rose in the scene. By default, north direction is 0.

The Orbital Scale control in the Site group defines the distance of the Sun
from the compass rose. The distance of Sun from the compass rose has no effect
on the accuracy of the sunlight.
Using Sun Positioner and Physical Sky
Like Daylight and Sunlight systems, the Sun Positioner and Physical Sky
system provides the light follows the geographically correct angle and
movement of the Sun over the earth at a given location. However, the Sun
Positioner and Physical Sky system provides intuitive workflow compared to
these legacy systems. The component of the legacy systems are scattered all over
the interface. For example, the legacy systems are located in the System panel of
Command Panel whereas the location settings are found in the Motion panel of
Command Panel.
The Sun Positioner/Physical Sky system is found in the Light panel. Once
you position the Sun object in the scene, you can adjust the exposure controls
from the Environment and Effects window. The shading parameters can be
adjusted from the Scene Materials rollout of Material Editor [see Figure F7].
Hands-on Exercise
From the File menu, choose Set Project Folder to open the Browse for
Folder dialog. Navigate to the folder where you want to save the files and then
click Make New Folder. Create the new folder with the name unit-ml3 and
click OK to create the project directory.
Exercise 1: Shadow Pattern Study
In this exercise, we will create an animated shadow pattern for shadow study
according to the position of the Sun. The following table summarizes the
exercise.

Table E1: Shadow Pattern Study
Topics in this section:
Getting Ready
Creating the Gold Material
Skill Level
Intermediate
Project Folder
unit-ml3
Start File
uml3-hoe1-start.max
Final Exercise File
uml3-hoe1-end.max
Time to Complete
25 Minutes
Getting Ready
Open the uml3-hoe1-start.max file in 3ds Max.
Creating the Gold Material
On the Create panel, click Lights and then select Photometric from the
drop-down available below Lights. On the Object Type rollout, click Sun
Positioner and then create a Sun Positioner object in the scene. Choose the
Time Configuration button 
 from the timeline to open the Time
Configuration dialog. In this dialog, set End Time to 500 and then click OK.
Make sure the SunPositioner001 object is selected and time slider is at
frame 0. Switch to the Modify panel. On the Display rollout, set Radius to
0.987 and North Offset to 100. On the Sun section, set Distance to 555.74.
Figure E1 shows the SunPositioner001 object in the scene.
The SunPositioner001 object uses San Francisco, CA as the default

location. If you want to change the location, click on San Francisco, CA from
the Location on Earth section of the Sun Position rollout to open the
Geographic Location dialog. Now, you can choose desired location from this
dialog.
On the Date & Time section, turn off the Use Date Range switch and then
set Time to 7:00. Toggle on the Auto Key mode 
 from the timeline. Drag the
time slide to frame 500. On the Date & Time section of the Sun Position
rollout, set Time to 18:00. Toggle off the Auto Key mode and then click the
Play Animation button 
 to view the animation of Sun. Now, render the
sequence to see the shadow pattern. Figure E2 shows the render at frame 25 and
80, respectively.
Quiz
Evaluate your skills to see how many questions you can answer correctly.
Fill in the Blanks
Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
1. __________ uses a directional light to simulate the sun.
2. You can access the Sunlight and Daylight systems from the __________ panel of
Command Panel.
3. If you have created a __________ system, you can choose the type of sunlight and skylight from
the Modify panel.
4. The __________ system provides intuitive workflow than the legacy Daylight and Sunlight
systems for the geographically correct angle and movement of the Sun over the earth at a given location.
Summary
This unit covered the following:
Sunlight and Daylight Systems
Positioning the Compass
Choosing a location
Sun Positioner and Physical Sky

Unit MBT - Bonus Hands-on
Exercises
Before starting the exercises of this unit, let's first create the project folder.
From the File menu, choose| Set Project Folder to open the Browse for Folder
dialog. Navigate to the location where you want to save the file and then click
Make New Folder. Create the new folder with the name unit-mbt and click OK
to create the project directory.
Exercises - Texturing and Lighting
Exercise T1: Creating Balloon Material
In this exercise, we will create a balloon shader using the Shellac material.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table ET1 - Creating Balloon Material
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Topics in the section
Getting Ready
Creating the Material
Project Folder
unit-mbt
Start File
umbt-mat1-start.max
Final exercise file
umbt-hoet1-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the umbt-mat1-start.max file.
Creating the Material
Open Slate Material Editor and then drag the Shellac material to the active

view. Rename the material as balloonMat. Apply material to geo1, geo2, and
geo3. Rename the material connected to the Shellac Mat slot as glossMat.
Similarly, rename the material connected to the Base Material slot as
colorFallOffMat. First, we will create the glossy material and then we will
model translucency for the material.
On the Parameter Editor | glossMat | Blinn Basic Parameters rollout, set
Diffuse to Red. On the Specular Highlights section, set Specular Level and
Glossiness to 225 and 70, respectively. On the Parameter Editor | Shellac
Basic Parameters rollout, set Shellac Color Blend to 30.
On the Parameter Editor | colorFallOffMat | Shader Basic Parameters
rollout, select Translucent Shader from the drop-down. Now, on the
Translucent Basic Parameters rollout set Diffuse and Specular to RGB [246,
14, 14] and RGB [235, 255, 141], respectively.
On the Specular Highlights section, set Specular Level and Glossiness to
99 and 22, respectively. Render the scene [see Figure E1]. Notice that we have
created a glossy red material. Now, we will add translucency to the material.
On the Translucency section, set Translucent Clr, Filter Color, and
Opacity to RGB [250, 143, 143], RGB [221, 198, 148], and 30, respectively.
Render the scene [see Figure E2]. Notice that 3ds Max has added translucency to
the material but we need to control the opacity as well the translucency based on
the viewing angle.
Connect a Falloff map to the Opacity slot of the colorFallOffMat mat.
Create a copy of the Falloff map using Shift and then connect it to Translucent
Color node. On the Property Editor | Falloff map | Falloff Parameters rollout,
set the first and second color swatches to RGB [230, 87, 77 ] and RGB [55, 6,
7], respectively. Render the scene [see Figure E3].

Exercise T2: Creating Concrete Asphalt Material
In this exercise, we will create concrete asphalt material.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table ET2 - Creating Asphalt Material
Skill level
Beginner
Time to complete
15 Minutes
Topics in the section
Getting Ready
Creating the Material
Project Folder
unit-mbt
Start File
umbt-mat1-start.max
Final exercise file
umbt-hoet2-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the umbt-mat1-start.max file.
Creating the Material
Open Slate Material Editor and then drag the Standard material to the
active view. Rename the material as asphaltMat.
Apply material to geo1, geo2, and geo3. On the Parameter Editor
|asphaltMat | Blinn Basic Parameters rollout, set Ambient to RGB [25, 25,

25]. On the Specular Highlights section, set Specular Level and Glossiness to
48 and 23, respectively.
Connect asphalt.bmp to the Diffuse Color node of asphaltMat. Create
copies of the bitmap node using Shift and connect them to Specular Color,
Specular Level, and Bump nodes.
Render the scene [see Figure E1].
Exercise T3: Creating Eyeball Material
In this exercises, we will create material for eyeball.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table ET3 - Creating Eyeball Material
Skill level
Beginner
Time to complete
15 Minutes
Topics in the section
Getting Ready
Creating the Material
Project Folder
unit-mbt
Start File
umbt-mat2-start.max
Final exercise file
umbt-hoet3-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the umbt-mat2-start.max file.

Creating the Material
Open Slate Material Editor and then drag the Raytrace material to the
active view. Rename the material as eyeballMat. Apply material to
GeoSphere001. On the Parameter Editor | eyeballMat | Raytrace Basic
Parameters rollout, set Index of Refl to 1.6. On the Specular Highlight
section, set Specular Level and Glossiness to 225 and 60, respectively. Connect
eyeball.jpg to the Diffuse slot of eyeballMat.
Note: Texture Courtesy
http://oliverwolfson.com/eye-texture
Connect a Faloff map to the Reflect slot of eyeballMat. On the
FalloffParameters rollout, set Falloff Type to Fresnel.
Render the scene [see Figure E1].
Exercise T4: Creating Water Material
In this exercises, we will create the water material.
The following table summarizes the exercise:
Table ET4 - Creating Water Material
Skill level
Beginner
Time to complete
15 Minutes
Topics in the section
Getting Ready
Creating the Material
Project Folder
unit-mbt

Start File
umbt-mat3-start.max
Final exercise file
umbt-hoet4-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the umbt-mat3-start.max file.
Creating the Material
Open Slate Material Editor and then drag the Standard material to the
active view. Rename the material as waterMat. Apply material to
GeoSphere001. On the Parameter Editor | waterMat | Shader Basic
Parameters rollout, select Anisotropic from the drop-down. On the
Anisotropic Basic Parameters rollout, set Ambient to RGB [12, 12, 12],
Diffuse to RGB [85, 127, 157], and Specular to RGB [160, 178, 190].
On the Specular Highlight section, set Specular Level, Glossiness, and
Anisotropy to 160, 55, and 60, respectively. Connect Noise map to the Bump
slot of waterMat. On the Noise map | Noise Parameters rollout, set Noise Type
to Fractal, Levels to 9, and Size to 18.
Connect Mask map to the Reflection slot of waterMat. Connect
lakerem.jpg to the Map slot of the Mask map. On the Parameter Editor |
lakerem.jpg | Coordinates rollout, select Environ and then set Mapping to
Spherical Environment. Connect Falloff map to the Mask slot of the Mask
map. On the Property Editor | Falloff map | Falloff Parameters rollout, set
Falloff Type to Fresnel. Render the scene [see Figure E1].
Exercise T5: Creating X-Ray Material
In this exercises, we will create the X-Ray material.
The following table summarizes the exercise:

Table ET5 - Creating X-Ray Material
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
15 Minutes
Topics in the section
Getting Ready
Creating the Material
Project Folder
unit-mbt
Start File
umbt-mat1-start.max
Final exercise file
umbt-hoet5-finish.max
Getting Ready
Open the umbt-mat3-start.max file.
Creating the Material
Open Slate Material Editor and then drag the Standard material to the
active view. Rename the material as xrayMat. Apply material to geo1, geo2, and
geo3. On the Parameter Editor | xrayMat | Blinn Basic Parameters rollout,
set Specular Level and Glossiness to 0 and 10, respectively. Connect the Falloff
map to the Diffuse Color slot of the xrayMat. On the Property Editor | Falloff
map | Mix Curve rollout, shape the curve as shown in Figure E1. Now, connect
the existing Falloff map to the Self-illumination and Opacity slots of xrayMat.
Render the scene [see Figure E2].
Exercise T6: Texturing a Cardboard Box

In this exercise, we will texture a cardboard box [see Figure E1] using UV
Editor.
The following Table summarizes the exercise.
Table ET6 - Texturing the Cardboard Box
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Topics in the section
Getting Ready
Texturing the Cardboard Box
Project Folder
unit-mbt
Final exercise file
umbt-hoet6-finish.max
Getting Ready
Reset 3ds Max. Set units to Generic Units and then create a box with the
Length, Height, and Width set to 190.
Texturing the Cardboard Box
Ensure the box is selected in a viewport and then go to Modify panel. Add
the Unwrap UVW modifier to the stack.
Note: Unwrap UVW Modifier
This modifier allows you to assign texturing coordinates to objects and sub-
object selections. You can edit the coordinates using various tools. You can use

this modifier on Mesh, Patch, Polygon, HSDS, and NURBS meshes. This
modifier gives you access to the Edit UVWs window which is a texture-
coordinate editor. You can also use it along with the UVW Map modifier. This is
required when you want to use a mapping method that is not available [such as
Shrink Wrap] with the Unwrap UVW modifier.
Note: UVW Map Modifier
The UVW Map modifier controls how mapped and procedural textures
appear on the surface of the geometry. The UVW mapping coordinates are used
to project bitmaps onto an object. This coordinate system is similar to the XYZ
coordinate system. The U and V axes of a bitmap corresponds to the X and Y
axes whereas the W axis corresponds to the Z axis. Generally, the W axis is used
with the procedural maps.
Click Polygon  on the Selection panel and then press Ctrl+A to select all
polygons. On the Projection rollout, click Box Map  and then click again to
deactivate.
What just happened?
Here, I have activated the Polygon selection mode and then selected all
polygons. Then, I have applied box mapping to the selected polygons. Box
mapping is best suited for the box shaped objects. When you apply this mapping,
3ds Max maps each polygon to the side of the box gizmo that most closely
matches the orientation.
On the Edit UVs rollout, click Open UV Editor to open the Edit UVWs
window. Choose Unfold Mapping from the Mapping menu of the window. The
Unfold Mapping dialog appears. Click OK to accept the default settings and to
unfold UVs [see Figure E2].
What just happened?
Here, I have applied the unfold mapping function to the selected polygons.
This function removes UV clutter and ensures that polygons do not overlap. This
function is available only in the Polygon selection mode.
Choose Pick Texture from the drop-down located on the top-right corner of
the Edit UVWs window to open Material/Map Browser appears. In the
browser, double-click on Bitmap from the Maps | General rollout. In the Select
Bitmap Image File dialog, select cardboard_texture.png and click Open. The

cardboard_texture.png appears in the Edit UVWs window [see Figure E3].
What just happened?
The Pick Texture option allows you to place a map or bitmap in the editor
view. You can then use that map or bitmap as a reference for moving UVs.
Click Vertex from the bottom-left corner of the Edit UVWs window to
activate the Vertex selection mode. Notice that all the vertices are selected. If
they are not selected, press Ctrl+A to select them. Ensure Move Selected
Subobjects  is active from the Edit UVWs window’s toolbar and then align all
UVs to the background texture [see Figure E4]. Press and hold Shift while
dragging to constrain the movement.
Now, individually select group of vertices and fine tune the alignment with
the background texture [see Figure E5]. You can also select vertices in a
viewport. If the UVs are not in a straight line, you can use Align Horizontally
to Pivot  and Align Vertically to Pivot  from the Quick Transform rollout
of the Edit UVWs window to straighten the UVs. Close the Edit UVWs
window.
Press M to open Slate Material Editor. From the Material/Map Browser |
Materials rollout | Scanline rollout, double-click Standard to add it to the
Active View and then assign it to the box in the scene. Rename the material as
boxMat. Connect cardboard_texture.png texture to the Diffuse slot of the
material. RMB click on boxMat node and choose Show Shaded Material in
Viewport from the menu to display the texture in the viewport.

Exercise T7: Texturing a Dice
In this exercise, we will texturing a dice [see Figure E1] using UV Editor. In
this Exercise we will export the UVs template to the Photoshop and then use
Photoshop to create the texture. We will then import the texture back into 3ds
Max and will apply it to the dice geometry.
Table ET7 - Texturing a Dice
Skill level
Intermediate
Time to complete
20 Minutes
Topics in the section
Getting Ready
Texturing the Dice
Project Folder
unit-mbt
Final exercise file
umbt-hoet7-finish.max
Getting Ready

Reset 3ds Max. Set units to Generic Units and then create a box with the
Length, Height, and Width set to 190.
Texturing the Dice
Ensure the box is selected in a viewport and then go to Modify panel. Add
the Unwrap UVW modifier to the stack. Click Polygon 
 on the Selection
panel and then press Ctrl+A to select all polygons. On the Projection rollout,
click Box Map  and then click again to deactivate.
On the Edit UVs rollout, click Open UV Editor to open the Edit UVWs
window. Choose Unfold Mapping from the Mapping menu of the window. The
Unfold Mapping dialog appears. Click OK to accept the default settings and
unfold UVs.
Choose Render UVW Template from the Tools menu to open the Render
UVs dialog. Click Render UV Template on the dialog. The Render Map
window appears. Click Save Image on the window’s toolbar to open the Save
Image dialog. Type dice_template in the File name field and choose PNG
Image File from the Save as type drop-down.
Click Save to save the template. Click OK from the PNG Configuration
dialog. Now, close all windows and dialogs. Open dice_template.png in
Photoshop. Layer 0 appears in the Layers panel. Create a new layer below
Layer 0 and fill it with black [see Figure E2].
Now, using Photoshop tools and features create dice texture according to the
dice template. I am putting simple numbers to identify the faces of the dice [see
Figure E3]. You should go ahead and create a nice looking dice texture for your
dice model.

Now, switch off the black layer and the template layer. Save the Photoshop
document as dice_texture.png.
In 3ds Max, apply a Standard material to the box. Set Diffuse color to red.
Connect dice_texture.png to the Diffuse Color and Opacity slots of the
material’s node, respectively. In the dice_texture.png map | Bitmap
Parameters rollout, turn off the Premultiplied Alpha switch. Render the scene.

Appendix A: Quiz Answers
Unit MT1 - Creating Textures in Photoshop
Multiple Choice
1. C, 2. C, 3. A
Fill in the Blanks
1. Adjustment, 2. Masks, 3. Difference Clouds, 4. High Pass, 5. Equalize,
6. Levels
True/False
1. T, 2. T, 3. F
Unit MT2 - Material Editors
Multiple Choice
1. C, 2. C
Fill in the Blanks
1. Auto, 2. Delete, 3. Ctrl+Tab
True/False
1. F, 2. T, 3. T
Unit MT3 - Standard Materials and Maps
Multiple Choice
1. A, 2. D
Fill in the Blanks
1. SuperSampling, 2. Metal, 3. Oren-Nayar-Blinn, 4. Blend, 5. Morpher,
6. Multi/Sub-Object, 7. Top/Bottom, 8. Matte/Shadow, 9. Ink ‘n Paint, 10.
UVW Remove
True/False
1. T, 2. T, 3. F, 4. F, 5. T
Unit MT4 - Physical and Autodesk Materials

Multiple Choice
1. C, 2. C
Fill in the Blanks
1. ART, Arnold, 2. 100, 3. weight, 4. IOR, 5. Anisotropy
True/False
1. T, 2. T, 3. F
Unit ML1 - Standard Lights
Multiple Choice
1. D, 2. D
Fill in the Blanks
1. Shadow Map, 2. Ray-traced, 3. luminance=R0/R, R0, R, R, 4. Show Cone,
5. Ray Bias, 6. Omni
True/False
1. F, 2. T, 3. T, 4. T, 5. F, 6. F, 7. T
Unit ML2 - Photometric Lights
Multiple Choice
1. B, 2. D, 3. D
Fill in the Blanks
1. Look At Controller, 2. Exposure, 3. HID
True/False
1. T, 2. T
Unit ML3 - Sunlight and Daylight
Fill in the Blanks
1. Sunlight, 2. System, 3. Daylight, 4. Sun Positioner

Other Books Published by Rising Polygon
List of Books Published by Rising Polygon
CINEMA 4D Studio
Beginner’s Guide to Create Models With CINEMA 4D R18 Studio
Shading, Lighting, and Rendering Techniques with CINEMA 4D Studio R18
Modeling Techniques with CINEMA 4D R17 Studio
3ds Max
Beginner’s Guide to Create Models With 3ds Max 2018
Modeling Techniques with 3ds Max 2017
Getting Started with Physical, mental ray, and Autodesk Materials in 3ds Max
2017
Getting Started with General Materials in 3ds Max 2017
Texturing Techniques with 3ds Max 2017
3ds Max / CINEMA 4D Combo
Beginner’s Guide to Create Models With 3ds Max 2018 and CINEMA 4D R18
Studio
Modeling Techniques with 3ds Max 2017 and CINEMA 4D R17 Studio
Modeling Techniques with 3ds Max 2016 and CINEMA 4D R17 Studio
Free eBooks
Create Textures and Background Design Patterns with Photoshop
CG Tutorials Collection

