Understanding the Dark 
Side of Human Nature
Philosophy  
& Intellectual History
Topic
Intellectual History
Subtopic
Course Guidebook
Professor Daniel Breyer
Illinois State University

Published by
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westfields Boulevard | Suite 500 | Chantilly, Virginia | 20151‑2299
[phone] 1.800.832.2412 | [fax] 703.378.3819 | [web] www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2019
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved 
above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise), without the prior written permission of The Teaching Company.

Daniel Breyer, PhD
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY
ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY
D
aniel Breyer is an Associate Professor of Philosophy at Illinois State 
University, where he also serves as the director of the Religious Studies 
program. Dr. Breyer received a BA in Classics from the University 
of Montana, an MA in Liberal Arts from St. John’s College, and a PhD in 
Philosophy from Fordham University. 
i
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Professor Biography

Dr. Breyer’s research explores what it means to be a person and which features 
of ourselves we think are most important but also most puzzling. With this 
focus, he has addressed questions in the areas of epistemology, ethics, 
moral psychology, philosophy of mind, philosophy of religion, and Buddhist 
philosophy. He has been invited to share his scholarship at celebrated venues 
such as the Columbia Society for Comparative Philosophy, and philosophers 
have discussed his work in leading publications. Dr. Breyer has been awarded 
competitive research grants for projects in both philosophy and religious 
studies, and he has been selected to participate in multiple interdisciplinary 
summer institutes funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities 
and the John Templeton Foundation. 
Dr. Breyer’s students and colleagues have repeatedly recognized him for 
teaching excellence and instructional innovation. At Illinois State University, 
he has been awarded prestigious teaching awards, including the Outstanding 
University Teaching Award for pre-tenured faculty, the Kenneth A. and 
Mary Ann Shaw Teaching Fellowship, and the College of Arts and Sciences 
Outstanding College Teaching Award for the Humanities. He regularly 
teaches popular courses on Greco-Roman, Buddhist, Hindu, and Christian 
philosophy as well as courses on special topics like luck, evil, and blame. 
Dr. Breyer’s passion for teaching has also motivated him to teach philosophy 
outside the boundaries of the traditional classroom to elementary-age 
children, high school students, the general public, and fellow faculty. 
Dr. Breyer has published on a wide range of topics, including value theory, 
divine foreknowledge, reflective luck, epistemic justification, cognitive 
agency, free will, and moral responsibility. His articles have appeared in 
top journals such as Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Pacific 
Philosophical Quarterly, the Journal of Buddhist Ethics, and Sophia. ■
ii
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Professor Biography

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biography .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i
Course Scope  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
LECTURE GUIDES
1	  What Do We Mean by the “Dark Side”? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
2	  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3	  What Is Evil?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4	  Moral Monsters and Evil Personhood .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5	  Evil and Responsibility .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6	  Sin: Original and Otherwise .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7	  Dark Thoughts and Desires  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
8	  Suffering and Its Causes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
9	  The Problem of Expectation and Desire .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 57
10	  The Fear of Death  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
11	  Existential Anxiety and the Courage to Be .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 69
12	  The Goodness of Grief .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
13	  Homo necans: Why Do We Kill? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
14	  Nightmares and the Dream Self  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
iii
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature

15	  Varieties of Self-Deception .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
16	  Varieties of Ignorance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
17	  Weakness of Will  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
18	  Luck and the Limits of Blame  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
19	  Victim Blaming and the Just-World Hypothesis .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 124
20	 Retribution and Revenge  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
21	  Forgiveness and Redemption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
22	 The Elimination of Anger .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
23	 Being Peaceful in a Troubled World .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
24	 The Allure of the Dark Side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Bibliography  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
Image Credits .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
iv
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Table of Contents

W
e can’t fully appreciate what it means to be human unless we come 
to terms with our dark side. This course tries to do just that, starting 
with a discussion of our fundamental nature. Are we fundamentally 
good, bad, or something in between? This question will lead us to consider 
the nature of evil and think about what, if anything, makes someone evil. 
We’ll then reflect on what our dark thoughts, twisted desires, and worst 
dreams have to say about us before investigating fascinating topics like 
ignorance, weakness of will, self-deception, original sin, and existential 
anxiety. We are also going to puzzle over the role that death and our fear of 
it plays in our lives, while reflecting on why the dark side fascinates us as 
intensely as it does. 
As the course draws to a close, we’ll think about how we might best respond 
to the dark side of human nature. Should we blame those who would harm 
us? Should we retaliate against them in anger? Or should we perhaps forgive 
even the worst of evils? 
Although this is primarily a philosophy course, we’ll be taking an 
interdisciplinary approach informed by scholarship from psychology, 
anthropology, theology, and other relevant fields. Rather than focusing solely 
on the Western tradition, we’re also going to take a cross-cultural approach, 
one that will place intellectual traditions from across the globe in dialogue 
with one another, all in the hope of gaining otherwise unavailable insights. 
Throughout the course, we’ll consider cutting-edge scholarship while 
engaging with classic texts in a way that will put us in direct conversation 
with great thinkers from both the past and the present. We’ll find ourselves 
learning from great thinkers like the Confucian philosopher Mencius, the 
Buddhist philosopher Śāntideva, the Stoic philosopher Seneca, and the 
Daoist philosopher Zhuangzi. We’ll also uncover contemporary insights 
from influential scholars like the epistemologist Miranda Fricker, the 
psychologist David Buss, and the theologian Walter Wink, among many 
others. Along the way, we’ll also encounter compelling stories—some true, 
others fiction—that will shed light on the dark side of human nature.■
UNDERSTANDING
THE DARK SIDE OF HUMAN NATURE

LECTURE 1
D
iscussing the dark side of human nature is serious 
business. The dark side leaves wreckage in its wake, and 
it is a facet of human nature that’s so mysterious that we 
feel drawn to decipher it. The dark side is our fragile underbelly. 
It is our negative but human side. It is impossible to understand 
what it means to be human without grappling with the dark side. 

The Nature of the Dark Side
w
w The dark side of human nature is about more than evil, immorality, and 
sin. It’s also about the human condition—about the essential and often 
unpleasant facts of our existence in this world. 
w
w To that end, this course will trace two important threads. The first is 
related to evil and immorality, while the second is related to the human 
condition more generally. Two stories—one of a ring of invisibility and 
one of a man trapped in a well—help illuminate these dual threads.
The Invisibility Ring
w
w In Plato’s masterwork the Republic, Glaucon, who in real life was Plato’s 
older brother, tells the story of a man who found a ring that could make 
its wearer invisible. His name was Gyges, and he was a shepherd. After 
an earthquake, Gyges ventured into a chasm torn into the earth, where he 
found the corpse of a giant, who was wearing nothing but a single golden 
ring. Gyges snatched the ring and returned to his flock. 
w
w As soon as Gyges realized the ring’s power, he “arranged to become one 
of the messengers sent to report to the king. On arriving there, he seduced 
the king’s wife, attacked the king with her help, killed him, and in this 
way took over the [entire] kingdom.” 
w
w Glaucon thinks that everyone, when it comes down to it, would behave 
like Gyges. Everyone, no matter how apparently good—no matter how 
seemingly just—would ultimately succumb to the temptations of the ring.
w
w The story raises some questions: What if a person knew for certain that 
he or she could get away with anything and face no consequences? Is 
there anything he or she would do that the person would be willing to 
call evil? The takeaway point is that if everyone has a side that flirts with 
immorality and evil, then it seems like everyone has a dark side.
3
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Do We Mean by the “Dark Side”?
Lecture 1

“The Man in the Well”
w
w To help show how the dark side is related to the human condition more 
generally, this lecture now turns to a story heard in various forms in 
the Jain and the Buddhist traditions. A version of it even appears in the 
Mahabharata, a great Hindu epic. It’s an allegory, or a parable, often 
referred to as “The Man in the Well.”
w
w The following is a summary of the tale: Once there was a man who 
roamed from region to region, forced by poverty and circumstance to 
find a new home. As he made his way, he came to a great forest, dense 
with trees, and he lost his way. 
w
w First, he encountered a charging elephant, then a sword-wielding 
demoness. As he fled from these dangers, he came upon an abandoned 
well. He plunged into the well, grabbing roots on his way down to stop 
his fall. 
w
w At the bottom of the well was a writing mass of snakes, centered around a 
great python waiting to swallow him. The man heard the elephant madly 
pacing at the well’s edge, shaking the walls of the well. Making things 
worse, mice began gnawing at the roots the man was clinging to.
w
w As the elephant smashed around, it dislodged a honeycomb, which 
tumbled into the darkness of the well. The honeycomb sent furious bees 
into the man’s hair, onto his face, and over his arms and hands. 
w
w Though suspended in 
the gloom and set upon 
by bees, with anger 
rumbling above and 
terror writhing below, 
the man caught a taste of 
the sweet honey. All he 
could think of was not the 
danger he was in, but how 
he might get more of that 
delicious honey. 
Because the origins of the “The Man 
in the Well” are in the Indian tradition, 
it’s partly an allegory about samsara, 
the cycle of death and rebirth. 
4
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Do We Mean by the “Dark Side”?
Lecture 1

The Human Condition
w
w The parable of “The Man in the Well” helps further clarify the dark side of 
human nature. The dark side isn’t just about immorality and evil, or even 
dark thoughts and twisted desires; it’s also about the human condition. It’s 
about the dark places we find ourselves in as human beings. 
w
w One of these dark places is in the shadow of death. In the parable, the man 
is driven partly by a fear of being mortal and frail. He flees from death, 
only to find that he cannot escape it. 
w
w The man in the well also suffers greatly and that seems to be part of 
what it means to be human, even if the goal is to escape such suffering. 
Additionally, the man remains trapped in the well at least partly because 
of his own failings. 
w
w He might be confused about the goodness of the honey. Perhaps he’s 
ignorant or self-deceived. Alternatively, perhaps he’s unable or unwilling 
to resist the temptation of the honey. Maybe he knows he shouldn’t focus 
so much on it, but he can’t follow through. 
This Course’s Approach
w
w This lecture closes with a look at how the course will approach its subject. 
This is primarily a philosophy course in that it considers arguments, 
puzzles over thought experiments, explores big ideas, analyzes concepts, 
and engages with what philosophers, past and present, have had to say. 
w
w Additionally, the course is cross-cultural in nature. Keep in mind that 
cross-cultural philosophy is not the same thing as comparative philosophy, 
which is about studying the differences and similarities between very 
different philosophical traditions. Comparative philosophy is important 
but limited. 
w
w Rather than looking at the differences and similarities between the 
familiar and the alien, as comparative philosophy does, cross-cultural 
philosophy emphasizes that philosophy is a universal human enterprise. 
5
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Do We Mean by the “Dark Side”?
Lecture 1

The philosopher Mark Siderits refers to his brand of cross-cultural 
philosophy as fusion philosophy, which uses the elements of various 
philosophical traditions to solve philosophical problems and develop 
insights that might have been unavailable without blending traditions. 
w
w This course uses fusion philosophy. It already did so in this lecture by 
looking at two stories from two different traditions. This fusion approach 
is especially useful because it helps reveal humanity as fully as possible—
from many different perspectives—while helping make progress toward 
finding real answers.
SUGGESTED READING
Plato, Republic, book II, 357a–368c.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 How would you define the dark side of human nature? Do you have 
firsthand experience with the dark side? If so, what is it and what 
do you think it tells you about human nature generally? 
2	 Would you choose Gyges’s power of invisibility, or would you 
choose the power to fly? What do you think your choice says 
about you? 
3	 Why do you think the dark side of human nature is so fascinating? 
Why, in particular, have you decided to take this course, and what 
do you hope to learn? 
6
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Do We Mean by the “Dark Side”?
Lecture 1

LECTURE 2
I
n this lecture, we’re going to consider our fundamental nature 
as humans, asking a mix of questions: Are we fundamentally 
good? Are we fundamentally evil? Are we a mixture of good 
and evil? For that matter, perhaps we are altogether neutral. As 
we consider these questions, we’ll also develop a framework for 
thinking about the dark side of human nature.

Mencius and Xunzi on Human Nature 
w
w As a point of focus, this lecture explores the great Confucian debate 
between two philosophers: Mencius, who argues that we’re fundamentally 
good, and Xunzi, who argues that we’re fundamentally evil. Mencius 
lived from around 372 to 289 BCE, more than 100 years after the death 
of Confucius. Confucius himself never wrote a systemic treatise, and 
what we know of his thought comes from the Analects, a collection of 
his statements purportedly written down by his students. 
w
w Mencius and Xunzi agreed on the importance of moral cultivation 
through education, and they both endorsed the Confucian view that 
human beings are perfectible. They disagreed about our fundamental 
nature, and they saw this disagreement as having important personal 
and social implications. 
w
w If Mencius is right and we’re fundamentally good, then it is external 
things like society and culture that corrupt us—that account for the dark 
side—and so we need to reform society and culture. If Xunzi is right and 
we’re fundamentally evil, then it’s our nature itself that needs correction, 
and so we need to create social structures that constrain and correct our 
natural tendencies. 
Mencius’s Thinking
w
w According to Mencius’s line of thinking, all human beings share a common 
nature. This means that he thinks human nature is universal. Additionally, 
Mencius points out that human beings naturally have minds and a moral 
sense, just like we naturally have other sense organs. Because all of 
our sense organs have natural preferences—our mouths prefer certain 
flavors, for instance—Mencius argues that our minds and our moral 
sense have certain preferences, including fine patterns and righteousness. 
w
w Mencius has other arguments. For example, if a person saw a child about 
to fall in a well, Mencius would feel confident that the person would at 
least feel motivated, in that moment, to rush and help the child. The person 
would be alarmed and concerned with the child. 
8
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil?
Lecture 2

w
w However, not everyone would 
respond that way. What are we 
to make of this fact? One factor 
to note is that Mencius doesn’t 
necessarily say that everyone 
would respond in a certain 
way; his point is that everyone 
would have a certain kind of gut 
reaction—a kind of involuntary 
response to the situation. 
w
w But still, we might insist, not 
everyone has these kinds of gut 
reactions. Mencius might reply 
to that objection by saying he is 
making a generic claim about 
how we would respond, and this 
generic claim represents the 
typical human response. 
Paul Bloom and Mencius
The Yale Psychologist Paul Bloom has explored the moral lives of babies. 
In his book Just Babies: The Origins of Good and Evil, Bloom reviews 
a number of studies that examine very young children. Bloom argues 
that the babies consistently demonstrate a clear pattern of preference 
for figures that are helpful over figures that end up hindering others. 
That sounds similar to Mencius, and evidence like Bloom’s supports 
Mencius’s view of human nature. However, Xunzi would disagree.
9
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil?
Lecture 2

Xunzi’s Thinking
w
w Xunzi’s view is that there is no such thing 
as an innate moral sense. In fact, Xunzi 
argues that we are all naturally evil—that 
is, selfish. Left unchecked, our nature 
will always push us to satisfy our own 
interests at the expense of others. 
w
w Additionally, Xunzi and Mencius actually 
disagree about what our nature is. For 
Mencius, our nature is our potential, or 
our innate tendencies, which might be 
frustrated or which might flourish. For 
Xunzi, by contrast, our nature is not our 
potential but our foundation; it’s what is 
already complete at birth. 
w
w According to Xunzi, then, the difference between human beings and other 
animals is not our innate goodness, as Mencius claimed. Instead, we are 
distinguished from other animals by deliberate effort—the artifice of the 
mind that imposes morality on a twisted nature. 
w
w Xunzi points out that people have what seem to be natural emotions that 
aren’t good. For instance, people are envious and resentful, they love 
profit, and they seek selfish pleasures. These emotions predictably lead 
people into conflict with each other. 
w
w Paul Bloom actually agrees with Xunzi here. He points out that moral 
emotions like anger, envy, and resentment can “have disastrous effects.” 
In fact, Bloom thinks this can even be true of positive emotions, like 
empathy, which can blind us to the plight of some while bringing us to 
the plight of others. 
w
w This is why Bloom thinks that reason is crucial to our moral development. 
We start out, as babies, with a natural moral sense and a battery of natural 
emotions, but all of this requires reason to guide it.
10
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil?
Lecture 2

Optimism, Pessimism, Dualism, and Indifferentism
w
w Mencius represents optimism: the view that human nature is inherently 
good. Xunzi represents a type of pessimism: the view that human nature 
is inherently evil, at least in a certain sense of evil. Perhaps Bloom has 
pointed toward what philosopher Roy Perrett calls dualism—that is, the 
view that human nature is both good and evil, with the result that there is 
an inherent struggle between good and evil within us all. From Bloom’s 
perspective, we have an innate moral sense, but we also have natural 
emotions and desires that can morally blind us. 
w
w The Confucian tradition helps identify another position. This is the view 
associated with Gaozi, a contemporary of Mencius. Gaozi argues that 
human nature is neutral with respect to good and evil. 
w
w To make his case, he compares human nature to a willow tree and to 
water. A willow tree’s nature allows it to be crafted into many different 
kinds of objects, from cups to houses, depending on the interests of the 
carpenter. And water can flow east, west, north, or south, depending on 
how it is directed. For Gaozi, human nature is indifferent, meaning his 
view can be called indifferentism. 
Mencius in Depth
w
w Because Mencius emphasizes the importance of moral cultivation, he, 
along with Bloom, champions a qualified optimism, according to which 
our moral development depends importantly on moral cultivation. We 
can contrast Mencius’s qualified optimism with absolute optimism, 
according to which our moral development is importantly impeded by 
moral cultivation. 
w
w More generally, Mencius has defended a specific model of human nature. 
This is the potentiality model, which frames human nature in terms of 
innate inclinations or potential. 
11
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil?
Lecture 2

w
w At times, Mencius also appears to endorse strict universalism, the view 
that all human beings in all places and times share the very same natural 
tendencies. At other times, however, Mencius appears to concede that not 
every human being will exhibit all the same tendencies.
w
w On this reading, Mencius is endorsing generic universalism—that is, the 
view that good theories of human nature capture what is representative 
of our tendencies as human beings in general. This is the view that 
Bloom seems to be getting at when he refers to normal human beings 
and typically functioning neurological structures. 
w
w This difference between strict and generic universalism has implications 
for the dark side of human nature. Under strict universalism, for instance, 
the mere existence of just a handful of psychopathic serial killers might 
serve as a counterexample. Under generic universalism, the existence of 
outliers like these might not make any difference. 
Xunzi in Depth
w
w Because the pessimistic Xunzi, like Mencius, emphasizes the importance 
of moral cultivation, Xunzi endorses a qualified pessimism. According 
to this view, even though we start off badly, we can check our natural 
tendencies through deliberate effort and become good. 
w
w Like Mencius, Xunzi has also defended a specific model of human nature: 
the foundational model. This model frames human nature in terms of 
what we begin with, not in terms of our potential. Our nature, Xunzi tells 
us, is what is completed at birth. 
Gaozi in Depth
w
w In opposition to both Mencius and Xunzi, Gaozi has championed 
indifferentism, the view that human nature is neutral with respect to good 
and evil. For Gaozi, our fundamental nature is insufficient to account for 
either our goodness or our badness. We start with a moral blank slate. 
12
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil?
Lecture 2

w
w It is possible to distinguish between strong and weak indifferentism. 
Strong indifferentism is the view that, by nature, we have absolutely no 
moral tendencies; everything that counts as good and bad arises from 
experience and convention. 
w
w By contrast, weak indifferentism is the view that we start with amoral 
tendencies that we can later identify as morally relevant in the context of 
culture and convention. As an example, the weak indifferentist might say 
that our tendency to become angry is an amoral tendency that becomes 
morally relevant only when plugged into a cultural context. Someone who 
endorses weak indifferentism might also endorse a distinction between 
our non-moral and our moral nature. 
Dualism in Depth
w
w According to dualism, there is an inherent struggle between good and 
evil within us all, but as with the other views, there are two types of 
dualism. The first is fundamental dualism, which is the view that there 
is an irresolvable tension between our fundamental goodness and our 
fundamental badness. No matter what we do, so this view holds, we’re 
saddled with both. 
w
w This kind of dualism is associated with the Tiantai Buddhist philosopher 
Zhiyi. It is also associated with Carl Jung’s notion of a shadow self. 
w
w The other type of dualism is provisional dualism, which is the view that 
although we are originally both good and evil, we can overcome our dark 
side or, less hopefully, be overcome by it. This type of dualism is associated 
with Manichaeism, which holds that although right now we are mixture 
of evil bodies and good souls, we can ultimately separate the inherently 
good soul from the inherently evil body and achieve final liberation. 
Individualism in Depth
w
w The great Confucian debate has helped identify a number of important 
views, but there is one more view of our fundamental nature worth 
exploring. This is what Roy Perrett calls individualism, and it is the 
view that only individuals qualify as good or evil. 
13
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil?
Lecture 2

w
w There are two types of individualism. The first is hard individualism, in 
which human nature doesn’t exist. This view is associated with Jean-Paul 
Sartre and certain other existential thinkers. In this view, our dark side is 
not a matter of human nature but of individual determination. 
w
w The second type of individualism is soft individualism, according to 
which human nature is so plastic and variable that we cannot possibly 
understand it outside of specific contexts and environments. On this view, 
the best we can hope for is to provide a representative account of certain 
human tendencies while emphasizing the contextual factors that trigger 
those tendencies. 
SUGGESTED READING
Bloom, Just Babies. 
Liu, An Introduction to Chinese Philosophy, chapters 3 and 4.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1	 What’s your view of human nature? Are you a pessimist, an 
optimist, a dualist, or something else? Why is this how you see 
human nature? 
2	 What’s the importance of the different metaphors Mencius and 
Xunzi use to describe human nature? What metaphors would you 
use to talk about our nature?
3	 What, in your opinion, is the best empirical evidence for Xunzi’s 
claim that human nature is bad? What is the best empirical evidence 
for Mencius’s claim that human nature is good? 
14
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Our Fundamental Nature: Good or Evil?
Lecture 2

LECTURE 3
T
his lecture approaches the question of what evil is by 
breaking it into two separate questions. The first is the 
ontological question. Ontology is the study of being—that 
is, the study of what exists and how it exists. The ontological 
question is this: Does evil actually exist, and if so, what kind of 
thing is it? 
Second is the conceptual question. This question is about evil as 
a moral concept. It is posed this way: What are we saying when 
we say that something is evil? Both of these questions will give 
us some insights into the very nature of evil, which will also 
help us clarify the moral extremes at the edges of the dark side 
of human nature. 

The Ontology of Evil
w
w To tackle the first question, this lecture begins by considering an influential 
way of thinking about what exists. This way of thinking has its roots in 
what Aristotle says in his Categories and what the Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika 
philosophers held in ancient India, but it is also so straightforward and 
intuitive that many thinkers have adopted some version of it. This way 
of thinking classifies what exists into those that are universal, those that 
are particular, properties, and concrete particulars. 
w
w Something is a universal if it can be instantiated in different places and 
different times. Universals are abstract rather than concrete, and they 
can be located in multiple different places at the same time. For example, 
the color blue can exist in the sky, clothing, and many other instances.
w
w By contrast, particular things are concrete entities that exist in specific 
places and times. A specific shirt hanging in a closet is an example. This 
shirt is present there and now.
w
w As for properties, philosophers have sometimes made a distinction 
between essential properties, which tell us what kind of thing something 
is, and accidental properties. For instance, a feisty cat would have the 
essential property of being a cat and the accidental property of being feisty.
w
w It might turn out that evil exists in the same way that the feisty cat exists. 
In this case, evil would be a concrete particular—it would be a substance 
that has a kind of independent existence. 
w
w Alternatively, it might be that evil exists in the same way that cat-ness 
exists. In this case, evil would be an essential property—that is, a property 
that makes particular things the kind of things they are. 
w
w Still another angle is that it might be that evil exists in the same way 
that a cat’s feistiness exists. In this case, evil would be an accidental 
property—that is, a characteristic something can have or not have while 
remaining essentially what it is. 
16
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Is Evil?
Lecture 3

Theories of Evil
w
w According to the privation theory of evil, evil is the privation of both 
being and goodness; it is not a thing in itself and, it is not even a property 
of anything. The privation theory has been incredibly influential as a way 
of thinking about evil, but it faces considerable problems.
w
w For instance, consider a sadistic killer who wants his victims to 
experience extreme suffering. The killer’s desire is positively bad, rather 
than simply not good. Additionally, desire is a property he possesses, not 
something he lacks, even if it turns out that he has the desire because he 
lacks compassion. 
w
w This course’s view is that it’s best to say that evil actually does exist and 
that it exists in the same way that feistiness exists as a property of cats. 
If this is correct, the answer to the ontological question is that evil exists 
as a property of things. 
w
w Note that some people are skeptics of the existence of evil, even as an 
accidental property of things. Others might believe that evil is a dangerous 
and loaded word, and that it is best to abandon the concept altogether. 
The Conceptual Analysis of Evil 
w
w This lecture now turns to the conceptual question of evil. For answering 
it, conceptual analysis is necessary. In its ideal form, conceptual analysis 
requires us to think about how we apply concepts in specific cases in the 
hope of finding the necessary and sufficient conditions associated with 
the application of those concepts. 
w
w An evil action certainly seems like it would have to be morally wrong: 
It would be odd for an action to be evil but not be morally wrong. 
Perhaps, then, this is a necessary condition: An action is evil only if it’s 
morally wrong.
17
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Is Evil?
Lecture 3

w
w That raises the question of sufficiency: Is being morally wrong enough to 
make an action evil? Some philosophers have suggested that it is. Most 
philosophers have disagreed with this view, however, holding instead that 
evil is qualitatively distinct from wrongness or badness. 
w
w In other words, an action has to be morally wrong, at the very least, to 
count as evil. However, being wrong doesn’t seem sufficient to qualify an 
action as evil. Lying might be wrong, for instance, but is a man telling his 
employer that he’s at the doctor while he’s in reality golfing actually evil? 
w
w This still leaves open the possibility that if wrongness comes in degrees, 
the concept of evil identifies the most extreme wrongs. In this case, the 
concept of evil is not qualitatively distinct from the concept of extreme 
wrongness. This raises the question of if being extremely wrong is both 
a necessary and a sufficient condition for an action to be evil. 
Thought Experiments
w
w To resolve this dispute, this lecture uses a pair of little thought experiments 
in which the concept of the extremely wrong comes apart from the 
concept of evil. The examples are inspired by the late philosopher Bernard 
Williams and have been recently adapted by Todd Calder. 
w
w Assume that killing an innocent person is always extremely wrong. 
However, imagine this scenario: A man is holding 10 people hostage. 
A would-be interloper tries to intervene, but is also captured.
w
w The man makes an offer to the interloper: Kill one of the hostages, and 
the other nine can go free. If the interloper rejects the offer, all 10 will 
die. In this case, if the interloper choose to kill one person to save nine, 
it would be difficult to call their action evil—even if killing in itself is 
extremely wrong. If this example holds, then being extremely wrong 
comes apart from evil.
w
w Some people might not buy that example, so consider a second scenario. 
This one tackles the following assumptions: What makes an action 
morally wrong is that it brings about overall extreme harm, and what 
makes an action morally right is that it brings about overall good. 
18
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Is Evil?
Lecture 3

w
w For instance, consider a hiring manager choosing between two candidates, 
Sam and Alex, to work for the charity Good Deeds. Imagine that the 
hiring manager knows that if Alex does not get the job, she will become 
deeply depressed, but if Sam does not get the job, she will be fine. 
w
w However, Sam is a celebrity. If she gets the job, Good Deeds will receive 
a lot of good press, which will increase the amount of money it receives 
in donations. With this in mind, the hiring manager has a good business 
reason to hire Sam over Alex. The manager also has a good social reason 
to hire Sam over Alex: Hiring Sam will result in more overall good than 
hiring Alex, even though Alex will suffer personally from not getting 
the job. 
w
w The catch is this: None of those reasons are why the hiring manager 
chooses Sam. The hiring manager chooses Sam because he wants to 
experience the pleasure of witnessing Alex’s suffering. 
w
w As Todd Calder points out, this means that according to the theory of 
wrongness described above—an action is morally wrong if it brings about 
overall extreme harm—the hiring manager has done nothing wrong by 
hiring Sam. Still, it seems like this action is evil.
God and Evil
Neoplatonic philosophers like Plotinus 
and early Christian philosophers 
like Augustine of Hippo worried that 
affirming evil’s existence, even as 
a property, implied that God was 
ultimately responsible for evil. 
19
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Is Evil?
Lecture 3

w
w These cases suggest that extreme wrongdoing and evil are not the same 
thing. The concepts seem to come apart when pushed. 
Evil Action and Harm
w
w Another possibility is that evil actions are those that cause morally 
relevant harm. However, it still might be the case that some evil actions do 
no harm at all. To see this, consider a case from philosopher Luke Russell. 
w
w Imagine a voyeur who takes “great pleasure in witnessing extreme 
suffering.” However, the voyeur is completely helpless: He cannot 
contribute to suffering or do anything to alleviate it. He is a completely 
passive spectator. 
w
w Russell claims that a case like this suggests that it’s not essential for an 
evil action to cause harm. The reason for this is that the voyeur does 
not actually cause any harm to anyone, but the very act of watching and 
taking great pleasure in extreme suffering sure seems evil.
Objections to the Russell Case
w
w One objection to Russell’s example might be to say that the case doesn’t 
tell us anything about evil action at all: It is the person who is evil, not 
the action. However, the problem isn’t really with the person; instead, it 
is with the action in which the person is engaged. 
w
w To see this point, reimagine the case to feature someone who has never 
previously witnessed anything like this and who would never seek out 
such a spectacle, but who nonetheless derives great pleasure from an 
accidental experience. It seems plausible to say that the action of taking 
pleasure is evil, even if we don’t want to say that the person is evil. 
w
w Another objection is to say that voyeuristic actions like this are evil partly 
because they actually do involve harm. This move is problematic because 
it exploits something that is not clear from the case. 
20
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Is Evil?
Lecture 3

w
w That unclear factor is the cause of 
the extreme suffering the voyeur 
watches. If it is torture, then 
morally relevant harm is obviously 
involved because someone is 
causing the suffering. If, however, 
it is a naturally occurring bacterial 
infection, for instance, then 
matters are trickier. In this case, 
harm is not involved in the morally 
relevant sense because no one is 
bringing about the suffering. 
w
w An objector might still reply that 
naturally occurring suffering is 
close enough to harm, even though 
there no one bringing it about. The 
objector might point out that that 
is what really matters—evil action 
cannot be disentangled from 
suffering of some kind.
w
w This certainly sounds like a sensible move, but the case can be modified 
yet again to get around it: Imagine that the voyeur enjoys watching 
simulated suffering of the very worst kind. In this case, both suffering 
and harm are gone. What can we say now? 
w
w At this point, the objector might reply that watching simulated suffering 
of the very worst kind ends up harming the voyeur himself. It harms 
him psychologically. 
w
w This, too, is a problematic response because it pushes hard against the 
stipulation that the act provides the voyeur with intense pleasure. Even 
if there are evil pleasures, which do in fact harm those who experience 
them, someone could still become so calloused and morally hardened that 
such voyeurism would do nothing further to damage them. 
21
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Is Evil?
Lecture 3

Conclusion
w
w It seems that we have some good reasons to think that evil and harm come 
apart in a way that shows us that harm is neither necessary nor sufficient 
for an action to qualify as evil. The way we’ve pulled evil apart from 
harm suggests something very important for understanding the dark side 
of human nature. 
w
w It suggests that evil action is associated in some way with evil personhood. 
This is because what seems evil about the actions discussed in this lecture 
is that they are associated with inner states like intense pleasure. 
SUGGESTED READING
Calder, “The Concept of Evil.” 
Russell, Evil.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 Before working through this lecture, how would you have defined 
evil? Now that you’ve worked through it, what’s your definition? 
Is it the same? Why or why not? 
2	 What is the privation theory of evil? 
3	 Can you think of an action that you would, without qualification, 
call evil? What does this example say about the nature of evil? 
22
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 What Is Evil?
Lecture 3

LECTURE 4
C
alling someone evil marks that person out as someone 
who is somehow outside the moral community. By calling 
someone evil, we make the most serious moral accusation 
we can against them, and that accusation might end up justifying 
certain feelings we might have about them as well as certain 
responses. In sum, it matters whether we call a person evil or 
something else. To delve into this issue, this lecture looks at 
several models concerning what makes a person evil.

The Evildoer Model
w
w The most obvious way to identify evil people is through their behavior, 
and this might suggest that evil people are just evildoers. This lecture 
refers to this line of thought as the evildoer model. 
w
w Although this model has the ring of plausibility, it raises important 
questions. For instance, to cross that moral line, what matters? Is it the 
frequency of evildoing? That would make sense of someone like Hitler, 
a frequent evildoer, but a case 
of a person who infrequently 
commits evil acts would be 
more complicated.
w
w Additionally, by focusing 
solely on what someone does, 
the model seems to miss 
important questions about 
who someone is. In other 
words, by focusing solely on 
external behavior, the model 
fails to account for the inner 
life of the evildoer—and it is 
the inner life that makes all 
the difference. 
The Dispositional Model
w
w Perhaps what matters for evil personhood is evil character—that is, being 
a certain sort of person. Luke Russell has suggested that we should think 
of evil people as those who are disposed to do evil things, not as those who 
actually do them. On this dispositional model, an evil person is someone 
who is “strongly and highly fixedly disposed to perform evil actions.” 
Hitler and serial killer Ted Bundy are evil because they are the kinds of 
people who would do evil things.
A 2017 Debate
During the 2017 debate 
in Louisiana over capital 
punishment, in his opposition 
to abolishing the death 
penalty, Assistant District 
Attorney Hugo Holland 
urged, “Life in prison just 
doesn’t do it for some folks 
because they are that evil.” 
24
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Moral Monsters and Evil Personhood
Lecture 4

w
w This dispositional account of evil character allows us to avoid questions 
about how much evil someone must do to count as an evil person, and it 
helps us capture an intuition that some people are just evil, no matter what 
they’ve done. However, we might worry that the dispositional account 
suggests that too many people are evil. 
w
w This is because in certain kinds of situations, many normal people would 
do very bad—even evil—things. After all, studies like the famous 
Milgram experiment, in which everyday people obeyed orders to harm 
others, suggest that more or less ordinary people will do very bad things 
when pressured to do so. 
w
w Additionally, consider this story: A man named Eric burned his house 
down with his family inside. Before setting the fire, he strangled his two 
young sons. He killed himself as well. His wife escaped the house, but 
Eric had hidden her phone so that she couldn’t call the police. However, 
what if Eric suffered from a specific mental illness that sparked his 
terrible deeds? 
w
w If he really suffered from a specific mental illness, then it’s plausible 
that he was strongly and fixedly disposed to do the specific kind of evil 
things he in fact did. Yet it looks like his mental illness disqualifies him 
from being evil. 
w
w Russell himself agrees. He modifies his account to say that an evil person 
is someone who is “strongly and … fixedly disposed to perform evil 
actions when in autonomy-favoring conditions.” This qualification would 
rule out ordinary folks whose autonomy is undermined by external factors 
found in Milgram-type experiments as well as people whose autonomy 
is undermined by internal factors like mental illness. 
w
w This modification makes it clear what it means for someone to be disposed 
to do evil. To be disposed to do evil, we can’t just be manipulated into it 
or end up doing it because we’re suffering from a disorder. To be disposed 
to do evil, we have to be the kinds of people who would do something 
evil, given conditions that allow us to determine how we act. 
25
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Moral Monsters and Evil Personhood
Lecture 4

w
w On this modified account, moreover, it might turn out that someone could 
be evil without ever actually doing anything evil, just as long as the 
person’s character disposes him to act in certain ways. The problem here 
is that having a bad character doesn’t seem sufficient for having an evil 
character, even if it’s necessary. 
The Affect Model
w
w Many philosophers have acknowledged the importance of antisympathetic 
feelings. These are feelings associated with taking pleasure in another 
person’s pain or suffering for its own sake. On the related affect model, 
someone has an evil character when they have or are at least disposed to 
have extreme antisympathetic feelings. 
w
w This model would explain what makes sadistic serial killers evil. They 
take great pleasure in inflicting extreme suffering on others, and they 
inflict that suffering for no other reason than to experience pleasure. 
It also helps explain why a helpless but sadistic voyeur could count as 
evil: On the affect model, taking great pleasure in witnessing extreme 
suffering, without actually causing the suffering, is sufficient for someone 
to count as evil. 
w
w As Todd Calder points out, however, even though some evil people take 
pleasure in extreme suffering, such sadism doesn’t seem either necessary 
or sufficient for evil character. It doesn’t seem sufficient because 
antisympathetic feelings might arise involuntarily. 
w
w Taking pleasure in extreme suffering doesn’t seem necessary for evil 
character because it seems like someone could qualify as evil solely 
because of their indifference to human suffering. This kind of emotional 
detachment and disregard for others is the hallmark of the cold-blooded 
killer, who often serves as the symbol of evil. To return to an earlier 
example, Eric would still seem evil if he were completely indifferent to 
the suffering he inflicted on his family. 
26
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Moral Monsters and Evil Personhood
Lecture 4

The Moral Monster Model
w
w Perhaps the coldly indifferent 
killer who feels nothing and the 
sadistic killer who takes great 
pleasure in extreme suffering 
are both moral monsters. They 
have nothing in common with 
the typical person; they are of 
a radically different kind. 
w
w This is Daniel Haybron’s position 
in his 2002 article “Moral 
Monsters and Saints,” in which 
he notes, “There is nothing 
mysterious or alien about the 
psychological makeup of the 
average bad person. The evil 
person, by contrast, is not at all 
like us.” The reason evil people are 
not like us, according to Haybron, 
is that they have no good side at 
all. They have either a deadened 
or a perverse moral sense. 
w
w Haybron recognizes that this moral monster model sounds both too 
demanding and too permissive. It might seem too demanding because it 
leaves out people who do extremely bad things but have a more or less 
normal sense of what’s right and wrong. And it might seem too permissive 
because it doesn’t require the evil person to do anything. 
w
w The model may have flaws, but it might be important because it tells us 
that calling anyone evil is dehumanizing and inherently problematic. 
Calling someone evil, on this model, means saying that they are not one 
of us—they are not truly human. If this is the case, then maybe it’s not 
a good idea to call anyone evil. 
27
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Moral Monsters and Evil Personhood
Lecture 4

w
w Adopting this model would allow us to talk about evil people while 
making it more or less impossible for us to call any actual person evil. 
And if we can’t actually call anyone evil, then we can’t use that accusation 
to justify treating a person in any particular way. 
w
w Todd Calder has a potential counterexample to the moral monster mode. 
Consider the hypothetical Sandy, who cares deeply for her family and 
for many other people, but who also takes intense pleasure in torturing 
children to death on weekend getaways, even though she understands that 
it is deeply immoral to do so. 
w
w Sandy certainly seems like an evil person. Yet she’s concerned about 
others, she recognizes moral reasons, and she often finds herself 
motivated to do what is right and good. If she’s evil, then the moral 
monster model has missed the mark. 
Conclusion 
w
w None of the four models discussed in this lecture has seemed obviously 
right, even though each of them has brought up certain intuitions about 
what an evil person is. Perhaps driving the confusion is the assumption 
that there is a single unified account of evil personhood—and perhaps 
assuming there is a single unified account is the problem. 
w
w This is what Luke Russell suggests in his book Evil: A Philosophical 
Investigation. The idea here is that we might want to adopt a conceptual 
pluralism about the concept of evil. Adopting this conceptual pluralism 
would mean that we recognize that there are a lot of different conceptions 
of evil and evil personhood, and it is hard to say which of these conceptions 
is objectively right. 
w
w If we adopt conceptual pluralism, we can recognize that some of the 
disagreements about evil personhood we’ve encountered are “merely 
linguistic disagreements.” This turns on the word evil. Two people might 
agree on everything except whether someone is properly called evil, in 
which case the two people have different conceptions of evil. 
28
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Moral Monsters and Evil Personhood
Lecture 4

w
w Those two people might agree that an action was extremely wrong, that 
the person who performed the action had certain immoral motives, and 
that the action caused serious harm. Their only disagreement is about 
whether the person who committed the action is really evil. 
w
w Conceptual pluralism moves us away from asking questions about 
whether someone is truly evil and toward asking questions about which 
conception of evil we’re employing. Still, we might wonder whether one 
conception of evil has a kind of primacy over the others. 
SUGGESTED READING
Haybron, “Moral Monsters and Saints.”
Russell, Evil.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 Do you think that doing evil things makes someone evil? Why or 
why not? 
2	 What’s the difference between the dispositional model and the 
moral monster model of evil personhood? What model of evil 
personhood do you think is right? 
3	 What is conceptual pluralism regarding evil? Do you agree with it?
29
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Moral Monsters and Evil Personhood
Lecture 4

LECTURE 5
P
sychopathic killers like Robert Harris—a man executed 
for the murder of two teenage boys—are often seen as 
archetypes of evil. However, many psychologists and 
philosophers have also worried about whether psychopaths are 
really responsible for their actions. Therefore, being clear about 
the conditions for evil personhood is especially important. 
This lecture explores the delicate boundary that separates 
ordinary people from people like Robert Harris. It is surprising 
how porous that boundary really is. 

Psychopathy, Responsibility, and Evil 
w
w There is much disagreement about the nature and causes of psychopathy, 
about how to diagnose psychopathy, and about the relationship between 
psychopathy and other personality disorders. 
w
w However, we could start to make some progress by distinguishing 
between psychopathy and sociopathy. According to the Mayo Clinic, 
sociopathy is “a mental condition in which a person consistently shows 
no regard for right and wrong and ignores the rights and feelings of others 
... [Sociopaths] tend to antagonize, manipulate or treat others harshly or 
with callous indifference.”
w
w According to criminal psychologist Robert Hare, psychopaths are extreme 
sociopaths. This means that all psychopaths are sociopaths, but not all 
sociopaths are psychopaths. The key difference between psychopathy and 
sociopathy is that sociopaths are able to form attachments with others in 
a way that psychopaths cannot. 
w
w Psychopaths seem to lack not only any feelings of remorse, guilt, and 
shame, but also any sense of empathy. This lack of empathy appears to 
result in an inability to recognize important moral facts. 
w
w In particular, psychopaths cannot reliably distinguish between 
conventional rules and moral rules. Conventional rules are rules that 
individuals and social groups create. In general, most of our laws are 
merely conventional, as are the rules associated with sports and games. 
In this sense, conventional rules are authority dependent. Their authority 
comes from outside them. 
w
w By contrast, moral rules aren’t merely conventional. They are authority 
independent in the sense that their validity doesn’t come from convention, 
agreement, or anywhere outside them. As philosopher Manuel Vargas 
puts it, “‘conventional’ rules rule out things because we (or some relevant 
group of us) say so, whereas ‘moral’ rules rule out things regardless of 
whether or not someone says so.” Jaywalking is wrong because we say 
so; hitting people in the face with hammers is wrong no matter what 
anybody says. 
31
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Evil and Responsibility
Lecture 5

Psychopathy and Morality
w
w In the 1980s, Elliot Turiel and his colleagues ran studies in which they 
asked children to consider some hypothetical scenarios. Their studies 
seemed to show that children as young as three grasped the difference 
between moral and conventional rules.
w
w Even though very young children naturally grasp the distinction between 
conventional and moral rules, psychopaths perform very poorly on Turiel’s 
moral-versus-conventional rules test. With this in mind, we might say that 
psychopaths are morally blind. Even when someone tries to explain the 
difference between conventional and moral rules to someone who suffers 
from psychopathy, they still don’t grasp the difference, even if they learn 
how to pretend as if they do. 
w
w Psychopaths lack the capacity to understand moral demands as being 
morally relevant. Put another way, they understand that there is a demand, 
but they don’t grasp those demands as being moral. 
w
w If all of this is right, then psychopaths are not blameworthy, but that 
doesn’t mean we have to let them run amok. We could quarantine them, 
for instance, as if they had a contagious, deadly disease. But no matter 
how we feel about them, it seems as unreasonable to hold them morally 
responsible as it would be to blame someone who, through no fault of their 
own, contracted a highly contagious and very deadly disease.
w
w Returning to the example of the murderer Robert Harris, a number 
of thinkers have suggested that Harris presents a paradigm case of 
psychopathy. This raises a question: Is Harris evil? 
w
w Harris laughed at the atrocities he committed. With this in mind, Harris 
seems like the archetypical evil person: He inflicts senseless and severe 
harm, he takes pleasure in the harm, and he seems altogether unlike 
typical people. 
32
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Evil and Responsibility
Lecture 5

w
w The philosopher Manuel Vargas thinks that this presents evidence that 
calling someone evil is to evaluate them as the very worst among us 
without taking a stand on how they became the bad people they are. For 
him, responsibility and evil come apart. 
Legal Insanity, Responsibility, and Evil 
w
w This conclusion might make some people uneasy, however. After all, 
imagine that we were to discover that Robert Harris had been forced to 
commit his unspeakable acts, and to act as though he were taking pleasure 
in them, by gangsters who were holding his family for ransom. 
w
w This is a farfetched example that 
did not occur, but considering 
such a scenario is instructive. 
The introduction of duress 
and coercion reduces how 
responsible someone really is 
for what they’ve done. In the 
hypothetical case of diminished 
responsibly, is Robert Harris 
an evil person, or does he seem 
more like a conflicted and 
tortured man? 
w
w For the sake of argument, 
another scenario would be that 
Robert Harris suffered from a 
“defect of the mind.” This would 
qualify him for the M’Naghten 
insanity defense, also known 
as the right-wrong test. This 
is the oldest insanity test, first 
introduced in England in 1843. 
It is also the most common 
insanity defense used in the 
United States 
The M’Naghten Trial
Daniel M’Naghten believed 
that he was the target of a 
vast conspiracy involving 
the pope and prime minister 
of England. In a preemptive 
act, he attempted to shoot 
the prime minister, but he 
missed and killed the prime 
minister’s secretary instead. 
During M’Naghten’s trial, the 
jury found him not guilty by 
reason of insanity, noting his 
delusional beliefs about the 
prime minister. The public 
was outraged, however, 
and that forced the British 
House of Lords to develop a 
strict rule for legal insanity: 
the M’Naghten rule. 
33
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Evil and Responsibility
Lecture 5

w
w According to the standards of the M’Naghten rule: 
To establish a defense on the ground of insanity, it must be 
clearly proved that, at the time of the committing of the act, the 
party accused was laboring under … a defect of reason, from 
disease of mind, and [did not] know the nature and quality of 
the act he was doing; or if he did know it, that he did not know 
he was doing what was wrong.
w
w The M’Naghten rule stresses the importance of whether a defendant 
knows that what he’s doing is wrong. This is what psychopaths have 
trouble with. The difference may be that the M’Naghten rule requires 
that this lack of moral knowledge be the result of a defect of the mind or 
a mental disease. Typical examples of such defects of the mind can range 
from schizophrenia and psychosis to traumatic brain injury. 
w
w Andrea Yates offers a real-life example of someone who was ultimately 
found not guilty by reason of insanity under the M’Naghten rule. On 
June 20, 2001, Andrea methodically drowned her five children in a 
bathtub. After laying her dead children on her bed, Andrea called the 
police. Her trial was controversial. Initially, she was found guilty and 
sentenced to life in prison, but that verdict was overturned. 
w
w In her retrial, she was found not guilty by reason of insanity and 
committed by the court to a mental facility. Andrea thought of herself 
as evil, saying as much when she explained why she killed her children 
to a prison psychiatrist. Andrea seemed to believe either that she was 
marked by Satan or that she was Satan himself. To save her children 
from herself and their doomed future with her, she felt that she had to 
kill them. 
w
w Andrea is not legally responsible for what she did, and if she really could 
not tell right from wrong when she committed her crimes, then it seems 
that she’s also not morally responsible for killing her children. She seems 
less like a moral monster and more like a victim of her own mind. 
34
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Evil and Responsibility
Lecture 5

Psychopathy and Cruelty 
w
w If it is difficult to call Andrea Yates evil, then perhaps we do care about 
how killers became the kind of person they are. This raises the question: 
What if Robert Harris became a psychopath not because of a disease of 
the mind, but because of his abusive upbringing? 
w
w We might not want to explore that difference because we might want 
to insist that Robert Harris, unlike Andrea Yates, was cruel. As Gary 
Watson notes, “Psychopaths are not just dangerous but cruel. They 
frequently enjoy forcing others into submission, for example.”
w
w Even if they don’t understand that what they’re doing is wrong, cruel 
people are perhaps responsible in the sense that we can attribute character 
flaws to them. We can note that their actions are vicious because they 
flow from their depraved dispositions. 
w
w On this way of seeing things, Robert Harris is significantly different from 
Andrea Yates. Now we have reasons to think that he is responsible, at 
least in a sense, for his actions. Because of this, it might seem perfectly 
reasonable to call him and other psychopathic killers evil. 
w
w But is a psychopathic killer like Robert Harris really cruel and 
contemptuous? Perhaps they don’t actually understand moral demands, 
and they don’t really grasp what makes their actions so awful. 
w
w According to the philosopher Dana Nelkin, it’s a mistake to think that 
psychopaths are cruel. She’s willing to grant that psychopathic killers take 
pleasure in their crimes and that they are insensitive to their victims, but 
she questions whether they are indifferent to human suffering in a way 
that would make them cruel. 
w
w Indifference is a matter of grasping moral facts, but not caring about 
them, whereas insensitivity is simply a matter of failing to grasp those 
facts. Psychopaths are insensitive but not indifferent, suggesting that they 
are perhaps neither contemptuous nor cruel. 
35
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Evil and Responsibility
Lecture 5

w
w Nelkin also argues that moral vices require moral understanding. Someone 
might derive pleasure from hurting others, but they cannot be cruel unless 
they understand the moral significance of what they’re doing. If this is 
right, then psychopathic killers are not in fact contemptuous and cruel. 
Active and Passive Members of a Moral Community 
w
w Responsibility and evil are intertwined. It is difficult to say that anyone 
who is not responsible in some morally relevant sense is evil. This is 
because calling someone evil is to acknowledge them as an active member 
of a moral community. 
w
w Being an active member of a 
moral community is different 
from being a passive member. 
Passive members are those 
beings—human beings and 
animals in particular—who are 
worthy of moral consideration. 
For an example of a passive 
member, take a cat: The cat’s 
owner should treat his pet with 
kindness rather than cruelty.
w
w Active 
members 
have 
certain obligations to passive 
members—obligations that 
a cat does not have. Active 
members are responsible for 
failing to live up to those 
obligations, whereas a cat, for 
instance, isn’t. 
36
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Evil and Responsibility
Lecture 5

w
w Keep in mind that those who count as evil might dwell in the very darkest 
recesses of the human condition. Still, it seems that they occupy a space 
we all share, even though that thought may be uncomfortable. 
SUGGESTED READING
Hare, Without Conscience.
Watson, “Responsibility and the Limits of Evil.”
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What is the Turiel test? How does it help us understand psychopathy? 
2	 What do you think about the case of Robert Harris? Do you think 
he’s a moral monster? Do you think he’s responsible for his actions? 
What does reflecting on his case tell us about responsibility 
and evil? 
3	 What’s the difference between legal insanity and psychopathy? 
What do you think about the case of Andrea Yates? 
37
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Evil and Responsibility
Lecture 5

LECTURE 6
T
his lecture looks at various conceptions of sin, focusing on 
the Western Christian tradition and then turning briefly to 
the Indian Buddhist tradition. The lecture hones in on the 
idea of original sin in particular. This will allow us to explore a 
view of human nature that emphasizes our dark side. 

Sin in the Christian Tradition 
w
w In the New Testament, the idea of sin can sometimes be read as falling 
short of the goal. Another metaphor that is emphasized is a crossing of 
a line. This is sin in the sense of transgression or doing what we’re not 
supposed to do. 
w
w Putting these two notions of sin together, we get the idea of sin as missing 
the mark set for us by God and as crossing the boundaries established 
for us by God. Often, these standards and boundaries are understood 
in terms of God’s law, as in the First 
Epistle of John, which tells us that 
sin is lawlessness. But at other times, 
all wrongdoing is considered sinful. 
w
w All of this suggests rather strikingly 
that sin is an act. It is wrongdoing, and 
wrongdoing is to miss the mark set for 
us by God and to transgress the rules 
God has established for us. 
w
w In the gospels, however, Jesus 
sometimes seems to challenge this 
understanding of sin as an act. For 
example, in Matthew 5, he suggests that 
we can miss the mark and transgress 
boundaries without doing anything at 
all; merely thinking or feeling a certain 
way seems to be enough for us to sin. 
w
w We might read this in at least two ways. We might think that Jesus means 
that sin begins in the mind; it begins with intentions and feelings and 
thoughts, and so we should guard against bad thoughts so that we don’t 
act on them in the future. This can be called the weak reading. 
w
w On the strong reading, by contrast, we might think that Jesus is suggesting 
that sin is not fundamentally about wrongdoing. It’s about having a certain 
state of mind. In particular, it’s about having certain habits of mind. 
The Word Sin
The English word sin 
is used to translate 
many Greek words 
in the Christian New 
Testament, but the 
most common word is 
hamartia. This noun 
comes from the verb 
hamartanein, which 
means “to err.”
39
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Sin: Original and Otherwise
Lecture 6

w
w This strong reading of Jesus’s words brings us to an important distinction 
between two ways of thinking about sin. The first is sin as wrongdoing; 
the second is sin as vice. As wrongdoing, sin is centrally an act (or perhaps 
an omission); it’s something we do. As vice, by contrast, sin is centrally 
a temperament, a habit of mind associated with a disposition to act. 
Thomas Aquinas and Augustine
w
w In his Summa theologiae, Thomas Aquinas considers which is worse: sin 
as vice or sin as vicious act. Aquinas thinks that the only real reason we 
call a disposition sinful is that it results in sinful or bad acts. 
w
w For Aquinas, our dispositions might 
themselves be ambiguous. Anger, when 
moderated, serves justice. However, it is 
also dangerous because it can drive us 
beyond the bounds of reason and God’s 
law in such a way that, though we had the 
right target in mind, we nonetheless miss 
the mark. 
w
w In the case of Augustine of Hippo, the 
great Christian philosopher, the idea that 
thoughts, feelings, and desires can be 
sinful in themselves is more plausible than 
for Aquinas. Aquinas thinks we should see 
dispositions and desires as leading to sin 
but not as properly sin. For Augustine, 
however, our desires can be sins. In other 
words, he seems to take the strong reading 
of Jesus’ words in Matthew.
w
w Sin, for Augustine, is playing by our own 
rules and making our own standards. 
Sinful desires are desires to be like God 
while denying our dependence on God. 
40
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Sin: Original and Otherwise
Lecture 6

Original Sin 
w
w This brings us to the concept of original sin, a concept Augustine is often 
credited with inventing, though the seeds of the doctrine were sown by 
the apostle Paul in Romans 5:12. This is the how the passage is translated 
in the New Revised Standard Version of the New Testament: “Just as sin 
came into the world through one man [Adam], and death came through 
sin, and so death spread to all because all have sinned.”
w
w Augustine takes Paul to mean that all humans have inherited sin from 
Adam. We are born sinful in the sense that through Adam’s voluntary 
choice to turn away from God, human nature has been stained with sin. 
w
w According to Augustine, Adam and Eve biologically passed their sins 
down to us. We have not only received the disease of sin from our 
ancestral parents, however. Augustine thinks we have also received the 
guilt associated with their sin. Our fallen human nature, then, is corrupt 
and culpable. 
w
w There are three important ideas to keep in mind here. The first is Adam’s 
primal sin, which is the result of Adam’s free choice. Next is the idea of 
original sin, which is the corrupted nature that all of humanity inherits 
from Adam. And finally, there is original guilt, the culpability associated 
with the state of original sin. 
Explaining Original Sin
w
w Different strands of the Christian tradition offer different perspectives 
on original sin, but the traditional view includes these three important 
ideas. The trick, for someone like Augustine, is to explain not only 
exactly how we all inherit Adam’s sin but also exactly how we all inherit 
Adam’s guilt. 
w
w Very roughly, theologians have taken one of two approaches. The first 
is realism and the second is attributionism. Augustine himself endorses 
realism, according to which Adam’s sin and Adam’s guilt are, somehow, 
truly ours. 
41
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Sin: Original and Otherwise
Lecture 6

w
w John Calvin, the 16th-century 
century 
French 
theologian, 
endorses attributionism. According 
to this, Adam’s sin and Adam’s 
guilt are not strictly speaking ours, 
but they have been attributed to us 
by God. 
w
w There is yet another way of 
thinking about original sin. So far, 
this lecture has treated sin itself as 
primarily a moral category. This 
is the moral conception of sin—that 
is, sin as a missing of the mark and 
as a transgression. 
w
w The late Marilyn McCord Adams, 
an influential philosopher and 
priest of the Episcopal Church, 
suggests that this conception of sin 
is religiously inadequate. By explaining sin in terms of morality, either we 
reduce the concept of sin to more fundamental moral concepts, thereby 
making an idol of morality in favor of God, or we secularize the concept 
of sin in a way that even the non-religious can accept, thereby trivializing 
the concept. 
w
w Put differently, Adams thinks that the moralistic conception of sin is 
too human-centered—too anthropomorphic. She thinks we need a God-
centered analysis of sin. 
w
w For Adams, the very concept of sin provides the resources we need to 
understand original sin. We are original sinners because of our nature as 
creatures—a nature that is necessarily inferior to God’s. Adams thinks of 
this as sin as uncleanness, but we might also think of it as the relational 
conception of sin, as opposed to the moralistic conception. 
42
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Sin: Original and Otherwise
Lecture 6

The Buddhist Conception of Sin 
w
w The Indian Buddhist tradition has a very different conception of sin. 
In fact, it’s so different that many scholars worry about attributing 
the concept of sin to Buddhist thinkers. The concept requires a divine 
lawmaker and, according to the Indian Buddhist tradition, there is no 
divine being whose commandments might be transgressed or whose 
standards we might fail to live up to. 
w
w However, the Buddhist tradition recognizes unwholesome actions that 
bring about negative effects. The Sanskrit word for this is papa, which 
refers to an unwholesome action that produces negative effects for us and 
others in this or a future life. 
w
w Papa is the opposite of punya, which refers to wholesome actions that 
lead to happiness in this or a future life. Both are concepts that make 
sense only in the context of rebirth and karma. Actions that count as 
papa bring about bad consequences for those who perform them, whereas 
actions that count as punya bring about good consequences for those who 
perform them. 
w
w In this sense, then, papa is sin: actions that count as papa defile those 
who perform them in such a way that they carry the seeds of these actions 
with them throughout this and future lives. This goes on until their 
sinful actions bear their unwholesome fruit, causing pain, or until they 
achieve liberation from the cycle of death and rebirth when, in a state 
of nirvana, all unwholesome seeds are destroyed and the stain of sin is 
finally cleansed. 
w
w This Buddhist conception of sin can be positioned as a view of sin as 
karmic defilement. Sin stains us; we are not necessarily originally stained, 
but through sin, we stain ourselves in ways that we are responsible 
for cleansing. 
43
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Sin: Original and Otherwise
Lecture 6

w
w This conception of sin is compatible with acts, dispositions, thoughts, 
and with feelings. For the Indian Buddhist tradition, what matters most 
in determining the karmic consequences of our actions is the state of 
mind associated with them. 
SUGGESTED READINGS
Adams, “Sin as Uncleanness.”
Wyma, “Innocent Sinfulness, Guilty Sin.”
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 How would you define sin? Do you think sin is a specifically 
religious notion, or do you think we could naturalize sin and make 
it a secular concept? 
2	 What is the difference between the Buddhist and the Christian 
concept of sin? 
3	 Does the concept of original sin make sense to you? What do you 
think of Wyma’s Molinist account of original sin? 
44
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Sin: Original and Otherwise
Lecture 6

LECTURE 7
C
arl Jung, a Swiss psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, refers 
to a concept known as the shadow self. In the Psychology 
of the Unconscious, Jung tells us that the shadow self is 
that unconscious part of our psyche that houses our most base 
desires, some of which reveal that we might not be as good as 
we think we are. For Jung, it’s important to bring this dark side 
to the level of conscious awareness where we can do something 
about it. Continuing to repress it will bring trouble. This lecture 
explores the shadow side by focusing on dark, unwanted 
thoughts and desires. 

Intrusive and Murderous Thoughts 
w
w A study run by Adam Radomsky at Concordia University suggests that 
most people have intrusive or upsetting thoughts. The study surveyed 777 
college students in 13 countries. It found that more than 90 percent of the 
respondents had intrusive thoughts at least once in the past three months, 
with most saying they’d had them more than once.
w
w Intrusive thoughts are unwanted thoughts. A relatively 
benign example is someone worrying they forgot to lock their door, 
but some intrusive thoughts are darker than that. Take, for example, 
thinking about killing someone.
w
w David Buss, a psychology professor at the University of Texas, studied 
such thoughts. After finding out that one of his colleagues had murderous 
thoughts, Buss wondered how many people really have them. He surveyed 
the students in his introduction to psychology course and asked them 
whether they had fantasized about murder. 
w
w He found that about three-quarters of them had. Next, he surveyed 5,000 
people from around the world and discovered that 91 percent of men and 84 
percent of women have 
thought about killing 
someone in some way. 
w
w Buss’s theory tells us that 
we all have “specialized 
psychological circuits that 
lead us to contemplate 
murder as a solution 
to adaptive problems.” 
We almost 
all 
have 
homicide fantasies, at 
least some times, because 
having them has been 
good for survival. 
46
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Dark Thoughts and Desires
Lecture 7

w
w These dark thoughts, however, typically remain merely thoughts, Buss 
suggests, because once we have them, we’re able to consider them for 
what they are. On reflection, we’re able to dampen our violent urges and 
get ourselves under control before acting out on them. 
Considering Dark Thoughts
w
w People tend not to want to know about their dark thoughts. Unwanted 
and intrusive thoughts seem different from thoughts and desires we 
acknowledge as our own. 
w
w We might explain this by distinguishing between those thoughts and 
desires that represent our real self and those that don’t. The American 
philosopher Harry Frankfurt has an influential and helpful way of 
thinking about all of this. In developing a theory of autonomy, Frankfurt 
suggests that we should identify the real self with our second-order 
desires, rather than first-order desires. 
w
w To make sense of this, consider an example: A person who wants to eat 
ice cream has a first-order desire. However, if he does not truly want 
to eat ice cream—that is, if he is conflicted about it—he does not have 
a second-order desire that the first-order desire come to fruition. He does 
not want to want to eat ice cream.
w
w Frankfurt suggests that when our second-order desires do not match up 
with our first-order desires, we are alienated from our first-order desires. 
To take an example from philosophy professor Laura Ekstrom, consider a 
personal injury attorney who experiences a desire to look at grisly photos 
of an accident victim. But he stops himself, asks why he has this desire, 
and cannot come with a good answer. His second-order desire does not 
want his first-order desire to become effective.
w
w In a later development of his theory, Frankfurt suggests the attorney is 
alienated from his first-order desires because he does not wholeheartedly 
identify with his dark desire. According to Frankfurt, we are wholehearted 
when we have no conflicts in our desires and no ambivalence about what 
we want. 
47
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Dark Thoughts and Desires
Lecture 7

w
w Ekstrom also provides perspective on this. On Ekstrom’s account, we 
own our desires only if they embody our conception of the good, because 
they have arisen from a process of critical evaluation. These critically 
evaluated desires are what she calls preferences, and to really count as 
our own, they have to integrate with other preferences in a stable support 
system that effectively constitutes the real self. The reason our attorney’s 
dark desire says little about him, morally speaking, is because it’s not an 
integrated preference.
Schadenfreude
w
w Schadenfreude—finding joy in someone else’s misfortune—is a dark 
feeling. In fact, extreme versions of schadenfreude would probably 
count as evil. The voyeur who does not bring about terrible suffering but 
who experiences high levels of pleasure while watching someone being 
tortured would, it seems, be experiencing an evil feeling.
w
w In the Buddhist tradition, thoughts and feelings like schadenfreude are 
seen as poisonous: They are an important part of the complex of causes 
that trap us in the cycle of death and rebirth and cut us off from liberation 
and enlightenment. 
w
w In response to this, the Buddhist tradition has emphasized mudita, or 
appreciative joy. Appreciative joy is finding joy in the happiness and 
success of others. It cultivates a sense of joy in the happiness and success 
in others in a way that battles both schadenfreude and indifference. 
The Buddha
w
w It seems like it would be perfectly reasonable to think that the Buddha 
himself, as an enlightened being, would have practiced appreciative joy 
in such a way as to completely eradicate any trace of schadenfreude. For 
that matter, it seems like it would be perfectly reasonable to think that 
the Buddha himself, as an enlightened being, would have eradicated all 
dark thoughts, desires, and feelings. 
48
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Dark Thoughts and Desires
Lecture 7

w
w According to the Buddhist scholar Stephen Batchelor, this might not be 
quite right. To see this, he asks us to consider the Buddha’s temptation 
by Mara, the Buddhist equivalent of the devil. Mara challenges the 
Buddha by tempting him in various ways—with sensual pleasure, with 
violence, and with doubt. The Buddha battles against these temptations 
and ultimately triumphs. 
w
w However, Batchelor wants to emphasize that the “Buddha and Mara are 
figurative ways of portraying a fundamental opposition within human 
natures.” As he puts it, “When Buddha-nature prevails, fixations ease 
and the world brightens, revealing itself as empty, contingent, and fluid. 
When Mara-nature dominates, fixations tighten, and the world appears 
opaque, necessary, static.” 
w
w These two natures are inseparable, according to Batchelor. This means 
that none of us, including the perfect Buddha, can disentangle them. Even 
perfect comes with darkness. 
49
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Dark Thoughts and Desires
Lecture 7

Tiantai Thoughts
w
w Batchelor’s ideas connect with what the 
Tiantai Buddhist philosophers Zhiyi and 
Zhili have to say about the relationship 
between dark thoughts and moral and 
even spiritual perfection. 
w
w Tiantai Buddhism focuses on explaining 
the subtle doctrine of emptiness. It’s in 
explaining this doctrine that Zhiyi and 
later Zhili suggest that even the Buddha 
had dark thoughts. 
w
w The Tiantai philosophers hold that one 
instant of consciousness—a single 
thought—contains all worlds. There 
are 3,000 worlds when we add up all 
the different realms of rebirth. A single 
thought contains the 3,000 worlds in the 
sense that the mind reflects those worlds. 
w
w If all of reality is reflected in any single aspect of reality, and some 
realms of reality contain evil, then reality itself contains evil. Even the 
Buddha’s mind contains evil, because each thought in the Buddha’s mind 
reflects or contains all other thoughts. If there is evil at all, then evil is 
everywhere, even in the Buddha’s mind. If there is good at all, then good 
is everywhere, even in the devil’s mind. 
w
w In this view, even a perfect person—morally perfect, spiritually perfect, 
all that—shares in our imperfections and, in particular, our dark thoughts. 
It seems it is impossible to get rid of them unless everyone gets rid of 
them. This might be disconcerting, but the basic idea is that having dark 
thoughts, at least on this view, is so normal that not even a perfect person 
could completely eradicate them.
Tiantai is a school 
of Buddhist 
philosophy that 
emerged in China 
in the 6th century. 
The name comes 
from the mountain 
in southeastern 
China where Zhiyi, 
its founder, lived.
50
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Dark Thoughts and Desires
Lecture 7

w
w In our fundamental nature, all of us have the potential for dark thoughts, 
even the Buddha. Because we can’t hope to eradicate this potential, the 
important factor is how we cultivate our fundamental nature. 
w
w On this way of thinking, the Buddha needs to actively cultivate himself 
even after achieving enlightenment by practicing things like appreciative 
joy. For us, this suggests that perfection is not an ultimate accomplishment 
but an ongoing achievement—that is, a continuous journey. 
w
w The Buddhist tradition is vast, and not all Buddhist thinkers would agree 
with this characterization of the Buddha. However, the Tiantai school 
provides an interesting view of what perfection might look like. Perfection 
might include a potential dark side beneath the surface. In particular, 
perfection might be compatible with the always-present potential for dark 
thoughts and desires. 
SUGGESTED READING
Batchelor, “Living with the Devil.”
Pincott, “Wicked Thoughts.”
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 How would you define a dark thought? 
2	 Do you think that even the very best of us have dark thoughts? 
3	 What is the difference between a first-order desire and a second-
order desire, and how does that help us think about dark thoughts 
and desires?
51
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Dark Thoughts and Desires
Lecture 7

LECTURE 8
T
he Greek philosopher Epicurus presented an analogy that 
can be framed in this way: Just as medicine diagnoses 
and treats the diseases of the body that cause physical 
suffering, philosophy diagnoses and treats the diseases of the 
soul that cause psychological suffering. 
Epicurus is not alone in thinking this way. Many Hellenistic 
philosophers, who flourished in ancient Athens and then Rome 
from roughly the fourth century BCE to the second century CE, 
agree with him. The dominant schools of Hellenistic philosophy 
included Epicureanism (named after Epicurus himself), Stoicism, 
and skepticism. Indian Buddhist philosophers also agree with 
Epicurus. 
This lecture explores this way of thinking about the human 
condition. It also examines the nature and causes of psychological 
suffering. The lecture focuses on the Indian Buddhist tradition’s 
analysis of suffering while drawing connections with 
contemporary work in evolutionary psychology. 

The Nature of Suffering 
w
w After achieving enlightenment, Siddhartha Gautama, now the Buddha, 
thought long and hard about how he would communicate his insights to 
others in a way they could understand. At the center of his message, he 
emphasized the Four Noble Truths. 
w
w Roughly, the Four Noble Truths are the truth of suffering, the truth of 
origination, the truth of cessation, and the truth of the path. In The Path 
of Purification, the 5th-century Buddhist philosopher Buddhaghosa 
explains the Four Noble Truths this way:
The truth of suffering is like a disease, the truth of origin is like 
the cause of the disease, the truth of cessation is like the cure 
of the disease, and the truth of the path is like the medicine.
w
w Buddhaghosa provides a medical analogy 
that is very similar to the analogy 
Epicurus offers. On Buddhaghosa’s 
reading, the Four Noble Truths have the 
form of a medical diagnosis, along with 
a treatment plan. 
w
w As for suffering itself, Buddha 
summarizes the truth of suffering with 
these words: “In brief, the five aggregates 
subject to clinging are suffering.” For the 
Buddha, there are five different aspects of 
us as persons: the physical body, feelings, 
perceptions, volitions, and consciousness. 
w
w Each of these aspects is subject to 
clinging—that is, each aspect is involved 
in our lifelong struggle to obtain what 
we want and avoid what we don’t want. 
However, no matter how hard we try, 
nothing lasts. That fact itself is suffering 
because it is so unsatisfying. 
53
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Suffering and Its Causes
Lecture 8

Types of Suffering
w
w There are at least three 
kinds of suffering, or three 
kinds of dukkha. The first is 
dukkhadukkhata. This is the 
kind of suffering associated 
most closely with mental and 
physical pain and our aversion 
to what we find unpleasant. 
w
w The second kind of suffering 
is viparinamadukkhata, or 
suffering associated with 
change. This kind of suffering 
is paradoxically bound up 
with pleasant experiences. 
Pleasurable feelings are such 
that, if we continue doing 
whatever brings us pleasure, 
we’ll end up experiencing pain. 
w
w The third and final kind of suffering is samskaradukkhata, or suffering 
inherent in conditioning factors. This kind of suffering is associated 
with the fact that experiences that seem neutral—neither pleasant nor 
unpleasant—in one moment might end up changing in the next. 
Craving and Suffering 
w
w According to the Buddha, this is the second truth—that is, the truth of 
the origin of suffering: 
It is this craving which leads to renewed existence, accompanied 
by delight and lust, seeking delight here and there; that is, 
craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, craving 
for extermination.
Other Causes of Suffering
Although this lecture focuses 
on craving as the most salient 
cause of suffering, it’s important 
to note that, given the Buddhist 
commitment to the view that 
everything arises from complex 
causal conditions, there is no 
single or first cause of suffering. 
Instead, there is a complex set 
of causes that leads to suffering. 
Ignorance, aversion, attachment, 
and craving all come together 
to produce suffering.
54
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Suffering and Its Causes
Lecture 8

w
w The important Sanskrit word here is trishna, which means something 
akin to an overpowering desire or a craving. If suffering is the human 
disease, then craving is the cause. The cessation of suffering, which the 
third noble truth tells us is possible, is accomplished by getting rid of 
craving, which, according to the Buddha, we can do following the path 
offered in the fourth noble truth. 
w
w According to the second noble truth, however, there are three kinds of 
craving: craving for what is pleasurable, craving for existence, and craving 
for extermination. Craving for what is pleasurable is straightforward. 
Craving for existence can be understood in terms of our strong desire 
for self-preservation. Craving for extermination is a craving for the 
elimination of everything that we judge to be negative. However, none 
of these can be permanent.
w
w Even if we have a craving for something that does last forever—perhaps 
nirvana itself, the complete cessation of suffering—the problem, at least 
according to the Buddha, is that craving of any kind presupposes that 
we are stable enough to possess something permanent. However, this 
is wrong: We are also impermanent; there is no stable self, according 
to the Buddha, that could permanently possess anything. Craving is 
fundamentally delusional. 
The Truth of Suffering
w
w In his book Why Buddhism Is True, the evolutionary psychologist Robert 
Wright notes that our complex evolutionary history has produced human 
animals that are, as he puts it, recurrently dissatisfied. To stay alive and to 
get our genes into the next generation, we have to do things like eat and 
mate. But we have to keep doing these things over and over. 
w
w We can’t just eat and feel completely satisfied, because we wouldn’t eat 
again—and we’d die. We can’t just have sex once and feel completely 
satisfied, because we wouldn’t reliably pass on our genes. Wright argues 
that we are hardwired to crave good things in a way that’s never fully 
satisfying—and that is the Buddha’s diagnosis of the human condition. 
55
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Suffering and Its Causes
Lecture 8

w
w Wright notes that our brains have evolved to process thoughts, perceptions, 
and feelings that contribute to the goal of passing our genes on; they have 
not evolved to process thoughts, perceptions, and feelings that accurately 
represent how the world really is. That doesn’t mean we’re systematically 
deceived, but it does mean that we tend to represent the world in ways 
that contribute to survival and reproduction. 
w
w We tend to overestimate how satisfying pleasures like food and sex will 
be, and we underestimate how fleeting those pleasures really are. This 
is a good thing from the perspective of evolution, because it enhances 
survival and reproduction, but it’s not so great either for our sense of 
reality or for our personal sense of satisfaction. 
SUGGESTED READING
Batchelor, After Buddhism. 
Wright, Why Buddhism Is True.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1	 What do you think about the claim that we’re all suffering? 
Is suffering the same as pain? 
2	 What is Buddhaghosa’s medical analogy, and how does Batchelor’s 
interpretation of the Four Noble Truths differ from this traditional 
reading?
56
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Suffering and Its Causes
Lecture 8

LECTURE 9
T
he reason desire is a problem, according to the character 
Krishna in the Hindu text known as the Bhagavad Gita, is 
that desire establishes expectations. Expectations are 
beliefs, but they are fueled by desire. Hope and fear are emotions, 
but they are grounded in what we want.
Trouble with desires and expectations reveals a subtle aspect 
of the dark side of human nature. Normally, we have a positive 
view of desire—for instance, desiring to brush teeth to keep them 
healthy. The problem is when desire becomes overpowering. 

The Disciplined Way of Action 
w
w In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna provides advice to the warrior Arjuna, who 
is torn between two paths. He is facing a battle in which he has friends 
and family members on the opposing side, so he thinks he either has to 
attack them and fail in his familial duties or refrain and fail as a warrior. 
w
w According to Krishna, Arjuna has various paths to liberation. He can seek 
insight into reality by following the disciplined path of knowledge, he 
can devote himself to God by following the disciplined path of devotion, 
or he can abandon desire by following 
the disciplined way of action. The first 
two paths play important roles in the 
Hindu tradition, but this lecture will focus 
exclusively on the third path. 
w
w On this path, Krishna advises Arjuna, we 
abandon our desires and expectations, 
acting in the world without being a part 
of the world. We lose who we imagine 
ourselves to be and merge into the true self: 
the atman. The atman is the self that lies 
behind who we take ourselves to be; it’s who 
we really are, deep down in our essence. 
w
w This notion is central to the Gita, but we can 
gloss over it for the moment simply by noting 
that the basic idea is that by abandoning 
desire and expectation, we can let go of 
who we usually take ourselves to be, lose 
our sense of self, and merge, somehow, into 
something more fundamental. That’s what 
the atman is; it’s fundamentally who we are. 
w
w By following a disciplined path of action, 
we merge with who we really are through a thoroughgoing absorption in 
activity. We detach ourselves from our typical concerns, losing any hope 
for success and abandoning any worries about the future. 
58
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Problem of Expectation and Desire
Lecture 9

w
w The disciplined path of action does not advise non-action. Instead, it 
advises desire-less action, or in Sanskrit, nishkamakarma. This can be 
understood in two ways. The first is detachment from the objects of 
desire. The second way is that it means removing desire altogether. 
The Necessity of Desire 
w
w This lecture now turns to the question of whether it is possible for anyone 
to act on purpose, or voluntarily, without desire. Desires are about how 
we’d like the world to be. If a person desires a glass of water, but finds 
that there’s no water around, the desire doesn’t go away. It might even 
become stronger. 
w
w With this in mind, the philosopher Michael Smith offers the direction 
of fit argument. Among other things, to have a motivating reason is 
to have a goal. To have a goal, however, is to be in a state with which 
the world must fit. But to be in such a state just is to have a desire. 
Therefore, motivation and intentional goal-oriented action require the 
presence of some kind of desire. 
w
w One response to Smith’s argument is to claim that Krishna advises 
Arjuna not to act on desire in a special sense. He’s telling Arjuna that 
his actions should not arise primarily from desires. He’s not telling him 
that he shouldn’t have any desires at all. 
w
w Another response to Smith’s direction of fit argument is to say that acting 
on purpose is really acting based on what one cares about, but that caring 
about something is not to have a desire for it. Instead, caring is a form of 
evaluation that we can understand in cognitive terms. 
w
w Perhaps we can deny that voluntary action is goal oriented at all. The 
philosopher Russ Shafer-Landau takes this line, arguing, “an agent may 
be motivated by evaluative beliefs without at the same time having a goal 
to be brought about thereby.” 
w
w This is an interesting response to Smith’s argument, and it might show 
that we don’t need desires to act. However, it might still seem mysterious 
what desire-less action would look like. 
59
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Problem of Expectation and Desire
Lecture 9

Flow Experiences
w
w What would it look like to act without desire in the sense that we are 
detached from any expectations, hopes, or fears about outcomes? The 
answer might lie in detached action in the form of what psychologist 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi calls flow experiences. 
w
w In flow experiences, we tend to lose track of ourselves in skilled activity 
that is intrinsically rewarding—that is, in activities that do not look 
beyond themselves for completion. In such states, we also tend to find 
deep satisfaction. 
w
w A flow experience is a kind of 
detached engagement. It’s the 
kind of experience a great writer 
might have while being lost in 
the experience of writing, a great 
basketball player might have when 
completely absorbed in the game, 
and a musician might have while 
getting lost in the music. 
w
w According to Csikszentmihalyi, 
people find flow experiences far more satisfying than the typical pleasures 
we pursue. The gratification we derive from active flow experiences 
contrasts sharply with the pleasure we derive from passive experiences 
such as binge watching our favorite shows. 
w
w Csikszentmihalyi claims that flow experiences are intrinsically 
motivating. When we are engaged in them, we don’t look for something 
outside them; they are complete in and of themselves. Additionally, 
flow experiences are valuable in and of themselves, rather than being 
merely instrumentally valuable. The philosopher Joel Kupperman has 
suggested that this is the kind of psychological state Krishna advises 
Arjuna to adopt. 
Flow experiences are 
not the same thing as 
zoning out. For instance, 
daydreaming while 
driving home is not 
a flow experience.
60
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Problem of Expectation and Desire
Lecture 9

A Life of Flow?
w
w One concern is that flow experiences are temporary. Is it really possible 
for someone like Arjuna to live a life of flow? Csikszentmihalyi identifies 
a certain personality type, the autotelic personality, which does experience 
extended periods of flow. 
w
w These are people who have a self-goal. The idea here, roughly, is that such 
people are self-sufficient in the sense that they have their own motivating 
ends; they aren’t looking outside themselves all the time for satisfaction. 
w
w To return to the Bhagavad Gita, this means that Arjuna can act as he 
must—he can perform his duty and enter into the great battle—while 
at the same time losing his sense of self in a way that makes his actions 
selfless and in a way that eliminates any concern he might have for any 
particular outcome. 
w
w For us, this means that if we agree that desire and expectation are in fact 
a subtle aspect of the dark side of human nature, it might also be possible 
for us to live, at least for the most part, without them, immersed in the 
flowing current of our own lives. 
SUGGESTED READING
Bhagavad Gita
Csikszentmihalyi, Flow.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What is Arjuna’s dilemma? How is it related to the problem 
of desire? 
2	 What are flow experiences? How do they help us resolve the 
problem of desire? 
3	 What is the paradox of liberation? How is it related to the problem 
of desire? 
61
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Problem of Expectation and Desire
Lecture 9

LECTURE 10
I
n his book The Denial of Death, the cultural anthropologist 
Ernest Becker argues that most of what we do is in fact driven 
by our fear of death. Like Becker, the Roman philosopher 
Lucretius and the Chinese philosopher Zhuangzi also think 
that the fear of death dominates our attention, driving us into 
organized religion and causing us to act in ways that go against 
our best interests. 
This lecture considers what Lucretius, Zhuangzi, and other 
thinkers have to say about our fear of death. Then, the lecture 
discusses whether immortality—genuine immortality as eternal 
life after bodily death—would actually be all that desirable. 

Zhuangzi on Death
w
w Zhuangzi was a Daoist philosopher who lived in the 4th century BCE. 
His work denies the badness of death. In one of his arguments, Zhuangzi 
emphasizes our ignorance about the nature of death. He asks, “How do I 
know that loving life is not a mistake? How do I know that hating death 
is not like a lost child forgetting its way home?”
w
w Zhuangzi thinks that, if we regard life as good, we have to regard death 
as good. This is because death is the completion of life; the function 
of life is to work and the 
function of death is to give 
us a break from that toil—to 
give us rest. 
w
w For death to give us rest, 
it seems Zhuangzi has to 
assume that we continue to 
exist in some way after death. 
Along with birth, death for 
Zhuangzi is another stage 
in transformation. 
w
w Qi—which is energy or 
breath—comes together 
to form things. Things die 
when the qi that composes 
them fragments. In death, 
our bodies will return to 
the earth. Our energy will 
dissipate into the world. 
But our bodies will nourish 
other things: animals, plants, 
and soil. Our energy will 
continue to form new things. 
Socrates on Death
In Plato’s Apology, Socrates 
provides a different reason 
to think that death might not 
be so bad after all. He states: 
“Being dead is one of two things: 
either the dead are nothing, as 
it were, and have no awareness 
whatsoever of anything at all; 
or else, as we’re told, it’s some 
sort of change, a migration of the 
soul from here to another place.” 
If death is simply a lack of 
awareness, then it would 
somewhat line up with Zhuangzi’s 
view that death is a rest from 
life. Socrates thinks that it 
would be a great advantage to 
dreamlessly sleep so deeply that 
the whole of time would seem 
no more than a single night.
63
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Fear of Death
Lecture 10

Epicurus on Death 
w
w The Greek philosopher Epicurus suggests that the state of death is not bad, 
because “when we are, death is not come, and when death is come, we are 
not.” The idea here is that we are never actually dead, because we cease 
to exist at the moment of death, and so being dead “is nothing to us.” 
w
w At least on one reading, his point is that death is not bad because death 
can’t be bad for us. When we’re alive, death isn’t yet bad for us. This is 
because we’re not dead. 
w
w When we’re dead, death isn’t bad for us. This is because we no longer 
exist. There is no time when death is actually bad for us, and because 
it’s not actually bad, there is 
nothing to fear. 
Lucretius on Death
w
w Lucretius, a Roman philosopher 
and follower of Epicurus, also 
thinks that death isn’t actually 
bad for us. To show this, he picks 
up on the comparative aspect of 
the deprivation account. 
w
w It’s true, Lucretius admits, 
that after we die we won’t 
experience all 
the 
goods 
life has to offer. After we 
die, we will cease to exist, 
and our nonexistence will 
last indefinitely. That might 
sound bad, but Lucretius 
wants to consider things from 
a different perspective. 
64
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Fear of Death
Lecture 10

w
w Consider that, before we were born, we also failed to exist, and our 
nonexistence also lasted indefinitely. Lucretius points out that because 
our postmortem nonexistence is exactly analogous to our prenatal 
nonexistence, consistency requires that we recognize that our post-
mortem nonexistence isn’t bad for us, either. Therefore, we have no reason 
to fear it. In other words, our fear of death is irrational. 
Postmortem and Prenatal Nonexistence
w
w Consider this example: When a person thinks about what it would be like 
if she were born earlier, she probably doesn’t imagine living a longer life. 
Instead, she probably imagines living in a different time period. However, 
this probably is not what she imagines when she wonders what things 
would be like if she were to die later. Instead, she imagines extending 
her current life—that is, living longer. 
w
w According to the philosopher Fred Feldman, this explains why we care 
about postmortem nonexistence and not prenatal nonexistence. When we 
think about dying later, we think about living longer and experiencing 
more of the goods that life has to offer, but when we think about living 
earlier, we think about having more or less the same life with more or 
less the same goods but at an earlier time. 
w
w In general, we care more about postmortem nonexistence because we 
think it deprives us of something we otherwise might have had. That’s 
not the case when we think about prenatal nonexistence. Another way of 
saying this is that we seem to care more about our future existence than 
our past existence. 
w
w Lucretius might reply that this is fair enough. It is obvious that we regard 
the future in this way, but this doesn’t justify our concerns. It doesn’t show 
that our worries about postmortem nonexistence are rational. 
65
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Fear of Death
Lecture 10

The Fear of Death
w
w The reasonable fear of death is what helps us avoid carelessly jumping off 
cliffs and eating poisonous foods. Our preference for what happens to us 
in the future over what happened in the past is related to this reasonable 
fear of death, because both allow us to make forward-looking decisions. 
w
w By contrast, the irrational fear of death plays only a debilitating role in 
practical deliberation. The irrational fear of death is the terror we feel 
when we think of death itself, a terror that shakes us and misleads us. 
It’s that terror that Lucretius 
wants to eliminate more 
than anything else.
w
w With this distinction in 
mind, we might find the 
arguments we’ve seen 
against the fear of death far 
more plausible. It would be 
biologically disastrous for 
us to eliminate all fear of 
death from our deliberation; 
we’d go extinct as a species. 
w
w However, eliminating the 
irrational fear of death—
the terror of death—doesn’t 
sound so bad. Being haunted 
by the specter of death is not 
ideal. If death itself isn’t 
something so awful, then 
being consumed by the fear 
of it seems irrational. 
Terror Management
Inspired by Ernest Becker’s 
suggestion that the fear 
of death drives us, the 
psychologists Sheldon 
Solomon, Jeff Greenberg, 
and Tom Pyszczynski have 
developed what they call 
terror management theory. 
On this theory, our awareness 
of the inevitability of death 
stimulates a devastating terror 
in us. We culturally manage 
this terror by developing and 
maintaining shared beliefs—
or worldviews—that reduce 
our terror by giving our 
lives meaning and value that 
transcend us as individuals. 
66
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Fear of Death
Lecture 10

Life after Death
w
w Another line of thought is that we shouldn’t fear death because there is a 
life after death. A person who believes in a life after death might fear that 
they are going to hell; however, that person fears hell, not death. Another 
person might believe they are going to heaven, which raises the question: 
Why should such a person fear death?
w
w Such a person might think that such life after death would be impoverished 
in important ways. As Achilles tells Odysseus in Homer’s Odyssey, life 
after death is a wretched non-life; it is not hellish, but neither is it great. 
w
w Alternatively, a person might think that life after death would be 
impoverished simply because the person would be separated, at least for 
a time, from those he or she loves. In that case, we could find comfort, 
as the philosopher Seneca suggests, in thinking of death as a type of 
vacation, as we wait for our loved ones themselves to arrive. 
w
w We might worry that because life after death isn’t this life, then death 
deprives us of this life. In that case, the fear of death would be like the 
fear of something uncertain—a change like moving to a new city, starting 
a new job, and making new friends. In sum, it might be the case that an 
afterlife of some sort solves the fear of death. 
Immortality
w
w The idea of an afterlife raises another question: Is immortality really all 
that desirable in itself? The philosopher Bernard Williams argues that 
Immortality is not in fact desirable: It would actually be quite horrible to 
live forever, if living forever were even intelligible.
w
w Immortality is desirable, Williams suggests, only if two conditions can 
be met. The first is that we have to be able to recognize that we ourselves 
have survived the process of death. This is the identity condition. 
67
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Fear of Death
Lecture 10

w
w The second is that we have to find the future life appealing. This is the 
desirability condition. In light of these two conditions, Williams considers 
a dilemma: Either who we are (our goals, desires, and the like) remains 
the same or who we are changes. 
w
w If who we are remains the same, then we will face painful boredom or 
alienation while living an immortal life. This is because the desires that 
ground our life projects are finite and exhaustible. 
w
w We could imagine that our interests change over time. The problem here 
is that if who we are does change throughout our immortal existence, 
then we can’t possibly evaluate whether the future life we’ll have will 
be appealing. According to Williams, whether we remain who we are or 
change in the afterlife, immortality is undesirable. 
SUGGESTED READING
Kagan, Death.
Solomon, Greenberg, and Pyszczynski, The Worm at the Core.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What role do you think that the fear of death plays in your life? 
2	 Why do you think death is bad? What is the deprivation account 
of the badness of death? 
3	 What is Lucretius’s argument against the badness of (and fear of) 
death? Is his argument convincing? How would you respond to 
Lucretius?
68
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Fear of Death
Lecture 10

LECTURE 11
E
xistential anxiety is associated with the potential 
meaninglessness of human existence. This lecture 
explores existential anxiety and the view that, ultimately, 
the human condition is simply absurd. 

Albert Camus and the Myth of Sisyphus 
w
w According to the French thinker Albert Camus, 
“There is only one really serious philosophical 
problem, and that is suicide.” Camus thinks 
the question of suicide is especially pressing, 
because the human condition is absurd. 
w
w For Camus, the absurdity of the human condition 
is grounded in the objective meaninglessness of 
the world. As he sees it, because there is no 
God and no divine plan, there is no overarching 
meaning in the world. Because there is no 
afterlife and death is simply nonexistence, it’s 
absurd to hope that another stage in things 
could provide us with such meaning. 
w
w The human condition is also absurd because we just can’t understand the 
world in a way that would make it satisfying. Not even reason can rescue 
us, because the world itself is irrational. 
w
w For Camus, the Ancient Greek myth of Sisyphus helps explain the 
absurdity of the human condition and provides an answer for how we 
might persevere in the face of life’s absurdity. For his sins, including 
cleverly stalling his own death and putting death itself in chains, Sisyphus 
was condemned to Tartarus, the abyss of torment, by the gods. His 
punishment was to forever push a boulder uphill, only to watch it roll 
back down the hill each time it reached the top. 
w
w For Camus, Sisyphus is the hero of the absurd. He pushes his stone 
in defiance of death. To Camus, Sisyphus is “stronger than his rock.” 
Additionally, Sisyphus represents everyone, with one small difference: 
Sisyphus is conscious of the absurdity. In the end, Camus says, we have 
to imagine that Sisyphus is happy. 
w
w For Camus, we overcome our existential anxiety over the absurdity 
of the human condition by taking ownership of our lives. There is no 
overarching meaning of life, but each of our lives matters to each of us. 
70
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Existential Anxiety and the Courage to Be
Lecture 11

Thomas Nagel on the Absurd 
w
w The philosopher Thomas Nagel 
considers the fact that our lives 
are mere blips on the cosmic 
screen, lasting only briefly. 
Nagel suggests that the factor that 
makes our lives absurd is “the 
collision between the seriousness 
with which we take our lives 
and the perpetual possibility 
of regarding everything about 
which we are serious as arbitrary, 
or open to doubt.”
w
w We take ourselves seriously in 
the sense that we self-consciously 
pursue our lives. But when we 
step back from our lives and reflect on them and the reasons that drive 
us, things start to seem ungrounded, unjustified, and arbitrary. 
w
w To deal with or perhaps to avoid life’s absurdity, we try to find meaning 
in things that are bigger than we are. The problem with this, however, 
is that to eliminate absurdity, these bigger things must themselves be 
meaningful, their meaning must be clear to us, and the meaning they have 
must be meaningful to us. And so, when we step back from these bigger 
things and question them, the whole process starts over. 
w
w And this doubt cannot be laid to rest partly because once we step back 
from our lives, we consider them from a perspective “in which no 
standards can be discovered.” The step backward is not a step into the 
realm of the truly meaningful; it is a step into meaninglessness. 
w
w We only really need to do something if we think that life’s absurdity is 
a problem in need of a solution, and Nagel, unlike Camus, suggests that 
it’s not. Rather than being a problem, the absurdity of the human condition 
is one of its defining features. 
71
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Existential Anxiety and the Courage to Be
Lecture 11

Tillich on the Courage to Be 
w
w According to the 20th-century Christian theologian Paul Tillich, 
existential anxiety actually has three distinct aspects, each grounded in 
a distinctive source. The first aspect is anxiety about fate and death. For 
Tillich, anxiety about fate and death ultimately threatens what he calls 
our ontic self-affirmation—our ability to affirm ourselves as existing. 
w
w The second aspect of existential anxiety, according to Tillich, is anxiety 
about meaninglessness and emptiness. Driven by the worry that nothing 
is satisfying to us, we may search for something that is ultimately 
meaningful. We then may experience the dread that no such thing exists. 
For Tillich, anxiety about meaninglessness and emptiness ultimately 
threatens what he calls our spiritual self-affirmation—our ability to 
affirm that our lives are meaningful. 
w
w The final aspect of existential anxiety, per Tillich, is anxiety about guilt 
and condemnation. For Tillich, anxiety about guilt and condemnation 
ultimately threatens what he calls our moral self-affirmation—our ability 
to affirm our lives as morally serious. 
w
w All three of these aspects of existential anxiety pervade the human 
condition. Together, they lead us toward despair. For Tillich, despair is 
a state “without hope.” When we’re in this state, we want nothing more 
than to escape it. As Tillich sees it, if existential anxiety were simply 
about death and fate, suicide “would be the way out of despair.” In this 
case, real courage would be the courage not to be. 
w
w But that’s not real courage, Tillich argues. Real courage is the courage 
to be. At its core, Tillich argues, courage itself is the affirmation of our 
existence in the face of threats. The courage to be is our self-affirmation 
in the face of despair. Courage is always a risk, because it is threatened 
by nonbeing in many forms. One form is death, but others include losing 
our individuality, losing our world, and losing meaning. 
w
w Tillich identifies three types of the courage to be. The first is the 
courage to be as a part. This is the courage to affirm ourselves through 
participation in something bigger than us. In this way, we translate our 
individual anxiety into collective anxiety. 
72
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Existential Anxiety and the Courage to Be
Lecture 11

w
w As valuable as this kind of courage is, it doesn’t face existential anxiety 
head on. For that, we need the courage to be as oneself. This is individual 
self-affirmation. By undertaking this kind of courage, we take on the task 
of becoming the individuals we are. 
w
w The problem with the courage to be as a part is that we end up losing 
ourselves in the collective. The problem with the courage to be as oneself 
is that we end up losing the world and others. However, the problem with 
both kinds of courage is that neither is “beyond the … threat of nonbeing.” 
w
w According to Tillich, we also need courage as absolute faith. This is 
faith not in the personal God of theism, but in “the God above God” and 
being itself. In having the courage to be in this sense, we transcend the 
dichotomies of self and other while uniting them. We go beyond ourselves 
in a way that truly affirms the ground of who we are. 
w
w Some research supports Tillich’s basic framework for describing existential 
anxiety. One study published in 2004 found that the kinds of existential 
concerns Tillich articulates are core human issues. Tillich seems to have 
identified something measurable—something we all experience. 
SUGGESTED READING
Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus.
Tillich, The Courage to Be.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What does it mean to say that life is absurd? Do you think life is 
actually absurd? 
2	 Does the notion of existential anxiety make sense to you? Is it 
something you’ve experienced? 
3	 What is the courage to be, according to Tillich? 
73
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  Existential Anxiety and the Courage to Be
Lecture 11

LECTURE 12
T
his lecture explores grief, which is painful and paralyzing. 
It can drive us to act in ways that are deplorable, detestable, 
and disturbing. Perhaps grief just another facet of our dark 
side—but perhaps there is also goodness in grief.

What Grief Is
w
w Grief is an emotional response to any significant loss—for instance, 
the loss of one’s career, the loss of one’s ability to walk, or the loss of 
a relationship. This lecture focuses on the sense of grief associated with 
death, as in the loss of a loved one. This is perhaps the most profound 
kind of grief. 
w
w Grief is an emotional response 
to the loss of a loved one, but 
what exactly is the object 
of grief? It seems like the 
obvious answer is that the 
object of our grief is the person 
who has died. However, we 
truly grieve over the loss of 
the relationship we had with 
the person who has died. 
w
w The object of grief is the 
fact that our relationship to 
someone is transformed by his 
or her death. Death is grief’s 
trigger. Grief’s object is the 
lost relationship. 
Seneca on Grief 
w
w The Stoic philosopher Seneca 
worries about the goodness of 
grief. Letters of consolation were popular as a literary genre in the ancient 
world, especially in Rome. Seneca himself wrote many, including one to 
a woman named Marcia, who had been grieving for her son, Metilius, for 
three years. Seneca starts out by praising Marcia for being a good person 
and by letting her know that he’s going to try to cure her of her grief.
Grief and Mourning
There is an important 
distinction between grief 
and mourning. Grief is a 
mental state, whereas 
mourning covers the 
behaviors associated 
with that mental state. 
On this way of thinking, 
grief is an internal 
emotional response, 
whereas mourning is the 
external expression of 
that emotional response. 
75
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Goodness of Grief
Lecture 12

w
w As part of the cure, Seneca asks Marcia to 
consider the examples of two Roman women 
who also lost a loved one. The first is Octavia, 
the sister of the Roman emperor Augustus. 
The second is Livia, Augustus’s wife. 
w
w Octavia “would not lay aside her mourning 
garb” and “lived buried and hidden from 
view, neglecting her accustomed duties.” 
By contrast, Livia “left her sorrow there 
with [her son when she buried him], and 
grieved no more than was … due to a son.” 
With these examples in mind, Seneca asks 
Marcia which example she thinks “the more 
commendable.” 
w
w The answer, for Seneca, is that Livia is the better example. He hopes that 
Marcia agrees, because to follow Octavia’s example is to punish herself 
for misfortunes in a way that just compounds misery. 
w
w Seneca thinks of grief as a type of disorder, one that can be more or 
less extreme. In Marcia’s case, things have gotten quite bad, and so he’s 
providing her with an example of someone who recovered from the 
disorder of grief. 
Seneca’s Arguments
w
w This lecture now turns to two of the arguments Seneca uses to cure 
Marcia of her bad case of grief. The first argument is the object of grief 
argument. Seneca asks Marcia why she grieves over her lost son. Is she 
focused on her suffering or her son’s? If it’s her son’s suffering, she 
needn’t worry, because the dead do not suffer. 
w
w If the object of her grief is Marcia’s suffering, however, then Seneca thinks 
the issue boils down to whether she received no pleasure from him during 
his life or whether she “would have received more had he lived longer.” 
76
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Goodness of Grief
Lecture 12

If she received no pleasure, then it should be easy to endure her son’s 
death. If she received pleasure, then she should be thankful for the 
pleasure she received, rather than complain about what she’s lost. 
w
w Seneca’s argument might strike some as having missed the point. The 
object of grief is the loss of one’s relationship, not the loss of value 
associated with the person or the loss of the pleasure they brought. 
w
w In acknowledgement of this, Seneca makes another argument, this one 
about what truly bothers us. Seneca says, “It is regret for the absence of 
his loved one which causes a mourner to grieve.” If this is right, however, 
then it’s easy to point out that being away from someone in itself is 
bearable enough. 
w
w What truly bothers us, Seneca insists, “is an idea.” This impression of how 
things are causes us all the trouble. With that in mind, we can see that “the 
remedy [is] in our own hands,” because we can reframe the situation. “Let 
us suppose,” Seneca says, “that [our dead loved ones] are on a journey, and 
let us deceive ourselves: We have sent them away, or, rather, we have sent 
them on in advance to a place whither we shall soon follow them.” 
w
w It seems right that we need to work through our idea of what grieves us 
as we grieve. However, Seneca’s analogy between the loss we feel when 
someone leaves for a trip and the loss for which we grieve doesn’t seem 
apt. If someone we love were to go on a lifelong trip, we would miss 
him or her terribly, but we would only grieve upon learning of his or 
her death. Moreover, Seneca suggests an unhealthy dose of self-deception 
in his reframing techniques.
The Absence of Grief
w
w Next, this lecture tackles a pair of questions: Would someone who never 
experiences grief be in a better position, morally speaking? Is there 
a goodness to grief that we’d miss out on if we were to follow through on 
Seneca’s advice or if we were to, for example, take a drug that eliminated 
grief altogether? 
77
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Goodness of Grief
Lecture 12

w
w The researcher Michael Cholbi 
thinks we’d lose out on something 
quite important—namely, the 
opportunity to gain self-knowledge. 
When those we love die, we’re 
forced to reevaluate ourselves, 
because their deaths make it clear 
to us how much who we are depends 
on other people. 
w
w Grief is a trigger for self-reflection. 
More than that, however, grief is 
a source of self-knowledge. As 
Cholbi explains, this is because 
going through grief is a matter 
of experiencing many different 
emotions, all focused on the 
relationship we’ve had with the 
person who has died. These different 
emotions reveal “different aspects 
of our personalities and practical 
identities.”
w
w The experience of anger, for instance, gives us important information 
about what we consider harmful, and the experience of fear gives us 
important information about what we find threatening. In general, Chobli 
argues, these different emotions reveal different aspects “of what matters 
to us.”
Zhuangzi on Grief
w
w The Daoist philosopher Zhuangzi agrees with Seneca about the 
necessity of death and the importance of shifting with circumstance. 
He even suggests, along with Seneca, that the ideal sage greets loss with 
equanimity. But Zhuangzi’s account of his own grief is more nuanced 
than anything we find in Seneca’s work. 
78
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Goodness of Grief
Lecture 12

w
w When Zhuangzi’s wife died, a friend who came to console him saw him 
“drumming on a pot and singing.” This shocked his friend, who found the 
whole spectacle unseemly. “Could there be anything more shameful?” his 
friend asked. Zhuangzi disagreed. Here is Zhuangzi’s response at length: 
When she first died, do you suppose that I was able not to 
feel the loss? I peered back into her beginnings; there was 
a time before there was a life. Not only was there no life, 
there was a time before there was a shape. Not only was 
there no shape, there was a time before there was energy. 
Mingled together in the amorphous, something altered, and 
there was the energy; by the alteration in the energy there was 
the shape, by alteration of the shape there was the life. Now 
once more altered she has gone over to death. This is to be 
companion with spring and autumn, summer and winter, in 
the procession of the four seasons. When someone was about 
to lie down and sleep in the greatest of mansions, I with my 
sobbing knew no better than to bewail her. The thought came 
to me that I was being uncomprehending towards destiny, so 
I stopped. 
w
w Zhungzi comes, like Seneca, to end his grief after reflection, but there’s 
no suggestion that he never should have grieved. The text even makes it 
possible for us to interpret Zhungzi’s grief as a motivator and source of 
self-knowledge. This contributes, it seems, to his well-being. 
w
w The scholar Amy Olberding suggests, “in his grief, [Zhungzi] foregoes 
[the] possibility [of perfection] to affirm an enriched humanity.” To 
make sense of this, she draws a memorable analogy. She suggests that 
Zhuangzi’s grief works like a humility square.
w
w Humility squares are found in Amish quilts. These quilts are beautifully 
and skillfully crafted, but they contain an important flaw. According 
to legend, at least, the flaw is intentional. The purpose of the flaw is to 
demonstrate the quilter’s humility before God. As skilled as the quilter 
is, she lacks God’s perfection, and she acknowledges this in her craft. 
79
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Goodness of Grief
Lecture 12

w
w According to Olberding, in affirming his grief, Zhuangzi is no more 
clumsy or unskilled than the humble Amish quilter. If he were to prolong 
his grief, he would be like an unskilled quilter, but if he were to forgo 
grief entirely, he would be like an arrogant quilter, chasing after an 
unseemly perfection. 
w
w Perhaps Zhuangzi has found a middle way through his own grief. This 
path avoids the excessive search for perfection that makes Seneca seem 
so inhumane and the excessive despair that makes Marcia seem so lost. 
SUGGESTED READING
Cholbi, “Finding the Good in Grief.”
Seneca, Epistles (especially the letter to Marcia).
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 Do you think that to experience grief when someone has died, 
we need to have an actual relationship with that person? Why or 
why not? 
2	 What do you think of Seneca’s view of grief? Does it seem 
reasonable to you? What about Zhuangzi’s view? 
3	 Do you think that Cholbi is right about what makes grief valuable? 
If you could take a pill that would allow you to avoid the pain of 
grief, would you? Why or why not?
80
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
  The Goodness of Grief
Lecture 12

LECTURE 13
T
his lecture considers whether there’s something in human 
nature that drives us to kill others. As points of focus, the 
lecture looks at the ideas several thinkers have presented 
on the topic. 

Psychopaths, War, and Biology
w
w Some people are different from most of us. Psychopaths, for instance, 
don’t grasp the difference between conventional and moral rules, and 
so perhaps something like this explains why some people would murder 
while others never would. 
w
w However, it is not true that everyone who has ever killed someone is 
a psychopath, and extreme situations like war complicate the picture 
further. Still, perhaps there’s something we can say that marks a middle 
way between the extremes of psychopathy and combat. 
w
w The psychologist Adrian Raine thinks there is. Raine suggests there are 
biological indicators that help explain violent behavior, including murder. 
One research method is to look at children who have been adopted and 
have never known their parents, but whose parents have criminal and 
violent backgrounds. These kinds of studies, Raine argues, shows 
that “having a biological 
parent convicted of a violent 
crime raises the likelihood 
of criminal violence in the 
adoptee.” 
w
w Other biological facts about 
us increase the likelihood 
that we’ll commit murder. 
Being born biologically male, 
for instance, makes someone 
exponentially more likely 
to commit violent crime 
than being born biologically 
female. Damage to the areas 
of the brain that are associated 
with impulse control greatly 
increase the likelihood of 
violent behavior. 
Heart Rates, Serotonin, 
and Violence
Surprisingly, a low resting 
heart rate is a strong 
predictor of aggressive 
behavior in children and 
adolescents. Low levels 
of the neurotransmitter 
serotonin also correlate 
with impulsive and 
violent behavior.
82
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Homo necans: Why Do We Kill?
Lecture 13

w
w There are even factors that we can trace to fetal development. For 
instance, pregnant women who drink, smoke cigarettes, or even fail to 
receive proper nutrition are more likely to have children who end up 
becoming violent and committing crimes later in life. 
w
w For Raine, all of this suggests that violent crime is at least partly a public 
health issue. By making sure people—children and pregnant mothers 
in particular—are as healthy as they can be, we can reduce violence, 
including murder. 
w
w In Raine’s view, treating violence as a public-health crisis would 
transform how we handle violent offenders. Just as we think it’s worth 
our time to cure cancer, so too we should think it’s worth our time to 
cure violent crime.
Paul Bloom versus Adrian Raine
w
w Psychologist Paul Bloom finds problems with Raine’s analogy. Cancer, 
Bloom notes, is something we could get rid of without any cost. We 
could, as he puts it, cleanly excise cancer from the world and this would 
be unambiguously desirable. By contrast, Bloom worries, violence is 
not something we could get rid of without any cost; we could not cleanly 
excise it from the world. 
w
w This is because, as he puts it, “Violence is part of human nature, shared 
with all other animals, evolved for punishment, defense, and predation.” 
Violence is an adaptation. Getting rid of it would cause problems. In 
particular, Bloom thinks, it would put us at a disadvantage in reining “in 
our worst instincts,” because the threat of violence and actual violence in 
the form of punishment serve to deter a whole range of harmful behaviors, 
from perjury to theft to murder. 
w
w Essentially, Raine and Bloom disagree how ingrained violence is. Raine 
suggests that violence is a kind of biological aberration, whereas Bloom 
suggests that it’s a fundamental part of human nature. 
83
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Homo necans: Why Do We Kill?
Lecture 13

David Buss on Killing
w
w Psychology professor David Buss argues that killing is in our fundamental 
nature. In his book The Murderer Next Door, Buss states: “Murder 
is a product of the evolutionary pressures our species confronted and 
adapted to.” By killing competitors, our ancestors would have benefited 
themselves in various ways. 
w
w Buss also notes that the difference between homicide patterns in men and 
women can be explained by emphasizing the different adaptive problems 
murder evolved to solve. After all, men make up 87 percent of all killers 
and 75 percent of victims, while women are far more likely to commit 
certain kinds of murders than men, especially infanticide. 
w
w With this in mind, Buss argues that men evolved homicidal mechanisms 
associated with warfare and other adult-on-adult violence. Women, on 
the other hand, evolved homicidal mechanisms that helped them solve 
problems like investing precious parental resources in children who were 
unlikely to survive.
w
w Buss also notes that a single emotion can motivate many different kinds 
of violence—even different kinds of murder. Jealousy, for instance, can 
cause someone to kill a rival, or it can cause someone to strangle a spouse, 
or it can lead someone to commit suicide. 
w
w If that’s so, however, why don’t more of us commit murder? Buss points 
out that external pressures such as the legal system, institutionalized 
punishment, and cultural norms play a role in explaining why most of us 
refrain from murder. 
w
w There are also internal pressures associated with what Buss refers to 
as a “coevolutionary arms race between homicide adaptations and 
victim defenses.” Being a victim of murder has deep costs associated 
with it, and so the human mind has also evolved in ways that push 
against our motivation to murder, including rational reflection 
and emotional regulation. 
84
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Homo necans: Why Do We Kill?
Lecture 13

Homo necans
w
w The late classicist Walter Burkert offers a 
slightly different perspective. Burkert coined 
the Latin phrase Homo necans, or the “killing 
human.” In his work, Burkert explores the 
nature of sacrificial violence in religion, 
tracing it back to its roots in hunting. 
w
w Burkert’s evolutionary hypothesis is that 
ritual sacrifice originated in our early 
attempts to resolve the tension between our 
social nature and our predatory nature—the 
tension between the sphere of the home and 
the sphere of the hunt. In acts of sacrifice, 
Burkert argues, humans domesticated and 
ritualized the violence and aggression of 
the hunt so that our destructive and violent 
tendencies could express themselves 
“harmlessly” in society. 
w
w Additionally, Burkert recognizes that we have two natures: one geared 
toward the social and one geared toward survival. His thoughts point to 
another angle on the topic of humans as killers. 
Situationism
w
w So far, this lecture has emphasized a dispositional model, according to 
which murder is most saliently explained by certain predispositions found 
either in all of us or in at least some good portion. However, another model 
is the situationist model. 
w
w According to situationism, the internal factors that contribute to violent 
behavior matter less than the external factors. Perhaps the most ardent 
proponent of situationism is Philip Zimbardo, who is most famous for 
85
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Homo necans: Why Do We Kill?
Lecture 13

conducting the Stanford Prison Experiment in 1971. In this experiment, 
male undergraduates participated in a prison simulation, making use 
of a converted basement on the Stanford University campus. 
w
w Some of the participants were randomly assigned to be guards, while 
others were randomly assigned to be prisoners. There were nine prisoners 
and nine guards, who worked in sets of three for eight-hour shifts. 
Prisoners were housed together in groups of no more than three, and there 
was a solitary confinement cell for any prisoners who acted out of line. 
w
w Although prisoners and guards were assigned their roles randomly, and not 
based in any way on their personalities, interests, preferences, everyone 
settled into their roles rather quickly. Just hours into the experiment, the 
guards began exercising control over the prisoners. 
w
w On the second day of the experiment, the prisoners openly rebelled by 
removing their numbers and barricading inside their cells. After that, 
matters continued to deteriorate between the guards and prisoners. 
Although the experiment was supposed to last for two weeks, Zimbardo 
terminated it after six days. The guards’ abusive behavior continued 
to escalate and prisoners began to break down emotionally, growing 
seriously despondent, extremely anxious, and increasingly confused 
about their identities. 
Situationism in Practice
w
w The Stanford Prison Experiment is just one study in a vast collection of 
experiments that Zimbardo thinks demonstrate that the most salient factor 
in explaining violent behavior is the situation. This suggests that perhaps 
any of us could commit murder, given the right circumstances. Consider, 
for example, soldiers in Nazi Germany ordered to commit unspeakable 
atrocities against civilians.
w
w Additionally, scholars have appealed to situationism and Zimbardo’s work 
to explain how German police who weren’t soldiers could have willingly 
murdered Jewish people in Poland, even though they were not forced to do 
86
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Homo necans: Why Do We Kill?
Lecture 13

so. Indeed, many perpetrators of the Holocaust were murderers on the job, 
but loving parents at home. Normal people, it seems, did the unthinkable, 
but only because they were in unthinkable circumstances. 
w
w However, the philosopher Lawrence Blum points out that not everyone 
behaved badly in Nazi-occupied territory. In fact, many people resisted 
authority and rescued others even when they put themselves at risk. Of 
these people, some seemed to have stable dispositions, including stable 
dispositions to feel empathy for others. Even in the Stanford Prison 
Experiment, some people responded better to the situation than others. 
Conclusion: The Bodhisattva Example
w
w This lecture closes with a question: What if someone is a good person 
and has a stable disposition to act morally across situations? Take, for 
example, the Buddhist example of a bodhisattva. 
w
w During a particular lifetime, a bodhisattva generates the aspiration to 
achieve enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. The bodhisattva 
forgoes nirvana until he or she has helped everyone escape the cycle of 
death and rebirth by eliminating suffering. 
w
w It seems that someone like that surely wouldn’t murder anyone. However, 
the 4th-century Buddhist philosopher Asanga published a work known, 
among other titles, as The Stages of the Bodhisattva. In this work, Asanga 
considers the circumstances under which a bodhisattva might actually 
break certain moral rules—or precepts—including the prohibition against 
killing. Asanga presents this example:
The bodhisattva may behold a robber or thief engaged in 
committing a great many deeds of immediate retribution, being 
about to murder many hundreds of magnificent living beings 
… for the sake of a few material goods. Seeing it, he forms this 
thought in his mind: “If I take the life of this sentient being, I 
myself may be reborn as one of the creatures of hell. Better that 
I be reborn a creature of hell than that this living being, having 
committed a deed of immediate retribution, should go straight 
87
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Homo necans: Why Do We Kill?
Lecture 13

to hell.” With such an attitude the bodhisattva ascertains that 
the thought is virtuous …[and] with only a thought of mercy 
for the consequence, he takes the life of that living being. 
There is no fault, but a spread of much merit.
w
w According to Asanga, at least in this case, the best thing for the 
bodhisattva to do is to kill this person. This is because, as the Buddhist 
scholar Charles Goodman points out, “By killing him, the bodhisattva 
rescues the robber from a fate much worse than mere death.” 
SUGGESTED READING
Buss, The Murderer Next Door.
Zimbardo, “A Situationist Perspective on the Psychology of Evil.”
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What is the most important difference between Buss’s theory and 
Raine’s theory?
2	 What do you think about Zimbardo’s situationist perspective? 
Do you think situations or dispositions are more important in 
explaining why someone is violent? 
88
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Homo necans: Why Do We Kill?
Lecture 13

LECTURE 14
T
his lecture explores the dark side of human nature by 
focusing on who we are in our nightmares. Questions relevant 
to this lecture include: Why do we have nightmares? What 
do they reveal about who we are? What is the moral significance 
of our bad dreams? And what kind of responsibility do we have 
for their content and for what we do and experience in them? 

Freud on Dreams 
w
w Sigmund Freud, the Austrian psychoanalyst, 
thinks about dreams in ways that can help us 
appreciate the challenge that bad dreams pose. 
Freud’s view is that the central function of dreams 
is wish fulfillment, but the content of our dreams 
is often difficult to unpack.
w
w Therefore, Freud makes a distinction between the 
content that we are conscious of in the dream—
the manifest content—and the content that is 
latent. The latent content is the obscure trigger 
or inspiration for a dream. It’s the symbolic side 
of the dream, and it captures the underlying wish 
that the dream functions to fulfill. 
w
w Sometimes, the manifest and latent content are clearly related. Other 
times, however, the manifest and the latent content are less clearly related. 
Freud’s view is that, in these cases, the manifest content is functioning 
to obscure or disguise embarrassing or uncomfortable latent content. 
w
w The latent content of our dreams is associated, for Freud, with repressed 
desires and the unconscious. According to Freud, our wishes, as repressed 
and unconscious desires, are transferred into the manifest content of our 
dreams through a process he calls dream-work. 
w
w This process transmutes the latent content of our repressed and forbidden 
desires into an acceptable form—that is, into the manifest content we’re 
conscious of while dreaming. This acceptable form makes our dreams 
less distressing, but more is going on than that. 
w
w In the process of dream-work, things become condensed in ways that blend 
multiple images and ideas into one thing. A dream whose manifest content 
is a dog, for instance, might be the result of the condensation of someone’s 
current pet and a childhood pet, or the condensation of someone’s fear 
of animals and fear of loss. In the process of dream-work, moreover, 
things get displaced. Displacement is the process of transforming one 
thing into another. 
90
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Nightmares and the Dream Self
Lecture 14

w
w Freud’s theory of dreams as wish fulfillment helps explain at least some 
of the content of bad dreams. For example, if a person were having a dream 
about strangling a white dog, he or she would take that to be an unpleasant 
dream. Freud can say that its unpleasantness is related to an underlying 
wish that the person needs to acknowledge consciously. Additionally, for 
Freud, our bad dreams might well reveal a hidden dark side that we’re 
more or less unwilling to acknowledge. 
Daniel Wegner on Freud
w
w The psychologist Daniel Wegner offers one way to test part of Freud’s 
theory. Wegner observes that when we want to stop thinking about 
something, we have a hard time suppressing the thought.
w
w To explain this, Wegner noted 
that there are two cognitive 
processes working against 
each other: one process 
that tries to suppress the 
thought and another that 
monitors for the suppressed 
thought. The monitoring 
process ends up triggering 
the very thoughts we’re trying 
to suppress. 
w
w With this in mind, Wegner 
hypothesized that something 
similar might be happening 
while we’re sleeping. When 
we sleep, many of mechanisms 
that help us suppress thoughts, 
such as attention, control, and 
working memory, become 
deactivated, 
especially 
during rapid eye movement 
(or REM) sleep. 
91
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Nightmares and the Dream Self
Lecture 14

w
w Wegner’s thought was that if 
these suppressing mechanisms 
are turned off, then our dreaming 
minds might end up flooded with 
the very thoughts we’ve been 
trying to suppress—just like 
Freud suggested. To test this, 
Wegner had subjects identify 
someone they knew and then 
spend five minutes writing down 
whatever thoughts came to mind 
before they went to sleep. 
w
w For the writing activity, one 
group was instructed not to think 
of the person they had identified, 
a second group was instructed to 
think about the person they had 
identified, and a third group was 
instructed to think about anything 
at all. The next morning, they 
reported any dreams they had. 
w
w Wegner found that those who were instructed not to think about the 
person they had identified—those who were instructed to suppress their 
thoughts—ended up dreaming about those people far more than subjects 
in either of the other two groups. This is the dream rebound effect, which 
various studies have now verified. 
w
w Now, this effect is a little different from the thought rebound effect; in 
dream rebound, we’re not actively trying to suppress thoughts in our 
dreams. That said, something similar is happening: those of us who 
are consciously trying to suppress thoughts before we fall asleep end 
up, ironically, having those thoughts reappear in our dreams, partly 
because the mechanisms associated with successful thought suppression 
are deactivated.
Evolution and Bad Dreams
One view on the evolutionary 
function of bad dreams 
is that bad dreams might 
help us process our 
emotions. Alternatively, 
as the philosopher Owen 
Flanagan puts it, the content 
of bad dreams—and the 
content of all dreams, for 
that matter—could just 
be a spandrel of sleep, 
serving no adaptive 
function whatsoever. 
92
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Nightmares and the Dream Self
Lecture 14

Suppression and Nightmares
w
w Following Wegner’s methods, the clinical psychologist Tana Kröner-
Borowik and Kröner-Borowik’s colleagues have found that “suppressing 
unwanted thoughts can lead to an increased occurrence of the suppressed 
thought in dreams.” They found that bad dreams and nightmares might 
well be the result of thought suppression. 
w
w This fits with some findings about insomnia. People who suffer from 
insomnia worry about whether they will be able to sleep properly. Often, 
they try to suppress their unwanted worries about experiencing insomnia. 
However, when these people end up falling asleep and dreaming, they 
tend to dream about insomnia-related topics. 
w
w This can also help explain recurrent bad dreams and nightmares. 
According to researcher Victor Spoormaker, recurrent nightmares result 
from the activation of a specific nightmare script. Kröner-Borowik 
suggests that the unwanted thoughts we try to suppress might in part 
activate this script. 
Immoral Dreams
w
w What happens if we dream 
something immoral? Augustine 
of Hippo worried about this. For 
instance, in his autobiographical 
work Confessions, he considers 
whether dreams in which he 
commits sexual actions, despite 
his conscious commitment to 
celibacy, speak against him. The 
same problem emerges in the 
Buddhist tradition, too, where 
monks who are supposed to be 
celibate experience sexually 
charged dreams in which they 
experience nocturnal emissions. 
93
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Nightmares and the Dream Self
Lecture 14

w
w Augustine distances himself from the darkness of his dreams by 
categorizing what he does in them as something that happens to him—as 
something involuntary. In our dreams, Augustine suggests, we are not 
really agents who voluntarily do things; we are subjects who involuntarily 
undergo things. 
w
w This seems like a plausible move to make, but some cases are more difficult 
to evaluate. Consider the case of 59-year-old Brian Thomas. Brian had 
a history of sleepwalking and night terrors since childhood. 
w
w Night terrors are like nightmares. Both are vivid, negative, and 
emotionally charged dreams that produce high enough levels of fear that 
they ultimately awaken dreamers. Unlike nightmares, however, night 
terrors occur during the deepest of sleep, and when dreamers wake up 
from them, they awake abruptly in a state of terror, confused and typically 
incapable of communication. 
w
w Dreamers who experience night terrors can sleepwalk and talk before 
waking up. Night terrors are more common in children than adults, but 
some adults do experience them. Brian Thomas was one. 
w
w Brian had been married to his wife Christine for nearly 40 years when 
they went camping in western Wales during the summer of 2008. One 
day, some kids made Brian and his wife feel threatened. That night, 
Brian had a vivid dream in which someone broke into their camper 
and was assaulting his wife. Brian was having a night terror and 
sleepwalking. When he abruptly awoke, he realized that he was choking 
his wife and that he had strangled her to death. 
w
w Brian was horrified and immediately called the police. Ultimately, 
Brian was acquitted of murdering his wife, because prosecutors believed 
that he was truly sleepwalking, rather than using his past history as 
an excuse. 
94
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Nightmares and the Dream Self
Lecture 14

w
w The thought behind Brian’s acquittal was that he suffered from a sleep 
disorder, and so what happened wasn’t something he did; it was something 
that happened to him. Additionally, Brian’s dream seemed to be a vicarious 
dream: He seems to have been dreaming that someone else was attacking 
his wife, not that he was her attacker. The idea, then, seems to be that 
Brian wasn’t really himself when he murdered his wife; his dark dream 
did not properly represent who he is. 
w
w In the case of someone like Brian who is sleepwalking and suffering from 
night terrors, the areas of the brain like the frontal cortex that regulate 
behavior—those moral parts of the brain—are dormant. The areas of 
the brain like the hypothalamus and limbic system, which are associated 
with emotion, are active. Sleepwalkers like Brian seem like they are 
less themselves while sleeping if only because they, like Augustine, 
cannot regulate their ancestral urges—lust in Augustine’s case and rage 
in Brain’s.
SUGGESTED READING
Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams.
Springett, “Philosophy of Dreaming.”
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What do you think the relationship between who you really are and 
who you are in dreams is? 
2	 What role might unwanted thoughts play in our bad dreams 
and nightmares? 
3	 Do you agree with Augustine that you’re not really responsible for 
what you do in your dreams? What about lucid dreams? Would the 
possibility of lucid dreaming complicate Augustine’s view? 
95
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Nightmares and the Dream Self
Lecture 14

LECTURE 15
T
his lecture explores the nature and significance of self-
deception. Specifically, the lecture considers whether 
self-deception is truly part of our dark side, or whether 
there’s something positive—and perhaps unavoidable—about 
self-deception. 

The Paradoxes of Self-Deception 
w
w The traditional model of self-deception states that self-deception 
isn’t about persisting in an irrational belief. Rather, it’s about lying to 
ourselves. This model clearly has some virtues, but it also runs us into 
some problems. It requires self-deceivers not only to hold contradictory 
beliefs, but also to try to get themselves to believe something they 
already believe to be false. These are the contradictory belief requirement 
and the intentional deception requirements, respectively. 
w
w The contradictory belief requirement leads to what the philosopher Alfred 
Mele has called the static paradox. This paradox asks: How can someone 
actually hold contradictory beliefs? Is that even possible? 
w
w The traditional model also faces another paradox, which Mele has called 
the dynamic paradox. This paradox arises from the intentional deception 
requirement. This paradox begs the question: How can someone 
intentionally deceive themselves? Wouldn’t being aware of the deception 
undermine the effort? 
w
w These two paradoxes call into question the traditional model, which sees 
self-deception as lying to oneself. However, perhaps we can modify the 
traditional model in ways that help us avoid paradox. 
Modifying the Traditional Model 
w
w Two basic strategies seem apparent for modifying the traditional 
model. The first is to emphasize that self-deception extends over time. 
It’s a process that doesn’t require anyone to hold his or her contradictory 
beliefs at the same time. The second is to emphasize the psychological 
complexity of self-deception.
w
w In many cases of self-deception, we do see that it extends over time, 
fitting with the first strategy. Think of someone who commits a crime, 
later feels uncomfortable with it, and resolves to get rid of his guilt by 
lying to himself about what happened. 
97
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Self-Deception
Lecture 15

w
w The second strategy involves dividing the self into parts, with one 
psychological part playing the role of the deceiver and another playing 
the role of the deceived. This move would dissolve the static paradox 
by locating contradictory beliefs in different psychological subsystems. 
w
w However such a division of the mind might work, the idea would be that 
the deceptive subsystem would act below the level of conscious awareness, 
so that it could effectively and successfully deceive the conscious self. 
However, it is not obvious how this approach makes room for the 
intentional deception requirement. After all, the deceptive subsystem 
has to operate below the level of conscious awareness. Are unconscious 
intentions really possible? 
w
w That’s a big question, but rather than resolve it, another option is to 
eliminate the intentional deception requirement altogether. Self-deception 
might be less about lying to oneself than about our tendency to believe 
in biased ways. This is precisely the approach to self-deception that 
revisionist models take. 
The Revisionist Models
w
w This revisionist approach helps us see self-deception in new ways. 
This approach views self-deception as related to our tendency to 
favor flattering or welcome information as opposed to unflattering or 
unwelcome information. 
w
w Picking up on this, we can identify three varieties of self-deception. 
The first variety of self-deception is a matter of failing to tell ourselves 
the entire truth—that is, self-deception as information resistance. 
The second variety of self-deception is a matter of obscuring the truth—
that is, self-deception as obfuscation. The final variety is a matter of lying 
to ourselves—that is, the classic notion of self-deception. 
w
w In cases of self-deception as information resistance, we avoid unwanted 
information and seek out what we want to hear. In cases of self-deception 
as obfuscation, we dismiss unwanted information. 
98
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Self-Deception
Lecture 15

w
w The revisionist approach might not have room for the classic notion of 
self-deception as lying to oneself, but it might have room for self-deception 
as self-evasion. For instance, consider the work of researchers Nicholas 
Epley and Erin Whitchurch. One experiment found that people more 
quickly identified photographs of themselves when the images had been 
altered to make them appear more attractive than when the photographs 
were unaltered. 
w
w Some have used this finding to suggest not only that people have 
a self-image that is more attractive than how they actually look, but also 
that this is the result of self-deception. In response to this suggestion, 
however, Steven Pinker has pointed out that such findings cannot tell us 
that people are actively deceiving themselves unless we know that they 
have an accurate self-image. 
w
w Such experimental findings seem to point to self-deception as self-
evasion. This is different from self-deception as information resistance, 
because in this variety of self-deception, we don’t avoid new information; 
we evade the truth about ourselves. 
99
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Self-Deception
Lecture 15

The Evolution of Self-Deception 
w
w The revisionist approach leads to an important question: What explains 
our tendency toward self-deception? Perhaps the best way to approach 
this question at least at first, is by considering self-deception from 
an evolutionary perspective—that is, looking at self-deception as 
an adaptation. 
w
w The main reason to think that self-deception is an adaptation is that it is 
associated with a number of benefits. Having an inflated self-conception 
might enhance our chances of success. According to Dominic Johnson 
and James Fowler, for instance, overconfidence is “advantageous, because 
it encourages individuals to claim resources they could not otherwise win 
if it came to a conflict.” 
w
w Picking up on this, William von Hippel and Robert Trivers contend, 
“self-deception evolved to facilitate interpersonal deception.” 
Self-deception allows us to avoid exhibiting signs associated with 
“deceptive intent.” According to von Hippel and Trivers, self-deception 
has a host of social advantages that make it plausible to think that it’s the 
adaptive product of our evolutionary history. 
w
w Shakti Lamba and Vivek Nityananda provide some support for this view. 
In a 2014 study, they looked at university students in tutorials who were 
asked to predict how they and their peers would do on an upcoming 
assignment. Some students self-deceptively predicted that they would 
perform well, but didn’t actually end up performing as they predicted. 
w
w These students were also expected to perform well by their peers. Their 
overconfidence, it seems, had influenced everyone around them. Though 
they didn’t do well, their self-deception facilitated interpersonal 
deception, just as von Hippel and Trivers would expect. 
w
w It might be the case, then, that self-deception is the adaptive product 
of our evolutionary history because it carries with it a host of social 
advantages that improve our chances of survival and success. On the 
cruel savanna, self-deception might mean survival. In the competitive 
boardroom, it might mean success. 
100
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Self-Deception
Lecture 15

Self-Deception as a Moral 
and Existential Concern 
w
w Even if self-deception has survival 
value and practical benefits, it still 
might seem disturbing. Joseph Butler, 
an 18th-century theologian, proposes 
that we are inclined to self-deception 
because we fail to reflect properly 
on what we’re doing when it fits with 
or serves our interests. 
w
w Another view is that, in broad agreement 
with existential philosophers like Jean-
Paul Sartre and Søren Kierkegaard, 
something like self-deception blocks us off from living authentically. 
Living authentically, with a clear-eyed sense of ourselves and our 
commitments, certainly seems antithetical to self-deception, as does 
living with integrity. 
Conclusion
w
w These issues raise an important question: What can we do about 
self-deception? Perhaps we should educate ourselves about our tendency 
toward self-deception. However, many different studies suggest that 
learning about our tendencies doesn’t provide much help. 
w
w In one study, for instance, researchers told subjects about eight biases 
people commonly have. They then asked participants to rate themselves. 
On average, the participants thought they were better than the 
average person. 
w
w Joseph Butler recognized that the attempt to counteract self-deception 
is ironically prone to self-deception. He suggests that we need to make 
a habit of critical reflection. In important matters such as morality, we 
need to follow rigid rules while being as impartial as possible. 
101
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Self-Deception
Lecture 15

w
w His advice is that anytime we’re thinking about what the right thing to 
do is, we should substitute another for ourselves. From this vantage point, 
we can achieve some epistemic and moral distance from our situations. 
w
w The 20th-century philosopher Richard Rorty has another suggestion: We 
should surround ourselves with honest people—good friends—who 
are willing to tell us the truth, who are willing to correct our mistaken 
view of ourselves, and who are also willing to do so in a kind and 
encouraging way. The company we keep can serve as a corrective to 
keep us honest. 
SUGGESTED READING
Deweese-Boyd, “Self-Deception.” 
Mele, Self-Deception Unmasked.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What are the two paradoxes associated with self-deception? 
2	 Do you think that being self-deceived helps us deceive others? Is 
there any sense in which self-deception is a good thing? 
102
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Self-Deception
Lecture 15

LECTURE 16
T
his lecture examines ignorance through the lens of 
questions such as: What is ignorance? Why is it bad? How 
can we counteract it? To start answering these questions, 
the lecture looks at an important debate between two great 
Hindu philosophers. After that, the lecture considers some 
contemporary accounts of ignorance. 

Shankara’s Theory of Maya
w
w This lecture begins with the 8th-century Hindu 
philosopher Shankara, who is remembered as 
one of the greatest champions of the Advaita 
Vedanta school of philosophy. As a Vedantin 
philosopher, Shankara acknowledged the 
authority of the Upanishads—a group of 
texts that commented on and developed the 
earlier Vedic texts. 
w
w Shankara sees his work as closely related 
to meditation, because meditation is the 
means by which we achieve genuine insight 
into brahman, or unconditioned reality. 
Specifically, for Shankara, meditation has nirguna brahman as its 
object—that is, brahman without qualities, or the unqualified real. 
w
w According to Shankara, the world is ultimately one with nirguna brahman, 
and nirguna brahman is a pure unity, without distinctions or qualities. 
This means that the world as we experience it is merely an appearance, 
not reality itself. We will only realize this, however, when we become 
enlightened and see that our ordinary experience is, in a sense, like 
a dream, which is undermined and replaced by wakefulness. 
w
w We have to do more than sublate just the experience of the world, however; 
this is what is causing our distorted experience of the world. Shankara 
thinks something causes us to miss what’s ultimately real. 
w
w This something is maya—that is, is the force of illusion or appearance. 
Maya brings the world as we typically experience it into existence.
w
w Maya has no beginning, because time exists only within it; it cannot be 
thought, because it constrains thinking; and it cannot be described, because 
all language depends on it. As a result, maya is mysterious, lying outside 
the bounds of reason in much the same way that brahman does. In the 
end, however, none of this adequately explains what the source of the first 
superimposition is, because maya itself remains mysterious. 
104
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Ignorance
Lecture 16

Ramanuja on Shankara 
w
w The 12th-century Hindu philosopher Ramanuja has a number of 
sophisticated arguments against Shankara’s account, but his most 
interesting and powerful argument focuses on Shankara’s understanding 
of ignorance itself. He recognizes that Shankara wants to understand 
ignorance not as a property of something, but as a negation. Ramanuja 
thinks Shankara’s “theory of ignorance is altogether untenable.” 
w
w Ramanuja notes that there are actually two ways of understanding 
ignorance as a negation. The first is as “non-knowledge of the true nature 
of brahman.” The second is as “the [mistaken] view of the reality of the 
apparent world.” According to Ramanuja, however, both options cause 
problems for Shankara.
w
w The first option fails because enlightenment and ignorance have different 
intentional objects—enlightenment is about brahman, while ignorance 
is about maya. This is a problem, Ramanuja claims, because ignorance 
can be the negation of enlightenment only if they refer to the same object. 
w
w In the case of the second option, ignorance 
and knowledge do have the same intentional 
object. Both enlightenment and ignorance 
are about brahman. The problem with this 
understanding of ignorance, according to 
Ramanuja, is that once we remove what’s 
getting in the way—namely, maya—we 
don’t reveal the essence of brahman. 
Instead, we simply get rid of maya. 
w
w To delve into these arguments further, 
imagine this scenario: A person wakes from 
a dream and sublates her dream experience. 
In doing this, the dream world completely 
dissolves, and she come to realize that this 
world is real, not the dream world. 
105
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Ignorance
Lecture 16

w
w Ramanuja’s problem is this: When the person wakes up, she is aware of the 
phenomenal world, but this does not thereby entail that she knows its true 
nature. She might well remain ignorant of important facts about the world. 
w
w In response to such a situation, Shankara might have emphasized 
ignorance as the contradictory of knowledge, not as a property. Shankara 
thinks that talking about properties is to use concepts that are infected 
with maya and, as a result, misleading.
w
w Specifically, Shankara might argue that the dream-world analogy 
is misleading. When the person wakes up from a dream, she doesn’t 
immediately know everything about the phenomenal world. However, 
the case would be different if she were to sublate maya. 
w
w When she removes maya as a limitation, only one thing remains: nirguna 
brahman. It is hard to see how she could possibly remain ignorant of any 
aspect of brahman. That is because there would now be only one possible 
object of knowledge, that object of knowledge is radically simple, and 
the possibility of being mistaken about that object of knowledge has 
been removed.
Ramanuja and Shankara’s Views
w
w Shankara’s views, in dialogue with Ramanuja, offer a window into 
what liberation through pure enlightenment might look like. Ramanuja 
thinks it’s ridiculous to suppose that enlightenment is just a matter of 
knowledge. For him, salvation is about doing something, not just coming 
to know something. 
w
w As an analogy, imagine a person who is trapped in a well. He might have 
an insight into how to get out of the well, but that doesn’t magically get 
him out. He also has to do something, or someone else has to do it for 
him. With this in mind, Ramanuja thinks that the only way to achieve 
salvation—the only way to get out of the well—is to devote himself to 
God, who will actively save him. 
w
w For Shankara, it’s as though the man merely thinks he is trapped in a well, 
but then he realizes he is not. In reality, there’s no well at all. 
106
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Ignorance
Lecture 16

The Roots of Ignorance
w
w It might be worthwhile to explain ignorance as a psychological or as a 
social phenomenon—as something that is produced by psychological and 
social factors—rather than simply saying that individuals are ignorant 
because they lack knowledge. 
w
w It is natural to think of ignorance as the product of social structures or 
practices that routinely blind us to the truth. This is perhaps part of the 
story about why it was so hard, for instance, to move from the geocentric 
astronomical model to the heliocentric model. Related to this, however, 
is a more worrisome sense of social ignorance. 
w
w This is related to what 
the philosopher Miranda 
Fricker calls testimonial 
injustice. Testimonial 
injustice happens when 
someone doesn’t receive 
the credence they deserve 
because they belong to 
a marginalized group. 
w
w People from marginalized 
groups suffer from this 
kind of social ignorance 
in many ways. They are 
harmed because their 
ability to communicate 
information and impart 
knowledge is undermined 
in a way that degrades 
them as human beings. 
They are also harmed 
when they are treated 
harshly and unjustly as 
a result of having their 
testimony dismissed. 
Gaslighting
One type of harm that results 
from testimonial injustice is 
related to the phenomenon of 
gaslighting. The term gaslighting 
comes from the 1944 movie 
Gaslight. In that movie, the 
character Gregory manipulates 
his wife Paula into believing 
that she’s going crazy. In acts 
of gaslighting, the gaslighter not 
only refuses to give someone’s 
testimony the proper credence; 
the gaslighter causes the 
person to question their own 
beliefs and knowledge. In 
cases of gaslighting, people are 
harmed by being made to feel 
ignorant when they are not.
107
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Ignorance
Lecture 16

Counteracting Injustice
w
w In cases of testimonial injustice, ignorance is a complex and harmful 
social phenomenon. To counteract this kind of ignorance, we have to 
uproot prejudice, empower the marginalized, and work hard for social 
change. This task can be tackled in various practical ways. 
w
w For example, the philosopher Hilde Lindemann Nelson has suggested that 
we use counter-stories to offset the master narratives that make testimonial 
injustice and gaslighting possible. Counter-stories are narratives that we 
can construct as correctives to the flawed representations that harm those 
who are marginalized and oppressed.
w
w Nelson considers the case of a group of nurses whose identities were 
partly determined by the stories the doctors told about them. These stories 
suggested that the work of the nurses was “touchy-feely” while the work 
of the doctors was “technical.” This touchy-feely narrative minimized 
nursing work and marginalized the nurses, causing damage. In response 
to this, the nurses countered these destructive stories with stories of 
their own. 
w
w Counter-stories are a powerful way to counteract ignorance, but 
counteracting any ignorance is complicated by some psychological 
tendencies we have. One of these tendencies is the Dunning-Kruger 
effect. This is a cognitive bias that makes it very hard for people who 
are incompetent to recognize their incompetence. As one of the theory’s 
namesakes, researcher David Dunning, puts it:
An ignorant mind is precisely not a spotless, empty vessel, but 
one that’s filled with the clutter of irrelevant or misleading life 
experiences, theories, facts, intuitions, strategies, algorithms, 
heuristics, metaphors, and hunches that regrettably have the 
look and feel of useful and accurate knowledge.
108
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Ignorance
Lecture 16

w
w This means that ignorance can often feel like expertise in a way that makes 
it very hard for people to recognize their mistaken views. One way we 
might counteract these mistaken views, as Dunning suggests, is to try 
to disarm people’s misconceptions by asking questions, pointing out 
misbeliefs, and helping the ignorant come to see the error of their ways. 
w
w The problem with this way of counteracting ignorance is that it falls afoul 
of another of our psychological tendencies. This is the so-called backfire 
effect. When confronted with facts or evidence or arguments that conflict 
with what we already believe, our beliefs often don’t weaken in response 
to this information; instead, our potentially mistaken beliefs actually 
tend to get stronger. 
w
w Ignorance about things we care about is especially hard to counteract 
with arguments and facts—the tools we philosophers often employ. To 
overcome ignorance, we might just have to be humble enough to recognize 
that we might be the ones who don’t have all the answers. 
SUGGESTED READINGS 
Fricker, Testimonial Injustice.
Radhakrishnan and Moore, eds., Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy, 
selections from Shankara and Ramanuja.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 The debate between Shankara and Ramanuja reveals much about 
the nature of ignorance. What are two lessons we can learn from it?
2	 What is testimonial injustice, and how does it differ from 
gaslighting? Have you ever been the victim of either? 
3	 What is the Dunning-Kruger effect, and how is it relevant to our 
discussion of ignorance? How might the backfire effect make 
correcting ignorance difficult? 
109
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Varieties of Ignorance
Lecture 16

LECTURE 17
T
his lecture focuses on weakness of will, which represents 
a fascinating aspect of the dark side of human nature. 
Suffering from weakness of will isn’t the same as suffering 
from sin or vice, but it certainly seems like a failure that keeps 
us from doing what we think is best. 

Aristotle on Weakness of Will 
w
w Some thinkers, such as the 
philosophers Socrates and 
Cheng Yi, deny the possibility of 
weakness of will. However, many 
thinkers have wanted to explain 
how weakness of will is possible. 
Aristotle is one example.
w
w The ancient Greek word meaning 
“lack of self-restraint” is akrasia. 
According to Aristotle, someone 
who is akratic goes against their 
better judgment as the result of 
some kind of feeling or desire. 
w
w He notes that there are really 
two kinds of akratic people. 
Those who act impetuously 
act directly from their feelings 
without deliberating about what 
they should do. By contrast, 
those who act from weakness 
experience an internal conflict as 
they deliberate about what they 
should do. People who act like 
this suffer from weakness of will. 
w
w Aristotle suggests that weakness of will is a cognitive failure. In the 
moment of deliberation, the akratic person sort of knows that he shouldn’t 
do something, but he doesn’t fully know it. 
w
w On this way of reading Aristotle, weakness of will is less a matter of 
going against our better judgment and more a matter of allowing desire 
to ruin our judgments. Weakness of will is a matter of having our better 
judgment temporarily derailed. 
111
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Weakness of Will
Lecture 17

Donald Davidson on Weakness of Will 
w
w In an influential article, the late philosopher Donald Davidson offers 
another way to think about the possibility of weakness of will. According 
to Davidson, Aristotle gives us a picture of weakness of will that 
emphasizes a struggle between two contestants: reason on the one hand, 
and desire on the other. Weakness of will arises, on this picture, when 
reason is overpowered by desire. 
w
w Davidson thinks this picture is inaccurate. He develops a different picture 
by focusing on the use of a person’s better judgment. Davidson’s way 
of explaining weakness of will emphasizes what it means to say that 
someone has made an all-things-considered judgment. 
w
w All-things-considered judgments are conditional, rather than categorical. 
A conditional judgment depends on and is relative to a set of considerations. 
Conditional judgments take the form of something like this: Relative to 
these particular considerations, this, at least at first blush, is better than 
that. Conditional judgments differ from categorical judgments, which 
simply affirm that one thing is best, without qualification. 
w
w Conditional judgments give us prima facie judgments that depend on 
comparative considerations. For instance, in light of the fact that bacon 
is delicious, Sarah might judge that eating bacon is prima facie better 
than eating salad. Or, in light of the fact that salad is healthy, Sarah might 
judge that salad is prima facie better than bacon. 
w
w With this in mind, Davidson argues that Sarah suffers from weakness of 
will when she eats some bacon only if: 
w
w She eats that bacon intentionally.
w
w She believes she could choose to eat a salad instead.
w
w She has a reason to eat the bacon. 
w
w She eats the bacon for this reason, even though she has other 
considerations on the basis of which she judges that eating the salad 
would be better than eating the bacon. 
112
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Weakness of Will
Lecture 17

w
w When Sarah takes into account every consideration she might have, she 
decides that eating the bacon is a bad idea and that eating salad is best. 
When she considers just the deliciousness of the bacon, however, she has 
a reason to eat it. 
w
w Though she has a reason to eat the bacon, her all-things-considered 
judgment is that she shouldn’t eat it. She doesn’t really have an adequate 
reason to eat the bacon, even by her own thinking. 
w
w However, she never fully commits to the view that the bacon is not the 
sort of thing she should eat. In other words, she never commits to the 
categorical judgment that bacon is the sort of thing she should never, 
without qualification, eat. So, Davidson argues, she never actually 
contradicts herself. 
w
w For Davidson, this is how weakness of will is possible. There’s no 
contradiction in choosing against our better judgment. We simply go 
against our better judgment, all the while having a reason to do so. 
w
w Davidson’s picture doesn’t require that we see weakness of will as a battle 
between reason and desire; instead, it’s a matter of weighing reasons. 
Those of us who suffer from weakness of will are actually irrational in 
the sense that we go against our better judgment, even if we don’t strictly 
contradict ourselves. 
113
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Weakness of Will
Lecture 17

Holton on the Ordinary Sense of Weakness of Will 
w
w In a 1999 article, the philosopher Richard Holton argues that weakness 
of will isn’t about acting against our better judgment at all. Rather, it’s 
about our failure to follow through on our intentions. 
w
w As Sarah Stroud points out, Holton’s revisionist view of weakness of 
will presents a pair of alterations to the subject. The first change is that 
weakness of will is no longer about the incongruity between our better 
judgment and what we actually do. Now it’s about an incongruity between 
what we intend to do and what we actually do. 
w
w The second change is that weakness of will is no longer about a conflict 
with our present judgments. This is because now we can exhibit weakness 
of will by giving up on plans we made in the past. 
w
w Holton points out that one important factor is whether giving up on our 
previous plans is reasonable or not. For instance, if a person plans on 
going to a party but decides not to attend for good reasons, then the person 
is not suffering from weakness 
of will. 
w
w Holton also points out that some of 
our plans for the future are more 
important than others. Resolutions, 
for instance, are plans we make to 
ensure we do something we might 
not feel like doing later. 
w
w Holton’s ideas help explain why 
some people are better at keeping 
to their resolutions than others 
and why some people suffer more 
or less from weakness of will. 
Even if we’re all more or less 
reasonable, we might not all have 
the same willpower. 
Ego Depletion 
The philosopher Neil Levy 
offers a slightly different 
perspective on weakness of 
will. As he sees it, weakness 
of will isn’t a distinctive 
failure. Instead, he thinks 
it’s just a special case of a 
broader phenomenon: ego 
depletion. Ego depletion 
results from the depletion 
of certain mental resources 
associated with cognitive 
processes like logical 
reasoning and self-control.
114
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Weakness of Will
Lecture 17

Conclusion 
w
w In The Way of the Bodhisattva, the great Buddhist philosopher Shantideva 
notes that, perhaps just by luck, he has found himself in a good position. 
Things are going well, and he’s aware of that fact. 
w
w However, he worries that he might not stay on that path. He might stray 
for reasons that he’s not entirely certain of. As he puts it, his mind might 
well end up being reduced to nothing, as though he were bewitched by 
spells. In that case, he won’t know the source of what dwells within him, 
driving him to fall back into old habits. 
w
w However, Shantideva has a suggestion. The important factor is being able 
to pay attention to the right things at the right time. He knows people can 
focus and control themselves when things really matter to them. 
w
w The trick is conscientiousness or vigilance—that is, paying attention 
to what matters at all times, as a skillful habit. For Shantideva, 
conscientiousness helps us keep our resolutions because it’s a virtue that 
helps us keep what’s important to us in view even when we’re flooded 
with emotion and even when we’re depleted, tempted, and tired.
SUGGESTED READING
Holton, “Intention and Weakness of Will.”
Stroud, “Weakness of Will.”
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 Have you ever experienced weakness of will? How would you 
describe the experience if you’ve had it? 
2	 What’s the relationship between weakness of will and akrasia? 
3	 Is weakness of will about breaking our resolutions, or is it about 
going against our better judgment? What view of weakness of will 
have you found most plausible? 
115
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Weakness of Will
Lecture 17

LECTURE 18
T
his lecture explores the role that luck plays in our moral 
lives, devoting special attention to how considerations 
about luck might end up affecting the way we think about 
responsibility and blame. When we confront the dark side of 
human nature, we often want to hold someone accountable, but 
what if it turns out that no one—even the worst among us—is 
truly accountable? 

Moral Luck and Control 
w
w This lecture begins with the topic of moral luck. We normally excuse 
people from responsibility when their actions are involuntary or physically 
forced. It is natural to think that there’s a control condition for moral 
responsibility and blame: We can hold someone responsible and blame 
them only if what they’ve done is within their control. 
w
w This is intuitive, but it is possible to challenge the control condition. 
Consider the classic case of a drunk driver who wrecks his car. Now 
imagine two possible results. One result is that a pedestrian is killed; 
the other is that no one is injured. The driver whose accident results in 
someone’s death might be convicted for manslaughter or even worse, 
whereas the driver who injures no one will have his driver’s license 
suspended at worst. How we judge each of these drivers depends on 
factors outside their control. 
w
w This is where we find moral luck. Roughly, moral luck occurs when 
we’re willing to hold someone responsible even though what they’ve done 
depends on factors that are beyond their control. 
w
w The drunk-driver scenario is a case of what the philosopher Thomas 
Nagel calls resultant moral luck. This kind of luck is associated with 
how the results of our actions are, at least sometimes, beyond our control. 
Other Types of Luck
w
w In addition to resultant luck, Nagel identifies three other kinds of moral 
luck: causal luck, constitutive luck, and circumstantial luck. Causal luck 
is associated with the ancient problem of freedom and determinism. 
Causal luck occurs when our actions are determined by causes over which 
we have no control. 
w
w The next kind of moral luck Nagel identifies is constitutive luck. 
Constitutive luck occurs when who we are is, at least in some significant 
sense, beyond our control. 
117
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Luck and the Limits of Blame
Lecture 18

w
w The final kind of moral luck Nagel articulates is circumstantial luck. This 
kind of moral luck is about how the places and times we find ourselves 
in are, at least sometimes, beyond our control. Being in these different 
places and times might affect our actions. 
The Problem with Luck
w
w The four kinds of moral luck present a serious philosophical problem: 
If we consistently apply the control condition—the principle that we’re 
responsible only for what’s within our control—then we can no longer 
blame people for their bad actions. This is because, in as Nagel puts it, 
‘“almost nothing about what a person does seems to be under his control.” 
w
w The philosopher John Greco frames the problem of moral luck as 
a straightforward argument about our lack of control. The first premise 
of the argument is the control condition. To this premise, however, Greco 
adds the luck assertion: Everything that happens is the result of luck. 
w
w These two premises together present a conclusion that many people 
want to resist. The conclusion is that no one is morally responsible and 
blameworthy for anything that happens. 
Moral Luck and Moral Difference 
w
w The problem of moral luck can become even worse. To see just how bad 
the problem of moral luck is, imagine two people: Alex and Beth. Alex 
drinks too much at a party, tries to drive home, and kills a pedestrian 
after swerving onto the sidewalk. Beth also drinks too much at the party 
and drives home. At one point, she swerves onto the sidewalk as well, 
but no pedestrians are present.
w
w The only difference between Alex and Beth is a matter of resultant luck. 
Alex and Beth make all the same choices and even do all the same things, 
right up until the lucky difference: Alex’s car hits and kills a pedestrian 
who happens to be standing on a corner, whereas Beth’s car doesn’t hit 
anyone because no one happens to be there. 
118
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Luck and the Limits of Blame
Lecture 18

w
w Beth is only morally different, with respect to her drunk driving, from 
Alex due to factors outside her control. It wasn’t up to her that no 
pedestrians were around when she lost control of her car, just like it 
wasn’t up to Alex whether a pedestrian was standing on the corner when 
he lost control of his car. 
w
w The philosopher Michael Zimmerman suggests distinguishing between 
two kinds of blame: substantial and insubstantial. Substantial blame 
is grounded in the decisions we make, whereas insubstantial blame is 
grounded in the results of those decisions. Using this distinction, we 
might say that Alex and Beth are equally to blame in the substantial sense, 
but not equally to blame in the less fundamental insubstantial sense. 
w
w At the risk of moving beyond common sense, we can imagine yet another 
person: Erica. Under no circumstances would Erica ever drink and drive. 
But the only reason Erica would never ever drink and drive is a matter 
of luck: Erica had a family member die in a drunk-driving accident, and 
that trauma has made drunk driving unthinkable for her.
119
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Luck and the Limits of Blame
Lecture 18

w
w Erica is in no way blameworthy for being the kind of person who would 
decide to drink and drive if given the chance; she never would make 
that choice. But the only reason she wouldn’t make that choice is due to 
luck—something that happened in her past and was beyond her control. 
Moral Record and Moral Worth 
w
w Erica is a very different kind of person from Alex, but she also has a very 
different moral record. Someone’s moral record is a function of what they 
have freely decided and what they’ve voluntarily done; it’s a record of 
their actual choices and actions. 
w
w On Alex’s moral record, he has a drunk-driving accident that has resulted 
in someone’s death, and that appears on his record because he made 
a choice. Nothing like that appears on Erica’s moral record, because she 
made no such choice. On this way of thinking, moral record is impacted 
by luck, but it’s only a function of the actual choices one makes. 
w
w Beyond our moral record is what Greco refers to as our moral worth. 
Someone’s moral worth is a function of what they would freely decide 
and what they would voluntarily 
do in the circumstances they 
might never even encounter. 
Moral worth is about the kind of 
person someone is, whereas moral 
record is about what someone has 
actually done. 
w
w Erica and Alex have different 
moral records, but also different 
moral worth. Alex and Daniel 
only have different moral records; they have the same moral worth 
because they are both the kinds of people who would voluntarily drink 
and drive given the opportunity. This raises a question: Is moral nature 
insulated from luck, or is our nature just a fact over which we have little 
or no control? 
The Buddhist philosopher 
Shantideva thinks that each 
person’s fundamental nature 
lies beyond praise and blame.
120
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Luck and the Limits of Blame
Lecture 18

Luck and Nature 
w
w The philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre resists the idea that we have tailor-made 
natures that determine who we are. He argues that in every moment of 
our lives we are making ourselves through our choices. 
w
w Picking up on this, Robert Kane, one of the most influential contemporary 
philosophers of free will, argues that each of our genuinely free actions 
is “the initiation of a ‘value experiment’ whose justification lies in the 
future and is not fully explained by the past.” Kane posits that in making 
a choice, people say, “‘Let’s try this. It is not required by my past, but is 
consistent with my past and is one branching pathway my life could now 
meaningfully take.’” 
w
w This is an exhilarating view of free choice and human possibility. If it is 
correct, it might show that luck can’t undermine blame. Perhaps we have 
to allow that resultant luck infects our moral lives, but substantial blame 
still lies with our choices—for which we are ultimately responsible.
w
w The philosopher Galen Strawson is not convinced. He thinks that 
luck swallows even our most basic choices, rendering responsibility 
an impossibility and blame irrational. Strawson’s view is that how we 
are from a mental standpoint is always the result of factors over which 
we don’t have even a small amount of control. As a result, it is impossible 
for us to be free in the sense that grounds responsibility and blame, 
because factors over which we have no control always cause us to act 
as we do. 
The Victim’s Perspective 
w
w Tamler Sommers has suggested that facts about victims—their attitudes, 
wishes, and behavior—should play a role in determining blameworthiness 
and responsibility. In particular, these facts should play a role in 
determining what perpetrators deserve.
121
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Luck and the Limits of Blame
Lecture 18

w
w On his approach, Alex and Beth, for instance, might be equally culpable, 
perhaps due to their shared choice to drink and drive. Whether Alex 
deserves more blame than Beth is something that depends on facts about 
the victims of his drunk-driving accident. 
w
w In this sense, Sommers wants to embrace moral luck, at least to a degree. 
What we do is, to some large measure, the result of luck, but how we 
deserve to be treated is also, to some degree, a matter of luck. It’s not up 
to Alex how the family of the pedestrian he killed will respond, but their 
response is important in determining just what Alex deserves. 
w
w Imagine two ways Alex’s story could play out. In the first, the police 
track him down. He is put on trial, convicted of homicide, and sentenced 
to death by firing squad. Sommers notes that this is an unusually harsh 
penalty, but that’s the point: Alex does not get what he deserves in this 
scenario. He likely deserved to go to prison, but surely he didn’t deserve 
the death penalty. 
w
w In the other telling of Alex’s story, the police are unable to track Alex 
down, but the father of the young man whom Alex killed is determined 
to find the driver who killed him. The father uses all of his resources to 
track Alex down, goes to Alex’s home, and fatally shoots him. 
w
w Sommers argues that, in this scenario, it’s far more plausible that 
Alex got what he deserved than in the first. The only difference 
between the two scenarios, however, is that the second considers the 
victim’s perspective. 
w
w This is an extreme case, but Sommers’s point is telling. It does seem like 
the victim’s perspective makes a difference when it comes to determining 
what someone deserves, whether that’s blame or even punishment. 
w
w Of course, there are limits here, too. It’s unreasonable to think that 
someone deserves harsh treatment simply because a victim feels a certain 
way. The problem is that considerations about luck make it hard to know 
just where to set the limits of blame. 
122
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Luck and the Limits of Blame
Lecture 18

SUGGESTED READING
Nagel, Mortal Questions, chapter 3.
Shantideva, The Way of the Bodhisattva, chapter 6.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What are the different kinds of moral luck? What is the problem 
of moral luck?
2	 What does reflecting on the role that luck plays in people’s lives 
tell you about the appropriateness of blame? 
3	 What do you think of Tamler Sommers’s view that the victim’s 
perspective makes a difference when it comes to determining what 
someone deserves?
123
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Luck and the Limits of Blame
Lecture 18

LECTURE 19
T
his lecture focuses on victim blaming and the just-world 
hypothesis. The just-world hypothesis refers to our tendency 
to believe that the world is a just and fair place and that, as 
a result, people get what they deserve. Victim blaming is a dark 
tendency related to the just-world hypothesis. 

The Psychology of Victim Blaming
w
w We can trace the psychological study of victim blaming and the just-
world hypothesis back to Melvin Lerner and Carolyn Simmons, social 
psychologists who first explored these issues in the 1960s. When we are 
helpless, Lerner and Simmons found, we tend to reject and devalue the 
suffering experienced by victims. We do this, they hypothesized, because 
of our need to see the world as a just place. 
w
w Picking up on Lerner and Simmons’s work, in a 1975 study, Zick Rubin 
and Letitia Anne Peplau wondered what kind of people believe in a just 
world. They observed that, at a very young age, everyone might well 
believe that the world is just. At least some people “outgrow the belief,” 
whereas others never do. 
w
w In their surveys, they found 
that people who endorse the 
just-world hypothesis tend 
“to be more religious [and] 
more authoritarian … than 
nonbelievers.” They also found 
that believers in the hypothesis 
tend to be “more likely to 
admire political leaders and 
existing social institutions, and 
to have negative attitudes toward 
underprivileged groups” 
w
w In a 2016 study, Laura Niemi and 
Liane Young explored why we’re 
sometimes sympathetic towards 
victims and why, at others, we 
scorn and blame them. They 
suggest that our attitudes are 
a function of our moral values and 
our ideological commitments. 
Focusing on Perpetrators
In their research, Laura 
Niemi and Liane Young found 
that one way to reduce 
victim blaming is to increase 
our focus on perpetrators 
and decrease our focus 
on victims. When study 
participants read vignettes 
that focused on victims 
rather than on perpetrators, 
participants perceived the 
victims as more responsible 
for what happened to them. 
How we tell stories affects 
our perception of victims.
125
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Victim Blaming and the Just-World Hypothesis
Lecture 19

w
w Specifically, they distinguish between two value systems. On the one 
hand, there are people who largely endorse individualizing values, which 
focus on prohibiting harm and promoting equality and fairness. On the 
other hand, there are people who endorse binding values, which focus on 
maintaining loyalty, obedience, and respect.
w
w Niemi and Young argue that, the more someone endorses individualizing 
values, the more they tend to care about people who stand outside the 
group. The more someone endorses binding values, the more they tend 
to be insensitive to the suffering of victims. This means that there is 
more than the just-world hypothesis at work when we blame victims; 
underlying moral outlooks also support it. 
Retributive Karma and Victim-Blaming 
w
w The phrase “what goes around comes around” is an expression of the just-
world hypothesis, but it’s also grounded in a powerful view of the world 
associated with various Indian philosophical and religious traditions. The 
concept at issue here is karma. 
w
w Karma is a Sanskrit word for “action.” In the early Vedic religion, karma 
was a word used to refer to specific kinds of action, particularly ritual 
action. In time, however, the word came to refer to both action and 
its consequences. 
w
w Along with this expansion of the concept, various traditions developed 
different theories of karma. For Jain thinkers, for instance, karma 
becomes a kind of physical filth that we produce through unwholesome 
actions. This gunk weighs down on the soul and binds it to the cycle of 
death and rebirth. To achieve liberation from this cycle, we have to cleanse 
ourselves of this karmic filth, and we do that through moral discipline 
and spiritual asceticism. 
126
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Victim Blaming and the Just-World Hypothesis
Lecture 19

w
w For Buddhists, karma is 
grounded in mental intention. 
The Sanskrit word here is 
cetana. According to the 
Buddha, “Action is volition, for 
after having intended something, 
one accomplishes action through 
body, speech, and mind.” 
w
w There are four kinds of action: 
wholesome actions, which 
lead to good consequences; 
unwholesome actions, which 
lead to bad consequences; mixed 
actions, which have a mix of 
good and bad consequences; and 
indeterminate actions, which 
are performed by enlightened 
beings, like the Buddha. 
These are actions that have 
no consequences. 
w
w Karma centrally refers to whatever it is that keeps a mental intention 
going and the connection between the action and its consequences. In this 
sense, karma is the moral law of cause and effect. 
w
w Belief in karma, in the Buddhist and Jain senses, would certainly seem 
to suggest at least a moderate belief in the just world hypothesis. This is 
because it links actions with their consequences in a way that suggests 
that, on the whole, people reap what they sow. 
w
w One natural way is to think of this is as a retributivist conception of karma. 
According to this conception of karma, the suffering and misfortunes that 
people experience can often be tracked to unwholesome actions that they 
have committed either earlier in this life or in a previous life. 
127
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Victim Blaming and the Just-World Hypothesis
Lecture 19

A Medical Analogy
w
w On matters of blame, the professor Arvind Sharma offers a medical 
analogy. When a doctor encounters a chronic smoker who has lung cancer, 
it’s reasonable to think that the smoker is, in some important sense, 
responsible for bringing about the cancer. 
w
w The morally important factor is whether 
the doctor actually does her duty and treats 
the patient. Blaming the patient is neither 
helpful nor appropriate, even if attributing 
responsibility is reasonable. Additionally, 
blaming the less fortunate is neither helpful nor 
appropriate, even if attributing responsibility 
is reasonable. 
w
w This analogy highlights that for those 
who endorse retributive karma, karmic 
explanations are causal and factual 
explanations. It makes an implicit distinction 
between what it means to blame someone as 
opposed to what it means to hold them responsible. One way to flesh this 
distinction out is to say that blaming someone is to hold them morally 
accountable, whereas as to hold someone responsible is to say that they 
played a causal role in bringing about a certain state of affairs. 
w
w As the author Mikel Burley highlights, however, “there is an important 
difference between the medical scientific belief that smoking increases 
one’s chances of developing lung cancer and the karmic belief that 
suffering in this life results from sins performed in previous ones.” To see 
this difference, Burley asks us to imagine someone who doesn’t believe 
in karma but visits a doctor who does. 
w
w This patient asks the doctor why she has cancer when so many other 
smokers are perfectly healthy.  In response, the doctor tells her that there’s 
more to the story than lifestyle and genes; in the end, it’s one’s karma that 
determines such things. She must have done something bad in a past life. 
128
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Victim Blaming and the Just-World Hypothesis
Lecture 19

w
w The difference between the medical diagnosis and the karmic judgment 
is that the medical diagnosis is a statement of fact that might carry 
with it implications about personal responsibility, whereas the karmic 
judgment is inherently bound up with moral disapprobation. For someone 
who endorses the karmic worldview, this might not be so jarring, but 
for someone who doesn’t, it’s morally offensive because it carries with 
it a kind of moral condemnation that seems otherwise—outside the 
framework of retributive karma—completely unwarranted. 
Thich Nhat Hanh on Blame
w
w The contemporary Vietnamese Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh has a 
suggestion that might help us see how someone could maintain a belief 
in karma without even implicitly blaming anyone for the state they’re in. 
Consider lettuce: If person plants it, but the lettuce does not grow, blaming 
the lettuce would be absurd.
w
w Blaming lettuce is absurd because the lettuce is just a thing—it’s not 
a subject, an agent, or anything like that. It doesn’t seem like the right 
candidate for blame. Additionally, blaming lettuce is ineffective. It just 
doesn’t work. A more effective route would be understanding what 
conditions make lettuce grow and what conditions inhibit its growth. 
w
w The deeper lesson is this: People are like lettuce. As Thich Nhat Hanh 
goes on to say, we should think of our children like that lettuce and 
ultimately extend such concern to everyone we meet, because the fact is 
that everybody’s like the lettuce. It’s inappropriate to blame anyone, and 
what’s more, it’s pointless. 
w
w With this in mind, Thich Nhat Hanh provides us with the resources to 
articulate a conception of karma that is causal but not retributive. No one 
is ultimately responsible for their situation, even if there are complex 
causal processes entangled with our past and present choices that have 
led up to where we are now. No one is blameworthy, and so the problem 
of victim blaming will never emerge. 
129
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Victim Blaming and the Just-World Hypothesis
Lecture 19

Conclusion
w
w This course’s instructor does not endorse either the just-world hypothesis 
or any version of karma. However, some people do, and so this lecture 
closes with two ideas. 
w
w The first is that thinking the world is a just place might not actually be 
what centrally drives us to blame victims. Instead, the driving factors 
might instead be binding values and a commitment to the reasonableness 
of blame. Whether anyone thinks victim blaming is reasonable might end 
up boiling down to very specific moral commitments like these. 
w
w The second thought is that it appears as if we can eliminate victim blaming 
while maintaining the belief that the world is, at bottom, a just place. In 
other words, believing that the world is a just place doesn’t have to come 
with the dark tendency to think that victims always get what they deserve. 
SUGGESTED READING
Burley, “Retributive Karma and the Problem of Victim Blaming.”
Niemi and Young, “When and Why We See Victims as Responsible.”
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 Do you hold some version of the just-world hypothesis? 
2	 Have you ever found yourself blaming a victim, whether someone 
else or yourself? If so, why do you think you did it? If not, why 
not? Do you think it has to do with your values or your worldview? 
3	 Do you think victim blaming is morally defensible? Why or 
why not? 
130
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Victim Blaming and the Just-World Hypothesis
Lecture 19

LECTURE 20
A
ll people have a retributive urge. This retributive urge 
drives us to punish others, but it also drives revenge. 
Sometimes, we play by the rules and allow institutions and 
authorities to take up our retributive tendencies and act on our 
behalf. Sometimes, though, we handle things ourselves—that is, 
we seek revenge. 

The Retributive Urge 
w
w One view is that the retributive urge reveals an important moral fact about 
us: We all have a sense of justice that drives us to stand up when we’re 
treated unfairly and that even drives us to stand up for other people who 
have been treated similarly. To some extent, that seems correct. Fairness 
does matter to most of us. 
w
w However, the retributive urge also drives us to act immorally. It drives 
us to hurt other people, turn our backs on others, hold grudges, and act 
in ways that endanger ourselves and those we love. The retributive urge 
also drives us to break the rules, break the law, and take matters into our 
own hands, when it would be more appropriate to leave things to others. 
w
w Why do we have this urge? The 
answer we commonly get from 
evolutionary psychology is that 
the retributive urge is fitness 
enhancing. Emotions like anger, 
resentment, and indignation are 
the mechanisms that motivate 
us to act retributively. Acting 
retributively is beneficial because 
it increases our chances of survival 
in the sense that it contributes to 
social coordination. 
w
w The idea here is that the retributive 
urge drives us to keep others in 
line in ways that enhance fitness. 
As a group, we’re more likely to 
thrive if we work together. The 
retributive urge, which is always 
on alert for unfair behavior, is part 
of what drives us to cooperate with 
each other. 
Punishment versus Revenge
Punishment is institutional 
or authoritative retaliation, 
whereas revenge is individual 
or unauthoritative retaliation. 
In a game of basketball, for 
instance, a referee might punish 
a player for unsportsmanlike 
behavior with a technical foul. 
The rules of the game allow 
for this, and the referee has 
the authority to discipline 
players in this way. However, 
if a player retaliates against 
another player, that player has 
engaged in an act of revenge. 
The player is reacting as an 
unauthorized individual.
132
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Retribution and Revenge
Lecture 20

Institutionalized Cultures and Honor Cultures 
w
w The scholar Tamler Sommers has argued that, even if the retributive 
urge is necessary for retributive behavior, it’s not enough for cognitively 
sophisticated creatures like us. This is because “we can question the 
rationality of our emotions.” If we think that acting on a certain urge is 
irrational or against our self-interest or otherwise inappropriate, we have 
reason to resist that urge. 
w
w Sommers’s point isn’t that we’re always good at resisting these urges; it’s 
that we can and do, at least sometimes, resist them. The problem is that 
retributive behavior remains “fitness enhancing for its role in improving 
social coordination,” but “increased cognitive sophistication” makes it 
less likely that we’ll act out on our retributivist urges. This is a problem, 
rather than an advantage, so long as we think that retributive behavior is 
important for social coordination.
w
w Sommers thinks that many societies have recognized this problem 
and have made steps toward resolving it. Their resolution has been to 
introduce cultural standards that support retributive behavior. 
w
w The two relevant cultural environments are honor cultures and 
institutionalized cultures. In honor cultures, social cooperation is small-
scale, focusing on interactions with “tight-knit groups” and family 
members, often excluding strangers. Resources are also relatively scarce 
in such cultures, and there’s little protection provided by the government 
or other formal institutions. 
w
w In institutionalized cultures, by contrast, social cooperation is large-scale, 
focusing on interactions with people beyond family and small groups, 
including anonymous interactions with strangers. Resources are not as 
scarce in such cultures, which are governed by institutions that provide 
protection and policies that encourage cooperation and discourage 
uncooperative or criminal behavior. 
133
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Retribution and Revenge
Lecture 20

w
w Sommers points out that our retributivist urges function differently in 
these two types of societies. In honor cultures, the retributive urge drives 
individuals to handle their own problems and to make displays that signal 
to others that any attempt to take advantage of them would come at a 
great cost. 
w
w In institutionalized cultures, offenders are still punished, but the role 
of punisher is taken up by a third party—a formal institution like the 
justice system. Individual acts of revenge are viewed as crimes. In 
institutionalized cultures, revenge is often viewed as immoral, even if we 
nonetheless admire it. In honor cultures, by contrast, revenge is admired 
and required. 
Vengeance in the Oresteia 
w
w The tragedian Aeschylus explores the difference between these two views 
of revenge and the transition from an honor culture to an institutionalized 
culture in his Oresteia, a trilogy made up of the interlinked plays 
Agamemnon, The Libation Bearers, and The Eumenides. For a summary 
of the events in the plays, refer to the audio or video lecture. 
134
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Retribution and Revenge
Lecture 20

w
w The most straightforward reading of this story, at least as told by 
Aeschylus, is that we move from an honor culture in which the offended 
take responsibility for avenging wrongs to an institutionalized culture in 
which a formal legal system handles such things. The futility of private 
revenge is replaced with the power of retributive justice.
w
w Aeschylus suggests that the transition from an honor culture to an 
institutionalized culture is both a matter of progress and a matter of 
some delicate complexity. Even in an institutionalized culture, after all, 
honor will matter, and the thirst for vengeance will remain. This raises 
an interesting question: In an honor culture, revenge can be just, but what 
about in an institutionalized culture? 
Just Revenge
w
w The philosopher Brian Rosebury argues that revenge can be just even 
when it’s not moral. Rosebury’s idea is that revenge, although indefensible 
morally, “is capable, under certain conditions, of a well-founded respect 
which is based on its standing outside morality, as a choice by the revenger 
not to act morally but to follow other motives.”
w
w Rosebury thinks that revenge is morally indefensible because we can’t 
justify it by appealing to altruism or social safety. This is because acts of 
revenge harm others and because acts of revenge undermine moral order, 
at least in institutionalized cultures. Even so, Rosebury argues, we might 
still call a vengeful act just.
w
w Some might worry that the only truly respect-worthy actions are morally 
justified actions. To ease such concerns, Rosebury presents a case. 
Imagine that Albert’s daughter has been killed by a diplomat from another 
country. Because of nuances surrounding diplomatic immunity and 
tensions between the diplomat’s country and Albert’s, the killer returns 
home without facing any consequences. 
135
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Retribution and Revenge
Lecture 20

w
w Albert knows, given the two country’s histories, that nothing is going 
to happen to the killer. He’ll go free. Albert wishes he could forgive the 
man, and he agrees, at least theoretically, that revenge is fruitless. Yet 
he finds himself with the overwhelming sense that he has to avenge his 
daughter; otherwise, he just wouldn’t be able to live with himself. Albert 
tracks the killer down and kills him. 
w
w Rosebury wants us now to consider whether we think what Albert has 
done is morally right or wrong. Then, Rosebury wants us to consider 
whether we respect what he has done. If we think the action is wrong but 
respect it nonetheless, Rosebury thinks we’ll see that our moral judgment 
doesn’t track our judgment of respect. 
w
w Albert did something we can sympathize with, and we can recognize that 
his act of vengeance is in a sense just. It follows from basic principles of 
reciprocity: The diplomat did something to Albert and his family. Lacking 
any institutional recourse, Albert did the same to the diplomat. 
Laura Blumenfeld
w
w Another type of situation requires us to reconsider the norms associated 
with institutionalized cultures and honor cultures. Sommers points out 
that we can have mixed cultures and within-group variation. 
w
w To demonstrate this, he considers the example of Laura Blumenfeld, author 
of a book titled Revenge. Blumenfeld was from a Jewish middle-class 
family living on Long Island. She graduated from Harvard, but after her 
father was shot on a trip to Israel, she went on a revenge quest lasting 
a decade. 
w
w However, her father wasn’t killed, he didn’t suffer any long-term injuries, 
and the person who shot him was already in prison. Institutional justice 
had done its job. Blumenfeld’s quest for revenge baffled everyone 
she knew, including her father, who felt that justice had been served. 
Blumenfeld felt dishonored and believed that institutional justice 
inadequately compensated for that dishonor. 
136
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Retribution and Revenge
Lecture 20

w
w The desire for vengeance drives us to do terrible things, but the retributive 
urge also plays a crucial role in creating and maintaining social cooperation. 
The tension between retributive justice (which is something moral) 
and just revenge (which is something beyond morality) is fascinating 
and troubling. It is fair to wonder whether the transition from honor to 
institutions is, or can ever be, completely satisfying. 
SUGGESTED READING
Aeschylus, Orestia.
Sommers, Relative Justice.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 Have you ever felt the retributivist urge? 
2	 What do you think the importance of cultural variation is when 
thinking about revenge? 
3	 What lessons about revenge do you think we can draw from 
Aeschylus’s Orestia? 
137
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Retribution and Revenge
Lecture 20

LECTURE 21
T
his lecture considers forgiveness and redemption as 
responses to the dark side of human nature. The lecture 
also looks at their limits. 

Forgiveness 
w
w Forgiveness is more than forgetting and less than excusing. It is a response 
to someone whom we continue to see as responsible for what they’ve 
done. Additionally, forgiveness is not necessarily a response to a request 
for forgiveness. 
w
w Perhaps forgiveness is primarily about how we react. This is the view 
of forgiveness that Jeffrie Murphy, a professor, has defended. Murphy 
argues, in essence, that forgiveness is renouncing our resentment on 
broadly moral grounds. 
w
w Additionally, it seems that we can forgive people even if we haven’t fully 
renounced our resentment toward them. One way of looking at resentment 
is as a feeling of ill will toward someone. In that case, it doesn’t look like 
we could forgive them and still resent them. 
w
w However, resentment might also be a moral 
protest that those we care about have not 
been treated properly. If that’s what 
resentment is, then it seems we can forgive 
while continuing to resent. 
w
w Forgiveness is a matter of overcoming ill 
will. This is the view that we get from Eve 
Garrard and David McNaughton, who look 
at ill will as a matter of “wishing harm to 
someone, relishing the pain and discomfort 
that he suffers.” 
w
w Simply getting rid of ill will isn’t enough, 
Garrard and McNaughton argue. It also 
requires cultivating at least some measure 
of goodwill toward those we forgive. Being 
disdainful of or even indifferent to them 
isn’t ill will, but it would block forgiveness. 
From the 
Buddhist 
perspective, 
when another 
person harms 
us, the goal 
is not to 
overcome ill 
will. The goal 
is never to 
have it in the 
first place. 
139
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Forgiveness and Redemption
Lecture 21

Moral Obligations
w
w An important question related to forgiveness is this: If the wrongdoer 
demonstrates real contrition, are the people they affected obligated 
to forgive the wrongdoer? In the Gospel of Luke, Jesus provides an 
answer: “If your brother sins,” he tells us, “rebuke him, and if he repents, 
forgive him; and if he sins against 
you seven times in the day, and 
turns to you seven times and says, 
‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.” 
w
w On a straightforward reading, it 
looks like Jesus thinks we have 
an obligation to forgive anyone 
who repents. Additionally, the 
philosopher Laurence Thomas 
has defended the idea of victims 
having an obligation to forgive 
wrongdoers who deserve it. This 
is easier for some people to accept 
when it comes to minor offenses 
than for grievous transgressions.
w
w Professor Kathryn Norlock also notes that placing an obligation on victims 
to forgive their victimizers, no matter how righteously contrite they might 
be, runs into other problems associated with gender, race, and social 
expectation. Traditionally, men have expected women to be forgiving, for 
instance, and for this reason alone, we should be cautious in affirming 
any obligation on the part of victims to forgive. 
w
w Though there can be debate over whether we have an obligation to forgive 
people who have done such great harm that it qualifies as evil, Thomas’s 
argument points toward the connection between forgiveness and 
redemption. In order for an evildoer to be redeemed—to be morally 
transformed and brought back into the moral community—it looks 
like he might need his victims to acknowledge his contrition through 
their forgiveness.
140
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Forgiveness and Redemption
Lecture 21

Spiritual Redemption
w
w God, in the Christian tradition, forgives human sin and redeems human 
beings. On this way of thinking, God does not simply forgive us. This 
way of thinking is associated with so-called satisfaction theories of the 
atonement. There are several important versions of this theory, but the 
basic idea behind any satisfaction theory is that through Jesus Christ, 
God is compensated for human sin. 
w
w The 11th-century Christian philosopher Anselm of Canterbury provides 
an influential satisfaction theory of atonement, which is often called the 
debt-cancellation theory. Anselm holds that humans, in our sinfulness, 
have incurred a debt toward God, because we owe God obedience 
and submission.
w
w Until this debt is paid, Anselm contends, we not only deserve to be 
punished; justice demands that we be punished. Yet humans cannot repay 
their debt to God, because repayment would require living the perfect life 
of obedience and submission owed to God. As a result, Anselm argues, 
only Christ, who deserves no punishment, can pay the debt and earn 
a reward that can then be transferred to human beings. 
w
w Anselm’s debt-cancellation theory doesn’t emphasize forgiveness or 
fully explain why Christ had to suffer and die for our sins. With that in 
mind, it’s worth considering another satisfaction theory—the penitential 
substitution theory. This theory goes back at least to 13th-century 
philosopher Thomas Aquinas, but the contemporary philosopher Richard 
Swinburne has recently developed it in interesting ways. 
w
w Swinburne points out that when we harm others and then seek forgiveness 
from them, we do four important things: We apologize, express remorse, 
repair the damage we’ve done, and offer penance (in the case of serious 
wrongs). Here, the idea of penance refers to suffering that one voluntarily 
undergoes or a sacrifice that one voluntarily makes in an effort to repair 
a relationship with another person. Swinburne thinks that, to reconcile 
ourselves with God, we must also apologize, express remorse, repair 
damage, and offer penance.
141
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Forgiveness and Redemption
Lecture 21

w
w Unfortunately, we can only apologize and express remorse; we cannot 
repair the damage we’ve done, nor can we offer proper penance, because 
we owe God a life of perfect obedience. This is a type we all fail to live, 
given our fallen nature. 
w
w However, it would be unfitting for God not to offer us help. As a result, 
Swinburne argues, God sent Jesus Christ to offer his sinless life and death 
as willing reparation and penance for the sins of us all.
w
w Swineburn’s theory emphasizes the close link between not only 
forgiveness and redemption, but also redemption and penance. To be 
redeemed is more than just to be forgiven or to offer an apology or even 
to be righteously contrite; on this model, it requires making up for what 
we’ve done through a kind of sacrifice. 
Moral Redemption 
w
w This lecture now turns to moral redemption, rather than the spiritual 
redemption that atonement theories deal with. Take, for example, the 
story of Ahimsaka, whose name means “harmless.”
w
w He started out as a good boy, but eventually turns to evil deeds—the 
gathering of fingers, cut off from live people—in order to obey a teacher’s 
perverse instructions. He eventually 
earns the terrible nickname, 
Angulimala, or “garland of fingers.” 
w
w Eventually, the Buddha intervened, 
presenting himself as a target. 
Chasing the Buddha with his 
blade, Angulimala ran as fast as he 
could, murder flooding his mind, 
but he could not catch the Buddha, 
even though the Buddha was only 
walking. Frustrated and confused, 
Angulimala shouted at the Buddha 
to stop. 
142
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Forgiveness and Redemption
Lecture 21

w
w At this, the Buddha turned to his would-be murderer and said, “I have 
stopped, Angulimala. Why don’t you stop, too?” Angulimala did stop, 
and he followed the Buddha from that day on. 
w
w The villagers did not forgive him. What he had done was too terrible. 
They hated him and would beat him when they could. The Buddha 
noted this and told Angulimala that all of this was the consequence of 
his own violence. As such, he needed to endure their hatred and his pain 
with tranquility. 
w
w Angulimala’s story is a story of redemption without forgiveness. As an 
enlightened being with no ill will to move on from, the Buddha could not 
forgive Angulimala. The villagers, who were victims, were so outraged 
by what he had done that they continued to harbor ill will against 
Angulimala. They did not forgive him, either. Yet he was redeemed, 
despite his inhuman crimes.
w
w We can read Angulimala’s story as a story about the miraculous powers 
of the Buddha to save those who seem beyond redemption. Alternatively, 
we can read it as a story about the power we all have, no matter what 
we’ve done, to transform ourselves so completely that we are no longer 
the monsters we once were. This second reading emphasizes our personal 
power to transform ourselves—our personal power to buy ourselves back 
through our own efforts. 
SUGGESTED READING
Garrard and McNaughton, Forgiveness.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 How would you define forgiveness? What is the difference between 
forgetting and forgiving? 
2	 Do you think we have an obligation to forgive others for what 
they’ve done? 
3	 What do you think about moral or spiritual redemption? 
143
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Forgiveness and Redemption
Lecture 21

LECTURE 22
I
s anger always destructive? Is it merely a reflection of the 
dark side of human nature, or can anger play an important 
role in our moral lives? This lecture seeks to address those 
questions. The thoughts of the Buddhist monk Shantideva and 
the philosopher Seneca guide the lecture. 

The Works of Shantideva and Seneca
w
w Seneca authored a work entitled On Anger, which functioned as letter of 
advice addressed to his brother Novatus. On Anger is sophisticated and 
insightful, but it’s also conversational and accessible to readers who don’t 
know much about Stoic philosophy. 
w
w Shantideva reflects on anger in the sixth chapter of The Way of the 
Bodhisattva, a work intended mainly for Mahayana Buddhist practitioners 
who 
aspire 
to 
become 
Bodhisattvas. (A bodhisattva is 
an enlightened being who, out 
of compassion, forgoes final 
liberation—or nirvana—in order 
to eliminate everyone’s suffering). 
w
w Shantideva and Seneca never met 
each other, living as they did in 
very different places and very 
different times, but on one point 
they’re perfectly aligned: Anger is 
so dangerous that we should avoid 
it altogether. 
What Is Anger?
w
w The word Seneca uses when talking about anger is the Latin term ira, which 
he defines as a “burning desire to punish him by whom you think yourself 
to have been unfairly harmed.” On this definition, anger is a strong desire, 
but it’s also a judgment. When we become angry, according to Seneca, 
we want the person who has harmed us to be harmed in return. 
w
w Shantideva doesn’t offer a precise definition of anger. However, in the 
Buddhist tradition, anger is a mental affliction bound up with the three 
root poisons of attachment, aversion, and ignorance, all of which lead to 
existential suffering. 
Shantideva and Seneca
Shantideva was a Buddhist 
monk who taught at Nalanda 
University in India during 
the 8th century. Seneca 
was a public intellectual, 
dramatist, orator, and 
the advisor and teacher 
of Emperor Nero in Rome 
during the 1st century. 
145
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Elimination of Anger
Lecture 22

w
w This lecture will build on Seneca’s foundation and work with this 
definition: Anger is an agitated emotional state brought about by the 
judgment that someone has wronged us (or those we care about) 
and typically accompanied either by a desire to harm the wrongdoer or 
by a hostile attitude toward them.
The Elimination View 
w
w Seneca and Shantideva think we should eliminate anger from our lives 
altogether. Stoic philosophers agree with Seneca about the need to 
eliminate anger, and the Buddha himself agrees with Shantideva that, 
even in the most extreme situations, anger is unjustified. 
w
w To make their case, both Seneca and Shantideva emphasize that 
it is irrational to be angry with nature. Here, the term nature means 
something like “the way things really are, rather than how they just seem 
to be.” Both Shantideva and Seneca think that it’s irrational to be angry 
with that. 
w
w To make his case, Shantideva often emphasizes the Buddhist doctrine of 
no-self. This is the doctrine that there is no stable and enduring self that 
lies behind our actions and makes us who we are. 
w
w Seneca doesn’t endorse the Buddhist doctrine of no-self, but he insists 
nonetheless that “no sane man becomes angry with nature.” For 
Seneca, because we are part of nature, we also count as interconnected 
citizens of the cosmos. As such, it makes no sense for us to wish anyone 
else harm. 
w
w Interestingly, Shantideva agrees with Seneca that we should regard 
each other as interconnected parts of a greater whole. This is because 
Shantideva believes that we are all unified in our desire for happiness and 
in our struggle with suffering. Once we recognize this, he argues, being 
angry with others makes no sense, because we’re all working together 
toward the same goal. 
146
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Elimination of Anger
Lecture 22

The Moderation View 
w
w Another line of thinking is that, especially in extreme cases of wrongdoing, 
anger is reasonable and even appropriate. Such thinking might lead to an 
endorsement of the moderation view of anger. 
w
w The moderation view is most famously set forth by Aristotle in the 
Nicomachean Ethics. Aristotle suggests that, rather than eliminate anger, 
we should manage it and harness its power. According to this moderation 
view, many instances of anger still count as bad, but many other instances 
are good.  In feeling anger, we may affirm the struggle of the victim, the 
responsibility of the wrongdoer, and the injustice of the act. 
w
w Some people might endorse the moderation view, thinking it is impossible 
to eliminate anger. Anger is a basic human emotion universally found 
in all human cultures, meaning it is hardwired into us and impossible 
to eliminate. If we can’t possibly eliminate anger, then we should prefer 
moderation over elimination. 
147
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Elimination of Anger
Lecture 22

w
w Seneca has a subtle and helpful response to 
this objection. He distinguishes between the 
initial shock we feel when “we believe there 
is an injustice” and the judgment we make. 
w
w Seneca thinks that the initial shock is an 
involuntary movement of the mind and, 
as such, doesn’t count as genuine anger. 
Seneca’s point is that genuine anger is 
more than an immediate gut reaction to 
a situation; it’s a judgment that requires 
our endorsement. 
w
w Armed with this distinction, Seneca can 
accommodate the concern that we can’t 
eliminate the initial, involuntary feelings 
associated with anger. He still insists we can eliminate genuine anger, 
because it’s up to us how we respond to those gut reactions. 
w
w Another line of thinking is that anger actually helps us recognize what 
is morally important in certain situations. Seneca recognizes that there’s 
something to this observation, but again, the distinction between reflexive 
anger and genuine anger can help here. 
w
w Our gut reactions to unjust situations can tell us a lot, but how we react to 
that information is what matters. Seneca and Shantideva can accept that 
gut reactions can be importantly informative, while insisting that genuine 
anger is destructive and irrational. Shantideva and Seneca also insist that 
rather than providing us with clear moral insights, genuine anger actually 
clouds our moral perception.
Anger as Motivation
w
w Yet another argument is that anger can motivate us to do the right thing. 
Shantideva and Seneca obviously think that anger is dangerous, and so 
their basic response to the motivating power of anger is to emphasize 
anger’s dangers over its benefits. 
People sometimes 
take others more 
seriously because 
they seem 
angry. However, 
according to 
Seneca, this only 
tells us that we 
sometimes might 
need to pretend 
to be angry. 
148
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Elimination of Anger
Lecture 22

w
w However, this calls for something that might replace the motivating power 
of anger. Shantideva and the Buddhist tradition are equipped to provide 
this, because they don’t just want us to eliminate anger; they want us to 
replace anger with compassion and loving-kindness. 
w
w Compassion in the Buddhist sense is the recognition that others are 
suffering and the desire that anyone capable of suffering ultimately 
be free of suffering and its causes. Meanwhile, loving-kindness is the 
recognition that all sentient beings seek happiness and the desire that 
they have the conditions that allow them to attain it. 
The Humanity-Affirmation Argument
w
w Another argument regarding the moderation view of anger is the 
humanity-affirmation argument. The idea behind this argument is that the 
only way to affirm the humanity of those who have suffered injustice is 
to feel angry about their oppression. To do otherwise would be inhumane. 
w
w To make this argument, the philosopher Martha Nussbaum appeals 
to Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel’s experience of being rescued from 
a Nazi death camp. On seeing the horrors of the camp, Wiesel recounts, 
an American soldier started yelling and cursing. Rather than finding 
the soldier’s behavior upsetting or offensive, Wiesel found his behavior 
justified, reasonable, and genuinely humane. 
w
w This is a powerful story, and it seems to provide a compelling reason 
to endorse the moderation view of anger over the elimination view. To 
understand what Seneca and Shantideva might say in response to this 
story, consider the following thought experiment.
w
w Imagine that instead of a frustrated soldier, Elie Wiesel had encountered 
Avalokiteśvara, the bodhisattva of compassion. Avalokiteśvara is the 
embodiment of compassion and loving-kindness. If he had come upon 
Wiesel in that awful death camp, he wouldn’t have become angry; he 
would have responded to him with the deepest kind of compassion, 
hoping to ease his suffering, and with the deepest kind of love, hoping to 
return him to his former happiness. 
149
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Elimination of Anger
Lecture 22

w
w Those who would rather have a friend who acts like the angry soldier 
would likely endorse the moderation view. Those who would rather have 
a friend who acts like the compassionate Avalokiteśvara would likely 
endorse the elimination view. 
SUGGESTED READING
Seneca, Anger, Mercy, Revenge.
Shantideva, The Way of the Bodhisattva.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What is your view of anger? How would you define it? What is 
your experience with it?
2	 Do you agree with Seneca and Shantideva that we should eliminate 
anger? What is the most powerful reason, in your opinion, for 
eliminating anger? 
3	 What is the humanity-affirmation argument? Are you convinced 
by the argument? Why or why not? 
150
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Elimination of Anger
Lecture 22

LECTURE 23
T
his lecture considers how we might stand up against the 
dark side without allowing it to overwhelm us. The lecture 
examines a number of stories and tools that provide 
guidance for how we might do this. 

The Pacifist’s Challenge 
w
w In the Buddhist, Jain, and Hindu 
traditions, the concept of ahimsa 
is a fundamental ethical principle. 
Ahimsa is a Sanskrit word that means 
“without harm” or “non-injury.” It’s 
sometimes also translated as “the 
principle of nonviolence.” 
w
w Ahimsa emphasizes the lack of 
harmful intentions and serves 
as a precondition for developing 
compassion—the recognition that 
everyone is suffering and the desire to eliminate the conditions for their 
suffering. Compassion, or karuna in Sanskrit, contributes not only to the 
elimination of other people’s suffering, but also to one’s own tranquility. 
w
w However, it is hard to maintain peace and tranquility in the face of danger. 
The world often presses on us in ways that make peace seem impossible. 
People sometimes unjustly inflict harm on others, so what are we to do 
in cases like this? How can we peacefully stand up to violence without 
allowing violence to consume us? 
w
w A common phrase related to this issue is “turning the other cheek,” which 
recalls Jesus’s famous words. In Matthew 5:39, Jesus says, “But I tell you, 
do not resist an evil person. If anyone strikes you on the right cheek, turn 
to them the other cheek also.”
w
w The Christian theologian Walter Wink has argued that this passage 
supports what he calls Jesus’s third way. This is a middle way between 
the extremes of cowardly submission and violent reprisal. Wink suggests 
that in this passage, Jesus is telling the victims of oppression to stand up 
for themselves, to defy their oppressors, and to assert their humanity, but 
without answering the brutality in kind. 
w
w Wink suggests that standing up to violence in this way nullifies the 
oppressor’s power. The oppressor can no longer shame the victim. 
152
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Being Peaceful in a Troubled World
Lecture 23

Mirroring Tendencies
w
w Recent discoveries in neuroscience give some reason to think that acting 
nice toward someone may change his or her behavior. The reason for this 
has to do with mirror neurons and our mirroring tendencies. 
w
w When we move our bodies, we activate specific neural circuits in our 
motor cortex, and this happens even when we just watch somebody 
else move in a certain way. This is why it’s nearly impossible to explain 
to a child how to tie shoelaces, but it’s very effective to have the child 
watch a demonstration. 
w
w Research suggests that this is true not only for motor movements, but 
also for other behaviors. When someone acts aggressively, other people 
have a tendency to mimic aggression, because they are neurologically 
mirroring it. The same goes for kindness. When someone is nice to us, 
we have a tendency to mimic that. 
Reframing Confrontation 
w
w The question remains: How can we remain calm and peaceful in the 
face of hostility and violence? Buddhist practitioners employ various 
reframing techniques in their journey on the path toward enlightenment 
and liberation—that is, on the path to nirvana. 
w
w For example, the 8th-century Mahayana Buddhist philosopher Shantideva 
makes use of many different reframing techniques in his masterpiece 
The Way of the Bodhisattva. In this work, Shantideva is writing for 
aspiring bodhisattvas—that is, beings who forgo final nirvana until 
everyone has achieved it.
w
w In The Way of the Bodhisattva, Shantideva explains how we ourselves 
might not only aspire to become a bodhisattva, but also begin to engage 
in the process of actually becoming one. To help us accomplish this, 
Shantideva offers practical arguments and advice, including advice 
that helps address the question: When others assail and annoy us, what 
should we do? 
153
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Being Peaceful in a Troubled World
Lecture 23

w
w One thing we have to do is resist becoming angry, and one of the techniques 
Shantideva offers for avoiding anger is a clear example of a reframing 
skill. This is part of how Shantideva describes the technique in The Way 
of the Bodhisattva: 
Those who stay close by me, then, 
To damage my good name and cut me down to size—
Are surely there protecting me
From falling into realms of grief.
w
w Shantideva’s central point is that we can skillfully reframe how we view 
those who slander us, who insult us, and who actively block our worldly 
ambitions. Rather than hindering us, they are actually helping us. 
w
w Worldly matters simply engender attachment and aversion. It is ignorant 
to think that such matters could make a person truly happy or could 
eliminate suffering. Instead of being angry with these people, Shantideva 
advises treating them as a source of joy. 
w
w Thich Nhat Hanh, a contemporary Vietnamese Buddhist monk, suggests 
another tool. This is how Thich Nhat Hanh puts it: 
There may be times when you are angry with someone, and 
you try everything you can to transform your anger, but 
nothing seems to work. In this case, the Buddha proposes 
that you give the other person a present. It sounds childish, 
but it is very effective. When we’re angry with someone, 
we want to hurt them. Giving them a present changes that 
into wanting to make them happy. So, when you are angry 
with someone, send him a present. After you have sent it, 
you will stop being angry with him. It’s very simple, and it 
always works. Don’t wait until you get angry to go and buy the 
present. When you feel very grateful, when you feel you love 
him or her so much, then go and buy the present right away. 
But don’t send it; don’t give it to the other person yet. Keep 
it. You may have the luxury of having two or three presents 
stored secretly in your drawer. Later, when you feel angry, 
take one out and deliver it. It is very effective.
154
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Being Peaceful in a Troubled World
Lecture 23

w
w This gift-giving technique changes us by moving us away from anger, 
resentment, and revenge. It moves us toward compassion, loving-
kindness, and generosity. Additionally, it changes others by mirroring 
for them something humane, by easing their suffering, and by helping 
them reframe the situation, too. 
w
w People might resist the gift. They might even see what we’re doing as 
ironic and insulting. However, Thich Nhat Hanh is suggesting that if we 
make this a practice and we do it skillfully, we can continue to be peaceful 
in the midst of trouble. 
SUGGESTED READING
Nhat Hanh, Peace Is Every Step.
Wink, The Powers That Be.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 What do you think of the stories of Julio Diaz and Ryokan? Do you 
aspire to be like them? Do their stories worry you? Does it seem 
too idealistic to model our lives on them? 
2	 What’s the difference between loving confrontation and loving de-
escalation? Do you agree with one approach more than the other? 
Why or why not? 
3	 What do you think of Wink’s interpretation of Matthew 5:39?
155
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 Being Peaceful in a Troubled World
Lecture 23

LECTURE 24
T
his lecture explores the allure of the dark side. It focuses on 
what makes death, violence, and evil so fascinating. To do 
so, the lecture draws from philosophers and researchers, 
both ancient and modern.

The Story of Leontius
w
w In the Republic, Plato tells the story of Leontius. One day, Leontius was 
walking outside the walls of Athens when he happened to see “some 
corpses lying at the executioners’ feet.” At this, Leontius found himself 
conflicted. On the one hand, he was disgusted as anyone would be by the 
sight and turned away; on the other, he had a strange desire to look at the 
dead bodies he had stumbled upon. 
w
w Plato’s story of Leontius is rich and important in many ways. Plato, for 
instance, thinks this suggests a third division in the soul: Not only is there 
a distinction between reason and desire, but there is also a spirited part 
of the soul revealed here. 
w
w When we encounter a dead body, we react 
in distinctive ways. Professor Pascal 
Boyer notes that encountering corpses 
triggers very specific mental processes, 
related to three important themes.
w
w The first theme is predation. For a long 
time, we’ve been both predators and 
prey. Viewing a dead body, so the story 
goes, triggers our sense of ourselves as 
potential prey and provokes fear. 
w
w The second theme associated with 
viewing a dead body is contagion. 
Corpses are decomposing organic matter; they are potentially toxic, so 
they require us to handle them carefully. In response to this, we find 
ourselves experiencing disgust at the sight of dead bodies. 
w
w The final theme that Boyer notes is violation. When we encounter a dead 
person, we experience a flood of distinctive thoughts and feelings related 
to the violation of a person. Encountering a dead person triggers our sense 
of what it’s like to be a person and to have the properties associated with 
persons. Yet because this person is now dead, our expectations associated 
with a person become violated.
157
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Allure of the Dark Side
Lecture 24

The Paradox of Horror 
w
w Picking up on this suggestion, 
psychologists Hank Davis and 
Andrea Javor used Boyer’s three 
themes—predation, contagion, 
and violation—to study how 
audiences react to horror films. 
They had participants score 
40 horror films according 
these themes. 
w
w The movies whose aggregate 
scores were higher tended to 
be rated more favorably on 
the Internet Movie Database. 
Effective horror films, it seems, 
impact us in many of the same ways dead bodies do. Their impact comes 
from their ability to trigger complex emotions and thoughts and to violate 
our expectations about the category of person.
w
w They also note that a sense of peril, associated with the theme of predation, 
is a “defining feature of the horror genre.” Audiences find being menaced, 
frightened, or even disgusted pleasurable enough to want to watch horror 
films. Philosopher Noël Carroll calls this the paradox of horror. 
w
w This ties in with Leontius and his desire to look at corpses. We can 
imagine that Leontius felt fear—we can imagine that the executioners 
were menacing and the situation was dreadful. 
w
w Still, even though the dead bodies Leontius wants to see are real, which 
makes them importantly different from a horror film, he’s relatively safe 
in the same way we are when we watch horror films. In neither case are 
we in immediate danger. Perhaps we are able to scrutinize dangers from 
a safe distance and rehearse real-world scenarios in a way that helps us 
learn about how we would handle horrible situations. 
Rubbernecking
When we rubberneck—
gawking at disasters and 
accidents—we participate in 
a kind of morbid curiosity. 
One professor, Eric Wilson, 
thinks that we want to 
experience other people’s 
suffering not in a sadistic way, 
but in order to empathize.
158
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Allure of the Dark Side
Lecture 24

Hedonic Reversals
w
w A hedonic reversal occurs when something that used to be painful or 
unpleasant becomes its opposite—that is, pleasant or pleasurable. Part of 
the explanation for this is that initially negative experiences can falsely 
signal that there is a threat to us. For instance, take a hot pepper that isn’t 
really dangerous, or a roller coaster 
isn’t truly going to kill anyone. 
w
w As we realize that we’ve been 
fooled—that our body isn’t quite 
telling the truth—some of us at 
least start to derive pleasure. One 
professor, Paul Rozin, describes 
this kind of pleasure as derived from 
a mastery of “mind over body.” 
w
w This is benign because it’s safe, but 
it’s masochistic because we end up 
enjoying what our bodies initially 
reject. We come to enjoy initially 
unpleasant sensations and feelings 
through this process of mastery. 
Motivations
w
w In a 1995 article, Deirdre Johnston 
identifies four different motivations that adolescents have for watching 
horror films. These motivations, she argues, suggest four different kinds 
of “experiences in response to graphically violent stimuli.” 
w
w The gore-watching motivation is associated with people who seem to be 
curious about violence, who have an “attraction to the grotesque,” and 
who seem to have a “vengeful interest” in killing and seeing people “get 
what they deserve.” Meanwhile, thrill watchers focus “on the suspense.” 
159
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Allure of the Dark Side
Lecture 24

w
w Independent watchers seem 
to care about playing a social 
role in which they can test 
their maturity and bravery and 
perhaps even demonstrate those 
qualities to others. Independent 
watchers identify with victims, 
but have a positive outlook. 
w
w Problem watchers also identify 
with victims, but they do not 
enjoy horror films. They tend to 
feel angry and lonely, and they 
tend to experience negative 
affect both before and after 
watching horror. 
w
w Johnston’s study suggests that 
people with certain personality traits tend to be motivated to view dark 
things like horror films for very different reasons. They might get very 
different things out of their experiences. 
Real Horror
w
w When it comes to real-life horror, the philosopher Robert Solomon has 
argued that being aroused by instances of real horror is desensitizing and 
perhaps even pathological. More importantly, “it is morally repugnant, 
and the moral repugnance lies precisely in the fact that those who enjoy 
the [truly] horrible no longer find that the horrible provokes horror.”
w
w For Solomon, horror as a response to the horrible is something very 
unpleasant—something that’s really a traumatizing and emotionally 
overwhelming experience. It’s the kind of experience that makes us feel 
helpless and lost. 
160
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Allure of the Dark Side
Lecture 24

w
w However, as the classicist Garrett Fagan notes, throughout many 
cultures over human history, audiences have been drawn to spectacles 
involving real horror. These range from executions to blood sports such 
as gladiatorial games.
w
w One way to start explaining this is to point out that, rather than being 
subhuman and abnormal, people are drawn to spectacles featuring real 
horror partly for the same reasons people are drawn to all kinds of sports: 
They find a community of peers whose collective experience validates 
their shared view of how the world is. 
w
w For a modern example, consider reactions to the death of Osama bin Laden, 
the founder al-Qaeda and the man who is credited with masterminding 
the attacks of September 11, 2001. Ask yourself: Were you happy to hear 
the news? Did you read any of the accounts of the siege that led to his 
death with pleasure? If you did not derive pleasure from this event, do 
you know anyone who did?
w
w It appears that there are all sorts of social, psychological, and moral 
factors that might drive us to enjoy or to find some satisfaction in what 
might seem so dark, at least at first blush. 
Conclusion
w
w Perhaps the reason people are haunted and fascinated by the dark side of 
things has much to do with mastery. This is the basic idea behind hedonic 
reversals. It’s what flips negative experiences into something enjoyable 
or at least interesting and worth pursuing
w
w This sort of exploration is what the Buddhist thinker Pema Chödrön has 
in mind when she says that, “in all kinds of situations, we can find out 
what is true simply by studying ourselves in every nook and cranny, in 
every black hole and bright spot.” 
161
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Allure of the Dark Side
Lecture 24

w
w Of course, merely thinking about dark matters won’t magically cure us 
or transform the troubled world, but it’s a start. This means that thinking 
about evil and other dark aspects of the human condition isn’t just some 
morbid curiosity. We’re not being strange or childish. On the contrary, 
we’re facing up to who we are. 
SUGGESTED READING
Carroll, The Philosophy of Horror.
Fagan, The Lure of the Arena.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER 
1	 Can you identity with Leontius? Have you ever found yourself 
compelled to look upon something grizzly or terrible? 
2	 Do you enjoy horror movies and hot peppers? If so, does anything 
considered in this lecture make sense of your interest in them? 
3	 Do you think it is evil to enjoy real horror? Why or why not?
162
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
 The Allure of the Dark Side
Lecture 24

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, Marilyn McCord. “Sin as Uncleanness.” Philosophical Perspectives 
5 (1991): 1–27. Excellent article exploring the concept of sin
Aeschylus. Orestia. Translated by Ted Hughes. New York: Farrar, Straus, and 
Giroux, 1999. Masterful Greek tragedy exploring themes such as revenge. 
Anselm of Canterbury. “Why God Became Man.” Davies, Brian, and G. 
R. Evans eds. Anselm of Canterbury: The Major Works. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1998. Good translation of Anselm’s theory of atonement. 
Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologiae. Translated by the Fathers of the 
English Dominican Province. New Advent, 2017. http://www.newadvent.
org/summa/. Readable and free edition of Aquinas’s masterwork.
Archer, John. The Nature of Grief: The Evolution and Psychology of 
Reactions to Loss. New York: Routledge, 1999. Excellent discussion of grief 
from the perspective of evolutionary psychology. 
Aristotle. Basic Works of Aristotle. Translated and edited by Richard 
McKeon. New York: Modern Library Edition, 2001. Still the best single-
volume edition of Aristotle’s central works available in English. 
———. Nichomachean Ethics. Edited and translated by Sarah Broadie and 
Christopher Rowe. Oxford: Oxford Univeristy Press, 2002. An excellent 
edition of Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics.
Augustine of Hippo. Confessions. Translated by Henry Chadwick. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. Readable translation of 
Augustine’s masterwork. 
Barry, Peter. The Fiction of Evil. New York: Routledge. 2017. Excellent 
exploration of evil through fiction, including a nice discussion of evil 
and redemption. 
Batchelor, Stephen. “Living with the Devil: A Buddhist Take on Good and 
Evil.” Tricycle. Summer 2004. https://tricycle.org/magazine/living-devil/. 
Brief popular article exploring a Buddhist perspective on the shadow self. 
163
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature

———. After Buddhism: Rethinking the Dharma for a Secular Age. New 
Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2015. Interesting secularization 
of Buddhism.
Becker, Ernest. The Denial of Death. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1973. 
Bhikkhu, Nikāya, and Ñāṇamoli Bhikkhu Bodhi, translators. The Middle 
Length Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Majjhima Nikaya. 
Fourth edition. Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications, 2015. Foundational 
works in the Buddhist tradition’s Pali canon, including the Aṅgulimāla Sutta.
Bloom, Paul. Just Babies: The Origins of Good and Evil. New York: Crown, 
2013. Entertaining popularization of Bloom’s research on the roots of 
morality and the relationship between human nature and both good and evil.
———. “Natural Born Killers.” The New York Times. June 21, 2013. https://
www.nytimes.com/2013/06/23/books/review/the-anatomy-of-violence-by-
adrian-raine.html. Excellent review of Raine’s book The Anatomy of Violence 
with insightful criticisms. 
Bodhi, Bhikku, translator. The Connected Discourses of the Buddha. 
Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications, 2000. Foundational works in the 
Buddhist tradition’s Pali canon.
Boyer, Pascal. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious 
Thought. New York, NY: Basic Books, 2001. Fascinating account of the 
evolutionary psychology of religious thought, including discussion of what 
happens when we encounter corpses. 
Breyer, Daniel. “Freedom with a Buddhist Face.” Sophia 52, no. 2 (2013): 
359–379. Analysis of the Buddhist view of freedom and responsibility
———. “Molinism, Freedom, and Luck.” Philosophia Christi 15, no. 2 (2013): 
415–432. Critique of Molinism. 
164
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

———. “The Cessation of Suffering and Buddhist Axiology.” Journal 
of Buddhist Ethics 22 (2015). http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/
files/2015/12/Breyer-Axiology-final.pdf. Discussion of what the ultimate 
good is in the Pali Buddhist tradition. 
Buddhaghosa. The Path of Purification. Translated by Bhikkhu Nanamoli. 
Fourth edition. Buddhist Publication Society, 2010. One of the most important 
works in the Buddhist philosophical tradition.
Burkert, Walter. Homo Necans: The Anthropology of Ancient Greek 
Sacrificial Ritual and Myth. Translated by Peter Bing. Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press, 1983. Fascinating discussion of 
violence and the roots of religion 
Burley, Mikel. “Retributive Karma and the Problem of Victim Blaming.” 
International Journal of Philosophy of Religion. Excellent and very helpful 
discussion of karma and victim blaming.
Buss, David. The Murderer Next Door: Why the Mind Is Designed to Kill. 
New York: Penguin Books, 2005. Excellent and interesting discussion of the 
evolutionary psychology of murder.
Calder, Todd. “Is Evil Just Very Wrong?” Philosophical Studies. Excellent 
analysis of the concept of evil as qualitatively distinct from the concept of 
the very wrong.
———. “The Concept of Evil.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Edited by Edward N. Zalta. Winter 2016 edition. Excellent survey of 
historical and contemporary philosophical accounts of evil.
Camus, Albert. The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays. Translated by Justin 
O’Brien. New York: Vintage, 1991 An excellent edition of Camus’s essays.
Card, Claudia. The Atrocity Paradigm: A Theory of Evil. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002. Important discussion of evil as atrocity, including 
an influential account of forgiveness and evil.
165
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Carroll, Noel. The Philosophy of Horror. New York: Routledge, 1990. 
Seminal discussion of art horror and our interest in it
Chan, Wing-Tsit, editor and translator. A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969. A useful single-volume 
anthology of Chinese philosophy. 
Cholbi, Michael. “Finding the Good in Grief: What Augustine Knew that 
Meursault Could Not,” Journal of the American Philosophical Association 
(2017): 91–105. Excellent discussion of the nature and value of grief.
Cook, Garreth. “The Moral Life of Babies: Yale Psychology Professor 
Paul Bloom Finds the Origins of Morality in Infants.” Scientific American, 
November 12, 2013. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-moral-
life-of-babies/. Insightful interview with Paul Bloom on morality and 
human nature. 
Crisp, Oliver. The Word Enfleshed: Exploring the Person and Work of Christ. 
Grand Rapids, MI: Backer Academic, 2016. Sophisticated exploration of 
incarnation, atonement, and other issues, including original sin. 
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow. New York: Harper Collins, 1990. Seminal 
discussion of flow experiences. 
Davidson, Donald. “How Is Weakness of the Will Possible?” In Davidson’s 
Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980. Important 
discussion of the nature of weakness of will. 
Davis, Hank, and Andrea Jvor. “Religion, Death, and Horror Movies: Some 
Striking Evolutionary Parallels.” Evolution and Cognition, 10, no. 1 (2004): 
11–18. Nice article using Boyer exploring our interest in horror films.
Deweese-Boyd, Ian. “Self-Deception.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. Edited by Edward N. Zalta. Fall 2017 edition. https://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/self-deception. Excellent survey of 
philosophical work on self-deception. 
166
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Dunning, David. “We Are All Confident Idiots.” Pacific Standard. 
October 27, 2014.  https://psmag.com/social-justice/confident-idiots-92793. 
Popular article on the Dunning-Kruger effect. 
Ekstrom, Laura. “Alienation, Autonomy, and the Self.” Midwest Studies in 
Philosophy 29 (2005): 45–67. Excellent article on alienation and the self.
Epicurus. The Essential Epicurus: Letters, Principal Doctrines, Vatican 
Sayings, and Fragments. Translated by Eugene M. O’Connor. Prometheus 
Books, 1991. Good sourcebook for Epicurus’s writings.
Fagan, Garrett. The Lure of the Arena: Social Psychology and the Crowd at 
the Roman Games. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011. Masterful 
study of real horror and our fascination with it.
Feldman, Fred. Confrontations with the Reaper: A Philosophical Study of 
the Nature and Value of Death. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992. 
Masterful philosophical treatment of death.
Fischoff, Stuart. “Hollywood, Halloween and Horror Movies—a Killer 
Formula.” Psychology Today, October 29, 2011. Popular article on our 
interest in horror films.
Framarin, Chris. Desire and Motivation in Indian Philosophy. New York: 
Routledge, 2009. Excellent analysis including a discussion of desire and 
motivation in the Bhagavad Gita. 
Frankfurt, Harry. The Importance of What We Care About. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1988. Collection of Frankfurt’s seminal essays. 
Freud, Sigmund. The Interpretation of Dreams. Translated by A. A. Brill. 
Modern Library edition. Excellent edition of Freud’s seminar discussion of 
dreams as wish fulfillment. 
Fricker, Miranda. Testimonial Injustice. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2007. Masterful and seminal discussion of testimonial injustice. 
167
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Garrard, Eve, and David McNaughton. Forgiveness. Durham: Acumen, 2010. 
Influential discussion of the nature and value of forgiveness. 
Goodman, Charles. The Consequences of Compassion. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2008. Masterful discussion of Buddhist ethics.
Gowans, Christopher. Philosophy of the Buddha. New York: Routledge, 
2003. Excellent philosophical introduction to the Buddha’s basic teachings.
Graham, A. C. Chuang Tzu: The Inner Chapters. Indianapolis: Hackett 
Publishing Company, 1981. Useful translation of important portions of 
the Zhuangzi.
Greco, John. “A Second Paradox Concerning Responsibility and Luck.” 
Metaphilosophy 26 (1995): 81–96. Insightful discussion of moral luck.
Hare, Robert. Without Conscience: The Disturbing World of the Psychopaths 
Among Us. New York: The Guilford Press, 1999. Influential discussion of 
psychopathy based on 25 years of research with vivid case studies.
Haybron, Daniel. “Moral Monsters and Saints.” The Monist, 85, no. 2 (2002): 
260–284. Insightful, helpful, but challenging philosophical analysis of the 
nature of evil personhood.
Holton, Robert. “Intention and Weakness of Will.” Journal of Philosophy 96 
(1999): 241–262. Important defense of a revisionist view of weakness of will. 
Homer. Odyssey. Translated by Emily Wilson. New York and London: W. W. 
Norton and Company, 2017. Fantastic translation of one of the great works 
in Western literature. 
Ivanhoe, Philip, and Bryan Van Norden, editors. Readings in Classical 
Chinese Philosophy. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 2003. 
Excellent volume with accessible translations.
168
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Johnston, Deirdre. “Adolescents’ Motivations for Viewing Graphic Horror.” 
Human Communication Research 21, no. 4 (1995): 522–552. Interesting 
study of the motives people have for watching horror films. 
Jung, Carl. Psychology of the Unconscious. Translated by Beatrice 
Hinkle. New York: Dover Publications, 2003. Good translation of Jung’s 
seminal work.
Kagan, Shelley. Death. Yale University Press, 2012. Excellent discussion 
of death. 
Kane, Robert. The Significance of Free Will. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1996. Masterwork on free will and moral responsibility. 
Kröner-Borowik, Tana, et al. “The Effects of Suppressing Intrusive Thoughts 
on Dream Content, Dream Distress and Psychological Parameters.” Journal 
of Sleep Research 22 (2013): 600–604. Brief article discussing unwanted 
thoughts and nightmares. 
Lamba, Shakti, and Vivek Nityananda. “Self-Deceived Individuals Are 
Better at Deceiving Others.” PLoS ONE (2014). https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0104562.  Brief article providing evidence that self-deception 
aids us in deceiving others. 
Lerner, Melvin, and Carolyn Simmons. “Observer’s Reaction to the 
‘Innocent Victim’: Compassion or Rejection?” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 4, no. 2 (1966): 203–210. Seminal study of the just-world 
hypothesis and victim blaming.
Liu, JeeLoo. An Introduction to Chinese Philosophy. New York: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2006. The best single-volume English-language introduction to 
Chinese philosophy. 
———. “The Paradox of Evil in Tiantai Buddhist Philosophy.” Religion 
Compass 1, no. 3 (2007): 398–413. Excellent discussion of Tiantai Buddhism 
and dark thoughts. 
169
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Lopez, Donald, Jr., and Robert Buswell Jr. The Princeton Dictionary of 
Buddhism. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014. Fantastic resource 
for Buddhist studies.
Lucretius. The Nature of Things. Translated by Alicia Stallings. New 
York and London: Penguin Classics, 2007. Good translation of Lucretius’s 
fantastic work.
McCarthy, Cormac. The Sunset Limited: A Novel in Dramatic Form. 
New York: Vintage Books, 2006. Powerful dramatic exploration of 
existential anxiety. 
McMahan, Jeff. The Ethics of Killing: Problems at the Margins of Life. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2003. Masterful analysis of the ethics 
of killing 
Mele, Alfred. Self-Deception Unmasked. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 2001. Insightful examination of self-deception. 
Metz, Thaddeus, “The Meaning of Life.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy. Edited by Edward N. Zalta. Summer 2013 edition. https://
plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2013/entries/life-meaning/. Helpful survey 
of philosophical work on the meaning of life. 
Miller, Barbara Stoler, translator. Bhagavad Gita. New York: Bantam 
Classics, 1986. A strong translation of the Bhagavad Gita with an 
excellent introduction.
Moore, Wes. The Other Wes Moore: One Name, Two Fates. Reprint edition. 
New York: Spiegel & Grau, 2011. Powerful account of real-life moral luck. 
Nagel, Thomas. “The Absurd.” The Journal of Philosophy 68, no. 20 (1971): 
716–727. Classic discussion of what it means to say that life is absurd.
———. Mortal Questions. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1979. 
Includes Nagel’s seminal discussion of moral luck. 
170
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Nelkin, Dana. “Freedom and Forgiveness.” In Free Will and Moral 
Responsibility. Edited by Ishtiyaque Haji and Justin Caoette. Newcastle 
upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Press, 2013. Excellent survey of views of 
forgiveness along with an insightful discussion of the relationship between 
forgiveness and free will. 
Nelson, Lindemann. Damaged Identities, Narrative Repair. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 2001. Insightful analysis of practical identity, including 
discussion of counter-stories. 
Nesse, Randolph. “The Nature of Grief: The Evolution and Psychology of 
Reactions to Loss.” Review in Evolution and Human Behavior 21 (2000): 
59–61. Excellent review of John Archer’s analysis of grief. 
Nhat Hanh, Thich. Peace is Every Step: The Path of Mindfulness in Everyday 
Life. New York: Bantam Books, 1991. Powerful explanation of the Buddhist 
path, including discussions of blame.
Niemi, Laura, and Liane Young. “When and Why We See Victims as 
Responsible: The Impact of Ideology on Attitudes Toward Victims.” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 42, no. 9 (2016): 1227–1242. 
Excellent study of victim blaming and the just-world hypothesis. 
Nusbaum., Martha. The Therapy of Desire. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1994. Influential discussion of themes in Hellenistic philosophy, 
including anger. 
Olberding, Amy. “Sorrow and the Sage: Grief in the Zhuangzi.” Dao 6 
(2007): 339–359. Excellent discussion of Zhuangzi’s views on grief.
Parfit, Derek. Reasons and Persons. New York: Oxford Univeristy Press, 
1984. A masterpiece of 20th-century philosophy. 
Perrett, Roy. “Evil and Human Nature.” The Monist 85, no. 2 (2002): 304–
319. Insightful discussion of the relationship between evil and human nature. 
171
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

———. An Introduction to Indian Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2016. A strong introduction to Indian philosophy.
Pincott, Jeana. “Wicked Thoughts.” Psychology Today. September 1, 2015 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/articles/201509/wicked-thoughts. 
Popular article on dark thoughts. 
Plato. Plato: Complete Works. Edited by John M. Cooper. Hackett Publishing 
Company, 1997. The best single-volume edition of Plato’s dialogues available 
in English. 
Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli, and Charles Moore. A Sourcebook in Indian 
Philosophy. Revised edition. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967. 
Dated, but still the best single-volume anthology of Indian philosophy 
available in English.
Raine. Adrian. The Anatomy of Violence: The Biological Roots of Crime. 
New York: Pantheon Books, 2013. Very interesting discussion of the 
biological and neurological origins of violence.
Ramachandran V. S. “Self-Awareness: The Last Frontier.” http://www.edge.
org/3rd_culture/rama08/rama08_index.html. Fascinating discussion of self-
awareness, including Ramachandran’s anosognosia patient case. 
Reps, Paul, and Nyogen Senzaki. Zen Flesh, Zen Bones: A Collection of 
Zen and Pre-Zen Writings. North Clarendon, VT: Tuttle Publishing, 1998. 
Includes the classic story of Ryokan.
Rosebury, Brian. “Respect for Just Revenge.” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 77, no. 2, (2008): 451–471. Interesting 
discussion of our judgments about revenge.
Rozin, Paul, et al. “Glad to Be Sad, and Other examples of Benign 
Masochism.” Judgment and Decision Making 8, no. 4 (2013): 439–447. 
Interesting article exploring hedonic reversals and benign masochism. 
172
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Rubin, Zick, and Letitia Anne Peplau. “Who Believes in a Just World?” 
Journal of Social Issues 31, no. 3 (1975): 65–89. Seminal study of the just-
world hypothesis. 
Russell, Luke. Evil: A Philosophical Investigation. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2014. Excellent wide-ranging philosophical analysis of 
the concept of evil.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Being and Nothingness. Translated by Hazel Barnes. 
New York: Philosophical Library, 1956. Sartre’s seminal work, including 
his discussion of self-deception and bad faith.
Scott, James. An Introduction to Evolutionary Ethics. New York: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2010. Excellent introduction to evolutionary ethics, with helpful 
discussions of the evolutionary roots of morality.
Sehon, Scott. Free Will and Action Explanation. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2016. Includes an insightful discussion of Robert Harris 
and psychopathy. 
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus. Epistles. Translated by Richard M. Gummere. 
Three volumes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1917. Dated but still 
very useful translation of Seneca’s letters, including his letter on grief.
———. Anger, Mercy, Revenge. Translated by Robert A. Kaster and Martha 
C. Nussbaum. Reprint edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012. 
Good translation and edition of Seneca’s On Anger and related works.
Shafer-Landau, Russ. Moral Realism. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2003. Defense of moral realism, including discussions of moral motivation.
Shantideva. The Way of the Bodhisattva. Translated by Padmakara 
Translation Group. Revised edition. Boston and London: Shambhala 
Classics, 2006. Shantideva’s masterwork, including discussions of anger 
and responsibility. 
173
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Sharma, Arvind. “Karma Was Fouled! Why Hoddle Did No Wrong 
to the Disabled.” Hinduism Today. September 1999. https://www.
hinduismtoday.com/modules/smartsection/item.php?itemid=4345. Defense 
of retributive karma. 
Siderits, Mark. Buddhism as Philosophy. Indianapolis: Hackett 
Publishing Company, 2007. Sophisticated introduction to the Buddhist 
philosophical tradition.
Smith, John, translator and editor. Mahabharata. New York and London: 
Penguin Classics, 2009. Excellent translation with a helpful introduction.
Smith, Michael. “The Humean Theory of Motivation.” Mind 96, no. 381 
(1987): 36–61. Influential discussion of moral motivation. 
Solomon, Sheldon, Jeff Greenberg, and Tom Pyszczynski. The Worm 
at the Core: On the Role of Death in Life. New York: Random House, 
2015. Provides empirical support for Earnest Becker’s views about the fear 
of death 
Sommers, Tamler. “The Two Faces of Revenge: Moral Responsibility and 
the Culture of Honor.” Biology and Philosophy 24 (2009): 35–50. Fascinating 
discussion of revenge, culture, and responsibility. 
———. Relative Justice: Cultural Diversity, Free Will, and Moral 
Responsibility. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2011. 
Excellent discussion of cultural diversity and our intuitions about freedom 
and responsibility.  
———. “Partial Desert.” Oxford Studies in Agency and Responsibility 
(2013): 246–262. Insightful and challenging discussion of the concept of 
the moral desert. 
Spoormaker, Victor. “A Cognitive Model of Recurrent Nightmares.” 
International Journal of Dream Research 1, no. 1 (2008): 15–22. Brief article 
presenting a cognitive account of recurrent nightmares. 
174
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Springett, Ben. “Philosophy of Dreaming.” Internet Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. http://www.iep.utm.edu/dreaming/. Excellent discussion of the 
philosophy of dreams, including the ethics of dreaming. 
Strawson, P. “Freedom and Resentment.” In Perspectives on Moral 
Responsibility. Edited by J. M. Fischer and M. Ravizza. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1993. Seminal discussion of the reactive attitudes.   
Stroud, Sarah. “Weakness of Will.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. Edited by Edward N. Zalta. Spring 2014 edition.  https://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/weakness-will/. Very helpful survey 
of philosophical work on weakness of will. 
Stump, Eleonore. “Atonement According to Aquinas.” In Philosophy and the 
Christian Faith, Edited by T. V. Morris. Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 1988: 61–91. Interpretation of Aquinas’s theory of atonement 
and discussion of the penitential substitution theory.
Swinburne, Richard. Responsibility and Atonement. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1989. Helpful account of the penitential substitution theory 
of atonement. 
Talbert, Matthew. Moral Responsibility: An Introduction. Cambridge: Polity 
Press, 2016. Excellent introduction to moral responsibility, including helpful 
discussions of psychopathy and blame.
Tillich, Paul. The Courage to Be. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1952. 
Tillich’s insightful and challenging exploration of existential anxiety. 
Thomas, Laurence. “Evil and Forgiveness: The Possibility of Moral 
Redemption.” In Evil, Political Violence, and Forgiveness Essays in Honor 
of Claudia Card. Edited by Andrea Veltman and Kathryn J. Norlock. New 
York: Lexington Books, 2009: 115–133. Insightful discussion of forgiveness 
and evil, arguing that we have an obligation to forgive. 
Upanishads. Translated by Patrick Olivelle. Oxford: Oxford World’s Classics, 
2008. Good translation and selection.
175
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Van der Dennen, Johan. “Review Essay: The Murder Next Door.” Homicide 
Studies 9, no. 4 (2006): 1–16. Excellent review of Buss’s book with 
insightful criticisms.
Van Norden, Bryan. “Mencius.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Spring 2017 edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/
mencius/. Excellent scholarly survey of Mencius’s views, including a helpful 
discussion of his claim that human nature is good.
Vargas, Manuel. “Are Psychopathic Serial Killers Evil? Are They 
Blameworthy for What They Do?” In Serial Killers—Philosophy for 
Everyone: Being and Killing. Edited by S. Waller. New York: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2010. Insightful discussion of psychopathy, responsibility, 
and evil. 
Von Hippel, William, and Robert Trivers. “The Evolution and Psychology 
of Self-Deception.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 34, no. 1 (2011): 1–56. 
Excellent overview of the evolutionary psychology of self-deception. 
Watson, Gary. “Skepticism about Weakness of Will.” Philosophical Review 
86 (1977): 316–339. Influential defense of a non-Socratic skepticism about 
weakness of will. 
———. “Responsibility and the Limits of Evil: Variations on a Strawsonian 
Theme.” In Responsibility, Character, and the Emotions. Edited by F. D. 
Schoeman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. Important 
discussion of responsibility and evil that introduces the notorious case of 
Robert Harris. 
Weems, Carl, et al. “Paul Tillich’s Theory of Existential Anxiety: 
A Preliminary Conceptual and Empirical Examination. Anxiety, Stress, and 
Coping: An International Journal 17, no. 4 (2004): 383–399. Interesting 
empirical study exploring Tillich’s theory of existential anxiety. 
176
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

Williams, Bernard. “The Makropulos Case: Reflections on the Tedium of 
Immortality.” In Problems of the Self. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1973. Insightful and stimulating discussion of the desirability 
of immortality. 
Windt, Jennifer M. “Dreams and Dreaming. In The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy. Edited by Edward N. Zalta. Winter 2017 edition. https://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/win2017/entries/dreams-dreaming. Helpful survey of 
the philosophy of dreaming.
Winerman, Lea. “Suppressing the ‘White Bears.’” American Psychological 
Association. October 2011. Nice survey of Daniel Wegner’s research on 
unwanted thoughts. 
Wink, Walter. The Powers That Be: Theology for a New Millennium. New 
York: Doubleday, 1998. Includes Wink’s views on loving confrontation. 
Wright, Robert. Why Buddhism Is True. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
2017. Interesting discussion of Buddhism and evolutionary psychology.
Wyma, Keith. “Innocent Sinfulness, Guilty Sin: Original Sin and Divine 
Justice.” In Christian Faith and the Problem of Evil. Edited by Peter van 
Inwagen. Eerdmans, 2005. Excellent discussion of original sin.
Zimbardo, Philip. “A Situationist Perspective on the Psychology of Evil: 
Understanding How Good People Are Transformed into Perpetrators.” In 
The Social Psychology of Good and Evil. Edited by A. G. Miller. New York, 
NY: Guilford Press, 2004. Helpful summary of the situationist perspective 
on the causes of violence.
177
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature
Bibliography

IMAGE CREDITS
2	
Valeria Vechterova/iStock/Getty Images.
7	
JamesBrey/E+/Getty Images.
9	
National Palace Museum,China /
Wikimedia commons/Public domain.
10	
AmaryllisGardener/Wikimedia 
commons/Public domain.
15	
VladGans/E+/Getty Images.
19	
Anonymous/Wikimedia 
Commons/Public domain.
21	
New York Public Library/Public domain.
23	 johnnorth/iStock/Getty Images.
27	 imagoRB/Getty Images.
30	 Zolnierek/iStock/Getty Images.
36	 Zbynek Pospisil/iStock/Getty Images.
38	 The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art/Public domian.
40	 Wellcome Library, London/CC BY 4.0.
42	 GeorgiosArt/iStock/Getty Images.
45	 KenCanning/E+/Getty Images.
46	 FogStock/Alin Dragulin/Getty Images.
49	 Wellcome Library, London/CC BY 4.0.
52	 Wundervisuals/E+/Getty Images.
53	 Wundervisuals/E+/Getty Images.
57	
bodnarchuk/iStock/Getty Images.
58	 University of Toronto/Internet 
Archive/Public domain.
62	 vanillapics/E+/Getty Images.
64	 Yolya/iStock/Getty Images.
69	 Srdjanns74/iStock/Getty Images.
70	 LC-USZ62-108028/Public domain.
71	
Nagelt/Wikimedia commons/
CC BY-SA 4.0.
74	
Matthias Lindner/iStock/Getty Images.
76	 duncan1890/DigitalVision 
Vectors/Getty Images.
78	 ljubaphoto/iStock/Getty Images.
81	
Gianluca68/iStock/Getty Images.
85	 Nico_blue/E+/Getty Images.
89	 alvarez/E+/Getty Images.
90	 LC-USZC4-4946/Public domain.
91	
Andresr/E+/Getty Images.
93	 Los Angeles County Museum 
of Art/Public domain.
96	 ZU_09/DigitalVision Vectors/
Getty Images.
99	 Letty17/E+/Getty Images.
101	 John Vanderbank/Wikimedia 
Commons/Public domain.
103	 gchutka/E+/Getty Images.
104	 vbel71/iStock/Getty Images.
105	 Tuzanna/Wikimedia Commons/
CC BY-SA 4.0 .
110	 Nice_Media_PRO/iStock/Getty Images.
111	
© MidoSemsem/Depositphotos.com.
111	
Anon/Wikimedia Commons/
Public domain.
113	 Monkey Business/Getty Images.
116	 Zero Cratives/Cultura/Getty Images.
119	 GregorBister/iStock/Getty Images.
124	 HuntImages/E+/Getty Images.
127	 kavina_/iStock/Getty Images.
128	 Image Source/DigitalVision/
Getty Images.
131	 nzphotonz/iStock/Getty Images .
134	 Wellcome Library, London/CC BY 4.0.
138	 Aldo Murillo/E+/Getty Images.
140	 AMR Image/E+/Getty Images.
142	 Akuppa John Wigham/Wikimedia 
Commons/CC BY 2.0.
144	 Anna Om/iStock/Getty Images.
147	 RapidEye/E+/Getty Images.
151	 Diy13/iStock/Getty Images.
152	 Hakase_/iStock/Getty Images.
156	 Renphoto/E+/Getty Images.
157	 fstop123/iStock/Getty Images.
159	 Anton5146/E+/Getty Images.
160	 kali9/E+/Getty Images.
178
Understanding the Dark Side of Human Nature

