
How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers: 
by Cashflow 
How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers is an innovative system that is proving to generate users an 
impressive income with low work to outcome ratio. In other words, the time you put into making this work is 
nothing compared to the money you’ll be making. There are two parts to this system, which caters for those 
with & without a budget. This method is one of my main sources of income at the moment, and like others 
that got hold of a copy, as long as you are willing to put the workload in and have the drive to make a 
substantial income online, then you too will make a substantial income implementing this. 
My normal price to the general public for this method is $297 with the video & audio package, so the fact 
you’ve got a copy for much less than this, count it as a bargain, but also make sure you put it to good use. As I 
say, if you’re willing to put the effort in, you could easily be profiting greatly from it too. 
First things first, I want to ask you to please read this eBook the whole way through before putting any of it to 
practice. I’m only saying this to save you time because I’ve found with previous methods I’ve released, people 
waste a lot of time going back and changing things later as they didn’t fully understand the methods to begin 
with. So read it through once thoroughly, then go back and work through the steps. This is of course your 
choice and you don’t have to, but I do recommend doing so; I can only offer my advice  
Enjoy & succeed, 
-Cashflow 
Copyright Information 
The information produced in this document is the property of FacebookCashflow.com. No part of this eBook is 
permitted to be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted in any way, shape or form without consent from 
FacebookCashFlow.com. This is strictly prohibited and doing so will result in possible prosecution to the 
offender. If you are to notice any copyright infringement, email me - kevintaylor @ facebookcashflow.com and 
you will be rewarded and thanked for your kind help in protecting this product as there are only 50 copies 
available so these methods will not get saturated. 
Disclaimer 
FacebookCashFlow.com assumes no responsibility for the use and/or misuse of this product including 
damage, injury, financial losses etc. as a result of using this product. It is not possible for 
FacebookCashFlow.com to guarantee your success in the future as there are risks and events that occur on the 
Internet that we cannot determine, however we will do our best to help you along the way. By using the 
information in this product you agree that FacebookCashFlow.com is not liable for any success, failure, or loss 
of your business, personal wealth & income that is linked directly or indirectly with the purchase and use of 
this product. 
IMPORTANT 
By using the sites mentioned in this eBook you must read and understand the terms and conditions of each 
site as FacebookCashFlow.com are not responsible for your actions, we only offer advice. 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
Contents: 
Title & A Quick Message From Cashflow 
Disclaimer & Copyright Information 
Contents (this page) 
Quick Intro 
Productivity Tips 
How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers 
Let’s Get To It... 
System 1 
System 2 
2 
2 
3 
4 
4 
5 
7 
8 
17 
Page | 2 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
Quick Introduction 
Firstly, each copy of How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers has its own unique 
password. I have implemented this password protection to stop this eBook being distributed 
freely and illegally in fairness to everyone that pays for a copy. If a copy is found being freely 
distributed, this will be held solely at your own fault. Do so at your own risk, because if a 
copy is found being distributed illegally, I will check the unique password against the 
purchase and PayPal will be contacted and a copyright violation case will be uplifted on 
your account. You have been warned, and will be caught if found doing so. 
Ok enough of the bad guys notice! I’m not going to fluff this eBook up, because it will waste 
your time & mine, and we all know time is money, so the less time we waste, the more 
dividers appear in the number in our bank account! I’ve had $2,000+ days with system 1 
alone from this course, you can too as long as you are willing to put the effort in. Not to 
mention how much you can make when you start System 2 which is the second part of this 
course aimed for those without a budget 
For everyone who’s willing to put in more time, you’re going to make a ton with this 
method. Like with most things, the more work you put in, the more you’ll make, obviously, 
but if you can sacrifice an hour or two a day it will be enough to bring you in a nice extra few 
grand in the bank a month. If you’re willing to go full time with this method, get ready to 
start seeing some big bucks! 
I’ve broken the method down into steps for you so it’s simple for you to replicate and set up 
yourself with a system to follow. Ok that’s enough talking, let’s get to it! 
Productivity Tips 
I wanted to add a few tips on keeping your productivity levels high as a lot of people go all 
out on things sometimes, burn themselves out, and when they don’t get any success they 
don’t bother trying anymore as they feel like they put all their effort into it with no or little 
outcome. 
So a few tips to help keep you motivated, positive, energetic & productive! 
1. Don’t overdo it. 
  This doesn’t mean be lazy, but what I do is work for an hour then take 15-30mins 
  break. Go get a drink or some food, have a 5 minute walk outside, have a rest and 
  refresh yourself. 
2. Eat small and regularly. 
  Too many people only eat 2 or 3 big meals a day. This makes them feel sluggish and 
Page | 3 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
lack energy which means a lack in productivity! If this sounds like you, divide your 
meal in to 2, and have double the amount of meals but smaller meals that you have 
more often. This will give your more of a sustained energy release from your food 
rather than one big high then feel tired after. This will keep you more energised & 
productive. 
3. Start your day fresh. 
  Have a read of this article - 
  http://zenhabits.net/habit-4-my-morning-routine/ . It is about kick starting your day 
  and how to be more energetic as well as more productive. 
4. Drink plenty of water! 
  Ensure that you keep yourself hydrated. Try and drink at least 3 litres of water a day 
  which is about 6 glasses of water. If you wake up at 9am and go to bed at 11pm, that 
  works out to about 1 glass of water every 2 hours. If you aren’t doing this then start 
  soon as you’ll feel a whole lot more energised throughout your day! 
5. Start Your Day Strong. 
  When you wake up, drink a glass of water, wait 30 mins before having your first 
  meal, and in that 30 minutes go for a light jog around the block, shower, brush your 
  teeth & all your other necessary bathroom duties, read for 10 mins and squeeze 5 
  minutes of meditation in there too if you can. It’s only 30 mins out of your day but 
  will make the rest of the day 10 times more productive! 
Just a few quick tips to take note of that should hopefully increase your productivity! 
Ok, now on to the money maker! 
Page | 4 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers 
“People online are one of two things. They are a) searching for information they desire 
(that can be sold to them), or b) bored and want something to hook their interest (again 
           something can be sold to give them something to do)” - Cashflow 
A quick introduction to what How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers is about. You are 
going to learn two innovative techniques that I and a few others are using that will have you 
profiting from a pre-trusted audience that are much more willing to convert in to leads for 
us than normal traffic, as well as building emails lists an knowing how to profit from them 
too. 
What I mean in the quote above is, people online are online for a reason, and that reason is 
that they’re looking for something. So I like to see this as an opportunity to help them find 
what they’re looking for, I put the traffic and whatever they’re looking for together, and 
make $$$ from it. 
You may have come across the odd site or two that are using this strategy (I wouldn’t be 
surprised if you’ve come across some of my sites) and if so, make sure you take note of 
what they’re doing right that you could use too. 
Let’s get into it. 
Page | 5 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers: 
Let’s Get To It... 
CPA Offers & Networks 
CPA stands for ‘Cost Per Action’. I’m sure the majority of you know what CPA stands for but 
for those who don’t, there are CPA networks that contain CPA offers. And these CPA offers 
are what we make our money from. 
CPA means cost per action, so every time an action is made by someone that has gone 
through our affiliate link, we get credited the CPA for it. 
System 1 of How to Make Fast Easy Cash with CPA Offers is about making money with CPA 
offers from social networks. 
Think Outside The Box 
The reason most people don’t make money on the internet is because they think too linear 
and don’t think outside of the box. You have to be creative and think in ways that the 
majority of people don’t. Otherwise, by doing the same things everyone else is doing, you 
will just get the same results everyone else is getting. 
It is easy to make money online when you get your creative mind working. 
I have included a report in this course called ‘Sign Up To A CPA Network.pdf’ and that 
explains how you can get signed up to a CPA network & also my personal top 10 CPA 
networks for you. 
CPA Networks 
We will be using CPA networks a lot throughout this System, so be sure to understand what 
CPA networks are & how they work. 
You can find out a lot about CPA networks if you’re new to them here – 
http://www.buzzle.com/articles/what-are-cpa-networks.html 
Page | 6 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
System #1 
System #1 of How to Make Fast Easy Cash With CPA Offers is for those that don’t have a 
great budget to work with. System #2 is aimed at those with a budget to spend, and System 
#2 is the one with the most potential to make a LOT of money. 
However, System #1 is designed to help those who don’t have a great budget to build some 
income & savings that they can then invest in to System # 2. 
Here is a screen shot of one of my recent earnings with this method – 
I made around $1300 on October 25th, which was split in 2 because of the deal I’ve got as 
you’ll see when you’ve gone through System 1. So In one day I made $650 with this method, 
all profit as there’s no spending involved. 
You get a few days of making this much and you’ll have a nice chunk saved that you can 
invest in to System 2 to make some serious coin. 
What is good about System 1 is that you don’t need much of a budget, in fact you don’t 
need any budget whatsoever! What I really want you to do is to build up some savings with 
this method to fund System 2, so please do try & do so. I know it will be tempting to spend 
the money you make with this method but if you invest it into System 2 you will make a 
heck of a lot more in the long run. 
Finding an offer 
The first step in System 1 of this course is to find an offer that you are going to promote to 
make money. 
Now when you are looking for an offer for this method you want to take a few things in to 
consideration. These include – 
• 
• 
Ease of completion for the user 
How much you get paid 
Page | 7 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Requires as little personal information as possible 
The user can benefit from it 
Doesn’t cost the user anything to complete 
Normally an email or a zip submit 
Like the last bullet point says, these types of offers are normally email or zip submit offers. 
So before we can start searching for our offers, you need to head over to some CPA 
networks and get signed up. Here’s a list of my top 5 CPA networks so head over to them 
and start signing up. I also included a free guide in this course that explains how to get 
signed up to CPA networks with ease, it’s called ‘Sign Up To A CPA Network.pdf’ so open 
that up when signing up to the following networks – 
1. CX Digital Media / Incentaclick 
  http://www.incentaclick.com 
2. Neverblue Ads 
  http://www.neverblueads.com 
3. Clickbooth 
  http://www.clickbooth.com 
4. ROI Rocket 
  http://www.roirocket.com 
5. Copeac 
  http://www.copeac.com 
Now once signed up we can start looking for the offers. If you have trouble signing up then make 
sure you refer to the ‘Sign Up To A CPA Network.pdf’ report included in this course. 
Choosing An Offer 
Ok we’re signed up & ready to find an offer. 
Remember what I said to keep in mind when choosing an offer. 
So on CX Digital I have used this offer that I have been having some good success with – 
Page | 8 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
It is the Apple iPad Email Submit LP3 offer. Here’s the landing page – 
Now remembering what I said about things to keep in mind – 
• 
Ease of completion for the user 
The offers is easy to complete for the user 
Page | 9 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
• 
How much you get paid 
You want to get paid at least $1 for the offer, we’re doing large volumes of people so 
the difference in $0.10 may be small but when we’re talking about 1000 people, and 
extra $0.10 a lead is an extra $100 overall. You get paid $1.25 every time someone 
signs up for this offer so it’s good. 
Requires as little personal information as possible 
It only requires the user to submit their email which most people don’t mind sharing 
The user can benefit from it 
The user gets a chance to test an iPad and keep it for free 
Doesn’t cost the user anything to complete 
All it requires is the user to submit their email which is the least personal 
information you have 
Normally an email or a zip submit 
Yes, this is an email submit 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Feel free to use this offer too as it’s been working for me as it is very broad to who it can 
target because the iPads are so popular at the moment. But I do recommend finding an 
offer that is specific to an audience if possible. We’ll go in to detail in a bit with who we’re 
targeting, but say we’re targeting sports fans, then an offer about iPads might not do as well 
as an offer that is to do with the World Cup for example. These are things you have to test & 
see what works best for your audience. 
Ok so now you know what you need to look for in an offer, go and find one that fits all the 
categories. 
The reason I have one of the points as ‘The user can benefit from it’ is because you don’t 
want to make it seem like you’re benefiting from it. If anything you want to make it seem 
like something cool you found & signed up for that they might be interested in too so you 
thought you’d share it with them. 
If you don’t come from this angle and you come across with an agenda then they might 
think it’s a scam and won’t sign up as well as harming your audience. 
So if you want to use the offer I’ve been using recently then it’s on CX Digital Media, it’s 
called ‘Apple iPad - Email - US - LP 3’ and the campaign ID is 7832. 
It requires approval so speak to your affiliate manager and ask them to approve you. Say 
you’re sending social media traffic and you should be good to go. 
Page | 10 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
Finding Someone to JV with 
Now that we have our offer, we need to find the person to JV with. 
JV means Joint Venture, which means a joint business proposition. 
Now we aren’t talking someone with access to a few hundred people. We’re looking for 
someone with ideally access to at least a couple thousand people such as someone on 
twitter with a load of followers, or the owner of a group on facebook with a load of 
members etc. 
However that doesn’t mean it’s not worth going through and finding the potential JV’s with 
access to less than this too. People with groups that have access to under 1,000 are still 
worth contacting because not many people contact them to do a JV, if at all. 
1,000 visitors you can probably make $50 from, so if you get 10+ of these groups then 
you’ve got an extra $1000 than you would have had if you didn’t contact them! 
So as for an example, I can’t say who but I got in touch with a twitter member with over 
80,000 followers about a JV. All they did was make a couple of tweets and as you can see we 
made $650 EACH IN A DAY. 
Being realistic, it wasn’t even a day, it was more like a couple hours. 
Here’s the screenshot for proof again – 
So that’s not bad considering it was just a couple tweets, we got over 15000 clicks, a 6.8% 
conversion rate which was a profit of $1296. There were not costs involved so it was all 
profit, then split by 2 was $650 each. 
Targeting Twitter followers gets a lower click through & conversion rate than Facebook 
groups but as you can see it still does well if you get someone with enough dedicated 
followers. One of my friends locked down a JV with a twitter member that had over 400,000 
users and made $2400, each! 
Page | 11 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
What is good about contacting followers or group members is that you instantly have the 
audience’s trust because it’s from a trusted source so we skip the ‘trying to sell’ part. This 
means it is much easier to get conversions. 
Now like I said previously, it depends on your offer who you are going to target. But with the 
iPad offer I’ve been using it is broad enough to where you could promote it to pretty much 
any large following or group. So what we’re going to do now is find facebook groups & 
twitter members with large followers. Facebook groups should have at least 1000 members 
and twitter members should have at least 25,000 followers. 
You can find as many as you want, but I recommend finding at least 20 groups on Facebook 
with at least 1,000 members and 20 members on twitter with at least 25,000 followers. 
You don’t want to target people who are legitimate businesses or celebrities though, more 
like un-official fan pages and interests as from experience I have had little or in most cases 
no response when they’re official fan pages or official followings. 
Go and find your groups & twitter members now. 
I had a quick look, for example I just typed in ‘I love facebook’ and a bunch of groups came 
up – 
This is just a quick idea but these are the sorts of groups you want to look for. People that 
have joined groups that are general interests, not really anything serious. The groups that 
are made more for ‘fun’ are the ones that seem to do best with this strategy. 
An example for a twitter account would be something like – 
Page | 12 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
As you can tell it’s a ‘fake’ account so not an official one so people only follow because they 
provide good tweets. 
Search around and gather a bunch of groups & twitter members you could JV with. The 
more the better for this method, the more you can contact to higher your chances are of 
making good money. 
Now that you should have your facebook groups & twitter members gathered we can move 
on. 
Approaching your JV 
We are now going to need to write up a draft message to your potential JV, what we want 
to focus on is them having to hardly do any work and make money. 
I usually send a 1st message that’s brief. The reason I do this is because a long message to 
begin with can be overwhelming and put a potential JV partner off. 
So my first message would be something like the following – 
‘Hey (THEIR NAME), I noticed your (group/following/fan base) is pretty big. I’m an internet 
marketer & know a way you & I could team up and make around $X together at the same 
time as giving your followers something cool. I’ll do all the hard work so it will be easy 
money for you. Hit me back if you’re interested and I’ll send you the game plan, won’t take 
long. Cheers, (YOUR NAME)’ 
You can even try and shorten it if you can, but that’s along the lines of what I say in the first 
message. 
Now don’t expect everyone to respond, because they won’t. In fact you’d think everyone 
would respond but it takes patience and finding the right angle to come from hen 
Page | 13 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
approaching your potential JVs. But contact enough people and eventually you will get 
responses. 
Assuming you no get some responses, in the second message make sure to include the 
following in your message to your JV - 
 You do this all the time and know how you can make some money together 
 It’s easy money for them 
 You will do all the hard work 
 They will be able to track & see conversions and watch the money roll in – 
 give them the login to your joint account 
o Let them know how much they could make 
o How you will pay them – find out the best way for both of you 
o No risk involved for them whatsoever 
o 
o 
o 
o 
I’m usually quite brief on how you find your CPA offer because it could give it away and they 
won’t need you anymore. But 99% of people aren’t that computer savvy so they won’t know 
what to do or how to find the CPA offers. 
Your Link 
There are a couple of things you can do once you’ve got your link. 
You get your link from signing in to your CPA account and going to the offer you want to 
promote. Then when you click on your offer, and there will be a box with a long URL that 
should say ‘your affiliate URL’ or ‘your affiliate link’ or something similar. That is your link 
that you need to send people through. If they don’t go through your affiliate link then you 
will not get credited for any sign ups. 
Now what I normally do is copy my affiliate link and go to http://bit.ly 
With this URL shortening service you can get shorten a long ugly affiliate link to 
http://bit.ly/ipad-testers-needed which looks neater & more professional. 
I know some people like to have their own domain and you can do that & set up domain 
forwarding if you want. 
I’ve included a guide on how to set up your own website if you’re interested in doing that. 
I’ve tried doing both websites and forwarding them to my affiliate link, as well as doing the 
URL shortener approach, and found that the domain vs URL shortener on twitter doesn’t 
have much difference, but the domains do seem to do a bit better. On facebook however, 
I’ve personally found that an actual domain does better than the URL forwarding. 
Page | 14 

HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
So head on over to ‘Setting Up Your Own Website.pdf’ that I included for free in this course 
if you’re interested in finding out how to set up your own website or find out how to 
forward your domain to your affiliate link. 
Tracking Conversions 
Now you’ve got your offer, your JV partner ready to roll, your link is live & ready for traffic 
to be sent, we need to decide how to track conversions. 
The easiest way I’ve found is to speak to your affiliate manager at your CPA network, and 
ask them to create a new account for a JV you’ve got going with someone and they need to 
be able to check stats without seeing your stats from personal campaigns. So you need a 
new account for this. 
Ask to fill the new account with ‘business’ information if you don’t want your personal 
information, but I don’t see the problem with showing your personal information on your 
account if you’re running a successful JV together. Noting to hide if you do it right! 
3, 2, 1... 
You’re almost ready to take everything live! 
Once all set up, write a message for the owner to send to their followers such as (using the 
ipad offer example) – 
‘Hey guys, I just entered in this competition myself because I’ve been dying to get an iPad 
but they’re so darned expensive I couldn’t get one yet. Thought you might be interested 
too, you can get an iPad for free just for testing it, perfect timing or Xmas! You can find out 
more here – (YOUR WEBSITE REDIRECT LINK TO OFFER)’ 
Done! 
Get it sent and see how you do! Don’t expect $600 on your first JV, it takes a couple to get 
used to it but you will make a few hundred bucks if you do it half right with enough visitors. 
Get behind the viewers, and think what would make you click if you got sent a message or 
saw a tweet about an offer like that. 
Now like I said at the start, this part of the system is for those who are on a budget. System 
2 is where the real money’s at. 
I’ve had some campaigns with JVs where in one day we contacted over 80,000 followers, 
had about a 20% click through rate to the offer, and a 6.8% sign up rate with a $1.25 payout. 
Page | 15 

 
HOW TO MAKE FAST EASY CASH WITH CPA OFFERS: SYSTEM 1 OF 2 
By Cashflow 
Together we made $1296.25 which was just under $600 each. That was just one JV 
campaign we ran recently tat I did for an example for this course. 
Better yet, we’re already planning more JVs together after the success of that one. $600 for 
a good JV and campaign is normal with this, it’s when you can get a few JV campaigns like 
this plus the smaller ones it is easily achievable to make $2k in a day. I’ve had more than a 
handful of $2k days with this so they’re definitely doable if you put the time in. 
That’s important. So the last note is that the JVs that do work with you on this, stay in touch 
with and do as many JVs with them as possible. That’s how you’ll make most o your money 
compared to time input. 
A couple other tips are to also try and contact bloggers or other people that have large 
followings aside from Twitter & Facebook, social traffic like this holds a goldmine of money 
to be made. 
Once you’ve got I’d say at least $3,000 saved up from this, ideally $5,000, I highly 
recommend investing that funding in to system 2. That’s where the real moneys at. 
Once you’ve made enough to start System 2, let’s get to it! 
Head on over to ‘System 2.pdf’ and let’s make some coin that will make your bank jealous. 
-Cashflow 
Page | 16 

