Electric Machinery 
Sixth Edition 
A. E. Fitzgerald 
Late Vice President for Academic Affairs 
and Dean of the Faculty 
Northeastern University 
Charles Kingsley, Jr. 
Late Associate Professor of Electrical 
Engineering, Emeritus 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Stephen D. Umans 
Principal Research Engineer 
Department of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science 
Laboratory for Electromagnetic and 
Electronic Systems 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
~l~C 
3raw 
 lill 
Boston Burr Ridge, IL 
Dubuque, IA 
Madison, Wl 
New York San Francisco 
St. Louis 
Bangkok 
Bogota Caracas Kuala Lumpur Lisbon London Madrid 
Mexico City 
Milan Montreal New Delhi Santiago Seoul Singapore Sydney 
Taipei Toronto 

McGraw-Hill Higher Education 
A Division of The McGraw-Hill Companies 
ELECTRIC MACHINERY, SIXTH EDITION 
Published by McGraw-Hill, a business unit of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue 
of the Americas, New York, NY 10020. Copyright (~) 2003, 1990, 1983, 1971, 1961, 1952 by 
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Copyright renewed 1980 by Rosemary Fitzgerald 
and Charles Kingsley, Jr. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed 
in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent 
of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic 
storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning. 
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside 
the United States. 
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
International 
Domestic 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 
ISBN 0-07-366009-4 
ISBN 0-07-112193-5 (ISE) 
Publisher: Elizabeth A. Jones 
Developmental editor: Michelle L. Flomenhofi 
Executive marketing manager: John Wannemacher 
Project manager: Rose Koos 
Production supervisor: Sherry L. Kane 
Media project manager: Jodi K. Banowetz 
Senior media technology producer: Phillip Meek 
Coordinator of freelance design: Rick D. Noel 
Cover designer: Rick D. Noel 
Cover image courtesy of: Rockwell Automation~Reliance Electric 
Lead photo research coordinator: Carrie K. Burger 
Compositor: Interactive Composition Corporation 
Typeface: 10/12 Times Roman 
Printer: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Company/Crawfordsville, IN 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Fitzgerald, A. E. (Arthur Eugene), 1909- 
Electric machinery / A. E. Fitzgerald, Charles Kingsley, Jr., Stephen D. Umans. --6th ed. 
p. 
cm.--(McGraw-Hill series in electrical engineering. Power and energy) 
Includes index. 
ISBN 0-07-366009-4--ISBN 0-07-112193-5 
1. Electric machinery. I. Kingsley, Charles, 1904-. II. Umans, Stephen D. III. Title. 
IV. Series. 
TK2181 .F5 
2003 
621.31 f042---dc21 
2002070988 
CIP 
INTERNATIONAL EDITION ISBN 0-07-112193-5 
Copyright ~ 2003. Exclusive rights by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., for manufacture and export. 
This book cannot be re-exported from the country to which it is sold by McGraw-Hill. The International 
Edition is not available in North America. 
www.mhhe.com 

McGraw.Hill 
Series in Electrical 
and Computer 
Enaineerina 
. 
w 
. . -  
Stephen W. Director, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Senior Consulting Editor 
Circuits and Systems 
Communications and Signal Processing 
Computer Engineering 
Control Theory and Robotics 
Electromagnetics 
Electronics and VLSI Circuits 
Introductory 
Power 
Antennas, Microwaves, and Radar 
Ronald N. Bracewell, Colin Cherry, James F. Gibbons, Willis W. Harman, Hubert Heffner, Edward W. 
Herold, John G. Linvill, Simon Ramo, Ronald A. Rohrer, Anthony E. Siegman, Charles Susskind, 
Frederick E. Terman, John G. Truxal, Ernst Weber, and John R. Whinnery, Previous Consulting Editors 

This book is dedicated to my mom, Nettie Umans, and my aunt, 
Mae Hoffman, and in memory of my dad, Samuel Umans. 

ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
The late Arthur E. Fitzgerald 
was Vice President for Academic Affairs at North- 
eastern University, a post to which he was appointed after serving first as Professor 
and Chairman of the Electrical Engineering Department, followed by being named 
Dean of Faculty. Prior to his time at Northeastern University, Professor Fitzgerald 
spent more than 20 years at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, from which he 
received the S.M. and Sc.D., and where he rose to the rank of Professor of Electrical 
Engineering. Besides Electric Machinery, Professor Fitzgerald was one of the au- 
thors of Basic Electrical Engineering, also published by McGraw-Hill. Throughout 
his career, Professor Fitzgerald was at the forefront in the field of long-range power 
system planning, working as a consulting engineer in industry both before and after 
his academic career. Professor Fitzgerald was a member of several professional so- 
cieties, including Sigma Xi, Tau Beta Pi, and Eta Kappa Nu, and he was a Fellow of 
the IEEE. 
The late Charles Kingsley, Jr. 
was Professor in the Department of Electrical 
Engineering and Computer Science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
from which he received the S.B. and S.M. degrees. During his career, he spent time 
at General Electric, Boeing, and Dartmouth College. In addition to Electric Ma- 
chinery, Professor Kingsley was co-author of the textbook Magnetic Circuits and 
Transformers. After his retirement, he continued to participate in research activities 
at M.I.T. He was an active member and Fellow of the IEEE, as well as its predecessor 
society, the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 
Stephen D. Umans 
is Principal Research Engineer in the Electromechanical 
Systems Laboratory and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, from which he received the S.B., 
S.M., E.E., and Sc.D. degrees, all in electrical engineering. His professional interests 
include electromechanics, electric machinery, and electric power systems. At MIT, 
he has taught a wide range of courses including electromechanics, electromagnetics, 
electric power systems, circuit theory, and analog electronics. He is a Fellow of the 
IEEE and an active member of the Power Engineering Society. 

,PREFACE 
T 
he chief objective of Electric Machinery continues to be to build a strong 
foundation in the basic principles of electromechanics and electric machinery. 
Through all of its editions, the emphasis of Electric Machinery has been 
on both physical insight and analytical techniques. Mastery of the material covered 
will provide both the basis for understanding many real-world electric-machinery 
applications as well as the foundation for proceeding on to more advanced courses in 
electric machinery design and control. 
Although much of the material from the previous editions has been retained in 
this edition, there have been some significant changes. These include: 
m 
A chapter has been added which introduces the basic concepts of power 
electronics as applicable to motor drives. 
m 
Topics related to machine control, which were scattered in various chapters in 
the previous edition, have been consolidated in a single chapter on speed and 
torque control. In addition, the coverage of this topic has been expanded 
significantly and now includes field-oriented control of both synchronous and 
induction machines. 
m 
MATLAB ®1 examples, practice problems, and end-of-chapter problems have 
been included in the new edition. 
n 
The analysis of single-phase induction motors has been expanded to cover the 
general case in which the motor is running off both its main winding and its 
auxiliary winding (supplied with a series capacitor). 
Power electronics are a significant component of many contemporary electric- 
machine applications. This topic is included in Chapter 10 of this edition of Electric 
Machinery in recognition of the fact that many electric-machinery courses now include 
a discussion of power electronics and drive systems. However, it must be emphasized 
that the single chapter found here is introductory at best. One chapter cannot begin to 
do justice to this complex topic any more than a single chapter in a power-electronics 
text could adequately introduce the topic of electric machinery. 
The approach taken here is to discuss the basic properties of common power elec- 
tronic components such as diodes, SCRs, MOSFETs, and IGBTs and to introduce 
simple models for these components. The chapter then illustrates how these compo- 
nents can be used to achieve two primary functions of power-electronic circuits in 
drive applications: rectification (conversion of ac to dc) and inversion (conversion of 
dc to ac). Phase-controlled rectification is discussed as a technique for controlling the 
dc voltage produced from a fixed ac source. Phase-controlled rectification can be used 
i MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

Preface 
x| 
to drive dc machines as well as to provide a controllable dc input to inverters in ac 
drives. Similarly, techniques for producing stepped and pulse-width-modulated wave- 
forms of variable amplitudes and frequency are discussed. These techniques are at the 
heart of variable-speed drive systems which are commonly found in variable-speed 
ac drives. 
Drive-systems based upon power electronics permit a great deal of flexibility in 
the control of electric machines. This is especially true in the case of ac machines 
which used to be found almost exclusively in applications where they were supplied 
from the fixed-frequency, fixed-voltage power system. Thus, the introduction to power 
electronics in Chapter 10 is followed by a chapter on the control of electric machines. 
Chapter 11 brings together material that was distributed in various chapters in 
the previous edition. It is now divided into three main sections: control of dc motors, 
control of synchronous motors, and control of induction motors. A brief fourth section 
discusses the control of variable-reluctance motors. Each of these main sections begins 
with a disCussion of speed control followed by a discussion of torque control. 
Many motor-drive systems are based upon the technique of field-oriented con- 
trol (also known as vector control). A significant addition to this new edition is the 
discussion of field-oriented control which now appears in Chapter 11. This is some- 
what advanced material which is not typically found in introductory presentations of 
electric machinery. As a result, the chapter is structured so that this material can be 
omitted or included at the discretion of the instructor. It first appears in the section on 
torque control of synchronous motors, in which the basic equations are derived and 
the analogy with the control of dc machines is discussed. It appears again in its most 
commonly used form in the section on the torque control of induction motors. 
The instructor should note that a complete presentation of field-oriented control 
requires the use of the dq0 transformation. This transformation, which appeared 
for synchronous machines in Chapter 6 of the previous edition, is now found in 
Appendix C of this edition. In addition, the discussion in this appendix has been 
expanded to include a derivation of the dq0 transformation for induction machines in 
which both stator and rotor quantities must be transformed. 
Although very little in the way of sophisticated mathematics is required of the 
reader of this book, the mathematics can get somewhat messy and tedious. This is 
especially true in the analyis of ac machines in which there is a significant amount 
of algebra involving complex numbers. One of the significant positive developments 
in the last decade or so is the widespread availability of programs such as MATLAB 
which greatly facilitate the solution of such problems. MATLAB is widely used in 
many universities and is available in a student version. 2 
In recognition of this development, this edition incorporates MATLAB in ex- 
amples and practice problems as well as in end-of-chapter problems. It should be 
emphasized, though, that the use of MATLAB is not in any way a requirement for 
the adoption or use of Electric Machinery. Rather, it is an enhancement. The book 
2 The MATLAB Student Version is published and distributed by The MathWorks, Inc. 
(http://www.mathworks.com). 

xii 
Preface 
now includes interesting examples which would have otherwise been too mathemat- 
ically tedious. Similarly, there are now end-of-chapter problems which are relatively 
straightforward when done with MATLAB but which would be quite impractical if 
done by hand. Note that each MATLAB example and practice problem has been no- 
tated with the symbol ~, found in the margin of the book. End-of-chapter problems 
which suggest or require MATLAB are similarly notatated. 
It should be emphasized that, in addition to MATLAB, a number of other 
numerical-analysis packages, including various spread-sheet packages, are available 
which can be used to perform calculations and to plot in a fashion similar to that done 
with MATLAB. If MATLAB is not available or is not the package of preference at 
your institution, instructors and students are encouraged to select any package with 
which they are comfortable. Any package that simplifies complex calculations and 
which enables the student to focus on the concepts as opposed to the mathematics 
will do just fine. 
In addition, it should be noted that even in cases where it is not specifically 
suggested, most of the end-of-chapter problems in the book can be worked using 
MATLAB or an equivalent program. Thus, students who are comfortable using such 
tools should be encouraged to do so to save themselves the need to grind through messy 
calculations by hand. This approach is a logical extension to the use of calculators 
to facilitate computation. When solving homework problems, the students should 
still, of course, be required to show on paper how they formulated their solution, 
since it is the formulation of the solution that is key to understanding the material. 
However, once a problem is properly formulated, there is typically little additional 
to be learned from the number crunching itself. The learning process then continues 
with an examination of the results, both in terms of understanding what they mean 
with regard to the topic being studied as well as seeing if they make physical sense. 
One additional benefit is derived from the introduction of MATLAB into this 
edition of Electric Machinery. As readers of previous editions will be aware, the 
treatment of single-phase induction motors was never complete in that an analytical 
treatment of the general case of a single-phase motor running with both its main and 
auxiliary windings excited (with a capacitor in series with the auxiliary winding) was 
never considered. In fact, such a treatment of single-phase induction motors is not 
found in any other introductory electric-machinery textbook of which the author is 
aware. 
The problem is quite simple: this general treatment is mathematically complex, 
requiring the solution of a number of simultaneous, complex algebraic equations. 
This, however, is just the sort of problem at which programs such as MATLAB 
excel. Thus, this new edition of Electric Machinery includes this general treatment of 
single-phase induction machines, complete with a worked out quantitative example 
and end-of-chapter problems. 
It is highly likely that there is simply too much material in this edition of Electric 
Machinery for a single introductory course. However, the material in this edition 
has been organized so that instructors can pick and choose material appropriate to the 
topics which they wish to cover. As in the fifth edition, the first two chapters introduce 
basic concepts of magnetic circuits, magnetic materials, and transformers. The third 

Preface 
xiii 
chapter introduces the basic concept of electromechanical energy conversion. The 
fourth chapter then provides an overview of and on introduction to the various machine 
types. Some instructors choose to omit all or most of the material in Chapter 3 from an 
introductory course. This can be done without a significant impact to the understanding 
of much of the material in the remainder of the book. 
The next five chapters provide a more in-depth discussion of the various machine 
types: synchronous machines in Chapter 5, induction machines in Chapter 6, dc 
machines in Chapter 7, variable-reluctance machines in Chapter 8, and single/two- 
phase machines in Chapter 9. Since the chapters are pretty much independent (with 
the exception of the material in Chapter 9 which builds upon the polyphase-induction- 
motor discussion of Chapter 6), the order of these chapters can be changed and/or 
an instructor can choose to focus on one or two machine types and not to cover the 
material in all five of these chapters. 
The introductory power-electronics discussion of Chapter 10 is pretty much 
stand-alone. Instructors who wish to introduce this material should be able to do 
so at their discretion; there is no need to present it in a course in the order that it is 
found in the book. In addition, it is not required for an understanding of the electric- 
machinery material presented in the book, and instructors who elect to cover this 
material in a separate course will not find themselves handicapped in any way by 
doing so. 
Finally, instructors may wish to select topics from the control material of Chapter 
11 rather than include it all. The material on speed control is essentially a relatively 
straightforward extension of the material found in earlier chapters on the individ- 
ual machine types. The material on field-oriented control requires a somewhat more 
sophisticated understanding and builds upon the dq0 transformation found in Ap- 
pendix C. It would certainly be reasonable to omit this material in an introductory 
course and to delay it for a more advanced course where sufficient time is available 
to devote to it. 
McGraw-Hill has set up a website, www.mhhe.com/umans, to support this new 
edition of Electric Machinery. The website will include a downloadable version of the 
solutions manual (for instructors only) as well as PowerPoint slides of figures from 
the book. This being a new feature of Electric Machinery, we are, to a great extent, 
starting with a blank slate and will be exploring different options for supplementing 
and enhancing the text. For example, in recognition of the fact that instructors are 
always looking for new examples and problems, we will set up a mechanism so that 
instructors can submit examples and problems for publication on the website (with 
credit given to their authors) which then can be shared with other instructors. 
We are also considering setting up a section of the website devoted to MATLAB 
and other numerical analysis packages. For users of MATLAB, the site might contain 
hints and suggestions for applying MATLAB to Electric Machinery as well as per- 
haps some Simulink ®3 examples for instructors who wish to introduce simulations 
into their courses. Similarly, instructors who use packages other than MATLAB might 
3 Simulink is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

xiv 
Preface 
want to submit their suggestions and experiences to share with other users. In this con- 
text, the website would appear again to be an ideal resource for enhancing interaction 
between instructors. 
Clearly, the website will be a living document which will evolve in response 
to input from users. I strongly urge each of you to visit it frequently and to send in 
suggestions, problems, and examples, and comments. I fully expect it to become a 
valuable resource for users of Electric Machinery around the world. 
Professor Kingsley first asked this author to participate in the fourth edition of 
Electric Machinery; the professor was actively involved in that edition. He participated 
in an advisory capacity for the fifth edition. Unfortunately, Professor Kingsley passed 
away since the publication of the fifth edition and did not live to see the start of the 
work on this edition. He was a fine gentleman, a valued teacher and friend, and he is 
missed. 
I wish to thank a number of my colleagues for their insight and helpful discus- 
sions during the production of this edition. My friend, Professor Jeffrey Lang, who 
also provided invaluable insight and advice in the discussion of variable-reluctance 
machines which first appeared in the fifth edition, was extremely helpful in formu- 
lating the presentations of power electronics and field-oriented control which appear 
in this edition. Similarly, Professor Gerald Wilson, who served as my graduate thesis 
advisor, has been a friend and colleague throughout my career and has been a constant 
source of valuable advice and insight. 
On a more personal note, I would like to express my love for my wife Denise and 
our children Dalya and Ari and to thank them for putting up with the many hours of 
my otherwise spare time that this edition required. I promised the kids that I would 
read the Harry Potter books when work on this edition of Electric Machinery was 
completed and I had better get to it! In addition, I would like to recognize my life-long 
friend David Gardner who watched the work on this edition with interest but who did 
not live to see it completed. A remarkable man, he passed away due to complications 
from muscular dystrophy just a short while before the final draft was completed. 
Finally, I wish to thank the reviewers who participated in this project and whose 
comments and suggestions played a valuable role in the final form of this edition. 
These include Professors: 
Ravel F. Ammerman, Colorado School of Mines 
Juan Carlos Balda, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 
Miroslav Begovic, Georgia Institute of Technology 
Prasad Enjeti, Texas A &M University 
Vernold K. Feiste, Southern Illinois University 
Thomas G. Habetler, Georgia Institute of Technology 
Steven Hietpas, South Dakota State University 
Heath Hofmann, Pennsylvania State University 
Daniel Hutchins, U.S. Naval Academy 
Roger King, University of Toledo 

Preface 
xv 
Alexander E. Koutras, California Polytechnic State University, Pomona 
Bruno Osorno, California State University, Northridge 
Henk Polinder, Delft University of Technology 
Gill Richards, Arkansas Tech University 
Duane E Rost, Youngstown State University 
Melvin Sandler, The Cooper Union 
Ali O. Shaban, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo 
Alan Wallace, Oregon State University 
I would like to specifically acknowledge Professor Ibrahim Abdel-Moneim Abdel- 
Halim of Zagazig University, whose considerable effort found numerous typos and 
numerical errors in the draft document. 
Stephen D. Umans 
Cambridge, MA 
March 5, 2002 

BRIEF CONTENTS 
Preface 
x 
1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
1 
2 Transformers 
57 
3 Electromechanical-Energy-ConversionPrinciples 
112 
4 Introduction to Rotating Machines 
173 
5 Synchronous Machines 
245 
6 Polyphase Induction Machines 
306 
7 DCMachines 
357 
8 Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
407 
9 Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
452 
10 Introduction to Power Electronics 
493 
11 Speed and Torque Control 
559 
Appendix A Three-Phase Circuits 
628 
Appendix B Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and Inductances 
of Distributed AC Windings 
644 
Appendix C The dq0 Transformation 
657 
Appendix D Engineering Aspects of Practical Electric Machine 
Performance and Operation 
668 
Appendix E Table of Constants and Conversion 
Factors for SI Units 
680 
Index 
681 
vi 

CONTENTS 
Preface x 
ChaDter 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic 
Materials 
1 
1.1 Introduction to Magnetic Circuits 
2 
1.2 Flux Linkage, Inductance, and Energy 
1.3 Properties of Magnetic Materials 
19 
1.4 AC Excitation 
23 
1.5 Permanent Magnets 
30 
1.6 Application of Permanent Magnet 
Materials 
35 
1.7 Summary 42 
1.8 Problems 
43 
11 
Chapter 2 
Transformers 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
2.10 Summary 
2.11 Problems 
57 
Introduction to Transformers 
57 
No-Load Conditions 
60 
Effect of Secondary Current; Ideal 
Transformer 
64 
Transformer Reactances and Equivalent 
Circuits 
68 
Engineering Aspects of Transformer 
Analysis 
73 
Autotransformers; Multiwinding 
Transformers 
81 
Transformers in Three-Phase Circuits 
Voltage and Current Transformers 
90 
The Per-Unit System 
95 
103 
104 
85 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
3.10 Summary 
3.11 Problems 
Chapter 3 
Electromechanical- 
Energy-Conversion 
Principles 
112 
Forces and Torques in Magnetic 
Field Systems 
113 
Energy Balance 
117 
Energy in Singly-Excited Magnetic Field 
Systems 
119 
Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque 
from Energy 
123 
Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque 
from Coenergy 
129 
Multiply-Excited Magnetic Field 
Systems 
136 
Forces and Torques in Systems with 
Permanent Magnets 
142 
Dynamic Equations 
151 
Analytical Techniques 
155 
158 
159 
Chapter 4 
Introduction to Rotating 
Machines 
173 
4.1 Elementary Concepts 
173 
4.2 Introduction to AC and DC Machines 
4.3 MMF of Distributed Windings 
187 
4.4 Magnetic Fields in Rotating Machinery 
4.5 Rotating MMF Waves in AC Machines 
4.6 Generated Voltage 
208 
4.7 Torque in Nonsalient-Pole Machines 
4.8 Linear Machines 
227 
4.9 Magnetic Saturation 
230 
176 
197 
201 
214 
VII 

viii 
Contents 
4.10 Leakage Fluxes 
4.11 Summary 
235 
4.12 Problems 
237 
233 
Chapter 5 
Synchronous Machines 
245 
5.1 
Introduction to Polyphase Synchronous 
Machines 
245 
5.2 
Synchronous-Machine Inductances; 
Equivalent Circuits 
248 
5.3 
Open- and Short-Circuit Characteristics 
5.4 
Steady-State Power-Angle 
Characteristics 
266 
5.5 
Steady-State Operating Characteristics 
5.6 
Effects of Salient Poles; Introduction to 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
5.10 Problems 
256 
275 
Direct- and Quadrature-Axis Theory 
281 
Power-Angle Characteristics of Salient-Pole 
Machines 
289 
Permanent-Magnet AC Motors 
293 
Summary 
295 
297 
Chapter 6 
Polyphase Induclion 
Machines 
306 
6.1 Introduction to Polyphase Induction 
Machines 
306 
6.2 Currents and Fluxes in Polyphase Induction 
Machines 
311 
6.3 Induction-Motor Equivalent Circuit 
313 
6.4 Analysis of the Equivalent Circuit 
317 
6.5 Torque and Power by Use of Thevenin's 
Theorem 
322 
6.6 Parameter Determination from No-Load and 
Blocked-Rotor Tests 
330 
6.7 Effects of Rotor Resistance; Wound and 
Double-Squirrel-Cage Rotors 
340 
6.8 Summary 
347 
6.9 Problems 
348 
Chapter 7 
DC Machines 
357 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
7.7 
7.8 
7.9 
7.10 Series Universal Motors 
7.11 Summary 
396 
7.12 Problems 
397 
Introduction 
357 
Commutator Action 
364 
Effect of Armature MMF 
367 
Analytical Fundamentals: Electric-Circuit 
Aspects 
370 
Analytical Fundamentals: Magnetic-Circuit 
Aspects 
374 
Analysis of Steady-State Performance 
379 
Permanent-Magnet DC Machines 
384 
Commutation and Interpoles 
390 
Compensating Windings 
393 
395 
Chapter 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and 
Stepping Motors 
407 
8.1 Basics of VRM Analysis 
408 
8.2 Practical VRM Configurations 
415 
8.3 Current Waveforms for Torque Production 
421 
8.4 Nonlinear Analysis 
430 
8.5 Stepping Motors 
437 
8.6 Summary 
446 
8.7 Problems 
448 
Chapter 9 
Single- and Two.Phase Motors 
452 
9.1 Single-Phase Induction Motors: Qualitative 
Examination 
452 
9.2 Starting and Running Performance of Single- 
Phase Induction and Synchronous Motors 
455 
9.3 Revolving-Field Theory of Single-Phase 
Induction Motors 
463 
9.4 Two-Phase Induction Motors 
470 

Contents 
ix 
9.5 Summary 
488 
9.6 Problems 
489 
Chapter 10 
Introduction to Power 
Electronics 
493 
10.l Power Switches 
494 
10.2 Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
507 
10.3 Inversion: Conversion of DC to AC 
538 
10.4 Summary 
550 
10.5 Bibliography 
552 
10.6 Problems 
552 
Chapter 1 1 
Speed and Torque Control 
559 
11.1 Control of DC Motors 
559 
11.2 Control of Synchronous Motors 
578 
11.3 Control of Induction Motors 
595 
11.4 Control of Variable-Reluctance Motors 
11.5 Summary 
616 
11.6 Bibliography 
618 
11.7 Problems 
618 
613 
APPendix A 
, 
, 
Three.Phase Circuits 
628 
A.1 Generation of Three-Phase Voltages 
628 
A.2 Three-Phase Voltages, Currents, and 
Power 
631 
A.3 Y- and A-Connected Circuits 
635 
A.4 Analysis of Balanced Three-Phase Circuits; 
Single-Line Diagrams 
641 
A.5 Other Polyphase Systems 
643 
Appendix B 
, 
, 
Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and 
Inductances of Distributed 
AC Windings 
644 
B.1 Generated Voltages 
644 
B.2 Armature MMF Waves 
650 
B.3 Air-Gap Inductances of Distributed 
Windings 
653 
Appendix C 
, 
, 
The dqO Transformation 
657 
C.1 Transformation to Direct- and Quadrature-Axis 
Variables 
657 
C.2 Basic Synchronous-Machine Relations in dq0 
Variables 
660 
C.3 Basic Induction-Machine Relations in dq0 
Variables 
664 
Appendix D 
, 
, 
Engineering Aspects of Practical 
Electric Machine Performance 
and Operation 
668 
D.I Losses 
668 
D.2 Rating and Heating 
670 
D.3 Cooling Means for Electric Machines 
674 
D.4 Excitation 
676 
D.5 Energy Efficiency of Electric Machinery 
678 
ADDendix E 
, 
, 
Table of Constants and Conversion 
Factors for Sl Units 
680 
Index 
681 

Magnetic Circuits and 
Magnetic Materials 
T 
he objective of this book is to study the devices used in the interconversion 
of electric and mechanical energy. Emphasis is placed on electromagnetic 
rotating machinery, by means of which the bulk of this energy conversion 
takes place. However, the techniques developed are generally applicable to a wide 
range of additional devices including linear machines, actuators, and sensors. 
Although not an electromechanical-energy-conversion device, the transformer is 
an important component of the overall energy-conversion process and is discussed in 
Chapter 2. The techniques developed for transformer analysis form the basis for the 
ensuing discussion of electric machinery. 
Practically all transformers and electric machinery use ferro-magnetic material 
for shaping and directing the magnetic fields which act as the medium for transfer- 
ring and converting energy. Permanent-magnet materials are also widely used. With- 
out these materials, practical implementations of most familiar electromechanical- 
energy-conversion devices would not be possible. The ability to analyze and describe 
systems containing these materials is essential for designing and understanding these 
devices. 
This chapter will develop some basic tools for the analysis of magnetic field 
systems and will provide a brief introduction to the properties of practical magnetic 
materials. In Chapter 2, these results will then be applied to the analysis of transform- 
ers. In later chapters they will be used in the analysis of rotating machinery. 
In this book it is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge of magnetic 
and electric field theory such as given in a basic physics course for engineering 
students. Some readers may have had a course on electromagnetic field theory based 
on Maxwell's equations, but an in-depth understanding of Maxwell's equations is 
not a prerequisite for study of this book. The techniques of magnetic-circuit analysis, 
which represent algebraic approximations to exact field-theory solutions, are widely 
used in the study of electromechanical-energy-conversion devices and form the basis 
for most of the analyses presented here. 

2 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
1.1 
INTRODUCTION 
TO MAGNETIC CIRCUITS 
The complete, detailed solution for magnetic fields in most situations of practical 
engineering interest involves the solution of Maxwell's equations along with various 
constitutive relationships which describe material properties. Although in practice 
exact solutions are often unattainable, various simplifying assumptions permit the 
attainment of useful engineering solutions. 1 
We begin with the assumption that, for the systems treated in this book, the fre- 
quencies and sizes involved are such that the displacement-current term in Maxwell's 
equations can be neglected. This term accounts for magnetic fields being produced 
in space by time-varying electric fields and is associated with electromagnetic ra- 
diation. Neglecting this term results in the magneto-quasistatic form of the relevant 
Maxwell's equations which relate magnetic fields to the currents which produce 
them. 
IB. da - 0 
(1.2) 
Equation 1.1 states that the line integral of the tangential component of the 
magnetic field intensity H around a closed contour C is equal to the total current 
passing through any surface S linking that contour. From Eq. 1.1 we see that the source 
of H is the current density J. Equation 1.2 states that the magnetic flux density B is 
conserved, i.e., that no net flux enters or leaves a closed surface (this is equivalent to 
saying that there exist no monopole charge sources of magnetic fields). From these 
equations we see that the magnetic field quantities can be determined solely from the 
instantaneous values of the source currents and that time variations of the magnetic 
fields follow directly from time variations of the sources. 
A second simplifying assumption involves the concept of the magnetic cir- 
cuit. The general solution for the magnetic field intensity H and the magnetic flux 
density B in a structure of complex geometry is extremely difficult. However, a 
three-dimensional field problem can often be reduced to what is essentially a one- 
dimensional circuit equivalent, yielding solutions of acceptable engineering accuracy. 
A magnetic circuit consists of a structure composed for the most part of high- 
permeability magnetic material. The presence of high-permeability material tends to 
cause magnetic flux to be confined to the paths defined by the structure, much as 
currents are confined to the conductors of an electric circuit. Use of this concept of 
I Although exact analytical solutions cannot be obtained, computer-based numerical solutions (the 
finite-element and boundary-element methods form the basis for a number of commercial programs) are 
quite common and have become indespensible tools for analysis and design. However, such techniques 
are best used to refine analyses based upon analytical techniques such as are found in this book. Their use 
contributes little to a fundamental understanding of the principles and basic performance of electric 
machines and as a result they will not be discussed in this book. 

1,1 
Introduction to Magnetic Circuits 
8 
Mean core 
length l c 
Cross-sectional 
area A c 
Wit 
Magnetic core 
N1 
permeability/z 
Figure 1.1 
Simple magnetic circuit. 
the magnetic circuit is illustrated in this section and will be seen to apply quite well 
to many situations in this book. 2 
A simple example of a magnetic circuit is shown in Fig. 1.1. The core is assumed 
to be composed of magnetic material whose permeability is much greater than that 
of the surrounding air (/z >>/z0). The core is of uniform cross section and is excited 
by a winding of N turns carrying a current of i amperes. This winding produces a 
magnetic field in the core, as shown in the figure. 
Because of the high permeability of the magnetic core, an exact solution would 
show that the magnetic flux is confined almost entirely to the core, the field lines 
follow the path defined by the core, and the flux density is essentially uniform over a 
cross section because the cross-sectional area is uniform. The magnetic field can be 
visualized in terms of flux lines which form closed loops interlinked with the winding. 
As applied to the magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.1, the source of the magnetic field 
in the core is the ampere-turn product N i. In magnetic circuit terminology N i is 
the magnetomotive force (mmf) .T" acting on the magnetic circuit. Although Fig. 1.1 
shows only a single coil, transformers and most rotating machines have at least two 
windings, and N i must be replaced by the algebraic sum of the ampere-turns of all 
the windings. 
The magnetic flux ¢ crossing a surface S is the surface integral of the normal 
component of B; thus 
¢ =/IB .da 
(1.3) 
In SI units, the unit of ¢ is the weber (Wb). 
Equation 1.2 states that the net magnetic flux entering or leaving a closed surface 
(equal to the surface integral of B over that closed surface) is zero. This is equivalent 
to saying that all the flux which enters the surface enclosing a volume must leave 
that volume over some other portion of that surface because magnetic flux lines form 
closed loops. 
2 For a more extensive treatment of magnetic circuits see A. E. Fitzgerald, D. E. Higgenbotham, and 
A. Grabel, Basic Electrical Engineering, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, 1981, chap. 13; also E. E. Staff, M.I.T., 
Magnetic Circuits and Transformers, M.I.T. Press, 1965, chaps. 1 to 3. 

4 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
These facts can be used to justify the assumption that the magnetic flux density 
is uniform across the cross section of a magnetic circuit such as the core of Fig. 1.1. 
In this case Eq. 1.3 reduces to the simple scalar equation 
~bc = Bc Ac 
(1.4) 
where 4)c = flux in core 
Bc = flux density in core 
Ac = cross-sectional area of core 
From Eq. 1.1, the relationship between the mmf acting on a magnetic circuit and 
the magnetic field intensity in that circuit is. 3 
-- Ni -- / 
Hdl 
(1.5) 
The core dimensions are such that the path length of any flux line is close to 
the mean core length lc. As a result, the line integral of Eq. 1.5 becomes simply the 
scalar product Hclc of the magnitude of H and the mean flux path length Ic. Thus, 
the relationship between the mmf and the magnetic field intensity can be written in 
magnetic circuit terminology as 
= Ni -- Hclc 
(1.6) 
where Hc is average magnitude of H in the core. 
The direction of Hc in the core can be found from the right-hand rule, which can 
be stated in two equivalent ways. (1) Imagine a current-carrying conductor held in the 
right hand with the thumb pointing in the direction of current flow; the fingers then 
point in the direction of the magnetic field created by that current. (2) Equivalently, if 
the coil in Fig. 1.1 is grasped in the right hand (figuratively speaking) with the fingers 
pointing in the direction of the current, the thumb will point in the direction of the 
magnetic fields. 
The relationship between the magnetic field intensity H and the magnetic flux 
density B is a property of the material in which the field exists. It is common to assume 
a linear relationship; thus 
B = #H 
(1.7) 
where # is known as the magnetic permeability. In SI units, H is measured in units of 
amperes per meter, B is in webers per square meter, also known as teslas (T), and/z 
is in webers per ampere-turn-meter, or equivalently henrys per meter. In SI units the 
permeability of free space is #0 = 4:r × 10 -7 henrys per meter. The permeability of 
linear magnetic material can be expressed in terms of/Zr, its value relative to that of free 
space, or # = #r#0. Typical values of/Z r range from 2000 to 80,000 for materials used 
3 
general, the mmf drop across any segment of a magnetic circuit can be calculated as f I-Idl over 
In 
that 
portion of the magnetic circuit. 

1,1 
Introduction to Magnetic Circuits 
5 
Mean core 
length I c 
+ 
Air gap, 
permeability/x 0, 
Area Ag 
Wi~ 
Magnetic core 
N1 
permeability/z, 
Area A c 
Figure 1.2 Magnetic circuit with air gap. 
in transformers and rotating machines. The characteristics of ferromagnetic materials 
are described in Sections 1.3 and 1.4. For the present we assume that/Zr is a known 
constant, although it actually varies appreciably with the magnitude of the magnetic 
flux density. 
Transformers are wound on closed cores like that of Fig. 1.1. However, energy 
conversion devices which incorporate a moving element must have air gaps in their 
magnetic circuits. A magnetic circuit with an air gap is shown in Fig. 1.2. When 
the air-gap length g is much smaller than the dimensions of the adjacent core faces, 
the magnetic flux ~ will follow the path defined by the core and the air gap and the 
techniques of magnetic-circuit analysis can be used. If the air-gap length becomes 
excessively large, the flux will be observed to "leak out" of the sides of the air gap 
and the techniques of magnetic-circuit analysis will no longer be strictly applicable. 
Thus, provided the air-gap length g is sufficiently small, the configuration of 
Fig. 1.2 can be analyzed as a magnetic circuit with two series components: a magnetic 
core of permeability/~, cross-sectional area Ac, and mean length/c, and an air gap 
of permeability/z0, cross-sectional area Ag, and length g. In the core the flux density 
can be assumed uniform; thus 
Bc = m 
(1.8) 
Ac 
and in the air gap 
~b 
(1.9) 
Bg- 
Ag 
where 4~ = the flux in the magnetic circuit. 
Application of Eq. 1.5 to this magnetic circuit yields 
jr = Hctc + Egg 
and using the linear B-H relationship of Eq. 1.7 gives 
.T'= BClc_}_ Bg g 
lZ 
lZo 
(1.10) 
(1.11) 

6 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Here the ~" = Ni is the mmf applied to the magnetic circuit. From Eq. 1.10 we 
see that a portion of the mmf, .Tc = Hclc, is required to produce magnetic field in the 
core while the remainder, fg = Hgg, produces magnetic field in the air gap. 
For practical magnetic materials (as is discussed in Sections 1.3 and 1.4), Bc 
and Hc are not simply related by a known constant permeability/z as described by 
Eq. 1.7. In fact, Bc is often a nonlinear, multivalued function of Hc. Thus, although 
Eq. 1.10 continues to hold, it does not lead directly to a simple expression relating 
the mmf and the flux densities, such as that of Eq. 1.11. Instead the specifics of the 
nonlinear Bc-He relation must be used, either graphically or analytically. However, in 
many cases, the concept of constant material permeability gives results of acceptable 
engineering accuracy and is frequently used. 
From Eqs. 1.8 and 1.9, Eq. 1.11 can be rewritten in terms of the total flux ~b as 
lc 
g 
) 
"f'=q~ 
~ 
+ /~oAg 
(1.12) 
The terms that multiply the flux in this equation are known as the reluctance T~ 
of the core and air gap, respectively, 
lC 
~c -- 
(1.13) 
#Ac 
g 
J'~g -- 
(1.14) 
/zoAg 
and thus 
~" = q~(7~c + ~g) 
(1.15) 
Finally, Eq. 1.15 can be inverted to solve for the flux 
(1.16) 
or 
/zAc 
#0Ag 
(1.17) 
In general, for any magnetic circuit of total reluctance 7"~tot, the flux can be found as 
y- 
q~ -- 
(1.18) 
7~tot 

1,1 
Introduction to Magnetic Circuits 
7 
+ v( ) 
I 
4, 
gl 
+ 
y. 
R2 
V 
Y" 
I = (R 1 + R2 ) 
~b = 
(7~c + 7~g) 
(a) 
(b) 
'T•. c 
7"¢.g 
Figure 1.3 Analogy between electric and magnetic circuits. 
(a) Electric circuit, (b) magnetic circuit. 
The term which multiplies the mmfis known as thepermeance 7 -9 and is the inverse 
of the reluctance; thus, for example, the total permeance of a magnetic circuit is 
1 
~tot = 7-~tot 
(1.19) 
Note that Eqs. 1.15 and 1.16 are analogous to the relationships between the cur- 
rent and voltage in an electric circuit. This analogy is illustrated in Fig. 1.3. Figure 1.3a 
shows an electric circuit in which a voltage V drives a current I through resistors R1 
and R2. Figure 1.3b shows the schematic equivalent representation of the magnetic 
circuit of Fig. 1.2. Here we see that the mmf ~ (analogous to voltage in the electric 
circuit) drives a flux ¢ (analogous to the current in the electric circuit) through the 
combination of the reluctances of the core 7~c and the air gap ~g. This analogy be- 
tween the solution of electric and magnetic circuits can often be exploited to produce 
simple solutions for the fluxes in magnetic °circuits of considerable complexity. 
The fraction of the mmfrequired to drive flux through each portion of the magnetic 
circuit, commonly referred to as the mmf drop across that portion of the magnetic 
circuit, varies in proportion to its reluctance (directly analogous to the voltage drop 
across a resistive element in an electric circuit). From Eq. 1.13 we see that high 
material permeability can result in low core reluctance, which can often be made 
much smaller than that of the air gap; i.e., for (IzAc/lc) >> (lzoAg/g), "R.c << ~'P~g and 
thus "~-tot ~ ']'~g. In this case, the reluctance of the core can be neglected and the flux 
and hence B can be found from Eq. 1.16 in terms of f and the air-gap properties alone: 
.T" 
.T'/z0Ag 
/z0Ag 
ck ~ ~ 
= 
= N i 
(1.20) 
T~g 
g 
g 
As will be seen in Section 1.3, practical magnetic materials have permeabilities which 
are not constant but vary with the flux level. From Eqs. 1.13 to 1.16 we see that as 

8 
CHAPTER 1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Fringing 
fields 
Air gap 
Figure 1.4 Air-gap fringing fields. 
long as this permeability remains sufficiently large, its variation will not significantly 
affect the performance of the magnetic circuit. 
In practical systems, the magnetic field lines "fringe" outward somewhat as they 
cross the air gap, as illustrated in Fig. 1.4. Provided this fringing effect is not excessive, 
the magnetic-circuit concept remains applicable. The effect of thesefringingfields is to 
increase the effective cross-sectional area Ag of the air gap. Various empirical methods 
have been developed to account for this effect. A correction for such fringing fields 
in short air gaps can be made by adding the gap length to each of the two dimensions 
making up its cross-sectional area. In this book the effect of fringing fields is usually 
ignored. If fringing is neglected, Ag = Ac. 
In general, magnetic circuits can consist of multiple elements in series and paral- 
lel. To complete the analogy between electric and magnetic circuits, we can generalize 
Eq. 1.5 as 
.T" = f Hdl = Z 
)ok = Z 
Hklk 
(1.21) 
k 
k 
where .T" is the mmf (total ampere-turns) acting to drive flux through a closed loop of 
a magnetic circuit, 
= Jl J" da 
(1.22) 
and 3ok = Hklk is the mmfdrop across the k'th element of that loop. This is directly 
analogous to Kirchoff's voltage law for electric circuits consisting of voltage sources 
and resistors 
= Z 
Rkik 
( 
V 
1.23) 
k 
where V is the source voltage driving current around a loop and Rkik is the voltage 
drop across the k'th resistive element of that loop. 

1.1 
Introduction to Magnetic Circuits 
9 
Similarly, the analogy to Kirchoff's current law 
Z 
in = 0 
(1.24) 
n 
which says that the sum of currents into a node in an electric circuit equals zero is 
Z 
~n -- 0 
(1.25) 
n 
which states that the sum of the flux into a node in a magnetic circuit is zero. 
We have now described the basic principles for reducing a magneto-quasistatic 
field problem with simple geometry to a magnetic circuit model. Our limited pur- 
pose in this section is to introduce some of the concepts and terminology used by 
engineers in solving practical design problems. We must emphasize that this type of 
thinking depends quite heavily on engineering judgment and intuition. For example, 
we have tacitly assumed that the permeability of the "iron" parts of the magnetic 
circuit is a constant known quantity, although this is not true in general (see Sec- 
tion 1.3), and that the magnetic field is confined soley to the core and its air gaps. 
Although this is a good assumption in many situations, it is also true that the wind- 
ing currents produce magnetic fields outside the core. As we shall see, when two 
or more windings are placed on a magnetic circuit, as happens in the case of both 
transformers and rotating machines, these fields outside the core, which are referred 
to as leakage fields, cannot be ignored and significantly affect the performance of the 
device. 
The magnetic circuit shown in Fig. 1.2 has dimensions Ac = Ag = 9 cm 2, g = 0.050 cm, 
lc = 30 cm, and N = 500 tums. Assume the value/J.r = 70,000 for core material. (a) Find the 
reluctances 7-¢.c and 7"¢.g. For the condition that the magnetic circuit is operating with Bc = 1.0 T, 
find (b) the flux 4) and (c) the current i. 
II Solution 
a. The reluctances can be found from Eqs. 1.13 and 1.14: 
7¢.c = 
lc 
_- 
0.3 
--- 3.79 x 103 
/zr/z0Ac 
70,000 (4zr x 10-7)(9 x 10 -4) 
7"¢.g = 
g 
= 
5 × 10 -4 
/x0Ag 
(47r x 10-7)(9 x 10 -4) = 4.42 X 105 
A.wbtUms 
b. From Eq. 1.4, 
A. turns 
Wb 
= BcAc = 1.0(9 x 10 -4) = 9 × 10-4 Wb 
c. From Eqs. 1.6 and 1.15, 
N 
(])(T~ c -~- "/~g) 
9 x 10-4(4.46 x 105) 
N 
500 
= 0.80A 
EXAMPLE 1.1 

10 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
)ractice Problem 1.' 
Find the flux 4) and current for Example 1.1 if (a) the number of turns is doubled to N = 1000 
turns while the circuit dimensions remain the same and (b) if the number of turns is equal to 
N = 500 and the gap is reduced to 0.040 cm. 
Solution 
a. ~b = 9 x 10 -4 Wb and i = 0.40 A 
b. ¢=9x 
10 -4Wbandi=0.64A 
!XAMPLE 1 : 
The magnetic structure of a synchronous machine is shown schematically in Fig. 1.5. Assuming 
that rotor and stator iron have infinite permeability (# --+ c~), find the air-gap flux ~b and flux 
density Bg. For this example I = 10 A, N = 1000 turns, g = 1 cm, and Ag = 2000 cm 2. 
1 Solution 
Notice that there are two air gaps in series, of total length 2g, and that by symmetry the flux 
density in each is equal. Since the iron permeability here is assumed to be infinite, its reluctance 
is negligible and Eq. 1.20 (with g replaced by the total gap length 2g) can be used to find the flux 
NltxoAg 
1000(10)(4Jr x 10-7)(0.2) 
= 
= 
= 
0.13 
Wb 
2g 
0.02 
Stator 
/z --+ o~ /,L:: :::::::A~ gap length g 
::: ::::: 
.............. :: ::: .... 
j 
L:i: 
I 
I 
c" ....... 
Air gap 
N turns ¢ ......... 
permeability 
~ 
I 
I 
No 
I 
Pole face, 
Rotor i 
~S.,r,." t... 
1" 
i 
Magnetic flux 
lines 
Figure 1.5 
Simple synchronous machine. 

1.2 Flux Linkage, Inductance, and Energy 
11 
and 
0.13 
Bg = A---~ = 0.2 = 0.65 T 
~ractice Problem 1.: 
For the magnetic structure of Fig. 1.5 with the dimensions as given in Example 1.2, the air-gap 
flux density is observed to be Bg = 0.9 T. Find the air-gap flux ~b and, for a coil of N -- 500 
turns, the current required to produce this level of air-gap flux. 
Solution 
4) = 0.18 Wb and i = 28.6 A. 
1.2 
FLUX LINKAGE, INDUCTANCE, 
AND ENERGY 
When a magnetic field varies with time, an electric field is produced in space as 
determined by Faraday's law: 
g. Os - -~ 
B. da 
(1.26) 
Equation 1.26 states that the line integral of the electric field intensity E around a 
closed contour C is equal to the time rate of change of the magnetic flux linking (i.e. 
passing through) that contour. In magnetic structures with windings of high electrical 
conductivity, such as in Fig. 1.2, it can be shown that the E field in the wire is 
extremely small and can be neglected, so that the left-hand side of Eq. 1.26 reduces to 
the negative of the induced voltage 4 e at the winding terminals. In addition, the flux 
on the right-hand side of Eq. 1.26 is dominated by the core flux 4~. Since the winding 
(and hence the contour C) links the core flux N times, Eq. 1.26 reduces to 
d~0 
dl. 
e = N dt = d---t- 
(1.27) 
where ~. is the flux linkage of the winding and is defined as 
= Nq9 
(1.28) 
Flux linkage is measured in units of webers (or equivalently weber-turns). The symbol 
q9 is used to indicate the instantaneous value of a time-varying flux. 
In general the flux linkage of a coil is equal to the surface integral of the normal 
component of the magnetic flux density integrated over any surface spanned by that 
coil. Note that the direction of the induced voltage e is defined by Eq. 1.26 so that if 
4 The term electromotive force (emf) is often used instead of induced voltage to represent that component 
of voltage due to a time-varying flux linkage. 

12 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
the winding terminals were short-circuited, a current would flow in such a direction 
as to oppose the change of flux linkage. 
For a magnetic circuit composed of magnetic material of constant magnetic 
permeability or which includes a dominating air gap, the relationship between q~ and 
i will be linear and we can define the inductance L as 
L -- - 
(1.29) 
i 
Substitution of Eqs. 1.5, 1.18 and 1.28 into Eq. 1.29 gives 
N 2 
L = 
(1.30) 
T~tot 
From which we see that the inductance of a winding in a magnetic circuit is propor- 
tional to the square of the turns and inversely proportional to the reluctance of the 
magnetic circuit associated with that winding. 
For example, from Eq. 1.20, under the assumption that the reluctance of the core 
is negligible as compared to that of the air gap, the inductance of the winding in 
Fig. 1.2 is equal to 
N 2 
N2/zoAg 
L -- 
= 
(1.31) 
(g/lzoag) 
g 
Inductance is measured in henrys (H) or weber-turns per ampere. Equation 1.31 
shows the dimensional form of expressions for inductance; inductance is proportional 
to the square of the number of turns, to a magnetic permeability, and to a cross- 
sectional area and is inversely proportional to a length. It must be emphasized that, 
strictly speaking, the concept of inductance requires a linear relationship between 
flux and mmf. Thus, it cannot be rigorously applied in situations where the nonlinear 
characteristics of magnetic materials, as is discussed in Sections 1.3 and 1.4, dominate 
the performance of the magnetic system. However, in many situations of practical 
interest, the reluctance of the system is dominated by that of an air gap (which is of 
course linear) and the nonlinear effects of the magnetic material can be ignored. In 
other cases it may be perfectly acceptable to assume an average value of magnetic 
permeability for the core material and to calculate a corresponding average inductance 
which can be used for calculations of reasonable engineering accuracy. Example 1.3 
illustrates the former situation and Example 1.4 the latter. 
EXAMPLE 
1.3 
The magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.6a consists of an N-turn winding on a magnetic core of infinite 
permeability with two parallel air gaps of lengths g~ and g2 and areas A~ and A2, respectively. 
Find (a) the inductance of the winding and (b) the flux density Bl in gap 1 when the 
winding is carrying a current i. Neglect fringing effects at the air gap. 

1.2 
Flux Linkage, Inductance, and Energy 
13 
-~ g2 
N i+~ 
-f 
_ 
¢ 
~'1 
'T~'2 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.6 (a) Magnetic circuit and (b) equivalent circuit for Example 1.3. 
II Solution 
a. The equivalent circuit of Fig. 1.6b shows that the total reluctance is equal to the parallel 
combination of the two gap reluctances. Thus 
Ni 
¢ 
~ 
7-~17-~2 
7?,. 1 +7"~ 2 
where 
g~ 
g2 
/zoA1 
/./,oA2 
From Eq. 1.29, 
)~ 
N¢ 
N2('~l 
+ 
'J~2) 
L 
_~ ~ 
~ 
_m 
i 
i 
7~]7~2 
(A1 
A_~2~ ) 
= lzoN z 
~ 
+ 
gl 
b. From the equivalent circuit, one can see that 
Ni 
lzoA1Ni 
1 ~ 
B 
"~1 
g l 
and thus 
¢1 
lzoNi 
B1--~-- 
A1 
gl 
In Example 1.1, the relative permeability of the core material for the magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.2 
is assumed to be ~u~ r --" 70,000 
at a flux density of 1.0 T. 
a. For this value of ]-£r calculate the inductance of the winding. 
b. In a practical device, the core would be constructed from electrical steel such as M-5 
EXAMPLE 1.4 

14 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
electrical steel which is discussed in Section 1.3. This material is highly nonlinear and its 
relative permeability (defined for the purposes of this example as the ratio B/H) varies 
from a value of approximately #r --- 72,300 at a flux density of B = 1.0 T to a value of on 
the order of #r "-- 2900 as the flux density is raised to 1.8 T. (a) Calculate the inductance 
under the assumption that the relative permeability of the core steel is 72,300. (b) Calculate 
the inductance under the assumption that the relative permeability is equal to 2900. 
II Solution 
a. From Eqs. 1.13 and 1.14 and based upon the dimensions given in Example 1.1, 
7~c = 
lc 
_ _ 
0.3 
-- 
-- 3.67 x 103 A. turns 
/Zr/z0Ac 
72,300 (4zr × 10-7)(9 × 10 -4) 
Wb 
while Rg remains unchanged from the value calculated in Example 1.1 as 
7~g = 4.42 x 105 A. turns / Wb. 
Thus the total reluctance of the core and gap is 
7~tot = '~c + "~g = 4.46 x 10 s A. tums 
Wb 
and hence from Eq. 1.30 
N 2 
5002 
L = 
= 
= 0.561 H 
7"~,to t 
4.46 x l0 s 
b. For #r ~--- 2900, the reluctance of the core increases from a value of 3.79 × 103 A • turns / 
Wb to a value of 
lc 
0.3 
A. turns 
~c = 
= 
= 9.15 x 10 4 
/Zr#0Ac 
2900 (4zr x 10-7)(9 x 10 -4) 
Wb 
and hence the total reluctance increases from 4.46 x 105 A • turns / Wb to 5.34 x 105 A • 
turns / Wb. Thus from Eq. 1.30 the inductance decreases from 0.561 H to 
N 2 
5002 
L = 
= 
= 0.468 H 
~tot 
5.34 x 10 s 
This example illustrates the linearizing effect of a dominating air gap in a magnetic circuit. 
In spite of a reduction in the permeablity of the iron by a factor of 72,300/2900 = 25, the 
inductance decreases only by a factor of 0.468/0.561 = 0.83 simply because the reluctance 
of the air gap is significantly larger than that of the core. In many situations, it is common to 
assume the inductance to be constant at a value corresponding to a finite, constant value of core 
permeability (or in many cases it is assumed simply that/z r ~ 
(X)). Analyses based upon such 
a representation for the inductor will often lead to results which are well within the range of 
acceptable engineering accuracy and which avoid the immense complication associated with 
modeling the nonlinearity of the core material. 

1.2 Flux Linkage, Inductance, and Energy 
15 
~ractice Problem 1.; 
Repeat the inductance calculation of Example 1.4 for a relative permeability/L/, r = 
30,000.~ 
Solution 
L = 0.554 H 
Using MATLAB, t plot the inductance of the magnetic circuit of Example 1.1 and Fig. 1.2 as 
a function of core permeability over the range 100 < Jt/,r _~ 100,000. 
II Solution 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% Permeability 
of free space 
mu0 = pi*4.e-7; 
%All dimensions 
expressed 
in meters 
Ac = 9e-4; Ag = 9e-4; 
g = 5e-4; 
ic = 0.3; 
N = 500 ; 
%Reluctance 
of air gap 
Rg = g/(mu0*Ag) 
; 
for n = i:i01 
mur(n) 
= i00 + (i00000 
- 100)*(n-l)/100; 
%Reluctance 
of core 
Rc(n) 
= ic/(mur(n)*mu0*ic) 
; 
Rtot = Rg+Rc(n) ; 
%Inductance 
L(n) 
= N^2/Rtot; 
end 
plot (tour, L) 
xlabel('Core 
relative 
permeability') 
ylabel('Inductance 
[H] ') 
The resultant plot is shown in Fig. 1.7. Note that the figure clearly confirms that, for the 
magnetic circuit of this example, the inductance is quite insensitive to relative permeability 
until the relative permeability drops to on the order of 1000. Thus, as long as the effective relative 
permeability of the core is "large" (in this case greater than 1000), any nonlinearities in the 
properties of the core material will have little effect on the terminal properties of the inductor. 
EXAMPLE 1.5 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

16 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
g 0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Core relative permeability 
x 104 
Figure 1.7 
MATLAB plot of inductance vs. relative permeability for 
Example 1.5. 
Write a MATLAB script to plot the inductance of the magnetic circuit of Example 1.1 with 
#r 
= 
70,000 as a function of air-gap length as the the air-gap is varied from 0.01 cm to 
0.10 cm. 
Figure 1.8 shows a magnetic circuit with an air gap and two windings. In this case 
note that the mmf acting on the magnetic circuit is given by the total ampere-turns 
acting on the magnetic circuit (i.e., the net ampere turns of both windings) and that 
the reference directions for the currents have been chosen to produce flux in the same 
direction. The total mmf is therefore 
.T = Nli] + N2i2 
(1.32) 
and from Eq. 1.20, with the reluctance of the core neglected and assuming that Ac = 
Ag, the core flux 4~ is 
/z0Ac 
cp = (Nlil + N2i2)~ 
(1.33) 
In Eq. 1.33, ~b is the resultant coreflux produced by the total mmf of the two windings. 
It is this resultant 4~ which determines the operating point of the core material. 

1,2 Flux Linkage, Inductance, and Energy 
17 
tgnetic core 
a~neability tz, 
x 
mean core length I c, 
cross-sectional area A c 
Figure 1.8 Magnetic circuit with two windings. 
If Eq. 1.33 is broken up into terms attributable to the individual currents, the 
resultant flux linkages of coil 1 can be expressed as 
)~l=Nl~=N12(lz°Ac)i]+N1N2(lz°Ac)i2g 
g 
(1.34) 
which can be written 
where 
~1 = Lllil + L12i2 
(1.35) 
L 11 - 
N12 #0Ac 
(1.36) 
g 
is the self-inductance of coil 1 and Lllil is the flux linkage of coil 1 due to its own 
current il. The mutual inductance between coils 1 and 2 is 
L 12 -
-
 N1N2/x0Ac 
(1.37) 
g 
and L 12i2 is the flux linkage of coil 1 due to current i2 in the other coil. Similarly, the 
flux linkage of coil 2 is 
L2 -- N2dp-- N1N2 (lZ°AC) il W N22 (lZ°Ac) 
~ 
(1.38) 
or 
)~2 -- L21il -a t- L22i2 
where L21 = L 12 is the mutual inductance and 
L22 -- N2 2/~0Ac 
g 
is the self-inductance of coil 2. 
(1.39) 
(1.40) 

18 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
It is important to note that the resolution of the resultant flux linkages into the 
components produced by it and i2 is based on superposition of the individual effects 
and therefore implies a linear flux-mmf relationship (characteristic of materials of 
constant permeability). 
Substitution of Eq. 1.29 in Eq. 1.27 yields 
d 
e = --:-(Li) 
(1.41) 
dt 
for a magnetic circuit with a single winding. For a static magnetic circuit, the induc- 
tance is fixed (assuming that material nonlinearities do not cause the inductance to 
vary), and this equation reduces to the familiar circuit-theory form 
di 
e = L-- 
(1.42) 
dt 
However, in electromechanical energy conversion devices, inductances are often time- 
varying, and Eq. 1.41 must be written as 
e=L 
m 
- 
di 
dL 
~- i~ 
(1.43) 
dt 
dt 
Note that in situations with multiple windings, the total flux linkage of each 
winding must be used in Eq. 1.27 to find the winding-terminal voltage. 
The power at the terminals of a winding on a magnetic circuit is a measure of the 
rate of energy flow into the circuit through that particular winding. The power, p, is 
determined from the product of the voltage and the current 
.d)~ 
p = i e = t~ 
(1.44) 
dt 
and its unit is watts (W), or joules per second. Thus the change in magnetic stored 
energy A W in the magnetic circuit in the time interval tl to t2 is 
ftlt2 
fx2 
A W = 
p dt = 
i dX 
(1.45) 
I 
In SI units, the magnetic stored energy W is measured in joules (J). 
For a single-winding system of constant inductance, the change in magnetic 
stored energy as the flux level is changed from X1 to X2 can be written as 
f)'2 
~~'2 X dX = 
1 
A W -- 
i dX - 
~- 
~-{ (X 2 - X 2) 
(1.46) 
I 
I 
The total magnetic stored energy at any given value of ~ can be found from 
setting X~ equal to zero: 
1 X2 
Li2 
(1.47) 
W ~ ~ 2L 
2 

1.3 
Properties of Magnetic Materials 
19 
For the magnetic circuit of Example 1.1 (Fig. 1.2), find (a) the inductance L, (b) the magnetic 
stored energy W for Be = 1.0 T, and (c) the induced voltage e for a 60-Hz time-varying core 
flux of the form Be = 1.0 sin ogt T where w = (2zr)(60) = 377. 
n Solution 
a. From Eqs. 1.16 and 1.29 and Example 1.1, 
~. 
Nq~ 
N 2 
L 
~ 
m 
~ 
i 
i 
7"¢.c + 7~g 
5002 
= 
= 0.56 H 
4.46 × 105 
Note that the core reluctance is much smaller than that of the gap (Rc << '~g). Thus 
to a good approximation the inductance is dominated by the gap reluctance, i.e., 
N 2 
L ~ 
= 0.57 H 
7Zg 
b. In Example 1.1 we found that when Be = 1.0 T, i = 0.80A. Thus from Eq. 1.47, 
1 
2 
1 
W = -~Li = ~(0.56)(0.80) 2 = 0.18J 
c. From Eq. 1.27 and Example 1.1, 
d)~ 
d9 
dBc 
e= 
dt = N--d-t = N ac d---t- 
= 500 × (9 × 10 -4) × (377 x 1.0cos (377t)) 
= 170cos (377t) 
V 
| 
:~:9:1~v~ I :,1H ~ll l[."ll 
Repeat Example 1.6 for Bc = 0.8 T, assuming the core flux varies at 50 Hz instead of 60 Hz. 
Solution 
a. The inductance L is unchanged. 
b. W = 0.115 J 
c. e = 113 cos (314t) V 
1.3 
PROPERTIES OF MAGNETIC MATERIALS 
In the context of electromechanical energy conversion devices, the importance of 
magnetic materials is twofold. Through their use it is possible to obtain large magnetic 
flux densities with relatively low levels of magnetizing force. Since magnetic forces 
and energy density increase with increasing flux density, this effect plays a large role 
in the performance of energy-conversion devices. 

20 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
In addition, magnetic materials can be used to constrain and direct magnetic 
fields in well-defined paths. In a transformer they are used to maximize the coupling 
between the windings as well as to lower the excitation current required for transformer 
operation. In electric machinery, magnetic materials are used to shape the fields 
to obtain desired torque-production and electrical terminal characteristics. Thus a 
knowledgeable designer can use magnetic materials to achieve specific desirable 
device characteristics. 
Ferromagnetic materials, typically composed of iron and alloys of iron with 
cobalt, tungsten, nickel, aluminum, and other metals, are by far the most common mag- 
netic materials. Although these materials are characterized by a wide range of prop- 
erties, the basic phenomena responsible for their properties are common to them all. 
Ferromagnetic materials are found to be composed of a large number of domains, 
i.e., regions in which the magnetic moments of all the atoms are parallel, giving rise 
to a net magnetic moment for that domain. In an unmagnetized sample of material, 
the domain magnetic moments are randomly oriented, and the net resulting magnetic 
flux in the material is zero. 
When an external magnetizing force is applied to this material, the domain mag- 
netic moments tend to align with the applied magnetic field. As a result, the do- 
main magnetic moments add to the applied field, producing a much larger value of 
flux density than would exist due to the magnetizing force alone. Thus the effective 
permeability lz, equal to the ratio of the total magnetic flux density to the applied 
magnetic-field intensity, is large compared with the permeability of free space/z0. 
As the magnetizing force is increased, this behavior continues until all the magnetic 
moments are aligned with the applied field; at this point they can no longer contribute 
to increasing the magnetic flux density, and the material is said to be fully saturated. 
In the absence of an externally applied magnetizing force, the domain magnetic 
moments naturally align along certain directions associated with the crystal structure 
of the domain, known as axes of easy magnetization. Thus if the applied magnetiz- 
ing force is reduced, the domain magnetic moments relax to the direction of easy 
magnetism nearest to that of the applied field. As a result, when the applied field is 
reduced to zero, although they will tend to relax towards their initial orientation, the 
magnetic dipole moments will no longer be totally random in their orientation; they 
will retain a net magnetization component along the applied field direction. It is this 
effect which is responsible for the phenomenon known as magnetic hysteresis. 
Due to this hystersis effect, the relationship between B and H for a ferromagnetic 
material is both nonlinear and multivalued. In general, the characteristics of the mate- 
rial cannot be described analytically. They are commonly presented in graphical form 
as a set of empirically determined curves based on test samples of the material using 
methods prescribed by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 5 
5 Numerical data on a wide variety of magnetic materials are available from material manufacturers. 
One problem in using such data arises from the various systems of units employed. For example, 
magnetization may be given in oersteds or in ampere-turns per meter and the magnetic flux density in 
gauss, kilogauss, or teslas. A few useful conversion factors are given in Appendix E. The reader is 
reminded that the equations in this book are based upon SI units. 

1.3 Properties of Magnetic Materials 
21 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
--10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
H, A • turns/m 
50 70 90 110 130 150 170 
Figure 1.9 B-H loops for M-5 grain-oriented electrical steel 0.012 in thick. Only the 
top halves of the loops are shown here. (Armco Inc.) 
The most common curve used to describe a magnetic material is the B-H curve 
or hysteresis loop. The first and second quadrants (corresponding to B > 0) of a 
set of hysteresis loops are shown in Fig. 1.9 for M-5 steel, a typical grain-oriented 
electrical steel used in electric equipment. These loops show the relationship between 
the magnetic flux density B and the magnetizing force H. Each curve is obtained 
while cyclically varying the applied magnetizing force between equal positive and 
negative values of fixed magnitude. Hysteresis causes these curves to be multival- 
ued. After several cycles the B-H curves form closed loops as shown. The arrows 
show the paths followed by B with increasing and decreasing H. Notice that with 
increasing magnitude of H the curves begin to flatten out as the material tends toward 
saturation. At a flux density of about 1.7 T, this material can be seen to be heavily 
saturated. 
Notice that as H is decreased from its maximum value to zero, the flux density 
decreases but not to zero. This is the result of the relaxation of the orientation of the 
magnetic moments of the domains as described above. The result is that there remains 
a remanant magnetization when H is zero. 
Fortunately, for many engineering applications, it is sufficient to describe the 
material by a single-valued curve obtained by plotting the locus of the maximum 
values of B and H at the tips of the hysteresis loops; this is known as a dc or normal 
magnetization curve. A dc magnetization curve for M-5 grain-oriented electrical steel 

EXAMPLE 
1.7 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
10,000 
100,000 
H, A • turns/m 
2.4 
2.2 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
~ 1.2 
~ 1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
22 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Figure 1.10 
Dc magnetization curve for M-5 grain-oriented electrical steel 0.012 in thick. 
( Armco Inc. ) 
is shown in Fig. 1.10. The dc magnetization curve neglects the hysteretic nature of 
the material but clearly displays its nonlinear characteristics. 
Assume that the core material in Example 1.1 is M-5 electrical steel, which has the dc magne- 
tization curve of Fig. 1.10. Find the current i required to produce Be = 1 T. 
II Solution 
The value of He for Bc = 1 T is read from Fig. 1.10 as 
He = 11 A. turns/m 
The mmf drop for the core path is 
.Y'c = Hclc = 11 (0.3) = 3.3 A. turns 
The mmf drop across the air gap is 
Bgg 
5 x 10 -4 
.~"g = Hgg = 
= 
= 396 A. tums 
#o 
4n" x 10 -7 
The required current is 
i 
= Yc+Yg 
N 
399 
= 
500 
=0.80 A 

1.4 
AC Excitation 
23 
Repeat Example 1.7 but find the current i for Bc -- 1.6 T. By what factor does the current have 
to be increased to result in this factor of 1.6 increase in flux density? 
Solution 
The current i can be shown to be 1.302 A. Thus, the current must be increased by a factor of 
1.302/0.8 -- 1.63. Because of the dominance of the air-gap reluctance, this is just slightly in 
excess of the fractional increase in flux density in spite of the fact that the core is beginning to 
significantly saturate at a flux density of 1.6 T. 
1.4 
AC EXCITATION 
In ac power systems, the waveforms of voltage and flux closely approximate sinusoidal 
functions of time. This section describes the excitation characteristics and losses 
associated with steady-state ac operation of magnetic materials under such operating 
conditions. We use as our model a closed-core magnetic circuit, i.e., with no air gap, 
such as that shown in Fig. 1.1 or the transformer of Fig. 2.4. The magnetic path length 
is lc, and the cross-sectional area is Ac throughout the length of the core. We further 
assume a sinusoidal variation of the core flux ~o(t); thus 
99(t) -- t~max sin ogt = AcBmax sin ogt 
(1.48) 
where t~max -- amplitude of core flux ~o in webers 
Bma x = amplitude of flux density Bc in teslas 
~o = angular frequency = 2zrf 
f = frequency in Hz 
From Eq. 1.27, the voltage induced in the N-turn winding is 
e(t) -- ogNt~max cos (ogt) = Emax cos ogt 
(1.49) 
where 
Emax -" wNt~max = 2zrf NAc Bmax 
(1.50) 
In steady-state ac operation, we are usually more interested in the root-mean- 
square or rms values of voltages and currents than in instantaneous or maximum 
values. In general, the rms value of a periodic function of time, f(t), of period T is 
defined as 
Frms = 
~ 9/~ f2(t) dt 
(1.51) 

24 
CHAPTER 1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
~o 
/'V' 
/ 
I 
"It 
I 
I I~i'!~ 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.11 
Excitation phenomena. (a) Voltage, flux, and exciting current" 
(b) corresponding hysteresis loop. 
From Eq. 1.51, the rms value of a sine wave can be shown to be 1 / ~/2 times its peak 
value. Thus the rms value of the induced voltage is 
2zr f NAcBmax : ~/27r f NAcBmax 
(1.52) 
Erms= ~/~ 
To produce magnetic flux in the core requires current in the exciting winding 
known as the exciting current, i~o. 6 The nonlinear magnetic properties of the core re- 
quire that the waveform of the exciting current differs from the sinusoidal waveform of 
the flux. A curve of the exciting current as a function of time can be found graphically 
from the magnetic characteristics of the core material, as illustrated in Fig. 1.1 la. 
Since Bc and Hc are related to ~o and i~ by known geometric constants, the ac hys- 
teresis loop of Fig. 1.1 lb has been drawn in terms of ~o = BcAc and is i~0 = Hclc/N. 
Sine waves of induced voltage, e, and flux, ~o, in accordance with Eqs. 1.48 and 1.49, 
are shown in Fig. 1.11 a. 
At any given time, the value of i~ corresponding to the given value of flux can 
be found directly from the hysteresis loop. For example, at time t t the flux is ~o t and 
• 
'" Notice that since 
" at time t" the corresponding values are ~o" and t~. 
the current is t~, 
the hysteresis loop is multivalued, it is necessary to be careful to pick the rising-flux 
values (tp' in the figure) from the rising-flux portion of the hysteresis loop; similarly 
the falling-flux portion of the hysteresis loop must be selected for the falling-flux 
values (~o" in the figure). 
6 More generally, for a system with multiple windings, the exciting mmf is the net ampere-turns acting to 
produce flux in the magnetic circuit. 

11.4 AC Excitation 
25 
Notice that, because the hysteresis loop "flattens out" due to saturation effects, 
the waveform of the exciting current is sharply peaked. Its rms value I~0,rms is defined 
by Eq. 1.51, where T is the period of a cycle. It is related to the corresponding rms 
value nc,rms of n c by the relationship 
/cHc,rms 
(1.53) 
I~0,rms = 
N 
The ac excitation characteristics of core materials are often described in terms 
of rms voltamperes rather than a magnetization curve relating B and H. The theory 
behind this representation can be explained by combining Eqs. 1.52 and 1.53. Thus, 
from Eqs. 1.52 and 1.53, the rms voltamperes required to excite the core of Fig. 1.1 
to a specified flux density is equal to 
ErmsI~0,rms- ~/27r f NAcBmax lcHrm------~s 
N 
-- x/~zr f Bmaxnrms(Aclc) 
(1.54) 
In Eq. 1.54, the product Aclc can be seen to be equal to the volume of the core and 
hence the rms exciting voltamperes required to excite the core with sinusoidal can be 
seen to be proportional to the frequency of excitation, the core volume and the product 
of the peak flux density and the rms magnetic field intensity. For a magnetic material 
of mass density Pc, the mass of the core is AclcPc and the exciting rms voltamperes 
per unit mass, Pa, can be expressed as 
Erms I~o,rms 
~/2zr f 
Pa = 
= ~ 
Bmax Hrms 
(1.55) 
mass 
Pc 
Note that, normalized in this fashion, the rms exciting voltamperes can be seen 
to be a property of the material alone. In addition, note that they depend only on Bmax 
because Hrms is a unique function of Bmax as determined by the shape of the material 
hysteresis loop at any given frequency f. As a result, the ac excitation requirements for 
a magnetic material are often supplied by manufacturers in terms of rms voltamperes 
per unit weight as determined by laboratory tests on closed-core samples of the 
material. These results are illustrated in Fig. 1.12 for M-5 grain-oriented electrical 
steel. 
The exciting current supplies the mmf required to produce the core flux and the 
power input associated with the energy in the magnetic field in the core. Part of this 
energy is dissipated as losses and results in heating of the core. The rest appears as 
reactive power associated with energy storage in the magnetic field. This reactive 
power is not dissipated in the core; it is cyclically supplied and absorbed by the 
excitation source. 
Two loss mechanisms are associated with time-varying fluxes in magnetic ma- 
terials. The first is ohmic I2R heating, associated with induced currents in the core 
material. From Faraday's law (Eq. 1.26) we see that time-varying magnetic fields 
give rise to electric fields. In magnetic materials these electric fields result in induced 

2.2 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
0.8 
1.4 
t'q 
1.2 
1.0 
E 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
0.001 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
Pa, rms VA/kg 
26 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Figure 1.12 
Exciting rms voltamperes per kilogram at 60 Hz for M-5 grain-oriented electrical 
steel 0.012 in thick. (Armco Inc.) 
currents, commonly referred to as eddy currents, which circulate in the core material 
and oppose changes in flux density in the material. To counteract the correspond- 
ing demagnetizing effect, the current in the exciting winding must increase. Thus 
the resultant "dynamic" B-H loop under ac operation is somewhat "fatter" than the 
hysteresis loop for slowly varying conditions, and this effect increases as the excita- 
tion frequency is increased. It is for this reason that the characteristics of electrical 
steels vary with frequency and hence manufacturers typically supply characteristics 
over the expected operating frequency range of a particular electrical steel. Note for 
example that the exciting rms voltamperes of Fig. 1.12 are specified at a frequency 
of 60 Hz. 
To reduce the effects of eddy currents, magnetic structures are usually built of thin 
sheets of laminations of the magnetic material. These laminations, which are aligned 
in the direction of the field lines, are insulated from each other by an oxide layer on 
their surfaces or by a thin coat of insulating enamel or varnish. This greatly reduces 
the magnitude of the eddy currents since the layers of insulation interrupt the current 
paths; the thinner the laminations, the lower the losses. In general, eddy-current loss 
tends to increase as the square of the excitation frequency and also as the square of 
the peak flux density. 
The second loss mechanism is due to the hysteretic nature of magnetic material. 
In a magnetic circuit like that of Fig. 1.1 or the transformer of Fig. 2.4, a time-varying 
excitation will cause the magnetic material to undergo a cyclic variation described by 
a hysteresis loop such as that shown in Fig. 1.13. 

Bmax 
Bmax 
--Hma x 
1.4 
AC Excitation 
27 
Hmax 
H 
Figure 1.13 
Hysteresis loop; 
hysteresis loss is proportional to the 
loop area (shaded). 
Equation 1.45 can be used to calculate the energy input W to the magnetic core 
of Fig. 1.1 as the material undergoes a single cycle 
J 
f(Hclc) 
W = 
i~0 d~. = 
--~ 
(Ac N dBc) -- Aclc J" He dBc 
(1.56) 
Recognizing that Aclc is the volume of the core and that the integral is the area of the 
ac hysteresis loop, we see that each time the magnetic material undergoes a cycle, 
there is a net energy input into the material. This energy is required to move around 
the magnetic dipoles in the material and is dissipated as heat in the material. Thus 
for a given flux level, the corresponding hysteresis losses are proportional to the area 
of the hysteresis loop and to the total volume of material. Since there is an energy 
loss per cycle, hysteresis power loss is proportional to the frequency of the applied 
excitation. 
In general, these losses depend on the metallurgy of the material as well as the 
flux density and frequency. Information on core loss is typically presented in graphical 
form. It is plotted in terms of watts per unit weight as a function of flux density; often 
a family of curves for different frequencies are given. Figure 1.14 shows the core loss 
Pc for M-5 grain-oriented electrical steel at 60 Hz. 
Nearly all transformers and certain sections of electric machines use sheet-steel 
material that has highly favorable directions of magnetization along which the core 
loss is low and the permeability is high. This material is termed grain-oriented steel. 
The reason for this property lies in the atomic structure of a crystal of the silicon-iron 

2.2 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
0.8 
1.4 
t'q 
1.2 
1.0 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
o. 0001 
0.001 
0.01 
0.] 
1 
10 
Pc, W/kg 
28 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Figure 1.14 
Core loss at 60 Hz in watts per kilogram for M-5 grain-oriented electrical steel 
0.012 in thick. (Armco Inc.) 
alloy, which is a body-centered cube; each cube has an atom at each comer as well 
as one in the center of the cube. In the cube, the easiest axis of magnetization is 
the cube edge; the diagonal across the cube face is more difficult, and the diagonal 
through the cube is the most difficult. By suitable manufacturing techniques most of 
the crystalline cube edges are aligned in the rolling direction to make it the favorable 
direction of magnetization. The behavior in this direction is superior in core loss 
and permeability to nonoriented steels in which the crystals are randomly oriented 
to produce a material with characteristics which are uniform in all directions. As a 
result, oriented steels can be operated at higher flux densities than the nonoriented 
grades. 
Nonoriented electrical steels are used in applications where the flux does not 
follow a path which can be oriented with the rolling direction or where low cost is 
of importance. In these steels the losses are somewhat higher and the permeability is 
very much lower than in grain-oriented steels. 
The magnetic core in Fig. 1.15 is made from laminations of M-5 grain-oriented electrical 
steel. The winding is excited with a 60-Hz voltage to produce a flux density in the steel of 
B = 1.5 sin wt T, where w = 2zr60 ~ 377 rad/sec. The steel occupies 0.94 of the core cross- 
sectional area. The mass-density of the steel is 7.65 g/cm 3. Find (a) the applied voltage, (b) the 
peak current, (c) the rms exciting current, and (d) the core loss. 

1.4 AC Excitation 
29 
N= 
8 in 
10 in 
Figure 1.15 
Laminated steel core with winding for 
Example 1.8. 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 1.27 the voltage is 
dq9 
dB 
e= N--~ = N Ac d---- ~ 
( 1°m2 ) 
= 200 x 4 in 2 x 0.94 x 
x 1.5 x (377 cos (377t)) 
39.42 in 2 
= 274 cos (377t) V 
b. The magnetic field intensity corresponding to nmax = 1.5 T is given in Fig. 1.10 as 
gma x = 36 A turns/m. Notice that, as expected, the relative permeability 
IXr = Bma~/(IxoHmax) = 33,000 at the flux level of 1.5 T is lower than the value of 
~r = 72,300 found in Example 1.4 corresponding to a flux level of 1.0 T, yet significantly 
larger than the value of 2900 corresponding to a flux level of 1.8 T. 
(,.0m) 
1c=(6+6+8+8) 
in \39"4in 
=0.71m 
The peak current is 
nmaxl c 
36(0.71) 
I = 
= 
= 0.13 A 
N 
200 
c. The rms current is obtained from the value of Pa of Fig. 1.12 for Bmax = 1.5 T. 
Pa = 1.5 VA/kg 
The core volume and weight are 
Vc = (4 in2)(0.94)(28 in) = 105.5 in 3 
We = (105.5 in 3) 
2.54 cm 
7.65 g 
1.0 ~n 
\ 1.0 cm 3 
-- 13.2 kg 

30 
CHAPTER 1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
The total rms voltamperes and current are 
Pa = (1.5 VA/kg) (13.2 kg) = 20 VA 
Pa 
20 
l~o,rms = Erms = 275(0.707) = 0.10A 
d. The core-loss density is obtained from Fig. 1.14 as Pc = 1.2 W/kg. The total core loss is 
Pc = (1.2 W/kg) (13.2 kg) = 16 W 
Repeat Example 1.8 for a 60-Hz voltage of B = 1.0 sin cot T. 
Solution 
a. V=185cos377tV 
b. I = 0.04A 
c. I~ = 0.061A 
d. Pc = 6.7 W 
1.5 
PERMANENT MAGNETS 
Figure 1.16a shows the second quadrant of a hysteresis loop for Alnico 5, a typical 
permanent-magnet material, while Fig. 1.16b shows the second quadrant of a hys- 
teresis loop for M-5 steel. 7 Notice that the curves are similar in nature. However, the 
hysteresis loop of Alnico 5 is characterized by a large value of residual flux density 
or remanent magnetization, Br, (approximately 1.22 T) as well as a large value of 
coercivity, Hc, (approximately -49 kA/m). 
The remanent magnetization, Br, corresponds to the flux density which would 
remain in a closed magnetic structure, such as that of Fig. 1.1, made of this material, 
if the applied mmf (and hence the magnetic field intensity H) were reduced to zero. 
However, although the M-5 electrical steel also has a large value of remanent magneti- 
zation (approximately 1.4 T), it has a much smaller value of coercivity (approximately 
-6 A/m, smaller by a factor of over 7500). The coercivity Hc corresponds to the value 
of magnetic field intensity (which is proportional to the mmf) required to reduce the 
material flux density to zero. 
The significance of remanent magnetization is that it can produce magnetic flux 
in a magnetic circuit in the absence of external excitation (such as winding currents). 
This is a familiar phenomenon to anyone who has afixed notes to a refrigerator with 
small magnets and is widely used in devices such as loudspeakers and permanent- 
magnet motors. 
7 To obtain the largest value of remanent magnetization, the hysteresis loops of Fig. 1.16 are those which 
would be obtained if the materials were excited by sufficient mmf to ensure that they were driven heavily 
into saturation. This is discussed further in Section 1.6. 

1.5 
Permanent Magnets 
3t 
Energy product, kJ/m 3 
B,T 
Point of 
Br 
maximum 
energy product • 
1.0 
0.5 
~ 
Load line for 
~" ~ ~ ~ Example 1.9 
Hc.... 
"~. 
< 
H, kA/m 
--50 
--40 
--30 
--20 
-- 10 
0 
(a) 
// 
B,T 
1.5 
Br 
1.0 
0.5 
,J 3.8 x 10 -5 
,\ 
,r 
\ 
\ 
Load line for 
\\Example 1.9 
\ 
\ 
\ 
f 
\ 
Slope = 
--6.28 x 10 -6 
Wb/Ao m 
nc 
,~ 
I 
"~ 
I 
• 
H, A/m 
--10 
--5 
0 
H, A/m --6 
0 
(b) 
(c) 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
B,T 
- 
4 x 10-5 
_ 2 x 10-5 
Figure 1.16 
(a) Second quadrant of hysteresis loop for Alnico 5; (b) second 
quadrant of hysteresis loop for M-5 electrical steel; (c) hysteresis loop for M-5 
electrical steel expanded for small B. (Armco Inc.) 

32 
CHAPTER 1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
From Fig. 1.16, it would appear that both Alnico 5 and M-5 electrical steel would 
be useful in producing flux in unexcited magnetic circuits since they both have large 
values of remanent magnetization. That this is not the case can be best illustrated by 
an example. 
EXAMPLE 1.9 
As shown in Fig. 1.17, a magnetic circuit consists of a core of high permeability (/x --+ c¢), 
an air gap of length g = 0.2 cm, and a section of magnetic material of length lm = 1.0 cm. 
The cross-sectional area of the core and gap is equal to Am -- Ag = 4 cm 2. Calculate the flux 
density B s in the air gap if the magnetic material is (a) Alnico 5 and (b) M-5 electrical steel. 
II Solution 
a. Since the core permeability is assumed infinite, H in the core is negligible. Recognizing 
that the mmf acting on the magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.17 is zero, we can write 
.~" = 0 = Hgg -4- nmlm 
or 
., 
=_ 
where Hg and Hm are the magnetic field intensities in the air gap and the magnetic 
material, respectively. 
Since the flux must be continuous through the magnetic circuit, 
~b = AgBg = AmBm 
or 
(am) 
Bg = 
-~ 
Bm 
where Bg and Bm are the magnetic flux densities in the air gap and the magnetic material, 
respectively. 
IA 
~ Magnetic 
I,-m 
x x × ,[--- material 
I m 
Air gap,--~ 
-~-g 
j_ ~ 
permeability 
l" 
i I 
..... #o, Area Ag 
Figure 1.17 Magnetic circuit 
for Example 1.9. 

t,5 
Permanent Magnets 
33 
These equations can be solved to yield a linear relationship for Bm in terms of Hm 
(A~mm) (/m) 
Bm = --#0 
g 
Hm --- -5/z0 Hm "- -6.28 x 10-6nm 
To solve for Bm we recognize that for Alnico 5, Bm and Hm are also related by the 
curve of Fig. 1.16a. Thus this linear relationship, also known as a load line, can be plotted 
on Fig. 1.16a and the solution obtained graphically, resulting in 
Bg = Bm --0.30 T 
b. The solution for M-5 electrical steel proceeds exactly as in part (a). The load line is the 
same as that of part (a) because it is determined only by the permeability of the air gap 
and the geometries of the magnet and the air gap. Hence from Fig. 1.16c 
Bg = 3.8 × 10 -5 T = 0.38 gauss 
which is much less than the value obtained with Alnico 5. 
Example 1.9 shows that there is an immense difference between permanent- 
magnet materials (often referred to as hard magnetic materials) such as Alnico 5 and 
soft magnetic materials such as M-5 electrical steel. This difference is characterized 
in large part by the immense difference in their coercivities He. The coercivity can 
be thought of as a measure of the magnitude of the mmf required to demagnetize 
the material. As seen from Example 1.9, it is also a measure of the capability of the 
material to produce flux in a magnetic circuit which includes an air gap. Thus we see 
that materials which make good permanent magnets are characterized by large values 
of coercivity He (considerably in excess of 1 kA/m). 
A useful measure of the capability of permanent-magnet material is known as its 
maximum energy product. This corresponds to the largest B-H product (B - H)max, 
which corresponds to a point on the second quadrant of the hysteresis loop. As can 
be seen from Eq. 1.56, the product of B and H has the dimensions of energy density 
(joules per cubic meter). We now show that operation of a given permanent-magnet 
material at this point will result in the smallest volume of that material required to 
produce a given flux density in an air gap. As a result, choosing a material with the 
largest available maximum energy product can result in the smallest required magnet 
volume. 
In Example 1.9, we found an expression for the flux density in the air gap of the 
magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.17: 
Am 
Bg -- -~g Bm 
(1.57) 
We also found that the ratio of the mmf drops across the magnet and the air gap is 
equal to - 1" 
Hmlm = -1 
(1.58) 
Hgg 

34 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Equation 1.58 can be solved for Hg, and the result can be multiplied by #0 to 
obtain Bg =/z0Hg. Multiplying by Eq. 1.57 yields 
Bg = /.60 
(-- Hm Bm) 
gAg 
( V°lmag )(-HmBm) 
= /-60 Volair gap 
(1.59) 
or 
2 
Volair gapBg 
(1.60) 
Volmag = /z0 (- Hm Bm) 
where Volmag is the volume of the magnet, Volair gap is the air-gap volume, and the 
minus sign arises because, at the operating point of the magnetic circuit, H in the 
magnet (Hm) is negative. 
Equation 1.60 is the desired result. It indicates that to achieve a desired flux 
density in the air gap, the required volume of the magnet can be minimized by 
operating the magnet at the point of the largest possible value of the B-H product 
Hm Bm, i.e., the point of maximum energy product. Furthermore, the larger the value 
of this product, the smaller the size of the magnet required to produce the desired flux 
density. Hence the maximum energy product is a useful performance measure for a 
magnetic material, and it is often found as a tabulated "figure of merit" on data sheets 
for permanent-magnet materials. 
Note that Eq. 1.59 appears to indicate that one can achieve an arbitrarily large 
air-gap flux density simply by reducing the air-gap volume. This is not true in practice 
because as the flux density in the magnetic circuit increases, a point will be reached 
at which the magnetic core material will begin to saturate and the assumption of 
infinite permeability will no longer be valid, thus invalidating the derivation leading 
to Eq. 1.59. 
Note also that a curve of constant B-H product is a hyperbola. A set of such 
hyperbolas for different values of the B-H product is plotted in Fig. 1.16a. From 
these curves, we see that the maximum energy product for Alnico 5 is 40 kJ/m 3 and 
that this occurs at the point B = 1.0 T and H = -40 kA/m. 
EXAMPLE 1.10 
The magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.17 is modified so that the air-gap area is reduced to Ag = 2.0 cm 2, 
as shown in Fig. 1.18. Find the minimum magnet volume required to achieve an air-gap flux 
density of 0.8 T. 
II Solution 
The smallest magnet volume will be achieved with the magnet operating at its point of maxi- 
mum energy product, as shown in Fig. 1.16a. At this operating point, Bm = 1.0 T and Hm -- 
-40 kMm. 

1.6 Application of Permanent Magnet Materials 
35 
T 
Im 
3_ 
g = 0.2 cm 
r gap, permeability/z o, 
ea Ag -- 2 cm 2 
Figure 1.18 Magnetic circuit for Example 1.10. 
Thus from Eq. 1.57, 
and from Eq. 1.58 
Am -- Ag 
-~m 
=2cm 2 
~.0 
=l.6cm 2 
lm --- --g 
Hg 
= --g 
( 
) 
= -0.2cm 
(47r x 10-7)(-40 x 103) 
= 3.18 cm 
Thus the minimum magnet volume is equal to 1.6 cm 2 × 3.18 cm = 5.09 cm 3. 
~ractice Problem 1.: 
Repeat Example 1.10 assuming the air-gap area is further reduced to Ag = 1.8 cm 2 and that 
the desired air-gap flux density is 0.6 T. 
Solution 
Minimum magnet volume = 2.58 cm 3. 
1.6 
APPLICATION OF PERMANENT 
MAGNET MATERIALS 
Examples 1.9 and 1.10 consider the operation of permanent magnetic materials under 
the assumption that the operating point can be determined simply from a knowledge 
of the geometry of the magnetic circuit and the properties of the various magnetic 

36 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
i 
--------- neodymium-iron-boron 
............ 
Alnico 5 
samarium-cobalt 
.... 
Alnico 8 
........... ~ ~- -- Ceramic 7 
m 
f 
I 
1 
/ 
.J 
J 
J 
L 
1.5 
1.4 
1.3 
1.2 
// 
................... ........... 1.1 
; 
1.0 
0 
"f 
0.9 
,4..', 
, 
- 0.8 
~, 
o.7 
/i 
/ 
i 
o.6 
• 
i 
0.5 
j 
, 
...-:" 
./ 
t'i 
J 
i 
, 0.4 
....... 
• --~" 0.3 
/" 
......................................... 
.E 
tl 
o 
/ 
................... [:~i 
~ 
0.2 
.............. 
[ 
..................... 
' .................... 
! ........ 
,-5 
,' 
0, 
--1000 
--900 
--800 
--700 
--600 
--500 
--400 
--300 
--200 
--100 
0 
H, kA/m 
Figure 1.19 
Magnetization curves for common permanent-magnet materials. 
B,T 
materials involved. In fact, the situation is more complex. 8 This section will expand 
upon these issues. 
Figure 1.19 shows the magnetization characteristics for a few common permanent 
magnet materials. Alnico 5 is a widely used alloy of iron, nickel, aluminum, and cobalt, 
originally discovered in 1931. It has a relatively large residual flux density. Alnico 8 
has a lower residual flux density and a higher coercivity than Alnico 5. Hence, it is 
less subject to demagnetization than Alnico 5. Disadvantages of the Alnico materials 
are their relatively low coercivity and their mechanical brittleness. 
Ceramic permanent magnet materials (also known as ferrite magnets) are made 
from iron-oxide and barium- or strontium-carbonate powders and have lower residual 
flux densities than Alnico materials but significantly higher coercivities. As a result, 
they are much less prone to demagnetization. One such material, Ceramic 7, is shown 
in Fig. 1.19, where its magnetization characteristic is almost a straight line. Ceramic 
magnets have good mechanical characteristics and are inexpensive to manufacture; 
as a result, they are the widely used in many permanent magnet applications. 
8 For a further discussion of permanent magnets and their application, see E Campbell, Permanent 
Magnet Materials and Their Application, Cambridge University Press, 1994; R. J. Parker, Advances in 
Permanent Magnetism, John Wiley & Sons, 1990; A. Bosak, Permanent-Magnet DC Linear Motors, 
Clarendon Press.Oxford, 1996; G. R. Slemon and A. Straughen, Electric Machines, Addison-Wesley, 
1980, Secs 1.20-1.25; and T. J. E. Miller, Brushless Permanent-Magnet and Reluctance Motor Drives, 
Clarendon Press.Oxford, 1989, Chapter 3. 

1,6 
Application of Permanent Magnet Materials 
37 
Samarium-cobalt represents a significant advance in permanent magnet technol- 
ogy which began in the 1960s with the discovery of rare earth permanent magnet 
materials. From Fig. 1.19 it can be seen to have a high residual flux density such as is 
found with the Alnico materials, while at the same time having a much higher coer- 
civity and maximum energy product. The newest of the rare earth magnetic materials 
is the neodymium-iron-boron material. It features even larger residual flux density, 
coercivity, and maximum energy product than does samarium-cobalt. 
Consider the magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.20. This includes a section of hard mag- 
netic material in a core of highly permeable soft magnetic material as well as an 
N-turn excitation winding. With reference to Fig. 1.21, we assume that the hard 
~iiiiiiiiiiiiii!ii!~!i~!!i!i:~ii~i~!i!iiiiiii~!~ii~/iii~!~i~!~iii~i~i~iiii~iiii~ii~i~i~i~i~i!iiiiiii~Ji~ii~iii~iii!iii~ 
ii!ii~iii!~i~i~iii!i~iiiii~iiii!iiC~iiiii~ii~ii~iii!~iii!iiii~i~iiiiii!iii!i!iiiiiii!i~iiii~iii!iiiiiiiiiiii!ii!iiiiiiiii~iiii~ii!~ 
° 
l m 
magnetic 
N turns 
~ 
material 
o 
Figure 1.20 
Magnetic circuit 
including both a permanent magnet 
and an excitation winding. 
nmax 
Br 
M
i
n
~
 
(d) 
f 
/ 
! 
/ 
(e) I 
B,T 
  ecoilline 
(f) 
/ 
r(a) 
(b) 
H(d) 
0 
Hma x 
H, kA/m 
i (d) 
ima x 
i, A 
Figure 1.21 
Portion of a B-H characteristic showing a minor loop and a 
recoil line. 

38 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
magnetic material is initially unmagnetized (corresponding to point a of the figure) 
and consider what happens as current is applied to the excitation winding. Because 
the core is assumed to be of infinite permeability, the horizontal axis of Fig. 1.21 can 
be considered to be both a measure of the applied current i = Hlm/N as well as a 
measure of H in the magnetic material. 
As the current i is increased to its maximum value, the B-H trajectory rises from 
point a in Fig. 1.21 toward its maximum value at point b. To fully magnetize the 
material, we assume that the current has been increased to a value/max sufficiently 
large that the material has been driven well into saturation at point b. When the current 
is then decreased to zero, the B-H characteristic will begin to form a hysteresis loop, 
arriving at point c at zero current. At point c, notice that H in the material is zero but 
B is at its remanent value Br. 
As the current then goes negative, the B-H characteristic continues to trace out 
a hysteresis loop. In Fig. 1.21, this is seen as the trajectory between points c and d. 
If the current is then maintained at the value -i (d), the operating point of the magnet 
will be that of point d. Note that, as in Example 1.9, this same operating point would 
be reached if the material were to start at point c and, with the excitation held at zero, 
an air gap of length g = lm(Ag/Am)(-lzoH(d)/B (d)) were then inserted in the core. 
Should the current then be made more negative, the trajectory would continue 
tracing out the hysteresis loop toward point e. However, if instead the current is 
returned to zero, the trajectory does not in general retrace the hysteresis loop toward 
point c. Rather it begins to trace out a minor hysteresis loop, reaching point f when 
the current reaches zero. If the current is then varied between zero and --i (d), the B-H 
characteristic will trace out the minor loop as shown. 
As can be seen from Fig. 1.21, the B-H trajectory between points d and fcan be 
represented by a straight line, known as the recoil line. The slope of this line is called 
the recoil permeability/ZR. We see that once this material has been demagnetized to 
point d, the effective remanent magnetization of the magnetic material is that of point 
f which is less than the remanent magnetization Br which would be expected based 
on the hysteresis loop. Note that should the demagnetization be increased past point 
d, for example, to point e of Fig. 1.2 l, a new minor loop will be created, with a new 
recoil line and recoil permeability. 
The demagnetization effects of negative excitation which have just been discussed 
are equivalent to those of an air gap in the magnetic circuit. For example, clearly the 
magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.20 could be used as a system to magnetize hard magnetic 
materials. The process would simply require that a large excitation be applied to the 
winding and then reduced to zero, leaving the material at a remanent magnetization 
Br (point c in Fig. 1.21). 
Following this magnetization process, if the material were removed from the 
core, this would be equivalent to opening a large air gap in the magnetic circuit, 
demagnetizing the material in a fashion similar to that seen in Example 1.9. At this 
point, the magnet has been effectively weakened, since if it were again inserted in the 
magnetic core, it would follow a recoil line and return to a remanent magnetization 
somewhat less than Br. As a result, hard magnetic materials, such as the Alnico ma- 
terials of Fig. 1.19, often do not operate stably in situations with varying mmf and 

1.6 Application of Permanent Magnet Materials 
39 
geometry, and there is often the risk that improper operation can significantly demag- 
netize them. A significant advantage of materials such as Ceramic 7, samarium-cobalt 
and neodymium-iron-boron is that, because of their "straight-line" characteristic in 
the second quadrant (with slope close to/z0), their recoil lines closely match their 
magnetization characteristic. As a result, demagnetization effects are significantly 
reduced in these materials and often can be ignored. 
At the expense of a reduction in value of the remanent magnetization, hard 
magnetic materials can be stabilized to operate over a specified region. This procedure, 
based on the recoil trajectory shown in Fig. 1.21, can best be illustrated by an example. 
Figure 1.22 shows a magnetic circuit containing hard magnetic material, a core and plunger of 
high (assumed infinite) permeability, and a single-turn winding which will be used to magnetize 
the hard magnetic material. The winding will be removed after the system is magnetized. The 
plunger moves in the x direction as indicated, with the result that the air-gap area can vary 
(2 cm 2 < Ag < 4 cm2). Assuming that the hard magnetic material is Alnico 5 and that the system 
is initially magnetized with Ag = 2 cm, (a) find the magnet length lm such that the system will 
operate on a recoil line which intersects the maximum B-H product point on the magnetization 
curve for Alnico 5, (b) devise a procedure for magnetizing the magnet, and (c) calculate the 
flux density Bg in the air gap as the plunger moves back and forth and the air gap varies between 
these two limits. 
II Solution 
a. Figure 1.23a shows the magnetization curve for Alnico 5 and two load lines 
corresponding to the two extremes of the air gap, Ag -- 2 cm 2 and Ag = 4 cm 2. We see 
that the system will operate on the desired recoil line if the load line for Ag = 2 cm 2 
intersects the B-H characteristic at the maximum energy product point (labeled point a in 
Fig. 1.23a), B~ ) = 1.0 T and H~m a) = -40 kMm. 
_
_
 
w 
EXAMPLE 1.11 
Hard magn 
material, a 
kir gap, g = 0.2 cm 
A m = 2 ct 
~, cm 2 <__ Ag <_ 4 cm 2 
± g/2 
i ii:'i~i~i~i',i~i:: 
Movable 
~ 
plunger 
coil 
Figure 1.22 Magnetic circuit for Example 1.11. 

40 
CHAPTER 
1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Load line, 
Am = 2 cm 2 
Point of maximum 
energy product 
Load line, 
~ 
= 4 cm 2 
Recoil line 
(see text) 
~B m, T 
Br= 1.24 
1.08 
1.0 
< 
II 
I 
I 
I 
"11 
Hm, kA/m 
--50 
--40 
--30 
--20 
--10 
0 
(a) 
0.5 
. 
\ 
\ 
Load line 
for t 
t x 
.. 
B X 
Xlntersectionshows~f' 
"='ma 
Magnenzanon 
m 
\ 
nfX 
Xmag netizati°n X 
\ 
ends here 
I \ 
~
)
 
Bmax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
/ 
Loa  I 
,\ 
line for \ 
B r ~ 
~ 
iX 
i=0 
XJ ~"'"~,, 
X 
/ 
X 
I X  
(a) 11i 
moves k 
X 
[ "" 
~ 
X t° the left as i 
X 
X I /X 
'kecreases 
X 
X 
[ 
/ 
X> Load line moves 
X 
X [ / 
X !o !he fight as/ 
X 
increases 
x 
> 
....... 
. 
\ 
X 
H(m a) 
Material initially 
Hmax 
Hm 
not magnetized 
(b) 
Figure 
1.23 (a) Magnetization curve for Alnico 5 for Example 1.11 (b) series of load 
lines for Ag = 2 cm 2 and varying values of i showing the magnetization procedure for 
Example 1.11. 

t.6 
Application of Permanent Magnet Materials 
4t 
and thus 
From Eqs. 1.57 and 1.58, we see that the slope of the required load line is given by 
B~m a) 
Bg Ag lm 
-H (a) 
ng Am g 
lm=g(~g)( 
n(a) 
-~oH~ ~) ) 
,0 
) 
= 0.2 cm 
~ 
4rr x 10 .7 x 4 x 104 
-- 3.98 cm 
b. Figure 1.23b shows a series of load lines for the system with Ag = 2 cm 2 and with 
current i applied to the excitation winding. The general equation for these load lines can 
be readily derived since from Eq. 1.5 
and from Eqs. 1.3 and 1.7 
Thus 
Ni = nmlm + Hgg 
BmAm -- BgAg = btoHgAg 
(/m) 
(ag) 
Bm=--/d'0 ~mm 
g 
Hm+ 
g 
~ 
i 
[ 
= -2.50 x 10-SHm + 6.28 x 10-2i 
From this equation and Fig. 1.23b, we see that to drive the magnetic material into 
saturation to the point Bmax - Hm~x, the current in the magnetizing winding must be 
increased to the value/max where 
Bmax + 2.50 x 10 -5 Hmax 
imax = 
A 
6.28 x 10 -2 
In this case, we do not have a complete hysteresis loop for Alnico 5, and hence we 
will have to estimate Bmax and Hmax. Linearly extrapolating the B-H curve at H = 0 back 
to 4 times the coercivity, that is, Hmax = 4 x 50 = 200 kMm, yields nmax = 2.1 T. This 
value is undoubtedly extreme and will overestimate the required current somewhat. 
However, using Bma x -- 2.1 T and Hma x --" 200 kA/m yields imax -- 45.2 A. 
Thus with the air-gap area set to 2 cm 2, increasing the current to 45.2 A and then 
reducing it to zero will achieve the desired magnetization. 
c. Because we do not have specific information about the slope of the recoil line, we shall 
assume that its slope is the same as that of the B-H characteristic at the point H = 0, 
B = Br. From Fig. 1.23a, with the recoil line drawn with this slope, we see that as the 
air-gap area varies between 2 and 4 cm a, the magnet flux density Bm varies between 1.00 
and 1.08 T. Since the air-gap flux density equals Am/Ag times this value, the airgap flux 
density will equal (2/2)1.00 = 1.0 T when Ag = 2.0 cm a and (2/4)1.08 = 0.54 T when 

42 
CHAPTER 
1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Ag = 4.0 cm 2. Note from Fig. 1.23a that, when operated with these air-gap variations, the 
magnet appears to have an effective residual flux density of 1.17 T instead of the initial 
value of 1.24 T. Note that as long as the air-gap variation is limited to the range considered 
here, the system will continue to operate on the line labeled "Recoil line" in Fig. 1.23a and 
the magnet can be said to be stabilized. 
As has been discussed, hard magnetic materials such as Alnico 5 can be subject 
to demagnetization, should their operating point be varied excessively. As shown in 
Example 1.11, these materials can be stabilized with some loss in effective remanent 
magnetization. However, this procedure does not guarantee absolute stability of op- 
eration. For example, if the material in Example 1.11 were subjected to an air-gap 
area smaller than 2 cm 2 or to excessive demagnetizing current, the effect of the stabi- 
lization would be erased and the material would be found to operate on a new recoil 
line with further reduced magnetization. 
However, many materials, such as samarium-cobalt, Ceramic 7, and neodymium- 
iron-boron (see Fig. 1.19), which have large values of coercivity, tend to have very 
low values of recoil permeability, and the recoil line is essentially tangent to the B-H 
characteristic for a large portion of the useful operating region. For example, this can 
be seen in Fig. 1.19, which shows the dc magnetization curve for neodymium-iron- 
boron, from which we see that this material has a remanent magnetization of 1.25 T 
and a coercivity of -940 kA/m. The portion of the curve between these points is a 
straight line with a slope equal to 1.06#0, which is the same as the slope of its recoil 
line. As long as these materials are operated on this low-incremental-permeability 
portion of their B-H characteristic, they do not require stabilization, provided they 
are not excessively demagnetized. 
For these materials, it is often convenient to assume that their dc magnetization 
curve is linear over their useful operating range with a slope equal to the recoil per- 
meability #R. Under this assumption, the dc magnetization curve for these materials 
can be written in the form 
n = #R(H -- H~) = nr -k- #RH 
(1.61) 
Here, H~ is the apparent coercivity associated with this linear representation. As 
can be seen from Fig. 1.19, the apparent coercivity is typically somewhat larger in 
magnitude (i.e. a larger negative value) than the material coercivity Hc because the dc 
magnetization characteristic tends to bend downward for low values of flux density. 
1.7 
SUMMARY 
Electromechanical devices which employ magnetic fields often use ferromagnetic 
materials for guiding and concentrating these fields. Because the magnetic perme- 
ability of ferromagnetic materials can be large (up to tens of thousands times that of 
the surrounding space), most of the magnetic flux is confined to fairly well-defined 
paths determined by the geometry of the magnetic material. In addition, often the 
frequencies of interest are low enough to permit the magnetic fields to be considered 

1.8 
Problems 
43 
quasi-static, and hence they can be determined simply from a knowledge of the net 
mmf acting on the magnetic structure. 
As a result, the solution for the magnetic fields in these structures can be obtained 
in a straightforward fashion by using the techniques of magnetic-circuit analysis. 
These techniques can be used to reduce a complex three-dimensional magnetic field 
solution to what is essentially a one-dimensional problem. As in all engineering 
solutions, a certain amount of experience and judgment is required, but the technique 
gives useful results in many situations of practical engineering interest. 
Ferromagnetic materials are available with a wide variety of characteristics. In 
general, their behavior is nonlinear, and their B-H characteristics are often represented 
in the form of a family of hysteresis (B-H) loops. Losses, both hysteretic and eddy- 
current, are functions of the flux level and frequency of operation as well as the 
material composition and the manufacturing process used. A basic understanding of 
the nature of these phenomena is extremely useful in the application of these materials 
in practical devices. Typically, important properties are available in the form of curves 
supplied by the material manufacturers. 
Certain magnetic materials, commonly known as hard or permanent-magnet ma- 
terials, are characterized by large values of remanent magnetization and coercivity. 
These materials produce significant magnetic flux even in magnetic circuits with air 
gaps. With proper design they can be made to operate stably in situations which 
subject them to a wide range of destabilizing forces and mmf's. Permanent magnets 
find application in many small devices, including loudspeakers, ac and dc motors, 
microphones, and analog electric meters. 
1.8 
PROBLEMS 
1.1 A magnetic circuit with a single air gap is shown in Fig. 1.24. The core 
dimensions are: 
Cross-sectional area Ac = 1.8 × 10 -3 m 2 
Mean core length lc = 0.6 m 
Gap length g = 2.3 x 10 -3 m 
N = 83 turns 
[iiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
~ 
meanlength l c, 
[i 
areaA c 
- 
[iii!iiiiiiiiiii~ permeability 
Nturns [i!iiiiiiiiiii~ 
[~ii~ii~ Air gap 
i li;i iiii ii il i iiiiiiiiiiiil 
Figure 1.24 Magnetic circuit for 
Problem 1.1. 

44 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Assume that the core is of infinite permeability (/x --+ c~) and neglect the 
effects of fringing fields at the air gap and leakage flux. (a) Calculate the 
reluctance of the core 7a,.c and that of the gap 7"¢.g. For a current of i = 1.5 A, 
calculate (b) the total flux ~, (c) the flux linkages )~ of the coil, and (d) the coil 
inductance L. 
1.2 Repeat Problem 1.1 for a finite core permeability of/z = 2500/z0. 
1.3 Consider the magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.24 with the dimensions of 
Problem 1.1. Assuming infinite core permeability, calculate (a) the number of 
turns required to achieve an inductance of 12 mH and (b) the inductor current 
which will result in a core flux density of 1.0 T. 
1.4 Repeat Problem 1.3 for a core permeability of/x = 1300/z0. 
1.5 The magnetic circuit of Problem 1.1 has a nonlinear core material whose 
permeability as a function of Bm is given by 
( 
3 4 9 9 )  
/z =/z0 
1 + V/1 + 0.047(Bm) 7"8 
where Bm is the material flux density. 
a. 
Using MATLAB, plot a dc magnetization curve for this material (Bm vs. 
Hm) over the range 0 < Bm < 2.2 T. 
b. 
Find the current required to achieve a flux density of 2.2 T in the core. 
c. 
Again, using MATLAB, plot the coil flux linkages as a function of coil 
current as the current is varied from 0 to the value found in part (b). 
1.6 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.25 consists of a core and a moveable plunger of 
width lp, each of permeability/z. The core has cross-sectional area Ac and 
mean length Ic. The overlap area of the two air gaps Ag is a function of the 
plunger position x and can be assumed to vary as 
(x) 
Ag -- Ac 
1 - Xoo 
You may neglect any fringing fields at the air gap and use approximations 
consistent with magnetic-circuit analysis. 
a. 
Assuming that # --+ c~, derive an expression for the magnetic flux 
density in the air gap Bg as a function of the winding current I and as the 
j Core: 
~J 
mean length l c, 
< I 
area A c, 
---------o 
) 
C 
I. 
;H 
, 
 turns 
c 
o 
Plunger 
Figure 1.25 Magnetic circuit for Problem 1.6. 

1.8 
Problems 
45 
plunger position is varied (0 < x < 0.8X0). What is the corresponding 
flux density in the core? 
b. 
Repeat part (a) for a finite permeability/z. 
1.7 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.25 and Problem 1.6 has the following 
dimensions" 
Ac=8.2cm 2 
lc=23cm 
lp = 2.8 cm 
g = 0.8 mm 
X0 = 2.5 cm 
N = 430 turns 
a. 
Assuming a constant permeability of/z = 2800/z0, calculate the current 
required to achieve a flux density of 1.3 T in the air gap when the plunger 
is fully retracted (x = 0). 
b. 
Repeat the calculation of part (a) for the case in which the core and 
plunger are composed of a nonlinear material whose permeability is given 
by 
(
1
1
9
9
)
 
/z=/z0 
1+ v/1+0"05B 8 
where Bm is the magnetic flux density in the material. 
c. 
For the nonlinear material of part (b), use MATLAB to plot the air-gap 
flux density as a function of winding current for x -- 0 and x = 0.5X0. 
1.8 An inductor of the form of Fig. 1.24 has dimensions: 
Cross-sectional area Ac = 3.6 cm 2 
Mean core length lc = 15 cm 
N - 75 turns 
Assuming a core permeability of/z = 2100/~0 and neglecting the effects of 
leakage flux and fringing fields, calculate the air-gap length required to 
achieve an inductance of 6.0 mH. 
1.9 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.26 consists of rings of magnetic material in a 
stack of height h. The rings have inner radius Ri and outer radius Ro. Assume 
that the iron is of infinite permeability (/z --+ c~) and neglect the effects of 
magnetic leakage and fringing. For: 
Ri -- 3.4 cm 
Ro = 4.0 cm 
h-2cm 
g = 0.2 cm 
calculate: 
a. 
the mean core length lc and the core cross-sectional area Ac. 
b. 
the reluctance of the core ~c and that of the gap ~g. 
For N = 65 turns, calculate: 
c. 
the inductance L. 
d. 
current i required to operate at an air-gap flux density of Bg = 1.35T. 
e. 
the corresponding flux linkages ~. of the coil. 

46 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Figure 1.26 
Magnetic circuit for 
Problem 1.9. 
1.10 Repeat Problem 1.9 for a core permeability of/z = 750/z0. 
1.11 Using MATLAB, plot the inductance of the inductor of Problem 1.9 as a 
function of relative core permeability as the core permeability varies for 
/z r = 100 to/Zr = 10000. (Hint: Plot the inductance versus the log of the 
relative permeability.) What is the minimum relative core permeability 
required to insure that the inductance is within 5 percent of the value 
calculated assuming that the core permeability is infinite? 
1.12 The inductor of Fig. 1.27 has a core of uniform circular cross-section of area 
Ac, mean length lc and relative permeability/Zr and an N-turn winding. Write 
an expression for the inductance L. 
1.13 The inductor of Fig. 1.27 has the following dimensions: 
Ac = 1.0 cm 2 
lc = 15 cm 
g = 0.8 mm 
N = 480 turns 
Neglecting leakage and fringing and assuming #r 
-- 1000, calculate the 
inductance. 
N-turn 
coil 
v/Core: 
j] 
mean length /c, 
area A c, 
, 
relative permeability #r 
Figure 1.27 
Inductor for Problem 1.12. 

1.8 
Problems 
47 
C/L 
I 
+ 
N-tum 
winding 
Figure 1.28 
Pot-core inductor for Problem 1.15. 
1.14 The inductor of Problem 1.13 is to be operated from a 60-Hz voltage source. 
(a) Assuming negligible coil resistance, calculate the rms inductor voltage 
corresponding to a peak core flux density of 1.5 T. (b) Under this operating 
condition, calculate the rms current and the peak stored energy. 
1.15 Consider the magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.28. This structure, known as a 
pot-core, is typically made in two halves. The N-turn coil is wound on a 
cylindrical bobbin and can be easily inserted over the central post of the core 
as the two halves are assembled. Because the air gap is internal to the core, 
provided the core is not driven excessively into saturation, relatively little 
magnetic flux will "leak" from the core, making this a particularly attractive 
configuration for a wide variety of applications, both for inductors such as that 
of Fig. 1.27 and transformers. 
Assume the core permeability to be/z = 2500/z0 and N = 200 turns. The 
following dimensions are specified: 
R l= 1.5cm 
R2=4cm 
l=2.5cm 
h=0.75cm 
g=0.5mm 
a. 
Find the value of R3 such that the flux density in the outer wall of the core 
is equal to that within the central cylinder. 
b. 
Although the flux density in the radial sections of the core (the sections of 
thickness h) actually decreases with radius, assume that the flux density 
remains uniform. (i) Write an expression for the coil inductance and 
(ii) evaluate it for the given dimensions. 
c. 
The core is to be operated at a peak flux density of 0.8 T at a frequency of 
60 Hz. Find (i) the corresponding rms value of the voltage induced in the 
winding, (ii) the rms coil current, and (iii) the peak stored energy. 
d. 
Repeat part (c) for a frequency of 50 Hz. 

48 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Core: 
mean length l c, 
area A c, 
permeability/z 
L g 
F 
Figure 1.29 
Inductor for Problem 1.17. 
1.16 A square voltage wave having a fundamental frequency of 60 Hz and equal 
positive and negative half cycles of amplitude E is applied to a 1000-turn 
winding surrounding a closed iron core of 1.25 x 10-3m 2 cross section. 
Neglect both the winding resistance and any effects of leakage flux. 
a. 
Sketch the voltage, the winding flux linkage, and the core flux as a 
function of time. 
b. 
Find the maximum permissible value of E if the maximum flux density is 
not to exceed 1.15 T. 
1.17 An inductor is to be designed using a magnetic core of the form of that of 
Fig. 1.29. The core is of uniform cross-sectional area Ac = 5.0 cm 2 and of 
mean length Ic = 25 cm. 
a. 
Calculate the air-gap length g and the number of turns N such that the 
inductance is 1.4 mH and so that the inductor can operate at peak currents 
of 6 A without saturating. Assume that saturation occurs when the peak 
flux density in the core exceeds 1.7 T and that, below saturation, the core 
has permeability/z = 3200/z0. 
b. 
For an inductor current of 6 A, use Eq. 3.21 to calculate (i) the magnetic 
stored energy in the air gap and (ii) the magnetic stored energy in the core. 
Show that the total magnetic stored energy is given by Eq. 1.47. 
1.18 Consider the inductor of Problem 1.17. Write a simple design program in the 
form of a MATLAB script to calculate the number of turns and air-gap length 
as a function of the desired inductance. The script should be written to request 
a value of inductance (in mH) from the user, with the output being the air-gap 
length in mm and the number of turns. 
The inductor is to be operated with a sinusoidal current at 60 Hz, and it 
must be designed such that the peak core flux density will be equal to 1.7 T 
when the inductor current is equal to 4.5 A rms. Write your script to reject any 
designs for which the gap length is out of the range of 0.05 mm to 5.0 mm or 
for which the number of turns drops below 5. 
Using your program find (a) the minimum and (b) the maximum 
inductances (to the nearest mH) which will satisfy the given constraints. For 
each of these values, find the required air-gap length and the number of turns 
as well as the rms voltage corresponding to the peak core flux. 

1.8 
Problems 
49 
Figure 1.30 Toroidal winding for Problem 1.19. 
1.19 A proposed energy storage mechanism consists of an N-turn coil wound 
around a large nonmagnetic (/z -/~0) toroidal form as shown in Fig. 1.30. As 
can be seen from the figure, the toroidal form has a circular cross section of 
radius a and toroidal radius r, measured to the center of the cross section. The 
geometry of this device is such that the magnetic field can be considered to be 
zero everywhere outside the toroid. Under the assumption that a << r, the H 
field inside the toroid can be considered to be directed around the toroid and 
of uniform magnitude 
Ni 
2rc r 
For a coil with N = 1000 turns, r = 10 m, and a = 0.45 m: 
a. 
Calculate the coil inductance L. 
b. 
The coil is to be charged to a magnetic flux density of 1.75 T. Calculate 
the total stored magnetic energy in the toms when this flux density is 
achieved. 
c. 
If the coil is to be charged at a uniform rate (i.e., di/dt = constant), 
calculate the terminal voltage required to achieve the required flux density 
in 30 sec. Assume the coil resistance to be negligible. 
1.20 Figure 1.31 shows an inductor wound on a laminated iron core of rectangular 
cross section. Assume that the permeability of the iron is infinite. Neglect 
magnetic leakage and fringing in the two air gaps (total gap length = g). The 
N-turn winding is insulated copper wire whose resistivity is p ~.m. Assume 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiiii i iiiiiiiiiiii~il!iiiiiiili!!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiil i iiii! iiiiiii!ii! 
i 
Core: 
depth h into 
the page 
Figure 1.31 
Iron-core inductor for 
Problem 1.20. 

50 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
that the fraction fw of the winding space is available for copper; the rest of the 
space is used for insulation. 
a. 
Calculate the cross-sectional area and volume of the copper in the 
winding space. 
b. 
Write an expression for the flux density B in the inductor in terms of the 
current density Jcu in the copper winding. 
c. 
Write an expression for the copper current density Jcu in terms of the coil 
current I, the number of turns N, and the coil geometry. 
d. 
Derive an expression for the electric power dissipation in the coil in terms 
of the current density Jcu. 
e. 
Derive an expression for the magnetic stored energy in the inductor in 
terms of the applied current density Jcu. 
f. 
From parts (d) and (e) derive an expression for the L/R time constant of 
the inductor. Note that this expression is independent of the number of 
turns in the coil and does not change as the inductance and coil resistance 
are changed by varying the number of turns. 
1.21 The inductor of Fig. 1.31 has the following dimensions: 
a--h=w---1.5cm 
b=2cm 
g=0.2cm 
The winding factor (i.e., the fraction of the total winding area occupied 
by conductor) is fw = 0.55. The resistivity of copper is 1.73 × 10 -8 S2.m. 
When the coil is operated with a constant dc applied voltage of 35 V, the 
air-gap flux density is measured to be 1.4 T. Find the power dissipated in the 
coil, coil current, number of turns, coil resistance, inductance, time constant, 
and wire size to the nearest standard size. (Hint: Wire size can be found from 
the expression 
( 
Awire 
) 
AWG=36-4.3121n 
1.267× l0 -8 
where AWG is the wire size, expressed in terms of the American Wire Gauge, 
and Awire is the conductor cross-sectional area measured in me.) 
1.22 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.32 has two windings and two air gaps. The core 
can be assumed to be of infinite permeability. The core dimensions are 
indicated in the figure. 
a. 
Assuming coil 1 to be carrying a current Il and the current in coil 2 to be 
zero, calculate (i) the magnetic flux density in each of the air gaps, (ii) the 
flux linkage of winding l, and (iii) the flux linkage of winding 2. 
b. 
Repeat part (a), assuming zero current in winding 1 and a current I2 in 
winding 2. 
c. 
Repeat part (a), assuming the current in winding 1 to be I1 and the current 
in winding 2 to be 12. 
d. 
Find the self-inductances of windings 1 and 2 and the mutual inductance 
between the windings. 

1.8 
Problems 
51 
--~ g2 ~--- 
Figure 1.32 Magnetic circuit for Problem 1.22. 
Core: 
Area A c 
Permeability/z 
N turns 
N 1 turns 
2_ 
g 
T 
N turns 
i 
tj ' - 
- 
i.t 
Figure 1.33 Symmetric magnetic circuit for Problem 1.23. 
1.23 The symmetric magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.33 has three windings. Windings A 
and B each have N turns and are wound on the two bottom legs of the core. 
The core dimensions are indicated in the figure. 
a. Find the self-inductances of each of the windings. 
b. Find the mutual inductances between the three pairs of windings. 
c. 
Find the voltage induced in winding 1 by time-varying currents iA(t) and 
iB (t) in windings A and B. Show that this voltage can be used to measure 
the imbalance between two sinusoidal currents of the same frequency. 
1.24 The reciprocating generator of Fig. 1.34 has a movable plunger (position x) 
which is supported so that it can slide in and out of the magnetic yoke while 
maintaining a constant air gap of length g on each side adjacent to the yoke. 
Both the yoke and the plunger can be considered to be of infinite permeability. 
The motion of the plunger is constrained such that its position is limited to 
O<x<w. 

52 
CHAPTER 1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
Depth D 
Nll 
i i i ii i!iE iilii: i!!i!i!iiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiii!ii!!iiii:iil 
t 
Plunger 
1/) 
x(t) = ~ (1 + E sin cot) 
-Jr- 
V2 
Figure 1.34 
Reciprocating generator for Problem 1.24. 
There are two windings on this magnetic circuit. The first has N1 turns 
and carries a constant dc current I0. The second, which has N2 turns, is 
open-circuited and can be connected to a load. 
a. 
Neglecting any fringing effects, find the mutual inductance between 
windings 1 and 2 as a function of the plunger position x. 
b. 
The plunger is driven by an external source so that its motion is given by 
x(t) - 
w (1 + E sin cot) 
where e < 1. Find an expression for the sinusoidal voltage which is 
generated as a result of this motion. 
1.25 Figure 1.35 shows a configuration that can be used to measure the magnetic 
characteristics of electrical steel. The material to be tested is cut or punched 
into circular laminations which are then stacked (with interspersed insulation 
to avoid eddy-current formation). Two windings are wound over this stack of 
laminations: the first, with Nt turns, is used to excite a magnetic field in the 
lamination stack; the second, with Ne turns, is used to sense the resultant 
magnetic flux. 
The accuracy of the results requires that the magnetic flux density be 
uniform within the laminations. This can be accomplished if the lamination 
width t = Ro - Ri is much smaller than the lamination radius and if the 
excitation winding is wound uniformly around the lamination stack. For the 
purposes of this analysis, assume there are n laminations, each of thickness A. 
Also assume that winding 1 is excited by a current i l = I0 sin wt. 
a. 
Find the relationship between the magnetic field intensity H in the 
laminations and current i l in winding 1. 
b. 
Find the relationship between the voltage ve and the time rate of change 
of the flux density B in the laminations. 
c. 
Find the relationship between the voltage vo = G f v2 dt and the flux 
density. 

1.8 Problems 
53 
t<< R i 
Ro 
i2=0 
v 0 = Gfv 2 dt 
0 
Winding 1, 
N 1 turns 
Winding 2, 
N 2 turns 
Stack of 
n laminations, 
each of thickness A 
Figure 1.35 Configuration for measurement of magnetic properties of 
electrical steel. 
In this problem, we have shown that the magnetic field intensity H and 
the magnetic flux density B in the laminations are proportional to the current 
il and the voltage v2 by known constants. Thus, B and H in the magnetic steel 
can be measured directly, and the B-H characteristics as discussed in 
Sections 1.3 and 1.4 can be determined. 
1.26 From the dc magnetization curve of Fig. 1.10 it is possible to calculate the 
relative permeability/Zr = Be/(/~0Hc) for M-5 electrical steel as a function of 
the flux level Bc. Assuming the core of Fig. 1.2 to be made of M-5 electrical 
steel with the dimensions given in Example 1.1, calculate the maximum flux 
density such that the reluctance of the core never exceeds 5 percent of the 
reluctance of the total magnetic circuit. 
1.27 In order to test the properties of a sample of electrical steel, a set of 
laminations of the form of Fig. 1.35 have been stamped out of a sheet of the 
electrical steel of thickness 3.0 mm. The radii of the laminations are 
Ri = 75 mm and Ro = 82 mm. They have been assembled in a stack of 10 
laminations (separated by appropriate insulation to eliminate eddy currents) 
for the purposes of testing the magnetic properties at a frequency of 100 Hz. 
a. 
The flux in the lamination stack will be excited from a variable-amplitude, 
100-Hz voltage source whose peak amplitude is 30 V (peak-to-peak). 
Calculate the number of turns N1 for the excitation winding required to 
insure that the lamination stack can be excited up to a peak flux density of 
2.0T. 
b. 
With a secondary winding of N2 = 20 turns and an integrator gain 
G = 1000, the output of the integrator is observed to be 7.0 V 

54 
CHAPTER 1 
Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
I 1 
o_.L 
¢ 
N 1 ¢ 
¢ 
o 
~i!iii~iii~i~iiiii~i~i~ii!iiiii~iiiii~!~i~ii~ii~iii!!~i~i~!iiiii!!!iii!~ii~i~i~iiiiii~ii!i~i~iiiiiii!iiiiiii~!~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii~iiB~i~ii~ii~iiiii~i!iii~iiiii~!iii~i!ii~!iiii~i~iiiii!i!i!i~i~i 
---o 
) 
O 
Figure 1.36 
Magnetic circuit for 
Problem 1.28. 
peak-to-peak. Calculate (i) the corresponding peak flux in the lamination 
stack and (ii) the corresponding amplitude of the voltage applied to the 
excitation winding. 
1.28 The coils of the magnetic circuit shown in Fig. 1.36 are connected in series so 
that the mmf's of paths A and B both tend to set up flux in the center leg C in 
the same direction. The coils are wound with equal turns, Nl = N2 = 100. 
The dimensions are: 
Cross-section area of A and B legs = 7 cm 2 
Cross-section area of C legs = 14 cm 2 
Length of A path = 17 cm 
Length of B path = 17 cm 
Length of C path = 5.5 cm 
Air gap = 0.4 cm 
The material is M-5 grade, 0.012-in steel, with a stacking factor of 0.94. 
Neglect fringing and leakage. 
a. 
How many amperes are required to produce a flux density of 1.2 T in the 
air gap? 
b. 
Under the condition of part (a), how many joules of energy are stored in 
the magnetic field in the air gap? 
c. 
Calculate the inductance. 
1.29 The following table includes data for the top half of a symmetric 60-Hz 
hysteresis loop for a specimen of magnetic steel: 
B,T 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.95 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.2 
0 
H,A.turns/m 48 52 58 73 85 103 135 193 80 42 2 -18-29-40-45-48 
Using MATLAB, (a) plot this data, (b) calculate the area of the hysteresis 
loop in joules, and (c) calculate the corresponding 60-Hz core loss in 
Watts/kg. The density of M-5 steel is 7.65 g/cm 3. 
1.30 Assume the magnetic circuit of Problem 1.1 and Fig. 1.24 to be made up of 
M-5 electrical steel with the properties described in Figs. 1.10, 1.12, and 1.14. 
Assume the core to be operating with a 60-Hz sinusoidal flux density of the 

1.8 
Problems 
55 
rms flux density of 1.1 T. Neglect the winding resistance and leakage 
inductance. Find the winding voltage, rms winding current, and core loss for 
this operating condition. The density of M-5 steel is 7.65 g/cm 3. 
1.31 Repeat Example 1.8 under the assumption that all the core dimensions are 
doubled. 
1.32 Using the magnetization characteristics for samarium cobalt given in 
Fig. 1.19, find the point of maximum energy product and the corresponding 
flux density and magnetic field intensity. Using these values, repeat 
Example 1.10 with the Alnico 5 magnet replaced by a samarium-cobalt 
magnet. By what factor does this reduce the magnet volume required to 
achieve the desired air-gap flux density? 
1.33 Using the magnetization characteristics for neodymium-iron-boron given in 
Fig. 1.19, find the point of maximum-energy product and the corresponding 
flux density and magnetic field intensity. Using these values, repeat 
Example 1.10 with the Alnico 5 magnet replaced by a neodymium-iron-boron 
magnet. By what factor does this reduce the magnet volume required to 
achieve the desired air-gap flux density? 
1.34 Figure 1.37 shows the magnetic circuit for a permanent-magnet loudspeaker. 
The voice coil (not shown) is in the form of a circular cylindrical coil which 
fits in the air gap. A samarium-cobalt magnet is used to create the air-gap dc 
magnetic field which interacts with the voice coil currents to produce the 
motion of the voice coil. The designer has determined that the air gap must 
have radius R = 1.8 cm, length g = 0.1 cm, and height h = 0.9 cm. 
Assuming that the yoke and pole piece are of infinite magnetic 
permeability (/z --+ oe), find the magnet height hm and the magnet radius Rm 
that will result in an air-gap magnetic flux density of 1.2 T and require the 
smallest magnet volume. 
(Hint: Refer to Example 1.10 and to Fig. 1.19 to find the point of 
maximum energy product for samarium cobalt.) 
C/L 
Figure 1.37 Magnetic circuit for the loudspeaker 
of Problem 1.34 (voice coil not shown). 

56 
CHAPTER 1 Magnetic Circuits and Magnetic Materials 
f_ ~ ~l Area A m 
Air gap: 
area Ag 
Figure 1.38 Magnetic circuit for 
Problem 1.35. 
1.35 It is desired to achieve a time-varying magnetic flux density in the air gap of 
the magnetic circuit of Fig. 1.38 of the form 
Bg = 
Bo + B1 sin cot 
where B0 = 0.5 T and Bl ---- 0.25 T. The dc field B0 is to be created by a 
neodimium-iron-boron magnet, whereas the time-varying field is to be created 
by a time-varying current. 
For Ag = 6 cm 2, g = 0.4 cm, and N = 200 turns, find: 
a. 
the magnet length d and the magnet area Am that will achieve the desired 
dc air-gap flux density and minimize the magnet volume. 
b. 
the minimum and maximum values of the time-varying current required to 
achieve the desired time-varying air-gap flux density. Will this current 
vary sinusoidally in time? 

Transformers 
B 
efore we proceed with a study of electric machinery, it is desirable to discuss 
certain aspects of the theory of magnetically-coupled circuits, with emphasis 
on transformer action. Although the static transformer is not an energy con- 
version device, it is an indispensable component in many energy conversion systems. 
A significant component of ac power systems, it makes possible electric generation at 
the most economical generator voltage, power transfer at the most economical trans- 
mission voltage, and power utilization at the most suitable voltage for the particular 
utilization device. The transformer is also widely used in low-power, low-current elec- 
tronic and control circuits for performing such functions as matching the impedances 
of a source and its load for maximum power transfer, isolating one circuit from another, 
or isolating direct current while maintaining ac continuity between two circuits. 
The transformer is one of the simpler devices comprising two or more electric 
circuits coupled by a common magnetic circuit. Its analysis involves many of the 
principles essential to the study of electric machinery. Thus, our study of the trans- 
former will serve as a bridge between the introduction to magnetic-circuit analysis of 
Chapter 1 and the more detailed study of electric machinery to follow. 
2.1 
INTRODUCTION TO TRANSFORMERS 
Essentially, a transformer consists of two or more windings coupled by mutual mag- 
netic flux. If one of these windings, the primary, is connected to an alternating-voltage 
source, an alternating flux will be produced whose amplitude will depend on the pri- 
mary voltage, the frequency of the applied voltage, and the number of turns. The 
mutual flux will link the other winding, the secondary, 1 and will induce a voltage in it 
1 It is conventional to think of the "input" to the transformer as the primary and the "output" as the 
secondary. However, in many applications, power can flow either way and the concept of primary and 
secondary windings can become confusing. An alternate terminology, which refers to the windings as 
"high-voltage" and "low-voltage," is often used and eliminates this confusion. 
57 

58 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
whose value will depend on the number of secondary turns as well as the magnitude of 
the mutual flux and the frequency. By properly proportioning the number of primary 
and secondary turns, almost any desired voltage ratio, or ratio of transformation, can 
be obtained. 
The essence of transformer action requires only the existence of time-varying 
mutual flux linking two windings. Such action can occur for two windings coupled 
through air, but coupling between the windings can be made much more effectively 
using a core of iron or other ferromagnetic material, because most of the flux is then 
confined to a definite, high-permeability path linking the windings. Such a transformer 
is commonly called an iron-core transformer. Most transformers are of this type. The 
following discussion is concerned almost wholly with iron-core transformers. 
As discussed in Section 1.4, to reduce the losses caused by eddy currents in the 
core, the magnetic circuit usually consists of a stack of thin laminations. Two common 
types of construction are shown schematically in Fig. 2.1. In the core type (Fig. 2.1 a) 
the windings are wound around two legs of a rectangular magnetic core; in the shell 
type (Fig. 2. lb) the windings are wound around the center leg of a three-legged core. 
Silicon-steel laminations 0.014 in thick are generally used for transformers operating 
at frequencies below a few hundred hertz. Silicon steel has the desirable properties 
of low cost, low core loss, and high permeability at high flux densities (1.0 to 1.5 T). 
The cores of small transformers used in communication circuits at high frequencies 
and low energy levels are sometimes made of compressed powdered ferromagnetic 
alloys known as ferrites. 
In each of these configurations, most of the flux is confined to the core and 
therefore links both windings. The windings also produce additional flux, known as 
leakage flux, which links one winding without linking the other. Although leakage 
flux is a small fraction of the total flux, it plays an important role in determining 
the behavior of the transformer. In practical transformers, leakage is reduced by 
Core -~ 
Core -"N 
vi,:i:: ¸:¸ 
: _;::i~i 
,,--_ 
_ _. 
~ - 
__ 
_. 
~ 
7"A 
//1 
//1 
t 
//t 
//t 
Y 
i~!ii!iiiiji!iii!ili!iiiii!iiiiiii!ii!iiiiiiiijiiii! 
I 
N\\\\\',,1 
! 
I 
' 
I 
...................... 
I 
, 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
L\\\.~\\N 
! 
I 
m. 
, 
/ 
: ::i::,: ,~ izi:~i :~r: 
\ 
Windings 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 
2.1 
Schematic views of (a) core-type and (b) shell-type 
transformers. 

2.1 
Introduction to Transformers 
59 
subdividing the windings into sections placed as close together as possible. In the 
core-type construction, each winding consists of two sections, one section on each of 
the two legs of the core, the primary and secondary windings being concentric coils. 
In the shell-type construction, variations of the concentric-winding arrangement may 
be used, or the windings may consist of a number of thin "pancake" coils assembled 
in a stack with primary and secondary coils interleaved. 
Figure 2.2 illustrates the internal construction of a distribution transformer such 
as is used in public utility systems to provide the appropriate voltage for use by 
residential consumers. A large power transformer is shown in Fig. 2.3. 
Figure 2.2 Cutaway view of self-protected 
distribution transformer typical of sizes 2 to 25 kVA, 
7200:240/120 V. Only one high-voltage insulator and 
lightning arrester is needed because one side of the 
7200-V line and one side of the primary are grounded. 
(General Electric Company.) 

60 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
Figure 2.3 
A 660-MVA three-phase 50-Hz transformer used to 
step up generator voltage of 20 kV to transmission voltage of 
405 kV. ( CEM Le Havre, French Member of the Brown Boveri 
Corporation.) 
2.2 
NO-LOAD CONDITIONS 
Figure 2.4 shows in schematic form a transformer with its secondary circuit open and 
an alternating voltage vl applied to its primary terminals. To simplify the drawings, it is 
common on schematic diagrams of transformers to show the primary and secondary 
windings as if they were on separate legs of the core, as in Fig. 2.4, even though 
the windings are actually interleaved in practice. As discussed in Section 1.4, a small 
steady-state current i~, called the exciting current, flows in the primary and establishes 

2.2 
No-Load Conditions 
61 
+ 
1) 
Primary winding, 
N turns 
-- 
ii%!iii!iii!i!iiiiiiiii .... 
( 
el_~~( 
iiiiiiiiiiiiii!i!ii}i 
ii?iii?iii?iii?iiiii?i?i?i?i~iii~iii~ili~?ii~iiiii 
Figure 2.4 Transformer with open 
secondary. 
an alternating flux in the magnetic circuit. 2 This flux induces an emf in the primary 
equal to 
d)~l 
d~0 
el = 
= NI~ 
(2.1) 
dt 
dt 
where 
~.1 -- flux linkage of the primary winding 
~0 = flux in the core linking both windings 
N1 -- number of turns in the primary winding 
The voltage el is in volts when q9 is in webers. This emf, together with the voltage 
drop in the primary resistance R1, must balance the applied voltage Vl; thus 
Vl -- Rli~o + el 
(2.2) 
Note that for the purposes of the current discussion, we are neglecting the effects of 
primary leakage flux, which will add an additional induced-emf term in Eq. 2.2. In 
typical transformers, this flux is a small percentage of the core flux, and it is quite 
justifiable to neglect it for our current purposes. It does however play an important 
role in the behavior of transformers and is discussed in some detail in Section 2.4. 
In most large transformers, the no-load resistance drop is very small indeed, 
and the induced emf el very nearly equals the applied voltage Vl. Furthermore, the 
waveforms of voltage and flux are very nearly sinusoidal. The analysis can then be 
greatly simplified, as we have shown in Section 1.4. Thus, if the instantaneous flux is 
q9 -- t~max sin cot 
(2.3) 
2 In general, the exciting current corresponds to the net ampere-turns (mmf) acting on the magnetic 
circuit, and it is not possible to distinguish whether it flows in the primary or secondary winding or 
partially in each winding. 

62 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
the induced voltage is 
d~p 
el = N1 ~ 
-- coNl~bmax coswt 
(2.4) 
where q~max is the maximum value of the flux and co = 2:r f, the frequency being 
f Hz. For the current and voltage reference directions shown in Fig. 2.4, the induced 
emf leads the flux by 90 °. The rms value of the induced emf el is 
2zr 
E1 : ~fNl~bmax : ~/27rfNlqbmax 
(2.5) 
If the resistive voltage drop is negligible, the counter emf equals the applied 
voltage. Under these conditions, if a sinusoidal voltage is applied to a winding, a 
sinusoidally varying core flux must be established whose maximum value CPmax satis- 
fies the requirement that E1 in Eq. 2.5 equal the rms value V1 of the applied voltage; 
thus 
Vl 
~bmax - 
(2.6) 
Under these conditions, the core flux is determined solely by the applied voltage, 
its frequency, and the number of turns in the winding. This important relation applies 
not only to transformers but also to any device operated with a sinusoidally-alternating 
impressed voltage, as long as the resistance and leakage-inductance voltage drops are 
negligible. The core flux is fixed by the applied voltage, and the required exciting 
current is determined by the magnetic properties of the core; the exciting current must 
adjust itself so as to produce the mmf required to create the flux demanded by Eq. 2.6. 
Because of the nonlinear magnetic properties of iron, the waveform of the exciting 
current differs from the waveform of the flux. A curve of the exciting current as a 
function of time can be found graphically from the ac hysteresis loop, as is discussed 
in Section 1.4 and shown in Fig. 1.11. 
If the exciting current is analyzed by Fourier-series methods, it is found to consist 
of a fundamental component and a series of odd harmonics. The fundamental com- 
ponent can, in turn, be resolved into two components, one in phase with the counter 
emf and the other lagging the counter emf by 90 °. The in-phase component supplies 
the power absorbed by hysteresis and eddy-current losses in the core. It is referred 
to as core-loss component of the exciting current. When the core-loss component is 
subtracted from the total exciting current, the remainder is called the magnetizing 
current. It comprises a fundamental component lagging the counter emf by 90 °, to- 
gether with all the harmonics. The principal harmonic is the third. For typical power 
transformers, the third harmonic usually is about 40 percent of the exciting current. 
Except in problems concerned directly with the effects of harmonic currents, 
the peculiarities of the exciting-current waveform usually need not be taken into 
account, because the exciting current itself is small, especially in large transformers. 
For example, the exciting current of a typical power transformer is about 1 to 2 percent 
of full-load current. Consequently the effects of the harmonics usually are swamped 

2.2 
No-Load Conditions 
63 
Im 
Ic 
+ 
Figure 2.5 
No-load phasor 
diagram. 
out by the sinusoidal-currents supplied to other linear elements in the circuit. The 
exciting current can then be represented by an equivalent sinusoidal current which 
has the same rms value and frequency and produces the same average power as 
the actual exciting current. Such representation is essential to the construction of a 
phasor diagram, which represents the phase relationship between the various voltages 
and currents in a system in vector form. Each signal is represented by a phasor 
whose length is proportional to the amplitude of the signal and whose angle is equal 
to the phase angle of that signal as measured with respect to a chosen reference 
signal. 
In Fig. 2.5, the phasors/~1 and + respectively, represent the rms values of the 
induced emf and the flux. The phasor i~ represents the rms value of the equivalent 
sinusoidal exciting current. It lags the induced emf/~1 by a phase angle 0c. 
The core loss Pc, equal to the product of the in-phase components of the/~1 and 
i¢, is given by 
Pc = E11~ cos 0c 
(2.7) 
The component ic in phase with /~1 is the core-loss current. The component Im 
in phase with the flux represents an equivalent sine wave current having the same 
rms value as the magnetizing current. Typical exciting volt-ampere and core-loss 
characteristics of high-quality silicon steel used for power and distribution transformer 
laminations are shown in Figs. 1.12 and 1.14. 
:.XAMPLE 2.' 
In Example 1.8 the core loss and exciting voltamperes for the core of Fig. 1.15 at Bmax = 1.5 T 
and 60 Hz were found to be 
Pc = 16 W 
(VI)rms = 20 VA 
and the induced voltage was 274/~/2 = 194 V rms when the winding had 200 turns. 
Find the power factor, the core-loss current Ic, and the magnetizing current Im. 

64 
CHAPTER 
2 
Transformers 
II Solution 
]6 
Power factor cos 0c = ~6 = 0.80 (lag) 
thus 
0c = -36.9 ° 
Note that we know that the power factor is lagging because the system is inductive. 
Exciting current I v = 2_£0 = 0.10 A rms 
194 
Core-loss component Ic = 16 = 0.082 A rms 
Magnetizing component Im = I~1 sin 0el = 0.060 Arms 
2.3 
EFFECT OF SECONDARY CURRENT; 
IDEAL TRANSFORMER 
As a first approximation to a quantitative theory, consider a transformer with a primary 
winding of N1 turns and a secondary winding of N2 turns, as shown schematically in 
Fig. 2.6. Notice that the secondary current is defined as positive out of the winding; 
thus positive secondary current produces an mmf in the opposite direction from that 
created by positive primary current. Let the properties of this transformer be ideal- 
ized under the assumption that winding resistances are negligible, that all the flux is 
confined to the core and links both windings (i.e., leakage flux is assumed negligible), 
that there are no losses in the core, and that the permeability of the core is so high 
that only a negligible exciting mmf is required to establish the flux. These proper- 
ties are closely approached but never actually attained in practical transformers. A 
hypothetical transformer having these properties is often called an ideal transformer. 
Under the above assumptions, when a time-varying voltage Vl is impressed on 
the primary terminals, a core flux q9 must be established such that the counter emf el 
equals the impressed voltage. Thus 
d~0 
vl = el = NI~ 
(2.8) 
dt 
The core flux also links the secondary and produces an induced emf e2, and an equal 
secondary terminal voltage re, given by 
d~0 
1)2 = e2 -- N2~ 
(2.9) 
dt 
?:iiii?i!i!:ii~i2!iiiiii!iiiiiii!ii!i~:~:, 
I 
"- - - 
", 
I 
il 
[ 
N, 
Figure 
2.6 
Ideal transformer and load. 

2,3 
Effect of Secondary Current; Ideal Transformer 
65 
From the ratio of Eqs. 2.8 and 2.9, 
v--L~ = N---L~ 
(2.10) 
V2 
N2 
Thus an ideal transformer transforms voltages in the direct ratio of the turns in its 
windings. 
Now let a load be connected to the secondary. A current i2 and an mmf N2i2 
are then present in the secondary. Since the core permeability is assumed very large 
and since the impressed primary voltage sets the core flux as specfied by Eq. 2.8, the 
core flux is unchanged by the presence of a load on the secondary, and hence the net 
exciting mmf acting on the core (equal to Nlil - N2i2) will not change and hence 
will remain negligible. Thus 
Nlil 
- 
N2i2 = 0 
(2.11) 
From Eq. 2.11 we see that a compensating primary mmf must result to cancel that of 
the secondary. Hence 
Nlil - 
N2i2 
(2.12) 
Thus we see that the requirement that the net mmf remain unchanged is the means 
by which the primary "knows" of the presence of load current in the secondary; any 
change in mmf flowing in the secondary as the result of a load must be accompanied 
by a corresponding change in the primary mmf. Note that for the reference directions 
shown in Fig. 2.6 the mmf's of il and i2 are in opposite directions and therefore 
compensate. The net mmf acting on the core therefore is zero, in accordance with the 
assumption that the exciting current of an ideal transformer is zero. 
From Eq. 2.12 
il 
N2 
-- 
(2.13) 
i2 
N1 
Thus an ideal transformer transforms currents in the inverse ratio of the turns in its 
windings. 
Also notice from Eqs. 2.10 and 2.13 that 
Vl il = v2i2 
(2.14) 
i.e., instantaneous power input to the primary equals the instantaneous power output 
from the secondary, a necessary condition because all dissipative and energy storage 
mechanisms in the transformer have been neglected. 
An additional property of the ideal transformer can be seen by considering the 
case of a sinusoidal applied voltage and an impedance load. Phasor symbolism can 
be used. The circuit is shown in simplified form in Fig. 2.7a, in which the dot- 
marked terminals of the transformer correspond to the similarly marked terminals in 
Fig. 2.6. The dot markings indicate terminals of corresponding polarity; i.e., if one 
follows through the primary and secondary windings of Fig. 2.6, beginning at their 
dot-marked terminals, one will find that both windings encircle the core in the same 
direction with respect to the flux. Therefore, if one compares the voltages of the two 
windings, the voltages from a dot-marked to an unmarked terminal will be of the 

66 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
(N1) 2 
Z2 \~22,] Ul 
N2 
N1 
N2 
:T 
J "l 
:T 
J~" 
• 
I2 + 
il "~ 
I'~ 
:[ 
- 
J] 
(Ul~ 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 2.7 Three circuits which are identical at terminals ab when the transformer is ideal. 
same instantaneous polarity for primary and secondary. In other words, the voltages 
fZl and f'2 in Fig. 2.7a are in phase. Also currents il and i2 are in phase as seen from 
Eq. 2.12. Note again that the polarity of il is defined as into the dotted terminal and 
the polarity of i2 is defined as out of the dotted terminal. 
We next investigate the impendance transformation properties of the ideal trans- 
former. In phasor form, Eqs. 2.10 and 2.13 can be expressed as 
N1 
N2 fz~ 
(2.15) 
91 =-~22V2 
and 
V2--~--~- 1 
,fl =~11N2I 2 and 
,f2= NI]I~ 
(2.16) 
From these equations 
V1 - (NR) 2Q2 
(2.17) 
Noting that the load impedance Z2 is related to the secondary voltages and 
currents 
Z 2 = ,, 
(2.18) 
12 
where Z2 is the complex impedance of the load. Consequently, as far as its effect is 
concerned, an impedance Z2 in the secondary circuit can be replaced by an equivalent 
impedance Z i in the primary circuit, provided that 
Z 2 
(2.19) 
Thus, the three circuits of Fig. 2.7 are indistinguishable as far as their performance 
viewed from terminals ab is concerned. Transferring an impedance from one side 
of a transformer to the other in this fashion is called referring the impedance to the 

2.3 Effect of Secondary Current; Ideal Transformer 
67 
other side; impedances transform as the square of the turns ratio. In a similar manner, 
voltages and currents can be referred to one side or the other by using Eqs. 2.15 and 
2.16 to evaluate the equivalent voltage and current on that side. 
To summarize, in an ideal transformer, voltages are transformed in the direct ratio 
of turns, currents in the inverse ratio, and impedances in the direct ratio squared; 
power and voltamperes are unchanged. 
The equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.8a shows an ideal transformer with an impedance R2 n t- j X2 -- 
1 + j4 f2 connected in series with the secondary. The tums ratio N1/N2 -- 5:1. (a) Draw an 
equivalent circuit with the series impedance referred to the primary side. (b) For a primary 
voltage of 120 V rms and a short connected across the terminals A-B, calculate the primary 
current and the current flowing in the short. 
II Solution 
a. The new equivalent is shown in Fig. 2.8b. The secondary impedance is referred to the 
primary by the turns ratio squared. Thus 
R2 + jX2 = 
-~2 
(e2 + jx2) 
-- 25+ jlOO f2 
b. From Eq. 2.19, a short at terminals A-B will appear as a short at the primary of the ideal 
transformer in Fig. 2.8b since the zero voltage of the short is reflected by the turns ratio 
N1/N2 to the primary. Hence the primary current will be given by 
I1 = 
V1 
_ _ 
120 
_ -- 0.28 - j 1.13 Arms 
R'2 + jX'2 
25 + jl00 
corresponding to a magnitude of 1.16 Arms. From Eq. 2.13, the secondary current will 
equal N1/N2 = 5 times that of the current in the primary. Thus the current in the short 
will have a magnitude of 5(1.16) -- 5.8 A rms. 
EXAMPLE 
2.2 
i]_ 
i2_ 
R2 
x2 
0/]__~ R£ 
x£ 
--o 
~ o  
o B 
--o 
o 
N1 
N2 
(a) 
(b) 
I2,._ r oA 
~ o  
B 
N1 
N2 
Figure 2.8 
Equivalent circuits for Example 2.2. (a) Impedance in series with the secondary. 
(b) Impedance referred to the primary. 

68 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
Practice Problem 2. 
Repeat part (b) of Example 2.2 for a series impedance Rz + j X2 = 0.05 + j0.97 ~ and a turns 
ratio of 14:1. 
Solution 
The primary current is 0.03 - j0.63 Arms, corresponding to a magnitude of 0.63 Arms. The 
current in the short will be 14 times larger and thus will be of magnitude 8.82 Arms. 
2.4 
TRANSFORMER REACTANCES AND 
EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS 
The departures of an actual transformer from those of an ideal transformer must be 
included to a greater or lesser degree in most analyses of transformer performance. 
A more complete model must take into account the effects of winding resistances, 
leakage fluxes, and finite exciting current due to the finite (and indeed nonlinear) 
permeability of the core. In some cases, the capacitances of the windings also have 
important effects, notably in problems involving transformer behavior at frequencies 
above the audio range or during rapidly changing transient conditions such as those 
encountered in power system transformers as a result of voltage surges caused by 
lightning or switching transients. The analysis of these high-frequency problems is 
beyond the scope of the present treatment however, and accordingly the capacitances 
of the windings will be neglected. 
Two methods of analysis by which departures from the ideal can be taken into 
account are (1) an equivalent-circuit technique based on physical reasoning and (2) a 
mathematical approach based on the classical theory of magnetically coupled circuits. 
Both methods are in everyday use, and both have very close parallels in the theories 
of rotating machines. Because it offers an excellent example of the thought process 
involved in translating physical concepts to a quantitative theory, the equivalent circuit 
technique is presented here. 
To begin the development of a transformer equivalent circuit, we first consider 
the primary winding. The total flux linking the primary winding can be divided into 
two components: the resultant mutual flux, confined essentially to the iron core and 
produced by the combined effect of the primary and secondary currents, and the 
primary leakage flux, which links only the primary. These components are identified 
in the schematic transformer shown in Fig. 2.9, where for simplicity the primary and 
secondary windings are shown on opposite legs of the core. In an actual transformer 
with interleaved windings, the details of the flux distribution are more complicated, 
but the essential features remain the same. 
The leakage flux induces voltage in the primary winding which adds to that 
produced by the mutual flux. Because the leakage path is largely in air, this flux and 
the voltage induced by it vary linearly with primary current i l. It can therefore be 
represented by a primary leakage inductance Lll (equal to the leakage-flux linkages 

2.4 
Transformer Reactances and Equivalent Circuits 
69 
Resultant mutual flux, ~o 
• 
r 
2 
J 
./ 
Primary 
~- 
leakage flux 
Secondary 
leakage flux 
Figure 2.9 
Schematic view of mutual and leakage fluxes in a 
transformer. 
with the primary per unit of primary current). The corresponding primary leakage 
reactance Xll is found as 
XI 1 = 2yrfLll 
(2.20) 
In addition, there will be a voltage drop in the primary resistance R1. 
We now see that the primary terminal voltage (11 consists of three components: 
the il R1 drop in the primary resistance, the i l Xll drop arising from primary leakage 
flux, and the emf/~1 induced in the primary by the resultant mutual flux. Fig. 2.10a 
shows an equivalent circuit for the primary winding which includes each of these 
voltages. 
The resultant mutual flux links both the primary and secondary windings and is 
created by their combined mmf's. It is convenient to treat these mmf's by considering 
that the primary current must meet two requirements of the magnetic circuit: It must 
not only produce the mmf required to produce the resultant mutual flux, but it must 
also counteract the effect of the secondary mmf which acts to demagnetize the core. 
An alternative viewpoint is that the primary current must not only magnetize the 
core, it must also supply current to the load connected to the secondary. According 
to this picture, it is convenient to resolve the primary current into two components: 
an exciting component and a load component. The exciting component i~ is defined 
as the additional primary current required to produce the resultant mutual flux. It is 
a nonsinusoidal current of the nature described in Section 2.2. 3 The load component 
3 In fact, the exciting current corresponds to the net mmf acting on the transformer core and cannot, in 
general, be considered to flow in the primary alone. However, for the purposes of this discussion, this 
distinction is not significant. 

70 
CHAPTER 2 Transformers 
R 1 
Xl 1 
-~-~ 
I1 .... ~.~_ 
-1 
- 
(a) 
g 1 
-1 
/1 
Re ~~_~ Xrn 
(b) 
^ 
v 
T 
+ 
#1 
l- 
R] 
Xl 1 
_il 
^ 
v 
N1 
N2 
+^ 
l + 
t 
Ideal 
(c) 
Xl 2 
R 2 
1- 
R~ 
Xl~ 
X~ 
R'2 
V1 
gc~ 
Xm 
V~ 
-I 
l- 
(d) 
Figure 2.10 Steps in the development of the transformer equivalent circuit. 
i' 2 is defined as the component current in the primary which would exactly counteract 
the mmf of secondary current i2. 
Since it is the exciting component which produces the core flux, the net mmf 
must equal N1 i~0 and thus we see that 
and from Eq. 2.21 we see that 
N1 i~o = N111 -- N212 
= Nl(I~o + I'2)- N212 
(2.21) 
,,, 
N2 12 
(2.22) 
I2 -- ~1 
From Eq. 2.22, we see that the load component of the primary current equals the 
secondary current referred to the primary as in an ideal transformer. 

2,41, Transformer Reactances and Equivalent Circuits 
7t 
The exciting current can be treated as an equivalent sinusoidal current i~0, in the 
manner described in Section 2.2, and can be resolved into a core-loss component 
ic in phase with the emf E1 and a magnetizing component lm lagging E1 by 90 °. 
In the equivalent circuit (Fig. 2.10b) the equivalent sinusoidal exciting current is 
accounted for by means of a shunt branch connected across El, comprising a core- 
loss resistance Rc in parallel with a magnetizing inductance Lm whose reactance, 
known as the magnetizing reactance, is given by 
Xm = 2rc f Lm 
(2.23) 
In the equivalent circuit of (Fig. 2.10b) the power E 2/Rc accounts for the core loss 
due to the resultant mutual flux. Rc is referred to as the magnetizing resistance or core- 
loss resistance and together with Xm forms the excitation branch of the equivalent 
circuit, and we will refer to the parallel combination of Rc and Xm as the exciting 
impedance Z~. When Rc is assumed constant, the core loss is thereby assumed to 
vary as E 2 or (for sine waves) as ~2ax f2, where ~bmax is the maximum value of the 
resultant mutual flux. Strictly speaking, the magnetizing reactance Xm varies with 
the saturation of the iron. When Xm is assumed constant, the magnetizing current 
is thereby assumed to be independent of frequency and directly proportional to the 
resultant mutual flux. Both Rc and Xm are usually determined at rated voltage and 
frequency; they are then assumed to remain constant for the small departures from 
rated values associated with normal operation. 
We will next add to our equivalent circuit a representation of the secondary 
winding. We begin by recognizing that the resultant mutual flux + induces an emf/~2 
in the secondary, and since this flux links both windings, the induced-emf ratio must 
equal the winding turns ratio, i.e., 
^ 
E1 
N1 
--- 
(2.24) 
E2 
N2 
just as in an ideal transformer. This voltage transformation and the current transfor- 
mation of Eq. 2.22 can be accounted for by introducing an ideal transformer in the 
equivalent circuit, as in Fig. 2.10c. Just as is the case for the primary winding, the 
emf E2 is not the secondary terminal voltage, however, because of the secondary 
resistance R2 and because the secondary current i2 creates secondary leakage flux 
(see Fig. 2.9). The secondary terminal voltage 92 differs from the induced voltage/~2 
by the voltage drops due to secondary resistance R2 and secondary leakage reactance 
Xl: (corresponding to the secondary leakage inductance L12), as in the portion of the 
complete transformer equivalent circuit (Fig. 2.10c) to the fight of/~2. 
From the equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.10, the actual transformer therefore can be 
seen to be equivalent to an ideal transformer plus external impedances. By referring 
all quantities to the primary or secondary, the ideal transformer in Fig. 2.10c can be 
moved out to the fight or left, respectively, of the equivalent circuit. This is almost 
invariably done, and the equivalent circuit is usually drawn as in Fig. 2.10d, with the 
ideal transformer not shown and all voltages, currents, and impedances referred to 

72 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
either the primary or secondary winding. Specifically, for Fig. 2.10d, 
,,_ 
1= 
X12 
(2.25) 
= 
R2 
(2.26) 
and 
N1 
V:~ = N22 V2 
(2.27) 
The circuit of Fig. 2.10d is called the equivalent-T circuit for a transformer. 
In Fig. 2.10d, in which the secondary quantities are referred to the primary, the 
referred secondary values are indicated with primes, for example, X' and R~, to dis- 
12 
tinguish them from the actual values of Fig. 2.10c. In the discussion that follows we 
almost always deal with referred values, and the primes will be omitted. One must sim- 
ply keep in mind the side of the transformers to which all quantities have been referred. 
A 50-kVA 2400:240-V 60-Hz distribution transformer has a leakage impedance of 0.72 + 
j0.92 f2 in the high-voltage winding and 0.0070 + j0.0090 f2 in the low-voltage winding. At 
rated voltage and frequency, the impedance Z~ of the shunt branch (equal to the impedance of 
Re and j Xm in parallel) accounting for the exciting current is 6.32 + j43.7 fl when viewed 
from the low-voltage side. Draw the equivalent circuit referred to (a) the high-voltage side and 
(b) the low-voltage side, and label the impedances numerically. 
I1 Solution 
The circuits are given in Fig. 2.11 a and b, respectively, with the high-voltage side numbered 1 
and the low-voltage side numbered 2. The voltages given on the nameplate of a power system 
transformer are based on the turns ratio and neglect the small leakage-impedance voltage drops 
under load. Since this is a 10-to-1 transformer, impedances are referred by multiplying or 
dividing by 100; for example, the value of an impedance referred to the high-voltage side is 
greater by a factor of 100 than its value referred to the low-voltage side. 
ZII = 0.72 + j0.92 
Zl2 = 0.70 + j0.90 
Zll = 0.0072 + j0.0092 ZI2 = 0.0070 + j0.0090 
Z~o = 632 + j4370 "~ 
~ 
ct~ ~:~g 
ct~ ~:~g 
<~ 
~ Z~° = 6.32 + j43.7 
Y 
r" h 
r" h 
W 
b 
a'l 
I 
d 
b 
', 
:b' 
a 
0 
= -~ 
'-----0 
O-- -- --' 
'-- • 
- 
0 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.11 
Equivalent circuits for transformer of Example 2.3 referred to (a) the high-voltage side and (b) the 
low-voltage side. 

2.5 
Engineering Aspects of Transformer Analysis 
73 
The ideal transformer may be explicitly drawn, as shown dotted in Fig. 2.11, or it may be 
omitted in the diagram and remembered mentally, making the unprimed letters the terminals. 
If this is done, one must of course remember to refer all connected impedances and sources to 
be consistent with the omission of the ideal transformer. 
)ractice Problem 2.: 
If 2400 V rms is applied to the high-voltage side of the transformer of Example 2.3, calculate the 
magnitude of the current into the magnetizing impedance Z~ in Figs. 2.11 a and b respectively. 
Solution 
The current through Z~ is 0.543 Arms when it is referred to the high-voltage side as in Fig. 2.1 la 
and 5.43 Arms when it is referred to the low-voltage side. 
2.5 
ENGINEERING ASPECTS OF 
TRANSFORMER ANALYSIS 
In engineering analyses involving the transformer as a circuit element, it is customary 
to adopt one of several approximate forms of the equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.10 rather 
than the full circuit. The approximations chosen in a particular case depend largely 
on physical reasoning based on orders of magnitude of the neglected quantities. The 
more common approximations are presented in this section. In addition, test methods 
are given for determining the transformer constants. 
The approximate equivalent circuits commonly used for constant-frequency 
power transformer analyses are summarized for comparison in Fig. 2.12. All quanti- 
ties in these circuits are referred to either the primary or the secondary, and the ideal 
transformer is not shown. 
Computations can often be greatly simplified by moving the shunt branch repre- 
senting the exciting current out from the middle of the T circuit to either the primary or 
the secondary terminals, as in Fig. 2.12a and b. These forms of the equivalent circuit 
are referred to as cantilever circuits. The series branch is the combined resistance 
and leakage reactance of the primary and secondary, referred to the same side. This 
impedance is sometimes called the equivalent series impedance and its components 
the equivalent series resistance Req and equivalent series reactance Xeq, as shown in 
Fig. 2.12a and b. 
As compared to the equivalent-T circuit of Fig. 2.10d, the cantilever circuit is 
in error in that it neglects the voltage drop in the primary or secondary leakage 
impedance caused by the exciting current. Because the impedance of the exciting 
branch is typically quite large in large power transformers, the corresponding exciting 
current is quite small. This error is insignificant in most situations involving large 
transformers. 

74 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
I1 
Req = R1 + R2 
Xeq "- Xll Jr- Xl2 
Re q = RI + R2 
Xe q 
-
-
 Xl 1 .Jr_ Xl 2 
(a) 
(b) 
Req 
Xeq 
Xeq 
+~ 
~ 
~V~ 
~ ~ 
^> 
i -I- 
'1='2 
l+ 
+t 
/1=12 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 2.12 
Approximate transformer equivalent circuits. 
EXAMPLE 2.' 
Consider the equivalent-T circuit of Fig. 2.11 a of the 50-kVA 2400:240 V distribution trans- 
former of Example 2.3 in which the impedances are referred to the high-voltage side. (a) Draw 
the cantilever equivalent circuit with the shunt branch at the high-voltage terminal. Calculate 
and label RCq and X~q. (b) With the low-voltage terminal open-circuit and 2400 V applied to the 
high-voltage terminal, calculate the voltage at the low-voltage terminal as predicted by each 
equivalent circuit. 
II Solution 
a. The cantilever equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 2.13. Req and XCq are found simply as 
the sum of the high- and low-voltage winding series impedances of Fig. 2.11 a 
Req -- 0.72 + 0.70 = 1.42 f2 
Xeq = 0.92 + 0.90 = 1.82 f2 
Req = 
Xeq = 
1.42 ~ 
1.82 f2 
ao 
i 
~ 
oc 
l 
~ Z~o = 632 + j4370 f2 
bo 
~ 
od 
Figure 2.13 
Cantilever equivalent 
circuit for Example 2.4. 

2,5 
Engineering Aspects of Transformer Analysis 
15 
b. For the equivalent-T circuit of Fig. 2.11 a, the voltage at the terminal labeled c'-d' will be 
given by 
( 
Z~ 
) =2399.4+j0.315V 
frc,_a, = 2400 
Z, + Zl~ 
This corresponds to an rms magnitude of 2399.4 V. Reflected to the low-voltage terminals 
by the low- to high-voltage turns ratio, this in tum corresponds to a voltage of 239.94 V. 
Because the exciting impedance is connected directly across the high-voltage 
terminals in the cantilever equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.13, there will be no voltage drop 
across any series leakage impedance and the predicted secondary voltage will be 240 V. 
These two solutions differ by 0.025 percent, well within reasonable engineering accuracy 
and clearly justifying the use of the cantilever equivalent circuit for analysis of this 
transformer. 
Further analytical simplification results from neglecting the exciting current en- 
tirely, as in Fig. 2.12c, in which the transformer is represented as an equivalent series 
impedance. If the transformer is large (several hundred kilovoltamperes or more), the 
equivalent resistance Req is small compared with the equivalent reactance Xeq and 
can frequently be neglected, giving the equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.12d. The circuits 
of Fig. 2.12c and d are sufficiently accurate for most ordinary power system prob- 
lems and are used in all but the most detailed analyses. Finally, in situations where 
the currents and voltages are determined almost wholly by the circuits external to 
the transformer or when a high degree of accuracy is not required, the entire trans- 
former impedance can be neglected and the transformer considered to be ideal, as in 
Section 2.3. 
The circuits of Fig. 2.12 have the additional advantage that the total equivalent 
resistance Req and equivalent reactance Xeq can be found from a very simple test in 
which one terminal is short-circuited. On the other hand, the process of determination 
of the individual leakage reactances Xll and X12 and a complete set of parameters for 
the equivalent-T circuit of Fig. 2.10c is more difficult. Example 2.4 illustrates that due 
to the voltage drop across leakage impedances, the ratio of the measured voltages of a 
transformer will not be indentically equal to the idealized voltage ratio which would be 
measured if the transformer were ideal. In fact, without some apriori knowledge of the 
turns ratio (based for example upon knowledge of the intemal construction of the trans- 
former), it is not possible to make a set of measurements which uniquely determine 
the turns ratio, the magnetizing inductance, and the individual leakage impedances. 
It can be shown that, simply from terminal measurements, neither the turns ratio, 
the magnetizing reactance, or the leakage reactances are unique characteristics of a 
transformer equivalent circuit. For example, the turns ratio can be chosen arbitrarily 
and for each choice of turns ratio, there will be a corresponding set of values for 
the leakage and magnetizing reactances which matches the measured characteristic. 
Each of the resultant equivalent circuits will have the same electrical terminal char- 
acteristics, a fact which has the fortunate consequence that any self-consistent set of 
empirically determined parameters will adequately represent the transformer. 

76 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
EXAMPLE 2.! 
The 50-kVA 2400:240-V transformer whose parameters are given in Example 2.3 is used to 
step down the voltage at the load end of a feeder whose impedance is 0.30 + j 1.60 f2. The 
voltage Vs at the sending end of the feeder is 2400 V. 
Find the voltage at the secondary terminals of the transformer when the load connected to 
its secondary draws rated current from the transformer and the power factor of the load is 0.80 
lagging. Neglect the voltage drops in the transformer and feeder caused by the exciting current. 
I Solution 
The circuit with all quantities referred to the high-voltage (primary) side of the transformer is 
shown in Fig. 2.14a, where the transformer is represented by its equivalent impedance, as in 
Fig. 2.12c. From Fig. 2.1 la, the value of the equivalent impedance is Zeq = 1.42 + j 1.82 f2 and 
the combined impedance of the feeder and transformer in series is Z = 1.72 + j3.42 f2. From 
the transformer rating, the load current referred to the high-voltage side is I = 50,000/2400 = 
20.8 A. 
This solution is most easily obtained with the aid of the phasor diagram referred to the high- 
voltage side as shown in Fig. 2.14b. Note that the power factor is defined at the load side of the 
transformer and hence defines the phase angle 0 between the load current i and the voltage T~/r2 
0 = -cos-' (0.80) = -36.87 ° 
From the phasor diagram 
Ob = v/V 2 
- 
(bc) 2 
and 
Vz = Ob - ab 
Note that 
bc -- I X cos O - I R sin O 
ab = I R cos O 4-1X sin O 
where R and X are the combined resistance and reactance, respectively. Thus 
be = 20.8(3.42)(0.80) - 20.8(1.72)(0.60) = 35.5 V 
ab -- 20.8(1.72)(0.80) + 20.8(3.42)(0.60) = 71.4 V 
Substitution of numerical values shows that I/'2 = 2329 V, referred to the high-voltage 
side. The actual voltage at the secondary terminals is 2329/10, or 
V2 = 233V 
Feeder 
Transformer 
I~" s = 2400 V 
-1 
(a) 
~? = 20.8A 
> at 0.80 pE lag 
+ 
Load] 
~
C
 
o "~i 
~--~o 
f'= i'- ~/~/7~ ~./-; 
- 
-,b 
(b) 
Figure 2.14 
(a) Equivalent circuit and (b) phasor diagram for Example 2.5. 

2.5 Engineering Aspects of Transformer Analysis 
77 
Repeat Example 2.5 for a load which draws rated current from the transformer with a power 
factor of 0.8 leading. 
Solution 
V2 = 239 V 
Two very simple tests serve to determine the parameters of the equivalent circuits 
of Fig. 2.10 and 2.12. These consist of measuring the input voltage, current, and power 
to the primary, first with the secondary short-circuited and then with the secondary 
open-circuited. 
Short-Circuit Test 
The short-circuit test can be used to find the equivalent series 
impedance Req -k- j Xeq. Although the choice of winding to short-circuit is arbitrary, 
for the sake of this discussion we will consider the short circuit to be applied to the 
transformer secondary and voltage applied to primary. For convenience, the high- 
voltage side is usually taken as the primary in this test. Because the equivalent series 
impedance in a typical transformer is relatively small, typically an applied primary 
voltage on the order of 10 to 15 percent or less of the rated value will result in rated 
current. 
Figure 2.15a shows the equivalent circuit with transformer secondary impedance 
referred to the primary side and a short circuit applied to the secondary. The short- 
circuit impedance Zsc looking into the primary under these conditions is 
Z~o(R2 -Jr- jXI2) 
Zsc--" R1 -+-jXh + 
(2.28) 
Z~o -Jr- R2 + j Xl2 
Because the impedance Z~ of the exciting branch is much larger than that of the 
secondary leakage impedance (which will be true unless the core is heavily saturated 
by excessive voltage applied to the primary; certainly not the case here), the short- 
circuit impedance can be approximated as 
Zsc ~ R1 + j Xl, + R2 Jr- j X12 = Req + j Xeq 
(2.29) 
Isc 
R 1 
Xl 1 
Xl 2 
R 2 
+ 
o 
o---- 
Req = 
Xeq = 
Isc 
e 1 + R 2 
Xl 1"2t- Xl 2 
o 
~ 
+ 
Vsc 
(a) 
(b) 
I , 
Figure 2.15 
Equivalent circuit with short-circuited secondary. (a) Complete equivalent circuit. 
(b) Cantilever equivalent circuit with the exciting branch at the transformer secondary. 

78 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
Note that the approximation made here is equivalent to the approximation made 
in reducing the equivalent-T circuit to the cantilever equivalent. This can be seen 
from Fig. 2.15b; the impedance seen at the input of this equivalent circuit is clearly 
Zsc = Zeq -- Req q- j Xeq since the exciting branch is directly shorted out by the short 
on the secondary. 
Typically the instrumentation used for this test will measure the rms magnitude 
of the applied voltage Vsc, the short-circuit current Isc, and the power Psc. Based upon 
these three measurements, the equivalent resistance and reactance (referred to the 
primary) can be found from 
VSC 
IZeql = IZscl = 
(2.30) 
Isc 
Psc 
eeq = gsc = i2 c 
(2.31) 
Xeq-- Xsc--- v/lZsc] 2- e2c 
(2.32) 
where the symbol II indicates the magnitude of the enclosed complex quantity. 
The equivalent impedance can, of course, be referred from one side to the other 
in the usual manner. On the rare occasions when the equivalent-T circuit in Fig. 2.10d 
must be resorted to, approximate values of the individual primary and secondary 
resistances and leakage reactances can be obtained by assuming that R1 = R2 -- 
0.5 Req and Xl, = Xl2 = 0.5Xeq when all impedances are referred to the same side. 
Strictly speaking, of course, it is possible to measure R l and R2 directly by a dc 
resistance measurement on each winding (and then referring one or the other to the 
other side of the idea transformer). However, as has been discussed, no such simple 
test exists for the leakage reactances XI, and X12. 
Open-Circuit Test 
The open-circuit test is performed with the secondary open- 
circuited and rated voltage impressed on the primary. Under this condition an exciting 
current of a few percent of full-load current (less on large transformers and more on 
smaller ones) is obtained. Rated voltage is chosen to insure that the magnetizing 
reactance will be operating at a flux level close to that which will exist under normal 
operating conditions. If the transformer is to be used at other than its rated voltage, the 
test should be done at that voltage. For convenience, the low-voltage side is usually 
taken as the primary in this test. If the primary in this test is chosen to be the opposite 
winding from that of the short-circuit test, one must of course be careful to refer the 
various measured impedances to the same side of the transformer in order to obtain 
a self-consistent set of parameter values. 
Figure 2.16a shows the equivalent circuit with the transformer secondary impe- 
dance referred to the primary side and the secondary open-circuited. The open-circuit 
impedance Zoc looking into the primary under these conditions is 
Zoc=Rl+jXl~ 
+Z~0=Rl+jXl~ 
+ Rc (j Xm) 
Rc + jXm 
(2.33) 
Because the impedance of the exciting branch is quite large, the voltage drop in the 
primary leakage impedance caused by the exciting current is typically negligible, and 

2.5 
Engineering Aspects of Transformer Analysis 
79 
Ioc 
R 1 
Xll 
o 
+ 
XI 2 
R 2 
f'oc 
Rc 
/~oc 
Xm 
- 
I 
0 
o 
o 
+ 
Voc 
Xeq -- 
Re q = 
Ioc 
Xl l + Xl 2 R I + R 2 
i 
- 
I 
o 
o 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.16 Equivalent circuit with open-circuited secondary. (a) Complete equivalent 
circuit. (b) Cantilever equivalent circuit with the exciting branch at the transformer primary. 
the primary impressed voltage f'oc very nearly equals the emf/~oc induced by the 
resultant core flux. Similarly, the primary I2cR1 loss caused by the exciting current is 
negligible, so that the power input Poc very nearly equals the core loss 
2 
Eoc/Re. As a 
result, it is common to ignore the primary leakage impedance and to approximate the 
open-circuit impedance as being equal to the magnetizing impedance 
Rc(jXm) 
(2.34) 
Zoc~Z~o= Rc+jXm 
Note that the approximation made here is equivalent to the approximation made in 
reducing the equivalent-T circuit to the cantilever equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.16b; the 
impedance seen at the input of this equivalent circuit is clearly Z~0 since no current 
will flow in the open-circuited secondary. 
As with the short-circuit test, typically the instrumentation used for this test will 
measure the rms magnititude of the applied voltage, Voc, the open-circuit current 
Ioc and the power Poc. Neglecting the primarly leakage impedance and based upon 
these three measurements, the magnetizing resistance and reactance (referred to the 
primary) can be found from 
Rc = 
(2.35) 
Poc 
Voc 
IZ~l = 
(2.36) 
Zoc 
1 
Xm - 
(2.37) 
/(1/lZ~0l) 2 - 
(1/ec) 2 
The values obtained are, of course, referred to the side used as the primary in this test. 
The open-circuit test can be used to obtain the core loss for efficiency computa- 
tions and to check the magnitude of the exciting current. Sometimes the voltage at the 
terminals of the open-circuited secondary is measured as a check on the turns ratio. 
Note that, if desired, a slightly more accurate calculation of Xm and Rc by retain- 
ing the measurements of R1 and Xll obtained from the short-circuit test (referred to 

80 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
the proper side of the transformer) and basing the derivation on Eq. 2.33. However, 
such additional effort is rarely necessary for the purposes of engineering accuracy. 
EXAMPLE 
2.6 
With the instruments located on the high-voltage side and the low-voltage side short-circuited, 
the short-circuit test readings for the 50-kVA 2400:240-V transformer of Example 2.3 are 48 V, 
20.8 A, and 617 W. An open-circuit test with the low-voltage side energized gives instrument 
readings on that side of 240 V, 5.41 A, and 186 W. Determine the efficiency and the voltage 
regulation at full load, 0.80 power factor lagging. 
II Solution 
From the short-circuit test, the magnitude of the equivalent impedance, the equivalent resistance, 
and the equivalent reactance of the transformer (referred to the high-voltage side as denoted 
by the subscript H) are 
48 
617 
IZeq'HI = 20.8 = 2.31 f2 
Req,H = 20.82 -- 1.42 ~2 
Xeq,H -- ~/2.312 _ 1.422 = 1.82 ~2 
Operation at full-load, 0.80 power factor lagging corresponds to a current of 
50,000 
IH = 
= 20.8A 
2400 
and an output power 
Poutput = Pioad = (0.8)50,000 ~- 40,000 W 
The total loss under this operating condition is equal to the sum of the winding loss 
Pwinding = 12 Req,H -- 20.82 (1.42) = 617 W 
and the core loss determined from the open-circuit test 
Pcore = 186 W 
Thus 
Ploss = Pwinding "+" Pcore = 803 W 
and the power input to the transformer is 
Pinput = Poutput + Ploss = 40,803 W 
The efficiency of a power conversion device is defined as 
eoutput 
einput- eloss 
eloss 
efficiency = 
= 
= 1 
einput 
Pinput 
einput 
which can be expressed in percent by multiplying by 100 percent. Hence, for this operating 
condition 
( Poutput ) 
(40,000)=98.0 
% 
efficiency = 100% 
einput 
= 100% 
40,000 + 803 

2.6 Autotransformers; Multiwinding Transformers 
81 
The voltage regulation of a transformer is defined as the change in secondary terminal 
voltage from no load to full load and is usually expressed as a percentage of the full-load value. 
In power systems applications, regulation is one figure of merit for a transformer; a low value 
indicates that load variations on the secondary of that transformer will not significantly affect 
the magnitude of the voltage being supplied to the load. It is calculated under the assumption that 
the primary voltage remains constant as the load is removed from the transformer secondary. 
The equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.12c will be used with all quantities referred to the high- 
voltage side. The primary voltage is assumed to be adjusted so that the secondary terminal 
voltage has its rated value at full load, or V2H -- 2400 V. For a load of rated value and 0.8 power 
factor lagging (corresponding to a power factor angle 0 = -cos -1 (0.8) = -36.9°), the load 
current will be 
'H=(50×103) e-j36"9°--20"a(O'a-jO'6) 
A
2
4
0
0
 
The required value of the primary voltage V1H can be calculated as 
VIH = ~r2H -~- ]H(eeq,H 71- jXeq,H) 
- 2400 + 20.8(0.80- j0.60)(1.42 + jl.82) 
- 2446 + j13 
The magnitude of f'lH is 2446 V. If this voltage were held constant and the load removed, 
the secondary voltage on open circuit would rise to 2446 V referred to the high-voltage side. 
Then 
2446- 2400 
Regulation = 
(100%) = 1.92% 
2400 
)ractice Problem 2., 
Repeat the voltage-regulation calculation of Example 2.6 for a load of 50 kW (rated load, unity 
power factor). 
Solution 
Regulation = 1.24% 
2.6 
AUTOTRANSFORMERS; MULTIWlNDING 
TRANSFORMERS 
The principles discussed in previous sections have been developed with specific ref- 
erence to two-winding transformers. They are also applicable to transformers with 
other winding configurations. Aspects relating to autotransformers and multiwinding 
transformers are considered in this section. 

82 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
0 
0 
o 
]a 
NI+  
I: 
o 
0 
0 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.17 
(a) Two-winding transformer. 
(b) Connection as an autotransformer. 
2.6.1 
In Fig. 2.17a, a two-winding transformer is shown with N1 and N2 turns on the 
primary and secondary windings respectively. Substantially the same transformation 
effect on voltages, currents, and impedances can be obtained when these windings 
are connected as shown in Fig. 2.17b. Note that, however, in Fig. 2.17b, winding bc 
is common to both the primary and secondary circuits. This type of transformer is 
called an autotransformer. It is little more than a normal transformer connected in a 
special way. 
One important difference between the two-winding transformer and the auto- 
transformer is that the windings of the two-winding transformer are electrically iso- 
lated whereas those of the autotransformer are connected directly together. Also, in 
the autotransformer connection, winding ab must be provided with extra insulation 
since it must be insulated against the full maximum voltage of the autotransformer. 
Autotransformers have lower leakage reactances, lower losses, and smaller exciting 
current and cost less than two-winding transformers when the voltage ratio does not 
differ too greatly from 1:1. 
The following example illustrates the benefits of an autotransformer for those 
situations where electrical isolation between the primary and secondary windings is 
not an important consideration. 
!XAMPLE 2.~ 
The 2400:240-V 50-kVA transformer of Example 2.6 is connected as an autotransformer, as 
shown in Fig. 2.18a, in which ab is the 240-V winding and bc is the 2400-V winding. (It is 
assumed that the 240-V winding has enough insulation to withstand a voltage of 2640 V to 
ground.) 
a. Compute the voltage ratings V. and Vx of the high- and low-voltage sides, respectively, 
for this autotransformer connection. 
b. Compute the kVA rating as an autotransformer. 
c. Data with respect to the losses are given in Example 2.6. Compute the full-load efficiency 
as an autotransformer operating with a rated load of 0.80 power factor lagging. 

2.6 
Autotransformers; Multiwinding Transformers 
83 
a 
o 
• 
+ 
o 
VH= 2640 V 
o 
+ 
VL= 2400V 
O 
O 
O 
208 A 
C 
228.8 A 
Q 
~ ~ ~20.8 A 
22-8.8 A 
208 A 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.18 
(a) Autotransformer connection for 
Example 2.7. (b) Currents under rated load. 
II Solution 
a. Since the 2400-V winding bc is connected to the low-voltage circuit, VL = 2400 V. When 
Vbc = 2400 V, a voltage Vab = 240 V in phase with Vbc will be induced in winding ab 
(leakage-impedance voltage drops being neglected). The voltage of the high-voltage side 
therefore is 
g H = 
Vab + 
Vbc = 2640 V 
b. From the rating of 50 kVA as a normal two-winding transformer, the rated current of 
the 240-V winding is 50,000/240 = 208 A. Since the high-voltage lead of the 
autotransformer is connected to the 240-V winding, the rated current In at the 
high-voltage side of the autotransformer is equal to the rated current of the 240-V winding 
or 208 A. The kVA rating as an autotransformer therefore is 
VHIH 
2640(208) 
= 
-- 550 kVA 
1000 
1000 
Note that, in this connection, the autotransformer has an equivalent turns ratio of 
2640/2400. Thus the rated current at the low-voltage winding (the 2400-V winding in this 
connection) must be 
( 640) 
IL= \2--~ 
208A=229A 
At first, this seems rather unsettling since the 2400-V winding of the transformer has a 
rated current of 50 kVA/2400 V = 20.8 A. Further puzzling is that fact that this 
transformer, whose rating as a normal two-winding transformer is 50 kVA, is capable of 
handling 550 kVA as an autotransformer. 
The higher rating as an autotransformer is a consequence of the fact that not all the 
550 kVA has to be transformed by electromagnetic induction. In fact, all that the 
transformer has to do is to boost a current of 208 A through a potential rise of 240 V, 
corresponding to a power transformation capacity of 50 kVA. This fact is perhaps best 
illustrated by Fig. 2.18b which shows the currents in the autotransformer under rated 

84 
CHAPTER 2 Transformers 
conditions. Note that the windings carry only their rated currents in spite of higher rating 
of the transformer. 
c. When it is connected as an autotransformer with the currents and voltages shown in 
Fig. 2.18, the losses are the same as in Example 2.6, namely, 803 W. But the output as an 
autotransformer at full load, 0.80 power factor is 0.80(550,000) = 440,000 W. The 
efficiency therefore is 
1- 
803 
~ 100% = 99.82% 
440,803 J 
The efficiency is so high because the losses are those corresponding to transforming only 
50 kVA. 
)ractice Problem 2.1 
A 450-kVA, 460-V:7.97-kV transformer has an efficiency of 97.8 percent when supplying a 
rated load of unity power factor. If it is connected as a 7.97:8.43-kV autotransformer, calculate 
its rated terminal currents, rated kVA, and efficiency when supplying a unity-power-factor load. 
Solution 
The rated current at the 8.43-kV terminal is 978 A, at the 7.97-kV terminal is 1034 A and the 
transformer rating is 8.25 MVA. Its efficiency supplying a rated, unity-power-factor load is 
99.88 percent. 
From Example 2.7, we see that when a transformer is connected as an auto- 
transformer as shown in Fig. 2.17, the rated voltages of the autotransformer can be 
expressed in terms of those of the two-winding transformer as 
Low-voltage: 
High-voltage: 
Vt,rated = V~rated 
(2.38) 
Vnrated--" Vlrated "3t-V2rated = (NI-)I-N2) 
VLratedN1 
(2.39) 
The effective turns ratio of the autotransformer is thus (N1 + N2)/N1. In addition, 
the power rating of the autotransformer is equal to (Nl + N2)/N2 times that of the 
two-winding transformer, although the actual power processed by the transformer 
will not increase over that of the standard two-winding connection. 
2.6.2 
Multiwinding 
Transformers 
Transformers having three or more windings, known as multiwinding or multicircuit 
transformers, are often used to interconnect three or more circuits which may have 
different voltages. For these purposes a multiwinding transformer costs less and is 

2.7 
Transformers in Three-Phase Circuits 
85 
more efficient than an equivalent number of two-winding transformers. Transformers 
having a primary and multiple secondaries are frequently found in multiple-output dc 
power supplies for electronic applications. Distribution transformers used to supply 
power for domestic purposes usually have two 120-V secondaries connected in series. 
Circuits for lighting and low-power applications are connected across each of the 
120-V windings, while electric ranges, domestic hot-water heaters, clothes-dryers, 
and other high-power loads are supplied with 240-V power from the series-connected 
secondaries. 
Similarly, a large distribution system may be supplied through a three-phase 
bank of multiwinding transformers from two or more transmission systems having 
different voltages. In addition, the three-phase transformer banks used to interconnect 
two transmission systems of different voltages often have a third, or tertiary, set of 
windings to provide voltage for auxiliary power purposes in substations or to sup- 
ply a local distribution system. Static capacitors or synchronous condensers may be 
connected to the tertiary windings for power factor correction or voltage regulation. 
Sometimes A-connected tertiary windings are put on three-phase banks to provide a 
low-impedance path for third harmonic components of the exciting current to reduce 
third-harmonic components of the neutral voltage. 
Some of the issues arising in the use of multiwinding transformers are associated 
with the effects of leakage impedances on voltage regulation, short-circuit currents, 
and division of load among circuits. These problems can be solved by an equivalent- 
circuit technique similar to that used in dealing with two-circuit transformers. 
The equivalent circuits of multiwinding transformers are more complicated than 
in the two-winding case because they must take into account the leakage impedances 
associated with each pair of windings. Typically, in these equivalent circuits, all 
quantities are referred to a common base, either by use of the appropriate turns ratios 
as referring factors or by expressing all quantities in per unit. The exciting current 
usually is neglected. 
2.7 
TRANSFORMERS 
IN THREE-PHASE 
CIRCUITS 
Three single-phase transformers can be connected to form a three-phase transformer 
bank in any of the four ways shown in Fig. 2.19. In all four parts of this figure, the wind- 
ings at the left are the primaries, those at the right are the secondaries, and any primary 
winding in one transformer corresponds to the secondary winding drawn parallel to it. 
Also shown are the voltages and currents resulting from balanced impressed primary 
line-to-line voltages V and line currents I when the ratio of primary-to-secondary 
turns N1/N2 = a and ideal transformers are assumed. 4 Note that the rated voltages 
and currents at the primary and secondary of the three-phase transformer bank de- 
pends upon the connection used but that the rated kVA of the three-phase bank is three 
times that of the individual single-phase transformers, regardless of the connection. 
4 The relationship between three-phase and single-phase quantities is discussed in Appendix A. 

86 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
T 
~ 
v~-aI 
I V/4-3-a 
(a) Y-A connection 
I 
aI/x/3 
> 
4 
Via 
~ 
x/-3V/a 
1 
(b) A-Y connection 
I 
r- 
aI 
'AA' 
V 
Via 
l 
¢ 
¢ 
v 
I/~ 
aI/4~ 
(c) A-A connection 
I 
> 
aI 
= 
¢ 
¢ 
I 
(d) Y-Y connection 
T 
V/a 
Figure 2.19 Common three-phase transformer connections; the transformer windings 
are indicated by the heavy lines. 
The Y-A connection is commonly used in stepping down from a high voltage 
to a medium or low voltage. One reason is that a neutral is thereby provided for 
grounding on the high-voltage side, a procedure which can be shown to be desirable 
in many cases. Conversely, the A-Y connection is commonly used for stepping up to 
a high voltage. The A-A connection has the advantage that one transformer can be 
removed for repair or maintenance while the remaining two continue to function as 
a three-phase bank with the rating reduced to 58 percent of that of the original bank; 
this is known as the open-delta, or V, connection. The Y-Y connection is seldom used 
because of difficulties with exciting-current phenomena. 5 
Instead of three single-phase transformers, a three-phase bank may consist of one 
three-phase transformer having all six windings on a common multi-legged core and 
contained in a single tank. Advantages of three-phase transformers over connections 
of three single-phase transformers are that they cost less, weigh less, require less floor 
space, and have somewhat higher efficiency. A photograph of the internal parts of a 
large three-phase transformer is shown in Fig. 2.20. 
Circuit computations involving three-phase transformer banks under balanced 
conditions can be made by dealing with only one of the transformers or phases and 
recognizing that conditions are the same in the other two phases except for the phase 
displacements associated with a three-phase system. It is usually convenient to carry 
out the computations on a single-phase (per-phase-Y, line-to-neutral) basis, since 
transformer impedances can then be added directly in series with transmission line 
impedances. The impedances of transmission lines can be referred from one side of 
the transformer bank to the other by use of the square of the ideal line-to-line voltage 
5 Because there is no neutral connection to carry harmonics of the exciting current, harmonic voltages are 
produced which significantly distort the transformer voltages. 

2.7 Transformers in Three-Phase Circuits 
87 
Figure 2.20 A 200-MVA, three-phase, 50-Hz, three-winding, 210/80/10.2-kV 
transformer removed from its tank. The 210-kV winding has an on-load tap 
changer for adjustment of the voltage. (Brown Boveri Corporation.) 
ratio of the bank. In dealing with Y-A or A-Y banks, all quantities can be referred to 
the Y-connected side. In dealing with A-A banks in series with transmission lines, it is 
convenient to replace the A-connected impedances of the transformers by equivalent 
Y-connected impedances. It can be shown that a balanced A-connected circuit of 
ZA f2/phase is equivalent to a balanced Y-connected circuit of Zy f2/phase if 
1 
Zy -- ~ ZA 
(2.40) 
Three single-phase, 50-kVA 2400:240-V transformers, each identical with that of Example 2.6, 
are connected Y-A in a three-phase 150-kVA bank to step down the voltage at the load end 
of a feeder whose impedance is 0.15 + j 1.00 ft/phase. The voltage at the sending end of the 
feeder is 4160 V line-to-line. On their secondary sides, the transformers supply a balanced 
three-phase load through a feeder whose impedance is 0.0005 + j0.0020 g2/phase. Find the 
line-to-line voltage at the load when the load draws rated current from the transformers at a 
power factor of 0.80 lagging. 
II Solution 
The computations can be made on a single-phase basis by referring everything to the high- 
voltage, Y-connected side of the transformer bank. The voltage at the sending end of the feeder 
EXAMPLE 2.8 

88 
CHAPTER 
2 
Transformers 
is equivalent to a source voltage Vs of 
4160 
Vs = 
= 2400 V line-to-neutral 
43 
From the transformer rating, the rated current on the high-voltage side is 20.8 A/phase Y. 
The low-voltage feeder impedance referred to the high voltage side by means of the square of 
the rated line-to-line voltage ratio of the transformer bank is 
= (4160) 2 
Zlv,H 
\ ~ 
(0.0005 + j0.0020) = 0.15 + j0.60 
and the combined series impedance of the high- and low-voltage feeders referred to the high- 
voltage side is thus 
Zfeeder,H = 0.30 + j 1.60 fl/phase Y 
Because the transformer bank is Y-connected on its high-voltage side, its equivalent single- 
phase series impedance is equal to the single-phase series impedance of each single-phase 
transformer as referred to its high-voltage side. This impedance was originally calculated in 
Example 2.4 as 
Zeq,H = 1.42 + j 1.82 ~/phase Y 
Due to the choice of values selected for this example, the single-phase equivalent circuit 
for the complete system is identical to that of Example 2.5, as can been seen with specific 
reference to Fig. 2.14a. In fact, the solution on a per-phase basis is exactly the same as the 
solution to Example 2.5, whence the load voltage referred to the high-voltage side is 2329 V 
to neutral. The actual line-neutral load voltage can then be calculated by referring this value to 
the low-voltage side of the transformer bank as 
( 40) 
Vlo.d = 2329 
4-~ 
= 134 V line-to-neutral 
which can be expressed as a line-to-line voltage by multiplying by ~/3 
Vload = 134~/'3 = 233 V line-to-line 
Note that this line-line voltage is equal to the line-neutral load voltage calculated in 
Example 2.5 because in this case the transformers are delta connected on their low-voltage side 
and hence the line-line voltage on the low-voltage side is equal to the low-voltage terminal 
voltage of the transformers. 
)ractice Problem 2.q 
Repeat Example 2.8 with the transformers connected Y-Y and all other aspects of the problem 
statement remaining unchanged. 
Solution 
405 V line-line 

2.7 
Transformers in Three-Phase Circuits 
89 
EXAMPLE 
2.9 
The three transformers of Example 2.8 are reconnected A- A and supplied with power through 
a 2400-V (line-to-line) three-phase feeder whose reactance is 0.80 ~2/phase. At its sending 
end, the feeder is connected to the secondary terminals of a three-phase Y-A-connected trans- 
former whose rating is 500 kVA, 24 kV:2400 V (line-to-line). The equivalent series impedance 
of the sending-end transformer is 0.17 + j0.92 ~/phase referred to the 2400-V side. The 
voltage applied to the primary terminals of the sending-end transformer is 24.0 kV line- 
to-line. 
A three-phase short circuit occurs at the 240-V terminals of the receiving-end transformers. 
Compute the steady-state short-circuit current in the 2400-V feeder phase wires, in the primary 
and secondary windings of the receiving-end transformers, and at the 240-V terminals. 
II Solution 
The computations will be made on an equivalent line-to-neutral basis with all quantities referred 
to the 2400-V feeder. The source voltage then is 
2400 = 1385 V line-to-neutral 
,/5 
From Eq. 2.40, the single-phase-equivalent series impedance of the A-A transformer seen 
at its 2400-V side is 
Zeq --- Req -1 t-- j Xeq = 
1.42 + j 1.82 = 0.47 + j 0.61 f2/phase 
The total series impedance to the short circuit is then the sum of this impedance, that of 
sending-end transformer and the reactance of the feeder 
Zto t -- (0.47 + j0.61) + (0.17 + j0.92) + j0.80 = 0.64 + j2.33 ~2/phase 
which has a magnitude of 
I Ztot [ = 
2.42 f2/phase 
The magnitude of the phase current in the 2400-V feeder can now simply be calculated 
as the line-neutral voltage divided by the series impedance 
1385 
Current in 2400-V feeder = 
= 572 A 
2.42 
and, as is shown in Fig. 2.19c, the winding current in the 2400-V winding of the receiving-end 
transformer is equal to the phase current divided by ~/3 or 
572 
Current in 2400-V windings = ~/~ = 330 A 
while the current in the 240-V windings is 10 times this value 
Current in 240-V windings = 10 x 330 = 3300 A 
Finally, again with reference to Fig. 2.19c, the phase current at the 240-V terminals into 
the short circuit is given by 
Current at the 240-V terminals = 3300~/3 = 5720 A 

90 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
Note of course that this same result could have been computed simply by recognizing that the 
turns ratio of the A-A transformer bank is equal to 10:1 and hence, under balanced-three-phase 
conditions, the phase current on the low voltage side will be 10 times that on the high-voltage 
side. 
Practice Problem 2." 
Repeat Example 2.9 under the condition that the three transformers are connected A-Y instead 
of A-A such that the short low-voltage side of the three-phase transformer is rated 416 V 
line-to-line. 
Solution 
Current in 2400-V feeder = 572 A 
Current in 2400-V windings = 330 A 
Current in 416-V windings = 3300 A 
Current at the 416-V terminals = 3300A 
2.8 
VOLTAGE AND CURRENT 
TRANSFORMERS 
Transformers are often used in instrumentation applications to match the magnitude 
of a voltage or current to the range of a meter or other instrumention. For example, 
most 60-Hz power-systems' instrumentation is based upon voltages in the range of 
0-120 V rms and currents in the range of 0-5 Arms. Since power system voltages 
range up to 765-kV line-to-line and currents can be 10's of kA, some method of 
supplying an accurate, low-level representation of these signals to the instrumentation 
is required. 
One common technique is through the use of specialized transformers known 
as potential transformers or PT's and current transformers or CT's. If constructed 
with a turns ratio of Nl :N2, an ideal potential transformer would have a secondary 
voltage equal in magnitude to N2/N1 times that of the primary and identical in phase. 
Similarly, an ideal current transformer would have a secondary output current equal to 
Nl/N2 times the current input to the primary, again identical in phase. In other words, 
potential and current transformers (also referred to as instrumentation transformers) 
are designed to approximate ideal transformers as closely as is practically possible. 
The equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.21 shows a transformer loaded with an impedance 
Zb -- Rb + j Xb at its secondary. For the sake of this discussion, the core-loss resistance 
Rc has been neglected; if desired, the analysis presented here can be easily expanded to 
include its effect. Following conventional terminology, the load on an instrumentation 
transformer is frequently referred to as the burden on that transformer, hence the 
subscript b. To simplify our discussion, we have chosen to refer all the secondary 
quantities to the primary side of the ideal transformer. 

2.8 
Voltage and Current Transformers 
91 
i~ 1 
o 
4- 
R] 
X] 
t 
t 
12 
X2 
R2 
N1 
N2 
o 
+ 
o 
Figure 2.21 
Equivalent circuit for an instrumentation 
transformer. 
zb 
Consider first a potential transformer. Ideally it should accurately measure voltage 
while appearing as an open circuit to the system under measurement, i.e., drawing 
negligible current and power. Thus, its load impedance should be "large" in a sense 
we will now quantify. 
First, let us assume that the transformer secondary is open-circuited (i.e., I Zbl = 
cx~). In this case we can write that 
V2 
(N~) 
jXm 
(2.41) 
-- 
R1 + j (Xl -~- Xm) 
From this equation, we see that a potential transformer with an open-circuited sec- 
ondary has an inherent error (in both magnitude and phase) due to the voltage drop of 
the magnetizing current through the primary resistance and leakage reactance. To the 
extent that the primary resistance and leakage reactance can be made small compared 
to the magnetizing reactance, this inherent error can be made quite small. 
The situation is worsened by the presence of a finite burden. Including the effect 
of the burden impedance, Eq. 2.41 becomes 
where 
and 
"t~'2 _ 
(N2) 
ZeqZb 
V1 -- 
~ 
(R1 + jX1)(Zeq + Z(~ + R' 2 + jX'2) 
(2.42) 
jXm(R1 -+- jX~) 
(2.43) 
Zeq -- R1 + j (Xm -Jff X1) 
Z b = 
Z b 
(2.44) 
is the burden impedance referred to the transformer primary. 
From these equations, it can be seen that the characterstics of an accurate potential 
transformer include a large magnetizing reactance (more accurately, a large exciting 
impedance since the effects of core loss, although neglected in the analysis presented 
here, must also be minimized) and relatively small winding resistances and leakage 
reactances. Finally, as will be seen in Example 2.10, the burden impedance must be 
kept above a minimum value to avoid introducing excessive errors in the magnitude 
and phase angle of the measured voltage. 

92 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
EXAMPLE 
2.10 
A 2400:120-V, 60-Hz potential transformer has the following parameter values (referred to the 
2400-V winding): 
X~=143~ 
X~=164f2 
Xm=163kf2 
R~ = 128 ~ 
R~ = 141 f2 
(a) Assuming a 2400-V input, which ideally should produce a voltage of 120 V at the 
low-voltage winding, calculate the magnitude and relative phase-angle errors of the secondary 
voltage if the secondary winding is open-circuited. (b) Assuming the burden impedance to be 
purely resistive (Zb = Rb), calculate the minimum resistance (maximum burden) that can be 
applied to the secondary such that the magnitude error is less than 0.5 percent. (c) Repeat part 
(b) but find the minimum resistance such that the phase-angle error is less than 1.0 degree. 
II Solution 
a. This problem is most easily solved using MATLAB. t From Eq. 2.41 with f'~ = 2400 V, 
the following MATLAB script gives 
f'2 = 119.90 Z0.045 ° V 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
c1c 
clear 
%PT parameters 
R1 = 128; 
Xl = 143; 
Xm = 163e3 ; 
N1 = 2400; 
N2 = 120; 
N = NI/N2 ; 
%Primary 
voltage 
Vl = 2400 ; 
%Secondary 
voltage 
V2 : VI*(N2/NI)*(j*Xm/(RI+ 
j*(Xl+Xm))) ; 
magV2 
= abs(V2) ; 
phaseV2 
= 180*angle(V2)/pi; 
fprintf('\nMagnitude 
of V2 = %g [V] ',magV2) 
fprintf('\n 
and angle = %g [degrees]\n\n',phaseV2) 
b. Here, again, it is relatively straight forward to write a MATLAB script to implement 
Eq. 2.42 and to calculate the percentage error in the magnitude of voltage ("2 as compared 
to the 120 Volts that would be measured if the PT were ideal. The resistive burden Rb 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

2.8 
Voltage and Current Transformers 
93 
can be initialized to a large value and then reduced until the magnitude error reaches 
0.5 percent. The result of such an analysis would show that the minimum resistance is 
162.5 f2, corresponding to a magnitude error of 0.50 percent and a phase angle of 0.22 °. 
(Note that this appears as a resistance of 65 kf2 when referred to the primary.) 
c. The MATLAB script of part (b) can be modified to search for the minimum resistive 
burden that will keep the phase angle error less than 1.0 degrees. The result would show 
that the minimum resistance is 41.4 f2, corresponding to a phase angle of 1.00 ° and a 
magnitude error of 1.70 percent. 
Using MATLAB, repeat parts (b) and (c) of Example 2.10 assuming the burden impedance is 
purely reactive (Zb = jXb) and finding the corresponding minimum impedance Xb in each 
case. 
Solution 
The minimum burden reactance which results in a secondary voltage magnitude within 0.5 per- 
cent of the expected 120 V is Xb = 185.4 S2, for which the phase angle is 0.25 °. The minimum 
burden reactance which results in a secondary voltage phase-angle of within 1.0 ° of that of the 
primary voltage is Xb -- 39.5 f2, for which the voltage-magnitude error is 2.0 percent. 
Consider next a current transformer. An ideal current transformer would accu- 
rately measure voltage while appearing as a short circuit to the system under measure- 
ment, i.e., developing negligible voltage drop and drawing negligible power. Thus, 
its load impedance should be "small" in a sense we will now quantify. 
Let us begin with the assumption that the transformer secondary is short-circuited 
(i.e., I Zbl = 0). In this case we can write that 
'2_(N_.~22) 
jXm 
(2.45) 
-X-'- 
m 
/ 
/ 
11 
R 2 + j (X 2 + Xm) 
In a fashion quite analogous to that of a potential transformer, Eq. 2.45 shows that a 
current transformer with a shorted secondary has an inherent error (in both magni- 
tude and phase) due to the fact that some of the primary current is shunted through 
the magnetizing reactance and does not reach the secondary. To the extent that the 
magnetizing reactance can be made large in comparison to the secondary resistance 
and leakage reactance, this error can be made quite small. 
A finite burden appears in series with the secondary impedance and increases the 
error. Including the effect of the burden impedance, Eq. 2.45 becomes 
I2=(N1) 
jXm 
I1 
N22 
Z~+R~+j(X~+Xm) 
(2.46) 
From these equations, it can be seen that an accurate current transformer has a 
large magnetizing impedance and relatively small winding resistances and leakage 

94 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
reactances. In addition, as is seen in Example 2.11, the burden impedance on a current 
transformer must be kept below a maximum value to avoid introducing excessive 
additional magnitude and phase errors in the measured current. 
A 800:5-A, 60-Hz current transformer has the following parameter values (referred to the 
800-A winding): 
X1 = 44.8/zft 
X~ = 54.3/z[2 
Xm = 17.7 m~ 
R1 = 10.3 #f2 
R~ = 9.6 #f2 
Assuming that the high-current winding is carrying a current of 800 amperes, calculate the 
magnitude and relative phase of the current in the low-current winding if the load impedance 
is purely resistive with Rb = 2.5 [2. 
i Solution 
The secondary current can be found from Eq. 2.46 by setting il =800A and R(~ = 
(N1/N2)2Rb = 0.097 mf2. The following MATLAB script gives 
i2 = 4.98/0.346 ° A 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
%CT parameters 
R_2p 
= 9.6e-6; 
X_2p 
= 54.3e-6; 
X_m 
= 17.7e-3; 
N_I = 5; 
N_2 = 800 ; 
N = N_I/N_2; 
%Load 
impedance 
R_b = 2.5; 
X_b = 0; 
Z_bp 
= N^2 *(R_b 
+ j * X_b) ; 
% Primary 
current 
Ii = 800 ; 
%Secondary 
current 
I2 = II*N*j*X_m/(Z_bp 
+ m_2p 
+ j*(X_2p 
+ X_m)); 
magi2 
= abs(I2) ; 
phaseI2 
= 180*angle(I2)/pi; 
fprintf('\nSecondary 
current 
magnitude 
= %g [A]',magI2) 
fprintf('\n 
and phase 
angle 
= %g [degrees]\n\n',phaseI2) 

2.9 The Per-Unit System 
95 
For the current transformer of Example 2.11, find the maximum purely reactive burden Z b = 
j Xb such that, for 800 A flowing in the transformer primary, the secondary current will be 
greater than 4.95 A (i.e., there will be at most a 1.0 percent error in current magnitude). 
Solution 
X b must be less than 3.19 
2.9 
THE PER-UNIT SYSTEM 
Computations relating to machines, transformers, and systems of machines are often 
carried out in per-unit form, i.e., with all pertinent quantities expressed as decimal 
fractions of appropriately chosen base values. All the usual computations are then car- 
fled out in these per unit values instead of the familiar volts, amperes, ohms, and so on. 
There are a number of advantages to the system. One is that the parameter values 
of machines and transformers typically fall in a reasonably narrow numerical range 
when expressed in a per-unit system based upon their rating. The correctness of 
their values is thus subject to a rapid approximate check. A second advantage is 
that when transformer equivalent-circuit parameters are converted to their per-unit 
values, the ideal transformer turns ratio becomes 1:1 and hence the ideal transformer 
can be eliminated. This greatly simplifies analyses since it eliminates the need to 
refer impedances to one side or the other of transformers. For complicated systems 
involving many transformers of different turns ratios, this advantage is a significant 
one in that a possible cause of serious mistakes is removed. 
Quantifies such as voltage V, current I, power P, reactive power Q, voltamperes 
VA, resistance R, reactance X, impedance Z, conductance G, susceptance B, and 
admittance Y can be translated to and from per-unit form as follows: 
Actual quantity 
Quantity in per unit = 
(2.47) 
Base value of quantity 
where "Actual quantity" refers to the value in volts, amperes, ohms, and so on. To 
a certain extent, base values can be chosen arbitrarily, but certain relations between 
them must be observed for the normal electrical laws to hold in the per-unit system. 
Thus, for a single-phase system, 
Pbase, Qbase, gAbase = gbase /base 
(2.48) 
gbase 
Rbase, Xbase, Zbase = 
(2.49) 
base 
The net result is that only two independent base quantities can be chosen arbitrarily; 
the remaining quantities are determined by the relationships of Eqs. 2.48 and 2.49. In 
typical usage, values of gAbase and gbase are chosen first; values of/base and all other 
quantities in Eqs. 2.48 and 2.49 are then uniquely established. 
The value of gAbase must be the same over the entire system under analysis. 
When a transformer is encountered, the values of gbase differ on each side and should 

96 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
be chosen in the same ratio as the tums ratio of the transformer. Usually the rated or 
nominal voltages of the respective sides are chosen. The process of referring quantities 
to one side of the transformer is then taken care of automatically by using Eqs. 2.48 
and 2.49 in finding and interpreting per-unit values. 
This can be seen with reference to the equivalent circuit of Fig. 2.10c. If the base 
voltages of the primary and secondary are chosen to be in the ratio of the turns of 
the ideal transformer, the per-unit ideal transformer will have a unity turns ratio and 
hence can be eliminated. 
If these rules are followed, the procedure for performing system analyses in 
per-unit can be summarized as follows: 
1. 
Select a VA base and a base voltage at some point in the system. 
2. 
Convert all quantities to per unit on the chosen VA base and with a voltage 
base that transforms as the turns ratio of any transformer which is encountered 
as one moves through the system. 
3. 
Perform a standard electrical analysis with all quantities in per unit. 
4. 
When the analysis is completed, all quantities can be converted back to real 
units (e.g., volts, amperes, watts, etc.) by multiplying their per-unit values by 
their corresponding base values. 
When only one electric device, such as a transformer, is involved, the device's own 
rating is generally used for the volt-ampere base. When expressed in per-unit form on 
their rating as a base, the characteristics of power and distribution transformers do not 
vary much over a wide range of ratings. For example, the exciting current is usually 
between 0.02 and 0.06 per unit, the equivalent resistance is usually between 0.005 and 
0.02 per unit (the smaller values applying to large transformers), and the equivalent 
reactance is usually between 0.015 and 0.10 per unit (the larger values applying to 
large high-voltage transformers). Similarly, the per-unit values of synchronous- and 
induction-machine parameters fall within a relatively narrow range. The reason for 
this is that the physics behind each type of device is the same and, in a crude sense, 
they can each be considered to be simply scaled versions of the same basic device. As 
a result, when normalized to their own rating, the effect of the scaling is eliminated 
and the result is a set of per-unit parameter values which is quite similar over the 
whole size range of that device. 
Often, manufacturers supply device parameters in per unit on the device base. 
When several devices are involved, however, an arbitrary choice of volt-ampere base 
must usually be made, and that value must then be used for the overall system. As 
a result, when performing a system analysis, it may be necessary to convert the sup- 
plied per-unit parameter values to per-unit values on the base chosen for the analysis. 
The following relations can be used to convert per-unit (pu) values from one base to 
another: 
I VAbase 11 
( e, Q, gA )pu on base 2 = ( e, Q, VA )pu on base 1 
VAbase 2 
( Vbase 1 ) 2 gAbase 2 
(R, X, Z)pu on base 2 = (R, X, Z)p u on base 1 
(gbase 2)2 gAbase 1 
(2.50) 
(2.51) 

2.9 The Per-Unit System 
97 
V base 1 
Vpu on base 2 ~" Vpu on base l L Vbase 2 
lpu on base 2 -" Ipu on base 1 
Vbase 2 VAbase 1 
Vbase 1 VAbase 2 
(2.52) 
(2.53) 
The equivalent circuit for a 100-MVA, 7.97-kV:79.7-kV transformer is shown in Fig. 2.22a. 
The equivalent-circuit parameters are: 
X L = 0.040 ~ 
XH = 3.75 ~ 
X m = 114 f2 
RL "-" 0.76 mE2 
RH = 0.085 
Note that the magnetizing inductance has been referred to the low-voltage side of the equivalent 
circuit. Convert the equivalent circuit parameters to per unit using the transformer rating as 
base. 
EXAMPLE 2.12 
o 
~ 
~ 
7.99 kV" 
kV ~ 
,]Vv x 
o 
RL 
XL 
XH 
RH 
(0.76 m~) (0.040 g2) 
X m 
(3.75 ~) 
(0.085 ~) 
(114 ~2) 
o 
o 
(a) 
o 
'V~ 
~ 
1.1 
~ 
,A~ 
o 
RL 
XL 
XH 
RH 
(0.0012 pu) (0.0630 pu) 
X m 
(0.0591 pu) (0.0013 pu) 
(180 pu) 
O 
O 
(b) 
RL 
XL 
XH 
RH 
(0.0012 pu) (0.0630 pu) 
(0.0591 pu) (0.0013 pu) 
Xm 
(180 pu) 
o 
o 
(c) 
Figure 2.22 Transformer equivalent circuits for Example 2.12. 
(a) Equivalent circuit in actual units. (b) Per-unit equivalent circuit with 
1:1 ideal transformer. (c) Per-unit equivalent circuit following elimination 
of the ideal transformer. 

98 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
m Solution 
The base quantities for the transformer are: 
Low-voltage side: 
VAbase = 100 MVA 
Vbase = 7.97 kV 
and from Eqs. 2.48 and 2.49 
vLo 
Rbase -- Xbase : 
---0.635 f2 
Vmbase 
High-voltage side: 
VAbase = 100 MVA 
Vbase = 79.7 kV 
and from Eqs. 2.48 and 2.49 
V~ase 
Rbase = Xbase = 
-- 63.5 g2 
Vmbase 
The per-unit values of the transformer parameters can now be calculated by division by 
their corresponding base quantities. 
0.040 
XL = 
-- 0.0630 per unit 
0.635 
3.75 
XH = 
= 0.0591 per unit 
63.5 
114 
Xm = 0.635 = 180 per unit 
7.6 x 10 -4 
RL = 
= 0.0012 per unit 
0.635 
0.085 
R. = 
= 0.0013 per unit 
63.5 
Finally, the voltages representing the turns ratio of the ideal transformer must each be di- 
vided by the base voltage on that side of the transformer. Thus the turns ratio of 7.97-kV:79.7-kV 
becomes in per unit 
(7.97 kV)(79.7 
kV) 
Per-unit turns ratio= 
7.97kV 
" 
79.7kV 
= 1" 1 
The resultant per-unit equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 2.22b. Because it has unity turns ratio, 
there is no need to keep the ideal transformer and hence this equivalent circuit can be reduced 
to the form of Fig. 2.22c. 
EXAMPLE 
2.13 
The exciting current measured on the low-voltage side of a 50-kVA, 2400:240-V transformer 
is 5.41 A. Its equivalent impedance referred to the high-voltage side is 1.42 + j 1.82 ~. Using 
the transformer rating as the base, express in per unit on the low- and high-voltage sides (a) the 
exciting current and (b) the equivalent impedance. 

2.9 The Per-Unit System 
99 
II Solution 
The base values of voltages and currents are 
Vb .... H = 2400 V 
Vb .... L = 240 V 
lb .... H = 20.8 A 
Ib .... L = 208 A 
where subscripts H and L indicate the high- and low-voltage sides, respectively. 
From Eq. 2.49 
2400 
240 
Zb .... H = 20.8 -- 115.2 f2 
Z b .... L = 208 -- 1.152 
f2 
a. From Eq. 2.47, the exciting current in per unit referred to the low-voltage side can be 
calculated as: 
5.41 
l~,e = 208 = 0.0260 per unit 
The exciting current referred to the high-voltage side is 0.541 A. Its per-unit value is 
0.541 
le,n = 
20.8 = 0.0260 per unit 
Note that, as expected, the per-unit values are the same referred to either side, 
corresponding to a unity turns ratio for the ideal transformer in the per-unit transformer. 
This is a direct consequence of the choice of base voltages in the ratio of the transformer 
turns ratio and the choice of a constant volt-ampere base. 
b. From Eq. 2.47 and the value for Zbase 
1.42 + j 1.82 
Zeq'H = 
115.2 
= 0.0123 + j0.0158 per unit 
The equivalent impedance referred to the low-voltage side is 0.0142 + j0.0182~2. Its 
per-unit value is 
Zeq, L 
0.142 + 0.0182 
1.152 
= 0.0123 + j0.0158 per unit 
The per-unit values referred to the high- and low-voltage sides are the same, the 
transformer turns ratio being accounted for in per unit by the base values. Note again that 
this is consistent with a unity turns ratio of the ideal transformer in the per-unit 
transformer equivalent circuit. 
~ractice Problem 2.1q 
A 15-kVA 120:460-V transformer has an equivalent series impedance of 0.018 + j0.042 per 
unit. Calculate the equivalent series impedance in ohms (a) referred to the low-voltage side 
and (b) referred to the high-voltage side. 
Solution 
Zeq,L ~-- 0.017 + j0.040 g2 and Zeq,n = 0.25 + j0.60 f2 
When they are applied to the analysis of three-phase systems, the base values for 
the per-unit system are chosen so that the relations for a balanced three-phase system 

100 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
hold between them: 
(Pbase, Qbase, VAbase)3-phase = 3 VAbase, per phase 
(2.54) 
In dealing with three-phase systems, VAbase ' 3-phase, the three-phase volt-ampere base, 
and Vbase ' 3-phase = Vbase, 1-1, the line-to-line voltage base are usually chosen first. The 
base values for the phase (line-to-neutral) voltage then follows as 
1 
Vbase, 1-n -- ~ 
Vbase, 1-1 
(2.55) 
Note that the base current for three-phase systems is equal to the phase current, 
which is the same as the base current for a single-phase (per-phase) analysis. Hence 
/base, 3-phase : /base, per phase = 
VAbase, 3-phase 
"V/3 Vbase, 3-phase 
(2.56) 
Finally, the three-phase base impedance is chosen to the be the single-phase base 
impedance. Thus 
Zbase, 3-phase ~--- Zbase, per phase 
Vbase, l-n 
/base, per phase 
Vbase, 3-phase 
'W/-31base, 3-phase 
( Vbase, 3-phase) 2 
VA base, 3-phase 
(2.57) 
The equations for conversion from base to base, Eqs. 2.50 through 2.53, apply 
equally to three-phase base conversion. Note that the factors of ~ 
and 3 relating 
A to Y quantities of volts, amperes, and ohms in a balanced three-phase system are 
automatically taken care of in per unit by the base values. Three-phase problems can 
thus be solved in per unit as if they were single-phase problems and the details of 
transformer (Y vs A on the primary and secondary of the transformer) and impedance 
(Y vs A) connections disappear, except in translating volt, ampere, and ohm values 
into and out of the per-unit system. 
EXAMPLE 
2.14 
Rework Example 2.9 in per unit, specifically calculating the short-circuit phase currents which 
will flow in the feeder and at the 240-V terminals of the receiving-end transformer bank. 
Perform the calculations in per unit on the three-phase, 150-kVA, rated-voltage base of the 
receiving-end transformer. 
II Solution 
We start by converting all the impedances to per unit. The impedance of the 500-kVA, 
24 kV:2400 V sending end transformer is 0.17 + j0.92 f2/phase as referred to the 2400-V 

2.9 
The Per-Unit System 
101 
side. From Eq. 2.57, the base impedance corresponding to a 2400-V, 150-kVA base is 
24002 
Zbase "- 
"- 3 8.4 f2 
150 × 103 
From Example 2.9, the total series impedance is equal to Zto t -- 0.64 + j2.33 Q/phase and 
thus in per unit it is equal to 
Ztot --- 
0.64 + j2.33 
38.4 
= 0.0167 + j0.0607 per unit 
which is of magnitude 
[Ztotl = 0.0629 per unit 
The voltage applied to the high-voltage side of the sending-end transformer is Vs = 
24.0 kV = 1.0 per unit on a rated-voltage base and hence the short-circuit current will equal 
Vs 
1.0 
lsc = 
= 
= 15.9 per unit 
[Ztot[ 
0.0629 
To calculate the phase currents in amperes, it is simply necessary to multiply the per- 
unit short-circuit current by the appropriate base current. Thus, at the 2400-V feeder the base 
current is 
150 x 103 
-- 
= 36.1A 
Ib .... 2400-v -- V~ 2400 
and hence the feeder current will be 
/feeder = 15.9 x 36.1 = 574 A 
The base current at the 240-V secondary of the receiving-end transformers is 
150 × 103 
- 
= 361A 
Ib .... 240-V -- 
~ 
240 
and hence the short-circuit current is 
I240-V ..... dary = 15.9 X 361 = 5.74 kA 
As expected, these values are equivalent within numerical accuracy to those calculated in 
Example 2.9. 
)ractice Problem 2.1' 
Calculate the magnitude of the short-circuit current in the feeder of Example 2.9 if the 2400- 
V feeder is replaced by a feeder with an impedance of 0.07 + j0.68 g2/phase. Perform this 
calculation on the 500-kVA, rated-voltage base of the sending-end transformer and express 
your solution both in per unit and in amperes per phase. 
Solution 
Short-circuit current = 5.20 per unit -- 636 A 

102 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
EXAMPLE 
2.15 
A three-phase load is supplied from a 2.4-kV:460-V, 250-kVA transformer whose equivalent 
series impedance is 0.026 + j0.12 per unit on its own base. The load voltage is observed to 
be 438-V line-line, and it is drawing 95 kW at unity power factor. Calculate the voltage at the 
high-voltage side of the transformer. Perform the calculations on a 460-V, 100-kVA base. 
II Solution 
The 460-V side base impedance for the transformer is 
4602 
m 
Zb .... transformer- 250 X 103 = 0.846 f2 
while that based upon a 100-kVA base is 
4602 
Zb .... 100-kVA = 
= 2.12 f2 
100 X 103 
Thus, from Eq. 2.51 the per-unit transformer impedance on a 100-kVA base is 
0.864 "~ 
Ztr..sformer = (0.026 + jO.12) \ 2.12 J = 0.0106 + j.0489 per unit 
The per unit load voltage is 
438 
~oad = 
= 0.952/0 ° per unit 
460 
where the load voltage has been chosen as the reference for phase-angle calculations. 
The per-unit load power is 
95 
eload -" 
= 0.95 per unit 
100 
and hence the per-unit load current, which is in phase with the load voltage because the load is 
operating at unity power factor, is 
iloa d = 
Pload = 
0.95 = 0.998/0 ° per unit 
Vload 
0.952 
Thus we can now calculate the high-side voltage of the transformer 
I~)'H = 
Vload + iloadZt .... former 
= 0.952 + 0.998(0.0106 + j0.0489) 
= 0.963 + j0.0488 = 0.964 L29.0 ° per unit 
Thus the high-side voltage is equal to 0.964 x 2400 V = 2313 V (line-line). 

2.10 Summary 
103 
)ractice Problem 2.1: 
Repeat Example 2.15 if the 250-kV three-phase transformer is replaced by a 150-kV transformer 
also rated at 2.4-kV:460-V and whose equivalent series impedance is 0.038 + j0.135 per unit 
on its own base. Perform the calculations on a 460-V, 100-kVA base. 
Solution 
High-side voltage = 0.982 per unit = 2357 V (line-line) 
2.10 
SUMMARY 
Although not an electromechanical device, the transformer is a common and indis- 
pensable component of ac systems where it is used to transform voltages, currents, 
and impedances to appropriate levels for optimal use. For the purposes of our study of 
electromechanical systems, transformers serve as valuable examples of the analysis 
techniques which must be employed. They offer us opportunities to investigate the 
properties of magnetic circuits, including the concepts of mmf, magnetizing current, 
and magnetizing, mutual, and leakage fluxes and their associated inductances. 
In both transformers and rotating machines, a magnetic field is created by the 
combined action of the currents in the windings. In an iron-core transformer, most 
of this flux is confined to the core and links all the windings. This resultant mutual 
flux induces voltages in the windings proportional to their number of turns and is 
responsible for the voltage-changing property of a transformer. In rotating machines, 
the situation is similar, although there is an air gap which separates the rotating and 
stationary components of the machine. Directly analogous to the manner in which 
transformer core flux links the various windings on a transformer core, the mutual flux 
in rotating machines crosses the air gap, linking the windings on the rotor and stator. 
As in a transformer, the mutual flux induces voltages in these windings proportional 
to the number of turns and the time rate of change of the flux. 
A significant difference between transformers and rotating machines is that in ro- 
tating machines there is relative motion between the windings on the rotor and stator. 
This relative motion produces an additional component of the time rate of change of the 
various winding flux linkages. As will be discussed in Chapter 3, the resultant voltage 
component, known as the speed voltage, is characteristic of the process of electrome- 
chanical energy conversion. In a static transformer, however, the time variation of flux 
linkages is caused simply by the time variation of winding currents; no mechanical 
motion is involved, and no electromechanical energy conversion takes place. 
The resultant core flux in a transformer induces a counter emf in the primary 
which, together with the primary resistance and leakage-reactance voltage drops, 
must balance the applied voltage. Since the resistance and leakage-reactance voltage 
drops usually are small, the counter emf must approximately equal the applied voltage 
and the core flux must adjust itself accordingly. Exactly similar phenomena must take 
place in the armature windings of an ac motor; the resultant air-gap flux wave must 
adjust itself to generate a counter emf approximately equal to the applied voltage. 

104 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
In both transformers and rotating machines, the net mmf of all the currents must 
accordingly adjust itself to create the resultant flux required by this voltage balance. 
In any ac electromagnetic device in which the resistance and leakage-reactance voltage 
drops are small, the resultant flux is very nearly determined by the applied voltage 
and frequency, and the currents must adjust themselves accordingly to produce the 
mmf required to create this flux. 
In a transformer, the secondary current is determined by the voltage induced in the 
secondary, the secondary leakage impedance, and the electric load. In an induction 
motor, the secondary (rotor) current is determined by the voltage induced in the 
secondary, the secondary leakage impedance, and the mechanical load on its shaft. 
Essentially the same phenomena take place in the primary winding of the transformer 
and in the armature (stator) windings of induction and synchronous motors. In all 
three, the primary, or armature, current must adjust itself so that the combined mmf 
of all currents creates the flux required by the applied voltage. 
In addition to the useful mutual fluxes, in both transformers and rotating ma- 
chines there are leakage fluxes which link individual windings without linking oth- 
ers. Although the detailed picture of the leakage fluxes in rotating machines is more 
complicated than that in transformers, their effects are essentially the same. In both, 
the leakage fluxes induce voltages in ac windings which are accounted for as leakage- 
reactance voltage drops. In both, the reluctances of the leakage-flux paths are domi- 
nanted by that of a path through air, and hence the leakage fluxes are nearly linearly 
proportional to the currents producing them. The leakage reactances therefore are 
often assumed to be constant, independent of the degree of saturation of the main 
magnetic circuit. 
Further examples of the basic similarities between transformers and rotating 
machines can be cited. Except for friction and windage, the losses in transformers 
and rotating machines are essentially the same. Tests for determining the losses and 
equivalent circuit parameters are similar: an open-circuit, or no-load, test gives in- 
formation regarding the excitation requirements and core losses (along with friction 
and windage losses in rotating machines), while a short-circuit test together with dc 
resistance measurements gives information regarding leakage reactances and wind- 
ing resistances. Modeling of the effects of magnetic saturation is another example: 
In both transformers and ac rotating machines, the leakage reactances are usually as- 
sumed to be unaffected by saturation, and the saturation of the main magnetic circuit 
is assumed to be determined by the resultant mutual or air-gap flux. 
2.11 
PROBLEMS 
2.1 A transformer is made up of a 1200-turn primary coil and an open-circuited 
75-turn secondary coil wound around a closed core of cross-sectional area 
42 cm 2. The core material can be considered to saturate when the rms applied 
flux density reaches 1.45 T. What maximum 60-Hz rms primary voltage is 
possible without reaching this saturation level? What is the corresponding 
secondary voltage? How are these values modified if the applied frequency is 
lowered to 50 Hz? 

2.11 
Problems 
105 
2.2 A magnetic circuit with a cross-sectional area of 15 cm 2 is to be operated at 
60 Hz from a 120-V rms supply. Calculate the number of turns required to 
achieve a peak magnetic flux density of 1.8 T in the core. 
2.3 A transformer is to be used to transform the impedance of a 8-fl resistor to an 
impedance of 75 ft. Calculate the required turns ratio, assuming the 
transformer to be ideal. 
2.4 A 100-fl resistor is connected to the secondary of an idea transformer with a 
turns ratio of 1:4 (primary to secondary). A 10-V rms, 1-kHz voltage source is 
connected to the primary. Calculate the primary current and the voltage across 
the 100-f2 resistor. 
2.5 A source which can be represented by a voltage source of 8 V rms in series 
with an internal resistance of 2 kfl is connected to a 50-f2 load resistance 
through an ideal transformer. Calculate the value of turns ratio for which 
maximum power is supplied to the load and the corresponding load power? 
Using MATLAB, plot the the power in milliwatts supplied to the load as a 
function of the transformer ratio, covering ratios from 1.0 to 10.0. 
2.6 Repeat Problem 2.5 with the source resistance replaced by a 2-kf2 reactance. 
2.7 A single-phase 60-Hz transformer has a nameplate voltage rating of 
7.97 kV:266 V, which is based on its winding turns ratio. The manufacturer 
calculates that the primary (7.97-kV) leakage inductance is 165 mH and the 
primary magnetizing inductance is 135 H. For an applied primary voltage of 
7970 V at 60 Hz, calculate the resultant open-circuit secondary voltage. 
2.8 The manufacturer calculates that the transformer of Problem 2.7 has a 
secondary leakage inductance of 0.225 mH. 
a. Calculate the magnetizing inductance as referred to the secondary side. 
b. A voltage of 266 V, 60 Hz is applied to the secondary. Calculate (i) the 
resultant open-circuit primary voltage and (ii) the secondary current 
which would result if the primary were short-circuited. 
2.9 A 120-V:2400-V, 60-Hz, 50-kVA transformer has a magnetizing reactance 
(as measured from the 120-V terminals) of 34.6 ft. The 120-V winding has a 
leakage reactance of 27.4 mr2 and the 2400-V winding has a leakage 
reactance of 11.2 ft. 
a. With the secondary open-circuited and 120 V applied to the primary 
(120-V) winding, calculate the primary current and the secondary voltage. 
b. With the secondary short-circuited, calculate the primary voltage which 
will result in rated current in the primary winding. Calculate the 
corresponding current in the secondary winding. 
2.10 A 460-V:2400-V transformer has a series leakage reactance of 37.2 f2 as 
referred to the high-voltage side. A load connected to the low-voltage side is 
observed to be absorbing 25 kW, unity power factor, and the voltage is 
measured to be 450 V. Calculate the corresponding voltage and power factor 
as measured at the high-voltage terminals. 

106 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
2.11 The resistances and leakage reactances of a 30-kVA, 60-Hz, 2400-V:240-V 
distribution transformer are 
R1 = 0.68 f2 
R2 = 0.0068 f2 
Xll = 7.8 f2 
X12 = 0.0780 
where subscript 1 denotes the 2400-V winding and subscript 2 denotes the 
240-V winding. Each quantity is referred to its own side of the transformer. 
a. 
Draw the equivalent circuit referred to (i) the high- and (ii) the 
low-voltage sides. Label the impedances numerically. 
b. 
Consider the transformer to deliver its rated kVA to a load on the 
low-voltage side with 230 V across the load. (i) Find the high-side 
terminal voltage for a load power factor of 0.85 power factor lagging. 
(ii) Find the high-side terminal voltage for a load power factor of 0.85 
power factor leading. 
c. 
Consider a rated-kVA load connected at the low-voltage terminals 
operating at 240V. Use MATLAB to plot the high-side terminal voltage as 
a function of the power-factor angle as the load power factor varies from 
0.6 leading through unity power factor to 0.6 pf lagging. 
2.12 Repeat Problem 2.11 for a 75-kVA, 60-Hz, 4600-V:240-V distribution 
transformer whose resistances and leakage reactances are 
R1 = 0.846 f2 
R2 = 0.00261 
X~ = 26.8 f2 
X12 = 0.0745 f2 
where subscript 1 denotes the 4600-V winding and subscript 2 denotes the 
240-V winding. Each quantity is referred to its own side of the transformer. 
2.13 A single-phase load is supplied through a 35-kV feeder whose impedance is 
95 + j360 f2 and a 35-kV:2400-V transformer whose equivalent impedance is 
0.23 + j 1.27 f2 referred to its low-voltage side. The load is 160 kW at 0.89 
leading power factor and 2340 V. 
a. 
Compute the voltage at the high-voltage terminals of the transformer. 
b. 
Compute the voltage at the sending end of the feeder. 
c. 
Compute the power and reactive power input at the sending end of the 
feeder. 
2.14 Repeat Example 2.6 with the transformer operating at full load and unity 
power factor. 
2.15 The nameplate on a 50-MVA, 60-Hz single-phase transformer indicates that it 
has a voltage rating of 8.0-kV:78-kV. An open-circuit test is conducted from 
the low-voltage side, and the corresponding instrument readings are 8.0 kV, 
62.1 A, and 206 kW. Similarly, a short-circuit test from the low-voltage side 
gives readings of 674 V, 6.25 kA, and 187 kW. 
a. 
Calculate the equivalent series impedance, resistance, and reactance of the 
transformer as referred to the low-voltage terminals. 

2.11 
Problems 
107 
b. 
Calculate the equivalent series impedance of the transformer as referred to 
the high-voltage terminals. 
c. 
Making appropriate approximations, draw a T equivalent circuit for the 
transformer. 
d. 
Determine the efficiency and voltage regulation if the transformer is 
operating at the rated voltage and load (unity power factor). 
e. 
Repeat part (d), assuming the load to be at 0.9 power factor leading. 
2.16 A 550-kVA, 60-Hz transformer with a 13.8-kV primary winding draws 4.93 A 
and 3420 W at no load, rated voltage and frequency. Another transformer has 
a core with all its linear dimensions ~ 
times as large as the corresponding 
dimensions of the first transformer. The core material and lamination 
thickness are the same in both transformers. If the primary windings of both 
transformers have the same number of turns, what no-load current and power 
will the second transformer draw with 27.6 kV at 60 Hz impressed on its 
primary? 
2.17 The following data were obtained for a 20-kVA, 60-Hz, 2400:240-V 
distribution transformer tested at 60 Hz: 
t 
i 
,i 
Voltage, 
Current, Power, 
V 
A 
W 
With high-voltage winding open-circuited 
240 
With low-voltage terminals short-circuited 
61.3 
1.038 
122 
8.33 
257 
a. 
Compute the efficiency at full-load current and the rated terminal voltage 
at 0.8 power factor. 
b. Assume that the load power factor is varied while the load current and 
secondary terminal voltage are held constant. Use a phasor diagram to 
determine the load power factor for which the regulation is greatest. What 
is this regulation? 
2.18 A 75-kVa, 240-V:7970-V, 60-Hz single-phase distribution transformer has the 
following parameters referred to the high-voltage side: 
R1 = 5.93 f2 
X1 = 43.2 
R2 = 3.39 f2 
X2 
= 40.6 f2 
Rc = 244 kf2 
X m = 114 k~ 
Assume that the transformer is supplying its rated kVA at its low-voltage 
terminals. Write a MATLAB script to determine the efficiency and regulation 
of the transformer for any specified load power factor (leading or lagging). 
You may use reasonable engineering approximations to simplify your 
analysis. Use your MATLAB script to determine the efficiency and regulation 
for a load power factor of 0.87 leading. 
2.19 The transformer of Problem 2.11 is to be connected as an autotransformer. 
Determine (a) the voltage ratings of the high- and low-voltage windings for 
this connection and (b) the kVA rating of the autotransformer connection. 

108 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
2.20 A 120:480-V, 10-kVA transformer is to be used as an autotransformer to 
supply a 480-V circuit from a 600-V source. When it is tested as a 
two-winding transformer at rated load, unity power factor, its efficiency 
is 0.979. 
a. 
Make a diagram of connections as an autotransformer. 
b. 
Determine its kVA rating as an autotransformer. 
c. 
Find its efficiency as an autotransformer at full load, with 0.85 power 
factor lagging. 
2.21 Consider the 8-kV:78-kV, 50-MVA transformer of Problem 2.15 connected as 
an autotransformer. 
a. 
Determine the voltage ratings of the high- and low-voltage windings for 
this connection and the kVA rating of the autotransformer connection. 
b. 
Calculate the efficiency of the transformer in this connection when it is 
supplying its rated load at unity power factor. 
2.22 Write a MATLAB script whose inputs are the rating (voltage and kVA) and 
rated-load, unity-power-factor efficiency of a single-transformer and whose 
output is the transformer rating and rated-load, unity-power-factor efficiency 
when connected as an autotransformer. 
2.23 The high-voltage terminals of a three-phase bank of three single-phase 
transformers are supplied from a three-wire, three-phase 13.8-kV (line-to-line) 
system. The low-voltage terminals are to be connected to a three-wire, 
three-phase substation load drawing up to 4500 kVA at 2300 V line-to-line. 
Specify the required voltage, current, and kVA ratings of each transformer 
(both high- and low-voltage windings) for the following connections: 
High-voltage 
Low-voltage 
Windings 
Windings 
a. 
Y 
A 
b. 
A 
Y 
c. 
Y 
Y 
d. 
A 
A 
2.24 Three 100-MVA single-phase transformers, rated at 13.8 kV:66.4 kV, are to be 
connected in a three-phase bank. Each transformer has a series impedance of 
0.0045 + j0.19 f2 referred to its 13.8-kV winding. 
a. 
If the transformers are connected Y-Y, calculate (i) the voltage and power 
rating of the three-phase connection, (ii) the equivalent impedance as 
referred to its low-voltage terminals, and (iii) the equivalent impedance as 
referred to its high-voltage terminals. 
b. 
Repeat part (a) if the transformer is connected Y on its low-voltage side 
and A on its high-voltage side. 
2.25 Repeat Example 2.8 for a load drawing rated current from the transformers at 
unity power factor. 

2.11 
Problems 
109 
2.26 A three-phase Y-A transformer is rated 225-kV:24-kV, 400 MVA and has a 
series reactance of 11.7 f2 as referred to its high-voltage terminals. The 
transformer is supplying a load of 325 MVA, with 0.93 power factor lagging 
at a voltage of 24 kV (line-to-line) on its low-voltage side. It is supplied from 
a feeder whose impedance is 0.11 + j 2.2 f2 connected to its high-voltage 
terminals. For these conditions, calculate (a) the line-to-line voltage at the 
high-voltage terminals of the transformer and (b) the line-to-line voltage at the 
sending end of the feeder. 
2.27 Assume the total load in the system of Problem 2.26 to remain constant at 
325 MVA. Write a MATLAB script to plot the line-to-line voltage which must 
be applied to the sending end of the feeder to maintain the load voltage at 
24 kV line-to-line for load power factors in range from 0.75 lagging to unity 
to 0.75 leading. Plot the sending-end voltage as a function of power factor 
angle. 
2.28 A A-Y-connected bank of three identical 100-kVA, 2400-V: 120-V, 60-Hz 
transformers is supplied with power through a feeder whose impedance is 
0.065 + j0.87 f2 per phase. The voltage at the sending end of the feeder is held 
constant at 2400 V line-to-line. The results of a single-phase short-circuit test 
on one of the transformers with its low-voltage terminals short-circuited are 
VII=53.4V 
f=60Hz 
III=41.7A 
P=832W 
a. Determine the line-to-line voltage on the low-voltage side of the 
transformer when the bank delivers rated current to a balanced 
three-phase unity power factor load. 
b. Compute the currents in the transformer's high- and low-voltage windings 
and in the feeder wires if a solid three-phase short circuit occurs at the 
secondary line terminals. 
2.29 A 7970-V: 120-V, 60-Hz potential transformer has the following parameters as 
seen from the high-voltage (primary) winding: 
X1 = 1721 ~2 
X~ = 1897 ~ 
Xm = 782 kf2 
R1 -- 1378 f2 
R~ = 1602 S2 
a. Assuming that the secondary is open-circuited and that the primary is 
connected to a 7.97-kV source, calculate the magnitude and phase angle 
(with respect to the high-voltage source) of the voltage at the secondary 
terminals. 
b. Calculate the magnitude and phase angle of the secondary voltage if a 
1-kfl resistive load is connected to the secondary terminals. 
c. Repeat part (b) if the burden is changed to a 1-kf2 reactance. 
2.30 For the potential transformer of Problem 2.29, find the maximum reactive 
burden (mimimum reactance) which can be applied at the secondary terminals 
such that the voltage magnitude error does not exceed 0.5 percent. 

110 
CHAPTER 2 
Transformers 
2.31 Consider the potential transformer of Problem 2.29. 
a. 
Use MATLAB to plot the percentage error in voltage magnitude as a 
function of the magnitude of the burden impedance (i) for a resistive 
burden of 100 ~2 < Rb < 3000 ~ and (ii) for a reactive burden of 
100 g2 < Xb < 3000 f2. Plot these curves on the same axis. 
b. 
Next plot the phase error in degrees as a function of the magnitude of the 
burden impedance (i) for a resistive burden of 100 f2 < Rb < 3000 f2 
and (ii) for a reactive burden of 100 f2 < Xb < 3000 f2. Again, plot these 
curves on the same axis. 
2.32 A 200-A:5-A, 60-Hz current transformer has the following parameters as seen 
from the 200-A (primary) winding: 
X1 = 745/zg2 
X~ = 813/xg2 
Xm = 307 mr2 
R1 = 136/zf2 
R(~ = 128/zf2 
a. 
Assuming a current of 200 A in the primary and that the secondary is 
short-circuited, find the magnitude and phase angle of the secondary 
current. 
b. 
Repeat the calculation of part (a) if the CT is shorted through a 250 #~ 
burden. 
2.33 Consider the current transformer of Problem 2.32. 
a. 
Use MATLAB to plot the percentage error in current magnitude as a 
function of the magnitude of the burden impedance (i) for a resistive 
burden of 100 f2 < Rb < 1000 f2 and (ii) for a reactive burden of 
100 ~ < Xb < 1000 f2. Plot these curves on the same axis. 
b. 
Next plot the phase error in degrees as a function of the magnitude of the 
burden impedance (i) for a resistive burden of 100 f2 < Rb < 1000 f2 
and (ii) for a reactive burden of 100 f2 < Xb < 1000 f2. Again, plot these 
curves on the same axis. 
2.34 A 15-kV: 175-kV, 125-MVA, 60-Hz single-phase transformer has primary and 
secondary impedances of 0.0095 + j0.063 per unit each. The magnetizing 
impedance is j 148 per unit. All quantities are in per unit on the transformer 
base. Calculate the primary and secondary resistances and reactances and the 
magnetizing inductance (referred to the low-voltage side) in ohms and 
henrys. 
2.35 The nameplate on a 7.97-kV:460-V, 75-kVA, single-phase transformer 
indicates that it has a series reactance of 12 percent (0.12 per unit). 
a. 
Calculate the series reactance in ohms as referred to (i) the low-voltage 
terminal and (ii) the high-voltage terminal. 
b. 
If three of these transformers are connected in a three-phase Y-Y 
connection, calculate (i) the three-phase voltage and power rating, (ii) the 
per unit impedance of the transformer bank, (iii) the series reactance in 

2.11 
Problems 
111 
ohms as referred to the high-voltage terminal, and (iv) the series reactance 
in ohms as referred to the low-voltage terminal. 
c. 
Repeat part (b) if the three transformers are connected in Y on their HV 
side and A on their low-voltage side. 
2.36 a. 
Consider the Y-Y transformer connection of Problem 2.35, part (b). If the 
rated voltage is applied to the high-voltage terminals and the three 
low-voltage terminals are short-circuited, calculate the magnitude of the 
phase current in per unit and in amperes on (i) the high-voltage side and 
(ii) the low-voltage side. 
b. 
Repeat this calculation for the Y-A connection of Problem 2.35, part (c). 
2.37 A three-phase generator step-up transformer is rated 26-kV:345-kV, 850 MVA 
and has a series impedance of 0.0035 + j0.087 per unit on this base. It is 
connected to a 26-kV, 800-MVA generator, which can be represented as a 
voltage source in series with a reactance of j 1.57 per unit on the generator 
base. 
a. 
Convert the per unit generator reactance to the step-up transformer base. 
b. 
The unit is supplying 700 MW at 345 kV and 0.95 power factor lagging to 
the system at the transformer high-voltage terminals. (i) Calculate the 
transformer low-side voltage and the generator internal voltage behind its 
reactance in kV. (ii) Find the generator output power in MW and the 
power factor. 

Electromechanical. 
Energy-Conversi on 
Principles 
W 
e are concerned here with the electromechanical-energy-conversion pro- 
cess, which takes place through the medium of the electric or magnetic 
field of the conversion device. Although the various conversion devices 
operate on similar principles, their structures depend on their function. Devices for 
measurement and control are frequently referred to as transducers; they generally 
operate under linear input-output conditions and with relatively small signals. The 
many examples include microphones, pickups, sensors, and loudspeakers. A second 
category of devices encompasses force-producing devices and includes solenoids, 
relays, and electromagnets. A third category includes continuous energy-conversion 
equipment such as motors and generators. 
This chapter is devoted to the principles of electromechanical energy conversion 
and the analysis of the devices which accomplish this function. Emphasis is placed 
on the analysis of systems which use magnetic fields as the conversion medium since 
the remaining chapters of the book deal with such devices. However, the analytical 
techniques for electric field systems are quite similar. 
The purpose of such analysis is threefold: (1) to aid in understanding how energy 
conversion takes place, (2) to provide techniques for designing and optimizing the 
devices for specific requirements, and (3) to develop models of electromechanical- 
energy-conversion devices that can be used in analyzing their performance as compo- 
nents in engineering systems. Transducers and force-producing devices are treated in 
this chapter; continuous energy-conversion devices are treated in the rest of the book. 
The concepts and techniques presented in this chapter are quite powerful and 
can be applied to a wide range of engineering situations involving electromechanical 
energy conversion. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 present a quantitative discussion of the forces 
in electromechanical systems and an overview of the energy method which forms the 
basis for the derivations presented here. Based upon the energy method, the remainder 
112 

3.1 
Forces and Torques in Magnetic Field Systems 
113 
of the chapter develops expressions for forces and torques in magnetic-field-based 
electromechanical systems. 
3.1 
FORCES AND TORQUES IN MAGNETIC 
FIELD SYSTEMS 
The Lorentz Force Law 
F = q(E + v × B) 
(3.1) 
gives the force F on a particle of charge q in the presence of electric and magnetic 
fields. In SI units, F is in newtons, q in coulombs, E in volts per meter, B in teslas, 
and v, which is the velocity of the particle relative to the magnetic field, in meters per 
second. 
Thus, in a pure electric-field system, the force is determined simply by the charge 
on the particle and the electric field 
F = qE 
(3.2) 
The force acts in the direction of the electric field and is independent of any particle 
motion. 
In pure magnetic-field systems, the situation is somewhat more complex. Here 
the force 
F = q(v × B) 
(3.3) 
is determined by the magnitude of the charge on the particle and the magnitude of 
the B field as well as the velocity of the particle. In fact, the direction of the force 
is always perpendicular to the direction of both the particle motion and that of the 
magnetic field. Mathematically, this is indicated by the vector cross product v × B in 
Eq. 3.3. The magnitude of this cross product is equal to the product of the magnitudes 
of v and B and the sine of the angle between them; its direction can be found from 
the fight-hand rule, which states that when the thumb of the fight hand points in the 
direction of v and the index finger points in the direction of B, the force, which is 
perpendicular to the directions of both B and v, points in the direction normal to the 
palm of the hand, as shown in Fig. 3.1. 
For situations where large numbers of charged particles are in motion, it is con- 
venient to rewrite Eq. 3.1 in terms of the charge density p (measured in units of 
coulombs per cubic meter) as 
Fv = p(E + v × B) 
(3.4) 
where the subscript v indicates that Fv is a force density (force per unit volume) which 
in SI units is measured in newtons per cubic meter. 
The product p v is known as the current density 
J = pv 
(3.5) 
which has the units of amperes per square meter. The magnetic-system force density 

114 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
B < 
F 
¥ BJ 
Figure 3.1 
Right-hand rule for determining the 
direction magnetic-field component of the Lorentz 
force F = q(v x B). 
corresponding to Eq. 3.3 can then be written as 
Fv = J x B 
(3.6) 
For currents flowing in conducting media, Eq. 3.6 can be used to find the force 
density acting on the material itself. Note that a considerable amount of physics is 
hidden in this seemingly simple statement, since the mechanism by which the force 
is transferred from the moving charges to the conducting medium is a complex one. 
"XAMPLE 3. 
A nonmagnetic rotor containing a single-turn coil is placed in a uniform magnetic field of 
magnitude B0, as shown in Fig. 3.2. The coil sides are at radius R and the wire carries current I 
Uniform magnetic field, B0~ 
Wire 2, current I 
out of paper 
( 
R, 
/ 
J 
,t 
J 
,t 
J 
\ 
/ 
/ 
Figure 3.2 Single-coil rotor for Example 3.1. 
J 
Wire 1, current I 
into paper 

3.1 
Forces and Torques in Magnetic Field Systems 
115 
as indicated. Find the 0-directed torque as a function of rotor position ot when I - 10 A, 
B0 = 0.02 T and R = 0.05 m. Assume that the rotor is of length l = 0.3 m. 
II Solution 
The force per unit length on a wire carrying current I can be found by multiplying Eq. 3.6 by 
the cross-sectional area of the wire. When we recognize that the product of the cross-sectional 
area and the current density is simply the current I, the force per unit length acting on the wire 
is given by 
F=I×B 
Thus, for wire 1 carrying current I into the paper, the 0-directed force is given by 
Flo = - I Bol sin ct 
and for wire 2 (which carries current in the opposite direction and is located 180 ° away from 
wire 1) 
F2o = - I Bol sin ct 
where I is the length of the rotor. The torque T acting on the rotor is given by the sum of the 
force-moment-arm products for each wire 
T = -2IBoRI 
sin(~ = -2(10)(0.02)(0.05)(0.3) sinot = -0.006sinot 
N. m 
Repeat Example 3.1 for the situation in which the uniform magnetic field points to the right 
instead of vertically upward as in Fig. 3.2. 
Solution 
T = -0.006 cos ot N- m 
For situations in which the forces act only on current-carrying elements and 
which are of simple geometry (such as that of Example 3.1), Eq. 3.6 is generally the 
simplest and easiest way to calculate the forces acting on the system. Unfortunately, 
very few practical situations fall into this class. In fact, as discussed in Chapter 1, most 
electromechanical-energy-conversion devices contain magnetic material; in these sys- 
tems, forces act directly on the magnetic material and clearly cannot be calculated 
from Eq. 3.6. 
Techniques for calculating the detailed, localized forces acting on magnetic ma- 
terials are extremely complex and require detailed knowledge of the field distribution 
throughout the structure. Fortunately, most electromechanical-energy-conversion de- 
vices are constructed of rigid, nondeforming structures. The performance of these 
devices is typically determined by the net force, or torque, acting on the moving 
component, and it is rarely necessary to calculate the details of the internal force 
distribution. For example, in a properly designed motor, the motor characteristics are 
determined by the net accelerating torque acting on the rotor; accompanying forces, 

116 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
which act to squash or deform the rotor, play no significant role in the performance 
of the motor and generally are not calculated. 
To understand the behavior of rotating machinery, a simple physical picture is 
quite useful. Associated with the rotor structure is a magnetic field (produced in 
many machines by currents in windings on the rotor), and similarly with the stator; 
one can picture them as a set of north and south magnetic poles associated with each 
structure. Just as a compass needle tries to align with the earth's magnetic field, these 
two sets of fields attempt to align, and torque is associated with their displacement 
from alignment. Thus, in a motor, the stator magnetic field rotates ahead of that of 
the rotor, pulling on it and performing work. The opposite is true for a generator, in 
which the rotor does the work on the stator. 
Various techniques have evolved to calculate the net forces of concern in the 
electromechanical-energy-conversion process. The technique developed in this chap- 
ter and used throughout the book is known as the energy method and is based on 
the principle of conservation of energy. The basis for this method can be understood 
with reference to Fig. 3.3a, where a magnetic-field-based electromechanical-energy- 
conversion device is indicated schematically as a lossless magnetic-energy-storage 
system with two terminals. The electric terminal has two terminal variables, a volt- 
age e and a current i, and the mechanical terminal also has two terminal variables, a 
force ffld and a position x. 
This sort of representation is valid in situations where the loss mechanism can be 
separated (at least conceptually) from the energy-storage mechanism. In these cases 
the electrical losses, such as ohmic losses in windings, can be represented as external 
elements (i.e., resistors) connected to the electric terminals, and the mechanical losses, 
such as friction and windage, can be included external to the mechanical terminals. 
Figure 3.3b shows an example of such a system; a simple force-producing device 
with a single coil forming the electric terminal, and a movable plunger serving as the 
mechanical terminal. 
The interaction between the electric and mechanical terminals, i.e., the elec- 
tromechanical energy conversion, occurs through the medium of the magnetic stored 
i 
ffld 
-Jr- 0 
/ W ~  
, 
Ol- 
+ 
+ 
Winding 
-1-( 
v 
resistance 
e ¢ 
m 
m 
m 
C 
Electrlca~ 
~vtecnanical 
-- o 
o---- 
terminal 
terminal 
Lossless 1 
winding 
(a) 
Magnetic cot 
....... 
......... 
I 
\] Movable 
..... ] magnetic plunger 
(b) 
Figure 3.3 (a) Schematic magnetic-field electromechanical-energy-conversion device; (b) simple 
force-producing device. 

3.2 Energy Balance 
117 
energy. Since the energy-storage system is lossless, it is a simple matter to write that 
the time rate of change of Wild, the stored energy in the magnetic field, is equal to the 
electric power input (given by the product of the terminal voltage and current) less 
the mechanical power output of the energy storage system (given by the product of 
the mechanical force and the mechanical velocity)" 
dWfld 
dx 
= ei 
- 
ffld~ 
(3.7) 
dt 
dt 
Recognizing that, from Eq. 1.27, the voltage at the terminals of our lossless 
winding is given by the time-derivative of the winding flux linkages 
d~, 
e = 
(3.8) 
dt 
and multiplying Eq. 3.7 by dt, we get 
dWnd = i d)~ - fnd dx 
(3.9) 
As shown in Section 3.4, Eq. 3.9 permits us to solve for the force simply as a 
function of the flux ~. and the mechanical terminal position x. Note that this result 
comes about as a consequence of our assumption that it is possible to separate the 
losses out of the physical problem, resulting in a lossless energy-storage system, as 
in Fig. 3.3a. 
Equations 3.7 and 3.9 form the basis for the energy method. This technique is quite 
powerful in its ability to calculate forces and torques in complex electromechanical- 
energy-conversion systems. The reader should recognize that this power comes at the 
expense of a detailed picture of the force-producing mechanism. The forces them- 
selves are produced by such well-known physical phenomena as the Lorentz force on 
current carrying elements, described by Eq. 3.6, and the interaction of the magnetic 
fields with the dipoles in the magnetic material. 
3.2 
ENERGY BALANCE 
The principle of conservation of energy states that energy is neither created nor 
destroyed; it is merely changed in form. For example, a golf ball leaves the tee with a 
certain amount of kinetic energy; this energy is eventually dissipated as heat due to air 
friction or rolling friction by the time the ball comes to rest on the fairway. Similarly, 
the kinetic energy of a hammer is eventually dissipated as heat as a nail is driven into 
a piece of wood. For isolated systems with clearly identifiable boundaries, this fact 
permits us to keep track of energy in a simple fashion: the net flow of energy into the 
system across its boundary is equal to the sum of the time rate of change of energy 
stored in the system. 
This result, which is a statement of the first law of thermodynamics, is quite 
general. We apply it in this chapter to electromechanical systems whose predominant 
energy-storage mechanism is in magnetic fields. In such systems, one can account for 

118 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
energy transfer as 
(Energy input~ 
fMechanical )/Increase 
in energy~ 
fEnergy 
~ 
from electric] - ~energy 
+ ~stored in magnetic) + ~convertedJ 
sources 
/ 
\output 
\field 
\into heat / 
(3.10) 
Equation 3.10 is written so that the electric and mechanical energy terms have positive 
values for motor action. The equation applies equally well to generator action: these 
terms then simply have negative values. In either case, the sign of the heat generation 
term is such that heat generation within the system results in a flow of thermal energy 
out of the system. 
In the systems which we consider here, the conversion of energy into heat occurs 
by such mechanisms as ohmic heating due to current flow in the windings of the 
electric terminals and mechanical friction due to the motion of the system compo- 
nents forming the mechanical terminals. As discussed in Section 3.1, it is generally 
possible to mathematically separate these loss mechanisms from the energy-storage 
mechanism. In such cases, the device can be represented as a lossless magnetic- 
energy-storage system with electric and mechanical terminals, as shown in Fig. 3.3a. 
The loss mechanisms can then be represented by external elements connected to 
these terminals, resistances to the electric terminals, and mechanical dampers to the 
mechanical terminals. Figure 3.3a can be readily generalized to situations with any 
number of electric or mechanical terminals. For this type of system, the magnetic 
field serves as the coupling medium between the electric and mechanical terminals. 
The ability to identify a lossless-energy-storage system is the essence of the 
energy method. It is important to recognize that this is done mathematically as part 
of the modeling process. It is not possible, of course, to take the resistance out of 
windings or the friction out of bearings. Instead we are making use of the fact that a 
model in which this is done is a valid representation of the physical system. 
For the lossless magnetic-energy-storage system of Fig. 3.3a, rearranging Eq. 3.9 
in the form of Eq. 3.10 gives 
d Welec -- d Wmech -~- d Wil d 
(3.11) 
where 
dWelec = i d~. = differential electric energy input 
d Wmech "-- ffld dx = differential mechanical energy output 
d Wfld = differential change in magnetic stored energy 
From Eq. 3.8, we can write 
dWelec "- ei dt 
(3.12) 
Here e is the voltage induced in the electric terminals by the changing magnetic stored 
energy. It is through this reaction voltage that the external electric circuit supplies 
power to the coupling magnetic field and hence to the mechanical output terminals. 
Thus the basic energy-conversion process is one involving the coupling field and its 
action and reaction on the electric and mechanical systems. 

3.3 
Energy in Singly-Excited Magnetic Field Systems 
119 
Combining Eqs. 3.11 and 3.12 results in 
dWelec -- ei dt = dWmech d- dWfld 
(3.13) 
Equation 3.13, together with Faraday's law for induced voltage (Eq. 1.27), form 
the basis for the energy method; the following sections illustrate its use in the analysis 
of electromechanical-energy-conversion devices. 
3.3 
ENERGY IN SINGLY-EXCITED MAGNETIC 
FIELD SYSTEMS 
In Chapters 1 and 2 we were concerned primarily with fixed-geometry magnetic 
circuits such as those used for transformers and inductors. Energy in those devices is 
stored in the leakage fields and to some extent in the core itself. However, the stored 
energy does not enter directly into the transformation process. In this chapter we are 
dealing with energy-conversion systems; the magnetic circuits have air gaps between 
the stationary and moving members in which considerable energy is stored in the 
magnetic field. This field acts as the energy-conversion medium, and its energy is the 
reservoir between the electric and mechanical systems. 
Consider the electromagnetic relay shown schematically in Fig. 3.4. The resis- 
tance of the excitation coil is shown as an external resistance R, and the mechanical 
terminal variables are shown as a force fnd produced by the magnetic field directed 
from the relay to the external mechanical system and a displacement x; mechanical 
losses can be included as external elements connected to the mechanical terminal. 
Similarly, the moving armature is shown as being massless; its mass represents me- 
chanical energy storage and can be included as an external mass connected to the 
mechanical terminal. As a result, the magnetic core and armature constitute a lossless 
magnetic-energy-storage system, as is represented schematically in Fig. 3.3a. 
This relay structure is essentially the same as the magnetic structures analyzed in 
Chapter 1. In Chapter 1 we saw that the magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.4 can be described by 
an inductance L which is a function of the geometry of the magnetic structure and the 
+ 
v( 
R 
i 
ii] x ~1 
"-I 
,.~ Mechanical 
ffld source 
-- 
t 
Electrical 
source 
~, e 
m 
Lossless 
coil 
Magnetic core 
~ 
Massless 
magnetic 
armature 
Figure 3.4 Schematic of an electromagnetic relay. 

120 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
permeability of the magnetic material. Electromechanical-energy-conversion devices 
contain air gaps in their magnetic circuits to separate the moving parts. As discussed in 
Section 1.1, in most such cases the reluctance of the air gap is much larger than that of 
the magnetic material. Thus the predominant energy storage occurs in the air gap, and 
the properties of the magnetic circuit are determined by the dimensions of the air gap. 
Because of the simplicity of the resulting relations, magnetic nonlinearity and 
core losses are often neglected in the analysis of practical devices. The final results 
of such approximate analyses can, if necessary, be corrected for the effects of these 
neglected factors by semi-empirical methods. Consequently, analyses are carried out 
under the assumption that the flux and mmf are directly proportional for the entire 
magnetic circuit. Thus the flux linkages ~. and current i are considered to be linearly 
related by an inductance which depends solely on the geometry and hence on the 
armature position x. 
~. = L(x)i 
(3.14) 
where the explicit dependence of L on x has been indicated. 
Since the magnetic force ftd has been defined as acting from the relay upon the 
external mechanical system and d Wmech is defined as the mechanical energy output 
of the relay, we can write 
dWmech = ftd dx 
(3.15) 
Thus, using Eq. 3.15 and the substitution dWelec = i d~., we can write Eq. 3.11 as 
dWfld = i d)~ - ftd dx 
(3.16) 
Since the magnetic energy storage system is lossless, it is a conservative system 
and the value of Wild is uniquely specified by the values of Z and x; ~. and x are thus 
referred to as state variables since their values uniquely determine the state of the 
system. 
From this discussion we see that Wild, being uniquely determined by the values 
of ~ and x, is the same regardless of how )~ and x are brought to their final values. 
Consider Fig. 3.5, in which two separate paths are shown over which Eq. 3.16 can be 
integrated to find Wild at the point (~.0, x0). Path 1 is the general case and is difficult to 
~'o 
Wnd (Z.O, %) 
2b 
-2a 
Xo 
Figure 3.5 
Integration paths 
for ~ld. 

3.3 
Energy in Singly-Excited Magnetic Field Systems 
121 
integrate unless both i and fnd are known explicitly as a function of)~ and x. However, 
because the integration of Eq. 3.16 is path independent, path 2 gives the same result 
and is much easier to integrate. From Eq. 3.16 
Wnd(Xo, xo) = f dWnd + f dWnd 
(3.17) 
path 2a 
path 2b 
Notice that on path 2a, d)~ = 0 and ffld "-- 0 (since ~. = 0 and there can be no magnetic 
force in the absence of magnetic fields). Thus from Eq. 3.16, d Wfld = 0 on path 2a. 
On path 2b, dx = 0, and, thus, from Eq. 3.16, Eq. 3.17 reduces to the integral of i d)~ 
over path 2b (for which x = x0). 
fO L° 
Wfld()~0, X0) = 
i(~, x0) d~ 
(3.18) 
For a linear system in which )~ is proportional to i, as in Eq. 3.14, Eq. 3.18 gives 
j~o ;~ 
~o x 
U 
1 ~2 
Wfld(~,, X) -- 
i(X', x) dU = 
L(x) dU = 2 L(x) 
(3.19) 
It can be shown that the magnetic stored energy can also be expressed in terms of 
the energy density of the magnetic field integrated over the volume V of the magnetic 
field. In this case 
(J0") 
Wild : 
H. dB' 
dV 
(3.20) 
For soft magnetic material of constant permeability (B =/zH), this reduces to 
/, (") 
Wild= 
~ 
dV 
(3.21) 
The relay shown in Fig. 3.6a is made from infinitely-permeable magnetic material with a 
movable plunger, also of infinitely-permeable material. The height of the plunger is much 
greater than the air-gap length (h >> g). Calculate the magnetic stored energy Wad as a function 
of plunger position (0 < x < d) for N = 1000 turns, g = 2.0 mm, d = 0.15 m, l = 0.1 m, 
and i = 10 A. 
II Solution 
Equation 3.19 can be used to solve for Wnd when ~. is known. For this situation, i is held 
constant, and thus it would be useful to have an expression for Wnd as a function of i and x. 
This can be obtained quite simply by substituting Eq. 3.14 into Eq. 3.19, with the result 
1 
Wftd = ~ L(x)i 2 
The inductance is given by 
L(x) = /Zo N2 Agap 
2g 
EXAMPLE 
3.2 

122 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
where Agap is the gap cross-sectional area. From Fig. 3.6b, Agap can be seen to be 
agap = l(d - x) = ld (1- 
d) 
Thus 
and 
L(x) = lz°N21d(1 - x/d) 
2g 
1 N2lzold(1 - x/d) i2 
w.. = ~ 
2g 
1 (10002)(4n x 10-7)(0.1)(0.15) 
( 
x) 
2(0.002) 
x 102 
1 - 
= 236 (1- d) J 
)ractice 
Problem 
3.: 
The relay of Fig. 3.6 is modified in such a fashion that the air gaps surrounding the plunger are 
no longer uniform. The top air gap length is increased to gtop -- 3.5 mm and that of the bottom 
gap is increased to gbot "
-
 2.5 mm. The number of turns is increased to N = 1500. Calculate 
the stored energy as a function of plunger position (0 < x < d) for a current of i = 5 A. 
Solution 
(x) 
Wnd=88.5 
1--~ 
J 
J 
i 
+
~
 
Lossless 
N-turn coil 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.6 (a) Relay with movable plunger for Example 3.2. (b) Detail showing 
air-gap configuration with the plunger partially removed. 

3.4 Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque from Energy 
123 
In this section we have seen the relationship between the magnetic stored energy 
and the electric and mechanical terminal variables for a system which can be repre- 
sented in terms of a lossless-magnetic-energy-storage element. If we had chosen for 
our example a device with a rotating mechanical terminal instead of a linearly dis- 
placing one, the results would have been identical except that force would be replaced 
by torque and linear displacement by angular displacement. In Section 3.4 we see 
how knowledge of the magnetic stored energy permits us to solve for the mechanical 
force and torque. 
3.4 
DETERMINATION OF MAGNETIC FORCE 
AND TORQUE FROM ENERGY 
As discussed in Section 3.3, for a lossless magnetic-energy-storage system, the mag- 
netic stored energy Wild is a state function, determined uniquely by the values of 
the independent state variables ~. and x. This can be shown explicitly by rewriting 
Eq. 3.16 in the form 
dWfld(~,, x) = i d)~ - ffld dx 
(3.22) 
For any state function of two independent variables, e.g., F(Xl, x2), the total 
differential of F with respect to the two state variables X l and x2 can be written 
OF 
dxl + ~ 
dx2 
(3.23) 
dF(xl, x2) = ~ 
x2 
x, 
It is extremely important to recognize that the partial derivatives in Eq. 3.23 are each 
taken by holding the opposite state variable constant. 
Equation 3.23 is valid for any state function F and hence it is certainly valid for 
Wnd; thus 
0 Wild 
0 Wild 
dWfld(~., x) -- 
d~. + 
dx 
(3.24) 
8~. x 
dx 
Since k and x are independent variables, Eqs. 3.22 and 3.24 must be equal for all 
values of d~ and dx, and so 
i 
.__ own~(Z,x) 
(3.25) 
where the partial derivative is taken while holding x constant and 
0 Wfld(/~, X) 
fro = -- 
(3.26) 
Ox 
z 
in this case holding )~ constant while taking the partial derivative. 
This is the result we have been seeking. Once we know Wild as a function of )~ 
and x, Eq. 3.25 can be used to solve for i (~., x). More importantly, Eq. 3.26 can be 
used to solve for the mechanical force ffld (~, x). It cannot be overemphasized that the 
partial derivative of Eq. 3.26 is taken while holding the flux linkages ~. constant. This 

124 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
is easily done provided W~d is a known function of ~. and x. Note that this is purely 
a mathematical requirement and has nothing to do with whether Z is held constant 
when operating the actual device. 
The force ffld is determined from Eq. 3.26 directly in terms of the electrical state 
variable ~.. If we then want to express the force as a function of i, we can do so by 
substituting the appropriate expression for ~. as a function of i into the expression for 
fna that is obtained by using Eq. 3.26. 
For linear magnetic systems for which ~. = L(x)i, the energy is expressed by 
Eq. 3.19 and the force can be found by direct substitution in Eq. 3.26 
Ofl)~2~ 
_ 
~.2 
dL(x) 
\ )  
ffld -- 
Ox 
-2 L(x) 
;~ 
2L(x) 2 
dx 
(3.27) 
If desired, the force can now be expressed in directly in terms of the current i simply 
by substitution of ~. -- L(x)i 
i 2 dL(x) 
f~d = 2 
dx 
(3.28) 
"XAMPLE 3., 
Table 3.1 contains data from an experiment in which the inductance of a solenoid was measured 
as a function of position x, where x = 0 corresponds to the solenoid being fully retracted. 
Table 3.1 
Data for Example 3.3. 
.|ll 
x [cm] 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
2.0 
L [mH] 
2.8 
2.26 
1.78 
1.52 
1.34 
1.26 
1.20 
1.16 
1.13 
1.11 
1.10 
Plot the solenoid force as a function of position for a current of 0.75 A over the range 0.2 < 
x < 1.8 cm. 
D 
II Solution 
The solution is most easily obtained using MATLABJ First, a fourth-order polynomial fit of 
the inductance as a function of x is obtained using the MATLAB function polyfit. The result is 
of the form 
L(x) - a(1)x 4 + a(2)x 3 + a(3)x 2 + a(4)x + a(5) 
Figure 3.7a shows a plot of the data points along with the results of the polynomial fit. 
Once this fit has been obtained, it is a straight forward matter to calculate the force from 
Eq. 3.28. 
i 2 dL(x) 
i 2 
f,d = 2 
dx 
= 2 (4a(1)x3 + 3a(2)x2 + 2a(3)x + a(4)) 
This force is plotted in Figure 3.7b. Note that the force is negative, which means that it is acting 
in such a direction as to pull the solenoid inwards towards x = 0. 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

3.4 
Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque from Energy 
125 
2.8 
2.6 
2.4 
2.2 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
2 
x [cm] 
(a) 
0 
-0.01 
-0.02 
-0.03 
z 
--0.04 
--0.05 
--0.06 
--0.07 
--0.08 0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
2 
X [cm] 
(b) 
Figure 3.7 
Example 3.3. (a) Polynomial curve fit of inductance. (b) Force as a 
function of position x for i = 0.75 A. 

126 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% Here is the data: x in cm, L in mH 
xdata = [0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0]; 
Ldata = [2.8 2.26 1.78 1.52 1.34 1.26 1.20 1.16 1.13 i.ii i.i0]; 
%Convert 
to SI units 
x = xdata*l.e-2 ; 
L = Ldata*l.e-3; 
len = length(x) ; 
xmax : x(len) ; 
% Use polyfit 
to perform 
a 4'th order fit of L to x. Store 
% the polynomial 
coefficients 
in vector 
a. The fit will be 
% of the form: 
% 
% 
Lfit : a(1)*x^4 
+ a(2)*x^3 
+ a(3)*x^2 
+ a(4)*x 
+ a(5) ; 
% 
a = polyfit (x,L, 4) ; 
% Let's check the fit 
for n = i:i01 
xfit(n) 
: xmax*(n-l)/100; 
Lfit(n) = a (1) *xfit (n) ^4 + a(2)*xfit(n)^3 
+ a(3)*xfit(n)^2 
... 
+ a(4)*xfit(n) 
+ a(5); 
end 
% Plot the data and then the fit to compare (convert xfit to cm and 
% Lfit to mH) 
plot (xdata, Ldata, ' * ' ) 
hold 
plot (xfit*100, Lfit*1000) 
hold 
xlabel('x 
[cm] ') 
ylabel('L 
[mH] ') 
fprintf('\n 
Paused. 
Hit any key to plot the force.\n') 
pause; 
% Now plot the force. The force will be given by 
% 
% 
i^2 
dL 
i^2 
% 
* 
= 
( 4*a(1)*x^3 + 3*a(2)*x^2 + 2*a(3)*x + a(4)) 
% 
2 
dx 
2 

3.4 
Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque from Energy 
127 
%Set current to 0.75 A 
I : 0.75; 
for n : i:i01 
xfit(n) 
: 0.002 + 0.016*(n-l)/100; 
F(n) =4*a(1)*xfit(n)^3+3* 
a(2)*xfit(n) ^2+2*a(3)*xfit(n) 
+a(4); 
F(n) : (I^2/2)*m(n); 
end 
plot (xfit*100,F) 
xlabel('x 
[cm] ') 
ylabel('Force 
[N] ') 
)ractice Problem 3.: 
An external controller is connected to the solenoid of Example 3.3 which maintains the coil 
flux linkages constant at ~. -- 1.5 mWb. Plot the resultant solenoid force over the range 
0.2 < x < 1.8 cm. 
Solution 
The resultant force is plotted in Fig. 3.8. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--0.01 
-0.02 
z 
--0.03 
--0.04 
--0.05 
--0.06 0.2 
I 
I 
I 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
x [cm] 
1.8 
Figure 3.8 
Practice problem 3.3. Plot of force vs. x for ~. = 1.5 mWb. 

128 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
For a system with a rotating mechanical terminal, the mechanical terminal vari- 
ables become the angular displacement 0 and the torque Tad. In this case, Eq. 3.22 
becomes 
dWfld(~., 0) = i d~. - Tad dO 
(3.29) 
where the explicit dependence of Wild on state variables ~. and 0 has been indicated. 
By analogy to the development that led to Eq. 3.26, the torque can be found from 
the negative of the partial derivative of the energy with respect to 0 taken holding )~ 
constant 
0 Wild(Z, 0) 1 
(3.30) 
Tfld = -- 
O0 
. 
For linear magnetic systems for which ~. = L(O)i, by analogy to Eq. 3.19 the 
energy is given by 
1 ~2 
Wnd(~., 0) = 2 L(O) 
(3.31) 
The torque is therefore given by 
0 (l ~, 2 ) 
_ 
_ 
1 
~2 ML(O) 
Tad = -~--~ 
~ L(O) 
x 
2 L(0) 2 dO 
(3.32) 
which can be expressed indirectly in terms of the current i as 
i 2 dL(O) 
Tad = 2 
dO 
(3.33) 
!XAMPLE 3.' 
The magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.9 consists of a single-coil stator and an oval rotor. Because the 
air-gap is nonuniform, the coil inductance varies with rotor angular position, measured between 
the magnetic axis of the stator coil and the major axis of the rotor, as 
L(O) = Lo + L2 cos (20) 
Rntnr ~Yi~ 
Stator axis 
Air gap 
Figure 3.9 
Magnetic circuit for 
Example 3.4. 

3.5 
Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque from Coenergy 
129 
where L0 = 10.6 mH and L: = 2.7 mH. Note the second-harmonic variation of inductance 
with rotor angle 0. This is consistent with the fact that the inductance is unchanged if the rotor 
is rotated through an angle of 180 °. 
Find the torque as a function of 0 for a coil current of 2 A. 
II Solution 
From Eq. 3.33 
i 2 dL(O) 
i 2 
Tfld(0) = 2 
dO 
= ~ (-2L2 sin (20)) 
Numerical substitution gives 
Wild(0 ) -- -1.08 × 10 -2 sin (20) N. m 
Note that in this case the torque acts in such a direction as to pull the rotor axis in alignment 
with the coil axis and hence to maximize the coil inductance. 
)ractice Problem 3., 
The inductance of a coil on a magnetic circuit similar to that of Fig. 3.9 is found to vary with 
rotor position as 
L(O) = Lo + L2 cos (20) + L4 sin (40) 
where L0 = 25.4 mH, L2 = 8.3 mH and L4 = 1.8 mH. (a) Find the torque as a function of 0 
for a winding current of 3.5 A. (b) Find a rotor position 0max that produces the largest negative 
torque. 
Solution 
a. Tfld(0) = --0.1017 sin (20) + 0.044cos (40) N. m 
b. The largest negative torque occurs when 0 = 45 ° and 0 = 225 °. This can be 
determined analytically, but it is helpful to plot the torque using MATLAB. 
3.5 
DETERMINATION OF MAGNETIC FORCE 
AND TORQUE FROM COENERGY 
A mathematical manipulation of Eq. 3.22 can be used to define a new state function, 
known as the coenergy, from which the force can be obtained directly as a function 
of the current. The selection of energy or coenergy as the state function is purely a 
matter of convenience; they both give the same result, but one or the other may be 
simpler analytically, depending on the desired result and the characteristics of the 
system being analyzed. 
The coenergy W~d is defined as a function of i and x such that 
W~d(i, x) = i)~ -- Wild(Z, x) 
(3.34) 

130 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
The desired derivation is carried out by using the differential of i)~ 
d(i)O = i d~. + )~ di 
(3.35) 
and the differential of dWfld(~., x) from Eq. 3.22. From Eq. 3.34 
dW~a(i, x) = d(iZ) - dWnd(~, x) 
(3.36) 
Substitution of Eqs. 3.22 and 3.35 into Eq. 3.36 results in 
dW~d(i, x) = ~ di + ffld dx 
(3.37) 
From Eq. 3.37, the coenergy W~a(i, x) can be seen to be a state function of the 
two independent variables i and x. Thus, its differential can be expressed as 
OWed 
dW~d(i, x) = 0 W~d 
di + 
dx 
(3.38) 
Oi 
x 
Ox 
i 
Equations 3.37 and 3.38 must be equal for all values of di and dx; thus 
0 W~d(i, x) 
~. = 
(3.39) 
Oi 
x 
O W~d(i, x) 
ffid -- 
(3.40) 
0X 
i 
Equation 3.40 gives the mechanical force directly in terms of i and x. Note that 
the partial derivative in Eq. 3.40 is taken while homing i constant; thus W~d must be 
a known function of i and x. For any given system, Eqs. 3.26 and 3.40 will give the 
same result; the choice as to which to use to calculate the force is dictated by user 
preference and convenience. 
By analogy to the derivation of Eq. 3.18, the coenergy can be found from the 
integral of ~. di 
/0 i 
W~a(i, x) = 
~.(i', x) di' 
(3.41) 
For linear magnetic systems for which ~. = L(x)i, the coenergy is therefore given 
by 
1 
W~d(i, x) = -~ L(x)i 2 
(3.42) 
and the force can be found from Eq. 3.40 
i 2 dL(x) 
f~d = 2 
dx 
(3.43) 
which, as expected, is identical to the expression given by Eq. 3.28. 
Similarly, for a system with a rotating mechanical displacement, the coenergy 
can be expressed in terms of the current and the angular displacement 0 
f0 i 
W~d(i, O) = 
)~(i', O) di' 
(3.44) 

3,S Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque from Coenergy 
t31 
and the torque is given by 
0 W~d(i, O) 
Tfld = 
00 
i 
If the system is magnetically linear, 
, . 
I 
i2 
W~d(t, 0) --- ~ L(O) 
and 
(3.45) 
(3.46) 
i 2 dL(O) 
(3.47) 
Tfld = 2 
dO 
which is identical to Eq. 3.33. 
In field-theory terms, for soft magnetic materials (for which B = 0 when H = 0), 
it can be shown that 
) 
W~d = 
B. dH 
dV 
(3.48) 
For soft magnetic material with constant permeability (B =/zH), this reduces to 
: 
f 
lzH2 dY 
Who= Jv 
2 
(3.49) 
For permanent-magnet (hard) materials such as those which are discussed in 
Chapter 1 and for which B = 0 when H = Hc, the energy and coenergy are equal to 
zero when B = 0 and hence when H = Hc. Thus, although Eq. 3.20 still applies for 
calculating the energy, Eq. 3.48 must be modified to the form 
0 
) 
W~d --- 
B-dH 
dV 
(3.50) 
Note that Eq. 3.50 can be considered to apply in general since soft magnetic materials 
can be considered to be simply hard magnetic materials with Hc -- 0, in which case 
Eq. 3.50 reduces to Eq. 3.48. 
In some cases, magnetic circuit representations may be difficult to realize or may 
not yield solutions of the desired accuracy. Often such situations are characterized 
by complex geometries and/or magnetic materials driven deeply into saturation. In 
such situations, numerical techniques can be used to evaluate the system energy using 
Eq. 3.20 or the coenergy using either Eqs. 3.48 or 3.50. 
One such technique, known as the finite-element method, 1 has become widely 
used. For example, such programs, which are available commercially from a number 
of vendors, can be used to calculate the system coenergy for various values of the 
displacement x of a linear-displacement actuator (making sure to hold the current 
constant as x is varied). The force can then be obtained from Eq. 3.40, with the 
derivative of coenergy with respect to x being calculated numerically from the results 
of the finite-element analysis. 
1 See, for example, E E Sylvester and R. L. Ferrari, Finite Elements for Electrical Engineers, Cambridge 
University Press, New York, 1983. 

132 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
EXAMPLE 
3.5 
For the relay of Example 3.2, find the force on the plunger as a function of x when the coil is 
driven by a controller which produces a current as a function of x of the form 
i(x)=lo(d)A 
II Solution 
From Example 3.2 
L(x) = lzoN21d(1 - x/d) 
2g 
This is a magnetically-linear system for which the force can be calculated as 
i2dL(x) 
i2 (lZo N2l) 
fHd = 2 
dx 
-- 
2 
2g 
Substituting for i (x), the expression for the force as a function of x can be determined as 
ffld = 
-- 
4g 
Note that from Eq. 3.46, the coenergy for this system is equal to 
i 2 
i 2 N21~old(1 
- x/d) 
W~d(i, x) = -~ L(x) -- -~ 
2g 
Substituting for i (x), this can be written as 
W~d(i,x) __ 12N21zold(1-x/d) (d) 2 
4g 
Note that, although this is a perfectly correct expression for the coenergy as a function of x 
under the specified operating conditions, if one were to attempt to calculate the force from taking 
the partial derivative of this expression for W~d with respect to x, the resultant expression would 
not give the correct expression for the force. The reason for this is quite simple: As seen from 
Eq. 3.40, the partial derivative must be taken holding the current constant. Having substituted 
the expression for i (x) to obtain the expression, the current is no longer a constant, and this 
requirement cannot be met. This illustrates the problems that can arise if the various force and 
torque expressions developed here are misapplied. 
Consider a plunger whose inductance varies as 
L(x) = L0(1 - (x/d) 2) 
Find the force on the plunger as a function of x when the coil is driven by a controller 
which produces a current as a function of x of the form 
i(x) = lo -~ 
A 

3,5 
Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque from Coenergy 
133 
Solution 
For a magnetically-linear system, the energy and coenergy are numerically equal: 
1 
2 
1B2/i.z _ 
1X2/L = gLi . The same is true for the energy and coenergy densities" 
g/zl H 2. For a nonlinear system in which X and i or B and H are not linearly propor- 
tional, the two functions are not even numerically equal. A graphical interpretation 
of the energy and coenergy for a nonlinear system is shown in Fig. 3.10. The area 
between the ~. - i curve and the vertical axis, equal to the integral of i dX, is the 
energy. The area to the horizontal axis given by the integral of X di is the coenergy. 
For this singly-excited system, the sum of the energy and coenergy is, by definition 
(see Eq. 3.34), 
Wnd + W~d = )~i 
(3.51) 
The force produced by the magnetic field in a device such as that of Fig. 3.4 for 
some particular value of x and i or X cannot, of course, depend upon whether it is 
calculated from the energy or coenergy. A graphical illustration will demonstrate that 
both methods must give the same result. 
Assume that the relay armature of Fig. 3.4 is at position x so that the device is 
operating at point a in Fig. 3.11 a. The partial derivative of Eq. 3.26 can be interpreted 
as the limit of - A Wild~ Ax with X constant as Ax --+ 0. If we allow a change Ax, the 
change -A Wad is shown by the shaded area in Fig. 3.1 l a. Hence, the force fad = 
(shaded area)/Ax as Ax --+ 0. On the other hand, the partial derivative of Eq. 3.40 can 
be interpreted as the limit of A W~d /Ax with i constant as Ax --+ 0. This perturbation 
of the device is shown in Fig. 3.11b; the force fad = (shaded area)/Ax as Ax --+ 0. 
The shaded areas differ only by the small triangle abc of sides Ai and AX, so that 
in the limit the shaded areas resulting from Ax at constant X or at constant i are 
X 
Xo 
0 
io 
i 
Figure 3.10 Graphical interpretation 
of energy and coenergy in a 
singly-excited system. 

134 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
k 
ko 
CI 
AkI 
~ 
~,0 
.................................... 
...... a 
After Ax 
.... ~::~ ....... 
.-- Original 
..... 
Wfld 
f 
After Ax ---...~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiii~ii I 
al 
~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii~:~ .......... 
~!iiiiiiiiii~ ...... 
.~ii!ili~ ...... 
l 0 
l 
0 
0 
i o 
t 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.11 
Effect of Ax on the energy and coenergy of a singly-excited 
device: (a) change of energy with k held constant; (b) change of coenergy with i 
held constant• 
equal. Thus the force produced by the magnetic field is independent of whether the 
determination is made with energy or coenergy. 
Equations 3.26 and 3.40 express the mechanical force of electrical origin in terms 
of partial derivatives of the energy and coenergy functions Wild(k, x) and W~d(i, x). It 
is important to note two things about them: the variables in terms of which they must 
be expressed and their algebraic signs. Physically, of course, the force depends on 
the dimension x and the magnetic field. The field (and hence the energy or coenergy) 
can be specified in terms of flux linkage k, or current i, or related variables. We again 
emphasize that the selection of the energy or coenergy function as a basis for analysis 
is a matter of convenience. 
The algebraic signs in Eqs. 3.26 and 3.40 show that the force acts in a direction to 
decrease the magnetic field stored energy at constant flux or to increase the coenergy 
at constant current. In a singly-excited device, the force acts to increase the inductance 
by pulling on members so as to reduce the reluctance of the magnetic path linking 
the winding. 
-XAMPLE 
3.1 
The magnetic circuit shown in Fig. 3.12 is made of high-permeability electrical steel. The rotor 
is free to turn about a vertical axis. The dimensions are shown in the figure. 
a. Derive an expression for the torque acting on the rotor in terms of the dimensions and the 
magnetic field in the two air gaps. Assume the reluctance of the steel to be negligible 
(i.e.,/z ~ oo) and neglect the effects of fringing. 
b. The maximum flux density in the overlapping portions of the air gaps is to be limited to 
approximately 1.65 T to avoid excessive saturation of the steel. Compute the maximum 
torque for rn = 2.5 cm, h = 1.8 cm, and g = 3 mm. 

3,5 
Determination of Magnetic Force and Torque from Coenergy 
135 
Axial length (perpendicular 
to page) = h 
Figure 3.12 
Example 3.6. 
Magnetic system of 
II Solution 
a. There are two air gaps in series, each of length g, and hence the air-gap field intensity Hag 
is equal to 
Ni 
Hag= 2g 
Because the permeability of the steel is assumed infinite and Bsteel must remain 
finite, Hstee] = Bsteel//z is zero and the coenergy density (Eq. 3.49) in the steel is zero 
(/Z nsteel/22 
__ B2eel/2/~ 
-- 0). Hence the system coenergy is equal to that of the air gaps, in 
which the coenergy density in the air gap is/z0HEg/2. The volume of the two overlapping 
air gaps is 2gh(rl + 0.5g)0. Consequently, the coenergy is equal to the product of the 
air-gap coenergy density and the air-gap volume 
2g) (2gh(rl + 0.5g)0) = #°(Ni)2h(rl + 0.5g)0 
W~g = 
2 
4g 
and thus, from Eq. 3.40 
Tfld -~ OW'g(i, O) ] = lzo(Ni)Zh(rl + 0.5g) 
00 
] i 
4g 
The sign of the torque is positive, hence acting in the direction to increase the 
overlap angle 0 and thus to align the rotor with the stator pole faces. 
b. For Bag -- 1.65 T, 
Hag-- 
Bag _. 
1.65 
= 1.31 x 10 6 A/m 
/z0 
4zr × 10 -7 
and thus 
Ni = 2gHag = 2(3 × 10-3)1.31 × 106 = 7860 A-turns 

136 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
Tnd can now be calculated as 
4zr x 10-7(7860)2(1.8 x 10-2)(2.5 x 10 -2 -+-0.5(3 x 10-3)) 
T~a = 
4(3 x 10 -3) 
= 3.09 N- m 
(a) Write an expression for the inductance of the magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.12 as a function 
of 0. (b) Using this expression, derive an expression for the torque acting on the rotor as a 
function of the winding current i and the rotor angle 0. 
Solution 
L(O) = 
i 2 dL(O) 
Tnd = 2 
dO 
#oN2h(r] + 0.5g)0 
2g 
i2 ( txoN2h(rl + O.5g) ) 
= 
3.6 
MULTIPLY-EXCITED MAGNETIC 
FIELD SYSTEMS 
Many electromechanical devices have multiple electrical terminals. In measurement 
systems it is often desirable to obtain torques proportional to two electric signals; a 
meter which determines power as the product of voltage and current is one example. 
Similarly, most electromechanical-energy-conversion devices consist of multiply- 
excited magnetic field systems. 
Analysis of these systems follows directly from the techniques discussed in 
previous sections. This section illustrates these techniques based on a system with two 
electric terminals. A schematic representation of a simple system with two electrical 
terminals and one mechanical terminal is shown in Fig. 3.13. In this case it represents 
a system with rotary motion, and the mechanical terminal variables are torque Tnd and 
angular displacement 0. Since there are three terminals, the system must be described 
in terms of three independent variables; these can be the mechanical angle 0 along 
with the flux linkages X1 and X2, currents i l and i2, or a hybrid set including one 
current and one flux. 2 
When the fluxes are used, the differential energy function dWnd(~.l, X2, 0) cor- 
responding to Eq. 3.29 is 
dWnd(~.], X2, O) = il dX1 + i2 dX2 - Tfla dO 
(3.52) 
2 See, for example, H. H. Woodson and J. R. Melcher, Electromechanical Dynamics, Wiley, New York, 
1968, Pt. I, Chap. 3. 

3.6 
Multiply-Excited Magnetic Field Systems 
137 
il..~ 
v 
4-o 
mo 
i2 
v 
4-o 
~.2 ~o 
Electric 
terminals 
iiiiii~~i.~ili~iiiii!i 
Tfld 
o+ 
0 
o-- 
Mechanical 
terminal 
Figure 3.13 
Multiply-excited magnetic energy 
storage system. 
and in direct analogy to the previous development for a singly-excited system 
and 
il -- 
O Wfld()~l, ~'2, 0) 
X2,0 
i2 "-" 
O Wfld(~.l, ~.2, 0) 
0/~.2 
~.l,0 
(3.53) 
(3.54) 
0 Wfld(~l, ~.2, 0) I 
(3.55) 
Tfld = 
-- 
O0 
),1.),2 
Note that in each of these equations, the partial derivative with respect to each inde- 
pendent variable must be taken holding the other two independent variables constant. 
The energy Wild can be found by integrating Eq. 3.52. As in the singly-excited 
case, this is most conveniently done by holding ~,1 and ~,2 fixed at zero and integrating 
first over 0; under these conditions, Tnd is zero, and thus this integral is zero. One can 
then integrate over ,k2 (while holding ~1 zero) and finally over ~.1. Thus 
f 
~,2 0 
Wfld(~'lo, ~'20, 00) "- 
i2(~.1 "- 0, ~'2, 0 "- 00) d~.2 
dO 
f 
~.l o 
4- 
il (~,1, ~,2 = ~,20, 0 -'- 00) d~,l 
(3.56) 
a0 
This path of integration is illustrated in Fig. 3.14 and is directly analogous to 
that of Fig. 3.5. One could, of course, interchange the order of integration for ~.2 
and ~.1. It is extremely important to recognize, however, that the state variables are 
integrated over a specific path over which only one state variable is varied at a time; 
for example, ~.1 is maintained at zero while integrating over ~2 in Eq. 3.56. This is 
explicitly indicated in Eq. 3.56 and can also be seen from Fig. 3.14. Failure to observe 
this requirement is one of the most common errors made in analyzing these systems. 
In a magnetically-linear system, the relationships between)~ and i can be specified 
in terms of inductances as is discussed in Section 1.2 
)~1 = Lllil + L12i2 
(3.57) 
~.2 = L21il -{- L22i2 
(3.58) 

138 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
~.l 0 
/ 
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ 
t Wfld(~" 1 O, ~'2 O, 00) 
~.2 o 
iiiiii I 
k~ 
Figure 3.14 Integration path to 
obtain ~ld(Z.10, Z.2o, eo). 
where 
Ll2 = L21 
(3.59) 
Here the inductances are, in general, functions of angular position 0. 
These equations can be inverted to obtain expressions for the i's as a function of 
the 0's 
where 
L22kl -- L12~.2 
il -- 
(3.60) 
D 
--L21~.l + Lll~.2 
i2 = 
(3.61) 
D 
D = LllL22 -- L12L21 
(3.62) 
The energy for this linear system can be found from Eq. 3.56 
f 
Z2o L ll (00)k2 
Wfld(klo, k2o, 00) = 
D(Oo) 
dke 
J0 
f 
;~'o (L22(00)~.1 - 
L12(00)~.2o) 
+ 
dkl 
,Io 
D(Oo) 
1 
1 
= 2D(Oo--------~L,,(O0)~.2o -F 2D(Oo----~L22(O0)~.2o 
LI2(00) 
-
-
 ~klo~,2o 
D(Oo) 
(3.63) 
where the dependence of the inductances and the determinant D(O) on the angular 
displacement 0 has been explicitly indicated. 
In Section 3.5, the coenergy function was defined to permit determination of 
force and torque directly in terms of the current for a single-winding system. A 

3,6 
Multiply-Excited Magnetic Field Systems 
t39 
similar coenergy function can be defined in the case of systems with two windings as 
W~d(il, i2, 0) = ~.lil + ~.2i2 -- Wild 
(3.64) 
It is a state function of the two terminal currents and the mechanical displacement. 
Its differential, following substitution of Eq. 3.52, is given by 
dWfld(il, i2, 0) "- ~.1 dil + ~.2 di2 + Tfld dO 
(3.65) 
From Eq. 3.65 we see that 
~,2 -" 
O W~d(il, i2, 0) 
Oil 
O W~d(il, i2, 0) 
0i2 
i2,0 
il ,O 
(3.66) 
(3.67) 
For such a linear system, the torque can be found either from the energy of 
Eq. 3.63 using Eq. 3.55 or from the coenergy of Eq. 3.70 using Eq. 3.68. It is at 
this point that the utility of the coenergy function becomes apparent. The energy 
expression of Eq. 3.63 is a complex function of displacement, and its derivative is 
even more so. Alternatively, the coenergy function is a relatively simple function of 
displacement, and from its derivative a straightforward expression for torque can be 
determined as a function of the winding currents il and i2 as 
O W~d(il, i2, 0) 
Tfld -- 
O0 
il,i2 
i 2 dLll(O) 
i 2 dLz2(O) 
dL12(O) 
= -
-
~
 
~ 
+ i l i 2 ~  
(3.71) 
2 
dO 
2 
dO 
dO 
O W~d(il, i2, 0) 
O0 
il,i2 
Analogous to Eq. 3.56, the coenergy can be found as 
f 
t2 o 
Whd(llo, 12 
o , '  
" 
" 
00) = 
)',2(il "-- O, i2, 0 = 00) di2 
do 
f 
tl 
+ 
~.1 (il, i2 = i2o, 0 = 0o) dil 
,1o 
For the linear system of Eqs. 3.57 to 3.59 
, 
. 
1 
1 
W~d(tl, i2, 0) = -gLll(O)i 2 + -gL22(O)i 2 + L12(0)ili2 
z 
z, 
(3.70) 
Systems with more than two electrical terminals are handled in analogous fashion. 
As with the two-terminal-pair system above, the use of a coenergy function of the 
terminal currents greatly simplifies the determination of torque or force. 
(3.68) 
(3.69) 
Tfld 
Most significantly, the torque can now be determined directly in terms of the 
currents as 

140 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
In the system shown in Fig. 3.15, the inductances in henrys are given as Lll = (3 + cos 20) x 
10 -3. L12 =0.3cos0" L22 = 30 + 10cos20. Find and plot the torque Tnd(0) for current il = 
0.8 A and i2 = 0.01 A. 
II Solution 
The torque can be determined from Eq. 3.71. 
i 2 dLll(O) 
i 2 dL22(O) + ili2dL12(O) 
T.~ 
-2 
dO 
42 
dO 
d------~ 
2. 
i 2 
= t--" (-2 x 10-3) sin20 + _--(-20sin20)- ili2(0.3)sinO 
2 
2 
For i l = 0.8 A and i2 = 0.01 A, the torque is 
Tnd = -- 1.64 x 10 -3 sin 20 -- 2.4 x 10 -3 sin 0 
Notice that the torque expression consists of terms of two types. One term, proportional 
to i]i2 sin 0, is due to the mutual interaction between the rotor and stator currents; it acts in a 
direction to align the rotor and stator so as to maximize their mutual inductance. Alternately, 
it can be thought of as being due to the tendency of two magnetic fields (in this case those of 
the rotor and stator) to align. 
The torque expression also has two terms each proportional to sin 20 and to the square of 
one of the coil currents. These terms are due to the action of the individual winding currents 
alone and correspond to the torques one sees in singly-excited systems. Here the torque is 
due to the fact that the self inductances are a function of rotor position and the corresponding 
torque acts in a direction to maximize each inductance so as to maximize the coenergy. The 
20 variation is due to the corresponding variation in the self inductances (exactly as was seen 
previously in Example 3.4), which in turn is due to the variation of the air-gap reluctance; 
i, 
¢ 
+ 
-- 
Electrical 
~.l, el 
' 
_~ 
~.2, e2 
~'~ 
source 1 
t 
~. i2 
Stator 
.............. 
..................... 
I 
:i; 
I 
........................... 
i 
Electrical 
source 2 
Figure 3.15 Multiply-excited magnetic system for Example 3.7. 

3.6 Multiply-Excited Magnetic Field Systems 
141 
X 10 -3 
41 ' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I / 
t 
3 
Total torque 
2 
z 
~ 
o 
2 
- 
Mutual- 
interaction torque 
3 
- 
-4 
i,, 
i 
i 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Theta [radians] 
Figure 3.16 Plot of torque components for the multiply-excited system of Example 3.7. 
notice that rotating the rotor by 180 ° from any given position gives the same air-gap reluctance 
(hence the twice-angle variation). This torque component is known as the reluctance torque. 
The two torque components (mutual and reluctance), along with the total torque, are plotted 
with MATLAB in Fig. 3.16. 
)ractice Problem 3. 
Find an expression for the torque of a symmetrical two-winding system whose inductances 
vary as 
Lll 
-
'
-
 L22 = 0.8 + 0.27 cos 40 
L12 = 0.65 cos 20 
for the condition that il = -i2 "- 0.37 A. 
Solution 
Tnd = --0.296 sin (40) + 0.178 sin (20) 
The derivation presented above for angular displacement can be repeated in 
an analogous fashion for the systems with linear displacement. If this is done, the 

142 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
expressions for energy and coenergy will be found to be 
f 
~-2 0 
Wfld(/~.lo, ~'2o, XO) = 
i2(~.1 = O, ~.2, x = Xo) d~.2 
dO 
f 
~.l 0 
-~- 
i1(~.1, ~.2 -- ~'2o, X = XO)d~.l 
dO 
(3.72) 
or 
f 
l2 
W~d(ilo, i2o, Xo) = 
~.2(il = O, i2, x = Xo) di2 
do 
f 
ll 
+ 
~.1(il, i2 = i2o,X =xo) dil 
dO 
Similarly the force can be found from 
O Wfld()~l, ~2, X) 
ffld -- 
OX 
~] ,)~2 
(3.73) 
ffld -" 
(3.74) 
O W~d(i l , i2, x) 
8x 
il,i2 
(3.75) 
For a magnetically-linear system, the coenergy expression of Eq. 3.70 becomes 
1 
1 
W~d(il,iz, x) = -~Lll(X)i 2 + -~Lzz(x)i 2 + Llz(x)i,i2 
and the force is thus given by 
iZdLll(x) 
fttd = "~ 
dx 
(3.76) 
i 2 dL22(x) 
dLl2(X) 
I 
+ i l i2 ~ 
(3.77) 
2 
dx 
dx 
3.7 
FORCES AND TORQUES IN SYSTEMS 
WITH PERMANENT MAGNETS 
The derivations of the force and torque expressions of Sections 3.4 through 3.6 focus 
on systems in which the magnetic fields are produced by the electrical excitation of 
specific windings in the system. However, in Section 3.5, it is seen that special care 
must be taken when considering systems which contain permanent magnets (also 
referred to as hard magnetic materials). Specifically, the discussion associated with 
the derivation of the coenergy expression of Eq. 3.50 points out that in such systems 
the magnetic flux density is zero when H = Hc, not when H = 0. 
For this reason, the derivation of the expressions for force and torque in Sec- 
tions 3.4 through 3.6 must be modified for systems which contain permanent mag- 
nets. Consider for example that the derivation of Eq. 3.18 depends on the fact that in 
Eq. 3.17 the force can be assumed zero when integrating over path 2a because there 
is no electrical excitation in the system. A similar argument applies in the derivation 
of the coenergy expressions of Eqs. 3.41 and 3.69. 

3,7 Forces and Torques in Systems with Permanent Magnets 
143 
In systems with permanent magnets, these derivations must be carefully revisited. 
In some cases, such systems have no windings at all, their magnetic fields are due 
solely to the presence of permanent-magnet material, and it is not possible to base a 
derivation purely upon winding fluxes and currents. In other cases, magnetic fields 
may be produced by a combination of permanent magnets and windings. 
A modification of the techniques presented in the previous sections can be used 
in systems which contain permanent magnets. Although the derivation presented 
here applies specifically to systems in which the magnet appears as an element of a 
magnetic circuit with a uniform internal field, it can be generalized to more complex 
situations; in the most general case, the field theory expressions for energy (Eq. 3.20) 
and coenergy (Eq. 3.50) can be used. 
The essence of this technique is to consider the system as having an additional 
fictitious winding acting upon the same portion of the magnetic circuit as does the 
permanent magnet. Under normal operating conditions, the fictitious winding carries 
zero current. Its function is simply that of a mathematical "crutch" which can be used 
to accomplish the required analysis. The current in this winding can be adjusted to 
zero-out the magnetic fields produced by the permanent magnet in order to achieve 
the "zero-force" starting point for the analyses such as that leading from Eq. 3.17 to 
Eq. 3.18. 
For the purpose of calculating the energy and coenergy of the system, this winding 
is treated as any other winding, with its own set of current and flux linkages. As a result, 
energy and coenergy expressions can be obtained as a function of all the winding flux 
linkages or currents, including those of the fictitious winding. Since under normal 
operating conditions the current in this winding will be set equal to zero, it is useful 
to derive the expression for the force from the system coenergy since the winding 
currents are explicitly expressed in this representation. 
Figure 3.17a shows a magnetic circuit with a permanent magnet and a movable 
plunger. To find the force on the plunger as a function of the plunger position, we 
assume that there is a fictitious winding of Nf turns carrying a current if wound so as 
to produce flux through the permanent magnet, as shown in Fig. 3.17b. 
/ 
Permanent 
magnet 
1 
ii!iii!iii!iii!ii•ii!!ii!iiii!ii•i•ii!•ii!ii•!iii!ii!iiiii•iii!ii•!iiiiii}i!••!•i•!!iii•ii•iii•}i•!}i•i!i!!i!•iii!i•i}••ii•!•!!ii••!•!•iii!•••i!••!!ii!•i••iii!•i•••ii 
}~iiiiii!i!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
i 
er 
~i~i~i~J:!~i~i~i~i~i~i~i~i~i:~iJ~:i~i~i~i:~.i~i~!~i~!~i~:!~:i~!~!~!~:!~:~i:~!~i~!~:!,~i~i~i~i~J~i~i~i~i:i:!~i~U 
(a) 
C~, 
i!ili~iiiiii!i!iiii!i!;!i!iiiiii!i!iiiiii~i!iiiiii!iiii!i~i!ii!iii~i 
-
-
 c 
Plunger 
Fictitious winding, 
Nf tums 
(b) 
Figure 3.17 (a) Magnetic circuit with permanent magnet and movable 
plunger; (b) fictitious winding added. 

144 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
For this single-winding system we can write the expression for the differential 
in coenergy from Eq. 3.37 as 
dW~d(if, x) = ~.f dif + ffld dx 
(3.78) 
where the subscript 'f' indicates the fictitious winding. Corresponding to Eq. 3.40, 
the force in this system can be written as 
ffld = 0 W~d(if0x-- O, x) I if 
(3.79) 
where the partial derivative is taken while holding if constant, and the resultant expres- 
sion is then evaluated at if = 0, which is equivalent to setting if--0 in the expression 
for W~o before taking the derivative. As we have seen, holding if constant for the 
derivative in Eq. 3.79 is a requirement of the energy method; it must be set to zero 
to properly calculate the force due to the magnet alone so as not to include a force 
component from current in the fictitious winding. 
To calculate the coenergy W~d(if, x) in this system, it is necessary to integrate 
Eq. 3.78. Since W~d is a state function of if and x, we are free to choose any integration 
path we wish. Figure 3.18 illustrates a path over which this integration is particularly 
simple. For this path we can write the expression for coenergy in this system as 
W~d(if -- O, x) = 
f dW~d+ / dW~d 
path 1 a 
path 1 b 
/0 x 
-- 
ffld(if = Ifo, X') dx' + 
~,f(if, x) dif 
(3.80) 
which corresponds directly to the analogous expression for energy found in Eq. 3.17. 
Note that the integration is initially over x with the current if held fixed at if ---- If0. 
This is a very specific current, equal to that fictitious-winding current which reduces 
the magnetic flux in the system to zero. In other words, the current If0 is that current 
in the fictitious winding which totally counteracts the magnetic field produced by the 
permanent magnet. Thus, the force ffld is zero at point A in Fig. 3.18 and remains so 
for the integral over x of path la. Hence the integral over path la in Eq. 3.80 is zero, 
Path la 
Path 1 b 
[ ~W'fld (if = 0, X) 
X 
X' 
Figure 3.18 Integration path for calculating 
Wild(if -- O, X) in the permanent magnet 
system of Fig. 3.17. 

3.7 
Forces and Torques in Systems with Permanent Magnets 
145 
and Eq. 3.80 reduces to 
' 
Whd(t f = 0, x) = 
~.f(i~, x) di~ 
(3.81) 
Note that Eq. 3.81 is perfectly general and does not require either the permanent 
magnet or the magnetic material in the magnetic circuit to be linear. Once Eq. 3.81 
has been evaluated, the force at a given plunger position x can be readily found from 
Eq. 3.79. Note also that due to the presence of the permanent magnet, neither the 
coenergy nor the force is zero when if is zero, as we would expect. 
The magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.19 is excited by a samarium-cobalt permanent magnet and 
includes a movable plunger. Also shown is the fictitious winding of Nf turns carrying a current 
if which is included here for the sake of the analysis. The dimensions are: 
Wm = 2.0 cm 
Wg = 3.0 cm 
W0 = 2.0 cm 
d = 2.0 cm 
go = 0.2 cm 
D = 3.0 cm 
Find (a) an expression for the coenergy of the system as a function of plunger position x 
and (b) an expression for the force on the plunger as a function of x. Finally, (c) calculate the 
force at x = 0 and x = 0.5 cm. Neglect any effects of fringing fluxes in this calculation. 
II Solution 
a. Because it is quite linear over most of its useful operating range, the dc magnetization 
curve for samarium-cobalt can be represented as a straight line of the form of Eq. 1.61 
B m = ttR(Hra- H~) = /L/,RH m -31-- Br 
where the subscript 'm' is used here to refer specifically to the fields within the 
samarium-cobalt magnet and 
/ZR = 1.05/Z0 
H e' = --712 kA/m 
Br =0.94 T 
/re 
o- 
samarium-col 
permanent mag 
Fictitious 
winding 
Depth D 
\ 
Movable 
I~S 
plunger 
/ 
/z ----> oo 
Figure 3.19 Magnetic circuit for 
Example 3.8. 

146 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
Note from Fig. 1.19 that the DC magnetization curve for samarium-cobalt is not 
completely linear; it bends slightly downward for low flux densities. Hence, in the 
linearized B-H characteristic given above, the apparent coercivity H c' is somewhat larger 
than the actual coercivity of samarium-cobalt. 
From Eq. 1.5 we can write 
Nfif = Hind + Hgx + Hogo 
where the subscript 'g' refers to the variable gap and the subscript '0' refers to the fixed 
gap. Similarly from the continuity of flux condition, Eq. 1.3, we can write 
BmWmD-- BgWgD = BoWoD 
Recognizing that in the air gaps Bg --/zoHg 
and Bo =/~oHo, we can solve the above 
equations for Bm: 
Bm "-- 
~R(Nf/f- H~d) 
d+ 
+ ,0 
Finally we can solve for the flux linkages/~,f of the fictitious winding as 
)~f = Nf W m D Bm = NfWmD#R(Nfif- H~d) 
x 
go 
UR 
+W0) 
d+Wm(.0)(V 
Thus we see that the flux linkages ~f will be zero when if "-- Ifo -- Hcd/Nf = 
-Brd/(#RNf) and from Eq. 3.81 we can find the coenergy as 
[ NfWmO#R(Nfi f - H~d)] 
Wild(X) -- 
d/Nf Ld T Wm(~u~ooS-(-~ 
~ ~w~o ~ dif 
WmD(Brd) 2 
2/ZR[d-~-Wm(~R)(~g'g "~- 
g0)]"0 
W0 
Note that the answer does not depend upon Nf or if which is as we would expect 
since the fictitious winding does not actually exist in this system. 
b. Once the coenergy has been found, the force can be found from Eq. 3.79 as 
ffld ~" -- 
W2mD(Brd) 2 
2#°Wg[d+Wm(UR)(~+ g°)] 
Wo 
Notice that the force is negative, indicating that the force is acting in the direction to 
decrease x, that is to pull the plunger in the direction which decreases the gap. 
c. Finally, substitution into the force expression yields 
-l15N 
atx =0cm 
f,d= 
-85.8N 
atx=0.5cm 

3.7 
Forces and Torques in Systems with Permanent Magnets 
147 
(a) Derive an expression for the coenergy in the magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.20 as a function of 
the plunger position x. (b) Derive an expression for the x-directed force on the plunger and 
evaluate it at x = Wg/2. Neglect any effects of fringing fluxes. The dimensions are: 
Wm=2.0cm 
Wg=2.5cm 
D=3.0cm 
d= 1.0cm 
g0=0.2cm 
Solution 
iii!ii!iiiiiiiii!iii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
~iii '~iJii~iiii'~iiiiiiii~iiii!iiiiiii 
~:~i~i~'~'~iii~i 
~i ~J~ii~! 
~!i~i~i,i 
........ 
[~i~i~i~ii~jPi~ii~iii~:ii~iii2ii~ii2!ii!j~iF~iy~iii~:~iii!ii~ii~ii~:~ii!ii~!ii!i!~iii~iii~i~i~ 
Depth D 
~ ~  
x~~ 
samafium-cobalt~ 
magnet iiiiiiiii!iiiiiii!~iiiiii!i!iliiiiiiiiii! 
..................................................................... 
iiii!!ii~iiiii~i~iii!ii~ii~iii!ii~i~iii~iiiiiiiiii!iiii~i~i~i~iiiiiiiiiiJ!iiiiii!!~ii~ii~iiii~iiiiiii~iiiiiiiii~iiiiiii~!i~i!iiiiii 
Figure 3.20 Magnetic circuit for Practice 
Problem 3.8. 
WmD(Brd) 2 
(Wg-x) 
Ad 
~ 
-- 
2 
2 
gW~DB r 
~R 
(Wg-x) / ] 
lzo(Wg - x)2 [l + (lzo ) ( wgwm "~ 2 
Atx = Wg/2, fnd = --107 N. 
Consider the schematic magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.21 a. It consists of a section of 
linear, hard magnetic material (Bm = krR(Hm -- Hc~)) of area A and length d. It is 
connected in series with an external magnetic circuit of mmf f'e. 
From Eq. 1.21, since there are no ampere-turns acting on this magnetic circuit, 
Hmd 4- Ore = 0 
(3.82) 
The flux produced in the external magnetic circuit by the permanent magnet is given by 
d~ = ABm =/ZRA(Hm- Hc ~) 
Substitution for Hm from Eq. 3.82 in Eq. 3.83 gives 
~ =/ZRA (-Hcr - -~) 
(3.83) 
(3.84) 

148 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
Are 
> 
3_ 
+ 
Linear, hard 
magnetic material 
B m =/ZR(H m -1- Hc') 
(a) 
Area A 
(N/)equiv~~ d ~"- I ~~ii 
Linear magnetic 
material B --/ZRH 
(b) 
Figure 3.21 
(a) Generic magnetic circuit containing a section of linear, 
permanent-magnet material. (b) Generic magnetic circuit in which the 
permanent-magnet material has been replaced by a section of linear 
magnetic material and a fictitious winding. 
Now consider the schematic magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.21b in which the lin- 
ear, hard magnetic material of Fig. 3.21a has been replaced by soft, linear mag- 
netic material of the same permeability (B = #RH) and of the same dimensions, 
length d and area A. In addition, a winding carrying (Ni)equiv ampere-turns has been 
included. 
For this magnetic circuit, the flux can be shown to be given by 
dp = iX R A ( ( N i ) equiv 
.~'e ) 
d 
d 
(3.85) 
Comparing Eqs. 3.84 and 3.85, we see that the same flux is produced in the external 
magnetic circuit if the ampere-turns, (Ni)equiv, in the winding of Fig. 3.21b is equal 
to -ncd. 
This is a useful result for analyzing magnetic-circuit structures which contain 
linear, permanent-magnet materials whose B-H characteristic can be represented in 
the form of Eq. 1.61. In such cases, replacing the permanent-magnet section with a 
section of linear-magnetic material of the same permeability #R and geometry and 
an equivalent winding of ampere-tums 
(gi)equiv -- -ncd 
(3.86) 
results in the same flux in the external magnetic circuit. As a result, both the lin- 
ear permanent magnet and the combination of the linear magnetic material and the 
winding are indistinguishable with regard to the production of magnetic fields in the 
external magnetic circuit, and hence they produce identical forces. Thus, the analysis 
of such systems may be simplified by this subsitution, as is shown in Example 3.9. 
This technique is especially useful in the analysis of magnetic circuits containing both 
a permanet magnetic and one or more windings. 
EXAMPLE 3.9 
Figure 3.22a shows an actuator consisting of an infinitely-permeable yoke and plunger, excited 
by a section of neodymium-iron-boron magnet and an excitation winding of Nl = 1500 turns. 

3.7 Forces and Torques in Systems with Permanent Magnets 
149 
neodymium-iron-boron K 
magnet 
tu ns 
Depth D 
I 
# ............................................................................................ 
 unger 
!!i!ii!iii!iiN. 
(a) 
+ 
(Ni)equiv ( 
+ 
Nlil ( 
) 
0 
(b) 
R x 
Rg o 
Rm 
Figure 3.22 (a) Actuator for Example 3.9. (b) Equivalent circuit for the actuator 
with the permanent magnet replaced by linear material and an equivalent 
winding carrying (Ni)equiv ampere-turns. 
The dimensions are: 
W=4.0cm 
Wl=4.5cm 
D=3.5cm 
d=8mm 
g0=lmm 
Find (a) the x-directed force on the plunger when the current in the excitation winding is 
zero and x = 3 mm. (b) Calculate the current in the excitation winding required to reduce the 
plunger force to zero. 
II Solution 
a. As discussed in Section 1.6, the dc-magnetization characteristic of neodymium-iron- 
boron can be represented by a linear relationship of the form 
B =/~R(H -- Hc r) = Br + ~RH 
where/z R = 1.06/z0, H e' = -940 kA/m and Br = 1.25 T. As discussed in this section, we 
can replace the magnet by a section of linear material of permeability/ZR and an 
equivalent winding of ampere-turns 
(Ni)equiv =-H~d =-(-9.4 
x 105)(8 x 10 -3) --7520 ampere-turns 
Based upon this substitution, the equivalent circuit for the system becomes that of 
Fig. 3.22b. There are two sources of mmf in series with three reluctances: the variable 
gap Rx, the fixed gap ~0, and the magnet Am. 
'T~, x 
~0 
'~m -- 
Izo W~ D 
go 
lzo W D 
d 
lzR WD 

150 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
With il = 0, the actuator is equivalent to a single-winding system whose coenergy is 
given by 
( 
 equiv ) 
1Li" 1 = 1 
(Ni 2 
Wild-" 2 
2 
nx --~- 7"~0 --]- 7"~m 
The force on the plunger can then be found from 
0 Wild 
_
_
 
(Ni)eequiv 
( dRx ) 
f"~ = T~ 
- -(TZx + 7Zo + 7Zm) ~ \ 
iequiv 
• 2 
( N t ) equiv 
/z0Wl D(Te,,x + ~0 + 7"~'m) 2 
Substituting the given values gives fnd = -703 N, where the minus sign indicates 
that the force acts in the direction to reduce x (i.e., to close the gap). 
b. The flux in the actuator is proportional to the total effective ampere-turns (Ni)equiv + N1 i l 
acting on the magnetic circuit. Thus, the force will be zero when the net ampere-turns is 
equal to zero or when 
(Ni)equiv 
7520 
il = 
-- 
-- 5.01 A 
Nl 
1500 
Note however that the sign of the current (i.e., in which direction it should be applied to 
the excitation winding) cannot be determined from the information given here since we do 
not know the direction of magnetization of the magnet. Since the force depends upon the 
square of the magnetic flux density, the magnet can be oriented to produce flux either 
upward or downward in the left-hand leg of the magnetic circuit, and the force calculated 
in part (a) will be the same. To reduce the force to zero, the excitation winding current of 
5.01 amperes must be applied in such a direction as to reduce the flux to zero; if the 
opposite current is applied, the flux density will increase, as will the force. 
D 
t 
ractice Problem 3., 
Practice Problem 3.8 is to be reworked replacing the samarium-cobalt magnet by a section of 
linear material and an equivalent winding. Write (a) expressions for 7"¢-m, the reluctance of the 
section of linear material; 7?,.g, the reluctance of the air gap; and (Ni)equiv, the ampere-turns of 
the equivalent winding; and (b) an expression for the inductance of the equivalent winding and 
the coenergy. 
Solution 
Wm=2.0cm 
Wg=2.5cm 
D=3.0cm 
d= 1.0cm 
g0=0.2cm 
7~m 
#RWmD 
2g 
n 
'/'~g -- #0(Wg -- x)D 
(Ni)equiv : -H'd = (Brd) 
/ZR 

3.8 Dynamic Equations 
151 
Wild m 
Z 
N 2 equiv 
(~m -3 I- T~g) 
Li{quiv 
(Brd) 2 
WmD(Brd) 2 
2 
2# 2 (7"~ m -3 I- "~.g) 
2]J~R [d --~- (/zo ) ( 2~gWm 
(Wg-x) 
Clearly the methods described in this chapter can be extended to handle situations 
in which there are permanent magnets and multiple current-carrying windings. In 
many devices of practical interest, the geometry is sufficiently complex, independent 
of the number of windings and/or permanent magnets, that magnetic-circuit analysis is 
not necessarily applicable, and analytical solutions can be expected to be inaccurate, if 
they can be found at all. In these cases, numerical techniques, such as the finite-element 
method discussed previously, can be employed. Using this method, the coenergy of 
Eq. 3.48, or Eq. 3.50 if permanet magnets are involved, can be evaluated numerically 
at constant winding currents and for varying values of displacement. 
3.8 
DYNAMIC EQUATIONS 
We have derived expressions for the forces and torques produced in electromechanical- 
energy-conversion devices as functions of electrical terminal variables and mechani- 
cal displacement. These expressions were derived for conservative energy-conversion 
systems for which it can be assumed that losses can be assigned to external electrical 
and mechanical elements connected to the terminals of the energy-conversion system. 
Such energy-conversion devices are intended to operate as a coupling means between 
electric and mechanical systems. Hence, we are ultimately interested in the operation 
of the complete electromechanical system and not just of the electromechanical- 
energy-conversion system around which it is built. 
The model of a simple electromechancal system shown in Fig. 3.23 shows the ba- 
sic system components, the details of which may vary from system to system. The sys- 
tem shown consists of three parts: an external electric system, the electromechanical- 
energy-conversion system, and an external mechanical system. The electric system 
+ 
R 
ffld v 
K 
0 
£ 
Figure 3.23 
Model of a singly-excited electromechanical system. 

152 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
is represented by a voltage source v0 and resistance R; the source could alternatively 
be represented by a current source and a parallel conductance G. 
Note that all the electrical losses in the system, including those which are inherent 
to the electromechanical-energy-conversion system are assigned to the resistance R 
in this model. For example, if the voltage source has an equivalent resistance Rs and 
the winding resistance of the electromechanical-energy-conversion system is Rw, the 
resistance R would equal the sum of these two resistances; R = Rs + Rw. 
The electric equation for this model is 
d)~ 
v0 = i R + 
(3.87) 
dt 
If the flux linkage ~. can be expressed as ~. = L (x)i, the external equation becomes 
di 
dL(x) dx 
vo = i R + L(x)-~ + i dx 
dt 
(3.88) 
The second term on the fight, L(di/dt), is the self-inductance voltage term. The 
third term i(dL/dx)(dx/dt) includes the multiplier dx/dt. This is the speed of the 
mechanical terminal, and the third term is often called simply the speed voltage. 
The speed-voltage term is common to all electromechanical-energy-conversion sys- 
tems and is responsible for energy transfer to and from the mechanical system by the 
electrical system. 
For a multiply-excited system, electric equations corresponding to Eq. 3.87 are 
written for each input pair. If the expressions for the )~'s are to be expanded in terms of 
inductances, as in Eq. 3.88, both self- and mutual-inductance terms will be required. 
The mechanical system of Fig. 3.23 includes the representation for a spring 
(spring constant K), a damper (damping constant B), a mass M, and an external me- 
chanical excitation force f0. Here, as for the electrical system, the damper represents 
the losses both of the external mechanical system as well as any mechanical losses 
of the electromechanical-energy-conversion system. 
The x-directed forces and displacement x are related as follows: 
Spring: 
Damper: 
Mass: 
fK = -- K (x - Xo) 
(3.89) 
dx 
fD = -B-- 
(3.90) 
dt 
d2x 
fM = -M dt-- ~ 
(3.91) 
where x0 is the value of x with the spring normally unstretched. Force equilibrium 
thus requires that 
f.,~ + fK + fD + fM -- f0 = f.,~ -- K (x - xo) - B-- 
- 
dx 
d2x 
M 
- fo = 0 
(3.92) 
dt 

3.8 
Dynamic Equations 
153 
Combining Eqs. 3.88 and 3.92, the differential equations for the overall system 
of Fig. 3.23 for arbitrary inputs vo(t) and fo(t) are thus 
di 
dL(x) 
vo(t) = i R + L(x)--~ + i 
dx 
(3.93) 
d2x 
dx 
fo(t) = -M--r~at ~ - B d----t - K(x - xo) + ffld(X, i) 
(3.94) 
The functions L (x) and ffld (X, i) depend on the properties of the electromechanical- 
energy-conversion system and are calculated as previously discussed. 
Figure 3.24 shows in cross section a cylindrical solenoid magnet in which the cylindrical 
plunger of mass M moves vertically in brass guide rings of thickness g and mean diameter d. 
EXAMPLE 3.10 
Guide fin 
--T .... 
ll 
I 
pring 
X 
X 
Coil 
/ 
--- Cylindrical 
steel shell 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!i]iii! 
~ 
Cylindrical 
steel plunger 
Applied force, ft 
Figure 3.24 Solenoid magnet for Example 3.10. 

154 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
The permeability of brass is the same as that of free space and is #0 = 47r x 10 -7 H/m in SI 
units. The plunger is supported by a spring whose spring constant is K. Its unstretched length is 
10. A mechanical load force ft is applied to the plunger from the mechanical system connected 
to it, as shown in Fig. 3.24. Assume that frictional force is linearly proportional to the velocity 
and that the coefficient of friction is B. The coil has N turns and resistance R. Its terminal 
voltage is vt and its current is i. The effects of magnetic leakage and reluctance of the steel are 
negligible. 
Derive the dynamic equations of motion of the electromechanical system, i.e., the differ- 
ential equations expressing the dependent variables i and x in terms of vt, ft, and the given 
constants and dimensions. 
II Solution 
We begin by expressing the inductance as functions of x. The coupling terms, i.e., the magnetic 
force fad and induced emf e, can then be expressed in terms of x and i and these relations 
substituted in the equations for the mechanical and electric systems. 
The reluctance of the magnetic circuit is that of the two guide rings in series, with the 
flux directed radially through them, as shown by the dashed flux lines q9 in Fig. 3.24. Because 
g << d, the flux density in the guide rings is very nearly constant with respect to the radial 
distance. In a region where the flux density is constant, the reluctance is 
Length of flux path in direction of field 
# (area of flux path perpendicular to field) 
The reluctance of the upper gap is 
g 
7"~l- 
lZozr xd 
in which it is assumed that the field is concentrated in the area between the upper end of the 
plunger and the lower end of the upper guide ring. Similarly, the reluctance of the lower gap is 
7"~2 = 
g 
lzorr ad 
The total reluctance is 
Hence, the inductance is 
where 
N 
2 
L(x) - 
= 
T¢ 
+ 1)_. 
(a+x) 
lzozr d 
x 
a 
#oread 
x 
g 
a+x 
a+x 
L 
/ ___ #o:rr ad N 2 
The magnetic force acting upward on the plunger in the positive x direction is 
Ad "-" 
0W~d(i, X) I = 
i2 dL 
i 2 
aL' 
a-----7-- i 
~ ~ 
= ~ (a ¥-~)~ 

3.9 
Analytical Techniques 
155 
The induced emf in the coil is 
or 
d 
di 
dL dx 
e= t- 
~(Li) = L 
+ i dx dt 
e=L'( 
x 
) di 
L'( 
ai 
) dx 
a+x 
d-t + 
(a+x) 2 
dt 
Substitution of the magnetic force in the differential equation of motion of the mechanical 
l_L, 
ai 2 
dx 
K (x - lo) + 
dt 
2 
(a Jl- X) 2 
system (Eq. 3.94) gives 
d2x 
ft = -M--d- ~ 
The voltage equation for the electric system is (from Eq. 3.93) 
vt=iR+L,( 
x 
)di 
( 
a 
) dx 
a + x 
~ + i L' 
(a + x) 2 
dt 
These last two equations are the desired results. They are valid only as long as the upper 
end of the plunger is well within the upper guide ring, say, between the limits 0.1 a < x < 0.9a. 
This is the normal working range of the solenoid. 
3.9 
ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES 
We have described relatively simple devices in this chapter. The devices have one or 
two electrical terminals and one mechanical terminal, which is usually constrained to 
incremental motion. More complicated devices capable of continuous energy conver- 
sion are treated in the following chapters. The analytical techniques discussed here 
apply to the simple devices, but the principles are applicable to the more complicated 
devices as well. 
Some of the devices described in this chapter are used to produce gross motion, 
such as in relays and solenoids, where the devices operate under essentially "on" 
and "off" conditions. Analysis of these devices is carried out to determine force as a 
function of displacement and reaction on the electric source. Such calculations have 
already been made in this chapter. If the details of the motion are required, such as the 
displacement as a function of time after the device is energized, nonlinear differential 
equations of the form of Eqs. 3.93 and 3.94 must be solved. 
In contrast to gross-motion devices, other devices such as loudspeakers, pickups, 
and transducers of various kinds are intended to operate with relatively small displace- 
ments and to produce a linear relationship between electrical signals and mechanical 
motion, and vice versa. The relationship between the electrical and mechanical vari- 
ables is made linear either by the design of the device or by restricting the excursion 
of the signals to a linear range. In either case the differential equations are linear and 
can be solved using standard techniques for transient response, frequency response, 
and so forth, as required. 

156 
CHAPTER 3 ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
3.9.1 
Gross Motion 
The differential equations for a singly-excited device as derived in Example 3.10 are 
of the form 
1L,( 
ai2 
) 
d2x 
dx 
(a --]- X) 2 
~- M-~ + B--d~ + K(x - lo) + ft 
(3.95) 
vt=iR+L'( 
x 
) di 
L'( 
ai 
) dx 
a+x 
~ + 
(a+x) 2 
dt 
(3.96) 
A typical problem using these differential equations is to find the excursion x(t) 
when a prescribed voltage vt = V0 is applied at t = 0. An even simpler problem is 
to find the time required for the armature to move from its position x (0) at t = 0 
to a given displacement x = X when a voltage vt -- V is applied at t = 0. There 
is no general analytical solution for these differential equations; they are nonlinear, 
involving products and powers of the variables x and i and their derivatives. They 
can be solved using computer-based numerical integration techniques. 
In many cases the gross-motion problem can be simplified and a solution found by 
relatively simple methods. For example, when the winding of the device is connected 
to the voltage source with a relatively large resistance, the i R term dominates on the 
fight-hand side of Eq. 3.96 compared with the di/dt self-inductance voltage term and 
the dx/dt speed-voltage term. The current i can then be assumed equal to V/R and 
inserted directly into Eq. 3.95. The same assumption can be made when the winding 
is driven from power electronic circuitry which directly controls the current to the 
winding. With the assumption that i = V/R, two cases can be solved easily. 
Case 1 
The first case includes those devices in which the dynamic motion is dom- 
inated by damping rather than inertia, e.g., devices purposely having low inertia or 
relays having dashpots or dampers to slow down the motion. For example, under such 
conditions, with j~ = 0, the differential equation of Eq. 3.95 reduces to 
dx 
1L,( 
a 
)(V)2 
B--d- [ = f (x) = -~ 
(a + x) 2 
- K(x - lo) 
(3.97) 
where f (x) is the difference between the force of electrical origin and the spring force 
in the device of Fig. 3.24. The velocity at any value ofx is merely dx/dt = f(x)/B; 
the time t to reach x = X is given by 
f0 
t = 
f(x) dx 
(3.98) 
The integration of Eq. 3.98 can be carried out analytically or numerically. 
Case 2 
In this case, the dynamic motion is governed by the inertia rather than the 
damping. Again with j~ = 0, the differential equation of Eq. 3.95 reduces to 
d2x 
1L, 
a 
M-~ = f (x) = -~ 
(a + x) 2 
- g(x - lo) 
(3.99) 

3.9 Analytical Techniques 
157 
Equation 3.99 can be written in the form 
( x)2 
2 dx 
--~ 
= f(x) 
(3.100) 
and the velocity v(x) at any value x is then given by 
i /ox 
v(x) = dt = 
f (x') dx' 
(3.101) 
The integration of Eq. 3.101 can be carried out analytically or numerically to find 
v(x) and to find the time t to reach any value of x. 
3.9.2 
Linearization 
Devices characterized by nonlinear differential equations such as Eqs. 3.95 and 3.96 
will yield nonlinear responses to input signals when used as transducers. To obtain 
linear behavior, such devices must be restricted to small excursions of displacement 
and electrical signals about their equilibrium values. The equilibrium displacement 
is determined either by a bias mmf produced by a dc winding current, or a permanent 
magnet acting against a spring, or by a pair of windings producing mmf's whose forces 
cancel at the equilibrium point. The equilibrium point must be stable; the transducer 
following a small disturbance should return to the equilibrium position. 
With the current and applied force set equal to their equilibrium values, I0 and 
fto respectively, the equilibrium displacement X0 and voltage V0 can be determined 
for the system described by Eqs. 3.95 and 3.96 by setting the time derivatives equal 
to zero. Thus 
1L' 
(a a12+ 10) 2 ) = K(Xo - lo) + fto 
(3.102) 
Vo = IoR 
(3.103) 
The incremental operation can be described by expressing each variable as 
the sum of its equilibrium and incremental values; thus i = Io + i', ft = fto + f', 
vt = V0 + v', and x = X0 + x'. The equations are then linearized by canceling any 
products of increments as being of second order. Equations 3.95 and 3.96 thus 
become 
1 L'a(Io + i,)2 
d2x ' 
dx' 
(a + X0 + x') 2 = M--~ + B--dT- + K(Xo + x' - to) + fto + f' 
(3.104) 
and 
Vo + v' = (Io + i')R + L'(Xo + x') di' 
L'a(Io + i') 
dx' 
÷ 
(3.105) 
a + Xo + x' dt 
(a + Xo + x') 2 dt 
The equilibrium terms cancel, and retaining only first-order incremental terms 
yields a set of linear differential equations in terms of just the incremental variables 

158 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
of first order as 
L'alo 
(a + X0) 2 
i' 
d2x' 
dx' 
[ 
= M-~ 
+ B---~ + K+ 
L'aI 2 
q 
/ x' + f' 
(3 106) 
(a + X0) 31 
LtXo 
di' 
L'alo 
dx' 
v' = i'R + 
~ 
(3.107) 
a + Xo dt 
(a + Xo) 2 dt 
Standard techniques can be used to solve for the time response of this set of 
linear differential equations. Alternatively, sinusoidal-steady-state operation can be 
assumed, and Eqs. 3.106 and 3.107 can be converted to a set of linear, complex 
algebraic equations and solved in the frequency domain. 
3.10 
SUMMARY 
In electromechanical systems, energy is stored in magnetic and electric fields. When 
the energy in the field is influenced by the configuration of the mechanical parts 
constituting the boundaries of the field, mechanical forces are created which tend 
to move the mechanical elements so that energy is transmitted from the field to the 
mechanical system. 
Singly excited magnetic systems are considered first in Section 3.3. By removing 
electric and mechanical loss elements from the electromechanical-energy-conversion 
system (and incorporating them as loss elements in the external electrical and me- 
chanical systems), the energy conversion device can be modeled as a conservative 
system. Its energy then becomes a state function, determined by its state variables ~. 
and x. Section 3.4 derives expressions for determining the force and torque as the 
negative of partial derivative of the energy with respect to the displacement, taken 
while holding the flux-linkage )~ constant. 
In Section 3.5 the state function coenergy, with state variables i and x or 0, is 
introduced. The force and torque are then shown to be given by the partial derivative of 
the coenergy with respect to displacement, taken while holding the current i constant. 
These concepts are extended in Section 3.6 to include systems with multi- 
ple windings. Section 3.7 further extends the development to include systems in 
which permanent magnets are included among the sources of the magnetic energy 
storage. 
Energy conversion devices operate between electric and mechanical systems. 
Their behavior is described by differential equations which include the coupling 
terms between the systems, as discussed in Section 3.8. These equations are usually 
nonlinear and can be solved by numerical methods if necessary. As discussed in 
Section 3.9, in some cases approximations can be made to simplify the equations. 
For example, in many cases, linearized analyses can provide useful insight, both with 
respect to device design and performance. 
This chapter has been concerned with basic principles applying broadly to the 
electromechanical-energy-conversion process, with emphasis on magnetic-field sys- 
tems. Basically, rotating machines and linear-motion transducers work in the same 
way. The remainder of this text is devoted almost entirely to rotating machines. 
Rotating machines typically include multiple windings and may include permanent 

3.11 
Problems 
159 
magnets. Their performance can be analyzed by using the techniques and principles 
developed in this chapter. 
3.11 
PROBLEMS 
3.1 The rotor of Fig. 3.25 is similar to that of Fig. 3.2 (Example 3.1) except that 
it has two coils instead of one. The rotor is nonmagnetic and is placed in a 
uniform magnetic field of magnitude B0. The coil sides are of radius R and 
are uniformly spaced around the rotor surface. The first coil is carrying a 
current 11 and the second coil is carrying a current 12. 
Assuming that the rotor is 0.30 m long, R = 0.13 m, and B0 = 0.85 T, 
find the 0-directed torque as a function of rotor position ot for (a) 11 = 0 A and 
12 = 5 A, (b) 11 = 5 A and 12 = 0 A, and (c) I1 = 8 A and I2 = 8 A. 
3.2 The winding currents of the rotor of Problem 3.1 are controlled as a function 
of rotor angle ot such that 
Ii=8sinot 
A 
and 
12=8cosot 
A 
Write an expression for the rotor torque as a function of the rotor position or. 
3.3 Calculate the magnetic stored energy in the magnetic circuit of Example 1.2. 
3.4 An inductor has an inductance which is found experimentally to be of the form 
2L0 
L= 
1 +x/xo 
where L0 = 30 mH, x0 = 0.87 mm, and x is the displacement of a movable 
element. Its winding resistance is measured and found to equal 110 mr2. 
a. 
The displacement x is held constant at 0.90 mm, and the current is 
increased from 0 to 6.0 A. Find the resultant magnetic stored energy in the 
inductor. 
Current 12 
into paper 
Current I 1 
out of paper 
Uniform magnetic field, B0.~ 
r / 
~///, 
, 
Current I 1 
~--' J 
into paper 
J 
~/x 
Current 12 
out of paper 
Figure 3.25 Two-coil rotor for Problem 3.1. 

160 
CHAPTER 3 ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
b. 
The current is then held constant at 6.0 A, and the displacement is 
increased to 1.80 mm. Find the corresponding change in magnetic stored 
energy. 
3.5 Repeat Problem 3.4, assuming that the inductor is connected to a voltage 
source which increases from 0 to 0.4 V (part [a]) and then is held constant at 
0.4 V (part [b]). For both calculations, assume that all electric transients can 
be ignored. 
3.6 The inductor of Problem 3.4 is driven by a sinusoidal current source of the 
form 
i (t) = Io sin cot 
where I0 = 5.5 A and 09 = 100n (50 Hz). With the displacement held fixed at 
x = x0, calculate (a) the time-averaged magnetic stored energy (Wild) in the 
inductor and (b) the time-averaged power dissipated in the winding resistance. 
3.7 An actuator with a rotating vane is shown in Fig. 3.26. You may assume that 
the permeability of both the core and the vane are infinite (/z --+ oo). The total 
air-gap length is 2g and shape of the vane is such that the effective area of the 
air gap can be assumed to be of the form 
Ag=Ao(1-('-~) 
2) 
(valid only in the range 101 _< Jr/6). The actuator dimensions are g - 0.8 mm, 
A0 = 6.0 mm 2, and N = 650 turns. 
a. 
Assuming the coil to be carrying current i, write an expression for the 
magnetic stored energy in the actuator as a function of angle 0 for 
101 _< rr/6. 
Core 
+ 
+ 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.26 Actuator with rotating vane for 
Problem 3.7. (a) Side view. (b) End view. 

3.11 
Problems 
161 
4- 
"T 
t=0 
s 
i 2 
~_4- 
Figure 3.27 An RC circuit for Problem 3.8. 
b. 
Find the corresponding inductance L(O). Use MATLAB to plot this 
inductance as a function of 0. 
3.8 An RC circuit is connected to a battery, as shown in Fig. 3.27. Switch S is 
initially closed and is opened at time t = 0. 
a. 
Find the capacitor voltage vc(t) for t _> 0 
b. 
What are the initial and final (t - cxz) values of the stored energy in the 
capacitor? (Hint: Wild 
1 2 
= ~ q /C, where q = C V0.) What is the energy 
stored in the capacitor as a function of time? 
c. 
What is the power dissipated in the resistor as a function of time? What 
is the total energy dissipated in the resistor? 
3.9 An RL circuit is connected to a battery, as shown in Fig. 3.28. Switch S is 
initially closed and is opened at time t - 0. 
a. 
Find the inductor current iL(t) for t > 0. (Hint: Note that while the switch 
is closed, the diode is reverse-biased and can be assumed to be an open 
circuit. Immediately after the switch is opened, the diode becomes 
forward-biased and can be assumed to be a short circuit.) 
b. 
What are the initial and final (t = c~) values of the stored energy in the 
inductor? What is the energy stored in the inductor as a function of time? 
c. 
What is the power dissipated in the resistor as a function of time? What is 
the total energy dissipated in the resistor? 
3.10 The L/R time constant of the field winding of an 500-MVA synchronous 
generator is 4.8 s. At normal operating conditions, the field winding is known 
to be dissipating 1.3 MW. Calculate the corresponding magnetic stored energy. 
4- 
"T 
t=0 
s 
R 
Figure 3.28 An RL circuit for Problem 3.9. 

162 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
Coil 
1,300 tun 
Cylindrical 
cast steel 
shell 
'< 
25 cm 
I]-~ 
20cm 
Cy 
plunger 
~'--10 cm--~ 
 J-I± 
~ 
2.5 cm 
20 cm 
Figure 3.29 Plunger actuator for 
Problem 3.12. 
3.11 The inductance of a phase winding of a three-phase salient-pole motor is 
measured to be of the form 
L(Om) = Lo + L2 cos 20m 
where 0m is the angular position of the rotor. 
a. 
How many poles are on the rotor of this motor? 
b. 
Assuming that all other winding currents are zero and that this phase is 
excited by a constant current I0, find the torque Tnd(0) acting on the rotor. 
3.12 Cylindrical iron-clad solenoid actuators of the form shown in Fig. 3.29 are 
used for tripping circuit breakers, for operating valves, and in other 
applications in which a relatively large force is applied to a member which 
moves a relatively short distance. When the coil current is zero, the plunger 
drops against a stop such that the gap g is 2.25 cm. When the coil is energized 
by a direct current of sufficient magnitude, the plunger is raised until it hits 
another stop set so that g is 0.2 cm. The plunger is supported so that it can 
move freely in the vertical direction. The radial air gap between the shell and 
the plunger can be assumed to be uniform and 0.05 cm in length. 
For this problem neglect the magnetic leakage and fringing in the air 
gaps. The exciting coil has 1300 turns and carries a constant current of 2.3 A. 
Assume that the mmf in the iron can be neglected and use MATLAB to 
a. 
plot the flux density in the variable gap between the yoke and the plunger 
for the range of travel of the plunger, 
b. 
plot the corresponding values of the total energy stored in the magnetic 
field in/x J, and 
c. 
plot the corresponding values of the coil inductance in #H. 
3.13 Consider the plunger actuator of Fig. 3.29. Assume that the plunger is initially 
fully opened (g = 2.25 cm) and that a battery is used to supply a current of 
2.5 A to the winding. 

3.11 
Problems 
163 
N-turn 
Electromagnet, 
cross-sectional 
area A c 
~
~
~
~
I
~
~
~
 
Figure 3.30 
Electromagnet lifting an iron slab 
(Problem 3.14). 
a. 
If the plunger is constrained to move very slowly (i.e., slowly compared 
to the electrical time constant of the actuator), reducing the gap g from 
2.25 to 0.20 cm, how much mechanical work in joules will be supplied to 
the plunger? 
b. 
For the conditions of part (a), how much energy will be supplied by the 
battery (in excess of the power dissipated in the coil)? 
3.14 As shown in Fig. 3.30, an N-turn electromagnet is to be used to lift a slab of 
iron of mass M. The surface roughness of the iron is such that when the 
iron and the electromagnet are in contact, there is a minimum air gap of 
gmin = 0.18 mm in each leg. The electromagnet cross-sectional area 
Ac = 32 cm and coil resistance is 2.8 f2. Calculate the minimum coil voltage 
which must be used to lift a slab of mass 95 kg against the force of gravity. 
Neglect the reluctance of the iron. 
3.15 Data for the magnetization curve of the iron portion of the magnetic circuit of 
the plunger actuator of Problem 3.12 are given below: 
Flux(rnWb) 
5.12 
8.42 
9.95 
10.6 
10.9 
11.1 
11.3 
11.4 
11.5 
11.6 
mrnf(A.turns) 
68 
135 
203 
271 
338 
406 
474 
542 
609 
677 
a. 
Use the MATLAB polyfit function to obtain a 3'rd-order fit of reluctance 
and total flux versus mmf for the iron portions of the magnetic circuit. 
Your fits will be of the form: 
?-~iron -- al.~i3ron -3r- a2-,~i2ron + a3.~iron -+- a4 
~biron 
3 
2 
-- bl.Firon + bz.Firon + b3.Firon -Jr-b4 
List the coefficients. 
(i) Using MATLAB and the functional forms found in part (a), plot the 
magnetization curve for the complete magnetic circuit (flux linkages ), 
versus winding current i) for a variable-gap length of g = 0.2 cm. On the 

164 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
~s-,q 
Cross section 
~ 
~
:
'
~
:
"
 
i ~ i ~':: 
of current 
carrying 
conductor i 
Figure 3.31 
Conductor in a slot 
(Problem 3.17). 
same axes, plot the magnetization curve corresponding to the assumption 
that the iron is of infinite permeability. The maximum current in your 
plot should correspond to a flux in the magnetic circuit of 600 mWb. 
(ii) Calculate the magnetic field energy and coenergy for each of these 
cases corresponding to a winding current of 2.0 A. 
c. 
Repeat part (b) for a variable-gap length of g = 2.25 cm. In part (ii), 
calculate the magnetic field energy and coenergy corresponding to a 
winding current of 20 A. 
3.16 An inductor is made up of a 525-turn coil on a core of 14-cm 2 cross-sectional 
area and gap length 0.16 mm. The coil is connected directly to a 120-V 60-Hz 
voltage source. Neglect the coil resistance and leakage inductance. Assuming 
the coil reluctance to be negligible, calculate the time-averaged force acting 
on the core tending to close the air gap. How would this force vary if the 
air-gap length were doubled? 
3.17 Figure 3.31 shows the general nature of the slot-leakage flux produced by 
current i in a rectangular conductor embedded in a rectangular slot in iron. 
Assume that the iron reluctance is negligible and that the slot leakage flux 
goes straight across the slot in the region between the top of the conductor and 
the top of the slot. 
a. 
Derive an expression for the flux density Bs in the region between the top 
of the conductor and the top of the slot. 
b. 
Derive an expression for the slot-leakage ~s sits crossing the slot above 
the conductor, in terms of the height x of the slot above the conductor, the 
slot width s, and the embedded length 1 perpendicular to the paper. 
c. 
Derive an expression for the force f created by this magnetic field on 
a conductor of length 1. In what direction does this force act on the 
conductor? 
d. 
When the conductor current is 850 A, compute the force per meter on a 
conductor in a slot 2.5 cm wide. 
3.18 A long, thin solenoid of radius r0 and height h is shown in Fig. 3.32. The 
magnetic field inside such a solenoid is axially directed, essentially uniform 
and equal to H = N i/h. The magnetic field outside the solenoid can be 

3.11 
Problems 
165 
I 
r o 
I 
T 
h 
Figure 3.32 
Solenoid coil 
(Problem 3.18). 
shown to be negligible. Calculate the radial pressure in newtons per square 
meter acting on the sides of the solenoid for constant coil current i -- I0. 
3.19 An electromechanical system in which electric energy storage is in electric 
fields can be analyzed by techniques directly analogous to those derived in 
this chapter for magnetic field systems. Consider such a system in which it is 
possible to separate the loss mechanism mathematically from those of energy 
storage in electric fields. Then the system can be represented as in Fig. 3.33. 
For a single electric terminal, Eq. 3.11 applies, where 
dWelec -- vi dt = v dq 
where v is the electric terminal voltage and q is the net charge associated with 
electric energy storage. Thus, by analogy to Eq. 3.16, 
d Wnd = v dq - fnd dx 
a. 
Derive an expression for the electric stored energy Wild (q, x) analogous 
to that for the magnetic stored energy in Eq. 3.18. 
b. Derive an expression for the force of electric origin ftd analogous to that 
of Eq. 3.26. State clearly which variable must be held constant when 
the derivative is taken. 
c. 
By analogy to the derivation of Eqs. 3.34 to 3.41, derive an expression for 
the coenergy W~d(V , X) and the corresponding force of electric origin. 
i,q 
+o 
mo 
Electric 
terminal 
ffld 
o-t- 
x 
0 m 
Mechanical 
terminal 
Figure 3.33 Lossless electric energy 
storage system. 

166 
CHAPTER 3 ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
!) 
%A 
Capacitance C- 
X 
Conducting 
plates of area A 
Figure 3.34 Capacitor plates (Problem 3.20). 
3.20 A capacitor (Fig. 3.34) is made of two conducting plates of area A separated 
in air by a spacing x. The terminal voltage is v, and the charge on the plates 
is q. The capacitance C, defined as the ratio of charge to voltage, is 
q 
E0A 
C 
_._ _ 
13 
X 
where E0 is the dielectric constant of free space (in SI units E0 = 
8.85 X 10 -12 F/m). 
a. 
Using the results of Problem 3.19, derive expressions for the energy 
Wild(q, x) and the coenergy W~d(V, x). 
b. 
The terminals of the capacitor are connected to a source of constant 
voltage V0. Derive an expression for the force required to maintain the 
plates separated by a constant spacing x = 8. 
3.21 Figure 3.35 shows in schematic form an electrostatic voltmeter, a capacitive 
system consisting of a fixed electrode and a moveable electrode. The 
moveable electrode is connected to a vane which rotates on a pivot such that 
the air gap between the two electrodes remains fixed as the vane rotates. The 
capacitance of this system is given by 
EoRd(ot- 101) 
C(O) = 
(101 _< c~) 
Fixed 
electrode 
Mow 
electrode 
Depth d into 
paper 
Figure 3.35 Schematic electrostatic 
voltmeter (Problem 3.21). 

3.11 
Problems 
167 
2, N 2 turns 
eable element 
. . . . . . . . .  ~, l, N 1 turns 
+ 
Figure 3.36 Two-winding magnetic 
circuit for Problem 3.22. 
A torsional spring is connected to the moveable vane, producing a torque 
Tspring 
= 
-- K (0 - 00) 
a. 
For 0 _< 0 _< or, using the results of Problem 3.19, derive an expression 
for the electromagnetic torque Tnd in terms of the applied voltage Vdc. 
b. 
Find an expression for the angular position of the moveable vane as a 
function of the applied voltage Vdc. 
c. 
For a system with 
R -- 12 cm, 
d -- 4 cm, 
g -- 0.2 mm 
ot-zr/3rad, 
00-0rad, 
K--3.65N.m/rad 
Plot the vane position in degrees as a function of applied voltage for 
0 _< Vdc _< 1500 V. 
3.22 The two-winding magnetic circuit of Fig. 3.36 has a winding on a fixed yoke 
and a second winding on a moveable element. The moveable element is 
constrained to motion such that the lengths of both air gaps remain equal. 
a. 
Find the self-inductances of windings 1 and 2 in terms of the core 
dimensions and the number of turns. 
b. 
Find the mutual inductance between the two windings. 
c. 
Calculate the coenergy Wt~d(il, i2). 
d. 
Find an expression for the force acting on the moveable element as a 
function of the winding currents. 
3.23 Two coils, one mounted on a stator and the other on a rotor, have self- and 
mutual inductances of 
LI1 -- 3.5 mH 
L22 -- 1.8 mH 
L12 -- 2.1cos0 mH 
where 0 is the angle between the axes of the coils. The coils are connected in 

168 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
series and carry a current 
i = ~/-2I sin cot 
a. 
Derive an expression for the instantaneous torque T on the rotor as a 
function of the angular position 0. 
b. 
Find an expression for the time-averaged torque Tavg as a function of 0. 
c. 
Compute the numerical value of Tavg for I -- 10 A and 0 = 90 °. 
d. 
Sketch curves of Tavg versus 0 for currents I = 5, 7.07, and 10 A. 
e. 
A helical restraining spring which tends to hold the rotor at 0 - 90 ° is 
now attached to the rotor. The restraining torque of the spring is 
proportional to the angular deflection from 0 -- 90 ° and is -0.1 N. m 
when the rotor is turned to 0 - 0 °. Show on the curves of part (d) how 
you could find the angular position of the rotor-plus-spring combination 
for coil currents I -- 5, 7.07, and 10 A. From your curves, estimate the 
rotor angle for each of these currents. 
f. 
Write a MATLAB script to plot the angular position of the rotor as a 
function of rms current for 0 < I < 10 A. 
(Note that this problem illustrates the principles of the dynamometer-type ac 
ammeter.) 
3.24 Two windings, one mounted on a stator and the other on a rotor, have self- and 
mutual inductances of 
LI1 
- 
4.5H 
L22 -- 2.5H 
L12 -- 2.8cos0 H 
where 0 is the angle between the axes of the windings. The resistances of the 
windings may be neglected. Winding 2 is short-circuited, and the current in 
winding 1 as a function of time is il = 10 sin wt A. 
a. 
Derive an expression for the numerical value in newton-meters of the 
instantaneous torque on the rotor in terms of the angle 0. 
b. 
Compute the time-averaged torque in newton-meters when 0 = 45 °. 
c. 
If the rotor is allowed to move, will it rotate continuously or will it tend 
to come to rest? If the latter, at what value of 00 ? 
3.25 A loudspeaker is made of a magnetic core of infinite permeability and circular 
symmetry, as shown in Figs. 3.37a and b. The air-gap length g is much less 
than the radius r0 of the central core. The voice coil is constrained to move 
only in the x direction and is attached to the speaker cone, which is not shown 
in the figure. A constant radial magnetic field is produced in the air gap by a 
direct current in coil 1, i l = 
I1. An audio-frequency signal i2 = 12 COS cot is 
then applied to the voice coil. Assume the voice coil to be of negligible 
thickness and composed of N2 turns uniformly distributed over its height h. 
Also assume that its displacement is such that it remains in the air gap 
(O<x <l-h). 
a. 
Calculate the force on the voice coil, using the Lorentz Force Law 
(Eq. 3.1). 

3.11 
Problems 
169 
Voice coil 
N 2 tums 
positive i 2 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.37 Loudspeaker for Problem 3.25. 
b. 
Calculate the self-inductance of each coil. 
c. 
Calculate the mutual inductance between the coils. (Hint: Assume that 
current is applied to the voice coil, and calculate the flux linkages of 
coil 1. Note that these flux linkages vary with the displacement x.) 
d. 
Calculate the force on the voice coil from the coenergy W~a. 
3.26 Repeat Example 3.8 with the samarium-cobalt magnet replaced by a 
neodymium-iron-boron magnet. 
3.27 The magnetic structure of Fig. 3.38 is a schematic view of a system designed 
to support a block of magnetic material (/x --+ c~) of mass M against the force 
of gravity. The system includes a permanent magnet and a winding. Under 
normal conditions, the force is supplied by the permanent magnet alone. The 
function of the winding is to counteract the field produced by the magnet so 
that the mass can be removed from the device. The system is designed such 
that the air gaps at each side of the mass remain constant at length go~2. 
Depth D into the paper 
~-- d--~ 
ling, 
rns 
lOravity 
 ,,a,.etio mate,a, 
mass M 
Figure 3.38 Magnetic support system for 
Problem 3.27. 

170 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
Assume that the permanent magnet can be represented by a linear 
characteristic of the form 
Bm =/ZR(Hm- Hc) 
and that the winding direction is such that positive winding current reduces 
the air-gap flux produced by the permanent magnet. Neglect the effects of 
magnetic fringing. 
a. 
Assume the winding current to be zero. (i) Find the force fnd acting on 
the mass in the x direction due to the permanent magnet alone as a 
function of x (0 < x < h). (ii) Find the maximum mass Mmax that can be 
supported against gravity for 0 < x < h. 
b. 
For M = Mmax/2, find the minimum current required to ensure that the 
mass will fall out of the system when the current is applied. 
3.28 Winding 1 in the loudspeaker of Problem 3.25 (Fig. 3.37) is replaced by a 
permanent magnet as shown in Fig. 3.39. The magnet can be represented by 
the linear characteristic Bm -- /ZR (Hm -- Hc). 
a. 
Assuming the voice coil current to be zero, (i2 = 0), calculate the 
magnetic flux density in the air gap. 
b. 
Calculate the flux linkage of the voice coil due to the permanent magnet 
as a function of the displacement x. 
c. 
Calculate the coenergy W~d(i2, x) assuming that the voice coil current is 
sufficiently small so that the component of W~d due to the voice coil self 
inductance can be ignored. 
d. 
Calculate the force on the voice coil. 
3.29 Figure 3.40 shows a circularly symmetric system in which a moveable 
plunger (constrained to move only in the vertical direction) is supported by a 
spring of spring constant K = 5.28 N/m. The system is excited by a 
Permanent 
magnet ~ 
f T 
Figure 3.39 Central core of 
loudspeaker of Fig. 3.37 with winding 1 
replaced by a permanent magnet 
(Problem 3.28). 

3.11 
Problems 
171 
~ Spring 
Plunger 
g ~!ii!ii!ii:i!iii!iiiii!ili!ii~iiiiii!iiiiilz~iiiiiiii!i:ii:iiiiiiil,2i!:ili!ii~ 
g 
g << R1 
R2 
tm 
X 
T 
R3 
Magnet 
C/L 
Figure 3.40 Permanent-magnet system for Problem 3.29. 
samarium-cobalt permanent-magnet in the shape of a washer of outer radius 
R3, inner radius R2, and thickness tm. The system dimensions are: 
R1 -- 2.1 cm, 
R2 = 4 cm, 
R3 = 4.5 cm 
h -- 1 cm, 
g = 1 mm, 
tm --= 3 mm 
The equilibrium position of the plunger is observed to be x - 1.0 mm. 
a. 
Find the magnetic flux density Bg in the fixed gap and Bx in the 
variable gap. 
b. 
Calculate the x-directed magnetic force pulling down on the plunger. 
c. 
The spring force is of the form fspring 
-- K (X0 - x). Find X0. 
3.30 The plunger of a solenoid is connected to a spring. The spring force is given 
by f = K0(0.9a - x), where x is the air-gap length. The inductance of the 
solenoid is of the form L = Lo(1 - x/a), and its winding resistance is R. 
The plunger is initially stationary at position x = 0.9a when a dc voltage 
of magnitude V0 is applied to the solenoid. 
a. 
Find an expression for the force as a function of time required to hold the 
plunger at position a/2. 
b. 
If the plunger is then released and allowed to come to equilibrium, find 
the equilibrium position X0. You may assume that this position falls in the 
range 0 _< X0 < a. 
3.31 Consider the solenoid system of Problem 3.30. Assume the following 
parameter values: 
L0=4.0mH 
a--2.2cm 
R=1.5~ 
K0=3.5N/cm 

172 
CHAPTER 3 
ElectromechanicaI-Energy-Conversion Principles 
The plunger has mass M = 0.2 kg. Assume the coil to be connected to a dc 
source of magnitude 4 A. Neglect any effects of gravity. 
a. 
Find the equilibrium displacement X0. 
b. Write the dynamic equations of motion for the system. 
c. 
Linearize these dynamic equations for incremental motion of the system 
around its equilibrium position. 
d. 
If the plunger is displaced by an incremental distance E from its 
equilibrium position X0 and released with zero velocity at time t = 0, find 
(i) The resultant motion of the plunger as a function of time, and (ii) The 
corresponding time-varying component of current induced across the coil 
terminals. 
3.32 The solenoid of Problem 3.31 is now connected to a dc voltage source of 
magnitude 6 V. 
a. Find the equilibrium displacement X0. 
b. Write the dynamic equations of motion for the system. 
c. 
Linearize these dynamic equations for incremental motion of the system 
around its equilibrium position. 
3.33 Consider the single-coil rotor of Example 3.1. Assume the rotor winding to be 
carrying a constant current of I - 8 A and the rotor to have a moment of 
inertia J = 0.0125 kg. m 2. 
a. 
Find the equilibrium position of the rotor. Is it stable? 
b. Write the dynamic equations for the system. 
c. 
Find the natural frequency in hertz for incremental rotor motion around 
this equilibrium position. 
3.34 Consider a solenoid magnet similar to that of Example 3.10 (Fig. 3.24) except 
that the length of the cylindrical plunger is reduced to a + h. Derive the 
dynamic equations of motion of the system. 

CHAPTER 
Introduction to Rotating 
Machines 
T 
he object of this chapter is to introduce and discuss some of the principles 
underlying the performance of electric machinery. As will be seen, these prin- 
ciples are common to both ac and dc machines. Various techniques and approx- 
imations involved in reducing a physical machine to simple mathematical models, 
sufficient to illustrate the basic principles, will be developed. 
4.1 
ELEMENTARY CONCEPTS 
Equation 1.27, e = d)~/dt, can be used to determine the voltages induced by time- 
varying magnetic fields. Electromagnetic energy conversion occurs when changes in 
the flux linkage ~. result from mechanical motion. In rotating machines, voltages are 
generated in windings or groups of coils by rotating these windings mechanically 
through a magnetic field, by mechanically rotating a magnetic field past the winding, 
or by designing the magnetic circuit so that the reluctance varies with rotation of the 
rotor. By any of these methods, the flux linking a specific coil is changed cyclically, 
and a time-varying voltage is generated. 
A set of such coils connected together is typically referred to as an armature 
winding. In general, the term armature winding is used to refer to a winding or a set 
of windings on a rotating machine which carry ac currents. In ac machines such as 
synchronous or induction machines, the armature winding is typically on the station- 
ary portion of the motor referred to as the stator, in which case these windings may 
also be referred to as stator windings. Figure 4.1 shows the stator winding of a large, 
multipole, three-phase synchronous motor under construction. 
In a dc machine, the armature winding is found on the rotating member, referred 
to as the rotor. Figure 4.2 shows a dc-machine rotor. As we will see, the armature 
winding of a dc machine consists of many coils connected together to form a closed 
loop. A rotating mechanical contact is used to supply current to the armature winding 
as the rotor rotates. 
173 

174 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Figure 4.1 
Stator of a 190-MVA three-phase 12-kV 37-r/min hydroelectric generator. 
The conductors have hollow passages through which cooling water is circulated. (Brown 
Boveri Corporation.) 
Synchronous and dc machines typically include a second winding (or set of 
windings) which carry dc current and which are used to produce the main operating 
flux in the machine. Such a winding is typically referred to as field winding. The field 
winding on a dc machine is found on the stator, while that on a synchronous machine 
is found on the rotor, in which case current must be supplied to the field winding via 
a rotating mechanical contact. As we have seen, permanent magnets also produce dc 
magnetic flux and are used in the place of field windings in some machines. 
In most rotating machines, the stator and rotor are made of electrical steel, and 
the windings are installed in slots on these structures. As is discussed in Chapter 1, 
the use of such high-permeability material maximizes the coupling between the coils 
and increases the magnetic energy density associated with the electromechanical 
interaction. It also enables the machine designer to shape and distribute the magnetic 
fields according to the requirements of each particular machine design. The time- 
varying flux present in the armature structures of these machines tends to induce 
currents, known as eddy currents, in the electrical steel. Eddy currents can be a large 
source of loss in such machines and can significantly reduce machine performance. In 
order to minimize the effects of eddy currents, the armature structure is typically built 
from thin laminations of electrical steel which are insulated from each other. This is 
illustrated in Fig. 4.3, which shows the stator core of an ac motor being constructed 
as a stack of individual laminations. 
In some machines, such as variable reluctance machines and stepper motors, 
there are no windings on the rotor. Operation of these machines depends on the 

4.1 
Elementary Concepts 
175 
Figure 4.2 
Armature of a dc motor. (General Electric Company.) 
Figure 4.3 
Partially completed stator core for an ac motor. 
(Westinghouse Electric Corporation.) 

176 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
nonuniformity of air-gap reluctance associated with variations in rotor position in 
conjunction with time-varying currents applied to their stator windings. In such ma- 
chines, both the stator and rotor structures are subjected to time-varying magnetic 
flux and, as a result, both may require lamination to reduce eddy-current losses. 
Rotating electric machines take many forms and are known by many names: dc, 
synchronous, permanent-magnet, induction, variable reluctance, hysteresis, brush- 
less, and so on. Although these machines appear to be quite dissimilar, the physical 
principles governing their behavior are quite similar, and it is often helpful to think 
of them in terms of the same physical picture. For example, analysis of a dc machine 
shows that associated with both the rotor and the stator are magnetic flux distributions 
which are fixed in space and that the torque-producing characteristic of the dc machine 
stems from the tendency of these flux distributions to align. An induction machine, in 
spite of many fundamental differences, works on exactly the same principle; one can 
identify flux distributions associated with the rotor and stator. Although they are not 
stationary but rather rotate in synchronism, just as in a dc motor they are displaced by 
a constant angular separation, and torque is produced by the tendency of these flux 
distribution to align. 
Certainly, analytically based models are essential to the analysis and design of 
electric machines, and such models will be derived thoughout this book. However, 
it is also important to recognize that physical insight into the performance of these 
devices is equally useful. One objective of this and subsequent chapters is to guide 
the reader in the development of such insight. 
4,2 
INTRODUCTION TO AC AND DC 
MACHINES 
4.2.1 
AC Machines 
Traditional ac machines fall into one of two categories: synchronous and induction. 
In synchronous machines, rotor-winding currents are supplied directly from the sta- 
tionary frame through a rotating contact. In induction machines, rotor currents are 
induced in the rotor windings by a combination of the time-variation of the stator 
currents and the motion of the rotor relative to the stator. 
Synchronous Machines 
A preliminary picture of synchronous-machine perfor- 
mance can be gained by discussing the voltage induced in the armature of the 
very much simplified salient-pole ac synchronous generator shown schematically 
in Fig. 4.4. The field-winding of this machine produces a single pair of magnetic 
poles (similar to that of a bar magnet), and hence this machine is referred to as a 
two-pole machine. 
With rare exceptions, the armature winding of a synchronous machine is on the 
stator, and the field winding is on the rotor, as is true for the simplified machine 
of Fig. 4.4. The field winding is excited by direct current conducted to it by means 
of stationary carbon brushes which contact rotatating slip rings or collector rings. 
Practical factors usually dictate this orientation of the two windings: It is advantageous 

4.2 
Introduction to AC and DC Machines 
177 
~ld 
nding 
Flux 
paths 
Figure 4.4 Schematic view of a simple, 
two-pole, single-phase synchronous 
generator. 
to have the single, low-power field winding on the rotor while having the high-power, 
typically multiple-phase, armature winding on the stator. 
The armature winding, consisting here of only a single coil of N turns, is indicated 
in cross section by the two coil sides a and -a placed in diametrically opposite narrow 
slots on the inner periphery of the stator of Fig. 4.4. The conductors forming these 
coil sides are parallel to the shaft of the machine and are connected in series by 
end connections (not shown in the figure). The rotor is turned at a constant speed 
by a source of mechanical power connected to its shaft. The armature winding is 
assumed to be open-circuited and hence the flux in this machine is produced by the 
field winding alone. Flux paths are shown schematically by dashed lines in Fig. 4.4. 
A highly idealized analysis of this machine would assume a sinusoidal distribu- 
tion of magnetic flux in the air gap. The resultant radial distribution of air-gap flux 
density B is shown in Fig. 4.5a as a function of the spatial angle Oa (measured with 
respect to the magnetic axis of the armature winding) around the rotor periphery. In 
I ° 
o: 
e 
~t 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.5 
(a) Space distribution of flux density and 
(b) corresponding waveform of the generated voltage for the 
single-phase generator of Fig. 4.4. 

178 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
practice, the air-gap flux-density of practical salient-pole machines can be made to 
approximate a sinusoidal distribution by properly shaping the pole faces. 
As the rotor rotates, the flux-linkages of the armature winding change with time. 
Under the assumption of a sinusoidal flux distribution and constant rotor speed, the 
resulting coil voltage will be sinusoidal in time as shown in Fig. 4.5b. The coil 
voltage passes through a complete cycle for each revolution of the two-pole machine 
of Fig. 4.4. Its frequency in cycles per second (Hz) is the same as the speed of the 
rotor in revolutions per second: the electric frequency of the generated voltage is 
synchronized with the mechanical speed, and this is the reason for the designation 
"synchronous" machine. Thus a two-pole synchronous machine must revolve at 3600 
revolutions per minute to produce a 60-Hz voltage. 
A great many synchronous machines have more than two poles. As a specific 
example, Fig. 4.6 shows in schematic form a four-pole single-phase generator. The 
field coils are connected so that the poles are of alternate polarity. There are two 
complete wavelengths, or cycles, in the flux distribution around the periphery, as 
shown in Fig. 4.7. The armature winding now consists of two coils al, -al and 
a2, --a2 connected in series by their end connections. The span of each coil is one 
wavelength of flux. The generated voltage now goes through two complete cycles 
per revolution of the rotor. The frequency in hertz will thus be twice the speed in 
revolutions per second. 
When a machine has more than two poles, it is convenient to concentrate on 
a single pair of poles and to recognize that the electric, magnetic, and mechanical 
conditions associated with every other pole pair are repetitions of those for the pair 
under consideration. For this reason it is convenient to express angles in electrical 
degrees or electrical radians rather than in physical units. One pair of poles in a 
multipole machine or one cycle of flux distribution equals 360 electrical degrees or 
2Jr electrical radians. Since there are poles/2 complete wavelengths, or cycles, in one 
Figure 4.6 Schematic view of a 
simple, four-pole, single-phase 
synchronous generator. 

4.2 
Introduction to AC and DC Machines 
179 
--al 
~ 
--a2 
0a, mechanical 
' 
\ 
zr// 
\ 
2zr radians 
0 
Oae, electrical 
radians 
Figure 4.7 Space distribution of the air-gap flux density in a 
idealized, four-pole synchronous generator. 
complete revolution, it follows, for example, that 
(p°les) Oa 
(4.1) 
0ae = 
2 
where 0ae is the angle in electrical units and 0a is the spatial angle. This same rela- 
tionship applies to all angular measurements in a multipole machine; their values in 
electrical units will be equal to (poles/2) times their actual spatial values. 
The coil voltage of a multipole machine passes through a complete cycle every 
time a pair of poles sweeps by, or (poles/2) times each revolution. The electrical 
frequency fe of the voltage generated in a synchronous machine is therefore 
fe -- (ples) 
n 
Hz 
(4.2) 
where n is the mechanical speed in revolutions per minute, and hence n/60 is the 
speed in revolutions per second. The electrical frequency of the generated voltage in 
radians per second is We = (poles/2) corn where corn is the mechanical speed in radians 
per second. 
The rotors shown in Figs. 4.4 and 4.6 have salient, or projecting, poles with con- 
centrated windings. Figure 4.8 shows diagrammatically a nonsalient-pole, or cylin- 
drical rotor. The field winding is a two-pole distributed winding; the coil sides are 
distributed in multiple slots around the rotor periphery and arranged to produce an 
approximately sinusoidal distribution of radial air-gap flux. 
The relationship between electrical frequency and rotor speed of Eq. 4.2 can serve 
as a basis for understanding why some synchronous generators have salient-pole ro- 
tor structures while others have cylindrical rotors. Most power systems in the world 
operate at frequencies of either 50 or 60 Hz. A salient-pole construction is character- 
istic of hydroelectric generators because hydraulic turbines operate at relatively low 
speeds, and hence a relatively large number of poles is required to produce the desired 
frequency; the salient-pole construction is better adapted mechanically to this situa- 
tion. The rotor of a large hydroelectric generator is shown in Fig. 4.9. Steam turbines 
and gas turbines, however, operate best at relatively high speeds, and turbine-driven 
alternators or turbine generators are commonly two- or four-pole cylindrical-rotor 

180 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Figure 4.8 
Elementary two-pole 
cylindrical-rotor field winding. 
Figure 4.9 Water-cooled rotor of the 190-MVA 
hydroelectric generator whose stator is shown in Fig. 4.1. 
(Brown Boveri Corporation.) 

4.2 
Introduction to AC and DC Machines 
t81 
Figure 4.10 
Rotor of a two-pole 3600 r/min turbine generator. (Westinghouse Electric 
Corporation.) 
machines. The rotors are made from a single steel forging or from several forgings, 
as shown in Figs. 4.10 and 4.11. 
Most of the world's power systems are three-phase systems and, as a result, 
with very few exceptions, synchronous generators are three-phase machines. For the 
production of a set of three voltages phase-displaced by 120 electrical degrees in 
time, a minimum of three coils phase-displaced 120 electrical degrees in space must 
be used. A simplified schematic view of a three-phase, two-pole machine with one 
coil per phase is shown in Fig. 4.12a. The three phases are designated by the letters 
a, b, and c. In an elementary four-pole machine, a minimum of two such sets of coils 
must be used, as illustrated in Fig. 4.12b; in an elementary multipole machine, the 
minimum number of coils sets is given by one half the number of poles. 
The two coils in each phase of Fig. 4.12b are connected in series so that their 
voltages add, and the three phases may then be either Y- or A-connected. Figure 4.12c 
shows how the coils may be interconnected to form a Y connection. Note however, 
since the voltages in the coils of each phase are indentical, a parallel connection is 
also possible, e.g., coil (a, -a) in parallel with coil (a', -a'), and so on. 
When a synchronous generator supplies electric power to a load, the armature 
current creates a magnetic flux wave in the air gap which rotates at synchronous speed, 
as shown in Section 4.5. This flux reacts with the flux created by the field current, 
and electromechanical torque results from the tendency of these two magnetic fields 
to align. In a generator this torque opposes rotation, and mechanical torque must be 
applied from the prime mover to sustain rotation. This electromechanical torque is the 
mechanism through which the synchronous generator converts mechanical to electric 
energy. 
The counterpart of the synchronous generator is the synchronous motor. A cut- 
away view of a three-phase, 60-Hz synchronous motor is shown in Fig. 4.13. Alter- 
nating current is supplied to the armature winding on the stator, and dc excitation 
is supplied to the field winding on the rotor. The magnetic field produced by the 

182 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Figure 4.11 
Parts of multipiece rotor for a 1333-MVA three-phase 1800 r/min turbine 
generator. The separate forgings will be shrunk on the shaft before final machining and 
milling slots for the windings. The total weight of the rotor is 435,000 lb. (Brown Boveri 
Corporation.) 
o 
a a 
a l 
0 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 4.12 Schematic views of three-phase generators: (a) two-pole, (b) four-pole, and 
(c) Y connection of the windings. 
armature currents rotates at synchronous speed. To produce a steady electromechan- 
ical torque, the magnetic fields of the stator and rotor must be constant in amplitude 
and stationary with respect to each other. In a synchronous motor, the steady-state 
speed is determined by the number of poles and the frequency of the armature current. 
Thus a synchronous motor operated from a constant-frequency ac source will operate 
at a constant steady-state speed. 

4.2 
Introduction to AC and DC Machines 
183 
Figure 4.13 
Cutaway view of a high-speed synchronous motor. The excitor shown on the 
left end of the rotor is a small ac generator with a rotating semiconductor rectifier assembly. 
(General Electric Company.) 
In a motor the electromechanical torque is in the direction of rotation and balances 
the opposing torque required to drive the mechanical load. The flux produced by 
currents in the armature of a synchronous motor rotates ahead of that produced by 
the field, thus pulling on the field (and hence on the rotor) and doing work. This is 
the opposite of the situation in a synchronous generator, where the field does work as 
its flux pulls on that of the armature, which is lagging behind. In both generators and 
motors, an electromechanical torque and a rotational voltage are produced. These are 
the essential phenomena for electromechanical energy conversion. 
Induction Machines 
A second type of ac machine is the induction machine. Like 
the synchronous machine, the stator winding of an induction machine is excited with 
alternating currents. In contrast to a synchronous machine in which a field winding on 
the rotor is excited with dc current, alternating currents flow in the rotor windings of 
an induction machine. In induction machines, alternating currents are applied directly 
to the stator windings. Rotor currents are then produced by induction, i.e., transformer 
action. The induction machine may be regarded as a generalized transformer in which 
electric power is transformed between rotor and stator together with a change of 
frequency and a flow of mechanical power. Although the induction motor is the most 

184 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
common of all motors, it is seldom used as a generator; its performance characteristics 
as a generator are unsatisfactory for most applications, although in recent years it has 
been found to be well suited for wind-power applications. The induction machine 
may also be used as a frequency changer. 
In the induction motor, the stator windings are essentially the same as those of 
a synchronous machine. However, the rotor windings are electrically short-circuited 
and frequently have no external connections; currents are induced by transformer 
action from the stator winding. A cutaway view of a squirrel-cage induction motor is 
shown in Fig. 4.14. Here the rotor "windings" are actually solid aluminum bars which 
are cast into the slots in the rotor and which are shorted together by cast aluminum 
rings at each end of the rotor. This type of rotor construction results in induction 
motors which are relatively inexpensive and highly reliable, factors contributing to 
their immense popularity and widespread application. 
As in a synchronous motor, the armature flux in the induction motor leads that of 
the rotor and produces an electromechanical torque. In fact, we will see that, just as 
in a synchronous machine, the rotor and stator fluxes rotate in synchronism with each 
other and that torque is related to the relative displacement between them. However, 
unlike a synchronous machine, the rotor of an induction machine does not itself 
rotate synchronously; it is the "slipping" of the rotor with respect to the synchronous 
armature flux that gives rise to the induced rotor currents and hence the torque. 
Induction motors operate at speeds less than the synchronous mechanical speed. A 
typical speed-torque characteristic for an induction motor is shown in Fig. 4.15. 
Figure 4.14 
Cutaway view of a squirrel-cage induction motor. 
(Westinghouse Electric Corporation.) 

4.2 
Introduction to AC and DC Machines 
185 
,,,._ 
r 
2O 
40 
6O 
80 
100 
Speed in percent of synchronous speed 
Figure 4.15 
Typical induction-motor speed-torque 
characteristic. 
Figure 4.16 
Cutaway view of a typical integral-horsepower dc motor. (ASEA 
Brown Boveri.) 
4.2.2 
DC Machines 
As has been discussed, the armature winding of a dc generator is on the rotor with 
current conducted from it by means of carbon brushes. The field winding is on the 
stator and is excited by direct current. A cutaway view of a dc motor is shown in 
Fig. 4.16. 
A very elementary two-pole dc generator is shown in Fig. 4.17. The armature 
winding, consisting of a single coil of N turns, is indicated by the two coil sides 

186 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
A, rmature 
:oil, N turns 
Rotation 
Carbon brush 
Copper 
commutator 
segments 
Figure 4.17 
Elementary dc machine with 
commutator. 
a and -a placed at diametrically opposite points on the rotor with the conductors 
parallel to the shaft. The rotor is normally turned at a constant speed by a source 
of mechanical power connected to the shaft. The air-gap flux distribution usually 
approximates a flat-topped wave, rather than the sine wave found in ac machines, and 
is shown in Fig. 4.18a. Rotation of the coil generates a coil voltage which is a time 
function having the same waveform as the spatial flux-density distribution. 
Although the ultimate purpose is the generation of a direct voltage, the voltage 
induced in an individual armature coil is an alternating voltage, which must there- 
fore be rectified. The output voltage of an ac machine can be rectified using external 
semiconductor rectifiers. This is in contrast to the conventional dc machine in which 
rectification is produced mechanically by means of a commutator, which is a cylinder 
formed of copper segments insulated from each other by mica or some other highly 
insulating material and mounted on, but insulated from, the rotor shaft. Stationary 
carbon brushes held against the commutator surface connect the winding to the exter- 
nal armature terminals. The commutator and brushes can readily be seen in Fig. 4.16. 
The need for commutation is the reason why the armature windings of dc machines 
are placed on the rotor. 
For the elementary dc generator, the commutator takes the form shown in Fig. 4.17. 
For the direction of rotation shown, the commutator at all times connects the coil side, 
which is under the south pole, to the positive brush and that under the north pole to 
the negative brush. The commutator provides full-wave rectification, transforming 
the voltage waveform between brushes to that of Fig. 4.18b and making available 
a unidirectional voltage to the external circuit. The dc machine of Fig. 4.17 is, of 
course, simplified to the point of being unrealistic in the practical sense, and later it 
will be essential to examine the action of more realistic commutators. 
The effect of direct current in the field winding of a dc machine is to create a 
magnetic flux distribution which is stationary with respect to the stator. Similarly, the 

4,3 
MMF of Distributed Windings 
t87 
Space distribution 
~
~
_
 
of flux density 
~a 
;i---a ...... ~[zn 
an~ Angle#aroun d 
. ~~__ .~ ........... 
~
p
 
periphery 
(a) 
2 
ca) / V V 
Time t 
(b) 
Figure 4.18 
(a) Space distribution of air-gap flux density in an 
elementary dc machine; (b) waveform of voltage between brushes 
effect of the commutator is such that when direct current flows through the brushes, 
the armature creates a magnetic flux distribution which is also fixed in space and 
whose axis, determined by the design of the machine and the position of the brushes, 
is typically perpendicular to the axis of the field flux. 
Thus, just as in the ac machines discussed previously, it is the interaction of these 
two flux distributions that creates the torque of the dc machine. If the machine is acting 
as a generator, this torque opposes rotation. If it is acting as a motor, the electrome- 
chanical torque acts in the direction of the rotation. Remarks similar to those already 
made concerning the roles played by the generated voltage and electromechanical 
torque in the energy conversion process in synchronous machines apply equally well 
to dc machines. 
4.3 
MMF OF DISTRIBUTED WINDINGS 
Most armatures have distributed windings, i.e., windings which are spread over a 
number of slots around the air-gap periphery, as in Figs. 4.2 and 4.1. The individual 
coils are interconnected so that the result is a magnetic field having the same number 
of poles as the field winding. 
The study of the magnetic fields of distributed windings can be approached by 
examining the magnetic field produced by a winding consisting of a single N-turn 
coil which spans 180 electrical degrees, as shown in Fig. 4.19a. A coil which spans 

188 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
N-turn coil 
carrying current 
ux lines 
Magnetic axis 
of stator coil 
(a) 
Fundamental 
~'agl 
Ni 
x~ .. 
" ~ ~ ~'~ 
I 
I 
Oa 
%% 
Jr 
Ni 
~ 
/ 
27r 
2 
] 
...... Rotor surface 
~ 
Stator surface 
.
.
.
.
 
ii 
(b) 
Figure 4.19 (a) Schematic view of flux produced by a concentrated, 
full-pitch winding in a machine with a uniform air gap. (b) The air-gap 
mmf produced by current in this winding. 
180 electrical degrees is known as a full-pitch coil. The dots and crosses indicate cur- 
rent flow towards and away from the reader, respectively. For simplicity, a concentric 
cylindrical rotor is shown. The general nature of the magnetic field produced by the 
current in the coil is shown by the dashed lines in Fig. 4.19a. Since the permeability 
of the armature and field iron is much greater than that of air, it is sufficiently accurate 
for our present purposes to assume that all the reluctance of the magnetic circuit is 
in the air gap. From symmetry of the structure it is evident that the magnetic field 
intensity Hag in the air gap at angle 0a under one pole is the same in magnitude as that 
at angle 0a + zr under the opposite pole, but the fields are in the opposite direction. 
Around any of the closed paths shown by the flux lines in Fig. 4.19a the mmf is 
N i. The assumption that all the reluctance of this magnetic circuit is in the air gap 
leads to the result that the line integral of H inside the iron is negligibly small, and 
thus it is reasonable to neglect the mmf drops associated with portions of the magnetic 
circuit inside the iron. By symmetry we argued that the air-gap fields Hag on opposite 
sides of the rotor are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. It follows that the 
air-gap mmf should be similarly distributed; since each flux line crosses the air gap 
twice, the mmf drop across the air gap must be equal to half of the total or Ni/2. 
Figure 4.19b shows the air gap and winding in developed form, i.e., laid out 
flat. The air-gap mmf distribution is shown by the steplike distribution of amplitude 

4.3 
MMF of Distributed Windings 
189 
Ni/2. On the assumption of narrow slot openings, the mmfjumps abruptly by Ni in 
crossing from one side to the other of a coil. This mmf distribution is discussed again 
in Section 4.4, where the resultant magnetic fields are evaluated. 
4.3.1 
AC Machines 
Fourier analysis can show that the air-gap mmf produced by a single coil such as the 
full-pitch coil of Fig. 4.19 consists of a fundamental space-harmonic component as 
well as a series of higher-order harmonic components. In the design of ac machines, 
serious efforts are made to distribute the coils making up the windings so as to 
minimize the higher-order harmonic components and to produce an air-gap mmf 
wave which consists predominantly of the space-fundamental sinusoidal component. 
It is thus appropriate here to assume that this has been done and to focus our attention 
on the fundamental component. 
The rectangular air-gap mmf wave of the concentrated two-pole, full-pitch coil of 
Fig. 4.19b can be resolved into a Fourier series comprising a fundamental component 
and a series of odd harmonics. The fundamental component .Tagl is 
.)E'ag 1 -- -- 
COS Oa 
T 
(4.3) 
where 0a is measured from the magnetic axis of the stator coil, as shown by the dashed 
sinusoid in Fig. 4.19b. It is a sinusoidal space wave of amplitude 
(Fagl)peak 
-- 
_
_
 
T 
(4.4) 
with its peak aligned with the magnetic axis of the coil. 
Now consider a distributed winding, consisting of coils distributed in several 
slots. For example, Fig. 4.20a shows phase a of the armature winding of a somewhat 
simplified two-pole, three-phase ac machine. Phases b and c occupy the empty slots. 
The windings of the three phases are identical and are located with their magnetic 
axes 120 degrees apart. We direct our attention to the air-gap mmf of phase a alone, 
postponing the discussion of the effects of all three phases until Section 4.5. The 
winding is arranged in two layers, each full-pitch coil of Nc turns having one side in 
the top of a slot and the other coil side in the bottom of a slot a pole pitch away. In 
a practical machine, this two-layer arrangement simplifies the geometric problem of 
getting the end turns of the individual coils past each other. 
Figure 4.20b shows one pole of this winding laid out fiat. With the coils connected 
in series and hence carrying the same current, the mmf wave is a series of steps each 
of height 2Ncia (equal to the ampere-turns in the slot), where ia is the winding current. 
Its space-fundamental component is shown by the sinusoid. It can be seen that the 
distributed winding produces a closer approximation to a sinusoidal mmf wave than 
the concentrated coil of Fig. 4.19. 
The amplitude of the fundamental-space-harmonic-component of the mmf wave 
of a distributed winding is less than the sum of the fundamental components of the 

190 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Axis of 
phase a 
(a) 
A 
I 
S p ac e 
jfu?d aavmtnta, 
ff 
o 
ii 
2ncia 
> 0 a 
a 
--a 
,~, 
......__...A 
(b) 
Figure 4.20 
The mmf of one phase of a distributed two-pole, 
three-phase winding with full-pitch coils. 
individual coils because the magnetic axes of the individual coils are not aligned with 
the resultant. The modified form of Eq. 4.3 for a distributed multipole winding having 
Nph series turns per phase is 
4 
(po,es) 
• ~"agl -- -- 
ia COS 
0 a 
(4.5) 
:r 
poles 
2 
in which the factor 4/7r arises from the Fourier-series analysis of the rectangular mmf 
wave of a concentrated full-pitch coil, as in Eq. 4.3, and the winding factor kw takes 
into account the distribution of the winding. This factor is required because the mmf's 
produced by the individual coils of any one phase group have different magnetic axes. 

4.3 
MMF of Distributed Windings 
191 
When they are connected in series to form the phase winding, their phasor sum is then 
less than their numerical sum. (See Appendix B for details.) For most three-phase 
windings, kw typically falls in the range of 0.85 to 0.95. 
The factor kw Nph is the effective series turns per phase for the fundamental mmf. 
The peak amplitude of this mmf wave is 
(fagl)peak 
= 
-- 
ia 
(4.6) 
Jr 
poles 
"XAMPLE 4. 
The phase-a two-pole armature winding of Fig. 4.20a can be considered to consist of 8 Nc-turn, 
full-pitch coils connected in series, with each slot containing two coils. There are a total of 24 
armature slots, and thus each slot is separated by 360°/24 = 15 °. Assume angle 0a is measured 
from the magnetic axis of phase a such that the four slots containing the coil sides labeled a 
are at 0a = 67.5 °, 82.5 °, 97.5 °, and 112.5 °. The opposite sides of each coil are thus found in 
the slots found at - 112.5 °, -97.5 °, -82.5 ° and -67.5 °, respectively. Assume this winding to 
be carrying current ia. 
(a) Write an expression for the space-fundamental mmf produced by the two coils whose 
sides are in the slots at 0a = 112.5 ° and -67.5 °. (b) Write an expression for the space- 
fundamental mmf produced by the two coils whose sides are in the slots at 0a -- 67.5 ° and 
-112.5 °. (c) Write an expression for the space-fundamental mmf of the complete armature 
winding. (d) Determine the winding factor kw for this distributed winding. 
I Solution 
a. Noting that the magnetic axis of this pair of coils is at (9 a = (112.5 ° - 67.5°)/2 = 22.5 ° 
and that the total ampere-turns in the slot is equal to 2Ncia, the mmf produced by this pair 
of coils can be found from analogy with Eq. 4.3 to be 
4 (2Ncia) 
(,~'agl)22.5 o -- -- 
COS (0a -- 22.5 °) 
rr 
2 
b. This pair of coils produces the same space-fundamental mmf as the pair of part (a) with 
the exception that this mmf is centered at 0a -- --22.5 °. Thus 
4 (2Ncia) 
(,~L"agl)_22.5o 
= 
-- 
COS ((9 a -Jr- 22.5 °) 
c. By analogy with parts (a) and (b), the total space-fundamental mmf can be written as 
(,~L-'agl)total = 
(,~E'agl)-22.5o 
"31-()L-'agl)-7.5o 
-Jr-(,~E'agl)7.5o 
+ 
(,~E'agl)22.5o 
4 (2Nc)ia[COS(Oa+22.S°,+cos(Oa-k-7.5°) 
+ COS(0a -- 7.5 °) + COS (0a -- 22.5°)] 
4 (7"66Nc)iaCOSOa 
Jr 
2 
-- 4.88Ncia cos (9 a 

192 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
d. Recognizing that, for this winding Nph = 8Nc, the total mmf of part (c) can be rewritten 
as 
4 
()E'agl)total = 
-- 
ia COS 0a 
zr 
2 
Comparison with Eq. 4.5 shows that for this winding, the winding factor is kw = 0.958. 
Practice Problem 4. 
Calculate the winding factor of the phase-a winding of Fig. 4.20 if the number of turns in the 
four coils in the two outer pairs of slots is reduced to six while the number of turns in the four 
coils in the inner slots remains at eight. 
Solution 
kw = 0.962 
Equation 4.5 describes the space-fundamental component of the mmf wave pro- 
duced by current in phase a of a distributed winding. If the phase-a current is sinusoidal 
in time, e.g., ia = Im COS cot, the result will be an mmf wave which is stationary in 
space and varies sinusoidally both with respect to 0a and in time. In Section 4.5 we 
will study the effect of currents in all three phases and will see that the application of 
three-phase currents will produce a rotating mmf wave. 
In a directly analogous fashion, rotor windings are often distributed in slots to 
reduce the effects of space harmonics. Figure 4.21 a shows the rotor of a typical two- 
pole round-rotor generator. Although the winding is symmetric with respect to the 
rotor axis, the number of turns per slot can be varied to control the various harmonics. 
In Fig. 4.21b it can be seen that there are fewer turns in the slots nearest the pole 
face. In addition, the designer can vary the spacing of the slots. As for distributed 
armature windings, the fundamental air-gap mmf wave of a multipole rotor winding 
can be found from Eq. 4.5 in terms of the total number of series turns Nr, the winding 
current Ir and a winding factor kr as 
4 (krNr)(poles 
) 
f'agl - -- 
Ir COS 
Or 
(4.7) 
Jr 
poles 
2 
where Or is the spatial angle measured with respect to the rotor magnetic axis, as 
shown in Fig. 4.21 b. Its peak amplitude is 
4 
(Fagl)peak 
-- 
-- 
Ir 
Jr 
poles 
(4.8) 
4.3.2 
DC Machines 
Because of the restrictions imposed on the winding arrangement by the commu- 
tator, the mmf wave of a dc machine armature approximates a sawtooth waveform 

4.3 
MMF of Distributed Windings 
193 
Pole faces 
(a) 
N10/r ~
~
 
 9'r 
U8/r 
/ 
 6'r 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
mmf 
Space 
] 
fundamental 
mmf wave 
N3I r 
Rotor 
axis 
Na/r 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
(b) 
Figure 4.21 
The air-gap mmf of a distributed winding on the rotor of a round-rotor 
generator. 
more nearly than the sine wave of ac machines. For example, Fig. 4.22 shows 
diagrammatically in cross section the armature of a two-pole dc machine. (In practice, 
in all but the smallest of dc machines, a larger number of coils and slots would prob- 
ably be used.) The current directions are shown by dots and crosses. The armature 
winding coil connections are such that the armature winding produces a magnetic 

194 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Magnetic axis 
of armature 
windin~ 
Magnetic axis 
of field winding 
Figure 4.22 Cross section of a two-pole dc machine. 
field whose axis is vertical and thus is perpendicular to the axis of the field winding. 
As the armature rotates, the coil connections to the external circuit are changed by 
the commutator such that the magnetic field of the armature remains vertical. Thus, 
the armature flux is always perpendicular to that produced by the field winding and 
a continuous unidirectional torque results. Commutator action is discussed in some 
detail in Section 7.2. 
Figure 4.23a shows this winding laid out flat. The mmf wave is shown in 
Fig. 4.23b. On the assumption of narrow slots, it consists of a series of steps. The 
height of each step equals the number of ampere-turns 2Ncic in a slot, where Nc is 
the number of turns in each coil and ic is the coil current, with a two-layer wind- 
ing and full-pitch coils being assumed. The peak value of the mmf wave is along the 
magnetic axis of the armature, midway between the field poles. This winding is equiv- 
alent to a coil of 12Ncic A.turns distributed around the armature. On the assumption 
of symmetry at each pole, the peak value of the mmf wave at each armature pole is 
6Ncic A.turns. 
This mmf wave can be represented approximately by the sawtooth wave drawn in 
Fig. 4.23b and repeated in Fig. 4.23c. For a more realistic winding with a larger number 
of armature slots per pole, the triangular distribution becomes a close approximation. 
This mmf wave would be produced by a rectangular distribution of current density at 
the armature surface, as shown in Fig. 4.23c. 
For our preliminary study, it is convenient to resolve the mmf waves of distributed 
windings into their Fourier series components. The fundamental component of the 
sawtooth mmf wave of Fig. 4.23c is shown by the sine wave. Its peak value is 8/rr 2 = 
0.81 times the height of the sawtooth wave. This fundamental mmf wave is that which 
would be produced by the fundamental space-harmonic component of the rectangular 
current-density distribution of Fig. 4.23c. This sinusoidally-distributed current sheet 
is shown dashed in Fig. 4.23c. 

4.3 
MMF of Distributed Windings 
195 
1 
I 
1 
1 
I 
J__ 
~._"~ 
E-" 
"~ 
E" 
® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® ® 
11 
12 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
1 
2 
(a) 
' 
L__i 
i 
i 
i 
6Ncic 
i 
I 
I/kl 
I 
J 
I 
I 
~!" 
"k 
I 
I 
4Nci c 
I 
i /I 
I~ 
, 
I 
:Y 
"I.: 
--2Nci c -~-~ 
--4Nci c 
--6Nci c 
(b) 
6Ncic 
mmf wave 
Fundamental 
component 
Current____.~ 
X 
sheet 
(c) 
Figure 4.23 
(a) Developed sketch of the dc machine of Fig. 4.22; (b) mmf wave; 
(c) equivalent sawtooth mmf wave, its fundamental component, and equivalent 
rectangular current sheet. 
Note that the air-gap mmf distribution depends on only the winding arrangement 
and symmetry of the magnetic structure at each pole. The air-gap flux density, however, 
depends not only on the mmf but also on the magnetic boundary conditions, primarily 
the length of the air gap, the effect of the slot openings, and the shape of the pole 
face. The designer takes these effects into account by means of detailed analyses, but 
these details need not concern us here. 
DC machines often have a magnetic structure with more than two poles. For 
example, Fig. 4.24a shows schematically a four-pole dc machine. The field winding 

196 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
J 
V///'/~ 
Ca conductors 
poles 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.24 (a) Cross section of a four-pole dc machine; (b) development of 
current sheet and mmf wave. 
produces alternate north-south-north-south polarity, and the armature conductors are 
distributed in four belts of slots carrying currents alternately toward and away from the 
reader, as symbolized by the cross-hatched areas. This machine is shown in laid-out 
form in Fig. 4.24b. The corresponding sawtooth armature-mmf wave is also shown. 
On the assumption of symmetry of the winding and field poles, each successive pair 
of poles is like every other pair of poles. Magnetic conditions in the air gap can 
then be determined by examining any pair of adjacent poles, that is, 360 electrical 
degrees. 
The peak value of the sawtooth armature mmf wave can be written in terms of 
the total number of conductors in the armature slots as 
/ 
) 
(fag)peak -- 
2m ~poles 
ia 
A. turns/pole 
(4.9) 
where 
Ca = total number of conductors in armature winding 
m = number of parallel paths through armature winding 
ia = armature current, A 
This equation takes into account the fact that in some cases the armature may be 
wound with multiple current paths in parallel. It is for this reason that it is often 
more convenient to think of the armature in terms of the number of conductors (each 
conductor corresponding to a single current-carrying path within a slot). Thus ia/m 
is the current in each conductor. This equation comes directly from the line integral 
around the dotted closed path in Fig. 4.24b which crosses the air gap twice and 
encloses Ca/poles conductors, each carrying current ia/m in the same direction. In 
more compact form, 
(Na)i a 
(4.10) 
(Fag)peak = 
poles 

4.4 
Magnetic Fields in Rotating Machinery 
197 
where Na = Ca/(2m) is the number of series armature turns. From the Fourier series 
for the sawtooth mmf wave of Fig. 4.24b, the peak value of the space fundamental is 
given by 
8 
(fagl)peak -- ~ 
poles 
(4.11) 
4.4 
MAGNETIC FIELDS IN ROTATING 
MACHINERY 
We base our preliminary investigations of both ac and dc machines on the assumption 
of sinusoidal spatial distributions of mmf. This assumption will be found to give very 
satisfactory results for most problems involving ac machines because their windings 
are commonly distributed so as to minimize the effects of space harmonics. Because of 
the restrictions placed on the winding arrangement by the commutator, the mmf waves 
of dc machines inherently approach more nearly a sawtooth waveform. Nevertheless, 
the theory based on a sinusoidal model brings out the essential features of dc machine 
theory. The results can readily be modified whenever necessary to account for any 
significant discrepancies. 
It is often easiest to begin by examination of a two-pole machine, in which the 
electrical and mechanical angles and velocities are equal. The results can immediately 
be extrapolated to a multipole machine when it is recalled that electrical angles and 
angular velocities are related to mechanical angles and angular velocities by a factor 
of poles/2 (see, for example, Eq. 4.1). 
The behavior of electric machinery is determined by the magnetic fields created 
by currents in the various windings of the machine. This section discusses how these 
magnetic fields and currents are related. 
4.4.1 
Machines with Uniform Air Gaps 
Figure 4.25a shows a single full-pitch, N-turn coil in a high-permeability magnetic 
structure (/z --+ c~), with a concentric, cylindrical rotor. The air-gap mmf.Tag of this 
configuration is shown plotted versus angle 0a in Fig. 4.25b. For such a structure, with 
a uniform air gap of length g at radius rr (very much larger than g), it is quite accurate 
to assume that the magnetic field I-I in the air gap is directed only radially and has 
constant magnitude across the air gap. 
The air-gap mmf distribution of Fig. 4.25b is equal to the line integral of Hag 
across the air gap. For this case of constant radial Hag, this integral is simply equal 
to the product of the air-gap radial magnetic field Hag times the air-gap length g, and 
thus Hag can be found simply by dividing the air-gap mmf by the air-gap length: 
.Fag 
Hag = 
(4.12) 
g 

198 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
coil 
Magnetic axis 
of stator coil 
(a) 
..••a•/Fundamental 
-~'agl 
s 
N/ 
~" 
" 
" 
s 
s 
x 
2 
s 
S 
S 
~ 
S 
' 
' 
I 
/t 
Ii 
s 
0 
x 
s 
Ni 
", 
s 
s 
x 
Jr 
s 
2rr 
I S 
9 
~ 
.s 
............... 
(b) 
Ni 
2g 
.. ~, .,~j Fundamental Hag 1 
-- 
H 
"Ni 
/ 
/'A"" I' ~N" 
~ 
ag 
I 
,/ 
~ - 
2 
1 / s 
I 
"~ 
h~,," 
,,"Z l 
Ni d 0 
~'~x 
Jr 
ss.q 
2Jr 
2g 
"~ -~" 
mmf 
Fundamental ~agl 
(c) 
Oa 
Figure 
4.25 
The air-gap mmf and radial component of Hag for a 
concentrated full-pitch winding. 
Thus, in Fig. 4.25c, the radial Hag field and mmf can be seen to be identical in form, 
simply related by a factor of 1/g. 
The fundamental space-harmonic component of Hag can be found directly from 
the fundamental component .T'ag~, given by Eq. 4.3. 
Hag 1 -- 
= -- 
cos 0a 
(4.13) 
g 
Jr 

4.4 
Magnetic Fields in Rotating Machinery 
199 
It is a sinusoidal space wave of amplitude 
(nagl)peak -- 
_
_
 
(4.14) 
For a distributed winding such as that of Fig. 4.20, the air-gap magnetic field 
intensity is easily found once the air-gap mmf is known. Thus the fundamental com- 
ponent of Hag can be found by dividing the fundamental component of the air-gap 
mmf (Eq. 4.5) by the air-gap length g 
4 ( kwNph 
)g.po~e 
(poles) 
Hagl = -- 
------~-s 
iaCOS 
0a 
(4.15) 
zr 
2 
This equation has been written for the general case of a multipole machine, and Nph 
is the total number of series tums per phase. 
Note that the space-fundamental air-gap mmf.T'agl and air-gap magnetic field Hag1 
produced by a distributed winding of winding factor kw and Nph/poles series tums per 
pole is equal to that produced by a concentrated, full pitch winding of (kw Npn)/poles 
tums per pole. In the analysis of machines with distributed windings, this result is 
useful since in considering space-fundamental quantities it permits the distributed 
solution to be obtained from the single N-turn, full-pitch coil solution simply by 
replacing N by the effective number of turns, kw Nph, of the distributed winding. 
A four-pole synchronous ac generator with a smooth air gap has a distributed rotor winding 
with 263 series turns, a winding factor of 0.935, and an air gap of length 0.7 mm. Assuming 
the mmf drop in the electrical steel to be negligible, find the rotor-winding current required to 
produce a peak, space-fundamental magnetic flux density of 1.6 T in the machine air gap. 
II Solution 
The space-fundamental air-gap magnetic flux density can be found by multiplying the air-gap 
magnetic field by the permeability of free space/.to, which in turn can be found from the space- 
fundamental component of the air-gap mmf by dividing by the air-gap length g. Thus, from 
Eq. 4.8 
(Bagl)peak_ /A0(OL"agl)peak 
4/Xo ( krNr ) 
-- 
g 
= :rrg ~,poles 
lr 
and Ir can be found from 
Ir = (:n'g: poles ) 
~k 4/z0krNr 
(Bagl)peak 
( 
Zr X 0.0007 × 4 
) 
= 
4 x 4n" x 10 .7 x 0.935 x 263 
1.6 
-- 11.4A 
EXAMPLE 
4.2 

200 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
A 2-pole synchronous machine has an air-gap length of 2.2 cm and a field winding with a 
total of 830 series turns. When excited by a field current of 47 A, the peak, space-fundamental 
magnetic flux density in the machine air-gap is measured to be 1.35 T. 
Based upon the measured flux density, calculate the field-winding winding factor kr. 
Solution 
kr ~- 0.952 
4.4.2 
Machines with Nonuniform Air Gaps 
Figure 4.26a shows the structure of a typical dc machine, and Fig. 4.26b shows 
the structure of a typical salient-pole synchronous machine. Both machines con- 
sist of magnetic structures with extremely nonuniform air gaps. In such cases the 
air-gap magnetic-field distribution is more complex than that of uniform-air-gap 
machines. 
Detailed analysis of the magnetic field distributions in such machines requires 
complete solutions of the field problem. For example, Fig. 4.27 shows the magnetic 
field distribution in a salient-pole dc generator (obtained by a finite-element solution). 
However, experience has shown that through various simplifying assumptions, ana- 
lytical techniques which yield reasonably accurate results can be developed. These 
techniques are illustrated in later chapters, where the effects of saliency on both dc 
and ac machines are discussed. 
Field 
coil 
Field 
coil 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.26 
Structure of typical salient-pole machines: (a) dc machine and (b) salient-pole 
synchronous machine. 

4.5 
Rotating MMF Waves in AC Machines 
201 
Stator 
Field coils 
Field pole 
Rotor teeth 
Armature coils 
Rotor 
Figure 4.27 Finite-element solution of the magnetic field distribution in a salient-pole 
dc generator. Field coils excited no current in armature coils. (General Electric 
Company.) 
4.5 
ROTATING MMF WAVES IN AC MACHINES 
To understand the theory and operation of polyphase ac machines, it is necessary to 
study the nature of the mmf wave produced by a polyphase winding. Attention will be 
focused on a two-pole machine or one pair of a multipole winding. To develop insight 
into the polyphase situation, it is helpful to begin with an analysis of a single-phase 
winding. 
4.5.1 
MMF Wave of a Single.Phase Winding 
Figure 4.28a shows the space-fundamental mmf distribution of a single-phase wind- 
ing, where, from Eq. 4.5, 
4 (kwNph) 
(poles) 
.T'agl = -- 
ia cos 
0a 
(4.16) 
Zr 
poles 
2 
When this winding is excited by a sinusoidally varying current in time at electrical 
frequency (D e 
ia -- Ia COS COet 
(4.17) 

202 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
.Tag 1 ~ Magnetic axis 
/ 
of phase winding 
Fmax 
",, 
/ 
"~,~.-t=0 
ss S 
% 
~.. 
s 
----''',_ 
"" 
/S 
S~ 
T "',N 
$S ~...---- 
".. x 
/s S 
t = t 1 
~ 
#S s s 
I 
,,~s 
~ 
I 
I 
~ 
I 
--rr 
,,~_~',, 
,_ t2 
, ,,~ _~,, 
zr ~" 0ae 
sssT/" 
2 '~,'",..... 
~, ..,-" ss 2 N~,, 
-" -/ 
",, 
-I 
,'" 
\-"-- 
--Fmad- -- 
toe ~ 
I 
(a) 
Magnetic axis 
of phase winding 
', > Oae 
< 
(b) 
.,> 
l Magnetic axis 
of phase winding 
y
'
-
~
 
y'+ 
~et'~ / 
] 
I 
I ,'~ °°et, 
--U 
~ 
~ 
r--Oae 
Oget'~ ~.- 
• ~"ag I ..... 
(c) 
Magnetic axis 
of phase winding 
Figure 4.28 Single-phase-winding space-fundamental air-gap mmf: (a) mmf 
distribution of a single-phase winding at various times (b) total mmf f'agl decomposed 
into two traveling waves .U- and .~'+ (c) phasor decomposition of .Uagl • 
the mmf distribution is given by 
(poleSoa) cOSCOet 
f'agl = Fmax cos 
2 
= Fmax cos (0ae) cos Oget 
(4.18) 
Equation 4.18 has been written in a form to emphasize the fact that the result is 
an mmf distribution of maximum amplitude. 
4 
Fmax = -- 
Ia 
(4.19) 
Jr 
poles 

4.5 
Rotating MMF Waves in AC Machines 
203 
This mmf distribution remains fixed in space with an amplitude that varies sinusoidally 
in time at frequency We, as shown in Fig. 4.28a. Note that, to simplify the notation, 
Eq. 4.1 has been used to express the mmf distribution of Eq. 4.18 in terms of the 
electrical angle 0ae. 
Use of a common trigonometric identity 1 permits Eq. 4.18 to be rewritten in the 
form 
1 
j 
.~C'ag 1 = fma x 
cos (Oae -- Wet) + -~ cos (Oae + Wet) 
(4.20) 
which shows that the mmf of a single-phase winding can be resolved into two rotating 
mmf waves each of amplitude one-half the maximum amplitude of -~'agl with one, 
.~'a+l, traveling in the +Oa direction and the other, ~/gl, traveling in the -Oa direction, 
both with electrical angular velocity O) e (equal to a mechanical angular velocity of 
2We/poles): 
1 
• ~L"a~ 1 "-- ~ Fmax cos (0ae -- Oget) 
(4.21) 
1 
• ~'agl --" ~ Fmax cos (0ae + O)et) 
(4.22) 
This decomposition is shown graphically in Fig. 4.28b and in a phasor representation 
in Fig. 4.28c. 
The fact that the air-gap mmf of a single-phase winding excited by a source of 
alternating current can be resolved into rotating traveling waves is an important con- 
ceptual step in understanding ac machinery. As shown in Section 4.5.2, in polyphase 
ac machinery the windings are equally displaced in space phase, and the winding cur- 
rents are similarly displaced in time phase, with the result that the negative-traveling 
flux waves of the various windings sum to zero while the positive-traveling flux waves 
reinforce, giving a single positive-traveling flux wave. 
In single-phase ac machinery, the positive-traveling flux wave produces useful 
torque while the negative-traveling flux wave produces both negative and pulsating 
torque as well as losses. These machines are designed so as to minimize the effects 
of the negative-traveling flux wave, although, unlike in the case of polyphase machin- 
ery, these effects cannot be totally eliminated. 
4.5.2 
MMF Wave of a Polyphase Winding 
In this section we study the mmf distributions of three-phase windings such as those 
found on the stator of three-phase induction and synchronous machines. The analyses 
presented can be readily extended to a polyphase winding with any number of phases. 
Once again attention is focused on a two-pole machine or one pair of poles of a 
multipole winding. 
In a three-phase machine, the windings of the individual phases are displaced 
from each other by 120 electrical degrees in space around the airgap circumference, 
as shown by coils a, -a, b, -b, and c, -c in Fig. 4.29. The concentrated full-pitch 
1 COS Or COS/~ = 1 COS (Or --/~) + 1 COS (Or "+-/~) 

204 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Axis of 
phase b 
Axis of 
-i~ phase a 
Axis of 
phase c 
Figure 4.29 Simplified two-pole 
three-phase stator winding. 
coils shown here may be considered to represent distributed windings producing si- 
nusoidal mmf waves centered on the magnetic axes of the respective phases. The 
space-fundamental sinusoidal mmf waves of the three phases are accordingly dis- 
placed 120 electrical degrees in space. Each phase is excited by an alternating current 
which varies in magnitude sinusoidally with time. Under balanced three-phase con- 
ditions, the instantaneous currents are 
ia = lm COS (.Oet 
(4.23) 
ib -- Im COS (a)et -- 120 °) 
(4.24) 
ic = Im cos (Wet + 120 °) 
(4.25) 
where Im is the maximum value of the current and the time origin is arbitrarily taken 
as the instant when the phase-a current is a positive maximum. The phase sequence 
is assumed to be abc. The instantaneous currents are shown in Fig. 4.30. The dots 
and crosses in the coil sides (Fig. 4.29) indicate the reference directions for positive 
phase currents. 
The mmf of phase a has been shown to be 
• ~'al -- "~'a~ -~- "~"M 
(4.26) 
where 
1 
• ~"+ = ~ Fmax cos (0ae - O)et) 
(4.27) 
and 
1 
.~"~ = ~ Fma x cos (0ae -q- (-Oet) 
(4.28) 
4 
Fmax = -- 
Im 
7r 
poles 
(4.29) 

4.5 
Rotating MMF Waves in AC Machines 
205 
la .. 
/', 
% ~S II 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
'( 
\ 
. 
S / 
ic 
`` 
s - 
", 
,,",, 
,.× 
I 
~ 
I 
~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~ 
I 
~ 
I 
I 
I 
~i 
0 
Jr 
2zr 
3 
3 
Figure 4.30 
Instantaneous phase 
currents under balanced three-phase 
conditions. 
O)et 
Note that to avoid excessive notational complexity, the subscript ag has been dropped; 
here the subscript al indicates the space-fundamental component of the phase-a air- 
gap mmf. 
Similarly, for phases b and c, whose axes are at 0a = 120 ° and 0a = -120 °, 
respectively, 
and 
~-bl = ~'+ + ~'ffi 
(4.30) 
1 
~'+ -- ~ Fmax cos (0ae -- O)et) 
(4.31) 
1 
.T'~ -- ~ Fmax cos (0ae -~- COet + 120 °) 
(4.32) 
• ~"cl = -)~"~ n t- .~"~ 
(4.33) 
1 
-T "+ -- ~ fmax cos (0ae - O)et) 
(4.34) 
1 
.T'~ -- ~ Fmax cos (0ae -Jr- (-Oet -- 120 °) 
(4.35) 
The total mmf is the sum of the contributions from each of the three phases 
• ~'(0ae, t) -- .~'al -t- .~"bl -Jr- .)L"cl 
(4.36) 
This summation can be performed quite easily in terms of the positive- and negative- 
traveling waves. The negative-traveling waves sum to zero 
.)c'- (0ae, t) --- .)t"~ + ~'~ nt- .~'c- i 
1 
= 
~ Fma x [cos (0ae -~- COet) -a t- cos (0ae -Jr- COet -- 120 °) 
+ COS (0ae n t- O)et + 120°)] 
=0 
(4.37) 

206 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
while the positive-traveling waves reinforce 
.~"+(0ae, t) = .~ "+ d- .~'~1 -+- .~'+ 
3 
= ~ Fmax cos (0ae - O)et) 
(4.38) 
Thus, the result of displacing the three windings by 120 ° in space phase and 
displacing the winding currents by 120 ° in time phase is a single positive-traveling 
mmf wave 
3 
• ~"(0ae, t) = ~ Fmax cos (0ae - Wet) 
=- 
((poles)) 
3 Fmax cos 
0a - Wet 
(4.39) 
2 
2 
The air-gap mmf wave described by Eq. 4.39 is a space-fundamental sinu- 
soidal function of the electrical space angle 0ae (and hence of the space angle 0a = 
(2/poles)0ae). It has a constant amplitude of (3/2)Fmax, i.e., 1.5 times the amplitude 
of the air-gap mmf wave produced by the individual phases alone. It has a positive 
peak at angle 0a = (2/poles)wet. Thus, under balanced three-phase conditions, the 
three-phase winding produces an air-gap mmf wave which rotates at synchronous 
angular velocity Ws 
(2) 
Ws= 
poles 
We 
(4.40) 
where 
09 e 
"-- angular frequency of the applied electrical excitation [rad/sec] 
Ws = synchronous spatial angular velocity of the air-gap mmf wave [rad/sec] 
The corresponding synchronous speed ns in r/min can be expressed in terms of 
the applied electrical frequency fe = we/(2zr) in Hz as 
(120) 
ns = 
poles 
fe 
r/min 
(4.41) 
In general, a rotating field of constant amplitude will be produced by a q-phase 
winding excited by balanced q-phase currents of frequency fe when the respective 
phase axes are located 2rr/q electrical radians apart in space. The amplitude of this 
flux wave will be q/2 times the maximum contribution of any one phase, and the 
synchronous angular velocity 
2 
will remain COs = (~)We radians per second. 
In this section, we have seen that a polyphase winding excited by balanced 
polyphase currents produces a rotating mmf wave. Production of a rotating mmf 
wave and the corresponding rotating magnetic flux is key to the operation of polyphase 
rotating electrical machinery. It is the interaction of this magnetic flux wave with that 
of the rotor which produces torque. Constant torque is produced when rotor-produced 
magnetic flux rotates in sychronism with that of the stator. 

4.5 
Rotating MMF Waves in AC Machines 
207 
4.5.3 
Graphical Analysis of Polyphase MMF 
For balanced three-phase currents as given by Eqs. 4.23 to 4.25, the production of 
a rotating mmf can also be shown graphically. Consider the state of affairs at t = 0 
(Fig. 4.30), the moment when the phase-a current is at its maximum value Im. The mmf 
of phase a then has its maximum value Fmax, as shown by the vector Fa = Fmax drawn 
along the magnetic axis of phase a in the two-pole machine shown schematically in 
Fig. 4.31a. At this moment, currents ib and ic are both lm/2 in the negative direction, 
as shown by the dots and crosses in Fig. 4.31 a indicating the actual instantaneous di- 
rections. The corresponding mmf's of phases b and c are shown by the vectors Fb and 
Fc, both of magnitude Fmax/2 drawn in the negative direction along the magnetic axes 
of phases b and c, respectively. The resultant, obtained by adding the individual con- 
3 Fmax centered on the axis 
tributions of the three phases, is a vector of magnitude F = 
of phase a. It represents a sinusoidal space wave with its positive peak centered on the 
axis of phase a and having an amplitude 3 times that of the phase-a contribution alone. 
At a later time COet = rr/3 (Fig. 4.30), the currents in phases a and b are a positive 
half maximum, and that in phase c is a negative maximum. The individual mmf 
components and their resultant are now shown in Fig. 4.3 lb. The resultant has the same 
amplitude as at t = 0, but it has now rotated counterclockwise 60 electrical degrees in 
space. Similarly, at COet = 2re/3 (when the phase-b current is a positive maximum and 
the phase-a and phase-c currents are a negative half maximum) the same resultant mmf 
distribution is again obtained, but it has rotated counterclockwise 60 electrical degrees 
still farther and is now aligned with the magnetic axis of phase b (see Fig. 4.31 c). As 
time passes, then, the resultant mmf wave retains its sinusoidal form and amplitude 
but rotates progressively around the air gap; the net result can be seen to be an mmf 
wave of constant amplitude rotating at a uniform angular velocity. 
In one cycle the resultant mmf must be back in the position of Fig. 4.3 l a. The 
mmf wave therefore makes one revolution per electrical cycle in a two-pole machine. 
In a multipole machine the mmf wave travels one pole-pair per electrical cycle and 
hence one revolution in poles/2 electrical cycles. 
~b 
h 
F = 3_ Fmax 
~b 
X~F = 3 7 Fmax 
3 [Fmax 
--IP'- a 
c 
c 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 4.31 
The production of a rotating magnetic field by means of three-phase currents. 

208 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
EXAMPLE 
4.3 
Consider a three-phase stator excited with balanced, 60-Hz currents. Find the synchronous 
angular velocity in rad/sec and speed in r/min for stators with two, four, and six poles. 
I1 Solution 
For a frequency of fe = 60 Hz, the electrical angular frequency is equal to 
we = 2zrfe = 120zr ~, 377 rad/sec 
Using Eqs. 4.40 and 4.41, the following table can be constructed: 
Poles 
ns (r/lnin) 
~:s (rad/sec) 
2 
3600 
1207r ~ 377 
4 
1800 
60zc 
6 
1200 
407r 
)ractice 
Problem 
4.: 
Repeat Example 4.3 for a three-phase stator excited by balanced 50-Hz currents. 
Solution 
Poles 
n~ (r/min) 
~s (rad/see) 
2 
3000 
100Jr 
4 
1500 
50zr 
6 
1000 
100Jr/3 
4.6 
GENERATED 
VOLTAGE 
The general nature of the induced voltage has already been discussed in Section 4.2. 
Quantitative expressions for the induced voltage will now be determined. 
4.6.1 
AC Machines 
An elementary ac machine is shown in cross section in Fig. 4.32. The coils on both the 
rotor and the stator have been shown as concentrated, multiple-turn, full-pitch coils. 
As we have seen, a machine with distributed windings can be represented in this form 
simply by multiplying the number of series turns in the winding by a winding factor. 
Under the assumption of a small air gap, the field winding can be assumed to produce 
radial space-fundamental air-gap flux of peak flux density Bpeak. Although Fig. 4.32 
shows a two-pole machine, the analysis presented here is for the general case of a 
multipole machine. As is derived in Example 4.2, if the air gap is uniform, Bpeak can 

4.6 Generated Voltage 
209 
Phase b 
magnetic axis 
N-turn coil 
.winding 
',tic axis 
a 
• .tic axis 
Phase c 
magnetic axis 
Figure 4.32 Cross-sectional view of an 
elementary three-phase ac machine. 
be found from 
where 
g = air-gap length 
4.0 ( kfNf ) 
Bpeak -- 7rg \poles 
If 
Nf - total series turns in the field winding 
kf -- field-winding winding factor 
If = field current 
(4.42) 
poles ) 
B = Bpeak COS 
2 Or 
(4.43) 
~p can be found as the integral of the flux density over the pole area 
~P 
i f+Jr/poles 
(poles) 
-- 
Bpeak COS 
Or 
r dOr 
,J -zr/poles 
2 
poles) 2Bpeaklr 
(4.44) 
When the rotor poles are in line with the magnetic axis of a stator phase, the flux 
linkage with a stator phase winding is kwNph~p, where ~p is the air-gap flux per pole 
[Wb]. For the assumed sinusoidal air-gap flux-density 

210 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
EXAMPLE 
4.4 
Here, 
Or = angle measured from the rotor magnetic axis 
r = radius to air gap 
1 = axial length of the stator/rotor iron 
As the rotor turns, the flux linkage varies cosinusoidally with the angle between 
the magnetic axes of the stator coil and rotor. With the rotor spinning at constant 
angular velocity tom, the flux linkage with the phase-a stator coil is 
~a = kwNph~p COs ( (P°12eS) oJm t) 
~--- kw Nph (I)p cos COmet 
(4.45) 
where time t is arbitrarily chosen as zero when the peak of the flux-density wave 
coincides with the magnetic axis of phase a. Here, 
( o,es) 
COme = 
2 
COrn 
(4.46) 
is the mechanical rotor velocity expressed in electrical rad/sec. 
By Faraday's law, the voltage induced in phase a is 
d~.a __ kwNphdC~p 
ea = dt 
--~ cos COmet 
-COmekw Nph (I)p sin COmet 
(4.47) 
The polarity of this induced voltage is such that if the stator coil were short- 
circuited, the induced voltage would cause a current to flow in the direction that 
would oppose any change in the flux linkage of the stator coil. Although Eq. 4.47 is 
derived on the assumption that only the field winding is producing air-gap flux, the 
equation applies equally well to the general situation where (I)p is the net air-gap flux 
per pole produced by currents on both the rotor and the stator. 
The first term on the fight-hand side of Eq. 4.47 is a transformer voltage and 
is present only when the amplitude of the air-gap flux wave changes with time. The 
second term is the speed voltage generated by the relative motion of the air-gap 
flux wave and the stator coil. In the normal steady-state operation of most rotating 
machines, the amplitude of the air-gap flux wave is constant; under these conditions 
the first term is zero and the generated voltage is simply the speed voltage. The term 
electromotive force (abbreviated emf) is often used for the speed voltage. Thus, for 
constant air-gap flux, 
ea -- -COmekw Nph (l)p sin COmet 
(4.48) 
The so-called cutting-of-flux equation states that the voltage v induced in a wire of length I (in 
the frame of the wire) moving with respect to a constant magnetic field with flux density of 

4.6 
Generated Voltage 
2tl 
magnitude B is given by 
v = IvzB 
where v± is the component of the wire velocity perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic 
flux density. 
Consider the two-pole elementary three-phase machine of Fig. 4.32. Assume the rotor- 
produced air-gap flux density to be of the form 
Bag(0r) ~-- Bpeak sin Or 
and the rotor to rotate at constant angular velocity We. (Note that since this is a two-pole machine, 
Wm -- We). Show that if one assumes that the armature-winding coil sides are in the air gap and 
not in the slots, the voltage induced in a full-pitch, N-turn concentrated armature phase coil 
can be calculated from the cutting-of-flux equation and that it is identical to that calculated 
using Eq. 4.48. Let the average air-gap radius be r and the air-gap length be g (g << r). 
am Solution 
We begin by noting that the cutting-of-flux equation requires that the conductor be moving 
and the magnetic field to be nontime varying. Thus in order to apply it to calculating the stator 
magnetic field, we must translate our reference frame to the rotor. 
In the rotor frame, the magnetic field is constant and the stator coil sides, when moved 
to the center of the air gap at radius r, appear to be moving with velocity COmer which is 
perpendicular to the radially-directed air-gap flux. If the rotor and phase-coil magnetic axes 
are assumed to be aligned at time t --- 0, the location of a coil side as a function of time will be 
given by Or = --COmet. The voltage induced in one side of one turn can therefore be calculated as 
el = lvj_ Bag (Or) "-- lO)mer Bpeak sin (-COmet) 
There are N turns per coil and two sides per turn. Thus the total coil voltage is given by 
e = 2Nel = -2Nlwmer Bpe~ sin COmet 
From Eq. 4.48, the voltage induced in the full-pitched, 2-pole stator coil is given by 
e = -(_omeN (I)p sin COme/ 
Substituting 
(I)p = 2Bpeaklr from Eq. 4.44 gives 
e = -(.omeN (2BpeJr) sin COmet 
which is identical to the voltage determined using the cutting-of-flux equation. 
In the normal steady-state operation of ac machines, we are usually interested in 
the rms values of voltages and currents rather than their instantaneous values. From 
Eq. 4.48 the maximum value of the induced voltage is 
Emax --- Ogmekw Nph ~p = 2~fmekw Nph ~p 
(4.49) 

212 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Its rms value is 
2zr fm~kw Nph ~p = ~ 
zrfm~kw Nph ~p 
(4.50) 
Erms = ~/~ 
where fme is the electrical speed of the rotor measured in Hz, which is also equal to the 
electrical frequency of the generated voltage. Note that these equations are identical 
in form to the corresponding emf equations for a transformer. Relative motion of a coil 
and a constant-amplitude spatial flux-density wave in a rotating machine produces 
voltage in the same fashion as does a time-varying flux in association with stationary 
coils in a transformer. Rotation introduces the element of time variation and transforms 
a space distribution of flux density into a time variation of voltage. 
The voltage induced in a single winding is a single-phase voltage. For the pro- 
duction of a set of balanced, three-phase voltages, it follows that three windings 
displaced 120 electrical degrees in space must be used, as shown in elementary form 
in Fig. 4.12. The machine of Fig. 4.12 is shown to be Y-connected and hence each 
winding voltage is a phase-neutral voltage. Thus, Eq. 4.50 gives the rms line-neutral 
voltage produced in this machine when Nph is the total series turns per phase. For a 
A-connected machine, the voltage winding voltage calculated from Eq. 4.50 would 
be the machine line-line voltage. 
EXAMPLE 
4.5 
A two-pole, three-phase, Y-connected 60-Hz round-rotor synchronous generator has a field 
winding with Nf distributed turns and winding factor kf. The armature winding has Na turns 
per phase and winding factor ka. The air-gap length is g, and the mean air-gap radius is r. The 
armature-winding active length is I. The dimensions and winding data are 
Nf = 68 series turns 
kf = 0.945 
Na = 18 series turns/phase 
ka = 0.933 
r = 0.53 m 
g = 4.5 cm 
l=3.8m 
The rotor is driven by a steam turbine at a speed of 3600 r/min. For a field current 
of If = 720 A dc, compute (a) the peak fundamental mmf (Fag~)p~ak produced by the field 
winding, (b) the peak fundamental flux density (Bagl)peak in the air gap, (c) the fundamental 
flux per pole ~p, and (d) the rms value of the open-circuit voltage generated in the armature. 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 4.8 
4 
/ 
4 (0945 x68) 
(Fagl)peak = -- 
720 
7r 
~ 
If=-- zr 
2 
4 
= --(32.1)720 = 2.94 x 10 4 A. turns/pole 
7l" 

4.6 
Generated Voltage 
213 
b. Using Eq. 4.12, we get 
/£0(Fagl)peak 
4zr × 10 -7 X 2.94 × 104 
(Bagl)peak = 
= 
= 0.821 T 
g 
4.5 × 10 -2 
Because of the effect of the slots containing the armature winding, most of the air-gap flux 
is confined to the stator teeth. The flux density in the teeth at a pole center is higher than 
the value calculated in part (b), probably by a factor of about 2. In a detailed design this 
flux density must be calculated to determine whether the teeth are excessively saturated. 
c. From Eq. 4.44 
dpp -- 2(Bagl)peaklr 
"- 2(0.821)(3.8)(0.53) = 3.31 Wb 
d. From Eq. 4.50 with fme = 60 Hz 
Erms,li ...... tral = 
~ 
2"(fmekaNaf~p 
-- ~ 
zr(60)(0.933)(18)(3.31) 
= 14.8 kV rms 
The line-line voltage is thus 
Erms,line-line = "v/-~ (14.8 kV) = 25.7 kV rms 
)ractice Problem 4., 
The rotor of the machine of Example 4.5 is to be rewound. The new field winding will have a 
total of 76 series turns and a winding factor of 0.925. (a) Calculate the field current which will 
result in a peak air-gap flux density of 0.83 T. (b) Calculate the corresponding rms line-line 
open-circuit voltage which will result if this modified machine is operated at this value of field 
current and 3600 rpm. 
Solution 
a. If = 696 A 
b. E .... line-line = 26.0 kV rms 
4.6.2 
DC Machines 
In a dc machine, although the ultimate objective is the generation of dc voltage, ac 
voltages are produced in the armature-winding coils as these coils rotate through the 
dc flux distribution of the stationary field winding. The armature-winding alternat- 
ing voltage must therefore be rectified. Mechanical rectification is provided by the 
commutator as has been discussed in Section 4.2.2. 
Consider the single N-turn armature coil of the elementary, two-pole dc machine 
of Fig. 4.17. The simple two-segment commutator provides full-wave rectification of 
the coil voltage. Although the spatial distribution of the air-gap flux in dc machines 
is typically far from sinusoidal, we can approximate the magnitude of the generated 
voltage by assuming a sinusoidal distribution. As we have seen, such a flux distribution 
will produce a sinusoidal ac voltage in the armature coil. The rectification action of 

214 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
e 
r 
0 
Jr 
2n" cot 
Figure 4.33 
Voltage between the 
brushes in the elementary dc machine 
of Fig. 4.17. 
the commutator will produce a dc voltage across the brushes as in Fig. 4.33. The 
average, or dc, value of this voltage can be found from taking the average of Eq. 4.48, 
lf0  
2 
Ea -- -- 
OgmeN~p sin (O)met) d(o)met) --- --OgmeN~p 
(4.51) 
7f 
For dc machines it is usually more convenient to express the voltage Ea in terms 
of the mechanical speed 09 m (rad/sec) or n (r/min). Substitution of Eq. 4.46 in Eq. 4.51 
for a multipole machine then yields 
( 
) 
(n) 
Ea 
-- 
polesTr N~p(_Om = poles N~p 
3-0 
(4.52) 
The single-coil dc winding implied here is, of course, unrealistic in the practi- 
cal sense, and it will be essential later to examine the action of commutators more 
carefully. Actually, Eq. 4.52 gives correct results for the more practical distributed 
ac armature windings as well, provided N is taken as the total number of turns in 
series between armature terminals. Usually the voltage is expressed in terms of the 
total number of active conductors Ca and the number m of parallel paths through the 
armature winding. Because it takes two coil sides to make a turn and 1/m of these 
are connected in series, the number of series turns is Na = Ca/(2m). Substitution in 
Eq. 4.52 then gives 
_ { poles 
27r )(--~) 
~pO)m= (poles 
60 ) (--~)*pn 
(4.53) 
Ea 
4.7 
TORQUE IN NONSALIENT-POLE 
MACHINES 
The behavior of any electromagnetic device as a component in an electromechanical 
system can be described in terms of its electrical-terminal equations and its displace- 
ment and electromechanical torque. The purpose of this section is to derive the voltage 
and torque equations for an idealized elementary machine, results which can be read- 
ily extended later to more complex machines. We derive these equations from two 
viewpoints and show that basically they stem from the same ideas. 
The first viewpoint is essentially the same as that of Section 3.6. The machine will 
be regarded as a circuit element whose inductances depend on the angular position 

4,7 
Torque in Nonsalient-Pole Machines 
215 
of the rotor. The flux linkages ~. and magnetic field coenergy will be expressed in 
terms of the currents and inductances. The torque can then be found from the partial 
derivative of the energy or coenergy with respect to the rotor position and the terminal 
voltages from the sum of the resistance drops Ri and the Faraday-law voltages d~./dt. 
The result will be a set of nonlinear differential equations describing the dynamic 
performance of the machine. 
The second viewpoint regards the machine as two groups of windings producing 
magnetic flux in the air gap, one group on the stator, and the other on the rotor. By 
making suitable assumptions regarding these fields (similar to those used to derive an- 
alytic expressions for the inductances), simple expressions can be derived for the flux 
linkages and the coenergy in the air gap in terms of the field quantities. The torque and 
generated voltage can then be found from these expressions. In this fashion, torque can 
be expressed explicitly as the tendency for two magnetic fields to align, in the same 
way that permanent magnets tend to align, and generated voltage can be expressed in 
terms of the relative motion between a field and a winding. These expressions lead to 
a simple physical picture of the normal steady-state behavior of rotating machines. 
4.7.1 
Coupled.Circuit Viewpoint 
Consider the elementary smooth-air-gap machine of Fig. 4.34 with one winding on 
the stator and one on the rotor and with 0m being the mechanical angle between the 
axes of the two windings. These windings are distributed over a number of slots so 
that their mmf waves can be approximated by space sinusoids. In Fig. 4.34a the coil 
sides s,-s and r,-r mark the positions of the centers of the belts of conductors 
comprising the distributed windings. An alternative way of drawing these windings is 
shown in Fig. 4.34b, which also shows reference directions for voltages and currents. 
Here it is assumed that current in the arrow direction produces a magnetic field in the 
air gap in the arrow direction, so that a single arrow defines reference directions for 
both current and flux. 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.34 
Elementary two-pole machine with smooth air gap: (a) winding 
distribution and (b) schematic representation. 

216 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
The stator and rotor are concentric cylinders, and slot openings are neglected. 
Consequently, our elementary model does not include the effects of salient poles, 
which are investigated in later chapters. We also assume that the reluctances of the 
stator and rotor iron are negligible. Finally, although Fig. 4.34 shows a two-pole 
machine, we will write the derivations that follow for the general case of a multipole 
machine, replacing 0m by the electrical rotor angle 
(poles) 
0me -- 
2 
0m 
(4.54) 
Based upon these assumptions, the stator and rotor self-inductances Lss and Lrr 
can be seen to be constant, but the stator-to-rotor mutual inductance depends on the 
electrical angle 0me between the magnetic axes of the stator and rotor windings. The 
mutual inductance is at its positive maximum when 0me--0 or 2re, is zero when 
0me = 4-zr/2, and is at its negative maximum when 0me = +Jr. On the assumption of 
sinusoidal mmf waves and a uniform air gap, the space distribution of the air-gap flux 
wave is sinusoidal, and the mutual inductance will be of the form 
£~sr(0me) = tsr cos (0me) 
(4.55) 
where the script letter E denotes an inductance which is a function of the electrical 
angle 0me. The italic capital letter L denotes a constant value. Thus Lsr is the magnitude 
of the mutual inductance; its value when the magnetic axes of the stator and rotor are 
aligned (0me = 
0). In terms of the inductances, the stator and rotor flux linkages )~s 
and ~,r are 
~.s = Lssis +/~sr(0me)ir = Lssis + Lsr cos (0me)ir 
(4.56) 
~,r = /~sr(0me)is + Lrrir = Lsr cos (0me)is q- Lrrir 
(4.57) 
where the inductances can be calculated as in Appendix B. In matrix notation 
[,ks] 
Lss 
/~sr(0me) ] [ is ] 
(4.58) 
~.r 
: 
£sr(0me) 
Lrr 
ir 
The terminal voltages Vs and l)r are 
d~.s 
Vs = Rsis + 
(4.59) 
dt 
d~.r 
Vr = Rrir + 
(4.60) 
dt 
where Rs and Rr are the resistances of the stator and rotor windings respectively. 
When the rotor is revolving, 0me must be treated as a variable. Differentiation of 
Eqs. 4.56 and 4.57 and substitution of the results in Eqs. 4.59 and 4.60 then give 
dis 
dir 
dome 
(4.61) 
Vs = Rsis + Lss-d- 7 + Lsr cos (0me)~- - Lsrir sin (0me) d---~ 
dir 
dir 
dome 
(4.62) 
Vr = Rrir + L~-r- + Lsr cos (0me)--7- -- Lsris sin (0me) d---~ 
tl t 
tl t 

4.T 
Torque in Nonsalient-Pole Machines 
2t7 
where 
dome 
dt 
poles) 
~- O)me -- 
2 
O)m 
(4.63) 
is the instantaneous speed in electrical radians per second. In a two-pole machine (such 
as that of Fig. 4.34), 0me and COme are equal to the instantaneous shaft angle 0m and 
the shaft speed 09 m respectively. In a multipole machine, they are related by Eqs. 4.54 
and 4.46. The second and third terms on the fight-hand sides of Eqs. 4.61 and 4.62 are 
L(di/dt) induced voltages like those induced in stationary coupled circuits such as 
the windings of transformers. The fourth terms are caused by mechanical motion and 
are proportional to the instantaneous speed. These are the speed voltage terms which 
correspond to the interchange of power between the electric and mechanical systems. 
The electromechanical torque can be found from the coenergy. From Eq. 3.70 
1 
.2 
1 Lrri 2 + Lsrisir COS Ome 
Wild-- 
-~ t ss l s '~" -~ 
, 
((poles)) 
-- 1Lssi2 + 
Lrri 2 + LsrisirCOS 
Om 
(4.64) 
--2 
2 
2 
Note that the coenergy of Eq. 4.64 has been expressed specifically in terms of the 
shaft angle 0m because the torque expression of Eq. 3.68 requires that the torque be 
obtained from the derivative of the coenergy with respect to the spatial angle 0rn and 
not with respect to the electrical angle 0me. Thus, from Eq. 3.68 
OWl~d(is, ir, Orn) 
~0m 
is, ir 
_ _ (poles 
2 
) Lsrisir 
 srisirSinOme 
sin (p~es 0m) 
Z 
(4.65) 
where T is the electromechanical torque acting to accelerate the rotor (i.e., a positive 
torque acts to increase 0m). The negative sign in Eq. 4.65 means that the electrome- 
chanical torque acts in the direction to bring the magnetic fields of the stator and rotor 
into alignment. 
Equations 4.61, 4.62, and 4.65 are a set of three equations relating the electrical 
variables Vs, is, Vr, ir and the mechanical variables T and 0m. These equations, together 
with the constraints imposed on the electrical variables by the networks connected to 
the terminals (sources or loads and external impedances) and the constraints imposed 
on the rotor (applied torques and inertial, frictional, and spring torques), determine the 
performance of the device and its characteristics as a conversion device between the 
external electrical and mechanical systems. These are nonlinear differential equations 
and are difficult to solve except under special circumstances. We are not specifically 
concerned with their solution here; rather we are using them merely as steps in the 
development of the theory of rotating machines. 

218 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
EXAMPLE 
4.6 
Consider the elementary two-pole, two-winding machine of Fig. 4.34. Its shaft is coupled to a 
mechanical device which can be made to absorb or deliver mechanical torque over a wide range 
of speeds. This machine can be connected and operated in several ways. For this example, let 
us consider the situation in which the rotor winding is excited with direct current Ir and the 
stator winding is connected to an ac source which can either absorb or deliver electric power. 
Let the stator current be 
is - Is cos (Det 
where t - 0 is arbitrarily chosen as the moment when the stator current has its peak value. 
a. Derive an expression for the magnetic torque developed by the machine as the speed is 
varied by control of the mechanical device connected to its shaft. 
b. Find the speed at which average torque will be produced if the stator frequency is 60 Hz. 
c. With the assumed current-source excitations, what voltages are induced in the stator and 
rotor windings at synchronous speed ((Dm = (De)? 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 4.65 for a two-pole machine 
T = -Lsrisir sin 0 m 
For the conditions of this problem, with 0 m = (Dmt + 8 
T = -Lsrlsl~ cos (Det sin ((Dmt + 8) 
where (Dm is the clockwise angular velocity impressed on the rotor by the mechanical 
drive and 8 is the angular position of the rotor at t -- 0. Using a trigonometric identity, 2 we 
have 
1 
T = --Lsrlslr{sin[(Wm + We)t + 8] + sin [((Dm -- we)t + 8]} 
2 
The torque consists of two sinusoidally time-varying terms of frequencies (_D m + 
(D e 
and (Dm -- (De" AS shown in Section 4.5, ac current applied to the two-pole, single-phase 
stator winding in the machine of Fig. 4.34 creates two flux waves, one traveling in the 
positive 0m direction with angular velocity (De and the second traveling in the negative 0m 
direction also with angular velocity (De. It is the interaction of the rotor with these two 
flux waves which results in the two components of the torque expression. 
Except when (Dm = 
"]-(De, the torque averaged over a sufficiently long time is zero. But if 
(Dm "-- (De, the rotor is traveling in synchronism with the positive-traveling stator flux wave, 
and the torque becomes 
1 
T = --Lsrlslr[sin(2(Det + 8) + sinS] 
2 
2 sina cos/3 = l[sin (ct +/3) + sin (ct -/3)] 

4.7 
Torque 
in Nonsalient-Pole 
Machines 
219 
The first sine term is a double-frequency component whose average value is zero. The 
second term is the average torque 
1 
Tavg = --~Lsrlslrsin6 
A nonzero average torque will also be produced when (Dm = 
--(De which merely means 
rotation in the counterclockwise direction; the rotor is now traveling in synchronism with 
the negative-traveling stator flux wave. The negative sign in the expression for Tavg means 
that a positive value of Tavg acts to reduce 6. 
This machine is an idealized single-phase synchronous machine. With a stator 
frequency of 60 Hz, it will produce nonzero average torque for speeds of -'[-(Dm = 
(De = 
27r60 rad/sec, corresponding to speeds of 4-3600 r/min as can be seen from Eq. 4.41. 
c. From the second and fourth terms of Eq. 4.61 (with 0e --- 0m -- (Dmt + 6), the voltage 
induced in the stator when (Dm = 
(De is 
es = -(DeLss/s sin (Det -- (DeLsr/r sin ((Det + ~) 
From the third and fourth terms of Eq. 4.62, the voltage induced in the rotor is 
er = --(DoLsr/s[sin (Det COS ((Det -q- ~) + COS (Dst sin ((Det + ~)] 
= --(DeLsrls sin (2(Det -k- S) 
The backwards-rotating component of the stator flux induces a double-frequency voltage 
in the rotor, while the forward-rotating component, which is rotating in sychronism with 
the rotor, appears as a dc flux to the rotor, and hence induces no voltage in the rotor 
winding. 
Now consider a uniform-air-gap machine with several stator and rotor windings. 
The same general principles that apply to the elementary model of Fig. 4.34 also 
apply to the multiwinding machine. Each winding has its own self-inductance as 
well as mutual inductances with other windings. The self-inductances and mutual 
inductances between pairs of windings on the same side of the air gap are constant 
on the assumption of a uniform gap and negligible magnetic saturation. However, 
the mutual inductances between pairs of stator and rotor windings vary as the cosine 
of the angle between their magnetic axes. Torque results from the tendency of the 
magnetic field of the rotor windings to line up with that of the stator windings. It can 
be expressed as the sum of terms like that of Eq. 4.65. 
Consider a 4-pole, three-phase synchronous machine with a uniform air gap. Assume the 
armature-winding self- and mutual inductances to be constant 
Laa -- Lbb ~- Lcc 
Lab -- Lbc -- Lca 
EXAMPLE 
4.7 ...... 

220 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Similarly, assume the field-winding self-inductance Lf to be constant while the mutual 
inductances between the field winding and the three armature phase windings will vary with 
the angle 0m between the magnetic axis of the field winding and that of phase a 
~af ~ Laf COS 20m 
~bf -- LafCOS (20m -- 120 °) 
/~cf "-- LafcOs (20m + 120 °) 
Show that when the field is excited with constant current If and the armature is excited by 
balanced-three-phase currents of the form 
ia -- la COS (09et + 3) 
ib --" la COS (O)et -- 120 ° + 3) 
ic = Ia COS (Wet + 120 ° + 3) 
the torque will be constant when the rotor travels at synchronous speed Ws as given by Eq. 4.40. 
II Solution 
The torque can be calculated from the coenergy as described in Section 3.6. This particular 
machine is a four-winding system and the coenergy will consist of four terms involving 1/2 
the self-inductance multiplied by the square of the corresponding winding current as well as 
product-terms consisting of the mutual inductances between pairs of windings multiplied by the 
corresponding winding currents. Noting that only the terms involving the mutual inductances 
between the field winding and the three armature phase windings will contain terms that vary 
with 0m, we can write the coenergy in the form 
Wfld(ia, ib, ic, if, 0m) --- (constant terms) +/~afiaif +/~bfibif + /~cficif 
= (constant terms) + Laflalf [cos 20m COS (o&t + 3) 
+ COS (20m -- 120 °) COS (W~t -- 120 ° + 6) 
+ COS (20m + 120 °) COS (Wet + 120 ° + 3)] 
3 
= (constant terms) + ~ Laf/alfcos (20m -- w,t -- 3) 
The torque can now be found from the partial derivative of W~d with respect to 0rn 
T-- aW6~ 
00 ..... 
ta,tb,tc,t f 
= -3Laf/alf sin (20m - oo~t - 6) 
From this expression, we see that the torque will be constant when the rotor rotates at syn- 
chronous velocity Ws such that 
Om --Wst = 
-~ 
t 
in which case the torque will be equal to 
T = 3Laflalf sin 8 

4.7 
Torque in Nonsalient-Pole Machines 
221 
Note that unlike the case of the single-phase machine of Example 4.6, the torque for this 
three-phase machine operating at synchronous velocity under balanced-three-phase conditions 
is constant. As we have seen, this is due to the fact that the stator mmf wave consists of a 
single rotating flux wave, as opposed to the single-phase case in which the stator phase current 
produces both a forward- and a backward-rotating flux wave. This backwards flux wave is not 
in synchronism with the rotor and hence is responsible for the double-frequency time-varying 
torque component seen in Example 4.6. 
For the four-pole machine of Example 4.7, find the synchronous speed at which a constant 
torque will be produced if the rotor currents are of the form 
ia -- /a COS (¢Oet + 8) 
ib = /a COS (Wet + 120 ° + 8) 
ic = /a COS (wet -- 120 ° + 8) 
Solution 
OOs = --(09e/2) 
In Example 4.7 we found that, under balanced conditions, a four-pole syn- 
chronous machine will produce constant torque at a rotational angular velocity equal to 
half of the electrical excitation frequency. This result can be generalized to show that, 
under balanced operating conditions, a multiphase, multipole synchronous machine 
will produce constant torque at a rotor speed, at which the rotor rotates in synchronism 
with the rotating flux wave produced by the stator currents. Hence, this is known as 
the synchronous speed of the machine. From Eqs. 4.40 and 4.41, the synchronous 
speed is equal to ms = (2/poles)tOe in rad/sec or ns = (120/poles)fe in r/min. 
4.7.2 
Magnetic Field Viewpoint 
In the discussion of Section 4.7.1 the characteristics of a rotating machine as viewed 
from its electric and mechanical terminals have been expressed in terms of its winding 
inductances. This viewpoint gives little insight into the physical phenomena which 
occur within the machine. In this section, we will explore an alternative formulation 
in terms of the interacting magnetic fields. 
As we have seen, currents in the machine windings create magnetic flux in the 
air gap between the stator and rotor, the flux paths being completed through the stator 
and rotor iron. This condition corresponds to the appearance of magnetic poles on 
both the stator and the rotor, centered on their respective magnetic axes, as shown 
in Fig. 4.35a for a two-pole machine with a smooth air gap. Torque is produced by 
the tendency of the two component magnetic fields to line up their magnetic axes. A 
useful physical picture is that this is quite similar to the situation of two bar magnets 
pivoted at their centers on the same shaft; there will be a torque, proportional to the 
angular displacement of the bar magnets, which will act to align them. In the machine 

222 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
F r 
Fs 
(a) 
..... 
Fr 
F s sin t~sr 
x 
/ 
_ ;ns'iSn,r 
',, 
,,' 
(b) 
Figure 4.35 Simplified two-pole machine: (a) elementary model and 
(b) vector diagram of mmf waves. Torque is produced by the tendency of the 
rotor and stator magnetic fields to align. Note that these figures are drawn with 
~sr positive, i.e., with the rotor mmf wave Fr leading that of the stator Fs. 
of Fig. 4.35a, the resulting torque is proportional to the product of the amplitudes of 
the stator and rotor mmf waves and is also a function of the angle 8sr measured from 
the axis of the stator mmf wave to that of the rotor. In fact, we will show that, for a 
smooth-air-gap machine, the torque is proportional to sin ~sr. 
In a typical machine, most of the flux produced by the stator and rotor windings 
crosses the air gap and links both windings; this is termed the mutual flux, directly 
analogous to the mutual or magnetizing flux in a transformer. However, some of the 
flux produced by the rotor and stator windings does not cross the air gap; this is 
analogous to the leakage flux in a transformer. These flux components are referred 
to as the rotor leakage flux and the stator leakage flux. Components of this leakage 
flux include slot and toothtip leakage, end-turn leakage, and space harmonics in the 
air-gap field. 
Only the mutual flux is of direct concern in torque production. The leakage 
fluxes do affect machine performance however, by virtue of the voltages they induce 
in their respective windings. Their effect on the electrical characteristics is accounted 
for by means of leakage inductances, analogous to the use of inclusion of leakage 
inductances in the transformer models of Chapter 2. 
When expressing torque in terms of the winding currents or their resultant mmf's, 
the resulting expressions do not include terms containing the leakage inductances. 
Our analysis here, then, will be in terms of the resultant mutual flux. We shall derive 
an expression for the magnetic coenergy stored in the air gap in terms of the stator 
and rotor mmfs and the angle t~sr between their magnetic axes. The torque can then 
be found from the partial derivative of the coenergy with respect to angle 3sr. 
For analytical simplicity, we will assume that the radial length g of the air gap 
(the radial clearance between the rotor and stator) is small compared with the radius 
of the rotor or stator. For a smooth-air-gap machine constructed from electrical steel 
with high magnetic permeability, it is possible to show that this will result in air-gap 
flux which is primarily radially directed and that there is relatively little difference 

4,7 
Torque in Nonsalient-Pole Machines 
223 
between the flux density at the rotor surface, at the stator surface, or at any intermediate 
radial distance in the air gap. The air-gap field then can be represented as a radial 
field Hag or Bag whose intensity varies with the angle around the periphery. The line 
integral of Hag across the gap then is simply Hagg and equals the resultant air-gap 
mmff'sr produced by the stator and rotor windings; thus 
Hagg -- S'sr 
(4.66) 
where the script ~ denotes the mmf wave as a function of the angle around the 
periphery. 
The mmf waves of the stator and rotor are spatial sine waves with 6sr being the 
phase angle between their magnetic axes in electrical degrees. They can be represented 
by the space vectors Fs and Fr drawn along the magnetic axes of the stator- and rotor- 
mmf waves respectively, as in Fig. 4.35b. The resultant mmf Fsr acting across the air 
gap, also a sine wave, is their vector sum. From the trigonometric formula for the 
diagonal of a parallelogram, its peak value is found from 
F 2 = F 2 + F 2 + 2FsFr cos 6sr 
(4.67) 
in which the F's are the peak values of the mmf waves. The resultant radial Hag field 
is a sinusoidal space wave whose peak value Hag,pea k is, from Eq. 4.66, 
Fsr 
(Hag)pea k = 
(4.68) 
g 
Now consider the magnetic field coenergy stored in the air gap. From Eq. 3.49, 
the coenergy density at a point where the magnetic field intensity is H is (/x0/2) H 2 in 
SI units. Thus, the coenergy density averaged over the volume of the air gap is/z0/2 
times the average value of H2g. The average value of the square of a sine wave is half 
its peak value. Hence, 
/z0 
(Hag)peak 
/z0 
(4.69) 
Average coenergy density = ~ 
2 
- -4 
The total coenergy is then found as 
Wt~ d --" (average coenergy density)(volume of air gap) 
.0 4 
--g- rcDlg- ixorcDll 
4g 
Fs2r 
(4.70) 
where I is the axial length of the air gap and D is its average diameter. 
From Eq. 4.67 the coenergy stored in the air gap can now be expressed in terms 
of the peak amplitudes of the stator- and rotor-mmf waves and the space-phase angle 
between them; thus 
W~ d = ~0 ~ Dl 
4g 
(F2 + F2 + 2FsFr cos 6sr) 
(4.71) 
Recognizing that holding mmf constant is equivalent to holding current constant, 
an expression for the electromechanical torque T can now be obtained in terms of the 

224 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
interacting magnetic fields by taking the partial derivative of the field coenergy with 
respect to angle. For a two-pole machine 
T = 
= - 
F~ Fr sin 8sr 
(4.72) 
O~sr Fs,Fr 
2g 
The general expression for the torque for a multipole machine is 
T= 
(poles) (/z0yr D/) 
- 
2 
2g 
Fs Fr sin 8sr 
(4.73) 
In this equation, 8sr is the electrical space-phase angle between the rotor and stator 
mmf waves and the torque T acts in the direction to accelerate the rotor. Thus when 
8sr is positive, the torque is negative and the machine is operating as a generator. 
Similarly, a negative value of 6sr corresponds to positive torque and, correspondingly, 
motor action. 
This important equation states that the torque is proportional to the peak values of 
the stator- and rotor-mmf waves Fs and Fr and to the sine of the electrical space-phase 
angle 8sr between them. The minus sign means that the fields tend to align themselves. 
Equal and opposite torques are exerted on the stator and rotor. The torque on the stator 
is transmitted through the frame of the machine to the foundation. 
One can now compare the results of Eq. 4.73 with that of Eq. 4.65. Recognizing 
that Fs is proportional to is and Fr is proportional to ir, one sees that they are similar in 
form. In fact, they must be equal, as can be verified by substitution of the appropriate 
expressions for Fs, Fr (Section 4.3.1), and Lsr (Appendix B). Note that these results 
have been derived with the assumption that the iron reluctance is negligible. However, 
the two techniques are equally valid for finite iron permeability. 
On referring to Fig. 4.35b, it can be seen that Fr sin ~sr is the component of the Fr 
wave in electrical space quadrature with the Fs wave. Similarly Fs sin 8sr is the com- 
ponent of the Fs wave in quadrature with the Fr wave. Thus, the torque is proportional 
to the product of one magnetic field and the component of the other in quadrature 
with it, much like the cross product of vector analysis. Also note that in Fig. 4.35b 
Fs sin ~sr = Fsr sin ~r 
(4.74) 
and 
Fr sin ~sr = 
Fsr sin 6s 
(4.75) 
where, as seen in Fig. 4.35, t~ r is the angle measured from the axis of the resultant 
mmf wave to the axis of the rotor mmf wave. Similarly, 8s is the angle measured from 
the axis of the stator mmf wave to the axis of the resultant mmf wave. 
The torque, acting to accelerate the rotor, can then be expressed in terms of the 
resultant mmf wave Fsr by substitution of either Eq. 4.74 or Eq. 4.75 in Eq. 4.73; thus 
(poles) (/z0yr DI) 
T = - 
2 
2g 
fs Fsr sin ~s 
(4.76) 
(p°les)(lz°rrDl)FrFsrsin'r 
(4.77) 
T--- 
2 
2g 

4.7 
Torque in Nonsalient-Pole Machines 
225 
Comparison of Eqs. 4.73, 4.76, and 4.77 shows that the torque can be expressed in 
terms of the component magnetic fields due to each current acting alone, as in Eq. 4.73, 
or in terms of the resultant field and either of the components, as in Eqs. 4.76 and 
4.77, provided that we use the corresponding angle between the axes of the fields. 
Ability to reason in any of these terms is a convenience in machine analysis. 
In Eqs. 4.73, 4.76, and 4.77, the fields have been expressed in terms of the peak 
values of their mmf waves. When magnetic saturation is neglected, the fields can, 
of course, be expressed in terms of the peak values of their flux-density waves or in 
terms of total flux per pole. Thus the peak value Bag of the field due to a sinusoidally 
distributed mmf wave in a uniform-air-gap machine is lZOFag,peak/g, where Fag,peak 
is the peak value of the mmf wave. For example, the resultant mmf Fsr produces a 
resultant flux-density wave whose peak value is Bsr =/z0 Fsr//g. Thus, Fsr = g Bsr//Z0 
and substitution in Eq. 4.77 gives 
T---( 
p°les2 )(~-~) 
BsrFrsinrr 
(4.78) 
One of the inherent limitations in the design of electromagnetic apparatus is the 
saturation flux density of magnetic materials. Because of saturation in the armature 
teeth the peak value Bsr of the resultant flux-density wave in the air gap is limited 
to about 1.5 to 2.0 T. The maximum permissible value of the winding current, and 
hence the corresponding mmf wave, is limited by the temperature rise of the winding 
and other design requirements. Because the resultant flux density and mmf appear 
explicitly in Eq. 4.78, this equation is in a convenient form for design purposes and 
can be used to estimate the maximum torque which can be obtained from a machine 
of a given size. 
An 1800-r/min, four-pole, 60-Hz synchronous motor has an air-gap length of 1.2 mm. The 
average diameter of the air-gap is 27 cm, and its axial length is 32 cm. The rotor winding has 
786 turns and a winding factor of 0.976. Assuming that thermal considerations limit the rotor 
current to 18 A, estimate the maximum torque and power output one can expect to obtain from 
this machine. 
II Solution 
First, we can determine the maximum rotor mmf from Eq. 4.8 
4 /krNr) 
4 (0.976 x 786) 
(Fr)max = zr \poles 
(Ir)max = 
--71. 
4 
18 = 4395 A 
Assuming that the peak value of the resultant air-gap flux is limited to 1.5 T, we can estimate the 
maximum torque from Eq. 4.78 by setting ~r equal to -re~2 (recognizing that negative values 
of 6r, with the rotor mmf lagging the resultant mmf, correspond to positive, motoring torque) 
Tmax=(Ple-----~s)( reD1 
---~) Bsr (fr)max 
(~) (zrx0"27x0"32) l.5x4400=1790N m 
2 
EXAMPLE 4.8 

226 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
For a synchronous speed of 1800 r/min, O) m = ns (zr/30) = 1800 (re/30) = 60zr rad/sec, 
and thus the corresponding power can be calculated as Pmax - 
°)mTmax -- 337 kW. 
Practice Problem 4.1 
Repeat Example 4.8 for a two-pole, 60-Hz synchronous motor with an air-gap length of 1.3 mm, 
an average air-gap diameter of 22 cm and an axial length of 41 cm. The rotor winding has a 
900 turns and a winding factor of 0.965. The maximum rotor current is 22 A. 
Solution 
Tma x = 2585 N. m and emax = 975 kW 
Alternative forms of the torque equation arise when it is recognized that the 
resultant flux per pole is 
(I)p = (average value of B over a pole)(pole area) 
(4.79) 
and that the average value of a sinusoid over one-half wavelength is 2/rr times its 
peak value. Thus 
(])p -- 
__ Bpeak 
Jr 
poles 
\ poles 
BReak 
(4.80) 
where Bpeak is the peak value of the corresponding flux-density wave. For example, 
using the peak value of the resultant flux Bsr and substitution of Eq. 4.80 into Eq. 4.78 
gives 
zr (p°les) 2 
T = 
2 
2 
(I)srFr sin ~r 
(4.81) 
where ~sr is the resultant flux per pole produced by the combined effect of the stator 
and rotor mmf's. 
To recapitulate, we now have several forms in which the torque of a uniform- 
air-gap machine can be expressed in terms of its magnetic fields. All are merely 
statements that the torque is proportional to the product of the magnitudes of the 
interacting fields and to the sine of the electrical space angle between their magnetic 
axes. The negative sign indicates that the electromechanical torque acts in a direction 
to decrease the displacement angle between the fields. In our preliminary discussion 
of machine types, Eq. 4.81 will be the preferred form. 
One further remark can be made concerning the torque equations and the thought 
process leading to them. There was no restriction in the derivation that the mmf wave 
or flux-density wave remain stationary in space. They may remain stationary, or they 
may be traveling waves, as discussed in Section 4.5. As we have seen, if the magnetic 
fields of the stator and rotor are constant in amplitude and travel around the air gap 
at the same speed, a steady torque will be produced by the tendency of the stator and 
rotor fields to align themselves in accordance with the torque equations. 

4.8 
Linear Machines 
227 
4.8 
LINEAR MACHINES 
In general, each of the machine types discussed in this book can be produced in linear 
versions in addition to the rotary versions which are commonly found and which are 
discussed extensively in the following chapters. In fact, for clarity of discussion, many 
of the machine types discussed in this book are drawn in their developed (Cartesian 
coordinate) form, such as in Fig. 4.19b. 
Perhaps the most widely known use of linear motors is in the transportation 
field. In these applications, linear induction motors are used, typically with the ac 
"stator" on the moving vehicle and with a conducting stationary "rotor" constituting 
the rails. In these systems, in addition to providing propulsion, the induced currents in 
the rail may be used to provide levitation, thus offering a mechanism for high-speed 
transportation without the difficulties associated with wheel-rail interactions on more 
conventional rail transport. 
Linear motors have also found application in the machine tool industry and 
in robotics where linear motion (required for positioning and in the operation of 
manipulators) is a common requirement. In addition, reciprocating linear machines 
are being constructed for driving reciprocating compressors and alternators. 
The analysis of linear machines is quite similar to that of rotary machines. In 
general, linear dimensions and displacements replace angular ones, and forces replace 
torques. With these exceptions, the expressions for machine parameters are derived 
in an analogous fashion to those presented here for rotary machines, and the results 
are similar in form. 
Consider the linear winding shown in Fig. 4.36. This winding, consisting of N 
turns per slot and carrying a current i, is directly analogous to the rotary winding 
shown in developed form in Fig. 4.25. In fact, the only difference is that the angular 
position 0a is replaced by the linear position z. 
The fundamental component of the mmf wave of Fig. 4.36 can be found directly 
from Eq. 4.13 simply by recognizing that this winding has a wavelength equal to fl 
and that the fundamental component of this mmf wave varies as cos (2rcz/fl). Thus 
replacing the angle 0a in Eq. 4.13 by 2zrz/fl, we can find the fundamental component 
of the mmf wave directly as 
4 (N_~~)(2zrz) 
Hag1 -- -- 
cos 
(4.82) 
If an actual machine has a distributed winding (similar to its rotary counterpart, 
shown in Fig. 4.20) consisting of a total of Nph turns distributed over p periods in z 
(i.e., over a length of pfl), the fundamental component of Hag can be found by analogy 
with Eq. 4.15 
4(kwNphi)(2rcz) 
-- 
cos 
(4.83) 
Magi-- 7/" 
2pg 
--fl 
where kw is the winding factor. 
In a fashion analogous to the discussion of Section 4.5.2, a three-phase linear 
winding can be made from three windings such as those of Fig. 4.31, with each phase 

228 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
~ag 
~ .~~ 7undamental 
"~'ag 1 
s ~ 
N/ 
~" 
, 
s 
--fl/2 
s S" ] 
]U Ni ~
"
'
,
 
fl/2 
ss S 
fl 
(a) 
2--g 
Fundamental Hag 1 
s ~ 
~,,,~ 
Ui 
] 
/" 
~. 
X 
~"" Hag 
] 
./ 
.- 
2 
sl~~ S- 
"a\~ 
]¢i'" 
I 
" 
I 
.dl 
I 
.. s 
N i 0 
r,~ ~ ,,, 
fl / 2 
fl 
.. 1 
2g 
mmf 
Fundamental .T'ag I 
(b) 
Figure 4.36 
The mmf and H field of a concentrated full-pitch 
linear winding. 
displaced in position by a distance fl/3 and with each phase excited by balanced 
three-phase currents of angular frequency tOe 
ia -- Im cos Oget 
(4.84) 
ib = lm COS (OOet -- 120 °) 
(4.85) 
ic -- lm COS (Wet + 120 °) 
(4.86) 
Following the development of Eqs. 4.26 through 4.38, we can see that there will 
be a single positive-traveling mmf which can be written directly from Eq. 4.38 simply 
by replacing 0a by 2rcz/fl as 
.T "+ (z, t) - ~ Fmax cos 
T 
- COet 
(4.87) 
where Fmax is given by 
4 
Fmax -- -- 
Im 
Jr 
2p 
(4.88) 

4.8 
Linear Machines 
229 
From Eq. 4.87 we see that the result is an mmf which travels in the z direction 
with a linear velocity 
O)e/~ 
v = 
= fe/3 
(4.89) 
2zr 
where fe is the exciting frequency in hertz. 
EXAMPLE 4.9 
A three-phase linear ac motor has a winding with a wavelength of fl = 0.5 m and an air gap of 
1.0 cm in length. A total of 45 tums, with a winding factor kw = 0.92, are distributed over a total 
winding length of 3/3 = 1.5 m. Assume the windings to be excited with balanced three-phase 
currents of peak amplitude 700 A and frequency 25 Hz. Calculate (a) the amplitude of the 
resultant mmf wave, (b) the corresponding peak air-gap flux density, and (c) the velocity of 
this traveling mmf wave. 
II Solution 
a. From Eqs. 4.87 and 4.88, the amplitude of the resultant mmf wave is 
4 
Fpeak "- ~ ~- 
2p 
Im 
= 34 
(0"92x45) 
7
0
0
2
z
r
 
2x3 
= 8.81 x 103 A/m 
b. The peak air-gap flux density can be found from the result of part (a) by dividing by the 
air-gap length and multiplying by/z0: 
/Zo Fpeak 
Bpe ~ 
= 
g 
(4zr x 10-7)(8.81 × 103) 
0.01 
= 1.11T 
c. Finally, the velocity of the traveling wave can be determined from Eq. 4.89: 
v = fe/3 = 25 x 0.5 = 12.5 m/s 
A three-phase linear synchronous motor has a wavelength of 0.93 m. It is observed to be 
traveling at speed of 83 km/hr. Calculate the frequency of the electrical excitation required 
under this operating condition. 
Solution 
f = 24.8 Hz 

230 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Linear machines are not discussed specifically in this book. Rather, the reader is 
urged to recognize that the fundamentals of their performance and analysis correspond 
directly to those of their rotary counterparts. One major difference between these two 
machine types is that linear machines have end effects, corresponding to the magnetic 
fields which "leak" out of the air gap ahead of and behind the machine. These effects 
are beyond the scope of this book and have been treated in detail in the published 
literature. 3 
4.9 
MAGNETIC SATURATION 
The characteristics of electric machines depend heavily upon the use of magnetic 
materials. These materials are required to form the magnetic circuit and are used by 
the machine designer to obtain specific machine characteristics. As we have seen in 
Chapter 1, magnetic materials are less than ideal. As their magnetic flux is increased, 
they begin to saturate, with the result that their magnetic permeabilities begin to 
decrease, along with their effectiveness in contributing to the overall flux density in 
the machine. 
Both electromechanical torque and generated voltage in all machines depend on 
the winding flux linkages. For specific mmf's in the windings, the fluxes depend on the 
reluctances of the iron portions of the magnetic circuits and on those of the air gaps. 
Saturation may therefore appreciably influence the characteristics of the machines. 
Another aspect of saturation, more subtle and more difficult to evaluate without 
experimental and theoretical comparisons, concerns its influence on the basic premises 
from which the analytic approach to machinery is developed. Specifically, relations 
for the air-gap mmf are typically based on the assumption of negligible reluctance in 
the iron. When these relations are applied to practical machines with varying degrees 
of saturation in the iron, significant errors in the analytical results can be expected. To 
improve these analytical relationships, the actual machine can be replaced for these 
considerations by an equivalent machine, one whose iron has negligible reluctance 
but whose air-gap length is increased by an amount sufficient to absorb the magnetic- 
potential drop in the iron of the actual machine. 
Similarly, the effects of air-gap nonuniformities such as slots and ventilating 
ducts are also incorporated by increasing the effective air-gap length. Ultimately, 
these various approximate techniques must be verified and confirmed experimentally. 
In cases where such simple techniques are found to be inadequate, detailed analyses, 
such as those employing finite-element or other numerical techniques, can be used. 
However, it must be recognized that the use of these techniques represents a significant 
increase in modeling complexity. 
Saturation characteristics of rotating machines are typically presented in the 
form of an open-circuit characteristic, also called a magnetization curve or saturation 
3 See, for example, S. Yamamura, Theory of Linear Induction Motors, 2d ed., Halsted Press, 1978. Also, 
S. Nasar and I. Boldea, Linear Electric Motors: Theory, Design and Practical Applications, 
Prentice-Hall, 1987. 

4.9 
Magnetic Saturation 
231 
e~o 
"3 
o 
Air-gap line 
Field excitation in ampere-turns 
or in field amperes 
Figure 4.37 Typical open-circuit 
characteristic and air-gap line. 
curve. An example is shown in Fig. 4.37. This characteristic represents the magnetiza- 
tion curve for the particular iron and air geometry of the machine under consideration. 
For a synchronous machine, the open-circuit saturation curve is obtained by operating 
the machine at constant speed and measuring the open-circuit armature voltage as a 
function of the field current. The straight line tangent to the lower portion of the curve 
is the air-gap line, corresponding to low levels of flux within the machine. Under 
these conditions the reluctance of the machine iron is typically negligible, and the 
mmf required to excite the machine is simply that required to overcome the reluc- 
tance of the air gap. If it were not for the effects of saturation, the air-gap line and 
open-circuit characteristic would coincide. Thus, the departure of the curve from the 
air-gap line is an indication of the degree of saturation present. In typical machines 
the ratio at rated voltage of the total mmf to that required by the air gap alone usually 
is between 1.1 and 1.25. 
At the design stage, the open-circuit characteristic can be calculated from design 
data techniques such as finite-element analyses. A typical finite-element solution for 
the flux distribution around the pole of a salient-pole machine is shown in Fig. 4.38. 
The distribution of the air-gap flux found from this solution, together with the funda- 
mental and third-harmonic components, is shown in Fig. 4.39. 
In addition to saturation effects, Fig. 4.39 clearly illustrates the effect of a nonuni- 
form air gap. As expected, the flux density over the pole face, where the air gap is 
small, is much higher than that away from the pole. This type of detailed analysis is 
of great use to a designer in obtaining specific machine properties. 
As we have seen, the magnetization curve for an existing synchronous machine 
can be determined by operating the machine as an unloaded generator and measuring 
the values of terminal voltage corresponding to a series of values of field current. 
For an induction motor, the machine is operated at or close to synchronous speed (in 
which case very little current will be induced in the rotor windings), and values of the 
magnetizing current are obtained for a series of values of impressed stator voltage. 

232 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Pole face 
Salient 
pole 
Mutual or 
air gap flux 
Equivalent smooth 
armature surface 
Leakage flux 
Field winding 
Figure 4.38 
Finite-element solution for the flux distribution around a 
salient pole. (General Electric Company.) 
f 
/ 
l' 
,,,,S' / 
N 
-X... 
j Flux-density 
~~ 
distribution 
\~ 
Fundamental 
omponent 
\~ 
Third harmonic 
I "--- "~'~ 
component 
f 
J 
Center line of pole 
Figure 4.39 
Flux-density wave corresponding to 
Fig. 4.38 with its fundamental and third-harmonic 
components. 

4.10 
Leakage Fluxes 
233 
It should be emphasized, however, that saturation in a fully loaded machine occurs 
as a result of the total mmf acting on the magnetic circuit. Since the flux distribution 
under load generally differs from that of no-load conditions, the details of the machine 
saturation characteristics may vary from the open-circuit curve of Fig. 4.37. 
4.10 
LEAKAGE FLUXES 
In Section 2.4 we showed that in a two-winding transformer the flux created by 
each winding can be separated into two components. One component consists of flux 
which links both windings, and the other consists of flux which links only the winding 
creating the flux. The first component, called mutual flux, is responsible for coupling 
between the two coils. The second, known as leakage flux, contributes only to the 
self-inductance of each coil. 
Note that the concept of mutual and leakage flux is meaningful only in the context 
of a multiwinding system. For systems of three or more windings, the bookkeeping 
must be done very carefully. Consider, for example, the three-winding system of 
Fig. 4.40. Shown schematically are the various components of flux created by a 
current in winding 1. Here ~Ple3 is clearly mutual flux that links all three windings, 
and qgll is clearly leakage flux since it links only winding 1. However, ~ole is mutual 
flux with respect to winding 2 yet is leakage flux with respect to winding 3, while ~013 
mutual flux with respect to winding 3 and leakage flux with respect to winding 2. 
Electric machinery often contains systems of multiple windings, requiting careful 
bookkeeping to account for the flux contributions of the various windings. Although 
the details of such analysis are beyond the scope of this book, it is useful to discuss 
these effects in a qualitative fashion and to describe how they affect the basic machine 
inductances. 
Air-Gap Space-Harmonic Fluxes 
In this chapter we have seen that although sin- 
gle distributed coils create air-gap flux with a significant amount of space-harmonic 
-----0 + 
~012 
11 .~ 
~ 
¢( :, ~.2_Coil 2 
+ ~ 
, 
~13 
~ 
X 1 q911 
- 
Coill 
< 
~'3 Coil3 
Figure 4.40 Three-coil system showing 
components of mutual and leakage flux produced by 
current in coil 1. 

234 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
content, it is possible to distribute these windings so that the space-fundamental com- 
ponent is emphasized while the harmonic effects are greatly reduced. As a result, we 
can neglect harmonic effects and consider only space-fundamental fluxes in calculat- 
ing the self and mutual-inductance expressions of Eqs. B.26 and B.27. 
Though often small, the space-harmonic components of air-gap flux do exist. In 
dc machines they are useful torque-producing fluxes and therefore can be counted as 
mutual flux between the rotor and stator windings. In ac machines, however, they may 
generate time-harmonic voltages or asynchronously rotating flux waves. These effects 
generally cannot be rigorously accounted for in most standard analyses. Nevertheless, 
it is consistent with the assumptions basic to these analyses to recognize that these 
fluxes form a part of the leakage flux of the individual windings which produce 
them. 
Slot-Leakage Flux 
Figure 4.41 shows the flux created by a single coil side in a slot. 
Notice that in addition to flux which crosses the air gap, contributing to the air-gap 
flux, there are flux components which cross the slot. Since this flux links only the 
coil that is producing it, it also forms a component of the leakage inductance of the 
winding producing it. 
End-Turn Fluxes 
Figure 4.42 shows the stator end windings on an ac machine. 
The magnetic field distribution created by end turns is extremely complex. In general 
these fluxes do not contribute to useful rotor-to-stator mutual flux, and thus they, too, 
contribute to leakage inductance. 
From this discussion we see that the self-inductance expression of Eq. B.26 must, 
in general, be modified by an additional term LI, which represents the winding leakage 
inductance. This leakage inductance corresponds directly to the leakage inductance 
of a transformer winding as discussed in Chapter 1. Although the leakage inductance 
is usually difficult to calculate analytically and must be determined by approximate 
or empirical techniques, it plays an important role in machine performance. 
kir gap 
carrying 
1to paper 
Figure 4.41 
Flux created by a single 
coil side in a slot. 

4.11 
Summary 
235 
Figure 4.42 
End view of the stator of a 26-kV 908-MVA 3600 r/min turbine 
generator with water-cooled windings. Hydraulic connections for coolant flow are 
provided for each winding end turn. (General Electric Company.) 
4.11 
SUMMARY 
This chapter presents a brief and elementary description of three basic types of rotating 
machines: synchronous, induction, and dc machines. In all of them the basic principles 
are essentially the same. Voltages are generated by the relative motion of a magnetic 
field with respect to a winding, and torques are produced by the interaction of the 
magnetic fields of the stator and rotor windings. The characteristics of the various 
machine types are determined by the methods of connection and excitation of the 
windings, but the basic principles are essentially similar. 
The basic analytical tools for studying rotating machines are expressions for the 
generated voltages and for the electromechanical torque. Taken together, they express 
the coupling between the electric and mechanical systems. To develop a reasonably 
quantitative theory without the confusion arising from too much detail, we have made 
several simplifying approximations. In the study of ac machines we have assumed 
sinusoidal time variations of voltages and currents and sinusoidal space waves of 
air-gap flux density and mmf. On examination of the mmf produced by distributed ac 
windings we found that the space-fundamental component is the most important. On 
the other hand, in dc machines the armature-winding mmf is more nearly a sawtooth 
wave. For our preliminary study in this chapter, however, we have assumed sinusoidal 
mmf distributions for both ac and dc machines. We examine this assumption more 

236 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
thoroughly for dc machines in Chapter 7. Faraday's law results in Eq. 4.50 for the 
rms voltage generated in an ac machine winding or Eq. 4.53 for the average voltage 
generated between brushes in a dc machine. 
On examination of the mmf wave of a three-phase winding, we found that bal- 
anced three-phase currents produce a constant-amplitude air-gap magnetic field rotat- 
ing at synchronous speed, as shown in Fig. 4.31 and Eq. 4.39. The importance of this 
fact cannot be overstated, for it means that it is possible to operate such machines, ei- 
ther as motors or generators, under conditions of constant torque (and hence constant 
electrical power as is discussed in Appendix A), eliminating the double-frequency, 
time-varying torque inherently associated with single-phase machines. For example, 
imagine a multimegawatt single-phase 60-Hz generator subjected to multimegawatt 
instantaneous power pulsation at 120 Hz! The discovery of rotating fields led to the 
invention of the simple, rugged, reliable, self-starting polyphase induction motor, 
which is analyzed in Chapter 6. (A single-phase induction motor will not start; it 
needs an auxiliary starting winding, as shown in Chapter 9.) 
In single-phase machines, or in polyphase machines operating under unbalanced 
conditions, the backward-rotating component of the armature mmf wave induces 
currents and losses in the rotor structure. Thus, the operation of polyphase machines 
under balanced conditions not only eliminates the second-harmonic component of 
generated torque, it also eliminates a significant source of rotor loss and rotor heating. 
It was the invention of polyphase machines operating under balanced conditions that 
made possible the design and construction of large synchronous generators with 
ratings as large as 1000 MW. 
Having assumed sinusoidally-distributed magnetic fields in the air gap, we then 
derived expressions for the magnetic torque. The simple physical picture for torque 
production is that of two magnets, one on the stator and one on the rotor, as shown 
schematically in Fig. 4.35a. The torque acts in the direction to align the magnets. 
To get a reasonably close quantitative analysis without being hindered by details, we 
assumed a smooth air gap and neglected the reluctance of the magnetic paths in the 
iron parts, with a mental note that this assumption may not be valid in all situations 
and a more detailed model may be required. 
In Section 4.7 we derived expressions for the magnetic torque from two view- 
points, both based on the fundamental principles of Chapter 3. The first viewpoint 
regards the machine as a set of magnetically-coupled circuits with inductances which 
depend on the angular position of the rotor, as in Section 4.7.1. The second regards the 
machine from the viewpoint of the magnetic fields in the air gap, as in Section 4.7.2. 
It is shown that the torque can be expressed as the product of the stator field, the rotor 
field, and the sine of the angle between their magnetic axes, as in Eq. 4.73 or any of 
the forms derived from Eq. 4.73. The two viewpoints are complementary, and ability 
to reason in terms of both is helpful in reaching an understanding of how machines 
work. 
This chapter has been concerned with basic principles underlying rotating- 
machine theory. By itself it is obviously incomplete. Many questions remain unan- 
swered. How do we apply these principles to the determination of the characteristics 
of synchronous, induction, and dc machines? What are some of the practical problems 

4.12 
Problems 
237 
that arise from the use of iron, copper, and insulation in physical machines? What 
are some of the economic and engineering considerations affecting rotating-machine 
applications? What are the physical factors limiting the conditions under which a 
machine can operate successfully? Appendix D discusses some of these problems. 
Taken together, Chapter 4 along with Appendix D serve as an introduction to the more 
detailed treatments of rotating machines in the following chapters. 
4.12 
PROBLEMS 
4.1 The rotor of a six-pole synchronous generator is rotating at a mechanical 
speed of 1200 r/min. 
a. 
Express this mechanical speed in radians per second. 
b. What is the frequency of the generated voltage in hertz and in radians per 
second? 
c. 
What mechanical speed in revolutions per minute would be required to 
generate voltage at a frequency of 50 Hz? 
4.2 The voltage generated in one phase of an unloaded three-phase synchronous 
generator is of the form v(t) = Vo cos cot. Write expressions for the voltage in 
the remaining two phases. 
4.3 A three-phase motor is used to drive a pump. It is observed (by the use of a 
stroboscope) that the motor speed decreases from 898 r/min when the pump 
is unloaded to 830 r/min as the pump is loaded. 
a. 
Is this a synchronous or an induction motor? 
b. Estimate the frequency of the applied armature voltage in hertz. 
c. 
How many poles does this motor have? 
4.4 The object of this problem is to illustrate how the armature windings of 
certain machines, i.e., dc machines, can be approximately represented by 
uniform current sheets, the degree of correspondence growing better as the 
winding is distributed in a greater number of slots around the armature 
periphery. For this purpose, consider an armature with eight slots uniformly 
distributed over 360 electrical degrees (corresponding to a span of one pole 
pair). The air gap is of uniform length, the slot openings are very small, and 
the reluctance of the iron is negligible. 
Lay out 360 electrical degrees of the armature with its slots in developed 
form in the manner of Fig. 4.23a and number the slots 1 to 8 from left to right. 
The winding consists of eight single-turn coils, each carrying a direct current 
of 10 A. Coil sides placed in any of the slots 1 to 4 carry current directed into 
the paper; those placed in any of the slots 5 to 8 carry current out of the paper. 
a. 
Consider that all eight slots are placed with one side in slot 1 and the other 
in slot 5. The remaining slots are empty. Draw the rectangular mmf wave 
produced by these slots. 
b. 
Next consider that four coils have one side in slot 1 and the other in slot 5, 
while the remaining four coils have one side in slot 3 and the other in 

238 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
slot 7. Draw the component rectangular mmf waves produced by each 
group of coils, and superimpose the components to give the resultant 
mmf wave. 
c. 
Now consider that two coils are placed in slots 1 and 5, two in slots 2 and 
6, two in 3 and 7, and two in 4 and 8. Again superimpose the component 
rectangular waves to produce the resultant wave. Note that the task can be 
systematized and simplified by recognizing that the mmf wave is 
symmetric about its axis and takes a step at each slot which is directly 
proportional to the number of ampere-conductors in that slot. 
d. 
Let the armature now consist of 16 slots per 360 electrical degrees with 
one coil side per slot. Draw the resultant mmf wave. 
4.5 A three-phase Y-connected ac machine is initially operating under balanced 
three-phase conditions when one of the phase windings becomes 
open-circuited. Because there is no neutral connection on the winding, this 
requires that the currents in the remaining two windings become equal and 
opposite. Under this condition, calculate the relative magnitudes of the 
resultant positive- and negative-traveling mmf waves. 
4.6 What is the effect on the rotating mmf and flux waves of a three-phase 
winding produced by balanced-three-phase currents if two of the phase 
connections are interchanges? 
4.7 In a balanced two-phase machine, the two windings are displaced 90 electrical 
degrees in space, and the currents in the two windings are phase-displaced 90 
electrical degrees in time. For such a machine, carry out the process leading 
to an equation for the rotating mmf wave corresponding to Eq. 4.39 (which is 
derived for a three-phase machine). 
4.8 This problem investigates the advantages of short-pitching the stator coils of 
an ac machine. Figure 4.43a shows a single full-pitch coil in a two-pole 
machine. Figure 4.43b shows a fractional-pitch coil for which the coil sides 
are fl radians apart, rather than zr radians (180 °) as is the case for the 
full-pitch coil. 
For an air-gap radial flux distribution of the form 
-- Z 
Bn cos nO 
Br 
n odd 
where n = 1 corresponds to the fundamental space harmonic, n -- 3 to the 
third space harmonic, and so on, the flux linkage of each coil is the integral 
of Br over the surface spanned by that coil. Thus for the nth space harmonic, 
the ratio of the maximum fractional-pitch coil flux linkage to that of the 
full-pitch coil is 
ff/2 B,, cos nO dO 
f/~/2 
fl/2 
3-[3/2 COS nO dO 
= 
= Isin (nil~2)] 
f_~/2 Bn cos nO dO 
fzr/2 
:rr/2 
3-:rr/2 COS nO dO 
It is common, for example, to fractional-pitch the coils of an ac machine 
by 30 electrical degrees (/3 = 5zr/6 - 150°). For n -- 1, 3, 5 calculate the 
fractional reduction in flux linkage due to short pitching. 

4.12 
Problems 
239 
N-turn coil 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.43 
Problem 4.8 (a) full-pitch coil and 
(b) fractional-pitch coil. 
4.9 A six-pole, 60-Hz synchronous machine has a rotor winding with a total of 
138 series turns and a winding factor kr - 0.935. The rotor length is 1.97 m, 
the rotor radius is 58 cm, and the air-gap length = 3.15 cm. 
a. 
What is the rated operating speed in r/min? 
b. 
Calculate the rotor-winding current required to achieve a peak 
fundamental air-gap flux density of 1.23 T. 
c. 
Calculate the corresponding flux per pole. 
4.10 Assume that a phase winding of the synchronous machine of Problem 4.9 
consists of one full-pitch, 11-turn coil per pole pair, with the coils connected 
in series to form the phase winding. If the machine is operating at rated speed 
and under the operating conditions of Problem 4.9, calculate the rms 
generated voltage per phase. 
4.11 The synchronous machine of Problem 4.9 has a three-phase winding with 45 
series turns per phase and a winding factor kw -- 0.928. For the flux condition 
and rated speed of Problem 4.9, calculate the rms-generated voltage per phase. 
4.12 The three-phase synchronous machine of Problem 4.9 is to be moved to an 
application which requires that its operating frequency be reduced from 60 to 
50 Hz. This application requires that, for the operating condition considered 
in Problem 4.9, the rms generated voltage equal 13.0 kV line-to-line. As a 
result, the machine armature must be rewound with a different number of 
turns. Assuming a winding factor of kw = 0.928, calculate the required 
number of series turns per phase. 
4.13 Figure 4.44 shows a two-pole rotor revolving inside a smooth stator which 
carries a coil of 110 turns. The rotor produces a sinusoidal space distribution 
of flux at the stator surface; the peak value of the flux-density wave being 
0.85 T when the current in the rotor is 15 A. The magnetic circuit is linear. 
The inside diameter of the stator is 11 cm, and its axial length is 0.17 m. The 
rotor is driven at a speed of 50 r/sec. 

240 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
Figure 4.44 
Elementary 
generator for Problem 4.13. 
a. 
The rotor is excited by a current of 15 A. Taking zero time as the instant 
when the axis of the rotor is vertical, find the expression for the 
instantaneous voltage generated in the open-circuited stator coil. 
b. The rotor is now excited by a 50-Hz sinusoidal alternating currrent whose 
peak value is 15 A. Consequently, the rotor current reverses every half 
revolution; it is timed to be at its maximum just as the axis of the rotor is 
vertical (i.e., just as it becomes aligned with that of the stator coil). 
Taking zero time as the instant when the axis of the rotor is vertical, find 
the expression for the instantaneous voltage generated in the 
open-circuited stator coil. This scheme is sometimes suggested as a dc 
generator without a commutator; the thought being that if alternative half 
cycles of the alternating voltage generated in part (a) are reversed by 
reversal of the polarity of the field (rotor) winding, then a pulsating direct 
voltage will be generated in the stator. Discuss whether or not this scheme 
will work. 
4.14 A three-phase two-pole winding is excited by balanced three-phase 60-Hz 
currents as described by Eqs. 4.23 to 4.25. Although the winding distribution 
has been designed to minimize harmonics, there remains some third and fifth 
spatial harmonics. Thus the phase-a mmf can be written as 
• ~'a --" ia(A1 cOS0a + A3 cos 30a q- A5 cos 50a) 
Similar expressions can be written for phases b (replace 0a by 0a - 120 °) and 
c (replace 0a by 0a + 120 °). Calculate the total three-phase mmf. What is the 
angular velocity and rotational direction of each component of the mmf? 
4.15 The nameplate of a dc generator indicates that it will produce an output 
voltage of 24 V dc when operated at a speed of 1200 r/min. By what factor 
must the number of armature turns be changed such that, for the same 
field-flux per pole, the generator will produce an output voltage of 18 V dc at 
a speed of 1400 r/min? 

4.t2 
Problems 
241 
4.16 The armature of a two-pole dc generator has a total of 320 series turns. When 
operated at a speed of 1800 ffmin, the open-circuit generated voltage is 240 V. 
Calculate ~p, the air-gap flux per pole. 
4.17 The design of a four-pole, three-phase, 230-V, 60-Hz induction motor is to be 
based on a stator core of length 21 cm and inner diameter 9.52 cm. The stator 
winding distribution which has been selected has a winding factor 
kw = 0.925. The armature is to be Y-connected, and thus the rated phase 
voltage will be 230/~/3 V. 
a. 
The designer must pick the number of armature turns so that the flux 
density in the machine is large enough to make efficient use of the 
magnetic material without being so large as to result in excessive 
saturation. To achieve this objective, the machine is to be designed with 
a peak fundamental air-gap flux density of 1.25 T. Calculate the required 
number of series turns per phase. 
b. 
For an air-gap length of 0.3 mm, calculate the self-inductance of an 
armature phase based upon the result of part (a) and using the inductance 
formulas of Appendix B. Neglect the reluctance of the rotor and stator 
iron and the armature leakage inductance. 
4.18 A two-pole, 60-Hz, three-phase, laboratory-size synchronous generator has a 
rotor radius of 5.71 cm, a rotor length of 18.0 cm, and an air-gap length of 
0.25 mm. The rotor field winding consists of 264 turns with a winding factor 
of kr - 0.95. The Y-connected armature winding consists of 45 turns per 
phase with a winding factor kw = 0.93. 
a. 
Calculate the flux per pole and peak fundamental air-gap flux density 
which will result in an open-circuit, 60-Hz armature voltage of 
120 V rms/phase (line-to-neutral). 
b. 
Calculate the dc field current required to achieve the operating condition 
of part (a). 
c. 
Calculate the peak value of the field-winding to armature-phase-winding 
mutual inductance. 
4.19 Write a MATLAB script which calculates the required total series field- and 
armature-winding turns for a three-phase, Y-connected synchronous motor 
given the following information: 
Rotor radius, R (meters) 
Air-gap length, g (meters) 
Electrical frequency, fe 
Field-winding factor, kf 
Rotor length, l (meters) 
Number of poles, poles 
Peak fundamental air-gap flux density, Bpeak 
Armature-winding factor, kw 
Rated rms open-circuit line-to-line terminal voltage, Vrated 
Field-current at rated-open-circuit terminal voltage, If 
4.20 A four-pole, 60-Hz synchronous generator has a rotor length of 5.2 m, 
diameter of 1.24 m, and air-gap length of 5.9 cm. The rotor winding consists 
of a series connection of 63 turns per pole with a winding factor of kr = 0.91. 
The peak value of the fundamental air-gap flux density is limited to 1.1 T and 

242 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
the rotor winding current to 2700 A. Calculate the maximum torque (N.m) 
and power output (MW) which can be supplied by this machine. 
4.21 Thermal considerations limit the field-current of the laboratory-size 
synchronous generator of Problem 4.18 to a maximum value of 2.4 A. If the 
peak fundamental air-gap flux density is limited to a maximum of 1.3 T, 
calculate the maximum torque (N.m) and power (kW) which can be produced 
by this generator. 
4.22 Figure 4.45 shows in cross section a machine having a rotor winding f and 
two identical stator windings a and b whose axes are in quadrature. The 
self-inductance of each stator winding is Laa and of the rotor is Lff. The air 
gap is uniform. The mutual inductance between a stator winding depends on 
the angular position of the rotor and may be assumed to be of the form 
Maf -- M cos 00 
Mbf = M sin 00 
where M is the maximum value of the mutual inductance. The resistance of 
each stator winding is Ra. 
a. 
Derive a general expression for the torque T in terms of the angle 00, the 
inductance parameters, and the instantaneous currents ia, Ib, and if. Does 
this expression apply at standstill? When the rotor is revolving? 
b. 
Suppose the rotor is stationary and constant direct currents la = I0, 
Ib = I0, and If = 210 are supplied to the windings in the directions 
indicated by the dots and crosses in Fig. 4.45. If the rotor is allowed to 
move, will it rotate continuously or will it tend to come to rest? If the 
latter, at what value of 00 ? 
Figure 4.45 
Elementary 
cylindrical-rotor, two-phase 
synchronous machine for 
Problem 4.22. 

4.12 Problems 
243 
c. 
The rotor winding is now excited by a constant direct current If while the 
stator windings carry balanced two-phase currents 
ia --- ~/21a COS cot 
ib ---- ~/21a sin cot 
The rotor is revolving at synchronous speed so that its instantaneous 
angular position is given by 00 = cot - 
3, where ~ is a phase angle 
describing the position of the rotor at t = 0. The machine is an elementary 
two-phase synchronous machine. Derive an expression for the torque 
under these conditions. 
d. 
Under the conditions of part (c), derive an expression for the 
instantaneous terminal voltages of stator phases a and b. 
4.23 Consider the two-phase synchronous machine of Problem 4.22. Derive an 
expression for the torque acting on the rotor if the rotor is rotating at constant 
angular velocity, such that 00 = cot + 3, and the phase currents become 
unbalanced such that 
ia "-- ~/~Ia cos cot 
ib = ~/2(Ia + I')sin cot 
What are the instantaneous and time-averaged torque under this condition? 
4.24 Figure 4.46 shows in schematic cross section a salient-pole synchronous 
machine having two identical stator windings a and b on a laminated steel 
core. The salient-pole rotor is made of steel and carries a field winding f 
connected to slip rings. 
Because of the nonuniform air gap, the self- and mutual inductances are 
functions of the angular position 00 of the rotor. Their variation with 00 can be 
approximated as: 
Laa -- L0 -F L2 cos 200 
Lbb = L0 -- L2 cos 200 
Mab = L2 sin 200 
Figure 4.46 Schematic two-phase, 
salient-pole synchronous machine for 
Problem 4.24. 

244 
CHAPTER 4 
Introduction to Rotating Machines 
where Lo and L2 are positive constants. The mutual inductance between the 
rotor and the stator windings are functions of 00 
Maf = M cos 00 
Mbf = M sin 00 
where M is also a positive constant. The self-inductance of the field winding, 
Lff, is constant, independent of 00. 
Consider the operating condition in which the field winding is excited by 
direct current If and the stator windings are connected to a balanced 
two-phase voltage source of frequency co. With the rotor revolving at 
synchronous speed, its angular position will be given by 00 = cot. 
Under this operating condition, the stator currents will be of the form 
ia -- ~/21a COS (cot + 3) 
ib = ~/2Ia sin (cot + 6) 
a. 
Derive an expression for the electromagnetic torque acting on the rotor. 
b. 
Can the machine be operated as a motor and/or a generator? Explain. 
c. 
Will the machine continue to run if the field current If is reduced to zero? 
Support you answer with an expression for the torque and an explanation as 
to why such operation is or is not possible. 
4.25 A three-phase linear ac motor has an armature winding of wavelength 25 cm. 
A three-phase balanced set of currents at a frequency of 100 Hz is applied to 
the armature. 
a. 
Calculate the linear velocity of the armature mmf wave. 
b. 
For the case of a synchronous rotor, calculate the linear velocity of the 
rotor. 
c. 
For the case of an induction motor operating at a slip of 0.045, calculate 
the linear velocity of the rotor. 
4.26 The linear-motor armature of Problem 4.25 has a total active length of 
7 wavelengths, with a total of 280 turns per phase with a winding factor 
kw = 0.91. For an air-gap length of 0.93 cm, calculate the rms magnitude of 
the balanced three-phase currents which must be supplied to the armature to 
achieve a peak space-fundamental air-gap flux density of 1.45 T. 
4.27 A two-phase linear permanent-magnet synchronous motor has an air-gap of 
length 1.0 mm, a wavelength of 12 cm, and a pole width of 4 cm. The rotor is 
5 wavelengths in length. The permanent magnets on the rotor are arranged to 
produce an air-gap magnetic flux distribution that is uniform over the width 
of a pole but which varies sinusoidally in space in the direction of rotor travel. 
The peak density of this air-gap flux is 0.97 T. 
a. 
Calculate the net flux per pole. 
b. 
Each armature phase consists of 10 turns per pole, with all the poles 
connected in series. Assuming that the armature winding extends many 
wavelengths past either end of the rotor, calculate the peak flux linkages 
of the armature winding. 
c. 
If the rotor is traveling at a speed of 6.3 m/sec, calculate the rms voltage 
induced in the armature winding. 

CHAPT 
=R 
Synchronous Machines 
A 
s we have seen in Section 4.2.1, a synchronous machine is an ac machine 
whose speed under steady-state conditions is proportional to the frequency 
of the current in its armature. The rotor, along with the magnetic field created 
by the dc field current on the rotor, rotates at the same speed as, or in synchronism 
with, the rotating magnetic field produced by the armature currents, and a steady 
torque results. An elementary picture of how a synchronous machi,e wurk~ i~ given 
in Section 4.2.1 with emphasis on torque production in terms of the interactions 
between the machine's magnetic fields. 
Analytical methods of examining the steady-state performance of polyphase 
synchronous machines will be developed in this chapter. Initial consideration will 
be given to cylindrical-rotor machines; the effects of salient poles are taken up in 
Sections 5.6 and 5.7. 
5.1 
INTRODUCTION TO POLYPHASE 
SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 
As indicated in Section 4.2.1, a synchronous machine is one in which alternating 
current flows in the armature winding, and dc excitation is supplied to the field 
winding. The armature winding is almost invariably on the stator and is usually a 
three-phase winding, as discussed in Chapter 4. The field winding is on the rotor. 
The cylindrical-rotor construction shown in Figs. 4.10 and 4.11 is used for two- 
and four-pole turbine generators. The salient-pole construction shown in Fig. 4.9 is 
best adapted to multipolar, slow-speed, hydroelectric generators and to most syn- 
chronous motors. The dc power required for excitation--approximately one to a 
few percent of the rating of the synchronous machinemis supplied by the excitation 
system. 
In older machines, the excitation current was typically supplied through slip 
rings from a dc machine, referred to as the exciter, which was often mounted on the 
same shaft as the synchronous machine. In more modern systems, the excitation is 
245 

246 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
supplied from ac exciters and solid-state rectifiers (either simple diode bridges or 
phase-controlled rectifiers). In some cases, the rectification occurs in the stationary 
frame, and the rectified excitation current is fed to the rotor via slip tings. In other 
systems, referred to as brushless excitation systems, the alternator of the ac exciter 
is on the rotor, as is the rectification system, and the current is supplied directly to 
the field-winding without the need for slip tings. One such system is described in 
Appendix D. 
As is discussed in Chapter 4, a single synchronous generator supplying power 
to an impedance load acts as a voltage source whose frequency is determined by 
the speed of its mechanical drive (or prime mover), as can be seen from Eq. 4.2. 
From Eqs. 4.42, 4.44, and 4.50, the amplitude of the generated voltage is propor- 
tional to the frequency and the field current. The current and power factor are then 
determined by the generator field excitation and the impedance of the generator 
and load. 
Synchronous generators can be readily operated in parallel, and, in fact, the 
electricity supply systems of industrialized countries typically have scores or even 
hundreds of them operating in parallel, interconnected by thousands of miles of 
transmission lines, and supplying electric energy to loads scattered over areas of many 
thousands of square miles. These huge systems have grown in spite of the necessity for 
designing the system so that synchronism is maintained following disturbances and 
the problems, both technical and administrative, which must be solved to coordinate 
the operation of such a complex system of machines and personnel. The principal 
reasons for these interconnected systems are reliability of service and economies in 
plant investment and operating costs. 
When a synchronous generator is connected to a large interconnected system 
containing many other synchronous generators, the voltage and frequency at its ar- 
mature terminals are substantially fixed by the system. As a result, armature currents 
will produce a component of the air-gap magnetic field which rotates at synchronous 
speed (Eq. 4.41) as determined by the system electrical frequency fe. As is discussed 
in Chapter 4, for the production of a steady, unidirectional electromechanical torque, 
the fields of the stator and rotor must rotate at the same speed, and therefore the 
rotor must turn at precisely synchronous speed. Because any individual generator 
is a small fraction of the total system generation, it cannot significantly affect the 
system voltage or frequency. It is thus often useful, when studying the behavior of 
an individual generator or group of generators, to represent the remainder of the sys- 
tem as a constant-frequency, constant-voltage source, commonly referred to as an 
infinite bus. 
Many important features of synchronous-machine behavior can be understood 
from the analysis of a single machine connected to an infinite bus. The steady-state 
behavior of a synchronous machine can be visualized in terms of the torque equa- 
tion. From Eq. 4.81, with changes in notation appropriate to synchronous-machine 
theory, 
rr 
p es 
T = -~ 
~RFfSin~RF 
(5.1) 

5,1 
Introduction to Polyphase Synchronous Machines 
247 
where 
(I) R -- resultant air-gap flux per pole 
Ff = mmf of the dc field winding 
~RF = electrical phase angle between magnetic axes of (I) R and Ff 
The minus sign of Eq. 4.81 has been omitted with the understanding that the 
electromechanical torque acts in the direction to bring the interacting fields into 
alignment. In normal steady-state operation, the electromechanical torque balances 
the mechanical torque applied to the shaft. In a generator, the prime-mover torque 
acts in the direction of rotation of the rotor, pushing the rotor mmf wave ahead of 
the resultant air-gap flux. The electromechanical torque then opposes rotation. The 
opposite situation exists in a synchronous motor, where the electromechanical torque 
is in the direction of rotation, in opposition to the retarding torque of the mechanical 
load on the shaft. 
Variations in the electromechanical torque result in corresponding variations in 
the torque angle, ~RF, as seen from Eq. 5.1. The relationship is shown in the form of a 
torque-angle curve in Fig. 5.1, where the field current (rotor mmf) and resultant air- 
gap flux are assumed constant. Positive values of torque represent generator action, 
corresponding to positive values of ~RF for which the rotor mmf wave leads the 
resultant air-gap flux. 
As the prime-mover torque is increased, the magnitude of ~RF must increase until 
the electromechanical torque balances the shaft torque. The readjustment process is 
actually a dynamic one, requiting a change in the mechanical speed of the rotor, 
typically accompanied by a damped mechanical oscillation of the rotor about its new 
steady-state torque angle. This oscillation is referred to as a hunting transient. In a 
practical machine undergoing such a transient, some changes in the amplitudes of the 
resultant flux-density and field-winding mmf wave may also occur because of various 
factors such as saturation effects, the effect of the machine leakage impedance, the 
response of the machine's excitation system, and so on. To emphasize the fundamental 
T 
--180 ° 
\ 
I -.v 
90 ° 
180 ° ~RF 
Figure 5.1 Torque-angle characteristic. 

248 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
principles of synchronous-machine operation, such effects will be neglected in the 
present discussion. 
The adjustment of the rotor to its new angular position following a load change 
can be observed experimentally in the laboratory by viewing the machine rotor with 
stroboscopic light triggered from the applied armature voltage (thus having a flashing 
frequency which causes the rotor to appear stationary when it is turning at its normal 
synchronous speed). Alternatively, electronic sensors can be used to determine the 
shaft position relative to the synchronous reference frame associated with the stator 
voltage. The resultant signal can be displayed on an oscilloscope or recorded with a 
data-acquisition system. 
As can be seen from Fig. 5.1, an increase in prime-mover torque will result 
in a corresponding increase in the torque angle. When ~RF becomes 90 °, the elec- 
tromechanical torque reaches its maximum value, known as the pull-out torque. Any 
further increase in prime-mover torque cannot be balanced by a corresponding in- 
crease in synchronous electromechanical torque, with the result that synchronism will 
no longer be maintained and the rotor will speed up. This phenomenon is known as 
loss of synchronism or pulling out of step. Under these conditions, the generator is 
usually disconnected from the external electrical system by the automatic operation 
of circuit breakers, and the prime mover is quickly shut down to prevent dangerous 
overspeed. Note from Eq. 5.1 that the value of the pull-out torque can be increased by 
increasing either the field current or the resultant air-gap flux. However, this cannot be 
done without limit; the field current is limited by the ability to cool the field winding, 
and the air-gap flux is limited by saturation of the machine iron. 
As seen from Fig. 5.1, a similar situation occurs in a synchronous motor for which 
an increase in the shaft load torque beyond the pull-out torque will cause the rotor to 
lose synchronism and thus to slow down. Since a synchronous motor develops torque 
only at synchronous speed, it cannot be started simply by the application of armature 
voltages of rated frequency. In some cases, a squirrel-cage structure is included in 
the rotor, and the motor can be started as an induction motor and then synchronized 
when it is close to synchronous speed. 
5.2 
SYNCHRONOUS-MACHINE 
INDUCTANCES; EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS 
In Section 5.1, synchronous-machine torque-angle characteristics are described in 
terms of the interacting air-gap flux and mmf waves. Our purpose now is to de- 
rive an equivalent circuit which represents the steady-state terminal volt-ampere 
characteristics. 
A cross-sectional sketch of a three-phase cylindrical-rotor synchronous machine 
is shown schematically in Fig. 5.2. The figure shows a two-pole machine; alternatively, 
this can be considered as two poles of a multipole machine. The three-phase armature 
winding on the stator is of the same type used in the discussion of rotating magnetic 
fields in Section 4.5. Coils aa', bb', and cc I represent distributed windings producing 
sinusoidal mmf and flux-density waves in the air gap. The reference directions for 

5.2 Synchronous-Machine Inductances; Equivalent Circuits 
249 
-~-U a 
Magnetic axis 
i a 
of rotor 
c 
cot + 0 o 
1\ 
f'~J2 
] Magnetic axis 
~
c
/
 
ofphasea 
I 
--U a 
Figure 5.2 Schematic diagram of 
a two-pole, three-phase cylindrical- 
rotor synchronous machine. 
the currents are shown by dots and crosses. The field winding ff' on the rotor also 
represents a distributed winding which produces a sinusoidal mmf and flux-density 
wave centered on its magnetic axis and rotating with the rotor. 
When the flux linkages with armature phases a, b, c and field winding f are ex- 
pressed in terms of the inductances and currents as follows, 
'ka = £aaia -Jr- Eabib q-" £acic "k- £afif 
(5.2) 
)~b = £baia -+- £bbib -+- /2bcic "k- /2bfif 
(5.3) 
)~c = /2caia q- /2cbib q- /2ccic + /2cfif 
(5.4) 
~-f ~--- /2faia + /2fbib q- /2fcic + /2ffif 
(5.5) 
the induced voltages can be found from Faraday's law. Here, two like subscripts denote 
a self-inductance, and two unlike subscripts denote a mutual inductance between the 
two windings. The script 12 is used to indicate that, in general, both the self- and 
mutual inductances of a three-phase machine may vary with rotor angle, as is seen, 
for example, in Section C.2, where the effects of salient poles are analyzed. 
Before we proceed, it is useful to investigate the nature of the various inductances. 
Each of these inductances can be expressed in terms of constants which can be 
computed from design data or measured by tests on an existing machine. 
5.2.1 
Rotor Self-Inductance 
With a cylindrical stator, the self-inductance of the field winding is independent of 
the rotor position 0m when the harmonic effects of stator slot openings are neglected. 
Hence 
/2ff = Lff = Lff0 + Lfl 
(5.6) 

250 
CHAPTER 5 Synchronous Machines 
where the italic L is used for an inductance which is independent of 0m. The component 
Lff0 corresponds to that portion of/2ff due to the space-fundamental component of 
air-gap flux. This component can be computed from air-gap dimensions and winding 
data, as shown in Appendix B. The additional component Ln accounts for the field- 
winding leakage flux. 
Under transient or unbalanced conditions, the flux linkages with the field wind- 
ing, Eq. 5.5, vary with time, and the voltages induced in the rotor circuits have an 
important effect on machine performance. With balanced three-phase armature cur- 
rents, however, the constant-amplitude magnetic field of the armature currents rotates 
in synchronism with the rotor. Thus the field-winding flux linkages produced by the 
armature currents do not vary with time, and the voltage induced in the field winding 
is therefore zero. With constant dc voltage Vf applied to the field-winding terminals, 
the field direct current If is given by Ohm's law, If = Vf/Re. 
5.2.2 
Stator-to-Rotor Mutual Inductances 
The stator-to-rotor mutual inductances vary periodically with 0me, the electrical angle 
between the magnetic axes of the field winding and the armature phase a as shown in 
Fig. 5.2 and as defined by Eq. 4.54. With the space-mmf and air-gap flux distribution 
assumed sinusoidal, the mutual inductance between the field winding f and phase a 
varies as cos 0me; thus 
~af : 
/~fa -- Laf cos 0me 
(5.7) 
Similar expressions apply to phases b and c, with 0me replaced by 0me - 120 ° and 
0me -~- 120 °, respectively. Attention will be focused on phase a. The inductance Laf 
can be calculated as discussed in Appendix B. 
With the rotor rotating at synchronous speed Ws (Eq. 4.40), the rotor angle will 
vary as 
0,, = Wst + ~o 
(5.8) 
where 60 is the angle of the rotor at time t = 0. From Eq. 4.54 
0me 
(poles) 
= 
2 
0m -- Oget -q- •e0 
(5.9) 
Here, O) e ~--- (poles/2)Ws is the electrical frequency and ~e0 is the electrical angle of 
the rotor at time t - 0. 
Thus, substituting into Eq. 5.7 gives 
£~af = /~fa -- LafcOs (Oget + ~e0) 
(5.10) 
5.2.3 
Stator Inductances; Synchronous Inductance 
With a cylindrical rotor, the air-gap geometry is independent of 0m if the effects of 
rotor slots are neglected. The stator self-inductances then are constant; thus 
/:aa -- /:bb = /~cc = Laa -" Laao + Lal 
(5.11) 

6.9 
Problems 
351 
has a wound rotor whose terminals are brought out through slip rings. 
a. 
At what speed does the motor run? 
b. What is the frequency of the voltages produced at the slip rings of the 
induction motor? 
c. 
What will be the frequency of the voltages produced at the slip rings of 
the induction motor if two leads of the induction-motor stator are 
interchanged, reversing the direction of rotation of the resultant rotating 
field? 
6.9 A three-phase, eight-pole, 60-Hz, 4160-V, 1000-kW squirrel-cage induction 
motor has the following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per phase Y 
referred to the stator: 
R1 =0.220 
R2=0.207 
X1 =1.95 
X2=2.42 
Xm=45.7 
Determine the changes in these constants which will result from the following 
proposed design modifications. Consider each modification separately. 
a. 
Replace the stator winding with an otherwise identical winding with a 
wire size whose cross-sectional area is increased by 4 percent. 
b. Decrease the inner diameter of the stator laminations such that the air gap 
is decreased by 15 percent. 
c. 
Replace the aluminum rotor bars (conductivity 3.5 x 107 mhos/m) with 
copper bars (conductivity 5.8 x 107 mhos/m). 
d. 
Reconnect the stator winding, originally connected in Y for 4160-V 
operation, in A for 2.4 kV operation. 
6.10 A three-phase, Y-connected, 460-V (line-line), 25-kW, 60-Hz, four-pole 
induction motor has the following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per 
phase referred to the stator: 
R1 = 0.103 
R2 = 0.225 
X1 = 1.10 
X2 = 1.13 
Xm = 59.4 
The total friction and windage losses may be assumed constant at 265 W, and 
the core loss may be assumed to be equal to 220 W. With the motor 
connected directly to a 460-V source, compute the speed, output shaft torque 
and power, input power and power factor and efficiency for slips of 1, 2 and 
3 percent. You may choose either to represent the core loss by a resistance 
connected directly across the motor terminals or by resistance Rc connected 
in parallel with the magnetizing reactance Xm. 
6.11 Consider the induction motor of Problem 6.10. 
a. 
Find the motor speed in r/min corresponding to the rated shaft output 
power of 25 kW. (Hint: This can be easily done by writing a MATLAB 
script which searches over the motor slip.) 
b. 
Similarly, find the speed in r/min at which the motor will operate with 
no external shaft load (assuming the motor load at that speed to consist 
only of the friction and windage losses). 
c. 
Write a MATLAB script to plot motor efficiency versus output power as 
the motor output power varies from zero to full load. 

252 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
air-gap component of the phase-a self-flux linkages. The second, Lal, known as the 
armature-winding leakage inductance, is due to the leakage component of phase-a 
1 
flux linkages. The third component, ~ Laa0, is due to the phase-a flux linkages from 
the space-fundamental component of air-gap flux produced by currents in phases b 
and c. Under balanced three-phase conditions, the phase-b and -c currents are related 
to the current in phase a by Eq. 5.15. Thus the synchronous inductance is an apparent 
inductance in that it accounts for the flux linkages of phase a in terms of the current 
in phase a, even though some of this flux linkage is due to currents in phases a and b. 
Hence, although synchronous inductance appears in that role in Eq. 5.18, it is not the 
self-inductance of phase a alone. 
The significance of the synchronous inductance can be further appreciated with 
reference to the discussion of rotating magnetic fields in Section 4.5.2, where it 
was shown that under balanced three-phase conditions, the armature currents create a 
rotating magnetic flux wave in the air gap of magnitude equal to 3 times the magnitude 
of that due to phase a alone, the additional component being due to the phase-b and 
-c currents. This corresponds directly to the 3 Laa0 component of the synchronous 
inductance in Eq. 5.17; this component of the synchronous inductance accounts for 
the total space-fundamental air-gap component of phase-a flux linkages produced by 
the three armature currents under balanced three-phase conditions. 
5.2.4 
Equivalent Circuit 
The phase-a terminal voltage is the sum of the armature-resistance voltage drop Raia 
and the induced voltage. The voltage eaf induced by the field winding flux (often 
referred to as the generated voltage or internal voltage) can be found from the time 
derivative of Eq. 5.18 with the armature current ia set equal to zero. With dc excitation 
If in the field winding, substitution of Eq. 5.10 gives 
d 
eaf -- ~-~ (/~afif) -- -o)eLaflf sin (Wet + 6e0) 
(5.19) 
Using Eq. 5.18, the terminal voltage can then be expressed as 
d~.a 
Va = Raia -Jr" dt 
dia 
= Raia -Jr- Ls--d- f + eaf 
(5.20) 
The generated voltage eaf of Eq. 5.19 is at frequency We, equal to the electrical 
frequency of the generator terminal voltage. Its rms amplitude is given by 
o&Laflf 
Eaf ----- 
(5.21) 
Under this synchronous operating condition, all machine armature quantifies 
(current and flux linkage) will also vary sinusoidally in time at frequency We. Thus, 

5,2 Synchronous-Machine Inductances; Equivalent Circuits 
253 
we can write the above equations in term of their rms, complex amplitudes. From 
Eq. 5.19 we can write the rms complex amplitude of the generated voltage as 
(°)eLaflf)eJSe° 
(5.22) 
J~af = j 
Similarly, the terminal-voltage equation, Eq. 5.20, can be written in terms of rms 
complex amplitudes as 
ga -- eala -4- j Xsla -+-/~af 
(5.23) 
where Xs -- (De ts is known as the synchronous reactance. 
An equivalent circuit in complex form is shown in Fig. 5.3a. The reader should 
note that Eq. 5.23 and Fig. 5.3a are written with the reference direction for Ia defined 
as positive into the machine terminals. This is known as the motor reference direction 
for the current. 
Alternatively, the generator reference direction is defined with the reference 
direction for Ia chosen as positive out of the machine terminals, as shown in Fig. 5.3b. 
Under this choice of current reference direction, Eq. 5.23 becomes 
Va-- -gala- 
jXsla + Eaf 
(5.24) 
Note that these two representations are equivalent; when analyzing a particular 
synchronous-machine operating condition the actual current will be the same. The 
sign of Ia will simply be determined by the choice of reference direction. Either choice 
is acceptable, independent of whether the synchronous machine under investigation 
is operating as a motor or a generator. However, since power tends to flow into a 
motor, it is perhaps intuitively more satisfying to choose a reference direction with 
current flowing into the machine for the analysis of motor operation. The opposite is 
true for generator operation, for which power tends to flow out of the machine. Most 
of the synchronous-machine analysis techniques presented here were first developed 
to analyze the performance of synchronous generators in electric power systems. As 
a result, the generator reference direction is more common and is generally used from 
this point on in the text. 
Xs 
Ra Ia 
,vov,-.y~,:~ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
" 
~7 a 
" 
Ea 
-o 
Ea 
(a) 
(b) 
Xs 
Ra 
Ia 
~ 
o 
+ 
Figure 5.3 Synchronous-machine equivalent circuits: 
(a) motor reference direction and (b) generator reference 
direction. 
~a 

254 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
+ 
X~0 
Xal 
R a 
+ 
#R 
Figure 5.4 Synchronous-machine 
equivalent circuit showing air-gap and 
leakage components of synchronous 
reactance and air-gap voltage. 
Figure 5.4 shows an alternative form of the equivalent circuit in which the syn- 
chronous reactance is shown in terms of its components. From Eq. 5.17 
(3) 
Xs = (-oeLs = (-oeLal + (-Oe ~ Laa0 
= Xal "l- Xq) 
(5.25) 
where Xal =coLal is the armature leakage reactance and X~0 = (-o(3Laa0) is the re- 
actance corresponding to the rotating space-fundamental air-gap flux produced by 
the three armature currents. The reactance X~0 is the effective magnetizing reactance 
of the armature winding under balanced three-phase conditions. The rms voltage/~R 
is the internal voltage generated by the resultant air-gap flux and is usually referred 
to as the air-gap voltage or the voltage "behind" leakage reactance. 
It is important to recognize that the equivalent circuits of Figs. 5.3 and 5.4 are 
single-phase, line-to-neutral equivalent circuits for a three-phase machine operating 
under balanced, three-phase conditions. Thus, once the phase-a voltages and currents 
are found, either from the equivalent circuit or directly from the voltage equations 
(Eqs. 5.23 and 5.24), the currents and voltages for phases b and c can be found simply 
by phase-shifting those of phase a by -120 ° and 120 ° respectively. Similarly, the 
total three-phase power of the machine can be found simply by multiplying that of 
phase a by three, unless the analysis is being performed in per unit (see Section 2.9), 
in which case the three-phase, per-unit power is equal to that found from solving for 
phase a alone and the factor of three is not needed. 
EXAMPLE 5. 
A 60-Hz, three-phase synchronous motor is observed to have a terminal voltage of 460 V 
(line-line) and a terminal current of 120 A at a power factor of 0.95 lagging. The field-current 
under this operating condition is 47 A. The machine synchronous reactance is equal to 1.68 ~2 
(0.794 per unit on a 460-V, 100-kVA, 3-phase base). Assume the armature resistance to be 
negligible. 
Calculate (a) the generated voltage Eaf in volts, (b) the magnitude of the field-to-armature 
mutual inductance Laf, and (c) the electrical power input to the motor in kW and in horsepower. 

5.2 
Synchronous-Machine Inductances; Equivalent Circuits 
255 
II Solution 
a. Using the motor reference direction for the current and neglecting the armature resistance, 
the generated voltage can be found from the equivalent circuit of Fig. 5.3a or Eq. 5.23 as 
/~af = 
Va -- jXsla 
We will choose the terminal voltage as our phase reference. Because this is a line-to- 
neutral equivalent, the terminal voltage Va must be expressed as a line-to-neutral voltage 
f'a- 460 = 265.6 V, line-to-neutral 
A lagging power factor of 0.95 corresponds to a power factor angle 0 = 
- cos -I (0.95) = - 18.2 °. Thus, the phase-a current is 
Ia = 
120 e -j18"2° A 
Thus 
J~af --- 265.6 - j 1.68(120 e -j18"2°) 
= 278.8 e -j43"4° V, line-to-neutral 
and hence, the generated voltage Eaf is equal to 278.8 V rms, line-to-neutral. 
b. The field-to-armature mutual inductance can be found from Eq. 5.21. With (_D e -- 120rr, 
"V/-., F-.,af 
%//_., ,,x, /_.1~, 
Lay = 
= 
"-- 22.3 mH 
o) e If 
120zr x 47 
c. The three-phase power input to the motor Pin can be found as three times the power input 
to phase a. Hence, 
Pin -'- 3Vala(power factor) = 3 x 265.6 × 120 x 0.95 
= 90.8 kW = 122 hp 
Assuming the input power and terminal voltage for the motor of Example 5.1 remain constant, 
calculate (a) the phase angle 8 of the generated voltage and (b) the field current required to 
achieve unity power factor at the motor terminals. 
II Solution 
a. For unity power factor at the motor terminals, the phase-a terminal current will be in 
phase with the phase-a line-to-neutral voltage f'a. Thus 
Pin __ 
90.6 kW 
= 114 A 
Ia = 3Va -- 3 x 265.6 V 
From Eq. 5.23, 
Eaf'- 
Va - 
jXsla 
= 265.6 - j 1.68 × 114 = 328 e -j358° V, line-to-neutral 
Thus, Eaf = 328 V line-to-neutral and 8 = -35.8 °. 
EXAMPLE 5.2 

256 
CHAPTER 5 Synchronous Machines 
b. Having found Laf in Example 5.1, we can find the required field current from Eq. 5.21. 
E,e 
~/2 × 328 
If = 
= 
= 55.2 A 
~oeLae 
377 × 0.0223 
The synchronous machine of Examples 5.1 and 5.2 is to be operated as a synchronous generator. 
For operation at 60 Hz with a terminal voltage of 460 V line-to-line, calculate the field current 
required to supply a load of 85 kW, 0.95 power-factor leading. 
Solution 
46.3 A 
It is helpful to have a rough idea of the order of magnitude of the impedance 
components. For machines with ratings above a few hundred kVA, the armature- 
resistance voltage drop at rated current usually is less than 0.01 times rated voltage; 
i.e., the armature resistance usually is less than 0.01 per unit on the machine rating as a 
base. (The per-unit system is described in Section 2.9.) The armature leakage reactance 
usually is in the range of 0.1 to 0.2 per unit, and the synchronous reactance is typically 
in the range of 1.0 to 2.0 per unit. In general, the per-unit armature resistance increases 
and the per-unit synchronous reactance decreases with decreasing size of the machine. 
In small machines, such as those in educational laboratories, the armature resistance 
may be in the vicinity of 0.05 per unit and the synchronous reactance in the vicinity of 
0.5 per unit. In all but small machines, the armature resistance can usually be neglected 
in most analyses, except insofar as its effect on losses and heating is concerned. 
5.3 
OPEN- AND SHORT-CIRCUIT 
CHARACTERISTICS 
The fundamental characteristics of a synchronous machine can be determined by a 
pair of tests, one made with the armature terminals open-circuited and the second 
with the armature terminals short-circuited. These tests are discussed here. Except 
for a few remarks on the degree of validity of certain assumptions, the discussions 
apply to both cylindrical-rotor and salient-pole machines. 
5.3.1 
Open.Circuit 
Saturation 
Characteristic 
and No-Load Rotational 
Losses 
Like the magnetization curve for a dc machine, the open-circuit characteristic (also 
referred to as the open-circuit saturation curve) of a synchronous machine is a curve of 
the open-circuit armature terminal voltage (either in volts or in per unit) as a function 
of the field excitation when the machine is running at synchronous speed, as shown by 
curve occ in Fig. 5.5. Typically, the base voltage is chosen equal to the rated voltage 
of the machine. 

5.3 
Open- and Short-Circuit Characteristics 
257 
o 
Rated 
voltage 
Air-gap line/ 
_ y 
OCC 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
b 
a 
Field current 
Figure 5.5 
Open-circuit characteristic 
of a synchronous machine. 
The open-circuit characteristic represents the relation between the space- 
fundamental component of the air-gap flux and the mmf acting on the magnetic 
circuit when the field winding constitutes the only mmf source. Note that the effects 
of magnetic saturation can be clearly seen; the characteristic bends downward with 
increasing field current as saturation of the magnetic material increases the reluctance 
of the flux paths in the machine and reduces the effectiveness of the field current in 
producing magnetic flux. As can be seen from Fig. 5.5, the open-circuit characteristic 
is initially linear as the field current is increased from zero. This portion of the curve 
(and its linear extension for higher values of field current) is known as the air-gap 
line. It represents the machine open-circuit voltage characteristic corresponding to 
unsaturated operation. Deviations of the actual open-circuit characteristic from this 
curve are a measure of the degree of saturation in the machine. 
Note that with the machine armature winding open-circuited, the terminal volt- 
age is equal to the generated voltage Eaf. Thus the open-circuit characteristic is a 
measurement of the relationship between the field current If and Eaf. It can therefore 
provide a direct measurement of the field-to-armature mutual inductance Laf. 
An open-circuit test performed on a three-phase, 60-Hz synchronous generator shows that the 
rated open-circuit voltage of 13.8 kV is produced by a field current of 318 A. Extrapolation 
of the air-gap line from a complete set of measurements on the machine shows that the field- 
current corresponding to 13.8 kV on the air-gap line is 263 A. Calculate the saturated and 
unsaturated values of Laf. 
II Solution 
From Eq. 5.21, Laf is found from 
Za f -- 
~/~ Eaf 
EXAMPLE 5.3 

258 
CHAPTER 5 Synchronous Machines 
Here, 
Ear -- 13.8 kV/~/3 = 7.97 kV. Hence the saturated value of Laf is given by 
Vc2(7.97 x 10 3) 
(Laf)sat -- 
: 94 mH 
377 x 318 
and the unsaturated value is 
~/2(7.97 x 10 3) 
(Laf) .... t -- 
----- 114 mH 
377 x 263 
In this case, we see that saturation reduces the magnetic coupling between the field and 
armature windings by approximately 18 percent. 
If the synchronous generator of Example 5.3 is operated at a speed corresponding to a generated 
voltage of 50 Hz, calculate (a) the open-circuit line-to-line terminal voltage corresponding to 
a field current of 318 A and (b) the field-current corresponding to that same voltage on the 
50-Hz air-gap line. 
Solution 
a. 11.5 kV 
b. 263A 
When the machine is an existing one, the open-circuit characteristic is usually de- 
termined experimentally by driving the machine mechanically at synchronous speed 
with its armature terminals on open circuit and by reading the terminal voltage cor- 
responding to a series of values of field current. If the mechanical power required to 
drive the synchronous machine during the open-circuit test is measured, the no-load 
rotational losses can be obtained. These losses consist of friction and windage losses 
associated with rotation as well as the core loss corresponding to the flux in the ma- 
chine at no load. The friction and windage losses at synchronous speed are constant, 
while the open-circuit core loss is a function of the flux, which in turn is proportional 
to the open-circuit voltage. 
The mechanical power required to drive the machine at synchronous speed and 
unexcited is its friction and windage loss. When the field is excited, the mechanical 
power equals the sum of the friction, windage, and open-circuit core loss. The open- 
circuit core loss therefore can be found from the difference between these two values 
of mechanical power. A typical curve of open-circuit core loss as a function of open- 
circuit voltage takes the form of that found in Fig. 5.6. 
5.3.2 
Short.Circuit Characteristic 
and Load Loss 
A short-circuit characteristic can be obtained by applying a three-phase short circuit 
through suitable current sensors to the armature terminals of a synchronous machine. 
With the machine driven at synchronous speed, the field current can be increased 

5.3 Open- and Short-Circuit Characteristics 
259 
r~ 
°,-q 
? 
r 
Open-circuit voltage 
Figure 5.6 Typical form of an 
open-circuit core-loss curve. 
and a plot of armature current versus field current can be obtained. This relation is 
known as the short-circuit characteristic. An open-circuit characteristic occ and a 
short-circuit characteristic scc are shown in Fig. 5.7. 
With the armature short-circuited, Va = 0 and, from Eq. 5.24 (using the generator 
reference direction for current) 
J~af = ]a(Ra -~- jXs) 
(5.26) 
The corresponding phasor diagram is shown in Fig. 5.8. Because the resistance is 
much smaller than the synchronous reactance, the armature current lags the excitation 
voltage by very nearly 90 °. Consequently the armature-reaction-mmf wave is very 
nearly in line with the axis of the field poles and in opposition to the field mmf, as 
shown by phasors ,4 and P representing the space waves of armature reaction and 
field mmf, respectively. 
The resultant mmf creates the resultant air-gap flux wave which generates the 
air-gap voltage/~R (see Fig. 5.4) equal to the voltage consumed in armature resistance 
.,..~ 
r~ 
Air-gap line 
a. 
~ 
occ 
// I 
/ scc 
/',,j 
f 
Field excitation 
0 
O' 
Figure 5.7 Open- and short-circuit 
characteristics of a synchronous 
machine. 

260 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
y~ 
k ~"- 
jXsia 
jXalia 
ia 
f 
v 
,I 
 4,f 
I 
Axis of 
field 
Figure 5.8 Phasor diagram for short-circuit 
conditions. 
Ra and leakage reactance Xal; as an equation, 
/~R = la(Ra -k- jXal) 
(5.27) 
In many synchronous machines the armature resistance is negligible, and the 
leakage reactance is between 0.10 and 0.20 per unit; a representative value is about 
0.15 per unit. That is, at rated armature current the leakage reactance voltage drop is 
about 0.15 per unit. From Eq. 5.27, therefore, the air-gap voltage at rated armature 
current on short circuit is about 0.15 per unit; i.e., the resultant air-gap flux is only 
about 0.15 times its normal voltage value. Consequently, the machine is operating 
in an unsaturated condition. The short-circuit armature current, therefore, is directly 
proportional to the field current over the range from zero to well above rated armature 
current; it is thus a straight line as can be seen in Fig. 5.7. 
The unsaturated synchronous reactance (corresponding to unsaturated operat- 
ing conditions within the machine) can be found from the open- and short-circuit 
characteristics. At any convenient field excitation, such as Of in Fig. 5.7, the arma- 
ture current on short circuit is O'b, and the unsaturated generated voltage for the same 
field current corresponds to O a, as read from the air-gap line. Note that the voltage 
on the air-gap line should be used because the machine is assumed to be operating in 
an unsaturated condition. If the line-to-neutral voltage corresponding to O a is Va, ag 
and the armature current per phase corresponding to O'b is la, sc, then from Eq. 5.26, 

5.3 Open- and Short-Circuit Characteristics 
261 
with armature resistance neglected, the unsaturated synchronous reactance Xs,u is 
Wa, ag 
(5.28) 
Xs,u- la, sc 
where the subscripts "ag" and "sc" indicate air-gap line conditions and short-circuit 
conditions, respectively. If Va,ag and Ia, sc are expressed in per unit, the synchronous 
reactance will be in per unit. If Va, ag and la, sc are expressed in rms line-to-neutral 
volts and rms amperes per phase, respectively, the synchronous reactance will be in 
ohms per phase. 
Note that the synchronous reactance in ohms is calculated by using the phase or 
line-to-neutral voltage. Often the open-circuit saturation curve is given in terms of the 
line-to-line voltage, in which case the voltage must be converted to the line-to-neutral 
value by dividing by ~/-3. 
For operation at or near rated terminal voltage, it is sometimes assumed that the 
machine is equivalent to an unsaturated one whose magnetization line is a straight 
line through the origin and the rated-voltage point on the open-circuit characteristic, 
as shown by the dashed line Op in Fig. 5.9. According to this approximation, the 
saturated value of the synchronous reactance at rated voltage Va,rated is 
Va,rated 
Xs = 
(5.29) 
E tt 
where I a' is the armature current Otc read from the short-circuit characteristic at 
the field current Of' corresponding to Va,rated on the open-circuit characteristic, as 
shown in Fig. 5.9. As with the unsaturated synchronous reactance, if Va,rated and I a' 
are expressed in per unit, the synchronous reactance will be in per unit. If Va,rated and 
I a' are expressed in rms line-to-neutral volts and rms amperes per phase, respectively, 
the synchronous reactance will be in ohms per phase. This method of handling the 
p 
/ 
11 j 
OCC 
Va, rated 
I,~ 
..... 
,4,'~";- 
X' 
i/- 
~a' rated 
IS¢C 
+~ 
,~ 
#" I 
..... 
, 
--r 
T---.~ 
"~ 
All ~--~ 
7 a 
C "~ ~ 
© 
0 
f' f" 
O' 
Field excitation 
Figure 5.9 open- and short-circuit 
characteristics showing equivalent 
magnetization line for saturated 
operating conditions. 

262 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
effects of saturation, which assumes that the effects of saturation can be described 
by a single value of saturated reactance, usually gives satisfactory results when great 
accuracy is not required. 
The short-circuit ratio (SCR) is defined as the ratio of the field current required 
for rated voltage on open circuit to the field current required for rated armature current 
on short circuit. That is, in Fig. 5.9 
Of' 
SCR = 
(5.30) 
Of" 
It can be shown that the SCR is the reciprocal of the per-unit value of the saturated 
synchronous reactance found from Eq. 5.29. It is common to refer to the field current 
Of' required to achieve rated-open-circuit voltage as AFNL (Amperes FieldNo Load) 
and the field current Of" required to achieve rated-short-circuit current as AFSC 
(Amperes Field Short Circuit). Thus, the short-circuit ratio can also be written as 
AFNL 
SCR = 
(5.31) 
AFSC 
!XAMPLE 5.~ 
The following data are taken from the open- and short-circuit characteristics of a 45-kVA, three- 
phase, Y-connected, 220-V (line-to-line), six-pole, 60-Hz synchronous machine. From the 
open-circuit characteristic: 
Line-to-line voltage = 220 V 
Field current = 2.84 A 
From the short-circuit characteristic: 
Armature current, A 
118 
152 
Field current, A 
2.20 
2.84 
From the air-gap line: 
Field current = 2.20 A 
Line-to-line voltage = 202 V 
Compute the unsaturated value of the synchronous reactance, its saturated value at rated 
voltage in accordance with Eq. 5.29, and the short-circuit ratio. Express the synchronous 
reactance in ohms per phase and in per unit on the machine rating as a base. 
II Solution 
At a field current of 2.20 A the line-to-neutral voltage on the air-gap line is 
202 
Va.ag = ~ 
= 116.7V 
and for the same field current the armature current on short circuit is 
/.,sc = l18A 

5.3 Open- and Short-Circuit Characteristics 
263 
From Eq. 5.28 
116.7 
Xs,u = 
--0.987 fl/phase 
118 
Note that rated armature current is 
45,000 
, 
= 
= 
118 A 
la rated 
~ 
X 220 
Therefore, la, sc = 1.00 per unit. The corresponding air-gap-line voltage is 
202 
Va, ag = 220 = 0.92 per unit 
From Eq. 5.28 in per unit 
0.92 
Xs,u = 1.00 -- 0.92 per unit 
The saturated synchronous reactance can be found from the open- and short-circuit 
characteristics and Eq. 5.29 
Va,rate d 
(220/ff3) 
Xs = 
= 
= 0.836 f2/phase 
Ia' 
152 
In per unit I~ = ~5__~2 = 1.29, and from Eq. 5.29 
118 
1.00 
Xs = 1.29 - 0.775 per unit 
Finally, from the open- and short-circuit characteristics and Eq. 5.30, the short-circuit 
ratio is given by 
2.84 
SCR = 
= 1.29 
2.20 
Note that as was indicated following Eq. 5.30, the inverse of the short-circuit ratio is equal to 
the per-unit saturated synchronous reactance 
1 
1 
Xs = SCR = 1.29 = 0.775 per unit 
Calculate the saturated synchronous reactance (in f2/phase and per unit) of a 85-kVA syn- 
chronous machine which achieves its rated open-circuit voltage of 460 V at a field current 
8.7 A and which achieves rated short-circuit current at a field current of 11.2 A. 
Solution 
Xs = 3.21 f2/phase = 1.29 per unit 
If the mechanical power required to drive the machine is measured while the 
short-circuit test is being made, information can be obtained regarding the losses 

264 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ S ~ y  lo~ loss 
Armature current 
Figure 5.10 Typical form of 
short-circuit load loss and stray load 
loss curves. 
caused by the armature current. Because the machine flux level is low under short- 
circuit conditions, the core loss under this condition is typically considered to be 
negligible. The mechanical power required to drive the synchronous machine during 
the short-circuit test then equals the sum of friction and windage loss (determined 
from the open-circuit test at zero field current) plus losses caused by the armature 
current. The losses caused by the armature current can then be found by subtracting 
friction and windage from the driving power. The losses caused by the short-circuit 
armature current are known collectively as the short-circuit load loss. A curve showing 
the typical form of short-circuit load loss plotted against armature current is shown 
in Fig. 5.10. Typically, it is approximately parabolic with armature current. 
The short-circuit load loss consists of I2R loss in the armature winding, local 
core losses caused by the armature leakage flux, and the very small core loss caused 
by the resultant flux. The dc resistance loss can be computed if the dc resistance is 
measured and corrected, when necessary, for the temperature of the windings during 
the short-circuit test. For copper conductors 
RT 
234.5 + T 
= 
(5.32) 
Rt 
234.5 + t 
where RT and Rt are the resistances at Celsius temperatures T and t, respectively. 
If this dc resistance loss is subtracted from the short-circuit load loss, the difference 
will be the loss due to skin effect and eddy currents in the armature conductors plus 
the local core losses caused by the armature leakage flux. This difference between the 
short-circuit load loss and the dc resistance loss is the additional loss caused by the 
alternating current in the armature. It is the stray-load loss described in Appendix D, 
commonly considered to have the same value under normal load conditions as on short 
circuit. It is a function of the armature current, as shown by the curve in Fig. 5.10. 
As with any ac device, the effective resistance of the armature Ra, eff can be 
computed as the power loss attributable to the armature current divided by the square of 
the current. On the assumption that the stray load loss is a function of only the armature 
current, the effective resistance of the armature can be determined from the short- 

5.3 Open- and Short-Circuit Characteristics 
265 
circuit load loss: 
short-circuit load loss 
ga,eff = (short-circuit armature current) 2 
(5.33) 
If the short-circuit load loss and armature current are in per unit, the effective resistance 
will be in per unit. If they are in watts per phase and amperes per phase, respectively, 
the effective resistance will be in ohms per phase. Usually it is sufficiently accurate 
to find the value of Ra, eff at rated current and then to assume it to be constant. 
For the 45-kVA, three-phase, Y-connected synchronous machine of Example 5.4, at rated 
armature current (118 A) the short-circuit load loss (total for three phases) is 1.80 kW at a 
temperature of 25°C. The dc resistance of the armature at this temperature is 0.0335 ~2/phase. 
Compute the effective armature resistance in per unit and in ohms per phase at 25°C. 
II Solution 
The short-circuit load loss is 1.80/45 = 0.040 per unit at la = 1.00 per unit. Therefore, 
0.040 
ga,eff = 
(1.00)2 
= 0.040 per unit 
On a per-phase basis the short-circuit load loss is 1800/3 = 600 W/phase and consequently 
the effective resistance is 
600 
Ra'eff -- (118) 2 - 0.043 f2/phase 
The ratio of ac-to-dc resistance is 
Ra, eff 
0.043 
Ra, dc 
0.0335 
= 1.28 
Because this is a small machine, its per-unit resistance is relatively high. The effective 
armature resistance of machines with ratings above a few hundred kilovoltamperes usually is 
less than 0.01 per unit. 
EXAMPLE 
5.5 
mractice Problem 
5., 
Consider a three-phase 13.8 kV 25-MVA synchronous generator whose three-phase short- 
circuit loss is 52.8 kW at rated armature current. Calculate (a) its rated armature current and 
(b) its effective armature resistance in ~2/phase and in per unit. 
Solution 
a. 1046 A 
b. Ra, eff -- 0.0161 ~/phase = 0.0021 per unit 

266 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
5.4 
STEADY-STATE 
POWER-ANGLE 
CHARACTERISTICS 
The maximum power a synchronous machine can deliver is determined by the max- 
imum torque which can be applied without loss of synchronism with the external 
system to which it is connected. The purpose of this section is to derive expressions 
for the steady-state power limits of synchronous machines in simple situations for 
which the external system can be represented as an impedance in series with a voltage 
source. 
Since both the external system and the machine itself can be represented as an 
impedance in series with a voltage source, the study of power limits becomes merely 
a special case of the more general problem of the limitations on power flow through 
a series impedance. The impedance will include the synchronous impedance of the 
synchronous machine as well as an equivalent impedance of the external system 
(which may consist of transmission lines and transformer banks as well as additional 
synchronous machines). 
Consider the simple circuit of Fig. 5.11 a, consisting of two ac voltages/~ 1 and 
/~2 connected by an impedance Z = R -F jX through which the current is i. The 
phasor diagram is shown in Fig. 5.1 lb. Note that in this phasor diagram, the reference 
direction for positive angles is counter-clockwise. Thus, in Fig. 5.11 b, the angle 6 is 
positive while the angle 4) can be seen to be negative. 
The power P2 delivered through the impedance to the load-end voltage source 
/~2 is 
P2 = E21 cos 4) 
(5.34) 
where 4) is the phase angle of i with respect to/~2. The phasor current is 
i = #~ - ~2 
(5.35) 
Z 
i 
R 
X 
o 
~ 
o 
+ 
+ 
#l 
#2 
O 
O 
[ 
Ri 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 5.11 
(a) Impedance interconnecting two voltages; 
(b) phasor diagram. 

S,4 Steady-State Power-Angle Characteristics 
26"t 
If the phasor voltages and the impedance are expressed in polar form, 
F, 1 = E1 e ja 
F-,2 ~-- E2 
Z = R + j X = IZl e joz 
(5.36) 
(5.37) 
(5.38) 
where 8 is the phase angle by which E1 leads/~2 and 4~z = tan -1 (X/R) is the phase 
angle of the impedance Z, then 
I. 
I e j~ 
E1 e j8 -- E2 
E1 ej(8_4,z) 
E2 
-j4~z 
= 
= 
= ~ 
- ~ 
e 
(5.39) 
IZl eJOz 
IZl 
IZl 
Taking the real part of Eq. 5.39 gives 
E~ 
E2 
I cos q~ = 
cos (8 - q~z) - ~ 
cos (-q~z) 
(5.40) 
IZl 
IZl 
Noting that cos (-4~z)=cos4~z = R/IZI we see that substitution of Eq. 5.40 in 
Eq. 5.34 gives 
E1E2 
E2 R 
P: = ~ 
cos (8 - 4~z) 
(5.41) 
IZl 
IZl 2 
or 
P2 ----- E1E2 sin (8 + otz) 
E~R 
(5.42) 
IZl 
IZl = 
where 
otz=90°-q~z=tan-l(R) 
(5.43) 
Similarly power P1 at source end/~1 of the impedance can be expressed as 
E1Ee 
E21R 
P1 = ~ 
sin (8 -- C~z) + ~ 
(5.44) 
IZl 
IZl 2 
If, as is frequently the case, the resistance is negligible, then R << [Z[, [Z[ ~ X and 
az ~ 0 and hence 
P1 = P2 = E1 E2 sin 8 
(5.45) 
X 
Equation 5.45 is a very important equation in the study of synchronous machines 
and indeed in the study of ac power systems in general. When applied to the situation 
of a synchronous machine connected to an ac system, Eq. 5.45 is commonly referred 
to as the power-angle characteristic for a synchronous machine, and the angle 8 is 
known as the power angle. If the resistance is negligible and the voltages are constant, 

268 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
then from Eq. 5.45 the maximum power transfer 
E1E2 
Pl,max = e2,max--" 
X 
(5.46) 
occurs when ~ = 4-90 °. Note that if ~ is positive, E1 leads E2 and, from Eq. 5.45, 
power flows from source E 1 to E2. Similarly, when ~ is negative, E1 lags E2 and power 
flows from source E2 to El. 
Equation 5.45 is valid for any voltage sources E1 and E2 separated by a reactive 
impedance j X. Thus for a synchronous machine with generated voltage J~af and 
synchronous reactance Xs connected to a system whose Thevenin equivalent is a 
voltage source VEQ in series with a reactive impedance j XEQ, as shown in Fig. 5.12, 
the power-angle characteristic can be written 
p = 
EafVEQ sin ~ 
(5.47) 
Xs "l- XEQ 
where P is the power transferred from the synchronous machine to the system and 
is the phase angle of/~af with respect to f'EQ. 
In a similar fashion, it is possible to write a power-angle characteristic in terms of 
Xs, Eaf, the terminal voltage Va, and the relative angle between them, or alternatively 
XEQ, Va and VEQ and their relative angle. Although these various expressions are 
equally valid, they are not equally useful. For example, while Eaf and VEQ remain 
constant as P is varied, Va will not. Thus, while Eq. 5.47 gives an easily solved relation 
between P and d;, a power-angle characteristic based upon Va cannot be solved without 
an additional expression relating Va to P. 
It should be emphasized that the derivation of Eqs. 5.34 to 5.47 is based on 
a single-phase ac circuit. For a balanced three-phase system, if El and E2 are the 
line-neutral voltages, the results must be multiplied by three to get the total three- 
phase power; alternatively E1 and E2 can be expressed in terms of the line-to-line 
voltage (equal to ~/3 times the line-neutral voltage), in which case the equations give 
three-phase power directly. 
When the power expression of Eq. 5.45 is compared with the expression of 
Eq. 5.1 for torque in terms of interacting flux and mmf waves, they are seen to 
Xs 
XEQ 
o 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Ea 
o 
k 
)k 
2 
y 
y- 
Generator 
Thevenin equivalent 
for the external system 
Figure 5.12 
Equivalent-circuit representation 
of a synchronous machine connected to an 
external system. 

5.4 Steady-State Power-Angle Characteristics 
269 
be of the same form. This is no coincidence. Remember that torque and power are 
proportional when, as here, speed is constant. What we are really saying is that Eq. 5.1, 
applied specifically to an idealized cylindrical-rotor machine and translated to circuit 
terms, becomes Eq. 5.45. A quick mental review of the background of each relation 
should show that they stem from the same fundamental considerations. 
From Eq. 5.47 we see that the maximum power transfer associated with 
synchronous-machine operation is proportional to the magnitude of the system volt- 
age, corresponding to VEQ, as well as to that of the generator internal voltage Eaf. 
Thus, for constant system voltage, the maximum power transfer can be increased by 
increasing the synchronous-machine field current and thus the internal voltage. Of 
course, this cannot be done without limit; neither the field current nor the machine 
fluxes can be raised past the point where cooling requirements fail to be met. 
In general, stability considerations dictate that a synchronous machine achieve 
steady-state operation for a power angle considerably less than 90 °. Thus, for a given 
system configuration, it is necessary to ensure that the machine will be able to achieve 
its rated operation and that this operating condition will be within acceptable operating 
limits for both the machine and the system. 
EXAMPLE 5.( 
A three-phase, 75-MVA, 13.8-kV synchronous generator with saturated synchronous reactance 
Xs -- 1.35 per unit and unsaturated synchronous reactance Xs,u -- 1.56 per unit is connected to 
an external system with equivalent reactance XEQ "-" 0.23 per unit and voltage VEQ -- 1.0 per 
unit, both on the generator base. It achieves rated open-circuit voltage at a field current of 
297 amperes. 
@ 
a. Find the maximum power Pmax (in MW and per unit) that can be supplied to the external 
system if the internal voltage of the generator is held equal to 1.0 per unit. 
b. Using MATLAB, t plot the terminal voltage of the generator as the generator output is 
varied from zero to Pmax under the conditions of part (a). 
c. Now assume that the generator is equipped with an automatic voltage regulator which 
controls the field current to maintain constant terminal voltage. If the generator is loaded 
to its rated value, calculate the corresponding power angle, per-unit internal voltage, and 
field current. Using MATLAB, plot per-unit Ear as a function of per-unit power. 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 5.47 
Eaf VEQ 
Pmax -- Ss + XEQ 
Note that although this is a three-phase generator, no factor of 3 is required because we are 
working in per unit. 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

270 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
Terminal voltage vs. power angle for part (b) 
1 
0.98 
"~ 0.96 
~ 0.94 
"~ 0.92 
~ 
0.9 
0.88 
0.86 0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
Power angle, delta [degrees] 
(a) 
,.a 
.,..~ 
1.8 
1.7 
1.6 
1.5 
1.4 
1.3 
1.2 
1.1 
Eaf vs. power for part (c) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
Power [per unit] 
(b) 
Figure 5.13 
Example 5.6. (a) MATLAB plot of terminal voltage vs. 
for part (b). (b) MATLAB plot of Eaf vs. power for part (c). 

S,4 Steady-State Power-Angle Characteristics 
2"1t 
Because the machine is operating with a terminal voltage near its rated value, we 
should express Pmax in terms of the saturated synchronous reactance. Thus 
1 
Pmax 
1.35 + 0.23 = 0.633 per unit 
47.5 MW 
b. From Fig 5.12, the generator terminal current is given by 
J~af- VEQ 
Eaf eft-- VEQ _ eft-- 1.0 
ia -- j (X s -']- XEQ ) = 
j (X s -~- XEQ ) -- 
jl.58 
The generator terminal voltage is then given by 
.23 
vl~ra : 
T~rEQ + jXEQIa ~--- 1.0 + 1-~(e jS- 1.0) 
Figure 5.13a is the desired MATLAB plot. The terminal voltage can be seen to vary 
from 1.0 at 8 = 0 ° to approximately 0.87 at 8 = 90 °. 
c. With the terminal voltage held constant at Va = 1.0 per unit, the power can be expressed as 
P = Va VEQ sin 8 t = ~1 
sin 8 t = 4.35 sin 8 t 
XEQ 
0.23 
where 8 t is the angle of the terminal voltage with respect to ("EQ. 
For P = 1.0 per unit, ~t = 13.3 ° and hence i is equal to 
~lla ~- Va eJSt_ VEQ __ 1.007 e j6"65° 
jXEQ 
and 
#af = ]~'rEQ + j(XEQ + Xs)/~a = 1.78 e j62"7° 
or Eaf = 1.78 per unit, corresponding to a field current of If = 1.78 x 297 = 
529 amperes. The corresponding power angle is 62.7 ° . 
Figure 5.13b is the desired MATLAB plot. Eaf can be seen to vary from 1.0 at P = 0 
to 1.78 at P = 1.0. 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% Solution 
for part 
(b) 
%System parameters 
Veq = 1.0; 
Eaf = 1.0; 
Xeq = .23; 
Xs = 1.35; 
% Solve for Va as delta varies 
from 0 to 90 degrees 
for n = i:i01 
delta(n) 
= (pi/2.)*(n-1)/100; 

272 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
Ia(n) : (Eaf *exp(j*delta(n)) 
- Veq)/(j* (Xs + Xeq) ) ; 
Va(n) = abs(Veq + j*Xeq*Ia(n)) ; 
degrees(n) 
= 180*delta(n)/pi; 
end 
%Now plot the results 
plot (degrees, Va) 
xlabel('Power 
angle, delta 
[degrees]') 
ylabel('Terminal 
voltage 
[per unit] ') 
title( 'Terminal voltage vs. power angle for part 
(b)') 
fprintf('\n\nHit 
any key to continue\n') 
pause 
% Solution for part 
(c) 
%Set terminal voltage to unity 
Vterm : 1.0; 
for n : i:i01 
P(n) : (n-l)/100; 
deltat(n) 
= asin(P(n)*Xeq/(Vterm*Veq)) 
; 
Ia(n) = (Vterm *exp(j*deltat(n)) 
- Veq) / (j*Xeq) ; 
Eaf(n) 
= abs(Vterm 
+ j*(Xs+Xeq)*Ia(n) ) ; 
end 
%Now plot the results 
plot (P, Eaf) 
xlabel ( ' Power 
[per unit ] ' ) 
ylabel('Eaf 
[per unit] ') 
title('Eaf 
vs. power for part 
(c) ') 
Consider the 75-MVA, 13.8 kV machine of Example 5.6. It is observed to be operating at 
terminal voltage of 13.7 kV and an output power of 53 MW at 0.87 pf lagging. Find (a) the 
phase current in kA, (b) the internal voltage in per unit, and (c) the corresponding field current 
in amperes. 
Solution 
a. /a = 2.57 kA 
b. Eaf = 1.81 per unit 
c. If = 538 amperes 
!XAMPLE 5.1 
A 2000-hp, 2300-V, unity-power-factor, three-phase, Y-connected, 30-pole, 60-Hz synchronous 
motor has a synchronous reactance of 1.95 ~2/phase. For this problem all losses may be 
neglected. 

5.4 Steady-State Power-Angle Characteristics 
273 
ia 
Xs m 
ia 
f'a 
ia 
Xsg 
Xs m 
.~ 
~ 
~ j~aXsm 
"- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
^ 
afm 
Ea 
m 
O 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
+ 
afro 
^ 
/ 
ia 
f:a 
--arm 
jiaXsg 
jiaXsm 
^ 
Eafg 
ia 
.^ 
#afm 
(d) 
(e) 
Figure 5.14 Equivalent circuits and phasor diagrams for Example 5.7. 
a. Compute the maximum power and torque which this motor can deliver if it is supplied 
with power directly from a 60-Hz, 2300-V infinite bus. Assume its field excitation is 
maintained constant at the value which would result in unity power factor at rated load. 
b. Instead of the infinite bus of part (a), suppose that the motor is supplied with power from 
a three-phase, Y-connected, 2300-V, 1500-kVA, two-pole, 3600 r/min turbine generator 
whose synchronous reactance is 2.65 g2/phase. The generator is driven at rated speed, and 
the field excitations of generator and motor are adjusted so that the motor runs at unity 
power factor and rated terminal voltage at full load. Calculate the maximum power and 
torque which could be supplied corresponding to these values of field excitation. 
II Solution 
Although this machine is undoubtedly of the salient-pole type, we will solve the problem 
by simple cylindrical-rotor theory. The solution accordingly neglects reluctance torque. The 
machine actually would develop a maximum torque somewhat greater than our computed value, 
as discussed in Section 5.7. 
a. The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 5.14a and the phasor diagram at full load in 
Fig. 5.14b, where 
#afm is the generated voltage of the motor and Xsm is its synchronous 
reactance. From the motor rating with losses neglected, 
Rated kVA = 2000 × 0.746 = 1492 kVA, three-phase 
= 497 kVA/phase 

274 
CHAPTER 5 Synchronous Machines 
Rated voltage -- 
Rated current - 
2300 
4~ 
-- 1328 V line-to-neutral 
497,000 
1328 
= 374 A/phase-Y 
From the phasor diagram at full load 
Eaf m "- v/V) + (laXsm) 2 -- 1515 W 
When the power source is an infinite bus and the field excitation is constant, Va and 
Ear m are constant. Substitution of Va for El, Eafm for E2, and Xsm for X in Eq. 5.46 then 
gives 
VaEafm 
1328 × 1515 
Pmax = 
= 
= 1032 kW/phase 
Xsm 
1.95 
= 3096 kW, three-phase 
In per unit, Pmax = 3096/1492 = 2.07 per unit. Because this power exceeds the motor 
rating, the motor cannot deliver this power for any extended period of time. 
With 30 poles at 60 Hz, the synchronous angular velocity is found from Eq. 4.40 
o& = 
we = 
(2zr60) = 8zr rad/sec 
and hence 
Pmax 
3096 x 103 
Tmax = 
= 
= 123.2 kN. m 
Ogs 
8zr 
b. When the power source is the turbine generator, the equivalent circuit becomes that shown 
^ 
in Fig. 5.14c, where Eafg is the generated voltage of the generator and Xsg is its 
synchronous reactance. Here the synchronous generator is equivalent to an external 
voltage f'EQ and reactance XEQ as in Fig. 5.12. The phasor diagram at full motor load, 
unity power factor, is shown in Fig. 5.14d. As before, Va = 1330 V/phase at full load and 
Eafm "- 1515 V/phase. 
From the phasor diagram 
Eafg--- w/Vt 2 + (laXsg) 2= 
1657 V 
Since the field excitations and speeds of both machines are constant, Eafg and Eafm are 
constant. Substitution of Eafg for El, Eafm for E2, and Xsg + Xsm for X in Eq. 5.46 then 
gives 
EafgEafm 
1657 x 1515 
Pmax -- Xsg + Xsm = 
4.60 
= 546 kW/phase 
= 1638 kW, three-phase 
In per unit, Pmax = 1638/1492 = 1.10 per unit. 
Pmax 
1635 × 103 
Tma x -~- 
-- 
-- 65.2 kN. m 
Ogs 
8zr 

5.5 Steady-State Operating Characteristics 
275 
Synchronism would be lost if a load torque greater than this value were applied to 
the motor shaft. Of course, as in part (a), this loading exceeds the rating of the motor and 
could not be sustained under steady-state operating conditions. 
~ractice Problem 5.q 
If the excitation system of the generator of Example 5.7 becomes damaged and must be limited 
to supplying only one half of the field excitation of part (b) of the example, calculate the 
maximum power which can be supplied to the motor. 
Solution 
819 kW 
5.5 
STEADY-STATE OPERATING 
CHARACTERISTICS 
The principal steady-state operating characteristics of a synchronous machine are 
described by the interrelations between terminal voltage, field current, armature cur- 
rent, power factor, and efficiency. A selection of performance curves of importance 
in practical application of synchronous machines are presented here. 
Consider a synchronous generator delivering power at constant frequency and 
rated terminal voltage to a load whose power factor is constant. The curve showing the 
field current required to maintain rated terminal voltage as the constant-power-factor 
load is varied is known as a compounding curve. The characteristic form of three 
compounding curves at various constant power factors are shown in Fig. 5.15. 
Synchronous generators are usually rated in terms of the maximum apparent 
power (kVA or MVA) load at a specific voltage and power factor (often 80, 85, or 
90 percent lagging) which they can carry continuously without overheating. The 
real power output of the generator is usually limited to a value within the apparent 
.,..~ 
I
~
 
0.8 pf lag 
1.0 pf 
0.8 pf lead 
Rated load 
Load kVA or armature current 
Figure 5.15 Characteristic form of 
synchronous-generator compounding 
curves. 

276 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
power rating by the capability of its prime mover. By virtue of its voltage-regulating 
system (which controls the field current in response to the measured value of terminal 
voltage), the machine normally operates at a constant terminal voltage whose value 
is within 4-5 percent of rated voltage. When the real-power loading and voltage 
are fixed, the allowable reactive-power loading is limited by either armature- or field- 
winding heating. A typical set of capability curves for a large, hydrogen-cooled turbine 
generator is shown in Fig. 5.16. They give the maximum reactive-power loadings 
corresponding to various real power loadings with operation at rated terminal voltage. 
Note that the three-curves seen in the figure correspond to differing pressure of the 
hydrogen cooling gas. As can be seen, increasing the hydrogen pressure improves 
cooling and permits a larger overall loading of the machine. 
Armature-winding heating is the limiting factor in the region from unity to rated 
power factor (0.85 lagging power factor in Fig. 5.16). For example, for a given real- 
power loading, increasing the reactive power past a point on the armature-heating 
limited portion of the capability curve will result in an armature current in excess 
of that which can be succesfully cooled, resulting in armature-winding temperatures 
which will damage the armature-winding insulation and degrade its life. Similarly, 
for lower power factors, field-winding heating is the limiting factor. 
Capability curves provide a valuable guide both to power system planners and to 
operators. As system planners consider modifications and additions to power systems, 
1.1 
1.0 
0.9 
"~ 0.8 
0.7 
03 
0.6 
o 
03 
;> "= 0.5 
o 
• ~ 0.4 
03 0.3 
0.2 
o, 
0 o 
o.1 
o.2 
,/p. 
.......... 
3(; 
j 
~ ~ P ~  
~, 
ps 
• 
_ 
[ 
.... 
Armature heating 
............... 
limited 
1 
I 
I 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
Per-unit power 
Figure 5.16 
Capability curves of an 0.85 power factor, 0.80 short-circuit 
ratio, hydrogen-cooled turbine generator. Base MVA is rated MVA at 0.5 psig 
hydrogen. 

5.5 
Steady-State Operating Characteristics 
277 
they can readily see whether the various existing or proposed generators can safely 
supply their required loadings. Similarly, power system operators can quickly see 
whether individual generators can safely respond to changes in system loadings which 
occur during the normal course of system operation. 
The derivation of capability curves such as those in Fig. 5.16 can be seen as 
follows. Operation under conditions of constant terminal voltage and armature current 
(at the maximum value permitted by heating limitations) corresponds to a constant 
value of apparent output power determined by the product of terminal voltage and 
current. Since the per-unit apparent power is given by 
Apparent power- dP 2 + Q2 _ Va/a 
(5.48) 
where P represents the per-unit real power and Q represents the per-unit reactive 
power, we see that a constant apparent power corresponds to a circle centered on 
the origin on a plot of reactive power versus real power. Note also from Eq. 5.48, 
that, for constant terminal voltage, constant apparent power corresponds to constant 
armature-winding current and hence constant armature-winding heating. Such a cir- 
cle, corresponding to the maximum acceptable level of armature heating, is shown in 
Fig. 5.17. 
Similarly, consider operation when terminal voltage is constant and field current 
(and hence Eaf) is limited to a maximum value, also determined by heating limitations. 
ng limit 
] 
/
~
 
Machine rating 
~i 
._ 
0 
ii 
rmature 
ating limit 
Va 
Figure 5.17 
Construction used for the 
derivation of a synchronous generator 
capability curve. 

278 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
In per unit, 
P - j Q = I3"aia 
(5.49) 
From Eq. 5.24 (with Ra = 0) 
/~af-" Va "+" j Xs]a 
(5.50) 
Equations 5.49 and 5.50 can be solved to yield 
( 
V2)2( VaEaf~2xs/I 
pC+ 
a + -~-s 
= 
(5.51) 
This equation corresponds to a circle centered at Q = -(V2/Xs) in Fig. 5.17 and 
determines the field-heating limitation on machine operation shown in Fig. 5.16. It is 
common to specify the rating (apparent power and power factor) of the machine as the 
point of intersection of the armature- and field-heating limitation curves. 
For a given real-power loading, the power factor at which a synchronous machine 
operates, and hence its armature current, can be controlled by adjusting its field 
excitation. The curve showing the relation between armature current and field current 
at a constant terminal voltage and with a constant real power is known as a V curve 
because of its characteristic shape. A family of V curves for a synchronous generator 
takes the form of those shown in Fig. 5.18. 
For constant power output, the armature current is minimum at unity power fac- 
tor and increases as the power factor decreases. The dashed lines are loci of constant 
power factor; they are the synchronous-generator compounding curves (see Fig. 5.15) 
showing how the field current must be varied as the load is changed to maintain con- 
stant power factor. Points to the right of the unity-power-factor compounding curve 
correspond to overexcitation and lagging power factor; points to the left correspond 
Per-unit 
0.8 pf 
power output 
lead 
1.0 pf 
0.8 pf 
0 0.25 0.5 0.75 
~.0/ 
/ 
lag 
i 
l// 
Field current 
Figure 5.18 Typical form of synchronous-generator 
V curves. 

5.5 
Steady-State Operating Characteristics 
279 
to underexcitation and leading power factor. Synchronous-motor V curves and com- 
pounding curves are very similar to those of synchronous generators. In fact, if it were 
not for the small effects of armature resistance, motor and generator compounding 
curves would be identical except that the lagging- and leading-power-factor curves 
would be interchanged. 
As in all electromechanical machines, the efficiency of a synchronous machine 
at any particular operating point is determined by the losses which consist of I2R 
losses in the windings, core losses, stray-load losses, and mechanical losses. Because 
these losses change with operating condition and are somewhat difficult to measure 
accurately, various standard procedures have been developed to calculate the effi- 
ciency of synchronous machines. 2 The general principles for these calculations are 
described in Appendix D. 
Data are given in Fig. 5.19 with respect to the losses of the 45-kVA synchronous machine of 
Examples 5.4 and 5.5. Compute its efficiency when it is running as a synchronous motor at a 
terminal voltage of 220 V and with a power input to its armature of 45 kVA at 0.80 lagging 
power factor. The field current measured in a load test taken under these conditions is If (test) = 
5.50 A. Assume the armature and field windings to be at a temperature of 75°C. 
II Solution 
For the specified operating conditions, the armature current is 
45 × 103 
Ia = 
= l13A 
~/3 × 230 
The IZR losses must be computed on the basis of the dc resistances of the windings at 
75°C. Correcting the winding resistances by means of Eq. 5.32 gives 
Field-winding resistanceRf at 75°C = 35.5 f2 
Armature dc resistanceRa at 75°C -- 0.0399 ~/phase 
The field IZR loss is therefore 
I 2Rf -- 5.502 × 35.5 -- 1.07 kW 
According to ANSI standards, losses in the excitation system, including those in any field- 
rheostat, are not charged against the machine. 
The armature IZR loss is 
312Ra -- 3 × 1132 × 0.0399 = 1.53 kW 
and from Fig. 5.19 at la -- 113 A the stray-load loss = 0.37 kW. The stray-load loss is considered 
to account for the losses caused by the armature leakage flux. According to ANSI standards, 
no temperature correction is to be applied to the stray load loss. 
EXAMPLE 5.8 
2 See, for example, IEEE Std. 115-1995, "IEEE Guide: Test Procedures for Synchronous Machines" 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., 345 East 47th Street, New York, New York, 10017 
and NEMA Standards Publication No. MG-1-1998, "Motors and Generators," National Electrical 
Manufacturers Association, 1300 North 17th Street, Suite 1847, Rosslyn, Virginia, 22209. 

280 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
280 
140 
240 
120 
200 < 100 
6 
= 
Z 
~ 
d 160 
~ 
80 
o 
• ~ 120 "~ 
60 
© 
....... ~,,~, 
~ 
.............. 
/ 
....... / ' /  
.... 
~ 
II/', 
80 ~ 
40 
i .................... 
i 
....... 
I/ ......... i' 
4o 
, 
i 
. 
• 
o 
o 
i 
0 
0.4 
0.8 
1.2 
1.6 
2.0 
2.4 
Losses, kW 
Friction and windage loss = 0.91 kW 
Armature dc resistance at 25°C = 0.0335 ~ per phase 
Field-winding resistance at 25°C = 29.8 
Figure 5.19 
Losses in a three-phase, 45-kVA, Y-connected, 220-V, 
60-Hz, six-pole synchronous machine (Example 5.8). 
Core loss under load is primarily a function of the main core flux in the motor. As is 
discussed in Chapter 2, the voltage across the magnetizing branch in a transformer (corre- 
sponding to the transformer core flux) is calculated by subtracting the leakage impedance drop 
from the terminal voltage. In a directly analogous fashion, the main core flux in a synchronous 
machine (i.e., the air-gap flux) can be calculated as the voltage behind the leakage impedance 
of the machine. Typically the armature resistance is small, and hence it is common to ignore 
the resistance and to calculate the voltage behind the leakage reactance. The core loss can then 
be estimated from the open-circuit core-loss curve at the voltage behind leakage reactance. 
In this case, we do not know the machine leakage reactance. Thus, one approach would 
be simply to assume that the air-gap voltage is equal to the terminal voltage and to determine 
the core-loss under load from the core-loss curve at the value equal to terminal voltage. 3 In this 
case, the motor terminal voltage is 230 V line-to-line and thus from Fig. 5.19, the open-circuit 
core loss is 1.30 kW. 
3 Although not rigorously correct, it has become common practice to ignore the leakage impedance drop 
when determining the under-load core loss. 

5.6 
Effects of Salient Poles; Introduction to Direct- and Quadrature-Axis Theory 
281 
To estimate the effect of ignoring the leakage reactance drop, let us assume that the 
leakage reactance of this motor is 0.20 per unit or 
Xal = 0.2 
45 X 103 
= 0.215 ~2 
Under this assumption, the air-gap voltage is equal to 
~'a - jXa, la = ~230 __ j0.215 X 141(0.8 + j0.6) 
,/5 
= 151 - j24.2 = 153 e -jg"l° V, line-to-neutral 
which corresponds to a line-to-line voltage of ~ 
(153) = 265 V. From Fig. 5.19, the cor- 
responding core-loss is 1.8 kW, 500 W higher than the value determined using the terminal 
voltage. We will use this value for the purposes of this example. 
Including the friction and windage loss of 0.91 kW, all losses have now been found: 
Total losses = 1.07 + 1.53 + 0.37 + 1.80 + 0.91 = 5.68 kW 
The total motor input power is the input power to the armature plus that to the field. 
Input power = 0.8 x 45 + 1.07 = 37.1 kW 
and the output power is equal to the total input power minus the total losses 
Output power = 37.1 - 5.68 = 31.4 kW 
Therefore 
Output power 
31.4 
Efficiency = 
= 1 
= 0.846 = 84.6% 
Input power 
37.1 
Calculate the efficiency of the motor of Example 5.8 if the motor is operating at a power input of 
45 kW, unity power factor. You may assume that the motor stray-load losses remain unchanged 
and that the motor field current is 4.40 A. 
Solution 
Efficiency = 88.4% 
5.6 
EFFECTS OF SALIENT POLES; 
INTRODUCTION TO DIRECT- 
AND QUADRATURE-AXIS THEORY 
The essential features of salient-pole machines are developed in this section based on 
physical reasoning. A mathematical treatment, based on an inductance formulation 
like that presented in Section 5.2, is given in Appendix C, where the dq0 transformation 
is developed. 

282 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
5.6.1 
Flux and MMF Waves 
The flux produced by an mmf wave in a uniform-air-gap machine is independent of the 
spatial alignment of the wave with respect to the field poles. In a salient-pole machine, 
such as that shown schematically in Fig. 5.20, however, the preferred direction of 
magnetization is determined by the protruding field poles. The permeance along the 
polar axis, commonly referred to as the rotor direct axis, is appreciably greater than 
that along the interpolar axis, commonly referred to as the rotor quadrature axis. 
Note that, by definition, the field winding produces flux which is oriented along 
the rotor direct axis. Thus, when phasor diagrams are drawn, the field-winding mmf 
and its corresponding flux (~)f are found along the rotor direct axis. The generated inter- 
nal voltage is proportional to the time derivative of the field-winding flux, and thus its 
phasor Eaf leads the flux (~)f by 90 °. Since by convention the quadrature axis leads the 
direct axis by 90 °, we see that the generated-voltage phasor Eaf lies along the quadra- 
ture axis. Thus a key point in the analysis of synchronous-machine phasor diagrams is 
that, by locating the phasor J~af, the location of both the quadrature axis and the direct 
axis is immediately determined. This forms the basis of the direct- and quadrature-axis 
formulation for the analysis of salient-pole machines in which all machine voltages 
and currents can be resolved into their direct- and quadrature-axis components. 
The armature-reaction flux wave 4)ar lags the field flux wave by a space angle of 
90 ° + (Plag, where (~lag is the time-phase angle by which the armature current lags the 
generated voltage. If the armature current Ia lags the generated voltage Eaf by 90 °, 
the armature-reaction flux wave is directly opposite the field poles and in the opposite 
direction to the field flux 4)f, as shown in the phasor diagram of Fig. 5.20a. 
The corresponding component flux-density waves at the armature surface pro- 
duced by the field current and by the synchronously-rotating space-fundamental com- 
ponent of armature-reaction mmf are shown in Fig. 5.20b, in which the effects of slots 
Axis of 
field pole 
(a) 
(b) 
Fundamental 
:tual field flux 
Armature surface 
Undamental 
rmature flux 
al armature flux 
Figure 5.20 
Direct-axis air-gap fluxes in a salient-pole 
synchronous machine. 

5,6 
Effects of Salient Poles; Introduction to Direct- and Quadrature-Axis Theory 
283 
are neglected. The waves consist of a space fundamental and a family of odd-harmonic 
components. In a well-designed machine the harmonic effects are usually small. 
Accordingly, only the space-fundamental components will be considered. It is the 
fundamental components which are represented by the flux-per-pole phasors (I)f and 
~a~ in Fig. 5.20a. 
Conditions are quite different when the armature current is in phase with the 
generated voltage, as illustrated in the phasor diagram of Fig. 5.21 a. The axis of the 
armature-reaction wave then is opposite an interpolar space, as shown in Fig. 5.21 b. 
The armature-reaction flux wave is badly distorted, comprising principally a funda- 
mental and a prominent third space harmonic. The third-harmonic flux wave generates 
third-harmonic emf's in the armature phase (line-to-neutral) voltages. They will be 
of the form 
E3,a = x/~V3 cos (3COet + ¢3) 
(5.52) 
E3,b -= V/2V3 cos (3(COet -- 120 °) + ¢3) = V~V3 cos (3Oget q- ¢3) 
(5.53) 
E3,c -- ~/-2V3 cos (3(COet - 120 °) + ¢3) -- ~/2V3 cos (3Oget q- ¢3) 
(5.54) 
Note that these third-harmonic phase voltages are equal in magnitude and in 
phase. Hence they do not appear as components of the line-to-line voltages, which 
are equal to the differences between the various phase voltages. 
Because of the longer air gap between the poles and the correspondingly larger 
reluctance, the space-fundamental armature-reaction flux when the armature reaction 
is along the quadrature axis (Fig. 5.21) is less than the space fundamental armature- 
reaction flux which would be created by the same armature current if the armature 
flux wave were directed along the direct axis (Fig. 5.20). Hence, the quadrature-axis 
magnetizing reactance is less than that of the direct axis. 
Focusing our attention on the space-fundamental components of the air-gap flux 
and mmf, the effects of salient poles can be taken into account by resolving the 
&f 
Ia 
t~ar 
(a) 
Third harmonic 
armature flux 
(b) 
Axis of 
field pole 
Fundamental 
ctual 
eld flux 
Armature surface 
Figure 5.21 
Quadrature-axis air-gap fluxes in a salient-pole synchronous machine. 

284 
CHAPTER 5 Synchronous Machines 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
ia 
+R 
I 
~af 
,v 
Quadrature 
axis 
Direct axis 
Figure 5.22 Phasor diagram of a salient-pole 
synchronous generator. 
armature current [a into two components, one along the direct axis and the other along 
the quadrature axis as shown in the phasor diagram of Fig. 5.22. This diagram is drawn 
for a unsaturated salient-pole generator operating at a lagging power factor. The direct- 
axis component id of the armature current, in time-quadrature with the generated 
voltage J~af, produces a component of the space-fundamental armature-reaction flux 
t~)ad along the axis of the field poles (the direct axis), as in Fig. 5.20. The quadrature- 
axis component iq, in phase with the generated voltage, produces a component of 
the space-fundamental armature-reaction flux t~aq in space-quadrature with the field 
poles, as in Fig. 5.21. Note that the subscripts d ("direct") and q ("quadrature") on 
the armature-reaction fluxes refer to their space phase and not to the time phase of 
the component currents producing them. 
Thus a direct-axis quantity is one whose magnetic effect is aligned with the axes 
of the field poles; direct-axis mmf's produce flux along these axes. A quadrature-axis 
quantity is one whose magnetic effect is centered on the interpolar space. For an 
unsaturated machine, the armature-reaction flux t~ar is the sum of the components 
t~ad and t~)aq. The resultant flux t~ R is the sum of ~ar and the field flux t~f. 
5.6.2 
Phasor Diagrams 
for Salient.Pole 
Machines 
With each of the component currents Id and /~q there is associated a component 
synchronous-reactance voltage drop, j idXd and j iqXq respectively. The reactances 
Xd and Xq are, respectively, the direct- and quadrature-axis synchronous reactances; 
they account for the inductive effects of all the space-fundamental fluxes created by 
the armature currents along the direct and quadrature axes, including both armature- 
leakage and armature-reaction fluxes. Thus, the inductive effects of the direct- and 
quadrature-axis armature-reaction flux waves can be accounted for by direct- and 
quadrature-axis magnetizing reactances, X¢d and X~0q respectively, similar to the 

5.6 
Effects of Salient Poles; Introduction to Direct- and Quadrature-Axis Theory 
285 
~1 d 
I a 
IaRa 
Quadrature 
/~af 
axis 
jIqXq 
v 
g~Xd 
Direct axis 
Figure 5.23 
Phasor diagram for a synchronous generator 
showing the relationship between the voltages and the currents. 
magnetizing reactance X~0 of cylindrical-rotor theory. The direct- and quadrature-axis 
synchronous reactances are then given by 
X d -- Xal -~- X~o d 
(5.55) 
Xq -- Xal-'[- X~pq 
(5.56) 
where Xa] is the armature leakage reactance, assumed to be the same for direct- and 
quadrature-axis currents. Compare Eqs. 5.55 and 5.56 with Eq. 5.25 for the nonsalient- 
pole case. As shown in the generator phasor diagram of Fig. 5.23, the generated voltage 
/~af equals the phasor sum of the terminal voltage f'a plus the armature-resistance drop 
Iaga and the component synchronous-reactance drops j IdXd "-[- j IqXq. 
As we have discussed, the quadrature-axis synchronous reactance Xq is less than 
of the direct axis Xd because of the greater reluctance of the air gap in the quadrature 
axis. Typically, Xq is between 0.6Xa and 0.7Xd. Note that a small salient-pole effect 
is also present in turbo-altemators, even though they are cylindrical-rotor machines, 
because of the effect of the rotor slots on the quadrature-axis reluctance. 
Just as for the synchronous reactance Xs of a cylindrical-rotor machine, these 
reactances are not constant with flux density but rather saturate as the machine flux 
density increases. It is common to find both unsaturated and saturated values specified 
for each of these parameters. 4 The saturated values apply to typical machine operating 
conditions where the terminal voltage is near its rated value. For our purposes in this 
chapter and elsewhere in this book, we will not focus attention on this issue and, 
unless specifically stated, the reader may assume that the values of Xd and Xq given 
are the saturated values. 
In using the phasor diagram of Fig. 5.23, the armature current must be resolved 
into its direct- and quadrature-axis components. This resolution assumes that the phase 
angle 4~ + 3 of the armature current with respect to the generated voltage is known. 
4 See, for example, IEEE Std. 115-1995, "IEEE Guide: Test Procedures for Synchronous Machines," 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., 345 East 47th Street, New York, New York, 10017. 

286 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
^ 
b 
o a = jIaXq 
a'c = jld(Xd -- 
b'a t-- b"c=jIqXq 
^ 
o'b'= jl~Xq 
x~) 
Figure 5.24 Relationships between component 
voltages in a phasor diagram. 
Often, however, the power-factor angle q~ at the machine terminals is explicitly known, 
rather than the angle q~ + 8. It then becomes necessary to locate the quadrature axis 
and to compute the power angle 8. This can be done with the aid of the construction 
of Fig. 5.24. 
The phasor diagram of Fig. 5.23 is repeated by the solid-line phasors in Fig. 5.24. 
Study of this phasor diagram shows that the dashed phasor o'a', perpendicular to ia, 
equals j iaXq. This result follows geometrically from the fact that triangles o'a'b' and 
oab are similar because their corresponding sides are perpendicular. Thus 
o'a' 
b'a' 
oa 
ba 
or 
(5.57) 
(b'a'~ 
o'a' = 
[lqlXq 
-~a ,/oa = 
~- 
[ial = Xqlial 
Ilql 
(5.58) 
Thus, line o'a' is the phasor jXqla and the phasor sum f'a + laga 
a t- jlaXq 
then locates the angular position of the generated voltage J~af (which in turn lies 
along the quadrature axis) and therefore the direct and quadrature axes. Physically 
this must be so, because all the field excitation in a normal machine is in the direct 
axis. Once the quadrature axis (and hence 8) is known, J~af can be found as shown in 
Fig. 5.23 
/~af "- ~'a "[- gala -'[- j Xdid + j Xqlq 
(5.59) 
One use of these relations in determining the excitation requirements for spec- 
ified operating conditions at the terminals of a salient-pole machine is illustrated in 
Example 5.9. 

5,6 
Effects of Salient Poles Introduction to Direct- and Quadrature-Axis Theory 
287 
The reactances X d and Xq of a salient-pole synchronous generator are 1.00 and 0.60 per 
unit, respectively. The armature resistance may be considered to be negligible. Compute the 
generated voltage when the generator delivers its rated kVA at 0.80 lagging power factor and 
rated terminal voltage. 
II Solution 
First, the phase of/~af must be found so that ~a can be resolved into its direct- and quadrature- 
axis components. The phasor diagram is shown in Fig. 5.25. As is commonly done for such 
problems, the terminal voltage f'a will be used as the reference phasor, i.e., ("a = Va # °°° = Va. 
In per unit 
la = Ia e j~ = 0.80 - j0.60 = 1.0 e -j36"9° 
The quadrature axis is located by the phasor 
E' = Va -Jr- jXqla = 1.0 + j0.60(1.0 e -j36"9°) -- 1.44 e j19"4° 
Thus, 6 = 19.4 °, and the phase angle between Eaf and ~a is (~ --¢ = 19.4 ° - (-36.9 °) = 56.3 °. 
Note, that although it would appear from Fig. 5.25 that the appropriate angle is 3 + 4~, this is 
not correct because the angle q~ as drawn in Fig. 5.25 is a negative angle. In general, the desired 
angle is equal to the difference between the power angle and the phase angle of the terminal 
current. 
The armature current can now be resolved into its direct- and quadrature-axis components. 
Their magnitudes are 
Id = Iial sin (3 - (it)) = 1.00 sin (56.3 °) = 0.832 
and 
lq -- Iial COS (8 -- q~) = 1.00COS (56.3 °) = 0.555 
As phasors, 
i4 = 0.832 e j(-90°+19"4°) -- 0.832 e j70"6° 
U 
A 
Eaf 
Figure 5.25 Generator phasor diagram for Example 5.9. 
EXAMPLE 5.9 

288 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
and 
lq -- 0.555 e j19"4° 
We can now find Eaf from Eq. 5.59 
#af ~" /Vra "~- jXdld + jXqjlq 
-- 1.0 + j 1.0(0.832 e j70"6°) -+- j0.6(0.555 e j19"4°) 
= 1.77 e j19"4° 
and we see that Eaf = 1.77 per unit. Note that, as expected, L/~af = 19.4 ° = 8, thus confirming 
that #af lies along the quadrature axis. 
mractice Problem 5.| 
Find the generated voltage for the generator of Example 5.9 if it is loaded to (a) 0.73 per-unit 
kVA, unity power factor at a terminal voltage of 0.98 per unit and (b) 0.99 per-unit kVA, 
0.94 leading power factor and rated terminal voltage. 
Solution 
a. 
#af = 1.20 e j24"5° per unit 
b. #af = 1.08 e j35"°° per unit 
EXAMPLE 5.10 
In the simplified theory of Section 5.2, the synchronous machine is assumed to be representable 
by a single reactance, the synchronous reactance Xs of Eq. 5.25. The question naturally arises: 
How serious an approximation is involved if a salient-pole machine is treated in this simple 
fashion? Suppose that a salient-pole machine were treated by cylindrical-rotor theory as if it had 
a single synchronous reactance equal to its direct-axis value Xd ? To investigate this question, 
we will repeat Example 5.9 under this assumption. 
II Solution 
In this case, under the assumption that 
Xq = X d = X s = 
1.0 per unit 
the generated voltage can be found simply as 
J~af ~-- Va+jXsla 
= 1.0 + j 1.0(1.0 e -j36"9°) = 1.79 e j26"6° per unit 
Comparing this result with that of Example 5.9 (in which we found that Eaf = 1.77 eJ194°), 
we see that the magnitude of the predicted generated voltage is relatively close to the correct 
value. As a result, we see that the calculation of the field current required for this operating 
condition will be relatively accurate under the simplifying assumption that the effects of saliency 
can be neglected. 

5.7 
Power-Angle Characteristics of Salient-Pole Machines 
289 
However, the calculation of the power angle 6 (19.4 ° versus a value of 26.6 ° if saliency 
is neglected) shows a considerably larger error. In general, such errors in the calculation of 
generator steady-state power angles may be of significance when studying the transient behavior 
of a system including a number of synchronous machines. Thus, although saliency can perhaps 
be ignored when doing "back-of-the-envelope" system calculations, it is rarely ignored in 
large-scale, computer-based system studies. 
5.7 
POWER-ANGLE CHARACTERISTICS 
OF SALIENT-POLE MACHINES 
For the purposes of this discussion, it is sufficient to limit our discussion to the 
simple system shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 5.26a, consisting of a salient- 
pole synchronous machine SM connected to an infinite bus of voltage f'EQ through 
a series impedance of reactance XEQ. Resistance will be neglected because it is usually 
small. Consider that the synchronous machine is acting as a generator. The phasor 
diagram is shown by the solid-line phasors in Fig. 5.26b. The dashed phasors show the 
external reactance drop resolved into components due to id and iq. The effect of the 
external impedance is merely to add its reactance to the reactances of the machine; 
the total values of the reactance between the excitation voltage/~af and the bus voltage 
VEQ is therefore 
XdT = Xd ~- XEQ 
(5.60) 
XqT = Xq + XEQ 
(5.61) 
If the bus voltage VEQ is resolved into components its direct-axis component 
Vd -- VEQ sin 6 and quadrature-axis component Vq = VEQ cos ~ in phase with id and 
iq, respectively, the power P delivered to the bus per phase (or in per unit) is 
P = IdVd -Jr- IqVq -- IdVEQ sin~ -Jr- IqVEQ cos S 
(5.62) 
Xd'Xq 
VE Q 
jidXEQ 
(a) 
(b) 
f 
jlqXq 
jI~d 
Figure 5.26 Salient-pole synchronous machine and series impedance: 
(a) single-line diagram and (b) phasor diagram. 

290 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
Also, from Fig. 5.26b, 
and 
Eaf -- VEQ cos 6 
XdT 
(5.63) 
--180 
q 
VEQ sin 6 
XqT 
(5.64) 
Substitution of Eqs. 5.63 and 5.64 in Eq. 5.62 gives 
P = EafVEQ sin 6 + 
V2Q(XdT -- XqT) 
XdT 
2XdTXqT 
sin 26 
(5.65) 
Equation 5.65 is directly analogous to Eq. 5.47 which applies to the case of a 
nonsalient machine. It gives the power per phase when Eaf and VEQ are expressed 
as line-neutral voltages and the reactances are in ff2/phase, in which case the re- 
sult must be multiplied by three to get three-phase power. Alternatively, express- 
ing Eaf and VEQ as line-to-line voltages will result in three-phase power directly. 
Similarly, Eq. 5.65 can be applied directly if the various quantites are expressed in 
per unit. 
The general form of this power-angle characteristic is shown in Fig. 5.27. The first 
term is the same as the expression obtained for a cylindrical-rotor machine (Eq. 5.47). 
The second term includes the effect of salient poles. It represents the fact that the air- 
gap flux wave creates torque, tending to align the field poles in the position of minimum 
Resultant = P 
EafVEQ sin 6 
0 
90o~'180 
o 
VE2Q(XdT-- XqT) sin 26 
2xd~Xq~ 
Figure 5.27 
Power-angle characteristic of a salient-pole synchronous 
machine showing the fundamental component due to field excitation and 
the second-harmonic component due to reluctance torque. 

5,7 
Power-Angle Characteristics of Salient-Pole Machines 
291 
reluctance. This term is the power corresponding to the reluctance torque and is of 
the same general nature as the reluctance torque discussed in Section 3.5. Note that 
the reluctance torque is independent of field excitation. Also note that, if XdT = XqT 
as in a uniform-air-gap machine, there is no preferential direction of magnetization, 
the reluctance torque is zero and Eq. 5.65 reduces to the power-angle equation for a 
cylindrical-rotor machine (Eq. 5.47). 
Notice that the characteristic for negative values of 3 is the same except for a 
reversal in the sign of P. That is, the generator and motor regions are alike if the 
effects of resistance are negligible. For generator action J~af leads fEe; for motor 
action/~af lags fEe. Steady-state operation is stable over the range where the slope 
of the power-angle characteristic is positive. Because of the reluctance torque, a 
salient-pole machine is "stiffer" than one with a cylindrical rotor; i.e., for equal 
voltages and equal values of XdT, a salient-pole machine develops a given torque at 
a smaller value of 3, and the maximum torque which can be developed is somewhat 
greater. 
The 2000-hp, 2300-V synchronous motor of Example 5.7 is assumed to have a synchronous 
reactance Xs = 1.95 f2/phase. In actual fact, it is a salient-pole machine with reactances Xd -- 
1.95 f2/phase and Xq = 1.40 f2/phase. Neglecting all losses, compute the maximum mechanical 
power in kilowatts which this motor can deliver if it is supplied with electric power from an 
infinite bus (Fig. 5.28a) at rated voltage and frequency and if its field excitation is held constant 
at that value which would result in unity-power-factor operation at rated load. The shaft load 
is assumed to be increased gradually so that transient swings are negligible and the steady- 
state power limit applies. Also, compute the value of ~ corresponding to this maximum power 
operation. 
II Solution 
The first step is to compute the synchronous motor excitation at rated voltage, full load, and 
unity power factor. As in Example 5.7, the full-load terminal voltage and current are 1330 V 
Infinite 
bus 
Va-- VEQ 
a'c =/d(Xd-- Xq) Iq ~
c
 
&f 
(at 
(b) 
Figure 5.28 
(a) Single-line diagram and (b) phasor diagram 
for motor of Example 5.11. 
EXAMPLE 5.11 

292 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
line-to-neutral and 374 A/phase, respectively. The phasor diagram for the specified full-load 
conditions is shown in Fig. 5.28b. The only essential difference between this phasor diagram 
and the generator phasor diagram of Fig. 5.25 is that Ia in Fig. 5.28 represents motor input 
current; i.e., we have switched to the motor reference direction for ~?a. Thus, switching the sign 
of the current to account for the choice of the motor reference direction and neglecting the 
effects of armature resistance, Eq. 5.59 becomes 
Eaf = Va - j irdXd -- jlqXq 
As in Fig. 5.28b, the quadrature axis can now be located by the phasor 
E'= (la- jlaXq = 1330--j374(1.40)= 1429e -2~~° 
That is, 6 = -21.5 °, with J~af lagging l~'a. The magnitude of/~d is 
Id = Ia sin [6[ = 374 sin (21.5 °) = 137 A 
With reference to the phasor element labeled a'c in Fig. 5.28b, the magnitude of J~af can be 
found by adding the length a'c = Io(Xo -- Xq) numerically to the magnitude of E'; thus 
Eaf ~ g' -n t- Id(Xd -- Xq) = 1429 + 137(0.55) = 1504 V line-to-neutral 
(Alternatively, Eaf could have been determined as Eaf ~ Va - j IdXd -- j IqXq.) 
From Eq. 5.65 the power-angle characteristic for this motor is 
P = 
EafVEQ sin 181 + VE:Q Xd -- Xq sin (2181) 
Xd 
2XdXq 
= 1030sinlSI + 178sin(2181) 
kW/phase 
Note that we have used I,Sl in this equation. That is because Eq. 5.65 as written applies to a 
generator and calculates the electrical power output from the generator. For our motor, ~ is 
negative and direct use of Eq. 5.65 will give a value of power P < 0 which is of course correct 
for motor operation. Since we know that this is a motor and that we are calculating electric 
power into the motor terminals, we ignore the sign issue here entirely and calculate the motor 
power directly as a positive number. 
The maximum motor input power occurs when d P/d,~ = 0 
dP - 1030cos~ + 356cos26 
d6 
Setting this equal to zero and using the trigonometric identity 
cos 2c~ -- 2 cos: ct - 1 
permit us to solve for the angle ~ at which the maximum power occurs" 
= 73.2 ° 
Therefore the maximum power is 
Pmax = 1080 kW/phase = 3240 kW, three-phase 

5.8 
Permanent-Magnet AC Motors 
293 
We can compare this value with emax = 3090 kW found in part (a) of Example 5.7, where 
the effects of salient poles were neglected. We see that the error caused by neglecting saliency 
is slightly less than five percent in this case. 
)ractice Problem 5.! 
A 325-MVA, 26-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase, salient-pole synchronous generator is observed to 
operating at a power output of 250-MW and a lagging power factor of 0.89 at a terminal 
voltage of 26 kV. The generator synchronous reactances are Xd = 1.95 and Xq = 1.18, both in 
per unit. The generator achieves rated-open-circuit voltage at a field current AFNL = 342 A. 
Calculate (a) the angle ~ between the generator terminal voltage and the generated voltage, 
(b) the magnitude of the generated voltage Eaf in per unit, and (c) the required field current in 
amperes. 
Solution 
a. 31.8 ° 
b. Eaf = 2.29 per unit 
c. If = 783 A 
The effect, as seen in Example 5.11, of salient poles on the maximum power 
capability of a synchronous machine increases as the excitation voltage is decreased, 
as can be seen from Eq. 5.65. Under typical operating conditions, the effect of salient 
poles usually amounts to a few percent at most. Only at small excitations does the 
reluctance torque become important. Thus, except at small excitations or when very 
accurate results are required, a salient-pole machine usually can be adequately treated 
by simple cylindrical-rotor theory. 
5.8 
PERMANENT-MAGNET AC MOTORS 
Permanent-magnet ac motors are polyphase synchronous motors with permanent- 
magnet rotors. Thus they are similar to the synchronous machines discussed up to 
this point in this chapter with the exception that the field windings are replaced by 
permanent magnets. 
Figure 5.29 is a schematic diagram of a three-phase permanent-magnet ac ma- 
chine. Comparison of this figure with Fig. 5.2 emphasizes the similarities between 
the permanent-magnet ac machine and the conventional synchronous machine. In 
fact, the permanent-magnet ac machine can be readily analyzed with the techniques 
of this chapter simply by assuming that the machine is excited by a field current of 
constant value, making sure to calculate the various machine inductances based on 
the effective permeability of the permanent-magnet rotor. 
Figure 5.30 shows a cutaway view of a typical permanent-magnet ac motor. 
This figure also shows a speed and position sensor mounted on the rotor shaft. This 
sensor is used for control of the motor, as is discussed in Section 11.2. A number 

294 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
Magnetic axis 
of rotor 
t+ 
0 o 
~tic axis 
se a 
Permanent-magnet rotor 
Figure 5.29 
Schematic diagram of 
a three-phase permanent-magnet 
ac machine. The arrow indicates the 
direction of rotor magnetization. 
L 
i: ::i•:ii•ii:i,i::•i: i ¸ 
i: :i~iiiiiiii~iiii!!iiiiii~iiiiii:: 
~ 
i l :i:: ~ 
:~: ~ i ~ 
ii!iiii:ii::~i ~ ~ ( 
:: 
: 
: ....... 
:i'~ ~:,~:~1i:1~ 
: ~il ~ , ' : ~ 
i 
i 
i::!i:.~ii :i!111 i!:i~~:~,i:i, 
i:ii!i 
?i i ~ 
: 
~- 
': 
/i:i ~ 
..... 
. 
:-i,~il 
r:i~:ii ¸ .... :i 
:.: 
i~:i~::iiiiii~!i,liiiiii~i,~ 
~ 
Figure 5.30 
Cutaway view of a permanent-magnet ac motor. Also shown is the shaft speed 
and position sensor used to control the motor. (EG&G Torque Systems.) 

5.9 Summary 
295 
of techniques may be used for shaft-position sensing, including Hall-effect devices, 
light-emitting diodes and phototransistors in combination with a pulsed wheel, and 
inductance pickups. 
Permanent-magnet ac motors are typically operated from variable-frequency mo- 
tor drives. Under conditions of constant-frequency, sinusiodal polyphase excitation, 
a permanent-magnet ac motor behaves similarly to a conventional ac synchronous 
machine with constant field excitation. 
An alternate viewpoint of a permanent-magnet ac motor is that it is a form of 
permanent-magnet stepping motor with a nonsalient stator (see Section 8.5). Under 
this viewpoint, the only difference between the two is that there will be little, if any, 
saliency (cogging) torque in the permanent-magnet ac motor. In the simplest opera- 
tion, the phases can be simply excited with stepped waveforms so as to cause the rotor 
to step sequentially from one equilibrium position to the next. Alternatively, using 
rotor-position feedback from a shaft-position sensor, the motor phase windings can be 
continuously excited in such a fashion as to control the torque and speed of the motor. 
As with the stepping motor, the frequency of the excitation determines the motor 
speed, and the angular position between the rotor magnetic axis and a given phase 
and the level of excitation in that phase determines the torque which will be produced. 
Permanent-magnet ac motors are frequently referred to as brushless motors or 
brushless dc motors. This terminology comes about both because of the similarity, 
when combined with a variable-frequency, variable-voltage drive system, of their 
speed-torque characteristics to those of dc motors and because of the fact that one 
can view these motors as inside-out dc motors, with their field winding on the rotor 
and with their armature electronically commutated by the shaft-position sensor and 
by switches connected to the armature windings. 
5.9 
SUMMARY 
Under steady-state operating conditions, the physical picture of the operation of a 
polyphase synchronous machine is simply seen in terms of the interaction of two 
magnetic fields as discussed in Section 4.7.2. Polyphase currents on the stator produce 
a rotating magnetic flux wave while dc currents on the rotor produce a flux wave which 
is stationary with respect to the rotor. Constant torque is produced only when the rotor 
rotates in synchronism with the stator flux wave. Under these conditions, there is a 
constant angular displacement between the rotor and stator flux waves and the result 
is a torque which is proportional to the sine of the displacement angle. 
We have seen that a simple set of tests can be used to determine the signifi- 
cant parameters of a synchronous machine including the synchronous reactance Xs 
or Xd. Two such tests are an open-circuit test, in which the machine terminal volt- 
age is measured as a function of field current, and a short-circuit test, in which the 
armature is short-circuited and the short-circuit armature current is measured as a 
function of field current. These test methods are a variation of a testing technique 
applicable not only to synchronous machines but also to any electrical system whose 
behavior can be approximated by a linear equivalent circuit to which Thevenin's 

296 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
theorem applies. From a Thevenin-theorem viewpoint, an open-circuit test gives 
the intemal voltage, and a short-circuit test gives information regarding the inter- 
nal impedance. From the more specific viewpoint of electromechanical machinery, 
an open-circuit test gives information regarding excitation requirements, core losses, 
and (for rotating machines) friction and windage losses; a short-circuit test gives in- 
formation regarding the magnetic reactions of the load current, leakage impedances, 
and losses associated with the load current such as I2R and stray load losses. The 
only real complication arises from the effects of magnetic nonlinearity, effects which 
can be taken into account approximately by considering the machine to be equiv- 
alent to an unsaturated one whose magnetization curve is the straight line Op of 
Fig. 5.9 and whose synchronous reactance is empirically adjusted for saturation as 
in Eq. 5.29. 
In many cases, synchronous machines are operated in conjunction with an ex- 
ternal system which can be represented as a constant-frequency, constant-voltage 
source known as an infinite bus. Under these conditions, the synchronous speed is 
determined by the frequency of the infinite bus, and the machine output power is 
proportional to the product of the bus voltage, the machine internal voltage (which is, 
in tum, proportional to the field excitation), and the sine of the phase angle between 
them (the power angle), and it is inversely proportional to the net reactance between 
them. 
While the real power at the machine terminals is determined by the shaft power 
input to the machine (if it is acting as a generator) or the shaft load (if it is a motor), 
varying the field excitation varies the reactive power. For low values of field current, 
the machine will absorb reactive power from the system and the power angle will 
be large. Increasing the field current will reduce the reactive power absorbed by the 
machine as well as the power angle. At some value of field current, the machine power 
factor will be unity and any further increase in field current will cause the machine 
to supply reactive power to the system. 
Once brought up to synchronous speed, synchronous motors can be operated quite 
efficiently when connected to a constant-frequency source. However, as we have seen, 
a synchronous motor develops torque only at synchronous speed and hence has no 
starting torque. To make a synchronous motor self-starting, a squirrel-cage winding, 
called an amortisseur or damper winding, can be inserted in the rotor pole faces, 
as shown in Fig. 5.31. The rotor then comes up almost to synchronous speed by 
induction-motor action with the field winding unexcited. If the load and inertia are 
not too great, the motor will pull into synchronism when the field winding is energized 
from a dc source. 
Altematively, as we will see in Chapter 11, synchronous motors can be oper- 
ated from polyphase variable-frequency drive systems. In this case they can be easily 
started and operated quite flexibly. Small permanent-magnet synchronous machines 
operated under such conditions are frequently referred to as brushless motors or 
brushless-dc motors, both because of the similarity of their speed-torque character- 
istics to those of dc motors and because of the fact that one can view these motors 
as inside-out dc motors, with the commutation of the stator windings produced elec- 
tronically by the drive electronics. 

5.10 Problems 
297 
Figure 5.31 
Rotor of a six-pole 1200 r/min synchronous 
motor showing field coils, pole-face damper winding, and 
construction. (Genera/Electric Company.) 
5.10 
PROBLEMS 
5.1 The full-load torque angle of a synchronous motor at rated voltage and 
frequency is 35 electrical degrees. Neglect the effects of armature resistance 
and leakage reactance. If the field current is held constant, how would the 
full-load torque angle be affected by the following changes in operating 
condition? 
a. Frequency reduced 10 percent, load torque and applied voltage constant. 
b. Frequency reduced 10 percent, load power and applied voltage constant. 
c. Both frequency and applied voltage reduced 10 percent, load torque 
constant. 
d. Both frequency and applied voltage reduced 10 percent, load power 
constant. 
5.2 The armature phase windings of a two-phase synchronous machine are 
displaced by 90 electrical degrees in space. 

298 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
a. 
What is the mutual inductance between these two windings? 
b. 
Repeat the derivation leading to Eq. 5.17 and show that the synchronous 
inductance is simply equal to the armature phase inductance; that is, 
Ls = Laa0 -k- Lal, where Laa0 is the component of the armature phase 
inductance due to space-fundamental air-gap flux and Lal is the armature 
leakage inductance. 
5.3 Design calculations show the following parameters for a three-phase, 
cylindrical-rotor synchronous generator: 
Phase-a self-inductance Laa -- 4.83 mH 
Armature leakage inductance Lal = 0.33 mH 
Calculate the phase-phase mutual inductance and the machine synchronous 
inductance. 
5.4 The open-circuit terminal voltage of a three-phase, 60-Hz synchronous 
generator is found to be 15.4 kV rms line-to-line when the field current 
is 420 A. 
a. 
Calculate the stator-to-rotor mutual inductance Laf. 
b. 
Calculate the open-circuit terminal voltage if the field current is held 
constant while the generator speed is reduced so that the frequency of the 
generated voltage is 50 Hz. 
5.5 A 460-V, 50-kW, 60-Hz, three-phase synchronous motor has a synchronous 
reactance of Xs = 4.15 f2 and an armature-to-field mutual inductance, 
Laf -- 83 mH. The motor is operating at rated terminal voltage and an input 
power of 40 kW. Calculate the magnitude and phase angle of the line-to- 
neutral generated voltage/~af and the field current If if the motor is operating 
at (a) 0.85 power factor lagging, (b) unity power factor, and (c) 0.85 power 
factor leading. 
5.6 The motor of Problem 5.5 is supplied from a 460-V, three-phase source 
through a feeder whose impedance is Zf = 0.084 + j0.82 f2. Assuming the 
system (as measured at the source) to be operating at an input power of 
40 kW, calculate the magnitude and phase angle of the line-to-neutral 
generated voltage/~af and the field current If for power factors of (a) 0.85 
lagging, (b) unity, and (c) 0.85 leading. 
5.7 A 50-Hz, two-pole, 750 kVA, 2300 V, three-phase synchronous machine has 
a synchronous reactance of 7.75 f2 and achieves rated open-circuit terminal 
voltage at a field current of 120 A. 
a. 
Calculate the armature-to-field mutual inductance. 
b. 
The machine is to be operated as a motor supplying a 600 kW load at 
its rated terminal voltage. Calculate the internal voltage Eaf and the 
corresponding field current if the motor is operating at unity power factor. 
c. 
For a constant load power of 600 kW, write a MATLAB script to plot the 
terminal current as a function of field current. For your plot, let the field 
current vary between a minimum value corresponding to a machine 
loading of 750 kVA at leading power factor and a maximum value 

5.10 
Problems 
299 
corresponding to a machine loading of 750 kVA at lagging power factor. 
What value of field current produces the minimum terminal current? Why? 
5.8 The manufacturer's data sheet for a 26-kV, 750-MVA, 60-Hz, three-phase 
synchronous generator indicates that it has a synchronous reactance Xs -- 
2.04 and a leakage reactance Xal = 0.18, both in per unit on the generator 
base. Calculate (a) the synchronous inductance in mH, (b) the armature 
leakage inductance in mH, and (c) the armature phase inductance Laa in mH 
and per unit. 
5.9 The following readings are taken from the results of an open- and a short- 
circuit test on an 800-MVA, three-phase, Y-connected, 26-kV, two-pole, 
60-Hz turbine generator driven at synchronous speed: 
Field current, A 
Armature current, short-circuit test, kA 
Line voltage, open-circuit characteristic, kV 
Line voltage, air-gap line, kV 
1540 
2960 
9.26 
17.8 
26.0 
(31.8) 
29.6 
(56.9) 
The number in parentheses are extrapolations based upon the measured data. 
Find (a) the short-circuit ratio, (b) the unsaturated value of the synchronous 
reactance in ohms per phase and per unit, and (c) the saturated synchronous 
reactance in per unit and in ohms per phase. 
5.10 The following readings are taken from the results of an open- and a 
short-circuit test on a 5000-kW, 4160-V, three-phase, four-pole, 1800-rpm 
synchronous motor driven at rated speed: 
Field current, A 
Armature current, short-circuit test, A 
Line voltage, open-circuit characteristic, V 
Line voltage, air-gap line, V 
169 
192 
694 
790 
3920 
4160 
4640 
5270 
The armature resistance is 11 mf2/phase. The armature leakage reactance is 
estimated to be 0.12 per unit on the motor rating as base. Find (a) the 
short-circuit ratio, (b) the unsaturated value of the synchronous reactance in 
ohms per phase and per unit, and (c) the saturated synchronous reactance 
in per unit and in ohms per phase. 
5.11 Write a MATLAB script which automates the calculations of Problems 5.9 
and 5.10. The following minimum set of data is required: 
II 
AFNL: The field current required to achieve rated open-circuit terminal 
voltage. 
II 
The corresponding terminal voltage on the air gap line. 
II 
AFSC: The field current required to achieve rated short-circuit current on 
the short-circuit characteristic. 
Your script should calculate (a) the short-circuit ratio, (b) the unsaturated 
value of the synchronous reactance in ohms per phase and per unit, and 
(c) the saturated synchronous reactance in per unit and in ohms per phase. 

300 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
5.12 Consider the motor of Problem 5.10. 
a. 
Compute the field current required when the motor is operating at rated 
voltage, 4200 kW input power at 0.87 power factor leading. Account for 
saturation under load by the method described in the paragraph relating 
to Eq. 5.29. 
b. 
In addition to the data given in Problem 5.10, additional points on the 
open-circuit characteristic are given below: 
Field current, A 
200 
250 
300 
350 
Line voltage, V 
4250 
4580 
4820 
5000 
If the circuit breaker supplying the motor of part (a) is tripped, leaving 
the motor suddenly open-circuited, estimate the value of the motor 
terminal voltage following the trip (before the motor begins to slow down 
and before any protection circuitry reduces the field current). 
5.13 Using MATLAB, plot the field current required to achieve unity-power-factor 
operation for the motor of Problem 5.10 as the motor load varies from zero to 
full load. Assume the motor to be operating at rated terminal voltage. 
5.14 Loss data for the motor of Problem 5.10 are as follows: 
Open-circuit core loss at 4160 V = 37 kW 
Friction and windage loss = 46 kW 
Field-winding resistance at 75°C = 0.279 f2 
Compute the output power and efficiency when'the motor is operating at rated 
input power, unity power factor, and rated voltage. Assume the field-winding 
to be operating at a temperature of 125°C. 
5.15 The following data are obtained from tests on a 145-MVA, 13.8-kV, three- 
phase, 60-Hz, 72-pole hydroelectric generator. 
Open-circuit characteristic: 
If, A 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
775 
800 
Voltage, kV 
2.27 4.44 
6.68 8.67 10.4 11.9 13.4 14.3 14.5 
Short-circuit test: 
If = 710 A, la = 6070 A 
a. 
Draw (or plot using MATLAB) the open-circuit saturation curve, the 
air-gap line, and the short-circuit characteristic. 
b. 
Find AFNL and AFSC. (Note that if you use MATLAB for part (a), you 
can use the MATLAB function 'polyfit' to fit a second-order polynomial to 
the open-circuit saturation curve. You can then use this fit to find AFNL.) 

5.10 
Problems 
301 
c. 
Find (i) the short-circuit ratio, (ii) the unsaturated value of the 
synchronous reactance in ohms per phase and per unit and (iii) the 
saturated synchronous reactance in per unit and in ohms per phase. 
5.16 What is the maximum per-unit reactive power that can be supplied by a 
synchronous machine operating at its rated terminal voltage whose 
synchronous reactance is 1.6 per unit and whose maximum field current is 
limited to 2.4 times that required to achieve rated terminal voltage under 
open-circuit conditions? 
5.17 A 25-MVA, 11.5 kV synchronous machine is operating as a synchronous 
condenser, as discussed in Appendix D (section D.4.1). The generator 
short-circuit ratio is 1.68 and the field current at rated voltage, no load is 
420 A. Assume the generator to be connected directly to an 11.5 kV source. 
a. 
What is the saturated synchronous reactance of the generator in per unit 
and in ohms per phase? 
The generator field current is adjusted to 150 A. 
b. 
Draw a phasor diagram, indicating the terminal voltage, internal voltage, 
and armature current. 
c. 
Calculate the armature current magnitude (per unit and amperes) and its 
relative phase angle with respect to the terminal voltage. 
d. 
Under these conditions, does the synchronous condenser appear inductive 
or capacitive to the 11.5 kV system? 
e. 
Repeat parts (b) through (d) for a field current of 700 A. 
5.18 The synchronous condenser of Problem 5.17 is connected to a 11.5 kV system 
through a feeder whose series reactance is 0.12 per unit on the machine base. 
Using MATLAB, plot the voltage (kV) at the synchronous-condenser 
terminals as the synchronous-condenser field current is varied between 150 A 
and 700 A. 
5.19 A synchronous machine with a synchronous reactance of 1.28 per unit is 
operating as a generator at a real power loading of 0.6 per unit connected to a 
system with a series reactance of 0.07 per unit. An increase in its field current 
is observed to cause a decrease in armature current. 
a. 
Before the increase, was the generator supplying or absorbing reactive 
power from the power system? 
b. 
As a result of this increase in excitation, did the generator terminal 
voltage increase or decrease? 
c. 
Repeat parts (a) and (b) if the synchronous machine is operating as a 
motor. 
5.20 Superconducting synchronous machines are designed with superconducting 
fields windings which can support large current densities and create large 
magnetic flux densities. Since typical operating magnetic flux densities 
exceed the saturation flux densities of iron, these machines are typically 
designed without iron in the magnetic circuit; as a result, these machines 
exhibit no saturation effects and have low synchronous reactances. 

302 
CHAPTER 5 
Synchronous Machines 
Consider a two-pole, 60-Hz, 13.8-kV, 10-MVA superconducting 
generator which achieves rated open-circuit armature voltage at a field current 
of 842 A. It achieves rated armature current into a three-phase terminal short 
circuit for a field current of 226 A. 
a. 
Calculate the per-unit synchronous reactance. 
Consider the situation in which this generator is connected to a 13.8 kV 
distribution feeder of negligible impedance and operating at an output power 
of 8.75 MW at 0.9 pf lagging. Calculate: 
b. 
the field current in amperes, the reactive-power output in MVA, and the 
rotor angle for this operating condition. 
c. 
the resultant rotor angle and reactive-power output in MVA if the field 
current is reduced to 842 A while the shaft-power supplied by the prime 
mover to the generator remains constant. 
5.21 For a synchronous machine with constant synchronous reactance Xs operating 
at a constant terminal voltage Vt and a constant excitation voltage Eaf, show 
that the locus of the tip of the armature-current phasor is a circle. On a phasor 
diagram with terminal voltage shown as the reference phasor, indicate the 
position of the center of this circle and its radius. Express the coordinates of 
the center and the radius of the circle in terms of Vt, Eaf and Xs. 
5.22 A four-pole, 60-Hz, 24-kV, 650-MVA synchronous generator with a 
synchronous reactance of 1.82 per unit is operating on a power system which 
can be represented by a 24-kV infinite bus in series with a reactive impedance 
of j0.21 f2. The generator is equipped with a voltage regulator that adjusts the 
field excitation such that the generator terminal voltage remains at 24 kV 
independent of the generator loading. 
a. 
The generator output power is adjusted to 375 MW. 
(i) 
Draw a phasor diagram for this operating condition. 
(ii) 
Find the magnitude (in kA) and phase angle (with respect to the 
generator terminal voltage) of the terminal current. 
(iii) 
Determine the generator terminal power factor. 
(iv) 
Find the magnitude (in per unit and kV) of the generator excitation 
voltage Eaf. 
b. 
Repeat part (a) if the generator output power is increased to 600 MW. 
5.23 The generator of Problem 5.22 achieves rated open-circuit armature voltage 
at a field current of 850 A. It is operating on the system of Problem 5.22 with 
its voltage regulator set to maintain the terminal voltage at 0.99 per unit 
(23.8 kV). 
a. 
Use MATLAB to plot the generator field current (in A) as a function of 
load (in MW) as the load on the generator output power is varied from 
zero to full load. 
b. 
Plot the corresponding reactive output power in MVAR as a function of 
output load. 

5.10 
Problems 
303 
c. 
Repeat the plots of parts (a) and (b) if the voltage regulator is set to 
regulate the terminal voltage to 1.01 per unit (24.2 kV). 
5.24 The 145 MW hydroelectric generator of Problem 5.15 is operating on a 
13.8-kV power system. Under normal operating procedures, the generator is 
operated under automatic voltage regulation set to maintain its terminal 
voltage at 13.8 kV. In this problem you will investigate the possible 
consequences should the operator forget to switch over to the automatic 
voltage regulator and instead leave the field excitation constant at AFNL, 
the value corresponding to rated open-circuit voltage. For the purposes of 
this problem, neglect the effects of saliency and assume that the generator 
can be represented by the saturated synchronous reactance found in 
Problem 5.15. 
a. 
If the power system is represented simply by a 13.8 kV infinite (ignoring 
the effects of any equivalent impedance), can the generator be loaded to 
full load? If so, what is the power angle 3 corresponding to full load? If 
not, what is the maximum load that can be achieved? 
b. 
Repeat part (a) with the power system now represented by a 13.8 kV 
infinite bus in series with a reactive impedance of j0.14 f2. 
5.25 Repeat Example 5.9 assuming the generator is operating at one-half of its 
rated kVA at a lagging power factor of 0.8 and rated terminal voltage. 
5.26 Repeat Problem 5.24 assuming that the saturated direct-axis synchronous 
inductance Xd is equal to that found in Problem 5.15 and that the saturated 
quadrature-axis synchronous reactance Xq is equal to 75 percent of this value. 
Compare your answers to those found in Problem 5.24. 
5.27 Write a MATLAB script to plot a set of per-unit power-angle curves for a 
salient-pole synchronous generator connected to an infinite bus 
(Vbus = 1.0 per unit). The generator reactances are Xd = 1.27 per unit and 
Xq = 0.95 per unit. Assuming Eaf = 1.0 per unit, plot the following curves: 
a. 
Generator connected directly to the infinite bus. 
b. 
Generator connected to the infinite bus through a reactance Xbus -- 
0.1 per unit. 
c. 
Generator connected directly to the infinite bus. Neglect saliency effects, 
setting Xq -- X d. 
d. 
Generator connected to the infinite bus through a reactance Xbus = 
0.1 per unit. Neglect saliency effects, setting Xq -- Xd. 
5.28 Draw the steady-state, direct- and quadrature-axis phasor diagram for a 
salient-pole synchronous motor with reactances Xd and Xq and armature 
resistance Ra. From this phasor diagram, show that the torque angle 8 between 
the generated voltage J~af (which lies along the quadrature axis) and the 
terminal voltage l)t is given by 
tan ~ - 
IaXq COS t~ + Ia Ra sin ~b 
Vt + IaXq sin ~b- IaRa cos ~b 

304 
CHAPTER 5 Synchronous Machines 
Here ¢ is the phase angle of the armature current i~ a and Vt, considered to be 
negative when i~ a lags ft. 
5.29 Repeat Problem 5.28 for synchronous generator operation, in which case the 
equation for 3 becomes 
tan 6 - 
IaXq COS t~ + la Ra sin ~b 
Vt - IaXq sin ¢ + la Ra cos ~b 
5.30 What maximum percentage of its rated output power will a salient-pole 
motor deliver without loss of synchronism when operating at its rated terminal 
voltage with zero field excitation (Eaf "- 0) if Xd = 0.90 per unit and 
Xq -- 0.65 per unit? Compute the per-unit armature current and reactive 
power for this operating condition. 
5.31 If the synchronous motor of Problem 5.30 is now operated as a synchronous 
generator connected to an infinite bus of rated voltage, find the minimum 
per-unit field excitation (where 1.0 per unit is the field current required to 
achieve rated open-circuit voltage) for which the generator will remain 
synchronized at (a) half load and (b) full load. 
5.32 A salient-pole synchronous generator with saturated synchronous reactances 
Xo -- 1.57 per unit and Xq = 1.34 per unit is connected to an infinite bus of 
rated voltage through an external impedance Xbus -- 0.11 per unit. The 
generator is supplying its rated MVA at 0.95 power factor lagging, as 
measured at the generator terminals. 
a. 
Draw a phasor diagram, indicating the infinite-bus voltage, the armature 
current, the generator terminal voltage, the excitation voltage, and the 
rotor angle (measured with respect to the infinite bus). 
b. 
Calculate the per-unit terminal and excitation voltages, and the rotor angle 
in degrees. 
5.33 A salient-pole synchronous generator with saturated synchronous reactances 
Xd = 0.78 per unit and Xq = 0.63 per unit is connected to a rated-voltage 
infinite bus through an external impedance Xbus = 0.09 per unit. 
a. 
Assuming the generator to be supplying only reactive power 
(i) 
Find minimum and maximum per-unit field excitations (where 1.0 per 
unit is the field current required to achieve rated open-circuit voltage) 
such that the generator does not exceed its rated terminal current. 
(ii) 
Using MATLAB, plot the armature current as a function of field 
excitation as the field excitation is varied between the limits 
determined in part (i). 
b. 
Now assuming the generator to be supplying 0.25 per unit rated real 
power, on the same axes add a plot of the per-unit armature current as a 
function of field excitation as the field current is varied in the range for 
which the per-unit armature current is less than 1.0 per unit. 
c. 
Repeat part (b) for generator output powers of 0.50 and 0.75 per unit. 
The final result will be a plot of V-curves for this generator in this 
configuration. 

5.10 
Problems 
305 
5.34 A two-phase permanent-magnet ac motor has a rated speed of 3000 r/min and 
a six-pole rotor. Calculate the frequency (in Hz) of the armature voltage 
required to operate at this speed. 
5.35 A 5-kW, three-phase, permanent-magnet synchronous generator produces an 
open-circuit voltage of 208 V line-to-line, 60-Hz, when driven at a speed of 
1800 r/min. When operating at rated speed and supplying a resistive load, its 
terminal voltage is observed to be 192 V line-to-line for a power output of 
4.5 kW. 
a. 
Calculate the generator phase current under this operating condition. 
b. 
Assuming the generator armature resistance to be negligible, calculate the 
generator 60-Hz synchronous reactance. 
c. 
Calculate the generator terminal voltage which will result if the motor 
generator load is increased to 5 kW (again purely resistive) while the 
speed is maintained at 1800 r/min. 
5.36 Small single-phase permanent-magnet ac generators are frequently used to 
generate the power for lights on bicycles. For this application, these 
generators are typically designed with a significant amount of leakage 
inductance in their armature winding. A simple model for these generators is 
an ac voltage source ea(t) = o)Ka cos cot in series with the armature leakage 
inductance La and the armature resistance Ra. Here co is the electrical 
frequency of the generated voltage which is determined by the speed of the 
generator as it rubs against the bicycle wheel. 
Assuming that the generator is running a light bulb which can be 
modeled as a resistance Rb, write an expression for the minimum frequency 
O)mi n which must be achieved in order to insure that the light operates at 
constant brightness, independent of the speed of the bicycle. 

CHAPTER 
Polyphase Induction 
Machines 
T 
he objective of this chapter is to study the behavior of polyphase induction 
machines. Our analysis will begin with the development of single-phase equiv- 
alent circuits, the general form of which is suggested by the similarity of an 
induction machine to a transformer. These equivalent circuits can be used to study 
the electromechanical characteristics of an induction machine as well as the loading 
presented by the machine on its supply source, whether it is a fixed-frequency source 
such as a power system or a variable-frequency, variable-voltage motor drive. 
6.1 
INTRODUCTION TO POLYPHASE 
INDUCTION MACHINES 
As indicated in Section 4.2.1, an induction motor is one in which alternating current 
is supplied to the stator directly and to the rotor by induction or transformer action 
from the stator. As in the synchronous machine, the stator winding is of the type 
discussed in Section 4.5. When excited from a balanced polyphase source, it will 
produce a magnetic field in the air gap rotating at synchronous speed as determined 
by the number of stator poles and the applied stator frequency fe (Eq. 4.41). 
The rotor of a polyphase induction machine may be one of two types. A wound 
rotor is built with a polyphase winding similar to, and wound with the same number 
of poles as, the stator. The terminals of the rotor winding are connected to insulated 
slip rings mounted on the shaft. Carbon brushes bearing on these rings make the rotor 
terminals available external to the motor, as shown in the cutaway view in Fig. 6.1. 
Wound-rotor induction machines are relatively uncommon, being found only in a 
limited number of specialized applications. 
On the other hand, the polyphase induction motor shown in cutaway in Fig. 6.2 
has a squirrel-cage rotor with a winding consisting of conducting bars embedded in 
slots in the rotor iron and short-circuited at each end by conducting end rings. The 
306 

6.1 
Introduction to Polyphase Induction Machines 
307 
Figure 6.1 
Cutaway view of a three-phase 
induction motor with a wound rotor and slip rings 
connected to the three-phase rotor winding. 
(General Electric Company.) 
Figure 6.2 Cutaway view of a three-phase squirrel-cage 
motor. The rotor cutaway shows the squirrel-cage laminations. 
(Rockwell Automation~Reliance Electric.) 

308 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6.3 (a) The rotor of a small squirrel-cage motor. (b) The squirrel-cage structure 
after the rotor laminations have been chemically etched away. (Athens Products.) 
extreme simplicity and ruggedness of the squirrel-cage construction are outstanding 
advantages of this type of induction motor and make it by far the most commonly 
used type of motor in sizes ranging from fractional horsepower on up. Figure 6.3a 
shows the rotor of a small squirrel-cage motor while Fig. 6.3b shows the squirrel cage 
itself after the rotor laminations have been chemically etched away. 
Let us assume that the rotor is turning at the steady speed of n r/min in the same 
direction as the rotating stator field. Let the synchronous speed of the stator field be 
ns r/min as given by Eq. 4.41. This difference between synchronous speed and the 
rotor speed is commonly referred to as the slip of the rotor; in this case the rotor 
slip is ns - n, as measured in r/min. Slip is more usually expressed as a fraction of 
synchronous speed. The fractional slip s is 
ns -n 
s = 
(6.1) 
ns 
The slip is often expressed in percent, simply equal to 100 percent times the fractional 
slip of Eq. 6.1. 
The rotor speed in r/min can be expressed in terms of the slip and the synchronous 
speed as 
n --- (1 - s)ns 
(6.2) 
Similarly, the mechanical angular velocity COm can be expressed in terms of the syn- 
chronous angular velocity COs and the slip as 
COm ~-- (1 -- S)COs 
(6.3) 
The relative motion of the stator flux and the rotor conductors induces voltages 
of frequency fr 
fr = Sfe 
(6.4) 

6.t 
Introduction to Polyphase Induction Machines 
309 
called the slip frequency, in the rotor. Thus, the electrical behavior of an induction 
machine is similar to that of a transformer but with the additional feature of frequency 
transformation produced by the relative motion of the stator and rotor windings. In 
fact, a wound-rotor induction machine can be used as a frequency changer. 
The rotor terminals of an induction motor are short circuited; by construction in 
the case of a squirrel-cage motor and externally in the case of a wound-rotor motor. 
The rotating air-gap flux induces slip-frequency voltages in the rotor windings. The 
rotor currents are then determined by the magnitudes of the induced voltages and 
the rotor impedance at slip frequency. At starting, the rotor is stationary (n = 0), 
the slip is unity (s = 1), and the rotor fl~equency equals the stator frequency fe. The 
field produced by the rotor currents therefore revolves at the same speed as the stator 
field, and a starting torque results, tending to turn the rotor in the direction of rotation 
of the stator-inducing field. If this torque is sufficient to overcome the opposition 
to rotation created by the shaft load, the motor will come up to its operating speed. 
The operating speed can never equal the synchronous speed however, since the rotor 
conductors would then be stationary with respect to the stator field; no current would 
be induced in them, and hence no torque would be produced. 
With the rotor revolving in the same direction of rotation as the stator field, the 
frequency of the rotor currents is sfe and they will produce a rotating flux wave 
which will rotate at Sns r/min with respect to the rotor in the forward direction. But 
superimposed on this rotation is the mechanical rotation of the rotor at n r/min. Thus, 
with respect to the stator, the speed of the flux wave produced by the rotor currents is 
the sum of these two speeds and equals 
sns + n = Sns + ns(1 - s) = ns 
(6.5) 
From Eq. 6.5 we see that the rotor currents produce an air-gap flux wave which 
rotates at synchronous speed and hence in synchronism with that produced by the 
stator currents. Because the stator and rotor fields each rotate synchronously, they are 
stationary with respect to each other and produce a steady torque, thus maintaining 
rotation of the rotor. Such torque, which exists for any mechanical rotor speed n other 
than synchronous speed, is called an asynchronous torque. 
Figure 6.4 shows a typical polyphase squirrel-cage induction motor torque-speed 
curve. The factors influencing the shape of this curve can be appreciated in terms of 
the torque equation, Eq. 4.81. Note that the resultant air-gap flux ~sr in this equation 
is approximately constant when the stator-applied voltage and frequency are constant. 
Also, recall that the rotor mmf Fr is proportional to the rotor current Ir. Equation 4.81 
can then be expressed in the form 
T = - K Ir sin ~r 
(6.6) 
where K is a constant and •r is the angle by which the rotor mmf wave leads the re- 
sultant air-gap mmf wave. 
The rotor current is equal to the negative of the voltage induced by the air-gap 
flux divided by the rotor impedance, both at slip frequency. The minus sign is required 
because the induced rotor current is in the direction to demagnetize the air-gap flux, 
whereas the rotor current is defined in Chapter 4 as being in the direction to magnetize 

310 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
300 
= 
250 
o 
4.a 
200 
o 
4.a 
150 
~" 100 
o 
o 
o 
~ 
50 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Speed, percent of synchronous speed 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
Slip as a fraction of synchronous speed 
),, 
100 
Figure 6.4 Typical induction-motor torque-speed 
curve for constant-voltage, constant-frequency operation. 
the air gap. Under normal running conditions the slip is small: 2 to 10 percent at full 
load in most squirrel-cage motors. The rotor frequency (fr = Sfe) therefore is very 
low (of the order of 1 to 6 Hz in 60-Hz motors). In this range the rotor impedance 
is largely resistive and hence independent of slip. The rotor-induced voltage, on the 
other hand, is proportional to slip and leads the resultant air-gap flux by 90 ° . Thus 
the rotor current is very nearly proportional to the slip, and proportional to and 180 ° 
out of phase with the rotor voltage. As a result, the rotor-mmf wave lags the resultant 
air-gap flux by approximately 90 electrical degrees, and therefore sin gr ~ - 1. 
Approximate proportionality of torque with slip is therefore to be expected in 
the range where the slip is small. As slip increases, the rotor impedance increases 
because of the increasing contribution of the rotor leakage inductance. Thus the rotor 
current is less than proportional to slip. Also the rotor current lags farther behind the 
induced voltage, and the magnitude of sin ~r decreases. 
The result is that the torque increases with increasing slip up to a maximum 
value and then decreases, as shown in Fig. 6.4. The maximum torque, or breakdown 
torque, which is typically a factor of two larger than the rated motor torque, limits the 
short-time overload capability of the motor. 
We will see that the slip at which the peak torque occurs is proportional to the rotor 
resistance. For squirrel-cage motors this peak-torque slip is relatively small, much as 
is shown in Fig. 6.4. Thus, the squirrel-cage motor is substantially a constant-speed 
motor having a few percent drop in speed from no load to full load. In the case 
of a wound-rotor motor, the rotor resistance can be increased by inserting external 
resistance, hence increasing the slip at peak-torque, and thus decreasing the motor 
speed for a specified value of torque. Since wound-rotor induction machines are 

6.2 
Currents and Fluxes in Polyphase Induction Machines 
3t I 
larger, more expensive and require significantly more maintenance than squirrel- 
cage machines, this method of speed control is rarely used, and induction machines 
driven from constant-frequency sources tend to be limited to essentially constant- 
speed applications. As we will see in Chapter 11, use of solid-state, variable-voltage, 
variable-frequency drive systems makes it possible to readily control the speed of 
squirrel-cage induction machines and, as a result, they are now widely used in a 
wide-range of variable-speed applications. 
6.2 
CURRENTS AND FLUXES IN POLYPHASE 
INDUCTION MACHINES 
For a coil-wound rotor, the flux-mmf situation can be seen with the aid of Fig. 6.5. 
This sketch shows the development of a simple two-pole, three-phase rotor winding 
in a two-pole field. It therefore conforms with the restriction that a wound rotor must 
have the same number of poles as the stator (although the number of phases need not 
be the same). The rotor flux-density wave is moving to the fight at angular velocity COs 
and at slip angular velocity SCOs with respect to the rotor winding, which in turn is 
rotating to the fight at angular velocity (1 - s)COs. It is shown in Fig. 6.5 in the position 
of maximum instantaneous voltage in phase a. 
If the rotor leakage reactance, equal to s cos times the rotor leakage inductance, 
is very small compared with the rotor resistance (which is typically the case at the 
small slips corresponding to normal operation), the phase-a current will also be a 
maximum. As shown in Section 4.5, the rotor-mmf wave will then be centered on 
phase a; it is so shown in Fig. 6.5a. The displacement angle, or torque angle, ~r under 
these conditions is at its optimum value of-90 ° . 
If the rotor leakage reactance is appreciable however, the phase-a current lags 
the induced voltage by the power-factor angle q~2 of the rotor leakage impedance. The 
phase-a current will not be at maximum until a correspondingly later time. The rotor- 
mmf wave will then not be centered on phase a until the flux wave has traveled q~2 
degrees farther down the gap, as shown in Fig. 6.5b. The angle ~r is now -(90 ° + ~b2). 
In general, therefore, the torque angle of an induction motor is 
~r = -(90 ° + ¢2) 
(6.7) 
Rotor-mmf 
wave ,f"'x¢__ Resultant 
~ 
\ flux-density 
~ 
rque 
wave 
a 
-c '.' 
-.",.. 
/ 
"3 = 90 °'' Rotation 
(a) 
Rotor-mmf 
wave 
~ 
Resultant 
. ~  
/ 
Xflux-density 
/ u  
u~°rquu e 
u~ 
ve 
a 
--c 
b ~-a ~ 
c 
--b~ka 
/ 
(b) 
Figure 6.5 
Developed rotor winding of an induction motor with its flux-density and mmf waves 
in their relative positions for (a) zero and (b) nonzero rotor leakage reactance. 

312 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
Flux-density wave 
Instantaneous 
bar-voltage 
~ 
~ 
Rotation % 
magnitudes ~11"~ 
-- 1-- T "~ N~. 
_
.
 
Rotor' ,~]. I__L_j. j.~,~, 9 ,o ,112 ~ 1415161 
(l__~)(.Os 
Rotation 
(a) 
Instantaneous 
bar-current 
~ 
o9 s 
magnitudes ~ 
T "~" ~ X 
1234 
56 
78 
9/'q/'x~ 
I I I I'' \ 
o,.q) ~ Q q) q~ q) q~.,o ~, ® ® ® @ ® @ o 
_ 
",.~,I / / J,-" ',/I 11 12 13 14 15 16 1 <1-Js)~ s 
"-~/"~i 
(b) 
Rotor mmf 
/ 
wave 
~'-.,~ZJ 
Ii 
I'x 
~-'~_ 
J 
o 
\ 
1 2 3 4 V ~ 
900 ~i~ ,-/ 
'~ 
oo~¢9Qoo¢9o~®®~®®®o 
\ ___~, 
6 
/~i 1112 IX\141516 1 (1--~s)w 
s 
component of 
l.X.x.1 
~-q 
.- d 
rotor-mmf 
wave 
(c) 
Figure 6.6 
Reactions of a squirrel-cage rotor in a two-pole field. 
It departs from the optimum value of -90 ° by the power-factor angle of the rotor 
leakage impedance at slip frequency. The electromagnetic rotor torque is directed 
toward the right in Fig. 6.5, or in the direction of the rotating flux wave. 
The comparable picture for a squirrel-cage rotor is given in Fig. 6.6. A 16-bar rotor 
placed in a two-pole field is shown in developed form. To simplify the drawing, only 
a relatively small number of rotor bars has been chosen and the number is an integral 
multiple of the number of poles, a choice normally avoided in order to prevent harmful 

6.3 
Induction-Motor Equivalent Circuit 
313 
harmonic effects. In Fig. 6.6a the sinusoidal flux-density wave induces a voltage in 
each bar which has an instantaneous value indicated by the solid vertical lines. 
At a somewhat later instant of time, the bar currents assume the instantaneous 
values indicated by the solid vertical lines in Fig. 6.6b, the time lag corresponding 
to the rotor power-factor angle q~2. In this time interval, the flux-density wave has 
traveled in its direction of rotation with respect to the rotor through a space angle 4)2 
and is then in the position shown in Fig. 6.6b. The corresponding rotor-mmf wave 
is shown by the step wave of Fig. 6.6c. The fundamental component is shown by 
the dashed sinusoid and the flux-density wave by the solid sinusoid. Study of these 
figures confirms the general principle that the number of rotor poles in a squirrel-cage 
rotor is determined by the inducing flux wave. 
6.3 
INDUCTION-MOTOR 
EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT 
The foregoing considerations of flux and mmf waves can readily be translated to a 
steady-state equivalent circuit for a polyphase induction machine. In this derivation, 
only machines with symmetric polyphase windings excited by balanced polyphase 
voltages are considered. As in many other discussions of polyphase devices, it is 
helpful to think of three-phase machines as being Y-connected, so that currents are 
always line values and voltages always line-to-neutral values. In this case, we can 
derive the equivalent circuit for one phase, with the understanding that the volt- 
ages and currents in the remaining phases can be found simply by an appropriate 
phase shift of those of the phase under study (-1-120 ° in the case of a three-phase 
machine). 
First, consider conditions in the stator. The synchronously-rotating air-gap flux 
wave generates balanced polyphase counter emfs in the phases of the stator. The stator 
terminal voltage differs from the counter emf by the voltage drop in the stator leakage 
impedance Z1 = R1 + j X1. Thus 
(Zl --/~2 + il(R1 + jX1) 
(6.8) 
where 
(Zl -- Stator line-to-neutral terminal voltage 
/~2 -- Counter emf (line-to-neutral) generated by the resultant air-gap flux 
il - Stator current 
R1 -- Stator effective resistance 
X1 - Stator leakage reactance 
The polarity of the voltages and currents are shown in the equivalent circuit of 
Fig. 6.7. 
The resultant air-gap flux is created by the combined mmf's of the stator and rotor 
currents. Just as in the case of a transformer, the stator current can be resolved into two 
components: a load component and an exciting (magnetizing) component. The load 
component 12 produces an mmf that corresponds to the mmf of the rotor current. The 
exciting component i~0 is the additional stator current required to create the resultant 

314 
CHAPTER 6 Polyphase Induction Machines 
1 
R1 
X1 
& 
Figure 6.7 Stator equivalent circuit 
for a polyphase induction motor. 
air-gap flux and is a function of the emf J~2. The exciting current can be resolved 
into a core-loss component ic in phase with /~2 and a magnetizing component Im 
lagging/~2 by 90 °. In the equivalent circuit, the exciting current can be accounted for 
by means of a shunt branch, formed by a core-loss resistance Rc and a magnetizing 
reactance Xm in parallel, connected across/~2, as in Fig. 6.7. Both Rc and Xm are 
usually determined at rated stator frequency and for a value of E2 close to the expected 
operating value; they are then assumed to remain constant for the small departures of 
E2 associated with normal operation of the motor. 
The equivalent circuit representing stator phenomena is exactly like that used 
to represent the primary of a transformer. To complete our model, the effects of the 
rotor must be incorporated. From the point of view of the stator equivalent circuit of 
Fig. 6.7, the rotor can be represented by an equivalent impedance Z2 
J~2 
Z 2 = 
,, 
(6.9) 
12 
corresponding to the leakage impedance of an equivalent stationary secondary. To 
complete the equivalent circuit, we must determine Z2 by representing the stator and 
rotor voltages and currents in terms of rotor quantities as referred to the stator. 
As we saw in Section 2.3, from the point of view of the primary, the secondary 
winding of a transformer can be replaced by an equivalent secondary winding having 
the same number of turns as the primary winding. In a transformer where the turns ratio 
and the secondary parameters are known, this can be done by referring the secondary 
impedance to the primary by multiplying it by the square of the primary-to-secondary 
turns ratio. The resultant equivalent circuit is perfectly general from the point of view 
of primary quantities. 
Similarly, in the case of a polyphase induction motor, if the rotor were to be 
replaced by an equivalent rotor with a polyphase winding with the same number of 
phases and turns as the stator but producing the same mmf and air gap flux as the 
actual rotor, the performance as seen from the stator terminals would be unchanged. 
This concept, which we will adopt here, is especially useful in modeling squirrel-cage 
rotors for which the identity of the rotor "phase windings" is in no way obvious. 
The rotor of an induction machine is short-circuited, and hence the impedance 
seen by induced voltage is simply the rotor short-circuit impedance. Consequently 
the relation between the slip-frequency leakage impedance Z2s of the equivalent rotor 

6.3 
Induction-Motor Equivalent Circuit 
315 
and the slip-frequency leakage impedance Zroto r of the actual rotor must be 
(/~rotor ) 
E'2s 
Ne2 
2 
= 
^ 
- -  
= NeffZrotor 
(6.10) 
Zzs 
Izs 
Irotor 
where Neff is the effective turns ratio between the stator winding and that of the actual 
rotor winding. Here the subscript 2s refers to quantities associated with the referred 
rotor. Thus/~2s is the voltage induced in the equivalent rotor by the resultant air-gap 
flux, and I2s is the corresponding induced current. 
When one is concerned with the actual rotor currents and voltages, the turns 
ratio Neff must be known in order to convert back from equivalent-rotor quantities 
to those of the actual rotor. However, for the purposes of studying induction-motor 
performance as seen from the stator terminals, there is no need for this conversion 
and a representation in terms of equivalent-rotor quantities is fully adequate. Thus 
an equivalent circuit based upon equivalent-rotor quantities can be used to represent 
both coil-wound and squirrel-cage rotors. 
Having taken care of the effects of the stator-to-rotor turns ratio, we next must take 
into account the relative motion between the stator and the rotor with the objective 
of replacing the actual rotor and its slip-frequency voltages and currents with an 
equivalent stationary rotor with stator-frequency voltages and currents. Consider first 
the slip-frequency leakage impedance of the referred rotor. 
/~2s 
Z2s = 
^ 
= 
R2 + jsX2 
(6.11) 
I2s 
where 
R2 -- Referred rotor resistance 
s X2 = Referred rotor leakage reactance at slip frequency 
Note that here X2 has been defined as the referred rotor leakage reactance at 
stator frequency fe. Since the actual rotor frequency fr - Sfe, it has been converted 
to the slip-frequency reactance simply by multiplying by the slip s. The slip-frequency 
equivalent circuit of one phase of the referred rotor is shown in Fig. 6.8. This is the 
equivalent circuit of the rotor as seen in the slip-frequency rotor reference frame. 
We next observe that the resultant air-gap mmf wave is produced by the combined 
effects of the stator current il and the equivalent load current i2. Similarly, it can be 
sX2 
+ 
R2 
Figure 6.8 
Rotor equivalent circuit for a 
polyphase induction motor at slip frequency. 

316 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
expressed in terms of the stator current and the equivalent rotor current I2s. These two 
currents are equal in magnitude since i2s is defined as the current in an equivalent 
rotor with the same number of turns per phase as the stator. Because the resultant 
air-gap mmf wave is determined by the phasor sum of the stator current and the rotor 
current of either the actual or equivalent rotor, i2 and i2s must also be equal in phase 
(at their respective electrical frequencies) and hence we can write 
iZs = i2 
(6.12) 
Finally, consider that the resultant flux wave induces both the slip-frequency emf 
induced in the referred rotor/!2s and the stator counter emf/!2. If it were not for the 
effect of speed, these voltages would be equal in magnitude since the referred rotor 
winding has the same number of turns per phase as the stator winding. However, 
because the relative speed of the flux wave with respect to the rotor is s times its 
speed with respect to the stator, the relation between these emfs is 
E2s -- sE2 
(6.13) 
We can furthermore argue that since the phase angle between each of these 
voltages and the resultant flux wave is 90 °, then these two voltages must also be equal 
in a phasor sense at their respective electrical frequencies. Hence 
/~2s ---- SJ~2 
(6.14) 
Division of Eq. 6.14 by Eq. 6.12 and use of Eq. 6.11 then gives 
/~2s 
s~2 
12s 
-- 
12 
--" Z2s --" R2 -k- jsX2 
Division by the slip s then gives 
(6.15) 
J~2 
R2 
Z2 -- 
,, 
-- 
--1-- j X 2 
(6.16) 
I2 
s 
We have achieved our objective. Z2 is the impedance of the equivalent stationary 
rotor which appears across the load terminals of the stator equivalent circuit of Fig. 6.7. 
The final result is shown in the single-phase equivalent circuit of Fig. 6.9. The com- 
bined effect of shaft load and rotor resistance appears as a reflected resistance R2/s, 
a function of slip and therefore of the mechanical load. The current in the reflected 
R] 
X l 
X 2 
fl 
VI 
Xm 
b 
Figure 6.9 Single-phase equivalent circuit 
for a polyphase induction motor. 

6.4 
Analysis of the Equivalent Circuit 
317 
rotor impedance equals the load component I2 of stator current; the voltage across this 
impedance equals the stator voltage/~2. Note that when rotor currents and voltages 
are reflected into the stator, their frequency is also changed to stator frequency. All 
rotor electrical phenomena, when viewed from the stator, become stator-frequency 
phenomena, because the stator winding simply sees mmf and flux waves traveling at 
synchronous speed. 
6.4 
ANALYSIS OF THE EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT 
The single-phase equivalent circuit of Fig. 6.9 can be used to determine a wide 
variety of steady-state performance characteristics of polyphase induction machines. 
These include variations of current, speed, and losses as the load-torque requirements 
change, as well as the starting torque, and the maximum torque. 
The equivalent circuit shows that the total power Pgap transferred across the air 
gap from the stator is 
Pgap -- nph I2 ( R--~2 
(6.17) 
where nph is the number of stator phases. 
The total rotor I ZR loss,/°rotor, can be calculated from the I ZR loss in the equiv- 
alent rotor as 
Protor----nph I2s g2 
(6.18) 
Since I2s = 12, we can write Eq. 6.18 as 
Protor = n ph 12 R2 
(6.19) 
The electromagnetic power Pmech developed by the motor can now be determined 
by subtracting the rotor power dissipation of Eq. 6.19 from the air-gap power of 
Eq. 6.17. 
Pmech -- Pgap -- Protor = nph I2 ( R2 ) 
-if- 
- nph 12 R2 
(6.20) 
or equivalently 
and 
 mech 
s) 
s 
Comparing Eq. 6.17 with Eq. 6.21 gives 
(6.21) 
Protor = s Pgap 
(6.23) 
We see then that, of the total power delivered across the air gap to the rotor, the 
fraction 1 - s is converted to mechanical power and the fraction s is dissipated as 12 R 
loss in the rotor conductors. From this it is evident that an induction motor operating 
at high slip is an inefficient device. When power aspects are to be emphasized, the 
Pmech = (1 -- S) Pgap 
(6.22) 

318 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
R1 
x~ 
x2 
R2 
4-- 
R2 ls s 
Figure 6.10 Alternative form of equivalent circuit. 
equivalent circuit can be redrawn in the manner of Fig. 6.10. The electromechanical 
power per stator phase is equal to the power delivered to the resistance R2(1 - s)/s. 
"XAMPLE 6. 
A three-phase, two-pole, 60-Hz induction motor is observed to be operating at a speed of 
3502 r/min with an input power of 15.7 kW and a terminal current of 22.6 A. The stator- 
winding resistance is 0.20 f2/phase. Calculate the 12 R power dissipated in rotor. 
I Solution 
The power dissipated in the stator winding is given by 
Pstator = 312R~ = 3(22.6)20.2 = 306 W 
Hence the air-gap power is 
egap 
= 
einput 
- 
estator 
~" 15.7 - 0.3 = 15.4 kW 
The synchronous speed of this machine can be found from Eq. 4.41 
(l 0) 
n~= 
p--0~es fe= 
~ 
60=3600r/min 
and hence from Eq. 6.1, the slip is s = (3600 - 3502)/3600 = 0.0272. Thus, from Eq. 6.23, 
Protor = S Pgap = 0.0272 × 15.4 kW = 419 W 
Practice Problem 6. 
Calculate the rotor power dissipation for a three-phase, 460-V, 60-Hz, four-pole motor with an 
armature resistance of 0.056 f2 operating at a speed of 1738 r/min and with an input power of 
47.4 kW and a terminal current of 76.2 A. 
Solution 
1.6 kW 
The electromechanical Tmech corresponding to the power emech can be obtained 
by recalling that mechanical power equals torque times angular velocity. Thus, 
Pmech -- O)m Tmech = (1 - s)COs Tmech 
(6.24) 
For Pmech in watts and cos in rad/sec, Tmech will be in newton-meters. 

6.4 Analysis of the Equivalent Circuit 
319 
Use of Eqs. 6.21 and 6.22 leads to 
Tmech "- Pmech = 
Pgap __ nphl2(g2/S) 
(6.25) 
OAm 
COs 
0As 
with the synchronous mechanical angular velocity COs being given by 
4.e 
0As- poles = 
poles 
0Ae 
(6.26) 
The mechanical torque Tmech and power Pmech are not the output values available 
at the shaft because friction, windage, and stray-load losses remain to be accounted 
for. It is obviously correct to subtract friction, windage, and other rotational losses 
from Tmech or Pmech and it is generally assumed that stray load effects can be subtracted 
in the same manner. The remainder is available as output power from the shaft for 
useful work. Thus 
and 
Pshaft- emech- erot 
(6.27) 
eshaft 
Tshaft- 
~--- Tmech- Trot 
(6.28) 
0Am 
where erot and Tro t are the power and torque associated with the friction, windage, 
and remaining rotational losses. 
Analysis of the transformer equivalent circuit is often simplified by either ne- 
glecting the magnetizing branch entirely or adopting the approximation of moving it 
out directly to the primary terminals. Such approximations are not used in the case 
of induction machines under normal running conditions because the presence of the 
air gap results in a relatively lower magnetizing impedance and correspondingly a 
relatively higher exciting currentm30 to 50 percent of full-load currentmand because 
the leakage reactances are also higher. Some simplification of the induction-machine 
equivalent circuit results if the core-loss resistance Rc is omitted and the associ- 
ated core-loss effect is deducted from Tmech or Pmech at the same time that rotational 
losses and stray load effects are subtracted. The equivalent circuit then becomes that 
of Fig. 6.11a or b, and the error introduced is often relatively insignificant. Such 
R1 
XI 
X2 
a 
b 
R1 
X 1 
X2 
R 2 
a 
b 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6.11 
Equivalent circuits with the core-loss resistance Rc neglected corresponding 
to (a) Fig. 6.9 and (b) Fig. 6.10. 

320 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
a procedure also has an advantage during motor testing, for then the no-load core 
loss need not be separated from friction and windage. These last circuits are used in 
subsequent discussions. 
EXAMPLE 
6.2 
A three-phase Y-connected 220-V (line-to-line) 7.5-kW 60-Hz six-pole induction motor has 
the following parameter values in ~/phase referred to the stator: 
R1 = 0.294 
R2 
- 
0.144 
X1 = 0.503 
X 2 = 0.209 
X m = 13.25 
The total friction, windage, and core losses may be assumed to be constant at 403 W, independent 
of load. 
For a slip of 2 percent, compute the speed, output torque and power, stator current, power 
factor, and efficiency when the motor is operated at rated voltage and frequency. 
ms Solution 
Let the impedance Zf (Fig. 6.11 a) represent the per phase impedance presented to the stator by 
the magnetizing reactance and the rotor. Thus, from Fig. 6.11 a 
Zf=Rf+jXf= (-~+jX2) inparallelwithjXm 
Substitution of numerical values gives, for s = 0.02, 
Rf-k- jXf -- 5.41 + j3.11 f2 
The stator input impedance can now be calculated as 
Zin ~-- R~ + jX~ + Zf = 5.70 + j3.61 = 6.75 ,'32.3 ° g2 
The line-to-neutral terminal voltage is equal to 
220 
V~= 4~ 
= 127V 
and hence the stator current can be calculated as 
I I -  -- 
Vl 
_ _ 
127 
Zin 
6.75/32.3 ° 
= 18.8/-32.3 ° A 
The stator current is thus 18.8 A and the power factor is equal to cos (-32.3 °) = 0.845 lagging. 
The synchronous speed can be found from Eq. 4.41 
(12o  
(1 o) 
ns = 
p-~es 7 fe 
= 
~ 
60 = 1200 r/min 
or from Eq. 6.26 
4Zrfe 
m 
ros- poles = 125.7 rad/sec 

6.4 
Analysis of the Equivalent Circuit 
321 
or 
The rotor speed is 
n = (1 -S)ns = (0.98)1200 = 1176 r/min 
09 m -- (1 - S)Ws = (0.98)125.7 = 123.2 rad/sec 
From Eq. 6.17, 
Note however that because the only resistance included in Zf is R2/s, the power dissipated in 
Zf is equal to the power dissipated in R2/s and hence we can write 
Pgap -- nphI~Rf = 3(18.8)2(5.41) = 5740 W 
We can now calculate Pmech from Eq. 6.21 and the shaft output power from Eq. 6.27. Thus 
eshaft = 
emech- 
erot = 
(1 -s)egap- 
erot 
= (0.98)5740 - 403 = 5220 W 
and the shaft output torque can be found from Eq. 6.28 as 
Pshaft 
5220 
Tshaf t -" 
-- 
= 42.4 N. m 
O) m 
123.2 
The efficiency is calculated as the ratio of shaft output power to stator input power. The 
input power is given by 
Pin 
-'- nphRe[f"~l~] = 3Re[127(18.8 [32.3°)] 
= 3 × 127 x 18.8cos (32.2 °) --6060 W 
Thus the efficiency 77 is equal to 
Pshaft 
5220 
~/= 
= 
= 0.861 = 86.1% 
Pin 
6060 
The complete performance characteristics of the motor can be determined by repeating 
these calculations for other assumed values of slip. 
Find the speed, output power, and efficiency for the motor of Example 6.2 operating at rated 
voltage and frequency for a slip of 1.5 percent. 
Solution 
Speed = 1182 r/min 
eshaft "- 3932 W 
Efficiency = 85.3% 

322 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
6.5 
TORQUE AND POWER BY USE 
OF THEVENIN'S THEOREM 
When torque and power relations are to be emphasized, considerable simplification 
results from application of Thevenin's network theorem to the induction-motor equiv- 
alent circuit. In its general form, Thevenin's theorem permits the replacement of any 
network of linear circuit elements and complex voltage sources, such as viewed from 
two terminals a and b (Fig. 6.12a), by a single complex voltage source Veq in series 
with a single impedance Zeq (Fig. 6.12b). The Thevenin-equivalent voltage l?eq is 
that appearing across terminals a and b of the original network when these terminals 
are open-circuited; the Thevenin-equivalent impedance Zeq is that viewed from the 
same terminals when all voltage sources within the network are set equal to zero. 
For application to the induction-motor equivalent circuit, points a and b are taken as 
those so designated in Fig. 6.11 a and b. The equivalent circuit then assumes the forms 
given in Fig. 6.13 where Thevenin's theorem has been used to transform the network 
to the left of points a and b into an equivalent voltage source f'],eq in series with an 
equivalent impedance Z],eq = R l,eq n t- j X l,eq. 
According to Thevenin's theorem, the equivalent source voltage 01,eq is the volt- 
age that would appear across terminals a and b of Fig. 6.11 with the rotor circuits 
'i .................................. 
U iU i   i'ii iiiiUi'iiiUiiiiiH'  U'i" Hi? 
'*'''': ............ 
:i :: !! ii :!!~i 
~i ::~:::~i::, May be connected to 
[.:~ili!: i:;il;:~i 
~i:!~.iiiii~:ii~i: l 
any other network 
L :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Constant 
__~eq / impedance 
oa 
May be connected to 
any other network 
ob 
Single voltage 
source 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6.12 (a) General linear network and (b)its equivalent at terminals ab 
by Thevenin's theorem. 
4- 
VI ,eq 
Rl,eq X l,eq a 
X2 
T 
Rl'eq 
Xl'eq 
a 
X2 
R2 
m 
0 
= 
0 
• 
b 
b 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6.13 Induction-motor equivalent circuits simplified 
by Thevenin's theorem. 

6,S Torque and Power by Use of Thevenin's Theorem 
323 
removed. The result is a simple voltage divider and thus 
( 
) 
gl,eq = ]~'Zl R1-k-ji~'i-k-Xm) 
(6.29) 
For most induction motors, negligible error results from neglecting the stator re- 
sistance in Eq. 6.29. The Thevenin-equivalent stator impedance Zl,eq is the impedance 
between terminals a and b of Fig. 6.11 viewed toward the source with the source volt- 
age set equal to zero (or equivalently replaced by a short circuit) and therefore is 
Zl,eq = Rl,eq + j Xl,eq -" (R1 -Jr- j X1) in parallel with j Xm 
(6.30) 
or 
jXm(R1 -+- jX1) 
(6.31) 
Zl,eq = R1 + j (X1 + Xm) 
Note that the core-loss resistance Rc has been neglected in the derivation of 
Eqs. 6.29 through 6.31. Although this is a very commonly used approximation, its 
effect can be readily incorporated in the derivations presented here by replacing the 
magnetizing reactance j Xm by the magnetizing impedance Zm, equal to the parallel 
combination of the core-loss resistance Rc and the magnetizing reactance j Xm. 
From the Thevenin-equivalent circuit (Fig. 6.13) 
I2 -- 
*l~rl ' eq 
(6.32) 
Zl,eq -'[- j X2 "a t- R2/s 
and thus from the torque expression (Eq. 6.25) 
1 [ 
nphV12,eq(R2/s) 
] 
Tmech -- 
(6.33) 
COs 
(gl,eq -Jr- (R2/s)) 2 -a u (Xl,eq -Jr- X2) 2 
where COs is the synchronous mechanical angular velocity as given by Eq. 6.26. The 
general shape of the torque-speed or torque-slip curve with the motor connected to a 
constant-voltage, constant-frequency source is shown in Figs. 6.14 and 6.15. 
In normal motor operation, the rotor revolves in the direction of rotation of 
the magnetic field produced by the stator currents, the speed is between zero and 
synchronous speed, and the corresponding slip is between 1.0 and 0 (labeled "Motor 
region" in Fig. 6.14). Motor starting conditions are those of s -- 1.0. 
To obtain operation in the region of s greater than 1 (corresponding to a negative 
motor speed), the motor must be driven backward, against the direction of rotation 
of its magnetic field, by a source of mechanical power capable of counteracting the 
electromechanical torque Tmech. The chief practical usefulness of this region is in 
bringing motors to a quick stop by a method called plugging. By interchanging two 
stator leads in a three-phase motor, the phase sequence, and hence the direction of 
rotation of the magnetic field, is reversed suddenly and what was a small slip before 
the phase reversal becomes a slip close to 2.0 following the reversal; the motor comes 
to a stop under the influence of torque Tmech and is disconnected from the line before 

324 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
Braking 
region 
Motor 
region 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--100 
--80 
--60 
--40 
--20 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
Torque 
I ,, 
•L 
Generator 
,, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 
Speed in percent of synchronous speed 
1.0 0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 --0.2 --0.4 --0.6 --0.8 --1.0 --1.2 
Slip as a fraction of synchronous speed 
Figure 6.t4 
Induction-machine torque-slip curve showing braking, motor, and 
generator regions. 
180 
36 
160 
32 TInS 
140 
28 
120 
24 
100 
20 
~; 
80 ~ 
16 
~ 60 j ,~ 
40 
8 
20 
Pma'x ~ 
/ 
7,V~ 
ll 
"~+ 
,/ 
I 
I 
,/" 
'X...... I 
P~j/ 
/ 
i 
! 
/ 
/ 
/ 
0 2.0 
1.8 
1.6 ~,1"4~'0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
s, 
unit .... 
_--48~ 
] --~" Pei 
J 
~----- SmaxT SmaxP I 
I 
~-~: 
Braking region 
-~-=~= 
Motor region 
=~=~ 
180 
Figure 6.15 Computed torque, power, and current curves for the 
7.5-kW motor in Examples 6.2 and 6.3. 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
~l 60 
~40 
20 
1o 
0 
< 

6.5 
Torque and Power by Use of Thevenin's Theorem 
325 
it can start in the other direction. Accordingly, the region from s = 1.0 to s -- 2.0 is 
labeled "Braking region" in Fig. 6.14. 
The induction machine will operate as a generator if its stator terminals are 
connected to a polyphase voltage source and its rotor is driven above synchronous 
speed (resulting in a negative slip) by a prime mover, as shown in Fig. 6.14. The source 
fixes the synchronous speed and supplies the reactive power input required to excite 
the air-gap magnetic field. One such application is that of an induction generator 
connected to a power system and driven by a wind turbine. 
An expression for the maximum electromechanical torque, or breakdown torque, 
Tmax, indicated in Fig. 6.15, can be obtained readily from circuit considerations. As 
can be seen from Eq. 6.25, the electromechanical torque is a maximum when the 
power delivered to R2/s in Fig. 6.13a is a maximum. It can be shown that this power 
will be greatest when the impedance of R2/s equals the magnitude of the impedance 
Rl,eq -+- j (Xl,eq + X2) between it and the constant equivalent voltage (Zl,eq. Thus, 
maximum electromechanical torque will occur at a value of slip (SmaxT) for which 
R2 
= v/R21,eq + (Xl,eq + X2) 2 
(6.34) 
SmaxT 
The slip SmaxT at maximum torque is therefore 
R2 
(6.35) 
SmaxT -- V/Rzl,eq + (Xl,eq + X2)2 
and the corresponding torque is, from Eq. 6.33, 
[ 
1 
1 
0.5nph V 2 
Tmax = __ 
1,eq 
v/R 
+ (Xl,eq Jr- X2) 2 
COs 
Rl,eq -+" 
1,eq 
(6.36) 
where COs is the synchronous mechanical angular velocity as given by Eq. 6.26. 
For the motor of Example 6.2, determine (a) the load component 12 of the stator current, the 
electromechanical torque Tmech, and the electromechanical power Pmech for a slip s = 0.03; (b) the 
maximum electromechanical torque and the corresponding speed; and (c) the electromechanical 
starting torque Tstar t and the corresponding stator load current 12,start. 
II Solution 
First reduce the circuit to its Thevenin-equivalent form. From Eq. 6.29, Vl,eq 
-- 122.3 V and 
from Eq. 6.31, Rl,~q + jXl,~q = 0.273 + j0.490 ~. 
a. At s = 0.03, R2/s -- 4.80. Then, from Fig. 6.13a, 
12 __ 
gl,eq 
__ 
__ 
122.3 
-- 
-- 23.9 A 
v/(Rl,eq + R2/s) 2 + (Xl,eq + X2) 2 
~/(5.07) z + (0.699) z 
EXAMPLE 
6.3 

326 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
From Eq. 6.25 
Tmec h = nphl~(R2/s) _-- 3 x 23.92 x 4.80 
Ws 
125.7 
= 65.4 N. m 
and from Eq. 6.21 
Pmech = nphl~(R2/s)(1 -- S) ----- 3 X 23.92 X 4.80 X 0.97 = 7980 W 
The curves of Fig. 6.15 were computed by repeating these calculations for a number 
of assumed values of s. 
b. At the maximum-torque point, from Eq. 6.35, 
R2 
SmaxT 
R 2 
V / 
l,eq Jr" (Xl,eq -~- X2) 2 
0.144 
= 
= 0.192 
x/0.2732 + 0.6992 
and thus the speed at Tma x is equal to (1 - 
SmaxT)n s -'- (1 - 0.192) x 1200 = 970 r/min 
From Eq. 6.36 
Tmax = 
m 
R2 
1,eq 
Ws 
Rl,eq -~- V / 
l,eq -Jr- (Xl,eq ~- X2) 2 
1 
0.5 x 3 x 122.32 
"] 
= 
J = 175N.m 
125.7 
0.273 + ~/0.2732 + 0.6992 
c. At starting, s --- 1. Therefore 
,start ~- 
Vl,eq 
From Eq. 6.25 
g/(Rl,eq -~- R2) 2 -~- (Xl,eq -~- X2) 2 
122.3 
= 
= 150A 
~/0.4172 -+- 0.6992 
Tstart __ nph 12R2 _-- 3 x 1502 x 0.144 __ 77.3 N. m 
Ws 
125.7 
)ractice 
Problem 
6.; 
The rotor of the induction motor of Example 6.3 is replaced by a rotor with twice the rotor 
resistance but which is otherwise identical to the original rotor. Repeat the calculations of 
Example 6.2. 
Solution 
a. 12 = 12.4 A, Tmech = 35.0 N. m, Pmech = 4270 W 
b. Tma x -~- 175 N. m at speed = 740 r/min 
c. At starting, Tstart = 128 N.m, 12,start = 136 A 

6.5 
Torque and Power by Use of Thevenin's Theorem 
327 
)ractice Problem 6., 
For the induction motor of Example 6.3, find (a) the rotor resistance required to produce peak 
electromechanical torque at zero speed (i.e., SmaxT = 1.0) and (b) the corresponding torque Tmax. 
Solution 
a. R2 "-0.751 f2 
b. Tmax= 175N.m 
Under the conditions of constant-frequency operation, a typical conventional 
induction motor with a squirrel-cage rotor is substantially a constant-speed motor 
having about 10 percent or less drop in speed from no load to full load. In the case of 
a wound-rotor induction motor, speed variation can be obtained by inserting external 
resistance in the rotor circuit; the influence of increased rotor resistance on the torque- 
speed characteristic is shown by the dashed curves in Fig. 6.16. For such a motor, 
significant speed variations can be achieved as the rotor resistance is varied. Similarly, 
the zero-speed torque variations seen in Fig. 6.16 illustrate how the starting torque of 
a wound-rotor induction motor can be varied by varying the rotor resistance. 
Notice from Eqs. 6.35 and 6.36 that the slip at maximum torque is directly 
proportional to rotor resistance R2 but the value of the maximum torque is independent 
of R2. When R2 is increased by inserting external resistance in the rotor of a wound- 
rotor motor, the maximum electromechanical torque is unaffected but the speed at 
which it occurs can be directly controlled. This result can also be seen by observing 
300 
250 
o 
.,o 
~ 2oo 
o 
+fi 150 
© 
.=. lOO 
~ 
5o 
Maximum or breakdown torque 
R2 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
1 O0 
Speed in percent of synchronous speed 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
Slip as a fraction of synchronous speed 
Figure 6.16 
Induction-motor torque-slip curves 
showing effect of changing rotor-circuit resistance. 

328 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
that the electromechanical torque expression of Eq. 6.33 is a function of the ratio 
R2/s. Thus, the torque is unchanged as long as the ratio R2/s remains constant. 
A three-phase, 230-V, 60-Hz, 12-kW, four-pole wound-rotor induction motor has the following 
parameters expressed in f2/phase. 
R1=0.095 
X1=0.680 
X2=0.672 
Xm=18.7 
Using MATLAB: plot the electromechanical mechanical torque Tmech as a function of 
rotor speed in r/min for rotor resistances of R2 = 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 ft. 
II Solution 
The desired plot is shown in Fig. 6.17. 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
%Here 
are the motor 
parameters 
V1 = 230/sqrt(3) 
; 
nph = 3 ; 
poles 
= 4 ; 
fe = 60 ; 
R1 = 0.095; 
Xl = 0. 680; 
X2 = 0.672; 
Xm = 18.7; 
%Calculate 
the synchronous 
speed 
omegas 
= 4*pi*fe/poles; 
ns = 120*fe/poles; 
%Calculate 
stator 
Thevenin 
equivalent 
Zleq 
: j*Xm*(ml+j*Xl)/(ml 
+ j*(Xl+Xm)) 
; 
Rleq 
= real(Zleq) 
; 
Xleq 
= imag(Zleq) 
; 
Vleq 
= abs(Vl*j*Xm/(Rl 
+ j*(XI+Xm))) 
; 
%Here 
is the loop over 
rotor 
resistance 
for m : 1:5 
if m == 1 
R2 = 0.i; 
elseif 
m==2 
R2 = 0.2; 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

6.5 Torque and Power by Use of Thevenin's Theorem 
329 
elseif m==3 
R2 = 0.5; 
elseif m==4 
R2 = 1.0; 
else 
R2 = 1.5; 
end 
%Here is the loop over slip 
for n : 1:200 
s(n) : n/200; 
%slip 
rpm(n) 
= ns*(l-s(n)); 
%rpm 
I2 : abs(Vleq/(Zleq 
+ j'X2 + R2/s(n))) ; 
%I2 
Tmech(n) = nph*I2^2*R2/(s(n)*omegas); 
%Electromechanical 
torque 
end 
%End of slip loop 
%Now plot 
plot (rpm, Tmech) 
if m ==i 
hold 
end 
end 
%End of resistance 
loop 
hold 
xlabel ( ' rpm' ) 
ylabel ('Tmech') 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
rpm 
Figure 6.17 Electromechanical torque vs. speed for the wound-rotor 
induction motor of Example 6.4 for various values of the rotor 
resistance R2. 

330 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
Calculate the electromechanical mechanical torque for the motor of Example 6.4 assuming a 
rotor resistance of 0.3 ~ and a motor speed of 1719 r/min. 
Solution 
36.8 N. m 
In applying the induction-motor equivalent circuit, the idealizations on which it 
is based should be kept in mind. This is particularly necessary when investigations 
are carried out over a wide speed range, such as is the case in investigations of motor 
starting. Saturation under the heavy inrush currents associated with starting conditions 
has a significant effect on the motor reactances. Moreover, the rotor currents are at 
slip frequency, which varies from stator frequency at zero speed to a low value at 
full-load speed. The current distribution in the rotor bars of squirrel-cage motors 
may vary significantly with frequency, giving rise to significant variations in rotor 
resistance. In fact, as discussed in Sections 6.7.2 and 6.7.3, motor designers can 
tailor the shape of the rotor bars in squirrel-cage motors to obtain various speed- 
torque characteristics. Errors from these causes can be kept to a minimum by using 
equivalent-circuit parameters corresponding as closely as possible to those of the 
proposed operating conditions. 1 
6.6 
PARAMETER DETERMINATION FROM 
NO-LOAD AND BLOCKED-ROTOR TESTS 
The equivalent-circuit parameters needed for computing the performance of a poly- 
phase induction motor under load can be obtained from the results of a no-load test, 
a blocked-rotor test, and measurements of the dc resistances of the stator windings. 
Stray-load losses, which must be taken into account when accurate values of efficiency 
are to be calculated, can also be measured by tests which do not require loading the 
motor. The stray-load-loss tests are not described here, however. 2 
6.6.1 
No.Load Test 
Like the open-circuit test on a transformer, the no-load test on an induction motor gives 
information with respect to exciting current and no-load losses. This test is ordinarily 
performed at rated frequency and with balanced polyphase voltages applied to the 
stator terminals. Readings are taken at rated voltage, after the motor has been running 
long enough for the bearings to be properly lubricated. We will assume that the no-load 
I See, for instance, R. E Horrell and W. E. Wood, "A Method of Determining Induction Motor 
Speed-Torque-Current Curves from Reduced Voltage Tests," Trans. AIEE, 73(3):670-674 (1954). 
2 For information concerning test methods, see IEEE Std. 112-1996, "Test Procedures for Polyphase 
Induction Motors and Generators," Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 345 East 47th 
Street, New York, New York, 10017. 

6,6 
Parameter Determination from No-Load and Blocked-Rotor Tests 
331 
test is made with the motor operating at its rated electrical frequency fr and that the 
following measurements are available from the no-load test: 
Vl,nl - The line-to-neutral voltage [V] 
II,nl -- The line current [V] 
Pnl -- The total polyphase electrical input power [W] 
In polyphase machines it is most common to measure line-to-line voltage, and thus 
the phase-to-neutral voltage must be then calculated (dividing by ~/3 in the case of a 
three-phase machine). 
At no load, the rotor current is only the very small value needed to produce 
sufficient torque to overcome the friction and windage losses associated with rotation. 
The no-load rotor IZR loss is, therefore, negligibly small. Unlike the continuous 
magnetic core in a transformer, the magnetizing path in an induction motor includes 
an air gap which significantly increases the required exciting current. Thus, in contrast 
to the case of a transformer, whose no-load primary 12 R loss is negligible, the no-load 
stator I 2 R loss of an induction motor may be appreciable because of this larger exciting 
current. 
Neglecting rotor I 2 R losses, the rotational loss Prot for normal running conditions 
can be found by subtracting the stator IZR losses from the no-load input power 
Prot -- Pnl - nph I2,n 1R 1 
(6.37) 
The total rotational loss at rated voltage and frequency under load usually is considered 
to be constant and equal to its no-load value. Note that the stator resistance R1 varies 
with stator-winding temperature. Hence, when applying Eq. 6.37, care should be 
taken to use the value corresponding to the temperature of the no-load test. 
Note that the derivations presented here ignore the core-loss and the associated 
core-loss resistance and assign all the no-load losses to friction and windage. Various 
tests can be performed to separate the friction and windage losses from the core losses. 
For example, if the motor is not energized, an external drive motor can be used to 
drive the rotor to the no-load speed and the rotational loss will be equal to the required 
drive-motor output power. 
Alternatively, if the motor is operated at no load and rated speed and if it is then 
suddenly disconnected from the supply, the decay in motor speed will be determined 
by the the rotational loss as 
doom 
Prot 
J ~  
= -Trot = 
(6.38) 
dt 
09 m 
Hence, if the rotor inertia J is known, the rotational loss at any speed (-Om can be de- 
termined from the resultant speed decay as 
doom 
Prot(O)m) -- --O)mJ~ 
(6.39) 
dt 
Thus, the rotational losses at rated speed can be determined by evaluating Eq. 6.39 
as the motor is first shut off when it is operating at rated speed. 

332 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
If the no-load rotational losses are determined in this fashion, the core loss can 
be determined as 
Pcore = Pnl- Prot- nphI?,nlR1 
(6.40) 
Here Pcore is the total no-load core loss corresponding to the voltage of the no-load 
test (typically rated voltage). 
Under no-load conditions, the stator current is relatively low and, to a first approx- 
imation, one can neglect the corresponding voltage drop across the stator resistance 
and leakage reactance. Under this approximation, the voltage across the core-loss re- 
sistance will be equal to the no-load line-to-neutral voltage and the core-loss resistance 
can be determined as 
gc = nph V12nl 
(6.41) 
Pcore 
Provided that the machine is operated close to rated speed and rated voltage, the 
refinement associated with separating out the core loss and specifically incorporating it 
in the form of a core-loss resistance in the equivalent circuit will not make a significant 
difference in the results of an analysis. Hence, it is common to ignore the core-loss 
resistance and to simply include the core losses with the rotational losses. For the 
purposes of analytical simplicity, this approach will be followed in the remainder of 
the text. However, if necessary, the reader should find it relatively straight forward to 
modify the remaining derivations to appropriately include the core-loss resistance. 
Because the slip at no load, Snl, is very small, the reflected rotor resistance R2/Snl is 
very large. The parallel combination of rotor and magnetizing branches then becomes 
j Xm shunted by the rotor leakage reactance X2 in series with a very high resistance, 
and the reactance of this parallel combination therefore very nearly equals Xm. Con- 
sequently the apparent reactance Xnl measured at the stator terminals at no load very 
nearly equals X~ + Xm, which is the self-reactance X1~ of the stator; i.e., 
Xnl = Xll = XI -~- Xm 
(6.42) 
The self-reactance of the stator can therefore be determined from the no-load 
measurements. The reactive power at no load Qnl can be determined as 
Qnl = v/S21- p2 
(6.43) 
where 
Snl -- nph Vl,nlll,nl 
(6.44) 
is the total apparent power input at no load. 
The no-load reactance Xnl can then be calculated from Onl and ll,nl as 
anl 
Xnl -- 
12 
(6.45) 
nph l,nl 
Usually the no-load power factor is small (i.e., anl >> enl) SO that the no-load 

6.6 
Parameter Determination from No-Load and Blocked-Rotor Tests 
333 
reactance very nearly equals the no-load impedance. 
Vl,nl 
Xnl ~ 
(6.46) 
II,nl 
6.6.2 
Blocked.Rotor Test 
Like the short-circuit test on a transformer, the blocked-rotor test on an induction motor 
gives information with respect to the leakage impedances. The rotor is blocked so that 
it cannot rotate (hence the slip is equal to unity), and balanced polyphase voltages are 
applied to the stator terminals. We will assume that the following measurements are 
available from the blocked-rotor test: 
Vl,bl = The line-to-neutral voltage [V] 
II,bl -- The line current [V] 
Pbl -- The total polyphase electrical input power [W] 
fbl = The frequency of the blocked-rotor test [Hz] 
In some cases, the blocked-rotor torque also is measured. 
The equivalent circuit for blocked-rotor conditions is identical to that of a short- 
circuited transformer. An induction motor is more complicated than a transformer, 
however, because its leakage impedance may be affected by magnetic saturation of 
the leakage-flux paths and by rotor frequency. The blocked-rotor impedance may also 
be affected by rotor position, although this effect generally is small with squirrel-cage 
rotors. 
The guiding principle is that the blocked-rotor test should be performed under 
conditions for which the current and rotor frequency are approximately the same as 
those in the machine at the operating condition for which the performance is later to 
be calculated. For example, if one is interested in the characteristics at slips near unity, 
as in starting, the blocked-rotor test should be taken at normal frequency and with 
currents near the values encountered in starting. If, however, one is interested in normal 
running characteristics, the blocked-rotor test should be taken at a reduced voltage 
which results in approximately rated current; the frequency also should be reduced, 
since the values of rotor effective resistance and leakage inductance at the low rotor 
frequencies corresponding to small slips may differ appreciably from their values at 
normal frequency, particularly with double-cage or deep-bar rotors, as discussed in 
Section 6.7.2. 
IEEE Standard 112 suggests a blocked-rotor test frequency of 25 percent of 
rated frequency. The total leakage reactance at normal frequency can be obtained 
from this test value by considering the reactance to be proportional to frequency. The 
effects of frequency often are negligible for normal motors of less than 25-hp rating, 
and the blocked impedance can then be measured directly at normal frequency. The 
importance of maintaining test currents near their rated value stems from the fact that 
these leakage reactances are significantly affected by saturation. 
Based upon blocked-rotor measurements, the blocked-rotor reactance can be 
found from the blocked-rotor reactive power 
Qbl = ~/S~I- p2 
(6.47) 

334 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
where 
Sbl "-- nph Vl,blll,bl 
(6.48) 
is the total blocked-rotor apparent power. The blocked-rotor reactance, corrected to 
rated frequency, can then be calculated as 
Xbl ~ 
Tbl 
nph 1,bl 
12 
(6.49) 
The blocked-rotor resistance can be calculated from the blocked-rotor input 
power as 
Pbl 
Rbl = 
12 
(6.50) 
np h 1,bl 
Once these parameters have been determined, the equivalent circuit parameters 
can be determined. Under blocked-rotor conditions, an expression for the stator input 
impedance can be obtained from examination of Fig. 6.11 a (with s = 1) as 
Zbl -- gl + jX1 + (R2 + jX2) in parallel with jXm 
( 
) 
-" R1 + R2 
R2 + (X m + 22)2 
( 
Xm(RE + Xz(Xm + X2)) ) 
Here we have assumed that the reactances are at their rated-frequency values. Making 
appropriate approximations (e.g., assuming R2 << Xm), Eq. 6.51 can be reduced to 
Zbl = gl + RE 
22 + Xm 
+ j 
X1 + X2 
Xe + Xm 
(6.52) 
Thus the apparent resistance under blocked-rotor conditions is given by 
Rbl = RI + R2 
X2 + Xm 
(6.53) 
and the apparent rated-frequency blocked-rotor reactance by 
Xbl = X 1 -~- X 2 
X2 -+- Xm 
(6.54) 
From Eqs. 6.54 and 6.53, the rotor leakage reactance X2 and resistance R2 can 
be found as 
( 
Xm 
) 
(6.55) 
X2 = (Xbl- X l) 
Xm -~- X l - Xbl 
and 
N2 ~ (gbl-- gl) (X2"~-Xm) 2 
Xm 
(6.56) 

6,6 
Parameter Determination from No-Load and Blocked-Rotor Tests 
335 
Table 6.1 
Empirical distribution of leakage reactances in induction motors. 
Iltlll! 
~
.
 
. 
Fraction of 
X 1 q- X 2 
Motor class 
Description 
X~ 
X2 
A 
B 
C 
D 
Wound rotor 
Normal starting torque, normal starting current 
0.5 
015 
Normal starting torque, low starting current 
0.4 
0.6 
High starting torque, low starting current 
0.3 
0.7 
High starting torque, high slip 
0.5 
0.5 
Performance varies with rotor resistance 
0.5 
0.5 
Source: IEEE Standard 112. 
In order to achieve maximum accuracy as with the no-load test, if possible the value 
of the stator resistance R1 used in Eq. 6.56 should be corrected to the value corre- 
sponding to the temperature of the blocked-rotor test. 
Substituting for Xm from Eq. 6.42 into Eq. 6.55 gives 
(Xnl- X1) 
(6.57) 
X2 -- (Xbl- 
X1) 
Xn 1 - Xbl 
Equation 6.57 expresses the rotor leakage reactance X2 in terms of the measured 
quantities Xnl and Xbl and the unknown stator leakage reactance X1. It is not possible to 
make an additional measurement from which X1 and X2 can be determined uniquely. 
Fortunately, the performance of the motor is affected relatively little by the way in 
which the total leakage reactance is distributed between the stator and rotor. IEEE 
Standard 112 recommends the empirical distribution shown in Table 6.1. If the motor 
class is unknown, it is common to assume that X1 and X2 are equal. 
Once the fractional relationship between X1 and X2 has been determined, it can 
be substituted into Eq. 6.57 and X2 (and hence XI) can be found in terms of Xnl and 
Xbl by solving the resultant quadratic equation. 
The magnetizing reactance Xm can then be determined from Eq. 6.42. 
Xm --- Xnl- 
X1 
(6.58) 
Finally, using the known stator resistance and the values of Xm and X2 which are now 
known, the rotor resistance R2 can now be determined from Eq. 6.56. 
The following test data apply to a 7.5-hp, three-phase, 220-V, 19-A, 60-Hz, four-pole induction 
motor with a double-squirrel-cage rotor of design class C (high-starting-torque, low-starting- 
current type): 
Test 1: No-load test at 60 Hz 
Applied voltage V = 219 V line-to-line 
Average phase current Ii,nl = 5.70 A 
Power Pnl =380 W 
EXAMPLE 
6.5 

336 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
Test 2: Blocked-rotor test at 15 Hz 
Applied voltage V = 26.5 V line-to-line 
Average phase current ll,bl = 18.57 A 
Power Phi = 675 W 
Test 3: Average dc resistance per stator phase (measured immediately after test 2) 
R1 -" 0.262 f2 
Test 4: Blocked-rotor test at 60 Hz 
Applied voltage V = 212 V line-to-line 
Average phase current l~,bl = 83.3 A 
Power Phi = 20.1 kW 
Measured starting torque Tst~ = 74.2 N. m 
a. Compute the no-load rotational loss and the equivalent-circuit parameters applying to the 
normal running conditions. Assume the same temperature as in test 3. Neglect any effects 
of core loss, assuming that core loss can be lumped in with the rotational losses. 
b. Compute the electromechanical starting torque from the input measurements of test 4. 
Assume the same temperature as in test 3. 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 6.37, the rotational losses can be calculated as 
12 Rl=380-3x5.702x0.262=354w 
Prot = Pal - nph l,nl 
The line-to-neutral no-load voltage is equal to V~.n~ = 219/~/~ = 126.4 V and thus, 
from Eqs. 6.43 and 6.44, 
Qn,-" 4(nphVl,nlll,n,) 2- p2 = 4(3 x 126.4 x 5.7) 2- 3802 -- 2128 W 
and thus from Eq. 6.45 
anl 
2128 
Xnl = 
= 
= 21.8 f2 
nphllZnl 
3 x 5.72 
We can assume that the blocked-rotor test at a reduced frequency of 15 Hz and rated 
current reproduces approximately normal running conditions in the rotor. Thus, from 
test 2 and Eqs. 6.47 and 6.48 with Vl,u = 26.5/x/~ = 15.3 V 
Qbl : 4(nphVl,bll,,bl) 2- P~ = V/(3 x 15.3 x 18.57) 2 -6752= 520VA 
and thus from Eq. 6.49 
(fr) (abl) 
(60) ( 
520 
) =2.01~ 
Xu= 
~ 
nphl~, u 
= 
~ 
3X18.572 
Since we are told that this is a Class C motor, we can refer to Table 6.1 and assume 
that X~ = 0.3(X~ 4- Xz) or X~ = kXz, where k = 0.429. Substituting into Eq. 6.57 results 

6,6 
Parameter Determination from No-Load and Blocked-Rotor Tests 
331 
in a quadratic in X 2 
2 
2 
k X 2 -~- (Xbl(1 -- k) - 
Xnl(1 + k))X2 + XnlXbl = 0 
or 
(0.429)2X2 + (2.01(1 -0.429) - 22.0(1 + 0.429))X2 + 22.0(2.01) 
-- 0.184X 2 - 30.29X2 + 44.22 -- 0 
Solving gives two roots: 1.48 and 163.1. Clearly, X2 must be less than X,I and hence 
it is easy to identify the proper solution as 
X 2 = 1.48 f2 
and thus 
From Eq. 6.58, 
X 1 ~- 0.633 f2 
Xm .m Xn 1 __ X1 = 21.2 f2 
Rbl can be found from Eq. 6.50 as 
Pbl 
675 
Rbl "-- 
---~ 
---- 0.652 ~2 
nph/~,bl 
3 × 18.572 
and thus from Eq. 6.56 
R2=(Rbl-R1)(X2"]-Xm) 
2Xm 
= (0.652 - 0.262) 
21.2 
= 0.447 ~2 
The parameters of the equivalent circuit for small values of slip have now been 
calculated. 
b. Although we could calculate the electromechanical starting torque from the equivalent- 
circuit parameters derived in part (a), we recognize that this is a double-squirrel-cage 
motor and hence these parameters (most specifically the rotor parameters) will differ 
significantly under starting conditions from their low-slip values calculated in part (a). 
Hence, we will calculate the electromechanical starting torque from the rated-frequency, 
blocked-rotor test measurements of test 4. 
From the power input and stator I2R losses, the air-gap power Pgap is 
Pgap = 
Pbl -- nphI21,blR1 
--- 20,100 - 3 × 83.32 × 0.262 = 14,650 W 
Since this is a four-pole machine, the synchronous speed can be found from Eq. 6.26 as 
COs = 188.5 rad/sec. Thus, from Eq. 6.25 with s = 1 
egap 
14,650 
Tstar t -- 
-- 
= 77.7 N. m 
COs 
188.5 

338 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
The test value, Tstar t -- 74.2 N. m is a few percent less than the calculated value because 
the calculations do not account for the power absorbed in the stator core loss or in 
stray-load losses. 
=ractice Problem 6.~ 
Repeat the equivalent-circuit parameter calculations of Example 6.5 under the assumption that 
the rotor and stator leakage reactances are equal (i.e., that X~ = X2). 
Solution 
Rj = 0.262 ~ 
R2 = 0.430 f2 
X1 = 1.03 f2 
X m = 20.8 f2 
X 2 = 1.03 
Calculation of the blocked-rotor reactance can be simplified if one assumes that 
Xm >> X2. Under this assumption, Eq. 6.54 reduces to 
Xbl = X1 + X2 
(6.59) 
X1 and X 2 can then be found from Eq. 6.59 and an estimation of the fractional 
relationship between X l and X2 (such as from Table 6.1). 
Note that one might be tempted to approximate Eq. 6.56, the expression for 
R2, in the same fashion. However, because the ratio (X2 + Xm)/Xm is squared, the 
approximation tends to result in unacceptably large errors and cannot be justified. 
EXAMPLE 6.6 
(a) Determine the parameters of the motor of Example 6.5 solving for the leakage reactances 
using Eq. 6.59. (b) Assuming the motor to be operating from a 220-V, 60-Hz source at a speed 
of 1746 r/min, use MATLAB to calculate the output power for the two sets of parameters. 
II Solution 
a. As found in Example 6.5, 
Xnl = 21.8 f2 
Xbl = 2.01 
Ri = 0.262 f2 
Rbl = 0.652 
Thus, from Eq. 6.42, 
XI + Xm = X.I = 21.8 
and from Eq. 6.59 
X I --~ X 2 -- Xbl = 2.01 g2 
From Table 6.1, X! = 0.3(X~ + X2) 
"-- 0.603 f2 and thus X 2 -- 1.41 f2 and 
Xm = 21.2 ~2. 

6,6 
Parameter Determination from No-Load and Blocked-Rotor Tests 
339 
Finally, from Eq. 6.56, 
Rz:(RbI-R1)<Xz'k-Xm) 
2:0"444~Xm 
Comparison with Example 6.5 shows the following 
Parameter 
Example 6.5 
Example 6.6 
Rl 
0.262 [2 
0.262 f2 
R2 
0.447 [2 
0.444 f2 
Xl 
0.633 f2 
0.603 [2 
Xz 
1.47 [2 
1.41 [2 
Xm 
21.2 [2 
21.2 g2 
b. For the parameters of Example 6.6, Pshaft : 2467 [W] while for the parameters of part (a) 
of this example, Pshaft -- 2497 [W]. Thus the approximation associated with Eq. 6.59 
results in an error on the order of 1 percent from using the more exact expression of 
Eq. 6.54. This is a typical result and hence this approximation appears to be justifiable in 
most cases. 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% 
% 
% 
ml (i) 
R2 (i) 
Xl (i) 
X2 (i) 
Xm(1) 
Here are the two sets of parameters 
Set 1 corresponds 
to the exact solution 
Set 2 corresponds 
to the approximate 
solution 
= 0.262; 
= 0.447; 
= 0.633; 
= 1.47; 
= 21.2; 
RI(2) 
= 0.262; 
R2(2) 
: 0.444; 
Xl(2) 
= 0.603; 
X2(2) 
: 1.41; 
Xm(2) 
= 21.2; 
nph : 3; 
poles 
: 4; 
Prot : 354; 
%Here is the operating 
condition 
Vl = 220/sqrt(3); 
fe = 60; 
rpm = 1746; 
%Calculate 
the synchronous 
speed 
ns = 120*fe/poles; 
omegas 
= 4*pi*fe/poles; 
slip = (ns-rpm)/ns; 
omegam 
= omegas*(l-slip); 

340 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
%Calculate 
stator 
Thevenin 
equivalent 
%Loop over the two motors 
for m = 1:2 
Zgap = j*Xm(m)*(j*X2(m)+m2(m)/slip)/(m2(m)/slip+j*(Xm(m)+X2(m))); 
Zin : Rl(m) 
+ j*Xl(m) 
+ Zgap; 
Ii = Vl/Zin; 
I2 : Ii*(j*Xm(m))/(R2(m)/slip+j*(Xm(m)+X2(m))); 
Tmech = nph*abs(I2)^2*R2(m)/(slip*omegas); 
%Electromechanical 
torque 
Pmech = omegam*Tmech; 
%Electromechanical 
power 
Pshaft 
= Pmech 
- Prot; 
if (m == i) 
fprintf('\nExact 
solution:') 
else 
fprintf('\nApproximate 
solution:') 
end 
fprintf('\n 
Pmech= %.if 
[W], Pshaft = %.if 
[W]',Pmech, Pshaft) 
fprintf('\n 
Ii = %.if 
[i]\n',abs(Ii)); 
end % end of "for m : 1:2" loop 
6.7 
EFFECTS OF ROTOR RESISTANCE; 
WOUND AND DOUBLE- 
SQUIRREL-CAGE ROTORS 
A basic limitation of induction motors with constant rotor resistance is that the rotor 
design has to be a compromise. High efficiency under normal running conditions 
requires a low rotor resistance; but a low rotor resistance results in a low starting 
torque and high starting current at a low starting power factor. 
6.7.1 
Wound-Rotor Motors 
The use of a wound rotoris one effective way of avoiding the need for compromise. The 
terminals of the rotor winding are connected to slip rings in contact with brushes. For 
starting, resistors may be connected in series with the rotor windings, the result being 
increased starting torque and reduced starting current at an improved power factor. 
The general nature of the effects on the torque-speed characteristics caused by 
varying rotor resistance is shown in Fig. 6.16. By use of the appropriate value of rotor 
resistance, the maximum torque can be made to occur at standstill if high starting 
torque is needed. As the rotor speeds up, the external resistances can be decreased, 
making maximum torque available throughout the accelerating range. Since most of 
the rotor I2R loss is dissipated in the external resistors, the rotor temperature rise 
during starting is lower than it would be if the resistance were incorporated in the 
rotor winding. For normal running, the rotor winding can be short-circuited directly 

6.7 
Effects of Rotor Resistance; Wound and Double-Squirrel-Cage Rotors 
341 
at the brushes. The rotor winding is designed to have low resistance so that running 
efficiency is high and full-load slip is low. Besides their use when starting requirements 
are severe, wound-rotor induction motors can be used for adjustable-speed drives. 
Their chief disadvantage is greater cost and complexity than squirrel-cage motors. 
The principal effects of varying rotor resistance on the starting and running 
characteristics of induction motors can be shown quantitatively by the following 
example. 
A three-phase, 460-V, 60-Hz, four-pole, 500-hp wound-rotor induction motor, with its slip 
tings short-circuited, has the following properties: 
Full-load slip = 1.5 percent 
Rotor IZR at full-load torque = 5.69 kW 
Slip at maximum torque = 6 percent 
Rotor current at maximum torque = 2.8212,fl, where I2,el is the full-load rotor current 
Torque at 20 percent slip = 1.20Tfl, where Tel is the full-load torque 
Rotor current at 20 percent slip -- 3.95 I2,fl 
If the rotor-circuit resistance is increased to 5 Rrotor by connecting noninductive resistances 
in series with each rotor slip ring, determine (a) the slip at which the motor will develop the same 
full-load torque, (b) total rotor-circuit IZR loss at full-load torque, (c) horsepower output at 
full-load torque, (d) slip at maximum torque, (e) rotor current at maximum torque, (f) starting 
torque, and (g) rotor current at starting. Express the torques and rotor currents in per unit based 
on the full-load torque values. 
II Solution 
The solution involves recognition of the fact that the effects of changes in the rotor resistance 
are seen from the stator in terms of changes in the referred resistance R2/s. Examination 
of the equivalent circuit shows that, for specified applied voltage and frequency, everything 
concerning the stator performance is fixed by the value of R2/s, the other impedance elements 
being constant. For example, if R2 is doubled and s is simultaneously doubled, there will be 
no indication from the stator that anything has changed. The stator current and power factor, 
the power delivered to the air gap, and the torque will be unchanged as long as the ratio Rz/S 
remains constant. 
Added physical significance can be given to the argument by examining the effects of 
simultaneously doubling R2 and s from the viewpoint of the rotor. An observer on the rotor 
would see the resultant air-gap flux wave traveling past at twice the original slip speed, gener- 
ating twice the original rotor voltage at twice the original slip frequency. The rotor reactance 
therefore is doubled, and since the original premise is that the rotor resistance also is doubled, 
the rotor impedance is doubled while the rotor power factor is unchanged. Since rotor voltage 
and impedance are both doubled, the effective value of the rotor current remains the same; 
only its frequency is changed. The air gap still has the same synchronously rotating flux and 
mmf waves with the same torque angle. An observer on the rotor would then agree with a 
counterpart on the stator that the torque is unchanged. 
An observer on the rotor, however, would be aware of two changes not apparent in the 
stator: (1) the rotor I 2 R loss will doubled, and (2) the rotor is turning more slowly and therefore 
EXAMPLE 6.7 

342 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
developing less mechanical power with the same torque. In other words, more of the power ab- 
sorbed from the stator goes into 12 R heat in the rotor, and less is available for mechanical power. 
The preceding thought processes can be readily applied to the solution of this example. 
a. If the rotor resistance is increased five times, the slip must increase five times for the same 
value of Rz/s and therefore for the same torque. But the original slip at full load is 0.015. 
The new slip at full-load torque therefore is 5(0.015) = 0.075. 
b. The effective value of the rotor current is the same as its full-load value before addition 
of the series resistance, and therefore the rotor Rz/s loss is five times the full-load value 
of 5.69 kW, or 
Rotor 12R = 5 × 5.69 = 28.4 kW 
c. The increased slip has caused the per-unit speed at full-load torque to drop from 1 - s = 
0.985 down to 1 - s = 0.925. Since the ratio R2/s is unchanged, the torque is the same 
and hence the power output has dropped proportionally, or 
0.925 
Pmech = 
(500) = 470 hp 
0.985 
Because the air-gap power is unchanged, the decrease in electromechanical mechanical 
shaft power must be accompanied by a corresponding increase in rotor I ZR loss. 
d. If rotor resistance is increased five times, the slip at maximum torque simply increases 
five times. But the original slip at maximum torque is 0.060. The new slip at maximum 
torque with the added rotor resistance therefore is 
SmaxT 
-- 5(0.060) = 0.30 
e. The effective value of the rotor current at maximum torque is independent of rotor 
resistance; only its frequency is changed when rotor resistance is varied. Therefore, 
12 .... T = 2.8212,fl 
f. With the rotor resistance increased five times, the starting torque will be the same as the 
original running torque at a slip of 0.20 and therefore equals the running torque without 
the series resistors, namely, 
Tstart 
= 
1.20Tel 
g. The rotor current at starting with the added rotor resistances will be the same as the rotor 
current when running at a slip of 0.20 with the slip rings short-circuited, namely, 
I2,~t,, = 3.9512,fl 
Practice Problem 6.; 
Consider the motor of Example 6.7. An external resistor is added to the rotor circuits such that 
the full-load torque is developed at a speed of 1719 r/min. Calculate (a) the added resistance 
in terms of the inherent rotor resistance Rrotor, (b) the rotor power dissipation at full load, and 
(c) the corresponding electromechanical power. 

6.7 
Effects of Rotor Resistance; Wound and Double-Squirrel-Cage Rotors 
343 
Solution 
a. Added resistance -- 
2Rrotor 
b. Rotor 12 R = 17.1 kW 
c. Pmech = 485 hp 
6.7.2 
Deep.Bar and Double-Squirrel-Cage Rotors 
An ingenious and simple way of obtaining a rotor resistance which will automatically 
vary with speed makes use of the fact that at standstill the rotor frequency equals the 
stator frequency; as the motor accelerates, the rotor frequency decreases to a very 
low value, perhaps 2 or 3 Hz at full load in a 60-Hz motor. With suitable shapes and 
arrangements for rotor bars, squirrel-cage rotors can be designed so that their effective 
resistance at 60 Hz is several times their resistance at 2 or 3 Hz. The various schemes 
all make use of the inductive effect of the slot-leakage flux on the current distribution 
in the rotor bars. This phenomenon is similar to the skin and proximity effect in any 
system of conductors carrying alternating current. 
Consider first a squirrel-cage rotor having deep, narrow bars like that shown in 
cross section in Fig. 6.18. The general character of the slot-leakage field produced 
by the current in the bar within this slot is shown in the figure. If the rotor iron had 
infinite permeability, all the leakage-flux lines would close in paths below the slot, as 
shown. Now imagine the bar to consist of an infinite number of layers of differential 
depth; one at the bottom and one at the top are indicated crosshatched in Fig. 6.18. The 
leakage inductance of the bottom layer is greater than that of the top layer because 
the bottom layer is linked by more leakage flux. Because all the layers are electrically 
in parallel, under ac conditions, the current in the low-reactance upper layers will be 
greater than that in the high-reactance lower layers. As a result, the current will be 
forced toward the top of the slot, and the phase of current in the upper layers will lead 
that of the current in the lower ones. 
This nonuniform current distribution results in an increase in the effective bar 
resistance and a smaller decrease in the effective leakage inductance of the bar. Since 
the distortion in current distribution depends on an inductive effect, the effective 
resistance is a function of the frequency. It is also a function of the depth of the 
bar and of the permeability and resistivity of the bar material. Figure 6.19 shows a 
/--f~xl / Rotor 
!I/l 
4 ~.ll 
!ul 
lql 
!ii ,l'-'k I_il 
!'/I 
l'l !il 
!, i I 
I i !i' 
!,i I 
I i!il 
!ill ~ 
i!iJ 
tif~ ~_a ;/;I 
Figure 
6.18 
Deep rotor bar and slot-leakage flux. 

344 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
4 
3 
;> "~ 
0 0 
20 
I 
t 
t 
J 
I 
l ...... 
[ 
! 
i 
40 
60 
J 
/
I
 
/ 
80 
100 120 
Frequency, Hz 
Figure 6.19 
Skin effect in a copper 
rotor bar 2.5 cm deep. 
curve of the ratio of effective ac resistance to dc resistance as a function of frequency 
computed for a copper bar 2.5 cm deep. A squirrel-cage rotor with deep bars can be 
readily designed to have an effective resistance at stator frequency (corresponding to 
rotor standstill conditions) several times greater than its dc resistance. As the motor 
accelerates, the rotor frequency decreases and therefore the effective rotor resistance 
decreases, approaching its dc value at small slips. 
An alternative way of attaining similar results is the double-cage arrangement 
shown in Fig. 6.20. In this case, the squirrel-cage winding consists of two layers of 
bars short-circuited by end tings. The upper bars are of smaller cross-sectional area 
than the lower bars and consequently have higher resistance. The general nature of the 
slot-leakage field is shown in Fig. 6.20, from which it can be seen that the inductance 
of the lower bars is greater than that of the upper ones because of the flux crossing the 
slot between the two layers. The difference in inductance can be made quite large by 
properly proportioning the constriction in the slot between the two bars. At standstill, 
when rotor frequency equals stator frequency, there is relatively little current in the 
lower bars because of their high reactance; the effective resistance of the rotor at 
standstill is then approximately equal to that of the high-resistance upper layer. At the 
low rotor frequencies corresponding to small slips, however, reactance effects become 
negligible, and the rotor resistance then approaches that of the two layers in parallel. 
Note that since the effective resistance and leakage inductance of double-cage 
and deep-bar rotors vary with frequency, the parameters R2 and X2, representing the 
Topba  
i! V/A ol 
i: ~ 
ill 
i: iV/A~ u! 
I 
• ..I 
II 
,,. 
 
o.om 
',~" 
~ -~I, 
Figure 6.20 
Double-squirrel-cage rotor bars and slot-leakage flux. 

6.7 Effects of Rotor Resistance; Wound and Double-Squirrel-Cage Rotors 
345 
referred effects of rotor resistance and leakage inductance as viewed from the stator, 
vary with rotor speed and are not constant. Strictly speaking, a more complicated form 
of equivalent circuit, with multiple parallel branches, is required in order to represent 
these cases. 
Under steady-state conditions, the simple equivalent circuit derived in Section 6.3 
can still be used to represent induction machines in these cases. However R2 and X2 
must be varied with slip. All the basic relations still apply to the motor if the values of 
R2 and X2 are properly adjusted with changes in slip. For example, in computing the 
starting performance, R2 and X2 should be taken as their effective values at stator fre- 
quency, while in computing the running performance at small slips, R2 should be taken 
as its effective value at a low frequency, and X2 should be taken as the stator-frequency 
value of the reactance corresponding to a low-frequency effective value of the rotor 
leakage inductance. Over the normal running range of slips, the rotor resistance and 
leakage inductance usually can be considered constant at substantially their dc values. 
6.7.3 
Motor.Application Considerations 
By use of double-cage and deep-bar rotors, squirrel-cage motors can be designed to 
have the good starting characteristics resulting from high rotor resistance and, at the 
same time, the good running characteristics resulting from low rotor resistance. The 
design is necessarily somewhat of a compromise, however, and such motors lack 
the flexibility of a wound-rotor machine with external rotor resistance. As a result, 
wound-rotor motors were commonly preferred when starting requirements were se- 
vere. However, as discussed in Section 11.3, when combined with power-electronics, 
squirrel-cage motors can achieve all the flexibility of wound-rotor motors, and hence 
wound-rotor motors are becoming increasingly less common even in these cases. 
To meet the usual needs of industry, integral-horsepower, three-phase, squirrel- 
cage motors are available from manufacturers' stock in a range of standard ratings up 
to 200 hp at various standard frequencies, voltages, and speeds. (Larger motors are 
generally regarded as special-purpose rather than general-purpose motors.) Several 
standard designs are available to meet various starting and running requirements. 
Representative torque-speed characteristics of the four most common designs are 
shown in Fig. 6.21. These curves are fairly typical of 1800 r/min (synchronous- 
speed) motors in ratings from 7.5 to 200 hp although it should be understood that 
individual motors may differ appreciably from these average curves. 
Briefly, the characteristic features of these designs are as follows. 
Design Class A: Normal Starting Torque, Normal Starting Current, Low Slip 
This design usually has a low-resistance, single-cage rotor. It emphasizes good run- 
ning performance at the expense of starting. The full-load slip is low and the full-load 
efficiency is high. The maximum torque usually is well over 200 percent of full-load 
torque and occurs at a small slip (less than 20 percent). The starting torque at full 
voltage varies from about 200 percent of full-load torque in small motors to about 
100 percent in large motors. The high starting current (500 to 800 percent of full-load 
current when started at rated voltage) is the principal disadvantage of this design. 
In sizes below about 7.5 hp these starting currents usually are within the limits on 
inrush current which the distribution system supplying the motor can withstand, and 

346 
CHAPTER 
6 
Polyphase 
Induction 
Machines 
350 
i 
i 
300 ,-.-~ ............... L ............. :..~...~:_. 
................................ i ........................ 
250 
,,., 
F 
i 
X, 
200 
- 
----F--- 
' 
-! 
.. 
, 
: 
Sa 
........ 
i 
150 .................. f ............................. i ................................... i ....................... -,--Jt 
lOO .......................................... 
i ........................................ 
i ......................................... 
f ........................................ 
i ........... x ....... ' 
50 ........... 
i__ClassA 
_ , ~ i  i! 
C;:2: Ill c 
0 I--- Class B 
----- Class[D 
'~ 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Percent of synchronous speed 
Figure 6.21 
Typical torque-speed curves for 
1800-r/min general-purpose induction motors. 
across-the-line starting at full voltage then can be used. Otherwise, reduced-voltage 
starting must be used. Reduced-voltage starting results in a decrease in starting torque 
because the starting torque is proportional to the square of the voltage applied to 
the motor terminals. The reduced voltage for starting is usually obtained from an 
autotransformer, called a starting compensator, which may be manually operated or 
automatically operated by relays which cause full voltage to be applied after the motor 
is up to speed. A circuit diagram of one type of compensator is shown in Fig. 6.22. If 
a smoother start is necessary, series resistance or reactance in the stator may be used. 
The class A motor is the basic standard design in sizes below about 7.5 and above 
about 200 hp. It is also used in intermediate ratings where design considerations may 
make it difficult to meet the starting-current limitations of the class-B design. Its field 
of application is about the same as that of the class-B design described next. 
Design Class B: Normal Starting Torque, Low Starting Current, Low Slip 
This 
design has approximately the same starting torque as the class-A design with but 
75 percent of the starting current. Full-voltage starting, therefore, may be used with 
larger sizes than with class A. The starting current is reduced by designing for rel- 
atively high leakage reactance, and the starting torque is maintained by use of a 
double-cage or deep-bar rotor. The full-load slip and efficiency are good, about the 
same as for the class A design. However, the use of high reactance slightly decreases 

6.8 
Summary 
347 
Line terminals 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
I 
-il 
Motor terminals 
Starting sequence: 
(a) Close 1 and 3 
(b) Open 1 and 3 
(c) Close 2 
Figure 6.22 Connections of a one-step starting 
autotransformer. 
the power factor and decidedly lowers the maximum torque (usually only slightly 
over 200 percent of full-load torque being obtainable). 
This design is the most common in the 7.5 to 200-hp range of sizes. It is used for 
substantially constant-speed drives where starting-torque requirements are not severe, 
such as in driving fans, blowers, pumps, and machine tools. 
Design Class C: High Starting Torque, Low Starting Current 
This design uses 
a double-cage rotor with higher rotor resistance than the class-B design. The result is 
higher starting torque with low starting current but somewhat lower running efficiency 
and higher slip than the class-A and class-B designs. Typical applications are in driving 
compressors and conveyers. 
Design Class D: High Starting Torque, High Slip 
This design usually has a single- 
cage, high-resistance rotor (frequently brass bars). It produces very high starting 
torque at low starting current, high maximum torque at 50 to 100 percent slip, but runs 
at a high slip at full load (7 to 11 percent) and consequently has low running efficiency. 
Its principal uses are for driving intermittent loads involving high accelerating duty 
and for driving high-impact loads such as punch presses and shears. When driving 
high-impact loads, the motor is generally aided by a flywheel which helps supply 
the impact and reduces the pulsations in power drawn from the supply system. A 
motor whose speed falls appreciably with an increase in torque is required so that the 
flywheel can slow down and deliver some of its kinetic energy to the impact. 
6.8 
SUMMARY 
In a polyphase induction motor, slip-frequency currents are induced in the rotor 
windings as the rotor slips past the synchronously-rotating stator flux wave. These 
rotor currents, in turn, produce a flux wave which rotates in synchronism with the stator 
flux wave; torque is produced by the interaction of these two flux waves. For increased 

348 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
load on the motor, the rotor speed decreases, resulting in larger slip, increased induced 
rotor currents, and greater torque. 
Examination of the flux-mmf interactions in a polyphase induction motor shows 
that, electrically, the machine is a form of transformer. The synchronously-rotating 
air-gap flux wave in the induction machine is the counterpart of the mutual core 
flux in the transformer. The rotating field induces emf's of stator frequency in the 
stator windings and of slip frequency in the rotor windings (for all rotor speeds other 
than synchronous speed). Thus, the induction machine transforms voltages and at 
the same time changes frequency. When viewed from the stator, all rotor electrical 
and magnetic phenomena are transformed to stator frequency. The rotor mmf reacts 
on the stator windings in the same manner as the mmf of the secondary current in a 
transformer reacts on the primary. Pursuit of this line of reasoning leads to a single- 
phase equivalent circuit for polyphase induction machines which closely resemble 
that of a transformer. 
For applications requiting a substantially constant speed without excessively 
severe starting conditions, the squirrel-cage motor usually is unrivaled because of its 
ruggedness, simplicity, and relatively low cost. Its only disadvantage is its relatively 
low power factor (about 0.85 to 0.90 at full load for four-pole, 60-Hz motors and 
considerably lower at light loads and for lower-speed motors). The low power factor 
is a consequence of the fact that all the excitation must be supplied by lagging reactive 
power taken from the ac source. 
One of the salient facts affecting induction-motor applications is that the slip 
at which maximum torque occurs can be controlled by varying the rotor resistance. 
A high rotor resistance gives optimum starting conditions but poor running perfor- 
mance. A low rotor resistance, however, may result in unsatisfactory starting condi- 
tions. However, the design of a squirrel-cage motor is, therefore, quite likely to be a 
compromise. 
Marked improvement in the starting performance with relatively little sacrifice 
in running performance can be built into a squirrel-cage motor by using a deep-bar 
or double-cage rotor whose effective resistance increases with slip. A wound-rotor 
motor can be used for very severe starting conditions or when speed control by rotor 
resistance is required. Variable-frequency solid-state motor drives lend considerable 
flexibility to the application of induction motors in variable-speed applications. These 
issues are discussed in Chapter 11. 
6.9 
PROBLEMS 
6.1 The nameplate on a 460-V, 50-hp, 60-Hz, four-pole induction motor indicates 
that its speed at rated load is 1755 r/min. Assume the motor to be operating 
at rated load. 
a. 
What is the slip of the rotor? 
b. 
What is the frequency of the rotor currents? 
c. 
What is the angular velocity of the stator-produced air-gap flux wave with 
respect to the stator? With respect to the rotor? 

6.9 
Problems 
349 
d. 
What is the angular velocity of the rotor-produced air-gap flux wave with 
respect to the stator? With respect to the rotor? 
6.2 Stray leakage fields will induce rotor-frequency voltages in a pickup coil 
mounted along the shaft of an induction motor. Measurement of the frequency 
of these induced voltages can be used to determine the rotor speed. 
a. 
What is the rotor speed in r/min of a 50-Hz, six-pole induction motor if 
the frequency of the induced voltage is 0.89 Hz? 
b. 
Calculate the frequency of the induced voltage corresponding to a 
four-pole, 60-Hz induction motor operating at a speed of 1740 r/min. 
What is the corresponding slip? 
6.3 A three-phase induction motor runs at almost 1198 r/min at no load and 
1112 r/min at full load when supplied from a 60-Hz, three-phase source. 
a. 
How many poles does this motor have? 
b. 
What is the slip in percent at full load? 
c. 
What is the corresponding frequency of the rotor currents? 
d. 
What is the corresponding speed of the rotor field with respect to the 
rotor? With respect to the stator? 
6.4 Linear induction motors have been proposed for a variety of applications 
including high-speed ground transportation. A linear motor based on the 
induction-motor principle consists of a car riding on a track. The track is a 
developed squirrel-cage winding, and the car, which is 4.5 m long and 1.25 m 
wide, has a developed three-phase, 12-pole-pair armature winding. Power at 
75 Hz is fed to the car from arms extending through slots to rails below 
ground level. 
a. 
What is the synchronous speed in km/hr? 
b. 
Will the car reach this speed? Explain your answer. 
c. 
What is the slip if the car is traveling 95 km/hr? What is the frequency of 
the track currents under this condition? 
d. 
If the control system controls the magnitude and frequency of the car 
currents to maintain constant slip, what is the frequency of the armature- 
winding currents when the car is traveling 75 km/hr? What is the 
frequency of the track currents under this condition? 
6.5 A three-phase, variable-speed induction motor is operated from a variable- 
frequency, variable-voltage source which is controlled to maintain constant 
peak air-gap flux density as the frequency of the applied voltage is varied. The 
motor is to be operated at constant slip frequency while the motor speed is 
varied between one half rated speed and rated speed. 
a. 
Describe the variation of magnitude and frequency of the applied voltage 
with speed. 
b. 
Describe how the magnitude and frequency of the rotor currents will vary 
as the motor speed is varied. 
c. 
How will the motor torque vary with speed? 

350 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
3-phase 
source 
Rotor 
terminals 
Figure 6.23 Interconnected induction 
and synchronous machines 
(Problems 6.7 and 6.8). 
6.6 Describe the effect on the torque-speed characteristic of an induction motor 
produced by (a) halving the applied voltage and (b) halving both the applied 
voltage and the frequency. Sketch the resultant torque-speed curves relative 
to that of rated-voltage and rated-frequency. Neglect the effects of stator 
resistance and leakage reactance. 
6.7 Figure 6.23 shows a system consisting of a three-phase wound-rotor 
induction machine whose shaft is rigidly coupled to the shaft of a three-phase 
synchronous motor. The terminals of the three-phase rotor winding of the 
induction machine are brought out to slip rings as shown. With the system 
supplied from a three-phase, 60-Hz source, the induction machine is driven 
by the synchronous motor at the proper speed and in the proper direction of 
rotation so that three-phase, 120-Hz voltages appear at the slip rings. The 
induction motor has four-pole stator winding. 
a. 
How many poles are on the rotor winding of the induction motor? 
b. 
If the stator field in the induction machine rotates in a clockwise 
direction, what is the rotation direction of its rotor? 
c. 
What is the rotor speed in r/min? 
d. 
How many poles are there on the synchronous motor? 
e. 
It is proposed that this system can produce dc voltage by reversing two 
of the phase leads to the induction motor stator. Is this proposal 
valid? 
6.8 A system such at that shown in Fig. 6.23 is used to convert balanced 50-Hz 
voltages to other frequencies. The synchronous motor has four poles and 
drives the interconnected shaft in the clockwise direction. The induction 
machine has six poles and its stator windings are connected to the source in 
such a fashion as to produce a counterclockwise rotating field (in the 
direction opposite to the rotation of the synchronous motor). The machine 

6.9 
Problems 
351 
has a wound rotor whose terminals are brought out through slip rings. 
a. 
At what speed does the motor run? 
b. What is the frequency of the voltages produced at the slip rings of the 
induction motor? 
c. 
What will be the frequency of the voltages produced at the slip rings of 
the induction motor if two leads of the induction-motor stator are 
interchanged, reversing the direction of rotation of the resultant rotating 
field? 
6.9 A three-phase, eight-pole, 60-Hz, 4160-V, 1000-kW squirrel-cage induction 
motor has the following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per phase Y 
referred to the stator: 
R1 = 0.220 
R2 = 0.207 
X1 = 1.95 
X2 = 2.42 
Xm = 45.7 
Determine the changes in these constants which will result from the following 
proposed design modifications. Consider each modification separately. 
a. Replace the stator winding with an otherwise identical winding with a 
wire size whose cross-sectional area is increased by 4 percent. 
b. Decrease the inner diameter of the stator laminations such that the air gap 
is decreased by 15 percent. 
c. 
Replace the aluminum rotor bars (conductivity 3.5 × 107 mhos/m) with 
copper bars (conductivity 5.8 × 107 mhos/m). 
d. 
Reconnect the stator winding, originally connected in Y for 4160-V 
operation, in A for 2.4 kV operation. 
6.10 A three-phase, Y-connected, 460-V (line-line), 25-kW, 60-Hz, four-pole 
induction motor has the following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per 
phase referred to the stator: 
R1=0.103 
R2=0.225 
XI=I.10 
X2=1.13 
Xm=59.4 
The total friction and windage losses may be assumed constant at 265 W, and 
the core loss may be assumed to be equal to 220 W. With the motor 
connected directly to a 460-V source, compute the speed, output shaft torque 
and power, input power and power factor and efficiency for slips of 1, 2 and 
3 percent. You may choose either to represent the core loss by a resistance 
connected directly across the motor terminals or by resistance Rc connected 
in parallel with the magnetizing reactance Xm. 
6.11 Consider the induction motor of Problem 6.10. 
a. Find the motor speed in r/min corresponding to the rated shaft output 
power of 25 kW. (Hint: This can be easily done by writing a MATLAB 
script which searches over the motor slip.) 
b. 
Similarly, find the speed in r/min at which the motor will operate with 
no external shaft load (assuming the motor load at that speed to consist 
only of the friction and windage losses). 
c. Write a MATLAB script to plot motor efficiency versus output power as 
the motor output power varies from zero to full load. 

352 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
d. 
Make a second plot of motor efficiency versus output power as the motor 
output power varies from roughly 5 kW to full load. 
6.12 Write a MATLAB script to analyze the performance of a three-phase 
induction motor operating at its rated frequency and voltage. The inputs 
should be the rated motor voltage, power and frequency, the number of poles, 
the equivalent-circuit parameters, and the rotational loss. Given a specific 
speed, the program should calculate the motor output power, the input power 
and power factor and the motor efficiency. Exercise your program on a 
500-kW, 4160 V, three-phase, 60-Hz, four-pole induction motor operating at 
1725 r/min whose rated speed rotational loss is 3.5 kW and whose 
equivalent-circuit parameters are: 
R1 =0.521 
R2=1.32 
X1 =4.98 
X2=5.32 
Xm=136 
6.13 A 15-kW, 230-V, three-phase, Y-connected, 60-Hz, four-pole squirrel-cage 
induction motor develops full-load internal torque at a slip of 3.5 percent 
when operated at rated voltage and frequency. For the purposes of this 
problem, rotational and core losses can be neglected. The following motor 
parameters, in ohms per phase, have been obtained: 
R1 = 0.21 
X1 -- X2 = 0.26 
Xm = 10.1 
Determine the maximum internal torque at rated voltage and frequency, 
the slip at maximum torque, and the internal starting torque at rated voltage 
and frequency. 
6.14 The induction motor of Problem 6.13 is supplied from a 230-V source 
through a feeder of impedance Zf -- 0.05 + j0.14 ohms. Find the motor slip 
and terminal voltage when it is supplying rated load. 
6.15 A three-phase induction motor, operating at rated voltage and frequency, has 
a starting torque of 135 percent and a maximum torque of 220 percent, both 
with respect to its rated-load torque. Neglecting the effects of stator resistance 
and rotational losses and assuming constant rotor resistance, determine: 
a. 
the slip at maximum torque. 
b. 
the slip at rated load. 
c. 
the rotor current at starting (as a percentage of rotor current at rated load). 
6.16 When operated at rated voltage and frequency, a three-phase squirrel-cage 
induction motor (of the design classification known as a high-slip motor) 
delivers full load at a slip of 8.7 percent and develops a maximum torque of 
230 percent of full load at a slip of 55 percent. Neglect core and rotational 
losses and assume that the rotor resistance and inductance remain constant, 
independent of slip. Determine the torque at starting, with rated voltage and 
frequency, in per unit based upon its full-load value. 
6.17 A 500-kW, 2400-V, four-pole, 60-Hz induction machine has the following 
equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per phase Y referred to the stator: 
R1 = 0.122 
R2 -- 0.317 
X 1 = 1.364 
X2 -- 1.32 
Xm = 45.8 

6.9 
Problems 
353 
It achieves rated shaft output at a slip of 3.35 percent with an efficiency 
of 94.0 percent. The machine is to be used as a generator, driven by a wind 
turbine. It will be connected to a distribution system which can be 
represented by a 2400-V infinite bus. 
a. 
From the given data calculate the total rotational and core losses at rated 
load. 
b. 
With the wind turbine driving the induction machine at a slip of 
-3.2 percent, calculate (i) the electric power output in kW, (ii) the 
efficiency (electric power output per shaft input power) in percent and 
(iii) the power factor measured at the machine terminals. 
c. 
The actual distribution system to which the generator is connected has an 
effective impedance of 0.18 + j0.41 f2/phase. For a slip of -3.2 percent, 
calculate the electric power as measured (i) at the infinite bus and (ii) at 
the machine terminals. 
6.18 Write a MATLAB script to plot the efficiency as a function of electric power 
output for the induction generator of Problem 6.17 as the slip varies from 
-0.5 to -3.2 percent. Assume the generator to be operating into the system 
with the feeder impedance of part (c) of Problem 6.17. 
6.19 For a 25-kW, 230-V, three-phase, 60-Hz squirrel-cage motor operating at 
rated voltage and frequency, the rotor I2R loss at maximum torque is 
9.0 times that at full-load torque, and the slip at full-load torque is 0.023. 
Stator resistance and rotational losses may be neglected and the rotor 
resistance and inductance assumed to be constant. Expressing torque in per 
unit of the full-load torque, find 
a. 
the slip at maximum torque. 
b. 
the maximum torque. 
c. 
the starting torque. 
6.20 A squirrel-cage induction motor runs at a full-load slip of 3.7 percent. 
The rotor current at starting is 6.0 times the rotor current at full load. The 
rotor resistance and inductance is independent of rotor frequency and 
rotational losses, stray-load losses and stator resistance may be neglected. 
Expressing torque in per unit of the full-load torque, compute 
a. 
the starting torque. 
b. 
the maximum torque and the slip at which the maximum torque 
occurs. 
6.21 A A-connected, 25-kW, 230-V, three-phase, six-pole, 50-Hz squirrel-cage 
induction motor has the following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per 
phase Y: 
R1 = 0.045 
R2 = 0.054 
X1 = 0.29 
X 2 = 0.28 
Xm = 9.6 
a. 
Calculate the starting current and torque for this motor connected directly 
to a 230-V source. 
b. 
To limit the starting current, it is proposed to connect the stator winding 
in Y for starting and then to switch to the A connection for normal 

354 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
operation. (i) What are the equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per 
phase for the Y connection? (ii) With the motor Y-connected and running 
directly off of a 230-V source, calculate the starting current and torque. 
6.22 The following data apply to a 125-kW, 2300-V, three-phase, four pole, 60-Hz 
squirrel-cage induction motor: 
Stator-resistance between phase terminals = 2.23 ft 
No-load test at rated frequency and voltage: 
Line current = 7.7 A 
Three-phase power = 2870 W 
Blocked-rotor test at 15 Hz: 
Line voltage = 268 V 
Line current = 50.3 A 
Three-phase power = 18.2 kW 
a. 
Calculate the rotational losses. 
b. 
Calculate the equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms. Assume that 
X l =X 2. 
c. 
Compute the stator current, inpUt power and power factor, output power 
and efficiency when this motor is operating at rated voltage and frequency 
at a slip of 2.95 percent. 
6.23 Two 50-kW, 440-V, three-phase, six-pole, 60-Hz squirrel-cage induction 
motors have identical stators. The dc resistance measured between any pair 
of stator terminals is 0.204 ft. Blocked-rotor tests at 60-Hz produce the 
following results: 
Volts 
Three-phase 
Motor 
(line-to-line) 
Amperes 
power, kW 
1 
74:7 
72.9 
4.40 
2 
99.4 
72.9 
11.6 
Determine the ratio of the internal starting torque developed by motor 2 
to that of motor 1 (a) for the same current and (b) for the same voltage. Make 
reasonable assumptions. 
6.24 Write a MATLAB script to calculate the parameters of a three-phase induction 
motor from open-circuit and blocked-rotor tests. 
Input: 
Rated frequency 
Open-circuit test: Voltage, current and power 
Blocked-rotor test: Frequency, voltage, current and power 
Stator-resistance measured phase to phase 
Assumed ratio X I / X2 

6.9 
Problems 
355 
Output: 
Rotational loss 
Equivalent circuit parameters R1, R2, X1, X2 and X m 
Exercise your program on a 2300-V, three-phase, 50-Hz, 250-kW 
induction motor whose test results are: 
Stator-resistance between phase terminals = 0.636 g2 
No-load test at rated frequency and voltage: 
Line current = 20.2 A 
Three-phase power -- 3.51 kW 
Blocked-rotor test at 12.5 Hz: 
Line voltage = 142 V 
Line current -- 62.8 A 
Three-phase power -- 6.55 kW 
You may assume that X1 = 0.4(Xl + X2). 
6.25 A 230-V, three-phase, six-pole, 60-Hz squirrel-cage induction motor 
develops a maximum internal torquelof 288 percent at a slip of 15 percent 
when operated at rated voltage and frequency. If the effect of stator resistance 
is neglected, determine the maximum internal torque that this motor would 
develop if it were operated at 190 V and 50 Hz. Under these conditions, at 
what speed would the maximum torque be developed? 
6.26 A 75-kW, 50-Hz, four-pole, 460-V three-phase, wound-rotor induction motor 
develops full-load torque at 1438 r/min with the rotor short-circuited. An 
external non-inductive resistance of 1.1 ~ is placed in series with each phase 
of the rotor, and the motor is observed to develop its rated torque at a speed of 
1405 r/min. Calculate the rotor resistance per phase of the motor itself. 
6.27 A 75-kW, 460-V, three-phase, four-pole, 60-Hz, wound-rotor induction motor 
develops a maximum internal torque of 225 percent at a slip of 16 percent 
when operated at rated voltage and frequency with its rotor short-circuited 
directly at the slip rings. Stator resistance and rotational losses may be 
neglected, and the rotor resistance and inductance may be assumed to be 
constant, independent of rotor frequency. Determine 
a. 
the slip at full load in percent. 
b. 
the rotor IZR loss at full load in watts. 
c. 
the starting torque at rated voltage and frequency in per unit and in N. m. 
If the rotor resistance is doubled (by inserting external series resistance 
at the slip rings) and the motor load is adjusted for such that the line current 
is equal to the value corresponding to rated load with no external resistance, 
determine 
d. 
the corresponding slip in percent and 
e. 
the torque in N. m. 

356 
CHAPTER 6 
Polyphase Induction Machines 
6.28 Neglecting any effects of rotational and core losses, use MATLAB to plot the 
internal torque versus speed curve for the induction motor of Problem 6.10 
for rated-voltage, rated-frequency operation. On the same plot, plot curves of 
internal torque versus speed for this motor assuming the rotor resistance 
increases by a factor of 2, 5 and 10. 
6.29 A 100-kW, three-phase, 60-Hz, 460-V, six-pole wound-rotor induction motor 
develops its rated full-load output at a speed of 1158 r/min when operated at 
rated voltage and frequency with its slip rings short-circuited. The maximum 
torque it can develop at rated voltage and frequency is 310 percent of full-load 
torque. The resistance of the rotor winding is 0.17 S2/phase Y. Neglect any 
effects of rotational and stray-load loss and stator resistance. 
a. 
Compute the rotor I2R loss at full load. 
b. 
Compute the speed at maximum torque in r/min. 
c. 
How much resistance must be inserted in series with the rotor windings 
to produce maximum starting torque? 
With the rotor windings short-circuited, the motor is now run from a 
50-Hz supply with the applied voltage adjusted so that the air-gap flux wave 
is essentially equal to that at rated 60-Hz operation. 
d. 
Compute the 50-Hz applied voltage. 
e. 
Compute the speed at which the motor will develop a torque equal to its 
rated 60-Hz value with its slip-tings shorted. 
6.30 A 460-V, three-phase, six-pole, 60-Hz, 150-kW, wound-rotor induction motor 
develops an internal torque of 190 percent with a line current of 200 percent 
(torque and current expressed as a percentage of their full-load values) at a 
slip of 5.6 percent when running at rated voltage and frequency with its rotor 
terminals short-circuited. The rotor resistance is measured to be 90 mfl 
between each slip ring and may be assumed to remain constant. A balanced 
set of Y-connected resistors is to be connected to the slip rings in order to 
limit the rated-voltage starting current to 200 percent of its rated value. What 
resistance must be chosen for each leg of the Y connection? What will be the 
starting torque under these conditions? 
6.31 The resistance measured between each pair of slip rings of a three-phase, 
60-Hz, 250-kW, 16-pole, wound-rotor induction motor is 49 mfl. With the 
slip tings short-circuited, the full-load slip is 0.041. For the purposes of this 
problem, it may be assumed that the slip-torque curve is a straight line from 
no load to full load. The motor drives a fan which requires 250 kW at the 
full-load speed of the motor. Assuming the torque to drive the fan varies as 
the square of the fan speed, what resistance should be connected in series 
with the rotor resistance to reduce the fan speed to 400 ffmin? 

DC Machines 
p 
c machines are characterized by their versatility. By means of various com- 
binations of shunt-, series-, and separately-excited field windings they can be 
designed to display a wide variety of volt-ampere or speed-torque character- 
istics for both dynamic and steady-state operation. Because of the ease with which 
they can be controlled, systems of dc machines have been frequently used in appli- 
cations requiring a wide range of motor speeds or precise control of motor output. In 
recent years, solid-state ac drive system technology has developed sufficiently that 
these systems are replacing dc machines in applications previously associated almost 
exclusively with dc machines. However, the versatility of dc machines in combination 
with the relative simplicity of their drive systems will insure their continued use in a 
wide variety of applications. 
7.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The essential features of a dc machine are shown schematically in Fig. 7.1. The stator 
has salient poles and is excited by one or more field coils. The air-gap flux distribution 
created by the field windings is symmetric about the center line of the field poles. 
This axis is called the field axis or direct axis. 
As discussed in Section 4.6.2, the ac voltage generated in each rotating arma- 
ture coil is converted to dc in the external armature terminals by means of a rotating 
commutator and stationary brushes to which the armature leads are connected. The 
commutator-brush combination forms a mechanical rectifier, resulting in a dc arma- 
ture voltage as well as an armature-mmf wave which is fixed in space. Commutator 
action is discussed in detail in Section 7.2. 
The brushes are located so that commutation occurs when the coil sides are in the 
neutral zone, midway between the field poles. The axis of the armature-mmf wave then 
is 90 electrical degrees from the axis of the field poles, i.e., in the quadrature axis. In 
the schematic representation of Fig. 7.1 a, the brushes are shown in the quadrature axis 
357 

358 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Onnclrnhlro 
Direct 
Brushes 
axis 
Field 
ield 
oil 
Armature 
coils 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 7.1 
Schematic representations of a dc machine. 
because this is the position of the coils to which they are connected. The armature-mmf 
wave then is along the brush axis, as shown. (The geometric position of the brushes 
in an actual machine is approximately 90 electrical degrees from their position in the 
schematic diagram because of the shape of the end connections to the commutator. 
For example, see Fig. 7.7.) For simplicity, the circuit representation usually will be 
drawn as in Fig. 7.1 b. 
Although the magnetic torque and the speed voltage appearing at the brushes are 
somewhat dependent on the spatial waveform of the flux distribution, for convenience 
we continue to assume a sinusoidal flux-density wave in the air gap as was done 
in Chapter 4. The torque can then be found from the magnetic field viewpoint of 
Section 4.7.2. 
The electromagnetic torque Tmech can be expressed in terms of the interaction of 
the direct-axis air-gap flux per pole ~d and the space-fundamental component Fal 
of the armature-mmf wave, in a form similar to Eq. 4.81. With the brushes in the 
quadrature axis, the angle between these fields is 90 electrical degrees, and its sine 
equals unity. Substitution in Eq. 4.81 then gives 
7r (p°les) 2 
Tmech -- ~- 
2 
~d Fal 
(7.1) 
in which the minus sign has been dropped because the positive direction of the torque 
can be determined from physical reasoning. The peak value of the sawtooth armature- 
mmf wave is given by Eq. 4.9, and its space fundamental Fal is 8/zr 2 times its peak. 
Substitution in Eq. 7.1 then gives 
Tmech'-(p°lesCa) 
~dia-Kadpdia2rrm 
(7.2) 

7.1 
Introduction 
359 
Brush 
voltage e a 
X 
~
)
 
Rectified 
coilvoltages 
t 
Figure 7.2 
Rectified coil voltages and resultant voltage 
between brushes in a dc machine. 
where 
and 
ia -- current in external armature circuit 
Ca "-" total number of conductors in armature winding 
m - number of parallel paths through winding 
poles Ca 
ga = 
(7.3) 
27rm 
is a constant determined by the design of the winding. 
The rectified voltage generated in the armature has already been found in Sec- 
tion 4.6.2 for an elementary single-coil armature, and its waveform is shown in 
Fig. 4.33. The effect of distributing the winding in several slots is shown in Fig. 7.2, in 
which each of the rectified sine waves is the voltage generated in one of the coils, with 
commutation taking place at the moment when the coil sides are in the neutral zone. 
The generated voltage as observed from the brushes is the sum of the rectified 
voltages of all the coils in series between brushes and is shown by the rippling line 
labeled ea in Fig. 7.2. With a dozen or so commutator segments per pole, the ripple 
becomes very small and the average generated voltage observed from the brushes 
equals the sum of the average values of the rectified coil voltages. From Eq. 4.53 the 
rectified voltage ea between brushes, known also as the speed voltage, is 
(p°les Ca) ~dC0m -- Ka~dC0 m 
(7.4) 
ea -- 
2zrm 
where Ka is the winding constant defined in Eq. 7.3. The rectified voltage of a dis- 
tributed winding has the same average value as that of a concentrated coil. The 
difference is that the ripple is greatly reduced. 
From Eqs. 7.2 and 7.4, with all variables expressed in SI units, 
eaia-- TmechO)m 
(7.5) 
Noting that the product of torque and mechanical speed is the mechanical power, this 
equation simply says that the instantaneous electric power associated with the speed 
voltage equals the instantaneous mechanical power associated with the magnetic 

360 
CHAPTER 7 DC Machines 
~d 
Air-gap 
-,~--' 
ZNfif 
ea0 
Air-gap -~//f 
Speed -- Ogmo 
ENfif 
(a) 
(b) 
ea0 
// 
Air-gap ----~/Y 
Speed = O)m0 
r 
tf 
(c) 
Figure 7.3 
Typical form of magnetization curves of a dc machine. 
torque, the direction of power flow being determined by whether the machine is 
acting as a motor or generator. 
The direct-axis air-gap flux is produced by the combined mmf ~ Nfif of the 
field windings; the flux-mmf characteristic is referred to as the magnetization curve 
for the machine. The form of a typical magnetization curve is shown in Fig. 7.3a, 
in which it is assumed that the armature mmf has no effect on the direct-axis flux 
because the axis of the armature-mmf wave is along the quadrature axis and hence 
perpendicular to the field axis. It will be necessary to reexamine this assumption 
later in this chapter, where the effects of saturation are investigated more thoroughly. 
Note that the magnetization curve of Fig. 7.3a does not pass through the origin. This 
behaviour will occur in cases where the field structure exhibits residual magnetism, 
i.e., where the magnetic material of the field does not fully demagnetize when the net 
field mmf is reduced to zero. 
Because the armature emf is proportional to flux times speed, it is usually more 
convenient to express the magnetization curve in terms of the armature emf ea0 at a 
constant speed Wm0 as shown in Fig. 7.3b. The voltage ea for a given flux at any other 
speed O-)m is proportional to the speed; i.e., from Eq. 7.4 
ea 
ea0 
-- Ka~d 
-- 
(7.6) 
O)m 
Ogm0 
Thus 
ea-- 
-- 
ea0 
(7.7) 
O)m0 
or, in terms of rotational speed in r/min (n) 
ea -- 
-- 
eao 
no 
(7.8) 
where no is the rotational speed corresponding to the armature emf of ea0. 
Figure 7.3c shows the magnetization curve with only one field winding excited, 
in this case with the armature voltage plotted against the field current instead of the 

7.1 
Introduction 
361 
field ampere-turns. This curve can easily be obtained by test methods; since the field 
current can be measured directly, no knowledge of any design details is required. 
Over a fairly wide range of excitation the reluctance of the electrical steel in the 
machine is negligible compared with that of the air gap. In this region the flux is 
linearly proportional to the total mmf of the field windings, the constant of propor- 
tionality being the direct-axis permeance/gd; thus 
fYPd --- ~')d Z 
Nfif 
(7.9) 
The dashed straight line through the origin coinciding with the straight portion of the 
magnetization curves in Fig. 7.3 is called the air-gap line. This nomenclature refers 
to the fact that this linear magnetizing characteristic would be found if the reluctance 
of the magnetic material portion of the flux path remained negligible compared to that 
of the air gap, independent of the degree of magnetic saturation of the motor steel. 
The outstanding advantages of dc machines arise from the wide variety of oper- 
ating characteristics which can be obtained by selection of the method of excitation of 
the field windings. Various connection diagrams are shown in Fig. 7.4. The method of 
excitation profoundly influences both the steady-state characteristics and the dynamic 
behavior of the machine in control systems. 
Consider first dc generators. The connection diagram of a separately-excited 
generator is given in Fig. 7.4a. The required field current is a very small fraction of 
the rated armature current; on the order of 1 to 3 percent in the average generator. 
A small amount of power in the field circuit may control a relatively large amount 
of power in the armature circuit; i.e., the generator is a power amplifier. Separately- 
excited generators are often used in feedback control systems when control of the 
armature voltage over a wide range is required. 
The field windings of self-excited generators may be supplied in three different 
ways. The field may be connected in series with the armature (Fig. 7.4b), resulting in 
o 
Field 
Armature 
o 
source 
o 
(a) 
(b) 
Field 
Field ~ 
~ 
o 
rheostat 
rheostat 
field 
~ 
Sf~e~dt 
Sf~il7 
.. 
O 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 7.4 Field-circuit connections of dc machines: (a) separate 
excitation, (b) series, (c) shunt, (d) compound. 

362 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
0 
100 
o 
75 
~ 
50 
~b 
N 25 
t 
Shunt 
S e p a r a t e l ~  
....-- 
-- 
=-"--- 
------ 
- 
......... 
m 
• 
i 
i 
i 
- / 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
r 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
Load current in percent of rating 
Figure 7.5 Volt-ampere characteristics of dc generators. 
a series generator. The field may be connected in shunt with the armature (Fig. 7.4c), 
resulting in a shunt generator, or the field may be in two sections (Fig. 7.4d), one 
of which is connected in series and the other in shunt with the armature, resulting 
in a compound generator. With self-excited generators, residual magnetism must be 
present in the machine iron to get the self-excitation process started. The effects of 
residual magnetism can be clearly seen in Fig. 7.3, where the flux and voltage are 
seen to have nonzero values when the field current is zero. 
Typical steady-state volt-ampere characteristics of dc generators are shown in 
Fig. 7.5, constant-speed operation being assumed. The relation between the steady- 
state generated emf Ea and the armature terminal voltage Va is 
Va - Ea- taRa 
(7.10) 
where la is the armature current output and Ra is the armature circuit resistance. In a 
generator, Ea is larger than Va, and the electromagnetic torque Tmech is a countertorque 
opposing rotation. 
The terminal voltage of a separately-excited generator decreases slightly with an 
increase in the load current, principally because of the voltage drop in the armature 
resistance. The field current of a series generator is the same as the load current, so that 
the air-gap flux and hence the voltage vary widely with load. As a consequence, series 
generators are not often used. The voltage of shunt generators drops off somewhat 
with load, but not in a manner that is objectionable for many purposes. Compound 
generators are normally connected so that the mmf of the series winding aids that 
of the shunt winding. The advantage is that through the action of the series winding 
the flux per pole can increase with load, resulting in a voltage output which is nearly 
constant or which even rises somewhat as load increases. The shunt winding usually 
contains many turns of relatively small wire. The series winding, wound on the 
outside, consists of a few turns of comparatively heavy conductor because it must carry 
the full armature current of the machine. The voltage of both shunt and compound 

7.1 
Introduction 
363 
%-. 
o 100 
75 
~ 
5o- 
~ 
25- 
OUnc 1 
Shunt 
~ 
- 
_ 
~ "~ 
% 
% 
%, 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
Load torque in percent of rating 
Figure 7.6 Speed-torque 
characteristics of dc motors. 
generators can be controlled over reasonable limits by means of rheostats in the shunt 
field. 
Any of the methods of excitation used for generators can also be used for motors. 
Typical steady-state dc-motor speed-torque characteristics are shown in Fig. 7.6, in 
which it is assumed that the motor terminals are supplied from a constant-voltage 
source. In a motor the relation between the emf Ea generated in the armature and the 
armature terminal voltage Va is 
Va = Ea + IaR. 
(7.11) 
or 
Va m Ea 
Ia - 
(7.12) 
Ra 
where Ia is now the armature-current input to the machine. The generated emf Ea 
is now smaller than the terminal voltage Va, the armature current is in the opposite 
direction to that in a generator, and the electromagnetic torque is in the direction to 
sustain rotation of the armature. 
In shunt- and separately-excited motors, the field flux is nearly constant. Conse- 
quently, increased torque must be accompanied by a very nearly proportional increase 
in armature current and hence by a small decrease in counter emf Ea to allow this 
increased current through the small armature resistance. Since counter emf is deter- 
mined by flux and speed (Eq. 7.4), the speed must drop slightly. Like the squirrel-cage 
induction motor, the shunt motor is substantially a constant-speed motor having about 
6 percent drop in speed from no load to full load. A typical speed-torque characteris- 
tic is shown by the solid curve in Fig. 7.6. Starting torque and maximum torque are 
limited by the armature current that can be successfully commutated. 
An outstanding advantage of the shunt motor is ease of speed control. With a 
rheostat in the shunt-field circuit, the field current and flux per pole can be varied at 
will, and variation of flux causes the inverse variation of speed to maintain counter 

364 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
emf approximately equal to the impressed terminal voltage. A maximum speed range 
of about 4 or 6 to 1 can be obtained by this method, the limitation again being 
commutating conditions. By variation of the impressed armature voltage, very wide 
speed ranges can be obtained. 
In the series motor, increase in load is accompanied by increases in the arma- 
ture current and mmf and the stator field flux (provided the iron is not completely 
saturated). Because flux increases with load, speed must drop in order to maintain 
the balance between impressed voltage and counter emf; moreover, the increase in 
armature current caused by increased torque is smaller than in the shunt motor be- 
cause of the increased flux. The series motor is therefore a varying-speed motor with 
a markedly drooping speed-torque characteristic of the type shown in Fig. 7.6. For 
applications requiting heavy torque overloads, this characteristic is particularly ad- 
vantageous because the corresponding power overloads are held to more reasonable 
values by the associated speed drops. Very favorable starting characteristics also result 
from the increase in flux with increased armature current. 
In the compound motor, the series field may be connected either cumulatively, so 
that its mmf adds to that of the shunt field, or differentially, so that it opposes. The 
differential connection is rarely used. As shown by the broken-dash curve in Fig. 7.6, 
a cumulatively-compounded motor has speed-load characteristics intermediate be- 
tween those of a shunt and a series motor, with the drop of speed with load depending 
on the relative number of ampere-tums in the shunt and series fields. It does not have 
the disadvantage of very high light-load speed associated with a series motor, but it 
retains to a considerable degree the advantages of series excitation. 
The application advantages of dc machines lie in the variety of performance 
characteristics offered by the possibilities of shunt, series, and compound excitation. 
Some of these characteristics have been touched upon briefly in this section. Still 
greater possibilities exist if additional sets of brushes are added so that other voltages 
can be obtained from the commutator. Thus the versatility of dc-machine systems and 
their adaptability to control, both manual and automatic, are their outstanding features. 
7.2 
COMMUTATOR ACTION 
The dc machine differs in several respects from the ideal model of Section 4.2.2. 
Although the basic concepts of Section 4.2.2 are still valid, a reexamination of the 
assumptions and a modification of the model are desirable. The crux of the matter is 
the effect of the commutator shown in Figs. 4.2 and 4.16. 
Figure 7.7 shows diagrammatically the armature winding of Figs. 4.22 and 4.23a 
with the addition of the commutator, brushes, and connections of the coils to the 
commutator segments. The commutator is represented by the ring of segments in the 
center of the figure. The segments are insulated from each other and from the shaft. 
Two stationary brushes are shown by the black rectangles inside the commutator. 
Actually the brushes usually contact the outer surface, as shown in Fig. 4.16. The 
coil sides in the slots are shown in cross section by the small circles with dots and 
crosses in them, indicating currents toward and away from the reader, respectively, as 
in Fig. 4.22. The connections of the coils to the commutator segments are shown by 

7.2 
Commutator Action 
365 
V1 
~!ii!!~i~i!~i!~!iii!iii~iiiiiii!!!i~iiii~iJiiJJ~i!iiiii!~ii~i~i~ii~ii~i~iii~ii~i~i~i~i~iJi~iiJ 
.... 
/ V 
~!~i~i~i~i~i~i!ii!!i~iii!i~}ii!iii!i~ii}i~}~!ii!iii~iiiii!ii~i~i~iii~i~!i!i~i~ii~ 
~¸ 
/ 
i iiji:i Yli}iiiii:'i}i}iiiiiiiii/!i!}!iii}iiiii}i}i}ii}ii 
i: 10 / 
f 
/ 
iiii!iiiii::i!iiiii;iliiii!!ii!iiiilililiiiiiiiiii 
;;ill i!il iiiiiii iiiiiiiiiiii!!!i!iiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiii I 
i..i 
 
iiiii!i!iiiiiii!ii 
ii!ii 
9,, 
NI 
i Magnetic axis 
of armature 
12..__ 
___.... 1 
i 
11 
¢--' ~ 
NN2 
/ 
.). 
7 
"'6 
(a) 
\\ 
Field coil 
NI 
V1 
NI 
T 
/// 
\\ 
/ 
i\ 
IQ® ~'. ~bll ->-/a~X 
A 
(b) 
j j 
/ 
// 
FI 
IE] 
Figure 7.7 
Dc machine armature winding with commutator and brushes. 
(a), (b) Current directions for two positions of the armature. 

366 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
the circular arcs. The end connections at the back of the armature are shown dashed 
for the two coils in slots 1 and 7, and the connections of these coils to adjacent 
commutator segments are shown by the heavy arcs. All coils are identical. The back 
end connections of the other coils have been omitted to avoid complicating the figure, 
but they can easily be traced by remembering that each coil has one side in the top of 
a slot and the other side in the bottom of the diametrically-opposite slot. 
In Fig. 7.7a the brushes are in contact with commutator segments 1 and 7. Current 
entering the fight-hand brush divides equally between two parallel paths through the 
winding. The first path leads to the inner coil side in slot 1 and finally ends at the brush 
on segment 7. The second path leads to the outer coil side in slot 6 and also finally ends 
at the brush on segment 7. The current directions in Fig. 7.7a can readily be verified 
by tracing these two paths. They are the same as in Fig. 4.22. The effect is identical 
to that of a coil wrapped around the armature with its magnetic axis vertical, and a 
clockwise magnetic torque is exerted on the armature, tending to align its magnetic 
field with that of the field winding. 
Now suppose the machine is acting as a generator driven in the counterclockwise 
direction by an applied mechanical torque. Figure 7.7b shows the situation after the 
armature has rotated through the angle subtended by half a commutator segment. The 
right-hand brush is now in contact with both segments 1 and 2, and the left-hand 
brush is in contact with both segments 7 and 8. The coils in slots 1 and 7 are now 
short-circuited by the brushes. The currents in the other coils are shown by the dots 
and crosses, and they produce a magnetic field whose axis again is vertical. 
After further rotation, the brushes will be in contact with segments 2 and 8, and 
slots 1 and 7 will have rotated into the positions which were previously occupied by 
slots 12 and 6 in Fig. 7.7a. The current directions will be similar to those of Fig. 7.7a 
except that the currents in the coils in slots 1 and 7 will have reversed. The magnetic 
axis of the armature is still vertical. 
During the time when the brushes are simultaneously in contact with two ad- 
jacent commutator segments, the coils connected to these segments are temporarily 
removed from the main circuit comprising the armature winding, short-circuited by 
the brushes, and the currents in them are reversed. Ideally, the current in the coils 
being commutated should reverse linearly with time, a condition referred to as linear 
commutation. Serious departure from linear commutation will result in sparking at 
the brushes. Means for obtaining sparkless commutation are discussed in Section 7.9. 
With linear commutation the waveform of the current in any coil as a function of time 
is trapezoidal, as shown in Fig. 7.8. 
Commutation 
,~, 
l 
i 
| 
Coil current 
Figure 7.8 
Waveform of current in an armature coil 
with linear commutation. 

7.3 
Effect of Armature MMF 
367 
The winding of Fig. 7.7 is simpler than that used in most dc machines. Ordi- 
narily more slots and commutator segments would be used, and except in small ma- 
chines, more than two poles are common. Nevertheless, the simple winding of Fig. 7.7 
includes the essential features of more complicated windings. 
7.3 
EFFECT OF ARMATURE MMF 
Armature mmf has definite effects on both the space distribution of the air-gap flux 
and the magnitude of the net flux per pole. The effect on flux distribution is important 
because the limits of successful commutation are directly influenced; the effect on 
flux magnitude is important because both the generated voltage and the torque per 
unit of armature current are influenced thereby. These effects and the problems arising 
from them are described in this section. 
It was shown in Section 4.3.2 and Fig. 4.23 that the armature-mmf wave can 
be closely approximated by a sawtooth, corresponding to the wave produced by a 
finely-distributed armature winding or current sheet. For a machine with brushes in 
the neutral position, the idealized mmf wave is again shown by the dashed sawtooth 
in Fig. 7.9, in which a positive mmf ordinate denotes flux lines leaving the armature 
surface. Current directions in all windings other than the main field are indicated by 
black and cross-hatched bands. Because of the salient-pole field structure found in 
almost all dc machines, the associated space distribution of flux will not be triangular. 
The distribution of air-gap flux density with only the armature excited is given by the 
solid curve of Fig. 7.9. As can readily be seen, it is appreciably decreased by the long 
air path in the interpolar space. 
%%%%% 
i 
I 
II 
Field coi 
Finely distributed 
' 
Finely distributed 
I~) conductors 
(~ conductors 
on armature 
on armature 
S' '% 
S 
% 
Motor 
s S 
rota~ 
S 
s S Armature-mmf 
S 
," 
distribution 
% ",, 
Generator 
~~'~~ation 
Flux-density 
"" ~ 
~~"'~'~ 
% 
s 
' distribution with 
",, 
' 
s S 
% 
s 
only the armature 
",, s 
'excited 
Figure 7.9 
Armature-mmf and flux-density distribution with 
brushes on neutral and only the armature excited. 

368 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Field iron 
Armature 
iron 
Figure 7.10 
Flux with only the armature excited and brushes on neutral. 
The axis of the armature mmf is fixed at 90 electrical degrees from the main- 
field axis by the brush position. The corresponding flux follows the paths shown in 
Fig. 7.10. The effect of the armature mmf is seen to be that of creating flux crossing 
the pole faces; thus its path in the pole shoes crosses the path of the main-field flux. 
For this reason, armature reaction of this type is called cross-magnetizing armature 
reaction. It evidently causes a decrease in the resultant air-gap flux density under one 
half of the pole and an increase under the other half. 
When the armature and field windings are both excited, the resultant air-gap flux- 
density distribution is of the form given by the solid curve of Fig. 7.11. Superimposed 
on this figure are the flux distributions with only the armature excited (long-dash curve) 
and only the field excited (short-dash curve). The effect of cross-magnetizing armature 
reaction in decreasing the flux under one pole tip and increasing it under the other can 
be seen by comparing the solid and short-dash curves. In general, the solid curve is 
not the algebraic sum of the two dashed curves because of the nonlinearity of the iron 
magnetic circuit. Because of saturation of the iron, the flux density is decreased by a 
greater amount under one pole tip than it is increased under the other. Accordingly, the 
resultant flux per pole is lower than would be produced by the field winding alone, 
a consequence known as the demagnetizing effect of cross-magnetizing armature 
reaction. Since it is caused by saturation, its magnitude is a nonlinear function of 
both the field current and the armature current. For normal machine operation at the 
flux densities used commercially, the effect is usually significant, especially at heavy 
loads, and must often be taken into account in analyses of performance. 
The distortion of the flux distribution caused by cross-magnetizing armature 
reaction may have a detrimental influence on the commutation of the armature current, 
especially if the distortion becomes excessive. In fact, this distortion is usually an 
important factor limiting the short-time overload capability of a dc machine. Tendency 
toward distortion of the flux distribution is most pronounced in a machine, such as 
a shunt motor, where the field excitation remains substantially constant while the 
armature mmf may reach very significant proportions at heavy loads. The tendency 
is least pronounced in a series-excited machine, such as the series motor, for both the 
field and armature mmf increase with load. 
The effect of cross-magnetizing armature reaction can be limited in the design and 
construction of the machine. The mmf of the main field should exert predominating 

7.3 
Effect of Armature MMF 
369 
llll~;lff 
UlbLIIt)UL~U 
l'llll;lJ 
UI~tlIUUL~U 
i, 
I 
(~) conductors 
~) conductors 
on armature 
on armature 
' 
i 
i Go.or.torr t.t,o° 
i/f 
t, ki 
Motor rotation 
, 
I 
, 
, 
I 
I Flux-density distribution 
I 
ll\ 
;/ 
I 
, armature alone 
, 
i ~. 
ff 
I 
i 
i 
Flux-density distribution " 
g 
main field alone 
Resultant flux-density 
distribution 
Figure 7.11 
Armature, main-field, and resultant flux-density 
distributions with brushes on neutral. 
control on the air-gap flux, so that the condition of weak field mmf and strong armature 
mmf should be avoided. The reluctance of the cross-flux path (essentially the armature 
teeth, pole shoes, and the air gap, especially at the pole tips) can be increased by 
increasing the degree of saturation in the teeth and pole faces, by avoiding too small 
an air gap, and by using a chamfered or eccentric pole face, which increases the air 
gap at the pole tips. These expedients affect the path of the main flux as well, but the 
influence on the cross flux is much greater. The best, but also the most expensive, 
curative measure is to compensate the armature mmfby means of a winding embedded 
in the pole faces, a measure discussed in Section 7.9. 
If the brushes are not in the neutral position, the axis of the armature mmf wave 
is not 90 ° from the main-field axis. The armature mmf then produces not only cross 
magnetization but also a direct-axis demagnetizing or magnetizing effect, depending 
on the direction of brush shift. Shifting of the brushes from the neutral position 
is usually inadvertent due to incorrect positioning of the brushes or a poor brush 
fit. Before the invention of interpoles, however, shifting the brushes was a common 
method of securing satisfactory commutation, the direction of the shift being such 
that demagnetizing action was produced. It can be shown that brush shift in the 
direction of rotation in a generator or against rotation in a motor produces a direct-axis 
demagnetizing mmf which may result in unstable operation of a motor or excessive 

370 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
drop in voltage of a generator. Incorrectly placed brushes can be detected by a load 
test. If the brushes are on neutral, the terminal voltage of a generator or the speed of 
a motor should be the same for identical conditions of field excitation and armature 
current when the direction of rotation is reversed. 
7.4 
ANALYTICAL FUNDAMENTALS: 
ELECTRIC-CIRCUIT ASPECTS 
From Eqs. 7.1 and 7.4, the electromagnetic torque and generated voltage of a dc 
machine are, respectively, 
and 
where 
Tmech -- Ka~dla 
(7.13) 
Ea = Ka ~dCOm 
(7.14) 
poles C a 
Ka = 
(7.15) 
2n'm 
Here the capital-letter symbols Ea for generated voltage and Ia for armature 
current are used to emphasize that we are primarily concerned with steady-state 
considerations in this chapter. The remaining symbols are as defined in Section 7.1. 
Equations 7.13 through 7.15 are basic equations for analysis of the machine. The 
quantity Eala is frequently referred to as the electromagnetic power; from Eqs. 7.13 
and 7.14 it is related to electromagnetic torque by 
Eala 
Tmech = 
-- Ka~dla 
(7.16) 
O)m 
The electromagnetic power differs from the mechanical power at the machine 
shaft by the rotational losses and differs from the electric power at the machine 
terminals by the shunt-field and armature 12 R losses. Once the electromagnetic power 
Eala has been determined, numerical addition of the rotational losses for generators 
and subtraction for motors yields the mechanical power at the shaft. 
The interrelations between voltage and current are immediately evident from the 
connection diagram of Fig. 7.12. Thus, 
and 
Va -- E a -at- l a R a 
Vt -- Ea -4-/a(Ra -k- Rs) 
(7.17) 
(7.18) 
IL = la q'- If 
(7.19) 
where the plus sign is used for a motor and the minus sign for a generator and Ra and Rs 
are the resistances of the armature and series field, respectively. Here, the voltage Va 

7.4 Analytical Fundamentals: Electric-Circuit Aspects 
371 
I a (motor) 
I a (generator) 
Armature 
i a Se!ieSfield 
/L (motor) 
I L (generator) 
T 
r 
 e elsaatl i'- 
Figure 7.12 
Motor or generator connection diagram 
with current directions. 
refers to the terminal voltage of the armature winding and Vt refers to the terminal 
voltage of the dc machine, including the voltage drop across the series-connected 
field winding; they are equal if there is no series field winding. 
Some of the terms in Eqs. 7.17 to 7.19 are omitted when the machine connections 
are simpler than those shown in Fig. 7.12. The resistance Ra is to be interpreted as 
that of the armature plus brushes unless specifically stated otherwise. Sometimes Ra 
is taken as the resistance of the armature winding alone and the brush-contact voltage 
drop is accounted for separately, usually assumed to be two volts. 
A 25-kW 125-V separately-excited dc machine is operated at a constant speed of 3000 r/min 
with a constant field current such that the open-circuit armature voltage is 125 V. The armature 
resistance is 0.02 f2. 
Compute the armature current, terminal power, and electromagnetic power and torque 
when the terminal voltage is (a) 128 V and (b) 124 V. 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 7.17, with Vt = 128 V and Ea = 125 V, the armature current is 
Vt- Ea 
128- 125 
Ia -- 
= 
= 150A 
Ra 
0.02 
in the motor direction, and the power input at the motor terminal is 
Vtla = 128 × 150 = 19.20 kW 
The electromagnetic power is given by 
Eala = 125 x 150 = 18.75 kW 
In this case, the dc machine is operating as a motor and the electromagnetic power is 
hence smaller than the motor input power by the power dissipated in the armature 
resistance. 
EXAMPLE 7.1 

372 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Finally, the electromagnetic torque is given by Eq. 7.16: 
EaIa 
18.75 × 103 
Tmech 
= 
-- 
~- 59.7 N. m 
O) m 
100zr 
b. In this case, Ea is larger than Vt and hence armature current will flow out of the machine, 
and thus the machine is operating as a generator. Hence 
and the terminal power is 
The electromagnetic power is 
Ea- Vt 
125- 124 
Ia = 
= 
=50A 
Ra 
0.02 
Vt la = 124 × 50 = 6.20 kW 
Eala = 125 x 50 = 6.25 kW 
and the electromagnetic torque is 
6.25 x 103 
Tmech = 
= 19.9 N" m 
lOOn" 
The speed of the separately-excited dc machine of Example 7.1 is observed to be 2950 r/min 
with the field current at the same value as in Example 7.1. For a terminal voltage of 125 V, 
calculate the terminal current and power and the electromagnetic power for the machine. Is it 
acting as a motor or a generator? 
Solution 
Terminal current: la = 104 A 
Terminal power: Vt la = 13.0 kW 
Electromechanical power: Eala 
-- 12.8 kW 
The machine is acting as a motor. 
EXAMPLE 7." 
Consider again the separately-excited dc machine of Example 7.1 with the field-current main- 
tained constant at the value that would produce a terminal voltage of 125 V at a speed of 
3000 r/min. The machine is observed to be operating as a motor with a terminal voltage of 
123 V and with a terminal power of 21.9 kW. Calculate the speed of the motor. 
II Solution 
The terminal current can be found from the terminal voltage and power as 
Input power 
21.9 x 103 
Ia = 
= 
= 178A 
V~ 
]23 

7.4 Analytical Fundamentals: Electric-Circuit Aspects 
373 
Thus the generated voltage is 
Ea = Vt-/aRa 
= 119.4 V 
From Eq. 7.8, the rotational speed can be found as 
(Ea) 
(119.4) =2866r/mi n 
n=n0 
~ 
=3000 
125 
Practice Problem 7.: 
Repeat Example 7.2 if the machine is observed to be operating as a generator with a terminal 
voltage of 124 V and a terminal power of 24 kW. 
Solution 
3069 r/min 
For compound machines, another variation may occur. Figure 7.12 shows a long- 
shunt connection in that the shunt field is connected directly across the line terminals 
with the series field between it and the armature. An alternative possibility is the 
short-shunt connection, illustrated in Fig. 7.13, with the shunt field directly across 
the armature and the series field between it and the line terminals. The series-field 
current is then IL instead of la, and the voltage equations are modified accordingly. 
There is so little practical difference between these two connections that the distinction 
can usually be ignored: unless otherwise stated, compound machines will be treated 
as though they were long-shunt connected. 
Although the difference between terminal voltage Vt and armature generated 
voltage Ea is comparatively small for normal operation, it has a definite bearing 
on performance characteristics. This voltage difference divided by the armature re- 
sistance determines the value of armature current Ia and hence the strength of the 
armature flux. Complete determination of machine behavior requires a similar inves- 
tigation of factors influencing the direct-axis flux or, more particularly, the net flux 
per pole @d. 
/a 
/L 
Figure 7.13 Short-shunt compound- 
generator connections. 

374 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
7.5 
ANALYTICAL FUNDAMENTALS: 
MAGNETIC-CIRCUIT ASPECTS 
The net flux per pole is that resulting from the combined mmf's of the field and 
armature windings. Although in a idealized, shunt- or separately-excited dc machine 
the armature mmf produces magnetic flux only along the quadrature axis, in a practical 
device the armature current produces flux along the direct axis, either directly as 
produced, for example, by a series field winding or indirectly through saturation 
effects as discussed in Section 7.3. The interdependence of the generated armature 
voltage Ea and magnetic circuit conditions in the machine is accordingly a function 
of the sum of all the mmf's on the polar- or direct-axis flux path. First we consider 
the mmf intentionally placed on the stator main poles to create the working flux, i.e., 
the main-field mmf, and then we include armature-reaction effects. 
7.5.1 
Armature 
Reaction 
Neglected 
With no load on the machine or with armature-reaction effects ignored, the resultant 
mmf is the algebraic sum of the mmf's acting on the main or direct axis. For the usual 
compound generator or motor having Nf shunt-field turns per pole and Ns series-field 
turns per pole, 
Main-field mmf = Nf lf + Ns Is 
(7.20) 
Note that the mmf of the series field can either add to or subtract from that of the 
shunt field; the sign convention of Eq. 7.20 is such that the mmf's add. For example, 
in the long-shunt connection of Fig. 7.12, this would correspond to the cumulative 
series-field connection in which Is = Ia. If the connection of this series field-winding 
were to be reversed such that Is = -Ia, forming a differential series-field connection, 
then the mmf of the series field would subtract from that of the shunt field. 
Additional terms will appear in Eq. 7.20 when there are additional field windings 
on the main poles and when, unlike the compensating windings of Section 7.9, they 
are wound concentric with the normal field windings to permit specialized control. 
When either the series or the shunt field is absent, the corresponding term in Eq. 7.20 
naturally is omitted. 
Equation 7.20 thus sums up in ampere-turns per pole the gross mmf of the main- 
field windings acting on the main magnetic circuit. The magnetization curve for a 
dc machine is generally given in terms of current in only the principal field winding, 
which is almost invariably the shunt-field winding when one is present. The mmf units 
of such a magnetization curve and of Eq. 7.20 can be made the same by one of two 
rather obvious steps. The field current on the magnetization curve can be multiplied 
by the turns per pole in that winding, giving a curve in terms of ampere-turns per pole; 
or both sides of Eq. 7.20 can be divided by Nf, converting the units to the equivalent 
current in the Nf coil alone which produces the same mmf. Thus 
Gross mmf- If + 
~ 
Is 
equivalent shunt-field amperes 
(7.21) 

7.5 
Analytical Fundamentals: Magnetic-Circuit Aspects 
375 
Mmf or shunt-field current, per unit 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
320 ..... i! 
~ ...... 
illl[ 
[, 
l 
ija:=o[ 
]_,~ 
280 [:~ii 
:[[i ....... 
.[.fill( 
!.~'I[ ....... ''b/4 ....... 
.... .......... 
::: i ''4..i .......... 
' |i--{[ ...... :' ~"~ ~ 
5 
f[[:~:[["~: 
~
~
 
"~- 
" ] 
"- ~ :-+~" 
'a -- 600 
-
-
 
:: !::i 
240 [[[[[[i 
220 ........ i ........ 
~ .... 
i 
J 
> 
200 
e~o 180 
> 160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
1.2 
ii/l ........... [ ............... i ........ iiii~~~~~2 
I a= 400 ........ ]. 
1.0 
[[ 
~ 
[[[][ ...... /~;....7__j 
a-- 00 [ '[[.[][- 
i 
........ -~/..T7 
..... l' 
~,"I 
J, 
, ,
~
 
2 
7 
. 
................ , ................ 
.................. 
:.: 
~ ~ 
~.o~ [...ii • ....... k 
:2.~_4_:ii[._i Speed for'ail curves : 'i200 rPm [-T-- 0.6 
I0 
I 
b 
~ ..................... i 
I i I I I i I I I i 
I l 
0.4 
, d~ 
,~ 
{ ....... [[[[[ Scale for mmf in A. turns per -[[[[ 
[ 
i .......... pole based on 1000 shunt-field .............. i 
i 
e 
, ..................... 
t .............. 
..... 
t, 
~>t 
[7 
;[~!ii[~_~~[ 
turns per pole 
i 
[ ~ i 
~ 
~ 
.... T 
.............. 
-' 
0.2 
t 
i 
i ......... I 
..... 
i 
o 
0 
1.0 
2.0 
7.0 
8.0 
9.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0 
Shunt-field current, A 
0 
1,000 
2,000 
3,000 
4,000 
5,000 
6,000 
7,000 
8,000 
9,000 
Mmf, A • turn/pole 
Figure 7.14 
Magnetization curves for a 250-V 1200-r/min dc machine. Also 
shown are field-resistance lines for the discussion of self-excitation in 
Section 7.6.1. 
This latter procedure is often the more convenient and the one more commonly 
adopted. As discussed in conjunction with Eq. 7.20, the connection of the series field 
winding will determine whether or not the series-field mmf adds to or subtracts from 
that of the main field winding. 
An example of a no-load magnetization characteristic is given by the curve 
for Ia = 0 in Fig. 7.14, with values representative of those for a 100-kW, 250-V, 
1200-r/min generator. Note that the mmf scale is given in both shunt-field current 
and ampere-turns per pole, the latter being derived from the former on the basis of a 
1000 turns-per-pole shunt field. The characteristic can also be presented in normalized, 
or per-unit, form, as shown by the upper mmf and fight-hand voltage scales. On these 
scales, 1.0 per-unit field current or mmf is that required to produce rated voltage at 
rated speed when the machine is unloaded; similarly, 1.0 per-unit voltage equals rated 
voltage. 
Use of the magnetization curve with generated voltage, rather than flux, plotted 
on the vertical axis may be somewhat complicated by the fact that the speed of a 

376 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
dc machine need not remain constant and that speed enters into the relation between 
flux and generated voltage. Hence, generated voltage ordinates correspond to a unique 
machine speed. The generated voltage Ea at any speed O)m is given by Eqs. 7.7 and 
7.8, repeated here in terms of the steady-state values of generated voltage. 
Ea=(Wrn) 
EaOogmO 
(7.22) 
or, in terms of rotational speed in r/min, 
(no) 
Ea = 
Ea0 
(7.23) 
In these equations, O)m0 and no are the magnetizing-curve speed in rad/sec and r/min 
respectively and Ea0 is the corresponding generated voltage. 
-XAMPLE 
7.: 
A 100-kW, 250-V, 400-A, long-shunt compound generator has an armature resistance (including 
brushes) of 0.025 g2, a series-field resistance of 0.005 ~, and the magnetization curve of 
Fig. 7.14. There are 1000 shunt-field turns per pole and three series-field turns per pole. The 
series field is connected in such a fashion that positive armature current produces direct-axis 
mmf which adds to that of the shunt field. 
Compute the terminal voltage at rated terminal current when the shunt-field current is 
4.7 A and the speed is 1150 r/min. Neglect the effects of armature reaction. 
II Solution 
As is shown in Fig. 7.12, for a long-shunt connection the armature and series field-currents are 
equal. Thus 
Is = la = IL + If = 400+4.7 = 405 A 
From Eq. 7.21 the main-field gross mmf is 
Gross mmf = If + (-~) 
Is 
= 4.7 + (10-~) 405 = 5.9 
equivalent shunt-field amperes 
By examining the la = 0 curve of Fig. 7.14 at this equivalent shunt-field current, one 
reads a generated voltage of 274 V. Accordingly, the actual emf at a speed of 1150 r/min can 
be found from Eq. 7.23 
(n) 
(1150) 
Ea = 
b 
Ea0 = 
274 = 263 V 
no 
Then 
Vt = 
Ea - la(ga + Rs) = 263 -405(0.025 + 0.005) = 251V 

7.5 Analytical Fundamentals: Magnetic-Circuit Aspects 
377 
Repeat Example 7.3 for a terminal current of 375 A and a speed of 1190 r/min. 
Solution 
257 V 
7.5.2 
Effects 
of Armature 
Reaction 
Included 
As described in Section 7.3, current in the armature winding gives rise to a demagne- 
tizing effect caused by a cross-magnetizing armature reaction. Analytical inclusion of 
this effect is not straightforward because of the nonlinearities involved. One common 
approach is to base analyses on the measured performance of the machine in question 
or for one of similar design and frame size. Data are taken with both the field and 
armature excited, and the tests are conducted so that the effects on generated emf of 
varying both the main-field excitation and the armature mmf can be noted. 
One form of summarizing and correlating the results is illustrated in Fig. 7.14. 
Curves are plotted not only for the no-load characteristic (I~ -- 0) but also for a family 
of values of Ia. In the analysis of machine performance, the inclusion of armature 
reaction then becomes simply a matter of using the magnetization curve corresponding 
to the armature current involved. Note that the ordinates of all these curves give values 
of armature-generated voltage Ea, not terminal voltage under load. Note also that all 
the curves tend to merge with the air-gap line as the saturation of the iron decreases. 
The load-saturation curves are displaced to the right of the no-load curve by an 
amount which is a function of I~. The effect of armature reaction then is approximately 
the same as a demagnetizing mmf Far acting on the main-field axis. This additional 
term can then be included in Eq. 7.20, with the result that the net direct-axis mmf can 
be assumed to be 
Net mmf = gross mmf- 
Far 
-- Nflf -Jr- Nsls - 
AR 
(7.24) 
The no-load magnetization curve can then be used as the relation between gen- 
erated emf and net excitation under load with the armature reaction accounted for as 
a demagnetizing mmf. Over the normal operating range (about 240 to about 300 V 
for the machine of Fig. 7.14), the demagnetizing effect of armature reaction may be 
assumed to be approximately proportional to the armature current. 
The reader should be aware that the amount of armature reaction present in 
Fig. 7.14 is chosen so that some of its disadvantageous effects will appear in a pro- 
nounced form in subsequent numerical examples and problems illustrating generator 
and motor performance features. It is definitely more than one would expect to find 
in a normal, well-designed machine operating at normal currents. 
Consider again the long-shunt compound dc generator of Example 7.3. As in Example 7.3, 
compute the terminal voltage at rated terminal current when the shunt-field current is 4.7 A 
and the speed is 1150 r/min. In this case however, include the effects of armature reaction. 
EXAMPLE 7.4 

378 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
II Solution 
As calculated in Example 7.3, Is = la = 400 A and the gross mmf is equal to 5.9 equivalent 
shunt-field amperes. From the curve labeled Ia = 400 in Fig. 7.14 (based upon a rated terminal 
current of 400 A), the corresponding generated emf is found to be 261 V (as compared to 274 V 
with armature reaction neglected). Thus from Eq. 7.23, the actual generated voltage at a speed 
of 1150 r/min is equal to 
(n) 
(1150) 
Ea -- 
-- 
Ea0 = 
261 = 250 V 
no 
~ ]  
Then 
Vt -- Ea - 
la(Ra + Rs) = 250 - 405(0.025 + 0.005) = 238 V 
-XAMPLE 
7.! 
To counter the effects of armature reaction, a fourth turn is added to the series field winding 
of the dc generator of Examples 7.3 and 7.4, increasing its resistance to 0.007 g2. Repeat the 
terminal-voltage calculation of Example 7.4. 
n Solution 
As in Examples 7.3 and 7.4, Is = la = 405 A. The main-field mmf can then be calculated as 
(~ff) 
( 4 )  
Gross mmf = 
If -+- 
Ns 
/~ = 4.7 + 
~ 
405 
= 6.3 
equivalent shunt-field amperes 
From the la = 400 curve of Fig. 7.14 with an equivalent shunt-field current of 6.3 A, one 
reads a generated voltage 269 V which corresponds to an emf at 1150 r/min of 
1150) 
Ea = 
~ 
269 = 258 V 
The terminal voltage can now be calculated as 
Vt = Ea - la (Ra + Rs) = 258 - 405(0.025 + 0.007) -- 245 V 
Repeat Example 7.5 assuming that a fifth turn is added to the series field winding, bringing its 
total resistance to 0.009 if2. 
Solution 
250 V 

7.6 Analysis of Steady-State Performance 
379 
7.6 
ANALYSIS OF STEADY-STATE 
PERFORMANCE 
Although exactly the same principles apply to the analysis of a dc machine acting as 
a generator as to one acting as a motor, the general nature of the problems ordinarily 
encountered is somewhat different for the two methods of operation. For a generator, 
the speed is usually fixed by the prime mover, and problems often encountered are 
to determine the terminal voltage corresponding to a specified load and excitation or 
to find the excitation required for a specified load and terminal voltage. For a motor, 
however, problems frequently encountered are to determine the speed corresponding 
to a specific load and excitation or to find the excitation required for specified load and 
speed conditions; terminal voltage is often fixed at the value of the available source. 
The routine techniques of applying the common basic principles therefore differ to 
the extent that the problems differ. 
7.6.1 
Generator Analysis 
Since the main-field current is independent of the generator voltage, separately-excited 
generators are the simplest to analyze. For a given load, the equivalent main-field 
excitation is given by Eq. 7.21 and the associated armature-generated voltage Ea 
is determined by the appropriate magnetization curve. This voltage, together with 
Eq. 7.17 or 7.18, fixes the terminal voltage. 
Shunt-excited generators will be found to self-excite under properly chosen oper- 
ating conditions. Under these conditions, the generated voltage will build up sponta- 
neously (typically initiated by the presence of a small amount of residual magnetism 
in the field structure) to a value ultimately limited by magnetic saturation. In self- 
excited generators, the shunt-field excitation depends on the terminal voltage and the 
series-field excitation depends on the armature current. Dependence of shunt-field 
current on terminal voltage can be incorporated graphically in an analysis by drawing 
the field-resistance line, the line 0a in Fig. 7.14, on the magnetization curve. The 
field-resistance line 0a is simply a graphical representation of Ohm's law applied 
to the shunt field. It is the locus of the terminal voltage versus shunt-field-current 
operating point. Thus, the line 0a is drawn for Rf -- 50 ~ and hence passes through 
the origin and the point (1.0 A, 50 V). 
The tendency of a shunt-connected generator to self-excite can be seen by exam- 
ining the buildup of voltage for an unloaded shunt generator. When the field circuit 
is closed, the small voltage from residual magnetism (the 6-V intercept of the mag- 
netization curve, Fig. 7.14) causes a small field current. If the flux produced by the 
resulting ampere-turns adds to the residual flux, progressively greater voltages and 
field currents are obtained. If the field ampere-turns opposes the residual magnetism, 
the shunt-field terminals must be reversed to obtain buildup. 
This process can be seen with the aid of Fig. 7.15. In Fig. 7.15, the generated 
voltage ea is shown in series with the armature inductance La and resistance Ra. The 
shunt-field winding, shown connected across the armature terminals, is represented 
by its inductance Lf and resistance Rf. Recognizing that since there is no load current 

380 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Z a 
f"V"V"V~ 
R a 
i a -- 0 
)~rif 4- 
) ) Lf 
Shunt 
) 
field 
vt 
.~ Rf 
Figure 7.15 
Equivalent circuit for 
analysis of voltage buildup in a 
self-excited dc generator. 
on the generator (iL -- 0), ia -- if and thus the differential equation describing the 
buildup of the field current if is 
dif 
(La -q- Lf) --7- -- ea - (ga -+- Rf)if 
(7.25) 
dt 
From this equation it is clear that as long as the net voltage across the winding 
inductances ea -- if(Ra q- Rf) is positive, the field current and the corresponding 
generated voltage will increase. Buildup continues until the volt-ampere relations 
represented by the magnetization curve and the field-resistance line are simultaneously 
satisfied, which occurs at their intersection ea - (Ra -k- Rf) if; in this case at ea - 250 V 
for the line 0a in Fig. 7.14. From Eq. 7.25, it is clear that the field resistance line 
should also include the armature resistance. However, this resistance is in general 
much less than the field and is typically neglected. 
Notice that if the field resistance is too high, as shown by line 0b for Re -- 100 
in Fig. 7.14, the intersection is at very low voltage and buildup is not obtained. 
Notice also that if the field-resistance line is essentially tangent to the lower part of 
the magnetization curve, corresponding to a field resistance of 57 f2 in Fig. 7.14, 
the intersection may be anywhere from about 60 to 170 V, resulting in very unstable 
conditions. The corresponding resistance is the critical field resistance, above which 
buildup will not be obtained. The same buildup process and the same conclusions 
apply to compound generators; in a long-shunt compound generator, the series-field 
mmf created by the shunt-field current is entirely negligible. 
For a shunt generator, the magnetization curve for the appropriate value of Ia is 
the locus of Ea versus If. The field-resistance line is the locus Vt versus If. Under 
steady-state operating conditions, at any value of If, the vertical distance between the 
line and the curve must be the la Ra drop at the load corresponding to that condition. 
Determination of the terminal voltage for a specified armature current is then simply 
a matter of finding where the line and curve are separated vertically by the proper 
amount; the ordinate of the field-resistance line at that field current is then the terminal 
voltage. For a compound generator, however, the series-field mmf causes correspond- 
ing points on the line and curve to be displaced horizontally as well as vertically. The 
horizontal displacement equals the series-field mmf measured in equivalent shunt- 
field amperes, and the vertical displacement is still the la Ra drop. 

7.6 
Analysis of Steady-State Performance 
381 
Great precision is evidently not obtained from the foregoing computational pro- 
cess. The uncertainties caused by magnetic hysteresis in dc machines make high 
precision unattainable in any event. In general, the magnetization curve on which the 
machine operates on any given occasion may range from the rising to the falling part 
of the rather fat hysteresis loop for the magnetic circuit of the machine, depending 
essentially on the magnetic history of the iron. The curve used for analysis is usually 
the mean magnetization curve, and thus the results obtained are substantially correct 
on the average. Significant departures from the average may be encountered in the 
performance of any dc machine at a particular time, however. 
A 100-kW, 250-V, 400-A, 1200-r/min dc shunt generator has the magnetization curves (includ- 
ing armature-reaction effects) of Fig. 7.14. The armature-circuit resistance, including brushes, 
is 0.025 ~2. The generator is driven at a constant speed of 1200 r/min, and the excitation is 
adjusted (by varying the shunt-field rheostat) to give rated voltage at no load. 
(a) Determine the terminal voltage at an armature current of 400 A. (b) A series field of 
four turns per pole having a resistance of 0.005 ~ is to be added. There are 1000 turns per 
pole in the shunt field. The generator is to be flat-compounded so that the full-load voltage 
is 250 V when the shunt-field rheostat is adjusted to give a no-load voltage of 250 V. Show 
how a resistance across the series field (referred to as a series-field diverter) can be adjusted to 
produce the desired performance. 
II Solution 
a. The 50 ~ field-resistance line 0a (Fig. 7.14) passes through the 250-V, 5.0-A point of the 
no-load magnetization curve. At Ia = 400 A 
IaR, = 400 x 0.025 = 10 V 
Thus the operating point under this condition corresponds to a condition for which the 
terminal voltage Vt (and hence the shunt-field voltage) is 10 V less than the generated 
voltage Ea. 
A vertical distance of 10 V exists between the magnetization curve for I~ = 400 A 
and the field-resistance line at a field current of 4.1 A, corresponding to Vt = 205 V. The 
associated line current is 
IL = /~- If = 400--4 = 396A 
Note that a vertical distance of 10 V also exists at a field current of 1.2 A, 
corresponding to Vt -- 60 V. The voltage-load curve is accordingly double-valued in this 
region. It can be shown that this operating point is unstable and that the point for which 
Vt = 205 V is the normal operating point. 
b. For the no-load voltage to be 250 V, the shunt-field resistance must be 50 fl and the 
field-resistance line is 0a (Fig. 7.14). At full load, If = 5.0 A because Vt = 250 V. Then 
/~ = 400 + 5.0 = 405 A 
and 
E, = Vt +/~(Ra + Rp) = 250 + 405(0.025 + Rp) 
EXAMPLE 7.6 

382 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
where Rp is the parallel combination of the series-field resistance R~ = 0.005 fl and the 
diverter resistance Rd 
RsRd 
Rp -- (Rs + Rd) 
The series field and the diverter resistor are in parallel, and thus the shunt-field 
current can be calculated as 
( R d )  
=405(Rp) 
Is=405 
R,+Rd 
-~s 
and the equivalent shunt-field amperes can be calculated from Eq. 7.21 as 
4 
4 
/net -- If+ 1-~I~ = 5.0+ 1--6-0-6/s 
= 5.0 + 1.62 (RRss) 
This equation can be solved for Rp which can be, in turn, substituted (along with 
Rs = 0.005 f2) in the equation for Ea to yield 
Ea -- 253.9 + 1.251net 
This can be plotted on Fig. 7.14 (Ea on the vertical axis and/net on the horizontal 
axis). Its intersection with the magnetization characteristic for/a -- 400 A (strictly 
speaking, of course, a curve for/a -- 405 A should be used, but such a small distinction is 
obviously meaningless here) gives/net = 6.0 A. 
Thus 
Rs(Inet- 5.0) 
Rp = 
1.62 
= 0.0031 f2 
and 
Rd = 0.0082 f2 
Repeat part (b) of Example 7.6, calculating the diverter resistance which would give a full-load 
voltage of 240-V if the excitation is adjusted for a no-load voltage of 250-V. 
Solution 
Rd = 1.9 mr2 
7.6.2 
Motor Analysis 
The terminal voltage of a motor is usually held substantially constant or controlled 
to a specific value. Hence, motor analysis most nearly resembles that for separately- 
excited generators, although speed is now an important variable and often the one 

7.6 
Analysis of Steady-State Performance 
383 
whose value is to be found. Analytical essentials include Eqs. 7.17 and 7.18 relating 
terminal voltage and generated voltage (counter emf); Eq. 7.21 for the main-field 
excitation; the magnetization curve for the appropriate armature current as the graph- 
ical relation between counter emf and excitation; Eq. 7.13 showing the dependence 
of electromagnetic torque on flux and armature current; and Eq. 7.14 relating counter 
emf to flux and speed. The last two relations are particularly significant in motor 
analysis. The former is pertinent because the interdependence of torque and the sta- 
tor and rotor field strengths must often be examined. The latter is the usual medium 
for determining motor speed from other specified operating conditions. 
Motor speed corresponding to a given armature current la can be found by first 
computing the actual generated voltage Ea from Eq. 7.17 or 7.18. Next the main-field 
excitation can be obtained from Eq. 7.21. Since the magnetization curve will be plotted 
for a constant speed corn0, which in general will be different from the actual motor 
speed tom, the generated voltage read from the magnetization curve at the foregoing 
main-field excitation will correspond to the correct flux conditions but to speed tom0. 
Substitution in Eq. 7.22 then yields the actual motor speed. 
Note that knowledge of the armature current is postulated at the start of this 
process. When, as is frequently the case, the speed at a stated shaft power or torque 
output is to be found, an iterative procedure based on assumed values of Ia usually 
forms the basis for finding the solution. 
A 100-hp, 250-V dc shunt motor has the magnetization curves (including armature-reaction 
effects) of Fig. 7.14. The armature circuit resistance, including brushes, is 0.025 ~2. No-load 
rotational losses are 2000 W and the stray-load losses equal 1.0% of the output. The field 
rheostat is adjusted for a no-load speed of 1100 r/min. 
a. As an example of computing points on the speed-load characteristic, determine the speed 
in r/min and output in horsepower (1 hp = 746 W) corresponding to an armature current 
of 400 A. 
b. Because the speed-load characteristic observed to in part (a) is considered undesirable, a 
stabilizing winding consisting of 1-1/2 cumulative series turns per pole is to be added. 
The resistance of this winding is assumed negligible. There are 1000 turns per pole in the 
shunt field. Compute the speed corresponding to an armature current of 400 A. 
II Solution 
a. At no load, Ea -- 250 V. The corresponding point on the 1200-r/min no-load saturation 
curve is 
(1200) 
Ea0 = 250 
1-~ 
=- 273 V 
for which If = 5.90 A. The field current remains constant at this value. 
At Ia = 400 A, the actual counter emf is 
Ea = 250- 400 × 0.025 = 240 V 
EXAMPLE 7.7 

384 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
From Fig. 7.14 with la = 400 and If = 5.90, the value of Ea would be 261 V if the speed 
were 1200 r/min. The actual speed is then found from Eq. 7.23 
n = 1200 \ 261 
= 1100 r/min 
The electromagnetic power is 
E, Ia = 240 x 400 = 96 kW 
Deduction of the rotational losses leaves 94 kW. With stray load losses accounted for, the 
power output P0 is given by 
94 kW - 0.01 P0 = P0 
or 
Po = 93.1 kW = 124.8 hp 
Note that the speed at this load is the same as at no load, indicating that armature- 
reaction effects have caused an essentially fiat speed-load curve. 
b. With If = 5.90 A and Is = la = 400 A, the main-field mmf in equivalent shunt-field 
amperes is 
( 1.5 ) 
5.90 + k, 
400 = 6.50 A 
From Fig. 7.14 the corresponding value of Ea at 1200 r/min would be 271 V. Accordingly, 
the speed is now 
/ 
n=1200\~ 
=1063r/min 
The power output is the same as in part (a). The speed-load curve is now drooping, due to 
the effect of the stabilizing winding. 
Repeat Example 7.7 for an armature current of la = 200 A. 
Solution 
a. Speed = 1097 r/min and P0 = 46.5 kW = 62.4 hp 
b. Speed = 1085 r/min 
7.7 
PERMANENT-MAGNET 
DC MACHINES 
Permanent-magnet dc machines are widely found in a wide variety of low-power 
applications. The field winding is replaced by a permanent magnet, resulting in 
simpler construction. Permanent magnets offer a number of useful benefits in these 

7.7 
Permanent-Magnet DC Machines 
385 
applications. Chief among these is that they do not require external excitation and its 
associated power dissipation to create magnetic fields in the machine. The space re- 
quired for the permanent magnets may be less than that required for the field winding, 
and thus permanent-magnet machines may be smaller, and in some cases cheaper, 
than their externally-excited counterparts. 
Alternatively, permanent-magnet dc machines are subject to limitations imposed 
by the permanent magnets themselves. These include the risk of demagnetization 
due to excessive currents in the motor windings or due to overheating of the magnet. 
In addition, permanent magnets are somewhat limited in the magnitude of air-gap 
flux density that they can produce. However, with the development of new magnetic 
materials such as samarium-cobalt and neodymium-iron-boron (Section 1.6), these 
characteristics are becoming less and less restrictive for permanent-magnet machine 
design. 
Figure 7.16 shows a disassembled view of a small permanent-magnet dc mo- 
tor. Notice that the rotor of this motor consists of a conventional dc armature with 
commutator segments and brushes. There is also a small permanent magnet on one 
end which constitutes the field of an ac tachometer which can be used in applications 
where precise speed control is required. 
Unlike the salient-pole field structure characteristic of a dc machine with external 
field excitation (see Fig. 7.23), permanent-magnet motors such as that of Fig. 7.16 
typically have a smooth stator structure consisting of a cylindrical shell (or fraction 
thereof) of uniform thickness permanent-magnet material magnetized in the radial 
direction. Such a structure is illustrated in Fig. 7.17, where the arrows indicate the 
Figure 7.16 Disassembled permanent-magnet dc motor. A permanent-magnet ac tachometer 
is also included in the same housing for speed control. (Buehler Products Inc.) 

386 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Radially magnetized 
permanent magnets 
(arrows indicate direction 
of magnetization) 
Figure 7.17 
Cross section of a typical permanent-magnet 
motor. Arrows indicate the direction of magnetization in the 
permanent magnets. 
direction of magnetization. The rotor of Fig. 7.17 has winding slots and has a com- 
mutator and brushes, as in all dc machines. Notice also that the outer shell in these 
motors serves a dual purpose: it is made up of a magnetic material and thus serves as 
a return path for magnetic flux as well as a support for the magnets. 
EXAMPLE 
7.8 
Figure 7.18a defines the dimensions of a permanent-magnet dc motor similar to that of Fig. 7.17. 
Assume the following values: 
Rotor radius Rr -- 1.2 cm 
Gap length tg = 0.05 cm 
Magnet thickness tm = 0.35 cm 
Also assume that both the rotor and outer shell are made of infinitely permeable magnetic 
material (# ~ c¢) and that the magnet is neodymium-iron-boron (see Fig. 1.19). 
Ignoring the effects of rotor slots, estimate the magnetic flux density B in the air gap of 
this motor. 
II Solution 
Because the rotor and outer shell are assumed to be made of material with infinite magnetic 
permeability, the motor can be represented by a magnetic equivalent circuit consisting of an 
air gap of length 2tg in series with a section of neodymium-iron-boron of length 2tm (see 
Fig. 7.18b). Note that this equivalent circuit is approximate because the cross-sectional area of 
the flux path in the motor increases with increasing radius, whereas it is assumed to be constant 
in the equivalent circuit. 
The solution can be written down by direct analogy with Example 1.9. Replacing the 
air-gap length g with 2tg and the magnet length lm with 2tm, the equation for the load line can 
be written as 
Bm -- -/z0 
nm= -7#0nm 

7.7 
Permanent-Magnet DC Machines 
387 
neodymium-iron-boron magnet 
t magnet 
Outer she 
/z --+ c 
otor tooth 
~CX~ 
2tm 
2tg 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 7.18 
(a) Dimension definitions for the motor of Fig. 7.17, (b) approximate 
magnetic equivalent circuit. 
This relationship can be plotted on Fig. 1.19 to find the operating point from its intersection 
with the dc magnetization curve for neodymium-iron-boron. Alternatively, recognizing that, 
in SI units, the dc magnetization curve for neodymium-iron-boron is a straight line of the 
form 
Bm = 1.06#oHm + 1.25 
we find that 
Bm= Bg -- 1.09 T 
)ractice Problem 7. 
Estimate the magnetic flux density in the motor of Example 7.8 if the rotor radius is increased 
to Rr -- 1.3 cm and the magnetic thickness is decreased to tm = 0.25 cm. 
Solution 
Bm = Bg ----- 1.03 T 
Figure 7.19 shows an exploded view of an alternate form of permanent-magnet 
dc motor. In this motor, the armature windings are made into the form of a thin disk 
(with no iron in the armature). As in any dc motor, brushes are used to commutate 
the armature current, contacting the commutator portion of the armature which is at 
its inner radius. Currents in the disk armature flow radially, and the disk is placed 
between two sets of permanent magnets which create axial flux through the armature 
winding. The combination of axial magnetic flux and radial currents produces a torque 
which results in rotation, as in any dc motor. This motor configuration can be shown 
to produce large acceleration (due to low rotor inertia), no cogging torque (due to the 
fact that the rotor is nonmagnetic), and long brush life and high-speed capability (due 

388 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Figure 7.19 Exploded view of a disk armature permanent- 
magnet servomotor. Magnets are Alnico. (PMI Motion 
Technologies.) 
to the fact that the armature inductance is low and thus there will be little arcing at 
the commutator segments). 
The principal difference between permanent-magnet dc machines and those dis- 
cussed previously in this chapter is that they have a fixed source of field-winding 
flux which is supplied by a permanent magnet. As a result, the equivalent circuit for 
a permanent-magnet dc motor is identical to that of the externally-excited dc motor 
except that there are no field-winding connections. Figure 7.20 shows the equivalent 
circuit for a permanent-magnet dc motor. 

7.7 
Permanent-Magnet DC Machines 
389 
Ia 
R a 
o------~ ,V~ 
+ 
V t 
Ea = Kmogm 
0 
Figure 7.20 
Equivalent circuit of 
a permanent-magnet dc motor. 
From Eq. 7.14, the speed-voltage term for a dc motor can be written in the form 
Ea = Ka~dCOm where ~a is the net flux along the field-winding axis and Ka is a 
geometric constant. In a permanent-magnet dc machine, ~a is constant and thus 
Eq. 7.14 can be reduced to 
Ea-- Kmogm 
(7.26) 
where 
Km = Ka~d 
(7.27) 
is known as the torque constant of the motor and is a function of motor geometry and 
magnet properties. 
Finally the torque of the machine can be easily found from Eq. 7.16 as 
Eala 
Tmech- 
= Kmla 
(7.28) 
O)m 
In other words, the torque of a permanent magnet motor is given by the product of 
the torque constant and the armature current. 
"XAMPLE 7.! 
A permanent-magnet dc motor is known to have an armature resistance of 1.03 g2. When 
operated at no load from a dc source of 50 V, it is observed to operate at a speed of 2100 r/min 
and to draw a current of 1.25 A. Find (a) the torque constant Km, (b) the no-load rotational 
losses of the motor and (c) the power output of the motor when it is operating at 1700 r/min 
from a 48-V source. 
II Solution 
a. From the equivalent circuit of Fig. 7.20, the generated voltage Ea can be found as 
Ea = Vt-IaRa 
= 50- 1.25 × 1.03 = 48.7 V 
At a speed of 2100 r/min, 
(2100r) 
(2rrrad)(1 
man) 
09 m -" 
X 
X 
min 
60 s 
= 220 rad/sec 

390 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Therefore, from Eq. 7.26, 
Ea 
48.7 
Km = 
-- 
= 0.22 V/(rad/sec) 
O) m 
220 
b. At no load, all the power supplied to the generated voltage Ea is used to supply rotational 
losses. Therefore 
Rotational losses = Eala "-- 48.7 x 1.25 = 61 W 
c. At 1700 r/min, 
O.) m 
= 
1700 
= 178 rad/sec 
and 
Ea = Km(.Om = 0.22 x 178 = 39.2 V 
The input current can now be found as 
Vt - 
Ea 
48- 39.2 
/a= 
-- 
Ra 
1.03 
= 8.54 A 
The electromagnetic power can be calculated as 
Pmech =-- Eala -- 39.2 X 8.54 = 335 W 
Assuming the rotational losses to be constant at their no-load value (certainly an 
approximation), the output shaft power can be calculated: 
Pshaft 
-- 
Pmech 
-- rotational losses = 274 W 
The armature resistance of a small dc motor is measured to be 178 mr2. With an applied voltage 
of 9 V, the motor is observed to operate at a no-load speed of 14,600 r/min while drawing a 
current of 437 mA. Calculate (a) the rotational loss and (b) the motor torque constant Kin. 
Solution 
a. Rotational loss = 3.90 W 
b. Km = 5.84 x 10 .3 V/(rad/sec) 
7.8 
COMMUTATION 
AND INTERPOLES 
One of the most important limiting factors on the satisfactory operation of a dc machine 
is the ability to transfer the necessary armature current through the brush contact at the 
commutator without sparking and without excessive local losses and heating of the 
brushes and commutator. Sparking causes destructive blackening, pitting, and wear 
of both the commutator and the brushes, conditions which rapidly become worse 
and burn away the copper and carbon. Sparking may be caused by faulty mechanical 

7,8 
Commutation and Interpoles 
39t 
conditions, such as chattering of the brushes or a rough, unevenly worn commutator, 
or, as in any switching problem, by electrical conditions. The latter conditions are 
seriously influenced by the armature mmf and the resultant flux wave. 
As indicated in Section 7.2, a coil undergoing commutation is in transition be- 
tween two groups of armature coils: at the end of the commutation period, the coil cur- 
rent must be equal but opposite to that at the beginning. Figure 7.7b shows the armature 
in an intermediate position during which the coils in slots 1 and 7 are being commu- 
tated. The commutated coils are short-circuited by the brushes. During this period the 
brushes must continue to conduct the armature current Ia from the armature winding to 
the external circuit. The short-circuited coil constitutes an inductive circuit with time- 
varying resistances at the brush contact, with rotational voltages induced in the coil, 
and with both conductive and inductive coupling to the rest of the armature winding. 
The attainment of good commutation is more an empirical art than a quantitative 
science. The principal obstacle to quantitative analysis lies in the electrical behavior of 
the carbon-copper (brush-commutator) contact film. Its resistance is nonlinear and is 
a function of current density, current direction, temperature, brush material, moisture, 
and atmospheric pressure. Its behavior in some respects is like that of an ionized gas or 
plasma. The most significant fact is that an unduly high current density in a portion of 
the brush surface (and hence an unduly high energy density in that part of the contact 
film) results in sparking and a breakdown of the film at that point. The boundary film 
also plays an important part in the mechanical behavior of the rubbing surfaces. At 
high altitudes, definite steps must be taken to preserve it, or extremely-rapid brush 
wear takes place. 
The empirical basis of securing sparkless commutation, then, is to avoid excessive 
current densities at any point in the copper-carbon contact. This basis, combined with 
the principle of utilizing all material to the fullest extent, indicates that optimum 
conditions are obtained when the current density is uniform over the brush surface 
during the entire commutation period. A linear change of current with time in the 
commutated coil, corresponding to linear commutation as shown in Fig. 7.8, brings 
about this condition and is accordingly the optimum. 
The principal factors tending to produce linear commutation are changes in brush- 
contact resistance resulting from the linear decrease in area at the trailing brush edge 
and linear increase in area at the leading edge. Several electrical factors mitigate 
against linearity. Resistance in the commutated coil is one example. Usually, however, 
the voltage drop at the brush contacts is sufficiently large (of the order of 1.0 V) in 
comparison with the resistance drop in a single armature coil to permit the latter 
to be ignored. Coil inductance is a much more serious factor. Both the voltage of 
self-induction in the commutated coil and the voltage of mutual-induction from other 
coils (particularly those in the same slot) undergoing commutation at the same time 
oppose changes in current in the commutated coil. The sum of these two voltages is 
often referred to as the reactance voltage. Its result is that current values in the short- 
circuited coil lag in time the values dictated by linear commutation. This condition is 
known as undercommutation or delayed commutation. 
Armature inductance thus tends to produce high losses and sparking at the trailing 
brush tip. For best commutation, inductance must be held to a minimum by using the 
fewest possible number of turns per armature coil and by using a multipolar design 

392 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
with a short armature. The effect of a given reactance voltage in delaying commutation 
is minimized when the resistive brush-contact voltage drop is significant compared 
with it. This fact is one of the main reasons for the use of carbon brushes with their 
appreciable contact drop. When good commutation is secured by virtue of resistance 
drops, the process is referred to as resistance commutation. It is typically used as the 
exclusive means only in fractional-horsepower machines. 
Another important factor in the commutation process is the rotational voltage in- 
duced in the short-circuited coil. Depending on its sign, this voltage may hinder or aid 
commutation. In Fig. 7.11, for example, cross-magnetizing armature reaction creates 
a definite flux in the interpolar region. The direction of the corresponding rotational 
voltage in the commutated coil is the same as the current under the immediately pre- 
ceding pole face. This voltage then encourages the continuance of current in the old 
direction and, like the resistance voltage, opposes its reversal. To aid commutation, 
the rotational voltage must oppose the reactance voltage. The general principle is 
to produce in the coil undergoing commutation a rotational voltage which approxi- 
mately compensates for the reactance voltage, a principle called voltage commutation. 
Voltage commutation is used in almost all modern integral-horsepower commutating 
machines. The appropriate flux density is introduced in the commutating zone by 
means of small, narrow poles located between the main poles. These auxiliary poles 
are called interpoles or commutating poles. 
The general appearance of interpoles and an approximate map of the flux pro- 
duced when they alone are excited are shown in Fig. 7.21. The interpoles are the 
smaller poles between the larger main poles in the dc-motor section shown in Fig. 7.23. 
The polarity of a commutating pole must be that of the main pole just ahead of it, i.e., 
in the direction of rotation for a generator, and just behind it for a motor. The interpole 
mmf must be sufficient to neutralize the cross-magnetizing armature mmf in the in- 
terpolar region and enough more to furnish the flux density required for the rotational 
voltage in the short-circuited armature coil to cancel the reactance voltage. Since 
both the armature mmf and the reactance voltage are proportional to the armature 
current, the commutating winding must be connected in series with the armature. To 
preserve the desired linearity, the commutating pole should operate at a relatively low 
flux level. By the use of commutating fields sparkless commutation can be obtained 
over a wide range in large dc machines. In accordance with the performance standards 
Interpole { 
leakage 
flux 
Effective(~/ \ 
interpole 
flux 
............................................................... 
Field 
~ I )  
iron 
i 
Commutating or 
:i~ 
Field 
interpole winding 
j 
~ii~ 
pole 
~.£Z~' 
!i~ii!i!iiiil iliii 
" 
.....E-, 
Commutating 
~, 
pole or interpole 
Armature 
iron 
Figure 7.21 
Interpoles and their associated component flux. 

7.9 
Compensating Windings 
393 
of NEMA, 1 general-purpose dc machines must be capable of carrying for one minute, 
with successful commutation, loads of 150 percent of the current corresponding to 
their continuous rating when operating with a field current equal to their rated-load 
excitation. 
7.9 
COMPENSATING WINDINGS 
For machines subjected to heavy overloads, rapidly changing loads, or operation with 
a weak main field, there is the possibility of trouble other than simply sparking at 
the brushes. At the instant when an armature coil is located at the peak of a badly 
distorted flux wave, the coil voltage may be high enough to break down the air 
between the adjacent segments to which the coil is connected and result in flashover, 
or arcing, between segments. The breakdown voltage here is not high, because the 
air near the commutator is in a condition favorable to breakdown, due to the presence 
of the plasma carrying the armature current between the brushes and the commutator. 
The maximum allowable voltage between segments is of the order of 30 to 40 V, 
a fact which limits the average voltage between segments to lower values and thus 
determines the minimum number of segments which can be used in a proposed design. 
Under transient conditions, high voltages between segments may result from the 
induced voltages associated with growth and decay of armature flux. Inspection of 
Fig. 7.10, for instance, may enable one to visualize very appreciable voltages of 
this nature being induced in a coil under the pole centers by the growth or decay 
of the armature flux shown in the sketch. Consideration of the sign of this induced 
voltage will show that it adds to the normal rotational emf when load is dropped 
from a generator or added to a motor. Flashing between segments may quickly spread 
around the entire commutator and, in addition to its possibly destructive effects on 
the commutator, constitutes a direct short circuit on the line. Even with interpoles 
present, therefore, armature reaction under the poles definitely limits the conditions 
under which a machine can operate. 
These limitations can be considerably extended by compensating or neutralizing 
the armature mmf under the pole faces. Such compensation can be achieved by means 
of a compensating or pole-face winding (Fig. 7.22) embedded in slots in the pole face 
and having a polarity opposite to that of the adjoining armature winding. The physical 
appearance of such a winding can be seen in the stator section of Fig. 7.23. Since the 
axis of the compensating winding is the same as that of the armature, it will almost 
completely neutralize the armature reaction of the armature conductors under the pole 
faces when it is given the proper number of turns. It must be connected in series with 
the armature in order to carry a proportional current. The net effect of the main field, 
armature, commutating winding, and compensating winding on the air-gap flux is that, 
except for the commutation zone, the resultant flux-density distribution is substantially 
the same as that produced by the main field alone (Fig. 7.11). Furthermore, the addition 
1 NEMA Standards Publication No. MG1-1998, Motors and Generators, Sections 23 and 24, National 
Electrical Manufactures Association, 300 North 17th Street, Suite 1847, Rosslyn, Virginia, 22209. 

394 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Commutating field 
or interpole 
Figure 7.22 
Section of dc machine showing 
compensating winding. 
of a compensating winding improves the speed of response of the machine because 
it reduces the armature-circuit time constant. 
The main disadvantage of pole-face windings is their expense. They are used in 
machines designed for heavy overloads or rapidly-changing loads (steel-mill motors 
are a good example of machines subjected to severe duty cycles) or in motors intended 
to operate over wide speed ranges by shunt-field control. By way of a schematic 
summary, Fig. 7.24 shows the circuit diagram of a compound machine with a com- 
pensating winding. The relative position of the coils in this diagram indicates that the 
commutating and compensating fields act along the armature axis, and the shunt and 
:~:i:, :ii~iiiii~!ii::i~i;ii~;i!ii 
~ 
,hi~i~i:i~i:i~!~:i,i~:i~i 
:~:ii~? : 
~ 
....... :::iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
Yi~ii!ii~!iiiiiiililiiiiiiiiiii!~i~:i 
:~ii,iiii~iii!i!i!iiG,i:!::,: 
~ 
~:!!i!i~iii~ii!i!~i,~'i! 
~I~ ~I:II~! 
;~:~,:~::,,:U:::::~,;; L: ~ 
~ 
~:i ~?iiiiii!ii~ i ~ i~:i:~: ,~ 
~ii!~!i 
~!~ii~!~:ilil 
~II!?~: 
YI,~I ~:' ~(i :~ ,i" 
..... ~!!~::i ~ _?~: 
Figure 7.23 
Section of a dc motor stator showing shunt and series coils, interpoles 
and pole-face compensating winding. (Westinghouse Electric Company.) 

7.10 
Series Universal Motors 
395 
o 
Tshunt 
/ field 
t_00_0 , 
Field ~ 
o 
rheostat ~ 
&9.L 
Series 
field 
Commutating 
winding 
( 
~ 
Armature 
o Compensating 
o 
winding 
Figure 7.24 
Schematic connection diagram 
of a dc machine. 
series fields act along the axis of the main poles. Rather complete control of air-gap 
flux around the entire armature periphery is thus achieved. 
7.10 
SERIES UNIVERSAL MOTORS 
Figure 7.25 shows a dc machine connection with a series-connected field winding. 
For this connection the direct-axis flux @d is proportional to the armature current. 
Hence from Eq. 7.14, the generated voltage Ea is proportional to the product of the 
armature current and the motor speed, and from Eq. 7.16 we see that the torque will 
be proportional to the square of the armature current. 
The dashed line in Fig. 7.26 shows a typical speed-torque characteristic for such 
a series-connected motor under dc operating conditions. Note that because the torque 
is proportional to the square of the armature current, the torque depends only upon 
the magnitude of the armature voltage and not its polarity; reversing the polarity of 
the applied voltage will not change the magnitude or direction of the applied torque. 
If the rotor and stator structures of a series connected motor are properly laminated 
to reduce ac eddy-current losses, the resultant motor is referred to as a series universal 
motor. The series universal motor has the convenient ability to run on either alternating 
or direct current and with similar characteristics. Such a single-phase series motor 
therefore is commonly called a universal motor. The torque angle is fixed by the brush 
position and is normally at its optimum value of 90 ° . If alternating current is supplied 
to a series universal motor, the torque will always be in the same direction, although 
it will pulsate in magnitude at twice line frequency. Average torque will be produced, 
and the performance of the motor will be generally similar to that with direct current. 
Series 
Ia 
field 
> 
+ 
Va 
Ea 
O 
Armature 
Figure 7.25 Series-connected 
universal machine. 

396 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
400 
300 
E 
o : 200 
~9 
100 
\. 
i 
60 Hz 
i 
J 
J i 
20 
40 
\ dc 
" 
"'4 
60 
80 
1 O0 
Percent rated speed 
Figure 7.26 Typical torque-speed 
characteristics of a series universal motor. 
Small universal motors are used where light weight is important, as in vac- 
uum cleaners, kitchen appliances, and portable tools, and usually operate at high 
speeds (1500 to 15,000 r/min). Typical characteristics are shown in Fig. 7.26. The ac 
and dc characteristics differ somewhat for two reasons: (1) With alternating current, 
reactance-voltage drops in the field and armature absorb part of the applied voltage; 
therefore for a specified current and torque the rotational counter emf generated in 
the armature is less than with direct current, and the speed tends to be lower. (2) With 
alternating current, the magnetic circuit may be appreciably saturated at the peaks of 
the current wave. Thus the rms value of the flux may be appreciably less with alternat- 
ing current than with the same rms value of direct current. The torque therefore tends 
to be less with alternating than with direct current. The universal motor provides the 
highest horsepower per dollar in the fractional-horsepower range, at the expense of 
noise, relatively short life, and high speed. 
To obtain control of the speed and torque of a series universal motor, the applied 
ac voltage may be varied by the use of a Triac, such as is discussed in Chapter 10. The 
firing angle of the Triac can be manually adjusted, as in a trigger-controlled electric 
drill, or it can be controlled by a speed control circuit, as in some portable tools and 
appliances. The combination of a series motor and a solid-state device provides an 
economical, controllable motor package. 
7.11 
SUMMARY 
This chapter has discussed the significant operating characteristics of dc machines. 
In general, the outstanding advantage of dc machines lies in their flexibility and 
versatility. Before the widespread availability of ac motor drives, dc machines were 
essentially the only choice available for many applications which required a high 
degree of control. Their principal disadvantages stem from the complexity associated 
with the armature winding and the commutator/brush system. Not only does this 
additional complexity increase the cost over competing ac machines, it also increases 
the need for maintenance and reduces the potential reliability of these machines. Yet 
the advantages of dc motors remain, and they continue to retain a strong competitive 
position in both large sizes for industrial applications and in smaller sizes for a wide 
variety of applications. 

7.12 
Problems 
397 
Dc generators are a simple solution to the problem of converting mechanical 
energy to electric energy in dc form, although ac generators feeding rectifier systems 
are certainly an option which must be considered. Among dc generators themselves, 
separately-excited and cumulatively-compounded, self-excited machines are the most 
common. Separately-excited generators have the advantage of permitting a wide range 
of output voltages, whereas self-excited machines may produce unstable voltages at 
lower output voltages where the field-resistance line becomes essentially tangent 
to the magnetization curve. Cumulatively-compounded generators may produce a 
substantially flat voltage characteristic or one which rises with load, whereas shunt- 
or separately-excited generators may produce a drooping voltage characteristic unless 
external regulating means (such as a series field winding) are added. 
Among dc motors, the outstanding characteristics of each type are as follows. The 
series motor operates with a decidedly drooping speed as load is added, the no-load 
speed usually being prohibitively high; the torque is proportional to almost the square 
of the current at low flux levels and to some power between 1 and 2 as saturation 
increases. The shunt motor at constant field current operates at a slightly drooping 
but almost constant speed as load is added, the torque being almost proportional 
to armature current; equally important, however, is the fact that its speed can be 
controlled over wide ranges by shunt-field control, armature-voltage control, or a 
combination of both. Depending on the relative strengths of the shunt and series field, 
the cumulatively-compounded motor is intermediate between the other two and may 
be given essentially the advantages of one or the other. 
In a wide variety of low-power applications in systems which are run from a 
dc source (automotive applications, portable electronics, etc.), dc machines are the 
most cost-effective choice. These dc machines are constructed in a wide-range of 
configurations, and many of them are based upon permanent-magnet excitation. In 
spite of the wide variety of dc machines which can be found in these various applica- 
tions, their performance can readily be determined using the models and techniques 
presented in this chapter. 
7.12 
PROBLEMS 
7.1 Consider a separately-excited dc motor. Describe the speed variation of the 
motor operating unloaded under the following conditions: 
a. 
The armature terminal voltage is varied while the field current is held 
constant. 
b. 
The field current is varied while the armature terminal voltage is held 
constant. 
c. 
The field winding is connected in shunt directly to the armature terminals, 
and the armature terminal voltage is then varied. 
7.2 A dc shunt motor operating at an armature terminal voltage of 125 V is 
observed to be operating at a speed of 1180 r/min. When the motor is operated 
unloaded at the same armature terminal voltage but with an additional 
resistance of 5 f2 in series with the shunt field, the motor speed is observed to 
be 1250 r/min. 

398 
CHAPTER 
7 
DC Machines 
a. 
Calculate the resistance of the series field. 
b. 
Calculate the motor speed which will result if the series resistance is 
increased from 5 f2 to 15 f2. 
7.3 For each of the following changes in operating condition for a dc shunt 
motor, describe how the armature current and speed will vary: 
a. 
Halving the armature terminal voltage while the field flux and load torque 
remain constant. 
b. 
Halving the armature terminal voltage while the field current and load 
power remain constant. 
c. 
Doubling the field flux while the armature terminal voltage and load 
torque remain constant. 
d. 
Halving both the field flux and armature terminal voltage while the load 
power remains constant. 
e. 
Halving the armature terminal voltage while the field flux remains 
constant and the load torque varies as the square of the speed. 
Only brief quantitative statements describing the general nature of the effect 
are required, for example, "speed approximately doubled." 
7.4 The constant-speed magnetization curve for a 25-kW, 250-V dc machine at a 
speed of 1200 r/min is shown in Fig. 7.27. This machine is separately 
excited and has an armature resistance of 0.14 f2. This machine is to be 
operated as a dc generator while driven from a synchronous motor at constant 
speed. 
a. 
What is the rated armature current of this machine? 
b. 
With the generator speed held at 1200 r/min and if the armature current is 
limited to its rated value, calculate the maximum power output of the 
300 
250 
> 200 
E 
~D 
150 
~D 
100 
r~ 
50 
0 0 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
........................ 
I 
I 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Field current, A 
Figure 
7.27 
1200 r/min 
magnetization curve for the dc 
generator of Problem 7.4. 

7,12 
Problems 
399 
generator and the corresponding armature voltage for constant field 
currents of (i) 1.0 A, (ii) 2.0 A and (iii) 2.5 A. 
c. 
Repeat part (b) if the speed of the synchronous generator is reduced to 
900 r/min. 
7.5 The dc generator of Problem 7.4 is to be operated at a constant speed of 
1200 r/min into a load resistance of 2.5 f2. 
a. 
Using the "spline0" function of MATLAB and the points of the 
magnetization curve of Fig. 7.27 at 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 A, create 
a MATLAB plot of the magnetization curve of Fig. 7.27. 
b. 
Using the "spline0" function as in part (a), use MATLAB to plot (i) the 
terminal voltage and (ii) the power delivered to the load as the generator 
field current is varied from 0 to 2.5 A. 
7.6 The dc machine of Problem 7.4 is to be operated as a motor supplied by a 
constant armature terminal voltage of 250 V. If saturation effects are ignored, 
the magnetization curve of Fig. 7.27 becomes a straight line with a constant 
slope of 150 volts per ampere of field current. For the purposes of this 
problem, you may assume that saturation effects can be neglected. 
a. 
Assuming that the field current is held constant at 1.67 A, plot the motor 
speed as a function of motor shaft power as the shaft power varies from 
0 to 25 kW. 
b. 
Now assuming that the field current can be adjusted in order to maintain 
the motor speed constant at 1200 r/min, plot the required field current as a 
function of motor shaft power as the shaft power varies from 0 to 25 kW. 
7.7 Repeat Problem 7.6 including the saturation effects represented by the 
saturation curve of Fig. 7.27. For part (a), set the field current equal to the 
value required to produce an open-circuit armature terminal voltage of 250 V 
at 1200 r/min. (Hint: This problem is most easily solved using MATLAB and 
its "spline0" function as in Problem 7.5.) 
7.8 A 15-kW, 250-V, 1150 r/min shunt generator is driven by a prime mover 
whose speed is 1195 r/min when the generator delivers no load. The speed 
falls to 1140 r/min when the generator delivers 15 kW and may be assumed 
to decrease in proportion to the generator output. The generator is to be 
changed into a short-shunt compound generator by equipping it with a series 
field winding which will cause its voltage to rise from 230 V at no load to 
250 V for a load of 61.5 A. It is estimated that the series field winding will 
have a resistance of 0.065 S2. The armature resistance (including brushes) is 
0.175 f2. The shunt field winding has 500 turns per pole. 
To determine the necessary series-field turns, the machine is run as a 
separately-excited generator and the following load data are obtained: 
Armature terminal voltage = 254 V 
Armature current = 62.7 A 

400 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Field current = 1.95 A 
Speed = 1140 r/min 
The magnetization curve at 1195 r/min is as follows: 
Ea, V 
230 
240 
250 
260 
270 
280 
Ir, A 
1.05 
1.13 
1.25 
1.44 
1.65 
1.91 
Determine 
a. 
the armature reaction in equivalent demagnetizing ampere-turns per pole 
for Ia = 62.7 A and 
b. 
the necessary number of series-field turns per pole. 
(Hint: This problem can be solved either graphically or by use of the 
MATLAB "spline()" function to represent the magnetization curve.) 
7.9 When operated from a 230-V dc supply, a dc series motor operates at 
975 r/min with a line current of 90 A. Its armature-circuit resistance is 0.11 f2 
and its series-field resistance is 0.08 f2. Due to saturation effects, the flux 
produced by an armature current of 30 A is 48 percent of that at an armature 
current of 90 A. Find the motor speed when the armature voltage is 230 V 
and the armature current is 30 A. 
7.10 Consider the long-shunt, 250-V, 100-kW dc machine of Example 7.3. 
Assuming the machine is operated as a motor at a constant supply voltage of 
250-V with a constant shunt-field current of 5.0 A, use MATLAB to plot the 
motor speed as a function of load. Use the MATLAB "spline()" function to 
represent the magnetization curve of Fig. 7.14. Neglect armature-reaction 
effects. Include two plots, one for the case where the series-field ampere-turns 
add to those of the shunt field and the second for the case where the 
series-field ampere-turns oppose those of the shunt field. 
7.11 A 250-V dc shunt-wound motor is used as an adjustable-speed drive over the 
range from 0 to 2000 r/min. Speeds from 0 to 1200 r/min are obtained by 
adjusting the armature terminal voltage from 0 to 250 V with the field current 
kept constant. Speeds from 1200 r/min to 2000 r/min are obtained by 
decreasing the field current with the armature terminal voltage remaining at 
250 V. Over the entire speed range, the torque required by the load remains 
constant. 
a. 
Sketch the general form of the curve of armature current versus speed over 
the entire range. Ignore machine losses and armature-reaction effects. 
b. 
Suppose that, instead of operating with constant torque, the load torque at 
any given speed is adjusted to maintain the armature current at its rated 
value. Sketch the general form of the allowable torque as a function of 
speed assuming the motor is controlled as described above. 
7.12 Two adjustable-speed dc shunt motors have maximum speeds of 1800 r/min 
and minimum speeds of 500 r/min. Speed adjustment is obtained by 

7.12 
Problems 
401 
field-rheostat control. Motor A drives a load requiring constant power over 
the speed range; motor B drives one requiring constant torque. All losses and 
armature reaction may be neglected. 
a. 
If the power outputs of the two motors are equal at 1800 r/min and the 
armature currents are each 125 A, what will the armature currents be at 
500 r/min? 
b. 
If the power outputs of the two motors are equal at 500 r/min and the 
armature currents are each 125 A, what will the armature current be at 
1800 r/min? 
c. 
Answer parts (a) and (b) with speed adjustment by armature-voltage 
control with conditions otherwise the same. 
7.13 Consider a dc shunt motor connected to a constant-voltage source and driving 
a load requiring constant electromagnetic torque. Show that if Ea > 0.5Vt 
(the normal situation), increasing the resultant air-gap flux decreases the 
speed, whereas if Ea < 0.5 Vt (as might be brought about by inserting a 
relatively high resistance in series with the armature), increasing the resultant 
air-gap flux increases the speed. 
7.14 A separately-excited dc motor is mechanically coupled to a three-phase, 
four-pole, 30-kVA, 460-V, cylindrical-pole synchronous generator. The dc 
motor is connected to a constant 230-V dc supply, and the ac generator is 
connected to a 460-V, fixed-voltage, fixed-frequency, three-phase supply. The 
synchronous reactance of the synchronous generator is 5.13 f2/phase. The 
armature resistance of the dc motor is 30 mA. The four-pole dc machine is 
rated 30 kW at 230 V. All unspecified losses are to be neglected. 
a. 
If the two machines act as a motor-generator set receiving power from the 
dc source and delivering power to the ac supply, what is the excitation 
voltage of the ac machine in volts per phase (line-to-neutral) when it 
delivers 30 kW at unity power factor? What is the internal voltage of the 
dc motor? 
b. 
Leaving the field current of the ac machine at the value corresponding to 
the condition of part (a), what adjustment can be made to reduce the 
power transfer between the two machines to zero? Under this condition 
of zero power transfer, what is the armature current of the dc machine? 
What is the armature current of the ac machine? 
c. 
Leaving the field current of the ac machine as in parts (a) and (b), what 
adjustment can be made to cause the transfer of 30 kW from the ac 
source to the dc source? Under these conditions what are the armature 
current and internal voltage of the dc machine? What will be the 
magnitude and phase of the current of the ac machine? 
7.15 A 150-kW, 600-V, 600 r/min dc series-wound railway motor has a combined 
field and armature resistance (including brushes) of 0.125 f2. The full-load 
current at rated voltage and speed is 250 A. The magnetization curve at 
400 r/min is as follows: 

402 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
Generated emf, V 
375 
400 
425 
450 
475 
Series-field current, A 
227 
260 
301 
350 
402 
Determine the internal starting torque when the starting current is limited 
to 460 A. Assume the armature reaction to be equivalent to a demagnetizing 
mmf which varies as the square of the current. (Hint: This problem can be 
solved either graphically or by use of the MATLAB "spline0" function to 
represent the magnetization curve.) 
7.16 A 25-kW, 230-V shunt motor has an armature resistance of 0.11 ~2 and a field 
resistance of 117 ~. At no load and rated voltage, the speed is 2150 r/min 
and the armature current is 6.35 A. At full load and rated voltage, the armature 
current is 115 A and, because of armature reaction, the flux is 6 percent less 
than its no-load value. What is the full-load speed? 
7.17 A 91-cm axial-flow fan is to deliver air at 16.1 m3/sec against a static pressure 
of 120 Pa when rotating at a speed of 1165 r/min. The fan has the following 
speed-load characteristic 
Speed, r/rain 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
1100 
1200 
Power, kW 
3.6 
4.9 
6.5 
8.4 
10.8 
13.9 
It is proposed to drive the fan by a 12.5 kW, 230-V, 46.9-A, four-pole dc 
shunt motor. The motor has an armature winding with two parallel paths and 
Ca = 666 active conductors. The armature-circuit resistance is 0.215 ~. The 
armature flux per pole is ~d = 10 -2 Wb and armature reaction effects can be 
neglected. No-load rotational losses (to be considered constant) are estimated 
to be 750 W. Determine the shaft power output and the operating speed of the 
motor when it is connected to the fan load and operated from a 230-V source. 
(Hint: This problem can be easily solved using MATLAB with the fan 
characteristic represented by the MATLAB "spline()" function.) 
7.18 A shunt motor operating from a 230-V line draws a full-load armature 
current of 46.5 A and runs at a speed of 1300 r/min at both no load and full 
load. The following data is available on this motor: 
Armature-circuit resistance (including brushes) = 0.17 f2 
Shunt-field turns per pole -- 1500 turns 
The magnetization curve taken with the machine operating as a motor at no 
load and 1300 r/min is 
E,, V 
180 
200 
220 
240 
250 
It., A 
0.98 
1.15 
1.46 
1.93 
2.27 

7.12 
Problems 
403 
a. Determine the shunt-field current of this motor at no load and 1300 r/min 
when connected to a 230-V line. Assume negligible armature-circuit 
resistance and armature reaction at no load. 
b. 
Determine the effective armature reaction at full load in ampere-turns per 
pole. 
c. 
How many series-field turns should be added to make this machine into a 
long-shunt cumulatively compounded motor whose speed will be 
1210 r/min when the armature current is 46.5 A and the applied voltage is 
230 V? Assume that the series field has a resistance of 0.038 f2. 
d. 
If a series-field winding having 20 turns per pole and a resistance of 
0.038 f2 is installed, determine the speed when the armature current is 
46.5 A and the applied voltage is 230 V. 
(Hint: This problem can be solved either graphically or by use of the 
MATLAB "spline0" function to represent the magnetization curve.) 
7.19 A 7.5-kW, 230-V shunt motor has 2000 shunt-field turns per pole, an 
armature resistance (including brushes) of 0.21 f2, and a commutating-field 
resistance of 0.035 f2. The shunt-field resistance (exclusive of rheostat) is 
310 f2. When the motor is operated at no load with rated terminal voltage and 
varying shunt-field resistance, the following data are obtained: 
Speed, r/min 
1110 
1130 
1160 
1200 
1240 
if, A 
0.672 
0.634 
0.598 
0.554 
0.522 
The no-load armature current is negligible. When the motor is operating at 
full load and rated terminal voltage with a field current of 0.554 A, the 
armature current is 35.2 A and the speed is 1185 r/min. 
a. 
Calculate the full-load armature reaction in equivalent demagnetizating 
ampere-turns per pole. 
b. 
Calculate the full-load electromagnetic torque at this operating condition. 
c. What starting torque will the motor produce with maximum field current 
if the starting armature current is limited to 65 A? Assume that the 
armature reaction under these conditions is equal to 160 ampere-turns per 
pole. 
d. 
Design a series field winding to give a speed of 1050 r/min when the 
motor is loaded to an armature current of 35.2 A and when the shunt field 
current is adjusted to give a no-load speed of 1200 r/min. Assume the 
series field will have a resistance of 0.05 f2. 
(Hint: This problem can be solved either graphically or by use of the 
MATLAB "spline0" function to represent the magnetization curve.) 
7.20 When operated at rated voltage, a 230-V shunt motor runs at 1750 r/min at 
full load and at no load. The full-load armature current is 70.8 A. The shunt 
field winding has 2000 turns per pole. The resistance of the armature circuit 

404 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
(including brushes and interpoles) is 0.15 f2. The magnetization curve at 
1750 r/min is 
E,, V 
200 
210 
220 
230 
240 
250 
It,, A 
0.40 
0.44 
0.49 
0.55 
0.61 
0.71 
a. 
Compute the demagnetizing effect of the armature reaction at full load. 
b. 
A long-shunt cumulative series field winding having four turns per pole 
and a resistance of 0.038 f2 is added to the machine. Compute the speed 
at full-load current and rated voltage. The shunt field current will remain 
equal to that of part (a). 
c. 
With the series-field winding of part (b) installed, compute the internal 
starting torque in N. m if the starting armature current is limited to 125 A. 
Assume that the corresponding demagnetizating effect of armature 
reaction is 230 ampere-turns per pole. 
(Hint: This problem can be solved either graphically or by use of the 
MATLAB "spline0" function to represent the magnetization curve.) 
7.21 A 230-V dc shunt motor has an armature-circuit resistance of 0.23 f2. When 
operating from a 230-V supply and driving a constant-torque load, the motor 
is observed to be drawing an armature current of 60 A. An external resistance 
of 1.0 f2 is now inserted in series with the armature while the shunt field 
current is unchanged. Neglecting the effects of rotational losses and armature 
reaction, calculate 
a. 
the resultant armature current and 
b. 
the fractional speed change of the motor. 
7.22 A common industrial application of dc series motors is in crane and hoist 
drives. This problem relates to the computation of selected motor 
performance characterstics for such a drive. The specific motor concerned is 
a series-wound, 230-V, totally-enclosed motor having a 1/2-hour crane rating 
of 100 kW with a 75°C temperature rise. The performance characteristics 
Table 7.1 
Motor characteristics for 
Problem 7.22. 
Line current 
Shaft torque 
Speed 
A 
N. m 
r/min 
100 
217 
940 
200 
570 
630 
300 
1030 
530 
400 
1480 
475 
500 
1980 
438 
600 
2470 
407 
700 
3000 
385 
800 
3430 
370 

7.12 
Problems 
405 
Series 
R2 
Field 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 7.28 Series crane motor (Problem 7.22): (a) hoisting connection and 
(b) lowering connection. 
of the motor alone at 230 V as found in the manufacturer's catalog are listed 
in Table 7.1. The resistance of the armature (including brushes) plus 
commutating winding is 0.065 ~ and that of the series field winding is 
0.027 ~. Armature reaction effects can be ignored. 
The motor is to be connected as in Fig. 7.28a for hoisting and Fig. 7.28b 
for lowering. The former connection consists simply of series-resistance 
control. The latter connection provides dynamic breaking with the field 
reconnected in shunt with the addition of an adjustable series resistance. 
You will use MATLAB to plot some sample speed-torque curves (speed 
as a function of torque) to determine the suitability of the motor and control 
for the specified application. Plot all of the curves on a single set of axes 
coveting roughly the torque-magnitude range found in Table 7.1. Provide for 
both positive and negative values of speed, corresponding respectively to 
hoisting and lowering, as well as for both positive and negative values of 
torque, corresponding respectively to torque in the direction of raising the 
load and torque in the direction of lowering the load. 
a. 
For the hoisting connection, plot speed-torque curves for the control 
resistor Rc set at 0, 0.3 and 0.6 f2. If any of these curves extend into the 
fourth quadrant within the range of torques covered, interpret physically 
what operation in that regime means. 
b. For the lowering connection, plot a speed-torque curve for R1 = 0.3 f2 
and R2 = 0.3 f2. The most important portion of this curve is in the fourth 
quadrant, but if it extends into the third quadrant, that region should also 
be plotted and interpreted physically. 
c. 
In part (b), what is the lowering speed corresponding to a torque of 
1500 N. m? (Hint: This can be found easily using the MATLAB 
"spline0" function.) 
7.23 A 25-kW, 230-V shunt motor has an armature resistance of 0.064 f2 and a 
field-circuit resistance of 95 f2. The motor delivers rated output power at 
rated voltage when its armature current is 122 A. When the motor is 
operating at rated voltage, the speed is observed to be 1150 r/min when the 
machine is loaded such that the armature current is 69.5 A. 

406 
CHAPTER 7 
DC Machines 
a. 
Calculate the rated-load speed of this motor. 
In order to protect both the motor and the dc supply under starting 
conditions, an external resistance will be connected in series with the 
armature winding (with the field winding remaining directly across the 230-V 
supply). The resistance will then be automatically adjusted in steps so that 
the armature current does not exceed 200 percent of rated current. The step 
size will be determined such that, until all the extemal resistance is switched 
out, the armature current will not be permitted to drop below rated value. In 
other words, the machine is to start with 200 percent of rated armature 
current and as soon as the current falls to rated value, sufficient series 
resistance is to be cut out to restore the current to 200 percent. This process 
will be repeated until all of the series resistance has been eliminated. 
b. 
Find the maximum value of the series resistance. 
c. 
How much resistance should be cut out at each step in the starting 
operation and at what speed should each step change occur? 
7.24 The manufacturer's data sheet for a permanent-magnet dc motor indicates 
that it has a torque constant Km = 0.21 V/(rad/sec) and an armature resistance 
of 1.9 f2. For a constant applied armature voltage of 85 V dc, calculate 
a. 
the no-load speed of the motor in r/min and 
b. 
its stall (zero-speed) current and torque (in N. m). 
c. 
Plot the motor torque as a function of speed. 
7.25 Measurements on a small permanent-magnet dc motor indicate that it has an 
armature resistance of 4.6 f2. With an applied armature voltage of 5 V, the 
motor is observed to achieve a no-load speed of 11,210 r/min while drawing 
an armature current of 12.5 mA. 
a. 
Calculate the motor torque constant Km in V/(rad/sec). 
b. 
Calculate the no-load rotational losses in mW. 
Assume the motor to be operating from an applied armature voltage of 
5V. 
c. 
Find the stall current and torque of the motor. 
d. 
At what speeds will the motor achieve an output power of 1 W? Estimate 
the motor efficiency under these operating conditions. Assume that the 
rotational loss varies as the cube of the speed. 
7.26 Write a MATLAB script to calculate the parameters of a dc motor. The inputs 
will be the armature resistance and the no-load armature voltage, speed, and 
armature current. The output should be the no-load rotational loss and the 
torque constant Km. 
7.27 The dc motor of Problem 7.25 will be used to drive a load which requires a 
power of 0.75 W at a speed of 8750 r/min. Calculate the armature voltage 
which must be applied to achieve this operating condition. 

CHAPTER 
Variable.Rel uctance 
Machines and Stepping 
Motors 
V 
ariable-reluctance machines 1 (often abbreviated as VRMs) are perhaps the 
simplest of electrical machines. They consist of a stator with excitation wind- 
ings and a magnetic rotor with saliency. Rotor conductors are not required 
because torque is produced by the tendency of the rotor to align with the stator- 
produced flux wave in such a fashion as to maximize the stator flux linkages that 
result from a given applied stator current. Torque production in these machines can 
be evaluated by using the techniques of Chapter 3 and the fact that the stator winding 
inductances are functions of the angular position of the rotor. 
Although the concept of the VRM has been around for a long time, only in the 
past few decades have these machines begun to see widespread use in engineering 
applications. This is due in large part to the fact that although they are simple in 
construction, they are somewhat complicated to control. For example, the position of 
the rotor must be known in order to properly energize the phase windings to produce 
torque. It is the widespread availability and low cost of micro and power electronics 
that has made the VRM competitive with other motor technologies in a wide range 
of applications. 
By sequentially exciting the phases of a VRM, the rotor will rotate in a step- 
wise fashion, rotating through a specific angle per step. Stepper motors are designed 
to take advantage of this characteristic. Such motors often combine the use of a 
variable-reluctance geometry with permanent magnets to produce increased torque 
and precision position accuracy. 
1 Variable-reluctance machines are often referred to as switched-reluctance machines (SRMs) to indicate 
the combination of a VRM and the switching inverter required to drive it. This term is popular in the 
technical literature. 
407 

408 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
8.1 
BASICS OF VRM ANALYSIS 
Common variable-reluctance machines can be categorized into two types: singly- 
salient and doubly-salient. In both cases, their most noticeable features are that there 
are no windings or permanent magnets on their rotors and that their only source of 
excitation consists of stator windings. This can be a significant feature because it 
means that all the resistive winding losses in the VRM occur on the stator. Because 
the stator can typically be cooled much more effectively and easily than the rotor, the 
result is often a smaller motor for a given rating and frame size. 
As is discussed in Chapter 3, to produce torque, VRMs must be designed such 
that the stator-winding inductances vary with the position of the rotor. Figure 8.1a 
shows a cross-sectional view of a singly-salient VRM, which can be seen to consist of 
a nonsalient stator and a two-pole salient rotor, both constructed of high-permeability 
magnetic material. In the figure, a two-phase stator winding is shown although any 
number of phases are possible. 
Figure 8.2a shows the form of the variation of the stator inductances as a function 
of rotor angle 0m for a singly-salient VRM of the form of Fig. 8.1 a. Notice that the 
inductance of each stator phase winding varies with rotor position such that the induc- 
tance is maximum when the rotor axis is aligned with the magnetic axis of that phase 
and minimum when the two axes are perpendicular. The figure also shows that the 
mutual inductance between the phase windings is zero when the rotor is aligned with 
the magnetic axis of either phase but otherwise varies periodically with rotor position. 
Figure 8. lb shows the cross-sectional view of a two-phase doubly-salient VRM 
in which both the rotor and stator have salient poles. In this machine, the stator has 
four poles, each with a winding. However, the windings on opposite poles are of the 
same phase; they may be connected either in series or in parallel. Thus this machine 
is quite similar to that of Fig. 8.1a in that there is a two-phase stator winding and 
a two-pole salient rotor. Similarly, the phase inductance of this configuration varies 
from a maximum value when the rotor axis is aligned with the axis of that phase to a 
minimum when they are perpendicular. 
Unlike the singly-salient machine of Fig. 8.1 a, under the assumption of negligible 
iron reluctance the mutual inductances between the phases of the doubly-salient VRM 
of Fig. 8.1 b will be zero, with the exception of a small, essentially-constant component 
associated with leakage flux. In addition, the saliency of the stator enhances the dif- 
ference between the maximum and minimum inductances, which in turn enhances the 
torque-producing characteristics of the doubly-salient machine. Figure 8.2b shows the 
form of the variation of the phase inductances for the doubly-salient VRM of Fig. 8. lb. 
The relationship between flux linkage and current for the singly-salient VRM is 
of the form 
~.2 
= 
Llz(0m) 
L22(0m) 
i2 
(8.1) 
Here L 11 (0m) and L 22 (0m) are the self-inductances of phases 1 and 2, respectively, 
and L l2(0m) is the mutual inductances. Note that, by symmetry 
L22(0m) ~- L II (0m - 90 °) 
(8.2) 

8.1 
Basics of VRM Analysis 
409 
Magnetic axis 
of phase 2 
Rotor axis 
0m 
Magnetic axis 
of phase 1 
(a) 
Magnetic axis 
of phase 2 
Rotor axis 
/77 
0m 
Magnetic axis 
of phase 1 
(b) 
Figure 8.1 
Basic two-phase VRMs: (a) singly-salient 
and (b) doubly-salient. 

4t0 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
Lll(Om) .¢ S~- 
-?--- 
',, 
/ 
_900\ 
90°\ 
/180 o ~0m 
-- 180 ° 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
L12(Om) 
(a) 
Lll (0 m) 
L22(0 m) 
| 
% 
/",, 
/~ 
,",, 
/-. 
_
_
 
--180 ° 
--90 ° 
I 0 ° 
90 ° 
180 ° 
1 
(b) 
Figure 8.2 
Plots of inductance versus 0m for (a) the singly-salient 
VRM of Fig. 8.1a and (b) the doubly-salient VRM of Fig. 8.1b. 
Note also that all of these inductances are periodic with a period of 180 ° because 
rotation of the rotor through 180 ° from any given angular position results in no 
change in the magnetic circuit of the machine. 
From Eq. 3.68 the electromagnetic torque of this system can be determined from 
the coenergy as 
O W~d(il, i2, 0m) 
Tmech = 
(8.3) 
00m 
where the partial derivative is taken while holding currents i l and i2 constant. Here, 
the coenergy can be found from Eq. 3.70, 
1 
1 
Wild -- -~Lll(Om)i 2 + Ll2(Om)ili2 + -~L22(Om)i] 
(8.4) 
Thus, combining Eqs. 8.3 and 8.4 gives the torque as 
1 dL 
(Om) 
dL 
(Om) 
1 dL22(Om) 
Tmech -- ~i 2 
11 
12 
l 
dOm 
+ il i2 -
-
 
a t- 
i 2 
(8.5) 
dOm 
-2 
dOm 
For the double-salient VRM of Fig. 8. lb, the mutual-inductance term dL 12 (0m)/d0m 
is zero and the torque expression of Eq. 8.5 simplifies to 
Tmech--~i~dLll(Om)+ 
~i] dL22(Om) 
dOm 
dOm 
(8.6) 

8.1 
Basics of VRM Analysis 
411 
Substitution of Eq. 8.2 then gives 
~i2dLll(Om) 1.2dLll(Om 
-
-
 90 °) 
Tmech 
dOm 
+ -~l 2 
dOm 
(8.7) 
Equations 8.6 and 8.7 illustrate an important characteristic of VRMs in which 
mutual-inductance effects are negligible. In such machines the torque expression 
consists of a sum of terms, each of which is proportional to the square of an individual 
phase current. As a result, the torque depends only on the magnitude of the phase 
currents and not on their polarity. Thus the electronics which supply the phase currents 
to these machines can be unidirectional; i.e., bidirectional currents are not required. 
Since the phase currents are typically switched on and offby solid-state switches 
such as transistors or thyristors and since each switch need only handle currents in 
a single direction, this means that the motor drive requires only half the number 
of switches (as well as half the corresponding control electronics) that would be 
required in a corresponding bidirectional drive. The result is a drive system which is 
less complex and may be less expensive. Typical VRM motor drives are discussed in 
Section 11.4. 
The assumption of negligible mutual inductance is valid for the doubly-salient 
VRM of Fig. 8.1b both due to symmetry of the machine geometry and due to the 
assumption of negligible iron reluctance. In practice, even in situations where sym- 
metry might suggest that the mutual inductances are zero or can be ignored because 
they are independent of rotor position (e.g., the phases are coupled through leakage 
fluxes), significant nonlinear and mutual-inductance effects can arise due to saturation 
of the machine iron. In such cases, although the techniques of Chapter 3, and indeed 
torque expressions of the form of Eq. 8.3, remain valid, analytical expressions are 
often difficult to obtain (see Section 8.4). 
At the design and analysis stage, the winding flux-current relationships and the 
motor torque can be determined by using numerical-analysis packages which can 
account for the nonlinearity of the machine magnetic material. Once a machine has 
been constructed, measurements can be made, both to validate the various assumptions 
and approximations which were made as well as to obtain an accurate measure of 
actual machine performance. 
From this point on, we shall use the symbol ps to indicate the number of stator 
poles and Pr to indicate the number of rotor poles, and the corresponding machine is 
called a Ps/Pr machine. Example 8.1 examines a 4/2 VRM. 
A 4/2 VRM is shown in Fig. 8.3. Its dimensions are 
R = 3.8 cm 
ot =/3 = 60 ° = rr/3 rad 
g -- 2.54 × 10 -2 cm 
D = 13.0 cm 
and the poles of each phase winding are connected in series such that there are a total of 
N = 100 turns (50 turns per pole) in each phase winding. Assume the rotor and stator to be of 
infinite magnetic permeability. 
EXAMPLE 
8 1 

412 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
--2 
Rotor axis 
I 
0m 
Magnetic axis 
of phase 1 
Length D 
g<< R 
Figure 8.3 
4/2 VRM for Example 8.1. 
a. Neglecting leakage and fringing fluxes, plot the phase-1 inductance L(0m) as a function 
of 0m. 
b. Plot the torque, assuming (i) il = 11 and i2 = 0 and (ii) i~ = 0 and iz = 12. 
c. Calculate the net torque (in N. m) acting on the rotor when both windings are excited such 
that il = i2 = 5 A and at angles (i) 0m = 0 °, (ii) 0m = 45 °, (iii) 0m = 75 °. 
II Solution 
a. Using the magnetic circuit techniques of Chapter 1, we see that the maximum inductance 
Lmax for phase 1 occurs when the rotor axis is aligned with the phase-1 magnetic axis. 
From Eq. 1.31, we see that Lmax is equal to 
N 2 #oU R D 
L max = 
2g 
where ct R D is the cross-sectional area of the air gap and 2g is the total gap length in the 
magnetic circuit. For the values given, 
N 2 #oot R D 
L max -~- 
2g 
(100)2(47[ × 10-7)(~/3)(3.8 × 10-2)(0.13) 
2 × (2.54 × 10 -4) 
= 0.128H 
Neglecting fringing, the inductance L(Om) will vary linearly with the air-gap 
cross-sectional area as shown in Fig. 8.4a. Note that this idealization predicts that the 
inductance is zero when there is no overlap when in fact there will be some small value 
of inductance, as shown in Fig. 8.2. 

8.1 
Basics of VRM Analysis 
413 
Lma x -- 0.128 
H 
--180 °-150 °-120 ° --90 ° 
--60 ° 
--30 ° 
Lll(em) 
Zmax 
0 
30 ° 
60 ° 
/ 
I 
I~ 
I 
I 
> Om 
90 ° 
120 ° 
150 ° 
180 ° 
(a) 
-- 180 ° 
I 
--150 ° 
--120 ° 
I 
I 
--90 ° --60 ° 
--30 ° 
Lmax 
dLll(O m) 
dO m 
Lmax/Ot 
I 
0 
30 ° 
(a = ]r/3) 
i 
i 
60 ° 90 ° 
120 ° 
150 ° 
180 ° 
(b) 
Lmax I2 
Tmax~ = 
2or 
Lmax I2 
Tmax2 -- 
2o~ 
[ 
i 
- 180 ° 
|| 
- 120 ° 
-i 
--150 ° 
Tmax 2 
i ,, 
i 
L 
i 
--90 ° --60 ° 
--30 ° 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I_ 
I 
ITm rque 
axl r 
L ..... 
I 
I 
0 
30 ° 
--rmax, 
--rmax~ 
(c) 
60 ° 
120 ° 
I 
I 
I 
! 
i 
90 ° 
I 
I 
I_ 
i 1 = 11, i 2 = 
0 
• ---i1=0, 
i2-'I 
2 
~_ 
== 
150 ° 
180 ° 
! 
i 
i 
Figure 
8.4 
(a) L11(0m) versus 0m, (b) dL11(Orn)/dOm versus 0m, and 
(c) torque versus 0rn. 
>0m 
>0m 
b. From Eq. 8.7, the torque consists of two terms 
1 2 dLll (0m) 
1.2 dLll (0m -- 90 °) 
Tmech = ~ il 
dora 
+ 2 t2 
dOm 
and dLll/dOm can be seen to be the stepped waveform of Fig. 8.4b whose maximum 
values are given by -'Ftmax/O/(with ot expressed in radians!). Thus the torque is as shown 
in Fig. 8.4c. 

414 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
c. The peak torque due to each of the windings is given by 
= (\~2__)i2= (0"128) 
52=l'53N'm2(n'/3) 
Tmax 
(i) From the plot in Fig. 8.4c, at 0m = 0 °, the torque contribution from phase 2 is clearly 
zero. Although the phase-1 contribution appears to be indeterminate, in an actual 
machine the torque change from Tmax, to -Tmax, at 0m = 0 ° would have a finite slope 
and the torque would be zero at 0 = 0 °. Thus the net torque from phases 1 and 2 at 
this position is zero. 
Notice that the torque at 0m -- 0 is zero independent of the current levels in phases 1 
and 2. This is a problem with the 4/2 configuration of Fig. 8.3 since the rotor can get 
"stuck" at this position (as well as at 0m = +90 °, +180°), and there is no way that 
electrical torque can be produced to move it. 
(ii) At 0m = 45 ° both phases are providing torque. That of phase 1 is negative while that 
of phase 2 is positive. Because the phase currents are equal, the torques are thus 
equal and opposite and the net torque is zero. However, unlike the case of 0m -- 0 °, 
the torque at this point can be made either positive or negative simply by appropriate 
selection of the phase currents. 
(iii) At 0m = 75 ° phase 1 produces no torque while phase 2 produces a positive torque of 
magnitude Tmax2. Thus the net torque at this position is positive and of magnitude 
1.53 N. m. Notice that there is no combination of phase currents that will produce a 
negative torque at this position since the phase-1 torque is always zero while that of 
phase 2 can be only positive (or zero). 
)ractice Problem 8. 
Repeat the calculation of Example 8.1, part (c), for the case in which a = fl = 70 °. 
Solution 
(i) T=0N.m 
(ii) T=0N.m 
(iii) T=1.59N.m 
Example 8.1 illustrates a number of important considerations for the design of 
VRMs. Clearly these machines must be designed to avoid the occurrence of rotor 
positions for which none of the phases can produce torque. This is of concern in the 
design of 4/2 machines which will always have such positions if they are constructed 
with uniform, symmetric air gaps. 
It is also clear that to operate VRMs with specified torque characteristics, the 
phase currents must be applied in a fashion consistent with the rotor position. For 
example, positive torque production from each phase winding in Example 8.1 can 
be seen from Fig. 8.4c to occur only for specific values of 0m. Thus operation of 
VRMs must include some sort of rotor-position sensing as well as a controller which 

8.2 
Practical VRM Configurations 
415 
determines both the sequence and the waveform of the phase currents to achieve 
the desired operation. This is typically implemented by using electronic switching 
devices (transistors, thyristors, gate-turn-off devices, etc.) under the supervision of a 
microprocessor-based controller. 
Although a 4/2 VRM such as in Example 8.1 can be made to work, as a practical 
matter it is not particularly useful because of undesirable characteristics such as its 
zero-torque positions and the fact that there are angular locations at which it is not 
possible to achieve a positive torque. For example, because of these limitations, this 
machine cannot be made to generate a constant torque independent of rotor angle; cer- 
tainly no combination of phase currents can result in torque at the zero-torque positions 
or positive torque in the range of angular locations where only negative torque can be 
produced. As discussed in Section 8.2, these difficulties can be eliminated by 4/2 de- 
signs with asymmetric geometries, and so practical 4/2 machines can be constructed. 
As has been seen in this section, the analysis of VRMs is conceptually straightfor- 
ward. In the case of linear machine iron (no magnetic saturation), finding the torque 
is simply a matter of finding the stator-phase inductances (self and mutual) as a func- 
tion of rotor position, expressing the coenergy in terms of these inductances, and then 
calculating the derivative of the coenergy with respect to angular position (holding 
the phase currents constant when taking the derivative). Similarly, as discussed in 
Section 3.8, the electric terminal voltage for each of the phases can be found from the 
sum of the time derivative of the phase flux linkage and the i R drop across the phase 
resistance. 
In the case of nonlinear machine iron (where saturation effects are important) 
as is discussed in Section 8.4, the coenergy can be found by appropriate integration 
of the phase flux linkages, and the torque can again be found from the derivative 
of the coenergy with respect to the angular position of the rotor. In either case, 
there are no rotor windings and typically no other rotor currents in a well-designed 
variable-reluctance motor; hence, unlike other ac machine types (synchronous and 
induction), there are no electrical dynamics associated with the machine rotor. This 
greatly simplifies their analysis. 
Although VRMs are simple in concept and construction, their operation is some- 
what complicated and requires sophisticated control and motor-drive electronics to 
achieve useful operating characteristics. These issues and others are discussed in 
Sections 8.2 to 8.5. 
8.2 
PRACTICAL VRM CONFIGURATIONS 
Practical VRM drive systems (the motor and its inverter) are designed to meet oper- 
ating criteria such as 
n 
Low cost. 
m 
Constant torque independent of rotor angular position. 
m 
A desired operating speed range. 
m 
High efficiency. 
m 
A large torque-to-mass ratio. 

416 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
As in any engineering situation, the final design for a specific application will involve 
a compromise between the variety of options available to the designer. Because VRMs 
require some sort of electronics and control to operate, often the designer is concerned 
with optimizing a characteristic of the complete drive system, and this will impose 
additional constraints on the motor design. 
VRMs can be built in a wide variety of configurations. In Fig. 8.1, two forms of 
a 4/2 machine are shown: a singly-salient machine in Fig. 8.1a and a doubly-salient 
machine in Fig. 8. lb. Although both types of design can be made to work, a doubly- 
salient design is often the superior choice because it can generally produce a larger 
torque for a given frame size. 
This can be seen qualitatively (under the assumption of a high-permeability, 
nonsaturating magnetic structure) by reference to Eq. 8.7, which shows that the torque 
is a function of dLll (Om)/dOm, the derivative of the phase inductance with respect 
to angular position of the rotor. Clearly, all else being equal, the machine with the 
largest derivative will produce the largest torque. 
This derivative can be thought of as being determined by the ratio of the maximum 
to minimum phase inductances Lmax/Lmin. In other words, we can write, 
dLll (Om) ,~ Lmax -- Lmin 
dOm 
A0m 
= A0m 
gmax 
(8.8) 
where A0m is the angular displacement of the rotor between the positions of maximum 
and minimum phase inductance. From Eq. 8.8, we see that, for a given Lmax and A0m, 
the largest value of Lmax/Lmin will give the largest torque. Because of its geometry, 
a doubly-salient structure will typically have a lower minimum inductance and thus 
a larger value of Lmax/Lmin; hence it will produce a larger torque for the same rotor 
structure. 
For this reason doubly-salient machines are the predominant type of VRM, and 
hence for the remainder of this chapter we consider only doubly-salient VRMs. In 
general, doubly-salient machines can be constructed with two or more poles on each 
of the stator and rotor. It should be pointed out that once the basic structure of a 
VRM is determined, Lmax is fairly well determined by such quantities as the num- 
ber of turns, air-gap length, and basic pole dimensions. The challenge to the VRM 
designer is to achieve a small value of Lmi n. This is a difficult task because Lmin is 
dominated by leakage fluxes and other quantities which are difficult to calculate and 
analyze. 
As shown in Example 8.1, the geometry of a symmetric 4/2 VRM with a uniform 
air gap gives rise to rotor positions for which no torque can be developed for any 
combination of excitation of the phase windings. These torque zeros can be seen to 
occur at rotor positions where all the stator phases are simultaneously at a position of 
either maximum or minimum inductance. Since the torque depends on the derivative of 
inductance with respect to angular position, this simultaneous alignment of maximum 
and minimum inductance points necessarily results in zero net torque. 

8.2 
Practical VRM Configurations 
417 
Phase 1 
ol 
--3 
--2 
r b2 
Phase 2 
3o-. 
Phase 3 
-1 
Figure 8.5 
Cross-sectional view of a 6/4 three-phase VRM. 
Figure 8.5 shows a 6/4 VRM from which we see that a fundamental feature 
of the 6/4 machine is that no such simultaneous alignment of phase inductances is 
possible. As a result, this machine does not have any zero-torque positions. This is a 
significant point because it eliminates the possibility that the rotor might get stuck in 
one of these positions at standstill, requiring that it be mechanically moved to a new 
position before it can be started. In addition to the fact that there are not positions of 
simultaneous alignment for the 6/4 VRM, it can be seen that there also are no rotor 
positions at which only a torque of a single sign (either positive or negative) can be 
produced. Hence by proper control of the phase currents, it should be possible to 
achieve constant-torque, independent of rotor position. 
In the case of a symmetric VRM with Ps stator poles and Pr rotor poles, a 
simple test can be used to determine if zero-torque positions exist. If the ratio Ps/Pr 
(or alternatively Pr/Ps if Pr is larger than Ps) is an integer, there will be zero-torque 
positions. For example, for a 6/4 machine the ratio is 1.5, and there will be no zero- 
torque positions. However, the ratio is 2.0 for a 6/3 machine, and there will be zero- 
torque positions. 
In some instances, design constraints may dictate that a machine with an inte- 
gral pole ratio is desirable. In these cases, it is possible to eliminate the zero-torque 
positions by constructing a machine with an asymmetric rotor. For example, the ro- 
tor radius can be made to vary with angle as shown in grossly exaggerated fashion 
in Fig. 8.6a. This design, which also requires that the width of the rotor pole be 
wider than that of the stator, will not produce zero torque at positions of alignment 
because dL(Om)/dOm is not zero at these points, as can be seen with reference to 
Fig. 8.6b. 

418 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
(a) 
I 
l 
.. 
s 
I 
--7l" 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Ii 
/ d L ( O m ) 
II 
I I 
~...I 
dO m 
~..t 
0 m 
(b) 
Figure 8.6 A 4/2 VRM with nonuniform air gap: (a) exaggerated 
schematic view and (b) plots of L(0m) and dL(Om)/dOm versus 0m. 
An alternative procedure for constructing an integral-pole-ratio VRM without 
zero-torque positions is to construct a stack of two or more VRMs in series, aligned 
such that each of the VRMs is displaced in angle from the others and with all rotors 
sharing a common shaft. In this fashion, the zero-torque positions of the individual 
machines will not align, and thus the complete machine will not have any torque zeros. 
For example, a series stack of two two-phase, 4/2 VRMs such as that of Example 8.1 
(Fig. 8.3) with a 45 ° angular displacement between the individual VRMs will result 
in a four-phase VRM without zero-torque positions. 
Generally VRMs are wound with a single coil on each pole. Although it is possible 
to control each of these windings separately as individual phases, it is common practice 
to combine them into groups of poles which are excited simultaneously. For example, 
the 4/2 VRM of Fig. 8.3 is shown connected as a two-phase machine. As shown in 
Fig. 8.5, a 6/4 VRM is commonly connected as a three-phase machine with opposite 
poles connected to the same phase and in such a fashion that the windings drive flux 
in the same direction through the rotor. 

8.2 
Practical VRM Configurations 
419 
In some cases, VRMs are wound with a parallel set of windings on each phase. 
This configuration, known as a bifilar winding, in some cases can result in a simple 
inverter configuration and thus a simple, inexpensive motor drive. The use of a bifilar 
winding in VRM drives is discussed in Section 11.4. 
In general, when a given phase is excited, the torque is such that the rotor is 
pulled to the nearest position of maximum flux linkage. As excitation is removed 
from that phase and the next phase is excited, the rotor "follows" as it is then pulled 
to a new maximum flux-linkage position. Thus, the rotor speed is determined by the 
frequency of the phase currents. However, unlike the case of a synchronous machine, 
the relationship between the rotor speed and the frequency and sequence of the phase- 
winding excitation can be quite complex, depending on the number of rotor poles and 
the number of stator poles and phases. This is illustrated in Example 8.2. 
Consider a four-phase, 8/6 VRM. If the stator phases are excited sequentially, with a total time 
of To sec required to excite the four phases (i.e., each phase is excited for a time of To~4 sec), 
find the angular velocity of the stator flux wave and the corresponding angular velocity of the 
rotor. Neglect any system dynamics and assume that the rotor will instantaneously track the 
stator excitation. 
II Solution 
Figure 8.7 shows in schematic form an 8/6 VRM. The details of the pole shapes are not of 
importance for this example and thus the rotor and stator poles are shown simply as arrows 
indicating their locations. The figure shows the rotor aligned with the stator phase-1 poles. 
This position corresponds to that which would occur if there were no load on the rotor and the 
stator phase-1 windings were excited, since it corresponds to a position of maximum phase-1 
flux linkage. 
EXAMPLE 8.2 
Figure 8.7 
Schematic view of a 
four-phase 8/6 VRM. Pole locations 
are indicated by arrows. 

420 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
Consider next that the excitation on phase 1 is removed and phase 2 is excited. At this 
point, the stator flux wave has rotated 45 ° in the clockwise direction. Similarly, as the excitation 
on phase 2 is removed and phase 3 is excited, the stator flux wave will move an additional 45 ° 
clockwise. Thus the angular velocity Ogs of the stator flux wave can be calculated quite simply 
as zr/4 rad (45 °) divided by To~4 sec, or w~ = re/To rad/sec. 
Note, however, that this is not the angular velocity of the rotor itself. As the phase-1 
excitation is removed and phase 2 is excited, the rotor will move in such a fashion as to 
maximize the phase-2 flux linkages. In this case, Fig. 8.7 shows that the rotor will move 15 ° 
counterclockwise since the nearest rotor poles to phase 2 are actually 15 ° ahead of the phase-2 
poles. Thus the angular velocity of the rotor can be calculated as -Jr/12 rad (15 °, with the minus 
sign indicating counterclockwise rotation) divided by To~4 see, or 09 m = -zr/(3T0) rad/sec. 
In this case, the rotor travels at one-third the angular velocity of the stator excitation and 
in the opposite direction! 
)ractice Problem 8.: 
Repeat the calculation of Example 8.2 for the case of a four-phase, 8/10 VRM. 
Solution 
09 m "-- n / (5 T 0) rad/sec 
Example 8.2 illustrates the complex relationship that can exist between the exci- 
tation frequency of a VRM and the "synchronous" rotor frequency. This relationship 
is directly analogous to that between two mechanical gears for which the choice of 
different gear shapes and configurations gives rise to a wide range of speed ratios. It 
is difficult to derive a single rule which will describe this relationship for the immense 
variety of VRM configurations which can be envisioned. It is, however, a fairly simple 
matter to follow a procedure similar to that shown in Example 8.2 to investigate any 
particular configuration of interest. 
Further variations on VRM configurations are possible if the main stator and rotor 
poles are subdivided by the addition of individual teeth (which can be thought of as a 
set of small poles excited simultaneously by a single winding). The basic concept is 
illustrated in Fig. 8.8, which shows a schematic view of three poles of a three-phase 
VRM with a total of six main stator poles. Such a machine, with the stator and rotor 
poles subdivided into teeth, is known as a castleated VRM, the name resulting from 
the fact that the stator teeth appear much like the towers of a medieval castle. 
In Fig. 8.8 each stator pole has been divided into four subpoles by the addition 
3 o (indicated by the angle/3 in the figure), with a slot of the 
of four teeth of width 6 7 
same width between each tooth. The same tooth/slot spacing is chosen for the rotor, 
resulting in a total of 28 teeth on the rotor. Notice that this number of rotor teeth and the 
corresponding value of/3 were chosen so that when the rotor teeth are aligned with 
those of the phase- 1 stator pole, they are not aligned with those of phases 2 and 3. In this 
fashion, successive excitation of the stator phases will result in a rotation of the rotor. 
Castleation further complicates the relationship between the rotor speed and the 
frequency and sequence of the stator-winding excitation. For example, from Fig. 8.8 

8.3 
Current Waveforms for Torque Production 
421 
I 
Figure 8.8 Schematic view of a three-phase castleated VRM with 
six stator poles and four teeth per pole and 28 rotor poles. 
it can be seen that for this configuration, when the excitation of phase 1 is removed 
and phase 2 is excited (corresponding to a rotation of the stator flux wave by 60 ° 
2 ° 
in the clockwise direction), the rotor will rotate by an angle of (2fl/3) = 4 7 in the 
counterclockwise direction. 
From the preceding analysis, we see that the technique of castleation can be 
used to create VRMs capable of operating at low speeds (and hence producing high 
torque for a given stator power input) and with very precise rotor position accuracy. 
For example, the machine of Fig. 8.8 can be rotated precisely by angular increments 
of (2fl/3). The use of more teeth can further increase the position resolution of 
these machines. Such machines can be found in applications where low speed, high 
torque, and precise angular resolution are required. This castleated configuration is 
one example of a class of VRMs commonly referred to as stepping motors because 
of their capability to produce small steps in angular resolution. 
8.3 
CURRENT WAVEFORMS FOR 
TORQUE PRODUCTION 
As is seen in Section 8.1, the torque produced by a VRM in which saturation and 
mutual-inductance effects can be neglected is determined by the summation of terms 
consisting of the derivatives of the phase inductances with respect to the rotor angular 
position, each multiplied by the square of the corresponding phase current. For 
example, we see from Eqs. 8.6 and 8.7 that the torque of the two-phase, 4/2 VRM of 
Fig. 8.1b is given by 
1 2dLll(Om) 
Tmech -- ~ i 1 
d0 m 
+ ~i 2dL22(Om) 
dOrn 
1 i2dL11(Om) ~ dL 
(Om -- 90 °) 
-- 2 1 
dOm 
+ 
i2 
11 dOm 
(8.9) 

422 
CHAPTER 
8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
~ Phase 1 
-9o o 
-5ooi 
- 
o 
50 ° 
90 ° 
e2 
[ 
'
-
 
I 
, 
, 
t 
I 
I 
-90 ° 
! 
-70 
t-30 ° 
I0 
t lO °20 ° 
t60 ° 
90 ° 
------I 
L 
__1 
I . . . . . . . . .  
~Om 
~Om 
--1'0 ° 
0 
:30 ° 
70 °; 
_900 
_6o0,, 
'oo Io 
o 
 ooi 
F .. ,,., 
80 ° 90 ° 
• 
0 m 
Figure 
8.9 
Idealized inductance and dL/dern curves for a three-phase 6/4 VRM with 
40 ° rotor and stator poles. 
For each phase of a VRM, the phase inductance is periodic in rotor angular 
position, and thus the area under the curve of d L/dOm calculated over a complete 
period of L(0m) is zero, i.e., 
fo rt/pr 
dOm 
L(2rc/pr) - L(0) = 0 
(8.10) 
d L ( Om.______~) 
i 
dOm 
where Pr is the number of rotor poles. 
The average torque produced by a VRM can be found by integrating the torque 
equation (Eq. 8.9) over a complete period of rotation. Clearly, if the stator currents 
are held constant, Eq. 8.10 shows that the average torque will be zero. Thus, to 
produce a time-averaged torque, the stator currents must vary with rotor position. The 
desired average output torque for a VRM depends on the nature of the application. For 
example, motor operation requires a positive time-averaged shaft torque. Similarly, 
braking or generator action requires negative time-averaged torque. 
Positive torque is produced when a phase is excited at angular positions with 
positive d L/dOm for that phase, and negative torque is produced by excitation at 
positions at which dL/dOm is negative. Consider a three-phase, 6/4 VRM (similar to 
that shown in Fig. 8.5) with 40 ° rotor and stator poles. The inductance versus rotor 
position for this machine will be similar to the idealized representation shown in 
Fig. 8.9. 
Operation of this machine as a motor requires a net positive torque. Alternatively, 
it can be operated as a generator under conditions of net negative torque. Noting that 

8.3 
Current Waveforms for Torque Production 
423 
I 
..... 
--90 ° 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
." 
.. 
: 
Torque 
Phase 1 
............. Phase 2 
Phase 3 
Total 
__1--1_____i--I_____1--I 
0 
90 ° 
Figure 8.10 
Individual phase torques and total torque for the motor of Fig. 8.9. Each 
phase is excited with a constant current/o only at positions where dL/dOm > O. 
positive torque is generated when excitation is applied at rotor positions at which 
d L/dOm is positive, we see that a control system is required that determines rotor 
position and applies the phase-winding excitations at the appropriate time. It is, in 
fact, the need for this sort of control that makes VRM drive systems more complex 
than might perhaps be thought, considering only the simplicity of the VRM itself. 
One of the reasons that VRMs have found application in a wide variety of sit- 
uations is because the widespread availability and low cost of microprocessors and 
power electronics have brought the cost of the sensing and control required to suc- 
cessfully operate VRM drive systems down to a level where these systems can be 
competitive with competing technologies. Although the control of VRM drives is 
more complex than that required for dc, induction, and permanent-magnet ac motor 
systems, in many applications the overall VRM drive system turns out to be less 
expensive and more flexible than the competition. 
Assuming that the appropriate rotor-position sensor and control system is avail- 
able, the question still remains as to how to excite the armature phases. From Fig. 8.9, 
one possible excitation scheme would be to apply a constant current to each phase at 
those angular positions at which dL/dOm is positive and zero current otherwise. 
If this is done, the resultant torque waveform will be that of Fig. 8.10. Note that 
because the torque waveforms of the individual phases overlap, the resultant torque 
will not be constant but rather will have a pulsating component on top of its average 
value. In general, such pulsating torques are to be avoided both because they may 
produce damaging stresses in the VRM and because they may result in the generation 
of excessive vibration and noise. 
Consideration of Fig. 8.9 shows that there are alternative excitation strategies 
which can reduce the torque pulsations of Fig. 8.10. Perhaps the simplest strategy is 
to excite each phase for only 30 ° of angular position instead of the 40 ° which resulted 
in Fig. 8.9. Thus, each phase would simply be turned off as the next phase is turned 
on, and there would be no torque overlap between phases. 
Although this strategy would be an ideal solution to the problem, as a practical 
matter it is not possible to implement. The problem is that because each phase winding 
has a self-inductance, it is not possible to instantaneously switch on or off the phase 

424 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
EXAMPLE 
8.3 
currents. Specifically, for a VRM with independent (uncoupled) phases, 2 the voltage- 
current relationship of the jth phase is given by 
d)~j 
vj = Rjij + dt 
(8.11) 
where 
Thus, 
~.j = Ljj(Om)ij 
(8.12) 
d 
vj = Rjij + --d~[Ljj(Om)ij] 
(8.13) 
Equation 8.13 can be rewritten as 
vj = 
Rj + -~[Ljj(Om)] ij + Ljj(Om)~ 
or 
dij 
(8.14) 
dt 
dLjj(Om) dOm ] 
dij 
vj = 
Rj + 
d(0m) 
dt 
ij + Ljj(Om) d----t 
(8.15) 
Although Eqs. 8.13 through 8.15 are mathematically complex and often require 
numerical solution, they clearly indicate that some time is required to build up cur- 
rents in the phase windings following application of voltage to that phase. A similar 
analysis can be done for conditions associated with removal of the phase currents. The 
delay time associated with current build up can limit the maximum achievable torque 
while the current decay time can result in negative torque if current is still flowing 
when dL(0m)/dOm reverses sign. These effects are illustrated in Example 8.3 which 
also shows that in cases where winding resistance can be neglected, an approximate 
solution to these equations can be found. 
Consider the idealized 4/2 VRM of Example 8.1. Assume that it has a winding resistance of 
R -- 1.5 ~2/phase and a leakage inductance Lt = 5 mH in each phase. For a constant rotor 
speed of 4000 r/min, calculate (a) the phase-1 current as a function of time during the interval 
-60 ° < 0m < 0 °, assuming that a constant voltage of V0 -- 100 V is applied to phase 1 just as 
d L 1~ (0m)/d0m becomes positive (i.e., at 0m = --60 ° = --rr/3 rad), and (b) the decay of phase-1 
current if a negative voltage of -200 V is applied at 0m = 0 ° and maintained until the current 
reaches zero. (c) Using MATLAB t, plot these currents as well as the corresponding torque. 
Also calculate the integral under the torque-versus-time plot and compare it to the integral 
under the torque-versus-time curve for the time period during which the torque is positive. 
2 The reader is reminded that in some cases the assumption of independent phases is not justified, and then 
a more complex analysis of the VRM is required (see the discussion following the derivation of Eq. 8.5). 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

8,3 
Current Waveforms for Torque Production 
425 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 8.15, the differential equation governing the current buildup in phase 1 is given 
by 
dL11 (0m) dOm ] 
dil 
Pl = 
R + 
dOm 
d--i- il + L11(0m) d-T 
At 4000 r/min, 
dOm 
Jr 
O)m 
d t = 4000 r/min x 30 
rad/sec 
r/min 
400zr 
3 
rad/sec 
From Fig. 8.4 (for -60 ° < 0m < 0 °) 
gmax( 
~) 
L11(Om ) --- tl .qt_ _.~ 
Om .qt_ _~ 
= 0.005 + 0.122(0m + ~/3) 
Thus 
and 
dL11(Om) 
d0m 
= 0.122 H/rad 
dL11 (0m) dOm 
dOm 
dt 
-- 51.1 
which is much greater than the resistance R = 1.5 f2 
This will enable us to obtain an approximate solution for the current by neglecting 
the Ri term in Eq. 8.13. We must then solve 
d(Lllil) 
1) 1 
dt 
for which the solution is 
Substituting 
Vldt 
Vot 
il(t) = ~,u 
_ 
Lll(t) 
L11(t) 
7t" 
Om -- --~- +OOmt 
into the expression for Lll (0m) then gives 
100t 
il(t) = 
A 
0.005 + 51.1t 
which is valid until 0m = 0 ° at t = 2.5 msec, at which point il (t) = 1.88 A. 
b. During the period of current decay the solution proceeds as in part (a). From Fig. 8.4, 
for0 ° _< 0m _< 60 °, dLll(Om)/dt = -51.1 f2 and the Ri term can again be ignored in 
Eq. 8.13. 
Thus, since the applied voltage is -200 V for this time period (t >_ 2.5 msec until 
il (t) = 0) in an effort to bring the current rapidly to zero, since the current must be 

426 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
continuous at time to = 2.5 msec, and since, from Fig. 8.4 (for 0 ° < 0rn < 60 °) 
 max 
) 
Lll(0m) 
: El + -~ 
-~ -- Om 
= 0.005 + 0.122(n'/3 - 0m) 
Lll(to)il(to) + ftt 1)1 dt 
o 
il(t) = 
Lll(t) 
0.25 -- 200(t -- 2.5 x 10 -3) 
0.005 + 51.1(5 x 10 -3 -- t) 
From this equation, we see that the current reaches zero at t -- 3.75 msec. 
c. The torque can be found from Eq. 8.9 by setting i2 = 0. Thus 
1 
dLll 
Tmech 
"
-
-
 ~i~ ~m 
Using MATLAB and the results of parts (a) and (b), the current waveform is plotted 
in Fig. 8.1 la and the torque in Fig. 8.1lb. The integral under the torque curve is 3.35 × 
10 -4 N. m. sec while that under the positive portion of the torque curve corresponding to 
positive torque is 4.56 x 10 -4 N. m. sec. Thus we see that the negative torque produces a 27 
percent reduction in average torque from that which would otherwise be available if the current 
could be reduced instantaneously to zero. 
Notice first from the results of part (b) and from Fig. 8.11a that, in spite of applying a 
negative voltage of twice the magnitude of the voltage used to build up the current, current con- 
tinues to flow in the winding for 1.25 ms after reversal of the applied voltage. From Fig. 8.1 lb, 
we see that the result is a significant period of negative torque production. In practice, this may, 
for example, dictate a control scheme which reverses the phase current in advance of the time 
that the sign of dL(Om)/dOm reverses, achieving a larger average torque by trading off some 
reduction in average positive torque against a larger decrease in average negative torque. 
This example also illustrates another important aspect of VRM operation. For a system 
of resistance of 1.5 ~ and constant inductance, one would expect a steady-state current of 
100/1.5 = 66.7 A. Yet in this system the steady-state current is less than 2 A. The reason for 
this is evident from Eqs. 8.14 and 8.15 where we see that dLll(Om)/dt = 51.1 ~ appears as an 
apparent resistance in series with the winding resistance which is much larger than the winding 
resistance itself. The corresponding voltage drop (the speed voltage) is of sufficient magnitude 
to limit the steady-state current to a value of 100/51.1 - 1.96 A. 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% Here 
are 
the 
inductances 
Lmax 
= 0.128; 
Lleak 
= 0.005; 
Posintegral 
= 0; 
integral 
= 0 ; 
we see that the solution becomes 

8.3 
Current Waveforms for Torque Production 
427 
~.1.2 
i0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
~
~
 
- 
_ 
_ 
/ 
I 
time [mseel 
(a) 
0.25 
0.15 
0.1 
0.05 
T 
z 
I-- 
-0.05 
-0.1 
-0.15 
-0.2 
J 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
f J  
215 
~ 
315 
I 
i 
-°.% 
& 
~ 
~:~ 
~ 
time [msec] 
(b) 
Figure 8.11 
Example 8.3 (a) phase-1 current and (b) torque 
profile. 
N = 500 ; 
tmax = 3.75e-3; 
deltat 
= tmax/N; 
% Now do the calculations 
for n = i: (N+I) 
t(n) 
: tmax*(n-1)/N; 
thetam(n) 
=-(pi/3) 
+ (400"pi/3) 
* t(n); 

428 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
if (thetam(n) 
<: 0) 
i(n) : 100*t(n) / (0.005 + 51.1 *t(n) ) ; 
dldlldtheta 
= 0.122; 
Torque(n) 
= 0.5*i(n)^2*dldlldtheta; 
Posintegral 
= Posintegral 
+ Torque(n)*deltat; 
integral = Posintegral; 
else 
i(n) = (0.25- 200*(t(n) - 2.5e-3))/(0.005+51.I* 
(5e-3 - t(n))); 
dldlldtheta 
= -0.122; 
Torque(n) 
= 0.5*i(n)^2*dldlldtheta; 
integral = integral + Torque(n)*deltat; 
end 
end 
fprintf('\nPositive 
torque integral = %g [N-m-sec] ',Posintegral) 
fprintf('\nTorque 
integral : %g [N-m-sec]\n',integral) 
plot (t*1000, i) 
xlabel('time 
[msec] ') 
ylabel('Phase 
current 
[A] ') 
pause 
plot (t*1000, Torque) 
xlabel('time 
[msec] ') 
ylabel('Torque 
[N-m] ') 
Reconsider Example 8.3 under the condition that a voltage of -250 V is applied to turn off the 
phase current. Use MATLAB to calculate the integral under the torque-versus-time plot and 
compare it to the integral under the torque-versus-time curve for the time period during which 
the torque is positive. 
Solution 
The current returns to zero at t = 3.5 msec. The integral under the torque curve is 3.67 × 
10 -4 N. m. s while that under the positive portion of the torque curve corresponding to positive 
torque remains equal to 4.56 x 10 -4 N. m. s. In this case, the negative torque produces a 
20 percent reduction in torque from that which would otherwise be available if the current 
could be reduced instantaneously to zero. 
Example 8.3 illustrates important aspects of VRM performance which do not 
appear in an idealized analysis such as that of Example 8.1 but which play an extremely 
important role in practical applications. It is clear that it is not possible to readily 
apply phase currents of arbitrary waveshapes. Winding inductances (and their time 

8.3 
Current Waveforms for Torque Production 
429 
derivatives) significantly affect the current waveforms that can be achieved for a given 
applied voltage. 
In general, the problem becomes more severe as the rotor speed is increased. 
Consideration of Example 8.3 shows, for a given applied voltage, (1) that as the 
speed is increased, the current will take a larger fraction of the available time during 
which dL(Om)/dOm is positive to achieve a given level and (2) that the steady-state 
current which can be achieved is progressively lowered. One common method for 
maximizing the available torque is to apply the phase voltage somewhat in advance 
of the time when dL(Om)/dOm begins to increase. This gives the current time to build 
up to a significant level before torque production begins. 
Yet a more significant difficulty (also illustrated in Example 8.3) is that just as the 
currents require a significant amount of time to increase at the beginning of a turn-on 
cycle, they also require time to decrease at the end. As a result, if the phase excitation 
is removed at or near the end of the positive dL (0m)/dOm period, it is highly likely that 
there will be phase current remaining as dL(Om)/dOm becomes negative, so there will 
be a period of negative torque production, reducing the effective torque-producing 
capability of the VRM. 
One way to avoid such negative torque production would be to turn off the phase 
excitation sufficiently early in the cycle that the current will have decayed essentially 
to zero by the time that dL(Om)/dOm becomes negative. However, there is clearly a 
point of diminishing returns, because turning off the phase current while dL (0m)/dOm 
is positive also reduces positive torque production. As a result, it is often necessary 
to accept a certain amount of negative torque (to get the required positive torque) 
and to compensate for it by the production of additional positive torque from another 
phase. 
Another possibility is illustrated in Fig. 8.12. Figure 8.12a shows the cross- 
sectional view of a 4/2 VRM similar to that of Fig. 8.3 with the exception that the 
rotor pole angle has been increased from 60 ° to 75 °, with the result that the rotor 
pole overhangs that of the stator by 15 °. As can be seen from Fig. 8.12b, this results 
in a region of constant inductance separating the positive and negative dL(Om)/dOm 
regions, which in turn provides additional time for the phase current to be turned off 
before the region of negative torque production is reached. 
Although Fig. 8.12 shows an example with 15 ° of rotor overhang, in any particular 
design the amount of overhang would be determined as part of the overall design 
process and would depend on such issues as the amount of time required for the 
phase current to decay and the operating speed of the VRM. Also included in this 
design process must be recognition that the use of wider rotor poles will result in a 
larger value of Lmin, which itself tends to reduce torque production (see the discussion 
of Eq. 8.8) and to increase the time for current buildup. 
Under conditions of constant-speed operation, it is often desirable to achieve 
constant torque independent of rotor position. Such operation will minimize pulsating 
torques which may cause excessive noise and vibration and perhaps ultimately lead to 
component failure due to material fatigue. This means that as the torque production of 
one phase begins to decrease, that of another phase must increase to compensate. As 
can be seen from torque waveforms such as those found in Fig. 8.11, this represents a 

430 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
(a) 
dtll(Om) 
dO m 
__~_112.5 
° 
5/-~---~---~I"--, I ~ 
Lll(0m) 
1 
~-67~--7"q 
[; "5° ~
~
 
"5° 
12.5° :- - - - --,7~- 
~ 172.5 ° 
't 
' ~ 1  
, 
, 
, 
', N N ~  
: 
:# ~--- 0m 
--180 °: 
--150 ° --120 °l 
--90 ° 
--60 ° 
--30 ° 
I 
30 ° 
60°1 
90 ° 
120 ° 
150 ° 
180 ° 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(b) 
Figure 8.12 
A 4/2 VRM with 15 ° rotor overhang: (a) cross-sectional view and (b) plots of 
L 11 (#m) and dL 11 (8m) / dern versus #rn. 
complex control problem for the phase excitation, and totally ripple-free torque will 
be difficult to achieve in many cases. 
8.4 
NONLINEAR ANALYSIS 
Like most electric machines, VRMs employ magnetic materials both to direct and 
shape the magnetic fields in the machine and to increase the magnetic flux density 
that can be achieved from a given amplitude of current. To obtain the maximum 
benefit from the magnetic material, practical VRMs are operated with the magnetic 
flux density high enough so that the magnetic material is in saturation under normal 
operating conditions. 
As with the synchronous, induction, and dc machines discussed in Chapters 5-7, 
the actual operating flux density is determined by trading off such quantities as cost, 
efficiency, and torque-to-mass ratio. However, because the VRM and its drive electron- 
ics are quite closely interrelated, VRMs design typically involves additional trade-offs 
that in turn affect the choice of operating flux density. 

8.4 
Nonlinear Analysis 
431 
Om 
0 ° 10 ° 20 ° 
30 ° 
40 ° 
50 ° 
60 ° 
70 ° 
80 ° 
90 ° 
Phase current, i 
0 m 
0 o 
~
1
0
 
° 
• < 
_ 
~
~
2
0
 
o 
°,.~ 
"~ 
50° 
60° 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
.- 
Phase current, i 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 8.13 
Plots of ~. versus i for a VRM with (a)linear and (b) nonlinear magnetics. 
Figure 8.2 shows typical inductance-versus-angle curves for the VRMs of Fig. 8.1. 
Such curves are characteristic of all VRMs. It must be recognized that the use of the 
concept of inductance is strictly valid only under the condition that the magnetic 
circuit in the machine is linear so that the flux density (and hence the winding flux 
linkage) is proportional to the winding current. This linear analysis is based on the as- 
sumption that the magnetic material in the motor has constant magnetic permeability. 
This assumption was used for all the analyses earlier in this chapter. 
An alternate representation of the flux-linkage versus current characteristic of a 
VRM is shown in Fig. 8.13. This representation consists of a series of plots of the flux 
linkage versus current at various rotor angles. In this figure, the curves correspond to 
a machine with a two-pole rotor such as in Fig. 8.1, and hence a plot of curves from 
0 ° to 90 ° is sufficient to completely characterize the machine. 
Figure 8.13a shows the set of ~.-i characteristics which would be measured in a 
machine with linear magnetics, i.e., constant magnetic permeability and no magnetic 
saturation. For each rotor angle, the curve is a straight line whose slope corresponds 
to the inductance L(0m) at that angular position. In fact, a plot of L(0m) versus 0m 
such as in Fig. 8.2 is an equivalent representation to that of Fig. 8.13a. 
In practice, VRMs do operate with their magnetic material in saturation and their 
~.-i characteristics take on the form of Fig. 8.13b. Notice that for low current levels, the 
curves are linear, corresponding to the assumption of linear magnetics of Fig. 8.13a. 
However, for higher current levels, saturation begins to occur and the curves bend 
over steeply, with the result that there is significantly less flux linkage for a given 
current level. Finally, note that saturation effects are maximum at 0m = 0 ° (for which 
the rotor and stator poles are aligned) and minimal for higher angles as the rotor 
approaches the nonaligned position. 
Saturation has two important, somewhat contradictory effects on VRM perfor- 
mance. On the one hand, saturation limits flux densities for a given current level and 
thus tends to limit the amount of torque available from the VRM. On the other hand, 
it can be shown that saturation tends to lower the required inverter volt-ampere rating 

X 
~max 
0 
432 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
0 m: 0 o 
~'max 
0 m : 
90 ° 
to 
i 
Om--O ° 
Om 
900 
I 
0 
I 0 
i 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 8.14 
(a) Flux-linkage-current trajectory for the (a) linear and (b) nonlinear 
machines of Fig. 8.13. 
for a given VRM output power and thus tends to make the inverter smaller and less 
costly. A well-designed VRM system will be based on a trade-off between the two 
effects. 3 
These effects of saturation can be investigated by considering the two machines of 
Figs. 8.13a and b operating at the same rotational speed and under the same operating 
condition. For the sake of simplicity, we assume a somewhat idealized condition in 
which the phase-1 current is instantaneously switched on to a value I0 at 0m = -90 ° 
(the unaligned position for phase 1) and is instantaneously switched off at 0m = 0 ° 
(the aligned position). This operation is similar to that discussed in Example 8.1 in that 
we will neglect the complicating effects of the current buildup and decay transients 
which are illustrated in Example 8.3. 
Because of rotor symmetry, the flux linkages for negative rotor angles are identical 
to those for positive angles. Thus, the flux linkage-current trajectories for one current 
cycle can be determined from Figs. 8.13a and b and are shown for the two machines 
in Figs. 8.14a and b. 
As each trajectory is traversed, the power input to the winding is given by its 
volt-ampere product 
.d)~ 
Pin -- i v = t ~ 
(8.16) 
dt 
The net electric energy input to the machine (the energy that is converted to 
mechanical work) in a cycle can be determined by integrating Eq. 8.16 around the 
3 For a discussion of saturation effects in VRM drive systems, see T. J. E. Miller, "Converter Volt-Ampere 
Requirements of the Switched Reluctance Motor," IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., IA-21:1136-1144 (1985). 

8,4 
Nonlinear Analysis 
433 
trajectory 
Net work - / Pin dt = f i dX 
(8.17) 
This can be seen graphically as the area enclosed by the trajectory, labeled Wnet in 
Figs. 8.14a and b. Note that the saturated machine converts less useful work per cycle 
than the unsaturated machine. As a result, to get a machine of the same power output, 
the saturated machine will have to be larger than a corresponding (hypothetical) 
unsaturated machine. This analysis demonstrates the effects of saturation in lowering 
torque and power output. 
The peak energy input to the winding from the inverter can also be calculated. It 
is equal to the integral of the input power from the start of the trajectory to the point 
(I0,)~max): 
f 
~,max 
Peak energy = 
i d)~ 
(8.18) 
J0 
This is the total area under the )~-i curve, shown in Fig. 8.14a and b as the sum of the 
areas labeled Wrec and Wnet. 
Since we have seen that the energy represented by the area Wnet corresponds to 
useful output energy, it is clear that the energy represented by the area Wrec corresponds 
to energy input that is required to make the VRM operate (i.e., it goes into creating 
the magnetic fields in the VRM). This energy produced no useful work; rather it must 
be recycled back into the inverter at the end of the trajectory. 
The inverter volt-ampere rating is determined by the average power per phase 
processed by the inverter as the motor operates, equal to the peak energy input to the 
VRM divided by the time T between cycles. Similarly, the average output power per 
phase of the VRM is given by the net energy input per cycle divided by T. Thus the 
ratio of the inverter volt-ampere rating to power output is 
Inverter volt-ampere rating 
area(Wrec -[- Wnet) 
= 
(8.19) 
Net output area 
area(Wnet) 
In general, the inverter volt-ampere rating determines its cost and size. Thus, for 
a given power output from a VRM, a smaller ratio of inverter volt-ampere rating to 
output power means that the inverter will be both smaller and cheaper. Comparison 
of Figs. 8.14a and b shows that this ratio is smaller in the machine which saturates; 
the effect of saturation is to lower the amount of energy which must be recycled each 
cycle and hence the volt-ampere rating of the inverter required to supply the VRM. 
Consider a symmetrical two-phase 4/2 VRM whose X-i characteristic can be represented by 
the following )~-i expression (for phase 1) as a function of 0m over the range 0 _< 0m < 90 ° 
)~1 = 
0.005 + 0.09 
~-o 
8.0 Jr- il 

434 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
Phase 2 of this motor is identical to that of phase 1, and there is no significant mutual inductance 
between the phases. Assume that the winding resistance is negligible. 
a. Using MATLAB, plot a family of ~-il curves for this motor as 0m varies from 0 to 90 ° in 
10 ° increments and as i~ is varied from 0 to 30 A. 
b. Again using MATLAB, use Eq. 8.19 and Fig. 8.14 to calculate the ratio of the inverter 
volt-ampere rating to the VRM net power output for the following idealized 
operating cycle" 
(i) The current is instantaneously raised to 25 A when 0 m = -90 °. 
(ii) The current is then held constant as the rotor rotates to 0m = 0 °. 
(iii) At 0m = 0 °, the current is reduced to zero. 
c. Assuming the VRM to be operating as a motor using the cycle described in part (b) and 
rotating at a constant speed of 2500 r/min, calculate the net electromechanical power 
supplied to the rotor. 
II Solution 
a. The ).I-il 
curves 
are shown in Fig. 8.15a. 
b. Figure 8.15b shows the areas 
Wnet and Wrec. Note that, as pointed out in the text, the 
~.-i curves are symmetrical around 0m = 0 ° and thus the curves for negative values of 0rn 
are identical to those for the corresponding positive values. The area Wnet is bounded by 
the ~.~-i~ curves corresponding to 0 m --- 0 ° and 0 m -- 90 '~ and the line i l = 25 A. The 
area Wrec is bounded by the line ~.~ = 
)~max and the I.~-i~ curve corresponding to 0m = 0 °, 
where ~-m,x = ~.~ (25 A, 0°). 
Using MATLAB to integrate the areas, the desired ratio can be calculated from 
Eq. 8.19 as 
Inverter volt-ampere rating 
area(Wrec + W, et) 
= 
= 1.55 
Net output power 
area(Wnet) 
c. Energy equal to area(Wnet) is supplied by each phase to the rotor twice during each 
revolution of the rotor. If area(Wnet) is measured in joules, the power in watts supplied 
per phase is thus equal to 
Pphase = 2 (area(Whet) 
)
•
 T 
W 
where T is the time for one revolution (in seconds). 
From MATLAB, area(W.et) = 9.91 joules and for 2500 r/min, T = 60/2500 = 
0.024 sec, 
9.91) 
Pphase ~" 2 
= 825 W 
0.024 
and thus 
Breech -'- 2 Pph .... = 1650 W 

8.4 
Nonlinear Analysis 
435 
0.8 
Family of lambda-i curves as theta m varies from 0 to 90 degrees 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
___.____ -
-
-
-
~
 
theta m = 90 degrees 
; 
,'o 
Current [A] 
0.8 
(a) 
Family of lambda-i curves as theta m varies from 0 to 90 degrees 
l 
1 
f 
T 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
.~0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
- 
theta m = 0 degrees 
_ 
= 90 degrees 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Current [A] 
(b) 
Figure 8.15 
(a) A.1-il curves for Example 8.4. (b) Areas used in the 
calculation of part (b). 

ct 
~ 
'-0 
~ 
~- 
'-(3 
~ 
D 
0 
(I) 
M 
M 
Im 
'-U 
----- 
CD 
(1) 
~- 
~ 
~--~ 
0 
Z 
0 
!m 
..--- 
~ 
0 
~-- 
}--' 
0 
D ~ 
II 
0"] 
~ 
C] 
1-~ 
rt 
OJ 
> 
> 
I -~- 
M 
~ 
~ 
(1) 
(1) 
~ 
('D 
~ 
~ 
Z 
rt 
~ 
D] 
I -~ 
O~ 
~ 
~ 
~J 
(D 
M 
~ 
(1) 
(] 
!m 
"~ 
~- 
~- 
M 
M 
--- 
w- 
o 
!m 
1~ 
0 ~ 
lm 
~ 
ct 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
Q~ 
(1) 
Q~ 
~- 
~ 
(1) 
0 ~ 
v 
~ 
cr 
~ 
l~ 
M 
:~ 
03 
c) 
o 
(] 
-. 
I-- 
~ 
(I) 
k-, 
tn 
ct 
b( 
~ 
• 
• 
!m 
I/~ 
C) 
li 
k-,- 
~ 
o 
II 
k-, 
md 
~o 
-. 
o 
o 
<: 
~ 
Z:.' 
o 
c~ 
~ 
o 
~ 
(I) 
li 
li 
0" 
k,- 
o 
-....I ~ 
Im 
I= 
~ 
- 
:~ 
k--, 
il 
.. 
"(3 
~ 
~ 
-. 
~ 
m 
~ 
Ln 
k-' 
k-' ~ 
tt 
O_, 
~ 
oh 
- 
k,- 
~ 
M 
t-' 
tt 
~- 
.. 
~:~ 
,,i 
oh 
~ 
'-O 
('I) 
II 
ti 
• 
o 
M 
o 
o 
9~ 
ct 
-. 
- 
k -~ 
0-' 
M 
~ 
Z 
k-, 
k-, 
o 
'O 
0 
~ 
rr 
M 
(I) 
M 
I 
~- 
~- 
ct 
M 
D" 
® 
0 
~ 
O_, 
~" 
~ 
~-. 
c~ 
-" 
~ 
~ 
--~ 
(I) 
~ 
(I) 
~ 
0 
~- 
!m 
(I) 
~ 
,-h ~ 
~ 
...4. ~ 
(I) 
(I) 
"~ 
~ 
~ 
\ 
(I) 
~ 
i 
~ 
O~ 
[]~ 
--- 
0 
~-~ 
~~ 
ct 
+ 
(I) 
~ 
~-~ 
~ 
o 
!EL 
I 
~I 
~I 
~ 
~ 
0 
o 
'--4 
~0 
lm 
o 
(I) 
o 
ct 
o 
(I) 
Cr 
~I 
0-' 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
0 
~ 
> 
~ 
o 
(I) 
~ 
Lq 
0 
it 
~ 
0 
"' 
:~ 
~ 
~ 
+ 
"' 
'-(3 
+ 
M 
tI 
~ 
0 
0 
!m 
(I) 
• 
(I) 
k ~" 
<o 
k~- 
0" 
I, 
~ 
k-, 
P-, 
o 
t~ 
~ 
o 
p.~ 
+ 
P-~ 
~- 
(I) 
<o 
- 
Q, 
q 
im 
(1) 
x- 
k ~ 
~- 
n, 
,n 
C~ 
o 
, 
o\ ° 
Ct 
I--. 
I 
~- 
~ 
~ 
Ct 
~" 
"~ 
~ 
• 
I 
~- 
0 
~ 
~m 
0 
v 
~ 
~ 
_ 
"-" 
(I) 
X 
• 
--- 
• 
(i) 
m- 
® 
.. 
i 
Lo 
-. 
~ 
(D 
~- 
I--'- "-" 
Ct 
o 
i ~- 
~. 
o 
~ 
el) 
<o 
o3 
o 
o 
v 
v 
u3 
4- 
~h 
+ 
oo 
0 
~ 
0 
O0 
• 
---4 
~ 
0 
"" 
0 
k O 
I-'- 
• 
~ 
~" 
o 
cD 
v 
~ 
'~ 
+co 
.~. 
(D 
+ 
M 
--- 
fl) 
0 
Z 
,,,,I 
" 
ID 
m" 
13.) 
O- 
l::m 
:0 
(l) 
~. 
0 
o 
Im 
(] 
($] 
Im 
z] 
09 
(I) 
-'0 
-0 
"-5 
o 
0 
--.i 

8.5 
Stepping Motors 
437 
fprintf('\n\nPart(c) 
AreaWnet = %g [Joules] ',AreaWnet) 
fprintf('\n 
Pphase : %g [W] and Ptot = %g [W]\n',Pphase,Ptot) 
)ractice Problem 8. 
Consider a two-phase VRM which is identical to that of Example 8.4 with the exception of 
an additional 5 mH of leakage inductance in each phase. (a) Calculate the ratio of the inverter 
volt-ampere rating to the VRM net power output for the following idealized operating cycle: 
(i) The current is instantaneously raised to 25 A when 0m -- --90 °. 
(ii) The current is then held constant as the rotor rotates to 0m = 10 °. 
(iii) At 0 m = 10 °, the current is reduced to zero. 
(b) Assuming the VRM to be operating as a motor using the cycle described in part (a) and 
rotating at a constant speed of 2500 r/min, calculate the net electromechanical power supplied 
to the rotor. 
Solution 
b. emech = 1467 W 
Inverter volt-ampere rating = 1.75 
Net output power 
Saturation effects clearly play a significant role in the performance of most VRMs 
and must be taken into account. In addition, the idealized operating cycle illustrated 
in Example 8.4 cannot, of course, be achieved in practice since some rotor motion is 
likely to take place over the time scale over which current changes occur. As a result, 
it is often necessary to resort to numerical-analysis packages such as finite-element 
programs as part of the design process for practical VRM systems. Many of these 
programs incorporate the ability to model the nonlinear effects of magnetic saturation 
as well as mechanical (e.g., rotor motion) and electrical (e.g., current buildup) dynamic 
effects. 
As we have seen, the design of a VRM drive system typically requires that a 
trade-off be made. On the one hand, saturation tends to increase the size of the VRM 
for a given power output. On the other hand, on comparing two VRM systems with 
the same power output, the system with the higher level of saturation will typically 
require an inverter with a lower volt-ampere rating. Thus the ultimate design will be 
determined by a trade-off between the size, cost, and efficiency of the VRM and of 
the inverter. 
8.5 
STEPPING MOTORS 
As we have seen, when the phases of a VRM are energized sequentially in an appro- 
priate step-wise fashion, the VRM will rotate a specific angle for each step. Motors 
designed specifically to take advantage of this characteristic are referred to as stepping 

438 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
motors or stepper motors. Frequently stepping motors are designed to produce a large 
number of steps per revolution, for example 50, 100, or 200 steps per revolution 
(corresponding to a rotation of 7.2 °, 3.6 ° and 1.8 ° per step). 
An important characteristic of the stepping motor is its compatibility with digital- 
electronic systems. These systems are common in a wide variety of applications and 
continue to become more powerful and less expensive. For example, the stepping 
motor is often used in digital control systems where the motor receives open-loop 
commands in the form of a train of pulses to turn a shaft or move an object a specific 
distance. Typical applications include paper-feed and print-head-positioning motors in 
printers and plotters, drive and head-positioning motors in disk drives and CD players, 
and worktable and tool positioning in numerically controlled machining equipment. 
In many applications, position information can be obtained simply by keeping count 
of the pulses sent to the motor, in which case position sensors and feedback control 
are not required. 
The angular resolution of a VRM is determined by the number of rotor and stator 
teeth and can be greatly enhanced by techniques such as castleation, as is discussed in 
Section 8.2. Stepping motors come in a wide variety of designs and configurations. In 
addition to variable-reluctance configurations, these include permanent-magnet and 
hybrid configurations. The use of permanent magnets in combination with a variable- 
reluctance geometry can significantly enhance the torque and positional accuracy of 
a stepper motor. 
The VRM configurations discussed in Sections 8.1 through 8.3 consist of a single 
rotor and stator with multiple phases. A stepping motor of this configuration is called 
a single-stack, variable-reluctance stepping motor. An alternate form of variable- 
reluctance stepping motor is known as a multistack variable-reluctance stepping 
motor. In this configuration, the motor can be considered to be made up of a set of 
axially displaced, single-phase VRMs mounted on a single shaft. 
Figure 8.16 shows a multistack variable-reluctance stepping motor. This type of 
motor consists of a series of stacks, each axially displaced, of identical geometry and 
each excited by a single phase winding, as shown in Fig. 8.17. The motor of Fig. 8.16 
has three stacks and three phases, although motors with additional phases and stacks 
are common. For an n~-stack motor, the rotor or stator (but not both) on each stack is 
displaced by 1 / n~ times the pole-pitch angle. In Fig. 8.16, the rotor poles are aligned, 
but the stators are offset in angular displacement by one-third of the pole pitch. By 
successively exciting the individual phases, the rotor can be turned in increments of 
this displacement angle. 
A schematic diagram of a two-phase stepping motor with a permanent-magnet, 
two-pole rotor is shown in Fig. 8.18. Note that this machine is in fact a two-phase 
synchronous machine, similar for example to the three-phase permanent-magnet 
ac machine of Fig. 5.29. The distinction between such a stepping motor and a syn- 
chronous motor arises not from the construction of the motor but rather from how the 
motor is operated. The synchronous motor is typically intended to drive a load at a 
specified speed, and the stepping motor is typically intended to control the position 
of a load. 

8.5 Stepping Motors 
439 
Figure 8.16 
Cutaway view of a three-phase, three-stack variable-reluctance stepping 
motor. ( Warner Electric.) 
The rotor of the stepping motor of Fig. 8.18 assumes the angles 0m = 0, 45 °, 
90°,... as the windings are excited in the sequence: 
1. 
Positive current in phase 1 alone. 
2. 
Equal-magnitude positive currents in phase 1 and phase 2. 
3. 
Positive current in phase 2 alone. 
4. 
Equal-magnitude negative current in phase 1 and positive current in phase 2. 
5. 
Negative current in phase 1 alone. 
6. 
And so on. 
Note that if a ferromagnetic rotor were substituted for the permanent-magnet rotor, 
the rotor would move in a similar fashion. 
The stepping motor of Fig. 8.18 can also be used for 90 ° steps by exciting the 
coils singly. In the latter case, only a permanent-magnet rotor can be used. This can 
be seen from the torque-angle curves for the two types of rotors shown in Fig. 8.19. 
Whereas the permanent-magnet rotor produces peak torque when the excitation is 
shifted 90 °, the ferromagnetic rotor produces zero torque and may move in either 
direction. 
The rotor position in the permanent-magnet stepping motor of Fig. 8.18 is defined 
by the winding currents with no ambiguity and depends on the direction of the phase 

440 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
Phase winding 
Figure 8.17 
Diagram of one stack and phase 
of a multiphase, multistack variable-reluctance 
stepping motor, such as that in Fig. 8.16. For an 
ns-stack motor, the rotor or stator (but not both) 
on each stack is displaced by 1/ns times the 
pole pitch. 
i:!iiiiiii:iiiUiliiiiiiiiJiiiiiii~i~; 
i :::~LiiiiiiiTiliiiiiiiiiiiTiiiiiiiiil 
1: ¸ 
Figure 8.18 Schematic diagram of a 
two-phase permanent-magnet 
stepping motor. 

8..5 
Stepping Motors 
441 
--90 ° 
T r, torque acting 
on rotor in +0 m 
direction 
(a) Rotor: permanent- 
magnet 
0 
construction 
T r, torque acting 
on rotor in +0 m 
direction 
(b) Rotor: variable 
reluctance 
construction 
0 ° 
i1 
\ ~  
Phpse 2 excited 
P~ase 1 excited 
...a 
,,,,_,d, 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
0 
'/ 
,, 
--90 ° 
0 o 
+90 ° 
+90 ° 
+ 180 ° 
+270 ° 
i 
~---~ Om 
/ 
! 
s 
/ 
Rotor position 
for 
1 excited 
phase 
/ 
\ 
Phase 2 excited 
~
t
 
/ 
~._ 
Phase 1 excited 
'/'0m 
Rotor position 
for phase 1 excited 
+ 180 ° 
+270 ° 
Figure 8.19 
Torque-angle curves for the stepping motor of Fig. 8.18: 
(a) permanent-magnet rotor and (b) variable-reluctance rotor. 
currents. Reversing the phase currents will cause the rotor to reverse its orientation. 
This is in contrast to VRM configuration with a ferromagnetic rotor, in which two 
rotor positions are equally stable for any particular set of phase currents, and hence 
the rotor position cannot be determined uniquely. Permanent-magnet stepping motors 
are also unlike their VRM counterparts in that torque tending to align the rotor with 
the stator poles will be generated even when there is no excitation applied to the phase 
windings. Thus the rotor will have preferred unexcited rest positions, a fact which 
can be used to advantage in some applications. 
Using the techniques of Chapter 3 and neglecting saturation effects, the torque of a two-phase, 
permanent-magnet stepping motor of the form of Fig. 8.18 can be expressed as 
Tmech : To (il cos 0m n t- i2 sin 0m) 
where To is a positive constant that depends upon the motor geometry and the properties of the 
permanent magnet. 
EXAMPLE 8.5 

442 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
Calculate the rest (zero-torque) positions which will result if the motor is driven by a drive 
such that each phase current can be set equal to three values -I0, 0, and I0. Using such a drive, 
what is the motor step size? 
II Solution 
In general, the zero-torque positions of the motor can be found by setting the torque expression 
to zero and solving for the resultant rotor position. Thus setting 
Tmech --- To (il sin 0m - 
i2 cos 0m) "- 0 
gives 
i~ sin 0m - i2 cos 0m : 0 
or 
(i2) 
0 m : tan-~ 
i-~ 
Note that not all of these zero-torque positions correspond to stable equilibrium positions. 
For example, operation with i~ - 
I0 and i2 - 
0 gives two zero-torque positions: 0m = 0 ° 
and 0m = 180 °. Yet only the position 0m = 0 ° is stable. This is directly analogous to the case 
of a hanging pendulum which sees zero torque both when it is hanging downward (0 = 0 °) 
and when it is sitting inverted (0 -- 180 °). Yet, it is clear that the slightest perturbation of the 
position of the inverted pendulum will cause it to rotate downwards and that it will eventually 
come to rest in the stable hanging position. 
Stable rest positions of the rotor are determined by the requirement that a restoring torque 
is produced as the rotor moves from that position. Thus, a negative torque should result if 
the rotor moves in the +0m direction, and a positive torque should result for motion in the -0m 
direction. Mathematically, this can be expressed as an additional constraint on the torque at the 
rest position 
OTm~h I 
00|n 
il ,i2 
<0 
where the partial derivative is evaluated at the zero-torque position and is taken with the phase 
currents held constant. Thus, in this case, the rest position must satisfy the additional constraint 
that 
0 Tmech 
00,, 
tl ,t2 
--- -To (il COS0m -']- i2 sin 0m) < 0 
From this equation, we see for example that with i~ = I0 and i2 
= 
0, at 0 m = 
0 °, 
OTmech/OOm < 0and thus0m = 0 ~ isastable rest position. Similarly, at0m = 180 °, OTmech/OOm > 
0 and thus 0m --- 180 ~ is not a stable rest position. 
Using these relationships, Table 8.1 lists the stable rest positions of the rotor for the various 
combinations of phase currents. 
From this table we see that this drive results in a step size of 45 °. 

8.5 
Stepping Motors 
443 
Table 8.1 
Rotor rest positions for Example 8.5. 
ii 
il 
i2 
0m 
0 
0 
0 
-Io 
270 ° 
0 
Io 
90 ° 
-Io 
0 
180 ° 
-Io 
-Io 
225 ° 
-Io 
Io 
135 ° 
Io 
0 
0 o 
Io 
-Io 
315 ° 
Io 
I0 
45 ° 
In order to achieve a step size of 22.5 °, the motor drive of Example 8.5 is modified so that each 
phase can be driven by currents of magnitude 0, +klo, and 4-10. Find the required value of the 
constant k. 
Solution 
k = tan -1 (22.5 °) = 0.4142 
In Example 8.5 we see that stable equilibrium positions of an unloaded stepping 
motor satisfy the conditions that there is zero torque, i.e., 
Tmech = 0 
(8.20) 
and that there is positive restoring torque, i.e., 
0Tmech 
< 0 
(8.21) 
OOm il,i2 
In practice, there will of course be a finite load torque tending to perturb the stepping 
motor from these idealized positions. For open-loop control systems (i.e., control 
systems in which there is no mechanism for position feedback), a high-degree of 
position control can be achieved by designing the stepping motor to produce large 
restoring torque (i.e., a large magnitude of O Tmech/OOm). In such a stepping motor, 
load torques will result in only a small movement of the rotor from the idealized 
positions which satisfies Eqs. 8.20 and 8.21. 
Example 8.5 also shows how carefully controlled combinations of phase cur- 
rents can enhance the resolution of a stepper motor. This technique, referred to as 
microstepping, can be used to achieve increased step resolution of a wide variety 
of stepper motors. As the following example shows, microstepping can be used to 
produce extremely fine position resolution. The increased resolution comes, however, 
at the expense of an increase in complexity of the stepping-motor drive electronics 
and control algorithms, which must accurately control the distribution of current to 
multiple phases simultaneously. 

444 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
EXAMPLE 8.6 
Consider again the two-phase, permanent-magnet stepping motor of Example 8.5. Calculate 
the rotor position which will result if the phase currents are controlled to be sinusoidal functions 
of a reference angle 0rer in the form 
il = 
I0cOS0ref 
i2 = I0 sin 0ref 
II Solution 
Substitution of the current expressions into the torque expression of Example 8.5 gives 
Tmech = To (il COS0m + i2 sin0m) = Tolo (cos 0r~rCOS0m + sin0r~f sin0m) 
Use of the trigonometric identity cos (ol -/~) = cos ot cos/~ ÷ sin c~ sin ~ gives 
Tmech -- Tolo cos (Ore f -- 0m) 
From this expression and using the analysis of Example 8.5, we see that the rotor equilib- 
rium position will be equal to the reference angle, i.e., 0m = 0r~f. In a practical implementation, 
a digital controller is likely to be used to increment 0re f in finite steps, which will result in finite 
steps in the position of the stepping-motor. 
The hybrid stepping motor combines characteristics of the variable-reluctance 
and permanent-magnet stepping motors. A photo of a hybrid stepping motor is shown 
in Fig. 8.20, and a schematic view of a hybrid stepping motor is shown in Fig. 8.21. 
The hybrid-stepping-motor rotor configuration appears much like that of a multistack 
variable-reluctance stepping motor. In the rotor of Fig. 8.21 a, two identical rotor stacks 
are displaced axially along the rotor and displaced in angle by one-half the rotor pole 
pitch, while the stator pole structure is continuous along the length of the rotor. Unlike 
the multistack variable-reluctance stepping motor, in the hybrid stepping motor, the 
rotor stacks are separated by an axially-directed permanent magnet. As a result, in 
Fig. 8.21 a one end of the rotor can be considered to have a north magnetic pole and 
i ;:i, ~ 
: '(::~: !'ili i i liiii!iiiii::: 
...... 
: i i :! i ¸ !!i! ¸¸ 
I 
Figure 8.20 
Disassembled 1.8°/step hybrid stepping motor. (Oriental Motor.) 

8.5 
Stepping Motors 
445 
f 
f 
f 
f 
Phase 1 
Phase 2 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 8.21 
Schematic view of a hybrid stepping motor. (a) Two-stack rotor showing 
the axially-directed permanent magnet and the pole pieces displaced by one-half the 
pole pitch. (b) End view from the rotor north poles and showing the rotor south poles at 
the far end (shown crosshatched). Phase 1 of the stator is energized to align the rotor as 
shown. 
the other end a south magnetic pole. Figure 8.2 lb shows a schematic end view of a 
hybrid stepping motor. The stator has four poles with the phase-1 winding wound on 
the vertical poles and the phase-2 winding wound on the horizontal poles. The rotor 
is shown with its north-pole end at the near end of the motor and the south-pole end 
(shown crosshatched) at the far end. 
In Fig. 8.21b, phase 1 is shown excited such that the top stator pole is a south 
pole while the bottom pole is a north pole. This stator excitation interacts with the 
permanent-magnet flux of the rotor to align the rotor with a pole on its north-pole end 
vertically upward and a pole on its south-pole end vertically downward, as shown in 
the figure. Note that if the stator excitation is removed, there will still be a permanent- 
magnet torque tending to maintain the rotor in the position shown. 
To turn the rotor, excitation is removed from phase 1, and phase 2 is excited. If 
phase 2 is excited such that the fight-hand stator pole is a south pole and the left- 
hand one is a north pole, the rotor will rotate 30 ° counterclockwise. Similarly, if the 
opposite excitation is applied to the phase-2 winding, a 30 ° rotation in the clockwise 
direction will occur. Thus, by alternately applying phase-1 and phase-2 excitation 
of the appropriate polarity, the rotor can be made to rotate in either direction by a 
specified angular increment. 
Practical hybrid stepping motors are generally built with more rotor poles than 
are indicated in the schematic motor of Fig. 8.21, in order to give much better angular 
resolution. Correspondingly, the stator poles are often castleated (see Fig. 8.8) to 
further increase the angular resolution. In addition, they may be built with more than 
two stacks per rotor. 
The hybrid stepping motor design offers advantages over the permanent-magnet 
design discussed earlier. It can achieve small step sizes easily and with a simple 

446 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
magnet structure while a purely permanent-magnet motor would require a multipole 
permanent magnet. In comparison with the variable-reluctance stepping motor, the 
hybrid design may require less excitation to achieve a given torque because some of 
the excitation is supplied by the permanent magnet. In addition, the hybrid stepping 
motor will tend to maintain its position when the stator excitation is removed, as does 
the permanent-magnet design. 
The actual choice of a stepping-motor design for a particular application is de- 
termined based on the desired operating characteristics, availability, size, and cost. 
In addition to the three classifications of stepping motors discussed in this chapter, 
a number of other different and often quite clever designs have been developed. Al- 
though these encompass a wide range of configurations and construction techniques, 
the operating principles remain the same. 
Stepping motors may be driven by electronic drive components similar to those 
discussed in Section 11.4 in the context of VRM drives. Note that the issue of con- 
trolling a stepping motor to obtain the desired response under dynamic, transient 
conditions is quite complex and remains the subject of considerable investigation. 4 
8.6 
SUMMARY 
Variable-reluctance machines are perhaps the simplest of electrical machines. They 
consist of a stator with excitation windings and a magnetic rotor with saliency. Torque 
is produced by the tendency of the salient-pole rotor to align with excited magnetic 
poles on the stator. 
VRMs are synchronous machines in that they produce net torque only when 
the rotor motion is in some sense synchronous with the applied stator mmf. This 
synchronous relationship may be complex, with the rotor speed being some specific 
fraction of the applied electrical frequency as determined not only by the number of 
stator and rotor poles but also by the number of stator and rotor teeth on these poles. 
In fact, in some cases, the rotor will be found to rotate in the direction opposite to the 
rotation direction of the applied stator mmf. 
Successful operation of a VRM depends on exciting the stator phase windings 
in a specific fashion correlated to the instantaneous position of the rotor. Thus, rotor 
position must be measured, and a controller must be employed to determine the 
appropriate excitation waveforms and to control the output of the inverter. Typically 
chopping is required to obtain these waveforms. The net result is that although the 
VRM is itself a simple device, somewhat complex electronics are typically required 
to make a complete drive system. 
The significance of VRMs in engineering applications stems from their low cost, 
reliability, and controllability. Because their torque depends only on the square of the 
applied stator currents and not on their direction, these machines can be operated from 
4 For further information on stepping motors, see P. Acarnley, Stepping Motors: A Guide to Modern 
Theory and Practice, 2nd ed., Peter Peregrinus Ltd., London, 1982; Takashi Kenjo, Stepping Motors and 
Their Microprocessor Controls, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1984; and Benjamin C. Kuo, Theory and 
Applications of Step Motors', West Publishing Co., St. Paul, Minnesota, 1974. 

8.6 Summary 
447 
unidirectional drive systems, reducing the cost of the power electronics. However, it 
is only recently, with the advent of low-cost, flexible power electronic circuitry and 
microprocessor-based control systems, that VRMs have begun to see widespread 
application in systems ranging from traction drives to high-torque, precision position 
control systems for robotics applications. 
Practical experience with VRMs has shown that they have the potential for high 
reliability. This is due in part to the simplicity of their construction and to the fact 
that there are no windings on their rotors. In addition, VRM drives can be operated 
successfully (at a somewhat reduced rating) following the failure of one or more 
phases, either in the machine or in the inverter. VRMs typically have a large number 
of stator phases (four or more), and significant output can be achieved even if some of 
these phases are out of service. Because there is no rotor excitation, there will be no 
voltage generated in a phase winding which fails open-circuited or current generated 
in a phase winding which fails short-circuited, and thus the machine can continue to 
be operated without risk of further damage or additional losses and heating. 
Because VRMs can be readily manufactured with a large number of rotor and 
stator teeth (resulting in large inductance changes for small changes in rotor angle), 
they can be constructed to produce very large torque per unit volume. There is, 
however, a trade-off between torque and velocity, and such machines will have a low 
rotational velocity (consistent with the fact that only so much power can be produced 
by a given machine frame size). On the opposite extreme, the simple configuration 
of a VRM rotor and the fact that it contains no windings suggest that it is possible 
to build extremely rugged VRM rotors. These rotors can withstand high speeds, and 
motors which operate in excess of 200,000 r/min have been built. 
Finally, we have seen that saturation plays a large role in VRM performance. 
As recent advances in power electronic and microelectronic circuitry have brought 
VRM drive systems into the realm of practicality, so have advances in computer- 
based analytical techniques for magnetic-field analysis. Use of these techniques now 
makes it practical to perform optimized designs of VRM drive systems which are 
competitive with alternative technologies in many applications. 
Stepping motors are closely related to VRMs in that excitation of each succes- 
sive phase of the stator results in a specific angular rotation of the rotor. Stepping 
motors come in a wide variety of designs and configurations. These include variable- 
reluctance, permanent-magnet, and hybrid configurations. The rotor position of a 
variable-reluctance stepper motor is not uniquely determined by the phase currents 
since the phase inductances are not unique functions of the rotor angle. The addition 
of a permanent magnet changes this situation and the rotor position of a permanent- 
magnet stepper motor is a unique function of the phase currents. 
Stepping motors are the electromechanical companions to digital electronics. By 
proper application of phase currents to the stator windings, these motors can be made 
to rotate in well-defined steps ranging down to a fraction of a degree per pulse. They are 
thus essential components of digitally controlled electromechanical systems where a 
high degree of precision is required. They are found in a wide range of applications 
including numerically controlled machine tools, in printers and plotters, and in disk 
drives. 

448 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
8.7 
PROBLEMS 
8.1 Repeat Example 8.1 for a machine identical to that considered in the example 
except that the stator pole-face angle is ,8 = 45 °. 
8.2 In the paragraph preceeding Eq. 8.1, the text states that "under the 
assumption of negligible iron reluctance the mutual inductances between the 
phases of the doubly-salient VRM of Fig. 8. lb will be zero, with the 
exception of a small, essentially constant component associated with leakage 
flux." Neglect any leakage flux effects and use magnetic circuit techniques to 
show that this statement is true. 
8.3 Use magnetic-circuit techniques to show that the phase-to-phase mutual 
inductance in the 6/4 VRM of Fig. 8.5 is zero under the assumption of infinite 
rotor- and stator-iron permeability. Neglect any contributions of leakage flux. 
8.4 A 6/4 VRM of the form of Fig. 8.5 has the following properties: 
Stator pole angle/~ = 30 ° 
Rotor pole angle ot -- 30 ° 
Air-gap length g = 0.35 mm 
Rotor outer radius R = 5.1 cm 
Active length D = 7 cm 
This machine is connected as a three-phase motor with opposite poles 
connected in series to form each phase winding. There are 40 turns per pole 
(80 turns per phase). The rotor and stator iron can be considered to be of 
infinite permeability and hence mutual-inductance effects can be neglected. 
a. 
Defining the zero of rotor angle 0m at the position when the phase-1 
inductance is maximum, plot and label the inductance of phase 1 as a 
function of rotor angle. 
b. 
On the plot of part (a), plot the inductances of phases 2 and 3. 
c. 
Find the phase-1 current I0 which results in a magnetic flux density of 
1.0 T in the air gap under the phase-1 pole face when the rotor is in a 
position of maximum phase-1 inductance. 
d. 
Assuming that the phase-1 current is held constant at the value found in 
part (c) and that there is no current in phases 2 and 3, plot the torque as a 
function of rotor position. 
The motor is to be driven from a three-phase current-source inverter 
which can be switched on or off to supply either zero current or a constant 
current of magnitude I0 in phases 2 and 3; plot the torque as a function of 
rotor position. 
e. 
Under the idealized assumption that the currents can be instantaneously 
switched, determine the sequence of phase currents (as a function of rotor 
position) that will result in constant positive motor torque, independent of 
rotor position. 
f. 
If the frequency of the stator excitation is such that a time To = 35 msec is 
required to sequence through all three phases under the excitation 

8.7 
Problems 
449 
conditions of part (e), find the rotor angular velocity and its direction of 
rotation. 
8.5 In Section 8.2, when discussing Fig. 8.5, the text states: "In addition to the 
fact that there are not positions of simultaneous alignment for the 6/4 VRM, 
it can be seen that there also are no rotor positions at which only a torque of a 
single sign (either positive or negative) can be produced." Show that this 
statement is true. 
8.6 Consider a three-phase 6/8 VRM. The stator phases are excited sequentially, 
requiting a total time of 15 msec. Find the angular velocity of the rotor in 
r/min. 
8.7 The phase windings of the castleated machine of Fig. 8.8 are to be excited by 
turning the phases on and off individually (i.e., only one phase can be on at 
any given time). 
a. 
Describe the sequence of phase excitations required to move the rotor to 
the fight (clockwise) by an angle of approximately 21.4 °. 
b. The stator phases are to be excited as a regular sequence of pulses. 
Calculate the phase order and the time between pulses required to 
produce a steady-state rotor rotation of 125 r/min in the counterclockwise 
direction. 
8.8 Replace the 28-tooth rotor of Problem 8.7 with a rotor with 26 teeth. 
a. 
Phase 1 is excited, and the rotor is allowed to come to rest. If the 
excitation on phase 1 is removed and excitation is applied to phase 2, 
calculate the resultant direction and magnitude (in degrees) of rotor 
rotation. 
b. 
The stator phases are to be excited as a regular sequence of pulses. 
Calculate the phase order and the time between pulses required to 
produce a steady-state rotor rotation of 80 r/min in the counterclockwise 
direction. 
8.9 Repeat Example 8.3 for a rotor speed of 4500 r/min. 
8.10 Repeat Example 8.3 under the condition that the rotor speed is 4500 r/min 
and that a negative voltage of -250 V is used to turn off the phase current. 
8.11 The three-phase 6/4 VRM of Problem 8.4 has a winding resistance of 
0.15 fl/phase and a leakage inductance of 4.5 mH in each phase. Assume that 
the rotor is rotating at a constant angular velocity of 1750 ffmin. 
a. 
Plot the phase-1 inductance as a function of the rotor angle 0m. 
b. 
A voltage of 75 V is applied to phase 1 as the rotor reaches the position 
0m = -30 ° and is maintained constant until 0m = 0 °. Calculate and plot 
the phase-1 current as a function of time during this period. 
c. 
When the rotor reaches 0 = 0 °, the applied voltage is reversed so that a 
voltage of-75 V is applied to the winding. This voltage is maintained 
until the winding current reaches zero, at which point the winding is 
open-circuited. Calculate and plot the current decay during the time until 
the current decays to zero. 
d. 
Calculate and plot the torque during the time periods investigated in parts 
(b) and (c). 

450 
CHAPTER 8 
Variable-Reluctance Machines and Stepping Motors 
$ 
8.12 Assume that the VRM of Examples 8.1 and 8.3 is modified by replacing its 
rotor with a rotor with 75 ° pole-face angles as shown in Fig. 8.12a. All other 
dimensions and parameters of the VRM are unchanged. 
a. 
Calculate and plot L(0m) for this machine. 
b. 
Repeat Example 8.3 except that the constant voltage 100 V is first 
applied at 0m = -67.5 ° when dL(Om)/dOm becomes positive and the 
constant voltage of- 100 V is then applied at 0m = -7.5 ° (i.e., when 
d L(Om)/dOm becomes zero) and is maintained until the winding current 
reaches zero. 
c. 
Plot the corresponding torque. 
8.13 Repeat Example 8.4 for a symmetrical two-phase 4/2 VRM whose ~.-i 
characteristic can be represented by the following expression (for phase 1) as 
a function of 0m over the range 0 < 0m _< 90°: 
).l __ (0.01_~._ 0.15 (90°--Oml I 
12.0 
) 1"2 ) il 
90 ° 
12.0 -+- il 
8.14 Consider a two-phase stepper motor with a permanent-magnet rotor such as 
shown in Fig. 8.18 and whose torque-angle curve is as shown in Fig. 8.19a. 
This machine is to be excited by a four-bit digital sequence corresponding to 
the following winding excitation: 
it 
t lllt 
bit 
bit 
1 
2 
il 
3 
4 
i2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
- I~ 
0 
1 
- I<1 
1 
0 
Ill 
1 
0 
1~1 
1 
1 
0 
t 
1 
0 
a. 
Make a table of 4-bit patterns which will produce rotor angular positions 
of 0,45°,..., 315 ° . 
b. 
By sequencing through the bit pattern found in part (a) the motor can be 
made to rotate. What time interval (in milliseconds) between bit-pattern 
changes will result in a rotor speed of 1200 r/min? 
8.15 Figure 8.22 shows a two-phase hybrid stepping motor with castleated poles 
on the stator. The rotor is shown in the position it occupies when current is 
flowing into the positive lead of phase 1. 
a. 
If phase one is turned off and phase 2 is excited with current flowing into 
its positive lead, calculate the corresponding angular rotation of the rotor. 
Is it in the clockwise or counterclockwise direction? 
b. 
Describe an excitation sequence for the phase windings which will result 
in a steady rotation of the rotor in the clockwise direction. 

8.7 
Problems 
451 
Phase 1 
poles 
~nd of 
:or 
poles 
at near end of 
the rotor 
+ 
o,..,.._ 
Phase 2 
Figure 8.22 Castleated hybrid stepping motor for 
Problem 8.15. 
c. 
Determine the frequency of the phase currents required to achieve a rotor 
speed of 8 r/min. 
8.16 Consider a multistack, multiphase variable-reluctance stepping motor, such 
as that shown schematically in Fig. 8.17, with 14 poles on each of the rotor 
and stator stacks and three stacks with one phase winding per stack. The 
motor is built such that the stator poles of each stack are aligned. 
a. 
Calculate the angular displacement between the rotor stacks. 
b. 
Determine the frequency of phase currents required to achieve a rotor 
speed of 900 r/min. 

CHAPTER 
Single. and Two.Phase 
Motors 
T 
his chapter discusses single-phase motors. While focusing on induction motors, 
synchronous-reluctance, hysteresis, and shaded-pole induction motors are also 
discussed. Note that another common single-phase motor, the series universal 
motor, is discussed in Section 7.10. Most induction motors of fractional-kilowatt 
(fractional horsepower) rating are single-phase motors. In residential and commercial 
applications, they are found in a wide range of equipment including refrigerators, air 
conditioners and heat pumps, fans, pumps, washers, and dryers. 
In this chapter, we will describe these motors qualitatively in terms of rotating- 
field theory and will begin with a rigorous analysis of a single-phase motor operating 
off of a single winding. However, most single-phase induction motors are actually 
two-phase motors with unsymmetrical windings; the two windings are typically quite 
different, with different numbers of turns and/or winding distributions. Thus this 
chapter also discusses two-phase motors and includes a development of a quantitative 
theory for the analysis of single-phase induction motors when operating off both their 
main and auxiliary windings. 
9.1 
SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS: 
QUALITATIVE EXAMINATION 
Structurally, the most common types of single-phase induction motors resemble 
polyphase squirrel-cage motors except for the arrangement of the stator windings. 
An induction motor with a squirrel-cage rotor and a single-phase stator winding is 
represented schematically in Fig. 9.1. Instead of being a concentrated coil, the actual 
stator winding is distributed in slots to produce an approximately sinusoidal space 
distribution of mmf. As we saw in Section 4.5.1, a single-phase winding produces 
equal forward- and backward-rotating mmf waves. By symmetry, it is clear that such 
a motor inherently will produce no starting torque since at standstill, it will produce 
equal torque in both directions. However, we will show that if it is started by auxiliary 
452 

9,1 
Single-Phase Induction Motors: Qualitative Examination 
458 
i 
+1 
f. 
Squirrel-cage 
[ Stator 
rotor 
] winding 
Figure 9.1 
Schematic view of a 
single-phase induction motor. 
means, the result will be a net torque in the direction in which it is started, and hence 
the motor will continue to run. 
Before we consider auxiliary starting methods, we will discuss the basic proper- 
ties of the schematic motor of Fig. 9.1. If the stator current is a cosinusoidal function 
of time, the resultant air-gap mmf is given by Eq. 4.18 
• f'agl = Fmax cos (0ae) cos COet 
(9.1) 
which, as shown in Section 4.5.1, can be written as the sum of positive- and negative- 
traveling mmf waves of equal magnitude. The positive-traveling wave is given by 
1 
f'a+l = ~ Frnax cos (0,e -- Wet) 
(9.2) 
and the negative-traveling wave is given by 
1 
• f'agl -- 2 Fmax COS (0ae -+- C_Oet) 
(9.3) 
Each of these component mmf waves produces induction-motor action, but the 
corresponding torques are in opposite directions. With the rotor at rest, the forward 
and backward air-gap flux waves created by the combined mmf's of the stator and 
rotor currents are equal, the component torques are equal, and no starting torque 
is produced. If the forward and backward air-gap flux waves were to remain equal 
when the rotor revolves, each of the component fields would produce a torque-speed 
characteristic similar to that of a polyphase motor with negligible stator leakage 
impedance, as illustrated by the dashed curves f and b in Fig. 9.2a. The resultant 
torque-speed characteristic, which is the algebraic sum of the two component curves, 
shows that if the motor were started by auxiliary means, it would produce torque in 
whatever direction it was started. 
The assumption that the air-gap flux waves remain equal when the rotor is in 
motion is a rather drastic simplification of the actual state of affairs. First, the effects 
of stator leakage impedance are ignored. Second, the effects of induced rotor currents 
are not properly accounted for. Both these effects will ultimately be included in the 

454 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
(Backward) 
-- ~ ~ ~ ~
\
 
-100 
. . . . . . . . . .  
,00 
"%'~._...,.,,,,'~ ~ ~. ~ "- 
[ 
Percent synchronous 
%_~r 
"\ b 
[ 
speed (forward) 
(a) 
--100 
¢ 
o 
| 
/ 
I 
(Backward) 
(Forward) 
. . i /  
50 
..... 
7
/
1
_
~
 
1 
Jr 
r 
--50 
/j~..~ 
~ . . . . . . . . .  
100 
Percent synchronous 
speed 
',,V,," 
(b) 
Figure 9.2 
Torque-speed characteristic of a single-phase 
induction motor (a) on the basis of constant forward and 
backward flux waves, (b) taking into account changes in the 
flux waves. 
detailed quantitative theory of Section 9.3. The following qualitative explanation 
shows that the performance of a single-phase induction motor is considerably better 
than would be predicted on the basis of equal forward and backward flux waves. 
When the rotor is in motion, the component rotor currents induced by the back- 
ward field are greater than at standstill, and their power factor is lower. Their mmf, 

9.2 Starting and Running Performance of Single-Phase Induction and Synchronous Motors 
455 
which opposes that of the stator current, results in a reduction of the backward 
flux wave. Conversely, the magnetic effect of the component currents induced by 
the forward field is less than at standstill because the rotor currents are less and their 
power factor is higher. As speed increases, therefore, the forward flux wave increases 
while the backward flux wave decreases. The sum of these flux waves must remain 
roughly constant since it must induce the stator counter emf, which is approximately 
constant if the stator leakage-impedance voltage drop is small. 
Hence, with the rotor in motion, the torque of the forward field is greater and 
that of the backward field less than in Fig. 9.2a, the true situation being about that 
shown in Fig. 9.2b. In the normal running region at a few percent slip, the forward 
field is several times greater than the backward field, and the flux wave does not 
differ greatly from the constant-amplitude revolving field in the air gap of a bal- 
anced polyphase motor. In the normal running region, therefore, the torque-speed 
characteristic of a single-phase motor is not too greatly inferior to that of a polyphase 
motor having the same rotor and operating with the same maximum air-gap flux 
density. 
In addition to the torques shown in Fig. 9.2, double-stator-frequency torque 
pulsations are produced by the interactions of the oppositely rotating flux and mmf 
waves which rotate past each other at twice synchronous speed. These interactions 
produce no average torque, but they tend to make the motor noisier than a polyphase 
motor. Such torque pulsations are unavoidable in a single-phase motor because of the 
pulsations in instantaneous power input inherent in a single-phase circuit. The effects 
of the pulsating torque can be minimized by using an elastic mounting for the motor. 
The torque referred to on the torque-speed curves of a single-phase motor is the time 
average of the instantaneous torque. 
9.2 
STARTING AND RUNNING 
PERFORMANCE OF SINGLE-PHASE 
INDUCTION AND SYNCHRONOUS 
MOTORS 
Single-phase induction motors are classified in accordance with their starting methods 
and are usually referred to by names descriptive of these methods. Selection of the 
appropriate motor is based on the starting- and running-torque requirements of the 
load, the duty cycle of the load, and the limitations on starting and running current 
from the supply line for the motor. The cost of single-phase motors increases with 
their rating and with their performance characteristics such as starting-torque-to- 
current ratio. Typically, in order to minimize cost, an application engineer will select 
the motor with the lowest rating and performance that can meet the specifications 
of the application. Where a large number of motors are to be used for a specific 
purpose, a special motor may be designed in order to ensure the least cost. In the 
fractional-kilowatt motor business, small differences in cost are important. 
Starting methods and the resulting torque-speed characteristics are considered 
qualitatively in this section. A quantitative theory for analyzing these motors is de- 
veloped in Section 9.4.2. 

456 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
i 
Auxiliary 
winding 
(a) 
~iaux X'q,, 
,9 
400 
300 
~D 
200 
~D 
~, 100 
0 0 
i I i 
iiiiii i i[i.i...l 
i Main and 
i [ auxiliary 
,fwin  
..... Main winding, 
i only ~.~-' 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Percent synchronous speed 
I 
yl 
;!-" 
.............. 
! 
";a'" ............... 
~ i"cl ........ 
lOO 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 9.3 
Split-phase motor: (a) connections, (b) phasor diagram at starting, and (c) typical torque-speed 
characteristic. 
9.2.1 
Split.Phase 
Motors 
Split-phase motors have two stator windings, a main winding (also referred to as 
the run winding) which we will refer to with the subscript 'main' and an auxiliary 
winding (also referred to as the start winding) which we will refer to with the subscript 
'aux'. As in a two-phase motor, the axes of these windings are displaced 90 electrical 
degrees in space, and they are connected as shown in Fig. 9.3a. The auxiliary winding 
has a higher resistance-to-reactance ratio than the main winding, with the result that 
the two currents will be out of phase, as indicated in the phasor diagram of Fig. 9.3b, 
which is representative of conditions at starting. Since the auxiliary-winding current 
iaux leads the main-winding current Imain, the stator field first reaches a maximum 
along the axis of the auxiliary winding and then somewhat later in time reaches a 
maximum along the axis of the main winding. 
The winding currents are equivalent to unbalanced two-phase currents, and the 
motor is equivalent to an unbalanced two-phase motor. The result is a rotating stator 
field which causes the motor to start. After the motor starts, the auxiliary winding is 
disconnected, usually by means of a centrifugal switch that operates at about 75 per- 
cent of synchronous speed. The simple way to obtain the high resistance-to-reactance 
ratio for the auxiliary winding is to wind it with smaller wire than the main wind- 
ing, a permissible procedure because this winding operates only during starting. Its 
reactance can be reduced somewhat by placing it in the tops of the slots. A typical 
torque-speed characteristic for such a motor is shown in Fig. 9.3c. 
Split-phase motors have moderate starting torque with low starting current. Typi- 
cal applications include fans, blowers, centrifugal pumps, and office equipment. Typi- 
cal ratings are 50 to 500 watts; in this range they are the lowest-cost motors available. 
9.2.2 
Capacitor.Type 
Motors 
Capacitors can be used to improve motor starting performance, running performance, 
or both, depending on the size and connection of the capacitor. The capacitor-start 

9,2 
Starting and Running Performance of Single-Phase Induction and Synchronous Motors 
457 
I 
Switch 
+ o 
, 
a 
Main 
~
~
 
1~" winding 
C 
-° 
T 
Iaux 
Auxiliary 
winding 
I aux 
Imain 
400 
= 300 
© 
= 
200 
(1,) 
100 
0 0 
[ 
i 
---~ auxiliary 
Main winding---),'" 
~] 
- 
only l;" 
........... 
~[ 
: ......... i i-~ - 
........ 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Percent synchronous speed 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 9.4 Capacitor-start motor: (a) connections, (b) phasor diagram at starting, and (c) typical torque-speed 
characteristic. 
motor is also a split-phase motor, but the time-phase displacement between the two 
currents is obtained by means of a capacitor in series with the auxiliary winding, 
as shown in Fig. 9.4a. Again the auxiliary winding is disconnected after the motor 
has started, and consequently the auxiliary winding and capacitor can be designed at 
minimum cost for intermittent service. 
By using a starting capacitor of appropriate value, the auxiliary-winding current 
iaux at standstill can be made to lead the main-winding current Imain by 90 electrical 
degrees, as it would in a balanced two-phase motor (see Fig. 9.4b). In practice, the 
best compromise between starting torque, starting current, and cost typically results 
with a phase angle somewhat less than 90 °. A typical torque-speed characteristic is 
shown in Fig. 9.4c, high starting torque being an outstanding feature. These motors are 
used for compressors, pumps, refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment, and other 
hard-to-start loads. A cutaway view of a capacitor-start motor is shown in Fig. 9.5. 
In the permanent-split-capacitor motor, the capacitor and auxiliary winding are 
not cut out after starting; the construction can be simplified by omission of the switch, 
and the power factor, efficiency, and torque pulsations improved. For example, the 
capacitor and auxiliary winding could be designed for perfect two-phase operation 
(i.e., no backwards flux wave) at any one desired load. The losses due to the backward 
field at this operating point would then be eliminated, with resulting improvement 
in efficiency. The double-stator-frequency torque pulsations would also be elimi- 
nated, with the capacitor serving as an energy storage reservoir for smoothing out the 
pulsations in power input from the single-phase line, resulting in quieter operation. 
Starting torque must be sacrificed because the choice of capacitance is necessarily a 
compromise between the best starting and running values. The resulting torque-speed 
characteristic and a schematic diagram are given in Fig. 9.6. 
If two capacitors are used, one for starting and one for running, theoretically 
optimum starting and running performance can both be obtained. One way of accom- 
plishing this result is shown in Fig. 9.7a. The small value of capacitance required for 

458 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
Figure 9.5 
Cutaway view of a capacitor-start induction motor. 
The starting switch is at the right of the rotor. The motor is of 
drip-proof construction. (General Electric Company.) 
i 
• "- 
A 
I 
_L ~20o 
Main 
o 
winding 
T 
~= 100 
/ 
" 
0 
Auxiliary 
0 
winding 
! 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Percent synchronous speed 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 9.6 
Permanent-split-capacitor motor and typical torque-speed 
characteristic. 
+ O  
--O 
i 
Main 
winding 
I 
_ 
T 
Auxiliary 
winding 
Switch 
300 
£ 200 
~, 100 
0 
0 
I 
J 
I 
Starting 
............................... 
1 ............................................ 
'......,...: 
..~ 
Running 
-- capacitor~'~ -~ 
~ 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Percent synchronous speed 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 9.7 
Capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor and typical torque-speed characteristic. 

9.2 
Starting and Running Performance of Single-Phase Induction and Synchronous Motors 
459 
optimum running conditions is permanently connected in series with the auxiliary 
winding, and the much larger value required for starting is obtained by a capacitor 
connected in parallel with the running capacitor via a switch with opens as the motor 
comes up to speed. Such a motor is known as a capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor. 
The capacitor for a capacitor-start motor has a typical value of 300 #F for a 
500-W motor. Since it must carry current for just the starting time, the capacitor is 
a special compact ac electrolytic type made for motor-starting duty. The capacitor 
for the same motor permanently connected has a typical rating of 40 #E and since it 
operates continuously, the capacitor is an ac paper, foil, and oil type. The cost of the 
various motor types is related to performance: the capacitor-start motor has the lowest 
cost, the permanent-split-capacitor motor next, and the capacitor-start, capacitor-run 
motor the highest cost. 
A 2.5-kW 120-V 60-Hz capacitor-start motor has the following impedances for the main and 
auxiliary windings (at starting): 
Zmain --- 4.5 + j3.7 f2 
main winding 
Zaux -- 9.5 + j 3.5 f2 
auxiliary winding 
Find the value of starting capacitance that will place the main and auxiliary winding 
currents in quadrature at starting. 
II Solution 
The currents 
l[main and irau x are shown in Fig. 9.4a and b. The impedance angle of the main 
winding is 
~main = tan -1 
~ 
= 39.6 ° 
To produce currents in time quadrature with the main winding, the impedance angle of the 
auxiliary winding circuit (including the starting capacitor) must be 
4) = 39.6 ° - 90.0 ° = -50.4 ° 
The combined impedance of the auxiliary winding and starting capacitor is equal to 
Ztotal = Zaux + j Xc = 9.5 + j (3.5 + Xc) S2 
1 is the reactance of the capacitor and co -- 2zr60 ~ 377 rad/sec. Thus 
where Xc -- -;--d 
tan-1 
9.5 
= -50"4° 
3.5 + Xc = tan (-50.4 °) = - 1.21 
9.5 
and hence 
Xc -- -1.21 x 9.5 - 3.5 -- -15.0 
EXAMPLE 9.1 

460 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
The capacitance C is then 
-1 
-1 
C = 
= 
= 177/zF 
coXc 
377 x (-15.0) 
~ractice Problem 9. 
Consider the motor of Example 9.1. Find the phase angle between the main- and auxiliary- 
winding currents if the 177-/xF capacitor is replaced by a 200-/~F capacitor. 
Solution 
85.2 ° 
9.2.3 
Shaded.Pole Induction Motors 
As illustrated schematically in Fig. 9.8a, the shaded-pole induction motor usually has 
salient poles with one portion of each pole surrounded by a short-circuited turn of 
copper called a shading coil. Induced currents in the shading coil cause the flux in 
the shaded portion of the pole to lag the flux in the other portion. The result is similar 
to a rotating field moving in the direction from the unshaded to the shaded portion of 
the pole; currents are induced in the squirrel-cage rotor and a low starting torque is 
produced. A typical torque-speed characteristic is shown in Fig. 9.8b. Their efficiency 
is low, but shaded-pole motors are the least expensive type of subfractional-kilowatt 
motor. They are found in ratings up to about 50 watts. 
9.2.4 
Self-Starting Synchronous-Reluctance Motors 
Any one of the induction-motor types described above can be made into a self-starting 
synchronous-reluctance motor. Anything which makes the reluctance of the air gap 
a function of the angular position of the rotor with respect to the stator coil axis 
will produce reluctance torque when the rotor is revolving at synchronous speed. For 
-k- 
o 
B 
o 
i 
Squirrel-cage rotor 
> 
Main 
win 
200 
................................................................................................................. 
lOO 
~~~~ 
~\ 
~- 
0 
1 
i 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Percent synchronous speed 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 9.8 Shaded-pole induction motor and typical torque-speed characteristic. 

9,2 Starting and Running Performance of Single-Phase Induction and Synchronous Motors 
461 
600 
500 
4O0 
~D 
= 
© 
300 
200 
100 
.................. 
i .................. 
Main~ ............................................................................... 
and ............ _¢_/~. 
\~ 
.................................. 
................ 
__ 
auxiliary_._ Z~al~,~i 
I ~ winding/~ /~- l i ~X i \[ 
I 
I- 
~ 
............. [ ...... .~l~,t 
...................................... 
]~ ........... 
~)~ain 
:indi!g + ~ ' - - - ~  
.......... 
oq,y 
....... l ................ 
l, ........... T ................................. 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Percent synchronous speed 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 
9.9 Rotor punching for four-pole synchronous-reluctance motor and 
typical torque-speed characteristic. 
example, suppose some of the teeth are removed from a squirrel-cage rotor, leaving the 
bars and end tings intact, as in an ordinary squirrel-cage induction motor. Figure 9.9a 
shows a lamination for such a rotor designed for use with a four-pole stator. The stator 
may be polyphase or any one of the single-phase types described above. 
The motor will start as an induction motor and at light loads will speed up to a 
small value of slip. The reluctance torque arises from the tendency of the rotor to try 
to align itself in the minimum-reluctance position with respect to the synchronously 
revolving forward air-gap flux wave, in accordance with the principles discussed 
in Chapter 3. At a small slip, this torque alternates slowly in direction; the rotor 
is accelerated during a positive half cycle of the torque variation and decelerated 
during the succeeding negative half cycle. If the moment of inertia of the rotor and its 
mechanical load are sufficiently small, the rotor will be accelerated from slip speed 
up to synchronous speed during an accelerating half cycle of the reluctance torque. 
The rotor will then pull into synchronism and continue to run at synchronous speed. 
The presence of any backward-revolving stator flux wave will produce torque ripple 
and additional losses, but synchronous operation will be maintained provided the load 
torque is not excessive. 
A typical torque-speed characteristic for a split-phase-start synchronous- 
reluctance motor is shown in Fig. 9.9b. Notice the high values of induction-motor 
torque. The reason for this is that in order to obtain satisfactory synchronous-motor 
characteristics, it has been found necessary to build synchronous-reluctance motors 
in frames which would be suitable for induction motors of two or three times their 
synchronous-motor rating. Also notice that the principal effect of the salient-pole rotor 

462 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
on the induction-motor characteristic is at standstill, where considerable "cogging" 
is evident; i.e., the torque varies considerably with rotor position. 
9.2.5 
Hysteresis Motors 
The phenomenon of hysteresis can be used to produce mechanical torque. In its 
simplest form, the rotor of a hysteresis motor is a smooth cylinder of magnetically 
hard steel, without windings or teeth. It is placed inside a slotted stator carrying 
distributed windings designed to produce as nearly as possible a sinusoidal space 
distribution of flux, since undulations in the flux wave greatly increase the losses. In 
single-phase motors, the stator windings usually are of the permanent-split-capacitor 
type, as in Fig. 9.6. The capacitor is chosen so as to result in approximately balanced 
two-phase conditions within the motor windings. The stator then produces a primarily 
space-fundamental air-gap field revolving at synchronous speed. 
Instantaneous magnetic conditions in the air gap and rotor are indicated in 
Fig. 9.10a for a two-pole stator. The axis S S' of the stator-mmf wave revolves at 
synchronous speed. Because of hysteresis, the magnetization of the rotor lags behind 
the inducing mmf wave, and therefore the axis R R' of the rotor flux wave lags behind 
the axis of the stator-mmf wave by the hysteretic lag angle 6 (Fig. 9.10a). If the rotor is 
stationary, starting torque is produced proportional to the product of the fundamental 
components of the stator mmf and rotor flux and the sine of the torque angle 6. The rotor 
then accelerates if the torque of the load is less than the developed torque of the motor. 
As long as the rotor is turning at less than synchronous speed, each region of the 
rotor is subjected to a repetitive hysteresis cycle at slip frequency. While the rotor 
accelerates, the lag angle 6 remains constant if the flux is constant, since the angle 6 
S 
R 
tator 
Rotor 
~D 
¢ 
/ 
R f 
I 
S' 
(a) 
0 
1 O0 
Percent synchronous speed 
(b) 
Figure 9.10 
(a) General nature of the magnetic field in the air gap and rotor 
of a hysteresis motor; (b) idealized torque-speed characteristic. 

9.3 
Revolving-Field Theory of Single-Phase Induction Motors 
463 
depends merely on the hysteresis loop of the rotor material and is independent of 
the rate at which the loop is traversed. The motor therefore develops constant torque 
right up to synchronous speed, as shown in the idealized torque-speed characteristic 
of Fig. 9.10b. This feature is one of the advantages of the hysteresis motor. In con- 
trast with a reluctance motor, which must "snap" its load into synchronism from an 
induction-motor torque-speed characteristic, a hysteresis motor can synchronize any 
load which it can accelerate, no matter how great the inertia. After reaching synchro- 
nism, the motor continues to run at synchronous speed and adjusts its torque angle so 
as to develop the torque required by the load. 
The hysteresis motor is inherently quiet and produces smooth rotation of its load. 
Furthermore, the rotor takes on the same number of poles as the stator field. The 
motor lends itself to multispeed synchronous operation when the stator is wound with 
several sets of windings and utilizes pole-changing connections. The hysteresis motor 
can accelerate and synchronize high-inertia loads because its torque is uniform from 
standstill to synchronous speed. 
9.3 
REVOLVING-FIELD THEORY OF 
SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS 
As discussed in Section 9.1, the stator-mmf wave of a single-phase induction motor 
can be shown to be equivalent to two constant-amplitude mmf waves revolving at 
synchronous speed in opposite directions. Each of these component stator-mmf waves 
induces its own component rotor currents and produces induction-motor action just 
as in a balanced polyphase motor. This double-revolving-field concept not only is 
useful for qualitative visualization but also can be developed into a quantitative theory 
applicable to a wide variety of induction-motor types. We will not discuss the full 
quantitative theory here. 1 However, we will consider the simpler, but important case 
of a single-phase induction motor running on only its main winding. 
Consider conditions with the rotor stationary and only the main stator wind- 
ing excited. The motor then is equivalent to a transformer with its secondary short- 
circuited. The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 9.11 a, where Rl,main and X 1,main are, 
respectively, the resistance and leakage reactance of the main winding, Xm,main is the 
magnetizing reactance, and R2,main and X2,main are the standstill values of the rotor 
resistance and leakage reactance referred to the main stator winding by use of the 
appropriate turns ratio. Core loss, which is omitted here, will be accounted for later 
as if it were a rotational loss. The applied voltage is f', and the main-winding current 
is l~main. The voltage J~main is the counter emf generated in the main winding by the 
stationary pulsating air-gap flux wave produced by the combined action of the stator 
and rotor currents. 
In accordance with the double-revolving-field concept of Section 9.1, the stator 
mmf can be resolved into half-amplitude forward and backward rotating fields. At 
1 For an extensive treatment of single-phase motors, see, for example, C. B. Veinott, Fractional- and 
Subfractional-Horsepower Electric Motors, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1970. 

464 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
gl,main Xl,main 
X2 
--i 
main E~ain ~ 
R2 
(a) 
gl,main Xl,main 
0.5 X 2 
+ 
'fi 0. 
, 
0.5 R 2 
^ 
~ 
V 
_ 
+-t ~.5 
UX~,ma~ 0.5 
/~m_aaii,b 
R2 
Rl,main Xl,main 
0.5 X 2 
i 
I 
0.5 Zf 
0. 
_. 
+! 
V 
. 
Emain,b, 
0.5 R 2 
0.5 ib 
~--s 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 9.11 
Equivalent circuits for a single-phase induction motor: (a) rotor blocked 
(b) rotor blocked, showing effects of forward and backward fields; (c) running 
conditions. 
standstill the amplitudes of the forward and backward resultant air-gap flux waves 
both equal half the amplitude of the pulsating field. In Fig. 9.11 b the portion of the 
equivalent circuit representing the effects of the air-gap flux is split into two equal 
portions, representing the effects of the forward and backward fields, respectively. 
Now consider conditions after the motor has been brought up to speed by some 
auxiliary means and is running on only its main winding in the direction of the 
forward field at a per-unit slip s. The rotor currents induced by the forward field are 
of slip frequency sfe, where fe is the stator applied electrical frequency. Just as in 
any polyphase motor with a symmetric polyphase or squirrel-cage rotor, these rotor 
currents produce an mmf wave traveling forward at slip speed with respect to the 
rotor and therefore at synchronous speed with respect to the stator. The resultant of 
the forward waves of stator and rotor mmf creates a resultant forward wave of air-gap 
flux, which generates a counter emf J~main,f in the main winding of the stator. The 
reflected effect of the rotor as viewed from the stator is like that in a polyphase motor 
and can be represented by an impedance 0.5R2,main/S Jr j0.5X2,main in parallel with 
j0.5Xm,main as in the portion of the equivalent circuit of Fig. 9.1 lc labeled 'f'. The 
factors of 0.5 come from the resolution of the pulsating stator mmf into forward and 
backward components. 
Now consider conditions with respect to the backward field. The rotor is still 
turning at a slip s with respect to the forward field, and its per-unit speed n in the 

9,3 
Revolving-Field Theory of Single-Phase Induction Motors 
465 
direction of the forward field is n = 1 - s. The relative speed of the rotor with respect 
to the backward field is 1 + n, or its slip with respect to the backward field is 1 + n = 
2 - s. The backward field then induces rotor currents whose frequency is (2 - s)fe- 
For small slips, these rotor currents are of almost twice stator frequency. 
At a small slip, an oscilloscope trace of rotor current will therefore show a 
high-frequency component from the backward field superposed on a low-frequency 
component from the forward field. As viewed from the stator, the rotor-mmf wave 
of the backward-field induced rotor current travels at synchronous speed but in the 
backward direction. The equivalent-circuit representing these internal reactions from 
the viewpoint of the stator is like that of a polyphase motor whose slip is 2 - s and 
is shown in the portion of the equivalent circuit (Fig. 9.11c) labeled 'b'. As with 
the forward field, the factors of 0.5 come from the resolution of the pulsating stator 
mmf into forward and backward components. The voltage J~main,b across the parallel 
combination representing the backward field is the counter emf generated in the main 
winding of the stator by the resultant backward field. 
By use of the equivalent circuit of Fig. 9.11 c, the stator current, power input, and 
power factor can be computed for any assumed value of slip when the applied voltage 
and the motor impedances are known. To simplify the notation, let 
( R2,main 
) 
Zf ~ Rf -I- jXf = 
~ 
-F jX2,main 
in parallel with j Xm,main 
(9.4) 
s 
and 
R2,main 
) 
Zb = Rb + jXb = 
~ 
+ jX2,main 
in parallel with jXm, main 
(9.5) 
The impedances representing the reactions of the forward and backward fields 
from the viewpoint of the single-phase main stator winding are 0.5Zf and 0.5Zb, 
respectively, in Fig. 9.11 c. 
Examination of the equivalent circuit (Fig. 9.11c) confirms the conclusion, 
reached by qualitative reasoning in Section 9.1 (Fig. 9.2b), that the forward air- 
gap flux wave increases and the backward wave decreases when the rotor is set in 
motion. When the motor is running at a small slip, the reflected effect of the rotor 
resistance in the forward field, 0.5 R2,main/S, is much larger than its standstill value, 
while the corresponding effect in the backward field, 0.5R2,main/(2 - s), is smaller. 
The forward-field impedance therefore is larger than its standstill value, while that 
of the backward field is smaller. The forward-field counter emf Emain, f therefore 
is larger than its standstill value, while the backward-field counter emf /~main,b is 
smaller; i.e., the forward air-gap flux wave increases, while the backward flux wave 
decreases. 
Mechanical power and torque can be computed by application of the torque and 
power relations developed for polyphase motors in Chapter 6. The torques produced 
by the forward and backward fields can each be treated in this manner. The interactions 
of the oppositely rotating flux and mmf waves cause torque pulsations at twice stator 
frequency but produce no average torque. 

466 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
As in Eq. 6.25, the electromagnetic torque Tmain,f of the forward field in newton- 
meters equals 1/cos times the power Pgap,f in watts delivered by the stator winding to 
the forward field, where COs is the synchronous angular velocity in mechanical radians 
per second; thus 
1 
Tmain, f -- -- 
Pgap,f 
(9.6) 
(_0 s 
When the magnetizing impedance is treated as purely inductive, Pgap,f is the power 
absorbed by the impedance 0.5Zf; that is, 
Pgap,f = 12(0.5Rf) 
(9.7) 
where Rf is the resistive component of the forward-field impedance defined in Eq. 9.4. 
Similarly, the internal torque Tmain,b of the backward field is 
1 
Tmain,b -- -- 
Pgap,b 
(9.8) 
O)s 
where Pgap,b is the power delivered by the stator winding to the backward field, or 
Pgap,b = 12 (0.5 Rb) 
(9.9) 
where Rb is the resistive component of the backward-field impedance Zb defined in 
Eq. 9.5. 
The torque of the backward field is in the opposite direction to that of the forward 
field, and therefore the net internal torque Tmech is 
1 
Tmech -- Tmain,f - 
Tmain,b -" -- (Pgap,f - 
Pgap,b) 
(9.10) 
O.) s 
Since the rotor currents produced by the two component air-gap fields are of 
different frequencies, the total rotor 12R loss is the numerical sum of the losses 
caused by each field. In general, as shown by comparison of Eqs. 6.17 and 6.19, the 
rotor I ZR loss caused by a rotating field equals the slip of the field times the power 
absorbed from the stator. Thus 
Forward-field rotor 12 R = s Pgap,f 
(9.11) 
Backward-field rotor 12 R = (2 - s) Pgap,b 
(9.12) 
Total rotor 12R = s Pgap,f + (2 - s)Pgap,b 
(9.13) 
Since power is torque times angular velocity and the angular velocity of the rotor 
is (1 - s)co~, using Eq. 9.10, the internal power Pme~h converted to mechanical form, 
in watts, is 
emech ~- (l -- S)O-)sTmech -- (l -- s)(Pgap, f - 
Pgap,b) 
(9.14) 
As in the polyphase motor, the internal torque Tmech and internal power Pmech 
are not the output values because rotational losses remain to be accounted for. It is 
obviously correct to subtract friction and windage losses from Tmech or Pmech and it 

9.3 
Revolving-Field Theory of Single-Phase Induction Motors 
467 
is usually assumed that core losses can be treated in the same manner. For the small 
changes in speed encountered in normal operation, the rotational losses are often 
assumed to be constant. 2 
A ¼-hP, 110-V, 60-Hz, four-pole, capacitor-start motor has the following equivalent circuit 
parameter values (in f2) and losses: 
Rl,main = 2.02 
Xl,main = 2.79 
R2,main = 4.12 
X2,main = 2.12 
X .... in = 66.8 
Core loss = 24 W 
Friction and windage loss = 13 W 
For a slip of 0.05, determine the stator current, power factor, power output, speed, torque, and 
efficiency when this motor is running as a single-phase motor at rated voltage and frequency 
with its starting winding open. 
n Solution 
The first step is to determine the values of the forward- and backward-field impedances at the 
assigned value of slip. The following relations, derived from Eq. 9.4, simplify the computations 
of the forward-field impedance Zf: 
2 
) 
X2,mainX .... in 
Rf 
Rf = 
X .... in 
1 
Xf = 
t 
X22 
s Q2,main + 1/(sQ2,main) 
X22 
sQ2,main 
where 
X22 
X22 = X2,main Jr- X .... in 
and 
Q2,main - 
R2,mai n 
Substitution of numerical values gives, for s = 0.05, 
Zf -- Rf + jXf = 31.9 + j40.3 
Corresponding relations for the backward-field impedance Z b are obtained by substituting 
2 - s for s in these equations. When (2 - 
s) a2,main is greater than 10, as is usually the case, 
less than 1 percent error results from use of the following approximate forms: 
R2,main (X .... in) 2 
Rb = 
2~S 
X22 
X2,main Xm,main 
Rb 
Xb= 
+ 
X22 
(2 -- S) Q2,main 
Substitution of numerical values gives, for s = 0.05, 
Zb -- Rb -+- jXb = 1.98 + j2.12 ~2 
EXAMPLE 9.2 
2 For a treatment of the experimental determination of motor constants and losses, see Veinott, op. cit., 
Chapter 18. 

468 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
Addition of the series elements in the equivalent circuit of Fig. 9.1 lc gives 
Rl,main -~- j Xl,main = 2.02 + j2.79 
0.5(Re + jXf) = 
15.95 + j20.15 
0.5(Rb + jXb) = 0.99 + jl.06 
Total Input Z = 18.96 + j24.00 = 30.6 Z51.7 ° 
V 
110 
Stator current I .
.
.
.
 
3.59 A 
Z 
30.6 
Power factor = cos (51.7 °) = 0.620 
Power input = 
Pin -- VI × power factor = 110 × 3.59 × 0.620 = 244 W 
The power absorbed by the forward field (Eq. 9.7) is 
egap,f 
= 
12(0.5Re) = 3.592 × 15.95 = 206 W 
The power absorbed by the backward field (Eq. 9.9) is 
Pgap,b = 12(0.5Rb) = 3.592 × 0.99 = 12.8 W 
The internal mechanical power (Eq. 9.14) is 
Pmech -- (1 - s)(Pgap,f- 
Pgap,b) 
-" 0.95(206 - 13) = 184 W 
Assuming that the core loss can be combined with the friction and windage loss, the 
rotational loss becomes 24 + 13 = 37 W and the shaft output power is the difference. Thus 
Pshaft = 184 -- 37 = 147 W = 0.197 hp 
From Eq. 4.40, the synchronous speed in rad/sec is given by 
ws= 
we= 
~ 
120n'= 188.5rad/sec 
or in terms of r/min from Eq. 4.41 
(l 0) 
ns= 
~ 
fe= 
--~ 
60=1800r/min 
Rotor speed = (1 - s)(synchronous speed) 
= 0.95 × 1800 = 1710 r/min 
and 
COrn = 0.95 × 188.5 = 179 rad/sec 
The torque can be found from Eq. 9.14. 
Pshaft 
147 
T~haft -- 
= 
= 0.821 N- m 
O.) m 
179 

9.3 
Revolving-Field Theory of Single-Phase Induction Motors 
469 
and the efficiency is 
Pshaft 
147 
r/= 
= 
-- 0.602 = 60.2% 
Pin 
244 
As a check on the power bookkeeping, compute the losses: 
I2el,rnain = (3.59)2(2.02) = 26.0 
Forward-field rotor 12R (Eq. 9.11) = 0.05 × 206 = 10.3 
Backward-field rotor I2R (Eq. 9.12)-- 1.95 x 12.8 -- 25.0 
Rotational losses = 37.0 
98.3W 
From Pin -- Pshaft, the total losses = 97 W which checks within accuracy of computations. 
)ractice Problem 9.' 
Assume the motor of Example 9.2 to be operating at a slip of 0.065 and at rated voltage and 
frequency. Determine (a) the stator current and power factor and (b) the power output. 
Solution 
a. 4.0 A, power factor -- 0.70 lagging 
b. 190W 
Examination of the order of magnitude of the numerical values in Example 9.2 
suggests approximations which usually can be made. These approximations pertain 
particularly to the backward-field impedance. Note that the impedance 0.5(Rb + 
j Xb) is only about 5 percent of the total motor impedance for a slip near full load. 
Consequently, an approximation as large as 20 percent of this impedance would 
cause only about 1 percent error in the motor current. Although, strictly speaking, 
the backward-field impedance is a function of slip, very little error usually results 
from computing its value at any convenient slip in the normal running region, e.g., 
5 percent, and then assuming Rb and Xb to be constants. 
Corresponding to a slightly greater approximation, the shunting effect of j Xm, main 
on the backward-field impedance can often be neglected, whence 
R2,main 
Zb ~ ~ 
-F j Xz,main 
(9.15) 
2-s 
This equation gives values of the backward-field resistance that are a few percent 
high, as can be seen by comparison with the exact expression given in Example 9.2. 
Neglecting s in Eq. 9.15 would tend to give values of the backward-field resistance 
that would be too low, and therefore such an approximation would tend to counteract 
the error in Eq. 9.15. Consequently, for small slips 
R2,main 
Zb "~ ~ 
-F j Xz,main 
(9.16) 
2 

470 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
In a polyphase motor (Section 6.5), the maximum internal torque and the slip at 
which it occurs can easily be expressed in terms of the motor parameters; the maximum 
internal torque is independent of rotor resistance. No such simple expressions exist 
for a single-phase motor. The single-phase problem is much more involved because 
of the presence of the backward field, the effect of which is twofold: (1) it absorbs 
some of the applied voltage, thus reducing the voltage available for the forward field 
and decreasing the forward torque developed; and (2) the backward field produces 
negative torque, reducing the effective developed torque. Both of these effects depend 
on rotor resistance as well as leakage reactance. Consequently, unlike the polyphase 
motor, the maximum internal torque of a single-phase motor is influenced by rotor re- 
sistance; increasing the rotor resistance decreases the maximum torque and increases 
the slip at which maximum torque occurs. 
Principally because of the effects of the backward field, a single-phase induction 
motor is somewhat inferior to a polyphase motor using the same rotor and the same 
stator core. The single-phase motor has a lower maximum torque which occurs at a 
lower slip. For the same torque, the single-phase motor has a higher slip and greater 
losses, largely because of the backward-field rotor 12R loss. The volt-ampere input 
to the single-phase motor is greater, principally because of the power and reactive 
volt-amperes consumed by the backward field. The stator 12R loss also is somewhat 
higher in the single-phase motor, because one phase, rather than several, must carry all 
the current. Because of the greater losses, the efficiency is lower, and the temperature 
rise for the same torque is higher. A larger frame size must be used for a single-phase 
motor than for a polyphase motor of the same power and speed rating. Because of 
the larger frame size, the maximum torque can be made comparable with that of a 
physically smaller but equally rated polyphase motor. In spite of the larger frame 
size and the necessity for auxiliary starting arrangements, general-purpose single- 
phase motors in the standard fractional-kilowatt ratings cost approximately the same 
as correspondingly rated polyphase motors because of the much greater volume of 
production of the former. 
9.4 
TWO-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS 
As we have seen, most single-phase induction motors are actually constructed in the 
form of two-phase motors, with two stator windings in space quadrature. The main 
and auxiliary windings are typically quite different, with a different number of turns, 
wire size, and turns distribution. This difference, in combination with the capacitor 
that is typically used in series with the auxiliary winding, guarantees that the mmfs 
produced by the two winding currents will be quite unbalanced; at best they may 
be balanced at one specific operating point. We will thus discuss various analytical 
techniques for two-phase motors, both to expand our understanding and insight into 
machine performance and also to develop techniques for the analysis of single- and 
two-phase motors. 
Under balanced operating conditions, a symmetrical two-phase motor can be 
analyzed using techniques developed in Chapter 6 for three-phase motors, modified 

9.4 
Two-Phase Induction Motors 
471 
only slightly to take into account the fact that there are two phases rather than three. 
In this section, we will first discuss one technique that can be used to analyze a 
symmetrical two-phase motor operating under unbalanced operating conditions. We 
will then formally derive an analytical model for an unsymmetrical two-phase motor 
that can be applied to the general case single-phase motors operating off both their 
main and auxiliary windings. 
9.4.1 
Unbalanced Operation of Symmetrical 
Two.Phase Machines; The 
Symmetrical-Component Concept 
When operating from the main winding alone, the single-phase motor is the extreme 
case of a motor operating under unbalanced stator-current conditions. In some cases, 
unbalanced voltages or currents are produced in the supply network to a motor, 
e.g., when a line fuse is blown. In other cases, unbalanced voltages are produced 
by the starting impedances of single-phase motors, as described in Section 9.2. The 
purpose of this section is to develop the symmetrical-component theory of two-phase 
induction motors from the double-revolving-field concept and to show how the theory 
can be applied to a variety of problems involving induction motors having two stator 
windings in space quadrature. 
First consider in review what happens when balanced two-phase voltages are 
applied to the stator terminals of a two-phase machine having a uniform air gap, a 
symmetrical polyphase or cage rotor, and two identical stator windings ot and fl in 
space quadrature. The stator currents are equal in magnitude and in time quadrature. 
When the current in winding ot is at its instantaneous maximum, the current in winding 
fl is zero and the stator-mmf wave is centered on the axis of winding or. Similarly, the 
stator-mmf wave is centered on the axis of winding fl at the instant when the current 
in winding fl is at its instantaneous maximum. The stator-mmf wave therefore travels 
90 electrical degrees in space in a time interval corresponding to a 90 ° phase change 
of the applied voltage, with the direction of its travel depending on the phase sequence 
of the currents. A more complete analysis in the manner of Section 4.5 shows that the 
traveling wave has constant amplitude and constant angular velocity. This fact is, of 
course, the basis for the theory of the balanced operation of induction machines. 
The behavior of the motor for balanced two-phase applied voltages of either 
phase sequence can be readily determined. Thus, if the rotor is turning at a slip s in 
the direction from winding ot toward winding r, the terminal impedance per phase 
is given by the equivalent circuit of Fig. 9.12a when the applied voltage fz~ lags the 
applied voltage fed by 90 ° . Throughout the rest of this treatment, this phase sequence 
is called positive sequence and is designated by the subscript 'f' since positive- 
sequence currents result in a forward field. With the rotor running at the same speed 
and in the same direction, the terminal impedance per phase is given by the equivalent 
circuit of Fig. 9.12b when fz~ leads fed by 90 °. This phase sequence is called negative 
sequence and is designated by subscript 'b', since negative-sequence currents produce 
a backward field. 

472 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
R 1 
X1 
X2 
R1 
X1 
X2 
R2 
S 
(a) 
(b) 
R2 
2-s 
Figure 9.12 Single-phase equivalent circuits for a two-phase 
motor under unbalanced conditions (a) forward field and 
(b) backward field. 
Suppose now that two balanced two-phase voltage sources of opposite phase 
sequence are connected in series and applied simultaneously to the motor, as indicated 
in Fig. 9.13a, where phasor voltages Vf and j Vf applied, respectively, to windings ot 
and fl form a balanced system of positive sequence, and phasor voltages "V'b and -j l?b 
form another balanced system but of negative sequence. 
The resultant voltage V,~ applied to winding ct is, as a phasor, 
"i?~- (zf + l)b 
(9.17) 
and that applied to winding fl is 
'v'/~ = j'~'f- jl)b 
(9.18) 
Fig. 9.13b shows a generalized phasor diagram in which the forward, or positive- 
sequence, system is given by the phasors ~'r and j l~'r and the backward, or negative- 
sequence, system is given by the phasors ~'b and -j ~'b. The resultant voltages, given 
by the phasors 12~ and V/~ are not, in general, either equal in magnitude or in time 
+ 
vb 
Ot 
,, iII1~ 
v ,,X \ 
\ 
-je  ---xj 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 9.13 Synthesis of an unbalanced two-phase system from the sum of two 
balanced systems of opposite phase sequence. 

9.4 Two-Phase Induction Motors 
473 
quadrature. From this discussion we see that an unbalanced two-phase system of 
applied voltages V~ and V# can be synthesized by combining two balanced voltage 
sets of opposite phase sequence. 
The symmetrical-component systems are, however, much easier to work with than 
their unbalanced resultant system. Thus, it is easy to compute the component currents 
produced by each symmetrical-component system of applied voltages because the 
induction motor operates as a balanced two-phase motor for each component system. 
By superposition, the actual current in a winding then is the sum of its components. 
Thus, if if and Ib are, respectively, the positive- and negative-sequence component 
phasor currents in winding or, then the corresponding positive- and negative-sequence 
component phasor currents in winding fl are, respectively, jif and -j ib, and the 
actual winding currents i~ and i# are 
Iot -- If 4- Ib 
(9.19) 
/~ = j If - j ~?b 
(9.20) 
The inverse operation of finding the symmetrical components of specified volt- 
ages or currents must be performed often. Solution of Eqs. 9.17 and 9.18 for the 
phasor components ~'f and t?b in terms of known phasor voltages fz and fz# gives 
1 
Vf = ~(V~ - jV/~) 
(9.21) 
1 
~'b- ~(V,~ 4- jV#) 
(9.22) 
These operations are illustrated in the phasor diagram of Fig. 9.14. Obviously, 
similar relations give the phasor symmetrical components if and Ib of the current in 
winding ot in terms of specified phasor currents 
i? m and ia in the two phases; thus 
^ 
If- ~(I~ - j~?/~) 
(9.23) 
,,,, 
ib -- ~(I~ 4-jI/~) 
(9.24) 
.^ 
Figure 9.14 Resolution of unbalanced two-phase 
voltages into symmetrical components. 

474 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
The equivalent-circuit parameters of a 5-hp 220-V 60-Hz four-pole two-phase squirrel-cage 
induction motor in ohms per phase are 
R1 = 0.534 
X1 = 2.45 
Xm = 70.1 
R2 = 0.956 
X 2 = 2.96 
This motor is operated from an unbalanced two-phase 60-Hz source whose phase voltages 
are, respectively, 230 and 210 V, the smaller voltage leading the larger by 80 °. For a slip of 
0.05, find (a) the positive- and negative-sequence components of the applied voltages, (b) the 
positive- and negative-sequence components of the stator-phase currents, (c) the effective values 
of the phase currents, and (d) the internal mechanical power. 
II Solution 
We will solve this example using MATLAB. t 
a. Let f'~ and f'~ denote the voltages applied to the two phases, respectively. Then 
I~'~ = 230Z0 ° = 230 + j0 V 
f,'~ = 210Z80 ° = 36.4 + j207 V 
From Eqs. 9.21 and 9.22 the forward and backward components of voltages are, 
respectively, 
f"f -- 218.4- j18.2-- 219.2/-4.8 ° V 
fZb -- 11.6 + j 18.2 -- 21.6/57.5 ° V 
b. Because of the ease with which MATLAB handles complex numbers, there is no need to 
use approximations such as are derived in Example 9.2. Rather, the forward- and 
backward-field input impedances of the motor can be calculated from the equivalent 
circuits of Figs. 9.12a and b. Dividing the forward-field voltage by the forward-field input 
impedance gives 
it. = 
- 9.3 - j6.3 = 11.2z -34.2 ° A 
Ri + j Xi + Zr 
Similarly, dividing the backward-field voltage by the backward-field input 
impedance gives 
lb = 
f/b 
= 3.7 -- j l.5 = 4.0" --21.9 ° A 
Ri + j Xi + Zb 
c. The winding currents can be calculated from Eqs. 9.19 and 9.20 
i~, -- ir + ib = 13.0--j7.8 = 15.2/-31.0"A 
7~ = jlr- 
jib -- 4.8 + j5.6 = 7.4/49.1" A 
Note that the winding currents are much more unbalanced than the applied voltages. 
Even though the motor is not overloaded insofar as shaft load is concerned, the losses are 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

9,4 
Two-Phase Induction Motors 
475 
appreciably increased by the current unbalance, and the stator winding with the greatest 
current may overheat. 
d. The power delivered across the air gap by the forward field is equal to the forward-field 
equivalent-circuit input power minus the corresponding stator loss 
Pgap,f = 2(Retl~'fl~]- 12R,) = 4149 W 
where the factor of 2 accounts for the fact that this is a two-phase motor. Similarly, the 
power delivered to the backward field is 
egap,b-- 2(Re[I3"bi~]- I~R,) : 14.5 W 
Here, the symbol Re[ ] indicates the real part of a complex number, and the superscript * 
indicates the complex conjugate. 
Finally, from Eq. 9.14, the internal mechanical power developed is equal to (1 - s) 
times the total air-gap power or 
Pmech = (1 --s)(egap,f- 
Pgap,b) = 3927 W 
If the core losses, friction and windage, and stray load losses are known, the shaft 
output can be found by subtracting them from the internal power. The friction and 
windage losses depend solely on the speed and are the same as they would be for balanced 
operation at the same speed. The core and stray load losses, however, are somewhat 
greater than they would be for balanced operation with the same positive-sequence 
voltage and current. The increase is caused principally by the (2 - s)-frequency core and 
stray losses in the rotor caused by the backward field. 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% Useful 
constants 
f = 60; 
%60 Hz system 
omega 
= 2*pi*f; 
s = 0.05; 
% slip 
% Parameters 
R1 = 0.534; 
Xl = 2.45; 
Xm = 70.1; 
R2 = 0.956; 
X2 = 2.96; 
% Winding 
voltages 
Valpha 
= 230; 
Vbeta 
= 210 * exp(j*80*pi/180); 
%(a) 
Calculate 
Vf and Vb from Equations 
and 9-21 and 9-22 
Vf = 0.5*(Valpha 
- j*Vbeta) ; 
Vb = 0.5*(Valpha 
+ j*Vbeta) ; 

476 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
magVf 
= abs(Vf) ; 
angleVf 
= angle(Vf)*180/pi; 
magVb 
= abs(Vb) ; 
angleVb 
= angle(Vb)*180/pi; 
fprintf('\n(a) 
') 
fprintf('\n 
Vf = %.if + j %.if = %.if at angle %.If degrees 
V', 
... 
real (Vf) , imag (Vf) , magVf, angleVf) ; 
fprintf('\n 
Vb = %.if + j %.if = %.if at angle %.if degrees 
V\n', 
... 
real (Vb) , imag (Vb) , magVb, angleVb) ; 
%(b) First calculate 
the forward-field 
input impedance 
of the motor 
from 
% the equivalent 
circuit 
of Fig. 
9-12(a). 
Zforward 
= R1 + j'X1 + j*Xm*(R2/s+j*X2)/ 
(m2/s+j*(X2+Xm)) 
; 
%Now calculate 
the forward-field 
current. 
If = Vf/Zforward; 
magIf 
= abs(If) ; 
angleIf 
= angle(If)*180/pi; 
% Next calculate 
the backward-field 
input impedance 
of the motor 
from 
% Fig. 
9-12(b) . 
Zback = ml + j*Xl + j*Xm*(m2/(2-s)+j*X2)/(m2/(2-s)+j*(X2+Xm)); 
%Now calculate 
the backward-field 
current. 
Ib = Vb/Zback; 
magIb 
= abs(Ib) ; 
angleIb 
= angle(Ib)*180/pi; 
fprintf('\n(b) 
') 
fprintf('\n 
If = %.if + j %.if = %.if at angle %.if degrees 
A', 
... 
real (If) ,imag(If) ,magIf,angleIf) 
; 
fprintf('\n 
Ib = %.if + j %.if = %.if at angle %.if degrees 
A\n', 
... 
real (Ib) , imag (Ib) , magIb, angleIb) ; 
%(c) Calculate 
the winding 
currents 
from Eqs. 9-19 and 9-20 
Ialpha 
= If + Ib; 
Ibeta = j*(If - Ib) ; 
magIalpha 
= abs(Ialpha); 
angleIalpha 
= angle(Ialpha)*180/pi; 
magIbeta 
= abs(Ibeta) ; 
angleIbeta 
= angle(Ibeta)*180/pi; 
fprintf('\n(c) 
') 
fprintf('\n 
Ialpha 
= %.if + j %.if = %.if at angle 
%.if degrees 
A', ... 
real (Ialpha) , imag (Ialpha) , magIalpha, angleIalpha) 
; 
fprintf('\n 
Ibeta= 
%.if + j %.if = %.if at angle %.if degrees 
A\n', ... 
real (Ibeta) , imag (Ibeta) ,magIbeta, angleIbeta) ; 

9.4 
Two-Phase Induction Motors 
477 
%(d) Power delivered 
to the forward field is equal to the 
% forward-field 
input power less the stator-winding 
I^2R loss 
Pgf = 2* (real(Vf*conj (If)) - Rl*magIf^2) ; 
% Power delivered 
to the backward 
field is equal to the 
% backward-field 
input power less the stator-winding 
I^2R loss 
Pgb = 2* (real(Vb*conj (Ib)) - Rl*magIb^2) ; 
% The electromagnetic 
power is equal to (l-s) times the 
% net air-gap power 
Pmech = (1-s)*(Pgf - Pgb) ; 
fprintf('\n(d) ') 
fprintf('\n 
Power to forward field = %. if W',Pgf) 
fprintf('\n 
Power to backward 
field = %.if W',Pgb) 
fprintf('\n 
Pmech : %. if W\n',mmech) 
fprintf ( ' \n' ) 
)ractice Problem 9.; 
For the motor of Example 9.3, use MATLAB to produce a plot of the internal mechanical power 
as a function of slip as the slip varies from s = 0.04 to s = 0.05 for the unbalanced voltages 
assumed in the example. On the same axes (using dashed lines), plot the internal mechanical 
power for balanced two-phase voltages of 220-V magnitude and 90 ° phase shift. 
Solution 
4000 
3900 
3800 
370O 
~ 3600 
E 
3500 
3400 
3300 
i 
i 
, 
i 
i 
..................... 
D
a
s
h
e
d
 
line: balanced voltages 
................... 
Solid line: unbalanced voltages 
.................... 
/ 
3200 
= 
' 
i 
i 
, 
i 
0.04 
0.042 
0.044 
0.046 
0.048 
0.05 
0.052 
slip 
0.054 
Figure 9.15 
MATLAB plot for Practice Problem 9.3. 

478 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
9.4.2 
The General Case: Unsymmetrical Two.Phase 
Induction Machines 
As we have discussed, a single-phase induction motor with a main and auxiliary 
winding is an example of an unsymmetrical two-phase induction motor. In this section 
we will develop a model for such a two-phase motor, using notation appropriate to the 
single-phase motor. We will assume, as is commonly the case, that the windings are 
in space quadrature but that they are unsymmetrical in that they may have a different 
number of turns, a different winding distribution, and so on. 
Our analytical approach is to represent the rotor by an equivalent two-phase 
winding as shown in schematic form in Fig. 9.16 and to start with flux-linkage/current 
relationships for the rotor and stator of the form 
~.main 
Zmain 
0 
£main,rl (Ome) £main,r2 (Ome) 
/main 
~.aux 
0 
Laux 
/~aux,rl (0me) 
/~aux,r2 (0me) 
laux 
~.rl 
£main,rl (0me) 
£aux,rl (0me) 
Lr 
0 
irl 
/~-r2 
£main,r2 (0me) 
/~aux,r2 (0me) 
0 
Lr 
ir2 
(9.25) 
where 0me is the rotor angle measured in electrical radians. 
Lmain = Self-inductance of the main winding 
Stator 
Figure 9.16 
Schematic representation of 
a two-phase induction motor with an equivalent 
two-phase rotor. 

9,4 
Two-Phase Induction Motors 
479 
Laux = Self-inductance of the auxiliary winding 
Lr -- Self-inductance of the equivalent rotor windings 
/2main,rl (0me) "-" Mutual inductance between the main winding and equivalent 
rotor winding 1 
/~main,r2(0me) ~-" Mutual inductance between the main winding and equivalent 
rotor winding 2 
/2aux,rl (0me) = Mutual inductance between the auxiliary winding and rotor 
winding 1 
/2aux,r2(0me ) = Mutual inductance between the auxiliary winding and rotor 
winding 2 
Assuming a sinusoidal distribution of air-gap flux, the mutual inductances be- 
tween the main winding and the rotor will be of the form 
/~main,rl (Ome) = Lmain,r cos Ome 
(9.26) 
and 
/~main,r2 (0me) --- -- Lmain,r sin 0me 
(9.27) 
where Lmain,r is the amplitude of the mutual inductance. 
The mutual inductances between the auxiliary winding will be of the same form 
with the exception that the auxiliary winding is displaced by 90 electrical degrees in 
space from the main winding. Hence we can write 
/~aux,rl (0me) = Laux,r sin 0me 
(9.28) 
and 
/~aux,r2 (0me) = Laux,r cos 0me 
(9.29) 
Note that the auxiliary winding will typically have a different number of turns 
(and perhaps a different winding distribution) from that of the main winding. Thus, 
for modeling purposes, it is often convenient to write 
where 
Laux,r -- a Lmain,r 
(9.30) 
Effective turns of auxiliary winding 
a = Turns ratio = 
(9.31) 
Effective turns of main winding 
Similarly, if we write the self-inductance of the magnetizing branch as the sum of a 
leakage inductance Lmain,1 and a magnetizing inductance Lm 
Lmain -= Lmain,1-k- Lm 
(9.32) 
then the self-inductance of the auxiliary winding can be written in the form 
Laux -- Laux,1 Jr-a 2 Lm 
(9.33) 

• (plolj oouonbos-oA!legou .~olels oql £q poonpo:td) °o9(s- E) -- ~tuc° + °c° -- ~co pug @lOg 
oouonbos-oA!l!sod aolels oql £q poonpoJd) °cos -- °tUco - °o9 = ~co so!ouonbo:tj le oq II!aX 
sluo:uno :toloa oql uo!ldtunsse s!ql ql!A~ lUOlS!SUO o "°o9 ,(3uonboaj ,(Iddns Fo.ul3OlO 
ltn3lsuo3 ptn3 's d!is ~ ol gu!puodso.uo3 ' otuco poods ie3!ueqootu 1u131suo3 ql.tA~ 'uo!le.~odo 
mels-,qpems ~u!tunsse £q podopAop aoqlanj oq ue3 uo.tl3gs s.tql U.l pOA.UOp suo!lenbo oql 
'sou!q3etu oseqd-oi~u!s .~oj aoldeq3 s!ql u! .~o.q.mo pue sou!q3etu uo!13npu! oseqddlod 
:toj 9 aoldvqD u! poAuop sl.m&I.t3 lUOleA!nbo oql jo luotudoloAO p oql ol sno~oIeuV 
• sue!pe.~ u! oI~Ue .xolo.~ oql s! °tU0(solod/E ) = tu 00.~oqA~ 
(8E'6) 
[(ow 0 u.ts v!~.~! _ ou, 0 soo ~!~!) 
~'~""7 + 
(OW0soo v!u~.~tu ! + °tu 0 u!s ~a!u!et~) a,u!etUT_ ] 
soI°d 
= 
~'OP 
~'OP 
Z.l l x n l~ 1 .31_ 
II/xnlz/+ 
(.WO)V,~..y p 
• 
• 
(~U,o) ~',,n.yp 
• 
• 
~'OP 
~OP 
E.~tu!~tu I Jr" 
I-tluFtul -
-
 
qootuL 
(otUO)V'uFwy p 
• 
• 
(OtUO) ~'m..~yp 
• 
• 
S13 tlgll.l.lA~ oq Ug3 JO1OtU s!ql Jo onbJol 3!lou~etu 
-o:tlooIO oql leql ~oqs ol posn oq ueo ~;'f uo!looS jo sonb!uq3ol oql ',(IleU!d 
• poods ol dn sotuo3 aolotu oql se mo poq31.taxs oq lou ,(etu ao ~(etu ~u!pu!A~ £xe.q!xne 
oql 'poppom gu!oq .tolotu jo od,(1 oql uodn ~u!puodo(l "SleU!tU.lOl gu!pu!ax-,(~!I!xne 
oql pue £Iddns gql uggaxlgq poloouuo3 st..tol!3edgo g '£Iddns oseqd-oIgU!S gql ol 3[[13g.t 
-!p polo~uuo3 s! ~u!pu!~ u!etu oql oI!qax 'lgql loej oql lunooog olu! o~Iel lsntu suo!l 
-enbo l!noa!o oql 'E'E'6 uo!13oS jo s.xolotu aol.t3edeo sno!.mA oql gu!Iopotu uoqA, k 
• sgu!pu!ax aolo:t luoIeA!nbo o~1 oql pue gu!pu!ax 
u!etu oql £IUO sopnIou ! qo!qax iopotu .xopao-poonpoa e £q poluoso.xdo.~ st..xolotu oql pug 
'oaoz s! luo~no ~u!pu!ax-dae!l!xne oql 'poloouuoos.tp st. ~u!pu!ax Lm!l!xne oql leql otu!l 
oql gu!axoIIod "pol.mls s! aolotu oql uoqax g~gl[OA £Iddns oseqd-oIgu!s oql ol Ienbo 
los qloq ~ae xn"ct pue u:"wct snql pug 'iOlieaed u! pmoouuo3 £idtu!s oae SgU!pU!a~ Lm!I ! 
-xne pue u!etu oql (I'Z'6 uo!looS) .xolotu uo!lonpu! oseqd-l!Ids ~z gu!ppotu uoqA~ 
• pol.toqs £IleU.~Olu! oae aolotu uo!13npu! ue jo sgu!pu!~ aoloa 
oql osneooq oaoz ol Ienbo los oae S0gelIOA gu!pu!ax-aoloa oql leql OlON "£IOA!lozdso:t 
'sgu!pu!ax aoloa pug '£ae!I!xng 'uFtu oql jo so3uels!soa oql oae 'H pug ,,n,~/,u.~,tu~/~aoqax 
JP 
-F "~ bI z " ~ = 
0 
-- 
z.~ ct 
(LE'6) 
Vyp 
" 
lP 
(9~'6) 
~ 
+ ~/t~.l = 0 -- t~a 
t~yp 
JP 
JP 
(17~'6) 
u:~%p ~- ":~u~/u:~u2 
ur~uct 
se so~ezIu!I xn U pu~ sluo~n3 
~u!pu!ax oql 3o sm:tol u! uollt.:tax oq ue3 ou!qoetu st.ql .IoJ suo!l~nbo g~el[OA gq,.L 
sJo;oiAI eseqd-OM_L pue-elfiu!s 
6 k131dVHO 
0811~ 

9,4 
Two-Phase Induction Motors 
481 
After considerable algebraic manipulation, which includes using Eqs. 9.36 and 9.37 
to eliminate the rotor currents, the main- and auxiliary-winding flux-linkage/current 
relationships of Eq. 9.25 can be written as phasor equations 
~main 
[tmain 
j 
2 
^+ 
- 
= 
-- 
Lmain,r(K 
-Jr-/~ )]Imain q'- Lmain,rLaux,r(/~+ -/~-)Iaux 
and 
~aux 
-Lmain rLaux,r(/~+ 
/~-)Imain -+- [Laux 
• 2 
^ + 
- 
-- 
, 
- 
- J Laux,r(K 
+/~ 
)] Iaux 
where 
and 
(9.39) 
(9.40) 
/~+ = 
SO9e 
(9.41) 
2(Rr -+- jSo9eLr) 
/~+ = 
(2- S)Oge 
(9.42) 
2(Rr q- j (2- 
s)ogeLr) 
Similarly, the voltage equations, Eqs. 9.34 and 9.35 become 
Vmain -- Imain Rmain + j toe ~-main 
(9.43) 
Vaux -- Iaux Raux Jr- joge~.aux 
(9.44) 
The rotor currents will each consist of positive- and negative-sequence compo- 
and 
^-- 
Am 
Ir2 -- jlrl 
(9.48) 
Finally, again after careful algebraic manipulation, the time-averaged electro- 
magnetic torque can be shown to be given by 
( 
) 
2 ^ " *  
2^,,, 
<Tmech> __ 
poles 
te[(Lmain,rimainimai n -Jr- Laux,riauxIaux)(R+ 
_ K-)* 
2 
^, 
^ 
^ 
^g 
+ jLmain,rLaux,r(ImainIaux- Imainlaux)(/~ + -+-/~-)*] 
(9.49) 
^+ 
^+ 
Ir2 -- --jlrl 
(9.46) 
while the complex amplitudes of the negative sequence components (at frequency 
(2 - s)oge) are given by 
Irl = -j (2 - s)o9e[Lmain,rlmain - jLaux,riaux] 
(9.47) 
2(Rr + j (2- s)o9etr) 
and 
nents. The complex amplitudes of the positive sequence components (at frequency 
So9e) are given by 
^+ 
-- j S og e [ t main, r l main -Jr- jtaux,r~?aux] 
Irl -- 
(9.45) 
2(Rr + jso9eLr) 

482 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
EXAMPLE 9.4 
where the symbol Re[ ] again indicates the real part of a complex number and the 
superscript * indicates the complex conjugate. Note that Eq. 9.49 is derived based 
upon the assumption that the various currents are expressed as rms quantities. 
Consider the case of a symmetrical two-phase motor such as is discussed in Section 9.4.1. In this 
case, Eqs. 9.25 through 9.37 simplify with equal self and mutual inductances and resistances 
for the two windings. Using the notation of Section 9.4.1, 'c~' and 'fl' replacing 'main' and 
'aux', the flux-linkage/current relationships of Eq. 9.39 and 9.40 become 
2 
^+ 
- 
2 
^+ 
~ot -- [Lot - jLot,r(K 
+ I( )] lot + Lot,r(K 
- K.-)I~ 
~'fl = --L2,otr( R+ -- R-)i~ot "q- [Lot -- jL2ot,r(R + "q- g-)] 
l~fl 
and the voltage equations (Eqs. 9.43 and 9.44) become 
Vot -- iotRot -'[- jOAe~.ot 
Show that when operated from a positive sequence set of voltages such that f'~ = -j Vot 
the single-phase equivalent circuit is that of the forward-field (positive-sequence) equivalent 
circuit of Fig. 9.12a. 
II Solution 
Substitution of the positive-sequence voltages in the above equations and solution for the 
impedance Zot = f,'ot /iot gives 
Zot= Rot+jweLot+ 
((.Oe Lot,r) 2 
( gr/S "71- jO.)eLr) 
=Rot+jXot+ 
X 2 ot,r 
(Rr/s + jXr) 
This equation can be rewritten as 
Zot -- Rot + j (Xot - Xot,r) + j Xot,r[j (Xr - Sot.r) -'[-- Rr/s] 
(Rr/S -'}- jX~) 
Setting Rot =~ R,, (Xot - Xot.r) :=~ X,, Xot,r ~ 
Xm, (X r -- got,r) ~ 
S2, and Rr =:~ R2, we see 
that this equation does indeed represent an equivalent circuit of the form of Fig. 9.12a. 
Analogous to the calculation of Example 9.4, show that when operated from a negative sequence 
set of voltages such that 17~ = j Vot the single-phase equivalent circuit is that of the backward- 
field (negative-sequence) equivalent circuit of Fig. 9.12b. 

9.4 Two-Phase Induction Motors 
483 
Solution 
Under negative-sequence conditions, the impedance Z~ is equal to 
((-Oe Lot,r) 2 
Z,~ = R~ + jweL~ + 
(gr/(2- s) + jcoeLr) 
X 2 
ot,r 
=Ro,+jXo~+ (er/(2-- s) "+" jXr) 
As in Example 9.4, this can be shown to correspond to an equivalent circuit of the form of 
Fig. 9.12b. 
A two-pole, single-phase induction motor has the following parameters 
Lmain ~--- 80.6 mH 
Rmain = 0.58 
taux = 196 mH 
Rau x = 3.37 f2 
Lr = 4.7 #H 
Rr = 37.6 #S2 
Zmain,r --- 0.588 mH 
L ..... = 0.909 mH 
It is operated from a single-phase, 230-V rms, 60-Hz source as a permanent-split-capacitor 
motor with a 35/zF capacitor connected in series with the auxiliary winding. In order to achieve 
the required phase shift of the auxiliary-winding current, the windings must be connected with 
the polarities shown in Fig. 9.17. The motor has a rotational losses of 40 W and 105 W of 
core loss. 
Consider motor operation at 3500 r/min. 
a. Find the main-winding, auxiliary-winding and source currents and the magnitude of the 
capacitor voltage. 
b. Find the time-averaged electromagnetic torque and shaft output power. 
+© 
--0 
+ @ 
L 
Main / 
_ 
~ 
Vc 
winding 
Vmain 
+ 
Irnain~ 
-4- ~'aux 
-- 
o 
,&O_O_r----~ 
iaux Auxiliary 
winding 
Figure 9.17 
Permanent-split-capacitor induction-motor 
connections for Example 9.5. 
EXAMPLE 9.5 

484 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
c. Calculate the motor input power and its electrical efficiency. Note that since core loss isn't 
explicitly accounted for in the model derived in this section, you may simply consider it as 
an additional component of the input power. 
d. Plot the motor time-averaged electromagnetic torque as a function of speed from standstill 
to synchronous speed. 
II Solution 
MATLAB, with its ease of handling complex numbers, is ideal for the solution of this problem. 
a. The main winding of this motor is directly connected to the single-phase source. Thus we 
directly set Vmain = 9 s. However, the auxiliary winding is connected to the single-phase 
source through a capacitor and its polarity is reversed• Thus we must write 
9aux -3t- 9C = -- 9s 
where the capacitor voltage is given by 
f'~ = jiaoxX~ 
Here the capacitor impedance Xc is equal to 
1 
1 
Xc .
.
.
.
.
 
75.8 f2 
(weC) 
(120zr × 35 × 10 -6) 
Setting f'~ = V0 = 230 V and substituting these expressions into Eqs. 9.43 and 9.44 
and using Eqs. 9.39 and 9.40 then gives the following matrix equation for the main- and 
auxiliary-winding currents. 
(Rmain + j~e,~l) 
-jogeA2 
where 
and 
jogeA2 
] 
(Raux + jXc + jo)eA3) 
Imain 
laux [ 01 
-v0 
• 
2 
A, = tmain - J tmain,r(K + + K-) 
/~2 = tmain,rt ..... (K +- 
K-) 
2 
^+ 
- 
A3 = Laux - jL ..... (K 
+ R ) 
The parameters k + and K- can be found from Eqs. 9.41 and 9.42 once the slip is 
found using Eq. 6.1 
n~ - n 
3600 - 3500 
s = 
= 0.278 
n, 
3600 
This matrix equation can be readily solved using MATLAB with the result 
imain = 15.9/-37.6 ° A 
I~ux = 5•20/- 150•7 ° A 

9,4 
Two-Phase Induction Motors 
48S 
and 
Is -- 18.5/--22.7 ° A 
The magnitude of the capacitor voltage is 
If'cl = [iauxScI = 374 V 
b. Using MATLAB the time-averaged electromagnetic torque can be found from Eq. 9.49 
to be 
< Tmech > = 9.74 N" m 
The shaft power can then be found by subtracting the rotational losses Prot from the 
air-gap power 
Pshaft -- O-)m < Tmech > -- erot 
(p--~les) (1 
S)O)e (~ Tmech ~ ) 
got 
= 3532 W 
c. The power input to the main winding can be found as 
emain = Re[VoI~nain] : 2893 W 
and that into the auxiliary winding, including the capacitor (which dissipates no power) 
Paux 
Re[ 
V0 ,ux] 
1043W 
The total input power, including the core loss power Pcore is found as 
Pin -- emain + eaux JI- ecore = 4041 W 
Finally, the efficiency can be determined 
eshaft 
0 : 
0.874 = 87.4% 
Pin 
d. The plot of < Tmech > versus speed generated by MATLAB is found in Fig. 9.18. 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% Source 
parameters 
V0 
= 230; 
omegae 
= 120*pi; 
% Motor 
parameters 
poles 
= 2; 
Lmain 
= 
.0806; 
Rmain 
= 0.58; 
Laux 
= 0.196; 
Raux 
= 3.37; 
Lr 
= 4.7e-6; 

486 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
18 
16 
14 
.~,12 
6 
4 
2 
0 
0 
4000 
l 
i 
i 
l 
l 
i 
i 
~;o 
~o'oo 
~'oo 
~o'oo 
~'oo 
~o'oo 
~'oo 
speed [r/rain] 
Figure 9.18 
Time-averaged electromagnetic torque versus speed for the 
single-phase induction motor of Example 9.5. 
Rr : 37.6e-6; 
Lmainr 
= 5.88e-4; 
Lauxr 
= 9.09e-4; 
C = 35e-6; 
Xc = -i/ (omegae*C) ; 
Prot 
= 40 ; 
Pcore 
= i05; 
% Run through 
program 
twice. 
If calcswitch 
= I, then 
% calculate 
at speed 
of 3500 r/min 
only. 
The second 
time 
% program 
will 
produce 
the plot 
for part 
(d). 
for calcswitch 
= 1:2 
if calcswitch 
== 1 
mmax 
: i; 
else 
mmax 
= i01 ; 
end 
for m = l:mmax 
if calcswitch 
== 1 
speed(m) 
= 3500; 
else 
speed(m) 
= 3599"(m-1)/i00; 
end 

9,4 
Two-Phase Induction Motors 
487 
% Calculate 
the slip 
ns = (2/poles)*3600; 
s = (ns-speed(m))/ns; 
% part 
(a) 
% Calculate 
the various 
complex 
constants 
Kplus 
= s*omegae/(2*(Rr 
+ j*s*omegae*Lr)) 
; 
Kminus 
= (2-s)*omegae/ 
(2*(Rr + j*(2-s)*omegae*Lr)) 
; 
A1 = Lmain 
- j*Lmainr^2 *(Kplus+Kminus) 
; 
A2 = Lmainr*Lauxr* 
(Kplus-Kminus) 
; 
A3 = Laux 
- j*Lauxr^2 *(Kplus+Kminus) 
; 
% Set up the matrix 
M(I,I) 
= Rmain 
+ j*omegae*Al; 
M(I,2) 
= j*omegae*A2; 
M(2,1) 
= -j*omegae*A2; 
M(2,2) 
: Raux 
+ j*Xc+ 
j*omegae*A3; 
% Here 
is the voltage 
vector 
V = IV0 ; -V0]; 
% Now find the current 
matrix 
I = M\V; 
Imain 
= I(1) ; 
Iaux = I(2); 
Is = Imain-Iaux; 
magImain 
= abs (Imain) ; 
angleImain 
= angle(Imain)*180/pi; 
magIaux 
= abs (Iaux) ; 
angleIaux 
= angle(Iaux)*180/pi; 
magIs 
= abs(Is) ; 
angleIs 
= angle(Is)*180/pi; 
%Capacitor 
voltage 
Vcap 
: Iaux*Xc; 
magVcap 
= abs (Vcap) ; 
% part 
(b) 
Tmechl 
= conj (Kplus-Kminus) 
; 
Tmechl 
: Tmechl*(Lmainr^2*Imain*conj 
(Imain)+Lauxr^2*Iaux*conj 
(Iaux)); 
Tmech2 
= j*Lmainr*Lauxr*conj 
(Kplus+Kminus) 
; 
Tmech2 
= Tmech2*(conj(Imain)*Iaux-Imain*conj(Iaux)); 
Tmech(m) 
= (poles/2)*real(Tmechl+Tmech2) 
; 
Pshaft 
= (2/poles)*(1-s)*omegae*Tmech(m)-Prot; 
%part 
(c) 
Pmain 
= real(V0*conj 
(Imain)) ; 
Paux = real(-V0*conj 
(Iaux)) ; 

488 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
Pin : Pmain+Paux+Pcore; 
eta : Pshaft/Pin; 
if calcswitch :: 1 
fprintf('part 
(a) :') 
fprintf('\n 
Imain = %g A at angle %g degrees',magImain,angleImain) 
fprintf('\n 
Iaux = %g A at angle %g degrees',magIaux,angleIaux) 
fprintf('\n 
Is = %g A at angle %g degrees',magIs,angleIs) 
fprintf('\n 
Vcap = %g V\n',magVcap) 
fprintf('\npart 
(b) :') 
fprintf('\n 
Tmech = %g N-m',Tmech) 
fprintf('\n 
Pshaft = %g W\n',Pshaft) 
fprintf('\npart 
(c) :') 
fprintf('\n 
Pmain = %g W',Pmain) 
fprintf('\n 
Paux = %g W',Paux) 
fprintf('\n 
Pin = %g W',Pin) 
fprintf('\n 
eta = %g percent\n\n',100*eta) 
else 
plot (speed, Tmech) 
xlabel('speed 
Jr/mini ') 
ylabel('<Tmech> 
[N-m] ') 
end 
end %end of for m loop 
end %end of for calcswitch loop 
)ractice 
Problem 
9.1 
(a) Calculate the efficiency of the single-phase induction motor of Example 9.5 operating at a 
speed of 3475 r/min. (b) Search over the range of capacitor values from 25 #F to 45 #F to find 
the capacitor value which will give the maximum efficiency at this speed and the corresponding 
efficiency. 
Solution 
a. 86.4% 
b. 41.8 #E 86.6% 
9.5 
SUMMARY 
One theme of this chapter is a continuation of the induction-machine theory of Chap- 
ter 6 and its application to the single-phase induction motor. This theory is expanded 
by a step-by-step reasoning process from the simple revolving-field theory of the sym- 
metrical polyphase induction motor. The basic concept is the resolution of the stator- 
mmf wave into two constant-amplitude traveling waves revolving around the air gap 
at synchronous speed in opposite directions. If the slip for the forward field is s, 

9.6 
Problems 
489 
then that for the backward field is (2 - s). Each of these component fields produces 
induction-motor action, just as in a symmetrical polyphase motor. From the view- 
point of the stator, the reflected effects of the rotor can be visualized and expressed 
quantitatively in terms of simple equivalent circuits. The ease with which the internal 
reactions can be accounted for in this manner is the essential reason for the usefulness 
of the double-revolving-field theory. 
For a single-phase winding, the forward- and backward-component mmf waves 
are equal, and their amplitude is half the maximum value of the peak of the stationary 
pulsating mmf produced by the winding. The resolution of the stator mmf into its 
forward and backward components then leads to the physical concept of the single- 
phase motor described in Section 9.1 and finally to the quantitative theory developed 
in Section 9.3 and to the equivalent circuits of Fig. 9.11. 
In most cases, single-phase induction motors are actually two-phase motors with 
unsymmetrical windings operated off of a single phase source. Thus to complete 
our understanding of single-phase induction motors, it is necessary to examine the 
performance of two-phase motors. Hence, the next step is the application of the 
double-revolving-field picture to a symmetrical two-phase motor with unbalanced 
applied voltages, as in Section 9.4.1. This investigation leads to the symmetrical- 
component concept, whereby an unbalanced two-phase system of currents or volt- 
ages can be resolved into the sum of two balanced two-phase component systems 
of opposite phase sequence. Resolution of the currents into symmetrical-component 
systems is equivalent to resolving the stator-mmf wave into its forward and backward 
components, and therefore the internal reactions of the rotor for each symmetrical- 
component system are the same as those which we have already investigated. A very 
similar reasoning process, not considered here, leads to the well-known three-phase 
symmetrical-component method for treating problems involving unbalanced opera- 
tion of three-phase rotating machines. The ease with which the rotating machine can 
be analyzed in terms of revolving-field theory is the chief reason for the usefulness 
of the symmetrical-component method. 
Finally, the chapter ends in Section 9.4.2 with the development of an analytical 
theory for the general case of a two-phase induction motor with unsymmetrical wind- 
ings. This theory permits us to analyze the operation of single-phase motors running 
off both their main and auxiliary windings. 
9.6 
PROBLEMS 
9.1 A 1-kW, 120-V, 60-Hz capacitor-start motor has the following parameters for 
the main and auxiliary windings (at starting): 
Zmain = 4.82 + j7.25 
Zau x --- 7.95 + j9.21 f2 
main winding 
auxiliary winding 
a. Find the magnitude and the phase angles of the currents in the two 
windings when rated voltage is applied to the motor under starting 
conditions. 

490 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
b. 
Find the value of starting capacitance that will place the main- and 
auxiliary-winding currents in time quadrature at starting. 
c. 
Repeat part (a) when the capacitance of part (b) is inserted in series with 
the auxiliary winding. 
9.2 Repeat Problem 9.1 if the motor is operated from a 120-V, 50-Hz source. 
9.3 Given the applied electrical frequency and the corresponding impedances 
Zmain and Zaux of the main and auxiliary windings at starting, write a 
MATLAB script to calculate the value of the capacitance, which, when 
connected in series with the starting winding, will produce a starting winding 
current which will lead that of the main winding by 90 ° . 
9.4 Repeat Example 9.2 for slip of 0.045. 
9.5 A 500-W, four-pole, 115-V, 60-Hz single-phase induction motor has the 
following parameters (resistances and reactances in f2/phase): 
R l,main = 1.68 
R2,main = 2.96 
Xl,main ~-- 1.87 
Xm,main = 60.6 
X2,main = 1.72 
Core loss = 38 W 
Friction and windage = 11.8 W 
Find the speed, stator current, torque, power output, and efficiency when the 
motor is operating at rated voltage and a slip of 4.2 percent. 
9.6 Write a MATLAB script to produce plots of the speed and efficiency of the 
single-phase motor of Problem 9.5 as a function of output power over the 
range 0 < Pout < 500 W. 
9.7 At standstill the rms currents in the main and auxiliary windings of a 
four-pole, capacitor-start induction motor are/main = 20.7 A and 
laux = 11.1 A respectively. The auxiliary-winding current leads the 
main-winding current by 53 ° . The effective turns per pole (i.e., the number of 
turns corrected for the effects of winding distribution) are Nmain -- 42 and 
Naux = 68. The windings are in space quadrature. 
a. 
Determine the peak amplitudes of the forward and backward stator-mmf 
waves. 
b. 
Suppose it were possible to adjust the magnitude and phase of the 
auxiliary-winding current. What magnitude and phase would produce a 
purely forward mmf wave? 
9.8 Derive an expression in terms of a2,main for the nonzero speed of a 
single-phase induction motor at which the internal torque is zero. (See 
Example 9.2.) 
9.9 The equivalent-circuit parameters of an 8-kW, 230-V, 60-Hz, four-pole, 
two-phase, squirrel-cage induction motor in ohms per phase are 
Rl = 0.253 
Xl = 1.14 
Xm = 32.7 
R2 = 0.446 
X2 = 1.30 
This motor is operated from an unbalanced two-phase, 60-Hz source 
whose phase voltages are, respectively, 223 and 190 V, the smaller voltage 
leading the larger by 73 °. For a slip of 0.045, find 
a. 
the phase currents in each of the windings and 
b. 
the internal mechanical power. 

9.6 
Problems 
491 
9.10 Consider the two-phase motor of Example 9.3. 
a. 
Find the starting torque for the conditions specified in the example. 
b. 
Compare the result of part (a) with the starting torque which the motor 
would produce if 220-V, balanced two-phase voltages were applied to 
the motor. 
c. 
Show that if the stator voltages f'~ and Vbeta of a two-phase induction 
motor are in time quadrature but unequal in magnitude, the starting 
torque is the same as that developed when balanced two-phase voltages 
of magnitude v/V~ V~ are applied. 
9.11 The induction motor of Problem 9.9 is supplied from an unbalanced two- 
phase source by a four-wire feeder having an impedance Z = 0.32 + 
j 1.5 f2/phase. The source voltages can be expressed as 
fe d -- 235L0 ° 
f'~ = 212/78 ° 
For a slip of 5 percent, show that the induction-motor terminal voltages 
correspond more nearly to a balanced two-phase set than do those of the 
source. 
9.12 The equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per phase referred to the stator for 
a two-phase, 1.0 kW, 220-V, four-pole, 60-Hz, squirrel-cage induction motor 
are given below. The no-load rotational loss is 65 W. 
R1 = 0.78 
R2 = 4.2 
X1 = X2 = 5.3 
Xm = 93 
a. 
The voltage applied to phase c~ is 220L0 ° V and that applied to phase/3 is 
220L65 ° V. Find the net air-gap torque at a slip s = 0.035. 
b. 
What is the starting torque with the applied voltages of part (a)? 
c. 
The applied voltages are readjusted so that f'~ - 220L65 ° V and 
f't~ -- 220L90° V. Full load on the machine occurs at s = 0.048. At what 
slip does maximum internal torque occur? What is the value of the 
maximum torque? 
d. 
While the motor is running as in part (c), phase fl is open-circuited. What 
is the power output of the machine at a slip s = 0.04? 
e. 
What voltage appears across the open phase-fl terminals under the 
conditions of part (d)? 
9.13 A 120-V, 60-Hz, capacitor-run, two-pole, single-phase induction motor has 
the following parameters: 
Lmain = 47.2 mH 
Rmain = 0.38 
Laux = 102 mH 
Raux -- 1.78 f2 
Lr = 2.35/zH 
Rr = 17.2/zf2 
Lmain,r -- 0.342 mH 
Laux,r = 0.530 mH 
You may assume that the motor has 48 W of core loss and 23 W of rotational 
losses. The motor windings are connected with the polarity shown in Fig. 9.17 
with a 40 #F run capacitor. 

492 
CHAPTER 9 
Single- and Two-Phase Motors 
a. 
Calculate the motor starting torque. 
With the motor operating at a speed of 3490 r/min, calculate 
b. 
the main and auxiliary-winding currents, 
c. 
the total line current and the motor power factor, 
d. 
the output power and 
e. 
the electrical input power and the efficiency. 
Note that this problem is most easily solved using MATLAB. 
9.14 Consider the single-phase motor of Problem 9.13. Write a MATLAB script 
to search over the range of capacitor values from 25 #F to 75 #F to find 
the value which will maximize the motor efficiency at a motor speed of 
3490 r/min. What is the corresponding maximum efficiency? 
9.15 In order to raise the starting torque, the single-phase induction motor of 
Problem 9.13 is to be converted to a capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor. 
Write a MATLAB script to find the minimum value of starting capacitance 
required to raise the starting torque to 0.5 N. m. 
9.16 Consider the single-phase induction motor of Example 9.5 operating over the 
speed range 3350 r/min to 3580 r/min. 
a. 
Use MATLAB to plot the output power over the given speed range. 
b. 
Plot the efficiency of the motor over this speed range. 
c. 
On the same plot as that of part (b), plot the motor efficiency if the run 
capacitor is increased to 45/zE 

Introduction to Power 
Electronics 
U 
ntil the last few decades of the twentieth century, ac machines tended to be em- 
ployed primarily as single-speed devices. Typically they were operated from 
fixed-frequency sources (in most cases this was the 50- or 60-Hz power grid). 
In the case of motors, control of motor speed requires a variable-frequency source, 
and such sources were not readily available. Thus, applications requiting variable 
speed were serviced by dc machines, which can provide highly flexible speed con- 
trol, although at some cost since they are more complex, more expensive, and require 
more maintenance than their ac counterparts. 
The availability of solid-state power switches changed this picture immensely. 
It is now possible to build power electronics capable of supplying the variable- 
voltage/current, variable-frequency drive required to achieve variable-speed per- 
formance from ac machines. Ac machines have now replaced dc machines in 
many traditional applications, and a wide range of new applications have been 
developed. 
As is the case with electromechanics and electric machinery, power electronics 
is a discipline which can be mastered only through significant study. Many books 
have been written on this subject, a few of which are listed in the bibliography at the 
end of this chapter. It is clear that a single chapter in a book on electric machinery 
cannot begin to do justice to this topic. Thus our objectives here are limited. Our goal 
is to provide an overview of power electronics and to show how the basic building 
blocks can be assembled into drive systems for ac and dc machines. We will not focus 
much attention on the detailed characteristics of particular devices or on the many 
details required to design practical drive systems. In Chapter 11, we will build on 
the discussion of this chapter to examine the characteristics of some common drive 
systems. 
493 

494 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
10.1 
POWER SWITCHES 
Common to all power-electronic systems are switching devices. Ideally, these devices 
control current much like valves control the flow of fluids: turn them "ON," and they 
present no resistances to the flow of current; turn them "OFF," and no current flow is 
possible. Of course, practical switches are not ideal, and their specific characteristics 
significantly affect their applicability in any given situation. Fortunately, the essen- 
tial performance of most power-electronic circuits can be understood assuming the 
switches to be ideal. This is the approach which we will adopt in this book. In this 
section we will briefly discuss some of the common switching devices and present 
simplified, idealized models for them. 
10.1.1 
Diodes 
Diodes constitute the simplest of power switches. The general form of the v-i char- 
acteristics of a diode is shown in Fig. 10.1. 
The essential features of a diode are captured in the idealized v-i characteristic 
of Fig. 10.2a. The symbol used to represent a diode is shown in Fig. 10.2b along 
with the reference directions for the current i and voltage v. Based upon terminology 
developed when rectifier diodes were electron tubes, diode current flows into the 
anode and flows out of the cathode. 
VRB 
Figure 10.1 
i 
I 
VF 
v-i characteristic of a diode. 
Diode ON 
Diode OFF 
Anode 
i 
> 
"~ IN 
v 
4- 
v 
Cathode 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.2 (a) v-i characteristic of an ideal diode. 
(b) Diode symbol. 

10.1 Power Switches 
495 
We can see that the ideal diode blocks current flow when the voltage is negative 
(i = 0 for v < 0) and passes positive current without voltage drop (v - 0 for i > 0). 
We will refer to the negative-voltage region as the diode's OFF state and the positive- 
current region as the diode's ON state. Comparison with the v-i characteristic shows 
that a practical diode varies from an ideal diode in that: 
II 
There is a finite forward voltage drop, labeled VF in Fig. 10.1, for positive 
current flow. For low-power devices, this voltage range is typically on the order 
of 0.6-0.7 V while for high-power devices it can exceed 3 V. 
n 
Corresponding to this voltage drop is a power dissipation. Practical diodes have 
a maximum power dissipation (and a corresponding maximum current) which 
must not be exceeded. 
II 
A practical diode is limited in the negative voltage it can withstand. Known 
as the reverse-breakdown voltage and labeled VRB in Fig. 10.1, this is the 
maximum reverse voltage that can be applied to the diode before it starts to 
conduct reverse current. 
The diode is the simplest power switch in that it cannot be controlled; it simply 
turns ON when positive current begins to flow and turns OFF when the current attempts 
to reverse. In spite of this simple behavior, it is used in a wide variety of applications, 
the most common of which is as a rectifier to convert ac to dc. 
The basic performance of a diode can be illustrated by the simple example shown 
in Example 10.1. 
Consider the half-wave rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.3a in which a resistor R is supplied by 
a voltage source Vs(t)= V0 sin o)t through a diode. Assume the diode to be ideal. (a) Find 
the resistor voltage VR(t) and current iR(t). (b) Find the dc average resistor voltage Vdc and 
current/de. 
EXAMPLE 10.1 
+ 
Vs(t) ( ) 
hE! iR(t) 
Vo 
v- 
~'1 
~" \ 
2~- 
~t 
I 
vdtlX 
/ 
%~ 
I I 
ii 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.3 (a) Half-wave rectifier circuit for Example 10.1. (b) Resistor voltage. 

496 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
II Solution 
a. This is a nonlinear problem in that it is not possible to write an analytic expression for 
the v-i characteristic of the ideal diode. However, it can readily be solved using the 
method-of-assumed-states in which, for any given value of the source voltage, the diode is 
alternately assumed to be ON (a short-circuit) or OFF (an open-circuit) and the current is 
found. One of the two solutions will violate the v-i characteristic of the diode (i.e., there 
will be negative current flow through the short-circuit or positive voltage across the 
open-circuit) and must be discarded; the remaining solution will be the correct one. 
Following the above procedure, we find that the solution is given by 
Vs(t) = V0 sincot 
Vs(t) >_ 0 
VR(t) = 
0 
Vs(t) < 0 
This voltage is plotted in Fig. 10.3b. The current is identical in form and is found simply 
as iR(t) = VR(t)/R. The terminology half-wave rectification is applied to this system 
because voltage is applied to the resistor during only the half cycle for which the supply 
voltage waveform is positive. 
b. The dc or average value of the voltage waveform is equal to 
~r 
oJf ~ 
V0 
V~c = -- 
Vo sin (cot) dt = 
and hence the dc current through the resistor is equal to 
Vo 
Ijc = zrR 
Calculate the average voltage across the resistor of Fig. 10.3 if the sinusoidal voltage source 
of Example 10.1 is replaced by a source of the same frequency but which produces a square 
wave of zero average value and peak-peak amplitude 2 V0. 
Solution 
Vjc = 
2 
10.1.2 
Silicon Controlled Rectifiers and TRIACs 
The characteristics of a silicon controlled rectifier, or SCR, also referred to as a 
thyristor, are similar to those of a diode. However, in addition to an anode and a 
cathode, the SCR has a third terminal known as the gate. Figure 10.4 shows the form 
of the v-i characteristics of a typical SCR. 
As is the case with a diode, the SCR will turn ON only if the anode is positive 
with respect to the cathode. Unlike a diode, the SCR also requires a pulse of current 
iG into the gate to turn ON. Note however that once the SCR turns ON, the gate signal 

10.1 
Power Switches 
497 
VRB 
i 
ON state 
I 
VF 
Figure 10.4 
v-i characteristic of an SCR. 
v~ 
OFF state 
~v 
Anode 
Cathode 
-k- v 
-- 
i "- 
fiG 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.5 (a) Idealized SCR v-i characteristic. 
(b) SCR symbol. 
can be removed and the SCR will remain ON until the SCR current drops below a 
small value referred to as the holding current, at which point it will turn OFF just as 
a diode does. 
As can be seen from Fig. 10.4, the ON-state characteristic of an SCR is similar to 
that of a diode, with a forward voltage drop VF and a reverse-breakdown voltage VRB. 
When the SCR is OFF, it does not conduct current over its normal operating range 
of positive voltage. However it will conduct if this voltage exceeds a characteristic 
voltage, labeled VFB in the figure and known as the forward-breakdown voltage. As 
is the case for a diode, a practical SCR is limited in its current-carrying capability. 
For our purposes, we will simplify these characteristics and assume the SCR 
to have the idealized characteristics of Fig. 10.5a. Our idealized SCR appears as an 
open-circuit when it is OFF and a short-circuit when it is ON. It also has a holding 
current of zero; i.e., it will remain ON until the current drops to zero and attempts to 
go negative. The symbol used to represent an SCR is shown in Fig. 10.5b. 
Care must be taken in the design of gate-drive circuitry to insure that an SCR 
turns on properly; e.g., the gate pulse must inject enough charge to fully turn on the 
SCR, and so forth. Similarly, an additional circuit, typically referred to as a snubber 
circuit, may be required to protect an SCR from being turned on inadvertently, such as 
might occur if the rate of rise of the anode-to-cathode voltage is excessive. Although 

498 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
EXAMPLE 10.2 
these details must be properly accounted for to achieve successful SCR performance 
in practical circuits, they are not essential for the present discussion. 
The basic performance of an SCR can be understood from the following example. 
Consider the half-wave rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.6 in which a resistor R is supplied by a 
voltage source vs(t) - 
Vo sin ~ot through an SCR. Note that this is identical to the circuit of 
Example 10.1, with the exception that the diode has been replaced by an SCR. 
Assume that a pulse of gate current is applied to the SCR at time to (0 < to < zr/w) 
following each zero-crossing of the source voltage, as shown in Fig. 10.7a. It is common to 
describe this firing-delay time in terms of a firing-delay angle, do - 
Ogto. Find the resistor 
voltage VR(t) as a function of or0. Assume the SCR to be ideal and that the gate pulses supply 
sufficient charge to properly turn ON the SCR. 
II Solution 
The solution follows that of Example 10.1 with the exception that, independent of the polarity 
of the voltage across it, once the SCR turns OFF, it will remain OFF until both the SCR voltage 
becomes positive and a pulse of gate current is applied. Once a gate pulse has been applied, 
the method-of-assumed-states can be used to solve for the state of the SCR. 
Following the above procedure, we find the solution is given by 
0 
Vs(t) > 0 
(prior to the gate pulse) 
VR(t) "-- 
Vs(t) = Vo sin wt 
Vs(t) > 0 
(following the gate pulse) 
0 
Vs(t) < 0 
This voltage is plotted in Fig. 10.7b. Note that this system produces a half-wave rectified 
voltage similar to that of the diode system of Example 10.1. However, in this case, the dc value 
of the rectified voltage can be controlled by controlling the timing of the gate pulse. Specifically, 
it is given by 
V0 ( 1 -t- cos c~0) 
V~c=~ 
Note that when there is no delay in firing the SCR (d0 = 0), this system produces a dc 
voltage of Vo/zr, equal to that of the diode rectifier system of Example 10.1. However, as the 
gate pulse of the SCR is delayed (i.e., by increasing d0), the dc voltage can be reduced. In 
fact, by delaying the gate pulse a full half cycle (c~0 = Jr) the dc voltage can be reduced to 
+ 
v~(t) ( ) 
+ 
R 
__VR(t) 
Figure 10.6 
Half-wave SCR 
rectifier circuit for Example 10.2. 

Vo 
Gate pulses 
UR(I) 
vo 
10.1 
Power Switches 
499 
(a) 
r 
O~ 0 
7r 
2zr + % 
3zr 
0 
oat 
(b) 
Figure 10.7 
(a) Gate pulses for Example 10.2. (b) Resistor voltage. 
zero. This system is known as a phase-controlled rectifier because the dc output voltage can 
be varied by controlling the phase angle of the gate pulse relative to the zero crossing of the 
source voltage. 
Calculate the resistor average voltage as a function of the delay angle or0 if the sinusoidal source 
of Example 10.2 is replaced by a source of the same frequency, but which produces a square 
wave of zero average value and peak-peak amplitude 2 V0. 
Solution 
 0(o0) 
Vac=T 
1---Jr 
Example 10.2 shows that the SCR provides a significant advantage over the 
diode in systems where voltage control is desired. However, this advantage comes at 
the additional expense of the SCR as well as the circuitry required to produce the gate 
pulses used to fire the SCR. 

500 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
EXAMPLE 10.3 
OFF state 
ON state 
Jr- 
V 
B 
~fi G 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.8 (a) Idealized TRIAC v-i characteristic. 
(b) TRIAC symbol. 
Another phase-controlled device is the TRIAC, which behaves much like two 
back-to-back SCRs sharing a common gate. The idealized v-i characteristic of a 
TRIAC is shown in Fig. 10.8a and its symbol in Fig. 10.8b. As with an SCR, TRIACs 
can be turned ON by the application of a pulse of current at their gate. Unlike an SCR, 
provided the current pulses inject sufficient charge, both positive and negative gate 
current pulses can be used to turn ON a TRIAC. 
The use of a TRIAC is illustrated in the following example. 
Consider the circuit of Fig. 10.9 in which the SCR of Example 10.2 has been replaced by a 
TRIAC. 
Assume again that a short gate pulse is applied to the SCR at a delay angle ct0 (0 < ct0 < Jr) 
following each zero-crossing of the source voltage, as shown in Fig. 10.10a. Find the resistor 
voltage VR (t) and its rms value VR.rms as a function of ct0. Assume the TRIAC to be ideal and 
that the gate pulses inject sufficient charge to properly turn it ON. 
II Solution 
The solution to this example is similar to that of Example 10.2 with the exception that the 
TRIAC, which will permit current to flow in both directions, turns on each half cycle of the 
source-voltage waveform. 
f0 
(prior to the gate pulse) 
OR(t) 
vs(t) = Vo sin rot 
(following the gate pulse) 
Unlike the rectification of Example 10.2, in this case the resistor voltage, shown in 
Fig. 10.10b, has no dc component. However, its rms value varies with c~0: 
VR 
.... 
-- 
V0 
-- 
sin 2 (wt) dt 
7l" 
= Vo 
2 
27r + ~ 
sin (2ao) 

10.1 
Power Switches 
S01 
) 
Figure 10.9 Circuit for 
Example 10.3. 
+ 
Vs(t) ( 
l 
Gate pulses 
v0 
+ 
R 
__VR(t) 
(a) 
VR(t) 
Vo 
Ot 0 
rr+c~ o 
i 
0 
Jr 2zr + ot 0 
3zr 
cot 
(b) 
Figure 10.10 
(a) Gate pulses for Example 10.3. (b) Resistor voltage. 
Notice that when or0 = 0, the TRIAC is ON all the time and it appears that the resistor 
is connected directly to the voltage source. In this case, VR,rms -- Vo/~ as expected. As or0 is 
increased to Jr, the rms voltage decreases towards zero. 
This simple type of controller can be applied to an electric light bulb (in which case it 
serves as light dimmer) as well as to a resistive heater. It is also used to vary the speed of a 

502 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
universal motor and finds widespread application as a speed-controller in small ac hand tools, 
such as hand drills, as well as in small appliances, such as electric mixers, where continuous 
speed variation is desired. 
~ractice Problem 10.; 
Find the rms resistor voltage for the system of Example 10.3 if the sinusoidal source has been 
replaced by a source of the same frequency but which produces a square wave of zero average 
value and peak-peak amplitude 2 V0. 
Solution 
VR'rms = V° V/(1 - c~°) 
zr 
10.1.3 
Transistors 
For power-electronic circuits where control of voltages and currents is required, 
power transistors have become a common choice for the controllable switch. Al- 
though a number of types are available, we will consider only two: the metal- 
oxide-semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET) and the insulated-gate bipolar 
transistor (IGBT). 
MOSFETs and IGBTs are both three-terminal devices. Figure 10.11 a shows the 
symbols for n- and p-channel MOSFETs, while Fig. 10.1 l b shows the symbol for 
n- and p-channel IGBTs. In the case of the MOSFET, the three terminals are referred 
to as the source, drain, and gate, while in the case of the IGBT the corresponding 
Gate 
Drain 
Source 
n-channel 
Gate 
Drain 
Source 
p-channel 
Gate 
Collector 
Emitter 
n-channel 
(a) 
(b) 
Gate 
Collector 
Emitter 
p-channel 
Figure 10.11 
(a) Symbols for n- and p-channel MOSFETs. 
(b) Symbols for n- and p-channel IGBTs. 

10.1 
Power Switches 
503 
terminals are the emitter, collector, and gate. For the MOSFET, the control signal 
is the gate-source voltage, vGS. For the IGBT, it is the gate-emitter voltage, VGE. In 
both the MOSFET and the IGBT, the gate electrode is capacitively coupled to the 
remainder of the device and appears as an open circuit at dc, drawing no current, and 
drawing only a small capacitive current under ac operation. 
Figure 10.12a shows the v-i characteristic of a typical n-channel MOSFET. The 
characteristic of the corresponding p-channel device looks the same, with the ex- 
ception that the signs of the voltages and the currents are reversed. Thus, in an 
n-channel device, current flows from the drain to the source when the drain-source and 
(VDs)RB 
Ohmic 
>;< 
I 
! 
J 
/ 
(VGS- VT) -- VDS 
Active 
VGS 
I 0 
\Vcs_ < VT 
(a) 
J 
__..J 
J 
Zl 
I 
> 
(%S)FB 
VDs 
(VcE)RB 
( 
, 
\ 
0 (VCE)sat 
VG E _< VT 
VGE 
(b) 
J 
J 
J 
J 
J 
zz 
I 
(VcE)FB 
Figure 10.12 (a) Typical v-i characteristic for an n-channel MOSFET. 
(b) Typical v-i characteristic for an n-channel IGBT. 
1)CE 

504 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
gate-source voltages are positive, while in a p-channel device current flows from the 
source to the drain when the drain-source and gate-source voltages are negative. 
Note the following features of the MOSFET and IGBT characteristics: 
m 
In the case of the MOSFET, for positive drain-source voltage vDS, no drain 
current will flow for values of VGS less than a threshold voltage which we will 
refer to by the symbol VT. Once vGS exceeds VT, the drain current iD increases 
as VGS is increased. 
In the case of the IGBT, for positive collector-emitter voltage vCE, no 
collector current will flow for values of VGE less than a threshold voltage VT. 
Once VGE exceeds VT, the collector current ic increases as VGE is increased. 
l 
In the case of the MOSFET, no drain current flows for negative drain-source 
voltage. 
In the case of the IGBT, no collector current flows for negative collector- 
emitter voltage. 
m 
Finally, the MOSFET will fail if the drain-source voltage exceeds its 
breakdown limits; in Fig. 10.12a, the forward breakdown voltage is indicated 
by the symbol (VDS)FB while the reverse breakdown voltage is indicated by the 
symbol ( VDS)RB. 
Similarly, the IGBT will fail if the collector-emitter voltage exceeds its 
breakdown values; in Fig. 10.12b, the forward breakdown voltage is indicated 
by the symbol (VcE)FB while the reverse breakdown voltage is indicated by the 
symbol (VcE)R B . 
m 
Although not shown in the figure, a MOSFET will fail due to excessive 
gate-source voltage as well as excessive drain current which leads to excessive 
power dissipation in the device. Similarly an IGBT will fail due to excessive 
gate-emitter voltage and excessive collector current. 
Note that for small values of 1)CE , the IGBT voltage approaches a constant value, 
independent of the drain current. This saturation voltage, labeled ( VCE)sat in the figure, 
is on the order of a volt or less in small devices and a few volts in high-power devices. 
Correspondingly, in the MOSFET, for small values of Vos, VDS is proportional to the 
drain current and the MOSFET behaves as a small resistance whose value decreases 
with increasing vGS. 
Fortunately, for our purposes, the details of these characteristics are not impor- 
tant. As we will see in the following example, with a sufficient large gate signal, the 
voltage drop across both the MOSFET and the IGBT can be made quite small. In this 
case, these devices can be modeled as a short circuit between the drain and the source 
in the case of the MOSFET and between the collector and the emitter in the case 
of the IGBT. Note, however, these "switches" when closed carry only unidirectional 
current, and hence we will model them as a switch in series with an ideal diode. This 
ideal-switch model is shown in Fig. 10.13a. 
In many cases, these devices are commonly protected by reverse-biased protec- 
tion diodes connected between the drain and the source (in the case of a MOSFET) 
or between the collector and emitter (in the case of an IGBT). These protection 

10.1 
Power Switches 
505 
G,B 
0 
D,C 
D,C 
o---- 
/ IT 
S,E 
S,E 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.13 
(a) Ideal-switch model for a MOSFET or 
an IGBT showing the series ideal diode which represents 
the unidirectional-current device characteristic. 
(b) Ideal-switch model for devices which include a 
reverse-biased protection diode. The symbols G, D, and 
S apply to the MOSFET while the symbols B, C, and E 
apply to the IBGT. 
devices are often included as integral components within the device package. If these 
protection diodes are included, there is actually no need to include the series diode, 
in which case the model can be reduced to that of Fig. 10.13b. 
Consider the circuit of Fig. 10.14a. Here we see an IGBT which is to be used to control 
the current through the resistor R as supplied from a dc source V0. Assume that the IGBT 
characteristics are those of Fig. 10.12b and that V0 is significantly greater than the saturation 
voltage. Show a graphical procedure that can be used to find VCE as a function of V~E. 
EXAMPLE 10.4 
+ ) 
ic} 
R 
+ 
VGE 
R 
(VCE)sat 
Coa 
,ine 
i 
_ 
(a) 
(b) 
VGE 
"'-LA 
vo 
Figure 10.14 
(a) Circuit for Example 10.4. (b) IGBT characteristic showing load line 
and operating point. 
r 
VCE 

506 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
II Solution 
Writing KVL for the circuit of Fig. 10.14a gives 
V0 = ic R + UCE 
Solving for ic gives 
iC --- (Vo- Vc~.) 
Note that this linear relationship, referred to as the load line, represents a constraint 
imposed by the external circuit on the relationship between the IGBT terminal variables ic and 
VCE. The corresponding constraint imposed by the IGBT itself is given by the v-i characteristic 
of Fig. 10.12b. 
The operating point of the circuit is that point at which both these constraints are simulta- 
neously satisfied. It can be found most easily by plotting the load line on the v-i relationship of 
the IGBT. This is done in Fig. 10.14b. The operating point is then found from the intersection 
of the load line with the v-i characteristic of the IGBT. 
Consider the operating point labeled A in Fig. 10.14b. This is the operating point corre- 
sponding to values of VGE less than or equal to the threshold voltage VT. Under these conditions, 
the IGBT is OFF, there is no collector current, and hence VCE = V0. As VGE is increased past 
VT, collector current begins to flow, the operating point begins to climb up the load line, and 
VCE decreases; the operating point labeled B is a typical example. 
Note however that as VGE is further increased, the operating point approaches that portion 
of the IGBT characteristic for which the curves crowd together (see the operating point labeled 
C in Fig. 10.14b). Once this point is reached, any further increase in VGE will result in only a 
minimal decrease in VCE. Under this condition, the voltage across the IGBT is approximately 
equal to the saturation voltage (VCE)sat. 
If the IGBT of this example were to be replaced by a MOSFET the result would be similar. 
As the gate-source voltage Vcs is increased, a point is reached where the voltage drop across 
approaches a small constant value. This can be seen by plotting the load line on the MOSFET 
characteristic of Fig. 10.12a. 
The load line intersects the vertical axis at a collector current of ic -- Vo/R. Note that the 
larger the resistance, the lower this intersection and hence the smaller the value of VGE required 
to saturate the transistor. Thus, in systems where the transistor is to be used as a switch, it 
is necessary to insure that the device is capable of carrying the required current and that the 
gate-drive circuit is capable of supplying sufficient drive to the gate. 
Example 10.4 shows that when a sufficiently large gate voltage is applied, the 
voltage drop across a power transistor can be reduced to a small value. Under these 
conditions, the IGBT will look like a constant voltage while the MOSFET will appear 
as a small resistance. In either case, the voltage drop will be small, and it is sufficient 
to approximate it as a closed switch (i.e., the transistor will be ON). When the gate 
drive is removed (i.e., reduced below VT), the switch will open and the transistor will 
turn OFE 

10.2 
Rectification Conversion of AC to DC 
507 
10.2 
RECTIFICATION: 
CONVERSION 
OF AC TO DC 
The power input to many motor-drive systems comes from a constant-voltage, 
constant-frequency source (e.g., a 50- or 60-Hz power system), while the output must 
provide variable-voltage and/or variable-frequency power to the motor. Typically such 
systems convert power in two stages: the input ac is first rectified to dc, and the dc 
is then converted to the desired ac output waveform. We will thus begin with a dis- 
cussion of rectifier circuits. We will then discuss inverters, which convert dc to ac, in 
Section 10.3. 
10.2.1 
Single-Phase, Full-Wave Diode Bridge 
Example 10.1 illustrates a half-wave rectifier circuit. Such rectification is typically 
used only in small, low-cost, low-power applications. Full-wave rectifiers are much 
more common. Consider the full-wave rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.15a. Here the resis- 
tor R is supplied from a voltage source Vs (t) = V0 sin cot through four diodes connected 
in a full-wave bridge configuration. 
If we assume the diodes to be ideal, we can use the method-of-assumed states to 
show that the allowable diode states are: 
Diodes D1 and D3 ON, diodes D2 and D4 OFF for Vs(t) > 0 
Diodes D2 and D4 ON, diodes D1 and D3 OFF for Vs(t) < 0 
The resistor voltage, plotted in Fig. 10.15b, is then given by 
Vs(t)- 
V0sincot 
Vs(t)>_O 
VR(t) -- 
--Vs(t) = -V0sincot 
Vs(t) < 0 
(10.1) 
Now notice that the resistor voltage is positive for both polarities of the source volt- 
age, hence the terminology full-wave rectification. The dc or average value of this 
waveform can be seen to be twice that of the half-wave rectified waveform of 
Example 10.1. 
Vdc = (2) 
V0 
(10.2) 
+ 
Vs(t) ( ) 
D1 ~ 
D4 
D2 
D3 
(a) 
VR(t) 
m 
Vo 
/]U 
zr "~ 
/ 2~ 
3zr ~ 
/ 
[ 
"xxx,. ,,/'~s(t) 
(b) 
Figure 10.15 
(a) Full-wave bridge rectifier. (b) Resistor voltage. 
r ogt 

508 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
The rectified waveforms of Figs. 10.3b and 10.15b are clearly not the sort of 
"dc" waveforms that are considered desirable for most applications. Rather, to be 
most useful, the rectified dc should be relatively constant and ripple free. Such a 
waveform can be achieved using a filter capacitor, as illustrated in Example 10.5. 
As shown in Fig. 10.16, a filter capacitor has been added in parallel with the load resistor 
in the full-wave rectifier system of Fig. 10.15. For the purposes of this example, assume that 
Vs(t) = V0 sincot with V0 = ~/~ (120) V, co = (2zr)60 ~ 377 rad/sec and that R = 10 f2 and 
C -- 10 4/.zF. Plot the resistor voltage, VR(t), current, iR(t), and the total bridge current, iB(t). 
+ 
Vs(t) Q 
-I 
D21 
D3 @ 
iB(t) 
c! 
Figure 10.16 
Full-wave bridge rectifier with capacitive 
filter for Example 10.5. 
II Solution 
The addition of the filter capacitor will tend to maintain the resistor voltage VR (t) as the source 
voltage drops. The diodes will remain ON as long as the bridge output current remains positive 
and will switch OFF when this current starts to reverse. 
This example can be readily solved using MATLAB. t Figure 10.17a shows the resistor 
voltage OR (t) plotted along with the rectified source voltage. During the time that the bridge is 
ON, i.e., one pair of diodes is conducting, the resistor voltage is equal to the rectified source 
voltage. When the bridge is OFF, the resistor voltage decays exponentially. 
Notice that because the capacitor is relatively large (the R C time constant is 100 msec 
as compared to the period of the rectified source voltage, which is slightly over 8.3 msec) the 
diodes conduct only for a short amount of time around the peak of the rectified-source-voltage 
waveform. This can be readily seen from the expanded plots of the resistor current and the 
bridge current in Fig. 10.17b. Although the resistor current remains continuous and relatively 
constant, varying between 15.8 and 17 A, the bridge output current consists essentially of a 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

O0 ~ c  
< 
o 
,,A 
~P 
x 
o 
co 
. 
~~ 
~ 
,--v o~ 
~ 
~-~. 
o~ 
,-~ 
< 
o__ 
~= 
~Q 
0 
~ 
0~ 
,-e- 
CT 
Q- 
"-,. --, 
o 
c 
Q- 
o 
I- 
I 
L 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
'I 
l__J 
Source current [A] 
¢.n 
o 
o~ 
o 
o-i 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
i 
i 
i 
i 
Voltage 
I,,O 
¢=, 
o3 
o> 
o 
IX.) 
-I~ 
o3 
oo 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
i 
i 
i 
i 
I 
i 
i 
t 
;:n 
I~ 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 

510 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
current pulse which flows for less than 0.9 msec near the peak of the rectified voltage waveform 
and has a peak value of 250 A. It should be pointed out that the peak current in a practical 
circuit will be smaller than 250 A, being limited by circuit impedances, diode drops, and so on. 
Using MATLAB, it is possible to calculate the rms value of the resistor current to be 
16.4 A while that of the bridge current is 51.8 A. We see therefore that the bridge diodes in 
such a system must be rated for rms currents significantly in excess of that of the load. The data 
sheets for power-supply diodes typically indicate their rms current ratings, specifically with 
these sorts of applications in mind. Such peaked supply currents are characteristic of rectifier 
circuits with capacitive loads and can significantly affect the voltage waveforms on ac power 
systems when they become a significant fraction of the overall system load. 
The ripple voltage in the resistor voltage is defined as the difference between its maximum 
and minimum values. In this example, the maximum value is equal to the peak value of the source 
voltage, or 169.7 V. The minimum value can be found from the MATLAB solution to be 157.8 V. 
Thus the ripple voltage is 11.9 V. Clearly the ripple voltage can be decreased by increasing the 
value of the filter capacitor. Note however that this comes at the expense of increased cost as 
well as shorter current pulses and higher rms current through the rectifier diodes. 
Here is the MATLAB script for Example 10.5. 
clc 
clear 
%parameters 
omega = 2"pi'60; 
R = I0; 
C = 0.01; 
V0 = 120*sqrt(2) ; 
tau : R'C; 
Nmax = 800; 
% diode = 1 when rectifier 
bridge 
is conducting 
diode = 1 ; 
%Here is the loop that does the work. 
for n = l:Nmax+l 
t(n) = (2.5*pi/omega)*(n-1)/Nmax; 
%time 
vs(n) 
= V0*cos(omega*t(n) 
) ; %source voltage 
vrect(n) 
= abs(vs(n) ) ; %full-wave 
rectified 
source voltage 
%Calculations 
if the rectifier 
bridge 
is ON 
if diode == 1 
%If the bridge is ON, the resistor voltage is equal to the rectified 
%source voltage. 
vm(n) 
= vrect(n) ; 
%Check the total current 
out of rectifiers 
if (omega*t(n)) 
<= pi/2. 
iB(n) 
= vR(n) /R - V0*C*omega*sin(omega*t(n) 
) ; 
elseif 
(omega*t(n)) 
<= 3.*pi/2. 

b ~ ~J 
~ 
~ 
~ 
N 
~J 
o\O 
~J 
~h 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
N 
~ 
o\O 
~. 
o\O 
CD 
(I) 
Q~ 
~- 
~- 
< 
o\O 
o\O 
CD 
< 
r~ 
~ 
~. 
o\O 
(1) 
~. 
~ 
~. 
0 
~ 
0 
N 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~J 
0 
~ 
0 
N 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
(D 
~ 
~ 
~- 
~ 
b~ 
~ 
(1) 
:~ 
~ 
0 
0 
~- 
~ 
H 
~ 
t~ 
~ 
t~ 
0 
~ 
~- 
~ 
~ 
0 
0 
C 
H 
~ 
0 
~ 
~- 
~ 
~ 
0 
0 
~ 
~ 
Q~ 
0 
---- --- 
N 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
0 
h~ 
~ 
.---. In 
.--. 
~- 
~ 
cn 
~ 
~Y 
~ 
~ 
~n 
~- 
~ 
~- 
~ 
cn 
~Y 
b ~ 
~- 
:~ 
li 
~ 
~) 
~ 
.---.. ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~) 
h~ 
~ 
0-, 
~" 
~ 
~) 
0 
o 
~ 
o 
-. 
-.. 
o 
0 
.---. 
o 
o 
-., 
-. 
o 
0 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
o 
~- 
15 
o 
< 
~- 
o 
~- 
~ 
~ 
bo 
O 
~- 
~- 
~- 
bo 
O 
~- 
~- 
-.. 
(1) 
- 
H 
d) 
- 
~ 
SS 
. 
ct 
~ 
- 
~ 
o'- 
-. 
o 
~1 
-.---, r.n 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
-..-~ 
r.n 
..,. 
Q 
co 
!D 
(1 
co 
~ 
bo 
c; 
(I) 
~ 
~ 
cr 
o 
~ 
(D 
~ 
(1) 
Q~ 
ct 
~ 
0 
FJ. 
(1) 
0 
cr 
i~. 
(1) 
• - 
" 
0 
~- 
0 
fD 
® 
O~ 
< 
fD 
g~ 
P~ 
® 
P~ 
(I) 
H 
~ 
r~ 
II 
CD 
II 
II 
CD 
~ 
CD 
II 
~ 
CD 
"-" 
~ 
~ 
0 
~ 
-. 
o 
~ 
~ 
i 
,~ ~ 
(I:) 
~ 
o' 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
+ 
i-'- 
o'- 
g~ 
o 
o 
0 
V 
"---" 
~n 
0 
~. 
~. 
i 
LQ 
0 
0 
0 
~ 
~ 
0 
~ 
-. 
0 
b ~ 
CD 
(D 
(I) 
!D 
~ 
Co 
ct 
In 
ct 
~. 
~. 
C; 
r.n 
< 
.-.. 
..-.. 
"4 
~" 
(1) 
0 
0 
"" 
o 
- 
~ 
ID 
i-,- 
.----. 
--- 
~" 
~ 
"--4 
~_. 
0 
~ 
. . . .  
0 
~_~ 
~r 
0 

512 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
Practice Problem 10., 
Use MATLAB to calculate the ripple voltage and rms diode current for the system of Exam- 
ple 10.5 for (a) C = 5 x 104/zF and (b) C = 5 x 103/zF. (Hint: Note that the rms current must 
be calculated over an integral number of cycles of the current waveform). 
Solution 
a. 2.64 V and 79.6 Arms 
b. 21.6 V and 42.8 Arms 
In Example 10.5 we have seen that a capacitor can significantly decrease the 
ripple voltage across a resistive load. However, this comes at the cost of large bridge 
current pulses since the current must be delivered to the capacitor in the short time 
period during which the rectified source voltage is near its peak value. 
Figure 10.18 shows the addition of an inductor L at the output of the bridge, in 
series with the filter capacitor and its load. If the impedance of the inductor is chosen 
to be large compared to that of the capacitor/load combination at the frequency of 
the rectified source voltage, very little of the ac component of the rectified source 
voltage will appear across the capacitor, and thus the resultant L-C filter will pro- 
duce low voltage ripple while drawing a relatively constant current from the diode 
bridge. 
We have seen how the addition of a filter capacitor across a dc load can signifi- 
cantly reduce the ripple voltage seen by the load. In fact, the addition of significant 
capacitance can "stiffen" the rectified voltage to the point that it appears as a constant- 
voltage dc source to a load. In an analogous fashion, an inductor in series with a load 
will reduce the current ripple out of a rectifier. Under these conditions, the rectified 
source will appear as a constant-current dc source to a load. 
The combination of a rectifier and an inductor at the output to supply a constant 
dc current to a load is of significant importance in power-electronic applications. It 
can be used, for example, as the front end of a current-source inverter which can be 
used to supply ac current waveforms to a load. We will investigate the behavior of 
such rectifier systems in the next section. 
+ 
Vs(t) 
D2 1 
D3 
iB(t) 
* l 
C~ 
&~_~ R(t) 
R I o?(t) 
Figure 10.18 
Full-wave bridge rectifier with an L-C filter 
supplying a resistive load. 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
513 
10.2.2 
Single-Phase Rectifier with Inductive Load 
In this section we will examine the performance of a single-phase rectifier driving an 
inductive load. This situation covers both the case where the inductor is included as 
part of the rectifier system as a filter to smooth out current pulses as well as the case 
where the load itself is primarily inductive. 
Let us examine first the half-wave rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.19. Here, the load 
consists of an inductor L in series with a resistor R. The source voltage is equal to 
Vs(t) = V0 cos o)t. 
Consider first the case where L is small (wL << R). In this case, the load looks 
essentially resistive and the load current iL (t) will vary only slightly from the current 
for a purely resistive load as seen in Example 10.1. This current, obtained from a 
detailed analytical solution, is plotted in Fig. 10.20a, along with the current for a 
purely resistive load. 
Note that the effect of the inductance is to decrease both the initial rate of rise 
of the current and the peak current. More significantly, the diode conduction angle 
increases; current flows for longer than the half-period that is the case for a purely 
resistive load. As can be seen in Fig. 10.20a, this effect increases as the inductance 
is increased; current flows for a greater fraction of the cycle, and the peak current as 
well as the current ripple is reduced. 
Figure 10.20b, which shows the inductor voltage, illustrates an important point 
that applies to all situations in which an inductor is subjected to steady-state, periodic 
conditions: the time-averaged voltage across the inductor must equal zero. This can 
be readily seen from the basic v-i relationship for an inductor 
di 
v = L-- 
(10.3) 
dt 
If we consider the operation of an inductor over a period of the excitation fre- 
quency and recognize that, under steady-state conditions, the change in the inductor 
current over that period must equal zero (i.e., it must have the same value at time t at 
the beginning of the period as it does one period later at time t + T), then we can write 
1 ft+T 
-- 
vdt 
i(t + T)-i(T)--O= 
L at 
(10.4) 
iL(t) 
+ 
+ 
R 
Vs(t) 
VL(t) 
-- 
L 
Figure 10.19 
Half-wave rectifier with 
an inductive load. 

514 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
V0 
R 
iL(t) 
0 
7g 
(a) 
I 
r 
2yr 
wt 
Inductor 
voltage 
Increasing L 
0 
~ 
2n" 
o)t 
\ 
(b) 
Figure 10.20 
Effect of increasing the series inductance in the circuit 
of Fig. 10.19 on (a) the load current and (b) the inductor voltage. 
from which we can see that the net volt-seconds (and correspondingly the average 
voltage) across the inductor during a cycle must equal zero 
f 
t+T V dt = 0 
(10.5) 
For this half-wave rectifier, note that as the inductance increases both the ripple 
current and the dc current will decrease. In fact, for large inductance (wL >> R) the 
dc load current will tend towards zero. This can be easily seen by the following 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
515 
argument: 
As the inductance increases, the conduction angle of the diode will increase 
from 180 ° and approach 360 ° for large values of L. 
In the limit of a 360 ° conduction angle, the diode can be replaced by a 
continuous short circuit, in which case the circuit reduces to the ac voltage 
source connected directly across the series combination of the resistor and the 
inductor. 
Under this situation, no dc current will flow since the source is purely ac. In 
addition, since the impedance Z = R + jwL becomes large with large L, the 
ac (tipple) current will also tend to zero. 
Figure 10.21a shows a simple modification which can be made to the half-wave 
rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.19. The free-wheeling diode D2 serves as an alternate path 
for inductor current. 
To understand the behavior of this circuit, consider the condition when the source 
voltage is positive, and the rectifier diode D 1 is ON. The equivalent circuit for this 
operating condition is shown in Fig. 10.2 lb. Note that under this condition, the volt- 
age across diode D2 is equal to the negative of the source voltage and diode D2 is 
turned OFE 
This operating condition will remain in effect as long as the source voltage is 
positive. However, as soon as the source voltage begins to go negative, the voltage 
across diode D2 will begin to go positive and it will turn ON. Since the load is 
Jr- VD1- 
iL(I) 
D1 
+ 
+ 
-- 
R 
+ 
Vs(t) 
D2 
VD2 
VL(t) 
Vs(t) 
-- 
+ 
L 
-- 
(a) 
iL(t) 
VD2 
+ 
(b) 
+ 
R 
VL(t) 
L 
+ 
Vs(t) 
q- VD1 -- 
(c) 
+ 
R 
VL(/) 
L 
Figure 10.21 
(a) Half-wave rectifier with an inductive load and a free-wheeling diode. 
(b) Equivalent circuit when Vs(t) > 0 and diode D1 is conducting. (c) Equivalent circuit 
when Vs(t) < 0 and the free-wheeling diode D2 is conducting. 

516 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
inductive, a positive load current will be flowing at this time, and that load current 
will immediately transfer to the short circuit corresponding to diode D2. At the same 
time, the current through diode D 1 will immediately drop to zero, diode D 1 will be 
reverse biased by the source voltage, and it will turn OFF. This operating condition is 
shown in Fig. 10.21 c. Thus, the diodes in this circuit alternately switch ON and OFF 
each half cycle: D1 is ON when Vs(t) is positive, and D2 is ON when it is negative. 
Based upon this discussion, we see that the voltage VL (t) across the load (equal 
to the negative of the voltage across diode D2) is a half-wave rectified version of 
Vs(t) as seen in Fig. 10.22a. As shown in Example 10.1, the average of this voltage is 
Vdc = Vo/rr. Furthermore, the average of the steady-state voltage across the inductor 
must equal zero, and hence the average of the voltage VL (t) will appear across the 
resistor. Thus the dc load current will equal Vo/(rc R). This value is independent of 
the inductor value and hence does not approach zero as the inductance is increased. 
Figure 10.22b shows the diode and load currents for a relatively small value of 
inductance (coL < R), and Fig. 10.22c shows these same currents for a large inductance 
coL >> R. In each case we see the load current, which must be continuous due to the 
presence of the inductor, instantaneously switching between the diodes depending 
on the polarity of the source voltage. We also see that during the time diode D 1 is 
ON, the load current increases due to the application of the sinusoidal source voltage, 
while during the time diode D2 is ON, the load current simply decays with the L/R 
time constant of the load itself. 
As expected, in each case the average current through the load is equal to 
Vo/(Jr R). In fact, the presence of a large inductor can be seen to reduce the tipple 
current to the point that the load current is essentially a dc current equal to this value. 
Let us now consider the case where the half-wave bridge of Fig. 10.19 is replaced 
by a full-wave bridge as in Fig. 10.23a. In this circuit, the voltage applied to the load 
is the full-wave-rectified source voltage as shown in Fig. 10.15 and the average (dc) 
voltage applied to the load will equal 2 Vo/zr. Here again, the presence of the inductor 
will tend to reduce the ac ripple. Figure 10.24, again obtained from a detailed analytical 
solution, shows the current through the resistor as the inductance is increased. 
If we assume a large inductor (wL >> R), the load current will be relatively ripple 
free and constant. It is therefore common practice to analyze the performance of this 
circuit by replacing the inductor by a dc current source lac as shown in Fig. 10.23b, 
where lac = 2 V0/(zr R). This is a commonly used technique in the analysis of power- 
electronic circuits which greatly simplifies their analysis. 
Under this assumption, we can easily show that the diode and source currents of 
this circuit are given by waveforms of Fig. 10.25. Figure 10.25a shows the current 
through one pair of diodes (e.g., diodes D1 and D3), and Fig. 10.25b shows the source 
current i~ (t). The essentially constant load current lac flows through each pair of diodes 
for one half cycle and appears as a square wave of amplitude l, jc at the source. 
In a fashion similar to that which we saw in the half-wave rectifier circuit with 
the free-wheeling diode, here a pair of diodes (e.g., diodes D 1 and D3) are carrying 
current when the source voltage reverses, turning ON the other pair of diodes and 
switching OFF the pair that were previously conducting. In this fashion, the load 
current remains continuous and simply switches between the diode pairs. 

o 
c- 
.-i 
.-i 
(1) 
.-i., 
0 
m 
77"11 
o~ 
k~ 
• .o 
0 
~o < 
0_ ~ 
:M 
~o 
o~ 
3 
0 
(I) 
v 
r_ o 
c-~ c_ 
0 
0_ 
0 
O_ 
(1) 
c:r 
L- 
t- 
r 

518 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
is(t) 
/ 
+ 
D1 ~ 
D4 
Vs(t) 
D2 
D3 
iL(t) 
is(t) 
+ 
R 
VL(t) 
L 
+ 
Vs(t) ( 
I 
D1 @ 
D4 
D2 
D3 
(a) 
(b) 
iL(t) 
R 
+ 
Idc~ 
~(t) 
Figure 10,23 
(a) Full-wave rectifier with an inductive load. (b) Full-wave rectifier with the inductor replaced 
by a dc current source. 
iL(t) 
easln 
,,,.- 
0 
~: 
2Jr 
wt 
Figure 10.24 
Effect of increasing the series inductance 
in the circuit of Fig. 10.23a on the load current. 
10.2.3 
Effects of Commutating Inductance 
Our analysis and the current waveforms of Fig. 10.25 show that the current commutes 
instantaneously from one diode pair to the next. In practical circuits, due to the 
presence of source inductance, commutation of the current between the diode pairs 
does not occur instantaneously. The effect of source inductance, typically referred to 
as commutating inductance, will be examined by studying the circuit of Fig. 10.26 
in which a source inductance Ls has been added in series with the voltage source in 
the full-wave rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.23b. We have again assumed that the load 
time constant is large (coL/R >> 1) and have replaced the inductor with a dc current 
source Idc. 
Figure 10.27a shows the situation which occurs when diodes D2 and D4 are ON 
and carrying current 10c and when Vs < 0. Commutation begins when Vs reaches zero 
and begins to go positive, turning ON diodes D 1 and D3. Note that because the current 
in the source inductance Ls cannot change instantaneously, the circuit condition at 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
519 
iD1, iD3 
Idc 
is(t) 
I~c 
--Idc - 
27r 
wt 
(a) 
> 
2re 
wt 
(b) 
Figure 10.25 
(a) Current through diodes D1 and D3 and 
(b) source current for the circuit of Fig. 10.23, both in the limit 
of large inductance. 
is(t) 
L s 
r 
+ 
DI@ 
Vs(t) 
D2 
D4 2 
f 
D3 ~. 
R 
+ 
/dc ~ 
(t) 
Figure 10.26 
Full-wave bridge rectifier with source inductance. 
Dc load current assumed. 
this time is described by Fig. 10.27b: the current through Ls is equal to --Idc, the 
current through diodes D2 and D4 is equal to/de, while the current through diodes 
D 1 and D3 is zero. 
Under this condition with all four diodes ON, the source voltage Vs(t) appears 
directly across the source inductance Ls. Noting that commutation starts at the time 

520 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
+ 
Vs(t) Q -[ 
is(t) 
L s 
I 
D1 
D 
de 
• D4 
j 
I 
(a) 
is(t) 
L s 
D 
+ 
Vs(t) Q 
~iDl --0 
f iD2 = Idc 
c 
D 
iD4= ld~c 
R 
(b) 
Figure 10.27 (a) Condition of the full-wave circuit of Fig. 10.26 
immediately before diodes D1 and D3 turn ON. (b) Condition immediately 
after diodes D1 and D3 turn ON. 
when Vs(t) - 0, the current through Ls can be written as 
1/o' 
is(t) -- --Idc + -~s 
Vs(t) dt 
-- -/de + 
~s 
(1 -- COS wt) 
(10.6) 
Noting that is -- iDI -- iD4, that iD1 + iD2 = Idc and, that by symmetry, iD4 =- iD2, 
we can write that 
Idc - is(t) 
iD2 = 
(10.7) 
2 
Diode D2 (and similarly diode D4) will turn OFF when iD2 reaches zero, which will 
occur when is(t) - Idc. In other words, commutation will be completed at time tc, 
when the current through Ls has completely reversed polarity and when all of the 
load current is flowing through diodes D 1 and D3. 

10.2 
Rectification Conversion of AC to DC 
521 
IDC" 
D1 
0 
COt c 
n + cot~ 
). 
cot 
(a) 
VL(t) 
v0 
Commutation 
notches 
cot c 
Jr 
Jr + cot c 
r 
cot 
(b) 
Figure 10.28 
(a) Currents through diodes D1 and D2 showing 
the finite commutation interval. (b) Load voltage showing the 
commutation notches due to the finite commutation time. 
Setting is(tc) = Idc and solving Eq. 10.6 gives an expression for the commutation 
interval tc as a function of Idc 
1 
, [ 
( ,dc Ls)l 
tc=-- 
cos 
1- 
~ 
(10.8) 
oJ 
V0 
Figure 10.28a shows the currents through diodes D 1 and D2 as the current com- 
mutates between them. The finite commutation time tc can clearly be seen. There is a 
second effect of commutation which can be clearly seen in Fig. 10.28b which shows 
the rectified load voltage VL (t). Note that during the time of commutation, with all 
the diodes on, the rectified load voltage is zero. These intervals of zero voltage on the 
rectified voltage waveform are known as commutation notches. 
Comparing the ideal full-wave rectified voltage of Fig. 10.15b to the waveform 
of Fig. 10.28b, we see that the effect of the commutation notches is to reduce the dc 
output of the rectifier. Specifically, the dc voltage in this case is given by 
( 
i~V°sinc°tdt 
Vdc- 
\~-/ 
v0 
= 
(1 + cos Wtc) 
(10.9) 
Jr 
where tc is the commutation interval as calculated by Eq. 10.8. 

522 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
Finally, the dc load current can be calculated as function of tc 
Vac 
V0 
/ac = 
= 
(1 + coscotc) 
(10.10) 
R 
arR 
Substituting Eq. 10.8 into Eq. 10.10 gives a closed-form solution for lac 
2Vo 
/~c = 
(10.11) 
rrR + 2coL~ 
and hence 
2V0 
Vdc =/acR = 
(10.12) 
2ogLs 
2"/'+ 
R 
We have seen that commutating inductance (which is to a great extent unavoidable 
in practical circuits) gives rise to a finite commutation time and produces commutation 
notches in the rectified-voltage waveform which reduces the dc voltage applied to 
the load. 
EXAMPLE 10.6 
Consider a full-wave rectifier driving an inductive load as shown in Fig. 10.29. For a 60-Hz, 
230-V rms source voltage, R = 5.6 f2 and large L (coL >> R), plot the dc current through the 
load Idc and the commutation time tc as the source inductance L~ varies from 1 to 100 mH. 
m Solution 
The solution can be obtained by substitution into Eqs. 10.8 and 10.11. This is easily done using 
MATLAB, and the plots of Idc and tc are shown in Figs. 10.30a and b respectively. Note that 
the maximum achievable dc current, corresponding to L, = 0, is equal to 2V0/(rr R) = 37 A. 
Thus, commutating inductances on the order of 1 mH can be seen to have little effect on the 
performance of the rectifier and can be ignored. On the other hand, a commutating inductance 
of 100 mH can be seen to reduce the dc current to approximately 7 A, significantly reducing 
the capability of the rectifier circuit. 
+ 
°s(t) ( 
m 
) 
t s 
D1 
D2 
~_Z 
D4 2 
( 
x 
D3 ~. 
c 
R 
L 
Figure 10.29 
Full-wave bridge rectifier with source inductance 
for Example 10.6. 

40 
, 
, 
, 
, 
i 
35 
30 
25 
o 
2O 
10- 
5.5 
10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
523 
~o 
;o 
~'o 
~'o 
io 
~'o 
~'o 
;o 
~'o 
Commutating inductance Ls [mH] 
9=0 
1 O0 
Ca) 
4.5 
/ 
4 
E 3.5 
3 
2.5 
2 
1.5 
~o 
;o 
do 
~'o 
io 
~'o 
~'o 
;o 
~'o 
~'o 
Commutating inductance Ls [mH] 
100 
(b) 
Figure 10.30 
(a) Dc current /dc and (b) commutation time to 
for Example 10.6. 

524 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
Here is the MATLAB script for Example 10.6. 
clc 
clear 
%parameters 
omega : 2"pi'60; 
R : 5.6; 
V0 : 230*sqrt(2) ; 
for n = i:i00 
Ls(n) 
= n*le-3; 
Idc(n) 
= 2*V0/ (pi*R + 2*omega*Ls(n) ) ; 
tc(n) 
= (i/omega)*acos(l-(2*Idc(n)*omega*Ls(n))/V0) 
; 
end 
plot (Ls*1000, Idc) 
xlabel('Commutating 
inductance 
Ls [mH] ') 
ylabel ( ' Idc' ) 
fprintf('\nHit 
any key to continue\n') 
pause 
plot (Ls*1000, tc*1000) 
xlabel('Commutating 
inductance 
Ls [mH] ') 
ylabel('tc 
[msec] ') 
Calculate the commutating inductance and the corresponding commutation time for the circuit 
of Example 10.6 if the dc load current is observed to be 29.7 A. 
Solution 
L~ = 5.7 mH and tc = 2.4 msec 
10.2.4 
Single-Phase, Full.Wave, 
Phase-Controlled Bridge 
Figure 10.31 shows a full-wave bridge in which the diodes of Fig. 10.15 have been 
replaced by SCRs. We will assume that the load inductance L is sufficiently large 
that the load current is essentially constant at a dc value Idc. We will also ignore any 
effects of commutating inductance, although they clearly would play the same role 
in a phase-controlled rectifier system as they do in a diode-rectifier system. 
Figure 10.32 shows the source voltage and the timing of the SCR gate pulses 
under a typical operating condition for this circuit. Here we see that the firing pulses 
are delayed by an angle c~a after the zero-crossing of the source-voltage waveform, 
with the firing pulses for SCRs T 1 and T3 occuring after the positive-going transition 
of vs(t) and those for SCRs T2 and T4 occuring after the negative-going transition. 

10.2 
Rectification Conversion of AC to DC 
525 
is(t) 
+ 
vs ,, () 
T1 ~L 
T2 ~ 
f 
T3 
Idc 
+ 
R 
VL(t) 
L 
Figure 10.31 
Full-wave, phase-controlled SCR bridge. 
Firing pulse, 
T1 &T3 
Vo 
> 
d 
O)t 
v0 
Figure 10.32 
Source voltage and firing pulses for the 
phase-controlled SCR bridge of Fig. 10.31. 
Figure 10.33a shows the current through SCRs T1 and T3. Note that these SCRs 
do not turn ON until they receive firing pulses at angle Otd after they are forward biased 
following positive-going zero crossing of the source voltage. Furthermore, note that 
SCRs T2 and T4 do not turn ON following the next zero crossing of the source voltage. 
Hence, SCRs T1 and T3 remain ON, carrying current until SCRs T2 and T4 are turned 
ON by gate pulses. Rather, T2 and T4 turn ON only after they receive their respective 
gate pulses (for example, at angle Jr + Otd in Fig. 10.33). This is an example offorced 
commutation, in that one pair of SCRs does not naturally commutate OFF but rather 
must be forcibly commutated when the other pair is turned ON. 
Figure 10.33b shows the resultant load voltage VL (t). We see that the load voltage 
now has a negative component, which will increase as the firing-delay angle Otd is 
increased. The dc value of this waveform is equal to 
( )coso  
 1013  

<o,11 
0 
---h II 
~ m m  
a~5 
5 
~ 
. 
09. 
W 
E 
~ 
< 
-, <~ 
o__~ 
• 
=r3 
~ 
0 
~ 
23" ,-4. 
~-~=r 
~-o 
~ 
zr 
,--,- 
~ 
---t m 
~6 
~ 
o 
~S 
~j- O. 
r-'C~ 
0 
..-~. 
t~ 
I 
I 
I 
0 
+ 
I 
I 
(3" 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
I 
r 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
527 
from which the firing-delay angle corresponding to a given value of dc voltage can 
be seen to be 
O~d ~ COS-1 (Tg Vdc / 
2V0 
(10.14) 
From Eq. 10.13 we see that the dc voltage applied to the load can vary from 2 V0/zr 
to -2Vo/rc. This is a rather surprising result in that it is hard to understand how a 
rectifier bridge can supply negative voltage. However, in this case, it is necessary to 
recognize that this result applies to an inductive load which maintains positive current 
flow through the SCRs in spite of the reversal of polarity of the source voltage. If 
the load were purely resistive, the current through the conducting SCRs would go 
to zero as the source-voltage reversed polarity, and they would simply turn OFF; no 
load current would flow until the next pair of SCRs is turned ON. 
Figure 10.33c shows the source voltage and current waveforms for the phase- 
controlled SCR-bridge. We see that the square-wave source current is out of phase 
with the source voltage. Its fundamental-harmonic is given by 
(4) 
is,1 (t) = 
-- 
Idc sin (o)t -- Old) 
(10.15) 
7r 
and thus the real power supplied to the load is given by 
2 
P = Vdcldc = -- VoIdc COSOld 
(10.16) 
7f 
and the reactive power supplied is 
2 
Q -- -- VoIdc sinotd 
(10.17) 
Under steady-state operation at a load current Iac, Vac - Idc R and the steady-state 
rC ldc R 
firing-delay angle can be found from Eq. 10.14 to be Ctss - cos-1 (~). 
Under this 
condition, the real power simply supplies the losses in the resistor and hence P - IEc R. 
It may seem strange to be supplying reactive power to a "dc" load. However, careful 
analysis will show that this reactive power supplies the energy associated with the 
small but finite ripple current through the inductor. 
If the delay angle is suddenly reduced (Otd < ass), the dc voltage applied to 
the load will increase (see Eq. 10.13) as will the power supplied to the load (see 
Eq. 10.16). As a result, Idc will begin to increase and the increased power will increase 
the energy storage in the inductor. Similarly, if the delay time is suddenly increased 
(td > too), Vdc will decrease (it may even go negative) and the power into the load 
will decrease, corresponding to a decrease in/de and a decrease in the energy storage 
in the inductor. 
Note that if Otd > Jr/2, Vdc will be negative, a condition which will continue until 
/de reaches zero at which time the SCR bridge will turn OFE Under this condition, 
the real power P will also be negative. Under this condition, power is being supplied 
from the load to the source and the system is said to be regenerating. 

528 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
EXAMPLE 
10.7 
A small superconducting magnet has an inductance L = 1.2 H. Although the resistance of 
the magnet itself is essentially zero, the resistance of the external leads is 12.5 m~2. Current 
is supplied to the magnet from a 60-Hz, 15-V peak, single-phase source through a phase- 
controlled SCR bridge as in Fig. 10.31. 
a. The magnet is initially operating in the steady state at a dc current of 35 A. Calculate the 
dc voltage applied to the magnet, the power supplied to the magnet, and the delay angle Ota 
in msec. Plot the magnet voltage VL (t). 
b. In order to quickly discharge the magnet, the delay angle is suddenly increased to ota = 
0.9zr = 162 °. Plot the corresponding magnet voltage. Calculate the time required to 
discharge the magnet and the maximum power regenerated to the source. 
II Solution 
The example is most easily solved using MATLAB, which can easily produce the required 
plots. 
a. Under this steady-state condition, Vdc = IdcR = 35 X 0.0125 = 0.438 V. The power 
supplied to the magnet is equal to P = Vdclac = 0.438 X 35 = 15.3 W, all of which is 
going into supplying losses in the lead resistance. The delay angle can be found from 
Eq. 10.14. 
cos 
cos 
= 1.52 rad = 87.4 ° 
A plot of VL(t) for this condition is given in Fig. 10.34a. 
b. For a delay angle of 0.9rr, the dc load voltage will be 
= 
~ 
coscq = 
cos (0.9Jr) = -9.1 V 
7/" 
A plot of VL(t) for this condition is given in Fig. 10.34b. 
The magnet current im can be calculated from the differential equation 
dim 
Vac -- imR-k- L~ dt 
subject to the initial condition that im(0) = 35 A. Thus 
im(t) : --R--- + 
ira(0)- ~ 
e -(~)r 
From this equation we find that the magnet current will reach zero at time t = 4.5 
seconds, at which time the bridge will shut off. The power regenerated to the source will 
be given by --Vjcim(t). It has a maximum value of 9.1 × 35 = 318 W at time t - 0. 

II 
I 
(D 
.< 
~w 
C 
q 
00 
-.~ 
"-40 
-~ 
o 
co 
.<~ 
0 
CT 
-~ 
~" 
I-I-I 
Ex 
~ 
"o 
o 
o 
,--* ---4 
~ 
. 
v 
~ 
o 
Load voltage [V] 
~2 
,..., 
f 
Load voltage [V] 
¢j1 
(3 
~1 
o 
...= 
¢J.= 
c) 
i 
i 
?f 

530 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
Here is the MATLAB script for Example 10.7. 
clc 
clear 
% system parameters 
R = 12.5e-3; 
L = 1.2; 
V0 = 15; 
omega = 120*pi; 
% part 
(a) 
% dc current 
Idc = 35; 
% dc voltage 
Vdc_a 
= R*Idc; 
% Power 
P = Vdc_a*Idc; 
%Calculate 
the delay angle 
alpha_da 
= acos(pi*R*Idc/(2*V0)) 
; 
%Now calculate 
the load voltage 
for n = 1:1300 
theta(n) 
= 2*pi*(n-1)/1000; 
t(n) = theta (n) /omega; 
vs(n) 
= V0*sin(theta(n)) 
; 
if theta(n) 
< alpha_da 
vL(n) 
= -vs(n); 
elseif 
(theta(n) 
< pi + alpha_da) 
vL(n) 
= vs(n); 
elseif 
theta(n) 
< 2*pi + alpha_da 
vL(n) 
= -vs(n) ; 
elseif theta(n) 
< 3*pi + alpha_da 
vL(n) 
= vs(n); 
elseif theta(n) 
< 4*pi + alpha_da 
vL(n) 
: -vs(n) ; 
else 
vL(n) 
= vs(n); 
end 
end 
plot(1000*t,vL) 
xlabel('time 
[msec] ') 
ylabel('Load 
voltage 
[V] ') 
pause 
% part 
(b) 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
531 
% delay angle 
alpha_db = 0.9*pi; 
% Find the new dc voltage 
Vdc_b = (2*V0/pi)*cos(alpha_db); 
% Time constants 
tau = L/R; 
% Initial current 
im0 = Idc ; 
% Calculate the time at which the current reaches zero 
tzero = -tau*log((-Vdc_b/R)/(im0-Vdc_b/R)) 
; 
% Now plot the load voltage 
for n = 1:1300 
theta(n) 
: 2*pi*(n-1)/1000; 
t(n) : theta (n) /omega; 
vs(n) = V0*sin(theta(n)) ; 
if theta(n) < alpha_db 
vL(n) = -vs(n); 
elseif 
(theta(n) < pi + alpha_db) 
vL(n) = vs(n); 
elseif theta(n) < 2*pi + alpha_db 
vL(n) = -vs(n); 
elseif theta(n) < 3*pi + alpha_db 
vL(n) = vs(n); 
elseif theta(n) < 4*pi + alpha_db 
vL(n) = -vs(n); 
else 
vL(n) = vs(n); 
end 
end 
plot (1000*t, vL) 
xlabel('time 
[msec] ') 
ylabel('Load 
voltage 
[V] ') 
fprintf('part 
(a) :') 
fprintf('\n 
Vdc_a = %g [mV] ',1000*Vdc_a) 
fprintf('\n 
Power = %g [W] ',P) ; 
fprintf('\n 
alpha_d=%g 
[tad] =%g [degrees] ',alpha_da,180*alpha_da/pi) 
fprintf('\npart 
(b) :') 
fprintf('\n 
alpha_d=%g 
[rad] =%g [degrees] ',alpha_db,180*alpha_db/pi) 
fprintf('\n 
Vdc_b = %g [V] ',Vdc_b) 
fprintf('\n 
Current will reach zero at %g [sec] ',tzero) 
fprintf('\n') 

532 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
The field winding of a small synchronous generator has a resistance of 0.3 f2 and an inductance 
of 250 mH. It is fed from a 24-V peak, single-phase 60-Hz source through a full-wave phase- 
controlled SCR bridge. (a) Calculate the dc voltage required to achieve a dc current of 18 A 
through the field winding and the corresponding firing-delay angle. (b) Calculate the field 
current corresponding to a delay angle of 45 °. 
Solution 
a. 5.4 V, 69 ° 
b. 36.0 A 
10.2.5 
Inductive Load with a Series DC Source 
As we have seen in Chapter 9, dc motors can be modeled as dc voltage sources in 
series with an inductor and a resistor. Thus, it would be useful to briefly investigate 
the case of a dc voltage source in series with an inductive load. 
Let us examine the full-wave, phase-controlled SCR rectifier system of Fig. 10.35. 
Here we have added a dc source Edc in series with the load. Again assuming that 
coL >> R so that the load current is essentially dc, we see that the load voltage VL(t) 
depends solely on the timing of the SCR gate pulses and hence is unchanged by the 
presence of the dc voltage source Edc. Thus the dc value of VL(t) is given by Eq. 10.13 
as before. 
In the steady-state, the dc current through the load can be found from the net dc 
voltage across the resistor as 
Vdc- Edc 
Idc-- 
(Vale >_ Edc) 
(10.18) 
R 
where Vac is found from Eq. 10.13. Under transient conditions, it is the difference 
voltage, Vac - Eac, that drives a change in the dc current through the series R-L 
combination, in a fashion similar to that illustrated in Example 10.7. 
+ 
Vs(t) 
m 
T1 ~L 
T2 
T4"~ 
f 
T3 
dc 
R 
+ 
4- 
VL(t) 
Figure 10.35 
Full-wave, phase-controlled SCR bridge with an 
inductive load including a dc voltage source. 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
533 
A small permanent-magnet dc motor is to be operated from a phase-controlled bridge. The 
60-Hz ac waveform has an rms voltage of 35 volts. The dc motor has an armature resistance 
of 3.5 f2 and an armature inductance of 17.5 mH. It achieves a no-load speed of 8000 r/min at 
an armature voltage of 50 V. 
Calculate the no-load speed in r/min of the motor as a function of the firing delay angle Otd. 
II Solution 
In Section 7.7 we see that the equivalent circuit for a permanent-magnet dc motor consists of 
a dc source (proportional to motor speed) in series with an inductance and a resistance. Thus, 
the equivalent circuit of Fig. 10.35 applies directly to the situation of this problem. 
From Eq. 7.26, the generated voltage from the dc motor (Edc in Fig. 10.35) is proportional 
to the speed of the dc motor. Thus, 
(8oo0) 
n= 
-~ 
Edc=160Edcr/min 
Under steady state operation, the dc voltage drop across the armature inductance will be 
zero. In addition, at no load, the armature current will be sufficiently small that the voltage 
drop across the armature resistance can be neglected. Thus, setting Edc = Vdc and substituting 
the expression for Vdc from Eq. 10.13 give, 
= 
= 
= 
cos ota = 31.5 cos ota 
Jr 
Note that because the bridge can only supply positive current to the dc motor (and hence, in the 
steady-state, the dc voltage must be positive), this expression is valid only for 0 _< otd < ~r/2. 
Finally, substituting the expression for the speed n in terms of Eac gives 
n = 160 x (31.5 cosotd) = 5040 cosota r/rain 
(0 < otd < zr/2) 
)ractice Problem 10. 
The dc-motor of Example 10.8 is observed to be operating at a speed of 3530 r/min and drawing 
a dc current of 1.75 ampere. Calculate the corresponding firing delay angle Otd. 
Solution 
ota = 0.15zr rad = 27 ° 
10.2.6 
Three-Phase Bridges 
Although many systems with ratings ranging up to five or more kilowatts run off 
single-phase power, most large systems are supplied from three-phase sources. In 
general, all of the issues which we have discussed with regard to single-phase, 

Va(t) 
Vb(t) 
Vc(t) 
(a) 
R 
OR(t) 
D4 
D5 ~ 
D6 ~ 
- 
X/'2 V l-l, rms 
OR(t) 
[ 
-~- VH, rms 
534 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
(b) 
(.or 
Figure 10.36 
(a) Three-phase, six-pulse diode bridge with resistive load. 
(b) Line-to-line voltages and resistor voltage. 
full-wave bridges apply directly to situations with three-phase bridges. As a result, 
we will discuss three-phase bridges only briefly. 
Figure 10.36a shows a system in which a resistor R is supplied from a three-phase 
source through a three-phase, six-pulse diode bridge. Figure 10.36b shows the three- 
phase line-to-line voltages (peak value ~/2Vl-i,rms where Vl-l,rms is the rms value of 
the line-to-line voltage) and the resistor voltage VR(t), found using the method-of- 
assumed-states and assuming that the diodes are ideal. 
Note that VR has six pulses per cycle. Unlike the single-phase, full-wave bridge 
of Fig. 10.15a, the resistor voltage does not go to zero. Rather, the three-phase diode 
bridge produces an output voltage equal to the instantaneous maximum of the abso- 
lute value of the three line-to-line voltages. The dc average of this voltage (which can 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
535 
be obtained by integrating over 1/6 of a cycle) is given by 
Vdc -- ~ 
--Vbc(t) dt 
7it 
3o9 
~ ~/~Wl-1 rms sin 
cot 
dt 
zr 
' 
3~/-2) Vl_Lrms 
(10.19) 
where Vl-l,rms is the rms value of the line-to-line voltage. 
Table 10.1 shows the diode-switching sequence for the three-phase bridge of 
Fig. 10.36a corresponding to a single period of the three-phase voltage of waveforms 
of Fig. 10.36b. Note that only two diodes are on at any given time and that each diode 
is on for 1/3 of a cycle (120°). 
Analogous to the single-phase, full-wave, phase-controlled SCR bridge of 
Figs. 10.31 and 10.35, Fig. 10.37 shows a three-phase, phase-controlled SCR bridge. 
Assuming continuous load current, corresponding for example to the condition 
coL >> R, in which case the load current will be essentially a constant dc current loc, 
this bridge is capable of applying a negative voltage to the load and of regenerating 
power in a fashion directly analogous to the single-phase, full-wave, phase-controlled 
SCR bridge which we discussed in Section 10.2.4. 
Table 10,1 
Diode conduction times for the three-phase diode bridge of Fig. 10.36a. 
mmw 
lit 
i 
C~d 
0-7r/3 
~'/3-2zr/3 
2~/3--n" 
~'-4~'/3 
4~/3-5zr/3 
5~/3--2~ 
D1 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
D2 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
D3 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
D4 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
D5 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
D6 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
Va(t) 
Vb(t) 
V¢(t) 
T 
T 
T6 
Idc 
+ 
R 
VL(t) 
L 
Figure 10.37 Three-phase, phase-controlled SCR 
bridge circuit with an inductive load. 

536 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
It is a relatively straightforward matter to show that maximum output voltage of 
this bridge configuration will occur when the SCRs are turned ON at the times when 
the diodes in a diode bridge would naturally turn ON. These times can be found from 
Table 10.1. For example, we see that SCR T5 must be turned ON at angle C~d = 0 
(i.e., at the positive zero crossing of Vab(t)). Similarly, SCR T1 must be turned ON at 
time C~d = Jr/3, and so on. 
Thus, one possible scheme for generating the SCR gate pulses is to use the 
positive-going zero crossing of Vab(t) as a reference from which to synchronize a 
pulse train running at six times the fundamental frequency (i.e., there will be six 
uniformly-spaced pulses in each cycle of the applied voltage). SCR T5 would be fired 
first, followed by SCRs T1, T6, T2, T4, and T3 in that order, each separated by 60 ° 
in phase delay. 
If the firing pulses are timed to begin immediately following the zero crossing 
of Vab(t) the load voltage waveform VL(t) will be that of Fig. 10.36b. If the firing 
pulses are delayed by an angle Otd, then the load-voltage waveforms will appear as in 
Fig. 10.38a (for Ctd = 0.1zr) and Fig. 10.38b (for Ctd = 0.9zr). 
rr/6 
Ctd = O.17r 
I ~ 
-~1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(a) 
r 
cot 
O~ d = 0.9rr 
(b) 
Figure 10.38 
Typical load voltages for delayed firing of the SCRs in 
the three-phase, phase-controlled rectifier of Fig. 10.37 (a) Otd = 0.1rr, 
(b) Re -" 0.97f. 
zr/6 
wt 

10.2 
Rectification: Conversion of AC to DC 
537 
The dc average of the output voltage of the phase-controlled bridge can be 
found as 
gdc 
~ 
309 -j~ ~l+rr/3to 
--Vbc (t) dt 
to 
a d +z/3 
3w 
~/2 ~-l,rms sin 
cot 
d t 
zc 
3 
to 
-- (3-~) 
Vl-l,rms cos Otd 
(0 < ot~ < Jr) 
(10.20) 
where gl-l,rms is the rms value of the line-to-line voltage. 
A large magnet with an inductance of 14.7 H and resistance of 68 f2 is to be supplied from 
a 60-Hz, 460-V, three-phase source through a phase-controlled SCR bridge as in Fig. 10.37. 
Calculate (a) the maximum dc voltage V d .... 
and current ld ..... which can be supplied from 
this source and (b) the delay angle 0td required to achieve a magnet current of 2.5 A. 
II Solution 
a. From Eq. 10.20, the maximum voltage (corresponding to c~d = 0) is equal to 
Vd .... = 
~ 
Vl-l,rms= 
~ 
460=621V 
Jr 
and Id ..... 
-- 
Wd ..... /R = 9.1 A 
b. The delay angle for a current of 2.5 A, corresponding to Vdc = /de R = 170 V, can be 
found from inverting Eq. 10.20 as 
Vl-l,rms 
= 1.29 rad = 74.1 ° 
EXAMPLE 
10.9 
Repeat Example 10.9 for the case in which the 60-Hz source is replaced by a 50-Hz, 400-V, 
three-phase source. 
Solution 
a. Va .... 
-" 540 V, Ia ..... 
= 7.94 V 
b. ota = 1.25 rad = 71.6 ° 
The derivations for three-phase bridges presented here have ignored issues such as 
the effect of commutating inductance, which we considered during our examination 
of single-phase rectifiers. Although the limited scope of our presentation does not 

538 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
permit us to specifically discuss them here, the effects in three-phase rectifiers are 
similar to those for single-phase systems and must be considered in the design and 
analysis of practical three-phase rectifier systems. 
10.3 
INVERSION: CONVERSION OF DC TO AC 
In Section 10.2 we discussed various rectifier configurations that can be used to 
convert ac to dc. In this section, we will discuss some circuit configurations, referred 
to as inverters, which can be used to convert dc to the variable-frequency, variable- 
voltage power required for many motor-drive applications. Many such configurations 
~nd techniques are available, and we will not attempt to discuss them all. Rather, 
consistent with the aims of this chapter, we will review some of the common inverter 
configurations and highlight their basic features and characteristics. 
For the purposes of this discussion, we will assume the inverter is preceded by a 
"stiff" dc source. For example, in Section 10.2, we saw how an LC filter can be used 
to produce a relatively constant dc output voltage from a rectifier. Thus, as shown 
in Fig. 10.39a, for our study of inverters we will represent such rectifier systems by 
a constant dc voltage source V0, known as the dc bus voltage at the inverter input. 
We will refer to such a system, with a constant-dc input voltage, as a voltage-source 
inverter. 
Similarly, we saw that a "large" inductor in series with the rectifier output pro- 
duces a relatively constant dc current, known as the dc link current. We will therefore 
+ 
Vs(t) 
L 
0 
L 
+ 
+1 
c i_ 
= 
0 
+ 
v~(t) 
Io 
Ca) 
I. 
/o 
t 
(b) 
Figure 10.39 
Inverter-input representations. (a) Voltage source. 
(b) Current source. 

10.3 Inversion: Conversion of DC to AC 
539 
represent such a rectifier system by a current source I0 at the inverter input. We will 
refer to this type of inverter as a current-source inverter. 
Note that, as we have seen in Section 10.2, the values of these dc sources can be 
varied by appropriate controls applied to the rectifier stage, such as the timing of gate 
pulses to SCRs in the rectifier bridge. Control of the magnitude of these sources in 
conjunction with controls applied to the inverter stage provides the flexibility required 
to produce a wide variety of output waveforms for various motor-drive applications. 
10.3.1 
Single.Phase, H-bridge Step-Waveform Inverters 
Figure 10.40a shows a single-phase inverter configuration in which a load (consisting 
here of a series RL combination) is fed from a dc voltage source V0 through a set of 
four IGBTs in what is referred to as an H-bridge configuration. MOSFETs or other 
switching devices are equally applicable to this configuration. As we discussed in 
Section 10.1.3, the IGBTs in this system are used simply as switches. Because the 
IGBTs in this H-bridge include protection diodes, we can analyze the performance 
of this circuit by replacing the IGBTs by the ideal-switch model of Fig. 10.13b as 
shown in Fig. 10.40b. 
For our analysis of this inverter, we will assume that the switching times of this 
inverter (i.e., the length of time the switches remain in a constant state) are much longer 
than the load time constant L/R. Hence, on the time scale of interest, the load current 
will simply be equal to VL/R, with VL being determined by the state of the switches. 
Let us begin our investigation of this inverter configuration assuming that switches 
S1 and $3 are ON and that iL is positive, as shown in Fig. 10.41a. Under this condition 
the load voltage is equal to V0 and the load current is thus equal to Vo/R. 
Let us next assume that switch S1 is turned OFF, while $3 remains ON. This 
will cause the load current, which cannot change instantaneously due to the presence 
of the inductor, to commutate from switch S 1 to diode D2, as shown in Fig. 10.4 lb. 
Note that under this condition, the load voltage is zero and hence there will be zero 
load current. Note also that this same condition could have been reached by turning 
switch $3 OFF with S 1 remaining ON. 
m 
m 
iL(t) R 
L 
+ 
VL(t) 
-
-
 
~4-~ D4 
.3--~D 3 
+ 
v0 
I LD 
I J_ 
Sl2~/L_~(t) R 
L 
S4~ D4 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.40 Single-phase H-bridge inverter configuration. (a) Typical configuration using IGBTs. (b) Generic 
configuration using ideal switches. 

540 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
+1 
Vo~ 
-T 
"1-" 
VL(t ) 
-- 
D2 
R 
L 
iL(t) 
) 
2.~ D4 
+ 
Vo m 
D12 
(a) 
(b) 
Jr- 
VL(t ) 
-- 
2 
R 
L 
.~ D4 
Figure 10.41 
Analysis of the H-bridge inverter of Fig. 10.40b. (a) Switches S1 and S3 ON. 
(b) Switch S3 ON. 
VL(t) 
vo 
-vo 
',~ 
T 
-~', 
Figure 10.42 
Typical output-voltage waveform for the 
H-bridge of Fig. 10.40. 
At this point, it is possible to reverse the load voltage and current by turning ON 
switches $2 and $4, in which case VL =- V0 and iL =- Vo/R. Finally, the current 
can be again brought to zero by turning OFF either switch $2 or switch $4. At this 
point, one cycle of an applied load-voltage waveform of the form of Fig. 10.42 has 
been completed. 
A typical waveform produced by the switching sequence described above is 
shown in Fig. 10.42, with an ON time of Al T and OFF time of A2T (A 2 = 0.5 -- A1) 
for both the positive and negative portions of the cycle. Such a waveform con- 
sists of a fundamental ac component of frequency f0 = 1/T, where T is the period 
of the switching sequence, and components at odd-harmonics frequencies of that 
fundamental. 
The waveform of Fig. 10.42 can be considered a simple one-step approximation to 
a sinusoidal waveform. Fourier analysis can be used to show that it has a fundamental 
component of peak amplitude 
VL,1 = (4) 
V0 sin (A,zr) 
(10.21) 

10.3 
Inversion: Conversion of DC to AC 
541 
and n'th-harmonic components (n = 3, 5, 7 .... ) of peak amplitude 
(4) 
VL,n = 
~ 
V0 sin (n A1Jr) 
(10.22) 
Although this stepped waveform appears to be a rather crude approximation to 
a sinusoid, it clearly contains a significant fundamental component. In many appli- 
cations it is perfectly adequate as the output voltage of a motor-drive. For example, 
three-such waveforms, separated by 120 ° in time phase, could be used to drive a three- 
phase motor. The fundamental components would combine to produce a rotating flux 
wave as discussed in Chapter 4. In some motor-drive systems, LC filters, consisting 
of shunt capacitors operating in conjunction with the motor phase inductances, are 
used to reduce the harmonic voltages applied to the motor phase windings. 
In general, the higher-order harmonics, whose amplitudes vary inversely with 
their harmonic number, as seen from Eq. 10.22, will produce additional core loss in 
the stator as well as dissipation in the rotor. Provided that these additional losses are 
acceptable both from the point of view of motor heating as well as motor efficiency, a 
drive based upon this switching scheme will be quite adequate for many applications. 
A three-phase, H-bridge, voltage-source, step-waveform inverter will be built from three 
H-bridge inverter stages of the type shown in Fig. 10.40b. Each phase will be identical, with the 
exception that the switching pattern of each phase will be displaced by 1/3 of a period in time 
phase. This system will be used to drive a three-phase, four-pole motor with Nph = 34 turns 
per phase and winding factor kw = 0.94. The motor is Y-connected, and the inverters are each 
connected phase-to-neutral. 
For a dc supply voltage of 125 V, a switching period T of 20 msec and with A1 = 0.44, 
calculate (a) the frequency and synchronous speed in rpm of the resultant air-gap flux wave 
and (b) the rms amplitude of the line-to-line voltage applied to the motor. 
II Solution 
a. The frequency fe of the fundamental component of the drive voltage will equal 
fe = 1 / T = 50 Hz. From Eq. 4.41 this will produce an air-gap flux wave which rotates at 
ns= 
~ j  
fe= 
~ 
50=1500r/min 
b. The peak of the fundamental component of the applied line-to-neutral voltage can be 
found from Eq. 10.21. 
(4) 
(4) 
Va.peak = 
-- 
V0 sin (AiJr) = 
125 sin (0.44zr) = 156 V 
7[" 
The resultant rms, line-to-line voltage is thus given by 
Vl_l,rm s = ~ 
Va,peak --" 191 V 
EXAMPLE 10.10 

542 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
,0t() 
/S? ~D1 
+ 
VL(t) 
_ 
//S~ ~D4 
R 
L 
iL(t) 
iL(t) 
ol 
-/o 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.43 
(a) H-bridge inverter configuration fed by a current source. (b) Typical stepped 
load-current waveform. 
)ractice Problem 10.! 
For the three-phase inverter system of Example 10.10, (a) find the ON-time fraction A1 for 
which the 5'th-harmonic component of the applied voltage will be zero. (b) Calculate the 
corresponding peak amplitude of the fundamental-component of the line-to-neutral voltage. 
Solution 
a. 0.2 
b. 93V 
Figure 10.43a shows an H-bridge current-source inverter. This inverter config- 
uration is analogous to the voltage-source configuration of Fig. 10.40. In fact, the 
discussion of the voltage-source inverter applies directly to the current-source con- 
figuration with the exception that the switches control the load current instead of the 
load voltage. Thus, again assuming that the load time constant (L/R) is much shorter 
than the switching time, a typical load current waveform would be similar to that 
shown in Fig. 10.43b. 
[XAMPLE 10.1" 
Determine a switching sequence for the inverter of Fig. 10.43a that will produce the stepped 
waveform of Fig. 10.43b. 
II Solution 
Table 10.2 shows one such switching sequence, starting at time t -- 0 at which point the load 
current iL (t) = -- I0. 
Note that zero load current is achieved by turning on two switches so as to bypass the load 
and to directly short the current source. When this is done, the load current will quickly decay 
to zero, flowing through one of the switches and one of the reverse-polarity diodes. In general, 
one would not apply such a direct short across the voltage source in a voltage-source inverter 

10.3 Inversion: Conversion of DC to AC 
543 
Table 10.2 Switching sequence used to produce 
the load current waveform of Fig. 10.43b. 
11.i,1 
,,, ,11...1,,==1,., 
ic(t) 
S1 
$2 
$3 
S4 
-Io 
OFF 
ON 
OFF 
ON 
0 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
Io 
ON 
OFF 
ON 
OFF 
0 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
-1o 
OFF 
ON 
OFF 
ON 
because the resultant current would most likely greatly exceed the ratings of the switches. 
However, in the case of a current-source inverter, the switch current cannot exceed that of the 
current source, and hence the direct short can be (and, in fact, must be) maintained for as long 
as it is desired to maintain zero load current. 
Consider the current-source inverter of Fig. 10.44a. Here the load consists of a sinusoidal 
voltage source Va cos cot. Assume the inverter switches are controlled such that the load cur- 
rent is a square-wave, also at frequency f =co/(27r), as shown in Fig. 10.44b. Calculate 
the time-average power delivered to the load as a function of the delay angle otd as defined 
in Fig. 10.44b. 
II Solution 
Because the load voltage is sinusoidal, time-average power will only be produced by the 
fundamental component of the load current. By analogy to Eq. 10.21, with I0 replacing V0 and 
with A1 = 0.5, the amplitude of the fundamental-component of the load current is 
(4) 
L,l= 
- 
Io 
EXAMPLE 10.1," 
,0t( ) 
G 
1~ D1 
4~ D4 
/° 
Vc(t ) --" V a cos(a~t) 
>+O-- 
0 
~2~ iL(t)D2 
~3~ D3 
--Va---l°- 
(a) 
~vL(t) 
/__ 
\ i./=,=+o, / / 
+ o~ d 
I 
I 
(b) 
Figure 10.44 (a) Current-source inverter for Example 10.12. (b) Load-current waveform. 
r rot 

544 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
and therefore the fundamental component of the load current is equal to 
(4) 
iL, 1 (t) 
= 
IL, 1 COS (o.)t 
- -  O/d) 
= 
-
-
 
I 0 COS (o)t 
- 
C~d) 
7[ 
The complex amplitude of the load voltage is thus given by f'L = Va and that of the load 
current is ]L = IL, le--Jad. Thus the time average power is equal to 
P 
=Re[IL " * 
= 
Vi~]= 
-- 
VaI0CoSC~d 
7l" 
By varying the firing-delay angle ad, the power transferred from the source to the load 
can be varied. In fact, as C~d is varied over the range 0 < ad < Jr, the power will vary over the 
range 
() 
2 
Va/0 > P > 
Val0 
7r 
7l" 
Note that this inverter can regenerate; i.e., for :r/2 < aa < :r, P < 0 and hence power will 
flow from the load back into the inverter. 
)ractice Problem 10.1q 
The inverter of Example 10.12 is operated with a fixed delay angle C~d = 0 but with a variable 
ON-time fraction A~. Find an expression for the time-average power delivered to the load as a 
function of A~. 
Solution 
P=(2) 
Valosin(A~rr) 
10.3.2 
Pulse-Width-Modulated Voltage-Source 
Inverters 
Let us again consider the H-bridge configuration of Fig. 10.40b, repeated again in 
Fig. 10.45. Again, an RL load is fed from a voltage source through the H-bridge. 
However, in this case, let us assume that the switching time of the inverter is much 
shorter than the load time constant (L/R). 
Consider a typical operating condition as shown in Fig. 10.46. Under this con- 
dition, the switches are operated with a period T and a duty cycle D (0 < D < 1). 
As can be seen from Fig. 10.46a, for a time DT switches S1 and $3 are ON, and the 
load voltage is V0. This is followed by a time (1 - D)T during which switches S 1 
and $3 are OFF, and the current is transferred to diodes D2 and D4, setting the load 
voltage equal to -V0. The duty cycle D is thus a fraction of the total period, in this 
case the fraction of the period during which the load voltage is V0. 

10.3 
Inversion: Conversion of DC to AC 
545 
4- 
Vo m 
2~D4 
Figure 10.45 
Single-phase H-bridge inverter 
configuration. 
Note that although switches $2 and $4 would normally be turned ON after 
switches S1 and $3 are turned OFF (but not before they are turned OFF, to avoid 
a direct short across the voltage source) because they are actually semiconductor 
devices, they will not carry any current unless the load current goes negative. Rather, 
the current will flow through the protection diodes D 1 and D3. Alternatively, if the 
load current is negative, then the current will be controlled by the operation of switches 
$2 and $4 in conjunction with diodes D 1 and D3. Under this condition, switches S 1 
and $3 will not carry current. 
This type of control is referred to as pulse-width modulation, or PWM, because 
it is implemented by varying the width of the voltage pulses applied to the load. As 
can be seen from Fig. 10.46a, the average voltage applied to the load is equal to 
(VL)avg ~-~ (2D - 1) Vo 
(10.23) 
As we will now show, varying the duty cycle under PWM control can produce a 
continuously varying load current. 
A typical load-current waveform is shown in Fig. 10.46b. In the steady state, 
the average current through the inductor will be constant and hence voltage across 
the inductor must equal zero. Thus, the average load current will equal the average 
UL(/) 
Vo 
0 
--V 
0 _ _ 
DT 
iL(t) , 
(iL)max 
- 
(iL)avg - 
(iL)min ~ 
I 
I 
I 
0 
DT 
T 
T + DT 
(a) 
Figure 10.46 
Typical (a) voltage and (b) current waveform under PWM operation. 
T 
T4- DT 
(b) 

546 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
voltage divided by the resistance or 
(VL)avg 
[2D - 1 ] V0 
(iL)avg = 
R 
- 
R 
(10.24) 
Thus we see that by varying the duty cycle D over the range of 0 to 1, we can vary 
the load current over the range -Vo/R <_ (iL)avg _< Vo/R. 
Because the current waveform is periodic, the maximum and minimum current, 
and hence the current tipple, can be easily calculated. Assigning time t = 0 to the 
time switches S1 and $3 are first turned ON and the load current is minimum, the 
current during this time period will be given by 
Vo 
( 
Vo ) 
t 
DT) 
(10.25) 
iL(t) -- -~- 4- 
(iL)min 
R 
e- 
(0 < t < 
where r = L/R. The maximum load current (iL)max is reached at time DT 
(iL)max 
V0 4- ((iL)min 
go) 
DT 
= 
e 
~ 
(10.26) 
R 
R 
After switches S 1 and $3 are turned OFF, the load voltage is - V0 and the current 
is given by 
iL(t) = 
V° 4- ((iL)max 4- VO) (t-DT, 
R 
~ 
e 
r 
(DT <t < T) 
(10.27) 
Because the current is periodic with period T, iL(t) again will be equal to (iL)min at 
time T. Thus 
and 
(iL)min = 
V0 
( 
Vo ) 
(T- DT) 
R + 
(iL)max 4- -~- 
e- 
r 
(10.28) 
Solving Eqs. 10.26 and 10.28 gives 
1 
2e -T(1 - D) 
T] 
(__~) 
- 
r 
+ e - ~  
(iL)min = -- 
(1 - e -T) 
(10.29) 
-DT 
] 
(V o)l-2e---v- 
+e-~ r 
(iL)max = 
-~- 
(1 - e -T) 
(10.30) 
The current ripple AiL can be calculated as the difference between the maximum 
and minimum current. 
AiL -- (iL)max -- (iL)min 
In the limit that T << r, this can be written as 
AiL ~ 
-~- 
r 
(10.31) 
(10.32) 

10.3 
Inversion: Conversion of DC to AC 
547 
-XAMPLE 10.1 
A PWM inverter such as that of Fig. 10.45 is operating from a dc voltage of 48 V and driving 
a load with L = 320 mH and R = 3.7 g2. For a switching frequency of 1 kHz, calculate the 
average load current, the minimum and maximum current, and the current ripple for a duty 
cycle D = 0.8. 
II Solution 
From Eq. 10.24, the average load current will equal 
[2D- 1]V0 
0.6 x 48 
(iL)avg = 
R 
= 
3.7 
= 7.78 A 
For a frequency of 1 kHz, the period T = 1 msec. The time constant r = L/R = 86.5 msec. 
(iL)min and (iL)max can then be found from Eqs. 10.29 and 10.30 to be (iL)min ~--- 7.76 A and 
(iL)max --" 7.81 A. Thus the current tipple, calculated from Eq. 10.31, is 0.05 A, which is equal 
to 0.6 percent of the average load current. Alternatively, using the fact that T/r = 0.012 << 1, 
the current ripple could have been calculated directly from Eq. 10.32 
(2~0) (T) 
(2×48) 
(8@.5) 
A/L = 
~ 
D(1 - D) = 
3.7 
x 0.8 x 0.2 = 0.05 A 
~ractice Problem 10.1' 
Calculate (a) the average current and (b) the current tipple for the PWM inverter of Exam- 
ple 10.13 if the switching frequency is reduced to 250 Hz. 
Solution 
a. 7.78 A (unchanged from Example 10.13) 
b. 0.19 A 
Now let us consider the situation for which the duty cycle is varied with time, 
i.e., D = D(t). If D(t) varies slowly in comparison to the period T of the switching 
frequency, from Eq. 10.23, the average load voltage will be equal to 
(VL)avg = [2D(t) - 1]V0 
(10.33) 
and the average load current will be 
[2D(t)- 
1]V0 
(iL)avg = 
R 
(10.34) 
Figure 10.47a illustrates a method for producing the variable duty cycle for this 
system. Here we see a saw-tooth waveform which varies between -1 and 1. Also 
shown is a reference waveform Wref(t) which is constrained to lie within the range - 1 
and 1. The switches will be controlled in pairs. During the time that Wref(t) is greater 
than the saw-tooth waveform, switches S1 and $3 will be ON and the load voltage 
will be V0. Similarly, when Wref(t) is less than the saw-tooth waveform, switches $2 

548 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
VO T 
VL(t) 
1.0 
- 
--JV~ t 
Sawtooth waveform 
(a) 
Get{ t ) 
Vo 
0.9V o - 
0 ~ 
--0.9% 
- 
--V 0 - 
(b) 
Figure 10.47 
(a) Method for producing a variable duty cycle 
from a reference waveform Wref(t). (b) Load voltage and average 
load voltage for Wref(t) = 0.9 sin cot. 
and $4 will be ON and the load voltage will be -Vo. Thus, 
(1 -]-- Wref(t)) 
D(t) 
-- 
(10.35) 
2 
and thus 
[ (, +  ref"') ,] v0  ref,,,V0 
(VL)avg -- 2 
2 
(10.36) 
Figure 10.47b shows the load voltage VL(t) for a sinusoidal reference waveform 
Wref(t) -- 0.9 sin cot. The average voltage across the load, (VL)avg -- Wref(t) V0, is also 
shown. 

10.3 
Inversion: Conversion of DC to AC 
549 
,otO 
VoO] 
] 
42~ D4 
12•D 
1 
~$2+ D2 
D3 
Va(t) 
Vb(t) 
Vc(t) 
~4~D4 
5~D5 
~ 
D6 
(a) 
(b) 
D2 
Figure 10.48 Three-phase inverter configurations. (a) Voltage-source. (b) Current-source. 
D5 
!ii 
Note that the H-bridge inverter configuration of Fig. 10.43 can be used to produce 
a PWM current-source inverter. In a fashion directly analogous to the derivation of 
Eq. 10.36, one can show that such an inverter would produce an average current of 
the form 
(iL)avg--" Wref(t)Io 
(10.37) 
where I0 is the magnitude of the dc link current feeding the H-bridge. Note, however, 
that the sudden current swings between I0 and -I0 associated with such an inverter 
will produce large voltages should the load have any inductive component. As a 
result, practical inverters of this type require large capacitive filters to absorb the 
harmonic components of the PWM current and to protect the load against damage 
due to voltage-induced insulation failure. 
10.3.3 
Three.Phase 
Inverters 
Although the single-phase motor drives of Section 10.3.2 demonstrate the impor- 
tant characteristics of inverters, most variable-frequency drives are three phase. Fig- 
ures 10.48a and 10.48b show the basic configuration of three-phase motor inverters 
(voltage- and current-source respectively). Here we have shown the switches as ideal 
switches, recognizing that in a practical implementation, bidirectional capability will 
be achieved by a combination of a semiconductor switching device, such as an IGBT 
and a MOSFET, and a reverse-polarity diode. 
These configurations can be used to produce both stepped waveforms (either 
voltage-source or current-source) as well as pulse-width-modulated waveforms. This 
will be illustrated in the following example. 
The three-phase current-source inverter configuration of Fig. 10.48b is to be used to produce 
a three-phase stepped current waveform of the form shown in Fig 10.49. (a) Determine the 
switch sequence over the period 0 < t < T and (b) calculate the fundamental, third, fifth, and 
seventh harmonics of the phase-a current waveform. 
EXAMPLE 10.14 

550 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
I 0 
ia 
ib 
ic 
m 
~ 
m 
m 
,,, 
m 
m 
u, 
...................................... 
01 
T/6 
T~2 
5T/6 
~t 
~
m
m
m
 
........... 
-,o1 
Figure 10.49 Three-phase stepped current waveform for 
Example 10.14. 
II Solution 
a. By observing that switch S 1 is ON when the phase-a current is positive, switch $4 is ON 
when it is negative, and so forth, the following table of switching operations can be 
produced. 
t O-(T/6) (T/6)-(T/3) (T/3)-(T/2) (T/2)-(2T/3) (2T/3)-(5T/6) (5T/6)-T 
S1 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
S2 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
S3 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
$4 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
S5 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
ON 
ON 
$6 
ON 
ON 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
OFF 
b. The amplitudes of the harmonic components of the phase current can be determined from 
Eqs. 10.21 and 10.22 by setting A~ = 1/3. Thus, 
/a,l = 
~ 
/0 
/a,3 = 
0 
*a,'=-- 
T~ 
*0 
/5'~ 
la,7 -- 
--~ ] Io 
10.4 
SUMMARY 
The goal of this chapter is relatively modest. Our focus has been to introduce some 
basic principles of power electronics and to illustrate how they can be applied to 
the design of various power-conditioning circuits that are commonly found in motor 
drives. Although the discussion in this chapter is neither complete nor extensive, it 

10.4 Summary 
551 
is intended to provide the background required to support the various discussions of 
motor control which are presented in this book. 
We began with a brief overview of a few of the available solid-state switching 
devices: diodes, SCRs, IGBTs and MOSFETs, and so on. We showed that, for the 
purposes of a preliminary analysis, it is quite sufficient to represent these devices as 
ideal switches. To emphasize the fact that they typically can pass only unidirectional 
current, we included ideal diodes in series with these switches. The simplest of these 
devices is the diode, which has only two terminals and is turned ON and OFF simply 
by the conditions of the external circuit. The remainder have a third terminal which 
can be used to turn the device ON and, in the case of transistors such as MOSFETS 
and IGBTs, OFF again. 
A typical variable-frequency, variable-voltage motor-drive system can be con- 
sidered to consist of three sections. The input section rectifies the power-frequency, 
fixed-voltage ac input and produces a dc voltage or current. The middle section filters 
the rectifier output, producing a relatively constant dc current or voltage, depending 
upon the type of drive under consideration. The output inverter section converts the dc 
to variable-frequency, variable-voltage ac voltages or currents which can be applied 
to the terminals of a motor. 
The simplest inverters we investigated produce stepped voltage or current wave- 
forms whose amplitude is equal to that of the dc source and whose frequency can 
be controlled by the timing of the inverter switches. To produce a variable-amplitude 
output waveform, it is necessary to apply additional control to the rectifier stage to 
vary the amplitude of the dc bus voltage or link current supplied to the inverter. 
We also discussed pulse-width-modulated voltage-source inverters. In this type 
of inverter, the voltage to the load is switched between V0 and -V0 such that the 
average load voltage is determined by the duty cycle of the switching waveform. 
Loads whose time constant is long compared to the switching time of the inverter 
will act as filters, and the load current will then be determined by the average load 
voltage. Pulse-width modulated current-source inverters were also discussed briefly. 
The reader should approach the presentation here with great caution. It is impor- 
tant to recognize that a complete treatment of power electronics and motor drives is 
typically the topic of a multiple-course sequence of study. Although the basic prin- 
ciples discussed here apply to a wide range of motor drives, there are many details 
which must be included in the design of practical motor drives. Drive circuitry to turn 
ON the "switches" (gate drives for SCRs, MOSFETs, IGBTs, etc.) must be carefully 
designed to provide sufficient drive to fully turn on the devices and to provide the 
proper switching sequences. The typical inverter includes a controller and a protection 
system which is quite elaborate. Typically, the design of a specific drive is dominated 
by the current and voltage ratings of available switches devices. This is especially true 
in the case of high-power drive systems in which switches must be connected in series 
and/or parallel to achieve the desired power rating. The reader is referred to references 
in the bibliography for a much more complete discussion of power electronics and 
inverter systems than has been presented here. 
Motor drives based upon the configurations discussed here can be used to con- 
trol motor speed and motor torque. In the case of ac machines, the application of 

552 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
power-electronic based motor drives has resulted in performance that was previously 
available only with dc machines and has led to widespread use of these machines in 
most applications. 
10.5 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
This chapter is intended to serve as an introduction to the discipline of power elec- 
tronics. For readers who wish to study this topic in more depth, this bibliography lists 
a few of the many textbooks which have been written on this subject. 
Bird, B. M., K. G. King, and D. A. G. Pedder, An Introduction to Power Electronics, 2/e. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993. 
Dewan, S. B., and A. Straughen, Power Semiconductor Circuits. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1975. 
Hart, D. W., Introduction to Power Electronics. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 
1998. 
Kassakian, J. G., M. E Schlecht, and G. C. Verghese, Principles of Power Electronics. 
Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1991. 
Mohan, N., T. M. Undeland, and W. P. Robbins, Power Electronics: Converters, Applications, 
and Design, 3/e. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2002. 
Rahsid, M. H., Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices and Applications, 2/e. Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1993. 
Subrahmanyam, V., Electric Drives: Concepts and Applications. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1996. 
Thorborg, K., Power Electronics. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall International 
(U.K.) Ltd, 1988. 
10.6 
PROBLEMS 
10.1 Consider the half-wave rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.3a. The circuit is driven by 
a triangular voltage source Vs(t) of amplitude V0 = 9 V as shown in 
Fig. 10.50. Assuming the diode to be ideal and for a resistor R = 1.5 kf2: 
a. 
Plot the resistor voltage VR(t). 
b. 
Calculate the rms value of the resistor voltage. 
c. 
Calculate the time-averaged power dissipation in the resistor. 
10.2 Repeat Problem 10.1 assuming the diode to have a fixed 0.6 V voltage 
drop when it is ON but to be otherwise ideal. In addition, calculate the 
time-averaged power dissipation in the diode. 
10.3 Consider the half-wave SCR rectifier circuit of Fig. 10.6 supplied from the 
triangular voltage source of Fig. 10.50. Assuming the SCR to be ideal, 
calculate the rms resistor voltage as a function of the firing-delay time 
td (0 < td < T/2). 
10.4 Consider the rectifier system of Example 10.5. Write a MATLAB script to 
plot the ripple voltage as a function of filter capacitance as the filter 

10.6 
Problems 
553 
Vo 
Figure 10.50 Triangular voltage waveform. 
capacitance is varied over the range 3000/xF < C < 105/xF. Assume the 
diode to be ideal. Use a log-scale for the capacitance. 
10.5 Consider the full-wave rectifier system of Fig. 10.16 with R = 500 fl and 
C -- 200/xF. Assume each diode to have a constant voltage drop of 0.7 V 
when it is ON but to be otherwise ideal. For a 220 V rms, 50 Hz sinusoidal 
source, write a MATLAB script to calculate 
a. 
the peak voltage across the load resistor. 
b. 
the magnitude of the ripple voltage. 
c. 
the time-averaged power supplied to the load resistor. 
d. 
the time-averaged power dissipation in the diode bridge. 
10.6 Consider the half-wave rectifier system of Fig. 10.51. The voltage source 
is Vs(t) -- V0 sin oot where V0 = 15 V, and the frequency is 100 Hz. For 
L = 1 mH and R = 1 S2, plot the inductor current iL(t) for the first 1-1/2 
cycles of the applied waveform assuming the switch closes at time t = 0. 
10.7 Repeat Problem 10.6, using MATLAB to plot the inductor current for the first 
10 cycles following the switch closing at time t -- 0. (Hint: This problem 
can be easily solved, using simple Euler integration to solve for the current.) 
Switch 
+ 
o,L 
Vs(t)_ 
D2 i 
Figure 10.51 
Problem 10.6. 
Half-wave rectifier system for 

554 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
is(t) 
D1 
~ iL(t) 
+ 
+ 
R 
Vs(t) 
D2 
V~s(t) 
+ 
-- 
-- 
L 
v(t) 
m 
Figure 10.52 
Half-wave rectifier system 
for Problem 10.8. 
10.8 Consider the half-wave rectifier system of Fig. 10.52 as L becomes 
sufficiently large such that co (L/R) >> 1, where co is the supply frequency. In 
this case, the inductor current will be essentially constant. For R - 5 f2 and 
Vs(t) = V0 sin cot where V0 = 45 V and co = 100zr rad/sec. Assume the 
diodes to be ideal. 
a. 
Calculate the average (dc) value Vdc of the voltage v' s (t) across the series 
resistor/inductor combination. 
b. 
Using the fact that, in the steady state, there will be zero average voltage 
across the inductor, calculate the dc inductor current Idc. 
c. 
Plot the instantaneous inductor voltage v(t) over one cycle of the supply 
voltage. 
d. 
Plot the instantaneous source current is(t). 
10.9 Consider the half-wave, phase-controlled rectifier system of Fig. 10.53. This 
is essentially the same circuit as that of Problem 10.8 with the exception that 
diode D 1 of Fig. 10.52 has been replaced by an SCR, which you can consider 
to be ideal. Let R = 5 ~ and Vs(t) = V0 sin cot, where V0 = 45 V and 
co - 100zr rad/sec. Assume that the inductor L is sufficiently large such that 
co(L/R) >> 1 and that the SCR is triggered ON at time td (0 < td < It/co). 
a. 
Find an expression for the average (dc) value Vdc of the voltage v~ (t) 
across the series resistor/inductor combination as a function of the delay 
time to. 
b 
~ iL(t) 
+ 
+ 
R 
Vs(t) 
D2 
v~(t) 
-- 
-- 
t 
Figure 10.53 
Half-wave, phase-controlled 
rectifier system for Problem 10.9. 

10.6 
Problems 
555 
+ 
Vs(t) 
m 
T1 5 
D2 2 
L 
f 
~, 
D35 
'"JI- 
v~(t) 
R 
L 
Figure 10.54 
Full-wave, phase-controlled rectifier system for 
Problem 10.10. 
iL(t) 
b. 
Using the fact that, in the steady state, there will be zero average voltage 
across the inductor, find an expression for the dc inductor current Idc, 
again as a function of the delay time td. 
c. 
Plot Idc as a function of td for (0 < td < re/W). 
10.10 The half-wave, phase-controlled rectifier system of Problem 10.9 and 
Fig. 10.53 is to be replaced by the full-wave, phase-controlled system of 
Fig. 10.54. SCR T1 will be triggered ON at time ta (0 < td < re/co), and SCR 
T4 will be triggered on exactly one half cycle later. 
a. 
Find an expression for the average (dc) value Vdc of the voltage v~ (t) 
across the series resistor/inductor combination as a function of the delay 
time td. 
b. 
Using the fact that, in the steady state, there will be zero average voltage 
across the inductor, find an expression for the dc inductor current Idc, 
again as a function of the delay time td. 
c. 
Plot Idc as a function of td for (0 < td _< re/co). 
d. 
Plot the source current is(t) for one cycle of the source voltage for 
td = 3 msec. 
10.11 The full-wave, phase-controlled rectifier of Fig. 10.55 is supplying a highly 
inductive load such that the load current can be assumed to be purely dc, as 
represented by the current source Idc in the figure. The source voltage is a 
+ 
Vs(t) ( ) 
TI~_ L 
+ 
v[(t)_ 
G 
Idc 
T3 L 
Figure 10.55 
Full-wave, phase-controlled 
rectifier for Problem 10.11. 

556 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
sinusoid, Vs(t) = V0 sinwt. As shown in Fig. 10.31, SCRs T1 and T3 are 
triggered together at delay angle Otd (0 < c~d < Jr), and SCRs T2 and T4 are 
triggered exactly one-half cycle later. 
a. 
For c~d = n/4: 
(i) 
Sketch the load voltage v~(t). 
(ii) 
Calculate the average (dc) value Vdc of V's(t). 
(iii) 
Calculate the time-averaged power supplied to the load. 
b. 
Repeat part (a) for otd = 3:r/4. 
10.12 A full-wave diode rectifier is fed from a 50-Hz, 220-V rms source whose 
series inductance is 12 mH. It drives a load with a resistance 8.4 g2 which 
is sufficiently inductive that the load current can be considered to be 
essentially dc. 
a. 
Calculate the dc load current Idc and the commutation time tc. 
b. 
Compare the dc current of part (a) with the dc current which would result 
if the commutating inductance could be eliminated from the system. 
10.13 A 1-kW, 85-V, permanent-magnet dc motor is to be driven from a full-wave, 
phase-controlled bridge such as is shown in Fig. 10.56. When operating at its 
rated voltage, the dc-motor has a no-load speed of 1725 r/min and an 
armature resistance Ra = 0.82 f2. A large inductor (L = 580 mH) with 
resistance RL = 0.39 ~2 has been inserted in series with the output of the 
rectifier bridge to reduce the ripple current applied to the motor. The source 
voltage is a 115-V rms, 60-Hz sinusoid. 
With the motor operating at a speed of 1650 r/min, the motor current is 
measured to be 7.6 A. 
a. 
Calculate the motor input power. 
b. 
Calculate the firing delay angle O~ d of the SCR bridge. 
10.14 Consider the dc-motor drive system of Problem 10.13. To limit the starting 
current of the dc motor to twice its rated value, a controller will be used 
to adjust the initial firing-delay angle of the SCR bridge. Calculate the 
required firing-delay angle c~d. 
+ 
v~(t) ( ) 
T1 ~_ L 
T31 _ 
Inductor 
.& 
f 
L 
RE "~ 
dc 
motor 
Figure 10.56 
Dc motor driven from a full-wave, phase-controlled rectifier. 
Problem 10.13. 

10.6 Problems 
557 
10.15 A three-phase diode bridge is supplied by a three-phase autotransformer 
such that the line-to-line input voltage to the bridge can be varied from zero 
to 230 V. The output of the bridge is connected to the shunt field winding of 
a dc motor. The resistance of this winding is 158 ~. The autotransformer is 
adjusted to produce a field current of 1.75 A. Calculate the rms output 
voltage of the autotransformer. 
10.16 A dc-motor shunt field winding of resistance 210 ~2 is to be supplied from 
a 220-V rms, 50-Hz, three-phase source through a three-phase, phase- 
controlled rectifier. Calculate the delay angle Otd which will result in a field 
current of 1.1 A. 
10.17 A superconducting magnet has an inductance of 4.9 H, a resistance of 
3.6 m~, and a rated operating current of 80 A. It will be supplied from a 
15-V rms, three-phase source through a three-phase, phase-controlled 
bridge. It is desired to "charge" the magnet at a constant rate to achieve rated 
current in 25 seconds. 
a. 
Calculate the firing-delay angle O~d required to achieve this objective. 
b. 
Calculate the firing-delay angle required to maintain a constant current 
of 80 A. 
10.18 A voltage-source H-bridge inverter is used to produce the stepped waveform 
v(t) shown in Fig. 10.57. For V0 = 50 V, T = 10 msec and D -- 0.3: 
a. 
Using Fourier analysis, find the amplitude of the fundamental time- 
harmonic component of v(t). 
b. 
Use the MATLAB 'fit()' function to find the amplitudes of the first 10 
time harmonics of v(t). 
10.19 Consider the stepped voltage waveform of Problem 10.18 and Fig. 10.57. 
a. 
Using Fourier analysis, find the value of D (0 < D _< 0.5) such that the 
amplitude of the third-harmonic component of the voltage waveform 
is zero. 
v(t) 
Vo 
-Vo 
I 
I 
oo 1: 
I 
[-" 
DT 
~] 
Figure 10.57 Stepped voltage waveform for Problem 10.18. 

558 
CHAPTER 10 
Introduction to Power Electronics 
iL(t) 
I0 
-Io- 
I 
Old Old+ D..._.T 
2 
7t' -+- Old--~ 
-~ 
DT 
.~ 
D T 
7r Jr- Ol d + 
I 
I 
I 
I 
:rt" rr+Ol d 
2zr 
27r+Ol d 
D T 
27r -t- Old + 
7r + Old 
2 
I- 
Dr 
-I 
>, 
(.ot 
DT 
2 
Figure 10.58 
Stepped current waveform for Problem 10.20. 
b. 
Use the MATLAB 'fit()' function to find the amplitudes of the first 10 
time harmonics of the resulting waveform. 
10.20 Consider Example 10.12 in which a current-source inverter is driving a load 
consisting of a sinusoidal voltage. The inverter is controlled to produce the 
stepped current waveform shown in Fig. 10.58. 
a. 
Create a table showing the switching sequence required to produce the 
specified waveform and the time period during which each switch is 
either ON or OFF. 
b. 
Express the fundamental component of the current waveform in the form 
il(t) = ll cos (cot + ¢1) 
where 11 and t~l are functions of I0, D and the delay angle a d. 
c. 
Derive an expression for the time-averaged power delivered to the 
voltage source rE(t) -- Va cos ogt. 
10.21 A PWM inverter such as that of Fig. 10.45 is operating from a dc voltage of 
75 V and driving a load with L = 53 mH and R = 1.7 f2. For a switching 
frequency of 1500 Hz, calculate the average load current, the minimum and 
maximum current, and the current ripple for a duty cycle D = 0.7. 

CHAPTER 
Speed and Torque 
Control 
y 
he objective of this chapter is to discuss various techniques for the control of 
electric machines. Since an in-depth discussion of this topic is both too exten- 
sive for a single chapter and beyond the scope of this book, the presentation 
here will necessarily be introductory in nature. We will present basic techniques for 
speed and torque control and will illustrate typical configurations of drive electronics 
that are used to implement the control algorithms. This chapter will build upon the 
discussion of power electronics in Chapter 10. 
Note that the discussion of this chapter is limited to steady-state operation. The 
steady-state picture presented here is quite adequate for a wide variety of electric- 
machine applications. However, the reader is cautioned that system dynamics can play 
a critical role in some applications, with concerns ranging from speed of response to 
overall system stability. Although the techniques presented here form the basis for 
dynamic analyses, the constraints of an introductory textbook are such that a more 
extensive discussion, including transient and dynamic behavior, is not possible. 
In the discussion of torque control for synchronous and induction machines, 
the techniques of field-oriented or vector control are introduced and the analogy is 
made with torque control in dc motors. This material is somewhat more sophisticated 
mathematically than the speed-control discussion and requires application of the 
dq0 transformations developed in Appendix C. The chapter is written such that this 
material can be omitted at the discretion of the instructor without detracting from the 
discussion of speed control. 
11.1 
CONTROL OF DC MOTORS 
Before the widespread application of power-electronic drives to control ac machines, 
dc motors were by far the machines of choice in applications requiring flexibility of 
control. Although in recent years ac drives have become quite common, the ease of 
control of dc machines insure their continued use in many applications. 
559 

560 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
11.1.1 
Speed Control 
The three most common speed-control methods for dc motors are adjustment of the 
flux, usually by means of field-current control, adjustment of the resistance associated 
with the armature circuit, and adjustment of the armature terminal voltage. 
Field-Current Control 
In part because it involves control at a relatively low power 
level (the power into the field winding is typically a small fraction of the power into 
the armature of a dc machine), field-current control is frequently used to control the 
speed of a dc motor with separately excited or shunt field windings. The equivalent 
circuit for a separately excited dc machine is found in Fig. 7.4a and is repeated in 
Fig. 11.1. The method is, of course, also applicable to compound motors. The shunt 
field current can be adjusted by means of a variable resistance in series with the shunt 
field. Alternatively, the field current can be supplied by power-electronic circuits 
which can be used to rapidly change the field current in response to a wide variety of 
control signals. 
Figure 11.2a shows in schematic form a switching scheme for pulse-width modu- 
lation of the field voltage. This system closely resembles the pulse-width modulation 
system discussed in Section 10.3.2. It consists of a rectifier which rectifies the ac 
input voltage, a dc-link capacitor which filters the rectified voltage, producing a dc 
voltage Vdc, and a pulse-width modulator. 
In this system, because only a unidirectional field current is required, the pulse- 
width modulator consists of a single switch and a free-wheeling diode rather than the 
more complex four-switch arrangement of Fig. 10.45. Assuming both the switch and 
diode to be ideal, the average voltage across the field winding will be equal to 
Vf = DVdc 
(11.1) 
where D is the duty cycle of the switching waveform; i.e., D is the fraction of time 
that the switch S is on. 
Figure 11.2b shows the resultant field current. Because in the steady-state the 
average voltage across the inductor must equal zero, the average field current If will 
thus be equal to 
If: 
Rf 
-~f 
(11.2) 
i a 
if 
° 
~V~ 
~ 
~ 
o 
+ 
R a 
[ 
Rf 
+ 
Va 
ea 
I Lf 
vf 
0 
0 
Armature Field 
Figure 11.1 
Equivalent circuit for a separately 
excited dc motor. 

11.1 
Control of DC Motors 
561 
mc 
input 
if 
I 
i 
Re 
> ~ 
1 
Vf 
Lf 
I 
, 
0 
0 
k.. 
~ 
.yk.~ 
Jk. 
J 
Rectifier 
DC link 
Pulse-width 
Field winding 
modulator 
(a) 
if* 
, 
DT 
(I--D)IT 
< 
>- < 
> 
s 
s 
ON 
OFF 
._ 
(b) 
Figure 11.2 (a) Pulse-width modulation system for a dc-machine field 
winding. (b) Field-current waveform. 
Thus, the field current can be controlled simply by controlling the duty cycle of the 
pulse-width modulator. If the field-winding time constant Lf/Rf is long compared 
to the switching time, the ripple current Aif will be small compared to the average 
current If. 
A 25-kW, 3600 r/min, 240-V dc motor has an armature resistance of 47 mf2 and a shunt-field 
with a resistance of 187 fZ and an inductance of 4.2 H. Calculate (a) the average field current If 
and (b) the magnitude of the current ripple Aif when the field winding is supplied from a 240 V 
dc source by pulse-width modulation with a duty cycle D = 0.75 and a switching period 
of 1 msec. 
II Solution 
a. The average field current is readily found from Eq. 11.2 
EXAMPLE 11.1 
:240) 
If-- O k ef 
= 0.75 \ 1-~ 
= 0.96 A 

562 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
b. The field time constant r = Lf/Rf = 22.5 msec is much longer that the switching period 
of 1 msec. Thus, the ripple current can be calculated using Eq. 10.32 as 
(2 dc) 
O,, O, 
Aie= 
~ 
7 
(2x240) 
( 
1 ) 
= 
187 
~ 
0.75x(1-0.75) 
= 21.4 mA 
~ractice Problem 
1 1 .' 
The duty-cycle D of the dc-motor controller of Example 11.1 is suddenly switched from 0.75 
to 1.0. Calculate (a) the resultant steady-state field current and (b) the time constant for the 
change from the initial value of 1.08 A to the new final value. 
Solution 
a. 1.28 A 
b. 22.5 msec 
To examine the effect of field-current control, let us begin with the case of a dc 
motor driving a load of constant torque Tload. From Eqs. 7.9 and 7.14, the generated 
voltage of a dc motor can be written as 
Ea -- Kf lfoom 
( 11.3) 
where If is the average field current, O) m is the angular velocity in rad/sec, and Kf = 
Ka79dNf is a geometric constant which depends upon the dimensions of the motor, 
the properties of the magnetic material used to construct the motor, as well as the 
number of turns in the field winding. Note that strictly speaking, Kf is not constant 
since it is proportional to the direct-axis permeance, which typically varies as the 
flux-level in the motor increases to the point that the effects of magnetic saturation 
become significant. 
The electromagnetic torque is given by Eq. 7.16 as 
Ea Ia 
Tmech = 
= Kflfla 
(11.4) 
0.) m 
and the armature current can be seen from the equivalent circuit of Fig. 11.1 to be 
given by 
(Va- Ea) 
la = 
(11.5) 
Ra 

1 t.1 
Control of DC Motors 
563 
Setting the motor torque equal to Tload, Eqs. 11.3 through 11.5 can be solved 
for 09 m 
Tload Ra 
(Va- Iaea) 
( Va 
gflf ) 
O)rn = 
-- 
(11.6) 
Kflf 
KfIf 
From Eq. 11.6, recognizing that the armature resistance voltage drop IaRa is 
generally quite small in comparison to the armature voltage Va, we see that for a given 
load torque, the motor speed will increase with decreasing field current and decrease 
as the field current is increased. The lowest speed obtainable is that corresponding 
to maximum field current (the field current is limited by heating considerations); the 
highest speed is limited mechanically by the mechanical integrity of the rotor and 
electrically by the effects of armature reaction under weak-field conditions giving 
rise to poor commutation. 
Armature current is typically limited by motor cooling capability. In many dc 
motors, cooling is aided by a shaft-driven fan whose cooling capacity is a function 
of motor speed. To examine in an approximate fashion the limitations on the allow- 
able continuous motor output as the speed is changed, we will neglect the influence 
of changing ventilation and assume that the armature current Ia cannot exceed its 
rated value, in order to insure that the motor will not overheat. In addition, in our 
approximate argument we will neglect the effect of rotational losses (which of course 
also change with motor speed). Because the voltage drop across the armature resis- 
tance is relatively small, the speed voltage Ea will remain essentially constant at a 
value slightly below the applied armature voltage; any change in field current will be 
compenstated for by a change in motor speed. 
Thus under constant-terminal-voltage operation with varying field current, the 
Eala product, and hence the allowable motor output power, remain substantially 
constant as the speed is varied. A dc motor controlled in this fashion is referred to as 
a constant-power drive. Torque, however, varies directly with field flux and therefore 
has its highest allowable value at the highest field current and hence lowest speed. 
Field-current control is thus best suited to drives requiting increased torque at low 
speeds. When a motor so controlled is used with a load requiting constant torque over 
the speed range, the rating and size of the machine are determined by the product of 
the torque and the highest speed. Such a drive is inherently oversized at the lower 
speeds, which is the principal economic factor limiting the practical speed range of 
large motors. 
am :~[9_,t ~', ! r,t q :l E i~,'~11 
With an armature terminal voltage of 240 V and with a shunt-field current of 0.34 A, the no-load 
speed of the dc motor of Example 11.1 is found to be 3600 r/min. In this example, the motor 
is assumed to be driving a load which varies with speed as 
/°load -- 22.4 3-~ 
kW 
where n is the motor speed in r/min. A rheostat is to be installed in series with the shunt field to 
vary the speed. Assuming the armature terminal voltage to remain constant at 240 V, calculate 

564 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
the required resistance range if the speed is to be varied between 1800 and 3600 r/min. The 
effect of rotational losses can be ignored. 
I Solution 
The load torque is equal to the load power divided by the motor speed 09 m expressed in rad/sec. 
First expressing the power in terms of 09 m 
/°load 
22.4( Wm ) 3 
= 
kW 
120zr 
The load torque is then given by 
Tloa d 
/°load __ 22.4 
O)m 
4.18 × 1 -4 2 
= 
-- 
: 
0 wmN'm 
O) m 
( 1 207/" )3 
Thus, at 1800 r/min, (.D m --- 60 7/" and T~oad = 14.9 N.m. At 3600 r/min, (.O m : 
120zr and T~oad = 
59.4 N.m. 
Before solving for If, we must find the value of Kf, which can be found from the no- 
load data. Specifically, we see that with a terminal voltage of 240-V and at a no-load speed 
of 3600 r/min (Wm = 120:r), the corresponding field current is 0.34 A. Since under no-load 
conditions Ea "~ Va, we can find Kf from Eq. 11.3 as 
Ea 
240 
Kf = 
= 
= 1.87 V/(A. rad/sec) 
Ifo) m 
0.34 × 120:r 
To find the required field current, we can solve Eq. 11.6 for If 
If= 2Kfcom 
Va 
(lq-~/1 - 4°gmTl°adRa 
)Va 
2 
Recognizing that Ra is small and hence that If -~ Va/(Kfogm) we see that the positive sign should 
be used and thus 
Va 
(1 .q_ (1 
409m TloadRa ) 
If = 2gfogm 
Va 2 
Once the field current has been found, the total field resistance can be found as 
V a 
240 
(Rf)tota I : 
~ 
: 
If 
If 
and the required added rheostat resistance can be found by subtracting the resistance of the 
shunt-field winding (187 f2) from (Rf)totaZ. 
This leads to the following table: 
| 
r/min 
Tio, d [N. m] 
If [A] 
(Rf)~,.i [fl] 
R~h~t [f~] 
1800 
14.9 
0.678 
354 
167 
3600 
59.4 
0.334 
719 
532 
Thus, the rheostat must be able to cover the range from 166 f2 to 532 f2. 

11.1 
Control of DC Motors 
565 
)ractice Problem 1 1 .: 
The rheostat of Example 11.2 is to be replaced by a duty cycle controller operating from the 
240-V dc supply. Calculate the duty-cycle range required to achieve operation over the speed 
range of 1800-3600 r/min as specified in Example 11.2. 
Solution 
0.26 < 
D 
< 0.53 
D 
Armature-Circuit Resistance Control 
Armature-circuit resistance control pro- 
vides a means of obtaining reduced speed by the insertion of external series resistance 
in the armature circuit. It can be used with series, shunt, and compound motors; for the 
last two types, the series resistor must be connected between the shunt field and the 
armature, not between the line and the motor. It is a common method of speed control 
for series motors and is generally analogous in action to wound-rotor-induction-motor 
control by the addition of external series rotor resistance. 
Depending upon the value of the series armature resistance, the speed may vary 
significantly with load, since the speed depends on the voltage drop in this resistance 
and hence on the armature current demanded by the load. For example, a 1200-r/min 
shunt motor whose speed under load is reduced to 750 r/min by series armature re- 
sistance will return to almost 1200-r/min operation if the load is removed because 
the no-load current produces a voltage drop across the series resistance which is in- 
significant. The disadvantage of poor speed regulation may not be important in a series 
motor, which is used only where varying-speed service is required or can be tolerated. 
A significant disadvantage of this method of speed control is that the power loss 
in the external resistor is large, especially when the speed is greatly reduced. In fact, 
for a constant-torque load, the power input to the motor plus resistor remains constant, 
while the power output to the load decreases in proportion to the speed. Operating 
costs are therefore comparatively high for lengthy operation at reduced speeds. Be- 
cause of its low initial cost however, the series-resistance method (or the variation of it 
discussed in the next paragraph) will often be attractive economically for applications 
which require only short-time or intermittent speed reduction. Unlike field-current 
control, armature-resistance control results in a constant-torque drive because both 
the field-flux and, to a first approximation, the allowable armature current remain 
constant as speed changes. 
A variation of this control scheme is given by the shunted-armature method, 
which may be applied to a series motor, as in Fig. 11.3a, or a shunt motor, as in 
Fig. 11.3b. In effect, resistors R1 and R2 act as a voltage divider applying a reduced 
voltage to the armature. Greater flexibility is possible because two resistors can now 
be adjusted to provide the desired performance. For series motors, the no-load speed 
can be adjusted to a finite, reasonable value, and the scheme is therefore applicable to 
the production of slow speeds at light loads. For shunt motors, the speed regulation in 
the low-speed range is appreciably improved because the no-load speed is definitely 
lower than the value with no controlling resistors. 

566 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Series 
field 
T 
" 
-- 
Shunt 
field 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 11.3 Shunted-armature method of speed control applied 
to (a) a series motor and (b) a shunt motor. 
Armature-Terminal Voltage Control 
Armature-terminal voltage control can be 
readily accomplished with the use of power-electronic systems such as those dis- 
cussed in Chapter 10. Figure 11.4 shows in somewhat schematic form three possible 
configurations. In Fig. 11.4a, a phase-controlled rectifier in combination with a dc- 
link filter capacitor can be used to produce a variable dc-link voltage which can be 
applied directly to the armature terminals of the dc motor. 
In Fig. 11.4b, a constant dc-link voltage is produced by a diode rectifier in combi- 
nation with a dc-link filter capacitor. The armature terminal voltage is then varied by 
a pulse-width modulation scheme in which switch S is alternately opened and closed. 
When switch S is closed, the armature voltage is equal to the dc-link voltage Vdc, and 
when the switch is opened, current transfers to the freewheeling diode, essentially 
setting the armature voltage to zero. Thus the average armature voltage under this 
condition is equal to 
Va = D Vdc 
(11.7) 
' 
1 
L 
' 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Vdc 
I 
r 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 11.4 Three typical configurations for armature-voltage control. (a) Variable dc-link voltage (produced 
by a phase-controlled rectifier) applied directly to the dc-motor armature terminals. (b) Constant dc-link voltage 
with single-polarity pulse-width modulation. (c) Constant dc-link voltage with a full H-bridge. 

11.1 
Control of DC Motors 
567 
where 
Va = average armature voltage (V) 
Vdc = dc-link voltage (V) 
D = PWM duty cycle (fraction of time that switch S is closed) 
Figure 11.4c shows an H-bridge configuration as is discussed in the context of 
inverters in Section 10.3.3. Note that if switch $3 is held closed while switch $4 
remains open, this configuration reduces to that of Fig. 11.4b. However, the H-bridge 
configuration is more flexible because it can produce both positive- and negative- 
polarity armature voltage. For example, with switches S 1 and $3 closed, the armature 
voltage is equal to V~c while with switches $2 and $4 closed, the armature voltage 
is equal to -Vdc. Clearly, using such an H-bridge configuration in combination with 
an appropriate choice of control signals to the switches allows this PWM system to 
achieve any desired armature voltage in the range -V~c < Va < V~c. 
Armature-voltage control takes advantage of the fact that, because the voltage 
drop across the armature resistance is relatively small, a change in the armature 
terminal voltage of a shunt motor is accompanied in the steady state by a substantially 
equal change in the speed voltage. With constant shunt field current and hence field 
flux, this change in speed voltage must be accompanied by a proportional change in 
motor speed. Thus, motor speed can be controlled directly by means of the armature 
terminal voltage. 
~: EX A MPL E :~ 1 ~ 1: .3 
A 500-V, 100-hp, 2500 r/min, separately excited dc motor has the following parameters: 
Field resistance: 
Re = 109 
Rated field voltage: 
Vf0 = 300 V 
Armature resistance: 
Ra = 0.084 f2 
Geometric constant: 
Kf = 0.694 V/(A • rad/sec) 
Assuming the field voltage to be held constant at 300 V, use MATLAB t to plot the motor 
speed as a function of armature voltage with the motor operating under no-load and also under 
rated full-load torque as the armature voltage is varied from 250 V to 500 V. 
II Solution 
From Eq. 11.4 
and from Eq. 11.5 
Tmech 
Ia= Kflf 
L 
Va - Ea 
Ra 
Va- Kf/fO.)m 
Ra 
t MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. 

Hence we can solve for O)m 
09 m 
Kflf 
( mec "a) 
(30) 
n = 
-
-
 
O) m 
7/" 
and the speed in r/min as 
Finally, the field current is 
Vf 
Re 
300 
109 
co 
= 2.75 A 
and the rated full-load torque is given by 
Prated 
100 x 746 
Trate d = 
-- 
-- 285 N • m 
(O)m)rated 
2500 X (~00) 
Figure 11.5 is the desired plot. Notice that the speed drops approximately 63 r/min as the 
torque is increased from zero to full-load, independent of the armature voltage and machine 
speed. 
2500 
I 
I 
I 
I 7
~
 
+ = Zero torque 
- - -  
_ 
2000 
1500 
1000 
568 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Armature voltage [V] 
Figure 11.5 
A plot of speed versus armature voltage for the dc motor of Example 11.3. 

t t.t 
Control of DC Motors 
569 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
% Motor parameters 
Rf = 109; 
Ra = 0.084; 
Kf = 0.694; 
% Constant 
field voltage 
Vf = 3OO ; 
% Resulting 
field current 
If = Vf/Rf; 
% Rated speed in rad/sec 
omegarated 
: 2500"(pi/30) ; 
% Rated power 
in Watts 
Prated- 
100"746; 
% Rated torque 
in N-m 
Trated = Prated/omegarated; 
% Vary the armature 
voltage 
from 250 to 500 V 
% and calculate 
speed. 
for n=l:101 
Va(n) 
= 250 * (i + (n-l)/i00) ; 
% Zero torque 
T = 0; 
omega = (Va(n)- T*Ra/ (Kf*If))/(Kf*If) ; 
NoLoadRPM(n) 
= omega*30/pi; 
% Full-load 
torque 
T - Trated; 
omega : (Va(n)- T*Ra/ (Kf*If))/(Kf*If) ; 
FullLoadRPM(n) 
= omega*30/pi; 
end 
plot (Va, NoLoadRPM) 
hold 
plot(Va(20) ,NoLoadRPM(20) , '+') 
plot (Va (50) , NoLoadRPM (50) , ' +' ) 
plot (Va (80) ,NoLoadRPM (80) , ' +' ) 
plot (Va, FulILoadRPM) 
plot (Va (20) ,FulILoadRPM(20) 
, 'o') 
plot (Va (50) , FulILoadRPM (50) , ' o' ) 
plot (Va (80) , FulILoadRPM (80) , ' o' ) 
hold 
xlabel('Armature 
voltage 
[V] ') 

570 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
ylabel('Speed 
[r/min] ') 
text(270,2300,'+ 
: Zero torque') 
text(270,2100,'o 
= Full-load torque') 
Calculate the change in armature voltage required to maintain the motor of Example 11.3 at a 
speed of 2000 r/min as the load is changed from zero to full-load torque. 
Solution 
12.5 V 
Frequently the control of motor voltage is combined with field-current control 
in order to achieve the widest possible speed range. With such dual control, base 
speed can be defined as the normal-armature-voltage, full-field speed of the motor. 
Speeds above base speed are obtained by reducing the field current; speeds below 
base speed are obtained by armature-voltage control. As discussed in connection with 
field-current control, the range above base speed is that of a constant-power drive. 
The range below base speed is that of a constant-torque drive because, as in armature- 
resistance control, the flux and the allowable armature current remain approximately 
constant. The overall output limitations are therefore as shown in Fig. 11.6a for 
approximate allowable torque and in Fig. 11.6b for approximate allowable power. 
The constant-torque characteristic is well suited to many applications in the machine- 
tool industry, where many loads consist largely of overcoming the friction of moving 
parts and hence have essentially constant torque requirements. 
The speed regulation and the limitations on the speed range above base speed are 
those already presented with reference to field-current control; the maximum speed 
thus does not ordinarily exceed four times base speed and preferably not twice base 
speed. For conventional machines, the lower limit for reliable and stable operation is 
(D 
<-- 
Constant torque 
<~ 
wer 
I 
Armature-voltage Field-current I 
control 
control 
I 
I 
-hit'- 
..M 
~l 
Base 
Maximum 
speed 
speed 
Speed 
0 
0 
Constant power 
 o/I 
#*"/ 
I 
eo°/A,=a~-I 
voltage! 
Base 
speed 
Speed 
(a) 
(b) 
Field-current 
control 
J'-, 
_hi 
Maximum 
speed 
Figure 11.6 (a) Torque and (b) power limitations of combined armature-voltage and 
field-current methods of speed control. 

11.1 
Control of DC Motors 
571 
O)ref 
~ T load 
• 
DC 
motor 
Speed 
• controller 
(.,0 m 
Figure 11.7 
Block diagram for a 
speed-control system for a separately 
excited or shunt-connected dc motor. 
about one-tenth of base speed, corresponding to a total maximum-to-minimum range 
not exceeding 40:1. 
With armature reaction ignored, the decrease in speed from no-load to full-load 
torque is caused entirely by the full-load armature-resistance voltage drop in the 
dc generator and motor. This full-load armature-resistance voltage drop is constant 
over the voltage-control range, since full-load torque and hence full-load current 
are usually regarded as constant in that range. When measured in r/min, therefore, 
the speed decrease from no-load to full-load torque is a constant, independent of the 
no-load speed, as we saw in Example 11.3. The torque-speed curves accordingly are 
closely approximated by a series of parallel straight lines for the various motor-field 
adjustments. Note that a speed decrease of, say, 40 r/min from a no-load speed of 
1200 r/min is often of little importance; a decrease of 40 r/min from a no-load speed 
of 120 r/min, however, may at times be of critical importance and require corrective 
steps in the layout of the system. 
Figure 11.7 shows a block diagram of a feedback-control system that can be used 
to regulate the speed of a separately excited or shunt-connected dc motor. The inputs 
to the dc-motor block include the armature voltage and the field current as well as 
the load torque Tload. The resultant motor speed O)m is fed back to a controller block 
which represents both the control logic and power electronics and which controls the 
armature voltage and field current applied to the dc motor, based upon a reference 
speed signal O)ref. Depending upon the design of the controller, with such a scheme 
it is possible to control the steady-state motor speed to a high degree of accuracy 
independent of the variations in the load torque. 
Figure 11.8 shows the block diagram for a simple speed control system to be applied to the dc 
motor of Example 11.3. In this controller, the field voltage is held constant (not shown) at its 
rated value of 300 V. Thus, the control is applied only to the armature voltage and takes the form 
Va = Va0 -Jl" G(o)ref -- O-)m) 
where Va0 is the armature voltage when O) m = O)re f and G is a multiplicative constant. 

572 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
~ 
0 
OAref 
09 m 
Figure 11.8 Simple dc-motor speed 
controller for Example 11.4. 
With the reference speed set to 2000 r/min ((/)re f ~" 2000 x zr/30), calculate Va0 and G so 
that the motor speed is 2000 r/min at no load and drops only by 25 r/min when the torque is 
increased to its rated full-load value. 
II Solution 
As was found in Example 11.3, the field current under this condition will be 2.75 A. At no 
load, 2000 r/min, 
Va ~' Ea = KflfWm -- 0.694 x 2.75 x 2000 
3-0 = 400 V 
and thus Va0 = 400 V. 
The full load torque was found in Example 11.3 to be Trate d = 
285 N.m and thus the 
armature current required to achieve rated full-load torque can be found from Eq. 11.4 
Trate d 
285 
la = 
= 
= 149A 
Kflf 
0.694 x 2.75 
At a speed of 1975 r/min, Ea will be given by 
E.=KfIfo)m=0.694x2.75x 
1975 
3-0 
=395V 
and thus 
Va = Ea "-[- laRa 
-
-
 395 + 149 × 0.084 = 408 V 
Solving for G gives 
Va-- 
Va0 
G= 
O)re f -- O) m 
408 - 400 
= 
- 
3.06 
V. sec/rad 
(2000 - 1975) (~) 
)ractice Problem 1 1., 
If the load torque in Example I 1.4 is equal to half of the rated full-load torque, calculate (a) the 
speed of the motor and (b) the corresponding load power. 
Solution 
a. 1988 r/min 
b. 29.6 kW 

11.1 
Control of DC Motors 
573 
In the case of permanent-magnet dc motors, the field flux is, of course, fixed 
by the permanent magnet (with the possible exception of any effects of temperature 
changes on the magnet properties as the motor heats up). From Eqs. 11.3 and 11.4, 
we see that the voltage generated voltage can be written in the form 
Ea - 
Kmwm 
(11.8) 
and that the electromagnetic torque can be written as 
Tmech -" Km la 
(11.9) 
Comparison of Eqs. 11.8 and 11.9 with Eqs. 11.3 and 11.4 show that the analysis 
of a permanent-magnet dc motor is identical to that of a shunt or separately excited 
dc motor with the exception that the torque-constant Km must be substituted for the 
term Kf lf . 
The permanent-magnet dc motor of Example 7.9 has an armature resistance of 1.03 ~ and a 
torque constant Km = 0.22 V/(rad/sec). Assume the motor to be driving a constant power load 
of 800 W (including rotational losses), and calculate the motor speed as the armature voltage 
is varied from 40 to 50 V. 
II Solution 
The motor power output (including rotational losses) is given by the product Eala and thus we 
can write 
Pload = Ea/a = Kmo)m/a 
Solving for O) m gives 
09 m -- 
The armature current can be written as 
Ploa~ 
Kmta 
(Va - Ea) 
(Va - Kmo)m) 
Ia= 
--" 
Ra 
Ra 
These two equations can be combined to give an equation for O) m of the form 
from which we can find 
2 
(K~) 
el°ad Ra 
O) m -- 
09 m + 
K 2 
=0 
Va[ 
1 
1± 
1-- 
U) 
Recognizing that, if the voltage drop across the armature resistance is small, Va ~ Ea --- 
Kmo)m, we pick the positive sign and thus 
ga 
I 
~/ 
4eloadga ] 
O)m = ~-~m 
1--~- 
1-- 
V) 
EXAMPLE 
11.5 

574 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Substituting values, we find that for Va = 40 V, 09 m "-- 169.2 rad/sec (1616 r/min) and for 
V a --- 50 V, 09 m -- 217.5 rad/sec (2077 r/min). 
~ractice Problem 1 1 .! 
Calculate the speed variation (in r/min) of the permanent-magnet dc motor of Example 11.5 if 
the armature voltage is held constant at 50 V and the load power varies from 100 W to 500 W. 
Solution 
2077 r/min to 1540 r/min 
11.1.2 
Torque 
Control 
As we have seen, the electromagnetic torque of a dc motor is proportional to the 
armature current la and is given by 
Tmech = Kflfla 
(11.10) 
in the case of a separately excited or shunt motor and 
Tmech ~-- Kmla 
(11.11) 
in the case of a permanent-magnet motor. 
From these equations we see that torque can be controlled directly by controlling 
the armature current. Fig. 11.9 shows three possible configurations. In Fig. 11.9a, a 
phase-controlled rectifier, in combination with a dc-link filter inductor, can be used 
to create a variable dc-link current which can be applied directly to the armature 
terminals of the dc motor. 
In Fig. 11.9b, a constant dc-link current is produced by a diode rectifier. The 
armature terminal voltage is then varied by a pulse-width modulation scheme in 
which switch S is alternately opened and closed. When switch S is opened, the current 
Idc flows into the dc-motor armature while when switch S is closed, the armature is 
I 
'de 
S r" 
"0 r 
I 
s,j_  0 
$4 r, 
$2 ~/ 
$3 r / 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 11.9 Three typical configurations for armature-current control. (a) Variable dc-link current 
(produced by a phase-controlled rectifier) applied directly to the dc-motor armature terminals. (b) Constant 
dc-link current with single-polarity pulse-width modulation. (c) Constant dc-link current with a full H-bridge. 

11.1 
Control of DC Motors 
575 
Torque I Ia 
] 
controller I 
> 
O)ref 
~, 
Speed 
controller 
I T load 
L 
i 
motor [ l,f 
: ; 
> 
O9 m 
Figure 11.10 Block diagram of a dc-motor 
speed-control system using direct-control 
of motor torque. 
shorted and Ia decays. Thus, the duty cycle of switch S will control the average current 
into the armature. 
Finally, Fig 11.9c shows an H-bridge configuration as is discussed in the context 
of inverters in Section 10.3.2. Appropriate control of the four switches S 1 through 
$4 allows this PWM system to achieve any desired armature average current in the 
range--Idc < Ia < /de. 
Note that in each of the PWM configurations of Fig. 11.9b and c, rapid changes in 
instantaneous current through the dc machine armature can give rise to large voltage 
spikes, which can damage the machine insulation as well as give rise to flashover and 
voltage breakdown of the commutator. In order to eliminate these effects, a practical 
system must include some sort of filter across the armature terminals (such as a 
large capacitor) to limit the voltage rise and to provide a low-impedance path for the 
high-frequency components of the drive current. 
Figure 11.10 shows a typical configuration in which the torque control is sur- 
rounded by a speed-feedback loop. This looks similar to the speed control of Fig. 11.7. 
However, instead of controlling the armature voltage, in this case the output of the 
speed controller is a torque reference signal Tref which in turn serves as the input to 
the torque controller. One advantage of such a system is that it automatically limits 
the dc-motor armature current to acceptable levels under all operating conditions, as 
is shown in Example 11.6. 
~ EXAMPLE 11~i6 
Consider the 100-hp dc motor of Examples 11.3 and 11.4 to be driving a load whose torque 
varies linearly with speed such that it equals rated full-load torque (285 N.m) at a speed of 
2500 r/min. We will assume the combined moment of inertia of the motor and load to equal 
0.92 kg.m 2. The field voltage is to be held constant at 300 V. 
a. Calculate the armature voltage and current required to achieve speeds of 2000 and 
2500 r/min. 
b. Assume that the motor is operated from an armature-voltage controller and that the 
armature voltage is suddenly switched from its 2000 r/min to its 2500 r/min value. 
Calculate the resultant motor speed and armature current as a function of time. 

576 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
c. Assume that the motor is operated from an armature-current controller and that the 
armature current is suddenly switched from its 2000 r/min to its 2500 r/min value. 
Calculate the resultant motor speed as a function of time. 
I Solution 
a. Neglecting any rotational losses, the armature current can be found from Eq. 11.4 by 
setting Tmech = Tload 
Substituting 
Tload 
la= Kflf 
(n) 
Tload-- 
__ 
Tfl 
nf 
where n is the motor speed in r/min, nf "- 2500 r/min and Tn = 285 N.m gives 
n Tfl 
I.= nfKflf 
Solving for Va -- Ea -'[- IaRa then allows us to complete the following table: 
r/min 
~m [rad/sec] 
V~ [Vl 
I a [A] 
Tload [N" m] 
2000 
209 
410 
119 
228 
2500 
262 
513 
149 
285 
b. The dynamic equation governing the speed of the motor is 
doAm 
J--~ = Tm~h- T, oad 
Substituting O) m "-- (zr/30)n and OA r ~" (7r/30)nf we can write 
Tl°ad 
(~) 
"-- 
OAm 
Under armature-voltage control, 
Tmech-- Kflfla=Kflf ( Va-Ea)ga 
Kflf ( Va - RaKflfOAm ) 
and thus the governing differential equation is 
doom 
(ga-KflfoArn'~)(Tfl) 
= 
R 
~ 
OAm 
J --~ 
Kf If 
Ra 
j 
OAf 
or 
doAm 
1 (Tn 
(Kflf) 2 ) 
KflfV a 
_ 
~ 
_[.. 
o) m 
dt b 7 
wf 
Ra 
JRa 
doAm 
dt + 48.4 OAm -- 24.7 V. = 0 

11.1 
Control of DC Motors 
5"17 
From this differential equation, we see that with the motor initially at (Dm --" (Di = 
209 rad/sec, if the armature voltage Va is suddenly switched from Vi = 413 V to 
Vf = 513 V, the speed will rise exponentially to (Dm --" (De = 262 rad/sec as 
(Dm -" (.Of + ((Di -- (Df) e-tIt 
= 262- 53e -t/~ rad/sec 
where r = 1/48.4 = 20.7 msec. Expressed in terms of r/min 
n = 2500- 50e -t/r r/min 
The armature current will decrease exponentially with the same 20.7 msec time 
constant from an initial value of (Vf - Vi)/Ra = 1190 A to its final value of 149 A. 
Thus, 
Ia = 149 + 1041e -t/~ A 
Notice that it is unlikely that the supply to the dc motor can supply this large initial 
current (eight times the rated full-load armature current) and, in addition, the high 
current and corresponding high torque could potentially cause damage to the dc motor 
commutator, brushes, and armature winding. Hence, as a practical matter, a practical 
controller would undoubtedly limit the rate of change of the armature voltage to avoid 
such sudden steps in voltage, with the result that the speed change would not occur as 
rapidly as calculated here. 
c. The dynamic equation governing the speed of the motor remains the same as that in 
part (b) as does the equation for the load torque. However, in this case, because the motor 
is being operated from a current controller, the electromagnetic torque will remain 
constant at Tmech --- Tf -- 285 N.m after the current is switched from its initial value of 
119 A to its final value of 149 A. 
Thus 
do) m 
(Tff) 
J ~  
= 
Tmech- Tload = Tf- 
O.) m 
or 
d~-- -~- 
~ 
(Dm 
j 
d(Dm 
= 
+ 1.18Wm -- 310 = 0 
dt 
In this case, the speed will rise exponentially to (Dm -- (.Of --- 262 rad/sec as 
(Dm = (Df + ((Di -- (Df) e-tIt 
= 262- 53e -t/~ rad/sec 
where now the time constant r -- 1/1.18 - 845 msec. 

578 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Clearly, the change in motor speed under the current controller is much slower. 
However, at no point during this transient do either the motor current or the motor torque 
exceed their rated value. In addition, should faster response be desired, the armature 
current (and hence motor torque) could be set temporarily to a fixed value higher than the 
rated value (e.g., two or three times rated as compared to the factor of 8 found in part (b)), 
thus limiting the potential for damage to the motor. 
Consider the dc motor/load combination of Example 11.6 operating under current (torque) 
control to be operating in the steady-state at a speed of 2000 r/min at an armature current of 
119 A. If the armature current is suddenly switched to 250 A, calculate the time required for 
the motor to reach a speed of 2500 r/min. 
Solution 
0.22 sec 
11.2 
CONTROL 
OF SYNCHRONOUS 
MOTORS 
1 1.2.1 
Speed Control 
As discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, synchronous motors are essentially constant-speed 
machines, with their speed being determined by the frequency of the armature currents 
as described by Eqs. 4.40 and 4.41. Specifically, Eq. 4.40 shows that the synchronous 
angular velocity is proportional to the electrical frequency of the applied armature 
voltage and inversely proportional to the number of poles in the machine 
(2) 
COs-- poles 
COe 
(11.12) 
where 
cos = synchronous spatial angular velocity of the air-gap mmf wave [rad/sec] 
COe = 2n'fe = angular frequency of the applied electrical excitation [rad/sec] 
fe = applied electrical frequency [Hz] 
Clearly, the simplest means of synchronous motor control is speed control via con- 
trol of the frequency of the applied armature voltage, driving the motor by a polyphase 
voltage-source inverter such as the three-phase inverter shown in Fig. 11.11. As is dis- 
cussed in Section 10.3.3, this inverter can either be used to supply stepped ac voltage 
waveforms of amplitude V, tc or the switches can be controlled to produce pulse-width- 
modulated ac voltage waveforms of variable amplitude. The dc-link voltage Vdc can 
itself be varied, for example, through the use of a phase-controlled rectifier. 

11.2 Control of Synchronous Motors 
579 
Frequency 
>[Controller] 
I 
I 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
"1 
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
3 phase 
ac input 
~ 
I 
I 
+ 
: 
m 
Vd c 
I 
.1 
J 
k.. 
J~,. 
Jk. 
,,/ 
Y 
Y 
Phase-controlled 
Dc link 
Inverter 
rectifier 
Figure 11.11 
Three-phase voltage-source inverter. 
3-phase 
output 
The frequency of the inverter output waveforms can of course be varied by con- 
trolling the switching frequency of the inverter switches. For ac-machine applications, 
coupled with this frequency control must be control of the amplitude of the applied 
voltage, as we will now see. 
From Faraday's Law, we know that the air-gap component of the armature voltage 
in an ac machine is proportional to the peak flux density in the machine and the 
electrical frequency. Thus, if we neglect the voltage drop across the armature resistance 
and leakage reactance, we can write 
(fe)(Bpeak)Vrate d 
(11.13) 
Va= 
frated 
B rated 
where Va is the amplitude of the armature voltage, fe is the operating frequency, and 
Bpeak is the peak air-gap flux density. Vrated, frated, and Brated are the corresponding 
rated-operating-point values. 
Consider a situation in which the frequency of the armature voltage is varied while 
its amplitude is maintained at its rated value (Va = Vrated). Under these conditions, 
from Eq. 11.13 we see that 
Bpeak -- 
-~e 
Brated 
(11.14) 
Equation 11.14 clearly demonstrates the problem with constant-voltage, variable- 
frequency operation. Specifically, for a given armature voltage, the machine flux 
density is inversely proportional to frequency and thus as the frequency is reduced, 
the flux density will increase. Thus for a typical machine which operates in saturation 
at rated voltage and frequency, any reduction in frequency will further increase the 
flux density in the machine. In fact, a significant drop in frequency will increase 

580 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
the flux density to the point of potential machine damage due both to increased 
core loss and to the increased machine currents required to support the higher flux 
density. 
As a result, for frequencies less than or equal to rated frequency, it is typical to 
operate a machine at constant flux density. From Eq. 11.13, with Bpeak = Brated 
fe ) Vrated 
(11.15) 
Va-" 
frated 
which can be rewritten as 
Va 
Vrated 
~ee = frated 
(11.16) 
From Eq. 11.16, we see that constant-flux operation can be achieved by maintain- 
ing a constant ratio of armature voltage to frequency. This is referred to as constant- 
volts-per-hertz (constant V/Hz) operation. It is typically maintained from rated fre- 
quency down to the low frequency at which the armature resistance voltage drop 
becomes a significant component of the applied voltage. 
Similarly, we see from Eq. 11.13 that if the machine is operated at frequencies in 
excess of rated frequency with the voltage at its rated value, the air-gap flux density 
will drop below its rated value. Thus, in order to maintain the flux density at its 
rated value, it would be necessary to increase the terminal voltage for frequencies 
in excess of rated frequency. In order to avoid insulation damage, it is common to 
maintain the machine terminal voltage at its rated value for frequencies in excess of 
rated frequency. 
The machine terminal current is typically limited by thermal constraints. Thus, 
provided the machine cooling is not affected by rotor speed, the maximum permissible 
terminal current will remain constant at its rated value/rated, independent of the applied 
frequency. As a result, for frequencies below rated frequency, with Va proportional to 
fe, the maximum machine power will be proportional to fe Vrated/rated. The maximum 
torque under these conditions can be found by dividing the power by the rotor speed COs, 
which is also proportional to fe as can be seen from Eq. 11.12. Thus, we see that 
the maximum torque is proportional to Vratedlrated, and hence it is constant at its 
rated-operating-point value. 
Similarly, for frequencies in excess of rated frequency, the maximum power will 
be constant and equal to Vratedlrated . The corresponding maximum torque will then 
vary inversely with machine speed as VratedIrated/COs 
. The maximum operating speed 
for this operating regime will be determined either by the maximum frequency which 
can be supplied by the drive electronics or by the maximum speed at which the rotor 
can be operated without risk of damage due to mechanical concerns such as excessive 
centrifugal force or to the presence of a resonance in the shaft system. 
Figure 11.12 shows a plot of maximum power and maximum torque versus speed 
for a synchronous motor under variable-frequency operation. The operating regime 
below rated frequency and speed is referred to as the constant-torque regime and that 
above rated speed is referred to as the constant-power regime. 

11.2 
Control of Synchronous Motors 
581 
Rated 
value 
Constant-torque 
regime 
\ 
Power 
, 
Rated 
speed 
Constant-power 
regime 
Torque 
r 
Speed 
Figure 11.12 
Variable-speed operating regimes for a synchronous motor. 
The 45-kVA, 220-V, 60-Hz, six-pole, three-phase synchronous machine of Example 5.4 is 
to be operated as a motor and driven from a variable-frequency, three-phase voltage-source 
inverter which provides 220 V at 60 Hz and which maintains constant V/Hz as the frequency 
is reduced. The machine has a saturated synchronous reactance of 0.836 per unit and achieves 
rated open-circuit voltage at a field current of 2.84 A. For the purposes of this example, assume 
that the motor losses are negligible. 
a. With the motor operating at 60 Hz, 220 V and at rated power, unity power factor, calculate 
(i) the motor speed in r/min and (ii) the motor field current. 
b. If the inverter frequency is reduced to 50 Hz and the motor load adjusted to rated torque, 
calculate the (i) the resulting motor speed and (ii) and the motor field current required to 
again achieve unity power factor. 
I Solution 
a. 
(i) The motor will operate at its synchronous speed which can be found from Eq. 4.41 
ns = 
~ 
/ 
fe 
-- 
~ 
60 = 1200 r/min 
(ii) As seen in Chapter 5, the field current can be determined from the generated voltage. 
For motor operation, 
E, af-- Va- j Xsla = 1.0- j0.836 x 1.0 = 1.30 L--39.9 ° 
where Va has been chosen as the reference phasor. Thus the field current is 
If = 1.30 x 2.84 = 3.69 A 
Note that we have chosen to solve for Eaf in per unit. A solution in real units would have 
of course produced the same result. 
b. 
(i) When the frequency is reduced from 60 Hz to 50 Hz, the motor speed will drop from 
1200 r/min to 1000 r/min. 
EXAMPLE 11.7 

582 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
(ii) Let us again consider the equation for the generated voltage 
#af-- Va - jXs[a 
where here we will assume that the equation is written in real units. 
As the inverter frequency is reduced from 60 Hz, the inverter voltage will drop 
proportionally since the inverter maintains constant V/Hz. Thus we can write 
Va-- ~m0 Va0 
where the subscript 0 is used to indicate a 60-Hz value as found in part (a). Reactance 
is also proportional to frequency and thus 
Xs = 
~mO Xs0 
The generated voltage is proportional to both the motor speed (and hence the 
frequency) and the field current, and thus we can write 
If 
Eaf: (~00)(-T~) EafO 
Finally, if we recognize that, to operate at rated torque and unity power factor under 
this reduced frequency condition, the motor armature current will have to be equal to the 
value found in part (a), i.e., la = lao, we can write the generated voltage equation as 
( O)rn 
)O)m0 (~)#af0 = ( O')m 
)O.)m0 l~ra0- j (~mm0)Xs0ia0 
or 
('~) #af0--" l~a0--jXs0ia0 
Since the subscripted quantities correspond to the solution of part (a), they must 
satisfy 
/~af0 = ~0 - j X~olao 
and thus we see that we must have It = If0. In other words, the field current for this 
operating condition is equal to that found in part (a), or If = 3.69 A. 
)ractice Problem 
1 1.' 
Consider 50-Hz operation of the synchronous motor of Example 11.7, part (b). If the load 
torque is reduced to 75 percent of rated torque, calculate the field current required to achieve 
unity power factor. 
Solution 
3.35 A 
Although during steady-state operation the speed of a synchronous motor is 
determined by the frequency of the drive, speed control by means of frequency control 
is of limited use in practice. This is due in most part to the fact that it is difficult 
for the rotor of a synchronous machine to track arbitrary changes in the frequency 

11.2 
Control of Synchronous Motors 
583 
of the applied armature voltage. In addition, starting is a major problem, and, as 
a result, the rotors of synchronous motors are often equipped with a squirrel-cage 
winding known as an amortisseur or damper winding similar to the squirrel-cage 
winding in an induction motor, as shown in Fig. 5.3. Following the application of 
a polyphase voltage to the armature, the rotor will come up almost to synchronous 
speed by induction-motor action with the field winding unexcited. If the load and 
inertia are not too great, the motor will pull into synchronism when the field winding 
is subsequently energized. 
Problems with changing speed result from the fact that, in order to develop torque, 
the rotor of a synchronous motor must remain in synchronism with the stator flux. 
Control of synchronous motors can be greatly enhanced by control algorithms in 
which the stator flux and its relationship to the rotor flux are controlled directly. Such 
control, which amounts to direct control of torque, is discussed in Section 11.2.2. 
1 1.2.2 
Torque Control 
Direct torque control in an ac machine, which can be implemented in a number of 
different ways, is commonly referred to asfield-oriented control or vector control. To 
facilitate our discussion of field-oriented control, it is helpful to return to the discussion 
of Section 5.6.1. Under this viewpoint, which is formalized in Appendix C, stator 
quantities (flux, current, voltage, etc.) are resolved into components which rotate in 
synchronism with the rotor. Direct-axis quantities represent those components which 
are aligned with the field-winding axis, and quadrature-axis components are aligned 
perpendicular to the field-winding axis. 
Section C.2 of Appendix C derives the basic machine relations in dq0 variables 
for a synchronous machine consisting of a field winding and a three-phase stator 
winding. The transformed flux-current relationships are found to be 
)~d -- Ldid + Lafif 
(11.17) 
(11.18) 
where (-Ome -- (poles/2)Wm is the electrical angular velocity of the rotor. 
Xq-- Lqiq 
3 
Xf = ~ Laf id n t- Lffif 
(11.19) 
where the subscripts d, q, and f refer to armature direct-, quadrature-axis, and field- 
winding quantities respectively. Note that throughout this chapter we will assume 
balanced operating conditions, in which case zero-sequence quantities will be zero 
and hence will be ignored. 
The corresponding transformed voltage equations are 
dXd 
Vd -- Raid + d--T - O)me•q 
(11.20) 
dXq 
Vq = 
Raiq q- -~ 
Jr- O)me/~d 
(11.21) 
dXf 
Vf "-- Rfif + 
(11.22) 
dt 

584 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Finally, the electromagnetic torque acting on the rotor of a synchronous motor is 
shown to be (Eq. C.31) 
3 (P°21es) 
Tmech = ~ 
()~diq -- ~.qid) 
(11.23) 
Under steady-state, balanced-three-phase operating conditions, 09me = 
60 e where 
O) e is the electrical frequency of the armature voltage and current in rad/sec. Because 
the armature-produced mmf and flux waves rotate in synchronism with the rotor and 
hence with respect to the dq reference frame, under these conditions an observer in 
the dq reference frame will see constant fluxes, and hence one can set d/dt = 0.1 
Letting the subscripts F, D, and Q indicate the corresponding constant values of 
field-, direct- and quadrature-axis quantities respectively, the flux-current relation- 
ships of Eqs. 11.17 through 11.19 then become 
'~D = LdiD + LafiF 
(11.24) 
~,Q = LqiQ 
(11.25) 
3 
~.F = ~ LafiD -+- LffiF 
(11.26) 
Armature resistance is typically quite small, and, if we neglect it, the steady-state 
voltage equations (Eqs. 11.20 through 11.22) then become 
p D = -O)e)~ Q 
(11.27) 
UQ = O)e~. D 
(11.28) 
1)F = RfiF 
(11.29) 
Finally, we can write Eq. 11.23 as 
3 (p°les) ()~DiQ -- ~.QiD) 
(1130) 
Tmech = ~ 
2 
From this point on, we will focus our attention on machines in which the effects 
of saliency can be neglected. In this case, the direct- and quadrature-axis synchronous 
inductances are equal and we can write 
Ld = Lq = Ls 
(11.31) 
where Ls is the synchronous inductance. Substitution into Eqs. 11.24 and 11.25 and 
then into Eq. 11.30 gives (po,es) 
Tmech = ~ 
2 
[(LsiD + LafiF)iQ- LsiQiD] 
----3 (p°les) 
LafiFiQ-2 
2 
(11.32) 
1 This can easily be derived formally by substituting expressions for the balanced-three-phase armature 
currents and voltages into the transformation equations. 

t 1.2 
Control of Synchronous Motors 
585 
Equation 11.32 shows that torque is produced by the interaction of the field flux 
(proportional to the field current) and the quadrature-axis component of the armature 
current, in other words the component of armature current that is orthogonal to the 
field flux. By analogy, we see that the direct-axis component of armature current, 
which is aligned with the field flux, produces no torque. 
This result is fully consistent with the generalized torque expressions which are 
derived in Chapter 4. Consider for example Eq. 4.73 which expresses the torque in 
terms of the product of the stator and rotor mmfs (Fs and Fr respectively) and the sine 
of the angle between them. 
T= 
(P°21es) (/z°zrD/~ 
- 
2g 
,] FsFrsinSsr 
(11.33) 
where 8r is the electrical space angle between the stator and rotor mmfs. This shows 
clearly that no torque will be produced by the direct-axis component of the armature 
mmf which, by definition, is that component of the stator mmf which is aligned with 
that of the field winding on the rotor. 
Equation 11.32 shows the torque in a nonsalient synchronous motor is propor- 
tional to the product of the field current and the quadrature-axis component of the 
armature current. This is directly analogous to torque production in a dc machine for 
which Eqs. 7.10 and 7.13 can be combined to show that the torque is proportional to 
the product of the field current and the armature current. 
The analogy between a nonsalient synchronous machine and dc machine can be 
further reinforced. Consider Eq. 5.21, which expresses the rms value of the line-to- 
neutral generated voltage of a synchronous generator as 
coeLafiF 
Ear = 
(11.34) 
Substitution into Eq. 11.32 gives 
3 (poles ~ EafiQ 
(11.35) 
rmech = 2 ~ ~ 
,] 
(De 
This is directly analogous to Eq. 7.16 (Tmech = Eala/cOm) for a dc machine in which 
the torque is proportional to the product of the generated voltage and the armature 
current. 
The brushes and commutator of a dc machine force the commutated armature 
current and armature flux along the quadrature axis such that Id = 0 and it is the 
interaction of this quadrature-axis current with the direct-axis field flux that produces 
the torque. 2 A field-oriented controller which senses the position of the rotor and 
controls the quadrature-axis component of armature current produces the same effect 
in a synchronous machine. 
2 In a practical dc motor, the brushes may be adjusted away from this ideal condition somewhat to 
improve commutation. In this case, some direct-axis flux will be produced, corresponding to a small 
direct-axis component of armature current. 

uo~ssaJdxa ~ql ~q U~A!~ ~q plnoA~ ~I~IIOA ~nle, tua~ ~ql jo ~pnl!idtu~ smJ 
~ql ~s~3 q3!qA~ U[ 'uotss~Jdx~ ~P, IlOA ~ql U! p~pnl3u! ~q plnoqs ~3Ul31SlS~.l ~.mletu.~e '~uple~ds ~(llOlJl S [ 
s~ut.tuJ~l~p osllz q3.tqA~ J~[IOJlUO3 £Je![t.xn~ ul~ £q pzu!mazmp st. ~'(a!) "ffu!pu!A~ plZtl 
JO1OtU zql O1 a! lumen3 zql s~!Iddns q3!qA~ ~Iddns a~A~od ~ql ol p~!Iddns OSle s! q3!q~ 
'lumen3 PPIJ ~ql Joj lu!od l~s ao ~nleA ~3u~a~j~J ~ql ,j~a(a!) pue znbaol Joj lu!od l~s 
~o ~nlea z3u~azjza zql 'J~a,£ 'smdu! oaxl seq ~i3olq aallOJlUO3-anbJol zq,L "tuaoj tueaffe!p 
-~i3olq u! tu~lsfis lOJlUO3-~nbJol p~lu~!Jo-pI~!j le3!d,(1 e SA~oqs e£I" I I ~anff!A 
"6£'I I pue 8E't I "sb3 u! punoj sd!qsuo!lepa 3!seq ~ql ffu!sn lu~.un3 
pue so~e~iu!i-xnl: I IeU!tUJOl uo slu!ealsuo3 IeUO!l!pp~ luotuoldtu ! II!A~ JOIIOJlUOO l'go!dz(1 
e 'onb:~ol po.~!sop oql ~u!z(j!oods ol uo!l!ppe uI "tu~ql ou!tuaolop ,qonb!un ol po.~!nboa 
oq II!A~ slu!ealsuo3 oo:tql 'IeaOuo~ u! 'pue ,o! pue O ! 'a ! 'solqe!.~eA luopuodpu! ooaql 
£lIenl3e o.~ ~.~oql '~.~oq p~lu~so.td lu!odA~!A IO.~luo3-p~lu~!ao-plolj ~ql aopun 'lgl~J H I 
• b ! Jo a ! J0ql!o ~u!tua~mp ,~Ionb!un ol luo!o[jjns lou s! ~nbJol pzJ!s~p e ~u!z(j!o~ds 
z(Idtu!s 'snq, L "lu~.un3 ~anlmu.re ~ql jo luzuodtuo3 s!xe-~anleJpenb ~ql pue lu~.un3 
pI~tJ ~ql jo O!q ! 13npoJd zql ,~q PZllOJlUO3 s! ~nbJol leql zzs zax ~E'I I "b~I tuoah 
(6£'I I) 
~=~I 
9+9 
ol Ienbz s! luo~n3 oanletuae oql jo zpnl!Idtue stu.~ oql 
leql A~OqS O1 pzsn zq ue3 D x!puzddv jo suo!lenb~ uo!letuaojsueal ~ql '£IaeI!tU!S 
(8£t~) 
Z(b!sT) + z(a!j~ 7 + ca/s,/) 
Ozy + ~y 
so~e~IU!I xntj 
~:mlmuae stu.t :toj uo!sszadxz ue m~ zax '~co ,(ouznbo:tj ieo.ulooi z oql ,~q ~A ~u!pI.AI.(I 
(L~~) 
~(0!~7) + z(a!J"2 + a!~2) 
sol Ienbo s! o~ellOA oanletuae oql jo oPm!ldtue sttu oq] snq] pue 
(9£'I I) 
(l°co) u!s 6a - 
(lOco) soo cIa - 
"a 
'D x!puoddv go suo!l~nbo uo!lmuaojsu~.n, 
oqJ, tuo.~j '£ii~otjpods "UA~OqS £I!p~o:t oq U~0 Se 'O~I~IIOA I~ut.ttt.Iol ou!qomu oql 0ouoq 
puu xnlJ aolm, s mmlnso:t ~ql :~u!u!tu:tomp u! ~io:t e £ei d soop J,! 'uo!mnpmd ~nb:~o~, u! 
OlO:t ~ £1zld lou s~op J, uo~n3 ~am,~tu~ oql jo lu~uodtuoo s!xmm~:i!p ~qJ, q:~noqJ, iV 
IO.q.uoo enbJo/pub peeds 
L ~ I:It.LdVHO 
99cj 

11.2 
Control of Synchronous Motors 
587 
~f 
0me 1 
(IQ)ref 
(ia)ref 
" 
-~l 
dq0 
~ 3-phase 
_ ~- Torque 
] 
to 
(ib)ref 
current- 
Synchronous 
c°ntr°ller ( 
ef [ 
abc 
(ic)ref 
s°urce 
~~0m ~ 
transform 
inverter 
motor 
(If)ref I 
~ 
If ,-"~ 
°gm 
Auxiliary 
Field 
Field 
~ controller 
supply 
winding 
(a) 
, 
/a 
I 
(COm)ref 
Field- 
oriented 
Synchronous 
_ 
controller ~
o
~
 
I 
- 
~ 
C°m 
(b) 
Figure 11.13 
(a) Block diagram of a field-oriented torque-control system for 
a synchronous motor. (b) Block diagram of a synchronous-motor speed-control 
loop built around a field-oriented torque control system. 
the reference value (iD)ref of the direct-axis current, based upon desired values for the 
armature current and voltage. The torque controller calculates the desired quadrature- 
axis current from Eq. 11.32 based upon Tref and (iF)ref 
2 ( 2 )  
Tre f 
(iQ)ref = ~ 
poles 
Laf(iF)ref 
(11.40) 
Note that a position sensor is required to determine the angular position of the rotor 
in order to implement the dq0 to abc transformation. 
In a typical application, the ultimate control objective is not to control motor 
torque but to control speed or position. Figure 11.13b shows how the torque-control 
system of Fig. 11.13b can be used as a component of a speed-control loop, with speed 
feedback forming an outer control loop around the inner torque-control loop. 

588 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
EXAMPLE 
11.8 
Consider again the 45-kVA, 220-V, six-pole synchronous motor of Example 11.7 operating at 
60 Hz with a field current of 2.84 A. If the motor is loaded to rated torque and operating under a 
field-oriented control system such that iD = 0, calculate (a) the phase currents ia(t), ib(t), and 
ic(t) as well as the per-unit value of the armature current and (b) the motor terminal voltage in 
per unit. Assume that 0me = 0 at time t = 0 (i.e., the rotor direct axis is aligned with phase a 
att = 0). 
II Solution 
a. We must first calculate Laf. From Example 11.7, we see that the motor produces rated 
open-circuit voltage (220-V rms, line-to-line) at a field current of 2.84 A. From Eq. 11.34 
~/-2Eaf 
taf 
O)eiF 
where Eaf is the rms, line-to-neutral generated voltage. Thus 
,,/2(220/.v/3) 
Laf -- 
= 0.168 H 
120zr x 2.84 
Rated torque for this six-pole motor is equal to 
Prated 
Prated 
Trated = 
-~" 
(O-)m) rated 
(We)rated (2/poles) 
45 x 103 
= 
= 358 N. m 
1207r(2/6) 
Thus, setting Tree = Trated = 358 N.m and (iF),~f = 2.84 A, we can find iQ from 
Eq. 11.40 as 
2 ( 2 )  
Tre f 
__--2(2)- 
358 
--167A 
iQ = ~ 
p-~es 
Laf(iF)ref 
3 
g 
0.168 X 2.84 
Using the fact that 0me =Oget and setting iD = 0, the transformation from dq0 
variables to abc variables (Eq. C.2 of Appendix C) gives 
ia(t) = iDCOS (Oget) -- iQsin (Oget) -- -167 sin (Wet) = -~/2(118) sin (O)et) A 
where We = 1207r ~ 377 rad/sec. Similarly 
ib(t) = --~/-2(118) sin (Wet -- 120 °) A 
and 
it(t) = -V/2(118) sin (Wet + 120 °) A 
The rms armature current is 118 A and the machine base current is equal to 
Phase 
45 X 103 
/base= ~/3Vba,,e = 
VC3220 =l18A 
Thus the per-unit machine terminal current is equal to la = 118/118 = 1.0 per unit. 

11.2 
Control of Synchronous Motors 
589 
b. The motor terminal voltage can most easily be found from the rms phasor relationship 
~ra= jXsla + #af 
In part (a) we found that ia = --~/2(118) sin (coet) A and thus 
ia=jll8A 
We can find Eaf from Eq. 11.34 as 
o)eLafi F 
1207r x 0.168 x 2.84 
Eaf -- 
= 
= 127 V line-to-neutral 
and, thus, since (#af)rms lies along the quadrature axis, as does Ia, 
#af -- j127 V 
The base impedance of the machine is equal to 
Vl~2ase 
2202 
Zbase -- 
= 
-- 1.076 f2 
Pbase 
45 × 103 
and the synchronous reactance of 0.836 pu is equal to Xs = 0.836 × 1.076 = 0.899 f2. 
Thus the rms line-to-neutral terminal voltage 
f'a = j Xsia + #af = j0.899(j 118) + j 127 
= -106 + j127 = 165/129.9 ° V line-to-neutral 
or Va -- 287 V rms line-to-line = 1.30 per unit. 
Note that the terminal voltage for this operating condition is considerably in excess 
of the rated voltage of this machine, and hence such operation would not be acceptable. 
As we shall now discuss, a control algorithm which takes advantage of the full capability 
to vary iF, iD, and iQ can achieve rated torque while not exceeding rated terminal voltage. 
~ractice Problem 1 1.1 
Calculate the per-unit terminal voltage and current of Example 11.8 if the field-oriented con- 
troller maintains iD -- 0 while reducing iF to 2.6 A. 
Solution 
V a = 1.29 per unit and Ia -- 1.09 per unit. 
As we have discussed, a practical field-oriented control must determine values 
for all three currents iF, iD, and iQ. In Example 11.8 two of these values were chosen 
relatively arbitrarily (iF = 2.84 and iD = 0) and the result was a control that achieved 
the desired torque but with a terminal voltage 30 percent in excess of the motor- 
rated voltage. In a practical system, additional constraints are required to achieve an 
acceptable control algorithm. 
One such algorithm would be to require that the motor operate at rated flux and 
at unity terminal power factor. Such an algorithm canbe derived with reference to the 

590 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
\ "a 
,_ 
jcoeLsla 
d-axis 
^ 
• 
Eaf \ \ 
q-axis 
Figure 11.14 Phasor diagram for unity-power- 
factor field-oriented-control algorithm 
phasor diagram of Fig 11.14 and can be implemented using the following steps: 
Step 1. Calculate the line-to-neutral armature voltage corresponding to rated 
flux as 
( 
O)m 
) 
(11.41) 
Va -- ( Wa)rated 
(O-)m)rated 
where (Va)rated is the rated line-to-neutral armature voltage at rated motor 
speed, O.) m is the desired motor speed, and (O)m)rated is its rated speed. 
Step 2. Calculate the rms armature current from the desired torque Tree as 
eref 
Tree O)m 
Ia = 3Va - 
3Va 
(11.42) 
where Pref is the mechanical power corresponding to the desired torque. 
Step 3. Calculate the angle 6 based upon the phasor diagram of Fig 11.14 
6__tan-I 
(c°eLsla) 
Va 
(11.43) 
where (.D e = 
O)me = (poles/2)COm is the electrical frequency corresponding to 
the desired motor speed. 
Step 4. Calculate (iQ)ref and (iD)ref 
(iQ)ref -- w/21a COS ~ 
(11.44) 
(iD)ref -- ~/'2Ia sin 8 
(11.45) 
Step 5. Calculate (iF)ref from Eq. 11.32 
2(2) 
Tree 
(iF)ree- 
~ 
poles 
Laf(iQ)ref 
(11.46) 
This algorithm is illustrated in Example 11.9. 

11.2 
Control of Synchronous Motors 
591 
The 45-kVA, 220-V synchronous motor of Example 11.8 is to be again operated at rated torque 
and speed from a field-oriented control system. Calculate the required motor field current and 
the per-unit terminal voltage and current if the unity-power-factor algorithm described above 
is implemented. 
II Solution 
We will follow the individual steps outlined above. 
Step 1. Since the motor is operating at rated speed, the desired terminal voltage will be 
the rated line-to-neutral voltage of the machine. 
220 
Va = 
-- 127 V = 1.0 per unit 
43 
Step 2. Setting Tre f -- 358 N.m and O) m -'- (2/poles)tOe = 40zr, the rms armature current 
can be calculated from Eq. 11.42 
Tref o) m 
358 x (40n) 
la-- 3(Va) 
3 x 127 
= 118 A 
As calculated in Example 11.8,/base = 
118 A and thus la = 1.0 per unit. This is as 
expected, since we want the motor to operate at rated torque, speed and terminal voltage, 
and at unity power factor. 
Step 3. Next calculate 8 from Eq. 11.43. This calculation requires that we determine the 
synchronous inductance Ls. 
Xs 
Ls = 
((_De)rate d 
Thus 
0.899 
= 
= 2.38 mH 
120zr 
o)eLs/a ) 
= - tan-1 
Va 
120Zr2.38 X 10 -3 X 118) 
--0.695 rad 
-39.8 ° 
- - tan-1 
127 
Step 4. We can now calculate the desired values of iQ and iD from Eqs. 11.44 
and 11.45. 
(iQ)ref --" ~/2/a COS ~ -- 128 A 
and 
(iD)ref -- ~/~Ia sing = --107 A 
Step 5. (/F)ref is found from Eq. 11.46 
2 (p_~les) 
rref 
(iF)ref = ~ 
Laf(iQ)ref 
m 
3 
0.168 x 128 = 3.70 A 
EXAMPLE 
11.9 

592 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Practice Problem 
1 1 .! 
Repeat Example 11.9 for the motor operating at rated torque and half of rated speed. Calculate 
(a) the desired motor field current, (b) the line-to-neutral terminal voltage (in volts), and (c) the 
armature current (in amperes). 
Solution 
a. (iF)ref = 3.70 A 
b. Va = 63.5 V line-to-neutral 
c. Ia = l18A 
The discussion of this section has focused upon synchronous machines with field 
windings and the corresponding capability to control the field excitation. The basic 
concept, of course, also applies to synchronous machines with permanent magnets 
on the rotor. However, in the case of permanent-magnet synchronous machines, the 
effective field excitation is fixed and, as a result, there is one less degree of freedom 
for the field-oriented control algorithm. 
For a permanent-magnet synchronous machine, since the effective equivalent 
field current is fixed by the permanent magnet, the quadrature-axis current is de- 
termined directly by the desired torque. Consider a three-phase permanent-magnet 
motor whose rated rms, line-to-neutral open-circuit voltage is (Eaf)rated at electrical 
frequency (O)e)rate d. From Eq. 11.34 we see that the equivalent Lafl f product for this 
motor, which we will refer to by the symbol ApM, is 
~/2(Eaf)rated 
ApM = 
(11.47) 
((-Oe) rated 
Thus, the direct-axis flux-current relationship for this motor, corresponding to 
Eq. 11.24, becomes 
XD = LdiD + ApM 
(11.48) 
and the torque expression of Eq. 11.32 becomes 
3 (P°21es) 
Tmech = ~ 
ApMiQ 
(11.49) 
From Eq. 11.49 we see that, for a permanent-magnet sychronous machine un- 
der field-oriented control, the quadrature-axis current is uniquely determined by the 
desired torque and Eq. 11.40 becomes 
2 ( 
2 
) 
Tree 
(11.50) 
(iQ)ref -- ~ 
poles 
ApM 
Once (iQ)ref has been specified, the only remaining control choice remains to 
determine the desired value for the direct-axis current, (iD)ref- One possibility is 
simply to set (iD)ref=0. This will clearly result in the lowest possible armature 
current for a given torque. However, as we have seen in Example 11.8, this is likely 
to result in terminal voltages in excess of the rated voltage of the machine. As a 

11.2 Control of Synchronous Motors 
593 
I 
I (IQ)ref 
I 
I 
I 
Tref 
~ I Torque I 
I 
t:~ 
PM 
. lcontrollerl 
a,,c 
synchronou  
(ID 
trans form 
~ 
motor 
I 
I 
09rn 
~ Auxiliary .~ 
controller I 
Figure 11.15 
Block diagram of a field-oriented torque-control system 
for a permanent-magnet synchronous motor. 
result, it is common to supply direct-axis current so as to reduce the direct-axis flux 
linkage of Eq. 11.48, which will in turn result in reduced terminal voltage. This 
technique is commonly referred to as flux weakening and comes at the expense of 
increased armature current. 4 In practice, the chosen operating point is determined 
by a trade-off between reducing the armature voltage and an increase in armature 
current. Figure 11.15 shows the block diagram for a field-oriented-control system for 
use with a permanent-magnet motor. 
A 25-kW, 4000-rpm, 220-V, two-pole, three-phase permanent-magnet synchronous motor pro- 
duces rated open-circuit voltage at a rotational speed of 3200 r/min and has a synchronous 
inductance of 1.75 mH. Assume the motor is to be operated under field-oriented control at 
2800 r/min and 65 percent of rated torque. 
a. Calculate the required quadrature-axis current. 
b. If the controller is designed to minimize armature current by setting io = 0, calculate the 
resultant armature flux linkage in per-unit. 
c. If the controller is designed to maintain the armature flux-linkage at its rated value, 
calculate the corresponding value of iD and the corresponding rms and per-unit values of 
the armature current. 
I Solution 
a. The rated speed of this machine is 
(O)m)rate~ = 4000 
= 419 rad/sec 
4 See T. M. Jahns, "Flux-Weakening Regime Operation of an Interior Permanent Magnet Synchronous 
Motor Drive," IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, Vol. 23, pp. 681-689. 
EXAMPLE 11.10 

594 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
and the rated torque is 
Prated 
25 × 103 
Trated -- 
-- 
"- 59.7 N. m 
(O)m) rated 
419 
This motor achieves its rated-open-circuit voltage of 220/q/3 = 127 V rms at a 
speed of n = 3200 r/min. The corresponding electrical frequency is 
(poles) (zr)(zr) 
(-De = 
T 
3-0 n = 
3-0 
3200 = 335 rad/sec 
From Eq. 11.47, 
"h//-2(Eaf)rated 
~ 
127 
ApM -" 
= 
= 0.536 Wb 
We 
335 
Thus, setting Tre f = 
0.65Trate d ~--- 38.8 N.m, from Eq. 11.50 we find that 
b. With (io) ref --- 0, 
2 (p~les) 
Tref 
2 (38.8) 
=48.3 
m 
(iQ)ref = ~ 
ApM = 3 
0.536 
)~D "-- ApM -" 0.536 Wb 
and 
kQ = Lsi o = (1.75 x 10-3)48.3 = 0.0845 Wb 
Thus, the rms line-to-neutral armature flux is equal to 
~a~-'W/~'2 "~" 
~2 
= W/05362 + 0"084522 = 0.384 Wb 
The base rms line-to-neutral armature flux can be determined from the base 
line-to-neutral voltage (Va)base = 127 V and the base frequency (We)base = 419 rad/sec as 
(Va)base 
(/~a)base = 
= 0.303 Wb 
(Oge)base 
Thus, the per-unit armature flux is equal to 0.384/0.303 = 1.27 per unit. From this 
calculation we see that the motor is significantly saturated at this operating condition. In 
fact, the calculation is probably not accurate because such a degree of saturation will most 
likely give rise to a reduction in the synchronous inductance as well as the magnetic 
coupling between the rotor and the stator. 
c. In order to maintain rated armature flux linkage, the control will have to produce a 
direct-axis component of armature current to reduce the direct-axis flux linkage such that 
the total armature flux linkage is equal to the rated value (~.a)b .... Specifically, we must 
have 
~'D "-- V'/2(~-a)2ase -- ~-~ -- ~/2 x 0.3032 - 0.08442 = 0.420 Wb 

11.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
595 
We can now find (iD)ref from Eq. 11.48 (setting Ld = Ls) 
~'D -- ApM 
0.420 - 0.536 
(iD)ref -- 
= 
Ls 
1.75 × 10 -3 
=-66.3 A 
The corresponding rms armature current is 
~/ 
• 2 
• 2 
~/ 
Ia = 
(/D)ref -~- (/Q)ref 
66.32 + 48.32 
2 
- 
= 58.0 A 
The base rms armature current for this machine is equal to 
ebase 
25 X 103 
base ~ 
%//~ Vbas e 
%/t~ 220 
=65.6 A 
and hence the per-unit armature current is equal to 58.0/65.6 = 0.88 per unit. 
Comparing the results of parts (b) and (c) we see how flux weakening by the introduction 
of direct-axis current can be used to control the terminal voltage of a permanent-magnet 
synchronous motor under field-oriented control. 
Practice Problem 1 1.1q 
Consider again the motor of Example 11.10. Repeat the calculations of parts (b) and (c) of 
Example 11.10 for the case in which the motor is operating at 80 percent of rated torque at a 
speed of 2500 r/min. 
Solution 
For part (b), ~.a = 1.27 per unit. 
For part (c), la = 0.98 per unit. 
11.3 
CONTROL OF INDUCTION MOTORS 
11.3.1 
Speed Control 
Induction motors supplied from a constant-frequency source admirably fulfill the 
requirements of substantially constant-speed drives. Many motor applications, how- 
ever, require several speeds or even a continuously adjustable range of speeds. From 
the earliest days of ac power systems, engineers have been interested in the develop- 
ment of adjustable-speed ac motors. 
The synchronous speed of an induction motor can be changed by (a) changing 
the number of poles or (b) varying the line frequency. The operating slip can be 
changed by (c) varying the line voltage, (d) varying the rotor resistance, or (e) applying 
voltages of the appropriate frequency to the rotor circuits. The salient features of 
speed-control methods based on these five possibilities are discussed in the following 
five sections. 

596 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Stator 
Rotor 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 11.16 Principles of the pole-changing winding. 
Stator 
Rotor 
Pole-Changing Motors 
In pole-changing motors, the stator winding is designed 
so that, by simple changes in coil connections, the number of poles can be changed 
in the ratio 2 to 1. Either of two synchronous speeds can then be selected. The rotor 
is almost always of the squirrel-cage type, which reacts by producing a rotor field 
having the same number of poles as the inducing stator field. With two independent 
sets of stator windings, each arranged for pole changing, as many as four synchronous 
speeds can be obtained in a squirrel-cage motor, for example, 600, 900, 1200, and 
1800 r/min for 60-Hz operation. 
The basic principles of the pole-changing winding are shown in Fig. 11.16, in 
which aa and a'a' are two coils comprising part of the phase-a stator winding. An 
actual winding would, of course, consist of several coils in each group. The windings 
for the other stator phases (not shown in the figure) would be similarly arranged. In 
Fig. 11.16a the coils are connected to produce a four-pole field; in Fig. 11.16b the 
current in the a'a' coil has been reversed by means of a controller, the result being a 
two-pole field. 
Figure 11.17 shows the four possible arrangements of these two coils: they can be 
connected in series or in parallel, and with their currents either in the same direction 
(four-pole operation) or in the opposite direction (two-pole operation). Additionally, 
the machine phases can be connected either in Y or A, resulting in eight possible 
combinations. 
Note that for a given phase voltage, the different connections will result in differ- 
ing levels of air-gap flux density. For example, a change from a A to a Y connection 
will reduce the coil voltage (and hence the air-gap flux density) for a given coil ar- 
rangement by ~. 
Similarly, changing from a connection with two coils in series 
to two in parallel will double the voltage across each coil and therefore double the 
magnitude of the air-gap flux density. These changes in flux density can, of course, 
be compensated for by changes in the applied winding voltage. In any case, they 
must be considered, along with corresponding changes in motor torque, when the 
configuration to be used in a specific application is considered. 
Armature-Frequency Control 
The synchronous speed of an induction motor can 
be controlled by varying the frequency of the applied armature voltage. This method 

11.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
597 
a 
-a 
a t 
-a t 
a 
-a 
-a t 
a t 
o 
~ 
~ 
o 
o 
~ 
~ 
o 
(a) 
(b) 
a 
-a 
a 
-a 
o 
i 
i 
o o 
i 
I 
T 
T 
T 
T 
a t 
_a t 
_a t 
a t 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 11.17 Four possible arrangements of phase-a stator coils 
in a pole-changing induction motor: (a) series-connected, four-pole; 
(b) series-connected, two-pole; (c)parallel-connected, four-pole; 
(d) parallel-connected, two-pole. 
of speed control is identical to that discussed in Section 11.2.1 for synchronous 
machines. In fact, the same inverter configurations used for synchronous machines, 
such as the three-phase voltage-source inverter of Fig. 11.11, can be used to drive 
induction motors. As is the case with any ac motor, to maintain approximately constant 
flux density, the armature voltage should also be varied directly with the frequency 
(constant-volts-per-hertz). 
The torque-speed curve of an induction motor for a given frequency can be calcu- 
lated by using the methods of Chapter 6 within the accuracy of the motor parameters 
at that frequency. Consider the torque expression of Eq. 6.33 which is repeated here. 
1[ 
nph V?eq(R2/s) 
] 
Tmech "- ~ 
O)s 
(Rl,eq + (R2/s)) 2 -Jr- (Xl,eq -]" X2) 2 
(11.51) 
where Ogs = (2/poles)we and O) e is the electrical excitation frequency of the motor in 
rad/sec, 
jXm 
) 
~'l,eq-- 
91 
R1 + j(X1 + Xm) 
(11.52) 
and 
jXm(R1 + jX1) 
Rl,eq -q- jXl,eq = R1 + j(X1 + Xm) 
(11.53) 
To investigate the effect of changing frequency, we will assume that R1 is negli- 
gible. In this case, 
(Xm) 
Vl,eq --~rl 
Xl..~_Xm 
(11.54) 
Rl,eq -- 0 
(11.55) 

~o~ 
0 
0 
~ 
~5"~ 
I 
--< 
> 
o 
• 
o 
~ 
~ 
~ 
-. 
~ 
0 
"~ 
O 
_~:nZ o 
Z~" 
~D 
O 
~ E 5  
~
~
 
¢~ 
~ 
0 
0 
~,o 
~, 
.'N 
Q. 
c ~ 
o 
- 
~ 
E 
b~ 
~< 
o 
• 
m 
~ 
0 
"" 
~c 
0 
0 
0 
::j- ~ 
~." 
0 
Tmech 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
II 
N 
II 
4~ 
N 
II 
N 
II 
4~ 
o0 
N 
II 
o 
N 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
O 
O 
O 
_~, 
~ 
o 
= 
o 
O 
~a 
~ 
n 
N 
oi 
+ 
~ 
~" 
~ 
O 
O 
~ 
C~ 
O 
~ 
~ 
o 
O 
• 
~ 
. 
= 
• 
:~ 
.. 
z 
"W 
-I 
I111 
--L 
.--L 
"O 
(D 
(1) 
Q. 
o ~ 
_O 
c- 
CD 
c~ 
O 
O 

11.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
599 
Finally, we can write the motor slip as 
COs -- O)m 
S ~ 
O)s 
poles (Awm) 
2 
O-)e 
(11.60) 
where Aogm = O)s -- Ogm is the difference between the synchronous and mechanical 
angular velocities of the motor. 
Substitution of Eqs. 11.57 through 11.60 into Eq. 11.51 gives 
nph[ ( gl, eq) 0 ]2 (e2 / Ao)) 
Tmech--" [(2o~O)(R2/A(.o)] 2 
(11.61) 
poles 
"]" [(Xl,eq "+- X2)012 
Equation 11.61 shows the general trend in which we see that the frequency 
dependence of the torque-speed characteristic of an induction motor appears only in 
the term R2/A~. Thus, under the assumption that R1 is negligible, as the electrical 
supply frequency to an induction motor is changed, the shape of the speed-torque 
curve as a function of AoJ (the difference between the synchronous speed and the 
motor speed) will remain unchanged. As a result, the torque-speed characteristic will 
simply shift along the speed axis as O) e (fe) is varied. 
A set of such curves is shown in Fig. 11.18a. Note that as the electrical frequency 
(and hence the synchronous speed) is decreased, a given value of Aco corresponds to a 
100 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 I 
I 
I 
-400 
-200 
fe--12Hz~ fe=24Hz~ fe=36Hz~ fe=48Hz~ fe=60Hz 
I 
I 
II 
0 
200 
400 
] 
I 
600 
r/min 
(b) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
II 
I 
800 
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 
Figure 
11.18 
(Continued) 

600 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
larger slip. Thus, for example, if the peak torque of a four-pole motor driven at 60 Hz 
occurs at 1638 r/min, corresponding to a slip of 9 percent, when driven at 30 Hz, the 
peak torque will occur at 738 r/min, corresponding to a slip of 18 percent. 
In practice, the effects of R1 may not be fully negligible, especially for large 
values of slip. If this is the case, the shape of the speed-torque curves will vary 
somewhat with the applied electrical frequency. Figure 11.18b shows a typical family 
of curves for this case. 
!XAMPLE 11.1' 
The three-phase, 230-V, 60-Hz, 12-kW, four-pole induction motor of Example 6.4 (with R2 '- 
0.2 ffa) is to be operated from a variable-frequency, constant-volts-per-hertz motor drive whose 
terminal voltage is 230 V at 60 Hz. The motor is driving a load whose power can be assumed 
to vary as 
(n)3 
P, oad -- 10.5 
1-~ 
kW 
where n is the load speed in r/min. Motor rotational losses can be assumed to be negligible. 
Write a MATLAB script to find the line-to-line terminal voltage, the motor speed in r/min, 
the slip and the motor load in kW for (a) a source frequency of 60 Hz and (b) a source frequency 
of 40 Hz. 
II Solution 
As the electrical frequency fe is varied, the motor reactances given in Example 6.4 must be 
varied as 
X = Xo 
where Xo is the reactance value at 60 Hz. Similarly, the line-to-neutral armature voltage must 
be varied as 
220 ( fe ) = 127 ILl 
V 
From Eq. 4.40, the synchronous angular velocity of the motor is equal to 
co, = 
p-~es 
fc = Zrfe rad/sec 
and, at any given motor speed O.)m, the corresponding slip is given by 
09 s m O) m 
S--- 
O)s 
Using Eqs. 11.51 through 11.53, the motor speed can be found by searching over 09 m for 
that speed at which Pl,,,0 = COrn Tmech. If this is done, the result is: 
a. For fe = 60 Hz: 
Terminal voltage = 230 V line-to-line 
Speed = 1720 r/min 

t 1.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
601 
Slip = 4.4% 
Ploaa = 9.17 kW 
b. For fe = 40 HZ: 
Terminal voltage = 153 V line-to-line 
Speed = 1166 r/min 
Slip = 2.8% 
Pload = 2.86 kW 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
c1c 
clear 
%Here 
are the 60-Hz 
motor 
parameters 
VI0 
= 230/sqrt(3) 
; 
Nph 
= 3; 
poles 
= 4 ; 
fe0 = 60 ; 
R1 = 0.095; 
R2 = 0.2; 
XI0 = 0.680; 
X20 = 0.672; 
Xm0 = 18.7; 
% Two frequency 
values 
fel = 60 ; 
fe2 = 40 ; 
for m = 1:2, 
if m== 
1 
fe = fel ; 
else 
fe = fe2 ; 
end 
% Calculate 
the reactances 
and the voltage 
Xl = Xl0*(fe/fe0) 
; 
X2 = X20*(fe/fe0) 
; 
Xm = Xm0* (fe/fe0) ; 
Vl = Vl0*(fe/fe0) 
; 
%Calculate 
the synchronous 
speed 
omegas 
= 4*pi*fe/poles; 
ns = 120*fe/poles; 
%Calculate 
stator 
Thevenin 
equivalent 
Vleq 
= abs(Vl*j*Xm/(ml 
+ j*(Xl+Xm)) 
) ; 

602 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Zleq : j*Xm*(RI+j*XI)/(RI 
+ j*(Xl+Xm)) ; 
Rleq = real(Zleq) ; 
Xleq = imag(Zleq) ; 
%Search 
over the slip until 
the Pload = Pmech 
slip = 0. ; 
error : 1 ; 
while 
error >= 0; 
slip = slip + 0.00001; 
rpm = ns*(1-slip) ; 
omegam 
= omegas* (1-slip) ; 
Tmech 
= (i/omegas)*Nph*Vleq^2 
*(R2/slip) ; 
Tmech 
: Tmech/( (Rl+R2/slip)^2 
+ (XI+X2)^2) ; 
Pmech = Tmech*omegam; 
Pload = 10.5e3*(rpm/1800)^3; 
error = Pload- 
Pmech; 
end 
%End of while 
loop 
fprintf('\nFor 
fe : %g [Hz] : ',fe) 
fprintf('\n 
Terminal 
voltage 
= %g [V i-I] ',Vl*sqrt(3)) 
fprintf('\n 
rpm = %g',rpm) 
fprintf('\n 
slip = %g [percent] 
',100*slip) 
fprintf('\n 
Pload : %g [kW] ',Pload/1000) 
fprint f ( ' \n\n' ) 
end 
Repeat Example 11.11 for a source frequency of 50 Hz. 
Solution 
Terminal voltage = 192 V line-to-line 
Speed = 1447 r/min 
Slip = 3.6% 
eloacl "- 5.45 kW 
Line-Voltage Control 
The internal torque developed by an induction motor is 
proportional to the square of the voltage applied to its primary terminals, as shown 
by the two torque-speed characteristics in Fig. 11.19. If the load has the torque-speed 
characteristic shown by the dashed line, the speed will be reduced from n l to n2. This 
method of speed control is commonly used with small squirrel-cage motors driving 
fans, where cost is an issue and the inefficiency of high-slip operation can be tolerated. 
It is characterized by a rather limited range of speed control. 

11.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
603 
~ 
~oad 
n2 
nl 
Speed 
Figure 11.19 Speed control by 
means of line voltage. 
Rotor-Resistance Control 
The possibility of speed control of a wound-rotor motor 
by changing its rotor-circuit resistance has already been pointed out in Section 6.7.1. 
The torque-speed characteristics for three different values of rotor resistance are 
shown in Fig. 11.20. If the load has the torque-speed characteristic shown by the 
dashed line, the speeds corresponding to each of the values of rotor resistance are 
n 1, n2, and n 3. This method of speed control has characteristics similar to those of dc 
shunt-motor speed control by means of resistance in series with the armature. 
The principal disadvantages of both line-voltage and rotor-resistance control are 
low efficiency at reduced speeds and poor speed regulation with respect to change in 
load. In addition, the cost and maintenance requirements of wound-rotor induction 
motors are sufficiently high that squirrel-cage motors combined with solid-state drives 
have become the preferred option in most applications. 
11.3.2 
Torque Control 
In Section 11.2.2 we developed the concept of field-oriented-control for synchronous 
machines. Under this viewpoint, the armature flux and current are resolved into two 
components which rotate synchronously with the rotor and with the air-gap flux wave. 
~ 
a 
¢, 
n 3 
n2 
nl 
Speed 
Figure 11.20 Speed control by 
means of rotor resistance. 

604 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
The components of armature current and flux which are aligned with the field-winding 
are referred to as direct-axis components while those which are perpendicular to this 
axis are referred to as quadrature-axis components. 
It turns out that the same viewpoint which we applied to synchronous machines 
can be applied to induction machines. As is discussed in Section 6.1, in the steady- 
state the mmf and flux waves produced by both the rotor and stator windings of an 
induction motor rotate at synchronous speed and in synchronism with each other. 
Thus, the torque-producing mechanism in an induction machine is equivalent to that 
of a synchronous machine. The difference between the two is that, in an induction 
machine, the rotor currents are not directly supplied but rather are induced as the 
induction-motor rotor slips with respect to the rotating flux wave produced by the 
stator currents. 
To examine the application of field-oriented control to induction machines, we 
begin with the dq0 transformation of Section C.3 of Appendix C. This transformation 
transforms both the stator and rotor quantities into a synchronously rotating reference 
frame. Under balanced-three-phase, steady-state conditions, zero-sequence quantities 
will be zero and the remaining direct- and quadrature-axis quantites will be constant. 
Hence the flux-linkage current relationships of Eqs. C.52 through C.58 become 
)~D = LSiD + LmiDR 
(11.62) 
)~Q = LSiQ + LmiQR 
(11.63) 
)~DR -- LmiD + LRiDR 
(11.64) 
~.QR = LmiQ + LRiQR 
(11.65) 
In these equations, the subscripts D, Q, DR, and QR represent the constant 
values of the direct- and quadrature-axis components of the stator and rotor quantities 
respectively. It is a straight-forward matter to show that the inductance parameters 
can be determined from the equivalent-circuit parameters as 
Xm0 
Lm = 
(11.66) 
O)e0 
XI0 
Ls -- Lm -k-- 
(11.67) 
(-Oe0 
X20 
LR -- Lm -~-- 
(11.68) 
O)e0 
where the subscript 0 indicates the rated-frequency value. 
The transformed voltage equations Eqs. C.63 through C.68 become 
VD -- RaiD -- COe~.Q 
(11.69) 
VQ -- RaiQ 4- O)e~,D 
(11.70) 
0 = RaRiDR -- (We - O)me)~,QR 
(11.71) 
0 = RaRiQR + (We- O)me)~,DR 
(11.72) 

t 1.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
605 
where one can show that the resistances are related to those of the equivalent circuit 
as 
and 
Ra = R1 
(11.73) 
RaR = R2 
(11.74) 
For the purposes of developing a field-oriented-control scheme, we will begin 
with the torque expression of Eq. C.70 
3 (poles) (Lm) 
Tmech = ~ 
2 
-~R 
(ZDRiq -- ~.QRid) 
(11.75) 
For the derivation of the dq0 transformation in Section C.3, the angular velocity 
of the reference frame was chosen to the synchronous speed as determined by the 
stator electrical frequency We. It was not necessary for the purposes of the derivation 
to specify the absolute angular location of the reference frame. It is convenient at this 
point to choose the direct axis of the reference frame aligned with the rotor flux. 
If this is done 
~QR -- 0 
and the torque expression of Eq. 11.75 becomes 
3 
Tmech 
2 (poles 
= 
2 
) (~-~) ~.DRiQ 
From Eq. 11.71 we see that 
/DR = 0 
and thus 
(11.76) 
and 
(11.77) 
(11.78) 
~,DR = LmiD 
(11.79) 
~,D = LSiD 
(11.80) 
From Eqs. 11.79 and 11.80 we see that by choosing set ~,QR = 0 and thus aligning 
the synchronously rotating reference frame with the axis of the rotor flux, the direct- 
axis rotor flux (which is, indeed, the total rotor flux) as well as the direct-axis flux are 
determined by the direct-axis component of the armature current. Notice the direct 
analogy with a dc motor. In a dc motor, the field- and direct-axis armature fluxes are 
determined by the field current and in this field-oriented control scheme, the rotor 
and direct-axis armature fluxes are determined by the direct-axis armature current. 
In other words, in this field-oriented control scheme, the direct-axis component of 
armature current serves the same function as the field current in a dc machine. 
The torque equation, Eq. 11.77, completes the analogy with the dc motor. We see 
that once the rotor direct-axis flux ~.DR is set by the direct-axis armature current, the 

606 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
torque is then determined by the quadrature-axis armature current just as the torque 
is determined by the armature current in a dc motor. 
In a practical implementation of the technique which we have derived, the direct- 
and quadrature-axis currents iD and iQ must be transformed into the three motor phase 
currents ia(t), ib(t), and it(t). This can be done using the inverse dq0 transformation 
of Eq. C.48 which requires knowledge of 0s, the electrical angle between the axis of 
phase a, and the direct-axis of the synchronously rotating reference frame. 
Since it is not possible to measure the axis of the rotor flux directly, it is necessary 
to calculate 0s, where 0s = (Det q- 00 as given by Eq. C.46. Solving Eq. 11.72 for (D e 
gives 
(ion) 
(De = (Dme -- RaR 
~DR 
(11.81) 
From Eq. 11.65 with ~.QR = 0 we see that 
iQR = -- 
iQ 
(11.82) 
Eq. 11.82 in combination with Eq. 11.79 then gives 
RaR ( i___QQ ) 
1 (i~D) 
(De = 09me "~- -~R 
iD 
= 09me -~- "t'R 
(11.83) 
where rR = LR/RaR is the rotor time constant. 
We can now integrate Eq. 11.83 to find 
[ 
1 (/Q) 
0S = 
(Dme "~- -- 
t + 00 
(11.84) 
rR 
where 0s indicates the calculated value of 0s (often referred to as the estimated value 
of 0s). In the more general dynamic sense 
J0'I 
' (i°)l 
0S = 
(Dme + 
-- 
dt' + 00 
(11.85) 
rR 
iD 
Note that both Eqs. 11.84 and 11.85 require knowledge of 00, the value of 0s at 
t = 0. Although we will not prove it here, it turns out that in a practical implementation, 
the effects of an error in this initial angle decay to zero with time, and hence it can 
be set to zero without any loss of generality. 
Figure 11.21 a shows a block diagram of a field-oriented torque-control system 
for an induction machine. The block labeled "Estimator" represents the calculation 
of Eq. 11.85 which calculates the estimate of 0s required by the transformation from 
dq0 to abc variables. 
Note that a speed sensor is required to provide the rotor speed measurement 
required by the estimator. Also notice that the estimator requires knowledge of the 
rotor time constant rR -- LR/RaR. In general, this will not be known exactly, both 
due to uncertainty in the machine parameters as well as due to the fact that the rotor 

11.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
607 
(iQ)ref 
I 
I 
Tref 
> 
Torque 
t 
I 
a 
controller 
( )ref trans 
  °R refT I 
m 
(~'a)ref 
~, Auxiliary 
controller 
(la)ref 
I ~stimator I ~me 
v 
• 
,o 
,c 
Induction 
form 
~oto~ 
~ ~ m  
(a) 
(O)m)ref +~-~ 
_ ~,,,,~ 
_ ~.i~ld- 
ia 
---'~_ z,J------~ ~ 
O o ~ ~ "  
inodUC;ion 
~
m
 
/ 
Wm 
(b) 
Figure 11.21 
(a) Block diagram of a field-oriented torque-control system 
for an induction motor. (b) Block diagram of an induction-motor speed-control 
loop built around a field-oriented torque control system. 
resistance RaR will undoubtedly change with temperature as the motor is operated. It 
can be shown that errors in rR result in an offset in the estimate of 0s, which in turn 
will result in an error in the estimate for the position of the rotor flux with the result 
that the applied armature currents will not be exactly aligned with the direct- and 
quadrature-axes. The torque controller will still work basically as expected, although 
there will be corresponding errors in the torque and rotor flux. 
As with the synchronous motor, the rms armature flux-linkages can be found 
from Eq. 11.38 as 
(~,a)rms -- 
2 
Combining Eqs. 11.63 and 11.82 gives 
~,Q ~- LSiQ + LmiQR = 
LS - LR// 
(11.86) 
(11.87) 

608 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
Substituting Eqs. 11.80 and 11.87 into Eq. 11.86 gives 
Lst D + Ls - -ff~ i~ 
(~,a)rms = 
2 
(11.88) 
Finally, as discussed in the footnote to Eq. 11.37, the rms line-to-neutral armature 
voltage can be found as 
Va -- ¢ vz + 
-¢ 
(RaiD - weXQ)2 + (RaiQ + 
(RaiD_COe(LsL 2 
2 
__ 
Z--R'R )iQ) 
2 
+ (RaiQ + COeLsiD) 2 
(11.89) 
These equations show that the armature flux linkages and terminal voltage are 
determined by both the direct- and quadrature-axis components of the armature cur- 
rent. Thus, the block marked "Auxiliary Controller" in Fig. 11.21 a, which calculates 
the reference values for the direct- and quadrature-axis currents, must calculate the 
reference currents (iD)ref and (iQ)ref which achieve the desired torque subject to con- 
straints on armature flux linkages (to avoid saturation in the motor), armature current, 
(Ia)rms -
-
 v/(i 2 + i~)/2 (to avoid excessive armature heating) and armature voltage 
(to avoid potential insulation damage). 
Note that, as we discussed with regard to synchronous machines in Section 11.2.2, 
the torque-control system of Fig. 11.21 a is typically imbedded within a larger control 
loop. One such example is the speed-control loop of Fig. 11.21 b. 
!XAMPLE 
11.1: 
The three-phase, 230-V, 60-Hz, 12-kW, four-pole induction motor of Example 6.7 and Exam- 
ple 11.11 is to be driven by a field-oriented speed-control system (similar to that of Fig. 11.21b) 
at a speed of 1740 r/min. Assuming the controller is programmed to set the rotor flux linkages 
~.DR to the machine rated peak value, find the rms amplitude of the armature current, the elec- 
trical frequency, and the rms terminal voltage, if the electromagnetic power is 9.7 kW and the 
motor is operating at a speed of 1680 r/min. 
II Solution 
We must first determine the parameters for this machine. From Eqs. I1.66 through Eq. 11.74 
Xm0 
18.7 
Lm = 
= 
= 49.6 mH 
coco 
120zr 
Xio 
0.680 
Ls = Lm + ~ 
= 49.6 mH + 
-- 51.41 mH 
COco 
120n" 
X2o 
0.672 
LR = Lm + -- 
= 49.6 mH + 
= 51.39 mH 
We( ) 
1207r 
R, = RI = 0.095 f2 
R~R = R2 -- 0.2 g2 

t t,3 
Control of Induction Motors 
609 
The rated rms line-to-neutral terminal voltage for this machine is 230/~/3 = 132.8 V and 
thus the peak rated flux for this machine is 
%//'2(Va)rate d 
%//2 X 132.8 
(~rated)peak "-" 
= 
"-" 0.498 Wb 
o) e 
1207r 
For the specified operating condition 
O) m = /'/ 
~-~ 
= 1680 
= 176 rad/sec 
and the mechanical torque is 
emech 
9.7 x 103 
Tmech = 
= 
= 55.1 N. m 
60 m 
176 
From Eq. 11.77, with/~DR = /~rated = 0.498 Wb 
2 
2 
LR 
iQ 
~ (p--~es)(~mm)(Tmech 
2 (2) 
(51"39x10-3) 
(55"1) 
=38.2 A 
= 3 
4 
49.6 x 10 .3 
0.498 
From Eq. 11.79, 
~.DR 
0.498 
iD = 
= 
= 10.0 A 
Lm 
49.6 x 10 -3 
The rms armature current is thus 
~/ i 2 + i~ 
~ 10.02 + 38.22 
/a= 
2 
= 
2 
= 27.9 A 
The electrical frequency can be found from Eq. 11.81 
O')e = O')me "~- -~R 
~D 
With 09me --- (poles/2)COm = 2 x 176 = 352 rad/sec 
( 
60 e = 352 + 
51.39 × 10 -3 
l'i-~.0J = 367 rad/sec 
and fe = (-Oe/(2~) --- 58.4 HZ. 
Finally, from Eq. 11.89, the rms line-to-neutral terminal voltage 
L2 ~ ie 
n t- (RaiQ n t- (-OeLsiD) 2 
RaiD -- O)e 
Ls 
-- 
I~i~ ,I 
Va= 
2 
= 140.6 V line-to-neutral = 243.6 V line-to-line 

610 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
~ractice Problem 
1 1.1: 
Consider again the induction motor and field-oriented-control system of Example 11.12. As- 
sume that the speed is readjusted to 1700 r/min and that the electromagnetic power is known to 
increase to 10.0 kW. Find the rms amplitude of the armature current, the electrical frequency, 
and the rms terminal voltage for this new operating condition. 
Solution 
Armature current = 28.4 A 
fe = 59.1 Hz 
Terminal voltage = 142.5 V line-to-neutral = 246.9 V line-to-line 
The ability to independently control the rotor flux and the torque has important 
control implications. Consider, for example, the response of the direct-axis rotor flux 
to a change in direct-axis current. Equation C.66, with )~qR -- 0, becomes 
dZdR 
0-- RaRidR -k-~ 
(11.90) 
dt 
Substituting for/dR in terms of ~.OR 
)~dR- Lmid 
/dR = 
(11.91) 
LR 
gives a differential equation for the rotor flux linkages ~-DR 
d~'dR 
( eaR ) 
( tm ) 
d 
----~ -F 
-~R 
)~dR -- 
~R 
id 
(11.92) 
From Eq. 11.92 we see that the response of the rotor flux to a step change in direct- 
axis current id is relatively slow; )~dR will change exponentially with the rotor time 
constant of rR -- LR/RaR. Since the torque is proportional to the product ~.dRiq we see 
that fast torque response will be obtained from changes in iq. Thus, for example, to 
implement a step change in torque, a practical control algorithm might start with a step 
change in (iQ)ref to achieve the desired torque change, followed by an adjustment in 
(iD)ref (and hence ~.dR) to readjust the armature current or terminal voltage as desired. 
This adjustment in (iD)ref would be coupled with a compensating adjustment in (iQ)ref 
to maintain the torque at its desired value. 
EXAMPLE 
11.13 
Consider again the induction motor of Example 11.12. Assuming the motor speed and electro- 
magnetic power remain constant (at 1680 r/min and 9.7 kW), use MATLAB to plot the per-unit 
armature current la and terminal voltage Va as a function of io as (~OR)ref is varied between 0.8 
and 1.2 per unit, where 1.0 per unit corresponds to the rated peak value. 
II Solution 
The desired plot is given in Fig. 11.22. Note that the armature current decreases and the terminal 
voltage increases as ~DR is increased. This clearly shows how io, which controls kDR, can be 

11.3 
Control of Induction Motors 
611 
1.2 
1.15 
1.1 
1.05 
0.95 - 
0.9- 
0.85 - 
0.8- 
Ha 
.............. 
" ..................................... 
" ................................................... 
0.75 
- 
I 
I 
i 
i 
i 
0.18 
0.2 
0.22 
0.24 
0.26 
0.28 
i D [per unit] 
Figure 
11.22 
MATLAB plot for Example 11.13 showing the effect of the direct-axis 
current iD on the armature voltage and current for an induction motor at constant speed 
and load. 
0.3 
chosen to optimize the tradeoff between such quantifies as armature current, armature flux 
linkages, and terminal voltage. 
Here is the MATLAB script: 
clc 
clear 
%Motor 
rating 
and characteristics 
Prated 
= 12e3; 
Vrated 
= 230; 
Varated 
= 230/sqrt(3) 
; 
ferated 
= 60; 
omegaerated 
= 2*pi*ferated; 
Lambdarated 
= sqrt(2)*Varated/omegaerated; 
Irated 
= Prated/(sqrt(3)*Vrated) 
; 
Ipeakbase 
= sqrt(2)*Irated; 
poles 
: 4 ; 
%Here are the 60-Hz motor 
parameters 

612 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
VI0 
= Vrated/sqrt(3) 
; 
XI0 
= 0.680; 
X20 
= 0.672; 
Xm0 
= 18.7; 
R1 = 0.095; 
R2 = 0.2; 
%Calculate 
required 
dq0 parameters 
Lm = Xm0/omegaerated; 
LS = Lm + Xl0/omegaerated; 
LR = Lm + X20/omegaerated; 
Ra = RI; 
RaR 
= R2 ; 
% Operating 
point 
n = 1680 ; 
omegam 
= n*pi/30; 
omegame 
= 
(poles/2)*omegam; 
Pmech 
= 9.7e3; 
Tmech 
= Pmech/omegam; 
% Loop 
to plot 
over 
lambdaDR 
for n = 1:41 
lambdaDR 
= 
(0.8 + 
(n-1)*0.4/40)*Lambdarated; 
lambdaDRpu 
(n) 
= lambdaDR/Lambdarated; 
iQ = 
(2/3) * (2/poles) * (LR/Lm) * (Tmech/lambdaDR) 
; 
iD = 
(lambdaDR/Lm) 
; 
iDpu(n) 
= iD/Ipeakbase; 
iQm = - (Lm/LR)*iQ; 
Ia : sqrt((iD^2 
+ iQ^2)/2) ; 
Iapu(n) 
= Ia/Irated; 
omegae 
= omegame 
- (RaR/LR)*(iQ/iD) 
; 
fe(n) 
= omegae/ 
(2*pi) ; 
Varms 
= sqrt( ((Ra*iD-omegae*(LS-Lm^2/LR)*iQ) 
^2 + . .. 
(Ra*iQ+ 
omegae*LS*iD)^2) 
/2) ; 
Vapu(n) 
= Varms/Varated; 
end 
%Now 
plot 
plot (iDpu, Iapu) 
hold 
plot(iDpu,Vapu, 
' :') 
hold 
xlabel('i_D 
[per unit] ') 
ylabel('per 
unit') 
text(.21,1.06, 
'Ia') 
text (.21, .83, 'Va') 

11.4 
Control of Variable-Reluctance Motors 
613 
11.4 
CONTROL OF VARIABLE-RELUCTANCE 
MOTORS 
Unlike dc and ac (synchronous or induction) machines, VRMs cannot be simply 
"plugged in" to a dc or ac source and then be expected to run. As is dicussed in 
Chapter 8, the phases must be excited with (typically unipolar) currents, and the 
timing of these currents must be carefully correlated with the position of the rotor 
poles in order to produce a useful, time-averaged torque. The result is that although 
the VRM itself is perhaps the simplest of rotating machines, a practical VRM drive 
system is relatively complex. 
VRM drive systems are competitive only because this complexity can be realized 
easily and inexpensively through power and microelectronic circuitry. These drive 
systems require a fairly sophisticated level of controllability for even the simplest 
modes of VRM operation. Once the capability to implement this control is available, 
fairly sophisticated control features can be added (typically in the form of additional 
software) at little additional cost, further increasing the competitive position of VRM 
drives. 
In addition to the VRM itself, the basic VRM drive system consists of the follow- 
ing components: a rotor-position sensor, a controller, and an inverter. The function 
of the rotor-position sensor is to provide an indication of shaft position which can be 
used to control the timing and waveform of the phase excitation. This is directly anal- 
ogous to the timing signal used to control the firing of the cylinders in an automobile 
engine. 
The controller is typically implemented in software in microelectronic (micro- 
processor) circuitry. Its function is to determine the sequence and waveforms of the 
phase excitation required to achieve the desired motor speed-torque characteristics. In 
addition to set points of desired speed and/or torque and shaft position (from the shaft- 
position sensor), sophisticated controllers often employ additional inputs including 
shaft-speed and phase-current magnitude. Along with the basic control function of 
determining the desired torque for a given speed, the more sophisticated controllers 
attempt to provide excitations which are in some sense optimized (for maximum 
efficiency, stable transient behavior, etc.). 
The control circuitry consists typically of low-level electronics which cannot be 
used to directly supply the currents required to excite the motor phases. Rather its 
output consists of signals which control an inverter which in turn supplies the phase 
currents. Control of the VRM is achieved by the application of an appropriate set of 
currents to the VRM phase windings. 
Figures 11.23a to c show three common configurations found in inverter systems 
for driving VRMs. Note that these are simply H-bridge inverters of the type discussed 
in Section 10.3. Each inverter is shown in a two-phase configuration. As is clear from 
the figures, extension of each configuration to drive additional phases can be readily 
accomplished. 
The configuration of Fig. 11.23a is perhaps the simplest. Closing switches Sla 
and Slb connects the phase-1 winding across the supply (Vl = V0) and causes the 
winding current to increase. Opening just one of the switches forces a short across 

614 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
A 
Sla 
I 
Phase 1 
Dla~ 
Slb ~ 
S2a ~ 
i2 D2b i 
+ vo 
D2a 
S2b 
w 
v 
(a) 
A 
y ÷ 
S1 
.
.
/
 
VO 
D 2 
-- Phase 2 
F"Y"'V""V~ 
• 
~ 
D1 
, Vo 
$2 
(b) 
) 
Phase 
I 
) 
Sl ( 
]~ DI 
/ 
w 
m 
m 
w 
(c) 
+ 
Vo 
$2 
A 
w 
hase 2 
Figure 11.23 
Inverter configurations. (a) Two-phase inverter which uses two switches per phase. 
(b) Two-phase inverter which uses a split supply and one switch per phase. (c) Two-phase inverter 
with bifilar phase windings and one switch per phase. 
the winding and the current will decay, while opening both switches connects the 
winding across the supply with negative polarity through the diodes (Vl = -V0) and 
the winding current will decay more rapidly. Note that this configuration is capable of 
regeneration (returning energy to the supply), but not of supplying negative current to 
the phase winding. However, since the torque in a VRM is proportional to the square 
of the phase current, there is no need for negative winding current. 
As discussed in Section 10.3.2, the process of pulse-width modulation, under 
which a series of switch configurations alternately charge and discharge a phase 
winding, can be used to control the average winding current. Using this technique, 
an inverter such as that of Fig. 11.23a can readily be made to supply the range of 
waveforms required to drive a VRM. 
The inverter configuration of Fig. 11.23a is perhaps the simplest of H-bridge 
configurations which provide regeneration capability. Its main disadvantage is that 
it requires two switches per phase. In many applications, the cost of the switches 
(and their associated drive circuitry) dominates the cost of the inverter, and the result 
is that this configuration is less attractive in terms of cost when compared to other 
configurations which require one switch per phase. 
Figure 11.23b shows one such configuration. This configuration requires a split 
supply (i.e., two supplies of voltage V0) but only a single switch and diode per phase. 

11,4 
Control of Variable-Reluctance Motors 
6t5 
Closing switch S 1 connects the phase-1 winding to the upper dc source. Opening the 
switch causes the phase current to transfer to diode D 1, connecting the winding to 
the bottom dc source. Phase 1 is thus supplied by the upper dc source and regenerates 
through the bottom source. Note that to maintain symmetry and to balance the energy 
supplied from each source equally, phase 2 is connected oppositely so that it is supplied 
from the bottom source and regenerates into the top source. 
The major disadvantages of the configuration of Fig. 11.23b are that it requires a 
split supply and that when the switch is opened, the switch must withstand a voltage 
of 2 V0. This can be readily seen by recognizing that when diode D 1 is forward-biased, 
the switch is connected across the two supplies. Such switches are likely to be more 
expensive than the switches required by the configuration of Fig. 11.23a. Both of 
these issues will tend to offset some of the economic advantage which can be gained 
by the elimination of one switch and one diode as compared with the inverter circuit 
of Fig. 11.23a. 
A third inverter configuration is shown in Fig. 11.23c. This configuration requires 
only a single dc source and uses only a single switch and diode per phase. This 
configuration achieves regeneration through the use of bifilar phase windings. In a 
bifilar winding, each phase is wound with two separate windings which are closely 
coupled magnetically (this can be achieved by winding the two windings at the same 
time) and can be thought of as the primary and secondary windings of a transformer. 
When switch S 1 is closed, the primary winding of phase 1 is energized, exciting 
the phase winding. Opening the switch induces a voltage in the secondary winding 
(note the polarity indicated by the dots in Fig. 11.23c) in such a direction as to forward- 
bias D 1. The result is that current is transferred from the primary to the secondary 
winding with a polarity such that the current in the phase decays to zero and energy 
is returned to the source. 
Although this configuration requires only a single dc source, it requires a switch 
which must withstand a voltage in excess of 2V0 (the degree of excess being deter- 
mined by the voltage developed across the primary leakage reactance as current is 
switched from the primary to the secondary windings) and requires the more complex 
bifilar winding in the machine. In addition, the switches in this configuration must 
include snubbing circuitry (typically consisting of a resistor-capacitor combination) 
to protect them from transient overvoltages. These overvoltages result from the fact 
that although the two windings of the bifilar winding are wound such that they are as 
closely coupled as possible, perfect coupling cannot be achieved. As a result, there 
will be energy stored in the leakage fields of the primary winding which must be 
dissipated when the switch is opened. 
As is discussed in Section 10.3, VRM operation requires control of the current 
applied to each phase. For example, one control strategy for constant torque production 
is to apply constant current to each phase during the time that dL/dOm for that phase 
is constant. This results in constant torque proportional to the square of the phase- 
current magnitude. The magnitude of the torque can be controlled by changing the 
magnitude of the phase current. 
The control required to drive the phase windings of a VRM is made more com- 
plex because the phase-winding inductances change both with rotor position and 

616 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
with current levels due to saturation effects in the magnetic material. As a result, 
it is not possible in general to implement an open-loop PWM scheme based on a 
precalculated algorithm. Rather, pulse-width-modulation is typically accomplished 
through the use of current feedback. The instantaneous phase current can be measured 
and a switching scheme can be devised such that the switch can be turned off when 
the current has been found to reach a desired maximum value and turned on when 
the current decays to a desired minimum value. In this manner the average phase 
current is controlled to a predetermined function of the rotor position and desired 
torque. 
This section has provided a brief introduction to the topic of drive systems for 
variable-reluctance machines. In most cases, many additional issues must be con- 
sidered before a practical drive system can be implemented. For example, accurate 
rotor-position sensing is required for proper control of the phase excitation, and the 
control loop must be properly compensated to ensure its stability. In addition, the fi- 
nite rise and fall times of current buildup in the motor phase windings will ultimately 
limit the maximum achievable rotor torque and speed. 
The performance of a complete VRM drive system is intricately tied to the 
performance of all its components, including the VRM, its controller, and its inverter. 
In this sense, the VRM is quite different from the induction, synchronous, and dc 
machines discussed earlier in this chapter. As a result, it is useful to design the complete 
drive system as an integrated package and not to design the individual components 
(VRM, inverter, controller, etc.) separately. The inverter configurations of Fig. 11.23 
are representative of a number of possible inverter configurations which can be used 
in VRM drive systems. The choice of an inverter for a specific application must be 
made based on engineering and economic considerations as part of an integrated 
VRM drive system design. 
11.5 
SUMMARY 
This chapter introduces various techniques for the control of electric machines. The 
broad topic of electric machine control requires a much more extensive discussion 
than is possible here so our objectives have been somewhat limited. Most noticeably, 
the discussion of this chapter focuses almost exclusively on steady-state behavior, 
and the issues of transient and dynamic behavior are not considered. 
Much of the control flexibility that is now commonly associated with electric 
machinery comes from the capability of the power electronics that is used to drive 
these machines. This chapter builds therefore on the discussion of power electronics 
in Chapter 10. 
The starting point is a discussion of dc motors for which it is convenient to 
subdivide the control techniques into two categories: speed and torque control. The 
algorithm for speed control in a dc motor is relatively straight forward. With the 
exception of a correction for voltage drop across the armature resistance, the steady- 
state speed is determined by the condition that the generated voltage must be equal to 
the applied armature voltage. Since the generated voltage is proportional to the field 

11.5 Summary 
617 
flux and motor speed, we see that the steady-state motor speed is proportional to the 
armature voltage and inversely proportional to the field flux. 
An alternative viewpoint is that of torque control. Because the commutator/brush 
system maintains a constant angular relationship between the field and armature flux, 
the torque in a dc motor is simply proportional to the product of the armature current 
and the field flux. As a result, dc motor torque can be controlled directly by controlling 
the armature current as well as the field flux. 
Because synchronous motors develop torque only at synchronous speed, the 
speed of a synchronous motor is simply determined by the electrical frequency of 
the applied armature excitation. Thus, steady-state speed control is simply a matter 
of armature frequency control. Torque control is also possible. By transforming the 
stator quantities into a reference frame rotating synchronously with the rotor (us- 
ing the dq0 transformation of Appendix C), we found that torque is proportional to 
the field flux and the component of armature current in space quadrature with the 
field flux. This is directly analogous to the torque production in a dc motor. Con- 
trol schemes which adopt this viewpoint are referred to as vector or field-oriented 
control. 
Induction machines operate asynchronously; rotor currents are induced by the 
relative motion of the rotor with respect to the synchronously rotating stator-produced 
flux wave. When supplied by a constant-frequency source applied to the armature 
winding, the motor will operate at a speed somewhat lower than synchronous speed, 
with the motor speed decreasing as the load torque is increased. As a result, precise 
speed regulation is not a simple matter, although in most cases the speed will not vary 
from synchronous speed by an excessive amount. 
Analogous to the situation in a synchronous motor, in spite of the fact that the 
rotor of an induction motor rotates at less than synchronous speed, the interaction 
between the rotor and stator flux waves is indeed synchronous. As a result, a trans- 
formation into a synchronously rotating reference frame results in rotor and stator 
flux waves which are constant. The torque can then be expressed in terms of the 
product of the rotor flux linkages and the component of armature current in quadra- 
ture with the rotor flux linkages (referred to as the quadrature-axis component of 
the armature current) in a fashion directly analogous to the field-oriented viewpoint 
of a synchronous motor. Furthermore, it can be shown that the rotor flux linkages 
are proportional to the direct-axis component of the armature current, and thus the 
direct-axis component of armature current behaves much like the field current in a 
synchronous motor. This field-oriented viewpoint of induction machine control, in 
combination with the power-electronic and control systems required to implement 
it, has led to the widespread applicability of induction machines to a wide range of 
variable-speed applications. 
Finally, this chapter ends with a brief discussion of the control of variable- 
reluctance machines. To produce useful torque, these machines typically require rela- 
tively complex, nonsinusoidal current waveforms whose shape must be controlled as 
a function of rotor position. Typically, these waveforms are produced by pulse-width 
modulation combined with current feedback using an H-bridge inverter of the type 

618 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
discussed in Chapter 10. The details of these waveforms depend heavily upon the 
geometry and magnetic properties of the VRM and can vary significantly from motor 
to motor. 
11.6 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Many excellent books are available which provide a much more thorough discussion 
of electric-machinery control than is possible in the introductory discussion presented 
here. This bibliography lists a few of the many textbooks available for readers who 
wish to study this topic in more depth. 
Boldea, I., Reluctance Synchronous Machines and Drives. New York: Clarendon 
Press.Oxford, 1996. 
Kenjo, T., Stepping Motors and Their Microprocessor Controls. New York: Clarendon 
Press.Oxford, 1984. 
Leonhard, W., Control of Electric Drives. Berlin: Springer, 1996. 
Miller, T. J. E., Brushless Permanent-Magnet and Reluctance Motor Drives. New York: 
Clarendon Press.Oxford, 1989. 
Miller, T. J. E., Switched Reluctance Motors and Their Controls. New York: Magna Press 
Publishing and Clarendon Press.Oxford, 1993. 
Mohan, N., Advanced Electric Drives: Analysis, Control and Modeling Using Simulink. 
Minneapolis: MNPERE (http://www.MNPERE.com), 2001. 
Mohan, N., Electric Drives: An Integrative Approach. Minneapolis: MNPERE 
(http://www.MNPERE.com), 2001. 
Murphy, J. M. D., and E G. Turnbull, Power Electronic Control of AC Motors. New York: 
Pergamon Press, 1988. 
Novotny, D. W., and T. A. Lipo, Vector Control and Dynamics of AC Drives. New York: 
Clarendon Press.Oxford, 1996. 
Subrahmanyam, V., Electric Drives: Concepts and Applications. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1996. 
Trzynadlowski, A. M., Control of Induction Motors. San Diego, California: Academic 
Press, 2001. 
Vas, E, Sensorless Vector and Direct Torque Control. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. 
11.7 
PROBLEMS 
11.1 When operating at rated voltage, a 3-kW, 120-V, 1725 r/min separately 
excited dc motor achieves a no-load speed of 1718 r/min at a field current of 
0.70 A. The motor has an armature resistance of 145 mA and a shunt-field 
resistance of 104 f2. For the purposes of this problem you may assume the 
rotational losses to be negligible. 
This motor will control the speed of a load whose torque is constant at 
15.2 N.m over the speed range of 1500-1800 r/min. The motor will be 
operated at a constant armature voltage of 120 V. The field-winding will be 
supplied from the 120-V dc armature supply via a pulse-width modulation 

11.7 
Problems 
619 
system, and the motor speed will be varied by varying the duty cycle of the 
pulse-width modulation. 
a. 
Calculate the field current required to achieve operation at 15.2 N.m 
torque and 1800 r/min. Calculate the corresponding PWM duty cycle D. 
b. 
Calculate the field current required to achieve operation at 15.2 N.m 
torque and 1500 r/min. Calculate the corresponding PWM duty cycle. 
c. 
Plot the required PWM duty cycle as a function of speed over the desired 
speed range of 1500 to 1800 r/min. 
11.2 Repeat Problem 11.1 for a load whose torque is 15.2 N.m at 1600 r/min and 
which varies as the speed to the 1.8 power. 
11.3 The dc motor of Problem 11.1 has a field-winding inductance Lf -- 3.7 H 
and a moment of inertia J = 0.081 kg.m 2. The motor is operating at rated 
terminal voltage and an initial speed of 1300 r/min. 
a. 
Calculate the initial field current If and duty cycle D. 
At time t = 0, the PWM duty cycle is suddenly switched from the value 
found in part (a) to D = 0.60. 
b. 
Calculate the final values of the field current and motor speed after the 
transient has died out. 
c. 
Write an expression for the field-current transient as a function of time. 
d. 
Write a differential equation for the motor speed as a function of time 
during this transient. 
11.4 A shunt-connected 240-V, 15-kW, 3000 r/min dc motor has the following 
parameters 
Field resistance: 
Armature resistance: 
Geometric constant: 
Rf = 132 g2 
Ra -- 0.168 f2 
Kf = 0.422 V/(A.rad/sec) 
When operating at rated voltage, no-load, the motor current is 1.56 A. 
a. 
Calculate the no-load speed and rotational loss. 
b. 
Assuming the rotational loss to be constant, use MATLAB to plot 
the motor output power as a function of speed. Limit your plot to a 
maximum power output of 15 kW. 
c. 
Armature-voltage control is to be used to maintain constant motor speed 
as the motor is loaded. For this operating condition, the shunt field 
voltage will be held constant at 240-V. Plot the armature voltage as a 
function of power output required to maintain the motor at a constant 
speed of 2950 r/min. 
d. 
Consider that the situation for armature-voltage control is applied to this 
motor while the field winding remains connected in shunt across the 
armature terminals. Repeat part (c) for this operating condition. Is such 
operation feasible? Why is the motor behavior significantly different 
from that in part (c)? 

620 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
11.5 The data sheet for a small permanent-magnet dc motor provides the 
following parameters" 
Rated voltage: 
Rated output power: 
No-load speed: 
Torque constant: 
Stall torque: 
grated -~- 3 V 
Prated = 0.28 W 
nnl = 12,400 r/min 
Km = 0.218 mV/(r/min) 
Tstall -- 0.094 oz.in 
a. 
Calculate the motor armature resistance. 
b. 
Calculate the no-load rotational loss. 
c. 
Assume the motor to be connected to a load such that the total shaft 
power (actual load plus rotational loss) is equal 0.25 W at a speed of 
12,000 r/min. Assuming this load to vary as the square of the motor 
speed, write a MATLAB script to plot the motor speed as a function of 
terminal voltage for 1.0 V < Va < 3.0 V. 
11.6 The data sheet for a 350-W permanent-magnet dc motor provides the 
following parameters: 
Rated voltage: 
Armature resistance: 
No-load speed: 
No-load current: 
Vrated -- 24 V 
Ra --- 97 mf2 
nnl = 3580 r/min 
/a,nl = 0.47 A 
a. 
Calculate the motor torque-constant Km in V/(rad/sec). 
b. 
Calculate the no-load rotational loss. 
c. 
The motor is supplied from a 30-V dc supply through a PWM inverter. 
Table 11.1 gives the measured motor current as a function of the PWM 
duty cycle D. 
Complete the table by calculating the motor speed and the load power for 
each value of D. Assume that the rotational losses vary as the square of the 
motor speed. 
Table 11.1 
Motor-performance data 
for Problem 11.6. 
nil 
i 
i 
D 
I, (A) 
r/min 
PIo.d (W) 
0.80 
13.35 
0.75 
12.70 
0.70 
12.05 
0.65 
11.40 
0.60 
10.70 
0.55 
10.05 
0.50 
9.30 

11.7 
Problems 
621 
11.7 The motor of Problem 11.5 has a moment of inertia of 6.4 x 10 -7 oz.in.sec 2. 
Assuming it is unloaded and neglecting any effects of rotational loss, 
calculate the time required to achieve a speed of 12,000 r/min if the motor 
is supplied by a constant armature current of 100 mA. 
11.8 An 1100-W, 150-V, 3000-r/min permanent-magnet dc motor is to 
be operated from a current-source inverter so as to provide direct 
control of the motor torque. The motor torque constant is Km -- 0.465 
V/(rad/sec); its armature resistance is 1.37 f2. The motor rotational loss 
at a speed of 3000 r/min is 87 W. Assume that the rotational loss can 
be represented by a constant loss torque as the motor speed varies. 
a. 
Calculate the rated armature current of this motor. What is the 
corresponding mechanical torque in N.m? 
b. 
The current source supplies a current of 6.2 A to the motor armature, and 
the motor speed is measured to be 2670 r/min. Calculate the load torque 
and power. 
c. 
Assume the load torque of part (b) to vary linearly with speed and the 
motor and load to have a combined inertia of 2.28 x 10 -3 kg.m 2. 
Calculate the motor speed as a function of time if the armature current 
is suddenly increased to 7.0 A. 
11.9 The permanent-magnet dc motor of Problem 11.8 is operating at its rated 
speed of 3000 r/min and no load. If rated current is suddenly applied to the 
motor armature in such a direction as to slow the motor down, how long 
will it take the motor to reach zero speed? The inertia of the motor alone is 
1.86 x 10 -3 kg-m 2. Ignore the effects of rotational loss. 
11.10 A 1100-kVA, 4600-V, 60-Hz, three-phase, four-pole synchronous motor is 
to be driven from a variable-frequency, three-phase, constant V/Hz inverter 
rated at 1250-kVA. The synchronous motor has a synchronous reactance 
of 1.18 per unit and achieves rated open-circuit voltage at a field current 
of 85 A. 
a. 
Calculate the rated speed of the motor in r/min. 
b. 
Calculate the rated current of the motor. 
c. 
With the motor operating at rated voltage and speed and an input power 
of 1000-kW, calculate the field current required to achieve unity-power- 
factor operation. 
The load power of part (c) varies as the speed to the 2.5 power. With the 
motor field-current held fixed, the inverter frequency is reduced such that the 
motor is operating at a speed of 1300 r/min. 
d. 
Calculate the inverter frequency and the motor input power and power 
factor. 
e. 
Calculate the field current required to return the motor to unity power 
factor. 

622 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
11.11 Consider a three-phase synchronous motor for which you are given the 
following data: 
Rated line-to-line voltage (V) 
Rated volt-amperes (VA) 
Rated frequency (Hz) and speed (r/min) 
Synchronous reactance in per unit 
Field current at rated open-circuit voltage (AFNL) (A) 
The motor is to be operated from a variable-frequency, constant V/Hz 
inverter at speeds of up to 120 percent of the motor-rated speed. 
a. 
Under the assumption that the motor terminal voltage and current cannot 
exceed their rated values, write a MATLAB script which calculates, for 
a given operating speed, the motor terminal voltage, the maximum 
possible motor input power, and the corresponding field current required 
to achieve this operating condition. You may consider the effects of 
saturation and armature resistance to be negligible. 
b. 
Exercise your program on the synchronous motor of Problem 11.10 for 
motor speeds of 1500 and 2000 r/min. 
11.12 For the purposes of performing field-oriented control calculations on 
non-salient synchronous motors, write a MATLAB script that will calculate 
the synchronous inductance Ls and armature-to-field mutual inductance Laf, 
both in henries, and the rated torque in N.m, given the following data: 
Rated line-to-line voltage (V) 
Rated (VA) 
Rated frequency (Hz) 
Number of poles 
Synchronous reactance in per unit 
Field current at rated open-circuit voltage (AFNL) (A) 
11.13 A 100-kW, 460-V, 60-Hz, four-pole, three-phase synchronous machine is to 
be operated as a synchronous motor under field-oriented torque control using 
a system such as that shown in Fig. 11.13a. The machine has a synchronous 
reactance of 0.932 per unit and AFNL -- 15.8 A. The motor is operating at 
rated speed, loaded to 50 percent of its rated torque at a field current of 
14.0 A with the field-oriented controller set to maintain iD = 0. 
a. 
Calculate the synchronous inductance Ls and armature-to-field mutual 
inductance Laf, both in henries. 
b. 
Find the quadrature-axis current iQ and the corresponding rms 
magnitude of the armature current ia. 
c. 
Find the motor line-to-line terminal voltage. 
11.14 The synchronous motor of Problem 11.13 is operating under field-oriented 
torque control such that iD -- 0. With the field current set equal to 14.5 A and 

11.7 
Problems 
623 
with the torque reference set equal to 0.75 of the motor rated torque, the 
motor speed is observed to be 1475 r/min. 
a. 
Calculate the motor output power. 
b. 
Find the quadrature-axis current iQ and the corresponding rms 
magnitude of the armature current ia. 
c. 
Calculate the stator electrical frequency 
d. 
Find the motor line-to-line terminal voltage. 
11.15 Consider the case in which the load on the synchronous motor in the field- 
oriented torque-control system of Problem 11.13 is increased, and the motor 
begins to slow down. Based upon some knowledge of the load characteristic, 
it is determined that it will be necessary to raise the torque set point Tre f from 
50 percent to 80 percent of the motor-rated torque to return the motor to its 
rated speed. 
a. 
If the field current were left unchanged at 14.0 A, calculate the values of 
quadrature-axis current, rms armature current, and motor line-to-line 
terminal voltage (in V and in per unit) which would result in response to 
this change in reference torque. 
b. 
To achieve this operating condition with reasonable armature terminal 
voltage, the field-oriented control algorithm is changed to the unity- 
power-factor algorithm described in the text prior to Example 11.9. 
Based upon that algorithm, calculate 
(i) 
the motor terminal line-to-line terminal voltage (in V and in 
per unit). 
(ii) 
the rms armature current. 
(iii) 
the direct- and quadrature-axis currents, iD and iQ. 
(iv) 
the motor field current. 
11.16 Consider a 500-kW, 2300-V, 50-Hz, eight-pole synchronous motor with a 
synchronous reactance of 1.18 per unit and AFNL = 94 A. It is to be 
operated under field-oriented torque control using the unity-power-factor 
algorithm described in the text following Example 11.8. It will be used to 
drive a load whose torque varies quadratically with speed and whose torque 
at a speed of 750 r/min is 5900 N.m. The complete drive system will include 
a speed-control loop such as that shown in Fig. 11.13b. 
Write a MATLAB script whose input is the desired motor speed (up to 
750 r/min) and whose output is the motor torque, the field current, the direct- 
and quadrature-axis currents, the armature current, and the line-to-line 
terminal voltage. Exercise your script for a motor speed of 650 r/min. 
11.17 A 2-kVA, 230-V, two-pole, three-phase permanent magnet synchronous 
motor achieves rated open-circuit voltage at a speed of 3500 r/min. Its 
synchronous inductance is 17.2 mH. 
a. 
Calculate ApM for this motor. 
b. 
If the motor is operating at rated voltage and rated current at a speed of 
3600 r/min, calculate the motor power in kW and the peak direct- and 

624 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
quadrature-axis components of the armature current, iD and iQ 
respectively. 
11.18 Field-oriented torque control is to be applied to the permanent-magnet 
synchronous motor of Problem 11.18. If the motor is to be operated at 
4000 ffmin at rated terminal voltage, calculate the maximum torque and 
power which the motor can supply and the corresponding values of iD 
and iQ. 
11.19 A 15-kVA, 230-V, two-pole, three-phase permanent-magnet synchronous 
motor has a maximum speed of 10,000 ffmin and produces rated open-circuit 
voltage at a speed of 7620 ffmin. It has a synchronous inductance of 
1.92 mH. The motor is to be operated under field-oriented torque control. 
a. 
Calculate the maximum torque the motor can produce without exceeding 
rated armature current. 
b. 
Assuming the motor to be operated with the torque controller adjusted to 
produce maximum torque (as found in part (a)) and iD = 0, calculate the 
maximum speed at which it can be operated without exceeding rated 
armature voltage. 
c. 
To operate at speeds in excess of that found in part (b), flux weakening 
will be employed to maintain the armature voltage at its rated value. 
Assuming the motor to be operating at 10,000 ffmin with rated armature 
voltage and current, calculate 
(i) 
the direct-axis current iD. 
(ii) 
the quadrature-axis current io. 
(iii) 
the motor torque. 
(iv) 
the motor power and power factor. 
11.20 The permanent magnet motor of Problem 11.17 is to be operated under 
vector control using the following algorithm. 
Terminal voltage not to exceed rated value 
Terminal current not to exceed rated value 
iD = 0 unless flux weakening is required to avoid excessive armature 
voltage 
Write a MATLAB script to produce plots of the maximum power and 
torque which this system can produce as a function of motor speed for 
speeds up to 10,000 r/min. 
11.21 Consider a 460-V, 25-kW, four-pole, 60-Hz induction motor which has the 
following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms per phase referred to the 
stator: 
R] = 0.103 
R2 = 0.225 
X! = 1.10 
X 2 = 1.13 
X m = 59.4 
The motor is to be operated from a variable frequency, constant-V/Hz drive 
whose output is 460-V at 60-Hz. Neglect any effects of rotational loss. The 
motor drive is initially adjusted to a frequency of 60 Hz. 

11.7 
Problems 
625 
a. 
Calculate the peak torque and the corresponding slip and motor speed 
in r/min. 
b. 
Calculate the motor torque at a slip of 2.9 percent and the corresponding 
output power. 
c. 
The drive frequency is now reduced to 35 Hz. If the load torque remains 
constant, estimate the resultant motor speed in r/min. Find the resultant 
motor slip, speed in r/min, and output power. 
11.22 Consider the 460-V, 250-kW, four-pole induction motor and drive system of 
Problem 11.21. 
a. 
Write a MATLAB script to plot the speed-torque characteristic of the 
motor at drive frequencies of 20, 40, and 60 Hz for speeds ranging from 
-200 r/min to the synchronous speed at each frequency. 
b. 
Determine the drive frequency required to maximize the starting torque 
and calculate the corresponding torque in N.m. 
11.23 A 550-kW, 2400-V, six-pole, 60-Hz three-phase induction motor has the 
following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms-per-phase-Y referred to the 
stator: 
R1 = 0.108 
R2 = 0.296 
X1 = 1.18 
X2 = 1.32 
Xm = 48.4 
The motor will be driven by a constant-V/Hz drive whose voltage is 2400 V 
at a frequency of 60 Hz. 
The motor is used to drive a load whose power is 525 kW at a speed of 
1138 r/min and which varies as the cube of speed. Using MATLAB, plot the 
motor speed as a function of frequency as the drive frequency is varied 
between 20 and 60 Hz. 
11.24 A 150-kW, 60-Hz, six-pole, 460-V three-phase wound-rotor induction motor 
develops full-load torque at a speed of 1157 r/min with the rotor short- 
circuited. An external noninductive resistance of 870 mr2 is placed in series 
with each phase of the rotor, and the motor is observed to develop its rated 
torque at a speed of 1072 r/min. Calculate the resistance per phase of the 
original motor. 
11.25 The wound rotor of Problem 11.24 will be used to drive a constant-torque 
load equal to the rated full-load torque of the motor. Using the results of 
Problem 11.24, calculate the external rotor resistance required to adjust the 
motor speed to 850 r/min. 
11.26 A 75-kW, 460-V, three-phase, four-pole, 60-Hz, wound-rotor induction 
motor develops a maximum internal torque of 212 percent at a slip of 
16.5 percent when operated at rated voltage and frequency with its rotor 
short-circuited directly at the slip tings. Stator resistance and rotational 
losses may be neglected, and the rotor resistance may be assumed to be 
constant, independent of rotor frequency. Determine 
a. 
the slip at full load in percent. 
b. 
the rotor I2R loss at full load in watts. 

626 
CHAPTER 11 
Speed and Torque Control 
c. 
the starting torque at rated voltage and frequency N.m. 
If the rotor resistance is now doubled (by inserting extemal series 
resistance at the slip rings), determine 
d. 
the torque in N.m when the stator current is at its full-load value. 
e. 
the corresponding slip. 
11.27 A 35-kW, three-phase, 440-V, six-pole wound-rotor induction motor 
develops its rated full-load output at a speed of 1169 r/min when operated at 
rated voltage and frequency with its slip rings short-circuited. The maximum 
torque it can develop at rated voltage and frequency is 245 percent of full- 
load torque. The resistance of the rotor winding is 0.23 r/phase Y. Neglect 
rotational and stray-load losses and stator resistance. 
a. 
Compute the rotor 12R loss at full load. 
b. 
Compute the speed at maximum torque. 
c. 
How much resistance must be inserted in series with the rotor to produce 
maximum starting torque? 
The motor is now run from a 50-Hz supply with the applied voltage 
adjusted so that, for any given torque, the air-gap flux wave has the same 
amplitude as it does when operated 60 Hz at the same torque level. 
d. 
Compute the 50-Hz applied voltage. 
e. 
Compute the speed at which the motor will develop a torque equal to its 
rated value at 60-Hz with its slip tings short-circuited. 
11.28 The three-phase, 2400-V, 550-kW, six-pole induction motor of 
Problem 11.23 is to be driven from a field-oriented speed-control system 
whose controller is programmed to set the rotor flux linkages )~DR equal to 
the machine rated peak value. The machine is operating at 1148 r/min 
driving a load which is known to be 400 kW at this speed. Find: 
a. 
the value of the peak direct- and quadrature-axis components of the 
armature currents iD and ia. 
b. 
the rms armature current under this operating condition. 
c. 
the electrical frequency of the drive in Hz. 
d. 
the rms line-to-line armature voltage. 
11.29 A field-oriented drive system will be applied to a 230-V, 20-kW, four-pole, 
60-Hz induction motor which has the following equivalent-circuit 
parameters in ohms per phase referred to the stator: 
Rl = 0.0322 
R2 = 0.0703 
X1 = 0.344 
X2 = 0.353 
X m = 18.6 
The motor is connected to a load whose torque can be assumed proportional 
to speed as 7ioad = 85(n/1800) N.m, where n is the motor speed in r/min. 
The field-oriented controller is adjusted such that the rotor flux linkages 
)~DR are equal to the machine's rated peak flux linkages, and the motor speed 
is 1300 r/min. Find 
a. 
the electrical frequency in Hz. 
b. 
the rms armature current and line-to-line voltage. 

11.7 
Problems 
627 
c. 
the motor input kVA. 
If the field-oriented controller is set to maintain the motor speed at 
1300 r/min, write a MATLAB script to plot the rms armature V/Hz as a 
percentage of the rated V/Hz as a function of ~.DR as ~-DR is varied between 
80 and 120 percent of the machine's rated peak flux linkages. 
11.30 The 20-kW induction motor-drive and load of Problem 11.29 is operating at 
a speed of 1450 r/min with the field-oriented controller adjusted to maintain 
the rotor flux linkages ~.DR equal to the machine's rated peak value. 
a. 
Calculate the corresponding values of the direct- and quadrature-axis 
components of the armature current, iD and iQ, and the rms armature 
current. 
b. 
Calculate the corresponding line-to-line terminal voltage drive electrical 
frequency. 
The quadrature-axis current iQ is now increased by 10 percent while the 
direct-axis current is held constant. 
c. 
Calculate the resultant motor speed and power output. 
d. 
Calculate the terminal voltage and drive frequency. 
e. 
Calculate the total kVA input into the motor. 
f. 
With the controller set to maintain constant speed, determine the set point 
for ~.DR, as a percentage of rated peak flux linkages, that sets the terminal 
V/Hz equal to the rated machine rated V/Hz. (Hint: This solution is most 
easily found using a MATLAB script to search for the desired result.) 
11.31 A three-phase, eight-pole, 60-Hz, 4160-V, 1250-kW squirrel-cage induction 
motor has the following equivalent-circuit parameters in ohms-per-phase-Y 
referred to the stator: 
R1=0.212 
R2=0.348 
X1=1.87 
X2=2.27 
Xm=44.6 
It is operating from a field-oriented drive system at a speed of 805 r/min and 
a power output of 1050 kW. The field-oriented controller is set to maintain 
the rotor flux linkages )~DR equal to the machine's rated peak flux linkages. 
a. 
Calculate the motor rms line-to-line terminal voltage, rms armature 
current, and electrical frequency. 
b. 
Show that steady-state induction-motor equivalent circuit and 
corresponding calculations of Chapter 6 give the same output power and 
terminal current when the induction motor speed is 828 r/min and the 
terminal voltage and frequency are equal to those found in part (a). 

Three.Phase Circuits 
G 
eneration, transmission, and heavy-power utilization of ac electric energy 
almost invariably involve a type of system or circuit called apolyphase system 
or polyphase circuit. In such a system, each voltage source consists of a group 
of voltages having related magnitudes and phase angles. Thus, an n-phase system 
employs voltage sources which typically consist of n voltages substantially equal 
in magnitude and successively displaced by a phase angle of 360°/n. A three-phase 
system employs voltage sources which typically consist of three voltages substantially 
equal in magnitude and displaced by phase angles of 120 ° . Because it possesses 
definite economic and operating advantages, the three-phase system is by far the 
most common, and consequently emphasis is placed on three-phase circuits in this 
appendix. 
The three individual voltages of a three-phase source may each be connected to 
its own independent circuit. We would then have three separate single-phase systems. 
Alternatively, as will be shown in Section A. 1, symmetrical electric connections can 
be made between the three voltages and the associated circuitry to form a three-phase 
system. It is the latter alternative that we are concerned with in this appendix. Note 
that the word phase now has two distinct meanings. It may refer to a portion of a 
polyphase system or circuit, or, as in the familiar steady-state circuit theory, it may 
be used in reference to the angular displacement between voltage or current phasors. 
There is very little possibility of confusing the two. 
A.1 
GENERATION OF THREE-PHASE 
VOLTAGES 
Consider the elementary two-pole, three-phase generator of Fig. A. 1. On the armature 
are three coils aa', bb', and cc' whose axes are displaced 120 ° in space from each 
other. This winding can be represented schematically as shown in Fig. A.2. When 
the field is excited and rotated, voltages will be generated in the three phases in 
accordance with Faraday's law. If the field structure is designed so that the flux is 
628 

A.1 
Generation of Three-Phase Voltages 
629 
Armature 
structure or stato 
Field winding 
Excited by direct 
current through 
slip rings 
Field strut 
)le produced 
or rotor 
~,a --'~ct current 
in field winding 
Figure A.1 
Elementary two-pole, three-phase generator. 
distributed sinusoidally over the poles, the flux linking any phase will vary sinusoidally 
with time, and sinusoidal voltages will be induced in the three phases. As shown in 
Fig. A.3, these three voltages will be displaced 120 ° electrical degrees in time as a 
result of the phases being displaced 120 ° in space. The corresponding phasor diagram 
is shown in Fig. A.4. In general, the time origin and the reference axis in diagrams 
such as Figs. A.3 and A.4 are chosen on the basis of analytical convenience. 
There are two possibilities for the utilization of voltages generated in this manner. 
The six terminals a, a', b, b', c, and c' of the three-phase winding may be connected 
to three independent single-phase systems, or the three phases of the winding may 
be interconnected and used to supply a three-phase system. The latter procedure is 
adopted almost universally. The three phases of the winding may be interconnected 
in two possible ways, as shown in Fig. A.5. Terminals a', b', and c t may be joined 
to form the neutral o, yielding a Y connection, or terminals a and b t, b and c t, and c 
and a t may be joined individually, yielding a A connection. In the Y connection, a 
neutral conductor, shown dashed in Fig. A.5a, may or may not be brought out. If a 
neutral conductor exists, the system is a four-wire, three-phase system; if not, it is 
a three-wire, three-phase system. In the A connection (Fig. A.5b), no neutral exists 
and only a three-wire, three-phase system can be formed. 
c ! 
f 
a 
a 
bt 
a~bt 
c 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure A.2 Schematic representation of the 
windings of Fig. A. 1. 

!) T l)aa' 
Ubb, 
Vcc, 
Uaa, 
630 
APPENDIX A 
Three-Phase Circuits 
r 
rot 
Figure A.3 Voltages generated in the windings 
of Figs. A. 1 and A.2. 
Vbb ' 
Figure A.4 
Phasor 
diagram of generated 
voltages. 
+ 
I 
lm 
c-~__~ m 
+ 
^ 
',b 
+ 
~c 
i a 
r 
& 
/cc' • 
oa 
oO 
ob 
Oc 
A 
^ 
l+ 
~ca 
(a) 
(b) 
+ 
v 
+ 
m 
oa 
ob 
OC 
Figure A.5 Three-phase connections" (a) Y connection and (b) A connection. 
The three phase voltages of Figs. A.3 and A.4, are equal and displaced in phase by 
120 degrees, a general characteristic of a balanced three-phase system. Furthermore, 
in a balanced three-phase system the impedance in any one phase is equal to that in 
either of the other two phases, so that the resulting phase currents are also equal and 
displaced in phase from each other by 120 degrees. Likewise, equal power and equal 

A.2 Three-Phase Voltages, Currents, and Power 
63t 
reactive power flow in each phase. An unbalanced three-phase system, however, may 
be unbalanced in one or more of many ways; the source voltages may be unbalanced, 
either in magnitude or in phase, or the phase impedances may not be equal. Note that 
only balanced systems are treated in this appendix, and none of the methods devel- 
oped or conclusions reached apply to unbalanced systems. Most practical analyses are 
conducted under the assumption of a balanced system. Many industrial loads are three- 
phase loads and therefore inherently balanced, and in supplying single-phase loads 
from a three-phase source definite efforts are made to keep the three-phase system 
balanced by assigning approximately equal single-phase loads to each of the three 
phases. 
A.2 THREE-PHASE VOLTAGES, CURRENTS, 
AND POWER 
When the three phases of the winding in Fig. A.1 are Y-connected, as in Fig. A.5a, 
the phasor diagram of voltages is that of Fig. A.6. The phase order or phase sequence 
in Fig. A.6 is abc; that is, the voltage of phase a reaches its maximum 120 ° before 
that of phase b. 
The three-phase voltages Va, ~rb, and f'c are called line-to-neutral voltages. 
The three voltages f'ab, f'bc, and f'ca are called line-to-line voltages. The use of 
J 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
--fie ~ 
fuc 
Figure A.6 Voltage phasor diagram for a Y-connected system. 

632 
APPENDIX A 
Three-Phase Circuits 
double-subscript notation in Fig. A.6 greatly simplifies the task of drawing the com- 
plete diagram. The subscripts indicate the points between which the voltage is deter- 
mined; for example, the voltage f'ab is calculated as f'ab -- f'a -- f'b. 
By Kirchhoff's voltage law, the line-to-line voltage gab is 
f'a-- 
- 
v5 f'aZ30 ° 
(A.1) 
as shown in Fig. A.6. Similarly, 
f"bc = ~ 
%Z30 ° 
(A.2) 
and 
Vca- ~ 
~"c z~30° 
(A.3) 
These equations show that the magnitude of the line-to-line voltage is ~/3 times the 
line-to-neutral voltage. 
When the three phases are A-connected, the corresponding phasor diagram of 
currents is given in Fig. A.7. The A currents are lab, Ibc, and ica. By Kirchhoff's 
current law, the line current la is 
ia = lab- ica- ~ 
iabZ--30 ° 
(A.4) 
i c 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Ica 
120 ° 
~ 
30 ° 
\\ 
\\ 
i. 
,, 
,, 
" -ica 
--lab 
Ibc 
la 
Figure A.7 
Current phasor diagram for A connection. 

A,2 
Three-Phase Voltages, Currents, and Power 
638 
as can be seen from the phasor diagram of Fig. A.7. Similarly, 
ib = ,/3 1be Z--30 ° 
and 
(A.5) 
Ic -- ~/3 Ica/-30 ° 
(A.6) 
Stated in words, Eqs. A.4 to A.6 show that for a A connection, the magnitude of 
the line current is ~/3 times that of the A current. Evidently, the relations between 
A currents and line currents of a A connection are similar to those between the 
line-to-neutral and line-to-line voltages of a Y connection. 
With the time origin taken at the maximum positive point of the phase-a voltage 
wave, the instantaneous voltages of the three phases are 
Va(t) ~- ~/2 Vrms cos cot 
Vb(t) -- V/2 Vrms cos (cot - 120 °) 
Vc(t) - ~/2 Vrms cos (cot + 120 °) 
(A.7) 
(A.8) 
(A.9) 
where Vrm s is the rms value of the phase-to-neutral voltage. When the phase currents 
are displaced from the corresponding phase voltages by the angle 0, the instantaneous 
phase currents are 
ia(t) -- ~ 
Irms COS (COt + 0) 
ib(t) = ~ 
Irms COS (cot + 0 -- 120 °) 
ic(t) = ~/2 Irms COS (cot + 0 + 120 °) 
(A.10) 
(A.11) 
(A.12) 
where Irms is the rms value of the phase current. 
The instantaneous power in each phase then becomes 
pa(t) --- Va(t)ia(t) = Vrmslrms[COS (2cot -k- 0) -+- cos0] 
(A.13) 
pb(t) = Vb(t)ib(t) = grms/rms[COS (2cot + 0 - 240 °) + cos 0] 
(A.14) 
pc(t) = Vc(t)ic(t) = Vrmslrms[COS (2COt + 0 + 240 °) + COS0] 
(A.15) 
Note that the average power of each phase is equal 
<pa(t)> -- <pb(t)> = <pc(t)> -- VrmslrmscosO 
(A.16) 
The phase angle 0 between the voltage and current is referred to as the power-factor 
angle and cos 0 is referred to as the power factor. If 0 is negative, then the power 
factor is said to be lagging; if 0 is power, then the power factor is said to be leading. 
The total instantaneous power for all three phases is 
p(t) = pa(t) -k- pb(t) q- pc(t) = 3Vrmslrms cos0 
(A.17) 
Notice that the sum of the cosine terms which involve time in Eqs. A. 13 to A. 15 
(the first terms in the brackets) is zero. We have shown that the total of the instanta- 
neous power for the three phases of a balanced three-phase circuit is constant and 

634 
APPENDIX A 
Three-Phase Circuits 
P = p(t) = total instantaneous three-phase power 
q/vvvvvv' 
Pa(t) 
Pc(t) 
Pb(t) 
<Pa(t)>, <Pb(t)>, 
<Pc(t)> 
> t 
Figure A.8 
Instantaneous power in a three-phase system. 
does not vary with time. This situation is depicted graphically in Fig. A.8. Instanta- 
neous powers for the three phases are plotted, together with the total instantaneous 
power, which is the sum of the three individual waves. The total instantaneous power 
for a balanced three-phase system is equal to 3 times the average power per phase. 
This is one of the outstanding advantages of polyphase systems. It is of particular 
advantage in the operation of polyphase motors since it means that the shaft-power 
output is constant and that torque pulsations, with the consequent tendency toward 
vibration, do not result. 
On the basis of single-phase considerations, the average power per phase Pp 
for either a Y- or A-connected system connected to a balanced three-phase load of 
impedance Zp = Rp -4- j Xp f2/phase is 
Pp = Vrms Irms cos 0 = 12 Rp 
(A.18) 
Here Rp is the resistance per phase. The total three-phase power P is 
P = 3Pp 
(A.19) 
Similarly, for reactive power per phase Qp and total three-phase reactive power Q, 
Qp = grmslrms sin0 = IZXp 
(A.20) 
and 
where Xp is the reactance per phase. 
Q = 3Qp 
(A.21) 

A.3 
Y- and A-Connected Circuits 
635 
The voltamperes per phase (VA)p and total three-phase voltamperes VA are 
(VA)p = Vrmslrms = lZsZp 
(A.22) 
VA -- 3(VA)p 
(A.23) 
In Eqs. A. 18 and A.20, 0 is the angle between phase voltage and phase current. 
As in the single-phase case, it is given by 
Rp 
X 
0 = tan -1 Xp =c°s- 1 
= sin -1 
P 
(A.24) 
Rp 
Zp 
Zp 
The power factor of a balanced three-phase system is therefore equal to that of any 
one phase. 
A.3 
Y- AND ~-CONNECTED 
CIRCUITS 
Three specific examples are given to illustrate the computational details of Y- and 
A-connected circuits. Explanatory remarks which are generally applicable are incor- 
porated into the solutions. 
In Fig. A.9 is shown a 60-Hz transmission system consisting of a line having the impedance 
ZI = 0.05 + j0.20 f2, at the receiving end of which is a load of equivalent impedance ZL = 
10.0 + j3.00 ~2. The impedance of the retum conductor should be considered zero. 
a. Compute the line current I; the load voltage VL; the power, reactive power, and 
voltamperes taken by the load; and the power and reactive-power loss in the line. 
Suppose now that three such identical systems are to be constructed to supply three 
such identical loads. Instead of drawing the diagrams one below the other, let them be 
drawn in the fashion shown in Fig. A. 10, which is, of course, the same electrically. 
b. For Fig. A.10 give the current in each line; the voltage at each load; the power, reactive 
power, and voltamperes supplied to each load; the power and reactive-power loss in each 
of the three transmission systems; the total power, reactive power, and voltamperes 
supplied to the loads; and the total power and reactive-power loss in the three transmission 
systems. 
EXAMPLE: 
A.I: ::: 
0.05 + jO.20 
120 V 
10.0 + j3.00 
Figure A.9 
Circuit for Example A.1, 
part (a). 

'(e) O1 (0) S1Jed 'L'V eldLu~xq Jol l!noJ!~) 
II, I.'V ~an§!.-I 
r,_0_0 0_~-----,V~ 
O~'Of + ~0"0 
00"£f+0"0I ~
,
~
 
00"gf+0"0l 
A0~;I 
0;l 
00"£f + 0"01 
A 0~;I 
o~of + ~oo 
"Sa~I~IIOA l~Jlnau-ol-au![ pu~ aU!l-Ol-aU!l jo asn aql uaa~laq qs!n~u!ls!p ol lnJaJt~a a13 
• mgIqoJd as~qd-aI~U!S lugI~A!nbg sl! ol mglqoJd l!naJ!a pglaguuo3- X gs~qd-agJql paau~I~ q 
g 8u!3npaJ jo poqlgm gql ~[~g!Jq au!Ilno 'gIdm~×g s!ql jo slinsgJ gql jo s!s~q gql uo "8 
"[: l'V ":~!d Joj (3) 1J~d l~gdg'd "J 
"~:I'V ":~!~ jo mals,(s gs~qd-ag~ql 
'g:q~-gg.tql gql u! sllnsga s!q,l. "pgll!tuo s! .tolanpuo3 ie:tlngu s!ql leql ~ou gtunss v 
tPg~!sgP J! I I'V "~!A u! ql[A~ pgsugds!p gq .Iolanpuo3 s!ql ue~) "g 
L.Iolanpuo3 lealngu .Io mnlg.t pau!qtuo3 aql m lug~n3 aql s! leqa~ I I'V "~!A uI "p 
"sgu![ gql u! sso I .tg~od-aA!laeaa pue Jgmod lelOl aql pue '.peo I aql/[q ua~lel saaadtuellOA 
pue '.tg~od ga!laegJ '.~a~od aseqd-ggaql lelol gql '.au!I qaeg u! sso I agA~od-gA!laega 
pue :tg~od aql '.peo I gql Jo aseqd qaea ,(q ug~lel saaadmellOA pue '.tamod gA.Ilal~g.I '.Ig~,od aql 
'.Ie:tlngu-ol-gu!I pue gu!l-ol-gu!I qloq 'g~t~llOA peo I aql '.lugzIna gu!I gql gA!~ I I'V "~!d .tOA "3 
"I I "V "~!A u! se 'sllnsg.t tugls,{s 
gseqd-gg.tql 'ga!~-:moj paauele q e lgql qans st saaanos a~I~IIOA gql JO d!qsuo!lelg.t gseqd 
gql leql pue guo olu! pgu!qmo3 g.m s.~olanpuo3 mnlga ggaql gql leql .tap!suo3 lxg N 
"(q) lJl~d 'I.'V elduJ~x3 Jo; l!noJ!C) O;'V o~nli!:l 
i-,_O_o_0j 
~ 
_v~,~ "Of+ ~0'0 
00"£f + 
00"£f + 0"0I 
A 0Z:I 
0~:I 
\ 
ooff + oo[ 
A 0i:I 
0~'0f + ~0"0 
sl!noJ!C) es~qd-eeJq/ 
V XIQN:~ddV 
9£9 

A.3 
Y- and A-Connected Circuits 
637 
0.05 + j0.20 
- l OV 
I 
^ A A _.~J-A-~WX 
Figure A.12 
Circuit for Example A.1 part (f). 
II Solution 
a. 
120 
I= 
= ll.4A 
~/(0.05 + 10.0) 2 + (0.20 + 3.00) 2 
VL = IIZLI = 11.4V/(10.0) 2 Jr (3.00) 2 = 119 V 
PL = IZRL = (11.4)2(3.00) --- 1200 W 
QL = I2XL 
= (11.4)2(3.00) = 390 VA reactive 
(VA)L = I21ZLI = (11.4)2v/(10.0) 2 + (3.00) 2 = 1360 VA 
P1 = 12 R~ = (11.4) 2 (0.05) = 6.5 W 
Q1 = 12X1 = (11.4) 2 (0.20) = 26 VA reactive 
b. The first four obviously have the same values as in part (a). 
Total power = 3PL = 3(1300) = 3900 W 
Total reactive power = 3QL = 3(390) = 1170 VA reactive 
Total VA = 3(VA)L = 3(1360) = 4080 VA 
Total power loss = 3PI = 3(6.5) = 19.5 W 
Total reactive-power loss = 3Q~ = 3(26) = 78 VA reactive 
c. The results obtained in part (b) are unaffected by this change. The voltage in parts (a) 
and (b) is now the line-to-neutral voltage. The line-to-line voltage is 
~/3(119) = 206 V 
d. By Kirchhoff's current law, the neutral current is the phasor sum of the three line currents. 
These line currents are equal and displaced in phase by 120 °. Since the phasor sum of 
three equal phasors 120 ° apart is zero, the neutral current is zero. 
e. The neutral current being zero, the neutral conductor can be dispensed with if desired. 

638 
APPENDIX A 
Three-Phase Circuits 
Since the presence or absence of the neutral conductor does not affect conditions, the 
values are the same as in part (c). 
A neutral conductor can be assumed, regardless of whether one is physically present. 
Since the neutral conductor in a balanced three-phase circuit carries no current and hence 
has no voltage drop across it, the neutral conductor should be considered to have zero 
impedance. Then one phase of the Y, together with the neutral conductor, can be removed 
for study. Since this phase is uprooted at the neutral, line-to-neutral voltages must be 
used. This procedure yields the single-phase equivalent circuit, in which all quantities 
correspond to those in one phase of the three-phase circuit. Conditions in the other two 
phases being the same (except for the 120 ° phase displacements in the currents and 
voltages), there is no need for investigating them individually. Line currents in the 
three-phase system are the same as in the single-phase circuit, and total three-phase 
power, reactive power, and voltamperes are three times the corresponding quantities in the 
single-phase circuit. If line-to-line voltages are desired, they must be obtained by 
multiplying voltages in the single-phase circuit by 4r3. 
"XAMPLE A.' 
Three impedances of value Zv = 4.00 + j3.00 = 5.00L36.9 ° ~ are connected in Y, as shown 
in Fig. A. 13. For balanced line-to-line voltages of 208 V, find the line current, the power factor, 
and the total power, reactive power, and voltamperes. 
m Solution 
The rms line-to-neutral voltage V on any one phase, such as phase a, is 
208 
V = 
= 120V 
Hence, the line current 
y .__ V 
Zv 
120 
= 
= 24.0 z-36.9 ° A 
5.00z36.9 o 
ao 
208 V 
CO 
bo 
Figure A.13 Circuit for Example A.2. 

A.3 Y- and A-Connected Circuits 
639 
and the power factor is equal to 
Power factor = cos 0 = cos (-36.9 °) = 0.80 lagging 
Thus 
P = 312Ry = 3(24.0)2(4.00) = 6910 W 
Q = 312Xy = 3(24.0)2(3.00) = 5180 VA reactive 
VA = 3VI = 3(120)(24.0) = 8640 VA 
Note that phases a and c (Fig. A.13) do not form a simple series circuit. Consequently, the 
current cannot be found by dividing 208 V by the sum of the phase-a and -c impedances. To 
be sure, an equation can be written for voltage between points a and c by Kirchhoff's voltage 
law, but this must be a phasor equation taking account of the 120 ° phase displacement between 
the phase-a and phase-c currents. As a result, the method of thought outlined in Example A. 1 
leads to the simplest solution. 
Three impedances of value ZA = 12.00+ j9.00 = 15.00/36.9 ° f2 are connected in A, as shown 
in Fig. A.14. For balanced line-to-line voltages of 208 V, find the line current, the power factor, 
and the total power, reactive power, and voltamperes. 
II Solution 
The voltage across any one leg of the A, VA is equal to the line-to-line voltage V~_~, which is 
equal to V/3 times the line-to-neutral voltage V. Consequently, 
VI-1 
208 
V= 
= 
-- 120V 
43 
and the current in the A is given by the line-to-line voltage divided by the A impedance 
i6 -- VI_I = 
208 
ZA 
15.00/36.9 ° 
= 13.87/-36.9 ° A 
Power factor = cos 0 = cos (-36.9 °) = 0.80 lagging 
EXAMPLE: A.3 ~: 
ao l 
208 V 
bo 
Z A = 12.00 + j9.00 
= 15.00/36.9 ° 
Figure A.14 Circuit for Example A.3. 

$40 
APPENDIX A 
Three-Phase Circuits 
From Eq. A.4 the phase current is equal to 
I = ~/3IA = Vc3(13.87) = 24.0 A 
Also 
P = 3P/, = 3IZRA = 3(13.87)2(12.00) 
= 6910 W 
Q - 3QA = 3IzXA = 3(13.87)2(9.00) = 5180VA reactive 
and 
VA = 3(VA)A = 3Vl-llA = 3(208)(13.87) = 8640 VA 
Note that phases ab and bc do not form a simple series circuit, nor does the path cba form 
a simple parallel combination with the direct path through the phase ca. Consequently, the 
line current cannot be found by dividing 208 V by the equivalent impedance of Zca in parallel 
with Zab + Zbc. Kirchhoff's-law equations involving quantities in more than one phase can 
be written, but they must be phasor quantities taking account of the 120 ° phase displacement 
between phase currents and phase voltages. As a result, the method outlined above leads to the 
simplest solution. 
Comparison of the results of Examples A.2 and A.3 leads to a valuable and 
interesting conclusion. Note that the line-to-line voltage, line current, power factor, 
total power, reactive power, and voltamperes are precisely equal in the two cases; in 
other words, conditions viewed from the terminals A, B, and C are identical, and one 
cannot distinguish between the two circuits from their terminal quantities. It will also 
be seen that the impedance, resistance, and reactance per phase of the Y connection 
(Fig. A.13) are exactly one-third of the corresponding values per phase of the A 
connection (Fig. A. 14). Consequently, a balanced A connection can be replaced by a 
balanced Y connection providing that the circuit constants per phase obey the relation 
1 
Zv - ~ Zzx 
(A.25) 
Conversely, a Y connection can be replaced by a A connection provided Eq. A.25 is 
satisfied. The concept of this Y-A equivalence stems from the general Y-A transfor- 
mation and is not the accidental result of a specific numerical case. 
Two important corollaries follow from this equivalence: (1) A general computa- 
tional scheme for balanced circuits can be based entirely on Y-connected circuits or 
entirely on A-connected circuits, whichever one prefers. Since it is frequently more 
convenient to handle a Y connection, the former scheme is usually adopted. (2) In 
the frequently occurring problems in which the connection is not specified and is not 
pertinent to the solution, either a Y or a A connection may be assumed. Again the Y 
connection is more commonly selected. In analyzing three-phase motor performance, 
for example, the actual winding connections need not be known unless the investi- 
gation is to include detailed conditions within the windings themselves. The entire 
analysis can then be based on an assumed Y connection. 

A.4 Analysis of Balanced Three-Phase Circuits; Single-Line Diagrams 
641 
A,4 
ANALYSIS OF BALANCED THREE-PHASE 
CIRCUITS; SINGLE-LINE DIAGRAMS 
By combining the principle of A-Y equivalence with the technique revealed by Exam- 
ple A. 1, a simple method of reducing a balanced three-phase-circuit problem to its 
corresponding single-phase problem can be developed. All the methods of single- 
phase-circuit analysis thus become available for its solution. The end results of the 
single-phase analysis are then translated back into three-phase terms to give the final 
results. 
In carrying out this procedure, phasor diagrams need be drawn for only one 
phase of the Y connection, the diagrams for the other two phases being unnecessary 
repetition. Furthermore, circuit diagrams can be simplified by drawing only one phase. 
Examples of such single-line diagrams are given in Fig. A.15, showing two three- 
phase generators with their associated lines or cables supplying a common substation 
load. Specific connections of apparatus can be indicated if desired. Thus, Fig. A.15b 
shows that G1 is Y-connected and G2 is A-connected. Impedances are given in ohms 
per phase. 
When one is dealing with power, reactive power, and voltamperes, it is some- 
times more convenient to deal with the entire three-phase circuit at once instead of 
concentrating on one phase. This possibility arises because simple expressions for 
three-phase power, reactive power, and voltamperes can be written in terms of line- 
to-line voltage and line current regardless of whether the circuit is Y- or A-connected. 
Thus, from Eqs. A. 18 and A. 19, three-phase power is 
P = 3Pp = 3VplpcosO 
Since ~-1 = ~/3Vp, Eq. A.26 becomes 
Similarly, 
and 
(A.26) 
P = ~f3~-llp cos 0 
(A.27) 
Q = ~/-3Vl-llp sin 0 
(A.28) 
VA- ~/3Vl-llp 
(A.29) 
1.4 + j 1.6 
0.80 + j 1.0 
~
L
2
a
 
Load terminals or 
Generator terminals 
substation bus 
or bus 
(a) 
Figure A.15 Examples of single-line diagrams. 
1.4 + j 1.6 
0.80 + j 1.0 
r 
ILoad I 
(b) 

642 
APPENDIX A 
Three-Phase Circuits 
It should be borne in mind, however, that the power-factor angle 0, given by Eq. A.24, 
is the angle between f'p and ip and not that between ~-1 and ip. 
EXAMPLE 
A.4 
Figure A. 15 is the equivalent circuit of a load supplied from two three-phase generating stations 
over lines having the impedances per phase given on the diagram. The load requires 30 kW at 
0.80 power factor lagging. Generator G1 operates at a terminal voltage of 797 V line-to-line 
and supplies 15 kW at 0.80 power factor lagging. Find the load voltage and the terminal voltage 
and power and reactive-power output of G2. 
II Solution 
Let I, P, and Q, respectively, denote line current and three-phase active and reactive power. 
The subscripts 1 and 2 denote the respective branches of the system; the subscript r denotes a 
quantity measured at the receiving end of the line. We then have 
P] 
15,000 
-- 
= 
= 13.6A 
11 -- ~/3E~ cos 01 
~/3(797)(0.80) 
Pr~ -- P~ -- 31Z~R1 = 15,000- 3(13.6)2(1.4) = 14,220 W 
Qrl = Q! - 312X~ = 15,000 tan (cos -~ 0.80) - 3(13.6)2(1.6) = 10,350 VA reactive 
The factor 3 appears before I~ R~ and 12X, in the last two equations because the current 11 is 
the phase current. The load voltage is 
VA 
~/(14,220) 2 + (10,350) 2 
VL = 
-- 
~/C3(current) 
Vc3(13.6) 
= 748 V line-to-line 
Since the load requires 30,000 W of real power and 30,000 tan (cos-' 0.80) = 22,500 VA 
of reactive power, 
Pr2 
"~ 30,000 - 14,220 = 15,780 W 
and 
Qr2 = 22,500 - 10,350 -- 12,150 VA reactive 
VA 
~/(15,780) 2 + (12,150) 2 
12 = ~/3VM 
~/3(748) 
= 15.4 A 
P2 = Pr2 4- 312R2 = 15,780 4- 3(15.4)2(0.80) = 16,350 W 
Q2 = Qr2 4- 31~X2 = 12,150 + 3(15.4)2(1.0) = 12,870 VA reactive 
VA 
~/(16,350) z 4- (12,870) 2 
V2 = 
= 
431~ 
,/3(15.4) 
= 780 V (1-1) 

A.5 Other Polyphase Systems 
643 
A.5 
OTHER POLYPHASE SYSTEMS 
Although three-phase systems are by far the most common of all polyphase systems, 
other numbers of phases are used for specialized purposes. The five-wire, four-phase 
system (Fig. A. 16) is sometimes used for low-voltage distribution. It has the advantage 
that for a phase voltage of 115 V, single-phase voltages of 115 (between a, b, c, or 
d and o, Fig. A.16) and 230 V (between a and c or b and d) are available as well 
as a system of polyphase voltages. Essentially the same advantages are possessed 
by four-wire, three-phase systems having a line-to-neutral voltage of 120 V and a 
line-to-line voltage of 208 V, however. 
Four-phase systems are obtained from three-phase systems by means of special 
transformer connections. Half of the four-phase system--the part aob (Fig. A.16), 
for examplemconstitutes a two-phase system. In some rectifier circuits, 6-, 12-, 18-, 
and 36-phase connections are used for the conversion of alternating to direct current. 
These systems are also obtained by transformation from three-phase systems. 
When the loads and voltages are balanced, the methods of analysis for three- 
phase systems can be adapted to any of the other polyphase systems by considering 
one phase of that polyphase system. Of course, the basic voltage, current, and power 
relations must be modified to suit the particular polyphase system. 
Oa 
oO 
ob 
0¢ 
od 
Figure A.16 A five-wire, 
four-phase system. 

Voltages, Magnetic 
Fields, and Inductances 
of Distributed 
AC Windings 
B 
oth amplitude and waveform of the generated voltage and armature mmf's 
in machines are determined by the winding arrangements and general ma- 
chine geometry. These configurations in turn are dictated by economic use 
of space and materials in the machine and by suitability for the intended service. In 
this appendix we supplement the introductory discussion of these considerations in 
Chapter 4 by analytical treatment of ac voltages and mmf's in the balanced steady 
state. Attention is confined to the time-fundamental component of voltages and the 
space-fundamental component of mmf's. 
B.1 
GENERATED VOLTAGES 
In accordance with Eq. 4.50, the rms generated voltage per phase for a concentrated 
winding having Nph turns per phase is 
E = ~/2 ~fNph~ 
(B.1) 
where f is the frequency and • the fundamental flux per pole. 
A more complex and practical winding will have coil sides for each phase dis- 
tributed in several slots per pole. Equation B.1 can then be used to compute the 
voltage distribution of individual coils. To determine the voltage of an entire phase 
group, the voltages of the component coils must be added as phasors. Such addition 
of fundamental-frequency voltages is the subject of this article. 
644 

B.1 Generated Voltages 
645 
B.1.1 
Distributed Fractional-Pitch 
Windings 
A simple example of a distributed winding is illustrated in Fig. B. 1 for a three-phase, 
two-pole machine. This case retains all the features of a more general one with any 
integral number of phases, poles, and slots per pole per phase. At the same time, a 
double-layer winding is shown. Double-layer windings usually lead to simpler end 
connections and to a machine which is more economical to manufacture and are found 
in all machines except some small motors below 10 kW. Generally, one side of a coil, 
such as a l, is placed in the bottom of a slot, and the other side, -a], is placed in the 
top of another slot. Coil sides such as al and a3 or a2 and a4 which are in adjacent 
slots and associated with the same phase constitute a phase belt. All phase belts are 
alike when an integral number of slots per pole per phase are used, and for the normal 
machine the peripheral angle subtended by a phase belt is 60 electrical degrees for a 
three-phase machine and 90 electrical degrees for a two-phase machine. 
Individual coils in Fig. B.1 all span a full pole pitch, or 180 electrical degrees; 
accordingly, the winding is a full-pitch winding. Suppose now that all coil sides in the 
tops of the slots are shifted one slot counterclockwise, as in Fig. B.2. Any coil, such as 
al, -a 1, then spans only five-sixths of a pole pitch or ~ (180) - 150 electrical degrees, 
and the winding is a fractional-pitch, or chorded, winding. Similar shifting by two 
2 
slots yields a 5-pitch winding, and so forth. Phase groupings are now intermingled, for 
some slots contain coil sides in phases a and b, a and c, and b and c. Individual phase 
~...._--- 3 0o---_......~ 
~--15° i-~ 15°~/ 
\ 
I 
/ 
' 
/ 
[iiiiiiiiiiii!iliiiiiiiii!i!i~ ..... 
iiiiJ!JiiJ!ii!i!Ji!i!i!!!!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiii!i 
........... 
li!iiiiii!iiiii!iiii!iiii~i~iiiiiiiiiiiii~iiiiiiiiiii!i!iiiii!!iiiiiiiii!i~ 
.... 
iiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiii~ 
~ ......................... 
iiiiiiiiiiiiii!ilili!i!iii!!ii!iii!~ 
..... 
ii!i!i!i!i!iiiiiiii!i 
~'~ 
`~iiiiii~i~ii~iii~i~!~i~i~ii!i!~!~i~!i!~!ii!!~ii!i!ii!!!~!!!i!!!i~iiii!ii!iii!i!i!~ 
........ 
:~:~:~:~:~:::~: 
;~iiii~i!i~i~i~i~i~i~!!~i~i~i!~i!~i~i~i~iiiii!iii!~i~iiiii~i~iii~ii~ii~ii~iiiii~iii~i~ii~ 
.... 
I 
, 
:'~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iliiii~ 
.................. 
~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iii!iiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiii;;~ 
...... 
/ 
,~iiii!iiiili!i!i!iii!i!iiiii!iiii!iiiiiii!iiii 
/ 
::~iiiiiiiiiii:iiiiiiiiii!!!iiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
.............................. 
) 
" 
,i,i,i,i,i,i,i,i,i,i,i,iiiiiiii! 
i 
 
,, 
c 
 
c4 
~
~
C
2
 
be 
..... '~!ii!iii!iiiiiiiiiiiiili!i .... c~ 
b3 .iiiiii)iiiiili!iiii~'~:: 
...... i:iiiiii i iiiii!iiil 
............................................................... 
--a 3 
--al 
............................................................ 
iiiii!ii?!ii i iiiiiiiiiiiiii 
...... 
........ ~i!iiiiii iiii!iiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiii~:-a4 
-a2 "~i iiiiiii!iiiiiiiii!il iiiiii!iiiiii~ ........ 
Figure B.1 
Distributed 
two-pole, 
three-phase 
full-pitch 
armature 
winding 
with voltage 
phasor 
diagram. 

646 
APPENDIX B Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and Inductances of Distributed AC Windings 
C 4 
b4 
......................................... 
C2 
--a 1 
~!~iii ~:i~iiiii~iii~iiiiiiii!iiiiiii~iiiiiiii~ii:: 
,~ 
:!:i ¸ ~:~!i~iii~ii~iii~i~i~ii~ii~i!iii~iii~iiiiii!i~i~iiii~i~iiiiiiiii~i~i~i!i!i!ii~ 
Figure B.2 Distributed two-pole, three-phase 
fractional-pitch armature winding with voltage 
phasor diagram. 
groups, such as that formed by a l, a2, a3, a4 on one side and -a l, -ae, -a3, -a4 on 
the other, are still displaced by 120 electrical degrees from the groups in other phases 
so that three-phase voltages are produced. Besides the minor feature of shortening the 
end connections, fractional-pitch windings can be shown to decrease the harmonic 
content of both voltage and mmf waves. 
The end connections between the coil sides are normally in a region of negligible 
flux density, and hence altering them does not significantly affect the mutual flux 
linkages of the winding. Allocation of coil sides in slots is then the factor determining 
the generated voltages, and only that allocation need be specified in Figs. B. 1 and B.2. 
The only requisite is that all coil sides in a phase be included in the interconnection in 
such a manner that individual voltages make a positive contribution to the total. The 
practical consequence is that end connections can be made according to the dictates 
of manufacturing simplicity; the theoretical consequence is that when computational 
advantages result, the coil sides in a phase can be combined in an arbitrary fashion to 
form equivalent coils. 
One sacrifice is made in using the distributed and fractional-pitch windings of 
Figs. B.1 and B.2 compared with a concentrated full-pitch winding: for the same 
number of turns per phase, the fundamental-frequency generated voltage is lower. 
The harmonics are, in general, lowered by an appreciably greater factor, however, 
and the total number of turns which can be accommodated on a fixed iron geometry 
is increased. The effect of distributing the winding in Fig. B. 1 is that the voltages of 
coils al and a2 are not in phase with those of coils a3 and a4. Thus, the voltage of 

B.1 
Generated Voltages 
647 
coils al and a2 can be represented by phasor O X in Fig. B. 1, and that of coils a3 and 
a4 by the phasor O Y. The time-phase displacement between these two voltages is the 
same as the electrical angle between adjacent slots, so that O X and O Y coincide with 
the centerlines of adjacent slots. The resultant phasor O Z for phase a is obviously 
smaller than the arithmetic sum of O X and O Y. 
In addition, the effect of fractional pitch in Fig. B.2 is that a coil links a smaller 
portion of the total pole flux than if it were a full-pitch coil. The effect can be super- 
imposed on that of distributing the winding by regarding coil sides a2 and -al as an 
equivalent coil with the phasor voltage O W (Fig. B.2), coil sides al, a4, -a2, and 
-a3 as two equivalent coils with the phasor voltage O X (twice the length of O W), 
and coil sides a3 and -a4 as an equivalent coil with phasor voltage O Y. The resultant 
phasor O Z for phase a is obviously smaller than the arithmetic sum of O W, O X, 
and O Y and is also smaller than O Z in Fig. B. 1. 
The combination of these two effects can be included in a winding factor kw to 
be used as a reduction factor in Eq. B. 1. Thus, the generated voltage per phase is 
E -- v/2yr kw f Nph ¢P 
(B.2) 
where Nph is the total turns in series per phase and kw accounts for the departure 
from the concentrated full-pitch case. For a three-phase machine, Eq. B.2 yields the 
line-to-line voltage for a A-connected winding and the line-to-neutral voltage for a 
Y-connected winding. As in any balanced Y connection, the line-to-line voltage of 
the latter winding is ~/3 times the line-to-neutral voltage. 
B.1.2 
Breadth and Pitch Factors 
By separately considering the effects of distributing and of chording the winding, 
reduction factors can be obtained in generalized form convenient for quantitative 
analysis. The effect of distributing the winding in n slots per phase belt is to yield n 
voltage phasors displaced in phase by the electrical angle y between slots, 9/being 
equal to 180 electrical degrees divided by the number of slots per pole. Such a group 
of phasors is shown in Fig. B.3a and, in a more convenient form for addition, again 
in Fig. B.3b. Each phasor AB, BC, and CD is the chord of a circle with center at 
O and subtends the angle y at the center. The phasor sum AD subtends the angle 
n y, which, as noted previously, is 60 electrical degrees for the normal, uniformly 
distributed three-phase machine and 90 electrical degrees for the corresponding two- 
phase machine. From triangles O Aa and O Ad, respectively, 
Aa 
AB 
oa = 
= 
(B.3) 
sin (y/2) 
2 sin (y/2) 
Ad 
AD 
OA -- 
= 
(B.4) 
sin (ny/2) 
2sin (ny/2) 
Equating these two values of O A yields 
AD = AB sin (ny/2) 
sin (y/2) 
(B.5) 

648 
APPENDIX B 
Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and Inductances of Distributed AC Windings 
/ 
/ 
B 11tt/~ 
y 
J
,
f
 
" ...... 
,' Iy 
A (J 
~' 
", 
d 
l/l/ 
~'~,, D 
", 
'\ '~ I / 
,~ 
\\ \, 
~ i / 
// 
x\ \~ 
I 
I 
// 
\\\ 
I 
/ 
(a) 
(b) 
\~l/// 
0 
Figure B.3 (a) Coil voltage phasors and (b) phasor sum. 
But the arithmetic sum of the phasors is n(AB). Consequently, the reduction factor 
arising from distributing the winding is 
AD 
sin (ny/2) 
kb -- 
= 
(B.6) 
nAB 
n sin (y/2) 
The factor kb is called the breadth factor of the winding. 
The effect of chording on the coil voltage can be obtained by first determining 
the flux linkages with the fractional-pitch coil. Since there are n coils per phase and 
Nph total series turns per phase, each coil will have N = Nph/n turns per coil. From 
Fig. B.4 coil side -a is only p electrical degrees from side a instead of the full 180 °. 
The flux linkages with the N-turn coil are 
)~ = N Bpeaklr 
sin 0 dO 
(B.7) 
poles 
+~ 
)~ -- N Bpeaklr 
[COS (Or + p) -- COS Ct] 
(B.8) 
poles 
where 
l = axial length of coil side 
r = coil radius 
poles - number of poles 
With ot replaced by cot to indicate rotation at co electrical radians per second, Eq. B.8 
becomes 
2 
) [cos (cot +/9) - cos cot] 
~ = NBpeaklr 
poles 
(B.9) 

B.1 
Generated Voltages 
649 
0 
Space distribution 
I 
of flux density 
B = Bpeak sin 0 
a / 
N-turn coil 
I I 
,,~\1 
24 
/ / 
]- 
p+et 
~1 
Figure B.4 Fractional-pitch coil in 
sinusoidal field. 
The addition of cosine terms required in the brackets of Eq. B.9 may be performed 
by a phasor diagram as indicated in Fig. B.5, from which it follows that 
cos (cot + p) - cos cot - -2 cos 
2 
cos 
cot - 
2 
a result which can also be obtained directly from the terms in Eq. B.9 by the appropriate 
trigonometric transformations. 
The flux linkages are then 
( 4 ) 
(n-p) 
((n-p)) 
(B.11) 
k---NBpeaklr 
poles 
cos 
2 
cos cot- 
2 
and the instantaneous voltage is 
dX 
( 
4 
) 
(n-p) 
( ( n - p ) )  
e = dt - coNBpeaklr 
cos 
sin cot - 
(B.12) 
poles 
2 
2 
The phase angle (n - p)/2 in Eq. B.12 merely indicates that the instantaneous 
voltage is no longer zero when ot in Fig. B.4 is zero. The factor cos [(n - p)/2] is an 
~
p
 
Phasor representing cos cot 
\/_ 
Phasor re;resenting ~
.
 
--~ 
cos 
+ 
... 
/ 
Phasor representing 
difference of other two 
Figure B.5 Phasor addition for 
fractional-pitch coil. 

650 
APPENDIX B 
Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and Inductances of Distributed AC Windings 
EXAMPLE B.1 
amplitude-reduction factor, however, so that the rms voltage of Eq. B. 1 is modified to 
E = v/27rkpfNph~ 
(B.13) 
where the pitch factor kp is 
(re-p) 
=sin(P ) 
(B.14) 
kp = cos 
2 
When both the breadth and pitch factors apply, the rms voltage is 
E = ~/27rkbkpfNph~ = ~/-2rrkwfNph~ 
(B.15) 
which is an alternate form of Eq. B.2; the winding factor kw is seen to be the product 
of the pitch and breadth factors. 
kw -- kbkp 
(B. 16) 
Calculate the breadth, pitch, and winding factors for the distributed fractional-pitch winding 
of Fig. B.2. 
I Solution 
The winding of Fig. B.2 has two coils per phase belt, separated by an electrical angle of 30 °. 
From Eq. B.6 the breadth factor is 
sin (ny/2) 
sin [2(30°)/2] 
kb = 
= 
= 0.966 
n sin (y/2) 
2 sin (30°/2) 
The fractional-pitch coils span 150 ° = 5zr/6 rad, and from Eq. B.14 pitch factor is 
kp=sin 
~ 
=sin 
~ 
=0.966 
The winding factor is 
kw = kbkp = 0.933 
B.2 
ARMATURE 
MMF WAVES 
Distribution of a winding in several slots per pole per phase and the use of fractional- 
pitch coils influence not only the emf generated in the winding but also the magnetic 
field produced by it. Space-fundamental components of the mmf distributions are 
examined in this article. 
B.2.1 
Concentrated Full-Pitch Windings 
We have seen in Section 4.3 that a concentrated polyphase winding of Nph turns in 
a multipole machine produces a rectangular mmf wave around the air-gap circum- 
ference. With excitation by a sinusoidal current of amplitude I, the time-maximum 
amplitude of the space-fundamental component of the wave is, in accordance 

B.2 
Armature MMF Waves 
651 
with Eq. 4.6, 
4 Nph 
(Fagl)peak = 
(~/2I) A. turns/pole 
(B.17) 
rr poles 
where the winding factor kw of Eq. 4.6 has been set equal to unity since in this case 
we are discussing the mmf wave of a concentrated winding. 
Each phase of a polyphase concentrated winding creates such a time-varying 
standing mmf wave in space. This situation forms the basis of the analysis leading to 
Eq. 4.39. For concentrated windings, Eq. 4.39 can be rewritten as 
3 4 (Nph)(~/2I)cos (0ae- cot)= 6 (Nph)(~/2I)COS (0ae-cot) 
5r(0ae, t) = ~ ~- poles 
~- 
poles 
(B.18) 
The amplitude of the resultant mmf wave in a three-phase machine in ampere- 
turns per pole is then 
6 ( Nph ) 
FA = 
-
-
 
(~/2I) A. turns/pole 
(B.19) 
Jr \poles 
Similarly, for a nph-phase machine, the amplitude is 
FA -- 2nph ( Nph ) (~/~l) A" 
poles 
(B.20) 
In Eqs. B.19 and B.20, I is the rms current per phase. The equations include 
only the fundamental component of the actual distribution and apply to concentrated 
full-pitch windings with balanced excitation. 
B.2.2 
Distributed Fractional-Pitch Winding 
When the coils in each phase of a winding are distributed among several slots per 
pole, the resultant space-fundamental mmf can be obtained by superposition from the 
preceding simpler considerations for a concentrated winding. The effect of distribution 
can be seen from Fig. B.6, which is a reproduction of the two-pole, three-phase, full- 
pitch winding with two slots per pole per phase given in Fig. B.1. Coils al and a2, bl 
and b2, and cl and c2 by themselves constitute the equivalent of a three-phase, two- 
pole concentrated winding because they form three sets of coils excited by polyphase 
currents and mechanically displaced 120 ° from each other. They therefore produce 
a rotating space-fundamental mmf; the amplitude of this contribution is given by 
Eq. B.19 when Nph is taken as the sum of the series turns in coils al and a2 only. 
Similarly, coils a3 and a4, b3 and b4, and c3 and Ca produce another identical mmf 
wave, but one which is phase-displaced in space by the slot angle 9/from the former 
wave. The resultant space-fundamental mmf wave for the winding can be obtained 
by adding these two sinusoidal contributions. 
The mmf contribution from the ala2bl b2clc2 coils can be represented by the pha- 
sor O X in Fig. B.6. Such phasor representation is appropriate because the waveforms 
concerned are sinusoidal, and phasor diagrams are simply convenient means for 

652 
APPENDIX B Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and Inductances of Distributed AC Windings 
c 3 c4 
mc 1 
C2 
b 4 
.... 
_a4 
.... --a 2 
--C 
30 ° 
/ 
Figure B.6 Distributed two-pole, three-phase, full-pitch 
armature winding with mmf phasor diagram. 
adding sine waves. These are space sinusoids, however, not time sinusoids. Pha- 
sor O X is drawn in the space position of the mmf peak for an instant of time when the 
current in phase a is a maximum. The length of O X is proportional to the number of 
turns in the associated coils. Similarly, the mmf contribution from the a3a4b3b4c3c4 
coils may be represented by the phasor O Y. Accordingly, the phasor O Z represents 
the resultant mmf wave. Just as in the corresponding voltage diagram, the resultant 
mmf is seen to be smaller than if the same number of turns per phase were concentrated 
in one slot per pole. 
In like manner, mmf phasors can be drawn for fractional-pitch windings as illus- 
trated in Fig. B.7, which is a reproduction of the two-pole, three-phase, fractional-pitch 
winding with two slots per pole per phase given in Fig. B.2. Phasor O W represents the 
contribution for the equivalent coils formed by conductors a2 and -al, b2 and -bl, 
and C2 and -cl; OX for ala4 and -a3 -a2, b]b4 and -b3 -b2, and ¢1C4 and -c3 -c2; 
and O Y for a3 and --a4, b3 and -b4, and c3 and -c4. The resultant phasor OZ is, 
of course, smaller than the algebraic sum of the individual contributions and is also 
smaller than O Z in Fig. B.6. 
By comparison with Figs. B. 1 and B.2, these phasor diagrams can be seen to be 
identical with those for generated voltages. It therefore follows that pitch and breadth 
factors previously developed can be applied directly to the determination of resultant 
mmf. Thus, for a distributed, fractional-pitch, polyphase winding, the amplitude of 
the space-fundamental component of mmf can be obtained by using kbkpNph = kw Nph 
instead of simply Nph in Eqs. B. 19 and B.20. These equations then become 
6 (kbkpNph) 
FA -- -- 
(~/21) 
Jr 
poles 
- 6__ ( kwNph ) (~f21) 
Jr 
poles 
(B.21) 

B.3 Air-Gap Inductances of Distributed Windings 
653 
c 3 --b 1 
a2 
// 
, 
60 ° 
W // 
b:~ 
Y 
---" 
b4 bl :ii~iiill 
--a 1 
--a3~ 
Figure B.7 Distributed two-pole, three-phase, 
fractional-pitch armature winding with mmf 
phasor diagram. 
for a three-phase machine and 
FA- 2nphzr (kbkpNph)poles (~/2I).__ 2nphg (kwNph)poles (~//2I) 
for a nph-phase machine, where FA is in ampere-turns per pole. 
(B.22) 
B.3 
AIR-GAP INDUCTANCES 
OF DISTRIBUTED WINDINGS 
Figure B.8a shows an N-turn, full-pitch, concentrated armature winding in a two-pole 
magnetic structure with a concentric cylindrical rotor. The mmf of this configuration 
is shown in Fig. B.8b. Since the air-gap length g is much smaller than the average 
air-gap radius r, the air-gap radial magnetic field can be considered uniform and 
equal to the mmf divided by g. From Eq. 4.3 the space-fundamental mmf is given 
by 
4 Ni 
• ~"agl -" -- ~ 
COS 0a 
(B.23) 
7r 2 
and the corresponding air-gap flux density is 
~agl 
J~agl -- /L0 g 
21zoN i 
rcg 
COS 0a 
(B.24) 

654 
APPENDIX B 
Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and Inductances of Distributed AC Windings 
oil 
l a Coil magnetic 
-~ 
I 
axis 
--zr 
I 
.T" 
/ 
Space fundamental, 
4Ni 
Sf ~ 
"~'agl = 7r 2 cos 0 a 
/ ° 
¢ 
% 
" 
S 
% 
(a) 
Figure B.8 
(a) N-turn concentrated coil and (b) resultant mmf. 
(b) 
Equation B.24 can be integrated to find the fundamental air-gap flux per pole 
(Eq. 4.44) 
rr/2 
= l 
~aglr dO = 
J -rr/2 
41zoNlr . 
~
t
 
(B.25) 
7rg 
where I is the axial length of the air gap. The air-gap inductance of the coil can be 
found from Eq. 1.29 
)~ 
N ~ 
4lzoN2lr 
L = - = 
= 
(B.26) 
i 
i 
rrg 
For a distributed multipole winding with Nph series turns and a winding factor 
kw -- kbkp, the air-gap inductance can be found from Eq. B.26 by substituting for N 
the effective turns per pole pair (2kw Nph/poles) 
L= 41zolr (2kwNph) 2 _ 16#0/r (kwNph) 2 
rrg 
poles 
-- 
rrg 
poles 
(B.27) 
Finally, Fig. B.9 shows schematically two coils (labeled 1 and 2) with winding 
factors kwl and kw2 and with 2N1/poles and 2N2/poles turns per pole pair, respec- 
tively; their magnetic axes are separated by an electrical angle ot (equal to poles/2 
times their spatial angular displacement). The mutual inductance between these two 
windings is given by 
,o.es 
 c°s° 
16/z0 (kw I N! )(kw2 N2)lr 
= 
cosct 
(B.28) 
:rrg (poles) 2 
Although the figure shows one winding on the rotor and the second on the stator, 
Eq. B.28 is equally valid for the case where both windings are on the same member. 

B.3 Air-Gap Inductances of Distributed Windings 
655 
Figure B.9 Two distributed windings 
separated by electrical angle o~. 
The two-pole stator-winding distribution of Fig. B.2 is found on an induction motor with an 
air-gap length of 0.381 mm, an average rotor radius of 6.35 cm, and an axial length of 20.3 cm. 
Each stator coil has 15 turns, and the coil phase connections are as shown in Fig. B. 10. Calculate 
the phase-a air-gap inductance Laa0 and the phase-a to phase-b mutual inductance Lab. 
II Solution 
Note that the placement of the coils around the stator is such that the flux linkages of each of 
the two parallel paths are equal. In addition, the air-gap flux distribution is unchanged if, rather 
than dividing equally between the two legs, as actually occurs, one path were disconnected and 
all the current were to flow in the remaining path. Thus, the phase inductances can be found 
by calculating the inductances associated with only one of the parallel paths. 
This result may appear to be somewhat puzzling because the two paths are connected in 
parallel, and thus it would appear that the parallel inductance should be one-half that of the 
single-path inductance. However, the inductances share a common magnetic circuit, and their 
T 
T 
T 
al 
a2 
bl 
b2 
cl 
c2 
~a 1 
~a 2 
~b 1 
~b 2 
~c 1 
~c 2 
a3 
a4 
b 3 
b4 
c3 
c4 
~a 3 
~b 3 
a4 
b4 
~c 3 
c 4 
Phase a 
Phase b 
Phase c 
Figure B.10 Coil phase connections of Fig. B.2 for Example B.2. 
EXAMPLE B.2 

GSG 
APPENDIX B 
Voltages, Magnetic Fields, and Inductances of Distributed AC Windings 
combined inductance must reflect this fact. It should be pointed out, however, that the phase 
resistance is one-half that of each of the paths. 
The winding factor has been calculated in Example B. 1. Thus, from Eq. B.27, 
Laa°=161z°lr(kwNph) 
27rg 
poles 
= 16(4~r x 10-7) x 0"203 x 0"0635 (0"933 x 30) 
2
~
r
(
3
.
8
1
 
x 10 -4) 
2 
= 42.4 mH 
The winding axes are separated by ot = 120 °, and thus from Eq. B.28 
Lab- 161z°(kwNph)21r 
-- 
cos a = -21.2 mH 
rrg(poles) 2 

_A_PP 
 N nix 
The dq0 Transformation 
I 
n this appendix, the direct- and quadrature-axis (dq0) theory introduced in Sec- 
tion 5.6 is formalized. The formal mathematical transformation from three-phase 
stator quantities to their direct- and quadrature-axis components is presented. These 
transformations are then used to express the governing equations for a synchronous 
machine in terms of the dq0 quantities. 
C.1 
TRANSFORMATION TO DIRECT- AND 
QUADRATURE-AXIS VARIABLES 
In Section 5.6 the concept of resolving synchronous-machine armature quantities 
into two rotating components, one aligned with the field-winding axis, the direct- 
axis component, and one in quadrature with the field-winding axis, the quadrature- 
axis component, was introduced as a means of facilitating analysis of salient-pole 
machines. The usefulness of this concept stems from the fact that although each of 
the stator phases sees a time-varying inductance due to the saliency of the rotor, the 
transformed quantities rotate with the rotor and hence see constant magnetic paths. 
Although not discussed here, additional saliency effects are present under transient 
conditions, due to the different conducting paths in the rotor, rendering the concept 
of this transformation all the more useful. 
Similarly, this transformation is useful from the point of view of analyzing the 
interaction of the rotor and stator flux- and mmf-waves, independent of whether or 
not saliency effects are present. By transforming the stator quantities into equivalent 
quantities which rotate in synchronism with the rotor, under steady-state conditions 
these interactions become those of constant mmf- and flux-waves separated by a 
constant spatial angle. This indeed is the point of view which corresponds to that of 
an observer in the rotor reference frame. 
The idea behind the transformation is an old one, stemming from the work of 
Andre Blondel in France, and the technique is sometimes referred to as the Blondel 
two-reaction method. Much of the development in the form used here was carried out 
657 

658 
APPENDIX C The dqO Transformation 
Axis of 
phase b 
Ro 
quadrat~ 
a 
Field 
winding 
Axis of 
phase a 
Axis of 
phase c 
Figure C.1 
Idealized synchronous machine 
by R. E. Doherty, C. A. Nickle, R. H. Park, and their associates in the United States. 
The transformation itself, known as the dqO transformation, can be represented in a 
straightforward fashion in terms of the electrical angle 0me (equal to poles/2 times the 
spatial angle 0m) between the rotor direct axis and the stator phase-a axis, as defined 
by Eq. 4.1 and shown in Fig. C. 1. 
Letting S represent a stator quantity to be transformed (current, voltage, or flux), 
we can write the transformation in matrix form as 
2[cos Ome  coS 
Ome ,200  cos Ome+'2OO ][Sa] 
= 
--sin(0me) 
-sin(0me- 120 °) 
--sin(0me 4- 120 °) 
Sb 
So 
~ 
~ 
~ 
s~ 
(c.1) 
and the inverse transformation as 
[ COS Ome  
sin  me  
Sb 
-- 
COS (0me- 120 °) 
-sin(0me- 120 °) 
1 
Sq 
S c 
cos ({gme + 120 °) 
-sin(0me + 120 °) 
1 
So 
(C.2) 
Here the letter S refers to the quantity to be transformed and the subscripts 
d and q represent the direct and quadrature axes, respectively. A third component, 
the zero-sequence component, indicated by the subscript 0, is also included. This 
component is required to yield a unique transformation of the three stator-phase 
quantities; it corresponds to components of armature current which produce no net air- 
gap flux and hence no net flux linking the rotor circuits. As can be seen from Eq. C. 1, 
under balanced-three-phase conditions, there are no zero-sequence components. Only 
balanced-three-phase conditions are considered in this book, and hence zero-sequence 
components are not discussed in any detail. 

C.1 
Transformation to Direct- and Quadrature-Axis Variables 
659 
Note that the dqO transformation applies to the instantaneous values of the quan- 
tities to be transformed, not rms values. Thus when applying the formal instantaneous 
transformations as presented here, one must be careful to avoid the use of rms values, 
as are frequently used in phasor analyses such as are found in Chapter 5. 
A two-pole synchronous machine is carrying balanced three-phase armature currents 
ia ~-- q/2Ia COS cot 
ib = ~/21a COS (cot -- 120 °) 
ic -~ X//2Ia COS (cot + 120 °) 
The rotor is rotating at synchronous speed co, and the rotor direct axis is aligned with the stator 
phase-a axis at time t -- 0. Find the direct- and quadrature-axis current components. 
II Solution 
The angle between the rotor direct axis and the stator phase-a axis can be expressed as 
0me = COt 
From Eq. C. 1 
2 
id = ~'[ia COS COt + ib COS (cot -- 120 °) + ic COS (cot + 120°)] 
.5 
9~ 
---- -- ~/2/a[COS 2 cot + COS 2 (cot -- 120 °) + COS 2 ((Dt + 120°)] 
3 
1 (1 + cos 2or) gives 
Using the trigonometric identity cos 2 ot - 
id-- x/C2la 
Similarly, 
2 
iq -- --~[ia sin cot + ib sin (cot -- 120 °) + ic sin (cot + 120°)] 
2 
---- 
~/2Ia[cOs cot sin cot + cos (cot - 120 °) sin (cot - 120 °) 
3 
+ cos (cot + 120 °) sin (cot + 120°)] 
1 
and using the trigonometric identity cos ot sin ot -- ~ sin 2or gives 
iq --0 
This result corresponds directly to our physical picture of the dq0 transformation. From 
the discussion of Section 4.5 we recognize that the balanced three-phase currents applied to 
this machine produce a synchronously rotating mmf wave which produces flux along the stator 
phase-a axis at time t - 0. This flux wave is thus aligned with the rotor direct axis at t - 0 
and remains so since the rotor is rotating at the same speed. Hence the stator current produces 
only direct-axis flux and thus consists only of a direct-axis component. 
EXAMPLE 
C. 1 ~ 

660 
APPENDIX C 
The dqO Transformation 
C.2 
BASIC SYNCHRONOUS-MACHINE 
RELATIONS IN dq0 VARIABLES 
Equations 5.2 to 5.5 give the flux-linkage current relationships for a synchronous 
machine consisting of a field winding and a three-phase stator winding. This simple 
machine is sufficient to demonstrate the basic features of the machine representation 
in dq0 variables; the effects of additional rotor circuits such as damper windings can 
be introduced in a straightforward fashion. 
The flux-linkage current relationships in terms of phase variables (Eqs. 5.2 to 5.5) 
are repeated here for convenience 
~a 
/~aa 
/~ab 
/~ac 
/2af 
ia 
/~b 
__ 
/2ba 
Ebb 
/~bc 
/~bf 
ib 
)~c 
/~ca 
£cb 
/~cc 
,l~cf 
ic 
~,f 
Efa 
Efb 
Efc 
£ff 
if 
(c.3) 
Unlike the analysis of Section 5.2, this analysis will include the effects of saliency, 
which causes the stator self and mutual inductances to vary with rotor position. 
For the purposes of this analysis the idealized synchronous machine of Fig. C. 1 
is assumed to satisfy two conditions: (1) the air-gap permeance has a constant com- 
ponent as well as a smaller component which varies cosinusoidally with rotor angle 
as measured from the direct axis, and (2) the effects of space harmonics in the air-gap 
flux can be ignored. Although these approximations may appear somewhat restric- 
tive, they form the basis of classical dq0 machine analysis and give excellent results 
in a wide variety of applications. Essentially they involve neglecting effects which 
result in time-harmonic stator voltages and currents and are thus consistent with our 
previous assumptions neglecting harmonics produced by discrete windings. 
The various machine inductances can then be written in terms of the electrical 
rotor angle 0me (between the rotor direct axis and the stator phase-a axis), using the 
notation of Section 5.2, as follows. For the stator self-inductances 
/2~a = Laa0 + L~I + Lg2 cos 20me 
Ebb -- Laa0 + Lal n t- Lg2 cos (20me + 120 °) 
Z2cc = Laa0 + Lal + Lg2 cos (20me - 120 °) 
(c.4) 
(c.5) 
(c.6) 
For the stator-to-stator mutual inductances 
1 
/~ab -- /~ba -- --~ La~0 + Lg2 cos (20me - 120 °) 
1 
/~bc -- /~cb -- --~ Laa0 + tg2 cos 20me 
1 
/~ac "-- £ca = 
2 
-- - Laa0 + Lg2 cos (20me n t- 120 °) 
(C.7) 
(c.8) 
(C.9) 

C,2 
Basic Synchronous-Machine Relations in dqO Variables 
66t 
For the field-winding self-inductance 
£ff = Lff 
and for the stator-to-rotor mutual inductances 
/2af =/2fa = Laf cos 0me 
£bf = Efb = Lafcos (0me- 120 °) 
£cf = Efc = Lafcos (0me + 120 °) 
(C.IO) 
(C.11) 
(C.12) 
(C.13) 
Comparison with Section 5.2 shows that the effects of saliency appear only in the 
stator self- and mutual-inductance terms as an inductance term which varies with 20me. 
This twice-angle variation can be understood with reference to Fig. C. 1, where it can 
be seen that rotation of the rotor through 180 ° reproduces the original geometry of the 
magnetic circuit. Notice that the self-inductance of each stator phase is a maximum 
when the rotor direct axis is aligned with the axis of that phase and that the phase- 
phase mutual inductance is maximum when the rotor direct axis is aligned midway 
between the two phases. This is the expected result since the rotor direct axis is the 
path of lowest reluctance (maximum permeance) for air-gap flux. 
The flux-linkage expressions of Eq. C.3 become much simpler when they are 
expressed in terms of dq0 variables. This can be done by application of the trans- 
formation of Eq. C.1 to both the flux linkages and the currents of Eq. C.3. The 
manipulations are somewhat laborious and are omitted here because they are simply 
algebraic. The results are 
)~d -- Ldid d- Lafif 
(C.14) 
~,q --" Lqiq 
(C.15) 
3 
~,f -- ~ Lafid + Lffif 
(C.16) 
)~o = Loio 
(C. 17) 
In these equations, new inductance terms appear: 
3 
Ld = Lal -Jr- ~ (Laao -+" Lg2) 
(C.18) 
3 
Lq -- Lal-Jr- ~(Laa0- Lg2) 
(C.19) 
L0 = Lal 
(C.20) 
The quantities Ld and Lq are the direct-axis and quadrature-axis synchronous 
inductances, respectively, corresponding directly to the direct- and quadrature-axis 
synchronous reactances discussed in Section 5.6 (i.e., Xo = ogeLd and Xq = coeLq). 
The inductance L0 is the zero-sequence inductance. Notice that the transformed flux- 
linkage current relationships expressed in Eqs. C.14 to C.17 no longer contain in- 
ductances which are functions of rotor position. This feature is responsible for the 
usefulness of the dq0 transformation. 

662 
APPENDIX C 
The dqO Transformation 
Transformation of the voltage equations 
dXa 
Va --- Raia + ~ 
(C.21) 
dt 
d)~b 
Vb = Raib + ~ 
(C.22) 
dt 
dXc 
Vc = Raic q- ~ 
(C.23) 
dt 
dXf 
Vf 
-~- Rfif q- ~ 
(C.24) 
dt 
results in 
dXd 
Vd -- Raid -F d-T - °)me~'q 
(C.25) 
dXq 
1)q = 
Raiq + ~ 
-at O)me/~.d 
(C.26) 
dXf 
1)f -~- Rfif q- ~ 
(C.27) 
dt 
dXo 
vo = Raio + ~ 
(C.28) 
dt 
(algebraic details are again omitted), where 09me--dOme/dt is the rotor electrical 
angular velocity. 
In Eqs. C.25 and C.26 the terms O)me~,q and O)me~, d are speed-voltage terms which 
come as a result of the fact that we have chosen to define our variables in a reference 
frame rotating at the electrical angular velocity 09me. These speed voltage terms are 
directly analogous to the speed-voltage terms found in the dc machine analysis of 
Chapter 9. In a dc machine, the commutator/brush system performs the transformation 
which transforms armature (rotor) voltages to the field-winding (stator) reference 
frame. 
We now have the basic relations for analysis of our simple synchronous ma- 
chine. They consist of the flux-linkage current equations C. 14 to C. 17, the voltage 
equations C.25 to C.28, and the transformation equations C.1 and C.2. When the 
rotor electrical angular velocity 09me is constant, the differential equations are linear 
with constant coefficients. In addition, the transformer terms d)~d/dt and d)~q/dt in 
Eqs. C.25 and C.26 are often negligible with respect to the speed-voltage terms O)me~, q 
and O)me~,d, providing further simplification. Omission of these terms corresponds to 
neglecting the harmonics and dc component in the transient solution for stator volt- 
ages and currents. In any case, the transformed equations are generally much easier 
to solve, both analytically and by computer simulation, than the equations expressed 
directly in terms of the phase variables. 
In using these equations and the corresponding equations in the machinery liter- 
ature, careful note should be made of the sign convention and units employed. Here 

C,2 
Basic Synchronous-Machine Relations in dqO Variables 
663 
we have chosen the motor-reference convention for armature currents, with positive 
armature current flowing into the machine terminals. Also, SI units (volts, amperes, 
ohms, henrys, etc.) are used here; often in the literature one of several per-unit systems 
is used to provide numerical simplifications. 1 
To complete the useful set of equations, expressions for power and torque are 
needed. The instantaneous power into the three-phase stator is 
ps = Vaia + Vbib + Vcic 
(C.29) 
Phase quantities can be eliminated from Eq. C.29 by using Eq. C.2 written for voltages 
and currents. The result is 
3 
ps = ~(Vdid + Vqiq + 2v0i0) 
(C.30) 
The electromagnetic torque, Tmech , is readily obtained by using the techniques 
of Chapter 3 as the power output corresponding to the speed voltages divided by the 
shaft speed (in mechanical radians per second). From Eq. C.30 with the speed-voltage 
terms from Eqs. C.25 and C.26, and by recognizing O)me as the rotor speed in electrical 
radians per second, we get 
(poles) 
Tmech -- ~ 
2 
()~diq -- ~qid) 
(C.31) 
A word about sign conventions. When, as is the case in the derivation of this 
appendix, the motor-reference convention for currents is chosen (i.e., the positive 
reference direction for currents is into the machine), the torque of Eq. C.31 is the torque 
acting to accelerate the rotor. Alternatively, if the generator-reference convention is 
chosen, the torque of Eq. C.31 is the torque acting to decelerate the rotor. This result 
is, in general, conformity with torque production from interacting magnetic fields 
as expressed in Eq. 4.81. In Eq. C.31 we see the superposition of the interaction of 
components: the direct-axis magnetic flux produces torque via its interaction with 
the quadrature-axis mmf and the quadrature-axis magnetic flux produces torque via 
its interaction with the direct-axis mmf. Note that, for both of these interactions, 
the flux and interacting mmf's are 90 electrical degrees apart; hence the sine of the 
interacting angle (see Eq. 4.81) is unity which in turns leads to the simple form of 
Eq. C.31. 
As a final cautionary note, the reader is again reminded that the currents, fluxes, 
and voltages in Eqs. C.29 through Eq. C.31 are instantaneous values. Thus, the reader 
is urged to avoid the use of rms values in these and the other transformation equations 
found in this appendix. 
1 See A. W. Rankin, "Per-Unit Impedances of Synchronous Machines," Trans. AIEE 64:569-573, 
839-841 (1945). 

664 
APPENDIX C 
The dqO Transformation 
C.3 
BASIC INDUCTION-MACHINE 
RELATIONS 
IN dq0 VARIABLES 
In this derivation we will assume that the induction machine includes three-phase 
windings on both the rotor and the stator and that there are no saliency effects. In this 
case, the flux-linkage current relationships can be written as 
/~,a 
/~aa 
/~ab 
/~ac 
/~aaR 
/~abR 
/~acR 
ia 
~,b 
/~ba 
/~bb 
/~bc 
/~baR 
/~bbR 
/~bcR 
ib 
~c 
__ 
£ca 
~cb 
~cc 
£caR 
~cbR 
/~ccR 
ic 
~.aR 
/~Aa 
/~aRb /~aRc /~aRaR /~aRbR /~aRC 
iaR 
~.bR 
£bRa 
£bRb 
£bRc 
£bRaR 
£bRbR 
£bRcR 
ibR 
~,cR 
£cRa 
£cRb 
£cRc 
£cRaR 
£cRbR 
£cRcR 
icR 
(C.32) 
where the subscripts (a, b, c) refer to stator quantities while the subscripts (aR, bR, 
cR) refer to rotor quantities. 
The various machine inductances can then be written in terms of the electrical 
rotor angle 0me (defined in this case as between the rotor phase-aR and the stator 
phase-a axes), as follows. For the stator self-inductances 
/~aa = £bb = £cc = Laa0 + Lal 
(C.33) 
where Laa0 is the air-gap component of the stator self-inductance and Lal is the leakage 
component. 
For the rotor self-inductances 
/~aRaR -- /~bRbR "-" /~cRcR m LaRaR0 _.1.. LaRI 
(C.34) 
where LaRaR0 is the air-gap component of the rotor self-inductance and LaR1 is the 
leakage component. 
For the stator-to-stator mutual inductances 
1 
£ab = £ba "-- £ac -- £ca -- £bc -- £cb -- --~ Laa0 
(C.35) 
For the rotor-to-rotor mutual inductances 
1 
£aRbR -- £bRaR -- £aRcR ---~ £cRaR -- £bRcR -- £cRbR -- --~LaRaR0 
(C.36) 
and for the stator-to-rotor mutual inductances 
£aaR = £aRa = •bbR = £bRb = £ccR = £cRc = LaaR COS 0me 
£baR = £aRb = £cbR = £bRc = £acR = £cRa = LaaR COS (0me- 120 °) 
£caR = £aRc = £~bR = £bRa = £bcR = £cRb = L~R COS (0me + 120 °) 
(C.37) 
(C.38) 
(C.39) 
The corresponding voltage equations become 
Va = Raia + 
dXa 
dt 
(C.40) 

C,3 
Basic Induction-Machine Relations in dqO Variables 
66S 
dXb 
Vb ~- Raib n t- ~ 
(C.41) 
dt 
dXc 
Vc = Raic -t- ~ 
(C.42) 
dt 
dXaR 
VaR ~-~ 0-- RaRiaR 4- ~ 
(C.43) 
dt 
d)~bR 
VbR = 0 = RaRibR + ~ 
(C.44) 
dt 
dXcR 
VcR = 0 = RaRicR q- ~ 
(C.45) 
dt 
where the voltages vaR, VbR, and VcR are set equal to zero because the rotor windings 
are shorted at their terminals. 
In the case of a synchronous machine in which the stator flux wave and rotor 
rotate in synchronism (at least in the steady state), the choice of reference frame for the 
dq0 transformation is relatively obvious. Specifically, the most useful transformation 
is to a reference frame fixed to the rotor. 
The choice is not so obvious in the case of an induction machine. For example, 
one might choose a reference frame fixed to the rotor and apply the transformation 
of Eqs. C. 1 and C.2 directly. If this is done, because the rotor of an induction motor 
does not rotate at synchronous speed, the flux linkages seen in the rotor reference 
frame will not be constant, and hence the time derivatives in the transformed voltage 
equations will not be equal to zero. Correspondingly, the direct- and quadrature-axis 
flux linkages, currents, and voltages will be found to be time-varying, with the result 
that the transformation turns out to be of little practical value. 
An alternative choice is to choose a reference frame rotating at the synchronous 
angular velocity. In this case, both the stator and rotor quantities will have to be 
transformed. In the case of the stator quantities, the rotor angle 0me in Eqs. C. 1 and 
C.2 would be replaced by 0s where 
0S = COet -k- 00 
(C.46) 
is the angle between the axis of phase a and that of the synchronously-rotating dq0 
reference frame and 00. 
The transformation equations for the stator quantities then become 
2[COS 0s  COS 
0s '20°  
- 
-sin(0s) 
-sin(0s- 120 °) 
Sq 
, 
So 
~ 
cos 0s +,200  1 ] 
-sin(0s + 120 °) 
Sb 
! 
Sc 
2 
(C.47) 
and the inverse transformation 
Sa I 
[ 
cos (0s) 
Sb 
-- 
cos (0s --120 °) 
Sc 
cos (0s + 120 °) 
-sin(0s- 120 °) 
1 
Sq 
-sin(0s + 120 °) 
1 
So 
(C.48) 

GGG 
APPENDIX C 
The dqO Transformation 
Similarly, in the case of the rotor, 0s would be replaced by OR where 
OR -- (O)e -- O)me)t + 00 
(C.49) 
is the angle between the axis of rotor phase aR and that of the synchronously-rotating 
dq0 reference frame and (We - 
(-Ome) is the electrical angular velocity of the syn- 
chronously rotating reference frame as seen from the rotor frame. 
The transformation equations for the rotor quantities then become 
[*dR] 2 E COS 0R  
-- 
--sin(0R) 
s~ 
~ 
1 
S0R 
cos 0R 120o  cos +,20o  1E,aR ] 
--sin(0R- 120 °) 
--sin(0R + 120 °) 
SbR 
1 
1 
Sc R 
(c.50) 
and the inverse transformation 
EsaRI E cos 0R  
sin 0R  
SbR 
-- 
COS (OR- 120 °) 
--sin(0R- 120 °) 
1 
SqR 
ScR 
COS (O R -~- 120 °) 
--sin(0R + 120 °) 
1 
S0R 
(C.51) 
Using this set of transformations for the rotor and stator quantities, the trans- 
formed flux-linkage current relationships become 
~.d "-- Lsid + LmidR 
(C.52) 
~.q = Lsiq + LmiqR 
(C.53) 
)~o = Loio 
(C.54) 
for the stator and 
~.dR -- Lmid q- LRidR 
(C.55) 
~qR = Lmiq + LRiqR 
(C.56) 
~.0R = LORi0R 
(C.57) 
for the rotor 
Here we have defined a set of new inductances 
3 
Ls -- ~Laa0 q- Lal 
3 
Lm -- ~LaaR0 
Lo : Lal 
3 
LR -- ~LaRaR0 + LaRI 
L0R : LaRI 
(c.58) 
(c.59) 
(c.60) 
(c.61) 
(c.62) 

C,3 
Basic Induction-Machine Relations in dqO Variables 
667 
The transformed stator-voltage equations are 
d)~d 
Vd -- Raid n t- --dtt- - O')e~'q 
(C.63) 
d)~q 
Vq = Raiq Jr- ~ 
+ WeLd 
(C.64) 
d)~0 
vo = Raio + 
(C.65) 
dt 
and those for the rotor are 
~,dR 
0 = RaRidR + --~ -- (We -(-Ome)~,qR 
(C.66) 
dLqR 
0 = RaRiqR n t- 
dt 
+ (tOe --(-Ome)).dR 
(C.67) 
d)~0R 
0-- RaRi0R -~- ~ 
(C.68) 
dt 
Finally, using the techniques of Chapter 3, the torque can be expressed in a 
number of equivalent ways including 
and 
Tmech -- ~ 
2 
(~,diq -- ~,qid) 
3 (ples /( 
= 
~R) (~,dRiq 
~'qRid) 
(C.69) 
(c.7o) 

APPFNnlX 
Engineering Aspects 
of Practical Electric 
Machine Performance 
and Operation 
I 
n this book the basic essential features of electric machinery have been discussed; 
this material forms the basis for understanding the behavior of electric machinery of 
all types. In this appendix our objective is to introduce practical issues associated 
with the engineering implementation of the machinery concepts which have been 
developed. Issues common to all electric machine types such as losses, cooling, and 
rating are discussed. 
D.1 
LOSSES 
Consideration of machine losses is important for three reasons: (1) Losses determine 
the efficiency of the machine and appreciably influence its operating cost; (2) losses 
determine the heating of the machine and hence the rating or power output that can be 
obtained without undue deterioration of the insulation; and (3) the voltage drops or 
current components associated with supplying the losses must be properly accounted 
for in a machine representation. Machine efficiency, like that of transformers or any 
energy-transforming device, is given by 
Efficiency - output 
(D. 1) 
input 
which can also be expressed as 
input- losses 
losses 
Efficiency = 
= 1 
(D.2) 
input 
input 
Efficiency -- 
output 
(D.3) 
output + losses 
668 

D.1 
Losses 
669 
Rotating machines in general operate efficiently except at light loads. For example, 
the full-load efficiency of average motors ranges from 80 to 90 percent for motors on 
the order of 1 to 10 kW, 90 to 95 percent for motors up to a few hundred kW, and up 
to a few percent higher for larger motors. 
The forms given by Eqs. D.2 and D.3 are often used for electric machines, since 
their efficiency is most commonly determined by measurement of losses instead of 
by directly measuring the input and output under load. Efficiencies determined from 
loss measurements can be used in comparing competing machines if exactly the same 
methods of measurement and computation are used in each case. For this reason, 
the various losses and the conditions for their measurement are precisely defined 
by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and the National Electrical Manufacturers Associa- 
tion (NEMA). The following discussion summarizes some of the various commonly 
considered loss mechanisms. 
Ohmic Losses 
Ohmic, or I2R losses, are found in all windings of a machine. By 
convention, these losses are computed on the basis of the dc resistances of the winding 
at 75°C. Actually the 12 R loss depends on the effective resistance of the winding under 
the operating frequency and flux conditions. The increment in loss represented by the 
difference between dc and effective resistances is included with stray load losses, 
discussed below. In the field windings of synchronous and dc machines, only the 
losses in the field winding are charged against the machine; the losses in external 
sources supplying the excitation are charged against the plant of which the machine 
is a part. Closely associated with I2R loss is the brush-contact loss at slip rings 
and commutators. By convention, this loss is normally neglected for induction and 
synchronous machines. For industrial-type dc machines the voltage drop at the brushes 
is regarded as constant at 2 V total when carbon and graphite brushes with shunts 
(pigtails) are used. 
Mechanical Losses 
Mechanical losses consist of brush and bearing friction, wind- 
age, and the power required to circulate air through the machine and ventilating 
system, if one is provided, whether by self-contained or external fans (except for the 
power required to force air through long or restricted ducts external to the machine). 
Friction and windage losses can be measured by determining the input to the machine 
running at the proper speed but unloaded and unexcited. Frequently they are lumped 
with core loss and determined at the same time. 
Open-Circuit, or No-Load, Core Loss 
Open-circuit core loss consists of the hys- 
teresis and eddy-current losses arising from changing flux densities in the iron of 
the machine with only the main exciting winding energized. In dc and synchronous 
machines, these losses are confined largely to the armature iron, although the flux 
variations arising from slot openings will cause losses in the field iron as well, par- 
ticularly in the pole shoes or surfaces of the field iron. In induction machines the 
losses are confined largely to the stator iron. Open-circuit core loss can be found by 
measuring the input to the machine when it is operating unloaded at rated speed or 
frequency and under the appropriate flux or voltage conditions, and then deducting 

670 
APPENDIX D Engineering Aspects of Practical Electric Machine Performance and Operation 
the friction and windage loss and, if the machine is self-driven during the test, the 
no-load armature I2R loss (no-load stator 12R loss for an induction motor). Usually, 
data are taken for a curve of core loss as a function of armature voltage in the neigh- 
borhood of rated voltage. The core loss under load is then considered to be the value 
at a voltage equal to rated voltage corrected for the armature resistance drop under 
load (a phasor correction for an ac machine). For induction motors, however, this 
correction is dispensed with, and the core loss at rated voltage is used. For efficiency 
determination alone, there is no need to segregate open-circuit core loss and friction 
and windage loss; the sum of these two losses is termed the no-load rotational loss. 
Eddy-current loss varies with the square of the flux density, the frequency, and 
the thickness of laminations. Under normal machine conditions it can be expressed 
to a sufficiently close approximation as 
ee 
-
-
 Ke(Bmaxf t~) 2 
(D.4) 
where 
- lamination thickness 
Bmax -- maximum flux density 
f = frequency 
Ke = proportionality constant 
The value of Ke depends on the units used, volume of iron, and resistivity of the iron. 
Variation of hysteresis loss can be expressed in equation form only on an empirical 
basis. The most commonly used relation is 
eh - ghf Bn 
(D.5) 
max 
where Kh is a proportionality constant dependent on the characteristics and volume 
of iron and the units used and the exponent n ranges from 1.5 to 2.5, a value of 2.0 
often being used for estimating purposes in machines. In both Eqs. D.4 and D.5, 
frequency can be replaced by speed and flux density by the appropriate voltage, with 
the proportionality constants changed accordingly. 
When the machine is loaded, the space distribution of flux density is significantly 
changed by the mmf of the load currents. The actual core losses may increase notice- 
ably. For example, mmf harmonics cause appreciable losses in the iron near the air-gap 
surfaces. The total increment in core loss is classified as part of the stray load loss. 
Stray Load Loss 
Stray load loss consists of the losses arising from nonuniform 
current distribution in the copper and the additional core losses produced in the iron 
by distortion of the magnetic flux by the load current. It is a difficult loss to determine 
accurately. By convention it is taken as 1.0 percent of the output for dc machines. For 
synchronous and induction machines it can be found by test. 
D.2 
RATING AND HEATING 
The rating of electrical devices such as machines and transformers is often deter- 
mined by mechanical and thermal considerations. For example, the maximum wind- 
ing current is typically determined by the maximum operating temperature which 

ID,2 Rating and Heating 
671 
the insulation can withstand without damage or excessive loss of life. Similarly the 
maximum speed of a motor or generator is typically determined by mechanical con- 
siderations related to the structural integrity of the rotor or the performance of the 
bearings. The temperature rise resulting from the losses considered in Section D. 1 is 
therefore a major factor in the rating of a machine. 
The operating temperature of a machine is closely associated with its life ex- 
pectancy because deterioration of the insulation is a function of both time and tem- 
perature. Such deterioration is a chemical phenomenon involving slow oxidation and 
brittle hardening and leading to loss of mechanical durability and dielectric strength. 
In many cases the deterioration rate is such that the life of the insulation can be 
represented as an exponential 
Life = Ae B/T 
(D.6) 
where A and B are constants and T is the absolute temperature. Thus, according to 
Eq. D.6, when life is plotted to a logarithmic scale against the reciprocal of absolute 
temperature on a uniform scale, a straight line should result. Such plots form valuable 
guides in the thermal evaluation of insulating materials and systems. A very rough 
idea of the life-temperature relation can be obtained from the old and more or less 
obsolete rule of thumb that the time to failure of organic insulation is halved for each 
8 to 10°C rise. 
The evaluation of insulating materials and insulation systems (which may in- 
clude widely different materials and techniques in combination) is to a large extent 
a functional one based on accelerated life tests. Both normal life expectancy and 
service conditions will vary widely for different classes of electric equipment. Life 
expectancy, for example, may be a matter of minutes in some military and missile 
applications, may be 500 to 1000 h in certain aircraft and electronic equipment, and 
may range from 10 to 30 years or more in large industrial equipment. The test pro- 
cedures will accordingly vary with the type of equipment. Accelerated life tests on 
models, called motorettes, are commonly used in insulation evaluation. Such tests, 
however, cannot be easily applied to all equipment, especially the insulation systems 
of large machines. 
Insulation life tests generally attempt to simulate service conditions. They usually 
include the following elements: 
m 
Thermal shock resulting from heating to the test temperature. 
m 
Sustained heating at that temperature. 
m 
Thermal shock resulting from cooling to room temperature or below. 
m 
Vibration and mechanical stress such as may be encountered in actual service. 
m 
Exposure to moisture. 
l 
Dielectric testing to determine the condition of the insulation. 
Enough samples must be tested to permit statistical methods to be applied in analyzing 
the results. The life-temperature relations obtained from these tests lead to the clas- 
sification of the insulation or insulating system in the appropriate temperature class. 
For the allowable temperature limits of insulating systems used commercially, the 
latest standards of ANSI, IEEE, and NEMA should be consulted. The three NEMA 

672 
APPENDIX D Engineering Aspects of Practical Electric Machine Performance and Operation 
insulation-system classes of chief interest for industrial machines are class B, class F, 
and class H. Class B insulation includes mica, glass fiber, asbestos, and similar ma- 
terials with suitable bonding substances. Class F insulation also includes mica, glass 
fiber, and synthetic substances similar to those in class B, but the system must be capa- 
ble of withstanding higher temperatures. Class H insulation, intended for still higher 
temperatures, may consist of materials such as silicone elastomer and combinations 
including mica, glass fiber, asbestos, and so on, with bonding substances such as 
appropriate silicone resins. Experience and tests showing the material or system to be 
capable of operation at the recommended temperature form the important classifying 
criteria. 
When the temperature class of the insulation is established, the permissible 
observable temperature rises for the various parts of industrial-type machines can 
be found by consulting the appropriate standards. Reasonably detailed distinctions 
are made with respect to type of machine, method of temperature measurement, 
machine part involved, whether the machine is enclosed, and the type of cool- 
ing (air-cooled, fan-cooled, hydrogen-cooled, etc.). Distinctions are also made be- 
tween general-purpose machines and definite- or special-purpose machines. The term 
general-purpose motor refers to one of standard rating "up to 200 hp with standard 
operating characteristics and mechanical construction for use under usual service 
conditions without restriction to a particular application or type of application." In 
contrast a special-purpose motor is "designed with either operating characteristics or 
mechanical construction, or both, for a particular application." For the same class of 
insulation, the permissible rise of temperature is lower for a general-purpose motor 
than for a special-purpose motor, largely to allow a greater factor of safety where 
service conditions are unknown. Partially compensating the lower rise, however, is 
the fact that general-purpose motors are allowed a service factor of 1.15 when op- 
erated at rated voltage; the service factor is a multiplier which, applied to the rated 
output, indicates a permissible loading which may be carried continuously under the 
conditions specified for that service factor. 
Examples of allowable temperature rises can be seen from Table D. 1. The table 
applies to integral-horsepower induction motors, is based on 40°C ambient temper- 
ature, and assumes measurement of temperature rise by determining the increase of 
winding resistances. 
The most common machine rating is the continuous rating defining the output 
(in kilowatts for dc generators, kilovoltamperes at a specified power factor for ac 
generators, and horsepower or kilowatts for motors) which can be carried indefinitely 
Table D.1 
Allowable temperature rise, °Ct. 
Motor type 
Class B 
Class F 
Class H 
1.15 service factor 
1.00 service factor, encapsulated windings 
Totally enclosed, fan-cooled 
Totally enclosed, nonventilated 
90 
115 
85 
110 
80 
105 
85 
110 
125 
135 
t Excerpted from NEMA standards. 

#,2 
Rating and Heating 
678 
without exceeding established limitations. For intermittent, periodic, or varying duty, 
a machine may be given a short-time rating defining the load which can be car- 
ried for a specific time. Standard periods for short-time ratings are 5, 15, 30, and 
60 minutes. Speeds, voltages, and frequencies are also specified in machine ratings, 
and provision is made for possible variations in voltage and frequency. Motors, for 
example, must operate successfully at voltages 10 percent above and below rated 
voltage and, for ac motors, at frequencies 5 percent above and below rated frequency; 
the combined variation of voltage and frequency may not exceed 10 percent. Other 
performance conditions are so established that reasonable short-time overloads can 
be carried. Thus, the user of a motor can expect to be able to apply for a short time 
an overload of, say, 25 percent at 90 percent of normal voltage with an ample margin 
of safety. 
The converse problem to the rating of machinery, that of choosing the size of 
machine for a particular application, is a relatively simple one when the load require- 
ments remain substantially constant. For many motor applications, however, the load 
requirements vary more or less cyclically and over a wide range. The duty cycle of 
a typical crane or hoist motor offers a good example. From the thermal viewpoint, 
the average heating of the motor must be found by detailed study of the motor losses 
during the various parts of the cycle. Account must be taken of changes in ventilation 
with motor speed for open and semiclosed motors. Judicious selection is based on a 
large amount of experimental data and considerable experience with the motors in- 
volved. For estimating the required size of motors operating at substantially constant 
speeds, it is sometimes assumed that the heating of the insulation varies as the square 
of the load, an assumption which obviously overemphasizes the role of armature 
IZR loss at the expense of the core loss. The rms ordinate of the power-time curve 
representing the duty cycle is obtained by the same technique used to find the rms 
value of periodically varying currents, and a motor rating is chosen on the basis of 
the result; i.e., 
~](kW) 2 x time 
rms kW - 
running time 4- (standstill time/k) 
(D.7) 
where the constant k accounts for the poorer ventilation at standstill and equals 
approximately 4 for an open motor. The time for a complete cycle must be short 
compared with the time for the motor to reach a steady temperature. 
Although crude, the rms-kW method is used fairly often. The necessity for 
rounding the result to a commercially available motor size 1 obviates the need for 
precise computations. Special consideration must be given to motors that are fre- 
quently started or reversed, for such operations are thermally equivalent to heavy 
overloads. Consideration must also be given to duty cycles having such high torque 
1 Commercially available motors are generally found in standard sizes as defined by NEMA. NEMA 
Standards on Motors and Generators specify motor rating as well as the type and dimensions of the 
motor frame. 

674 
APPENDIX D 
Engineering Aspects of Practical Electric Machine Performance and Operation 
peaks that motors with continuous ratings chosen on purely thermal bases would be 
unable to furnish the torques required. It is to such duty cycles that special-purpose 
motors with short-time ratings are often applied. Short-time-rated motors in general 
have better torque-producing capability than motors rated to produce the same power 
output continuously, although, of course, they have a lower thermal capacity. Both 
these properties follow from the fact that a short-time-rated motor is designed for 
high flux densities in the iron and high current densities in the copper. In general, the 
ratio of torque capacity to thermal capacity increases as the period of the short-time 
rating decreases. Higher temperature rises are allowed in short-time-rated motors than 
for general-purpose motors. A motor with a 150-kW, 1-hr, 50°C rating, for example, 
may have the torque ability of a 200-kW continuously rated motor; it will be able 
to carry only about 0.8 times its rated output, or 120 kW continuously, however. In 
many cases it will be the economical solution for a drive requiring a continuous ther- 
mal capacity of 120 kW but having torque peaks which require the capability of a 
200-kW continuously rated motor. 
D.3 
COOLING MEANS FOR ELECTRIC 
MACHINES 
The cooling problem in electric apparatus in general increases in difficulty with in- 
creasing size. The surface area from which the heat must be carried away increases 
roughly as the square of the dimensions, whereas the heat developed by the losses 
is roughly proportional to the volume and therefore increases approximately as the 
cube of the dimensions. This problem is a particularly serious one in large turbine 
generators, where economy, mechanical requirements, shipping, and erection all de- 
mand compactness, especially for the rotor forging. Even in moderate size machines, 
for example, above a few thousand kVA for generators, a closed ventilating system 
is commonly used. Rather elaborate systems of cooling ducts must be provided to 
ensure that the cooling medium will effectively remove the heat arising from the 
losses. 
For turbine generators, hydrogen is commonly used as the cooling medium in 
the totally enclosed ventilating system. Hydrogen has the following properties which 
make it well suited to the purpose: 
m 
Its density is only about 0.07 times that of air at the same temperature and 
pressure, and therefore windage and ventilating losses are much less. 
m 
Its specific heat on an equal-weight basis is about 14.5 times that of air. This 
means that, for the same temperature and pressure, hydrogen and air are about 
equally effective in their heat-storing capacity per unit volume, but the heat 
transfer by forced convection between the hot parts of the machine and the 
cooling gas is considerably greater with hydrogen than with air. 
m 
The life of the insulation is increased and maintenance expenses decreased 
because of the absence of dirt, moisture, and oxygen. 

D.3 Cooling Means for Electric Machines 
675 
The fire hazard is minimized. A hydrogen-air mixture will not explode if the 
hydrogen content is above about 70 percent. 
The result of the first two properties is that for the same operating conditions the heat 
which must be dissipated is reduced and at the same time the ease with which it can 
be carried off is increased. 
The machine and its water-cooled heat exchanger for cooling the hydrogen must 
be sealed in a gas-tight envelope. The crux of the problem is in sealing the bearings. 
The system is maintained at a slight pressure (at least 0.5 psi) above atmospheric so that 
gas leakage is outward and an explosive mixture cannot accumulate in the machine. 
At this pressure, the rating of the machine can be increased by about 30 percent above 
its aircooled rating, and the full-load efficiency increased by about 0.5 percent. The 
trend is toward the use of higher pressures (15 to 60 psi). Increasing the hydrogen 
pressure from 0.5 to 15 psi increases the output for the same temperature rise by about 
15 percent; a further increase to 30 psi provides about an additional 10 percent. 
An important step which has made it possible almost to double the output of 
a hydrogen-cooled turbine-generator of given physical size is the development of 
conductor cooling, also called inner cooling. Here the coolant (liquid or gas) is forced 
through hollow ducts inside the conductor or conductor strands. Examples of such 
conductors can be seen in Fig. D. 1. Thus, the thermal barrier presented by the electric 
insulation is largely circumvented, and the conductor losses can be absorbed directly 
by the coolant. Hydrogen is usually the cooling medium for the rotor conductors. 
Either gas or liquid cooling may be used for the stator conductors. Hydrogen is the 
coolant in the former case, and transit oil or water is commonly used in the latter. A 
sectional view of a conductor-cooled turbine generator is given in Fig. D.2. A large 
hydroelectric generator in which both stator and rotor are water-cooled is shown in 
Figs. 4.1 and 4.9. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure D.1 
Cross sections of bars for two-layer stator windings of turbine-generators. 
Insulation system consists of synthetic resin with vacuum impregnation. (a) Indirectly 
cooled bar with tubular strands; (b) water-cooled bars, two-wire-wide mixed strands, 
(c) water-cooled bars, four-wire-wide mixed strands. (Brown Boveri Corporation.) 

676 
APPENDIX D Engineering Aspects of Practical Electric Machine Performance and Operation 
Figure D.2 Cutaway view of a two-pole 3600 r/min turbine 
rated at 500 MVA, 0.90 power factor, 22 kV, 60 Hz, 45 psig H2 
pressure. Stator winding is water-cooled; rotor winding is 
hydrogen-cooled. (Genera/Electric Company.) 
D.4 
EXCITATION 
The resultant flux in the magnetic circuit of a machine is established by the combined 
mmf of all the windings on the machine. For the conventional dc machine, the bulk 
of the effective mmf is furnished by the field windings. For the transformer, the 
net excitation may be furnished by either the primary or the secondary winding, 
or a portion may be furnished by each. A similar situation exists in ac machines. 
Furnishing excitation to ac machines has two different operational aspects which are 
of economic importance in the application of the machines. 
D.4.1 
Power Factor in AC Machines 
The power factor at which ac machines operate is an economically important feature 
because of the cost of reactive kilovoltamperes. Low power factor adversely affects 
system operation in three principal ways. (1) Generators, transformers, and transmis- 
sion equipment are rated in terms of kVA rather than kW because their losses and 
heating are very nearly determined by voltage and current regardless of power factor. 
The physical size and cost of ac apparatus are roughly proportional to kVA rating. The 
investment in generators, transformers, and transmission equipment for supplying a 
given useful amount of active power therefore is roughly inversely proportional to 
the power factor. (2) Low power factor means more current and greater 12 R losses in 
the generating and transmitting equipment. (3) A further disadvantage is poor voltage 
regulation. 
Factors influencing reactive-kVA requirements in motors can be visualized read- 
ily in terms of the relationship of these requirements to the establishment of magnetic 
flux. As in any electromagnetic device, the resultant flux necessary for motor operation 
must be established by a magnetizing component of current. It makes no difference 
either in the magnetic circuit or in the fundamental energy conversion process whether 

D.4 
Excitation 
677 
this magnetizing current be carried by the rotor or stator winding, just as it makes 
no basic difference in a transformer which winding carries the exciting current. In 
some cases, part of it is supplied from each winding. If all or part of the magnetizing 
current is supplied by an ac winding, the input to that winding must include lagging 
reactive kVA, because magnetizing current lags voltage drop by 90 °. In effect, the 
lagging reactive kVA set up flux in the motor. 
The only possible source of excitation in an induction motor is the stator input. The 
induction motor therefore must operate at a lagging power factor. This power factor is 
very low at no load and increases to about 85 to 90 percent at full load, the improvement 
being caused by the increased real-power requirements with increasing load. 
With a synchronous motor, there are two possible sources of excitation: alternat- 
ing current in the armature or direct current in the field winding. If the field current 
is just sufficient to supply the necessary mmf, no magnetizing-current component 
or reactive kVA are needed in the armature and the motor operates at unity power 
factor. If the field current is less, i.e., the motor is underexcited, the deficit in mmf 
must be made up by the armature and the motor operates at a lagging power factor. 
If the field current is greater, i.e., the motor is overexcited, the excess mmf must be 
counterbalanced in the armature and a leading component of current is present; the 
motor then operates at a leading power factor. 
Because magnetizing current must be supplied to inductive loads such as trans- 
formers and induction motors, the ability of overexcited synchronous motors to supply 
lagging current is a highly desirable feature which may have considerable economic 
importance. In effect, overexcited synchronous motors act as generators of lagging 
reactive kilovoltamperes and thereby relieve the power source of the necessity for 
supplying this component. They thus may perform the same function as a local ca- 
pacitor installation. Sometimes unloaded synchronous machines are installed in power 
systems solely for power-factor correction or for control of reactive-kVA flow. Such 
machines, called synchronous condensers, may be more economical in the larger sizes 
than static capacitors. 
Both synchronous and induction machines may become self-excited when a suf- 
ficiently heavy capacitive load is present in their stator circuits. The capacitive current 
then furnishes the excitation and may cause serious overvoltage or excessive transient 
torques. Because of the inherent capacitance of transmission lines, the problem may 
arise when synchronous generators are energizing long unloaded or lightly loaded 
lines. The use of shunt reactors at the sending end of the line to compensate the ca- 
pacitive current is sometimes necessary. For induction motors, it is normal practice 
to avoid self-excitation by limiting the size of any parallel capacitor when the motor 
and capacitor are switched as a unit. 
D.4.2 
Turbine-Generator Excitation Systems 
As the available ratings of turbine-generators have increased, the problems of sup- 
plying the dc field excitation (amounting to 4000 A or more in the larger units) have 
grown progressively more difficult. A common excitation source is a shaft-driven 
dc generator whose output is supplied to the alternator field through brushes and 

678 
APPENDIX D 
Engineering Aspects of Practical Electric Machine Performance and Operation 
slip rings. Alternatively, excitation may be supplied from a shaft-driven alternator 
of conventional design as the main exciter. This alternator has a stationary armature 
and a rotating-field winding. Its frequency may be 180 or 240 Hz. Its output is fed 
to a stationary solid-state rectifier, which in turn supplies the turbine-generator field 
through slip rings. 
Cooling and maintenance problems are inevitably associated with slip rings, 
commutators, and brushes. Many modern excitation systems have minimized these 
problems by minimizing the use of sliding contacts and brushes. As a result, some 
excitation systems employ shaft-driven ac alternators whose field windings are sta- 
tionary and whose ac windings rotate. By the use of rotating rectifiers, dc excitation 
can be applied directly to the generator field winding without the use of slip rings. 
Excitation systems of the latest design are being built without any sort of rotating 
exciter-alternator. In these systems, the excitation power is obtained from a special 
auxiliary transformer fed from the local power system. Alternatively it may be ob- 
tained directly from the main generator terminals; in one system a special armature 
winding is included in the main generator to supply the excitation power. In each of 
these systems the power is rectified using phase-controlled silicon controlled recti- 
fiers (SCRs). These types of excitation system, which have been made possible by 
the development of reliable, high-power SCRs, are relatively simple in design and 
provide the fast response characteristics required in many modern applications. 
D.5 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY OF ELECTRIC 
MACHINERY 
With increasing concern for both the supply and cost of energy comes a corresponding 
concern for efficiency in its use. Although electric energy can be converted to me- 
chanical energy with great efficiency, achieving maximum efficiency requires both 
careful design of the electric machinery and proper matching of machine and intended 
application. 
Clearly, one means to maximize the efficiency of an electric machine is to min- 
imize its internal losses, such as those described in Section D. 1. For example, the 
winding 12R losses can be reduced by increasing the slot area so that more copper 
can be used, thus increasing the cross-sectional area of the windings and reducing the 
resistance. 
Core loss can be reduced by decreasing the magnetic flux density in the iron of 
the machine. This can be done by increasing the volume of iron, but although the loss 
goes down in terms of watts per pound, the total volume of material (and hence the 
mass) is increased; depending on how the machine design is changed, there may be 
a point beyond which the losses actually begin to increase. Similarly, for a given flux 
density, eddy-current losses can be reduced by using thinner iron laminations. 
One can see that there are trade-offs involved here; machines of more efficient 
design generally require more material and thus are bigger and more costly. Users 
will generally choose the "lowest-cost" solution to a particular requirement; if the 
increased capital cost of a high-efficiency motor can be expected to be offset by 

D,5 Energy Efficiency of Electric Machinery 
679 
energy savings over the expected lifetime of the machine, they will probably select 
the high-efficiency machine. If not, users are very unlikely to select this option in 
spite of the increased efficiency. 
Similarly, some types of electric machines are inherently more efficient than 
others. For example, single-phase capacitor-start induction motors (Section 9.2) are 
relatively inexpensive and highly reliable, finding use in all sorts of small appliances, 
e.g., refrigerators, air conditioners, and fans. Yet they are inherently less efficient than 
their three-phase counterparts. Modifications such as a capacitor-run feature can lead 
to greater efficiency in the single-phase induction motor, but they are expensive and 
often not economically justifiable. 
To optimize the efficiency of use of electric machinery the machine must be 
properly matched to the application, both in terms of size and performance. Since 
typical induction motors tend to draw nearly constant reactive power, independent 
of load, and since this causes resistive losses in the supply lines, it is wise to pick 
the smallest-rating induction motor which can properly satisfy the requirements of a 
specific application. Alternatively, capacitative power-factor correction may be used. 
Proper application of modern solid-state control technology can also play an important 
role in optimizing both performance and efficiency. 
There are, of course, practical limitations which affect the selection of the motor 
for any particular application. Chief among them is that motors are generally avail- 
able only in certain standard sizes. For example, a typical manufacturer might make 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 and 1 hp(NEMAstandard 
fractional-horsepower ac motors rated at g, g, 4, 3, ~, ~, 
ratings). This discrete selection thus limits the ability to fine-tune a particular appli- 
cation; if the need is 0.8 hp, the user will undoubtedly end up buying a 1-hp device 
and settling for a somewhat lower than optimum efficiency. A custom-designed and 
manufactured 0.8-hp motor can be economically justified only if it is needed in large 
quantities. 
It should be pointed out that an extremely common source of inefficiency in 
electric motor applications is the mismatch of the motor to its application. Even the 
most efficient 50-kW motors will be somewhat inefficient when driving a 20-kW load. 
Yet mismatches of this type often occur in practice, due in great extent to the difficulty 
in characterizing operating loads and a tendency on the part of application engineers 
to be conservative to make sure that the system in question is guaranteed to operate 
in the face of design uncertainties. More careful attention to this issue can go a long 
way toward increasing the efficiency of energy use in electric machine applications. 

ApPFNnlX 
Table of Constants and 
Conversion Factors 
for SI Units 
Constants 
Permeability of free space 
Permittivity of free space 
Conversion Factors 
Length 
Mass 
Force 
Torque 
Pressure 
Energy 
Power 
Moment of intertia 
Magnetic flux 
Magnetic flux density 
Magnetizing force 
#0 = 4zr x 10 -7 H/m 
Eo = 8.854 x 10 -12 F/m 
1 m = 3.281 ft = 39.37 in 
1 kg = 0.0685 slug = 2.205 lb (mass) = 35.27 oz 
1 N = 0.225 lbf = 7.23 poundals 
1 N.m = 0.738 lbf.ft = 141.6 oz.in 
1 Pa (N/m 2) = 1.45 x 10 -4 lbf/in2 = 9.86 x 10 -6 atm 
1 J (W.sec)--- 9.48 x 10 -4 BTU = 0.239 calories 
1 W = 1.341 x 10 -3 hp = 3.412 BTU/hr 
1 kg.m 2 = 0.738 slug.ft 2 -- 23.7 lb-ft 2 = 141.6 oz.in.sec 2 
1 Wb = 108 lines (maxwells) 
1 T (Wb/m 2) = 10,000 gauss = 64.5 kilolines/in 2 
1 A.turn/m - 0.0254 A.turn/in = 0.0126 oersted 
680 

INDEX 
A 
ac excitation, 23-30 
ac machines 
armature windings, 173 
distributed ac windings, 644-656 
generated voltage, 208-213 
induction machines. See Induction 
machines 
mmf wave, 189-192, 201-208 
permanent-magnet ac motors, 
293-295 
power factor, 676-677 
rotating mmf waves, 201-208 
synchronous machines. See 
Synchronous machines 
AFNL (Amperes field no load), 262 
AFSC (Amperes field short 
circuit), 262 
Air gap, 5 
nonuniform, 200 
uniform, 197-200 
Air-gap fringing fields, 8 
Air-gap inductances of distributed 
windings, 653-656 
Air-gap line, 231,257, 361 
Air-gap space-harmonic fluxes, 
233-234 
Air-gap voltage, 254 
Allowable temperature rises, 672 
Alnico 5, 8, 33, 36 
Alnico materials, 36 
American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI), 669 
Amortisseur winding, 296, 583 
Ampere turns, 16 
Amperes field no load (AFNL), 262 
Amperes field short circuit (AFSC), 262 
Amperes per meter, 4 
Amperes per square meter, 113 
Analytical techniques, 155-158 
Anode, 494 
ANSI, 669 
Apparent coercivity, 42 
Approximate transformer equivalent 
circuits, 74 
Armature mmf waves, 650-653 
Armature phase-to-phase mutual 
inductances, 251 
Armature winding, 173 
Armature-circuit resistance control, 565 
Armature-frequency control, 596-602 
Armature-terminal voltage control, 
566-570 
Armature-winding heating, 276 
Asynchronous torque, 309 
Autotransformers, 82-84 
Auxiliary winding, 456 
Axes of easy magnetization, 20 
B 
Balanced three-phase system, 630, 
641-642 
Base values, 95 
B-H curve, 21 
Bifilar phase windings, 615 
Bifilar winding, 419 
Blocked-rotor test, 333-340 
Blondel, Andre, 657 
Blondel two-reaction method, 657 
Book 
overview, xii, xiii 
website, xiii 
Breadth factor, 648 
Breakdown torque, 310, 325 
Brush-contact loss, 669 
Brushes, 176 
Brushless dc motors, 295 
Brushless excitation system, 246 
Brushless motors, 295 
Burden, 90 
C 
Cantilever circuits, 73 
Cantilever equivalent circuit, 77 
Capability curves, 276-277 
Capacitative power-factor 
correction, 679 
Capacitor-start capacitor-run 
motor, 458,459 
Capacitor-start motor, 457-459 
Capacitor-type motors, 456-460 
Castleation, 420-421,438 
Cathode, 494 
Ceramic 7, 36, 39, 42 
Ceramic magnets, 36 
Ceramic permanent magnet materials, 36 
Charge density, 113 
Class A design, 345-346 
Class B design, 346-347 
Class B insulation, 672 
Class C design, 347 
Class D design, 347 
Class F insulation, 672 
Class H insulation, 672 
Coenergy, 129 
Coercivity, 30, 33 
Coil voltage phasors, 648 
Collector, 502, 503 
Collector rings, 176 
Commutating inductance, 518-524 
Commutating poles, 392 
Commutation, 518 
Commutation interval, 521 
Commutation notches, 521 
Commutator/commutation, 186, 
364-367, 390-393 
Compensating windings, 393-395 
Compound motor, 364 
Compounding curve, 275 
Computer programs. See MATLAB 
Concentrated full-pitch windings, 
650-651 
Concentrated windings, 179 
Conduction angle, 513 
Conductor cooling, 675 
Conservation of energy, 116 
Conservative system, 120 
Constant-power drive, 563 
Constant-power regime, 580 
Constant-torque drive, 565 
Constant-torque regime, 580 
Constant-volts-per-hertz, 580 
Continuous energy conversion 
equipment, 112 
Continuous rating, 672 
Control, 559-627 
dc motors, 559-578 
induction motors, 595-612 
681 

682 
Index 
Control--Cont. 
scope of chapter, 559 
synchronous motors, 578-595 
VRMs, 613-616 
Conversion factors (SI units), 680 
Conversion of ac to dc. See Rectification 
Conversion of dc to ac. See Inversion 
Cooling, 674-675 
Core flux, 62 
Core loss, 63,280, 669-670, 678 
Core-loss component, 62 
Core-loss resistance, 71, 314 
Core-type transformers, 58 
Coulombs per cubic meter, 113 
Coupled-circuit viewpoint, 215-221 
Critical field resistance, 380 
Cross-magnetizing armature 
reaction, 368 
CTs, 90, 93-95 
Current density, 2, 113 
Current transformer, 93 
Current transformers (CTs), 90, 93-95 
Current-source inverter, 539 
Cutting-of-flux equation, 210, 211 
D 
Damper winding, 296, 297,583 
dc bus voltage, 538 
dc link current, 538 
dc machines, 185-187,357-406 
armature mmf, 367-370 
armature reaction, 374-378 
armature winding, 173 
commutator/commutation, 186, 
364-367, 390-393 
compensating windings, 393-395 
compound motor, 364 
electrical-circuit aspects, 370-373 
field-circuit connections, 361 
generated voltage, 213-214 
generator analysis, 379-382 
magnetic-circuit aspects, 374-378 
mmf wave, 192-197 
motor analysis, 382-384 
permanent-magnet, 384-390 
schematic connection diagram, 395 
schematic representation, 358 
series motors, 364 
series universal motors, 395-396 
shunt/separately-excited motors, 
363-364 
speed control, 560-564 
speed-torque characteristics, 363 
steady-state performance, 379-384 
torque control, 574-578 
volt-ampere characteristics, 362 
dc magnetization curve, 21-22 
Deep-bar rotors, 343-347 
Definite-purpose machines, 672 
Delayed commutation, 391 
Delta-Delta connection, 86 
Delta-Y connection, 86 
Demagnetizing effect of 
cross-magnetizing armature 
reaction, 368 
Diode symbol, 494 
Diodes, 494--496 
Direct axis, 282, 357 
Direct-and quadrature-axis (dpO) 
theory, 657-667 
Direct-axis air-gap flux, 282, 360 
Direct-axis components, 282, 583,604 
Direct-axis magnetizing reactances, 284 
Direct-axis permeance, 361 
Direct-axis quantity, 284 
Direct-axis synchronous inductance, 661 
Direct-axis synchronous reactances, 284 
Direct-axis theory, 282-289 
Disk armature permanent-magnet 
servomotor, 388 
Distributed ac windings, 644-656 
Distributed fractional-pitch windings, 
645-647, 651-653 
Distributed two-pole, three-phase, 
fractional-pitch armature 
winding, 653 
Distributed two-pole, three-phase, 
full-pitch armature winding, 652 
Distributed windings, 179, 187, 189, 190 
Distribution transformer, 59 
Doherty, R. E., 658 
Double-layer windings, 645 
Double-revolving-field concept, 
455,463 
Double-squirrel-cage rotors, 343-347 
Doubly-salient VRM, 408-411,416 
dqO transformation, 657-667 
Drain, 502 
Dynamic equations, 15 !-155 
E 
Eddy current, 26 
Eddy-current loss, 670 
Effective permeability, 20 
Efficiency 
electric machinery, 678-679 
mechanical losses, and, 668 
power conversion device, 80 
synchronous machine, 279 
8/6 VRM, 419 
800-A winding, 94 
Electric field intensity, 11 
Electrical degrees, 178 
Electrical radians, 178 
Electromagnetic power, 370 
Electromagnetic relay, 119 
Electromechanical-energy-conversion 
principles, 112-172 
analytical techniques, 155-158 
determination of magnetic 
force/torque from coenergy, 
129-136 
determination of magnetic 
force/torque from energy, 
123-129 
dynamic equations, 151-155 
energy balance, 117-119 
energy in singly-excited magnetic field 
systems, 119-123 
forces/torques in magnetic field 
systems, 113-117 
forces/torques in systems with 
permanent magnets, 142-151 
gross motion, 156-157 
linearization, 157-158 
multiply-excited magnetic field 
systems, 136-142 
purpose, 112 
Electromotive force (emf), 1 In, 210 
Electrostatic voltmeter, 165 
Emf, l ln, 210 
Emitter, 502, 503 
End effects, 230 
End-turn fluxes, 234 
Energy balance, 117-119 
Energy efficiency, 668, 678-679 
Energy method, 116 
Engineering aspects, 668-679 
cooling, 674-675 
energy efficiency, 668, 678-679 
excitation, 676-678 
heating, 670-674 
insulation, 671-672 
losses, 668-670 
rating, 672-674 
transformer analysis, 73-81 
Equivalent circuits 
induction machines, 313-321 
instrumentation transformer, 91 

Index 
683 
permanent-magnet dc motor, 389 
single-phase induction motor, 464 
synchronous machines, 252-256 
transformers, 68-73 
two-phase motor, 472 
Equivalent series impedance, 73 
Equivalent series reactance, 73 
Equivalent series resistance, 73 
Equivalent-T circuit, 72 
Excitation, 676-678 
ac, 23-30 
negative, 38 
self-, 677 
turbine-generator systems, 677-678 
under/overexcited, 677 
Excitation branch, 71 
Excitation phenomena, 24 
Excitation system, 245 
Exciter, 245 
Exciting component, 69 
Exciting current, 24, 25, 60 
Exciting impedance, 71 
Exciting rms voltamperes per unit 
mass, 25 
F 
Faraday's Law, 11, 25, 210, 579 
Ferrite magnets, 36 
Ferrites, 58 
Ferromagnetic materials, 20 
Fictitious winding, 143 
Field axis, 357 
Field-current control, 560-565 
Field-current waveform, 561 
Field-oriented control, 583-595 
Field-resistance line, 379 
Finite-element method, 131 
Firing-delay angle, 498 
Firing-delay time, 498 
First law of thermodynamics, 117 
Five-wire, 643 
Flat-compounded, 381 
Flux 
air-gap space-harmonic, 233-234 
direct-axis air-gap, 292, 360 
end-turn, 234 
leakage, 233-234 
mmf waves, and, 282-284 
mutual, 233 
quadrature-axis air-gap, 283 
slot-leakage, 234 
Flux linkage, 11 
Force density, 113 
Forced commutation, 525 
Force-producing devices, 112, 116 
Forward voltage drop, 495 
Forward-breakdown voltage, 497 
Fourier series, 189, 197 
Four-phase systems, 643 
Four-phase 8/6 VRM, 419 
Four-pole dc machine, 196 
Four-pole single-phase synchronous 
generator, 178 
Four-pole synchronous-reluctance 
motor, 461 
4/2 VRM, 414-416, 418 
Fractional slip, 308 
Fractional-pitch coil, 649 
Free-wheeling diode, 515 
Fringing fields, 8 
Full-pitch coil, 188 
Full-wave bridge, 507 
Full-wave bridge rectifier, 507 
Full-wave phase-controlled SCR rectifier 
system, 532 
Full-wave rectification, 507 
Full-wave rectifier, 507 
G 
Gate, 502, 503 
General-purpose motor, 672 
Generated voltages, 252, 644-650 
Generator reference direction, 253 
Grain-oriented steel, 27. See also M-5 
grain-oriented electrical steel 
Gross motion, 156-157 
It 
Half-wave rectifier circuit 
diodes, 495 
inductive load, 513 
SCR, 498 
Hard magnetic materials, 33 
H-bridge, 539-544 
H-bridge inverter configuration, 542 
Heating, 670-674 
Henrys per ampere, 12 
Henrys per meter, 4 
High-speed synchronous motor, 183 
High-voltage, 57n 
High-voltage side, 80 
Holding current, 497 
Hunting transient, 247 
Hybrid stepping motor, 444-446 
Hydrogen, 674-675 
Hydrogen cooling, 675 
Hysteresis effect, 20 
Hysteresis loop, 21, 27 
Hysteresis loss, 27, 670 
Hysteresis motors, 462--463 
I 
Ideal current transformer, 90, 93 
Ideal potential transformers, 90 
Ideal transformer, 64-67 
Idealized synchronous machine, 658 
Ideal-switch model, 504, 505 
IEEE, 669 
IGBT, 502-506 
Impedance 
equivalent series, 73 
exciting, 71 
referring the, 66 
Thevenin-equivalent, 322 
Thevenin-equivalent stator, 323 
Indirectly cooled bar, 675 
Induced voltage, 11 
Inductance 
commutating, 518-524 
defined, 12 
direct-axis synchronous, 661 
leakage, 252 
magnetizing, 71 
mutual, 17 
primary leakage, 68 
quadrature-axis synchronous, 661 
rotor self, 249-250 
secondary leakage, 71 
self, 17 
stator, 250-252 
stator-to-rotor mutual, 250 
synchronous, 250-252 
zero-sequence, 661 
Induction machines, 183-185,306-356. 
See also ac machines 
blocked-rotor test, 333-340 
currents/fluxes, 311-313 
deep-bar rotors, 343-347 
double-squirrel-cage rotors, 343-347 
dqO transformation, 664-667 
equivalent circuit, 313-321 
no-load test, 330-333 
rotor resistance, 340-347 
single-phase induction motors. See 
Single-phase induction motors 
speed control, 595-603 
Thevenin's theorem, 322-330 
torque control, 603-612 
torque/power, 322-330 

684 
Index 
Induction machines--Cont. 
torque-speed characteristics, 345,346 
two-phase induction motors, 470-488 
wound-rotor motors, 340-343 
Induction-motor speed-torque 
characteristic, 185 
Inductive load with series dc source, 
532-533 
Infinite bus, 246 
Inner cooling, 675 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), 669 
Instrumentation transformers, 90 
Insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT), 
502-506 
Insulation, 671-672 
Insulation life tests, 671 
Integral-horsepower dc motor, 185 
Integration paths, 120 
Internal voltage, 252 
Interpoles, 392 
Inversion, 538-550 
H-bridge, 539-544 
pulse-width-modulated voltage-source 
inverters, 544-549 
three-phase inverters, 549-550 
Inverter, 538 
Inverter configuration, 614-615 
Inverter-input representations, 538 
IZR losses, 669, 678 
Iron-core transformer, 58 
J 
Joules (J), 18 
Joules per seconds, 18 
K 
Kirchhoff's current law, 9, 632, 637 
Kirchhoff's voltage law, 8, 632 
kVA rating, 676 
L 
Lagging, 633 
Leading, 633 
Leakage fields, 9 
Leakage flux, 58,233-234 
Leakage inductance, 252 
Leakage reactance, 254 
Light dimmer, 501 
Linear commutation, 366 
Linear machines, 227-230 
Linearization, 157-158 
Line-to-line voltages, 631 
Line-to-neutral voltages, 631 
Line-voltage control, 602, 603 
Load component, 69 
Load loss, 264 
Long-shunt connection, 373 
Lorentz Force Law, 113 
Loss of synchronism, 248 
Losses, 668-670 
brush-contact, 669 
core, 669-670 
eddy-current, 670 
efficiency, and, 668 
hysteresis, 670 
IZR, 669 
load, 264 
mechanical, 669 
no-load rotational, 258, 670 
ohmic, 669 
open-circuit core, 669 
reducing/minimizing, 678 
short-circuit load, 264 
stray load, 264, 270 
Lossless electric energy, 165 
Lossless-energy-storage system, 118 
Low-voltage, 57n 
M 
M-5 electrical steel, 33 
M-5 grain-oriented electrical steel 
B-H loops, 21 
core loss, 28 
dc magnetization curve, 22 
exciting rms voltamperes, 26 
Machine efficiency, 668, 678-679 
Machine losses. See Losses 
Machine rating, 672-674 
Machines. See Motors 
Magnetic circuit model, 9 
Magnetic circuit with two windings, 17 
Magnetic circuit/material, 1-56 
ac excitation, 23-30 
air gaps, 5 
B-H curve, 21 
dc magnetization curve, 21-22 
electric circuits, compared, 6 
Faraday's law, 11 
flux linkage, 11 
fringing fields, 8 
inductance, 12 
leakage fields, 9 
mmf drop, 8 
mutual inductance, 17 
permanent magnets, 30-42 
properties, 19-23 
right-hand rule, 4 
self-inductance, 17 
Magnetic field intensity, 2 
Magnetic field viewpoint, 221-226 
Magnetic-field electromechanical energy 
conversion device, 116 
Magnetic fields in rotating machinery, 
197-201 
Magnetic flux, 3 
Magnetic flux density, 2 
Magnetic hysteresis, 20 
Magnetic permeability, 4 
Magnetic saturation, 230-233 
Magnetic stored energy, 18 
Magnetization curve, 230, 360 
Magnetizing current, 62 
Magnetizing inductance, 71 
Magnetizing reactance, 71,254, 314 
Magnetizing resistance, 71 
Magnetomotive force (mmf), 3 
Main winding, 456 
Main-field mmf, 374 
Matching machine to application, 679 
MATLAB, x-xiii 
polyfit, 124 
program code. See MATLAB scripts 
spline(), 399-405 
student version, xi 
MATLAB scripts 
armature-frequency control, 601-602 
armature-terminal voltage control, 
569-570 
block-rotor test, 339-340 
current (current transformers), 94 
determination of magnetic 
force/torque, 126 
electromechanical mechanical torque, 
328-329 
full-wave bridge rectifier, 510-511 
inductance, 15 
steady-state power-angle 
characteristics, 271-272 
symmetrical-component systems, 
475-477 
torque control (induction motors), 
611-612 
unsymmetrical two-phase induction 
machines, 485-488 
voltage, 92 
VRMs, 426-428,436 
Maximum electromechanical 
torque, 325 

Index 
685 
Maximum energy product, 33 
Maxwell's equations, 2 
Mechanical losses, 669 
Metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect 
transistor (MOSFET), 502-506 
Microstepping, 443 
Minor hysteresis loop, 38 
mmf, 3 
mmf drop, 7, 8 
mmf waves, armature, 650-653 
MOSFET, 502-506 
Motor reference direction, 253 
Motor size, 673,679 
Motorettes, 671 
Motors 
ac machines. See ac machines 
capacitor-type, 456-460 
dc machines. See dc machines 
general-purpose, 672 
hysteresis, 462-463 
induction machines. See Induction 
machines 
linear machines, 227-230 
pole-changing, 596 
rating, 672-674 
size, 673,679 
special-purpose, 672 
split-phase, 456 
stepping, 437-446 
synchronous machines. See 
Synchronous machines 
VRMs. See Variable-reluctance 
machines (VRMs) 
Multicircuit transformers, 84 
Multiply-excited magnetic field systems, 
136-142 
Multi-stack variable-reluctance stepping 
motor, 438 
Multiwinding transformers, 84-85 
Mutual flux, 233 
Mutual inductance, 17 
N 
National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association (NEMA), 669 
n-channel IGBT, 502 
n-channel MOSFET, 502 
Negative excitation, 38 
Negative sequence, 471 
NEMA, 669 
Neodymium-iron-boron, 37, 
39,42 
Newtons per cubic meter, 113 
Nickle, C. A., 658 
No-load conditions, 60-64 
No-load magnetization 
characteristics, 375 
No-load phasor, 63 
No-load rotational loss, 670 
No-load rotational losses, 258 
No-load test, 330-333 
Nonoriented electrical steels, 28 
Nonoriented steels, 28 
Nonuniform air gaps, 200 
Normal magnetization curve, 21 
N-turn concentrated coil, 654 
Numerical-analysis package, xii. See 
also MATLAB 
O 
Ohmic losses, 669 
Ohm's law, 379 
1.8°/step hybrid stepping motor, 444 
Open-circuit characteristics, 230, 231, 
256-258 
Open-circuit core loss, 669 
Open-circuit core-loss curve, 259 
Open-circuit saturation curve, 256 
Open-circuit test, 78-80 
Open-circuited secondary, 79 
Open-delta connection, 86 
Operating temperature, 671 
Opposite phase sequence, 472 
Overexcited, 677 
Overview of book, xii, xiii 
P 
Park, R. H., 658 
p-channel IGBT, 502 
p-channel MOSFET, 502 
Permanence, direct axis, 361 
Permanent magnet, 30-43 
Permanent-magnet ac motors, 
293-295 
Permanent-magnet dc machines, 
384-390 
Permanent-magnet stepping motors, 
439-441 
Permanent-split-capacitor motor, 
457, 458 
Permeability 
effective, 20 
magnetic, 4 
recoil, 38, 42 
Permeance, 7 
Per-unit system, 95-103 
Phase, 628 
Phase order, 631 
Phase sequence, 631 
Phase-controlled rectifier, 499 
Phasor diagram, 63 
Pitch factor, 650 
Plugging, 323 
Pole-changing motors, 596 
Pole-face winding, 393-395 
Polyphase induction machines. See 
Induction machines 
Polyphase mmf, 207 
Polyphase synchronous machines. See 
Synchronous machines 
Polyphase systems, 628, 643 
Positive sequence, 471 
Pot-core, 47 
Potential transformers (PTs), 90-93 
Power, 18 
Power angle, 267 
Power electronics, 493-558 
diodes, 494-496 
IGBT, 502-506 
inversion, 538-550. See also Inversion 
MOSFET, 502-506 
power switches, 494-506 
rectification, 507-538. See also 
Rectification 
SCR, 496-499 
transistors, 502-506 
TRIAC, 500 
Power factor 
ac machines, 676-677 
three-phase systems, 633,635 
Power switches, 494-506 
Power-angle characteristic 
defined, 267 
salient-pole machines, 289-293 
steady-state, 266-275 
Power-factor angle, 633 
Practical VRM drive systems, 415 
Primary, 57 
Primary leakage inductance, 68 
Primary leakage reactance, 69 
Primary resistance, 61 
Prime mover, 246 
Projecting poles, 179 
PTs, 90-93 
Pulling out of step, 248 
Pull-out torque, 248 
Pulse-width-modulated voltage-source 
inverters, 544-549 
Pulse-width modulation (PWM), 545 

686 
Index 
Q 
Quadrature axis, 282, 357 
Quadrature-axis air-gap fluxes, 283 
Quadrature-axis components, 282, 
583,604 
Quadrature-axis magnetizing 
reactances, 284 
Quadrature-axis quantity, 284 
Quadrature-axis synchronous 
inductance, 661 
Quadrature-axis synchronous 
reactances, 284 
Quadrature-axis theory, 282-289 
R 
Rating of machinery, 672-674 
Ratio of transformation, 58 
Reactance 
direct/quadrature-axis 
magnetizing, 284 
direct/quadrature-axis 
synchronous, 284 
equivalent series, 73 
leakage, 69, 71,254 
magnetizing, 71,254, 314 
primary leakage, 69 
secondary leakage, 71 
synchronous, 253 
unsaturated synchronous, 260 
Reactance voltage, 391 
Reactive kVA, 677 
Recoil line, 38 
Recoil permeability, 38, 42 
Rectification, 507-538 
commutating inductance, 518-524 
inductive load with series dc source, 
532-533 
single-phase full-wave diode bridge, 
507-512 
single-phase full-wave 
phase-controlled bridge, 524-532 
single-phase rectifier with inductive 
load, 513-518 
three-phase bridges, 533-538 
Reference direction, 253 
Referring the impedance, 66 
Regenerating, 527 
Reluctance, 6 
Remanent magnetization, 21,30 
Residual flux density, 30 
Residual magnetism, 360 
Resistance 
core-loss, 71, 314 
critical field, 380 
equivalent series, 73 
magnetizing, 71 
primary, 61 
secondary, 71 
Resistance commutation, 392 
Resultant core flux, 16 
Reverse-breakdown voltage, 495 
Revolving-field theory, 463-470 
Right-hand rule, 4, 114 
Ripple voltage, 510 
Rms, 23 
rms-kW method, 673 
Root-mean-square (rms), 23 
Rotor, 173, 175 
Rotor self inductance, 249-250 
Rotor-resistance control, 603 
Run winding, 456 
S 
Salient pole, 176 
Salient-pole synchronous machine, 
281-293 
Salient-pole synchronous machine and 
series impedance, 289 
Samarium-cobalt, 37, 39, 42 
Saturated, 20 
Saturation 
magnetic, 230-233 
VRMs, 431-437 
Saturation curve, 230-231 
Saturation voltage, 504 
Sawtooth armature mmf wave, 196 
Sawtooth waveform, 548 
SCR, 262, 496-499 
SCR symbol, 497 
Secondary, 57 
Secondary leakage inductance, 71 
Secondary leakage reactance, 71 
Secondary resistance, 71 
Self-excitation, 677 
Self-excited generators, 361 
Self-inductance, 17 
Self-starting synchronous-reluctance 
motors, 460-462 
Separately-excited generator, 361 
Separately-excited motors, 363 
Series motor, 364 
Series universal motors, 395-396 
Series-field diverter, 381 
Service factor, 672 
Shading coil, 460 
Shared-pole induction motor, 460 
Shell-type transformers, 58 
Short-circuit characteristics, 258-265 
Short-circuit load loss, 264 
Short-circuit ratio (SCR), 262 
Short-circuit test, 77-78 
Short-circuited secondary, 77 
Short-shunt connection, 373 
Short-time ratings, 673,674 
Shunt motor, 363 
Shunted-armature method, 565,566 
SI units, 680 
Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR), 
496-499 
Simple magnetic circuit, 3 
Simulink, xiii 
Single-line diagrams, 641-642 
Single-phase full-wave diode bridge, 
507-512 
Single-phase full-wave phase-controlled 
bridge, 524-532 
Single-phase H-bridge step-waveform 
inverters, 539-544 
Single-phase induction motors, 
452-470, 489 
capacitor-type motors, 456--460 
equivalent circuits, 464 
revolving-field theory, 463-470 
schematic view, 453 
shaded-pole induction motors, 460 
split-phase motors, 456 
torque-speed characteristic, 454 
Single-phase rectifier with inductive 
load, 513-518 
Single-phase systems, 628 
Single-phase winding space-fundamental 
air-gap mmf, 202 
Single-stack variable-reluctance stepping 
motor, 438 
Singly-excited electromechanical 
system, 151 
Singly-salient VRM, 408-410 
6/4 VRM, 417 
660-MVA three-phase 50-Hz 
transformer, 60 
Size of machine, 673 
Slip, 308 
Slip frequency, 309 
Slip rings, 176, 245 
Slot-leakage flux, 234 
Snubber circuit, 497 
Soft magnetic materials, 33 
Software packages. See MATLAB 
Source, 502 

Index 
687 
Space-fundamental air-gap flux, 251 
Sparking, 390 
Sparkless commutation, 391 
Special-purpose motor, 672 
Speed control 
dc motors, 560-564 
induction motors, 595-603 
synchronous motors, 578-583 
Speed voltage, 103, 152, 210, 359 
Squirrel-cage induction motor, 184 
Squirrel-cage rotor, 306-308, 343-347 
SRMs. See Variable-reluctance 
machines (VRMs) 
Stabilized, 42 
Stabilizing winding, 383 
Standard-setting bodies, 669 
Start winding, 456 
Starting capacitor, 457 
State function, 123 
State variables, 120 
Stator, 173, 174 
Stator inductance, 250-252 
Stator windings, 173 
Stator-to-rotor mutual inductances, 250 
Steady-state power-angle characteristics, 
266-275 
Stepping motors, 437-446 
Stray load loss, 264, 670 
Switched-reluctance machines. See 
Variable-reluctance machines 
(VRMs) 
Symmetrical-component concept, 
471-477 
Synchronous angular velocity, 206 
Synchronous condensers, 677 
Synchronous generator capability 
curve, 276-277 
Synchronous inductance, 250-252 
Synchronous machines, 176-183, 
245-305. See also ac machines 
direct-axis theory, 282-289 
dqO transformation, 660-663 
efficiency, 279 
equivalent circuits, 252-256 
flux/mmf waves, 282-284 
inductances, 249-252 
open-circuit characteristics, 256-258 
permanent-magnet ac motors, 
293-295 
power-angle characteristics, 266-275, 
289-293 
quadrature-axis theory, 282-289 
salient-pole machines, 281-293 
self-starting reluctance machines, 
460-462 
short-circuit characteristics, 258-265 
speed control, 578-583 
steady-state operating characteristics, 
275-281 
steady-state power-angle 
characteristics, 266-275 
torque control, 583-595 
Synchronous reactance, 253 
Synchronous speed, 206, 221 
Synchronous-generator V curves, 278 
Synchronous-machine equivalent 
circuits, 252-256 
T 
Temperature rises, 672 
Teslas, 4 
Tests 
blocked-rotor, 333-340 
induction motors, 330-340 
no,load, 330-333 
open-circuit, 78-80, 258-262 
short-circuit, 77-78, 256-258 
stray-load-loss, 330 
Thevenin-equivalent circuit, 323 
Thevenin-equivalent impedance, 322 
Thevenin-equivalent stator 
impedance, 323 
Thevenin-equivalent voltage, 322 
Thevenin's theory, 322 
Three-phase ac machine, 209 
Three-phase bridges, 533-538 
Three-phase circuits, 628-643 
balanced system, 630, 641-642 
generation of voltage, 628-631 
instantaneous power, 634 
other polyphase systems, 643 
schematic view of three-phase 
generator, 182 
single-line diagrams, 641-642 
transformers, 85-90 
unbalanced system, 631 
voltages/currents/power, 631-635 
Y/delta-connected circuits, 635-640 
Three-phase connections, 630 
Three-phase inverters, 549-550 
Three-phase six-pulse diode bridge, 534 
Three-phase system, 628 
Three-phase three-stack 
variable-reluctance stepping 
motor, 439 
Three-phase transformer, 86 
Three-phase transformer bank, 85 
Three-phase transformer connections, 86 
Threshold voltage, 504 
Thyristor, 496 
Time-averaged voltage, 513 
Torque 
asynchronous, 309 
breakdown, 310, 325 
coenergy, and, 129-136 
coupled-circuit viewpoint, 215-221 
energy, and, 123-129 
induction machines, 322-330 
magnetic field viewpoint, 221-226 
maximum electromechanical, 325 
nonsalient-pole machines, 214-226 
permanent magnets, 142-151 
pull-out, 248 
VRM, 421-430 
Torque angle, 247 
Torque constant, 389 
Torque control 
dc motors, 574-578 
induction motors, 603-612 
synchronous motors, 583-595 
Torque-angle characteristic, 247 
Torque-angle curve, 247 
Total ampere-turns, 16 
Transducers, 112 
Transformer equivalent circuit, 68-72 
Transformer reactance, 68-72 
Transformers, 57-111 
autotransformers, 82-84 
core-type, 58 
current, 93-95 
distribution, 59 
engineering aspects, 73-81 
ideal, 64-67 
instrumentation, 90 
multiwinding, 84-85 
no-load conditions, 60-64 
open-circuit test, 78-80 
per-unit system, 95-103 
potential, 90-93 
reactances, 68-72 
secondary current, 64-67 
shell-type, 58 
short-circuit test, 77-78 
three-phase circuits, 85-90 
two-winding, 82 
voltage regulation, 81 
Transistors, 502-506 
TRIAC, 500 
TRIAC symbol, 500 

688 
Index 
Turbine-generator excitation systems, 
677-678 
Two-phase permanent magnet stepping 
motor, 440 
Two-phase systems, 643 
Two-pole cylindrical-rotor field 
winding, 179 
Two-pole dc machine, 194 
Two-pole single-phase synchronous 
generator, 177 
Two-pole three-phase generator, 629 
Two-pole three-phase stator winding, 204 
Two-pole 3600r/min turbine 
generator, 181 
Two-winding transformer, 82 
200-MVA, three-phase, 50-Hz, 
three-winding, 210/80/10.2-kV 
transformer, 87 
2400-V winding, 92 
U 
Unbalanced operation of symmetrical 
two-phase machines, 471-477 
Unbalanced three-phase system, 631 
Undercommutation, 391 
Underexcited, 677 
Uniform air gaps, 197-200 
Universal motor, 395 
Unsaturated synchronous reactance, 260 
Unsymmetrical two-phase induction 
machines, 478-488 
V 
V connection, 86 
V curves, 278 
Variable-frequency solid-state motor 
drives, 348 
Variable-reluctance machines (VRMs), 
407-451 
bifilar winding, 419 
castleation, 420-421 
control, 613-616 
doubly-salient VRM, 408-411,416 
4/2 machines, 414-4 16, 418 
nonlinear analysis, 430-437 
practical configurations, 415 
saturation effects, 431-437 
singly-salient VRM, 408-4 10 
stepping motors, 437-446 
6/4 machines, 417 
torque, 421-430 
Vector control, 583 
Ventilating system, 674 
v-i characteristic 
ideal diodes, 494 
idealized SCR, 497 
idealized TRIAC, 500 
inductor, 513 
n-channel IGBT, 503 
n-channel MOSFET, 503 
SCR, 497 
Voltage behind leakage 
reactance, 254 
Voltage commutation, 392 
Voltage, generated, 644-650 
Voltage ratio, 58 
Voltage regulation, 81 
Voltage-regulating 
system, 276 
Voltage-source inverter, 538 
VRMs. See Variable-reluctance 
machines (VRMs) 
W 
Water-cooled bar, 675 
Water-cooled rotor, 179 
Watts (W), 18 
Webers per ampere-turn-meter, 4 
Webers per square meter, 4 
Weber-turns per ampere, 12 
Winding factor, 190 
Windings (distributed ac windings), 
644-656 
Wound rotor, 306 
Wound-rotor motors, 340-343 
Y 
Y-delta connection, 86 
Y-Y connection, 86 
Z 
Zero-sequence component, 658 
Zero-sequence inductance, 661 

