Praise for 7 Principles of Transformational Leadership:
“Effective leadership sets a vision and strategy for 
an organization, rallies others around that vision, and 
ensures the right culture and talent are present to exe-
cute. But, before you can be what Hugh calls “a transfor-
mational leader,” you must have a compelling strategy 
and vision for yourself. Hugh Blane helped me craft and 
articulate a strategy and vision for my own life, and now 
the 7 Principles of Transformational Leadership will help 
you do the same.” 
—Dr. Timothy Chester, vice president for Information 
Technology at The University of Georgia
“Hugh Blane offers practical leadership advice based 
on his years of executive coaching. Starting at the begin-
ning with who you are and where you want to go, his 
examples, stories and principles offer valuable guidance 
for the journey to effective, transformational leadership."
—Jack Mudd, retired senior vice president, Mission 
Leadership, Providence Health & Services
“Hugh Blane shares decades of experience working 
within businesses and with clients in a deeply personal 
manner, bringing the reader to a shared conclusion that 
technical skills absent clarity, purpose and love are inad-
equate to allow a person to become a truly transforma-
tional leader.”
—Bryce Seidl, retired president and CEO at Pacific 
Science Center

“If you haven't read this book you are more lost than 
you realize! Far too many of us spend far too much time 
stuck on the hamster wheel of the day to day. Stuck with 
no direction and too much to do. But in this insightful 
book Hugh Blane gives us a clear road map of how to get 
off the hamster wheel and out of the fog by latching onto 
and then maintaining laser focus on our PURPOSE!!! 
Only apply these principals if you want a life far more 
fulfilling and if you want to close the gap between where 
you are today and where you aspire to be tomorrow!”
—John Felkins, director of coaching, Dave Ramsey
“Leadership is a choice we make, it’s not just a role 
or a title. Being a transformational leader is both a priv-
ilege and a responsibility. Hugh Blane’s 7 Principles of 
Transformational Leadership outlines a paradigm and a 
framework on how anyone can be a transformational 
leader by choice.”
—Deepak Goindwani, vice president, product devel-
opment at CDK Global

PRINCIPLES OF 
TRANSFORMATIONAL 
LEADERSHIP
CREATE A MINDSET OF PASSION,  
INNOVATION, AND GROWTH
HUGH BLANE
7

Copyright © 2017 by Hugh Blaine
All rights reserved under the Pan-American and 
International Copyright Conventions. This book may 
not be reproduced, in whole or in part, in any form or 
by any means electronic or mechanical, including pho-
tocopying, recording, or by any information storage and 
retrieval system now known or hereafter invented, with-
out written permission from the publisher, The Career 
Press.
7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
Typeset by PerfecType, Nashville, Tenn.
Cover design by Jonathan Bush Design
Printed in the U.S.A.
To 
order 
this 
title, 
please 
call 
toll-free 
1-800-CAREER-1 (NJ and Canada: 201-848-0310) to 
order using VISA or MasterCard, or for further informa-
tion on books from Career Press.
The Career Press, Inc.
12 Parish Drive
Wayne, NJ 07470
www.careerpress.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP Data Available Upon Request.

AC K NOW L E DG M E N T S
T
he acknowledgment section of a book is not written 
for the reader. It is for the author to thank the people 
who helped him or her on the journey of writing a book. 
Indulge me as I thank a group of very special people. 
First and foremost I want to say thank you to my par-
ents. Both were courageous souls who chose to immi-
grate with two small children from Scotland to Canada 
and then Birmingham, Alabama, in 1968. Were it not for 
their desire for a better life, for themselves and primarily 
for their children, this book would not be in your hands. 
Both would be exceptionally proud of this accomplish-
ment, as I am of theirs. 
I want to thank my mentor and business advisor Alan 
Weiss. Alan has stretched my thinking and, by doing 
so, enriched my life in ways I never imagined possible. 
Thank you, Alan, for showing me how to live boldly, 
confidently, and generously. And yes, the second book 
is on its way.

To the clients who partnered with me to convert their 
human potential into accelerated results I cannot thank 
you enough. You gave me the opportunity to bring the 
insights of transformational leadership into your all-too-
often overwhelmed, overscheduled, and overbooked 
workplace and to make a difference in your performance 
while also enabling human flourishing. I am enriched by 
your partnership and thank you. 
I want to thank the business colleagues who posi-
tively shaped my thinking with the book. A heartfelt 
thank you goes out to Roberta Matuson, Linda Popky, 
Mark Rodgers, Judy Chan, and Richard Citrin. Each of 
you inspired me to become an author and to get out of 
my own way with my writing. I am honored to join you 
as published authors and indebted to you for your sup-
port and encouragement. 
Thank you to my sister, Elise, who sees the very best 
in me and knew I had a book to write even when I didn’t. 
Your belief in me is without question a gift that I cher-
ish and relied heavily upon while writing the book. To 
my best man, Robert, your wisdom, faith, and discern-
ment have shaped me in powerful ways. Your thoughts 
and perspectives are on many pages of this book, and 
no, you cannot have a portion of the royalties. To my 
brother from another mother, John Felkins. We became 
fast friends and your friendship and encouragement 
have been ballast when I’ve felt as though I was sinking 
amidst the responsibilities of work and business. You are 

a fabulous father and amazing advisor and I am blessed 
to call you my friend. 
Thank you to Adonis McNeal. You’ve been on the 
receiving end of far too many calls during which I 
thought out loud about each of the seven principles and 
ended up on my soapbox. You were always gracious and 
generous with your attention and encouragement. You 
too are my brother from another mother. It’s too bad I 
didn’t get your dashing good looks though. 
And last, but certainly not least, to the love of my 
life, Alyson Sharron. Without question, in front of every 
good man stands a strong, powerful, and loving woman 
pulling him into the future. You are that for me. I thank 
you for your swift kick in the pants, your swift voice of 
encouragement, and the unquestioning admonition of 
greater possibility. Were it not for you this book would 
never have happened. Thank you for your patience, love, 
and support. 


C ON T E N T S
Introduction: Mindset Is Not Just for Athletes, 
Academics, and Cave-Dwelling Mystics. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 11
Chapter One: The Purpose Principle. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 27
Chapter Two: The Promises Principle . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter Three: The Projects Principle . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 89
Chapter Four: The Persuasion Principle. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 125
Chapter Five: The Praising Principle . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 159
Chapter Six: The Perseverance Principle. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 191
Chapter Seven: The Preparation Principle. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 219
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
Index. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
About the Author. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256


11
I N T RODUC T ION: 
M I N D SE T  I S  NO T 
J U S T  F OR  A T H L E T E S , 
AC A DE M IC S ,  A N D  C AV E -
DW E L L I NG  MY S T IC S 
Understand Your Mindset and You’ll Understand Your Results
I did not come into this world with an “I can do anything” 
mindset. Far from it. At 48 years old, I found myself 
unfulfilled emotionally, spiritually, and ­financially—in 
spite of being in the third year of a marriage to the love of 
my life. I had been working my tail off to be successful, 
but felt as though I was driving with one foot jammed 
on the accelerator and the other squarely on the brakes. 
I was exerting a massive amount of energy each day, but 
going nowhere fast. Every day I felt like Sisyphus climb-
ing a mountain—only to be rolled back down to the 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
12
bottom and admonished for daring to climb the moun-
tain. Living this way was exhausting. 
In hindsight, my mindset was rooted in scarcity and 
poverty. No matter what I accomplished, it wasn’t good 
enough. My favorite reply to people giving me compli-
ments and acknowledging me for what I was accomplish-
ing was, “Yes, but. . . .” I summarily dismissed people 
because I didn’t believe what I was accomplishing was 
up to the high standards I had set. My thinking was my 
biggest enemy. How did I get here? 
On a day like any other for a 6 year old, I was playing 
in my bedroom when I heard my mother screaming. I 
ran downstairs and saw her blocking the doorway to our 
house and three men standing on our front steps. I ran 
and stood in the cradle of my mother’s arm and looked 
at the men with fear and confusion. They were not police 
officers delivering bad news about my father, nor were 
they thugs there to rob us. They were just men doing 
their job, which on that day was to repossess our furni-
ture. And doing their job left my mother screaming and 
frantically telephoning my father to “Take care of this!”
During a recession in the 1960s in Scotland, repos-
sessing furniture happened to other families, not to my 
mother. Christobel Rice Blane had married into one of 
the wealthiest families in Glasgow, Scotland. Life was 
exactly as she hoped until my grandfather died. My 
grandfather, David Blane, was an extraordinarily gifted 
businessman who started his business life pushing a 
large wooden cart up and down the streets of Glasgow, 

13
Introduction
offering bread, fruit, fish, and any other product he could 
sell for a profit. He worked long, hard days and had an “I 
will do this” mindset. 
In the time span of 40 years, my grandfather amassed 
a fortune. He had a Jaguar, MG, and Rolls Royce deal-
ership, a scrap metal business, and a bookie joint. He 
raised his 10 children with silver spoons in their mouths 
and with the support of two nannies. The family home 
was built and named for a vacation property my grand-
father found in Padua, Italy, and had not one, but two, 
billiard rooms. At one point, my father’s clothes were 
custom tailored and he drove one of the nicest cars in 
town. My father was the proverbial “big guy on campus.”
My mother came from the opposite side of the tracks. 
Her father was a laborer, who at one time worked in a 
coal mine. Their family had no money. When my mother 
was in high school, she had one dress she would wear 
to school every day. She would come home and iron it 
to wear again the following day. Cristobel knew she was 
poor and the thought that kept her motivated was the 
hope of “getting out of this godforsaken place” and mak-
ing a better life for herself.
On one hand, the mindset with which my father was 
raised was one of affluence and privilege. My mother’s 
mindset, on the other hand, was one of poverty and scar-
city. What happened on the day the repo men arrived 
galvanized my mother’s mindset and obliterated that of 
my father. For my mother, the highest hopes she had for 
her life came crashing down around her. For my father, 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
14
any sense of self-worth or self-esteem shriveled like a rai-
sin in the sun.
What does this have to do with me and my mindset? 
On that fateful day, my mindset as a 6 year old shifted 
from safety and security to fear and uncertainty. I came 
to believe that whatever possessions I had could and 
would be taken away from me. This mindset permeated 
my thinking; my perceptions of people, places, and lead-
ership placed me squarely on track for the life I found 
myself living at 48 years old.
My intent in recounting this story is to provide you 
with context about how mindsets and the leadership you 
and I exhibit are the byproduct of nature as well as nur-
ture. The only real choice we have is to acknowledge our 
current mindset, accept our role in creating or tolerating 
it, articulate the desired mindset we want to have, and 
then take action each day to create it. 
I’ve found that 80 percent of a leader’s success is men-
tal. There are leaders who believe that work is a long, 
slow slog through enemy territory on their belly with 
bullets flying over their heads. This mindset will produce 
lower performance 100 percent of the time. You cannot 
perform at the highest levels if your mindset is equally 
not at the highest level.
Although neuroscience and psychology have posi-
tively shaped my mindset, they are not the cornerstones 
of this book. I am not a psychologist, but rather a leader-
ship expert who has successfully changed my own mind-
set, as well as the mindsets of my clients, for the better. 

15
Introduction
I wrote this book for two key reasons: First, in the 
world of work, the amount of untapped human poten-
tial inside organizations is staggering. After working in 43 
states and seven countries on three continents, I’ve wit-
nessed firsthand 65 percent of employees with a chronic 
case of JDTM: just doing the minimum. Their mindsets are 
characterized as exerting the minimum amount of effort 
possible while maintaining a positive annual review. But 
before you conclude that employees with JDTM are greedy, 
lazy, and selfish, consider the fact that leaders in corpora-
tions across all industries suffer from JDTM also and are 
the carriers of the JDTM virus. Far too often, the mission, 
vision, and values guiding organizations, teams, and indi-
vidual employees are written by senior leaders while on 
executive retreats in mountain lodges. They are, in turn, 
devoid of any tangible connection with the people who 
meet and engage the customer on a daily basis. Employees 
suffer from JDTM because their leaders are unwilling to 
undertake the individual transformations required in 
order to transform their teams or organizations. 
Second, on a personal level, I hope to enable more 
human flourishing. I believe in the biblical passage that 
reads, “And to whomsoever much is given, of him shall 
much be required.” I have an obligation and responsibil-
ity to take what I’ve learned and pass it along to others 
who can benefit. We will cover this in extended detail in 
the following chapters. 
Before moving on, I have an assessment you’ll want to 
complete. These are not ethereal, navel-gazing questions 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
16
that require you to sit on a cushion in a cross-legged posi-
tion for 60 minutes. They are statements that, when con-
sidered thoughtfully and purposefully, will help you see 
the connection between your mindset and your results.
The Transformational Leadership Assessment
On a scale from 1 to 10 (1 is strongly disagree and 10 is 
strongly agree), rate yourself on the following statements: 
1.	 I have a clearly articulated purpose for my 
leadership and personal life. 
2.	 I have clearly defined the priorities that are 
in service of my purpose, as well as the peo-
ple who matter most to me.
3.	 I have made non-negotiable promises to all 
of the people who matter most to me both 
personally and professionally.
4.	 I know with certainty and have articulated 
the behaviors I will exhibit in order to achieve 
my purpose, promises, and priorities.
5.	 I actively stretch my leadership every year 
with new projects that provide increased 
value to the people who matter most to me. 
6.	 I have a remarkable ability to persevere in 
the face of adversity and setbacks.
7.	 I actively teach and mentor others in order 
to cement my learning, as well as to help 
others grow and learn.

17
Introduction
8.	 When it comes to my thinking, I “play to 
win” as opposed to “play not to lose.”
9.	 I have cultivated a positive mindset, as well 
as positive self-talk.
10.	 I have a contagious and persuasive belief 
about helping others grow their leadership 
and enhance their mindset.
11.	 I praise myself for things I do well and elim-
inate or reduce the things I don’t do well 
daily, weekly, and monthly.
12.	 I take time to reflect and think creatively 
and strategically about my professional and 
personal life.
After completing the Transformational Leadership 
Assessment, consider the following questions:
•	
What statements received the highest and 
lowest scores? 
•	
What are the implications for these areas 
being rated so high and low? 
•	
If you could significantly improve one 
answer, which one would have the biggest 
positive impact on your leadership and your 
result? 
A Mindset of Growth, Optimism, and Positivity
Here’s what I’ve learned working with organizations 
such as Sony Pictures, Boeing, Nordstrom, Starbucks, 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
18
and Microsoft: Transformational leaders are dissatisfied 
with being good, and instead believe in and strive for a 
state best described as “flourishing.” In this chapter, I 
start by presenting a new mindset about rethinking the 
world of work and position you for transformational 
growth. 
If you want a flourishing business—a business that 
has top-line growth, greater profitability, high levels of 
customer satisfaction, and top talent retention—you 
must have flourishing relationships with your employ-
ees. In today’s world of work, the customer experience 
must be so compelling that customers would not con-
sider going elsewhere. That can only be created by com-
mitted and happy employees.
When leaders commit to creating experiences that 
are compelling, noteworthy, and loyalty-centric, the 
only way to execute and deliver this strategy is through 
happy and satisfied employees. In no uncertain terms, if 
you want to create a compelling, flourishing experience 
for your customers but your employees are not flourish-
ing, there is just no way for your business to flourish. The 
following is an equation that will transform your leader-
ship and your results: 
FB = (FE + FC + ME)
A flourishing business (FB) comes from flourishing 
employees (FE), flourishing customers (FC), and memo-
rable experiences (ME). 

19
Introduction
Flourishing employees are created by flourishing 
leaders who commit to cultivating flourishing customers 
and producing memorable experiences. And yet, there 
are employees who should never be placed in customer-
facing roles but find themselves there on a regular basis. 
Some of these people are so uncomfortable, incompetent, 
or indifferent to the customer that they should never be 
put in roles that require customer interactions. 
Are there examples inside your organization in 
which unhappy employees are creating negative expe-
riences for customers? Are there times when employees 
see a customer as an interruption and something to be 
tolerated, as opposed to a precious asset that needs to 
be cultivated and treated with respect? Is it ever accept-
able in your employees’ eyes to be rude and uncaring? If 
you answer yes, the problem doesn’t rest with the front-
line employee. The bigger question is: Do leaders walk 
through your doors each morning with a keen desire to 
make a meaningful difference in your customers’ and 
employees’ lives?
If you as a leader have lost this desire and are unable 
to feel enthused about making a difference in your most 
important constituents’ life, it is time to make an exit 
from the ranks of leadership. It is really quite simple. If 
you are not flourishing at work, it is time for a change—
first in mindset and then in role, if need be. Your level of 
personal flourishing permeates and shapes your leader-
ship and shows up in the customer experience.

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
20
It’s Not What Others Tell You; It’s What You Tell Yourself
The number-one lament of readers of my blog is that 
they feel overwhelmed and don’t have the time necessary 
to effectively lead. This feeling can happen for a variety 
of reasons, some of which are valid, whereas others are 
rooted in the leader’s mindset. Throughout the last 25 
years, I’ve found six factors that contribute to the feeling 
of overwhelm—all of which create a mindset that lowers 
performance and stifles the well-being of customers and 
employees. 
1.	 Underperformance is tolerated. Every orga-
nization has employees that underperform 
and others that over perform. The former 
are interested in having a paycheck and have 
little enthusiasm for increasing their perfor-
mance. Rather than find a job at which the 
expectations are lower, they’re allowed to stay 
in their roles even in the face of underperfor-
mance. When underperformance is tolerated, 
a clear message is sent to all employees that 
this is acceptable and there are no repercus-
sions. This mindset stalls growth and is a cat-
alyst for even greater underperformance. 
2.	 Miscommunication. When leaders feel over-
whelmed and are continually running from 
one meeting to another without any mar-
gin or white space, miscommunication is 

21
Introduction
assured. By that I mean you will miss the 
subtle nuances of interpersonal communi-
cation, and in the process of rushing from 
meeting to meeting, miscommunicate expec-
tations due to the anxiety of needing to be in 
two places at once. This leads to false starts 
and the all-too-familiar rework required as a 
result of miscommunication.
3.	 Being tired, worn down, and burned out. 
In America, leaders pride themselves on 
pushing themselves to the limit. It is a badge 
of honor to say to family and friends that 
you work 70 hours a week. And yet, in study 
after study, the research shows that as the 
number of hours you work each week goes 
up, the quality of your work goes down. 
Greater effectiveness comes from leaders and 
employees who are energized, uplifted, and 
enthused about making a positive differ-
ence in the life of a customer. This is nearly 
impossible to do when a leader or employee 
is hanging on for dear life and trying to keep 
their nose above water. 
4.	 Not having the skills to manage stress 
effectively. There are two types of stress we 
face at one time or another: eustress and dis-
tress. Eustress occurs when the gap between 
what we want and what we have is slightly 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
22
pushed, but not in ways that lead us to feel 
overwhelmed. We see this stress as manage-
able and our goal achievable. 
Distress is the opposite. The gap is unman-
ageable and the goal is seen as unreachable. 
This leads us to feel overwhelmed, out of con-
trol, and ineffective. Leaders need the ability 
to capitalize on eustress, as well as the abil-
ity to reduce or eliminate the causes and or 
effects of distress. And yet the number-one 
strategy for dealing with stress in organiza-
tions today is to put your nose to the grind-
stone and gut it out. There are times when 
this strategy is needed and the preferred way 
forward. However, too often working harder 
is preferred by busy and overwhelmed lead-
ers over working smarter. 
5.	 Poor time management and priority-
setting habits. The exigency of a leader’s 
day-to-day work is one in which continual 
priority-setting is a necessity but not a reality. 
Being able to strategically and respectfully 
say no to bosses as well as customers is a key 
skill transformational leaders have mastered. 
When leaders look at their calendars and ask 
what percent of their time is spent in low-
value producing activities relative to their 
most strategic priorities, what figure would 
you expect to hear? Eighty percent? Seventy? 

23
Introduction
Fifty? All too often the figure from my coach-
ing and consulting clients is 30 percent. With 
greater priority-setting skills, as well as good 
time management, a leader can increase the 
strategic use of their calendar by 25 to 50 per-
cent, which has a transformational impact on 
their performance.
6.	 Unaware of the importance of mindset on 
performance. In business schools across 
the country, the number of classes taught 
on mindset and mental training is tiny. Yes, 
psychology is taught in broad and often the-
oretical terms, much like the tried-and-true 
courses on financial management and mar-
keting, and new courses on social media. 
What happens in between the ears of 
leaders and employees is in many ways what 
determines financial performance, market 
share, and talent acquisition and retention. 
When a factor as important as mindset is 
missing from a leader’s arsenal of tools, the 
results are less than appealing. 
When you look at this list, undoubtedly you will 
be able to add other factors that lead you to feel over-
whelmed. Just about all of these can be influenced by 
a leader. Happy employees are essential for happy cus-
tomers. One of a leader’s primary jobs is to manage the 
mindset of his or her employees so the mindset of the 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
24
customer is favorable and inclined to do more business 
with the organization. 
How employees talk to themselves is critical. Some 
may feel that no matter how good an idea they create, 
management will never support them. If their belief and 
self-talk is rooted in defeatist language and beliefs, it 
is impossible to behave differently until what they tell 
themselves changes.
For example, Robert was a new coaching client in the 
healthcare field. He told me, as many of my clients do, 
of the 70-plus hours he was working and the demands 
on his time. He lamented feeling overwhelmed and frus-
trated because his day was spent in reactive firefight-
ing mode. Things had gotten so bad that his employees 
had even asked him to become less reactive and to help 
them do the same. When I asked who was in charge of 
his schedule and how he spent his day, his answer was a 
resolute “hospitals and patients.” 
Robert was right in one regard: His work was deter-
mined in many ways by the ravages of a career in health-
care, where a person’s life and well-being is influenced by 
his or her caregivers. These professions are surrounded 
by “a decision must be made now circumstances.”
But Robert also missed a crucial distinction. 
Although the external factors influencing his day were 
real, his response to them was equally so. Robert was 
not in charge of what happened to him every day, but 
he was certainly in charge of how he responded to what 
happened to him. How Robert responded rested 

25
Introduction
squarely in the six inches separating his two ears. It 
wasn’t his boss, his hospital, or his patients. Robert’s 
mindset was in charge of the people, processes, and per-
spectives he brought to bear every day. Changing your 
mindset so as to unleash your human potential is what 
this book is about.
The good news is there are seven principles that will 
help you master your leadership mindset and convert 
your human potential, as well as the potential in your 
team and organization, into accelerated performance. 
Each of the following chapters corresponds with a dif-
ferent principle. 


27
1
The Purpose Principle
The One Idea, Dream, Hope, or Aspiration
Ask 10 people what they would do if they won the lot-
tery and had the financial resources to no longer work, 
and you’ll hear ideas such as “start my own business” 
or “start a charity.” Throughout the last 11 years as a 
financial advisor, I saw this type of wishful thinking. 
Whenever I met a new or prospective client I would 
ask a simple, straightforward question: “What, to you, 
is important about money?” The number-one answer 
I heard was “security.” And on numerous occasions I 
heard from female clients that they didn’t want to end 
up as a “bag lady.” 
What was interesting is that the people I was speak-
ing to and meeting with were not financially insecure. 
They had resources, but still carried with them a poverty 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
28
mindset. One healthcare executive making more than 
one million dollars per year was worried about having 
enough money to retire.
But, having security as a purpose puts a stranglehold 
on many of the ideas, hopes, and dreams for what our 
lives can be. The hopes and dreams we have for our lives 
get pushed aside because of our prevailing mindset. 
Let’s be clear about the one primary benefit of clar-
ifying your leadership purpose: The jumping-off point 
for greatness both individually and organizationally is a 
clear and compelling purpose. People at work or in your 
personal life who have achieved something extraordi-
nary or who live lives defined as “rewarding” and “uplift-
ing” have a clear and compelling idea about what is 
important to them, why it is important, and what value 
they will achieve by working to accomplish it. 
One of my clients is a hospital CEO who defined 
her purpose as follows: “I want to create a culture where 
every single employee is engaged in creating the extraor-
dinary in patient care and safety.” Her purpose translates 
three things that are important to her:
1.	 Patient care and safety are paramount. 
2.	 Every employee must be engaged in order to 
make this happen.
3.	 Creating the extraordinary is essential.
This CEO is not content with the ordinary. She 
believes the extraordinary is possible and sees her job as 
primarily focused on creating the cultural transformation 

29
The Purpose Principle
to make this happen. Her purpose guides her every move 
and permeates her thinking even in the constantly shift-
ing market that is healthcare.
When I asked her about our work together she said, 
“Getting clear about my purpose was not easy, but it has 
made leading so much easier and rewarding now that I 
have it.”
That leaves me with these questions for you: Are you 
clear about your leadership purpose? Do you feel pas-
sionate about what you want? Are you relentless in learn-
ing and growing your own skill set as a leader as well 
as your mindset, and creating value for others? Or does 
each day feel as though you are driving in fog?
What does driving in fog look like from a leadership 
perspective? Imagine you’re on vacation, driving to Napa 
Valley wine country to taste some of America’s most 
notable wines. In the hopes of making your trip even 
more memorable you rent a high-performance convert-
ible. It’s red, shiny, and a real head-turner. Just looking at 
the car increases your heart rate and you can’t wait to hit 
the open road.
As you round a curve enjoying this wonderful 
moment, you suddenly drive head-on into a fog bank. 
Out of nowhere the fog encases your car. What is the first 
thing you do? Most likely, you’ll put your foot on the 
brakes to slow down. Next, you’ll put both hands on the 
wheel and possibly even pull yourself closer to the wheel 
in the hopes of seeing better. And to help even further, 
you’ll turn down the radio to help you think. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
30
Gone is the carefree and enthusiastic feeling you just 
had for your trip. Instead, the feeling you are experiencing 
is adrenaline cascading through your body. You are in sur-
vival mode and in this moment you are fighting to survive.
After what seems like minutes, but likely was three-
to-five seconds, the fog lifts and you can once again see 
clearly for miles ahead. The tension that flooded your 
body in survival mode is gone and the feeling of being 
safe returns. Slowly the enthusiasm you have for your 
trip returns and in a few minutes the radio is back on 
and your foot is on the accelerator.
When we lack a clear and compelling purpose for our 
leadership, as well as for our teams and organizations, 
we are driving in fog. There is tension and the enjoy-
ment for our destination evaporates as quickly as the fog 
obscures our vision. With a clear and compelling pur-
pose, we remove our foot from the brake and squarely 
hit the accelerator. We accelerate toward our destination 
with enthusiasm and excitement.
When I ask executives and entrepreneurs what they 
really want for themselves and for their teams and orga-
nizations, nine times out of 10 there is no clear purpose. 
That leaves employees feeling as though they are driving 
in fog. Their feet are on the brakes regarding any new 
ideas and they are inhibited in their capacity to make 
their customers’ lives easier and more rewarding. This is 
the opposite of what most leaders want and yet it is what 
the vast majority of leaders are creating.

31
The Purpose Principle
Every leader has dreams, hopes, and aspirations for 
his or her professional as well as his or her personal life. 
In each coaching and consulting engagement I have, the 
moment a leader’s hopes, dreams, and aspirations are 
clarified, there is a noticeable release of tension and a pal-
pable excitement in the air. It’s as if the engine is revving 
at a higher RPM and the enthusiasm for moving toward 
the hopes for the future becomes the primary focus. 
If you picked up this book in order to create dramatic 
revenue, performance, and relationship growth, you 
will not be disappointed. The next section will help you 
define your purpose and in turn live a more rewarding 
and enriching life.
Finding Your Purpose in Talent, Love, and Value
Without exception, dramatic performance as well as 
engagement and satisfaction, both personally and pro-
fessionally, are closer than you think when you have a 
clearly articulated purpose. I say “closer than you think” 
because improvements of almost all types in organiza-
tions start with one word: clarity. It is used with respect to 
expectations, results, value, competencies, accountabil-
ity, and what makes us feel alive and vibrant. Without 
clarity there is little-to-no likelihood that focus can 
follow. With clarity and focus come new insights, new 
strategies, and new behaviors that move individuals and 
organizations forward in unprecedented ways. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
32
This section is important to you for one reason: All 
of the other principles of leadership become intellectual 
constructs as opposed to supporting principles without a 
clear and compelling purpose. For example, you can go 
through the motions of the second principle of transfor-
mational leadership, the Promises Principle, but it is folly 
to try and set meaningful and compelling promises if you 
don’t first know what your purpose is. Without question, 
this section will prove the most pivotal of the whole book.
A few words of caution before we get started: 
Depending on the mindset you bring to this section, 
you might have one of two responses to what you read 
in this section. The first response is one of frustration. 
You’ve heard the exhortations from coaches and consul-
tants before, and you’ve understood for years the link-
age between accelerated performance and what a person 
loves doing, what they’re really good at, and what value 
they bring to their customer, team, or organization.
You have heard the message, but you have also been 
unable to clarify what each dimension of purpose really 
means to you. In turn, this section might be seen as labo-
rious and frustrating. Instead of diving into the section 
with curiosity and courage you turn the page to the next 
section, telling yourself you will come back to this sec-
tion later. 
The second possible response is one of enthusi-
asm. You believe that no matter how clear and compel-
ling your purpose, you want to learn a new perspective 
and possibly alter how you live out your purpose. You 

33
The Purpose Principle
welcome the time spent clarifying what’s important to 
you and value growing in your ability to lead with pur-
pose and with passion.
Regardless of your reaction, here’s my promise to you 
for this section: The moment you get crystal clear about 
your purpose, your level of engagement and enthusiasm 
will skyrocket. The fog lifts and you’ll see miles down 
the road for you, your team, and your organization, and 
you’ll hit the accelerator. This section will help you get 
crystal clear if you cultivate two words: curiosity and cour-
age. You’ll need curiosity to pull back the layers of your 
historical way of viewing the subject of purpose and 
you’ll need courage to think bigger about your leader-
ship than you have in the past. 
The Fuel That Propels Greatness
The three dimensions of purpose are: love, talent, and 
value. 
Love is the unbridled enthusiasm you have for your 
work. When love is present there is a continual striving 
and leaning into whatever is required to learn, grow, and 
improve. Without love your talent and value leave you 
(and others) feeling empty and dissatisfied.
Talent is what you do in highly differentiated ways. 
Talent is rooted in the skill and expertise you bring to your 
customers and the relationships that matter most to you. 
Talent, in many regards, is the price of entry into the world 
of work today. Lacking talent is a career-limiting move. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
34
Value is the benefit customers or employees derive 
from interacting with us. Value can be seen as making 
people’s lives easier and better in some meaningful way. 
Value is not the technical product or service you provide. 
It is the benefit people receive from using the product or 
service you provide. Keep in mind that you can have pas-
sion for what you do and do it exceptionally well, but if 
customers or employees see little or no value, your suc-
cess is in jeopardy.
In order to clarify your purpose, you will want to 
gain a deeper understanding of how your unique tal-
ents, skills, and passions create value for yourself, your 
customer, and your organization. The following sections 
will walk you through the process I use with my clients 
in order to clarify their purpose.
Love
At the heart of excellence lies love. Through your love 
of something you are motivated to overcome challenges 
and achieve your biggest hopes, dreams, and aspirations. 
When you are compelled by what you do, work ceases to 
be a four-letter word. Love is a key component of per-
sonal fulfillment and can be found by answering the fol-
lowing four questions:
1.	 What part of my job do I love doing? Why?
2.	 What part of my work do I find most 
rewarding?

35
The Purpose Principle
3.	 What is the one idea, hope, dream, or aspi-
ration regarding my work that has grabbed 
hold of me and won’t let go?
4.	 What aspect of my work, if I were no lon-
ger able to do it, would make my work less 
fulfilling?
To make this real for you, the following is a real-
world example from my own leadership.
I am passionate about two things: At work I love con-
verting human potential into accelerated business results 
and in my personal life I love doing something each day 
that enables human flourishing. I talk about each one, I 
read about each one, I learn as much as I can about each 
one, and I cannot imagine going through the day not 
doing each one. I am passionate about them.
Talent
What do you do really well? Where do your strengths lie? 
To answer this question, start by identifying what you do 
well for your organization. In what ways do you effec-
tively serve your customers and employees? Thinking 
about talent also provides you with an opportunity to 
say “I may be talented at something, but I’m not passion-
ate about it.” Consider the following questions to help 
you begin that thinking process.
1.	 What are my five most important talents and 
skills? 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
36
2.	 What is my proudest contribution and/or 
accomplishment? Why?
3.	 What part of my work do I receive the most 
compliments about?
4.	 The five work activities I take great pride in 
are . . .
5.	 What part of my job do I plan to master?
I am excellent at listening for the hidden content and 
context of a person’s highest hopes, dreams, and aspi-
rations. This is a gift I was born with and I’ve done as 
much as possible to respect it, cultivate it, and improve 
it. I am also excellent at leadership messaging. I’ve cul-
tivated this skill because I want leaders to foster human 
flourishing, and leadership messaging is essential. I am 
also excellent at priority-setting and executive decision-
making, thus providing practical and tactical ideas cli-
ents can use immediately to improve the quality of their 
most important relationships. 
Value
Last, but certainly not the least, is value. Clarifying your 
purpose requires understanding the value your actions 
create. These outcomes are often more significant than 
the simple completion of a task. 
For example, when you hire someone to mow your 
lawn, a result is that you have cut grass and a tidy yard. 
At the same time, there is a more significant relational 

37
The Purpose Principle
outcome: You converted time doing a less-important task 
(doing yard work) to spending time with your family. An 
important emotional connection is created because you 
delegated one task and instead invested in your family 
relationships. 
As a precursor to specifically articulating the value 
you create, answer the following questions to get an idea 
about your leadership. 
1.	 List as many activities as possible that you do 
in your role.
2.	 List a minimum of two results for each 
activity. 
3.	 Review the activities and results you identi-
fied. Which one or ones do you do in distinc-
tive and highly valuable ways?
4.	 What are your top four most valuable 
activities?
By answering these questions, what have you learned 
about your leadership? Can you now answer the follow-
ing four questions?
1.	 In my professional life, what are the most 
valuable contributions I make to my cus-
tomer, my colleagues or coworkers, and my 
organization? 
2.	 What aspects of my work are distinctive? 
What differentiates me from my colleagues 
who have the same role?

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
38
3.	 What part of my work, if I were to no lon-
ger do it, would leave my customer bitterly 
disappointed?
4.	 How can I increase the value I bring to my 
organization?
Each value statement should not mention how you 
helped your client or customer achieve the result. What 
is articulated should be increased growth, reduced 
employee turnover, higher customer satisfaction, and 
other results. Always keep in mind that people don’t care 
about what tool is used to achieve the result they want. 
They only care about the value or the outcome they 
experience. 
What Is Your Purpose?
Consider the insights you have had thus far. What ideas 
are particularly meaningful to you? These insights are 
the catalyst for your leadership purpose. Now it’s time 
to write your initial purpose statement. This statement 
should reflect your passion, competencies, and the orga-
nizational outcomes for which you want to be known. A 
template is provided for you, but feel free to write your 
purpose statement in your own words.
I create (what you do) so that (whoever your cus-
tomer is) can achieve (what).

39
The Purpose Principle
Try It on for Size
Once you have an initial draft of your purpose state-
ment, how does it fit? Take a few minutes to discuss your 
purpose with someone you trust and respect. If you are 
bold, talk with a customer and see what his or her reac-
tion is. Does it resonate with you? What, if any, changes 
will make it a better fit for your leadership?
In the next section we’ll talk about how to live out 
your purpose in meaningful and purposeful ways while 
building a brand and reputation as someone who creates 
transformational results.
Be Distinct or Be Extinct
What makes you distinctive? That can be a hard ques-
tion to answer. We can’t see ourselves clearly and often-
times our mindset pays more attention to what we are 
not doing well as opposed to what we are doing well. 
We also have the headwind of working in a world of 
work in which we are admonished to do more, do it 
better, do it faster, and do it cheaper. This mantra of 
performance is never-ending and it leaves us feeling 
overwhelmed. 
The key idea about being distinctive is less about 
being something to people that you aren’t and more 
about aligning what you are gifted and talented at doing 
in highly differentiated ways for people who value it. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
40
This is an incredibly simple idea and there is certainly no 
rocket science here. However, all too often the mindset I 
find in leaders is that they believe they have to comport 
themselves to what clients need as opposed to what they 
can do in beneficial ways. With this belief, satisfaction 
and performance are tossed out the window.
The jumping-off point for distinction is three-fold. 
You must have a purpose that is engaging and exciting to 
you. You have to understand and listen to your custom-
ers and employees in ways that provide you with action-
able insights. And you have to have a self-confidence that 
is unshakable. In the last section we addressed the love, 
talent, and value you provide, and in the next section we 
will address how to craft a leadership brand and reputa-
tion that is highly differentiated. In this section you are 
going to clarify your most distinctive beliefs and why 
they are important. 
There is a website called thisibelieve.org. It is an inter-
national organization that engages people in describing 
the core values that guide their daily lives. You can hear 
the stories about what people believe on NPR. When I 
heard this for the first time I was intrigued and thought 
it an excellent values clarification exercise for my clients. 
I did the exercise myself and share my answers as a cata-
lyst for you to clarify what you believe. Why? I believe 
that if you get clear about what you believe, you will 
focus on making it actionable and real. In total, I have 14 
things that I believe.

41
The Purpose Principle
1.	 I believe love makes the world a better 
place. Every major faith tradition believes 
that the world in which we live was cre-
ated in love and for love and that we have 
a responsibility to live in alignment with 
that belief. I believe that love is a word far 
too infrequently used in the corporate world 
and that by not using it we’re shortchanging 
ourselves, our families, our employees, and 
our customers. 
2.	 I believe that generosity is a habit and 
stems from gratitude. I believe that people 
who are ungrateful are incapable of being 
generous. Generosity can be emotional, 
spiritual, or financial. Yes, people can write 
checks out of obligation, but true generosity, 
giving for the pleasure of giving to another 
without anticipation of a return, is rooted in 
a generous mindset. When we are not grate-
ful for what we have we hold on to what we 
have and lack generosity. 
3.	 I believe that to those whom much has 
been given, much is expected. I have been 
incredibly blessed in my life, and I believe 
that in turn it is my role, my responsibility, 
and yes, my obligation, to share what I’ve 
learned with others. I don’t expect everyone 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
42
to act on what I share, but I do expect them to 
keep the exchange of success strategies alive.
4.	 I believe we need to retire the word retire-
ment. Statistics say that when I reach the age 
of 65, and if I’m reasonably healthy, I will 
live to 90. I cannot imagine sitting dormant; 
many people believe retirement means 
doing nothing for 25 years. I love what I do, 
and as long as I am making a contribution to 
the world, why would I stop?
5.	 I believe we need to stop imposing our 
beliefs and values on others. We need to 
jettison the Golden Rule and embrace the 
Platinum Rule instead. The Golden Rule 
says that I should treat people as I want to be 
treated. The Platinum Rule says that I will treat 
others in ways that they want to be treated as 
long as they are in accordance with our values 
and we are not violating them to do so. 
6.	 I believe we’re growing or dying. If we are 
not growing, we are dying. If we are not 
learning something new and thinking dif-
ferently, we are decaying. Yes, each day I 
grow or die. Far too many people are con-
tent to live life based on outdated mindsets 
and never challenge what they think, feel, or 
believe. This is folly par excellence. 
7.	 I believe in experiencing beauty daily. 
Whether in artwork or in a natural landscape, 

43
The Purpose Principle
seeing beauty enriches us and uplifts us. 
Every day we should look at something 
beautiful and allow it to stir our soul and 
enrich our lives. It can be as common as the 
moon over the water, the sun reflecting off 
a leaf, or the expression of care or concern 
that makes someone’s day better.
8.	 I believe mindset trumps skill set. I believe 
there are incredibly talented people who 
never reach their full potential because their 
mindset is tainted with issues from the past. 
Their mindset soils everything that happens 
to them.
9.	 I believe people live in fear. Fear has become 
pervasive and is based on past experiences. 
I believe fear stifles all creativity. In my own 
life I have had to jettison fear because it was 
a large part of how I grew up. I think there 
are far too many people driven by fear.
10.	 I believe in assuming positive intent. 
There are people we interact with that do 
not always lead to the best of interactions, 
but we should assume these people had no 
ill intent. People are not out to take advan-
tage of us.
11.	 I believe in the same starting point, not 
the same ending point. I believe society 
has fostered a victimization and entitlement 
mindset. There are people who believe they 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
44
should have the same outcome in life as 
someone else. Just because you are able to 
go into business does not mean you should 
have the same outcome as everyone else 
who started the same business. Each of us is 
entitled to the same starting point, but not 
the same finishing point.
12.	 I believe that being overwhelmed is a 
choice. When we lack clear priorities, roles, 
expectations; when we are not clear on what 
we can say yes and no to; and when we have 
not focused on the critical few things that 
absolutely have to be done, we will feel 
overwhelmed. Being overwhelmed can be 
mastered by making one or two choices that 
allow us to feel empowered and in control.
13.	 I believe that life is for savoring. I believe 
life can be a feast or a banquet, but the 
majority of people choose the fast-food 
drive-through. When we open our eyes to 
the natural beauty around us and to the 
interesting people in intriguing locations, 
we cannot help but marvel at all the teem-
ing life. And yet many people are simply sur-
viving and not savoring life. I think that is a 
terrible way to live your life.
14.	 I believe I can help you live a more reward-
ing life. Without question I have a fabulous 
and very blessed life. I believe that in some 

45
The Purpose Principle
small way, by articulating this list of what I 
believe, I may help you compile the five, 10, 
15, or 20 things you believe. I believe that 
when you get clear about what you believe, 
you will hyper-focus on your beliefs and 
make them become even more of a reality.
Let’s return to the question from the beginning of this 
section. What makes you distinctive? In order to have a 
clearer perspective of who you are and what makes you 
distinctive, take time to answer this question: What do I 
believe? You will see yourself clearly, you will lift the fog 
covering your work, and you will link what you believe 
with working in purposeful and highly differentiated 
ways. Let’s now discover whether you are living in accor-
dance with your core beliefs and discover ways to feel 
invigorated by your work. 
What Are You Selling? 
There is a quote from a Harley Davidson executive who 
talked about what Harley Davidson was selling. He said, 
“What we sell is the ability for a 40-year-old accountant to 
dress in black leather and ride through small towns and 
have people be afraid of him.” That’s a pithy and provoca-
tive quote, but it begs the question: What are you selling? 
What is the one thing people say you stand for in 
conversations with customers and employees? Is it excel-
lence in the customer experience? Is it creating a culture 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
46
in which every employee is engaged in creating the 
extraordinary? Is it to reduce costs or survive from one 
layoff to another? Or, are you a leader who is a purveyor 
of optimism, transformational thinking, and unprece-
dented growth? Are you selling the idea that in order to 
have a flourishing business your job as a leader is to help 
each employee do something daily that allows them and 
the customer to flourish? Whatever you believe to be 
important and valuable, are you doing it purposefully 
and in such a way that people want to buy it? 
In this section you’ll make the concrete connection 
between what you believe and what people experience. 
The two words you’ll pay close attention to are intent and 
impact. Your intent might be as pure as the driven snow, 
but your impact could be negative and leave people figu-
ratively running for the hills. As you read this section 
keep one key point firmly in mind: People never buy 
what you’re selling based on your intent. They buy what 
you’re selling based on how what you do and say impacts 
them personally.
The Leadership Brand Impact Process
Organizations know about the power of brands. Brands 
create value, loyalty, and, when compelling and distinc-
tive, they create profound emotional experiences for cus-
tomers that attract more customers who want the same 
experience. What is not recognized as much is that a lead-
er’s brand can be a catalyst for transformational growth. 

47
The Purpose Principle
Transformational leaders no longer rely solely on their orga-
nization’s brand to guide their behavior. Transformational 
leaders develop their own individual brand.
Where do you start? What follows is my Leadership 
Brand Impact process. There are two key points to start 
with: First, you have a brand whether you know it or not. 
Second, the impact your brand has on others is either 
helping or hurting your performance. The LBI will help 
you decide whether the impact your brand is having is 
positive or negative.
The process I’ll outline requires courage. It’s not for 
the faint of heart. You will ask people who are impor-
tant to you about your impact and see clearly, maybe for 
the first time, the impact you have on people. Some of 
what you’ll hear will be incredibly uplifting and inspira-
tional. Other aspects will leave you uncomfortable and/
or embarrassed. But rest assured, you cannot change 
anything unless you see it clearly. The LBI will help you 
with that. 
Step 1
Clarify the brand impact you intended. Take 10 minutes 
to write down the impact you want to have on the people 
who matter most to you. The starting point for under-
standing the impact your brand has on others involves 
writing four words or phrases that you believe best 
describe your leadership. Don’t overthink this; simply 
capture what you see as the essence of your leadership. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
48
For example, you may use words such as inspiring, col-
laborative, thoughtful, and pragmatic. 
Step 2
Clarify the brand impact people experience. This step 
starts by creating a list of eight to 10 people who you trust 
and respect. They can be colleagues, managers, cowork-
ers, direct reports, former employees, and friends. Your 
list should consist of people whose opinions you value.
Call or speak in person with those on your list and 
let them know you are involved in a leadership activity 
that requires candid feedback. As someone you respect, 
his or her assistance in seeing the impact of your leader-
ship from an outsider’s perspective is essential. 
Specifically, ask them to provide you with four words 
or phrases they believe best describe the impact your 
leadership has on them and others. It might be a one-
word descriptor such innovative or inspiring. It can also 
include phrases such as can-do attitude.
Step 3
This step reviews the 32 to 40 words that represent what 
others see as your Leadership Brand Impact. Review your 
words and compile a list of themes or patterns. Similar 
words or synonyms should be distilled into a one-word 
descriptor that best represents what you believe is the 
tone and/or feel of the words. 

49
The Purpose Principle
The overarching objective in this step is to clarify your 
Leadership Brand Impact from other perspectives and 
distill it into the fewest words possible. This will allow 
you to study your two lists and look for gaps between 
what you intended and what people experienced. Is 
there a gap between your intended brand impact and the 
brand impact listed by your observers? While looking at 
your list, ask yourself the following questions:
1.	 Is my intent aligned with my impact? 
2.	 Am I being seen in ways consistent with my 
purpose?
3.	 Are my brand impact descriptors (both my 
own and from my observers) distinctive or 
simply the price of entry for being in my role? 
4.	 What is the upside and downside to my lead-
ership brand/reputation?
5.	 Am I excited about the words used to describe 
me, or am I neutral?
No doubt, there are words on your lists that are 
aligned with what you intended and others that are not. 
Transformational leaders grow up and take responsibil-
ity for the impact they have on others.
Step 4
This step will help you clarify the behaviors you’ll adopt 
to create the brand impact you want. It asks three simple 
yet important questions:

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
50
1.	 What is the impact I want to be known for?
2.	 If I want to be known for XYZ, what traits, 
characteristics, behaviors, and or values will I 
embody in order to create my desired impact? 
3.	 What will become essential and/or non-­
negotiable to me? 
This last step is less about logic and more about what’s 
probable; it is rooted in articulating your highest hopes, 
dreams, and aspirations for the impact your leadership 
has. This step converts the insights you’ve gleaned from 
the LBI and asks you to become behaviorally explicit 
about what you will implement based on your insights. 
This step is essential. If you gloss over this step the LBI 
will become an intellectually interesting exercise but 
won’t lead to anything noteworthy or transformational. 
Showing up is where the rubber meets the road. 
Showing up requires focusing daily on how you com-
municate, hold meetings, delegate, hold people account-
able, talk with customers, and deal with adversity and 
uncertainty, and calibrating whether or not your impact 
leads people to buy what you’re selling. 
Step 5
In this step, leaders go to all of the people who provided 
feedback, as well as their key constituents, and share the 
impact they want to have. They show up in a real and 
transparent way about what they learned about their 

51
The Purpose Principle
leadership, what insights they’ve gleaned about their 
impact, and what they will do differently.
They now give people permission to tell them when 
what they are doing is not aligned with what they said. 
They don’t just give people permission, they continually 
and frequently ask for advice from people about how 
they can live out the leadership brand in powerful, pur-
poseful, and compelling ways. 
The clients who have used the LBI successfully report 
that this process was transformational for them. They felt 
as though the Scottish poet Robert Burns was right when 
he said, in effect, that seeing ourselves as others see us is 
essential. They also said they are 60 percent more effec-
tive by having gone through this process. I hope that is 
the case for you as well. In the next section you integrate 
everything you’ve learned and jump into creating your 
ideal day. 
Your Ideal Day Is Waiting
Can every day be an ideal day? No, it can’t. Will the 
choices we make increase the possibility that the num-
ber of days we experience as an ideal day increase? Yes, 
absolutely. 
Here’s my bold admonition: Living an ideal day is 
a choice. There’s no way around the fact that we have a 
choice as to how we choose to plan and live our days. In 
his book Man’s Search for Meaning, psychologist Viktor 
Frankl recounted how, in the face of the unfathomable 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
52
horror, deprivation, and cruelty of a German concentra-
tion camp, he could choose his experience. He didn’t 
simply put on rose-colored glasses and think happy 
thoughts. He chose to accept his circumstances and 
focused on his hopes for what he would experience and 
accomplish after his release.
Viktor Frankl didn’t delegate his choices for his daily 
experiences either. He chose his experiences and worked 
tirelessly in the concentration camp to share his choice 
with fellow prisoners. He unquestioningly posited that we 
all have a choice as to how we experience and live our day. 
Of course there are days when you will walk into 
the office knowing you will terminate an employee with 
two children in college and a new home. No one will 
disagree that situations such as those are hard and chal-
lenging. But far too often leaders see only the negative. 
They view work as a four-letter word and see their days as 
filled with land mines, a relentless need to do more, do 
it faster, and do it cheaper, and an onslaught of political, 
manipulative, or lazy people who make their day frus-
trating and challenging. 
Viewing your day this way has you arriving home only 
to greet your family or friends exhausted, overwhelmed, 
and incapable of a meaningful connection. This type of 
day has you checked out emotionally at home because 
you’ve used up all of your emotional energy simply sur-
viving the day. Which day are you choosing? Are you 
choosing an ideal day of your making or a day simply 
responding to the exigencies of the day?

53
The Purpose Principle
You’re Closer Than You Think
The good news is that your ideal is much closer than you 
think. It’s a simple shift in perspective or belief. Eight 
years ago my wife grew exasperated sleeping next to me. 
My snoring was waking her in the middle of the night 
even though she was wearing ear plugs. I scheduled a 
sleep study and learned I had a mild case of sleep apnea. 
A CPAP machine allowed me to wake in the morning 
without the feeling of having gone 15 rounds with a 
heavyweight boxer.
My sleep quality increased, but my sleep quantity 
didn’t. I was waking at 2:30 a.m. and staying awake for 
45 minutes to an hour. When asleep, I had high-quality 
sleep, but I wasn’t sleeping long enough.
I worked with a sleep coach (yes, there are such peo-
ple) and learned that an increase in sleep quantity was 
closer than I thought. The perspective I brought to my 
sleep was that going to bed earlier was the prescription 
I needed. The opposite was the case for me. I needed to 
go to bed 45 minutes later; by doing so I would sleep 
without interruption throughout the night. It was 
counterintuitive.
I learned two important lessons: The first is that 
coaches are the fastest way to increased performance and 
the best way to make performance sustainable. The sec-
ond lesson is that we are most often closer to our ideal 
than we can see. When we have a shift in perspective it 
changes the way we act and respond. By changing the 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
54
way we act and respond, we change the results we get. 
Living our ideal day is that simple and shouldn’t be made 
any more complicated.
Where Do You Start?
In the previous sections you identified what you love 
doing, what you’re good at, and what value you bring to 
your team and organization. You’ve articulated what you 
believe and what makes you distinctive in the eyes of 
your most important relationships, and you’ve seen your 
leadership impact through the eyes of the people who 
are important to you. With this backdrop, there are three 
things you need to do in order to live your ideal day. You 
must reframe your past, reclaim your future, and recali-
brate your present.
Reframe Your Past
You have to be able to look at the negative events in your 
past and say, “It may not have been ideal, but here’s how 
I’m going to view these events and what I’ve learned.” In 
choosing to focus on what is positive you become highly 
resilient. That shapes your reactions and behaviors in 
positive ways. This can be hard at times, but refram-
ing negative experiences into positive ones is incred-
ibly powerful and within your control. What one, two, 
or three experiences do you want to reframe? I chose to 

55
The Purpose Principle
reframe the repossessing of our furniture from the loss 
of personal possession to the gaining of tenacity, disci-
pline, and perseverance. 
Reclaim Your Future
In order to have high hopes for your ideal day there must 
be dreams, aspirations, or big ideas that have grabbed 
hold of you and that you have said yes to. Big dreams or 
aspirations leave us acting like a gambler who goes all 
in. In that moment, the conversation is “Under no cir-
cumstances will I take no for an answer on this type of 
personal and professional life. This is the life I am claim-
ing.” When you live your leadership purpose there is no 
way out and there is no backdoor. When you say, “I will 
accomplish this,” you have reclaimed the idealized day 
you have in mind.
Recalibrate Your Present
Recalibrating your present requires discerning what 
things you should not do again and what you abso-
lutely should do again. This strategy requires recalibrat-
ing what worked and what didn’t work throughout the 
course of the last year. What was something that accel-
erated your performance and your sense of satisfaction? 
What created hope for you, and what created anxiety? 
Identify the areas of your present that will get in your 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
56
way and do whatever you can to reduce them or elimi-
nate them. Find those things that are going to help you 
create growth and double down on them.
If you reframe your past, reclaim your future, and 
recalibrate your present you can live your ideal day. But 
be forewarned: The most revolutionary act you can ever 
take is to claim your ideal day and to move toward it 
with faith, confidence, and a deep sense of resolve. When 
you articulate your ideal day it’s essential that you share 
it with someone you trust and respect. When you share 
your ideal day and that you are pursuing it, it becomes 
real and tangible. It doesn’t mean every day will be ideal, 
but it does mean the number of ideal days you have will 
increase appreciably. 
The following chapters support all of the work you’ve 
done so far. In the next chapter specifically, you apply 
what you’ve learned in ways that are professionally 
rewarding as well as exciting in their ability to dramati-
cally increase the level of growth you want in revenue, 
performance, and the quality of your personal and pro-
fessional relationships. 

57
2
The Promises Principle
The Difference Between Promises, Commitments, and Vows
Four years ago, my wife Alyson found a great house in a 
quiet beach community one block off Puget Sound. She 
was convinced that the home, which had not been updated 
since it was built in 1957, would be a fabulous blank can-
vas from which we could create our northwest contempo-
rary oasis overlooking Puget Sound. I didn’t see it. I saw a 
house with a chopped-up floor plan, old carpet, no office, 
and a rooster next door that would drive me bonkers.
But Alyson took me on three tours and created a men-
tal picture that I started to see. She won me over when 
we walked into the downstairs area and she stood me in 
front of a fireplace. She turned me around to look out a 
6-foot by 10-foot window that faced the water. She said, 
“This is the world headquarters of Claris Consulting. 
This space will be your office. I promise you this will be 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
58
the space that inspires you and creates the mindset for 
you to do your best work.”
I believed her and signed the power of attorney for 
her to purchase the house while I was on a three-week 
business trip.
What Is a Promise?
A promise is an abiding commitment, an assurance to 
others that we will or will not do something. Alyson 
promised me the office of my dreams and she did every-
thing she could to make it happen, including delaying 
other improvements so that I could have it. By delaying 
the kitchen remodel, she communicated clearly that her 
promises were not simply words used to sucker me in to 
buying the house. No, she meant it, even if it required 
delaying improvements to the area of the house she 
dreamed of having.
There are five powerful lessons about promises I 
learned from Alyson.
1.	 Promises without a higher purpose or objec-
tive have little-to-no positive impact. 
2.	 Promises are voluntary and never forced.
3.	 Promises require saying no as much as say-
ing yes. 
4.	 Promises to people we care about carry tre-
mendous weight.
5.	 Promises are about credibility and trust.

59
The Promises Principle
The Purpose of Promises
Alyson clearly saw what I couldn’t see and knew that, 
although I couldn’t see right away what the house would 
look like, in time I’d catch up to her. She was steadfast 
in creating the vision we had for our house. She focused 
on having a home with water and mountain views, lots 
of natural light, clean and contemporary space, room for 
entertaining, and an office for me. Her decisions were 
geared to making our vision real. Her promise for my 
office had a powerful impact on me because I knew she 
wanted the same thing for me professionally. 
Promises are voluntary and not ever forced. Promises 
must be voluntary. When promises are made solely to 
placate someone or to get a foot in the door only to turn 
the tables and renegotiate the outcome, the promises 
come across as hollow and manipulative. Alyson volun-
tarily made promises about the schedule of our home 
remodel without coercion and in turn communicated 
volumes about what mattered most: having the home of 
our dreams in a way that worked for both of us.
Promises also require saying no. With our home 
we knew the budgeting advice we got was accurate. Get 
three bids, add them together, and that’s how much the 
remodel will cost. We knew we would have to say no to 
certain things. For example, the bathrooms would come 
last. From a leadership perspective, Alyson led the charge 
with our contractor and repeatedly had to say no to ideas 
for improvements. With a budget of one million dollars 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
60
we could have said yes to more ideas, but we didn’t have 
a budget of that size, so saying no became essential. The 
same holds true with making promises. If you say yes 
to a promise, what must you say no to in order to fulfill 
your promise? 
When we make promises to people we care about, 
they carry tremendous weight. Promises are not going 
to be made to a telemarketer who calls at 8 p.m. on a 
Wednesday evening. If a promise is made, it is made with 
the intent of jettisoning the call as soon as possible. A 
promise made to a child, a spouse, or a boss is a totally 
different situation. When we make promises to people 
who are important to us, the promise takes on a higher 
level of importance as well as a higher level of commit-
ment to accomplishing it. 
Credibility and trust are the components of prom-
ises. Without exception, kept promises do more for a 
leader’s credibility and trustworthiness with employees 
and customers than any leadership development ini-
tiative. Actually, the one cardinal rule to be the type of 
leader people are willing to follow is incredibly simple: 
Do what you say you will do. That’s what Alyson did in a 
high-stakes home remodel. When each budget estimate 
by our contractor was missed she did what she always 
said she would do and never wavered. In this critical 
environment where money was being hemorrhaged I 
could always trust her to know what to do.
Why should you care about the promises you make? 
You should care because your employees and customers 

61
The Promises Principle
have heard leaders make promises before and not ful-
fill them. They are jaded, disengaged, and distrusting of 
leaders to the point that they are simply tolerating most 
leaders. When leaders tell people what they want to hear 
and then do something else they create a credibility gap 
that leaves employees disbelieving the message simply 
because they disbelieve the messenger. 
The promises we make to ourselves can inspire trust-
worthiness; yet how easily are these promises broken? 
Sometimes it may seem that our work and home lives 
are weighed down by everything that appears to require 
our attention. Consequently, we struggle to keep our 
promises to others and ourselves. Because we have not 
planned to honor our promises, they have little chance 
of being fulfilled. In the Promise Principle, you’ll exam-
ine how kept promises enhance your leadership and fur-
ther your purpose.
Promise Evaluation
Consider the discrete types of promises you make in 
your work and home life. Promise types may include 
meeting deadlines, delivering work on budget, follow-
ing through on a commitment to a colleague, choos-
ing to act in ways that further your purpose, and so on. 
Make a list of eight to 12 promises you typically make. 
Once you have your list, rank how you uphold these 
promises on a 5-point scale (1 = easily broken to 5 = 
always honored). 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
62
Answer the following questions and then look at 
your list and rankings.
1.	 What types of promises do you follow 
through on?
2.	 In what situations is it more difficult to keep 
your promises? 
3.	 What are the relational outcomes of these 
choices? 
4.	 How do these promises relate to your purpose?
In order for you to fully live out your purpose, what 
two or three promises are necessary that you make to 
yourself? What are the important promises you want from 
yourself that are in alignment with your purpose?
In order for you to fully live out your purpose, what 
two or three promises are necessary that you make to 
your employees, customers, boss, board, and your family 
and friends? What are the important promises you want 
to make that are in alignment with your purpose and 
that foster increased credibility and trust? 
Before you move to the section on why the absence 
of promises creates apprehension, ambiguity, and 
uncertainty, stop and list your non-negotiable promises. 
These are the promises you will make to the people that 
matter most to you. If those people really matter, you 
will not keep your promises solely in your head. You’ll 
put a pen to paper and make your promises concrete 
and tangible. 

63
The Promises Principle
Why Apprehension, Ambiguity, and Uncertainty Flourish 
Without Promises
What is the root of apprehension, ambiguity, and uncer-
tainty? At the center of each word is fear. If I am appre-
hensive, I am afraid of the unknown. When ambiguity is 
present I am unsure of what might happen. With uncer-
tainty, I might be afraid about what I should do next. I 
don’t want to fail or lose something important, so I hold 
back.
In each case, smart, talented, and well-meaning 
employees stand on the sidelines rather than running on 
to the field of play yelling “put me in the game.” This is a 
recipe for underperformance.
Far too many of us live in fear when it comes to our 
business lives. For some of us, it’s financial fear. For oth-
ers, it’s emotional. No matter the source or type, fear has 
a debilitating effect on personal and professional growth 
over extended periods of time. Fear can be a catalyst for 
action, but inspired performance and accelerated progress 
can never be realized in the shadow of a fearful mindset.
Some people say that fear can be a positive element 
in our lives. That may be true when it comes to having 
a healthy dose of caution against overtly risky behavior, 
but in the business world, letting fear take control is par-
amount to self-sabotage. When we’re fearful, we play not 
to lose instead of playing to win. 
I was told recently that the statement “Do not be 
afraid” (or a similar admonition) appears 365 times in 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
64
the Bible. That’s once for every day of the year. Consider 
for a moment what would happen if you told yourself 
that no one was out to get you, and that you wouldn’t be 
pelted with tomatoes while locked in stockades. 
Instead, what if you promised yourself and your 
employees to direct all of your emotional and intellec-
tual horsepower into taking proactive approaches to 
challenges? What would happen to your performance if 
you promised to create powerful proactive solutions to 
problems at work and at home while shedding the anxi-
ety of a fearful mindset? I believe it would be a freeing 
and empowering promise to make.
Let’s be clear about one key point: In the business 
world, performance decreases as fear increases. If perfor-
mance is decreasing and your markets are maintaining 
or increasing, I guarantee you that some sort of fear is 
behind it. The fear might take the form of anxiety about 
a new job or responsibility. It could also be financial fear 
of budget cuts or lack of resources. Either way, this mind-
set contributes to a loss of progress in the organization 
and requires new promises to correct it.
The best way to fight fear is to identify what causes 
it. If you can determine the cause of fear, you can redi-
rect it and make it less frightening for you and your 
team. Throughout my extensive work with executives 
and entrepreneurs as a coach and mentor, I have discov-
ered seven types of fear that are most common. Take a 
moment to consider each one and identify the ones that 
are challenging to you.

65
The Promises Principle
1. Fear of Accountability
The fear of accountability is two-fold. For leaders, there 
is a fear that by holding someone accountable they might 
get upset or challenge your perspective. In one organiza-
tion I worked with, the senior executive was afraid of 
holding people accountable due to her behavior style. 
She was direct, to the point, and a bottom-line leader. 
Her direct reports were relationship-focused, harmony-
driven, and conflict-adverse. This leader was afraid that 
her way of leading would be offensive and her employees 
felt that her approach to seeking accountability would 
be abrasive and hurtful. In turn, the promise on the 
table was that clear expectations, increased accountabil-
ity regarding metrics, and best-of-class processes would 
be addressed only if it was comfortable. If anyone felt 
uncomfortable the conversation ended.
2. Fear of Making Mistakes
The fear of making mistakes can be real in many orga-
nizations. In one strategic planning session, I heard the 
senior vice president of operations wax poetically about 
risk-taking and improved performance, only to instill 
fear and trepidation by saying with stern conviction, 
“Of course, your risk-taking must be successful.” His 
only option was to succeed and failure was tantamount 
to treason. It’s no surprise the majority of employees 
chose to not risk the uncertainty of, well, risk-taking. The 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
66
unspoken but powerful promise from this executive was 
succeed or you’ll be gone.
3. Fear of Leaving a Job That Sucks the Energy Out of You 
The 50-year-old (and older) executives with whom I 
speak are afraid of leaving their jobs due to age discrimi-
nation. This fear is multiplied if you are female. Are some 
organizations biased toward younger employees? Yes. Is 
discrimination real? Yes. However, the realities can be 
overblown. This fear doesn’t actively consider the value 
created by an executive or the goodwill and brand devel-
oped through years of doing noteworthy work. 
What I’ve found in this particular situation is the 
root fear of not being confident in oneself to find the 
ideal day and life that brings us alive. Without a promise 
to ourselves about creating and cultivating our ideal day, 
we promise ourselves to remain in jobs and organiza-
tions that suck the energy out of us rather than help us 
come alive.
4. Fear of Not Being Seen As Smart and Successful
At its core, this fear is rooted in self-doubt. It is the quint-
essential imposter syndrome in which employees and 
leaders see themselves as “lucky to have a job” as opposed 
to “so talented that the company is fortunate to have 
them.” I worked with one leader who had five degrees 
from Ivy League schools, and whose IQ was higher than 

67
The Promises Principle
99 percent of not only the general population but also of 
his colleagues. In talking with him I realized that the pri-
mary reason he had five degrees was to convince himself 
he was smart and successful. This insecurity promised 
one thing to his colleagues: Whenever he was engaged in 
discussion about issues pertaining to work he would do 
everything imaginable to be seen as the smartest person 
in the room. His fear squelched innovation, collabora-
tion, and increased performance.
5. Fear of Upsetting Your Boss or Senior Leaders
The fear of upsetting your boss or senior leaders is most 
commonly associated with bringing bad news. This fear 
can be rooted in a person’s insecurity, or it can be rooted 
in a boss’s intolerance for bad news. Some bosses are 
afraid of bad news so they put on Kevlar body armor to 
repel all bad news. When employees are afraid of either 
experiencing the wrath of an unhappy boss or of wasting 
their time or energy, they promise themselves to avoid 
the situation and allow someone else to be the bearer of 
bad news. This strategy never works well.
6. Fear of Turning Away From Current Success to Have Even 
Greater Success 
There are teams and leaders who view success as mere 
luck. They think they were in the right place at the 
right time and their success cannot be replicated. This 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
68
perspective shows up whenever new ideas are presented 
but then dismissed with the proverbial “that’s not the 
way we’ve done things in the past.” Leaders can learn 
a lot from the past, but the real courageous act is to 
leave the confines of the known, predictable, and cer-
tain, and challenge ourselves to think and act differently. 
The promise of maintaining the status quo is misguided 
unless the status quo involves continual experimenta-
tion and innovation.
7. Fear of Investing in Oneself
Without question the fastest and most sustainable way to 
grow is to work with a coach or mentor. For seven years 
I’ve worked with a mentor by the name of Alan Weiss. He 
is the rock star of consulting and has written 64 books 
on solo consulting. Without reservation, my return on 
investment for working with Alan is tenfold. And yet, too 
many leaders are reticent to work with a coach or men-
tor because they are afraid to invest in themselves. This 
is foolhardy. The greatest return on investment a leader 
can make is to promise himself, as well as the employ-
ees, that personal and professional growth is imperative, 
and that he will be a role model for others by working 
with a coach or mentor. When leaders do so they send a 
clear message that growth is not an intellectual idea. It is 
a promise that is non-negotiable. 
Which fear most hinders your performance? Which 
fear most hinders employee performance? If none of 

69
The Promises Principle
these fears are issues, what fear do you wrestle with the 
most? This section seeks to reduce employees’ uncer-
tainty and apprehension with an assurance of what they 
can expect and rely on from their leaders. As a transfor-
mational leader, you have the opportunity to help your 
employees feel more secure in their work and, in turn, to 
do higher-quality and more valuable work. 
Take a few minutes to brainstorm a list of the ways or 
topics around which employees feel uncertainty, appre-
hension, or ambiguity at work. Then, brainstorm a list of 
three promises you can make to mitigate some of these 
fears. Your ideas are the jumping-off point for our next 
section, which discusses how promises influence peo-
ple’s behavior. 
Promises as a Tool to Influence Behavior
In this section you will look at the six ways a promise 
influences behavior and clarify how the promises you are 
making or will make are influencing your most important 
relationships. Promises influence people’s behavior in 
one of two ways: A promise kept builds trust, respect, and 
credibility. A promise broken does the opposite. Broken 
promises not only have an impact on the task and tech-
nical aspects of work, but they also have a much greater 
negative impact on the relational aspects of leadership. 
How would you react to a colleague breaking a prom-
ise she made to you? It would likely depend on the size of 
the promise made or its importance to you. What is the 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
70
relational impact on broken promises? If you lost sleep 
over your colleagues hindering you from delivering a 
project on time the impact would be substantial. How 
important is the frequency of broken promises with your 
colleague? A one-time event is viewed differently than 
a continual stream of broken promises. What advice do 
you give to others when a promise is broken? In order 
for promises to have a positive influence on other people 
there are three must-have aspects of a promise that have 
to be considered. 
1. Promises Must Create Alignment Around a Clear Future State
Promises communicate in clear and compelling lan-
guage the destination each party is headed. There are 
no general ideas or themes with a promise, but rather 
specifics. An issue might be to seek out and retain a new 
supplier. The process of doing so might take three weeks, 
but as long as there are promises made for having a new 
supplier option, you can have a clear line of sight for 
increasing production capacity, increasing on-time deliv-
eries, and sleeping better. The clear future state helps 
you reduce your anxiety, which increases your effective-
ness and your performance as the production manager.
Promises also create alignment. Cars with wheels out 
of alignment waste energy and burn through tires. When 
the wheels are aligned the inefficiency of the misalign-
ment is removed and the longevity of the tires increases 
appreciably. It’s the same with promises. The moment 

71
The Promises Principle
there is clarity as to what both parties want, the energy 
wasted with misaligned expectations, results, and alter-
natives is eliminated. 
2. Promises Must Clarify Results and Expectations
Embedded in each promise is also a clarification of results 
and expectations. For example, when a leader promises 
to accomplish a key result and the expectations sur-
rounding the result, they are also by default defining the 
results and expectations of others directly or indirectly 
impacted by the promise. Without question, in our do 
more, do it faster, and do it better and cheaper world of 
work, clarifying in crystal-clear terms the desired results 
and expectations leaves direct reports feeling increased 
confidence and a renewed sense of optimism. 
3. Promises Must Have Clear Communication
There is a key premise with promises. Whenever we com-
municate expectations and results via our promises, we 
must accept 100 percent responsibility for the impact our 
words have on the other person. Gone are the days when 
a leader can indemnify themselves with the “That’s not 
what I meant” excuse. Clear communication, especially 
around results and expectations, requires leaders to 
understand the communication preferences of the peo-
ple they are communicating with and communicate in 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
72
ways that work best for them, not in ways that work best 
for the leaders.
The accompanying premise is that people who have 
been promised something will only extend flexibil-
ity and understanding when the other person does not 
make excuses for not fulfilling their promise. This is 
essential for heightened credibility and trustworthiness, 
for example, what is described in the following response: 
“I blew this. I got distracted by a last-minute request by 
my boss. I’m not using that as an excuse, but rather pro-
viding some context as to what got in my way. If I do it by 
3 p.m. on Friday will that work?” 
There is one last piece about clear communication 
that is important. When trust and respect are in place, 
most people will assume positive intent and act accord-
ingly. A leader’s primary job is to exemplify trustworthi-
ness and respectfulness. When they do, their credibility 
increases. 
No doubt you have made promises to strategic priori-
ties you need to fulfill. You cannot be an effective leader 
without doing so. However, what is often missing are 
compelling and courageous promises about the impact 
your leadership will have on others. Building on what 
you articulated in the “What Are You Selling?” and “Your 
Ideal Day Is Waiting” sections of the Purpose Principle, 
what promises will you make to the people who matter 
most to you? 

73
The Promises Principle
There are five promises that transformational leaders 
make. They are:
1.	 Promises to yourself.
2.	 Promises to your employees.
3.	 Promises to your customers.
4.	 Promises to your boss and senior leaders.
5.	 Promises to your family and friends.
Before moving on to the section on the peril of prom-
ises made without a purpose, draft one to three promises 
for each of the five areas listed. Here are a few examples 
from my work as an advisor to use as a catalyst for your 
thinking.
Promises to yourself: I promise that regardless of 
the demands I’ll face at work, I will exercise Monday, 
Wednesday, and Friday at 6 a.m. for 60 minutes. I will 
also eat healthfully three times a week by myself and use 
that time to recharge, refocus, and renew my enthusiasm 
for my work. 
Promises to your employees: I promise that I will 
lead the charge with the team to focus equally on what 
we as a team are doing well and what we need to improve. 
This will not be rote or simply a to-do item on my list, 
but rather a promise to keep the team focused on the 
positive work they’re accomplishing. 
Promises to your customers: I promise as my pri-
mary goal to make your lives easier. I will ask for your 
feedback and your advice as to how we’re doing and I 
promise to take action on your advice. I will tell you 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
74
what I heard, what I can do differently, and when you 
can expect to see it. 
Promises to your boss and senior leaders: I prom-
ise to never bring you problems without solutions unless 
I’m at a loss for what to do. I also promise to respectfully 
and purposefully disagree with you in private and sup-
port you in public. 
Promises to your family and friends: I promise to 
have dinner with you twice a week at 6:30 p.m. and to 
have my phone off while we are eating dinner. You are 
important to me and, although my time is constrained, 
I promise to make the time we have together the highest 
quality possible. 
Each of the five areas needs to be addressed. Promises 
to yourself without promises to others is self-absorbed 
and communicates that you are the most important per-
son in the relationship. Promises to others without corre-
sponding promises to oneself leads to victimization and 
martyrdom. What promises will you make and to whom?
Priorities Without Purpose Are a Catalyst for Lower Performance
Before we dive into setting priorities, I want to commend 
you for doing the heavy lifting of clarifying your purpose 
and declaring your promises. When you work through 
the exercises of the Purpose Principle, you come to the 
Promises Principle with high hopes of having your pur-
pose become real. Make no mistake, this is a substantial 
piece of leadership development that while challenging, 

75
The Promises Principle
will provide you with 10 significant advantages. When 
viewed together these advantages become the catalyst for 
you accomplishing transformational work and creating a 
mindset of passion, innovation, and growth. 
1. Clarity
The number-one benefit to having a defined and compel-
ling purpose is that you know what’s important to you 
and why it’s important. This is not a small issue. Without 
question, the most successful leaders I’ve worked with 
have clarity around the compelling reason for doing 
what they do. They have found their one big idea and 
work tirelessly to accomplish it. This affords them a clear 
line of sight into where they are heading and the focus to 
make it a reality.
2. Control
With your purpose you’ll have greater control. Not over 
what happens to you, but over the choices you make in 
response to what happens as well as to the type of pro-
fessional life you want to experience. When leaders work 
through articulating what they love, what their talents 
are, and what value they create, they are undertaking 
the most significant aspect of leadership. With a com-
pelling purpose, you feel a heightened sense of control 
because your professional life is no longer determined 
by the desires and directives of senior leaders inside your 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
76
organization. You are in the driver’s seat of your profes-
sional life and no longer in the backseat hoping to arrive 
at a worthwhile destination. 
3. Consistency
In order to be consistent, leaders have to know what 
they want to do and when it’s important to do so. In 
the first sections of this book you have been given the 
opportunity to articulate what you believe is important 
to you and what you are not willing to leave unfinished. 
Inconsistency comes if—and this is a big if—you don’t 
believe fully in your purpose and any extenuating prom-
ises. Claiming your purpose places a flag in the ground 
that says, “Thus far and no farther.” You are jettisoning 
the days of missteps and false starts and are intentionally 
committing to do what you say you will do. You will lead 
more consistently with a clear articulation of what you 
believe in and what you stand for.
4. Commitment
There is a world of difference between commitment and 
compliance. Compliance is rooted in doing something if 
you want to and when you get around to doing it. When 
asked to finish a report a colleague might say, “Well, 
yes, we should do that. But as you know I’ve got vaca-
tion coming up and right after we return the kids are 
back in school, and I’m teaching a new class at church.” 

77
The Promises Principle
Commitment, on the other hand, sounds very different. 
It sounds like: “Yes, the report is important and I’ll have 
it to you by Friday next week at noon.” When you write 
your leadership purpose you are in many ways writing 
your declaration of leadership independence. It is some-
thing you, like the founding fathers of America, will act 
on decisively. Your purpose is a commitment to living a 
purposeful life as opposed to an accidental life.
5. Credibility
People pay attention to what you say and what you do. 
Any gap between what you say and what you do leads 
people to question your intentions, sincerity, and credi-
bility. Transformational leaders recognize that what they 
say matters and they strive to create clear promises about 
what can be expected of them—not solely for their own 
benefit, but for everyone involved. When they act consis-
tently, credibility increases, and leadership effectiveness 
rises as does organizational performance.
6. Confidence
It is counterintuitive, but your confidence as a leader 
increases appreciably not when you see the benefits of 
your purpose being realized, but when you believe in 
your purpose to the point at which you can say without 
hesitation, “This is what I want and I’m going to achieve 
it.” You’ve heard the often-repeated bromide, “I’ll believe 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
78
it when I see it.” Transformational leaders don’t think 
that way. They adopt the perspective of “I’ll see it when 
I believe it.” This is not blind naiveté on a leader’s part. 
Yes, they recognize that the sixth principle of transfor-
mational leadership, the Perseverance Principle, is essen-
tial for transformational results. But they also know with 
certainty that if their mindsets and the mindsets of those 
around them are hesitant and uncertain, the likelihood 
of accomplishing transformational results is consider-
ably lower. In turn, their confidence is not in the abso-
luteness of accomplishment, but in the absoluteness of 
having a compelling purpose as well as a replicable pro-
cess for achieving transformational results. 
7. Community 
A compelling leadership purpose attracts likeminded 
leaders, colleagues, and stakeholders. With all of the 
other advantages listed here, leaders who are leading on 
purpose share what is important to them and become 
a magnet for others who aspire to create the same type 
of experience for themselves as well as for others. Their 
behavior and beliefs call to other leaders who have 
similar hopes, dreams, and aspirations, and together 
they create a community rooted in shared aspirations. 
Communities of like-minded collaborators become a 
place of inspiration, aspiration, and accelerated growth 
for everyone involved.

79
The Promises Principle
8. Candor
For many leaders the level of candor they display after 
clarifying their purpose goes up appreciably. With a clear 
purpose comes the clarity, commitment, and confidence 
to speak the truth as to what the leader wants, how she 
will act to achieve it, and where she as a leader is hitting 
the mark and where it is being missed. Purpose becomes 
the catalyst for less hedging in conversations because 
when transformational leaders believe strongly in their 
purpose, they are compelled to say and do something 
daily to achieve it. 
9. Collaboration
In order for leaders to have a clear purpose they’ll have 
had to get clear about what they love doing and what 
talents and skills they have that they use in highly dif-
ferentiated ways. They know the value they provide and 
no longer feel a high need to prove themselves to oth-
ers. Knowing this allows the leaders to be more comfort-
able in their own leaderships and in turn invites people 
to share what they love and are good at to the situation 
or project. The level of interpersonal competition goes 
down and the level of innovation and growth increases. 
Without question, transformational leaders know that in 
many situations two heads are better than one. When you 
work through the Projects Principle and the Persuasion 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
80
Principle you learn how to choose which heads you want 
working on your projects. 
10. Courage
The word courage comes from the French word cœur, 
which means “heart.” The first question you were asked 
in the process of articulating your purpose was, “What 
do you love doing?”; in essence, what is at the heart of 
your work and what are you not willing to leave undone? 
Your answer is at the heart of your leadership. And yet, 
courage doesn’t mean that fear is banished and you’ll 
never have to be courageous. On the contrary, the most 
courageous act you’ll have on a daily basis is whether to 
live out your purpose or allow the disruptions and exi-
gencies of your work life to dictate your behavior. With 
a clear and compelling purpose, the reserves of cour-
age you’ll find in your leadership will amaze you. You’ll 
think bigger and set more aggressive goals and love the 
shift of your mindset on yourself as well as on others. 
You undoubtedly have experienced some of these advan-
tages and not others. The vast majority of the leaders I 
work with want these advantages. Who wouldn’t? And 
yet, what is clearly within their reach remains elusive for 
one reason and one reason only: They have not taken the 
time to think through what it is they love doing, what 

81
The Promises Principle
they can do in highly differentiated ways, and how they 
make people’s lives easier. 
The jumping-off point for achieving transforma-
tional results is the Purpose Principle, and setting priori-
ties for your leadership without a clear and compelling 
purpose is a recipe for maximum frustration and lower 
performance. Before turning the page and setting your 
priorities, do a gut check and ask yourself the following 
question: Is my purpose important enough that I’m will-
ing to make non-negotiable promises to my key stake-
holders as well as change my calendar with new and 
compelling priorities? If the answer is yes, you’ll love the 
next section. If your answer is no, review the Purpose 
Principle and find one idea that has grabbed hold of you 
and won’t let go. Isolating your one idea, dream, hope, 
or aspiration becomes one of the most exciting, liberat-
ing, and transformational events you will experience as 
a leader. 
When Everything Is a Priority, Nothing Is a Priority
What is a priority? The word priority comes from the 
Anglo-Norman French word priorie, which means “elder 
or superior of a religious order.” A priory is a small mon-
astery or nunnery governed by a prior or a prioress. In 
today’s world, a priority is something governed by a 
higher order. In this section I’ll make the case that your 
highest priorities are best derived from your purpose and 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
82
promises. Doing this purposefully as opposed to acci-
dentally is the purpose of this section. 
As someone who struggled with priority-setting, I 
can say firsthand that setting priorities without a clear 
idea of my purpose or the promises I made was a fool’s 
errand. I would set priorities based on the shiny object 
in front of me while being enamored with the newness 
of the idea and its inherent possibilities. I believed all of 
my priorities could or should be implemented immedi-
ately but lacked the ability to discern the relative impor-
tance each one held and in turn set meaningful and 
clear priorities. 
Unless, of course, it had to do with money. For a large 
part of my business life the most important priority I had 
was to make money, be successful, and progress in my 
career. That was my priority. And with that as a prior-
ity I placed at the head of the line business transactions 
that were driven by financial reward. Although financial 
reward is not a bad thing, I took it to an extreme. My 
mindset was rooted in a poverty mindset and led me to 
look for ways to advance my financial well-being as fast 
as possible. That meant my financial well-being was a 
priority over the well-being of others, my health, and my 
personal relationships. I’m not proud to say that, but I 
had a disordered attachment to money.
Your mindset too shapes your priorities. Imagine not 
eating for three days. We’ll agree that food will become 
a priority for you and exercise and cardiovascular endur-
ance become less of a priority. If you have been out of 

83
The Promises Principle
work for two years and have pulled your children out of 
college because of a lack of resources it goes without say-
ing that having a paycheck is a priority for you and that 
loving the job that you do would become a secondary 
priority.
The vast majority of my clients do not have locat-
ing their next meal or finding a paycheck as a priority. 
Their number-one priority is accomplishing their to-do 
list. They have become, as I once heard someone refer to 
our work lives, “A human doing as opposed to a human 
being.” They’ve become so engrossed in checking off 
items on their to-do list that they’ve become blind to 
asking if they have the right priorities on their list.
The good news is that increased effort isn’t the answer 
to better priority-setting. What is required is greater hind-
sight, clearer foresight, and a ruthless determination to 
say yes to taking one action every day that is aligned with 
your purpose and your promises. Most leaders are say-
ing yes to an ever-expanding list of priorities—­priorities 
they will likely never be able to accomplish because of a 
finite amount of time and resources. 
Yes, increased effort is essential in some circum-
stances, but what leaders need more is an increased 
amount of courage and confidence to have clear rules for 
what they will say yes to and what they will say no to. 
Without this courage and confidence leaders will contin-
ually feel as though they are falling behind. Here are two 
quick and easy processes for seeing your priority-setting 
in action. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
84
Greater Hindsight
To see clearly what priorities you’ve set, review your cal-
endar for the last four weeks and answer the following 
two questions: 
1.	 With clarity as to what my purpose is, can I say 
with confidence that if someone were to review 
my calendar they would know what’s impor-
tant to me and what I care about? If so, why? If 
not, what would they think my priorities were?
2.	 What promises have I valued or ignored based 
upon how and where I am spending my time?
Clearer Foresight
The following is a quick gut checklist of five questions 
that address your priority-setting skills.
1.	 How many priorities do you have? Do you 
have more than five priorities? If you do, you 
have too many—especially if they are key, 
mission-critical priorities.
2.	 What is a priority to you? What is the one 
thing you wake up thinking about and go 
to bed worrying about? Whatever is repeat-
edly on your mind is a priority for you. Is it 
achievement, a promotion, a raise, dealing 
with the union or dealing with management, 
or increasing revenue or profit? Whatever is 

85
The Promises Principle
always on your mind is being made a priority 
for you. 
3.	 Are your customers a priority? If your cus-
tomers were asked whether they thought they 
were a high priority for you and your orga-
nization, would you hear a resounding yes? 
Not a wishy-washy yes, but a resounding yes. 
If yes, why is that and what priorities must 
you keep having, stop having, or start having 
in order to maintain this success? If no, what 
needs to be a priority to correct this?
4.	 Are your employees a priority? If your 
employees were asked if they are a high prior-
ity of yours would you hear a resounding yes? 
Again, not a wishy-washy yes, but a resound-
ing yes. If yes, why is that and what priorities 
must you keep having, stop having, or start 
having in order to maintain this success? If 
no, what needs to be a priority to correct this?
5.	 Is there alignment between your purpose, 
promises, and priorities? What are your 
boss’s/organization’s highest priorities for 
you? Are they aligned with your leadership 
purpose and promises?
The reality is that leadership effectiveness is acceler-
ated when a ruthless choice is made about what priori-
ties to set. This book sets out to show you how to set 
priorities based on your purpose and promises and how 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
86
to live them out on a daily basis. There are two forces that 
have to be understood in the case of effective priority-
setting, however. 
The first is the opposing forces that hinder you from 
fulfilling your promises and purpose, and the second is 
the promoting forces. The promoting forces are the ones 
that help you fulfill your promises and purpose. We’ll 
look at both with one caveat: Setting clear priorities does 
not require you to overthink the process. The process 
you’re going to do next will do the heavy lifting of clari-
fying what’s helping and hindering effective priority-­
setting for you. Trust the process and seek to identify the 
one action you can take to either minimize an opposing 
force or accentuate a promoting force. Either one will be 
beneficial. 
Yes, I said just one action. When you make it a pri-
ority to take one action on a daily basis to grow as a 
leader, you’ll accelerate your learning and identify what 
works and what doesn’t and then take another follow-
up action. You’ll rinse and repeat and by doing so you’ll 
grow as a leader. 
Force-Field Analysis
A force-field analysis is a commonly used and helpful 
tool used in many organizations. Specifically, they help 
leaders and teams identify the forces that support and 
hinder their ability to complete a project or achieve an 
objective. 

87
The Promises Principle
Opposing Barriers 
What are the opposing barriers to fulfilling your prom-
ises? These can be people, processes, or available 
resources. Brainstorm the longest list possible. For you 
as a leader, a force-field analysis can be helpful in iden-
tifying the factors that hinder you from achieving your 
purpose. Some examples could be spending too much 
time in unproductive meetings or serving on too many 
committees outside of work. 
Promoting Forces 
What are the promoting forces that can ensure your 
promises and purpose are lived out successfully? These 
too can be people, processes, or available resources. An 
example could be a passion for customer experiences or 
helping employees flourish. A force-field analysis will 
help you answer the following questions:
1.	 What is the ultimate promise, goal, or objec-
tive I want to achieve?
2.	 What are all of the opposing or promoting 
forces of my promise?
3.	 What is the priority ranking I’d give to each 
of the forces? 
4.	 What forces are the most important and need 
addressing immediately?
5.	 What are my most important actions to take? 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
88
6.	 When will I schedule these actions for 
implementation?
7.	 Who will I ask to be my accountability part-
ner and when will I meet with them to dis-
cuss my responses with them? 
Priority-Setting in Real Time
There’s an old adage: When you fail to plan, you plan to 
fail. In the work you’ve done here you’ve identified where 
your priorities are aligned and misaligned with your 
purpose. That begs the question: What do you do now? 
Without overly simplifying priority-setting and mini-
mizing the urgent matters you’ll face every day, the most 
important next step you can take is to choose where you 
will invest time and energy to fulfill your purpose. Priorities 
get your time and attention, so knowing where you want to 
invest your time and energy is important, especially since 
in the next principle we’ll address doing work and projects 
that are transformational for you and your organization. 
Have you articulated your promises? Can you see a 
direct linkage between your promises and your purpose? 
Are there one or two promises that, if you were to more 
fully live it/them out, it would have a positive impact on 
the people who matter most to you? Is there a promise 
that, if you made it and it became a priority for you, you 
would experience a greater sense of satisfaction and well-
being? What one step will you take to make it become 
real today? That’s the place you start. 

89
3
The Projects Principle
Projects As a Leadership Development Exercise
Unfortunately, in many organizations the word project 
creates a negative response. Too many projects are cum-
bersome and lumbering. They’re populated with people 
who view the project as a time suck and who lack cre-
ativity and enthusiasm for doing meaningful work. Also, 
because they feel over scheduled, overworked, and over-
whelmed, they want to check off the project team meet-
ing on their to-do list and go back to more important 
work. What is perceived is the belief that projects are a 
waste of time as opposed to a vehicle for creating high-
value, meaningful, fun, and transformational work. 
There are two ways we can think about the word 
projects: The first way is to think of the word as a noun 
and in a project management–type of way. Using the 
word this way pertains to planning and designing work 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
90
so a positive result can be achieved. It refers to a research 
project, for example. Leaders tend to like projects in this 
sense as it implies that meaningful work is being pur-
sued, and with the right project management skills, suc-
cess can be achieved. 
The second way to think about the word project is as 
a verb. Here the word is rooted in extending outward, 
beyond something else, as in a movie being projected 
onto a 50-foot-wide screen. Projects in this sense are 
synonymous with magnifying and extending beyond an 
originating source. 
The third principle in transformational leadership is 
more concerned with how you as a leader project your 
purpose, promises, and priorities into the conversations, 
meetings, emails, and presentations that comprise your 
everyday life. It is an invitation to design and implement 
a leadership development project that rapidly, ruthlessly, 
and relentlessly projects who you are as a leader into the 
world of work. 
The metaphor I find helpful to position your leader-
ship project is that of a light bulb. Think about two light 
bulbs. The first is a 100-watt bulb used in any room of 
your house. Most people think of the bulb in terms of 
wattage, but what is equally, if not more important is the 
brightness of the bulb, or its lumens. The 100-watt bulb 
you have in close proximity to where you are sitting has, 
on average, 1,600 lumens.
Compare that to a drive-in movie theater light bulb. 
The light bulb used to project a movie onto a 50-foot-wide 

91
The Projects Principle
screen from 150 feet away requires a bulb with between 
33,000 and 40,000 lumens. The greater the lumens the 
farther the image can be projected. 
The same holds true for your leadership project. The 
more lumens, or love and passion for your project, the 
farther you can project it to a broader audience. But as 
with either a light bulb at home or a drive-in movie the-
ater, preparations must be made before the light bulb can 
be turned on. In this section you will clear the decks of 
any outdated project-related thinking and replace it with 
the thinking necessary to be successful. Implementing 
the following strategies allows you to be successful faster 
and with greater satisfaction. For your leadership proj-
ect to be transformational there are five strategies you’ll 
want to embrace. 
Strategy #1: Act Smaller 
The number-one problem people run into when it comes 
to doing transformational work is that they get caught 
up in the urgencies of the day and lose sight of the one 
small thing they can do today to achieve their bigger 
tomorrow. I’m not suggesting you think small in relation 
to what you want to accomplish or what you’re capable 
of. What I am suggesting is that you need smaller daily 
actions that, when repeated over and over again, result 
in the accomplishment of your transformational project. 
As a former triathlete, I learned to think of my year-
long training programs in four-week and quarterly time 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
92
frames. For a half-Ironman distance triathlon (a 1.2-mile 
swim, a 56-mile bike ride, and a 13.1-mile run) I held 
the picture of a completed triathlon in a particular time 
and placement loosely in my mind’s eye, but held tightly 
to the four weeks of training in front of me. The process 
is called periodization. The process involves three weeks 
of building the intensity and duration of your training 
followed by one week of recovery time. This process is 
proven to help you go longer and faster, with less injury. 
Transformational leadership projects are the same. 
For you to be successful, hold loosely to the vision of 
transforming a particular area of your business, but hold 
tightly to the small next steps required to be successful 
throughout the next four weeks and the next quarter. This 
process allows you to have multiple wins or successes, as 
well as create a higher sense of urgency and focus. 
Strategy #2: Master Your Mindset
My personal trainer once told me that how I look physi-
cally has more to do with what I put in my mouth than it 
does with my exercise routine. He reminded me that the 
time I spend doing cardio and weight training is fruitless 
if I eat chocolate cake, potato chips, and pizza. He smiled 
and said, “It’s a losing strategy to expect six-pack abs if 
you eat that way.” I did not like hearing that bad news.
Transformational leaders choose carefully the 
thoughts they allow to permeate their thinking and 
master the internal dialogue they have with themselves. 

93
The Projects Principle
They jettison negative “I can’t do this” types of narra-
tives, and replace them with “I’m smart and will learn 
how to do this” types of thinking. This is not a Pollyanna 
perspective, nor is it looking at the world through rose-
colored glasses. It is a highly pragmatic and practical 
process for supplying your project with the nutrition-
ally dense thinking that allows you to be successful. If 
you would like to learn 27 strategies for doing this more 
fully, you can download my complimentary “Mastering 
Your Mindset” special report at www.clarisconsulting.net.
Strategy #3: Cultivate Ruthless Focus
When your leadership project is compelling to you it’s 
easy to focus on it, especially when all is well at work 
and home. But when the yogurt hits the fan it’s far more 
difficult. That’s when a ruthless focus on your project 
is required. The demands of your day will do all they 
can to take you off course, so you must have a clear and 
compelling reason for completing your leadership proj-
ect. You will learn more strategies in the Perseverance 
Principle, but even before designing your leadership proj-
ect it’s important to know your project will get derailed 
and you’ll find people who will want you to set priorities 
that are important to them and less important to your 
projects. That’s when a ruthless, make-no-excuses focus 
is essential. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
94
Strategy #4: Create White Space
We are a hyper-connected culture. We are connected to 
our bosses, our employees, and our colleagues through 
our smartphones and email. A Gallup panel survey con-
ducted in April and May of 2015 showed that 81 percent 
of adults have a smartphone within reach during their 
waking hours, and 80 percent of those who have the 
phone in close proximity check their phone “a few times 
per hour.” This leaves you more reactive than proactive. 
The white space I’m suggesting is a 15-minute block 
of time once before you start your day and once before 
you end your day. This is a time where you unplug, dis-
connect, and take an inventory of what’s working and 
what’s not working, with regard to your leadership, your 
team, and your results. For example, the questions my 
clients might ask at the end of the day are: 
1.	 What success or successes am I most grateful 
for today? 
2.	 What specifically did I do that helped me 
be successful, and what can I do to leverage 
this success for even greater successes and 
satisfaction? 
3.	 Where did I come up short today? 
4.	 What specifically did I do that resulted in me 
not being successful, and what patterns or 
themes am I seeing that need my attention?
5.	 What will I do differently tomorrow?

95
The Projects Principle
6.	 What help, if any, will I need tomorrow to be 
successful? 
Strategy #5: Hire a Coach
We cannot tell ourselves the unvarnished truth nor can 
we grow as fast and with heightened consistency with-
out a coach. Leadership is not a solo activity and lead-
ers must have followers in order to be effective. Leaders 
also need someone they trust and respect to tell them the 
truth and to provide an outsider’s perspective. In turn, 
coaches and mentors can be catalysts for accelerated 
performance. Nowadays, athletes have coaches, musi-
cians have coaches or teachers, and CEOs have coaches. 
Coaches are truth-tellers who say what we need to hear 
in ways we can hear it. Without an outsider’s perspective 
we will hold on to biased perspectives.
Know this before you head into the next section: 
These five strategies, when coupled with a project you’d 
love to accomplish, ensure your success. 
Focusing on Inputs Is a Career-Limiting Move
The first and most important step in developing a trans-
formational leadership project is forgetting your meth-
odology and your prior experiences with projects. When 
you forget methodology, what you’ll end up with at the 
end of this chapter is not the same old project. This may 
not be easy for you, as we are indoctrinated to believe 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
96
that what we do is vitally important, and doing it well 
leads us to success. However, that is not true.
For 10 years I worked as a financial advisor to high-
net-worth software executives. For the first two years 
after entering the business I was predominantly focused 
on the methodology required to manage money success-
fully. That’s not a bad idea when it comes to managing 
someone’s money, but my focus came from spending 
time with academic and theoretical brainiac invest-
ment advisors who were partnering with the compliance 
department to ensure no one got sued, especially the 
firm I worked for.
What I believed and projected to my clients was that 
my method of managing a portfolio was so compelling 
that no one could resist the logic and would, if they were 
smart, hire me as their advisor. I was so enamored with my 
methodology that I neglected to become enamored with 
what really mattered to the client: helping them achieve 
their most important financial objectives. Quite frankly, 
I was more interested in the transactional aspects of port-
folio construction than I was in the transformational 
aspects of accomplishing a client’s hopes and dreams.
After leading with methodology and being mar-
ginally successful, I learned a value-based conversation 
that shoved methodology to the back burner and placed 
focusing on client value front and center. It was a simple 
conversation I had with clients that started with “What’s 
important about money to you?” What I learned by ask-
ing value-based questions was astounding.

97
The Projects Principle
In my first conversation with a couple (the husband 
was a physician who earned more than seven figures per 
year), I heard important items mentioned from the hus-
band, such as return on investment, reducing their tax 
liability, investing in down markets, and choosing the 
best investment vehicles. His wife gave a completely dif-
ferent answer. She gave a one-word answer that projected 
her greatest priority: security. For 10 minutes she told me 
how insecure she felt because they had not executed a 
will, there was no life insurance policy that named her 
as the beneficiary, and her husband’s ex-wife was still on 
the title for their home after eight years. 
With tears streaming down her face she said, “If any-
thing happens to him I’ll be a bag lady.” The husband 
said that was ridiculous, but for her the reality was star-
ing her in the face and had been for eight years. Without 
planning and an outsider’s help they would repeat what 
they had done for the last eight years. What she wanted 
more than anything was a financial lifeline that would 
eliminate the uncertainty, apprehension, and angst asso-
ciated with their management of money. 
I would never have learned what was really impor-
tant unless I jettisoned my focus on what I did (method-
ology) and instead focused on the highest of priorities: 
the results that the client wanted. 
Let’s cut to the chase: No one cares about modern 
portfolio theory and portfolio optimization other than 
industry professionals. What people care about is what 
modern portfolio theory and portfolio optimization 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
98
gives them. They are simply tools or a means to the end 
of using financial resources in ways that make people 
feel secure, happy, and confident that their financial lives 
are in order. Can modern portfolio theory and portfolio 
optimization help people achieve their goals? Of course. 
Is every financial advisor using both as tools to make cli-
ents successful financially? Yes, every single one. 
But what transformational leaders know is that what 
compels someone to say yes to their ideas is not the tools 
used. Have you ever asked a dentist what type of drill 
he will use to complete a filling? Have you ever asked 
a mechanic what tools he will use to repair your car? 
Can you imagine hiring a remodeling contractor based 
on what tools they use? I’ll bet you nine times out of 10 
your decision is based on the level of trust and respect 
you have for the contractor and whether you believe they 
have the ability to produce the result you want. In my 
case, when someone felt I cared less about my method-
ology and what was interesting or important to me, and 
instead my primary goal was to help them live the most 
rewarding and enriching financial life, my practice dou-
bled in revenue in 24 months. 
What You Should Focus On
The case I’m making is simple: If you are a financial 
advisor, accountant, attorney, engineer, IT professional, 
in human resources, or in any technically trained pro-
fession, you need to fall out of love with what you do 

99
The Projects Principle
and fall in love with making your clients’, customers’, 
and employees’ lives better for having worked with 
you. Falling in love with making other’s lives easier 
and more rewarding is then projected onto the men-
tal screen held in between the ears of your customers 
and it says, “This person can improve the quality of my 
life.” For that message to be received the nature and 
tone of your conversations needs to change from how 
you do what you do to what is important to them. To 
get to the real motivation people have for saying yes to 
you and your ideas, the following types of questions 
are essential. 
Results
1.	 What is the most important goal or objective 
you want to accomplish?
2.	 What is important to you about accomplish-
ing that?
3.	 How would life be better if you accomplished 
this objective?
4.	 If you could set priorities for what must be 
accomplished throughout the course of the 
next three to 12 months, what must happen 
for you to feel successful and satisfied?
5.	 What has been your experience in working 
toward this goal previously? What worked for 
you, what didn’t, and what must happen for 
you to know you are successful?

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
100
Metrics
1.	 What will you want to see in order to know 
you are making progress toward your goal? 
2.	 What is acceptable achievement, and what is 
ideal achievement?
3.	 Who would you like involved in measuring 
progress? 
4.	 How specifically will you measure progress?
Value
1.	 What’s 
important 
about 
this 
to 
you 
personally?
2.	 What would be the difference if you were 
supremely successful?
3.	 What would happen if you were completely 
unsuccessful? What would that mean to you?
4.	 What is not having this goal accomplished 
costing you now personally, professionally, 
financially, and emotionally?
Notice that there is nothing in the conversation 
regarding how I would go about helping someone accom-
plish the result they want. The only thing I’m interested 
in is learning as much as I can about what’s important 
to the other person. I want to know their hopes, fears, 
aspirations, and desires. When I know what’s important I 
learn what priorities should be adopted and the best way 
to accomplish them. 

101
The Projects Principle
The previous questions serve two purposes: First, 
they help you learn what’s important to other people so 
you can help them. Second, they guide you in thinking 
through a transformational leadership project for your-
self. Your leadership development project is clarified when 
you start with the question “What’s the most important 
goal or objective I want to accomplish as a leader?” The 
results to each of the questions point you to a leadership 
project that integrates everything you’ve learned thus far. 
Your job after answering these questions is to ensure your 
project is aligned with your purpose, has clear promises, 
and stipulates non-negotiable priorities to be successful. 
If your methodology is front and center, a client’s 
hopes, dreams, and aspirations will take a back seat. If 
your methodology is front and center, your leadership 
will be transactional and not transformational. Do trans-
formational leaders have a process and methodology for 
doing exemplary work? Absolutely.
The questions you’ll want answers to after having 
read this section are:
•	
“What am I projecting as a leader?” 
•	
“Am I leading a purpose-centric life or an 
accidental life?”
•	
“Am I making people’s lives easier or more 
difficult?”
Once you fall in love with your clients’ or employees’ 
hopes, dreams, and aspirations, you’ll learn how to cre-
ate a flourishing bottom line.

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
102
A Flourishing Bottom Line Requires Flourishing Employees 
and Customers 
Stop and think about the word flourishing for a moment. 
The definition of the word is: “to grow well or luxuri-
antly, to thrive, to do or fare well, to prosper, to be in a 
period of highest productivity, excellence, or influence, 
to make bold, sweeping movements.”
Are you faring well, prospering, highly productive, 
excelling, and living boldly? Are your employees faring 
well, prospering, being more productive, excelling, and 
living boldly? Are your customers faring well, prosper-
ing, being more productive, excelling, and living boldly 
after having worked with you? Would your employees 
give similar answers to yours? Would your customers 
answer in similar ways? 
My experiences with my most successful clients is 
that their personal levels of prosperity, excellence, bold-
ness, and sweeping movements are passed along to 
employees without any increases. When leaders aren’t 
flourishing there are no employees flourishing. And we 
know where that leads with customers.
When employees are simply surviving, and are 
unproductive and committed to the status quo rather 
than excellence, they will be reticent if not resentful to 
the idea of customer flourishing. When leaders are not 
flourishing they cannot become exemplars and catalysts 
for those around them to flourish. 

103
The Projects Principle
There is a very simple prism through which transfor-
mational leaders view their role and responsibility as lead-
ers. They see their job through what I call The Flourishing 
Performance Formula, which has three key parts: 
1.	 A leader’s job is to ensure the design, cre-
ation, and implementation of flourishing 
customer experiences. You’ll know you’ve 
accomplished this when customers volun-
tarily and repeatedly use your products and 
services even in the face of price increases. 
You’ll know it when you see customers refer 
new customers to you. You’ll hear things 
such as, “The CEO of Northwest Design told 
me I had to call you.” These will not be one-
off comments. Comments like these happen 
repeatedly when customers are flourishing. 
You’ll also see customers not only remain 
open and receptive to your ideas and new 
products, but they’ll call and ask you for your 
advice before taking action. 
2.	 A leader’s job is to ensure the design, cre-
ation, and implementation of flourishing 
employee experiences that achieve key #1. 
You’ll know you’ve accomplished this when 
employees willingly and enthusiastically dis-
cuss and brainstorm ways to create excellent 
customer value and experiences. To that end 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
104
you’ll see continual experimentation, learn-
ing, and growth along with heightened levels 
of accountability for doing so. There is con-
tinual praise and celebration for a job well 
done by all teams and team members as well 
as an overarching commitment to making 
one customer’s and one employee’s life easier 
and more rewarding daily. 
3.	 A leader’s job is to ensure they personally 
flourish in order to create key #1 and key 
#2. The apple doesn’t fall far from the tree. 
If you as a leader desire to lead an organi-
zational transformation you cannot do so 
without an individual leadership transfor-
mation taking place with all leaders. If you 
want greater accountability are you the exem-
plar and avatar for accepting accountability? 
If you know that letting go of past successes is 
essential for the accomplishment of new suc-
cesses, do people point to you as the epitome 
of not resting on your laurels? Are you in a 
continual state of learning, growth, excelling, 
high productivity, prosperity (not financially 
per se), and living a bold and flourishing life? 
If you are not, it is disingenuous for you to 
ask others to do so. 
The simplicity of this formula can come across as 
overly basic for sophisticated, hard-charging MBA types 

105
The Projects Principle
and it can be easily dismissed. But in leadership, espe-
cially with respect to the idea of customer and employee 
flourishing, leaders who minimize the idea of human 
flourishing do so at their peril.
Before you read the next paragraph, rate yourself on 
a 1 to 5 scale, with 5 being the highest manifestation of 
flourishing and 1 being the lowest, regarding the three 
questions. If you’re a 3 on any question, what is the like-
lihood you can create a rating higher than that for your 
employees and customers? Very low. 
There are two key points this chapter will make. The 
first is that a focus on customer and employee flourish-
ing will not only increase your performance, but will dra-
matically increase your level of personal satisfaction and 
enjoyment with work. Secondly, when a leader wants to 
transform her or his organization, a personal leadership 
transformation is required first. Rest assured, my experi-
ence with successful leaders is that a leader’s purpose, 
promises, and priorities can be game-changers that lead 
to her or him flourishing. When you integrate all of the 
work you’ve done so far with the idea of flourishing 
you’ll accomplish results that are described as “transfor-
mational” by the people who matter most to you.
Why Is Flourishing in Short Supply?
Flourishing is in short supply quite simply because 
of lowered standards. Customers have become accus-
tomed to airlines that regularly delay flights and dismiss 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
106
passenger frustration; they’ve come to expect banks and 
other financial institutions to be more concerned with 
the bank’s financial well-being than the customers. 
(The fraudulent account debacle at Wells Fargo in 2016 
is an example.) Also, the national political narrative 
has been degraded to unimaginable levels. Every presi-
dential election since the founding of our republic has 
had contentious and divisive elections. In 1800, when 
Thomas Jefferson and John Adams faced off against one 
another (one was the sitting president and the other vice 
president), the election got so nasty that after the elec-
tion Congress passed the 12th Amendment, which dis-
allowed the nominee with the second-most number of 
votes to be elected vice president. Politics has and will 
likely retain a common narrative: Each candidate is a 
barrier to America flourishing, each is unethical and/or 
immoral, each is inept as a leader and, if elected, America 
will be flushed down the toilet.
The negative experience associated with lower stan-
dards has become so prevalent that many customers are 
simply waiting to be disappointed and are looking for 
the slightest interruption to an expectation as proof that 
organizations don’t care about them. Customers have 
become jaded and distrusting, which means organiza-
tions have to create new experiences that counteract this 
prevailing mindset. But employees oftentimes feel the 
same way and a victimization mindset has taken root 
in many corners of American society. Leaders are facing 
headwinds of unprecedented proportions that start in 

107
The Projects Principle
between the ears and behind the eyes of employees as 
well as customers. 
Flourishing is a mindset issue. The subtitle of this 
book is Create a Mindset of Passion, Innovation, and Growth. 
The operative word is mindset. I’ve been studying mind-
set for more than 20 years and have found that mind-
set trumps skill set and is the key differentiator for my 
most successful clients. It will sound counterintuitive to 
the denizens of servant leadership, but I believe a lead-
er’s first job is to flourish personally and professionally 
in order to be an exemplar and role model to others. I 
don’t mean this as an invitation to be self-centered, nar-
cissistic, greedy, and an egocentric leader. It is instead 
recognition that leaders who flourish with the intent of 
enabling others to flourish are a magnet for transforma-
tional results. 
Flourishing Recommendations
Flourishing requires you to embrace three mindsets: 
the flourishing customer, the flourishing employee, and 
flourishing leadership. 
1. Embrace the Flourishing Customer Mindset
Leaders who create transformational results are clear 
about the mindset they want their customer to have after 
doing business with them. They have thought about and 
articulated clearly what each customer will feel, think, 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
108
know, believe, and do. They then turn these desired 
experiences into designed experiences. This is similar to 
what Walt Disney did while opening his first theme park. 
He and his team thought through each aspect of a guest 
experience and designed delight into every step. There 
wasn’t a building, ride, or guest experience that wasn’t 
choreographed. Transformational leaders do the same.
How do customers feel after having completed an 
interaction or transaction with your team or organiza-
tion? Do they feel empowered, smart, savvy, part of the 
in crowd, hip, or effective? Have you made their lives 
easier? Name the three most important experiences you 
want a customer to have with and through you or your 
company. Then go and ask three of your best clients for 
three words that best describe their experience with 
you. Is it the same, close, or nowhere close to what you 
desired? What you will learn in this one small section 
is essential to a flourishing business, so take your time 
to answer the questions from your perspective and then 
talk with a client. 
Embrace the Flourishing Employee Mindset
You’ve heard the admonition that never a happy cus-
tomer has been created with an unhappy employee. 
There is a myriad of reasons why you may have unhappy 
employees, but it boils down to two primary reasons: 
You either inherited them or you created them. In both 

109
The Projects Principle
cases, leaders are required to do something to reverse the 
situation. 
On a flight across the country I overheard two flight 
attendants loudly discussing their new contract from the 
galley. Being only two rows removed from their conver-
sation the vitriol and negativity was palpable, and the 
five-and-a-half hours being exposed to the surly flight 
attendants was such that when possible I fly another 
airline. 
What mindset do you want your employees to hold 
about your customer and you as a leader? Do you want 
employees to feel that the customer experience has to be 
one of flourishing, otherwise you’re failing? Do you want 
employees to see you as trustworthy, persistent, hon-
est, inspiring, visionary or strategic? What do you want 
employees to know you stand for? And based on these 
ideals, what do you want them to do? When you think 
about the customer experience and the mindset needed 
by employees to create it, what needs to be in place now 
that currently is not in place? 
Leaders get clear about what kind of employee 
mindset is required in order to create the desired cus-
tomer mindset. By that I mean leaders get very specific 
about the behaviors, attitudes, and thought processes an 
employee will cultivate in order to create the customer 
experience. Without this level of clarity employees are 
driving in the fog and likely to careen off the road and 
take the customer out with them. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
110
Embrace the Flourishing Leadership Mindset
It is a fool’s errand to think for a moment that the cus-
tomer and employee mindset will come alive by a leader 
who, in their heart of hearts, is dead to the idea of flourish-
ing experiences for employees and customers. Consider 
the word inspiration, for example. The word comes from 
the Latin root inspire, which means “to breathe life into 
something.” To breathe life into something, the life has 
to first be inside you. In overly simplistic terms, you can’t 
give CPR if you are dead. 
If you are convinced that flourishing is the ideal for 
your customers and your employees, the next section on 
leadership development will provide you with the frame-
work for seeing your leadership project as a laboratory 
for flourishing. 
It’s Not What You Know, It’s What You Can Teach
Far too often leaders feel overwhelmed by the everyday 
demands of their jobs and they in turn disengage from 
the ideal of employees flourishing and doing their best 
work. They love the idea of employee flourishing and of 
a flourishing bottom line, but are not actively engaged in 
a leadership project that allows it to happen.
Why is that? Most leaders I meet in organizations 
come to work and want to do good work and they want to 
make a difference, but they allow themselves to get over-
whelmed by their to-do list, become highly transactional, 

111
The Projects Principle
and lose sight of what drives employee enthusiasm for 
doing their best work. They allow the naysayers and neg-
ative nellies to convert their thinking from possibility-
based thinking to probability-type thinking. 
The truth about leadership is that strong leaders 
become transformational leaders; leaders who want to 
do their best work, and who want others to do their 
best work, surround themselves with transformational 
employees. Transformational leaders are not intimidated 
by smart, talented, and driven employees. On the con-
trary, they are emboldened and relentless about sur-
rounding themselves with the brightest and best.
Transformational leaders fully recognize that trans-
formational employees need and seek opportunities to 
learn, grow, and expand their skill set as well as their 
mindset. They are never content to simply maintain the 
status quo. When their rhythm of work becomes too 
repetitive and the results become predictable, transfor-
mational employees will create new opportunities where 
they are or will leave and seek them elsewhere.
Weak leaders, on the other hand, surround them-
selves with weak employees. Weak leaders feel as though 
they must keep employees from surpassing them and are 
afraid of having employees show them up. They in turn 
surround themselves with people who are content where 
they are and are less interested in learning, growth, and 
innovation.
Let me be clear: Your leadership project will help you 
implement what you have learned so you can be a strong 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
112
and transformational leader. Your project is the primary 
tool you use for internalizing and personifying all that 
you have learned while illuminating the path for other 
employees to follow.
It is worth repeating: With a compelling and virtuous 
purpose, clear promises, and strategic priorities that sup-
port you and your employees doing their best work, your 
leadership project will help you not only accomplish 
your business results, but also make a positive difference 
in the lives of the employees. This in turn makes a posi-
tive difference in the lives of your customers. By helping 
your employees live a more rewarding and enriching life, 
your project will be transformed from a boring, mind-
numbing, and draining type of project into the projec-
tion of something valuable and important.
There were two strong and transformational leaders 
that transformed my thinking at an early age and who 
set the stage for allowing me to do my best work. The first 
was my junior high school track coach, David Litton. In 
one gym class he saw me beat the running-back of the 
football team in three, 40-yard dashes. Although the 
football coach felt threatened that some skinny kid with 
no talent or interest in football would embarrass his star 
player, Coach Litton saw something different. He saw in 
me the raw talent for running fast and painted a picture 
for me of having the same type of success as the foot-
ball players, but in a sport that played to my strengths. 
When I said yes to joining the track team, Coach Litton 
coached me physically and psychologically to be a star 

113
The Projects Principle
athlete in my own light. He invested time in helping me 
to be the best version of me I could be.
Billie James, my high school guidance counselor, rec-
ognized the difficulty I was having with school, friends, 
and family. One morning, she woke up thinking about 
me and what she could do to help me adjust to the chal-
lenges. At 3 a.m. she wrote me a five-page letter telling 
me about all the strength and goodness she saw in me. 
She entitled the letter “Prizing Hugh.” Billie believed in 
me and saw talents and skills I couldn’t see. She went 
above and beyond what I thought was the traditional 
boundary of high school counselor and left an indelible 
mark on my personal and educational life.
Both David and Billie infused into my thinking a 
much-needed confidence, hope, and optimism. Thirty-
five years later the seeds planted by David and Billie have 
deep roots. From them I learned that caring for another 
person is the first step in changing his or her thinking. If 
I didn’t feel that David or Billie cared for me I would not 
have been receptive to their ideas of what they thought 
might be possible for me.
In our busy and fractured lives, we have the same 
choice as Billie and David: to shed light into those areas 
that remain darkened to new possibilities, to plant seeds 
of hope where there is despair, and grow optimism where 
there is uncertainty and fear. If we do these things, there 
is a corresponding increase in a person’s well-being and 
willingness to exert themselves to achieve a new and 
bigger potential. The moment the seeds of optimism 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
114
and hope are planted in the world of work, the poten-
tial for increased productivity and profitability increases 
proportionately. 
How can you do the same? I’ll use the word light as 
a pneumonic for how Billie and David positively influ-
enced me and how you too can positively influence oth-
ers. Light stands for:
Listening. Billie and David listened to understand 
and not simply to respond. They suspended any judg-
ment of what I said and were fully present to my fears, 
hopes, complaints, and concerns. Every young adult 
wants to know that they have been listened to and under-
stood. Sure, our parents listen to us and want the best for 
us, but all too often in their hope of making us strong 
young adults they listen to respond as opposed to listen 
to understand. With Billie and David I left most conver-
sations feeling valued, important, and heard.
Integrity. David and Billie aligned their values with 
their behavior. John Wooden, the famed UCLA basket-
ball coach, once said, “Sports doesn’t build character—it 
reveals it.” This quote was later changed to a leadership 
context and read, “Adversity doesn’t build character—it 
reveals it.” When I think back to how Billie and David 
acted toward me I can unquestioningly see alignment 
between what they said they believed and what they 
did; there was alignment and I saw them as credible and 
trustworthy.
Generosity. Billie and David were generous people. 
In their roles both had lots of kids to look after and yet 

115
The Projects Principle
they still found time to let each child know he or she 
was important and valued. In the midst of all they had 
going on I never felt rushed when talking with them. I 
don’t think they thought about it as being generous, they 
were simply being themselves. And in the midst of their 
generosity toward me I learned how to be generous also. 
At 12 years old I didn’t call it gratitude. I called it “nice” 
and “cool.” 
At my 30-year high school reunion I spoke with Billie 
and expressed my gratitude for her caring letter. She did 
not remember the letter, but was touched by what she 
called my “generous memory.” My conversation with 
Billie was a transformational conversation for me. I saw, 
maybe for the first time, how throughout the arc of a life 
one letter or conversation can positively impact a person. 
Her generosity planted the seed of generosity in me that 
still grows today. 
Heart-to-heart connection. David and Billie built 
relationships based on love, care, and resonance. They 
genuinely cared about the children they taught and saw 
each child’s hopes, dreams, and aspirations as fragile and 
worthy of their attention. They purposefully planted the 
seed of courageousness in me and cultivated the belief 
that with focus, hard work, and discipline, my hopes, 
dreams, and aspirations were possible.
Telling the truth. Billie and David didn’t pull any 
punches. They told me what I needed to hear, but did so 
in a way I could hear it. In hindsight, I think they were 
master communicators. I’ve met people who say that they 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
116
are “brutally honest” and believe this is virtuous. I’ve 
found them to have more brutality in their message than 
honesty, but that is because how they deliver their mes-
sage is done in ways that work for them and not for the 
person with whom they are speaking. Telling someone 
what they need to hear in ways they can hear it involves 
being grounded in wanting to be generous, aligning your 
behavior with your values, and listening to the other per-
son in order to know how best to talk with them. 
It’s really quite simple: Performance, innovation, 
growth, and commitment deteriorate when leaders lose 
sight of their role of making a positive difference in the 
lives of those they lead or manage. Having an apprecia-
ble increase in the performance, innovation, and col-
laboration within your team and organization requires a 
generous focus on shedding light in all of your personal 
interactions. By shedding light, you will transform your 
employees’ hopes and aspirations for work into some-
thing real and tangible. 
Cascading Excellence Throughout Your Organization
There is a common misconception that people resist 
change. I disagree. A good friend and colleague once 
said, “People don’t mind change. What they mind is feel-
ing badly.” If a leadership project and/or change initia-
tive will leave employees feeling incompetent, dumb, or 
lazy they will resist the change. They may agree with the 
necessary changes, but by adopting the changes they end 

117
The Projects Principle
up feeling inferior or incompetent. The change will stall 
and accelerated performance is all but impossible. 
Does this mean leaders must become therapists and 
walk through their organization asking people how they 
“feel” about a change? Yes and no. I’m not recommend-
ing for a moment that leaders emulate the television 
therapist Dr. Phil. You’re off the hook in that regards. 
However, I am recommending that if you want trans-
formational levels of growth, understanding how the 
change impacts employees and stakeholders—how the 
change makes them feel—must be recognized, respected, 
reflected on empathically, and responded to accordingly. 
When a leader cannot talk about how people are faring 
during the change, they are seen as out of touch, clueless, 
or disinterested. Employees are merely cogs in the wheel. 
When a leader can discuss the emotional parts of 
change and how people are faring, employees and stake-
holders feel heard and valued, and are open to hearing 
a leader’s thoughts on the next steps. They are active lis-
teners to the following three cascading communication 
strategies. 
1.	 Defining the “what.” Leaders must answer 
what it is that must be accomplished. Leaders 
are required to paint a compelling image of 
the future that is exciting, ennobling, uplift-
ing, and compelling. 
2.	 Articulating the “why.” Leaders must also pres-
ent unassailable reasons why the attainment of 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
118
the future is in everyone’s best interests. The 
why portion of cascading excellence touches 
both the head and the heart of employees and 
leaves them saying, “Yes, you’re right.” 
3.	 Partnering on the “how.” Employees and 
stakeholders who have a voice, are asked for 
advice, and are allowed to have their finger-
prints all over a project plan or change ini-
tiative view the change as their idea and will 
make promises and set priorities that foster 
its accomplishment.
Why Individual Transformation Matters
If leaders want an organizational transformation they 
have to be prepared to undergo an individual transfor-
mation first. It’s so simple, but oftentimes overlooked. 
What a leader does every day communicates what is 
important to her. Has she made promises to continu-
ally learn new ways of helping customers and employees 
flourish? Does she have priorities that create high value 
for her stakeholders? 
If leaders want to cultivate organizational excellence 
they must first cultivate individual excellence. It is dis-
ingenuous at best to pronounce employee and customer 
excellence as an aspiration that is non-negotiable, and 
then to live in ways that support maintaining the status 
quo. Let’s not mince any words. If you want to cascade 

119
The Projects Principle
excellence into every customer and employee experi-
ence, you as a leader must embrace pursuing personal 
and professional excellence.
Leaders are role models for change, growth, innova-
tion, and transformation. Their every move and conversa-
tions are being watched and, in turn, are an opportunity 
to live out their purpose, promises, and priorities. If this 
makes you nervous, it should, but there is good news. 
Employees are not looking for perfection. They are looking 
for someone who instills confidence, courage, and clarity 
about helping them to flourish, do their best work, and 
make their lives easier. Exhibiting these aspirations gar-
ners tremendous good will and fosters a partnership with 
leaders to cascade excellence throughout an organization. 
Your Transformational Leadership Project 
Every organization has deep reservoirs of talent that are 
not achieving their full potential. There are many rea-
sons why full potential is not achieved and excellence is 
not cascaded throughout an organization. You will no 
doubt have your own list, but after working with organi-
zations for 30-plus years I have found a set of 20 reasons 
why talent is not realizing its full potential. Here is my 
list. What would you add?
1.	 Uninspiring leadership.
2.	 Unclear expectations.
3.	 Low levels of trust and respect.

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
120
4.	 A culture of compliance rather than 
commitment.
5.	 A lack of, or a continually changing, strate-
gic direction.
6.	 Low levels of accountability.
7.	 The wrong performance metrics.
8.	 The creation and tolerance of disengaged 
employees.
9.	 Low levels of critical/objective thinking.
10.	 Poor or no strategic prioritization and 
decision-making.
11.	 Low levels of rewards and recognition.
12.	 A lack of disciplined execution.
13.	 No fun.
14.	 Little or no coaching or mentoring.
15.	 The wrong people in the wrong role.
16.	 No process for continually overcoming 
barriers.
17.	 A negative mindset.
18.	 Double standards: Senior leaders do one thing 
and expect another from the rank and file.
19.	 Seeing employees and customers as broken.
20.	 Unhappy customers based on inferior prod-
ucts or services.
Whether you work in a start-up company with 10 
employees or a mature organization with 25,000 employ-
ees, cascading excellence throughout your organization 
requires leaders to engage in a continual leadership 

121
The Projects Principle
development process that is focused on talent maximi-
zation, barrier elimination, and results acceleration. In 
no uncertain terms this is what transformational leaders 
do. In this section you will design a holistic leadership 
development project and dive headlong into increasing 
your business performance. 
Talent Maximization
Talent maximization starts with the premise that you 
have talented people working with you. If you don’t, that’s 
a separate management issue that will not be addressed 
here. But assuming you do, in order to convert the skills 
and talents of employees, you must identify the employ-
ees who are evangelists for what you want to accomplish. 
These employees have the mindset and skill set that is 
not only supportive of your leadership, but enthusiastic 
and committed. 
Think about your project and clarify who should be 
involved. Who represents the best mindset, the best skill 
set, the best experience, the greatest passion, the greatest 
energy, and the greatest creativity? Name your top three 
or five people and what talent they bring to the project. 
Barrier Elimination
You can have the smartest and hardest-working employ-
ees on the planet, but they will never produce accelerated 
business results if the one and only thing standing in 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
122
between them and greater results is not eliminated: bar-
riers and obstacles. 
Barriers can be cultural, process-oriented, attitudi-
nal, communication-related, leadership, compensation, 
and so on. In order to cascade excellence throughout 
your organization, you should be less interested in the 
symptoms of lower performance, and more focused on 
the root causes that, once identified, help organizations 
remove barriers permanently. 
Once you have identified the talent you want or need 
to achieve your project, it’s time to enlist them in con-
ducting a force-field analysis to break down the restrain-
ing forces to your leadership project or building on the 
promoting forces for achieving breakthroughs. As a 
reminder, restraining and promoting forces are:
Restraining Forces: What are the opposing barriers 
to a satisfying and successful completion of your project? 
These can be people, processes, or available resources. 
You’ll want to brainstorm the longest list possible with 
your evangelists. 
Promoting Forces: What are the promoting forces 
that can secure a satisfying and successful completion of 
your project? These can be people, processes, or available 
resources. Identifying your restraining and promoting 
forces requires that you address the following: 
1.	 What is the result I want to achieve? This is 
the foundational question for your leader-
ship project. 

123
The Projects Principle
2.	 What are the metrics and value of completing 
my project?
3.	 What are the promoting and restraining 
forces that must be addressed?
4.	 How do I set priorities for the forces at play? 
Which needs addressing first, second, and 
third? Clarify and rank each one according to 
priority.
5.	 To what forces will I give immediate attention? 
6.	 What new priorities and/or promises for my 
leadership are required in order for this proj-
ect to be successful?
7.	 Where in my calendar will I schedule each 
aspect of my project? 
Results Acceleration
The results you want in your leadership project must 
be infused with emotion. Yes, the “what” of the project 
must be clear, but the “why” must be fully present also. 
Without the emotion of the “why,” the commitment nec-
essary to do anything different or difficult will be absent. 
Leaders must be the primary evangelist for their proj-
ect. And although the word evangelist may have a negative 
connotation based on some political or religious intran-
sigence, an evangelist is someone who builds a critical 
mass of belief, support, enthusiasm, and engagement 
for an idea or aspiration. In many ways, leaders have to 
balance being open and receptive to input with being 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
124
single-minded, driven, and not taking no for an answer. 
They have to hit the street proclaiming what they believe 
and why it’s important. 
Results acceleration, especially when it comes to cas-
cading excellence throughout an organization, requires 
an evangelical focus on the three dimensions of what 
was discussed in the Purpose Principle. It requires high 
levels of love, talent, and value. Leaders in turn link their 
strategic results and leadership project in ways that con-
nect the love they have for their work, the talent they 
and others bring, and the value they are committed to 
creating. 
I started this chapter recognizing that projects in 
the common usage had built a bad reputation. What I’ll 
end with is the promise that with a compelling leader-
ship purpose, high-value promises, and strategic prior-
ities, you can design a leadership project that will not 
only provide transformational value to the people who 
matter most to you, but you can design a repeatable and 
enjoyable project that is more rewarding and enriching 
for you. In the next chapter, you learn how to persuade 
those with competing priorities to support your project 
using my three-part persuasion process. 

125
4
The Persuasion Principle
Persuasion: What Is It and Do You Have It?
There are 1.7 million airline passengers on domestic 
flights in the United States every day. In order to board 
their flights, each passenger must proceed through a 
security screening process. This screening is done in 
the hopes of making traveling more safe and to ver-
ify that passengers are safe to proceed to their gate for 
departure. 
For transformational leaders, they recognize that 
each of their stakeholders likewise has a screening pro-
cess for listening to and following a leader’s lead. This 
process is less about sharp objects and the two-ounce 
requirement for toiletries, but rather, is the leader safe 
to follow to the destination he advocates? If a leader 
doesn’t pass the screening process he will not experience 
flashing lights or be asked to enter a small interrogation 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
126
room, but will instead find himself at his departure gate 
perplexed as to why he is the only one on the flight to his 
desired future. 
To persuade someone is defined by Merriam Webster 
as “causing someone to do something through reason-
ing or argument and to cause someone to believe some-
thing, especially after a sustained effort.” Persuasion is 
therefore about convincing and influencing someone to 
act or think a certain way. The operative word is to act. 
In the face of competing demands, fewer resources, and 
higher expectations, leaders will encounter people who 
will not want to align their priorities with theirs. 
Persuasion in transformational leadership is not 
about eloquent and stirring speeches like Abraham 
Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address or Martin Luther King’s I 
Have A Dream speech. Persuasion in transformational 
leadership is about positive influence, not manipula-
tion. In its purest form persuasion is the shaping with 
full integrity the thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and behav-
iors of another. But that begs the question: Why do peo-
ple do what they do? To know why people do what they 
do, you’ll need to notice the order of the definition of 
persuasion, shaping the thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and 
behaviors of others. We’re going to look at each aspect of 
persuasion specifically.
The key point you’ll learn from the Persuasion 
Principle is that in order to have people behave in ways 
that are helpful to your purpose, promises, priorities, 
and projects, you must start by understanding and then 

127
The Persuasion Principle
shaping their thoughts, feelings, and beliefs about you 
and your initiatives so they will act in ways that are sup-
portive of your requests. If you want to hear yes more 
often you have to know what happens in between peo-
ple’s ears before yes comes out of their mouths. If you 
don’t understand what precedes yes you will continue 
to hear no. 
Thoughts
Every action you and I take is preceded by a thought, 
and these thoughts are a powerful catalyst for how we 
live our lives and what we say yes to. In the TSA screen-
ing example, if your thoughts about TSA screening are 
that it is beneficial and helpful in making passengers 
safer, you will see airport screening in a positive light. If 
you think the process is a waste of time and neglects the 
bigger issue of screened baggage in the cargo bay, your 
thoughts regarding TSA screenings will lead you to see 
airport screening in a negative light.
Feelings
The thought that airport screening is valuable and 
increases the safety for all passengers is followed by the 
feeling of safety and or comfort. These feelings happen at 
light-speed and often go unnoticed. In reality, thoughts 
and feelings are highly interconnected. When you think 
your time is valuable and you strive to be expedient, an 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
128
interference in being expedient is thought to be a threat 
and waste of time. The thought of having your time 
wasted creates a feeling of anxiety or apprehension for 
not being effective. 
Beliefs
The beliefs we each hold for work, our stakeholders, 
and what we are capable of accomplishing are power-
ful triggers for our actions and behaviors. If I think air-
port screening is a waste of time and feel anxious for 
being hindered from doing my best work, my belief is 
that whatever obstacle I encounter needs to be avoided 
or eliminated. Setting aside the TSA example for a sec-
ond, there are employees who have spectacular talent 
who don’t believe in themselves and suffer from impos-
ter syndrome. This belief holds that the person is not 
entitled to be in the position they are and that at some 
point the will be found to be an imposter. There are also 
leaders who believe they may not be the most talented 
leader, but they have the love and passion for what they 
do in such copious amounts that nothing will prevent 
them from achieving their goal. Whichever belief is held 
becomes true. 
Behaviors
Here’s the key point about behaviors: Whenever you see 
someone do something or act in a particular way, they are 

129
The Persuasion Principle
doing so because they believe the action they’re taking is 
the best response to what they believe about a situation. 
If you see someone berating a TSA agent, they believe 
that by doing so they will secure the best outcome. You 
know this is foolhardy, but you are not feeling the same 
emotions nor are you having the same thoughts. Therein 
lies the great challenge for transformational leaders. The 
challenge is that if you want people to support your ini-
tiatives, say yes to your ideas, and support your purpose, 
priorities, projects, or promises, do not focus on the 
behaviors you’re seeing. Focus on the thoughts, feelings, 
and beliefs driving the behavior. 
At work, if a colleague sees you and her first thought 
is that you are political, manipulative, and lazy, that 
you are not a team player and that you are solely out 
for your own self-interests, the first feelings associated 
with seeing you would be that of dread. If I dread see-
ing you I have a self-preserving belief that I should extri-
cate myself from a conversation with you as quickly as 
possible. The behavior you see from the other person 
may be described as curt, rude, and possibly dismissive. 
Transformational leaders then do behavioral jiujitsu. 
They ask themselves what beliefs, feelings, or thoughts 
are triggering these behaviors. They ask because when 
these questions are asked and answered the likelihood 
of hearing yes goes up appreciably. 
So how persuasive are you? Put aside the theory of 
thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and behavior and ask your-
self, “How persuasive am I? How persuasive is my 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
130
leadership?” The simple answer is: If you’re persuasive 
you’ll hear four kinds of yes. 
1.	 Yes, that’s a good idea, and yes I’ll help. 
This is the first and most potent yes. This is 
the most desired response leaders want, but 
frequently don’t hear. For a leader to hear this 
yes they have given considerable thought to 
the priorities of the person they’re asking, 
linked their proposal to the other person’s 
self-interests, and found positive ways they 
can help the other person achieve a mutually 
rewarding end result. 
2.	 Yes, if we can add this one idea we can have 
an even more positive impact. The second 
type of yes is one in which a second or com-
plimentary idea is used to improve on your 
idea in a way that serves the greater purpose. 
When leaders hear this type of yes there is a 
creativity that is infused into the conversa-
tion. It is additive and builds on one idea and 
ultimately helps all involved to think bigger 
about the possible outcomes. This yes results 
in the idea no longer being the brain child of 
one person, but rather the collaborative idea 
of two or more people. 
3.	 Yes, I don’t know how to do that, but I 
know I’ll figure it out. This yes can be a pow-
erful and transformational yes. As leaders in 

131
The Persuasion Principle
every organization can attest, there are objec-
tives worth doing that don’t have clear paths 
with well-lit signs and precise directions. And 
therein lies the positive side of leaders hear-
ing this yes. Transformational leaders want to 
hear people say yes to their ideas, but maybe 
more importantly, they want to hear yes to 
ideas that challenge the status quo while cul-
tivating a mindset of passion, innovation, 
and growth. 
4.	 Yes, I’ll take care of it. This yes is short and 
to the point and shows a clear agreement of 
what’s requested. When a Chief Marketing 
Officer is asked to answer her board of direc-
tors questions—a board with little or no 
background in marketing—about how social 
media marketing is impacting the sales pro-
cess, the best place to start is by understand-
ing the thoughts the board has currently, 
what their feelings are about marketing and 
social media, as well as what, if any, beliefs 
are driving this request to be educated. 
Hearing these four kinds of yes confirms that posi-
tive persuasion is underway and that you’re on track to 
achieve your purpose, promises, priorities, and projects. 
That’s the context of positive persuasion. In the next 
section you’ll learn specifically the Transformational 
Leadership Persuasion Process. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
132
The Three-Part Leadership Persuasion Process
If you are in a leadership position, you have likely read 
about how to have teams and employees you lead do 
something they may not want to do. A day does not go 
by that you don’t directly or indirectly persuade some-
one. You have high hopes for having people follow your 
lead and act in ways that foster innovation, growth, and 
passion. 
But in everyday life, leaders are dealing with the real-
ity that, all too often, people don’t do what they’re asked 
and/or behave in ways that don’t support the best inter-
ests of the customer, team, or organization. 
Let’s level set on one key issue. The employment 
journey, from on-boarding to exit interviews, is a per-
suasion process that sends a clear and compelling mes-
sage to every employee about what’s important and what 
the expectations are for doing transformational work. 
When leaders look at each interaction with employees 
and customers as a building block in the three-part per-
suasion process, it is simple to understand and remark-
able in its effectiveness. In the three sections that follow 
we’ll break down each part of the persuasion process and 
make it actionable and real world. The process of per-
suading another person is simple:
1.	 Build strong relationships based on trust and 
respect.
2.	 Understand the objectives and priorities of 
the other person.

133
The Persuasion Principle
3.	 Provide solutions that help them achieve 
their priorities. 
If you do all three you’ll have the persuasion neces-
sary to lead the transformation of your project in power-
ful and compelling ways. 
Why Trust and Respect Sound the Starting Gun
In order for you to become more persuasive, high lev-
els of trust and respect are the foundational building 
block. Think for a moment about a colleague, boss, or 
teammate you don’t trust or respect. How much positive 
persuasion does the person have with you? Likely very 
little. Trust is about doing what we say we will do and the 
corresponding credibility. Respect, on the other hand, is 
about having a high regard for the talents and skills of 
the other person.
Let’s say you appoint a senior vice president (SVP) 
to lead a major project. In 2016, a major project would 
have been the Samsung recall of their Galaxy 7s phone. 
For those of you who don’t remember, the phone caught 
fire and required every phone to be recalled. The recall 
eroded 26 billion ($26,000,000,000) yes, billion with a 
“B” worth of value. This was a high-stakes, if not life and 
death, situation for Samsung. 
The SVP promised to complete a detailed analy-
sis of the recall and present their findings to the board 
in 45 days. If the work presented is of a high standard 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
134
and addresses all of the issues the board and executives 
raised, you will have a high regard for the SVP’s skills 
and talents. If the work is accomplished in the promised 
timeframe, you see the SVP as trustworthy. In this case, 
trust and respect are both essential in order to persuade 
the senior executives and the board to stay the course 
and execute the developed plan. 
Imagine, however, that the SVP meets their deadline, 
but submits work that is lacking in quality. Because the 
quality of the work is not respected, the SVP’s ability to 
persuade the executives and board is compromised. The 
higher the stakes, the more important trust and respect 
become. 
What’s Important to You?
Knowing the objectives and priorities of the people you 
want to persuade is a crucial second step. This requires 
putting aside our own self-interests and prioritizing what 
is important to the other person. When we know what 
is important to the other person, for example, balanc-
ing the need for innovation and growth with the need to 
continually infuse excellence into products near the end 
of their life cycle, we can better present solutions that 
help achieve that objective. 
In the Projects Principle we discussed jettisoning 
methodology in favor of results. The case I made was that 
falling out of love with what you do and falling in love 
with making your clients, customers, and employees 

135
The Persuasion Principle
lives better for having worked with you is a game-chang-
ing mindset shift. The same holds true in the Persuasion 
Principle. The act of falling in love with understanding 
the objectives and priorities of the people who can help 
or hurt your project, your career, and the resources you 
have, is an incredibly persuasive act. When the message 
you broadcast is one of “Your priorities are as important 
to me as they are to you,” the quality of your relation-
ships increases dramatically and leaves others not only 
open to what you have to say, but hopeful they can hear 
from you. You are now a strategic partner to the other 
person as opposed to the vendor or supplier of widgets. 
Provide Solutions That Achieve Others’ Priorities
The key point in this section is that when leaders lead 
with solutions without fully understanding and address-
ing the objectives and priorities of the person they want 
to persuade, it’s the death knell for success even if you 
have the title of “CEO” after your name. The most suc-
cessful leaders I’ve worked with tirelessly build the high-
est levels of trust and respect possible while immersing 
themselves in what’s important to the other person 
before they ever suggest a solution. 
In the three sections that follow we will take a deeper 
dive into the process and skills required to build high 
levels of trust and respect, know the objectives and pri-
orities of others, and how to best provide solutions that 
leave people saying yes to your ideas. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
136
Don’t Raise Your Voice, Raise Your Persuasion IQ
The formula for building high levels of trust and respect 
is surprisingly simple: Do what you say you’re going to 
do and do it to the agreed-upon standards. If you follow 
the formula you’ll build trust and respect as well as have 
happy employees and customers. Wait a minute. If it’s so 
simple why don’t people do it? They don’t do it for one 
primary reason: They think they’ve gotten clear about 
expectations when in reality they haven’t. They lack a 
framework for getting clear and for infusing accountabil-
ity into situations. 
How are you doing with trust and respect? Here’s a 
self-assessment to prompt your thinking as to how much 
positive persuasion you have. The following statements 
will ask you to rate yourself on the behaviors necessary 
to have high levels of trust and respect. On a scale of 1 
to 10, with 10 being a high level of agreement and 1 rep-
resenting a low level of agreement, rate yourself on the 
following statements. 
Level of Trust
1.	 I actively and intentionally work to create 
an environment that fosters trust with my 
colleagues.
2.	 I do what I say I will do.
3.	 I act with integrity in all personal and profes-
sional interactions.

137
The Persuasion Principle
4.	 I speak well of people when they are not 
within earshot.
5.	 My colleagues say I genuinely care about each 
of them.
6.	 I tell the truth in ways that build trust.
Level of Respect
1.	 I look for and focus on my colleagues’ talents 
and skills.
2.	 I frequently communicate my respect for the 
skills and talents my colleagues have.
3.	 I actively infuse as much value as possible into 
all of the interactions I have with colleagues.
4.	 I am focused and don’t get distracted when 
interacting with my colleagues. 
5.	 I feel respected by my colleagues.
6.	 I recognize and communicate my interest in 
and appreciation for others’ perspectives. 
Now, go back and answer the questions from the 
perspective of your boss, colleagues, or coworkers. How 
would they answer these questions about you? Do you 
see a gap between how you answered the questions and 
how you think your colleagues would answer the ques-
tions? Is there is a gap between your perception of your 
behavior and others’ perceptions of your behavior? If so, 
there is a risk of having a credibility gap, which jeopar-
dizes your ability to persuade others. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
138
Quite simply, trust and respect is built on having clear 
expectations and doing what you said you would do. 
Crafting Clear Expectations
Having clear expectations can reduce the strife in your 
personal life and professional life by 50 percent as well 
as increase your performance. You do that by getting 
clear about the expectations you have with someone. For 
example, a CEO client of mine led a $200,000,000 finan-
cial institution and was at loggerheads with the board as 
to their strategic direction and priorities. Her expecta-
tions were that growth and greater profitability would 
come from being a market-driven organization. This 
would lead to more time, money, and resources devoted 
to marketing to their key customers. If done well, the 
financials would continue to grow from their current 
positive place. The board had an expectation that they 
would be a financial-driven institution and that deci-
sions would be rooted in the financials and that market-
ing needed to follow what the financials allowed. 
These conflicting expectations required a higher level 
of clarity as to the fundamental expectations each party 
could agree on as well as expectations to address differing 
expectations in ways that built trust and respect. When 
I learned of the situation the CEO felt disrespected and 
undervalued and the board felt hindered from doing their 
job. Neither of the previous trust and respect questions 
would have rated the other highly on each dimension. 

139
The Persuasion Principle
Clear expectations are rooted in seven fundamental 
steps.
1. Reaffirm the Purpose 
In almost every frustrating situation I’ve experienced in 
board rooms and executive suites the one fatal flaw is 
jumping to how a situation can be resolved before clari-
fying the “what” or “why” of a situation. The process for 
establishing expectations that foster innovation, growth, 
and passion starts with the purpose of the team or orga-
nization. When you start a conversation with, “Our 
purpose is to dramatically improve the quality of our 
leadership while also dramatically increasing the qual-
ity of our business results,” you have answered the over-
arching contextual question of what the purpose is. Yes, 
you may get wrapped around the proverbial axle when it 
comes to how to accomplish your purpose, but starting 
with what the purpose is points everyone in the right 
direction. 
2. Define Success
The definition of success for your purpose and why it’s 
beneficial infuses hope, optimism, and energy into the 
conversation. Someone may know what the intended 
purpose is, but until the definition of success is clari-
fied for them individually the purpose will remain 
intellectual and theoretical. For example, if a leader in 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
140
your organization hears that you want to dramatically 
increase the quality of the organization’s leadership and 
her business results, she will likely say yes to that, as it’s 
theoretically a sound idea. But the real power comes in 
articulating for each person the benefits of achieving the 
purpose. For example, if you accomplished your purpose 
you would achieve the following: 
1.	 Leaders will have a clearer line of sight for 
career growth and no longer view their 
careers as unpredictable and unmanageable.
2.	 Leaders will have an accurate assessment of 
where they stand currently with specific suc-
cesses to build on and targeted challenges to 
address. 
3.	 Leaders will have professional development 
opportunities that, if taken advantage of, will 
propel them to higher levels of both success 
and satisfaction.
3. Clarify Roles, Responsibilities, and Time Frames 
Next are the specifics of roles, responsibilities, and time 
frames. Each of these three areas need to be crisp, clear, 
and understood. For example, as Volunteer Coordinator, 
you are in charge of volunteer recruitment, development, 
retention, scheduling, and quality assurance (responsi-
bilities) for the customer engagement project. My role 
will be to check in with you to ensure you have the 

141
The Persuasion Principle
most available resources and to see what I can do to help 
you be successful. Also, the kickoff of the project is six 
months from today and you’ll have 15 hours per week 
away from your current work to devote to this. You’re 
being asked to take on this role because of your expertise 
in managing volunteers and your success with the capital 
campaign last year. Addressing each area with specificity 
is required for someone to say yes to you.
4. Clarify Decision-Making 
Imbedded in this step is the recognition of decision-­
making authority. Is a person able to make decisions uni-
laterally or only after conferring with their boss? Trust 
and respect are big parts of this step. If I trust and respect 
you, and have clearly articulated your role and budget, 
I may instruct you to make a decision you deem best to 
accomplish your purpose and to make us successful, and 
then the next time we meet tell me what you decided. 
This is delegation at its zenith. If the person in a role is a 
new employee with less experience I may ask for weekly 
status reports. Regardless of experience, clarify by using 
the following 1 through 5 decision-making model: 1 is, 
as the senior leader, I can and will make all of the deci-
sions. I don’t have to ask your opinion, but I do have to 
tell you; 2 is similar to a 1 except I will consult with you, 
ask for your opinion, and then make my decision; 3 is a 
mutual decision; 4 means you will make a decision after 
conferring with me; 5 means you can make a decision 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
142
without conferring with me at all. If you do this one step 
alone any frustrations you have with expectation will go 
down by 50 percent. 
5. Schedule Status Updates
This expectation is also directly rooted in trust and 
respect. If I have any uncertainty about your talents, 
skills, or ability to stay on task I may ask for more fre-
quent status updates. You may also want more frequent 
status updates if the project is a mission critical project. In 
either case, knowing the frequency of the updates as well 
as what is expected in a status update is crucial. Saying, 
“Let’s check in once every two weeks” lacks specificity. 
In this step, both parties can clarify what a status update 
looks like to them. For one person, it may be a percent-
age completed on high-priority tasks, actual to-budget 
figures, risk and challenges, and lessons learned. What’s 
also required is what format the check-in will use. Will 
it be submitted in writing two days in advance so each 
person has time to digest the information and come pre-
pared to ask questions? Be clear about what you want as 
well as what you can do given all of your other priorities. 
6. Address the Issues
Issues that go unresolved will erode trust and respect 
quickly. It is essential for expectations to be meaning-
ful and transformational. Without writing a chapter on 

143
The Persuasion Principle
conflict management, the best way to address issues is to 
ask a question with curiosity and openness. For exam-
ple, “George, my understanding was that we agreed to 
check in once every two weeks and that you would have 
your status update circulated two days in advance of our 
in-person meeting. I didn’t receive your update. Help me 
understand what happened.” You’ll likely hear a reason-
able explanation and can discuss with George what to do 
moving forward. If you don’t ask, George will know that 
there are no consequences for not circulating his report 
and will likely do the same again. The key is to recognize 
that you will erode trust and respect by not addressing 
the issues.
7. Confirm Understanding and Agreement
The final step is to confirm with the other person all of 
the previous steps. For example, “Based on this conversa-
tion let’s check in that we’re both on the same page. What 
do you understand your role, expectations, and the like 
to be?” When you have a clear summary you’ll only have 
one next step. Go back to the Promises Principle section 
and review the priority setting section. Understanding 
how to go about creating clear expectations is one thing. 
The next is to set priorities around them so you can do 
what you promised the standard you agreed to. If you 
do, you’ll have people more willing to say yes to your 
requests and you’ll have fewer interruptions to higher 
performance.

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
144
You Have Two Ears and One Mouth
It has been said that the eyes are the window into the 
soul. If true, the ears are the doorway to the heart. It is 
by our ears we listen to what’s important to someone. 
We not only hear the words they are using, but hear the 
tone of voice, inflection, and can distinguish between 
the emotions expressed and listen for what is hoped for 
moving forward. Our ears afford us the ability to do so, 
but all too frequently we don’t. We are busy listening 
through the filter of what’s important to us and in many 
cases don’t listen, but interpret what others are saying. 
One of my clients, Dr. Timothy Chester, is CIO at 
the University of Georgia and wrote an interesting blog 
that described the art of using our two ears and why 
one mouth is more than enough. He recounted a con-
versation he had with the director of human resources 
at Texas A&M University and how frustrating it was for 
them to talk with the IT director managing the universi-
ty’s payroll system. What human resources wanted was 
clear and authoritative data about employees. When 
human resources asked what some of the data meant, 
the response was, “What do you want the data to mean?”
There are two ways to view this conversation: The 
first is through the technical aspect of the conversa-
tion and how accurate and authoritative information is 
essential in making the best decision possible. The sec-
ond is the people/persuasion prism and how imperative 
it is that technically trained and proficient professionals 

145
The Persuasion Principle
learn how to listen first in order to understand what’s 
important to someone before opening their mouths. 
Then, as in the persuading process, our mouths can be 
used to provide significant value to the person we’re 
speaking with, namely to help people be successful. 
When we use our ears first we have the potential of 
becoming a strategic business partner known for solv-
ing problems. 
Throughout the last 15 years I’ve worked with hun-
dreds of technically brilliant and well-intended pro-
fessionals who are more accomplished at leaving their 
lesser technically inclined constituents frustrated rather 
than empowered. While they listen intently for the tech-
nical issues related to an issue, they turn a deaf ear to 
the people and relationship side of their work. In turn, 
they communicate their lack of a clear and compelling 
understanding of the priorities of the people they want 
to persuade. 
You are persuading people every day and you must 
become exceptionally good at the people side of your 
work as well as the technical side of your work. If you 
don’t, you will not have a seat at the executive decision-
making table and will be relegated to being seen as a cost 
to be minimized rather than a profit to be maximized. 
How can you secure a seat at the executive decision-­
making table? How can you persuade others more pow-
erfully, enhance your leadership brand and reputation, 
and be seen as a strategic value creator? Here are seven 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
146
persuasion strategies that require you to use your ears 
first before opening your mouth. 
1. Speak the Other Person’s Language
In order to root out the important and strategic objec-
tives of the person you’re trying to persuade, this is the 
basic blocking and tackling required of all profession-
als. You must know how the person you’re working with 
prefers you communicate with them. Do they prefer you 
provide lots of data with a historical perspective? Or do 
they prefer you to get to the bottom line and give them 
an executive summary? Do they want you to ask them 
questions and involve them in a conversation? Or do 
they want you to tell them what to do and just get things 
done? If you use the wrong language with a key decision-
maker you’ll frustrate them, lose credibility, and waste 
time and energy.
2. Focus on Their Self-Interests Not Yours
Every person you interact with has an unspoken list of 
self-interests that influence their behavior. Some people 
are influenced by accuracy and perfection and others 
are interested in consensus and including all of the right 
people. The more you listen to people and learn first-
hand what’s important, the more you’ll be able to fulfill 
a person’s self-interests and work to convert their desires 
into solutions you can provide. 

147
The Persuasion Principle
3. Drop the Technobabble
Stop using acronyms. Acronyms are really helpful in 
providing a shortcut for communicating within certain 
groups or teams. However, when you use a technical 
acronym a client, customer, or leader doesn’t know or 
understand you create a division between you and the 
other person. This is a division that erodes trust and 
respect and prevents you from understanding what’s at 
stake and important. If you want to build resonance and 
communicate credibly, stop using technical jargon and 
talk in terms the other person understands. 
4. Think, Act, and Talk Like a Trusted Business Advisor
Presenting solutions that you hear yes to is rooted in 
being thought of as a trusted business partner. This 
means you will have insight, experience, and perspec-
tives that are valuable to another person. To build the 
receptivity to hear your ideas and partner with you on an 
issue requires that you listen to understand rather than 
listen to respond. If you listen to understand you will 
leave others heard and understood in powerful ways. 
Once someone feels heard they are significantly more 
receptive to listening to your recommendations and 
trusting what you have to say. Strategic business partners 
are highly adept at asking the critical business questions 
in the “Why Focusing on Inputs Is a Career-Limiting 
Move” section of the Projects Principle. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
148
5. Know Their Driving Business Objectives
Whatever your functional role or expertise, my recom-
mendation is counterintuitive—forget your technical 
expertise and instead focus on the other person’s most 
pressing business objectives. This is hard for some tech-
nologically trained professionals because they view the 
world from a technological perspective. Learning how to 
talk in less binary or linear ways and focus more on stra-
tegic business issues and how you can help achieve busi-
ness goals should be your number-one priority.
6. Fall Out of Love
Most people who enter highly technical fields have fallen 
in love with their technology. They love using their edu-
cation and training to solve highly complex technical 
problems and take a great deal of personal pride in doing 
so. And therein lies the problem. They place more value 
on being a firefighter than they do on helping others 
become fire retardant.
Tim Chester at the University of Georgia told me, 
“IT departments should outsource the transactional and 
keep the transformative.” This type of thinking leaves 
many technically trained people feeling uncomfort-
able, as it represents a sea change in how they view the 
value they provide. They only know how to be the hired 
technical pair of hands and not an advisor who creates 

149
The Persuasion Principle
accelerated business results. This is a death knell for most 
technically trained professionals.
7. Be Memorable
Every interaction throughout your day involves, impacts, 
and influences those with whom you work. The ques-
tion is whether or not your impact and influence is posi-
tive. Your intent may be as pure as driven snow, but if 
your impact is negative your influence deteriorates. 
Technically trained professionals need to remember that 
if there is nothing very distinctive about their work and 
the value they create then they will end up extinct.
If you remember, what the human resource director 
wanted was clear and authoritative data. What the seven 
steps allow you to have is a clear and authoritative execu-
tive presence. When you add data with executive pres-
ence you have an unmatched combination.
Listening can be an art form. As with paintbrushes 
and paint in the hands of a gifted artist, listening can 
create a masterpiece that brings delight and awe to the 
person being listened to. In the next section I will share 
eight strategies to use when you do open your mouth, 
as opposed to the previous seven strategies that detail 
what to do before you open your mouth. The ideal 
way to look at the previous section is with regards to 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
150
receptive persuasion and the following eight as expres-
sive persuasion. 
Handling Competing Priorities
In this section we’ll talk about how to present your ideas 
in such a way that people will want to say yes to them. 
There are eight strategies for having someone say yes to 
your requests. Some of the strategies are more mindset-
related and others are more skill set related. But in each 
case the strategies are a positive step forward to hearing 
someone say yes to your ideas. 
Persuasion Strategy #1: Put Others First
Although it may seem repetitive or unnecessary, the first 
mindset strategy reminds us to be of service. Why do you 
need reminding to be of service? Because there is con-
tinuing pressure at all levels of an organization to deliver 
business results, sometimes at any cost. The admonition 
is to do more, do it better, do it faster, and do it cheaper. 
This mantra can, depending on how it’s deployed, place 
results ahead of relationships, profits ahead of people, 
and doing ahead of being. 
To be of service to another you must start by caring 
deeply about what is important to the person you want 
to persuade. This requires knowing that you have busi-
ness objectives that must be accomplished, but that get-
ting a “sale” may preclude you from getting a second, 

151
The Persuasion Principle
third, or fourth much more profitable sale. The only way 
to secure the fourth sale is to make sure the first and 
all subsequent sales are clearly linked to being of service 
to the other person and making his or her life easier or 
better. What specifically are their priorities and what, if 
any, promises have they made that you can help them 
achieve? Everything you accomplish will start here.
Persuasion #2: Be Open to Being Persuaded
Persuading someone to say yes to your request rests with 
you being persuaded also. In the 1980s when Ronald 
Reagan was president and Tip O’Neal was speaker of the 
house, both men knew that having the president’s agenda 
make its way through the House of Representatives 
would only be accomplished with Tip O’Neal’s approval. 
Although both men were consummate politicians 
and negotiators, they knew that an openness to being 
persuaded was essential to making political progress. 
They were open to being persuaded, and by doing so, 
provided the other person with something they could 
live with but probably not love. What’s important to 
remember with the Persuasion Principle is that persuad-
ing another person to your way of seeing a situation is 
never a black-and-white, right-or-wrong type of proposi-
tion, but more along the lines of good, better, and best.
The same holds true with securing a yes to your ideas 
of, say, $450,000 of added head count. If the only option 
is for someone to provide you with exactly $450,000 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
152
worth of additional headcount or else, you are likely 
going to be disappointed and seen as a “my way or the 
highway” type of leader. What is required in order to 
hear yes from a colleague or boss when requesting addi-
tional resources is a clear willingness to be receptive to 
new and possibly more resourceful ways of thinking 
about the allocation of resources. It is a resourcefulness 
that is capable of being persuaded to see your perspective 
differently. Rather than an “or else” mindset, cultivate a 
collaborative and mutually beneficial mindset. 
Persuasion Strategy #3: Exude Confidence
Exuding confidence for many leaders is not a problem. 
The problem is that their confidence comes from their 
title or where their names appear on the organizational 
chart as opposed to the power of their ideas. When this 
happens their confidence is perceived as arrogance. 
Arrogance, an exaggerated belief in one’s abilities or 
importance, is not attractive and repels the adoption 
of ideas. 
Confidence, on the other hand, is rooted in certainty 
and belief in a position, person, or outcome. Confidence 
about your ideas, when coupled with a collaboration and 
mutually beneficial mindset, are essential for transfor-
mational leaders. If you believe in something firmly, are 
willing to be persuaded, and are enthused for persuading 
others, you’ve built the foundation for the next step. 

153
The Persuasion Principle
Persuasion Strategy #4: Be in The Moment
Far too often we are dissociated from the present 
moment. We predominantly think about our past expe-
riences with persuading others and whether or not we 
were successful, or we are projecting into the future and 
thinking about our request for additional resources and 
what we’ll do if we’re rejected. When our thinking is in 
the past or future we aren’t listening to the person dis-
cuss his or her priorities and hopes for the future. We’re 
interpreting him or her based on our past or our future, 
both of which preclude us from hearing subtle clues in 
voice tone and word choices. It also creates anxiety and 
apprehension. Coaches always say to athletes, “Get your 
head in the game,” whenever an athlete makes a simple 
mistake. For transformational leaders the clarion call is 
to get your mindset in the moment. 
Persuasion Strategy #5: Use the If/Then Strategy 
When you are presenting an idea you will hear concerns, 
objections, or questions. This is exactly what you want. 
Concerns, objections, and questions show engagement 
whereas a flat refusal to support you shuts off any con-
versation. When you hear an objection such as, “My pri-
orities are to reduce my budget by 7.5 percent while also 
decreasing the wait time for customers on hold regard-
ing the new credit card promotion. I know I can do this 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
154
because the one-time expenses for the closed office in 
Baltimore will be completed by fourth quarter, so I’ll be 
okay there, but I do need to reduce the wait time.” 
The objective in using the if/then strategy is simply 
to continue the conversation to see if the collaboration 
and mutual benefit strategy can be utilized. For example, 
“Paula, I have an idea about how I can help you decrease 
the customers’ on-hold time issue you have. If it were 
possible that my team, who has successfully worked on 
this same issue for us, could share our best practices and 
help you accomplish the hold time targets you want, 
would you then be willing to help me with the headcount 
issue I’m working on?”
Persuasion Strategy #6: The Magic of Three Yeses Strategy
If you want someone to say yes to providing you with 
additional resources, an important step is to provide 
them with three attractive options for saying yes. If you 
have high levels of trust and respect and a track record 
of exemplary results, presenting only one option has, at 
most, a 25 percent chance of success. Presenting only one 
option leaves people curious about other possibilities 
and a “no” becomes the easiest way to halt the process. 
When you provide two options it presents a binary 
choice, which usually falls into the thought process of 
“right and wrong” or “good and bad.” This also halts the 
process and reduces the odds of someone saying yes to 
your ideas to the same odds of flipping a coin—a 50/50 

155
The Persuasion Principle
chance of success. Conversely, when you provide three 
options, all of which are capable of meeting the other 
person’s needs, wants, or objectives, your success rate on 
one of your options being accepted goes up to 90 percent. 
Persuasion Strategy #7: The Powerful Language Strategy 
Without language we can’t request that a barista make 
our favorite coffee; we can’t make known our feelings for 
a partner, spouse, or child; and we can’t tell the doctor 
where it hurts. Language is a powerful tool for good or 
ill, but in the world of email, Twitter, and social media it 
has devolved to an abridged 140-character world of the 
fewest possible words. Culturally, we now accept “No 
worries” as a response to a positive gesture as opposed to 
“You’re welcome.” 
I observed two leaders in a team meeting discuss a 
difficult and complex issue. On three occasions, the first 
leader used language such as “That idea won’t work” and 
“That’s unnecessarily complex and cumbersome.” The 
second leader used language such as “We can build on 
that idea by . . .” and “Your ideas are really helpful for me 
to think more clearly about this issue and how we can 
move forward faster. Thank you.” 
The first leader’s language was rooted in what’s not 
working and the second leader’s was rooted in what can 
work next. The first leader was communicating a judg-
ment that what had been extended was unacceptable and 
unworkable. The second communicated the opposite. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
156
Think of the words you use as seeds planted in the 
fertile soil of someone’s experience of you and that the 
response you receive to your ideas and requests are the 
harvest of what words you planted. The two leaders in 
the previous example used a different language and had 
a level of receptivity to their ideas that is directly propor-
tionate to the language. As a transformational leader you 
should try to choose positive, uplifting, optimistic, and 
grateful words that are a catalyst for positive persuasion. 
Persuasion Strategy #8: The Show-Me-the-Money Strategy 
This strategy may invite memories of Tom Cruise yelling 
“Show me the money!” into the phone in the movie Jerry 
Maguire. Tom Cruise’s character is a down-and-out sports 
agent desperate to hold onto a client and is persuaded to 
talk like his football star client. Money is not the answer 
to every persuasion dilemma you have, but recognize 
that many leaders in organizations are hyper-focused on 
driving business results and do see most of the decisions 
as financial decisions. If your request does not enable 
someone to see a clear return on investment for saying 
yes to your idea your will likely fall on deaf ears. 
For example, a CIO client of mine was astute 
enough to recognize that his $179,000 investment in an 
organization-­wide new printer, copier, and faxing system 
had little to do with a new printer system. Printers were 
neither what was important nor purchased. What was 
being purchased was an “accelerator of organizational 

157
The Persuasion Principle
priorities” that had a 10-fold return on investment. Using 
several of the previous strategies listed, he clearly articu-
lated the following:
1.	 The cost in hours related to employee effec-
tiveness, ease of operation/trouble-shooting, 
and maintenance of the current system.
2.	 The costs in the future to operate the new 
system.
3.	 The amount of miscommunication and doc-
ument rework based on the current system.
4.	 The time wasted in mission critical depart-
ments due to inefficiencies and how recov-
ering 25 percent of the time wasted was a 
catalyst for the accomplishment of organiza-
tional priorities.
5.	 How the current system was impacting the 
senior executive’s individual departments 
and what increases they would individually 
receive.
After totaling the figures the CIO showed a value of 
$3,500,000, but then cut the number in half to show his 
concern for being conservative on the potential upside. 
The $1,500,000 upside after the investment of $179,000 
had a net gain of $1,321,000 with a seven-fold return on 
each dollar spent. This presentation showed key decision-­
makers that this CIO was a strategic business partner to 
the rest of the organization—a business partner who was 
committed to delivering high-value results. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
158
In this section you learned the three-part persuasion 
process along with detailed actions to make each step 
applicable to the real world. In the next section you’ll 
take these strategies and compliment them with what is 
the most underused and misunderstood principle in the 
book: the Praising Principle.

159
5
The Praising Principle
The Negative Mindset That Prevents Praising
Leaders who instill in their employees a supreme con-
fidence in their abilities have a huge competitive busi-
ness advantage. Doing so requires leaders to recognize 
that employees’ fears and uncertainties are normal—and 
that their primary job is to help convert employees’ fears 
into courageous next steps with praise and purification. 
Eliminating a leader’s negative mindset is an essential 
first step in the Praising Principle, as it precedes effec-
tively addressing the reasons why employees don’t live 
up to their full potential. 
In all of my work with executives and entrepreneurs 
the biggest inhibitor I’ve found to effective praising and, 
in turn, higher performance is not the skill set of the indi-
vidual, but rather their mindset. In the fast-paced world 
of work today, the fastest way to transformational results 
is to cultivate the right mindset by planting the thinking 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
160
that allows you to flourish while eliminating the thinking 
that holds you back. We’ll cover this more in the calendar 
grooming section, but suffice it to say that there are three 
primary mindset inhibitors that keep leaders from prais-
ing others as well as themselves. Addressing these three 
negative mindsets fosters more praising and purifies the 
unwanted and limiting aspects of your leadership. 
Holding On to the Past
The past is a powerful force, capable of propelling us 
toward our goals or holding us back from our potential. 
Unfortunately, most of us let it hold us back. 
I remember speaking with a vice president of strategic 
projects about a project that was delayed and eventually 
unsuccessful. It lead to accusations and finger-pointing 
by everyone involved that the VP was solely responsible 
for the failure. Understandably, the VP felt attacked and 
thrown under the bus. Was he responsible? Yes, for sev-
eral contributing factors, but so were the senior leaders 
who failed to read executive briefings and later claimed 
they were caught off guard when the information made it 
onto their radar screens. The VP looked around the execu-
tive table and saw leaders who, only days earlier, agreed 
with him regarding their responsibility for the failure, but 
remained silent as senior leaders read him the riot act. 
The resentment the VP held after this meeting 
didn’t just go away—instead, it lingered and had long-
term adverse effects on the mindset of the VP as well 

161
The Praising Principle
his department. It also infected the rest of his team and 
strained the working relationships between his team and 
other leaders.
Although the VP needs to be acutely aware of the 
political and cultural nuances of leading within the 
organization, what’s equally important is not carrying 
the past around like an anvil. What this VP needed was 
to reframe the past event and reclaim his most desirable 
future in context of the cultural implications. 
Being Your Own Worst Critic
During annual reviews, leaders and employees might 
hear 10 accolades about their performance throughout 
the last year and one area for improvement. More than 
80 percent of my clients tell me that, when all is said and 
done, they focus on the one area for improvement and 
dismiss what they’ve done well. This is similar to driv-
ing with one foot on the accelerator and the other on the 
brakes. That is not a strategy for accelerated performance. 
In fact, it guarantees reduced performance and decreases 
a person’s level of satisfaction and effectiveness.
The dilemma is that every person listens to two men-
tal radio stations on a daily basis. The first station broad-
casts positive and affirming messages such as, “You’re 
really talented. You’re exceptionally good at taking com-
plex ideas and making them practical and applicable.” 
The other station isn’t nearly as pleasant to listen to. 
“Who do you think you are? You can’t do that. You’re not 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
162
half as good as you think you are.” Whichever station you 
listen to influences powerfully the message you broad-
cast to others. And there lies the rub. Unfortunately, this 
second radio station gets far more airtime than the first. 
It also broadcasts at a much higher volume. In fact, we’re 
so accustomed to listening to the negative broadcast in 
our minds that thinking positively of ourselves is con-
sidered boastful and arrogant. If we feel that way about 
ourselves, think about the implications for our messages 
to employees and customers. 
Of course, that couldn’t be further from the truth. 
Beating yourself up doesn’t do anybody any good. You 
have the capacity to be your biggest advocate or your big-
gest critic. Every day, you wake up and make the choice. 
Which radio station are you tuning into? If you’re tuning 
into the negative radio station playing in your head, it is 
time to change the station. By taking stock of what you pay 
attention to on a daily basis, you can determine whether 
the negative or positive messages get more air time. If 
you’re listening to your biggest critic more than your big-
gest advocate, then it’s clear you need to make a change. 
The good news is that once you commit to shifting your 
focus from negative perspectives to positive ones, you’ll 
begin to create a different experience for yourself—as well 
as for those around you. You’ll provide greater praise and 
recognition by tuning your mindset to what’s working. As 
an executive, it is your responsibility to make sure that 

163
The Praising Principle
your mindset is tuned into the right radio station and that 
you then broadcast your mindset to others. 
Living in Fear
Far too many of us live in fear when it comes to our busi-
ness lives. For some of us, it’s financial fear. For others, 
it’s emotional. No matter the source or type of fear, fear 
has a debilitating effect on personal and professional 
growth over extended periods of time. Fear can be a 
catalyst for action, but accelerated progress can never be 
made beneath the shadow of a fearful mindset.
Some people say that fear can be a positive element 
in our lives. That may be true when it comes to having 
a healthy dose of caution against overtly risky behavior. 
But in the business world, letting fear take control is par-
amount to self-sabotage. When we’re fearful, we play not 
to lose instead of playing to win. 
Consider for a moment what would happen if you 
lived your life without fear or trepidation. What if you 
focused your emotional energy on taking proactive 
approaches to challenges and creating powerful solutions 
to problems at work and at home? Shedding the anxiety 
of a fearful mindset is a freeing and empowering act.
In the business world, performance decreases as 
fear increases. If performance is decreasing for you or 
your team, I guarantee that some sort of fear is behind 
it and the amount of praise and finding what’s working 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
164
is plummeting. The fear might take the form of anxi-
ety about a new job or responsibility. It could also be 
financial fear of budget cuts or lack of resources. Either 
way, this mindset contributes to a loss of progress in the 
organization.
The best way to fight fear is to identify what causes it. 
If you can determine the cause of fear, you can redirect 
it and make it less frightening for you and your team. 
Throughout my extensive work with executives as a 
coach and mentor, I have discovered eight types of fear 
that are most common to executives. Which ones are 
challenging to you?
1.	 Fear of holding people accountable.
2.	 Fear of making mistakes.
3.	 Fear of leaving a job that sucks the energy out 
of you.
4.	 Fear of not being seen as smart and successful.
5.	 Fear of upsetting your boss or senior leaders.
6.	 Fear of turning away from current successes 
in order to have even greater success.
7.	 Fear of investing in one’s self.
8.	 Fear of making decisions.
Each of these negative thinking habits inhibits a 
leader from praising effectively. In turn, what employees 
hear is a litany of areas for improvement without a corre-
sponding recitation of what is going well. This one-sided 
narrative is discouraging and leads to underperformance 
and a drain of top talent.

165
The Praising Principle
Where Seldom Is Heard a Discouraging Word
Praise helps people feel valued, heard, and appreciated. 
People who feel valued, heard, and appreciated work 
with more passion, experiment, take risks, and grow at 
rates far greater than those who don’t. That concludes my 
prepared remarks. It’s likely you will have questions, so 
let me put some meat on these bones. 
In every organization there are pockets of employee 
potential lying dormant. Every leader I’ve worked with 
believes that his or her employees are capable of accom-
plishing more than they are. When you ask employees 
if they could do more the resounding answer is yes. 
What’s fascinating is that when you ask employees why 
they don’t accomplish more or what they are capable of 
accomplishing the number-one answer is because they 
choose not to. They could if they wanted to, they just 
choose not to. The ability to do more but choosing not 
to is a massive drain on performance. Why don’t people 
perform to their full potential? There are six reasons.
1. No Payoff
People don’t perform to their full potential when there 
is no payoff for working to their full potential. Every 
leader, team, and individual employee looks for a payoff 
to doing their work. It could be a deeper sense of sat-
isfaction, success, of making a difference. However you 
slice and dice it, human beings are meaning-making 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
166
machines, and while at work we make meaning of our 
work. Is it meaningful, rewarding, and valuable? Are 
my efforts appreciated and recognized? When they’re 
not, the payoff devolves to simply getting a paycheck. 
And money has been proven to not be the greatest of 
motivators. 
2. Uninspiring Leadership
The word inspire comes from the Latin inspire, which 
means “to breathe life into something.” When there is no 
life in a leader’s leadership, when she is going through 
the motions and espousing the mission, vision, and val-
ues but not living them, employees are left feeling unin-
spired. Without question, uninspired leaders cannot 
create inspired employees unless the inspiration is to jet-
tison themselves from the company as soon as possible.
3. Underperformance Is Tolerated
People don’t perform to their full potential when under-
performance is tolerated and there is no accountabil-
ity. Yes, even in the face of the corporate mantra of “do 
more, do it better, do it faster, and do it cheaper,” under-
performance is tolerated when a leader turns a blind eye 
to his inability to learn, grow, and change, yet expects 
and demands employees learn, grow, and change. 
Also, people don’t perform to their full potential when 
they look around and see leaders and other employees 

167
The Praising Principle
underperforming without any consequences. The mes-
sage sent is clear and compelling: If you underperform, 
behave poorly or unethically, miss deadlines, or lose a 
big client you may not have your hand slapped.
4. Unclear Expectations 
People don’t perform to their full potential when the 
expectations are unclear. Leaders who don’t have the 
bandwidth or white space to think clearly create more 
confusion and ambiguity than they intend. When a 
leader says, “I want you to handle the Cramer proj-
ect,” the same issue that I’ve found on three continents, 
seven countries, and 43 states is that the word handle 
is not clear. What does handle mean to the leader and 
what does handle mean to the employee? When lead-
ers are clear about the results desired, the time-frame 
demands, the responsibilities, roles, authority, there is 
clarity. I have built a thriving advisory firm around the 
word clarity. 
5. No Trust or Respect
People don’t perform to their full potential when their 
coworkers and leaders don’t do what they say they’ll 
do and/or don’t have the talent or skill to do their job 
well. Trust is about a person’s reliability and respect is 
about talent and skill. When an employee or leader loses 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
168
respect and trust with another person, the relationship 
is toast, as is the possibility of accelerated performance.
6. No Investment in Employee Development
People don’t perform to their full potential when the 
investments in improved mindset and skill set are delayed 
or eliminated. The absolute fastest way to dramatically 
grow a leader’s leadership and the results is by working 
with a leadership coach. Although that may sound self-
serving, I too have grown at an accelerated pace because 
my coach and mentor is an objective observer of my 
work and can provide me with new ideas, perspectives, 
insights, and tactics for accelerated performance that I 
would never have found on my own. 
These six reasons people don’t perform to their full 
potential can be addressed in powerful and substan-
tive ways. In the Praising Principle you will learn how 
to praise people in concrete, sincere, and timely ways so 
that you can affirm the opposite of the eight previous 
reasons, and instead create the nine reasons why people 
choose to perform to their highest potential. 
You’ll also learn that praising has a cousin skill called 
“purification.” And much like a water filter that eliminates 
impurities and makes our drinking water safe, you too 
will purify the aspects of your leadership that detract from 
accomplishing your purpose, promises, and projects.

169
The Praising Principle
By learning how to praise and purify your leadership 
you will build the confidence employees have of them-
selves as well as of your leadership. You will encourage 
experimentation, risk-taking, and learning while also 
infusing hope and optimism into the workplace. You 
will, in no uncertain terms, bring out the best in others 
as well as yourself. 
Jettisoning Judgment and Cultivating Courage and Curiosity
Every Sunday across America there are close to 350,000 
raving fans who ply themselves into the stadium of their 
favorite football team and another 20,000,000 million 
watching on television. Those in the stadiums cheer 
ferociously, fist pump, high five, and scream their vocal 
chords raw whenever their teams do something they see 
as beneficial to winning the game. They do so to demor-
alize the opposition, propel their team to victory, and 
reward the Herculean efforts by the sport’s most elite tal-
ent. You can, for the first time, attend an event with a 
friend and find a normally subdued person go through 
a Jekyll and Hyde conversion when sports are involved.
Why is it that the same executive who screams and 
high fives total strangers shows up at work and only 
gives polite applause when the team does something 
equally beneficial? Is it because sporting events watched 
with 60,000 other people release a primal passion? Is it 
because the emotional response is lost in the throngs of 
other half-crazed enthusiastic fans? Whichever reason 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
170
holds true, I contend that leaders who bring an enthusi-
astic recognition and praise for their work teams to work 
will propel their teams to victory, squelch the opposi-
tion, and reward the Herculean effort some employees 
exhibit to getting the work done.
I’m not advocating sports-centric high fives with 
accompanying screaming. What I’m advocating for is a 
praising mindset that rewards the expression of benefi-
cial passion, innovation, and growth. For that to be true, 
there are three aspects of praise that need to be present. 
1.	 Sincere Praise. Praise that is mechanical, 
obligatory, and/or delivered in a rote manner 
will degrade a leader’s credibility. It will be 
seen as artificial and contrived, and foster a 
relationship gap between the person giving 
the praise and the person receiving it.
2.	 Timely Praise. The most potent form of 
praise is the type that is delivered in real 
time. Catching employees or coworkers doing 
something noteworthy and commenting on 
it immediately raises the well-being not only 
of the person receiving the praise, but creates 
a culture in which appreciation and contin-
ued growth become strategic assets.
3.	 Specific Praise. Generalized praise such as, 
“Good job!” pales in comparison to specific 
praise such as, “Your project management 
work on the Carson project was incredibly 

171
The Praising Principle
helpful. You lived out our strategic goal of 
improving our customer experience and let 
the client feel confident and at ease with your 
performance. They said they loved working 
with us. That was really good work.”
The Benefits of Praise
Praise will act as a catalyst for even higher levels of suc-
cess when the three praise aspects are present. Employees 
and coworkers know if a leader is paying attention to 
what they’re doing and sincere praise creates a positive 
feedback loop in which what gets noticed and rewarded 
gets magnified. 
Praising is also not reserved solely for employees. 
Leaders benefit from reviewing their own personal lead-
ership and identifying what they have done well and 
what they deserve to be praised for. This is akin to the 
“putting on your own oxygen mask first” theory. 
Although the benefits of praise are significant, to 
maximally reap those benefits, praise must be balanced 
with providing both positive and constructive feedback. 
This is the second aspect of praising called purification 
and we’ll cover it in the next chapter. For now, it’s impor-
tant for leaders to recognize that some leaders may feel 
that praise is not necessary and that quality work is evi-
dence of expectations met. For those of you uncomfort-
able giving praise or those who see it as overblown and 
unnecessary consider this: Employees who have been 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
172
recently praised are more engaged in their work, demon-
strate increased productivity, score higher customer satis-
faction rates, and hold better safety records. The benefits 
of praise are significant. 
To better develop this critical skill, it’s important for 
you to identify how you view praise. On a scale of 1 to 10, 
with 1 being “don’t agree” and 10 being “strongly agree,” 
rate yourself on the following praising dimensions:
1.	 I am comfortable giving sincere, timely, 
and specific praise and recognition to an 
employee, colleague, or coworker.
2.	 I am continually on the lookout for oppor-
tunities and ways to recognize the contribu-
tions of people I work with.
3.	 I am seen as someone who repeatedly shows 
appreciation for work that is valuable and 
noteworthy.
4.	 I purposefully find ways to link individ-
ual accomplishments to departmental and/
or organizational purpose, priorities, and 
promises. 
5.	 I actively look for ways to instill confidence, 
hope, and optimism in a person’s ability to 
do transformational work.
6.	 I enjoy finding ways to celebrate individual or 
team success.
7.	 I listen with the intent of understanding and 
not simply of responding.

173
The Praising Principle
If you and I were sitting across from one another I 
would ask to hear the scores you gave yourself and then 
ask you the following questions:
•	
Which of the seven dimensions did you rate 
yourself the highest and why? 
•	
Which of the seven praising dimensions did 
you rate yourself the lowest and why? 
•	
What observations or insights do you have 
from your responses? 
•	
Which of the seven praising dimensions 
would you like to increase dramatically? 
The praising assessment is not a pass or fail, right or 
wrong type of assessment. It is a check-in as to how you 
view praise and whether you have an opportunity to be 
the catalyst for the mindset that can propel you and your 
team forward. To that end, however you rated yourself, 
there are 11 recommendations for how to increase your 
effectiveness in using praise as a strategic asset. Based on 
your answers to the praising assessment, the following rec-
ommendations will help you improve your praising skills. 
Praising With Sincerity
1.	 If you appreciate someone, tell them why 
what they did was important to you. Tell them 
about how what they’ve done is instrumental 
to the organization and its results, but per-
sonalize the praise by sharing the value you 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
174
experienced. When it comes to praise, mak-
ing it personal is what people receiving praise 
see as the most important. The million-dollar 
question is: “How did the act that you’re giv-
ing me praise for help or benefit you?” 
2.	 Always praise with the intent of encourag-
ing the person because that is exactly what 
praising does. Praising is not about check-
ing a task off your to-do list. Praise is about 
helping someone see themselves as valuable 
and appreciated. It was noted that Abraham 
Lincoln believed the best outcome from a 
conversation was not to have the person leave 
the conversation thinking highly of him, but 
rather the person leave the conversation feel-
ing good about him- or herself. Praise infuses 
self-confidence and a belief in what’s possible. 
3.	 Link your praising to your purpose and 
understand why it is important to you. If you 
cannot link what someone has done to why 
you feel it is important, it becomes intellec-
tual or artificial. Make the link and you’ll 
be not only more sincere, but also eager to 
deliver the praise as it’s aligned with what is 
most important to you.
4.	 Remember that the praise you deliver is planted 
in the fertile soil of a person’s memory, takes 
root, and grows either positive or negative 
beliefs. Your praise can be nourishment in a 

175
The Praising Principle
sometimes starved-for-appreciation corporate 
culture. There are few evil, wicked, bad, and 
nasty people walking the halls of your orga-
nization, but there are people who are over-
whelmed and cannot see clearly to extend a 
word of encouragement because their prover-
bial praising gas tank is empty. 
Before you move on to read the section on timeli-
ness, take two minutes to identify three people (employ-
ees, colleagues, leaders) who did something valuable 
and beneficial. Plan on speaking with them within the 
next 72 hours and extend the praise they deserve with 
sincerity. 
Praising With Timeliness
1.	 In order for your praise to be timely you 
need to pay attention. Timeliness is rooted 
in being in the moment and being on the 
lookout for people doing work that matters. 
Yes, you are likely running from one meet-
ing to another and have 200 emails scream-
ing for your attention, but keep in mind that 
the people who matter most to you are con-
tinually looking at you and taking cues from 
your behavior. If you’re not known for pay-
ing attention and seeing in real time what’s 
taking place in your organization you’ll miss 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
176
out on becoming a magnet for finding people 
doing good work and multiplying it. 
2.	 Timeliness is a praising multiplier. Timeliness 
intensifies and multiplies the impact of prais-
ing. If you receive praise four weeks after you 
did something noteworthy the praise will be 
important, but when delivered quickly the 
praise is triggered in memories that are fresh. 
This intensifies the effects of the praise and 
makes it more visceral. 
3.	 Do not rely on your memory. The longer the 
time between your observation of a notewor-
thy event and the recounting or praising of 
the event, the fewer the details and specif-
ics you’ll have. You’ll also lose some of the 
enthusiasm as time clouds your feelings as 
well as your memories.
Timeliness Application
1.	 Think about the previous day. Did you experi-
ence something praiseworthy? If so, what was 
it? What can you say to that person tomor-
row to communicate the value you perceived? 
When will you say it? Be specific.
2.	 Think about the last week or month and 
identify one missed opportunity to praise 
someone. What was the outcome of missing 
this opportunity to praise the person? What 

177
The Praising Principle
would you do differently? What might the 
outcome have been if you had praised?
Praising With Specificity
1.	 Always share the “why” behind your praise. 
Communicate the reasons why what the per-
son did is important to you, the customer, an 
important project, or fellow employees. The 
greater the specificity, the greater the impact. 
Think of praise as a laser beam that you direct 
to cutting through the busyness of the day 
and to target the purpose, promises, or pri-
orities most important to you. 
2.	 Link the praise you are giving to the individ-
ual’s hopes, dreams, or aspirations for his or 
her professional or personal life. This requires 
that you as a leader know what is important 
to the person, but when you do, the speci-
ficity of your praise can be more rewarding 
for the person and more satisfying for you to 
deliver. For example, “Janet, I know you asked 
to have an opportunity to lead a team on 
strategic projects. Your work today confirms I 
need to help you find that opportunity soon. 
When you presented to the executive team 
the project scope and results they loved your 
clear communication and conviction. The 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
178
executive team was encouraged and excited. 
That’s exactly what we’re looking for in our 
team leaders. Let’s earmark time to discuss 
more fully what opportunities are available 
and which one might be right for you.” 
3.	 Link your praise to continual learning, 
growth, and innovation. A colleague of mine, 
Brian Walter, once told me that he uses a 
“valuemercial” idea with his clients. A “val-
uemercial” is similar to a commercial of 30 
seconds but instead focuses on the value 
most important to a team or organization. 
For example, using the previous example 
with Janet, a leader might start or end a team 
meeting with the following message: “Before 
we get started, I wanted to let everyone know 
that Janet did an outstanding job presenting 
the project to the executive team yesterday. 
What made the presentation so compelling 
was her explanation of the value customers, 
employees, and our bottom line will receive. 
It was sharp, crisp, clear, and compelling. I’d 
like you to show her some love when you see 
her and then let’s take 20 minutes at our next 
meeting and review what specifically she did 
that made her presentation successful. It’s 
important for all of us to be that clear, crisp, 
and compelling, and we can learn from Janet. 
Okay, now back to our agenda.” 

179
The Praising Principle
4.	 Praise is fuel for transformational growth 
both for you as a leader and for your team. 
The recommendations here can have a posi-
tive impact on your leadership if you imple-
ment them with sincerity, timelines, and 
specificity. Let’s look at the opposite side 
of the coin. In the next section you’ll learn 
about the purification process. 
Your Life Is a Statue of David and You Are Michelangelo
In our work thus far, we reviewed the affirming and 
rewarding aspects of praising employees, colleagues, or 
coworkers doing meaningful and valuable work. Now 
we shift our perspective and invert the praising process. 
This compliment to praising is purification; its purpose 
is to help us identify areas that are negatively impacting 
performance while building our credibility as leaders. 
Purification is about removing obstacles and barriers to 
higher performance, both for the leader as well as for the 
employees and colleagues she or he works with. 
Transformational leaders isolate one or two harm-
ful beliefs or behaviors and work to eliminate or remove 
them. Although the act of praising ensures forward prog-
ress with hope and optimism, purification is frequently 
associated with faith traditions and involves fasting as 
part of a spiritual practice. Fasting provides devotees 
with an opportunity to turn away from the earthly and 
human aspects of their day-to-day existence and reflects 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
180
more on the greater questions of the tenets of their faith. 
Purification from a medical and health perspective 
involves fasting as a way of detoxifying the body from 
impurities and toxins found in our environment and, in 
some cases, the foods we eat. 
In this book, purification helps leaders turn away from 
the exigency of day-to-day work and consider the greater 
questions of leadership. By doing so, we detoxify any 
leadership impurities that may be limiting performance. 
When viewed in the larger context of transformational 
leadership, purification will help you accomplish three 
things: You will see leadership as never being a solo activ-
ity; you will see how becoming genuinely curious about 
the ways our leadership impacts those we work with can 
transform our leadership; and you will identify something 
that doesn’t support your purpose, promises, or priorities. 
These three accomplishments change your behavior in 
ways that allow you to get a more appropriate result. 
In this section, you will learn how best to purify your 
leadership as well as the leadership and performance of 
others. To do so there are three key factors required of you 
for the purification process to produce positive results.
1.	 Embrace purification with curiosity over 
judgment.
2.	 Strive for new insights and discernment.
3.	 Leverage the one-percent rule.
The purification process encourages leaders to become 
especially curious about the aspects of their leadership 

181
The Praising Principle
that no longer serve them well. It is not simply a matter 
of finding fault and punishing oneself. Judgment retards 
creative problem-solving while curiosity is a healthy 
aspect of goal-setting and seeking improvement. In a 
similar fashion to the Praising Principle, the Purification 
Assessment is an excellent tool for determining how you 
view purification. On a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being 
“don’t agree” and 10 being “strongly agree,” rate yourself 
on the following praising dimensions:
1.	 I challenge commonly held beliefs and 
assumptions about growth and performance.
2.	 I regularly ask myself how I can improve what 
I do and how I do it.
3.	 I consistently look to people outside my cur-
rent organization to learn and grow from 
them.
4.	 I am comfortable articulating a connection 
between individual growth and departmen-
tal and/or organizational growth.
5.	 I frequently start conversations about what 
great work looks like and how to do it.
6.	 I enjoy finding new and better ways of serv-
ing my customer.
7.	 I frequently learn more from my mistakes 
than I do from my successes.
As you did in the previous section, which of the 
seven dimensions did you rate yourself the highest and 
why? Which of the seven purification dimensions did 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
182
you rate yourself the lowest and why? What observations 
or insights did you learn from your responses? Which 
of the seven purification dimensions would you like to 
increase dramatically?
Please remember: The assessments here are not 
pass or fail, right or wrong. They are best viewed as a 
conversation-­starter for you to determine how you view 
purification and whether you do something to move 
you and your team forward. This is very similar to when 
Michaelangelo created his statue of David. He said in order 
to create a masterpiece like David he started by removing 
everything that didn’t fit his image of what David would 
be. You are called to do the same. Taken together with 
your answers to the purification assessment, the follow-
ing recommendations will help you think about how to 
start applying the purification process.
Purifying With Curiosity
1.	 Remember: Every human being does what 
they do for a reason. We don’t know what 
that reason is most of the time, and until we 
do, we can’t make sense of the behaviors we 
see. This process requires curiosity as to what 
we see and why, as well as jettisoning judg-
ment. Without curiosity we can’t look at con-
fusing situations and earnestly try and make 
sense of them, and with judgment we are too 

183
The Praising Principle
frequently putting people and situations in 
neat and tidy boxes that, although expedient, 
are generalizations and stereotypes. 
2.	 Stop, look, and ask higher-quality questions. 
By changing the quality of the questions you 
ask yourself as well as others the quality of 
your answer goes up appreciably. For exam-
ple, a higher-quality question is: “I have the 
utmost respect for Bill, but was extremely 
harsh in my criticism of his work on the 
Summit Group proposal. I wonder why I said 
what I did in the team meeting?” A lower-
level question is: “Why did I say such a stupid 
thing in the team meeting?” One stems from 
curiosity and the other from judgment. 
3.	 Be nice to yourself. When you use the purifi-
cation principle, talk to yourself about purifi-
cation in the same way you would to a friend 
you care about. Recognize that there are times 
for consolation and times for tough love and 
that most people are their own worst crit-
ics and judge themselves harshly. When that 
happens, the ability to ask higher-­quality 
questions all but disappears and inserted 
into the conversation is the drill sergeant 
from hell that wants nothing more than to 
assure your self-destruction. Don’t allow that 
person in your life. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
184
Purifying for Insight and Discernment
1.	 Lighten up. Recommendation number one is: 
Don’t take yourself so seriously. Although you 
want to improve and live out your purpose 
more fully, refrain from becoming morosely 
fixated on your shortcomings. The ability to 
see yourself clearly is an incredibly important 
aspect of your leadership; your credibility is 
important and needs to be viewed seriously. 
But so is the ability to laugh at yourself and 
your mistakes. When you laugh at yourself 
and your mistakes you give people the abil-
ity to more closely look at their own mistakes 
and take the corrective action necessary to 
minimize them.
2.	 Purification takes discipline. Insight and dis-
cernment are derived from disciplines and 
require continual practice. When you follow 
an exercise program, the more you exercise 
the easier it becomes. The same holds true for 
both praising and purifying. The more you 
do both the more you build into your muscle 
memory the process of purposefully taking 
an inventory of your assets and liabilities. If 
you want to be a more effective leader, team-
mate, or employee, know your strengths and 
blind-spots are accelerated with the Praising 
Principle. 

185
The Praising Principle
3.	 Slow down. To gain new insights and have 
greater discernment, you cannot travel through 
the process at excessive speeds. And you espe-
cially cannot gain insight and discernment if 
you are multi-tasking. Mario Andretti, famed 
Formula One driver once said, “If everything 
feels as though it’s under control you’re sim-
ply not going fast enough.” That is pithy and 
true in Formula One racing in one respect. 
The drivers are hurtling themselves around a 
track at full-throttle, but they also have to slow 
down and take pit stops. If they didn’t, they’d 
run out of gas and be stranded on the track. 
You too need to slow down at times—not per-
manently, but frequently enough to get your 
bearings in order to go faster. 
4.	 Look for patterns. We all have patterns for 
doing routine work. We may drive to the 
office the same way as well as dress and get 
ready for work the same way. This is a way 
of taking the mundane and making it more 
efficient. We each have only so much men-
tal fuel in our days for making decisions and 
being effective. The less energy our brain uses 
on mundane issues the more we have for the 
big stuff. Are there patterns affecting you? Are 
you in so many meetings you don’t have time 
to eat? Are you ruminating at night about 
work and only sleeping four hours? Has your 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
186
exercise program suffered because of your 
ankle injury and in turn you are carrying 
more stress and anxiety? What patterns can 
you see in yourself as well as with others? Be 
discerning as to what is causing the pattern.
Purifying With the One-Percent Rule
1.	 Take one day at a time. The one-percent rule 
posits that getting better in any endeavor by 
one percent daily results in a 100-percent 
improvement in 72 days. (In this example, 
I’m using the power of compound interest. 
So as you build on your successes each day 
you’re accelerating to the 100-percent des-
tination with multiplication versus addi-
tion.) The idea of getting better by 1 percent 
is appealing to most of my clients, as they 
see it as workable through finding one new 
idea, one new perspective, or listening to a 
colleague discuss what they did to improve 
the customer experience. Through any means 
necessary, transformational leaders look to 
get better by 1 percent each day. 
2.	 Focus on progress. If you are a brain surgeon 
and you have just sawed a hole in my head I 
want you to be perfect in your work. Please 
come to work rested and please don’t have an 
argument with your partner before arriving 

187
The Praising Principle
in my operating room. Today is the day to be 
perfect. For all of you who are not brain sur-
geons, the other 99.95 percent reading this 
book, progress is preferable to perfection. I’ve 
listened to every role and job in all different 
organizations, and they tell me their work 
must be perfect. I will agree that if you are a 
nurse, an accountant, or an engineer working 
on the latest airplane, I want to know you are 
continuing to make progress and you’ve done 
your work correctly. But I would never ask for 
perfection. It’s not possible, nor should you 
strive for it. Perfectionism leads to procrasti-
nation. Making progress leads to acceleration. 
3.	 Narrow your focus. In the Promises Principle 
we talked about the number of priorities a 
leader can realistically have individually. I’ve 
found the magic number to be three. When 
you narrow your focus to the three most criti-
cal things you are committed to doing, the 
quality of your focus, the clarity of your think-
ing, and the quality of your results goes up. 
When you engage in the purification aspects 
of transformational leadership, choose your 
priorities and drive them a mile. You’ll feel 
more satisfied and successful, which will be 
cascaded throughout your organization. 
In the calendar grooming section com-
ing up next, you’ll learn a simple five-minute 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
188
process for taking what you’ve learned in the 
Praising Principle and making it real-world 
and actionable. 
Saying No to Others While Never Accepting No for an Answer
The shortest section in this chapter may have the longest 
shelf life. The calendar grooming process is an ultra-short 
(five minute) process of reviewing your day as a transfor-
mational leader. It is a process of finding the areas of your 
leadership that are going well and accentuating them, 
along with the areas that are not going well and reduc-
ing or eliminating them. Calendar grooming is similar to 
dressing for work every day. You remove the clothes worn 
to bed, shower, and put on clean clothes appropriate for 
the day ahead. If you have no client or customer meet-
ings you may wears khaki pants or jeans. If customer 
meetings are on your schedule you may wear dress slacks 
and a sport coat. In either case, you look at your day and 
decide the best way to dress for the day ahead.
The same holds true for the calendar grooming pro-
cess except the grooming doesn’t happen in the morn-
ing, it happens at the end of the day and takes less time 
than it does for you to drink your first cup of coffee or 
tea in the morning. There are two versions and three sim-
ple steps to calendar grooming. The first version is an 
abridged yet powerful daily check-in that involves taking 
five minutes to answer the five questions. Version two 
involves taking 20 to 30 minutes once per week and once 

189
The Praising Principle
per month to review your previous observations and dis-
cern more targeted and powerful next steps. The power 
in version two comes from the data points you have as 
well as the addition of more questions. But first, here are 
the five questions. 
1.	 Where was I most successful today in living 
out my purpose, priorities, or promises? 
2.	 What allowed me to be successful? Be specific.
3.	 Where was I unsuccessful today in living out 
my purpose, promises, or priorities?
4.	 What insights can I glean about what allowed 
me to be unsuccessful? Be specific.
5.	 What is the one thing I will implement tomor-
row in order to use the above insights to my 
advantage?
If you do this daily for 90 days you will have invested 
450 minutes out of the 129,600 minutes you have. That’s 
.003 percent of the minutes allocated to you. But you’re 
asleep for one third of that. So you only have 86,400 
minutes. That means you’ll have invested .005 percent of 
your time. This is a fraction of the time you have avail-
able, but like the parable of the mustard seed moving 
mountains, calendar grooming can, with the mindset of 
passion, innovation, and growth, move the mountain 
that is your leadership in satisfying and successful ways. 
So, what’s different in version two? Version two 
requires two additional steps and two additional ques-
tions. You should earmark 30 minutes during the weekend 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
190
to review your calendar in totality. Think of it as the end 
of a quarter of play in your favorite sport. In hindsight, 
what went well when you think of the week as a whole as 
opposed to individual days? You’ll ask yourself the same 
questions as you did all week, but with one small shift. 
You ask about “this week” as opposed to “today.”
The main purpose is to see your week holistically 
and in totality as opposed to an individual day. In doing 
so, you will raise your gaze from the exigencies of your 
days and see with a broader perspective. You will expand 
your peripheral vision and see around the corner of your 
week and think with more clarity about what you want 
next week. 
Let me talk for a moment to all of my hard-charging 
type A personalities who have a bias for proactive and 
immediate action. I know you are a doer and can easily 
rally yourself for action, and in many ways you have an 
admirable “Yes, I can, yes, I will” mindset. I want you on 
my team because of who you are and how you go about 
doing things. 
But, and this will seem counterintuitive, if you want 
to go faster, for five minutes go slower. If you groom your 
calendar you will move the needle on key issues with 
greater effectiveness. By taking five minutes each day to 
answer these questions through the prism of praising 
and purifying, your actions and the actions of those you 
work with will become laser-focused and allow you to 
accelerate toward your destination. Give me .005 of your 
time and I’ll prove it. 

191
6
The Perseverance Principle
Talent Is as Common as Table Salt and Can Ruin Your Dinner
I’ve met exceptionally smart and talented leaders who, 
when confronted with adversity, crumble like a house of 
cards in a windstorm. I’ve also met other leaders whose 
talent and brilliance is less pronounced, but who will 
persevere through unimaginable adversity in order to 
be successful. After all of my coaching and consulting 
work I’ve concluded that when it comes to transforma-
tional performance, talent is overrated and perseverance 
is underestimated. 
Perseverance is prominently displayed in the world 
of politics, business, and sports. In politics, Abraham 
Lincoln failed to be elected or reelected 12 times before 
finally being elected President of the United States. Sir Eric 
Dyson experimented 5,127 times in five years to develop 
his cyclone vacuum cleaner and now has a net worth of 
five billion pounds. Dallas Mavericks basketball team 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
192
owner and multi-billionaire Mark Cuban was known for 
working until 2 a.m. and not taking a vacation for seven 
years. And then there are the talented athletes who were 
not expected to become the mega stars they are because 
of talent or stature. Think of Michael Jordon, Serena 
Williams, Russell Wilson, and Wayne Gretzky. Are they 
talented? Absolutely. Were they or are they currently the 
hardest-working athlete in their sport? Absolutely. 
Each of these athletes was born with gifts and tal-
ents, but without a disciplined work ethic and persever-
ance their gifts and talents would never have reached the 
potential they did. Russell Wilson is too short to play in 
the NFL, but he won a Super Bowl in this first three years 
because of a mindset of “My 2016 goal is just to win. 
Win in everything I participate in.” Wayne Gretzky was 
the right height and weight for a hockey player and he 
had good instincts. But his instincts were honed from an 
immense number of hours on the ice. Serena Williams 
once said about success, “Luck has nothing to do with 
it, because I have spent many, many hours, countless 
hours, on the court working for my one moment in time, 
not knowing when it would come.”
Of all the principles we’ve covered so far the 
Perseverance Principle is where the rubber meets the 
road. It’s the principle that asks “How badly do I want 
my purpose? Will I overcome all the obstacles that will 
surely come? Will I not take no for an answer? Will I look 
through the fear of failure that will likely show up and 
be courageous anyway?” My contention is that when you 

193
The Perseverance Principle
articulate a big idea, hope, dream, or aspiration, you feel 
passionate about your perseverance. 
The War for Talent 
The term “war for talent” has been bandied about for the 
last two decades. It is an admonition to executives and 
entrepreneurs that no matter what great idea, product, or 
service you have, the achievement of your strategic goals 
will only happen when you have the right talent. Yes, tal-
ent is an essential element in all leaders’ success, as suc-
cess is never a solo activity. 
If you are like many of the leaders I work with, you 
have talented employees who lack the perseverance nec-
essary to overcome adversity. You may have recruited 
the best talent and skill set, but neglected to recruit the 
best mindset. A hospital CEO I know recruited one of 
the most prominent surgeons in the state. His talent was 
exceptional as was his love of his craft. What was equally 
exceptional was his disdain for collaboration with col-
leagues. His mindset was one of “I’m the best surgeon in 
this specialty on all the eastern coast.” Although true, his 
belief about his talent and repute as an exemplary spe-
cialty surgeon left others seeking medical care of their 
own. Yes, talent is important, but equally important is 
what happens in between the ears of each person. 
Your job as a transformational leader is to recog-
nize that talent, although essential, pales in comparison 
to perseverance. Yes, you want to have talented, smart, 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
194
gifted employees on your team. You also want to look 
around the room and know that the talent you have will 
run through the teeth of battle if need be to accomplish 
strategic initiatives. You can help them do that first and 
foremost with a compelling purpose. You too will never 
achieve transformational results without deep reserves of 
grit and determination. In the sections that follow, you’ll 
learn how to persevere in the face of adversity and how 
to overcome the four barriers to doing your best work. 
There are no easy magic bullet steps, however. What 
you’ll find is that the muscle you need to train more than 
any other is the muscle resting on your shoulders and in 
between your ears. In the next section you’ll learn strate-
gies for doing just that. 
Why Winston Churchill’s Advice to Schoolboys Applies to Adults
Perseverance is an interesting principle. The concept of 
perseverance is well known and of late has been studied 
and dissected and laid at the feet of how we were raised. 
Did we learn positive impulse control as children? I per-
sonally did not learn impulse control as a child. At 12 
years old, my family doctor said the reason for my inat-
tentiveness at school was rooted in ADD. That may have 
been true, but there were areas of my young life that 
fascinated me and that I would get lost in. I persevered 
immensely in subjects I was interested and engaged in, 
and relegated the traditional subjects to the scrap heap. 

195
The Perseverance Principle
In many ways I learned perseverance in counterintuitive 
ways and am glad I did.
Winston Churchill once addressed his school and 
talked about the last 10 months of World War II for Britain. 
He said Britain had been rejected by its allies to join in 
the war effort and was waging a war against Germany 
alone. He said, “But for everyone, surely, what we have 
gone through in this period—I am addressing myself to 
the school—surely from this period of 10 months this is 
the lesson: never give in, never give in, never, never, never, 
never—in nothing, great or small, large or petty—never 
give in except to convictions of honour and good sense.”
But, how do you never give in? Is it through force of 
will or is there a magic bullet? I don’t believe in sheer 
force of will or magic bullets, but I do believe in pro-
cesses. The process I use is the same process many pro-
fessional athletes use and is proven to increase your 
perseverance significantly. It’s called the “The Giddy-Up 
Process” and requires you to answer nine questions: 
1.	 What do you want? Answering this question 
is the jumping-off point for perseverance. 
Think back to the Purpose Principle. What is 
the big idea you have in mind for your per-
sonal and professional life? Does it fire you 
up? Does it inspire you? You will not perse-
vere if you have a fuzzy idea about what you 
want. There are millions of people walking 
around who have a vague notion of what they 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
196
want. But not you. With crystal-clear focus, 
describe what you want. 
2.	 What’s important about that to you? 
Throughout the Projects Principle as well as 
the Persuading Principle, I urged you to ask 
the question, “What’s important about that 
to you?” That question is now being asked 
of you. If you want a promotion to the VP of 
Sales position, what’s important about that to 
you? Keep in mind that your answers have to 
inspire you and light a fire underneath you. 
If you follow each of the principles and want 
to be rewarded with a promotion to the VP 
of Sales position, what’s the payoff for you, 
your organization, your employees, and your 
customers? If your answers are uninspiring 
and what you want and are doing are out of 
obligation, that becomes a long, slow slog 
through enemy territory. It will drain you 
and ensure your failure.
3.	 What will you need to give up? Make no mis-
take about it; what you want will require that 
you stop something. It may mean you’ll have 
to stop work at 6 p.m. and be home to have 
dinner with the family. It may require you to 
stop employing people you like, and instead 
employ people who are comfortable never 
rating the bar on their performance. It may 
require that you jettison the negative mindset 

197
The Perseverance Principle
you carry around and the corresponding 
need to please others. What are the top three 
or five things you’ll have to give up? List them 
and look at them in black and white.
4.	 What will you need to learn to be successful? 
If you need to give up being liked or decide 
you need to learn how to set the bar higher for 
you and your team, where will you learn how 
to do that? The tension you will always feel is 
the pull back to what is known and predictable 
and away from the desired yet unpredictable 
future. What book, class, or webinar will you 
take in order to learn how to do something? 
5.	 Who will you need to surround yourself 
with? In parallel to the last question, who 
will you surround yourself with? There is a 
minuscule chance you will be successful in 
persevering if you are surrounded by people 
who want the opposite of what you want. 
For many recovering addicts there is a time 
period in which they cannot spend time with 
friends or family members who drink or use 
drugs. The pull to their using days is so strong 
that they have to surround themselves with 
people who are, as they say in the recovery 
movement, “working.” That is, working the 
process and on the same journey. You too 
need people who believe in you and will sup-
port you in your grand journey. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
198
6.	 What story will you tell yourself every day? 
There are two stories being told every day 
inside our heads: the story of “Yes, we can” and 
the story of “No, we can’t.” These two stories 
become the way we perceive the world around 
us. It is not the car that pulls out in front of you 
that frustrates you. It’s the story you tell your-
self about the moron who needs to have his 
license revoked because of his inept driving. 
This stupid person of course cannot be known, 
but that’s the story we tell. We also tell similar 
stories about ourselves. What is the dominant 
thought you will carry with you as you move 
toward your purpose, priorities, and promises? 
7.	 What will you do when adversity hits? If you 
have lived on the Gulf of Mexico for 20 years 
and are told by the Weather Service that a hur-
ricane is headed to your end of the beach and 
will make land fall in 12 hours with winds of 
85 miles per hour, you will have been though 
hurricanes before and will have mapped out a 
process for handling danger such as this.
The same holds true for perseverance. 
If you know the obstacle you will face, for 
example, I buy junk food when I shop hun-
gry, you can make plans for not going to the 
grocery store hungry. If you know that not 
sleeping well makes you resistant to your 
teams’ ideas for process improvements, you 

199
The Perseverance Principle
can plan on going to bed earlier before big 
team meetings or can develop a process for 
vetting ideas for process improvement that 
does the heavy lifting for you.
8.	 How will you reward yourself? Far too often 
leaders believe that perseverance is the price 
of entry for being in the world of work. No 
matter what, get your job done through thick 
and thin. That is true in one sense. As a leader 
you are required to overcome adversity and 
get big projects done whether you’re on fire 
about the project or not. But on the other 
hand, if your work is continually asking you 
to over perform without any reward, you are 
headed for a flaming burnout and a massive 
amount of resentment. If you think about 
your purpose and the corresponding priori-
ties and promises, what will you do to reward 
yourself for engaging in a stretch leadership 
project and being successful? A special din-
ner with a loved one? A new pen? A new sport 
coat or piece of clothing you’ve admired? If 
you don’t have a reward there is a tendency to 
become a martyr or become resentful. 
9.	 Who is your exemplar? When I’m at my best 
with perseverance I have a mental picture of 
someone who is the epitome of what I want to 
accomplish. I may know the person or may have 
only read about them. Having an exemplar 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
200
also helps with the story I tell myself. My men-
tor Alan Weiss is one of my exemplars. His zest 
for life is one of his most compelling traits. He 
savors life and scoops up as many new expe-
riences as possible. He loves the theater, trav-
eling, wine, food, challenging conversations, 
reading, exploring new ideas, and helping peo-
ple like me fulfill all of my potential. 
For you to persevere in all of the important areas of 
your life you need to answer these nine questions. Just 
think back over the last three months either person-
ally or professionally. Which of these nine questions, if 
answered fully, would have been beneficial for you? If 
perseverance and sticking to your goals and aspirations 
are important to you, take five minutes to read this list 
again and answer the question in ways that clarify your 
thinking and focus your attention. When you do, the 
fog will lift as to what you need to do to persevere and 
you’ll accelerate toward your destination with gusto and 
conviction. In the next section, we’ll discuss the two pri-
mary ways you will approach success for you and learn 
how to play to your strengths with perseverance.
The Tortoise and the Hare in Organizations
The tortoise is not well thought of in the world of work. 
If the choice is between the slower, more deliberate 
and methodical tortoise and the rocket-fast but solitary 

201
The Perseverance Principle
and not persevering hare, most leaders prefer the hare. 
Why? Speed is vitally important to every business today. 
Customers expect hare-fast responses to their ques-
tions and when they receive tortoise-like responses the 
impression is that the business doesn’t care. What fol-
lows a business’s tortoise-like response is a hare-quick 
post to social media about the slow response.
How quickly does your business respond to shifts 
in the market or to customer complaints? When you see 
a process inside your organization that needs revamp-
ing, do you think about it for prolonged periods or do 
you hare-fast rework it? The reality is that the tortoise 
and hare responses are both valuable, just in different 
contexts. For example, there are initiatives that can be 
and need to be implemented in hare-fast time frames. 
There are also initiatives that can only be accomplished 
with what feels like plodding progress. For example, the 
personal mastery process doesn’t come blisteringly fast. 
You can make quick gains early in the transformational 
leadership process, but radical transformations come 
only after long periods of what is seen as mind-numbing 
effort with little or no progress. 
The Benefits of a Tortoise and a Hare
Since I am not advocating for the hiring of either long-
eared, herbivorous, fast-running hares or a land-­dwelling 
reptile, let’s be clear about the tortoise and the hare met-
aphor. The tortoise represents that part of our work and 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
202
professional lives that can only be accomplished with 
perseverance and a protective outer shell. The destination 
is clear and in focus, but it comes forward in baby steps. 
The hare represents the fast-twitch muscles required to 
get out of the blocks fast, but that cannot be sustained 
over long periods of time. You need both capabilities but 
will remain transactional in your benefits if you try and 
have employees do both. That is similar to asking a 350-
pound offensive lineman to play wide receiver on a foot-
ball team. 
In order for you to achieve your purpose, promises, 
and priorities you need to value the benefits and limi-
tations of both the tortoise and the hare. You need to 
build a protective outer shell to the naysayers and those 
who will suggest you slow down and not push so hard. 
You will have to embrace running at full tilt without hav-
ing all the answers to what seems like mission-critical 
questions. Winston Churchill embraced both the tor-
toise and the hare ways of working when he admonished 
his cabinet that negotiating with Hitler, even in the face 
of nonstop bombing and the death of British citizens, 
was futile. He also implored his cabinet members that 
success was achieved through the rapid deployment of 
new armaments. He did so while Germany had success-
fully invaded France and British troops were encircled at 
Dunkirk. Some may say he was incapable of being per-
suaded, but in essence Churchill knew that victory for 
Britain, however perilous, was not a one-pronged strat-
egy, but a two-pronged tortoise and hare strategy.

203
The Perseverance Principle
Three Steps to Building an Impervious Outer Shell to Detractors
Seek Respect, Not Friendship
My mentor Alan Weiss once told me that if I wanted to 
be liked that I should get a dog. As an advisor to exec-
utives and entrepreneurs my focus should be on being 
respected. Alan has a witty and penetrating way of cut-
ting to the chase. In the early part of my career doing 
business reorganizations and turnarounds I spent an 
inordinate amount of time trying to be liked as well as 
respected. In my role I had to make hard and difficult 
decisions and sought to make them in ways that would 
preserve my good standing with the people affected. It 
didn’t work. I worked harder and under greater stress 
because I needed to be liked. As an immigrant and some-
one who had moved numerous times during the forma-
tive years of my life, I unknowingly was trying to avoid 
being rejected while also being respected. The freedom 
I have known comes not from trying to be all things to 
all people, but rather to be the person who exemplifies 
my purpose, and is ruthless with keeping promises and 
works to create transformational value for my clients. 
Ask for Advice, Not Feedback
I learned an important lesson about the difference 
between advice and feedback. When I asked for feed-
back, people were all too willing to provide it, but I didn’t 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
204
have an interest in whether it was helpful or actionable. 
And oftentimes, I learned that the feedback I received 
was geared more toward preserving the self-worth and 
self-esteem of the person giving the feedback. I’ve found 
that my desire for success oftentimes shadows others’ 
desire and consequently the feedback from others with 
a differing view of success is rooted in having me be less 
successful. 
Transformational leaders ask for advice instead. 
Feedback doesn’t require action once the feedback is 
given. It is too often a one-way transaction in which 
the person giving the feedback sees their responsibility 
ending with the shared feedback. Advice, on the other, 
hand is shared between two colleagues who respect one 
another and who want the best for one other. Advice, 
when asked for sincerely, generates a substantially dif-
ferent response than feedback. Advice includes a desire 
on the other person’s part to partner with the person 
and advise them about how to achieve their purpose or 
desired state. Advice is seldom thrown over the transom, 
but rather handed personally to the other person. 
Court Your Purpose
The third way to be impervious to detractors is to court 
your purpose out of hiding and into the daylight of your 
everyday life. In the Purpose Principle the word love was 
used to describe one of the essential building blocks of your 
purpose. When you fall in love with your purpose you will 

205
The Perseverance Principle
treat it in a similar way as how you treated the early loves in 
your personal life. You will write notes of affection; you’ll 
spend time with the person and tell them all the things 
you like and admire about them. You act in ways that, in 
retrospect, may seem sappy and adolescent, but was rooted 
purely in how you felt toward the other person. You were 
impervious to the rational part of your mind, and were 
moved by the love toward the other person.
The same holds true for your purpose. Treat it with 
the care and love you would a person you love. Serenade 
them with words of affection and care, spend time enjoy-
ing their company, shower them with gifts that show 
your appreciation, and know that each day you feed your 
purpose the stronger it grows and the more of an insepa-
rable bond is created. 
Two Steps to Building Hare-Like Reflexes
Become Improvisational 
I spoke with an executive today about his inability to 
execute as fast as he wanted to. He knew the techni-
cal aspects of his work through and through, but was 
stumped as to why he was faltering with execution. What 
I heard in the 20 minutes we talked was his high need 
for every action and response on his part to be right. He 
had set up in his thinking that, when right, he would 
be successful. When he was wrong he would be a fail-
ure. He had painted himself into a corner and, in turn, 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
206
had imposed on others the same requirement. Wrong 
actions or decisions were, in his thinking, unacceptable. 
This belief slowed him and his team down substantially. 
At the root of the issue was a high level of self-criticism. 
He held himself to an exceptionally high standard and 
whenever the standard was at risk of not being met he 
did what he felt was required in order to be right, and 
unknowingly communicated to his team the same high 
standard he had for himself along with the criticism. 
Although you may think this requires a therapist to 
resolve, I beg to differ. What I’ve seen with smart and 
intelligent executives is that the moment they see the fal-
lacy of their thinking they move naturally toward fixing 
it. We discussed using three steps to being more improvi-
sational. The first is to shift the thinking from black-and-
white, right-and-wrong thinking to the good, better, and 
best thinking. For example, a good answer may not be his 
ideal answer, but it’s good in that it creates a starting point 
for creating a better answer, which, if followed by experi-
mentation and risk-taking, can lead to the best answer. We 
also discussed how improvisation is high art and requires 
wicked smart wits and can be developed over time. This 
line of thinking resonated with him as he saw this as intel-
lectually appealing. He also agreed to watch, listen, and 
catch himself being critical of himself and others and to 
identify when he does it and under what circumstances. 
The more light he can bring to this aspect of his leader-
ship, the more improvisational he will become. 

207
The Perseverance Principle
Build Muscle Memory
I’ve been a runner for most of my life. A sprinter by train-
ing and experience, I enjoy the thrill of full-throttle run-
ning. It’s hard for me to run in a group and not to want 
to speed up and overtake the person up front, but when 
I started doing triathlons the sprinter in me learned the 
hard way that my muscles needed to adapt to long, slow 
swimming, biking, and running, and that completing 
was the objective—not competing. 
Experts in triathlons taught me that my muscles 
could adapt and that I could infuse sprinting into my 
triathlons, but only after months and years of persistent 
training. Once my muscles had learned both the sprint-
ing and extended duration aspects of a triathlon, I could 
choose the appropriate approach to swimming, biking, 
and running at the appropriate time. When you want to 
run like a hare you cannot go out and in one day become 
hare-like. It takes time and a process of gradually and 
purposefully increasing the load on your muscles to 
handle the increasing demands. For example, which is 
more comfortable for you? The tortoise or hare way of 
working? If the tortoise, decide to decrease the amount 
of time it takes you to do the least attractive part of your 
job by 25 percent. If you prefer the hare way of work-
ing, which area of your leadership do you see as taking 
way too long to accomplish? Who is the one person who 
you trust and respect that you can go and ask for advice 
about how to benefit from working with the tortoise? 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
208
Whichever skill set you want to develop, recognize 
that when a purpose has grabbed hold of you and has 
you fired up about accomplishing it, there is an unwaver-
ing spirit that encircles you. You wake up in the morning 
visualizing your day and how you will enthusiastically 
exemplify your purpose. You go through your day 
actively finding ways of infusing your purpose into your 
voicemails, emails, and meetings. When you think of 
your critical decisions that need to be made you have 
your purpose operating in the foreground. 
But in order to persevere and achieve transforma-
tional results for yourself, and before you can assist 
others in doing the same, you have to recognize that 
you cannot be a 350-pound offensive lineman as well 
as a wide receiver simultaneously. You have a persever-
ance DNA, a talent, skill, and preference for one type 
of action over another. But you can become impervious 
to naysayers and obstacles by following these steps. In 
the next section we’ll discuss the four obstacles to doing 
your best work and integrate the learnings from this sec-
tion to the next. 
The Four Barriers to Doing Your Best Work
Without question, every transformational leader wants to 
do compelling and meaningful work, and they see their 
leadership purpose as the starting point for doing so. Yet 
with every starting point comes a slowing point that can, 
if left unattended, lead to a stopping point. Leaders who 

209
The Perseverance Principle
are successful and satisfied have learned how to address 
the four most common barriers that inhibit them from 
accomplishing their purpose. By understanding these 
leadership barriers, leaders are better prepared to over-
come the barriers and lead purposefully rather than 
accidentally. 
1. Inertia 
Inertia is seductive. It is easy to get lulled into doing your 
work and leading the work of others in the same ways 
you have always done it, even if it doesn’t work anymore. 
Every person on the planet knows that change is certain 
and that growth is optional, yet the appeal to remaining 
the same is appealing because it doesn’t require change 
and the accompanying discomfort of learning some-
thing new. Inertia infects us with a virus that multiplies 
the acceptance of replicating the past even in the face of 
knowingly doing uninspired and pedestrian work. Ask 
10 leaders if their work is inspired, creative, transforma-
tional, innovative, and purposeful, and the affirmative 
responses will be in the one-to-two people range. Ask 
also the same 10 leaders if they honestly would describe 
their work as lacking creativity and producing safe and 
predictable results, and you’ll hear the affirmative six to 
eight times. How is this possible? Quite simply, as we dis-
cussed in the Promises Principle, when leaders have 12 
priorities and feel overwhelmed, overworked, and over-
burdened, the likelihood of them devoting more energy, 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
210
time, and resources to reinventing work is almost non-
existent. They’ve become Sisyphus simply waiting for the 
end-of-the-day boulder to roll down the hill and squash 
them. They’ve given up and resigned themselves to their 
current state of affairs. 
What is astounding, however, is that when leaders 
find their one hope, dream, or idea that’s grabbed hold 
of them, when they see their way to cull the herd of their 
priorities, when they stop trying to correct their weak-
nesses and instead play to their strengths, it’s curtain 
time for inertia. It doesn’t mean that life becomes but-
terflies, ice cream, and unicorns, but it does mean the 
mindset of the leader is transformed and so are their 
beliefs as to what is possible. 
2. Ignorance 
You can be smart and ignorant simultaneously. For 
example, a leader can be technically brilliant, well-
educated, have a brilliant and compelling work history, 
and remain ignorant about an employee’s or customer’s 
hopes, dreams, and aspirations. 
I also believe it is a safe assumption for me to view 
those of you reading this book as well-intentioned, smart, 
and talented leaders. I don’t think you are broken, nor do 
I see you as a slothful ignoramus. What I do see in every 
boardroom, cubicle, and corner office are leaders who are 
either not informed or ill-informed about the power of 
purpose, who have become addicted to using hard facts 

211
The Perseverance Principle
and data to lead themselves and their organizations; I see 
leaders who have forgotten that their behaviors are impact-
ing their performances and that capturing the hearts and 
minds of employees is job number one. They are smart, 
don’t get me wrong. But they are smart about all things 
other than what’s required to create the organization 
transformation they so desperately want. They’re ignorant 
about the people and relationship side of leadership. 
Throughout this book you have been introduced to 
strategies for winning back your heart and mind as well 
as the hearts and minds of those you lead. In one sense, 
you are no longer ignorant about the art and science of 
leadership, but ignorant about what barrier is most hold-
ing you back. Is it truly that you don’t know how, or have 
you been ensnared by inertia and haven’t found the exit 
door? Before you answer what’s ensnared you let’s talk 
about the next barrier, incompetence. 
3. Inexperience
Inexperience in a transformational leadership context is 
not as severe an indictment as it sounds. It doesn’t per-
tain to the long-term ability of a leader, but instead is 
an observation about the short-term talents and skills 
needed to do transformational work. Inexperience 
applies to new or more senior leaders who are fully capa-
ble of learning how to perform meaningful work, but 
who lack the specific, targeted, and current skill set to 
become a transformational leader. Inexperience points 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
212
more to the opportunity for skill development, both for 
leaders as well as their direct reports. 
It might be easy for you to say, “Yes, my team is inex-
perienced and I want to develop a more innovative, pas-
sionate, and growth-focused mindset.” It might be easy 
to clarify the skills required to handle an upset customer 
or retain a customer who called to close their account. 
But the transformational leader is continually asking 
themselves what new experiences and education they 
need to lead the transformation they envision. Do you 
need more experience leading based on purpose? Do you 
need more experience about crafting your leadership 
promises and priorities? How about persuading others or 
leading strategic projects? If your answer is that there are 
no new experiences or education you need, can I remind 
you to reread the ignorance and inertia section again? If 
not, you’ll want to listen for the roar of the heavy boul-
der rolling down the hall toward you. 
4. Indifference 
Nine times out of 10, indifference comes from not hav-
ing a clear and compelling leadership and/or organiza-
tional purpose. For some leaders, achieving financial 
results is their purpose. This purpose, however, does 
little to win the hearts and minds of employees or cus-
tomers. Yes, achieving financial results is essential to 
remaining relevant, but financial metrics as a purpose 

213
The Perseverance Principle
counterintuitively ensures lower performance. What 
transformational leaders recognize is that making a 
meaningful difference in a person’s life jettisons indif-
ference and brings forth greater creativity, energy, and a 
willingness to change and grow.
I’ve seen indifference come in many different forms. 
There is the indifference that comes from inept senior 
leaders, unrelenting budget cuts, contentious contract 
negotiations, disgruntled customers, sales, marketing 
and operations misalignments, product quality misman-
agement, and a personal life that is out of control. I’ve 
also seen it rooted in simple things, such as poor health, 
poor sleep, and poor nutrition. 
The times in which indifference comes from some-
one who truly just doesn’t give one iota about the prod-
uct, customer, performance, reputation, or well-being 
of a coworker of colleague, the indifference needs to be 
rooted out and treated like a cancer. If it’s left to its own 
devices it will metastasize and kill you or your organi-
zation. This is where transformational leaders step up. 
They will not allow the inertia, inexperience, or igno-
rance to deter them. They will be on a mission to remove 
indifference the moment it raises its head. 
Every principle you have learned about so far is 
required to overcome these four barriers to doing your best 
work and for creating a culture in which others come to do 
their best work. Although there are times that removing 
the cancer of indifference may require an immediate and 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
214
radical procedure, most often what’s required is persever-
ance in the face of adversity. In the next section, you’ll 
learn how to leverage both the tortoise and hare ways of 
approaching work and create transformational results. 
Why Execution Trumps Strategy
In the vocabulary of the Perseverance Principle, execu-
tion trumps strategy for three primary reasons, each of 
which is rooted in outdated and incorrect perceptions 
about strategy. These perceptions, when seen as a whole, 
point emphatically to the importance of thinking stra-
tegically about your leadership, your business, your 
employees, your results, and your sense of personal sat-
isfaction and success. However, they also point to the 
game-changing reality that strategic thinking, if not 
married to ruthless execution, is destined to fill up yet 
another shelf of highly thought of but rarely used bind-
ers of strategic plans. Look at your bookshelf—either on 
your computer or a physical bookshelf—and ask your-
self one question: If I were to grade me, my team, and 
my organization on the ability to convert strategic ideas 
into actionable, profitable, and rewarding results, what 
score would I give on a 1 to 10 scale? In this situation, 
1 is deplorable and 10 is exemplary. What follows are 
the most important and relevant misperceptions about 
strategy and execution.

215
The Perseverance Principle
Outdated Perception #1: Strategy Is a Respite From a Busy Day
The first incorrect perception most people hold is that 
strategy sessions are a way to tune out the exigencies of 
the day and engage in intellectually stimulating, some-
times fun, energizing conversations. Although you may 
get energized by strategy, the best perception to hold of 
strategy is that it is a rigorous process of self-examina-
tion about prior results, what worked and didn’t work, 
and what the demands facing you and your organiza-
tion are. Strategy sessions are simply a launching pad for 
doing work that will improve your business position. It is 
essential that you answer questions such as “Where will 
we as an organization be in two to three years?,” “How 
will we make a meaningful difference in our customer’s 
life?,” or “What do we want our employees to experience 
and achieve in two to three years?” These are engaging 
and important questions and, for many people, enjoy-
able because they are transported away from the harsh 
reality of today’s priorities. Strategy sessions allow them 
to imagine a future full of new ­possibilities—new pos-
sibilities that may very well be more enticing than the 
current state of affairs. 
New Perception: Strategy sessions are a staging area 
for accelerated performance. Period. Yes, having a clear 
picture of your future is essential, and yes, being passion-
ate about your future is required, but the stage needs to 
be set that, in order to persevere in achieving your future 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
216
state, the persistent and consistent execution required is 
what needs to be clearly in mind moving forward. 
Outdated Perception #2: Successful Execution Eliminates Failure
In the world of work many people have come to the con-
clusion that they have to be successful in every endeavor 
they undertake. Success therefore requires eliminating 
failure, as failure is not tolerated in many organizations. 
The stakes are too high, the investments too large, and the 
customer too finicky. Yes, winning the war is required, 
but to think for a moment that the war can be won with-
out losing a battle or two along the way is foolhardy.
The most negative and misplaced perception I 
encounter in my work is the one that states: If you fail, 
you will be relegated to the district office in Fargo, North 
Dakota, and your career path will be significantly lim-
ited. This type of thinking means that many leaders 
come to execution tentatively. They are hesitant to exe-
cute because if they execute incorrectly they will be seen 
in a less favorable light. 
New Perception: Infuse into your leadership the 
belief in F3: Failing Forward Faster. Persevering in the face 
of adversity is assisted when examples of leaders and 
individuals who have achieved noteworthy results are 
front and center. Remember the examples of Sir James 
Dyson, Oprah Winfrey, Babe Ruth, J.K. Rowling, Thomas 
Edison, and Abraham Lincoln. Inculcate into your meet-
ings and leadership that if you are not failing, you are 

217
The Perseverance Principle
not trying anything new. Perseverance is an intellectual 
construct and not a value to be exemplified.
Outdated Perception #3: Speed Is Dangerous
In the world of automobile racing speed is the name of 
the game. The person who can go around the track the 
fastest and cross the finish line ahead of their competi-
tors is the winner. Race-car drivers in turn go the fastest 
they can by being right on the edge of speed and safety. 
They are not afraid of going fast. As a matter of fact, 
they are continually looking for ways to go faster, not 
in foolish or reckless ways, but in ways that are right on 
the edge. Spectators may find motorsports exhilarating 
to watch, but when given the opportunity to experience 
the speed of automobile racing up close and personal, 
the spectator squeals like a 5 year old who just saw a 
mouse in her bedroom. 
And yet, speed is the new currency in the world of 
work. The amount of $10 million can be transferred 
from one financial institution to another in the click of 
a mouse. Customer perceptions can change in an instant 
if an employee’s reaction time to a problem or issue is 
too slow. But far too many employees fear speed because 
they see speed as reckless, imperfect, and undesirable. 
They feel this way because they are metaphorically driv-
ing on the racetrack of work, not in a Formula One racing 
care, but in the family minivan. You too would feel out 
of control racing in a minivan. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
218
New Perception: Redefine speed as dangerous only 
if the vehicle and racetrack you are driving on are mis-
matched. Discuss what new skill set, mindset, equip-
ment, processes, and systems are required to decrease the 
time to market for new products or increase the response 
time for key customers. Have a bias for consistent and 
persistent action. Redefine what the costs are for slower 
speed and what the payoffs are for faster speed.
Perseverance and execution trump strategy because 
strategy is fine and good in that it sets direction for you, 
your team, and even your organization. But the reality is 
that achieving your strategy requires a perseverance that 
is best described as ruthless and unrelenting. 
In this chapter you’ve likely found one or two areas 
that point directly to the barriers holding you back from 
your most important strategic initiatives. The tough-love 
part of transformational leadership is this: Until you fall 
in love with your purpose and want it with such feroc-
ity, the perseverance described here is simply words on 
a page. When your purpose grabs hold of you and won’t 
let go, the words on this page are no longer intellectual 
constructs floating around in your head, but rather ideas 
that compel you to lace up your running shoes and move 
your feet. The next section is about converting every-
thing you’ve read into a final plan for being a catalyst for 
transformational results.

219
7
The Preparation Principle
Living a Purposeful Life Versus an Accidental Life
Although I advocate for being purposeful in every area 
of your life, there are events and times when you will not 
and cannot be fully prepared. On December 13, 2016, 
my family experienced a disaster that no one wanted nor 
were we prepared for. My brother-in-law, Joey Sharron, 
was swimming in Mexico when two waves hit him from 
behind and pushed him head-first into a sand bar. His 
neck was broken on impact and were it not for a woman 
standing on the beach 25 yards away and yelling for her 
husband to help him, he likely would have drowned and 
been pronounced dead at the scene. 
He received 15 minutes of CPR without being resus-
citated. As the lifeguards were stopping CPR, a physician 
from an adjacent hotel, who had watched the accident, 
ran for a defibrillator, and arrived on the scene and 
started CPR again. His arrival and intervention lasted 10 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
220
additional minutes and, after administering four shocks, 
he revived Joey. 
Emergency surgery was performed in Mexico 
and three days later Joey was transported to Mass 
General in Boston where he was diagnosed as a quad-
riplegic. He is alive, has no brain damage, and has an 
amazing mindset. He is, in many ways, preparing him-
self and his family to accept his prognosis merely as a 
starting point, not his finishing point. 
Two weeks into Joey’s injury I’m not fully prepared to 
grasp the enormity of his injury or the impact this will 
have on each family member. There are aspects of caring 
for and living with an accident of this magnitude that is 
beyond comprehension and leaves each of us crying and 
ill-prepared to deal with the severity of his condition. 
But in the face of this accident, Joey specifically, and 
my family in general, have learned something new each 
and every day about what’s possible—possible for his 
recovery, possible for his work, and possible for what we 
can do to make the healing process healthier. Watching 
Joey handle this adversity in inspiring and courageous 
ways tells me that Joey can teach me a lot about the 
Preparation Principle and Transformational Leadership. 
Joey has said that he’s never going to give up and that he 
knows exactly what’s going to be thrown at him physi-
cally and emotionally. He knows this is a massive test 
for his health and quality of life, but also for his wife, 
family, and business too. He’s not naive in any way, but 

221
The Preparation Principle
he believes that how he thinks about his injury and by 
the choices he makes with his mindset and his rehabili-
tation, he can overcome the situation and lead a produc-
tive and healthy life. Joey’s attitude is transforming what 
I believed was possible and is preparing me to be amazed 
at what he accomplishes. 
The title of this section is living a purposeful life and 
not an accidental life. Accidental doesn’t mean accidental 
in the sense Joey experienced or that your leadership and 
life are mere accidents. But what I find with every execu-
tive and entrepreneur I’ve ever worked with is that the 
demands of their work are inhibiting them from design-
ing the leadership and life that allows them to flourish. 
The reality is that your transformational leadership 
journey will be filled with obstacles and barriers you 
anticipated as well as those you didn’t. You’ve likely 
looked at aspects of your leadership as well as your orga-
nization’s performance and realized much of the work 
you are doing needs to be transformed. You may have 
looked at your customer experiences and seen where 
they need to be transformed, or that your employee 
experiences need to be transformed in order for them 
to be able to bring their best selves to work. By now, you 
might be saying to yourself that your work needs to be 
converted from a long, slow slog in enemy territory with 
bullets flying over your head, into the highest expression 
of what you hope for as a leader.
One executive I worked with repeatedly told me of 
the eight to 10 meetings they were in each day, and the 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
222
250 emails they received. There was no white space to 
slow down and think, and they lamented that they felt 
like a human doing as opposed to a human being.
There are times when it is the nature of the beast to 
go from meeting to meeting and to navigate a mountain 
of emails. But the risk in doing so for prolonged periods 
of time is that you end up convincing yourself that you’re 
doing your best work. That would be similar to thinking 
that you could run a marathon every week for 52 weeks 
and expect for the 13th marathon to be as strong and 
powerful as the first, or that the 52nd would hold the 
potential for a personal best. That’s twisted thinking. 
Whatever transformation you want for your organi-
zation, it will always start with you preparing for and 
undergoing an individual transformation first. There is 
no way to get around that. And here in the Preparation 
Principle, I want to prepare you not only for the flourish-
ing leadership transformation that’s possible, but more 
importantly, for the personal transformation that leaves 
you and those who are important to you successful as 
well as supremely satisfied. 
In order for you to cut the time it takes you to achieve 
greater success in half, you’ll need to be prepared to 
address the realities of transformational leadership. 
Specifically, you’ll need to learn to: welcome barriers and 
obstacles; be the role model for what you envision; leave 
the safe, comfortable, known, and predictable; and pre-
pare for greatness and learn from a 16th-century monk. 
Let’s cover each one in more detail. 

223
The Preparation Principle
Your Greatest Barriers and Obstacles are the Gateway to Your 
Greatest Successes
Your greatest successes are hidden in your greatest fail-
ures and barriers. Do you believe that? Let me make my 
case. Whenever you find yourself stuck or hindered from 
accomplishing what you want, there is a barrier or obsta-
cle that’s preventing you from greater progress and, once 
addressed, will allow you to accelerate toward greater suc-
cess. That’s a no-brainer, right? Since you likely deal with 
obstacles and barriers every day I’ll add that what hinders 
you most from greater success is not the obstacle per se, 
but that eight out of 10 times the barriers you encounter 
are mindset—not skill set—barriers, and in turn, culti-
vating a mindset of passion, innovation, and growth for 
yourself as well as for those you lead and work with will 
be the catalyst for overcoming obstacles and barriers. This 
is the first area of leadership you need to be prepared for. 
And yet, preparing yourself to achieve your greatest 
successes requires a new frame of reference about bar-
riers and obstacles, a frame of reference that welcomes 
barriers and obstacles because they provide you with 
three benefits. They are: 
1.	 Test your mettle. 
2.	 Confirm what you do know and what you 
still need to learn. 
3.	 Be a role model to others for what you hope 
will become commonplace. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
224
Let’s dive into each one in more detail. 
Test Your Mettle
Think about the rescue of Apollo 13 in 1970. Fifty hours 
into their mission and 200,000 miles from Earth, some-
thing went terribly wrong. Minutes after mission control 
asked the crew to turn on a hydrogen and oxygen tank–
stirring fan, a sound that would send chills up any per-
son’s spine was heard. A loud and unplanned bang led to 
fluctuations in capsule power and the firing of the space-
craft’s thrusters.
The problem was a second oxygen tank explosion fol-
lowing a short circuit. With limited power and life-essen-
tial resources running out, the crew had to abort their 
planned landing on the moon and instead use the lunar 
module as their lifeline. Engineers were given a mandate 
to bring the astronauts home safely. They worked around 
the clock to figure out how to provide them with oxygen, 
power, and a plan to return to Earth. 
Close to four days after that ominous bang, Apollo 
13 hurtled itself around the moon and successfully 
splashed down on Earth. Their return was hailed as one 
of the world’s most unprecedented engineering achieve-
ments and stunned not only the astronauts, but the 
world at large. This rescue was the ultimate obstacle as 
well as the ultimate in testing the engineering mettle 
of NASA. Afterward, this event role modeled what was 

225
The Preparation Principle
possible and allowed, rather than the cancellation of 
other missions. It also allowed the continuation of the 
Apollo program. 
It is not hyperbole to say that imbedded in every 
obstacle and barrier is the seed of your greatest achieve-
ment. Steve Jobs was ousted from Apple after a disagree-
ment with cofounder Steve Wozniak. Steve Jobs never 
saw the oust coming and later said that getting fired 
from Apple was the best thing that could have ever hap-
pened to him. Jobs turned this obstacle of being kicked 
out of the company and focused on his Next and Pixar 
projects. His focus resulted in him later selling Pixar to 
Disney for $7.4 billion dollars. And after he returned to 
Apple he shepherded Apple’s market capitalization from 
$3 billion in 1997 to $350 billion in 2011. He did not go 
quietly into the night, sit in a corner, and lament his lot 
in life. On the contrary, he threw himself into other proj-
ects and channeled his drive and energy purposefully. 
Confirm What You Do Know and What You Still Need to Learn 
One of the great things about obstacles and barriers is 
that it confirms what we do know and what we don’t 
know and need to learn. In the NASA example, imagine a 
meeting with all of the engineers when they learn of the 
Apollo 13 disaster. I envision a meeting in which every 
engineer lists out what is known about the situation. 
They’ll need oxygen, thrust (to preserve physical as well 
as lunar module power), and they’ll need easy-to-follow 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
226
instructions because of the lack of food and energy. That 
probably resulted in another list of what they did not 
know and needed to find out. What do we not know how 
to fix now that we need to fix first in order to make prog-
ress in bringing these astronauts home?
Obstacles are delightful in this regard. There are 
things in every form of adversity that you will know how 
to address or fix. But it will also be true that there are 
things you won’t know how to address or fix, and that 
will require you to learn something new, expand your 
knowledge, and possibly your ability to work with diverse 
groups of people to come up with the best solution.
Be a Role Model to Others for What You Hope Will Become Commonplace 
Leaders like you, Joey, and me are role models. People 
are continually watching leaders, especially in times 
of adversity, and take their cues as to what they should 
do when the road to success is blocked. When employ-
ees see a leader respond with courage, confidence, and 
commitment, the message is sent in ways corporate 
marketing or human resources departments cannot 
send: This is the way we as an organization or team 
respond.
The important insight about role modeling is this: As 
a role model, you should welcome being tested, because 
when you’re tested and smack up against a yogurt-­
covered fan, you’ll learn more and grow more than you 
ever imagined possible, and you’ll become the exemplar 

227
The Preparation Principle
for your organization as to what values and beliefs guide 
your leadership. If you didn’t have obstacles or barriers 
you would never have the refining fire for your leader-
ship or the opportunity in real time to powerfully com-
municate what’s important to you. You would also have 
no urgency or desire to get better. You would be compla-
cent and content to remain the same.
Barriers and obstacles, which you will find from 
doing the work I recommend, are necessary in order 
for you to become a transformational leader. And quite 
frankly, if your mindset is such that you want to avoid 
barriers and obstacles, your leadership becomes fat, 
flabby, uninspired, and, frankly, pedestrian. 
Throughout the seven principles the case I’m mak-
ing is this: When you find and articulate the one idea, 
hope, dream, or aspiration that has grabbed hold of 
you and won’t let go, it’s a game-changer. It changes 
how you engage at work as well as at home, it changes 
how you engage with employees and customers, and it 
changes the performance and results of your teams and 
organization. 
But for many of you the idea of having this rallying 
cry for your leadership is clouded by your experience of 
the corporate communications department’s work on 
mission, purpose, and vision. Once articulated and dis-
tributed within six months no one can remember it or 
discuss it in emotional and compelling terms, so it dies a 
slow and quiet death. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
228
However, when you work through the Purpose 
Principle with earnestness and commitment, the clarity 
and focus you need to take barriers and obstacles and 
convert them into opportunities for greatness emerges 
with greater frequency. Until you have this clarity and 
focus for your leadership, your leadership is more intel-
lectual and less emotional. Yes, intellect is important, but 
to overcome big obstacles, you and your team must care 
deeply about something bigger than yourself; something 
other than money, profit, market share, and so on. Yes, 
they’re important, but transformational leaders are in 
love with something noble, uplifting, and meaningful. 
In the next section we’ll look at how not preparing is 
the death knell for your desired results and what plans 
you need to make to become transformational.
Leaving the Comfortable Confines of the Safe, Predictable, 
and Known
From time to time you’ll find that what you’re doing is no 
longer working. I have worked with technology execu-
tives for more than 10 years. One of the hardest things 
they have had to leave behind is their enjoyment of the 
technical side of their work. They entered the technol-
ogy field because of an enjoyment or skill in program-
ming and have become enamored with programming 
or the intricacies of their technology. Although loving 
what you do and being good at it is essential to success at 
work, they’ve lost sight of the business value technology 

229
The Preparation Principle
brings to an organization. When I suggest they forget 
their technology and instead focus on the business and 
economic value to their technology, I’m rewarded with 
deer-in-the-headlights looks. You would have thought I 
asked them to put their first child up for adoption. The 
separation anxiety they experience is rooted in the care-
fully constructed value they ascribe to themselves. If 
they’re an expert in their technology they will be seen 
as valuable and successful. When I ask them to focus on 
business and economic value to technology investments 
they don’t know how to do that, have never learned how 
to calculate ROI on technology spending, and experi-
ence the fight, freeze, or flee response. Importantly, until 
they know how to do what I’m asking, and until they see 
the value in doing so, they remain stuck in the known, 
safe, and predictable. 
The same holds true in healthcare. Several of my hos-
pital clients have physicians and nurses who can only see 
the world through the prism of their specialty or practice 
area. The implications for their practice areas on the over-
all businesses are not considered. The same can be found 
in higher education where many professors never leave 
the safe and comfortable confines of the ivory tower to 
know what is truly in the best interest of the world of 
work students are entering.
So what’s required in order to leave the safe and com-
fortable confines of the known and predictable? If you 
want to get the results you dream of, be prepared to step 
into the crucible that leadership is and recognize that 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
230
there are four key motivators for leaving the safe, com-
fortable, and known. 
Dreams
The clarion call for writing this book was to prompt you 
to think bigger about your leadership and to connect 
your thinking with plans that have the power to convert 
your work life from a job into the highest expression pos-
sible of what is most important to you. In no uncertain 
terms, my dream was for you to become a catalyst for 
human flourishing in the world of work. But that cannot 
happen accidentally. It can only happen purposefully 
when a leader is no longer satisfied or content with his or 
her leadership and results. 
When you have a dream for your professional life 
there will be times when you experience high levels of 
dissatisfaction. Dissatisfaction is a sign that your dreams 
are being thwarted or are at risk of being compromised. 
If you are never dissatisfied with your current state or 
the changes taking place around you, your dreams are 
either too small or you have an unprecedented tolerance 
for maintaining the status quo. You go on a diet when 
you’re dissatisfied with how your pants feel and when 
your dreams of feeling comfortable in your clothes are in 
jeopardy. You’ll replace your car when you’re dissatisfied 
with the upkeep of your current vehicle or a dream of 
driving a newer model pervades your thinking. Each of 
our dissatisfactions are rooted in a dream we have. 

231
The Preparation Principle
The same holds true with your leadership. What part 
of your leadership are you dissatisfied with? What part of 
your leadership do you think needs to be dreamed of dif-
ferently so that you can enjoy work more and also have 
a bigger impact on others? Dissatisfaction is not a nega-
tive. It’s the catalyst you need in order to start the process 
of dreaming bigger in order to leave the safe, comfort-
able, and known.
Choices
Each and every one of us has the capacity for floundering 
or flourishing. It is a choice we get to make and is ours 
alone. Which have you chosen today? To choose to flour-
ish takes courage. Courage comes from the French word 
coeur and means “heart.” For you to choose to step out-
side of the safe, known, and predictable into uncharted 
territory is, as Joseph Campbell said in The Power of 
Myth, a heroic choice. The dissatisfaction you may feel 
compels you, oftentimes reluctantly, to venture outside 
the known and safe and to pursue something different 
even in the face of not having a clearly charted path. 
Dissatisfaction propels us to make choices based on the 
full knowledge that remaining the same is no longer an 
option, and that making a tentative choice forward into 
the unknown will be supported in time with faith and 
courage. The journey to transformational leadership 
is never linear and requires all of the seven principles. 
Each principle can help you to be more courageous and 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
232
turn away from what has made you successful in the past 
toward what will make you successful in the future.
Beliefs
Let’s be clear: To be a transformational leader you must 
believe you are not a victim. You have the power and 
capacity to make decisions, to make plans, to learn new 
skills, and expand your experiences so as to be more 
valuable to your organization, your customers, and your 
employees. With very few exceptions, the senior leaders 
in your organization believed in something and were 
purposeful as to what they wanted to create either in 
their role, scope, or impact. The believed that what they 
envisioned was possible and that they were responsible 
for creating it.
While working with Starbucks, a senior vice presi-
dent told me the story about how the founder and CEO, 
Howard Shultz, started working for Starbucks as a mar-
keting manager and left four years later to start his own 
coffee company because of a disagreement with the 
owners. He believed he would be better off leaving and 
starting his own company. Four years later he bought 
the company from the original owners and now has an 
empire of 25,000 coffee shops across the world. 
The story was told in the hopes of sharing insights 
as to what makes Starbucks what it is today. Starbucks is 
led by a CEO who believes it is better to walk away from 
situations that are not right and don’t hold the potential 

233
The Preparation Principle
for doing great work. Was there a risk for Howard Shultz 
to leave? Certainly. Was there a benefit? Certainly. What 
was present in copious amounts for Howard Shultz was 
a belief that living and leading a life of his choosing is 
never dictated by circumstance. He believed and chose 
to live his life in ways where he had greater control and 
influence and not to delegate that to others. Will all of 
your decisions pay as handsome a dividend for you as 
Howard Shultz’s decision did for him? Actually, yes, they 
will. They will just look different. 
If you dream, choose, and believe, the likelihood is 
that you will commit to moving outside of the safe, com-
fortable, and known. The commitment that’s next is to 
continually put one foot in front of the other without 
wanting guarantees or to know everything will be per-
fect. It’s about making progress every day toward that 
which is important and inspiring for you. That brings us 
to the fourth key motivator. 
Action
What one idea have you learned so far that prompts 
you to do something different, scary, bold, or exciting? 
Leadership is primarily a solo activity in that no one can 
dream, make choices for, or believe for you. You must do 
all of that on your own. But once you’ve dreamed, made a 
decision, and fostered an unshakable belief, doing some-
thing each day that moves the needle on performance 
comes naturally. More than anything every successful 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
234
leader has cultivated a bias for action—a bias for taking 
one action every day that gets you closer to greater suc-
cess and satisfaction. 
My experience is that the motivators in the shortest 
supply are dream and belief and the motivator that is in 
the greatest supply is action. And therein lies the dilemma 
for many leaders. They find themselves compelled to act 
but haven’t clarified their dreams and by extension culti-
vated the belief necessary to be successful. I am not naïve, 
nor do I have my head in the sand when I consider the 
demands faced by most leaders today. The rate of change 
has accelerated to the point that most leaders feel dizzy, 
overwhelmed, overburdened, and over-scheduled. 
What should you plan on doing? You should prepare 
yourself for a breakthrough. If you like the idea of a break-
through in performance and what it means professionally, 
let me also prepare you for what precedes a breakthrough: 
a breakdown. It’s not uncommon for breakthroughs to be 
preceded by breakdowns in communication, breakdowns 
in resource allocation, breakdowns in employee/leader 
trust and respect. Wherever you envision a breakthrough, 
attaining it requires overcoming your biggest barriers, 
leaving the safe and comfortable behind, and embarking 
on a hero’s adventure. Although your breakthroughs are 
aided and made easier with the seven principles of trans-
formational leadership, in the next section you’ll learn 
a three-step process for taking the dreaming, choosing, 
believing, and action framework and making it relevant 
to your everyday work life. 

235
The Preparation Principle
Failing to Prepare Means Preparing to Fail
Is failing to prepare the death knell of transformational 
leadership? Yes, but not in the manner you’re accus-
tomed to. The planning I’m advocating is the planning 
for undergoing the individual transformation required 
to lead the organizational transformation you desire. 
In the Purpose Principle, I claimed that defining your 
purpose is not the same as looking at life through rose-
colored glasses. The questions about purpose, meaning, 
and significance are not softball questions, but rather the 
hardball strategic life questions my clients courageously 
ask themselves. 
And for too many of you, the exigency of your daily 
to-do list forces you into a transactional way of engag-
ing with life and leads to never planning to live the most 
rewarding and enriching life. It’s not in the plans, so it’s 
not going to happen. 
People at work or in your personal life who have 
achieved something extraordinary and who live lives 
defined as rewarding and uplifting have a clear and com-
pelling plan for achieving what’s important to them. In 
this section, I want to take any theory and convert it into 
actionable next steps. But there is a rub: I don’t believe 
there is a one-size-fits-all prescription for planning your 
leadership. Yes, the seven principles have existed for mil-
lennia and have transformed cultures both positively 
as well as negatively. What I am convinced of, beyond 
a shadow of a doubt, is that once you have a leadership 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
236
process you believe in and you have a purpose that is 
compelling for you, you are smart enough and talented 
enough to make a decisive plan for your leadership. 
So, in this chapter I am not taking the position of the 
sage on the stage handing you stone tablets with 10 strat-
egies for leading the organizational transformation you 
want. Instead, I’m respecting your intelligence and com-
mitment and acting as the guide by your side. As a fel-
low traveler and guide to executives and entrepreneurs 
on the road to flourishing, I will share with you what my 
most successful clients (and possibly Howard Shultz as 
well) have done to plan for personal and organizational 
transformations. In turn, you’ll have a prescription for 
next steps you can personalize in ways that work for you.
The Preparation Principle outlines specifically what 
successful leaders do above and beyond the other six 
principles. The following three characteristics of trans-
formational leaders are continuously planned into the 
daily work of leading their organizations. 
Transformational Leaders Wake Up
The first thing transformational leaders plan on doing is 
waking up. Not in the sense of opening their eyes first 
thing in the morning and getting out of bed, which of 
course they do, but they wake up to their hopes, dreams, 
and aspirations, they wake up to the impact they have 
on others, they wake up to what they do well, why they 
don’t do well, and what they will do to get better. Waking 

237
The Preparation Principle
up in this sense is the process of continually looking at 
the activities, actions, and mindset the leader has in see-
ing themselves clearly through the eyes of the people 
who matter most to them. 
They wake up to the reaction others have to their 
emails, voicemails, and the meetings they hold. They are 
also waking up and seeing clearly what their triggers and 
vices are. For example, they wake up to the fact that when 
the senior-most executive in their organizations attends 
one of their meetings, they become overly forceful and 
describe their work in grandiose and overly productive 
ways. Transformational leaders wake up to their impact 
with others as a catalyst for either greater performance or 
lesser performance.
Transformational Leaders Grow Up 
When transformational leaders grow up they take 100 
percent responsibility for their actions and their impact. 
They don’t shy away in any manner or form to the fact 
that they have a responsibility to positively impact those 
that they lead. In turn, they take 100 percent responsibil-
ity for their actions and decisions, and do so willingly. 
They have grown into the realization that people are 
continually watching them and taking cues as to what is 
important to them and how they should behave.
They also grow up to the fact that many employees 
don’t like to be held accountable and that one of their pri-
mary jobs is to role model accountability and truth-telling. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
238
This is not theoretical for transformational leaders, but is 
planned into their work on a daily and weekly basis. 
Transformational Leaders Show Up 
By showing up we’re not referencing just physically being 
present, but mentally and emotionally present also. By 
showing up, transformational leaders have woken up to 
the priorities and promises necessary to achieve their 
purpose, as well as execute on their projects; they plan 
behaviorally specific actions that send a leadership mes-
sage in purposeful and powerful ways.
Transformational leaders recognize that the only tool 
they have in their toolkit is themselves. That is a liberat-
ing as well as frightening thought. You are the vehicle by 
which one of two things happens: extraordinary perfor-
mance or ordinary performance. By your actions people 
will know what you stand for, what you value, hope for 
and will reward. The showing up process is never ending 
for transformational leaders and frankly they don’t want 
it to be. Transformational leaders recognize that doing 
transformational work is not a paint by numbers exercise 
nor is it a straight line point A to point B endeavor. There 
are circuitous routes that occasionally take leaders down 
dead-end roads, and while many people may think this a 
waste of time, the transformational leader looks at these 
diversions as an excellent opportunity to show up as a 
continual learner. A learner who aspires to innovate and 
grow based on their successes as well as their failures. In 

239
The Preparation Principle
order for you to plan for success and satisfaction you need 
to continually wake up, grow up, and show up. If you 
don’t embrace these traits and characteristics then life 
is a journey with accidental outcomes. The Preparation 
Principle and this section on planning is not about how 
to manage your calendar specifically, but rather strives 
to impress upon you that living your purpose, priorities, 
and promises each day is a choice you must make pur-
posefully otherwise it will not happen. With intention 
and attention to your leadership as well as your personal 
life, your life plan is one of your designing.
In the next section we will link waking up, growing 
up, and showing up to what you can learn from a 16th-
century monk by the name of Ignatius of Loyola.
What Can You Learn From a 16th-Century Monk?
Discernment. That’s what you can learn from Saint 
Ignatius of Loyola. Discernment about yourself primar-
ily, but equally as important, discernment about oth-
ers and how their thoughts, words, or actions trigger a 
response in you. Let’s be clear about something before 
we discuss the merits of St. Ignatius: Leadership is a 
solo activity in the sense that you are the only tool you 
have in your toolkit. Yes, I’ve said that before, but it’s 
worth repeating because there is nowhere for you to hide 
when it comes to being seen, known, and a catalyst for 
transformation. 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
240
Every major faith tradition extols the benefit of 
knowing oneself in the pursuit of the divine. Buddha 
said, “It is better to conquer yourself than to win a thou-
sand battles. Then the victory is yours. It cannot be taken 
from you, not by angels or by demons, heaven or hell.” 
The Prophet Muhammad said, “He who knows himself 
knows His Lord.” In the Bible, in Lamentations Chapter 
3 verse 40, it reads, “Let us examine and probe our ways, 
And let us return to the LORD.”
While I’ve stipulated that you have to undergo an 
individual transformation first in order to create an orga-
nizational transformation, you too will be required to 
lead others through their own transformation. In order 
for the biggest and most audacious results to be yours, 
you will have to know yourself in ways you don’t now, 
and by so doing, assure the victory Buddha spoke of 
while probing your ways as in Lamentations. Waking up 
to the real you, the you that is capable of extraordinary 
works, may have fears and concerns rooted in whether 
you’re capable of being transformational. If you are like 
the leaders I work with, waking up to what’s working in 
your leadership and what’s not can feel daunting. That’s 
why I want to introduce you to a 16th-century Catholic 
monk by the name of Saint Ignatius of Loyola.
Who was Ignatius of Loyola? Loyola was a hot-
headed rich kid born into nobility in 16th-century Spain. 
He joined the army at 17, and was known for strutting 
around with his cape swung open to show off his legs in 
tight-fitting hose and sword. He was a womanizer, had a 

241
The Preparation Principle
big ego and a quick temper, that had to rely on his privi-
leged status to escape prosecution for numerous violent 
crimes. At the Battle of Pamplona in 1521 he was gravely 
injured when a cannonball hit him in the legs, wounding 
his right leg and fracturing the left in multiple places. He 
returned home to his father’s castle in Loyola, where he 
underwent several surgical operations to repair his legs, 
having the bones set and then reset when his vanity got 
the best of him. His vanity was such that he had his legs 
rebroken because he thought his legs would look bad in 
tights.And this was before anesthesia. Think about that 
for a second. The vanity and narcissism of Ignatius was 
profound.
But here’s where the story gets interesting. Ignatius 
woke up to the direction his life was taking. He saw the 
vices, addictions, and ways of being in the world that 
led him away from what was good, uplifting and eter-
nal, and toward what was selfish, narcissistic and ego 
driven. He underwent a spiritual conversion that led 
after many years to the creation of the religious order 
the Jesuits. Today there are 16,000-plus Jesuit priests, 
brothers, scholastics, and novices worldwide which rep-
resents the largest male religious order in the Catholic 
Church. Jesuits are pastors in parishes, teachers, and 
chaplains. They are also doctors, lawyers, and astrono-
mers. They care for the whole person: body, mind, and 
soul and in their education ministries, they seek to nur-
ture “men and women for others.” All this came from 
what was an ego-driven, angry, spoiled rich kid? Yes, 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
242
and what Ignatius left behind and is the central part of 
what is called Ignatian Spirituality is the Examination of 
Conscious. A 15-minute, once or twice daily, examina-
tion of the day’s activities and how we respond to them.
While I personally have practiced Ignatian Spirituality 
for the last three years, I’m not suggesting you embrace 
it. What I am suggesting is that the practice Ignatius sug-
gested is transformational in its ability to increase our 
awareness of ourselves and of the world we experience. 
When you are an overwhelmed, overburdened and over-
scheduled leader you need a process for pulling back the 
layers of your way of seeing the work and people you 
interact with and infusing a transformational discern-
ment process into your day. The variation on Ignatius’s 
examination I’m going to propose is without a doubt 
the fastest way for leaders to facilitate their own individ-
ual transformation. If you use this process once per day 
you’ll grow faster and be capable of leading others with 
greater clarity and focus. 
Here’s a snapshot of what Ignatius taught in his 
Examination of Conscious. There are five parts to 
Ignatius’s process, five questions that when answered 
purposefully and thoughtfully takes 15 minutes to 
answer. They are:
1. Creation: Where did I see God’s love expressed 
or received today? Ignatius believed that the whole 
world was created from love, in love, and for love. He 
helped Jesuits pay attention to all of creation as an act 

243
The Preparation Principle
of love and to intentionally and purposefully seek out 
examples of things created in love and for love. 
2. Presence: Where did I experience God’s presence 
today? Ignatius also believed that God was hiding in 
plain sight and that we didn’t need to go looking for the 
Divine, but that we needed to simply be more aware of 
where the Divine was hiding in plain sight. This question 
raises our awareness to the Divine and asks for examples 
of where God’s presence was felt or seen. 
3. Memory: What were the events today that was 
a violation of love done to me or by me? This is a big-
gie for Ignatius. What he asked priests to do was review 
every moment of their day from rising from bed all the 
way through to going back to bed. He wanted Jesuits to 
become acutely aware of their affective states. For you 
and me, he wanted us to pay attention to the kid with 
his jeans hanging 12 inches off his waist, with earbuds, 
and slowly walking across the crosswalk oblivious to us 
missing our light because of him. Ignatius would want 
to know our reaction to him and would say to all of us 
today that understanding the reactions we have to situa-
tions is essential if we are going to lead a movement. We 
have to understand ourselves in light of our strengths as 
well as our shortcomings. 
4. Mercy: Where do I need God’s mercy today? We 
never live up fully to our potential. We fall short and dis-
appoint people. This question was to remind people that 
we do have shortcomings and that we can be extended 
forgiveness just as we can forgive others.

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
244
5. Eternity: What am I excited about for tomorrow 
and why? This last question is rooted in the belief of 
creating a new heaven on earth as a co-creator with the 
Divine. What will I create tomorrow and what is exciting 
about doing so for me?
The first paragraph of this section said discernment 
is what you can learn from Saint Ignatius. Discernment 
about yourself primarily, but equally as important, dis-
cernment about others and how their thoughts, words, 
or actions trigger a response in you. I’ve created a varia-
tion of Igantius’s questions but with the same intent of 
creating a transformational perspective of yourself and 
others so you can as Gandhi said, be the change you 
want to see in the world.
Hugh’s Transformation Examination
1. Where did I create the most value and/or well-being 
today? 
Every day you have the opportunity and responsibil-
ity to plant in the hearts and minds of your employees 
and customers something of value and/or well-being. 
Identify one, two, or three ways you created value or well 
being today. Over time you will see this part of your pro-
fessional life more clearly, which will instill greater con-
fidence and courage in you as well as more credibility 
and connection with those you are interacting with.
2. Where was I most present and in the moment 
today?

245
The Preparation Principle
Far too often leaders are either living in the past and 
living an event from weeks, months, or even years ago. 
This has them living in fear of repeating this event. Or, 
they are living in the future to the extent that they are 
disconnected from the important insights and impact of 
the present. This question pulls you toward the current 
moment so as to see at what times and in what places are 
you most connected and present. This is a powerful clue as 
to what part of your work is the most captivating for you. 
3. What are the two or three most pivotal events or 
experiences I had today and what was my reaction to 
them? 
This part of the Transformation Examination is about 
getting real with yourself. It asks you to isolate two or 
three events from the day and specifically identify your 
reactions to them. This question is not a onion-peeling, 
navel-gazing question, but rather a massively important 
awareness-building question. Remember the admon-
ishment from Socrates about Know Thyself. That’s the 
intent of this question.
4. Where do I regret not living up to my highest 
potential today? 
Let’s be real. There are parts of the day that don’t 
go well. We do something or say something that has a 
negative impact on someone or damages our reputation. 
When we can see these events clearly and own them we 
are living responsibly. Over time you might see patterns 
to your shortcomings, and with the help of the other 
principles, a coach, or mentor you can devise strategies 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
246
for reducing or eliminating it. But change in this area 
requires seeing and owning the shortcoming. A word 
of caution though. This question can bring out your 
worst critic and can become an opportunity to scourge 
yourself. Avoid that by paying attention to the Praising 
Principle.
5. What am I excited about creating tomorrow and 
why?
This is the part of the examination that most peo-
ple like. They are action-oriented leaders who want to 
get going and do some planning. Yes, it is empowering 
to know what you will create from one day to the next, 
but only when your plans for tomorrow are insightfully 
informed by today. Isolate two to three things you want 
to create and why it is important to you.
What is your reaction to these questions? Do you see 
them as helpful, valuable, provocative, time-wasting, 
navel-gazing, or an impediment to doing the work that 
matters most to you? 
Whatever your reaction keep this in mind. These 
questions are not time wasters. They are performance 
accelerators. What the people whom you lead want most 
of all is to trust you, respect you, and have a meaningful 
personal connection with you so they can come along 
side of you and create something noteworthy and trans-
formational. They want that from you, but you cannot 
give that to them unless you trust, respect, and have a 
personal connection with yourself. The Transformation 
Examination will help you build the connection and by 

247
The Preparation Principle
doing so, transform your leadership as well as create a 
mindset of innovation and growth. 
All throughout this chapter I’ve presented you with 
options for how to prepare for the leadership adventure 
before you. Each strategy for preparation is assisted with 
the Transformation Examination. In the closing section 
I’ll sit down across from you with a cup of coffee and sug-
gest how to integrate all of the principles and set you on 
the path to personal and organizational transformation.


249
C ONC L U SION
S
o what you do you do now? That’s a fabulous question 
and one that I do not take lightly. If you and I were sit-
ting across from one another having a cup of coffee and 
I had the opportunity to share what I think are the most 
valuable words of wisdom I can share, here’s what I’d say. 
Remember that if you’re not flourishing individually 
the likelihood of you enabling employees or customers 
to flourish is incredibly small. Just as it is with airline 
safety announcements, you need to put on our own oxy-
gen mask first. I would tell you to put your oxygen mask 
on first and make a promise to choose to flourish person-
ally. Take the Purpose Principle and drive the concepts 
there a mile. Find just one idea, hope, dream, or aspira-
tion and grab hold of it and don’t ever let go.
I would tell you to make a decision. Make a decision 
about your priorities and the promises that you’ll make 
to the people who matter most to you. I would tell you 
that the promises and priorities you make define you as a 
person and are the backbone of character. I would remind 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
250
you that they are directly linked to what you articulate in 
the Purpose Principle, and that you are far more capable 
of choosing each and every day what the quality of your 
life will look like. You are not a victim, nor are you in 
control of the entire universe, but you have an amazing 
life, so choose carefully each and every day.
Focus on value creation. Forget your methodology, 
forget what you do technically, and live, breathe, and do 
everything you can to understand your customer’s expe-
rience. I’d remind you that what matters most is mak-
ing peoples’ lives easier. When you do that, not only 
will your employees’ and your customers’ lives be more 
rewarding, but so will yours.
Remember that in every single meeting, email, 
or other interaction, you have an opportunity to per-
suade someone to support you, and have them embrace 
employee and customer flourishing. I’d look you square 
in the eyes and remind you that you make a difference in 
peoples’ lives and that you should accept that responsi-
bility fully and with enthusiasm because, with your pur-
pose, your promises, priorities, learning, and growth, you 
can create a community of like-minded ­co-conspirators 
who do amazing work.
I’d ask you to be a catalyst for community and con-
nection where you purposefully help people cultivate 
the mindset of what’s working as opposed to what’s not 
working. Infuse your insights from the Praising Principle 
into every hour of your day, and by purposefully help-
ing people feel good about themselves; you’ll infuse 

251
Conclusion
hope and optimism into their work life, allowing them 
to flourish. I’d ask you to become the exemplar of hope, 
optimism, and praise.
I would also tell you to never give up. There is work 
that only you can do and that your work world needs 
you more than ever to hold true to what you find noble 
and uplifting. Never lose sight of that. In every corner of 
your organization, people are paying attention to what 
you do and say in the face of unrelenting adversity—
adversity that can leave you drained and disenchanted. 
Continually and purposefully put one foot in front of 
the other. Your talent is important, but your persever-
ance is the real game-changer.
I’d also advise focusing on the Preparation Principle. 
The discernment and wisdom that you have within you 
about your leadership, your relationship with the peo-
ple that matter most to you, and the impact that you’re 
having in all areas of your life, are accelerated with the 
Transformation Examination. The Preparation Principle 
is the hub of transformational leadership and all the other 
principles extend from that. You need to prepare yourself 
to go on a transformational journey and, at the end of 
that journey, be prepared to review that journey and rein-
vent it in any way, shape, manner, or form that works for 
you. As I’ve said, you get to choose how you want to live 
your life both personally as well as professionally.
And the last thing I would say to you is this: Love is 
the most transformational emotion that you and I have. 
Love propels us and it changes us. So fall in love with an 

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
252
idea, hope, dream, or aspiration, fall in love with your 
employees and your customers, fall in love with doing 
valuable work, fall in love with infusing hope and opti-
mism wherever you go, fall in love with praising people 
for doing their best work, and fall in love with the pain 
and discomfort of moving forward in times of over-
whelming adversity. And I’d also say fall in love with 
the notion that each and every day can be a day filled 
with personal and professional flourishing. The world 
needs more people on fire with human flourishing. Are 
you on board?

253
I N DE X
Acceleration, results, 123-124
Accidental life, 219-223
Accomplishment, 12, 99
Accountability, 65, 104, 120, 164
Achievement, 100
Acronyms, 147
Action, 190, 233-234
Addressing the issues, 142-143
Adversity, 198
Advice, feedback vs., 203-204
Agreed-upon standards, 136
Agreement, confirming, 143
Alignment, 39, 62, 70-71, 85
Ambiguity, 62, 63
Appreciation, 173-174
Apprehension, 62, 63
Aspirations, 27, 30, 36, 50, 55, 78, 101, 177
Assurance, 58
Attention, 88
Barrier elimination, 121-123
Barriers, 87, 221, 223-228
Behavior, purpose and, 69-72
Behaviors, 128-131
Beliefs, 42, 127, 128, 152, 232-233
Benefits of praise, the, 171-179
Bias for action, 234
Blane, Christobel Rice, 12, 13
Blane, David, 12-13
Boss, promises to your, 74
Bottom line, 102-105
Brand impact, 47-51
Brands, 46
Burnout, 21
Business objectives, driving, 148
Calendar grooming, 187-190
Candor, 79
Certainty, 152
Chester, Dr. Timothy, 144, 148-149
Choices, 52, 154, 231-232
Churchill, Winston, 195, 202
Clarifying decision-making, 141-142
Clarifying roles, 140-141
Clarity, 31, 47,71, 75, 84, 138
Coaching, 95, 120
Collaboration, 79-80
Commitment, 57, 76-77, 116, 120
Communication, 71-72
Community, 78, 250
Competencies, 38
Competing priorities, 150-158
Complaints, 114
Compliance, 120
Concerns, 114
Confidence, 66, 77-78, 152, 172
Confirming understanding, 143
Conflict management, 143
Conflicting expectations, 138
Connection, 15, 115, 250
Conscious, Examination of, 241-244
Consistency, 76
Context, 14, 36
Continual learning, 178
Control, 75-76
Core values, 40
Courage, 33, 47, 80, 169-171, 193
Creation, value, 250
Credibility gap, 137
Credibility, 58, 60, 62, 69, 72, 77
Critic, 161-163
Curiosity, 33, 169-171, 180, 182-183
Customers, 18-19
Customers, promises to your, 73
Decision-making, 141-142, 164
Defining success, 139-140
Development, employee, 168
Dialogue, internal, 93
Discernment, 55, 184-186, 239, 251
Discipline, 184
Dissatisfaction, 230, 231
Distinction, 39-45

7 Principles of Transformational Leadership
254
Distress, 21-22
Dreams, 27, 30, 36, 50, 55, 101, 177, 230-231
Driving business objectives, 148
Dyson, Eric, 191-192
Elimination, barrier, 121-123
Employee development, 168
Employees, promises to, 73
Encouragement, 174
Energy, investing, 88
Enthusiasm, 32-33
Evaluating promises, 61-62
Examination of Conscious, 241-244
Excellence 116-119, 122
Execution, 120, 214-218
Expectations, 71, 119, 138-143, 167
Experimentation, 104
Failing to prepare, 235-239
Failure, 192, 216-217
Faith tradition, 41
Family, promises to your, 74
Fear, 14, 43, 63-69, 80, 114, 163-164, 192
Feedback, 171, 203-204
Feelings, 127-128
Flourishing customer mindset, 107-108
Flourishing employee mindset, 108-109
Flourishing leadership mindset, 110
Flourishing Performance Formula, 103-105
Flourishing, 18-19, 102-110
Focus, 93, 98-101, 187, 196
Focusing on inputs, 95-98
Force-field analysis, 86-88
Forces, promoting, 122-123
Forces, restraining, 122, 123
Foresight, 84-86
Friends, promises to your, 74
Friendship, respect vs., 203
Future state, 70-71
Future, reclaiming your, 55
Generosity, 41, 114-115
Goals, 87, 99
Growth, 17-19, 46-47, 78, 104, 116, 178
Holding onto the past, 160-161
Honesty, 116
Hopes, 27, 30, 36, 50, 55, 101, 114, 172, 177
If/then strategy, 153-154
Ignatian Spirituality, 241-244
Ignatius of Loyola, Saint, 239-244
Ignorance, 210-211, 213
Imposter syndrome, 66
Improvisation, 205-206
Impurities, leadership, 180
Indifference, 212-214
Individual transformation, 118-119
Inertia, 209-210, 213
Inexperience, 211-212, 213
Influence, positive, 126
Innovation, 116, 178
Inputs, focusing on, 95-98
Insight, 184-186
Inspiration, 78, 110
Intent, 46, 72
Internal dialogue, 93
Investing in oneself, fear of, 68-69
Issues, addressing the, 142-143
Issues, unresolved, 142-143
James, Billie, 113-116
Judgment, 169-171, 180, 182-183
Just doing the minimum, 15
Language, 146, 155-158
Leadership brand impact, 46-57
Leadership development, 74
Leadership impurities, 180
Leadership persuasion process, 132-135
Leadership purpose, 27-56
Leadership, uninspiring, 166
Level of respect, 137-138
Level of trust, 136-137
Leveraging success, 94
Listening, 114, 145, 147, 172
Litton, David, 112-116
Living in fear, 163-164
Love, 31, 33, 34-35, 41, 252
Maximization, talent, 121
Measuring progress, 100
Methodology, 95-98, 101, 250
Metrics, 100, 123
Metrics, performance, 120
Mindset, 11-16, 17-19, 23, 29, 32, 39, 43, 
	
82, 92-93, 106-107, 109, 120, 196-197
Mindset, flourishing customer, 107-108
Mindset, flourishing employee, 108-109
Mindset, flourishing leadership, 110
Mindset, negative, 159-164
Miscommunication, 20-21
Mistakes, 65-66, 164
Muscle memory, 207-208
Narrowing your focus, 187
Negative mindset, 159-164
Negative thinking, 164
Neuroscience, 14
No, saying, 58, 59-60
Objectives, 87, 99, 132, 134, 148
Obstacles, 192, 221, 223-228
One-percent rule, 180, 186-188

255
Index
Opposing barriers, 87
Opposing forces, 86
Optimism, 17-19, 113, 172
Overwhelm, 20-23, 44
Past, holding onto the, 160-161
Past, reframing your, 54-55
Patterns, 185-186
Payoff, 165-166
Performance metrics, 120
Performance, 23, 116, 215-216
Perseverance Principle, 93, 191-218
Persuasion Principle, 125-158
Persuasion process, leadership, 132-135
Positivity, 17-19
Potential, 113, 165-169
Poverty mindset, 27-28
Powerful language strategy, 155-158
Praise, 170-179
Praising Principle, 159-190
Preparation Principle, 219-246, 251
Preparing to fail, 235-239
Present, recalibrating your, 55-56
Priorities, 81-86, 132, 134, 153, 189, 202
Priorities, competing, 150-158
Priorities, purpose and, 74-80
Priority-setting, 22-23, 83, 88
Process, leadership persuasion, 132-135
Progress, measuring, 100
Projects Principle, 89-124, 134, 147
Promise evaluation, 61-62
Promises Principle, 57-88, 187
Promises, 57, 58-61, 85, 112, 123, 189, 202
Promoting forces, 86, 87-88, 122-123
Purification, 168-169, 171, 177-188
Purpose of promises, 59-61
Purpose Principle, 27-56, 81, 195, 235
Purpose statement, 38-39
Purpose, 61, 62, 75, 85, 112, 174, 189, 	
	
192, 202, 204-205, 208
Purpose, behavior and, 69-72
Purpose, priorities without, 74-80
Purpose, reaffirming the, 139
Purposeful life, 219-223
Questions, value-based, 96
Reaffirming the purpose, 139
Recalibrating your present, 55-56
Reclaiming your future, 55
Reframing your past, 54-55
Respect, 69, 72, 119, 132, 133, 136, 	
	
137-138, 167-168
Respect, friendship vs., 203
Responsibilities, clarifying, 140-141
Restraining forces, 122, 123
Results acceleration, 123-124
Results, 11-16, 37, 71, 99
Role modeling, 226-228
Roles, clarifying, 140-141
Saint Ignatius of Loyola, 239-244
Scheduling status updates, 142
Screening process, 125-126
Security, 14, 27-28
Service, 150-151
Shared aspirations, 78
Sharron, Joey, 219-221, 226
Show-me-the-money strategy, 156-158
Sincerity, 173-175
Solutions, 133, 135, 147
Specific praise, 170-171
Specificity, 177-179
Speed, 217-218
Standards, agreed-upon, 136
Starbucks, 232-233
State, future, 70-71
Strategy, 214-218
Stress, 21-22
Success, 66-68, 94, 100, 164, 189, 197, 223-228
Talent maximization, 121
Talent, 31, 33, 35-36, 191-194
Talent, war for, 193-194
Technology, 148-149
Three yeses strategy, 154-155
Time frames, clarifying, 140-141
Time management, 22-23
Time, investing, 88
Timeliness, 175-177
Timely praise, 170
Transformation, individual, 118-119
Transformational Leadership 
Assessment, 16-17
Trust, 58, 60, 61, 62, 69, 72, 119, 132, 	
	
133, 136-137, 167-168
Truth, 115-116
Uncertainty, 14, 62, 63
Unclear expectations, 167
Underperformance, 20, 166-167
Understanding, confirming, 143
Uninspiring leadership, 166
Unresolved issues, 142-143
Value, 31, 33, 34, 36-38, 46, 100
War for talent, 193-194
Weiss, Alan, 68, 203
White space, 94-95
Why, 117-118
Yourself, promises to, 73

256
A B OU T  T H E  AU T HOR
H
ugh Blane is the president of Claris Consulting. He 
is the globally recognized performance expert hired 
to help organizations solve challenging business issues, 
strengthen personal and professional relationships, and 
execute strategic initiatives faster and more reliably. His 
clients include Sony Pictures, Starbucks, Nordstrom, 
Microsoft, Pepperdine University, KPMG, and Costco. 
He publishes a top blog on leadership and mindset at 
www.clarisconsulting.net and is an in-demand speaker.

