THE WHITE BOOK OF...
cloud
Security
The definitive guide to managing 
risk in the new ICT landscape
THE WHITE BOOK OF...

THE WHITE 
BOOK OF…
Cloud Security
Contents
Preface   4	
Acknowledgments   5
1: Is Cloud Computing Secure?   6
2: Cloud Security Simplified   14
3: Questions of Confidentiality   20
4: Ensuring Integrity   26
5: The Risk of Service Disruption   32
6: Putting It All Together   36
7: Data is King   40
8: The Cloud-Friendly Security Team   44
9: The Cloud Security Checklist   48
10: The Final Word on Cloud Security   54
Cloud Security Speak: Key terms explained   57
Appendix: The White Book of Cloud Adoption   60

Acknowledgments
In compiling and developing this publication, Fujitsu is very grateful to the members of its  
UK CIO Advisory Board and valued customers across the globe. Particular thanks are extended 
to the following for their contributions:
l Nick Gaines, Group IS Director, Volkswagen UK
l Tony Mather, Chief Information Officer, Clear Channel International
With further thanks to our authors:
l Ian Mitchell, Chief Architect, Fujitsu UK and Ireland
l John Alcock, Information Assurance Consultant, Fujitsu UK and Ireland
And our specialist contributors:
l Darren Ratcliffe, VP & Global Cloud CTO, Fujitsu Global Business Group
l John Swanson, Information Assurance Consultant, Fujitsu UK and Ireland
l Mark Wilson, Strategy Manager, Fujitsu UK and Ireland
l Vincent Hughes, Senior Research Analyst, Fujitsu UK and Ireland
l Shane Tan Hua Beng, Consultant, Cloud Services, Fujitsu Asia Pte Ltd
l Johanna Heimonen, Business Director, Fujitsu Nordic
l Thomas A Hoover, IT Security and Compliance/Information Security, Fujitsu America Inc
For any inquiries on Fujitsu’s global cloud offering, please contact:
askfujitsu@uk.fujitsu.com
ISBN: 978-0-9568216-1-4
Published by Fujitsu Services Ltd. 
Copyright © Fujitsu Services Ltd 2011. All rights reserved.
No part of this document may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form without prior written 
permission of Fujitsu Services Ltd. Fujitsu Services Ltd endeavours to ensure that the information in 
this document is correct and fairly stated, but does not accept liability for any errors or omissions.

As we highlighted in the first book in this series, The White Book of Cloud 
Adoption, cloud computing is demonstrating its potential to transform the 
way IT-based services are delivered to organisations. What’s more, there is 
little, if any, argument about the clear advantages of cloud: it is generally 
accepted that cloud adoption can and will create substantial business 
benefits through reduced capital expenditure and increased business agility. 
For most organisations, therefore, the journey to cloud is no longer a 
question of “if” but rather “when”, and a large number of enterprises  
have already travelled some way down this path.
However, there is one overwhelming question that is still causing many CIOs 
and their colleagues to delay their move to cloud: Is cloud computing secure? 
A simple answer is: Yes, if you approach cloud in the right way, with the 
correct checks and balances to ensure all necessary security and risk 
management measures are covered. Businesses that are already deep into 
their cloud programmes are reporting that security, while an extremely 
important consideration, is not a barrier to adoption.
That said, those CIOs ready to adopt cloud services are right to place security 
at the top of their agendas. After all, the consequences of getting your 
cloud security strategy wrong could not be more serious. As many unwary 
businesses have found to their cost in recent high-profile cases, a single 
cloud-related security breach can result in an organisation severely 
damaging its reputation – or, worse, the entire business being put at risk.
By providing a clear and unbiased guide to navigating the complexities of 
cloud security, we hope this book will help to ensure your cloud computing 
journey is as trouble-free and beneficial as it should be. Please let us know 
what you think – and how your cloud adoption progresses.
Cameron McNaught
Senior Vice President, Cloud, Global Business Group
Fujitsu
Preface
5

 
Is 
Cloud 
Computing 
Secure?
1

7 
1 Is Cloud Computing Secure?
Those further 
along their cloud 
path are finding  
that, like all 
forms of 
information 
security,  
the question 
boils down to 
effective risk 
management
Summary
“Is cloud computing secure?” is invariably the 
first question CIOs proposing cloud solutions and 
services face from CEOs and senior colleagues. Yet 
those further along their cloud path are finding 
that, like all forms of information security, the 
question boils down to effective risk management. 
By employing multiple layers of defence and a 
robustly designed cloud architecture, organisations 
can confidently answer: “Yes, it is secure enough.”
Photograph: Corbis
When Fujitsu released The White Book of Cloud Adoption in 2010 (see Appendix 
at the end of this book) to explain the pertinent issues for customers in a simple, 
digestible form, we didn’t envisage how popular it would become. CIOs tell us it 
has helped clarify their own thinking and overcome many of their organisations’ 
fears and misconceptions.
 
But while researching the book, we quickly realised the primary concern for 
those new to cloud was security. By contrast, organisations that had been using 
cloud for some time did not consider security an obstacle to adoption. (In fact, 
their biggest focus was, more justifiably, interoperability – ensuring different 
cloud providers’ systems and services could talk to one another.) 
The White Book of Cloud Adoption is still available and provides a 
comprehensive overview of the whole topic. But given the ongoing questions, 
we believe there is a need to explore the specific issues around cloud security in 
a similarly comprehensive fashion. 
This second book in the series, The White Book of Cloud Security, is the result.
Here, we explore the key issues surrounding cloud security for CIOs and their 
teams. From Fujitsu’s position as a trusted cloud partner to leading organisations, 
we hope to pass on valuable advice and guidance about not only information 
security, but more broadly risk. This book will help CIOs make informed security 
decisions about their diverse cloud set-ups and better understand how to reap all 
the benefits of cloud without compromising their organisations’ security.

8 
We hope to pass 
on valuable 
advice and 
guidance about 
not only 
information 
security, but 
more broadly risk
Adapt and embrace
When it comes to cloud security, a CIO’s objective remains the same as ever:  
to understand and manage risk. Yet perhaps the biggest risk of all is not 
embracing the opportunities cloud has to offer. Cloud gives an organisation  
a way to rethink its entire strategy for IT and business service provision, as  
well as the potential to improve its competitiveness and agility. 
In addition, business functions and employees are increasingly demanding to 
use cloud applications and services that they believe improve their productivity 
and ability to innovate. Given these drivers, security teams, processes and 
solutions must adapt to embrace cloud, rather than reject it because it doesn’t 
fit with all of their traditional approaches to security. 
Rapid progress
Cloud is evolving at a phenomenal speed, even in the context of the 
fast-moving IT sector. As it evolves, so do the solutions and standards 
designed to address CIOs’ concerns. Security standards are emerging – 
and constantly evolving – that directly address many of the challenges 
we already see today.
Different layers
In The White Book of Cloud Adoption (see Appendix at the back of this book), 
we outlined the different layers in the cloud services stack: 
l Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS)
l Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)
l Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)
l Business Process-as-a-Service (BPaaS). 
These layers – and their associated standards, requirements and solutions – 
are all at different levels of maturity. In this book, we explore cloud security 
and risk issues in a generic sense, rather than delving into the specific details 
of individual layers. But CIOs should remember when assessing providers (be 
they cloud service providers, existing IT suppliers, outsourcing companies or 
in-house IT) to ensure they compare like with like. 

“The world of 
business is  
becoming more  
uncertain, as  
with new system 
architectures come 
new cyber threats.  
No longer can 
the mechanisms 
deployed in the 
past be relied on for 
protection”
Nick Gaines, Group IS Director, Volkswagen UK
1 Is Cloud Computing Secure?

Governance and 
enterprise risk  
management 
Data residency 
and jurisdiction 
Compliance  
and audit
Access control
Shared resources 
and data 
segregation
Security incident 
management
Physical security
Privileged users
Continuity services
Data disposal
Private 
Community 
Public
Hybrid  
I I I   I I I      I         I I
I I I     I I        I         I I
I I I     I I        I         I I
I I I     I I        I           I
I I I   I I I      I         I I 
I I I     I I        I         I I
I I I   I I I       I         I I
I I I   I I I       I         I I
Dependent upon 
service 
Dependent upon 
service 
Dependent upon 
service 
Dependent upon 
service 
Dependent upon 
business needs 
Dependent upon 
business needs 
Dependent upon 
business needs 
Dependent upon 
business needs 
The ratings assume each item on the left is implemented appropriately.
Security characteristics of different types of cloud

11
1 Is Cloud Computing Secure?
Not all clouds are equal
Although this book refers generically to “cloud”, there are in fact several types of 
cloud. It is important to realise, too, that the type of cloud an organisation 
chooses is one of the biggest factors affecting risk. We choose to characterise 
these types as private, public and community clouds – or “hybrid” to refer to a 
combination of approaches.
Different types of cloud have different security characteristics. The table on 
page 10 shows a simple comparison. (The number of stars indicates how 
suitable each type of cloud is for each area.)
Security risks
Organisations with defined controls for externally sourced services or access 
to IT risk-assessment capabilities should still apply these to aspects of cloud 
services where appropriate. 
But while many of the security risks of cloud overlap with those of 
outsourcing and offshoring, there are also differences that organisations 
need to understand and manage.
l Processing sensitive or business-critical data outside the enterprise 
introduces a level of risk because any outsourced service bypasses an 
organisation’s in-house security controls. With cloud, however, it is possible 
to establish compatible controls if the provider offers a dedicated service. 
An organisation should ascertain a provider’s position by asking for 
information about the control and supervision of privileged administrators.
l Organisations using cloud services remain responsible for the security 
and integrity of their own data, even when it is held by a service provider. 
Traditional service providers are subject to external audits and security 
certifications. Cloud providers may not be prepared to undergo the same 
level of scrutiny.
l When an organisation uses a cloud service, it may not know exactly where 
its data resides or have any ability to influence changes to the location of data.
l Most providers store data in a shared environment. Although this may 
be segregated from other customers’ data while it’s in that environment, it 

12 
No one security 
method will 
solve all these 
data protection 
problems so it is 
important to 
consider multiple 
layers of defence
may be combined in backup and archive copies. This could especially be the 
case in multi-tenanted environments.
l CIOs should not assume service providers will be able to support 
electronic discovery, or internal investigations of inappropriate or illegal 
activity. Cloud services are especially difficult to investigate because logs and 
data for multiple customers may be either co-located or spread across an 
ill-defined and changing set of hosts. 
l Organisations need to evaluate the long-term viability of any cloud 
provider. They should consider the consequences to service should the 
provider fail or be acquired, since there will be far fewer readily identifiable 
assets that can easily be transferred in-house or to another provider. 
In short, no one security method will solve all these data protection problems 
so it is important to consider multiple layers of defence. Ideally, 
organisations should compartmentalise their cloud infrastructure and 
applications to apply the right controls in the right places and help contain 
the impact of security incidents.

“When adopting cloud 
services, there are four  
key considerations:
1. Where is my data?
2. How does it integrate?
3. What is my exit strategy?
4. What are the new  
    security issues?”
Tony Mather, CIO, Clear Channel International
1 Is Cloud Computing Secure?

Access
control
System
protection
Personal
security
Information 
integrity
Cloud security 
management
Network
protection
Identity 
management
 2
 Cloud
 Security
 Simplified

15
2 Cloud Security Simplified
Summary
As with all coherent security strategies, 
cloud security can seem dauntingly 
complex, involving many different aspects 
that touch all parts of an organisation.  
CIOs and their teams need to plot  
effective management strategies as  
well as understand the implications for 
operations and technology. In this section, 
we outline the key considerations.
Photograph: Corbis
The table on page 16 highlights all the different aspects of cloud security  
that CIOs need to consider. We have broken these down into the three  
following key areas: 
l Management
l Operation
l Technology
It provides an at-a-glance reference to the issues organisations need to  
address if they are to put in place effective cloud security strategies backed  
up with appropriate processes and technologies. On the following pages,  
there is a drill-down into each of these.
CIOs and their 
teams need to 
plot effective 
cloud security 
management 
strategies  
as well as 
understand the 
implications for 
operations and 
technology

16
Management
Operation
Technology
1 Updated security policy 
2 Cloud security strategy
3 Cloud security governance
4 Cloud security processes
5 Security roles & responsibilities
6 Cloud security guidelines
7 Cloud security assessment
8 Service integration
9 IT & procurement security requirements
10 Cloud security management
1 Access control
2 System protection
3 Identification
4 Authentication
5 Cloud security audits
6 Identity & key management
7 Physical security protection
8 Backup, recovery & archive
9 Core infrastructure protection
10 Network protection 
1 Awareness & training
2 Incident management
3 Configuration management
4 Contingency planning
5 Maintenance
6 Media protection
7 Environmental protection
8 System integrity
9 Information integrity
10 Personnel security
Aspects of cloud security

17
2 Cloud Security Simplified
Drilling down
The following is a brief explanation of each of the elements 
highlighted in the diagram.
Management
l Updated security policy 
Amendments to the organisation’s overarching security policy.
l Cloud security strategy
The organisation’s strategy for security with respect to cloud. This 
should complement or be part of the organisation’s existing 
overarching security strategy.
l Cloud security governance
The process for ensuring cloud security strategy and policy updates 
are adhered to.
l Cloud security processes
The security processes associated specifically with cloud and/or the 
amendments required to existing security processes in order to 
incorporate cloud.
l Security roles & responsibilities
Who is responsible for what with respect to ensuring the different 
elements of cloud security are implemented effectively.
l Cloud security guidelines
Advice and guidance provided to both business and IT teams 
regarding all aspects of security that affect them.
l Cloud security assessment
The ability to objectively measure the effectiveness of a given 
cloud service provider’s security.
l Service integration
The integration of several cloud services at a management level.
l IT & procurement security requirements
Specific cloud security requirements that would need to be 
included in any procurement and/or IT project’s overall 
requirements.
l Cloud security management
The overall day-to-day management of cloud security.
It is vital 
organisations 
ensure that their 
access control 
policies are still 
sustained by 
their use of 
cloud services

18
Operation
l Awareness & training
Educating employees about the security impact of cloud on their 
individual functions and roles.
l Incident management
Managing cloud-related problems and incidents.
l Configuration management
Ensuring the configuration of an organisation’s service is 
appropriate and secure.
l Contingency planning
A pre-planned approach to business continuity, disaster recovery 
and the ongoing management (up and down) of cloud usage.
l Maintenance
The processes ensuring that anything in a cloud environment (or 
consumed from a cloud environment) is properly maintained and 
up to date.
l Media protection
Ensuring any data stored in a cloud environment is 
managed appropriately.
l Environmental protection
Ensuring an organisation’s cloud service provider (and using that 
provider rather than internal IT) improves that organisation’s 
environmental credentials.
l System integrity
Ensuring all cloud systems remain secure.
l Information integrity
Ensuring all information stored in a cloud environment is secure.
l Personnel security
Ensuring all personnel (both internal staff and employees of the 
cloud provider) are trustworthy and do not have the ability to 
compromise the service.

19
Technology
l Access control
Technology and software (including its configuration) that ensures 
the right person has access to the right data (and only the right 
data) for them.
l System protection
Technology to protect individual cloud systems from security risks 
such as distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks.
l Identification
Technology to identify employees and other authorised personnel 
accessing a cloud service.
l Authentication
Technology to verify that an individual accessing a cloud system is 
who they claim to be.
l Cloud security audits
The tools and processes by which organisations ensure security 
(and associated systems and processes) are adequately 
maintained.
l Identity & key management
The management of security keys (e.g. encryption keys, SSL keys) 
and identities of the organisation’s personnel.
l Physical security protection
Ensuring a provider has appropriate security controls for access to 
its buildings.
l Backup, recovery & archive
The tools and procedures for ensuring that data stored in a cloud 
system is available in the event of a catastrophic failure on the part 
of the provider.
l Core infrastructure protection
Protection of servers and other core infrastructure.
l Network protection
Protection of the internal network and the boundary of the 
network (where it connects to a cloud environment).
2 Cloud Security Simplified

 3
Questions of
Confidentiality

21
3 Questions of Confidentiality
“A key question 
needs to be:  
‘Am I adhering  
to local 
jurisdiction?”
Tony Mather,  
CIO, Clear Channel 
International
Summary
Organisations adopting cloud services need to 
understand the implications for maintaining the 
confidentiality of personal or other sensitive 
business information. The key considerations are 
how the physical or legal location of data affects its 
use and ensuring only specified users and devices 
can view particular data. Buyers need to understand 
the regulatory frameworks under which they 
operate, assess potential providers and draw up 
suitable contracts to reflect regulatory obligations.
Photograph: Alamy
One of the greatest concerns for organisations coming to grips with cloud 
computing is confidentiality. Everyone expects certain information to be kept 
confidential in both their personal and professional lives and they expect the 
organisations for which they work, or with which they share their information,  
to maintain that assurance of confidentiality.
In the case of a fully-managed public cloud service, privacy and confidentiality 
risks are likely to vary according to the provider’s terms of service and privacy 
policy. There’s an even greater level of risk where providers reserve the right to 
change their terms and policies without recourse for existing customers. 
Data residency
When considering public cloud services, rather than private or community clouds, an 
organisation needs to understand the potential risk and impact of the secondary use 
of information. Secondary use of certain information by the provider may violate the 
laws or terms under which that information was collected. Given the variance in 
privacy legislation across different jurisdictions, the location where information is 
stored can have significant effects on the protection of privacy and confidentiality – 
as well as on the obligations of those who process or store the information.
Some regulatory bodies and the laws of certain jurisdictions establish privacy 
standards that can affect an organisation’s decision to use a particular provider – 
particularly where that provider is offering a publicly-hosted shared service.

22 
It is vital to 
understand  
the types of 
information 
stored and the 
appropriate level 
of risk associated 
with the loss of 
particular data
For example, the USA Patriot Act gives US law enforcement the right during the 
course of investigations into suspected terrorists to access information stored by 
providers, without having to inform data owners. Affected users of US-based cloud 
services would never know their information had been accessed. 
Identify and classify
But while the location of data and the laws governing different jurisdictions  
are important considerations, it is also vital to understand the types of 
information stored and the appropriate level of risk associated with the loss  
of particular data.
By identifying and classifying data, it is possible to consider the most appropriate 
location in which to store particular information. For example, some data may be 
too sensitive for a public cloud but can still exist in a private one. For other data, 
technologies such as tokenisation could provide the answer. This is where a 
sensitive piece of information is replaced with a reference code and the actual  
data is held in another database, hosted elsewhere.
A joined-up approach
The key consideration for any organisation is to define a joint approach among 
architecture, data management, compliance and security teams, in order to 
identify the data that needs to be protected, and the legal and regulatory 
obligations that pertain to that data. Using this combination of skills and 
experience, an organisation can determine the appropriate level of protection 
while still ensuring the data can be accessed when and where necessary.
Legal or physical location?
It is important to understand the laws that may relate to the legal location of  
data (i.e. the location of the legal entity that holds the data – such as the cloud 
provider) rather than its physical location.
Information in a cloud environment may have more than one legal location at  
any one time, with differing legislative implications. In some cases, a provider  
may, without giving notice to its users, move information from jurisdiction to 
jurisdiction, from provider to provider or from machine to machine.
Provider policies
An organisation might determine that particular data can be safely stored in a cloud 
environment. But even if this is the case and there are financial or other compelling 

3  Questions of Confidentiality
“The real horror 
story for cloud users 
would be seeing 
other people’s data”
Tony Mather, CIO, Clear Channel International

Some cloud 
service providers 
may be more 
secure than 
in-house IT, 
especially for 
organisations 
with less mature 
or poorly-
resourced  
IT functions
24 
business reasons for doing so, it is important to consider whether a provider has:
l Documented procedures for co-operation with local law enforcement agencies, 
in order that organisations understand exactly what action would be taken in the 
event of a data-access request
l A contractual agreement that prohibits exposure of data without approval, so 
customers have notice of any proposed hand-over of data to authorities
l The ability to specify that data reside in particular legal jurisdictions when 
delivering cloud services to customers in particular countries (to comply with data 
protection regulations that require data to be stored in given regions).
Contract for confidentiality
Where data residency is an important issue, organisations must make sure that this 
is reflected in the contractual arrangements with their providers. It is important to 
look for clear policies and practices in order to make an informed decision about the 
privacy and confidentiality risks. 
When drawing up cloud service contracts, organisations should consider adding data 
confidentiality clauses to ensure providers do not cause them to breach local data 
legislation because of that providers’ compliance with another jurisdiction’s laws.
Access control
The other key consideration for ensuring the confidentiality of cloud-based data is 
access control. Cloud-hosted data can be accessed through more channels and in 
more locations than data hosted in the organisation. With a potential multitude of 
devices and remote users seeking access from different global locations, via a mix 
of public and private Wi-Fi, mobile networks and fixed connections, it is vital 
organisations ensure confidential information is not compromised and that their 
access control policies are still sustained by their use of cloud services.
The challenge of multiple logins
Having multiple logins for different services is likely to reduce access security. This 
is because it makes users more likely to store passwords insecurely on their devices 
or paper rather than committing them to memory. Therefore when defining access 
control mechanisms for cloud applications and data, organisations should try to 
ensure their approach is integrated with their in-house models.
Many organisations are using single sign-on (SSO) to alleviate the security issues 
presented by multiple logins. This can result in added complexity where there are 
multiple cloud providers in addition to internal services. Organisations should 
ascertain whether it is appropriate to partner with one or more trusted identity 
providers, so SSO can be continued. The access control model should also clarify 
who determines the trusted and trusting parties, and how.

25
3 Questions of Confidentiality
Granular data control
Different parts of the business generally only require access to a certain subset of 
the organisation’s data. For example, it’s unlikely that retail staff would need to 
access their organisation’s legal and commercial applications. It may therefore  
be worth considering role-based access control to further reduce the risk of 
confidential information falling into the wrong hands. Indeed, it will be 
increasingly desirable to control access to data at a much more granular level 
(we explore this further in Chapter 7).
A question of context
Despite the broad organisational trend towards “device agnosticism”, in terms of 
security, businesses may consider certain types of device “more worthy” than 
others. Limiting access to services on this basis is referred to as context-sensitive 
access control. This means users’ levels of access to data are governed by the 
devices they’re using and their locations or types of connection. 
For example, a smartphone app accessing sensitive data over a cellular network 
may have only limited access, while a company-maintained PC (or even the same 
smartphone) directly connected to the company LAN may have full access.
Caution: evolving architectures
As cloud evolves, new security architectures will emerge to govern access control. 
Some of these will be very simple – for example, ensuring individual applications 
are protected from attacks. Others will be more complex, such as the example 
above. CIOs should keep abreast of these developments and ensure they do not 
lock their organisations into particular solutions until they are confident that the 
solutions will meet business needs.
Monitor, control, log
Organisations must ensure there are appropriate controls for both business users 
and IT support staff with “super user” privileges. It is important that the cloud 
provider monitors the use of such privileges, has appropriate behavioural controls 
in place and logs all data access so that it can provide audit trails to enable the 
investigation of potential security breaches and unauthorised access.
Cloud can be safer
Sometimes, cloud providers (as with outsourcers) are subject to greater scrutiny 
than the organisations using them. For example, a customer may demand a 
provider carries out background checks on all its employees, even though it does 
not apply a similar level of diligence to its own people. Some cloud service 
providers may therefore be more secure than in-house IT, especially for 
organisations with less mature or poorly-resourced IT functions.

 4
Ensuring 
Integrity

27 
4  Ensuring Integrity
It is important  
to ensure 
providers comply 
with any 
regulatory, 
corporate, 
industry or  
other standards 
relating to  
cloud services
Summary
An organisation moving sensitive business data 
to a cloud environment must take steps to ensure 
that its data is safe, genuine and accurate. Failing 
to do so can have both legal and operational 
consequences. It is therefore important to take 
data integrity into account as part of the due 
diligence process when selecting cloud providers. 
Photograph: Shutterstock
Protecting the integrity of data in a cloud environment is vital. 
Organisations must:
l Ensure that data stored using cloud services has not been tampered with
l Thoroughly address all compliance-related issues
l Ensure their reputations are protected by working with trusted providers.
It is important to ensure providers comply with any regulatory, corporate, 
industry or other standards relating to cloud services. They must also be able to 
provide the information their customers require in order to meet their own 
obligations. 
To this end, they should be able to demonstrate that:
l Their systems are secure (e.g. through certification)
l They can provide an adequate data-audit trail
l Their terms of use do not jeopardise customers’ own legislative requirements 
or ethical codes.
While some of the means for doing so are similar to the steps outlined in 
Chapter 3, organisations also need to consider a number of specific areas.
Managing multiple providers
Cloud solutions are often based on data entry via web applications and 
organisations may use separate vendors for functions like HR management and 
payroll services, with no cross-checking or reconciliation among them. This may be 

28 
a good reason to use one provider for related applications or to employ a cloud 
services aggregator that offers intermediate transaction management functions.
Acceptable use and ethical fit
Reputations take many years to establish but can be damaged or destroyed in a 
matter of days. It’s vital to build trusted relationships with cloud providers in 
order to maintain and protect the reputations of all parties.
Providers all have their own terms of service defining acceptable use. Often 
these are designed to protect them against violations of laws on terrorism, 
pornography and so on, in a similar vein to the acceptable-use terms many 
organisations already have in place for internal IT.
Any organisation consuming cloud services must be comfortable with its 
provider’s terms and indeed the ethical position these represent. For example, 
if a provider was found to be in breach of any legal or moral codes, how would 
that reflect on users of the service? Organisations therefore need mechanisms to 
understand providers’ policies and their implications, particularly in regard to the 
providers’ standards of conduct.
Tamper-proofing data
How can the owner of information held in a database ensure its data has not 
been tampered with, either deliberately or accidentally? This is a concern even 
for internal systems, but cloud adds additional complexity through multi-tenancy 
(multiple customers sharing the same physical systems and storage media) and 
the use of external operational staff.
While other security controls must also be used, confirming data has not been 
altered (either deliberately or inadvertently through a process failure) is 
generally achieved by checking that the data’s computational hash 
(a mathematically-determined code derived from the data) is still the same as 
it was originally. Ideally, the verification should take place using a hash that’s 
been agreed in advance, to avoid what is known as a man-in-the-middle 
attack, in which the original hash is replaced with the amended data’s hash at 
the point of verification between the systems transmitting and 
requesting information.
The IT industry  
is notoriously 
volatile, and  
the growing 
cloud sector  
in particular  
is likely to see 
many mergers 
and acquisitions

29
4 Ensuring Integrity
As it is not always practical to agree hashes in advance, it is common to use 
digital certificates to assert information is from a trusted source. This approach is 
commonly used in secure Internet transactions through encryption (for example, 
the HTTPS protocol for secure website access) but it can also be used to sign data 
transmissions. It is possible for malicious third parties to deliver false certificates, 
so organisations should maintain a list of trusted certificate providers to 
establish a chain of trust.
Understanding certification and standards
There are a number of common certifications and standards that providers use to 
bolster their claims of security and data integrity. The most frequently used are:
l ISO 27001 – the current standard certification for the operation, monitoring, 
maintenance and improvement of information security management systems
l ISO 27002 – recommendations for information security management (not 
currently certifiable)
l ISO/IEC 20000 – specifies the minimum process requirements an organisation 
must establish to be able to provide and manage IT services to a defined quality
l ISO 9001 – the most common of a number of quality management 
certifications. Being certified demonstrates a provider is driven to continually 
improve its internal, customer-facing and regulatory systems and processes.
Auditing and compliance
Although cloud computing is a relatively new development, data centre 
management is not. There are already proven tools and formal processes for 
auditing and testing the security aspects of data centres. For example:
l Field tests for fail-safety
l Regular security exercises
l Formal frameworks for security testing (such as penetration tests)
l Independent security audits
l Reports to customers on past service levels.
 

Buyer beware
None of an organisation’s legal and regulatory compliance responsibilities  
are transferred to a provider when the organisation adopts cloud services.  
While the provider might be obliged to operate in conformance with particular 
requirements, responsibility for data, service levels, infrastructure, uptime  
and so on remains with the buyer. Organisations must therefore ensure:
l They understand how the service will be provided
l They conduct due diligence investigations into the provider’s stability
l Providers’ reporting is adequate. (E.g. are the tools appropriate? Are the 
dashboards fit for purpose?)
E-discovery
Electronic discovery (e-discovery) is a legal term referring to searches of stored 
data in the event of litigation. In a public cloud, this can create significant 
difficulties. An organisation should ensure questions relating to e-discovery are 
answered satisfactorily prior to contracting with a provider.
Mergers and acquisitions
Equally, an organisation needs to understand what happens to its data and 
services in the event of a provider entering into a merger or acquisition. The IT 
industry is notoriously volatile, and the growing cloud sector in particular is likely 
to see many mergers and acquisitions. 
Data protection
When cloud applications hold personally identifiable information, organisations 
must ensure providers protect this adequately and in compliance with the local 
data protection laws that govern the information in question. For large, 
multi-region cloud solutions, this can be a complex scenario. The main data 
protection risks to the business are:
l Loss of data by the provider
l Unauthorised access to data the business holds
l Malicious activities targeting the provider
l Poor internal IT security on the part of the provider.
Organisations must assess the risks of these hazards and understand their 
potential impacts on the business before adopting a cloud service.
30 

4  Ensuring Integrity
“Infrastructure providers 
may offer the integrity  
and security required,  
but in the longer term  
this has to be designed 
into the application  
for cloud services”
Nick Gaines, Group IS Director, Volkswagen UK

 5
The
Risk
of 
Service
Disruption

33
5 The Risk of Service Disruption
Organisations 
using cloud 
services may  
be very 
dependent on 
public network 
links, and risk 
becoming 
“collateral 
damage”  
in incidents 
affecting service 
providers
Summary
Amid ongoing reports of cloud services being 
brought down by both malicious attacks and 
providers’ technical and operational failures, CIOs 
need strategies to mitigate the risk of disruption to 
business services. Before contracting, they should 
carefully assess providers’ processes for managing 
availability. However, they will also need to accept 
that occasional outages are inevitable and 
plan accordingly.
Photograph: Alamy
The cloud availability conundrum
When it comes to availability, cloud services pose something of a conundrum for 
CIOs. On the one hand, the independence of such services from the organisations 
using them, the varied methods of connection available to users and the fact 
these services are central to the provider’s business mean they are likely to remain 
live if local problems hit their customers’ businesses. On the other, organisations 
using cloud services may be very dependent on public network links, and risk 
becoming “collateral damage” in incidents affecting service providers.
Attacks and failures
The activities of so-called “hacktivist” groups, such as LulzSec and Anonymous, 
show that organisations with poor security processes can suffer considerable 
reputational and financial damage. The technology media also frequently 
highlights service outages at major cloud providers that have occurred because 
of natural disasters, or technical or operational failures.
Is downtime the “new normal”?
The point of highlighting these outages is not to criticise. These stories hit the 
press because of their huge impact. They do, however, need to be viewed in 
context. Some commentators suggest this is the “new normal” and that 
businesses must learn to live with and manage outages, just as they have 
learned to cope with the odd power cut, dead phone line or train breakdown.
It’s also worth considering whether existing internal or outsourced services can 
maintain similar availability rates. How long does it generally take to resume 
normal service following an incident? It may be that a few minutes of downtime 

34 
Many of the 
same service 
management 
disciplines 
and best 
practices that 
are usually 
applied to 
traditional IT 
will still apply 
in a cloud 
environment
is acceptable. Organisations requiring very high availability might consider 
designing their infrastructure to span multiple regions and maybe even multiple 
cloud providers, just as in a private infrastructure set-up they might have 
multiple data centres, communications paths and power sources.
Mitigating the risk
Organisations choosing to use cloud services need to accept the risk that 
availability might occasionally be eroded by network downtime, data centre 
outages and other single points of failure. They can mitigate some of this risk by 
selecting an enterprise-strength cloud provider, but this will cost a little more. 
Where availability of data and applications is important to an organisation, 
however, they would be unwise to select a provider on price alone. Rather, they 
should investigate and compare potential providers’ availability, and disaster 
recovery and business continuity plans in order to make an informed choice.
CIOs and staff responsible for procurement will need to identify and negotiate 
effective terms and conditions that mitigate any perceived exposure to risk and 
cost. At the same time, providers will be trying to standardise terms and minimise 
contractual differences among their customers. While the cloud space is still 
maturing, these tensions will continue. But we expect providers to eventually 
develop a standard approach that will satisfy all but the most demanding customers. 
Tried and tested tactics
Many of the same service management disciplines and best practices that are 
usually applied to traditional IT will still apply in a cloud environment – for 
example, business continuity and disaster recovery planning.
Business continuity
Outsourcing to a cloud provider does not outsource the responsibility for an 
effective and up-to-date business continuity (BC) plan. Organisations must 
assess the risks and understand the impact of any move to cloud on their BC 
plans (for example, the implications of accepting different SLAs from multiple 
providers). Effectively managed, however, cloud can have benefits for BC, for 
example in relation to testing and development. Using cloud services, new 
systems can be built, scaled and tested rigorously without affecting existing 
internal infrastructure, systems and processes.
Disaster recovery 
Cloud contracts rarely include disaster recover (DR) provisions or financial penalties 
for failing to recover services within a specific timeframe following an incident. Some 
cloud infrastructure providers don’t take responsibility for customer data. Buyers must 
understand a provider’s DR plans and ensure they meet their overall requirements. 

5 The Risk of Service Disruption
In addition, organisations need to ensure outsourced cloud services are 
incorporated into in-house DR plans. This includes so-called “shadow IT” (cloud 
systems outside the control and possibly implemented without the knowledge of 
the IT department). The considerations are similar to those involved in protecting 
business-critical “applications” developed using Excel spreadsheets or an Access 
database. CIOs must ensure they don’t hinder business innovation and agility, 
but at the same time need to identify and monitor shadow IT so that it can be 
incorporated into overall DR plans.
It’s also worth remembering that cloud can actually significantly simplify and 
reduce the cost of DR. Providers can offer standby infrastructure and platforms on 
a pay-per-use basis that can rapidly be brought up to speed in the event of 
disruptions affecting both internal and externally-sourced systems and services.
Overcoming attacks
A single cloud infrastructure will generally be used by a number of the 
provider’s customers. A significant proportion of these customers will share not 
only a common network infrastructure but a common computing, memory and 
storage infrastructure. Organisations need to be aware that an attack that 
targets any of the provider’s customers who share the same cloud environment 
is likely to affect their own ability to access services. 
Organisations also increase the risk of suffering a distributed denial-of-service 
(DDoS) attack if they use multiple providers (although conversely this can also 
reduce the impact of any attack since it’s unlikely all of an organisation’s 
providers will be hit at the same time).
Buyers should question potential providers carefully to understand the 
mechanisms they have in place to detect, classify and trace DDoS attacks. 
They should also ask for full details of the providers’ capabilities and how they 
scale their services.
Evaluating alerts
CIOs must ensure their cloud providers can show documented processes for 
evaluating security alerts from operating system and application vendors. This is 
particularly critical, given the increasing number of zero-day threats (identified 
security holes that have not yet been patched). It’s important that vulnerable 
systems are protected from attack until routine service packs and updates fix any 
problems. Indeed, organisations face a higher level of risk if they fail to ensure 
systems are patched in a timely manner than they do from untested patches 
that could have unwanted side effects. Even so, it’s also important to understand 
the testing procedures a provider uses.
35

 6
Putting 
It 
All 
Together

37 
6 Putting It All Together
Organisations 
need to be 
certain 
everything 
joins up
Summary
Many of the risks associated with cloud come 
about as a result of inadequate service integration. 
This is both a technical and a business process 
consideration. Organisations must be certain cloud 
services are effectively joined up – both with one 
another and with in-house systems and business 
services. They should identify and mitigate risks 
systematically in advance, ensuring providers can 
be effectively assessed, monitored and managed. 
Photograph: Pixelate.biz
Organisations often have concerns that moving systems and data into a cloud 
environment will lead to a sprawl of services from different providers, with all the 
associated technical, management and contractual headaches this implies. To 
ensure an effective end-to-end service that seamlessly joins up systems, services 
and processes – both internal and external – effective integration is essential.
Among other things, organisations need to be certain that:
l Services will work correctly
l They can recover speedily from service outages
l They can manage multiple providers effectively
l They can demonstrate their systems and processes are compliant
l All the risks are clearly identified and mitigated.
Joining the dots
Organisations need to ensure robust and effective interoperability across 
infrastructure, applications and processes, among multiple providers, and 
between external and internal systems and services. In other words, they need 
to be certain everything joins up. 

38 
To gain the  
full benefits  
of cloud, 
organisations 
need to maintain 
the freedom to 
switch providers 
should the  
need arise
From a risk perspective, to do this effectively, they need to understand where  
the potential gaps or threats to service delivery lie and then mitigate those  
risks systematically.
Integrating business services
Most organisations typically focus on interoperability at the technology or 
application level. But as more and more cloud providers offer business processes 
“as a service”, CIOs must be able to guarantee effective integration and 
interoperability at that higher business-process level if they are to ensure 
continuity of service and operations.
Whose problem is it anyway?
Organisations need to be clear who is responsible for fixing any problem. They 
must work through potential outages and understand in advance whom to 
approach for a “fix”. Where there are multiple providers, organisations should 
determine if they will work together to recover after an incident. (For example, 
cloud providers are sometimes unable to share information with others due to 
regulatory restrictions.) In addition, organisations’ business continuity and 
disaster recovery plans will need to factor in their cloud providers’ own plans  
(see Chapter 10).
Warning: keep exits clear
Ultimately, cloud computing will be a utility – and to gain the full benefits of  
this model, organisations need to maintain the freedom to switch providers 
should the need arise. This should be addressed at the beginning of any cloud 
procurement so that the exit arrangements and obligations are fully understood 
at the outset. It is absolutely critical that organisations ensure service 
termination and/or transition to another provider is covered in the contracted 
terms and conditions.

39
6 Putting It All Together
Five further considerations
Other key aspects organisations must consider if they are to ensure effective 
service integration include the following:
1. Consistency of reporting 
Organisations should be clear of the hierarchy of their cloud providers and, 
where possible, ensure there is a consistency of input into reports in terms  
of format and context. This is especially the case for reports that aggregate 
information across multiple providers.
2. Managing multiple providers 
When dealing with a number of cloud providers delivering different services, an 
organisation should identify a logical single point of control and management.
3. Contractual security assurance
Organisations must be sure providers will deliver adequate protection and 
security throughout the life of the contract.
4. Managed security
Organisations must ensure providers offer adequate managed security services 
with appropriate support levels. This should include 24/7 access to support, 
vulnerability management and appropriate protection services.
5. Incident management
Organisations must understand how providers’ incident management processes 
will join up with their own investigation and resolution processes. 

lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
lREC
 7
Data
is
King

41
7 Data is King
As cloud 
matures, 
organisations 
will need to 
rethink their 
security models 
fundamentally
Summary
When applications and data no longer sit 
exclusively inside an organisation, it stops 
making sense to treat the firewalled boundary  
of the data centre as the primary line of defence.  
As cloud models evolve, businesses will need 
increasingly granular security controls at the 
application and data levels. This presents 
management, operational and technical challenges, 
but also enables exciting opportunities.
Photograph: Shutterstock
To ensure data confidentiality, integrity and availability, today’s cloud providers 
offer capabilities such as encryption, segregation (to keep different customers’ 
resources separate), rigorous access controls (to prevent unauthorised access  
to data) and scheduled data backups. But as cloud matures, organisations will 
need to rethink their security models fundamentally.
Growing granularity
Currently, the data centre boundary (typically a demilitarised zone created by  
a series of firewalls) is the de facto standard “security wall” that protects access  
to an organisation’s applications and data. But, in the cloud world, applications 
may not be inside the organisation’s data centre. Consequently, security will be 
applied to applications and data at an ever more granular level. For example, 
firewalls will be built directly into applications and access to data will be 
controlled at the level of individual attributes within a record.
Understand and classify
For the model above to work, it is vital that organisations ensure data is 
accurately classified, so people can only access the specific information they’re 
authorised to view – and so appropriate rules can be built into new applications 
and enforced automatically. 
To classify effectively, the IT department will need a thorough understanding of 
the structure of the organisation’s data and how it is used. Some data may not 
even be owned by the organisation (especially if it has been acquired from a 

42
“Customer 
experience will 
be the measure 
of business 
success in 
real-time 
systems”
Nick Gaines,  
Group IS Director, 
Volkswagen UK
data marketplace – the data equivalent of an application store) and CIOs need  
to consider appropriate use and storage when moving such information into a 
cloud environment.
Grey areas of ownership
In other instances, it may not be clear whether the organisation, individual 
consumer or provider owns the data. Examples include website activity logs that 
reveal customer behaviour patterns or (even further abstracted) data regarding 
an organisation that is extracted from social networking sites. Organisations will 
need to clarify such grey areas in advance to ensure their use of cloud data is 
both secure and compliant.
A need for transparency
Organisations need to be confident their cloud providers’ security provisions 
meet the standards claimed. Some researchers suggest current security models 
are not transparent enough. Although a provider may give guarantees of data 
confidentiality, integrity, secure auditing and resource isolation, an organisation 
should look for the detail of how the provider actually enforces these measures.
The problem of persistence
Some of the IT department’s key technical cloud security concerns relate to the 
location and temporary persistence of transient data. Cloud applications are 
designed to be accessed through a browser. Web browsers, though, cache 
information and if an organisation is careless, unauthorised parties can access 
this stored data and gain access to confidential or sensitive information.
Tackling the technical challenges
IT departments can go some way to addressing these issues by employing a web 
architecture that makes only presentation data (i.e. the web page plus the data 
being shown) available to the browser, keeping the business logic secure within 
the application. This ensures that business logic and core data are protected 
from the casual viewer. 
Some browser-based applications, however, will request a wide data set from  
the business logic layer and then use local script rules to present pieces of that 
information based on the user interactions with the page. Organisations should 
therefore be aware that caching of such a broad data set could pose a 
security risk.

43
7 Data is King
A future solution 
In future, we may see models where cloud applications are provided with 
individual security policies, enabling the tracking of data across cloud software 
components. By understanding which components are exposed to sensitive data 
in a multi-tenanted cloud environment, the application can constrain and 
potentially avoid security problems by isolating those components1.
Three final considerations
1. Data stored within a cloud environment may need to reference data held 
within systems in the organisation’s data centre. This data may be sensitive, as 
might the reference keys used. Organisations therefore need to consider security 
when integrating data across cloud providers and their internal systems.
2. Organisations must also consider the security of data connections when 
moving a service from one provider to another provider, in order to ensure the 
data maintains its integrity.
3. A related consideration is the size of the data being migrated during the 
transition. The volume of data may mean organisations cannot undertake such 
an activity without some interruption to the service.
Exciting opportunities
Despite the challenges involved, IT departments that tackle cloud data security 
effectively will open up exciting opportunities for their organisations. Businesses 
will increasingly be able to exploit the hidden value of their vast amounts of 
information, with analysis being possible ever closer to real time. They can 
employ new solutions such as “big data” analytics and complex event 
processing engines.
More exciting still is the move away from traditional relational database 
structures to more open architectures such as Linked Data. This concept is 
famously championed by Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the world-wide web, 
who urges organisations to publish structured data online in an open, machine-
readable format. The result will be a “semantic web” where data from different 
sources can easily be connected and queried in real time.
Notes
1. See: http://www.computing.co.uk/ctg/news/2109259/cloud-tracked-ensure-security

 8
The 
Cloud-
Friendly 
Security  
Team
A. CLOUD
Chief Security Officer
Enabler of cloud adoption

45
8 The Cloud-Friendly Security Team
Organisations 
must be 
prepared to 
restructure 
security teams  
to reflect any 
change of focus 
and ensure  
they have the 
capabilities  
to meet 
changing 
security needs
Summary
As cloud-use increases, security teams need  
to ensure they are seen as enablers rather than 
blockers. That means they need to factor cloud  
into their existing systems and processes. They  
will also increasingly require skills in contractual 
and provider management, as well as a firm 
understanding of both their business’s 
requirements and the security implications  
of a multiple-cloud landscape.
Photograph: Alamy, Shutterstock
Cloud is already having a profound impact on security teams, not least because 
of the ease with which “shadow IT” can now proliferate within organisations  
(see Chapter 5). The issue is often exacerbated when the IT department and  
the security office are perceived as cloud “blockers”. 
While much of what security teams do will remain the same, they will 
nonetheless increasingly have to factor in cloud. Organisations must be prepared 
to restructure security teams to reflect any change of focus and ensure they have 
the capabilities to meet changing security needs.
The seven steps towards an effective cloud security team
1. Develop a cloud strategy
Security teams should develop and own cloud security strategies as part of their 
organisations’ broader information strategies. They should then review and 
revise security policies, procedures and processes to embed cloud into the 
security function and governance model. This may mean adding new policy 
statements or simply extending existing ones to encompass new concepts. It 
may also have knock-on effects on the security teams’ approaches to compliance 
and audit activities.
2. Focus on a federated model
As cloud becomes more broadly adopted, the team will have to understand and 
adapt to a federated security model, where the authentication and authorisation 

46 
Due to the 
perceived risk 
associated with 
cloud, the role  
of the chief 
security officer 
will become 
increasingly 
critical 
between participating services are brokered and identity data is shared across 
the organisation’s boundaries. A centralised model becomes unsustainable  
in a world where much of what needs securing actually resides outside the 
organisation. As ever more business services appear in a cloud context, the 
security team will need to encompass and address security issues related to 
process and technology integration.
3. Move closer to contracts and the business
The security team will also need to work with the legal department to ensure 
contracts with providers reflect the organisation’s security requirements. To this 
end, it should develop, in collaboration with the commercial department, 
appropriate requirements and provider assessment criteria to ensure it obtains 
the appropriate levels of security, compliance and assurance around the services 
it is buying.
Many security teams have already been developing these skills as a result of 
outsourcing. Teams are changing from being providers themselves into more of a 
contract assurance function. They also need to become increasingly familiar with 
business functions in order to interpret business requirements and assess the 
potential impact of meeting those requirements with cloud services.
4. Manage multiplicity
Security teams in organisations that are using multiple cloud services also need 
to understand and manage the new risks this may present. For example, the 
organisation may enter into a contract with a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) 
vendor that hosts its application on the same cloud infrastructure the 
organisation uses for some of its own legacy applications. 
In this example, there is an obvious risk with availability. Less obvious is the 
potential risk of access to a wider set of data – the legacy data and the data in 
the SaaS application together might be more meaningful and therefore valuable.
5. Secure the exit
Upon termination of a cloud service contract, the security team needs to be 
satisfied that no residual sensitive data remains anywhere on the provider’s 
systems. That includes operational databases, backups and archives. It is worth 
considering this eventuality at procurement time so the relevant obligations can 
be clearly set out in the contract.

47
8 The Cloud-Friendly Security Team
6. Build diverse teams
Traditionally, security teams have largely comprised in-house technical staff. 
However, in a cloud world, the team may need to extend to include security 
representatives from providers, as well as from other parts of the business. Due 
to the perceived risk associated with cloud, the role of the chief security officer 
will become increasingly critical in terms of putting all the pieces together and 
ensuring the organisation’s data and business logic are suitably protected.
7. Seek out security standards
It is much cheaper and easier to enter into contracts with providers if there are 
recognised standards against which they can be judged, rather than 
organisations having to draw up their own set of requirements. Cloud standards 
are still evolving, so the security team need to keep abreast of any 
new developments.
In summary, the security team needs more than ever before to facilitate good 
practice, especially through collaboration with the cloud service provider, rather 
than appear to be blocking the adoption of cloud capabilities. This means 
moving closer to a supporting – rather than an ownership – role.

 9
The 
Cloud 
Security 
Checklist

49
9  The Cloud Security Checklist
As with 
traditional 
outsourcing 
projects, 
organisations 
need to assess 
not only their 
own security 
capabilities, but 
also those of any 
proposed cloud 
service provider
Summary
A simple, two-part checklist to help CIOs determine 
whether both the security team and the rest of the 
organisation are fit and ready to use cloud securely.
Photographs: Shutterstock
In The White Book of Cloud Adoption (see Appendix), we included an 
assessment model to help CIOs prioritise the company’s business systems and 
services for cloud adoption. This model provides a simple, objective mechanism 
for assessing the benefits of migrating a business system (or its function) into a 
cloud environment against the cost and complexity of doing so. The model also 
helps CIOs identify what type of cloud or cloud service, if any, would be 
appropriate for the different systems and services they may consider migrating. 
This chapter takes that original adoption assessment model one step further  
and provides specific pointers on the key security and risk-related considerations 
when assessing any move to cloud. 
The first part of the checklist (starting on the next page) allows a CIO to 
determine if the security team is ready for cloud. The second allows CIOs  
and their security teams to determine if the rest of the organisation and any 
proposed provider can offer genuine assurance of cloud security. In both cases, 
organisations must be able to tick all (not most) of the boxes before they can 
claim to be secure in a cloud context.
Effective cloud security involves considerations spanning the three broad 
areas of management, operation and technology (see Chapter 2). As with 
traditional outsourcing projects, organisations need to assess not only their own 
capabilities, but also those of any proposed cloud service provider. So the second 
part of the checklist helps CIOs to break down the various considerations by 
business area and assess both their own organisations’ cloud security readiness 
and that of any cloud service provider under consideration.

50 
Is the security team ready for cloud?
1. Is the security team aware of/knowledgeable about cloud?
 Security team  
❑
2. Does the organisation have a cloud security strategy with 
which its auditors would be happy?
3. Has security governance been adapted to include cloud?
4. Does the team’s structure enable cloud security?
5. Has the security team updated all security policies and 
procedures to incorporate cloud?
6. Has the security team provided guidance to the business on 
how to remain secure within a cloud environment?
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑

51
9  The Cloud Security Checklist
4. Does the organisation know within which 
jurisdictions its data can reside?
5. Is there a mechanism for managing  
cloud-related risks?
6. Does the organisation understand the data 
architecture needed to operate with appropriate 
security at all levels?
7. Can the organisation be confident of end-to-end 
service continuity across several cloud service 
providers? 
8. Does the provider comply with all relevant industry 
standards (e.g. the UK’s Data Protection Act)?
9. Does the compliance function understand the  
specific regulatory issues pertaining to the  
organisation’s adoption of cloud services?
Provider
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
Organisation
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
Management
1. Is everyone aware of his or her cloud security 
responsibilities?
2. Is there a mechanism for assessing the security  
of a cloud service?
3. Does the business governance mitigate the 
security risks that can result from cloud-based 
“shadow IT”?
Is the organisation/provider fit for cloud security?

52 
4. Does the organisation know in which application or 
database each data entity is stored or mastered?
5. Is the cloud-based application maintained and 
disaster tolerant (i.e. would it recover from an 
internal or externally-caused disaster)?
6. Are all personnel appropriately vetted, 
monitored and supervised?
7. Is the provider able to deliver a service within the 
required performance parameters?
8. Is it easy to securely integrate the cloud-based 
applications at runtime and contract termination?
9. Do you know the location from which the provider 
will deliver support and management services?
Provider
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
Organisation
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
Operation
1. Are regulatory compliance reports, audit reports 
and reporting information available from the 
provider?
2. Does the provider have the right attitude to 
incident resolution and configuration management, 
even when services involve multiple providers?
3. Does using a cloud provider give the 
organisation an environmental advantage?
10. Do the procurement processes contain cloud 
security requirements?

53
9  The Cloud Security Checklist
4. Are mechanisms in place for identification, 
authorisation and key management in a cloud 
environment?
5. Are all cloud-based systems, infrastructure and 
physical locations suitably protected?
6. Are the network designs suitably secure for the 
organisation’s cloud adoption strategy?
Provider
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
Organisation
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
Technology
1. Are there appropriate access controls (e.g. 
federated single sign-on) that give users controlled 
access to cloud applications?
2. Is data separation maintained between the 
organisation’s information and that of other 
customers of the provider, at runtime and during 
backup (including data disposal)?
3. Has the organisation considered and addressed 
backup, recovery, archiving and decommissioning of 
data stored in a cloud environment?
The above checklist is intended to be a high-level guide to the areas organisations need to consider. There 
are also several very good evaluation models already on the market:
l Cloud Security Alliance Security Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud Computing V2.1
l Gartner ID G00209052: “Determining criteria for cloud security assessment: it’s more than a checklist”
l Cloud Legal Project at Queen Mary, University of London (http://www.cloudlegal.ccls.qmul.ac.uk/)
l The German Federal Office for Information Security’s security requirements for cloud computing providers
l Cloud security study of the Fraunhofer Institute for Secure Information Technology (SIT).
In addition, further guidance can be found from the following websites:
l www.first.org
l www.cloudsecurityalliance.org
l www.enisa.europa.eu
l www.nist.gov

S
E
C
U
R
E
 10
The
Final 
word
on 
Cloud 
Security

55 
10  The Final Word on Cloud Security
Security is no 
longer a source 
of worry or 
apprehension. 
It has simply 
become another 
consideration  
in risk 
management 
strategies and 
processes
Summary
Organisations new to cloud say security is their 
number one concern. Indeed, many perceive it as a 
significant barrier to adoption. But those further 
along the cloud journey have a different perspective. 
While security is just as important for them, it is no 
longer a source of worry or apprehension. It has 
simply become another consideration in their risk 
management strategies and processes. Their 
experience informs future decisions about moving 
other services into (or sourcing them from) a cloud 
environment, thus helping them make ever further 
strides along their cloud path.
Photograph: Alamy
In this book, we have tried to pass on the insights we have gleaned working with 
customers all over the world to ease their transitions to cloud. Fujitsu’s extensive 
analysis has led to the following conclusions:
l The type of cloud (public, trusted, private or hybrid) has the biggest single 
impact on the level of risk and its manageability.
l To assure confidentiality, organisations need to define approaches for 
identifying the data to be protected and ascertaining how to access that data. 
To do this, they should build relationships with trusted cloud service providers.
l Organisations should consider an access-control approach that incorporates 
and integrates in-house, outsourced and cloud systems.
l To ensure data integrity, organisations must understand how the provider 
guarantees data has not been tampered with.
l To comply with regulations (e.g. SOX, Basel III, CSA V2, PCI-DSS, ISO 27001, 
BS11000, HIPPA), organisations must ensure the relevant regulatory, corporate, 
industry or other standards apply (legally or contractually) to the provider.
l Building a relationship with a trusted cloud service provider helps 
organisations to maintain and protect their reputation.
l From an audit perspective, it is important that organisations know how 
cloud services are provided and they must ensure providers can give them the 
regulatory and audit information they require.

56 
At Fujitsu, we 
recognise that 
for customers 
adopting cloud 
services, security 
is a key concern 
– and we take 
this very 
seriously
l Business continuity strategies need to factor in an organisation’s external 
cloud services. Organisations must understand the impact of accepting different 
SLAs from different providers.
l Disaster recovery plans need to include the cloud service provider’s plans as 
well as in-house plans.
l Organisations should be prepared for attacks (e.g. distributed denial-of-
service) against both themselves and their cloud providers.
l Organisations need to ascertain the interoperability of providers’ offerings 
before buying. Otherwise, there is a risk that services from different providers 
across infrastructure, applications and process will not join up at runtime.
l In multi-provider environments, organisations need to be able to quickly 
determine who is responsible for fixing any problem that occurs. They should 
choose providers willing to work with others to resolve any issues expediently.
l Reporting across multiple service providers can be complex. Organisations 
must ensure consistency of input and format from their various providers.
l Organisations will need to manage data at an ever more granular level as 
cloud solutions evolve.
l Cloud will have a profound impact on the security team, which will require a 
more diverse range of technical, contractual and business relationship skills.
Organisations can use the cloud security checklist in Chapter 9 to ascertain how 
prepared their security teams and wider businesses are for cloud. There are also 
links to additional third-party models and frameworks for those who want to 
explore cloud security considerations in greater detail.
Fujitsu and cloud security
At Fujitsu, we recognise that for customers adopting cloud services, security is a 
key concern – and we take this very seriously. Our cloud offerings have built-in 
security mechanisms that address customers’ concerns. We have a Cloud Security 
Committee focused on ensuring our cloud offerings are – and remain – secure. 
As an active member of the Cloud Security Alliance and other industry bodies, we 
are also firmly committed to the cause of furthering cloud security standards. 
Fujitsu’s global expertise and experience in information assurance is widely 
recognised and means Fujitsu is ideally placed to assist customers in all areas of 
security, not least cloud security.
For more information on Fujitsu’s cloud security capabilities and to learn 
how we can assist your organisation further, please contact us at: 
askfujitsu@uk.fujitsu.com

Cloud Security Speak: Key terms explained
A way to control who and/or what may access a given resource, either physical  
(e.g. a server) or logical (e.g. a record in a database).
A design model that documents how a solution to a design problem can be 
achieved and repeated. 
The proportion of time a system is in a functioning condition, based on a number  
of performance measures such as uptime
.
Data sets that grow so large that they become awkward to work with using  
traditional database management tools. Typically contains many small records 
that are travelling fast.
(See also: Disaster recovery) Business continuity involves planning to keep  
all aspects of a business functioning amid disruptive events (whereas disaster 
recovery focuses on restoring or replicating the IT systems and services that  
support business functions).
Documentary confirmation that a service, product, person or organisation 
conforms to certain characteristics or possesses particular skills. This is often,  
but not always, subject to some form of external assessment.
The architecture of the systems involved in the delivery of cloud computing. This 
typically involves multiple cloud components communicating with one another 
over a loosely-coupled mechanism (i.e. one where each component has little or  
no knowledge of the others).
The organisation purchasing cloud services for consumption either by its customers 
or its own IT users. (Also referred to in this book as “the buyer”.)
A service provider that makes a cloud-computing environment – such as a public 
cloud – available to others. (Also referred to in this book as “the provider”.)
The different levels at which cloud services are provided. Commonly: Infrastructure-
as-a-Service (IaaS); Platform-as-a-Service (Paas); Software-as-a-Service (SaaS); 
Data-as-a-Service (DaaS); and Business Process-as-a-Service (BPaaS).
The act of keeping data secret within a certain circle, where that information is not 
intended to be known publicly.
(When referring to a system) Exhibiting different behaviour depending upon the 
task or situation (for example, presenting data differently on different classes of 
device, such as personal computers, tablets and smartphones).
The location of data in terms of both the legal location (the country in which the 
cloud service contract is enforced) and the physical location (i.e. the data centres 
where it is stored).
Access control
Architectural patterns
Availability
Big data
Business continuity (BC)
Certification
Cloud architecture
Cloud service buyer (CSB)
Cloud service provider (CSP)
Cloud services stack
Confidentiality
Context-sensitive
Data residency
57

58 
(See also: Business continuity) The process, policies and procedures related to 
recovery or replication of technology infrastructure after a natural or human-
induced disaster. DR is a subset of business continuity.
An attempt to make a computing resource unavailable to its intended users  
by bombarding it with many simultaneous connection requests. “Distributed” 
refers to the use of multiple, dispersed systems to attack the resource.
The provision of security to allow for clean separation between the service being 
accessed and the associated authentication and authorisation procedures. This 
enables secure collaboration across multiple systems, networks and 
organisations employing different security systems.
A means of checking data integrity using a short code mathematically 
generated from the original data. Any accidental or intentional change to  
the data will change the hash value.
A secure protocol for the transfer of encrypted communications across a 
computer network.
Protocol to provide encrypted communication and secure identification of  
a network web server.
In the context of data security, integrity means that the data cannot be 
modified without detection.
The ability of diverse systems and organisations to work together.
A concept (famously championed by the web’s inventor Tim Berners-Lee)  
in which structured data is published in a standard format so it can be 
interlinked and queried or read by both humans and machines. This facilitates 
the widespread use of multiple, diverse data sources in the creation of services 
and applications.
A service that provides proof of the integrity and origin of data together  
with authentication that can be asserted (with a high level of assurance)  
to be genuine.
An external provider who manages and assumes responsibility for delivering  
a defined set of services, either proactively or as they are needed.
The USA Patriot Act, a law enacted in the US, formerly known as the Uniting 
(and) Strengthening America (by) Providing Appropriate Tools Required (to) 
Intercept (and) Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001.
Data that, by its nature, is covered under privacy and data-protection 
legislation. This applies to information about both employees and consumers.
Real-time programs must guarantee a response (from event to system 
response) within strict time constraints. A real-time system may be one where 
the application is considered (in context) to be mission-critical.
Disaster recovery (DR)
Distributed denial-of-service 
(DDoS) attack
Federation
Hash
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure 
(HTTPS)
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 
with SSL/TLS
Integrity
Interoperability
Linked data
Non-repudiation
Outsourced service provider/
managed service provider (OSP/MSP)
Patriot Act
Personally identifiable information 
(PII)
Real time
58

59 
Part of a service contract where the level of service is formally defined to provide 
a common understanding of services, priorities, responsibilities and guarantees.
A term often used to describe IT systems and IT solutions built and/or used 
inside organisations without formal approval from the IT department.
A solution to provide real-time analysis of security alerts generated by network 
hardware and applications; also used to log security data and generate reports 
for compliance purposes.
A mechanism whereby a single action of user authentication and authorisation 
permits access to multiple systems without the need to enter multiple 
passwords.
A business unit that deals with security issues on both an organisational and  
a technical level.
The process of replacing a piece of sensitive data with a value that is not 
considered sensitive in the context of the environment in which it resides  
(for example, replacing an item of data with a reference to the actual data 
which is held in another database and hosted in a different environment).
(See also: Availability) A measure of the time that a computer system has  
been available for service. Not to be confused with overall system availability, 
which will depend on a number of measures, including the uptime of individual 
components.
The cyclical practice of identifying, classifying, remediating and mitigating 
vulnerabilities.
Service level agreement (SLA)
Shadow IT
Security information and event 
management (SIEM)
Single sign-on (SSO)
Security operations centre (SOC)
Tokenisation
Uptime
Vulnerability management
Cloud Security Speak
59

60 
Also 
in 
this 
series…
Extract from Chapter 1:
In pure business terms, cloud is essentially a flexible, scalable, pay-per-use model for 
the way IT services are delivered and consumed, typically through short-term contracts. 
With its pay-as-you-go model, cloud moves many IT costs from capital expenditure to 
operating expenditure; its “elastic model” means available IT capability can be flexed to 
mirror changing business demand; and it enables consumers of IT to have much greater 
transparency over their costs.
But there are different levels where that model can be applied – and the desired 
benefits attained:
l Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) 
Virtual machine services accessed over the network, providing compute and/or storage 
capabilities
l Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)
Platform software services (such as web, application, database servers, enterprise 
service buses and other middleware, with associated security mechanisms) on which 
web service-based applications can be built
l Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)
Applications provided as a service from the cloud, with end-user licences procured or 
“released” in line with changing demand
l Data-as-a-Service (DaaS)
Data or information delivered from the cloud either as raw data sets or consumed 
through an analytics interface
l Business Process-as-a-Service (BPaaS)
Cloud-delivered business services that are aligned to business processes and associated 
measurable business outcomes.
To order a copy of this book, and for more information on the steps to cloud 
computing, please contact: askfujitsu@uk.fujitsu.com
The White Book of Cloud Adoption:  
The definitive guide to a business technology revolution

Fujitsu Regional Offices
Europe, Middle East, Africa, India
Fujitsu (UK & Ireland)
+44 (0) 870 242 7998
askfujitsu@uk.fujitsu.com
uk.fujitsu.com
Fujitsu Technology Solutions
(continental europe, middle east, africa & India)
+49 1805 372 900 
(14ct/min; mobile devices are limited to 42ct/min)
cic@ts.fujitsu.com
ts.fujitsu.com
Fujitsu (Nordic region)
+358 45 7880 4000
info@fi.fujitsu.com
www.fujitsu.com/fi
North America
FUJITSU AMERICA , INC
+1 800 831 3183
globalcloud@us.fujitsu.com
www.fujitsu.com/us
Asia Pacific
Fujitsu Headquarters
+81 3 6252 2220
Shiodome City Center, 1-5-2 Higashi-Shimbashi
Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan,105-7123
www.fujitsu.com
Fujitsu China Holdings Co Ltd
+86 5887 1000
www.fujitsu.com/cn
Fujitsu (Australia)
+61 9113 9200
askus@au.fujitsu.com
www.fujitsu.com/au
FUJITSU (NEW ZEALAND)
+64 4 495 0700
askus-nz@nz.fujitsu.com
www.fujitsu.com/nz
Fujitsu (Korea)
+82 (080) 750 6000
webmaster@kr.fujitsu.com
www.fujitsu.com/kr
Fujitsu (Singapore)
+65 6512 7555
fujitsucloud@sg.fujitsu.com
www.fujitsu.com/sg
Ref: 3369


