Monetizing with eBay
By Tate
 
eBay is one of the most populated automated marketplaces on the internet. If you try to 
sell something, there’s a good chance that you will make money off of it. The problem, however, 
is finding something that you can buy cheaply, resell on eBay for a higher price, while still 
keeping terms with eBay so that you don’t get your paypal limited. If you buy any eBay ebook 
besides mine, let me go ahead and spoil the ending for you: They want you to buy Windows 7 
and Microsoft Office keys, and then resell them on ebay. That will get you limited, guaranteed. 
Microsoft watches over eBay to make sure you aren’t selling keys. I sold keys once, and after 
I sold only 3 keys, I got the dreaded email from Microsoft. Luckily I wasn’t limited, but I was 
firmly warned that if I continue to sell their products without a vendor license (which requires a 
legalized business), I would have my eBay account closed, and my paypal limited. Thankfully I 
later discovered this method, which sky rocketed my income.
 
We will be selling Steam accounts. Don’t exit the eBook. Let me explain first. Steam doesn’t 
monitor eBay like Microsoft does, so you can sell Steam accounts freely without any 
consequences. There’s a trick to properly selling Steam accounts, and I’ll teach you it in this 
eBook.
 
Steps (Condensed Version)
Step 1: Create an eBay Account and Sell Steam Account.
Step 2: Receive money from buyer.
Step 3: Use money from buyer to buy a steam account on HackForums.
Step 4: Use your profit to buy more steam accounts and repeat.
 
Create an eBay Account
This is rather simple, and there’s no reason to reinvent the wheel. Follow this official 
instructional on how to make a seller’s account on eBay: http://pages.ebay.com/help/sell/
seller_account.html
 
Selling the Account
We’re not going to be directly selling an account. We’re going to be selling a game. Go to the 
Steam Powered Game Stats and find the most popular, most expensive game. I personally use 
the newest releases, such as Call of Duty Black Ops and Battlefield Bad Company 2: Vietnam. 
Make sure the game isn’t so new that there are no accounts being sold on HackForums, 
though. Call of Duty Black Ops and Call of Duty Modern Warfare 2 are pretty safe games to sell.
 
First, follow this link and chose the category, “Video Games”->”Games”. This is where you will 
sell your items. 
 
You will then be prompted with a screen that looks like this:

 
Just click “Continue listing without a product”.
 
You will then go to the next screen, where you will click “Go” where it says “Keep it simple”.
 
Here is a format I like to use while selling.
Title: Game Name - Brand New [PC]
Description: Find a nice review of the game and post it as the description.
Starting Bid: $20
Buy Now: $25
Bid Time: 1 day (most people will just use your buy it now, you have no reason to leave it open 
for too long)
 
Warning: Don’t include anything but a review in your description. Say nothing about DVDs, 
keys, and Steam accounts.
 
After doing all of this, list your item and wait a little while.
 
Getting a Steam Account
After you’ve received your $25 from a buyer, head over to HackForums or any marketplace that 
allows blackhat activity and buy yourself a Steam account with the game you sold on it. Search 
the marketplace for your game name, there are normally 3 to 5 people selling any popular game 
on steam for about $5. This will allow you to make $20 profit per person.
 
If you look for a game for over 3 days, and still can’t find the game, issue your buyer a refund 
and try to sell a more popular game. This will happen. You’ll just have to experiment with the 
games you’re selling. Modern Warfare 2 and Black Ops are fairly stable games, if you want to 
play it safe.
 
Appeasing your Customer
When you buy the Steam account, make a new hotmail with a style such as this 

one: “ebaysteamaccount9282@hotmail.com”. Make the password generic, for 
example, “changeme”. Change the password to the Steam account to “changeme” as well, and 
then verify the email you created to it. 
 
Send an email to your customer with this format:
“Hey, -BUYER NAME-. If you didn’t know, the game is preloaded on Steam. This prevents me 
from having to ship the game to you. You can download steam from store.steampowered.com. 
I have already loaded the DVD, which installs to steam. I can’t reuse the DVD. You will have no 
problem working with Steam. Message me if you do.
 
Username: -STEAM USERNAME-
Password: -STEAM PASSWORD-
Email: -STEAM EMAIL-
Email Password: -STEAM EMAIL PASSWORD-
 
Thank you for buying.”
 
Whenever you sell, you will have a few people who get fed up about being a steam account 
and not the DVD. Give them one or two messages about how the DVD only loads and installs 
steam, and how using steam is the same as using the DVD. If they are still persistent, just 
refund them. It will prevent you from getting negative feedback, and it will prevent chargebacks 
in PayPal.
 
Power Selling
eBay has a seller option that will allow you to Power Sell. We won’t be doing this. As you can 
see, if you’ve made it this far, eBay has a limit of 10 video game sales a month in the video 
game category. To bypass this, simply post your sales in the other ‘Games’ category. Most 
people don’t chose a category when searching, so they just “Search All”. This will allow you to 
make an unlimited amount of sales each month.
 
Alternative Methods of Getting Steam Accounts
As you’ve probably figured out, it’s a hassle to find bot sellers at times, and it’d be a lot nicer to 
just have a database of Steam accounts. After you make 9 or 10 sales, you’ll have well enough 
profit to buy yourself a nice rat/stealer and a crypter to keep it FUD. If you’re fine with buying 
Steam accounts, skip this section of the eBook.
 
Buy and set up some sort of stealer or rat, and then get it FUD with a crypter. Here is the 
spreading portion of the eBook.
 
Bind your virus with a popular injector off the internet. Here’s one you can use:
http://www.ucdownloads.com/downloads/downloads.php?do=file&id=1921
 
Download random public hacks off of UC-Forum.com, and then zip the DLL and your binded 
virus/injector and upload them on other websites. Try doing it for games like Black Ops, 

Modern Warfare 2, or any of the games you’re trying to sell. This is a perfect way of getting 
unsuspecting Steam accounts that have valuable games in them.
 
Keep the Steam accounts handy and sell them as soon as possible.
 
Conclusion
I hope you are pleased with this method. If you get limited with this method, it’s not my methods 
fault. You most likely got limited for having an unverified account and suddenly receiving a lot of 
payments. If you’ve never had a lot of payments before, slowly start selling, and then after a few 
weeks or months, start selling in more bulk.

