
SINGULAR PERTURBATION THEORY
MATHEMATICAL AND ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES
WITH APPLICATIONS TO ENGINEERING

MATHEMATICAL AND ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES
WITH APPLICATIONS TO ENGINEERING
Alan Jeffrey, Consulting Editor
Published:
Inverse Problems
A. G. Ramm
Singular Perturbation Theory
R. S. Johnson
Forthcoming:
Methods for Constructing Exact Solutions of Partial Differential Equations
with Applications
S. V. Meleshko
The Fast Solution of Boundary Integral Equations
S. Rjasanow and O. Steinbach
Stochastic Differential Equations with Applications
R. Situ

SINGULAR PERTURBATION THEORY
MATHEMATICAL AND ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES WITH
APPLICATIONS TO ENGINEERING
R. S. JOHNSON
Springer

eBook ISBN:
0-387-23217-6
Print ISBN:
0-387-23200-1
Print ©2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc.
All rights reserved
No part of this eBook may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without written consent from the Publisher
Created in the United States of America
Boston
©2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc.
Visit Springer's eBookstore at:
http://ebooks.springerlink.com
and the Springer Global Website Online at:         http://www.springeronline.com

To Ros, who still, after nearly 40 years,
sometimes listens when I extol the wonders of
singular perturbation theory, fluid mechanics or water waves
—usually on a long trek in the mountains.

This page intentionally left blank

CONTENTS
Foreword
xi
Preface
xiii
1.Mathematical preliminaries
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Some introductory examples
2
Notation
10
Asymptotic sequences and asymptotic expansions
13
Convergent series versus divergent series
16
Asymptotic expansions with a parameter
20
Uniformity or breakdown
22
Intermediate variables and the overlap region
26
The matching principle
28
Matching with logarithmic terms
32
1.10 Composite expansions
35
Further Reading
40
Exercises
41

viii
Contents
2. Introductory applications
47
47
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
Roots of equations
Integration of functions represented by asymptotic
expansions 55
Ordinary differential equations: regular problems
59
Ordinary differential equations: simple singular problems
66
Scaling of differential equations
75
Equations which exhibit a boundary-layer behaviour
80
Where is the boundary layer?
86
Boundary layers and transition layers
90
Further Reading
103
Exercises
104
3. Further applications
115
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
A regular problem
116
Singular problems I
118
Singular problems II
128
Further applications to ordinary differential equations
139
Further Reading
147
Exercises
148
4. The method of multiple scales
157
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
Nearly linear oscillations
157
Nonlinear oscillators
165
Applications to classical ordinary differential equations
168
Applications to partial differential equations
176
A limitation on the use of the method of multiple scales
183
Boundary-layer problems
184
Further Reading
188
Exercises
188
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
197
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
Mechanical & electrical systems
198
Celestial mechanics
219
Physics of particles and of light
226
Semi- and superconductors
235
Fluid mechanics
242

ix
5.6
5.7
Extreme thermal processes
255
Chemical and biochemical reactions
262
Appendix: The Jacobian Elliptic Functions
269
Answers and Hints
271
References
283
Subject Index
287

This page intentionally left blank

FOREWORD
The importance of mathematics in the study of problems arising from the real world,
and the increasing success with which it has been used to model situations ranging
from the purely deterministic to the stochastic, is well established. The purpose of the
set of volumes to which the present one belongs is to make available authoritative, up
to date, and self-contained accounts of some of the most important and useful of these
analytical approaches and techniques. Each volume provides a detailed introduction to
a specific subject area of current importance that is summarized below, and then goes
beyond this by reviewing recent contributions, and so serving as a valuable reference
source.
The progress in applicable mathematics has been brought about by the extension and
development of many important analytical approaches and techniques, in areas both
old and new, frequently aided by the use of computers without which the solution of
realistic problems would otherwise have been impossible.
A case in point is the analytical technique of singular perturbation theory which
has a long history. In recent years it has been used in many different ways, and its
importance has been enhanced by it having been used in various fields to derive
sequences of asymptotic approximations, each with a higher order of accuracy than its
predecessor. These approximations have, in turn, provided a better understanding of
the subject and stimulated the development of new methods for the numerical solution
of the higher order approximations. A typical example of this type is to be found in
the general study of nonlinear wave propagation phenomena as typified by the study
of water waves.

xii
Foreword
Elsewhere, as with the identification and emergence of the study of inverse problems,
new analytical approaches have stimulated the development of numerical techniques
for the solution of this major class of practical problems. Such work divides naturally
into two parts, the first being the identification and formulation of inverse problems,
the theory of ill-posed problems and the class of one-dimensional inverse problems,
and the second being the study and theory of multidimensional inverse problems.
On occasions the development of analytical results and their implementation by
computer have proceeded in parallel, as with the development of the fast boundary
element methods necessary for the numerical solution of partial differential equations
in several dimensions. This work has been stimulated by the study of boundary inte-
gral equations, which in turn has involved the study of boundary elements, collocation
methods, Galerkin methods, iterative methods and others, and then on to their im-
plementation in the case of the Helmholtz equation, the Lamé equations, the Stokes
equations, and various other equations of physical significance.
A major development in the theory of partial differential equations has been the
use of group theoretic methods when seeking solutions, and in the introduction of
the comparatively new method of differential constraints. In addition to the useful
contributions made by such studies to the understanding of the properties of solu-
tions, and to the identification and construction of new analytical solutions for well
established equations, the approach has also been of value when seeking numerical
solutions. This is mainly because of the way in many special cases, as with similarity
solutions, a group theoretic approach can enable the number of dimensions occurring
in a physical problem to be reduced, thereby resulting in a significant simplification
when seeking a numerical solution in several dimensions. Special analytical solutions
found in this way are also of value when testing the accuracy and efficiency of new
numerical schemes.
A different area in which significant analytical advances have been achieved is in
the field of stochastic differential equations. These equations are finding an increasing
number of applications in physical problems involving random phenomena, and oth-
ers that are only now beginning to emerge, as is happening with the current use of
stochastic models in the financial world. The methods used in the study of stochastic
differential equations differ somewhat from those employed in the applications men-
tioned so far, since they depend for their success on the Ito calculus, martingale theory
and the Doob-Meyer decomposition theorem, the details of which are developed as
necessary in the volume on stochastic differential equations.
There are, of course, other topics in addition to those mentioned above that are of
considerable practical importance, and which have experienced significant develop-
ments in recent years, but accounts of these must wait until later.
Alan Jeffrey
University of Newcastle
Newcastle upon Tyne
United Kingdom

PREFACE
The theory of singular perturbations has been with us, in one form or another, for a little
over a century (although the term ‘singular perturbation’ dates from the 1940s). The
subject, and the techniques associated with it, have evolved over this period as a response
to the need to find approximate solutions (in an analytical form) to complex problems.
Typically, such problems are expressed in terms of differential equations which contain
at least one small parameter, and they can arise in many fields: fluid mechanics, particle
physics and combustion processes, to name but three. The essential hallmark of a
singular perturbation problem is that a simple and straightforward approximation (based
on the smallness of the parameter) does not give an accurate solution throughout the
domain of that solution. Perforce, this leads to different approximations being valid in
different parts of the domain (usually requiring a ‘scaling’ of the variables with respect to
the parameter). This in turn has led to the important concepts of breakdown, matching,
and so on.
Mathematical problems that make extensive use of a small parameter were probably
first described by J. H. Poincaré (1854–1912) as part of his investigations in celestial
mechanics. (The small parameter, in this context, is usually the ratio of two masses.)
Although the majority of these problems were not obviously ‘singular’—and Poincaré
did not dwell upon this—some are; for example, one is the earth-moon-spaceship
problem mentioned in Chapter 2. Nevertheless, Poincaré did lay the foundations for
the technique that underpins our approach: the use of asymptotic expansions. The
notion of a singular perturbation problem was first evident in the seminal work of L.
Prandtl (1874–1953) on the viscous boundary layer (1904). Here, the small parameter is

xiv
Preface
the inverse Reynolds number and the equations are based on the classical Navier-Stokes
equation of fluid mechanics. This analysis, coupled with small-Reynolds-number ap-
proximations that were developed at about the same time (1910), prepared the ground
for a century of singular perturbation work in fluid mechanics. But other fields over
the century also made important contributions, for example: integration of differential
equations, particularly in the context of quantum mechanics; the theory of nonlinear
oscillations; control theory; the theory of semiconductors. All these, and many others,
have helped to develop the mathematical study of singular perturbation theory, which
has, from the mid-1960s, been supported and made popular by a range of excellent
text books and research papers. The subject is now quite familiar to postgraduate stu-
dents in applied mathematics (and related areas) and, to some extent, to undergraduate
students who specialise in applied mathematics. Indeed, it is an essential tool of the
modern applied mathematician, physicist and engineer.
This book is based on material that has been taught, mainly by the author, to MSc
and research students in applied mathematics and engineering mathematics, at the
University of Newcastle upon Tyne over the last thirty years. However, the presentation
of the introductory and background ideas is more detailed and comprehensive than has
been offered in any particular taught course. In addition, there are many more worked
examples and set exercises than would be found in most taught programmes. The style
adopted throughout is to explain, with examples, the essential techniques, but without
dwelling on the more formal aspects of proof, et cetera; this is for two reasons. Firstly, the
aim of this text is to make all the material readily accessible to the reader who wishes
to learn and use the ideas to help with research problems and who (in all likelihood)
does not have a strong mathematical background (or who is not that concerned about
these niceties). And secondly, many of the results and solutions that we present cannot
be recast to provide anything that resembles a routine proof of existence or asymptotic
correctness. Indeed, in many cases, no such proof is available, but there is often ample
evidence that the results are relevant, useful and probably correct.
This text has been written in a form that should enable the relatively inexperienced
(or new) worker in the field of singular perturbation theory to learn and apply all the
essential ideas. To this end, the text has been designed as a learning tool (rather than
a reference text, for example), and so could provide the basis for a taught course. The
numerous examples and set exercises are intended to aid this process. Although it is
assumed that the reader is quite unfamiliar with singular perturbation theory, there
are many occasions in the text when, for example, a differential equation needs to be
solved. In most cases the solution (and perhaps the method of solution) are quoted, but
some readers may wish to explore this aspect of mathematical analysis; there are many
good texts that describe methods for solving (standard) ordinary and partial differential
equations. However, if the reader can accept the given solution, it will enable the main
theme of singular perturbation theory to progress more smoothly.
Chapter 1 introduces all the mathematical preliminaries that are required for the
study of singular perturbation theory. First, a few simple examples are presented that
highlight some of the difficulties that can arise, going some way towards explaining
the need for this theory. Then notation, definitions and the procedure of finding

xv
asymptotic expansions (based on a parameter) are described. The notions of uniformity
and breakdown are introduced, together with the important concepts of scaling and
matching. Chapter 2 is devoted to routine and straightforward applications of the
methods developed in the previous chapter. In particular, we discuss how these ideas
can be used to find the roots of equations and how to integrate functions represented
by a number of matched asymptotic expansions. We then turn to the most significant
application of these methods: the solution of differential equations. Some simple regular
(i.e. not singular) problems are discussed first—these are rather rare and of no great
importance—followed by a number of examples of singular problems, including some
that exhibit boundary or transition layers. The role of scaling a differential equation is
given some prominence.
In Chapter 3, the techniques of singular perturbation theory are applied to more
sophisticated problems, many of which arise directly from (or are based upon) im-
portant examples in applied mathematics or mathematical physics. Thus we look at
nonlinear wave propagation, supersonic flow past a thin aerofoil, solutions of Laplace’s
equation, heat transfer to a fluid flowing through a pipe and an example taken from gas
dynamics. All these are classical problems, at some level, and are intended to show the
efficacy of these techniques. The chapter concludes with some applications to ordinary
differential equations (such as Mathieu’s equation) and then, as an extension of some
of the ideas already developed, the method of strained coordinates is presented.
One of the most general and most powerful techniques in the armoury of singular
perturbation theory is the method of multiple scales. This is introduced, explained and
developed in Chapter 4, and then applied to a wide variety of problems. These in-
clude linear and nonlinear oscillations, classical ordinary differential equations (such as
Mathieu’s equation—again—and equations with turning points) and the propagation
of dispersive waves. Finally, it is shown that the method of multiple scales can be used
to great effect in boundary-layer problems (first mentioned in Chapter 2).
The final chapter is devoted to a collection of worked examples taken from a wide
range of subject areas. It is hoped that each reader will find something of interest here,
and that these will show—perhaps more clearly than anything that has gone before—
the relevance and power of singular perturbation theory. Even if there is nothing of
immediate interest, the reader who wishes to become more skilled will find these a
useful set of additional examples. These are listed under seven headings: mechanical
& electrical systems; celestial mechanics; physics of particles & light; semi- and su-
perconductors; fluid mechanics; extreme thermal processes; chemical & biochemical
reactions.
Throughout the text, worked examples are used to explain and describe the ideas,
which are reinforced by the numerous exercises that are provided at the end of each of
the first four chapters. (There are no set exercises in Chapter 5, but the extensive ref-
erences can be investigated if more information is required.) Also at the end of each of
Chapters 1–4 is a section of further reading which, in conjunction with the references
cited in the body of the chapter, indicate where relevant reference material can be
found. The references (all listed at the end of the book) contain both texts and research
papers. Sections in each chapter are numbered following the decimal pattern, and

xvi
Preface
equations are numbered according to the chapter in which they appear; thus equation
(2.3) is the third (numbered) equation in Chapter 2. The worked examples follow a
similar pattern (so E3.3 is the third worked example in Chapter 3) and each is given a
title in order to help the reader—perhaps—to select an appropriate one for study; the
end of a worked example is denoted by a half-line across the page. The set exercises
are similarly numbered (so Q3.2 is the second exercise at the end of Chapter 3)
and, again, each is given a title; the answers (and, in some cases, hints and intermediate
steps) are given at the end of the book (where A3.2 is the answer to Q3.2). A detailed
and comprehensive subject index is provided at the very end of the text.
I wish to put on record my thanks to Professor Alan Jeffrey for encouraging me
to write this text, and to Kluwer Academic Publishers for their support throughout.
I must also record my heartfelt thanks to all the authors who came before me (and
most are listed in the References) because, without their guidance, the selection of
material for this text would have been immeasurably more difficult. Of course, where
I have based an example on something that already exists, a suitable acknowledge-
ment is given, but I am solely responsible for my version of it. Similarly, the clarity
and accuracy of the figures rests solely with me; they were produced either in Word
(as was the main text), or as output from Maple, or using SmartDraw.

1. MATHEMATICAL PRELIMINARIES
Before we embark on the study of singular perturbation theory, particularly as it is rele-
vant to the solution of differential equations, a number of introductory and background
ideas need to be developed. We shall take the opportunity, first, to describe (without
being too careful about the formalities) a few simple problems that, it is hoped, explain
the need for the approach that we present in this text. We discuss some elementary dif-
ferential equations (which have simple exact solutions) and use these—both equations
and solutions–to motivate and help to introduce some of the techniques that we shall
present. Although we will work, at this stage, with equations which possess known
solutions, it is easy to make small changes to them which immediately present us with
equations which we cannot solve exactly. Nevertheless, the approximate methods that
we will develop are generally still applicable; thus we will be able to tackle far more
difficult problems which are often important, interesting and physically relevant.
Many equations, and typically (but not exclusively) we mean differential equations,
that are encountered in, for example, science or engineering or biology or economics,
are too difficult to solve by standard methods. Indeed, for many of them, it appears
that there is no realistic chance that, even with exceptional effort, skill and luck, they
could ever be solved. However, it is quite common for such equations to contain
parameters which are small; the techniques and ideas that we shall present here aim to
take advantage of this special property.
The second, and more important plan in this first chapter, is to introduce the ideas,
definitions and notation that provide the appropriate language for our approach. Thus

2
1. Mathematical preliminaries
we will describe : order, asymptotic sequences, asymptotic expansions, expansions with
parameters, non-uniformities and breakdown, matching.
1.1
SOME INTRODUCTORY EXAMPLES
We will present four simple ordinary differential equations–three second-order and
one first-order. In each case we are able to write down the exact solution, and we will
use these to help us to interpret the difficulties that we encounter. Each equation will
contain a small parameter, 
which we will always take to be positive; the intention
is to obtain, directly from the equation, an approximate solution which is valid for
small
E1.1
An oscillation problem
We consider the constant coefficient equation
with x(0) = 0, 
(where the dot denotes the derivative with respect to t); this
is an initial-value problem. Let us assume that there is a solution which can be written
as a power series in
where each of the 
is not a function of 
The equation (1.1) then gives
where we again use, for convenience, the dot to denote derivatives. We write (1.3) in
the form
and, since the right-hand side is precisely zero, all the 
must vanish; thus
we require
(Remember that each 
does not depend on
The two initial conditions give

3
and, using the same argument as before, we must choose
where the ‘1’ in the second condition is accommodated by 
(If the initial
conditions were, say, 
then we would have to select
Thus the first approximation is represented by the problem
the general solution is
where A and B are arbitrary constants which, to satisfy the initial conditions, must
take the values A= 1, B = 0. The solution is therefore
The problem for the second term in the series becomes
The solution of this equation requires the inclusion of a particular integral, which here
is 
the complete general solution is therefore
where C and D are arbitrary constants. (The particular integral can be found by any
one of the standard methods e.g. variation of parameters, or simply by trial-and-error.)
The given conditions then require that 
and D = 0 i.e.
and so our series solution, at this stage, reads
Let us now review our results.
The original differential equation, (1.1), should be recognised as the harmonic
oscillator equation for all
and, as such, it possesses bounded, periodic solutions.
The first term in our series, (1.5), certainly satisfies both these properties, whereas
the second fails on both counts. Thus the series, (1.7), also fails: our approximation

4
1. Mathematical preliminaries
procedure has generated a solution which is not periodic and for which the amplitude
grows without bound as 
Yet the exact solution is simply
which is easily obtained by scaling out the 
factor, by working with
rather than t. (The ‘e’ subscript here is used to denote the exact solution.) It is now an
elementary exercise to check that (1.8) and (1.7) agree, in the sense that the expansion
of (1.8), for small 
and fixed t, reproduces (1.7). (A few examples of expansions
are set as exercises in Q1.1, 1.2.) This process immediately highlights one of our
difficulties,namely, taking
first and then allowing 
this is a classic case
of a non-uniform limiting process i.e. the answer depends on the order in which the limits
are taken. (Examples of simple limiting processes can be found in Q1.4.) Clearly, any
approximate methods that we develop must be able to cope with this type of behaviour.
So, for example, if it is known (or expected) that bounded, periodic solutions exist,
the approach that we adopt must produce a suitable approximation to this solution.
We have taken some care in our description of this first example because, at this
stage, the approach and ideas are new; we will present the other examples with slightly
less detail. However, before we leave this problem, there is one further observation
to make. The original equation, (1.1), can be solved easily and directly; an associated
problem might be
with appropriate initial data. This describes an oscillator for which the frequency
depends on the value of x(t) at that instant—it is a nonlinear problem. Such equations
are much more difficult to solve; our techniques have got to be able to make some
useful headway with equations like (1.9).
E1.2
A first-order equation
We consider the equation
with 
Again, let us seek a solution in the form
and then obtain
or

5
we use the prime to denote the derivative. Thus we require
with the boundary conditions
The solution for 
is immediately
but this result is clearly unsatisfactory: the solution for 
grows exponentially, whereas
the solution of equation (1.10) must decay for 
(because then 
Per-
haps the next term in the series will correct this behaviour for large enough x; we have
Thus
and we require A = 0; the series solution so far is therefore
However, this is no improvement; now, for sufficiently large x, the second term dom-
inates and the solution grows towards 
Let us attempt to clarify the situation by
examining the exact solution.
We write equation (1.10) as
the general solution is therefore
and, with C = 1 to satisfy the given condition at x = 0, this yields
Clearly the series, (1.12), is recovered directly by expanding the exact solution, (1.13),
in 
for fixed x, so that we obtain
Equally clearly, this procedure will give a very poor approximation for large x; indeed,
for x about the size of 
the approximation altogether fails. A neat way to see this
is to redefine x as 
this is called scaling and will play a crucial rôle in what

6
1. Mathematical preliminaries
we describe in this text. If we now consider    small, for X fixed, the size of x is now
proportional to 
and the results are very different:
indeed, in this example, we cannot even write down a suitable approximation of (1.14)
for small 
The expression in (1.14) attains a maximum at X= 1/2, and for larger X
the function tends to zero.
We observe that any techniques that we develop must be able to handle this situation;
indeed, this example introduces the important idea that the function of interest may
take different (approximate) forms for different sizes of x. This, ultimately, is not
surprising, but the significant ingredient here is that ‘different sizes’ are measured in
terms of the small parameter, 
We shall be more precise about this concept later.
E1.3
Another simple second-order equation
This time we consider
with
(The use of 
here, rather than 
is simply an algebraic convenience, as will become
clear; obviously any small positive number could be represented by or 
—or anything
equivalent, such as 
or
et cetera.) Presumably—or so we will assume—a first
approximation to equation (1.15), for small
is just
but this problem has no solution. The general solution is 
where A and
B are the two arbitrary constants, and no choice of them can satisfy both conditions.
In a sense, this is a more worrying situation than that presented by either of the two
previous examples: we cannot even get started this time.
The exact solution is
and the difficulties are immediately apparent: 
with x fixed, gives
but then how do we accommodate the condition at infinity? Correspondingly, with
and fixed, we obtain 
and now how can we obtain the dependence
on 
As we can readily see, to treat 
and x separately is not appropriate here—we
need to work with a scaled version of x (i.e.
The choice of such a variable
avoids the non-uniform limiting process: 
and

7
E1.4
A two-point boundary-value problem
Our final introductory example is provided by
with 
and 
given. This equation contains the parameter 
in two places:
multiplying the higher derivative, which is critical here (as we will see), and adjusting
the coefficient of the other derivative by a small amount. This latter appearance of the
parameter is altogether unimportant—the coefficient is certainly close to unity—and
serves only to make more transparent the calculations that we present.
Once again, we will start by seeking a solution which can be represented by the
series
so that we obtain
the shorthand notation for derivatives is again being employed. Thus we have the set
of differential equations
with boundary conditions written as
where 
and 
are given (but we will assume that they are not functions of 
The
general solution for 
is
but it is not at all clear how we can determine A. The difficulty that we have in this
example is that we must apply two boundary conditions, which is patently impossible
(unless some special requirement is satisfied). So, if we use 
we obtain
if, by extreme good fortune, we have 
then we also satisfy the second
boundary condition (on x = 1). Of course, in general, this will not be the case; let us
proceed with the problem for which 
Thus the solution using 
does

8
1. Mathematical preliminaries
not satisfy 
and the solution
does not satisfy 
Indeed, we have no way of knowing which, if either, is
correct; thus there is little to be gained by solving the 
problem:
(We note that, since 
we must have 
and then there is, ex-
ceptionally, a solution of the complete problem: 
for 
But we still
do not know
As in our previous examples, let us construct and examine the exact solution. Equa-
tion (1.16) is a second order, constant coefficient, ordinary differential equation and
so we may seek a solution in the form
i.e.
The general solution is therefore
and, imposing the two boundary conditions, this becomes
(We can note here that the contribution from the term 
is absent in the
special case 
we proceed with the problem for which
This solution, (1.22), is defined for 
and with 
let us select any
and, for this x fixed, allow 
(where 
denotes tending to zero
through the positive numbers). We observe that the terms 
and
vanish rapidly in this limit, leaving
this is our approximate solution given in (1.20). (Some examples that explore the
relative sizes of      exp(x) and ln(x) can be found in Q1.5.) Thus one of the possible
options for 
introduced above, is indeed correct. However, this solution is, as
already noted, incorrect on x = 0 (although, of course, 
The difficulty
is plainly with the term 
for any x > 0 fixed, as 
this vanishes
exponentially, but on x = 0 this takes the value 1 (one). In order to examine the rôle
of this term, as 
we need to retain it (but not to restrict ourselves to x = 0); as

9
we have seen in earlier examples, a suitable rescaling of x is useful. In this case we set
and so obtain
and now, for any X fixed, as 
we have
This is a second, and different, approximation to 
valid for xs which are proportional
to 
note that on X = 0, (1.25) gives the value
 which is the correct boundary value.
In summary, therefore, we have (from (1.23))
and (from (1.25))
These two together constitute an approximation to the exact solution, each valid for an
appropriate size of x. Further, these two expressions possess the comforting property
that they describe a smooth—not discontinuous—transition from one to the other,
in the following sense. The approximation (1.26) is not valid for small x, but as x
decreases we have
(which we already know is incorrect because 
correspondingly, (1.27) is not
valid for large 
but we see that
results (1.28) and (1.29) agree precisely. This is clearly demonstrated in figure 1, where
we have plotted the exact solution for 
(as an example) i.e.
for various 
As 
decreases, the dramatically different behaviours for x not too small,
and x small, are very evident. (Note that the solution for x not too small is

10
1. Mathematical preliminaries
Figure 1. Plot of 
for 
with 
the
maximum value attained (e) is marked on the y-axis.
In these four simple examples, we have described some difficulties that are encountered
when we attempt to construct approximate solutions, valid as 
directly from
given differential equations; a number of other examples of equations with exact
solutions can be found in Q1.3. We must now turn to the discussion of the ideas
that will allow a systematic study of such problems. In particular, we first look at the
notation that will help us to be precise about the expansions that we write down.
1.2
NOTATION
We need a notation which will accurately describe the behaviour of a function in a
limit. To accomplish this, consider a function f (x) and a limit 
here a may be
any finite value (and approached either from the left or the right) or infinite. Further,
it is convenient to compare f (x) against another, simpler, function, g (x); we call g (x)
a gauge function. The three definitions, and associated notation, that we introduce are

11
based on the result of finding the limit
We consider three cases in turn.
(a) Little-oh
We write
if the limit, (1.31), is L = 0; we say that ‘ f is little-oh of g as 
Clearly, this
property of a function does not provide very useful information; essentially all it
says is that f (x) is smaller than g (x) (as 
So, for example, we have
but also
and
It is an elementary exercise to show that each satisfy the definition L = 0 from
(1.31), by using familiar ideas that are typically invoked in standard ‘limit’ problems.
For example, the last example above involves
confirming that the limit is zero. (Note that, in the above examples, the gauge func-
tion which is a non-zero constant is conventionally taken to be g (x) = 1; note also
that the limit under consideration should always be quoted, or at least understood.)
(b) Big-oh
We write
if the limit, (1.31), is finite and non-zero; this time we say that ‘ f is big-oh of g
as
or simply ‘ f is order g as
As examples, we offer
but
also

12
1. Mathematical preliminaries
finally
but
(Little-oh and big-oh–o and O—are usually called the Landau symbols.)
(c) Asymptotically equal to or behaves like
Finally, we write
if the limit L, in (1.31), is precisely L = 1; then we say that ‘ f is asymptotically
equal to g as
or ‘ f behaves like g as 
Some examples are
and then we may also write
Finally, it is not unusual to use ‘=’ in place of ‘~’, but in conjunction with a
measure of the error. So, with ‘~’, ‘O’ and ‘o’ as defined above, we write
or
but such statements should be regarded as no more than equivalents to some of
the statements given earlier. Some exercises that use o, O and ~ are given in
Q1.6, 1.7 and 1.8.
We should comment that other definitions exist for O, for example, although
what we have presented is, we believe, the most straightforward and most directly
useful. An alternative, in particular, is to define f (x) = O[g(x)] as        if
positive constants C and R s.t.
our limit definition follows directly from this.

13
1.3
ASYMPTOTIC SEQUENCES AND ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSIONS
First we recall example (1.32), which epitomises the idea that we will now generalise.
We already have
and this procedure can be continued, so
(and the correctness of this follows directly from the Maclaurin expansion of sin(3x)).
The result in (1.33), and its continuation, produces progressively better approximations
to sin (3x), in that we may write
and then
At each stage, we perform a ‘varies as’ calculation (as in (1.33), via the definition of‘~’);
in this example we have used the set of gauge functions 
for n = 0, 1, 2, ....;
such a set is called an asymptotic sequence. In order to proceed, we need to define a
general set of functions which constitute an asymptotic sequence.
Definition (asymptotic sequence)
The set of functions 
is an asymptotic sequence as
if
for every n.
As examples, we have
(In each case, it is simply a matter of confirming that 
Some
further examples are given in Q1.9.

14
1. Mathematical preliminaries
Now, with respect to an asymptotic sequence (that is, using the chosen sequence),
we may write down a set of terms, such as (1.34); this is called an asymptotic expansion.
We now give a formal definition of an asymptotic expansion (which is usually credited
to Henri Poincaré (1854–1912)).
Definition (asymptotic expansion)
The series of terms written as
where the    are constants, is an asymptotic expansion of f(x), with respect to the
asymptotic sequence 
if, for every
If this expansion exists, it is unique in that the coefficients,     are completely
determined.
There are some comments that we should add in order to make clear what this defi-
nition says and implies—and what it does not.
First, given only a function and a limit of interest (i.e. f (x) and               the asymp-
totic expansion is not unique; it is unique (if it exists—we shall comment on this
shortly) only if the asymptotic sequence is also prescribed. To see that this is the case,
let us consider our function sin(3x) again; we will demonstrate that this can be repre-
sented, as 
in any number of different ways, by choosing different asymptotic
sequences (although, presumably, we would wish to use the sequence which is the
simplest). So, for example,
indeed, this last example, is a familiar identity for sin(3x). (Another simple example of
this non-uniqueness is discussed in Q1.10.) So, given a function and the limit, we need
to select an appropriate asymptotic sequence—appropriate because, for some choices,
the asymptotic expansion does not exist.

15
To see this, let us consider the function sin(3x) again, the limit 
and the
asymptotic sequence
The first term in such an expansion, if it exists, will be a
constant (corresponding to n = 0); but 
in this limit, so the constant is
zero. Perhaps the first term is proportional to 
for some n > 0; thus we examine
If we are to have 
(for some n and some constant c), then this limit is
to be L = 1. However, this limit does not exist—it is infinite—for every n > 0. Hence
we are unable to represent sin(3x), as 
with the asymptotic sequence proposed
(which many readers will find self-evident, essentially because sin(3x) ~ 3x as
If every 
in the asymptotic expansion is either zero or is undefined, then the
expansion does not exist.
Let us take this one step further; if we have a function, a limit and an appropriate
asymptotic sequence, then the coefficients, 
are unique. This is readily demonstrated.
From the definition of an asymptotic expansion, we have
consider
and take the limit to give
which determines each
Finally, the terms 
should not be regarded or treated as a series in
any conventional way. This notation 
is simply a shorthand for a sequence of
‘varies as’ calculations (as in (1.33), for example); at no stage in our discussion have
we written that these are the familiar objects called series—and certainly not convergent
series. Indeed, many asymptotic expansions, if treated conventionally i.e. select a value
and compute the terms in the series, turn out to be divergent (although,
exceptionally, some are convergent). Of course, numerical estimates are sometimes
relevant, either to gain an insight into the nature of the solution or, more often, to
provide a starting point for an iterative solution of the problem. Because these issues
may be of some interest, we will (in §1.4) deviate from our main development and
offer a few comments and observations. We must emphasise, however, that the thrust

16
1. Mathematical preliminaries
of this text is towards the introduction of methods which aid the description of the
structure of a solution (in the limit under consideration).
Finally, before we move on, we briefly comment on functions of a complex variable.
(We will present no problems that sit in the complex plane, but it is quite natural to
ask if our definitions of an asymptotic expansion remain unaffected in this situation.)
Given 
and the limit 
we are able to construct asymptotic
expansions exactly as described above, but with one important new ingredient. Because
is a point in the complex plane, it is possible to approach 
i.e. take the limit,
from any direction whatsoever. (For real functions, the limit can only be along the
real line, either 
or 
However, in general, the asymptotic correctness
will hold only for certain directions and not for every direction e.g. 
for
(for some 
and for other args the asymptotic expansion (with
the same asymptotic sequence, 
fails because 
for some n.
1.4
CONVERGENT SERIES VERSUS DIVERGENT SERIES
Suppose that we have a function f (x) and a series
then 
is a convergent series if 
as 
for all x satisfying
(for some R > 0, the radius of convergence). This is a statement of
the familiar property of the type of series that is usually encountered; so we have, for
example, as 
that
and
One important consequence is that we may approximate a function, which has a
convergent-series representation, to any desired accuracy, by retaining a sufficient num-
ber of terms in the series. For example
where the limit as 
is 2. With these ideas in mind, we turn to the challenge
of working with divergent series.
In this case, 
has no limit as 
for any x (except, perhaps, at the one
value x = a, which alone is not useful). Usually 
diverges—the situation that is
typical of asymptotic expansions—but it may remain finite and oscillate. In either case,
this suggests that any attempt to use a divergent series as the basis for numerical estimates
is doomed to failure; this is not true. A divergent series can be used to estimate f (x)

17
for a given x, but the error in this case cannot be made as small as we wish. However,
we are able to minimise the error, for a given x, by retaining a precise number of terms
in the series–one term more or one less will increase the error. The number of terms
retained will depend on the value of x at which f (x) is to be estimated. This important
property can be seen in the case of a (divergent) series which has alternating signs—a
quite common occurrence—via a general argument.
Consider the identity
where N is finite; 
is the remainder. Suppose that 
and 
with
(and, correspondingly, a reversal of all the signs if 
this
describes the alternating-sign property of the series. Let us write
then
But the remainders are of opposite sign, so they always add (not cancel, approximately),
which we may express as
similarly
Hence the magnitude of the remainder—the error in using the series—is less than the
magnitude of the last term retained and also less than that of the first term omitted. It is
important to observe that, provided N remains finite, it is immaterial to this argument
whether the series is convergent or divergent. Thus, for a given x, we stop the series
at the term with the smallest value of
(which, if the series is convergent, arises at
infinity and is zero); the sum of the terms selected will then provide the best estimate
for the function value. Let us investigate how this idea can be implemented in a classical
example.
E1.5
The exponential integral
A problem which exhibits the behaviour that we have just described, and for which
the calculations are particularly straightforward, is the exponential integral:
We are interested, here, in evaluating Ei(x) for large x (and we observe that
as 
see Q1.13); of course, we cannot perform the integration, but we can

18
1. Mathematical preliminaries
generate a suitable approximation via the familiar technique of integration by parts. In
particular we obtain
and so on, to give
Note that we have used a standard mathematical procedure, which has automatically
generated a sequence of terms—indeed, it has generated an asymptotic sequence,
defined as 
This is another important observation: our definitions have
implied a selection of the asymptotic sequence, but in practice a particular choice either
appears naturally (as here) or is thrust upon us by virtue of the structure of the problem;
we will write more of this latter point in due course. Here, for the expansion of (1.37)
in the form (1.38), we might regard                              as the natural asymptotic sequence.
It is clear that we may write, for example,
but what of the convergence, or otherwise, of this series? In order to answer this, we
will use the standard ratio test.
We construct
(because x > 0 and
and if this expression is less than unity as 
for some
x, then the series converges (absolutely). But the expression in (1.39) tends to infinity
as 
for all finite x; hence the series in (1.38) diverges. To examine this series
in more detail, let us write (1.38) in the form
where the series 
can be interpreted as an asymptotic expansion for
is the remainder, given by

19
It is convenient, because it simplifies the details, if we elect to work with
and then we have
and so on. Thus, using (1.36a,b), we obtain
so that, in general,
The best estimate, for a given x, is obtained by choosing that n which minimises the
smaller of these two bounds; in this example, this is clearly n = [x] (where [ ] denotes
‘the integral part of ’). In fact, when x is itself an integer, these two bounds for
are identical.
As a numerical example, we seek an estimate for Ei(5)—and since our asymptotic
expansion is valid as 
x = 5 appears to be a rather bold choice. The remainder
then satisfies
and
i.e. 0.166 < I(5) < 0.174, where we have re-introduced the sign of the remainder, so
that 
and then we obtain 0.00112 < Ei(5) < 0.00117. The sur-
prise, perhaps, is that a divergent asymptotic expansion, valid as 
can produce
tolerable estimates for xs as small as 5. Of course, for larger values of x, the estimates
are more accurate e.g. 0.09155 < I(10) < 0.09158, from which we can obtain a good
estimate for Ei(10). Two further examples for you to investigate, similar to this one,
can be found in Q1. 11, 1.12; other asymptotic expansions of integrals are discussed
in Q1.13–1.17 and finding an expansion from a differential equation is the exercise in
Q1.18.
In this example, E1.5, we have used the alternating-sign property, but we could have
worked directly with the remainder, 
If it is possible to obtain a reasonable

20
1. Mathematical preliminaries
estimate for the remainder, there is no necessity to invoke a special property of the
series (which in any event, perhaps, is not available). Here, we have (from (1.41))
for 
because 
(where 
and so
For any given x, this estimate for the remainder is minimised by the choice n = [x],
exactly as we found earlier. The only disadvantage in using this approach, for any
general series, is that we may not know the sign of the remainder, and so we must
content ourselves with the error
Although a study of series, both convergent and divergent, is a very worthwhile
undertaking and, as we have seen, it can produce results relevant to some aspects of
our work, we must move on. We now turn to that most important class of asymptotic
expansions: those that use a parameter as the basis for the expansion.
1.5
ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSIONS WITH A PARAMETER
We now introduce functions, 
which depend on a parameter 
and are to be
expanded as 
Here, x may be either a scalar or a vector (although our early
examples will involve only scalars). In the case of vectors, we might write (in longhand)
note that commas separate the variables, but that a semicolon is used to
separate the parameter. As we shall see, it does not much matter in this work if the func-
tion we (eventually) seek is a solution of an ordinary differential equation (x is a scalar)
or a solution of a partial differential equation (x is a vector): the techniques are essen-
tially the same. The appropriate definition of the asymptotic expansion now follows.
Definition (asymptotic expansion with a parameter 1)
With respect to the asymptotic sequence 
defined as 
we write the
asymptotic expansion of 
as
for x = O(1) and every
The requirement that x = O(1) is equivalently that
x is fixed as the limit process 
is imposed.
Now suppose that f is defined in some domain, D say, which will usually be prescribed
by the nature of the given problem e.g. the region inside a box which contains a gas. It
is at this stage that we pose a fundamental question: does the asymptotic expansion in

21
(1.42) hold for
If the answer is ‘yes’, then the expansion is said to be regular
or uniform or uniformly valid; if not, then the expansion is singular or non-uniform or
not uniformly valid. Further, it is not unusual to use the terms breakdown or blow up to
describe the failure of an asymptotic expansion. To explore these ideas, we introduce
a first, simple example.
E1.6
An example of
Let us consider the function
for 
and use the binomial expansion to obtain the ‘natural’ asymptotic expan-
sion, valid for x = O(1):
Here, the asymptotic sequence is 
and we have taken the expansion as far as terms
at 
But the domain of f is given as 
and clearly the expansion (1.44) is
not even defined on x = 0 (which is more dramatic than simply not being valid near
x = 0). Thus (1.44) is not uniformly valid–indeed, it ‘blows up’ at x = 0.
The original function can, of course, be evaluated at x = 0:
and now another complication is evident. The asymptotic sequence used in (1.44)
does not include terms 
and so it could never give the correct value on
x = 0, even if the terms were defined there. Clearly, the expansion in (1.44) has been
obtained by treating x large relative to 
but this cannot be true if x is sufficiently
small. The critical size is where x is about the size of 
which is precisely the idea that
led us to the introduction of a scaled version of x. Let us write
then
where we have labelled the same function, expressed in terms of X and 
as
The binomial expansion of (1.46), for 
with X = O(1), yields
which, on X = 0, recovers (1.45).

22
1. Mathematical preliminaries
Thus we have two representations of
one valid for x = O(1), (1.44), and
one for 
(1.47). Further, the latter expansion is defined on X = 0 (i.e. x = 0)
and gives the correct value (as an expansion of 
With these observations in
place, we are now in a position to discuss uniformity and breakdown more completely
and more carefully.
1.6
UNIFORMITY OR BREAKDOWN
Suppose that we wish to represent 
for 
by an asymptotic expansion
which has been constructed for x = O(1). This expansion is uniformly valid if
for every 
and 
Conversely, it breaks down (and is therefore non-uniform)
if there is some 
and some 
such that
In other words, the expansion is said to break down if there is a size of x, in the
domain of the function, for which two consecutive terms in the asymptotic expansion
are the same size. On the other hand, the expansion is uniformly valid if the asymptotic
ordering of the terms, as represented by the asymptotic sequence 
is maintained
for all x in the domain.
It is an elementary exercise to apply this principle to our previous example; from
(1.44) we have
and the domain of the original function is 
As 
the second term in the
expansion, (1.48), becomes the same size as the first where 
the expansion
has broken down. That is, for x of this size, the expansion (1.48) is no longer valid;
in order to determine the form of the expansion for 
we must return to the
function and use this choice i.e. write 
is exactly how we generated
(1.47). Thus the breakdown of an expansion can lead us to the choice of a new,
scaled variable, and we note that this is based on the properties of the expansion, not
any additional or special knowledge about the underlying function. (This point is
important for what will come later: when we solve differential equations, we will not
have the exact solution available—only an asymptotic expansion of the solution. But,
as we shall see, the equation itself does hold information about possible scalings.) We
apply this principle of breakdown and rescaling to another example.

23
E1.7
Another example of
Here, we are given
with 
for x = O(1) we write
and then two applications of the binomial expansion yields
The domain of f is
and so we must consider
and
in either
case the asymptotic expansion (1.49) breaks down. For 
the breakdown occurs
where 
(from 
for 
the breakdown is where
(from 
In the former case, we introduce 
to give
(which, we note, recovers the correct value on X = 0). For the other breakdown, we
introduce 
and so
Thus the function requires three different asymptotic expansions, valid for different
sizes of x, and two of these have been determined by examining the breakdown. (We
note that these choices are evident from the original function, although this is not
how we deduced the scalings in this example.) Furthermore, expansion (1.50) is valid
as 
and expansion (1.51) is valid for
there are no further breakdowns
(based on the information available in these asymptotic expansions).
Before we continue the discussion of these ideas, and their consequences, we must
adjust the definition of an asymptotic expansion with a parameter; see (1.42). We
have already encountered functions such as 
these cannot be represented

24
1. Mathematical preliminaries
in separable form i.e.
for any choice of the functions a and 
Thus we must
extend the definition of an asymptotic expansion to accommodate this:
Definition (asymptotic expansion with a parameter 2)
We write (cf. (1.42)
for x = O(1) and every          where
as
It is clear that the separable case is simply a special version of this more general defi-
nition; let us investigate an example which incorporates such a term.
E1.8
One more example of
Consider the function
for 
with x = O(1) we obtain
because the term 
is exponentially small. This asymptotic expansion, (1.53),
as written down, is uniformly valid: there is no breakdown as 
and the asymptotic
ordering of the terms is even reinforced as 
However, from (1.52), we see that
which is not the result we obtain from (1.53): the (complete) expansion, started in
(1.53), cannot be uniformly valid! Of course, it is clear that the difficulty is associated
with the exponential term; it is this which contributes to the boundary value (on
x = 0), but it is ignored in the 2-term asymptotic expansion (1.53).
The rôle of the exponential term becomes evident when we retain it, following our
familiarscaling 
which gives

25
for X = O(1) as           Then the value of (1.55), on X = 0, recovers the correct
boundary value, (1.54). Furthermore, the asymptotic expansion (1.55) is not uniformly
valid in 
as 
it breaks down where 
i.e. x = O(l), which
is the variable previously used to generate (1.53).
This example prompts a number of additional and important observations. For the
purposes of determining a relevant scaling, from the breakdown of an expansion, it is
quite sufficient for this to occur only in one direction i.e. expansion A breaks down,
producing a scaling used to obtain expansion B, but B does not necessarily break down
to recover the scaling used in A. This is evident here when we compare (1.53) and
(1.55); expansion (1.55) breaks down, but (1.53) does not. Indeed, as we have seen,
there is no clue in (1.53) that we have a problem—this is only evident when we return
to the original function, (1.52), or we already have available the expansion (1.55). It
is possible to extend the asymptotic expansion given in (1.53) and thereby make plain
the nature of the breakdown; this will prove to be a useful adjunct in some of our later
work.
The breakdown that must exist in the expansion of (1.52), for x = O(l) as
arises from the exponential term. However, to include this term in the asymptotic
expansion would mean, apparently, the inclusion of all terms based on the sequence
because
is smaller than
for any n (see Q1.5). Of course, there is
no need to write them down explicitly; we could indicate their presence by the use of
an ellipsis (i.e. ...) or, which is the usual practice, simply to state which terms we will
retain. So we might expand (1.52), for x = O(1) and 
retaining O(1),
and 
terms only, to give
In a sense, the omitted terms are understood, but not explicitly included and, more
significantly, any further manipulation of (1.55) that we employ will use only the terms
written down. It is clear that, with or without the use of ellipsis, the expansion (1.55)
breaks down as 
for, eventually, the exponential term becomes O(1)—the
same size as the first term. (The fact that there is an infinity of breakdowns, where x
satisfies
for each n, is immaterial; we have a well-defined breakdown the
other way—from (1.55)—which is sufficient. Further, an intimate relation between
different expansions of the same function, which we discuss later, shows that this
infinity of breakdowns plays no rôle.)
The inclusion of the exponentially small term in (1.55) may seem superfluous,
and it is in a strictly numerical sense, but it contains important information about the
nature of the underlying function (and it helps us better to understand the breakdown).
Because we are interested in the behaviour of functions (as 
and not simply
numerical estimates, we shall retain such terms when they provide useful and relevant
information.

26
1. Mathematical preliminaries
1.7
INTERMEDIATE VARIABLES AND THE OVERLAP REGION
In our examples thus far, we have expanded the given functions for x = O(1),
and, in one case, for 
We now investigate other scalings which correspond
to sizes that sit between those generated by the breakdown of an asymptotic expansion.
This will lead us to an important and significant principle in the theory of singular
perturbations.
Let us suppose that we have an asymptotic expansion of a function which is valid for
x = O(1), and another of the same function which is valid for 
further, the
breakdown of at least one of these expansions produces the scaling used in the other.
The line we now pursue is to examine what happens to these expansions when we
allow 
where
i.e. the size (scale) of x is smaller than O(1) but not as small as 
Given that the
expansion valid for x = O(1) breaks down at 
the asymptotic ordering of the
terms is unaltered if we use 
i.e. it is still valid for this size of x. Conversely,
we are given that the expansion valid for 
breaks down where x = O(1), but
it remains valid for x smaller than O(1)—so this is also valid for
Hence both
expansions are valid for 
intermediate variable; furthermore, this validity
holds for all 
which satisfy (1.56). In order to make plain what is happening here,
let us apply this procedure to an example.
E1.9
Example with an intermediate variable
We are given the two asymptotic expansions
both as 
(It is left as an exercise to show that these expansions are obtained
from the function 
but we do not need to know
the form of the function in what follows.)
In the expansion (1.57), we write 
where 
is defined in (1.56), and
expand:
where we have retained terms O(1), 
and 
It is not clear how many terms
we should retain, without being more precise about the size of 
For example,

27
Figure 2. Diagrammatic representation of the overlap region, between 
and
if we choose 
then 
and so, to be consistent, we should certainly
include
the issue of precisely which terms we should retain will be addressed
later. Correspondingly, in the expansion (1.58), we write 
and
expand:
We have chosen to write down only the first three terms of this expansion, in order to
be consistent with (1.59). We see that (1.59) and (1.60) are identical and, furthermore,
this holds for all
satisfying (1.56): we have verified, in this example, the rôle of the
intermediate variable. (Again, it is left as an exercise to show that the same results are
obtained directly by expanding the original function 
for
To proceed with this discussion, we now make choices for 
choice for the
O(1) expansion (e.g. (1.59)), and another for the 
expansion (e.g. (1.60)).
For example, in the former we might select 
and in the latter we use
both ‘expansions of expansions’ are valid for these choices, because both satisfy
(1.56). Thus the asymptotic expansion, constructed for x = O(1), is valid also for
correspondingly, the expansion constructed for 
is valid for
Hence the expansion of expansions (e.g. (1.59) or (1.60)) is valid for xs
between 
and
the resulting expansion is now valid in an overlap region
(which is represented in figure 2).

28
1. Mathematical preliminaries
We have made one choice 
but the same argument can be developed
for other choices; in particular, we could use 
As p decreases,
so the overlap region extends; indeed, we may allow this to proceed provided p > 0
(because (1.56) still holds). Of course, if we permit the limit 
then conditions
(1.56) will be violated, although we may allow p to be as close as we desire to zero. This
obviously prompts the question: what does happen to our procedure—the expansion of
expansions—if we do select p = 0? After all—being naïve—it would seem but a small
step from p nearly zero (which is permitted) to p = 0 (although we are all aware that
there can be big differences between 
and x = a in some contexts!). In fact, this
situation here is not unfamiliar; it is analogous to the discussion that must be undertaken
when the convergence of a series is investigated. Given that a series is convergent for
and divergent for 
its status for 
(i.e. the two
cases x = a ± R) must be investigated via individual and special calculations. Here, we
will employ the same philosophy, namely, to apply our procedure in the case p = 0,
and note the results; they may, or may not, prove useful. In the event, it will transpire
that the results are fundamentally important, and lead to a very significant property of
asymptotic expansions.
1.8
THE MATCHING PRINCIPLE
Again, we suppose that we have two asymptotic expansions, one valid for x = O(1) and
one for 
exactly as described in the previous section. This time, however,
we expand the first expansion for 
and the second for x = O(1), i.e. the
overlap region is the maximum that we can envisage (and one step beyond anything
permitted so far). We know that this procedure is acceptable for the pair
with 0 < p < 1, but now we set p = 0. Let us investigate this by returning to our
previous example.
E1.10
Example with the maximum overlap
As in E1.9, we are given
and we expand (1.61) further, using 
We retain terms O(1) and 
because
we have no information about terms 
and smaller. Thus we obtain

29
obtained by expanding with X = O(1); correspondingly, (1.62) gives
and we see that (1.63) and (1.64) are identical, when expressed in terms of the same
variable (x or X). Further, these new expansions are not recoverable from (1.59) or
(1.60) simply by writing 
there: being precise about the terms to be retained
has resulted in the appearance of a new term 
The two expansions, (1.61) and
(1.62), are said to match to this order (because we can match only the terms available
in the original expansions).
The matching principle is a fundamental tool in the techniques of singular pertur-
bation theory; it is invoked, sometimes as a check, but more often as a means for
determining arbitrary constants (or functions) that are generated in the solution of
differential equations. Although we have not presented the matching principle as
a proven property of functions—it is one reason why we call it a ‘principle’—we
have every confidence in its validity. For some classes of functions, it is possible to
develop a proof which goes something like this. Define the operator 
which
generates the first n terms of the asymptotic expansion of 
as 
for
(written
correspondingly, the operator 
generates the first
m terms of the asymptotic expansion of 
as 
for 
Here,
the two functions are identical in that 
for some scaling
obtained from the breakdown of the asymptotic expansion(s). Under suitable
conditions—but we are able to apply the principle more widely—it can be proved
that
when written in the same variable i.e. 
or 
(Much more on these ideas can be
found in some of the texts and references that are listed in the section on Further
Reading at the end of this chapter.) Put simply, this states that the m-term expansion of
the n-term expansion is identical to the n-term expansion of the m-term expansion;
when presented in this form, this procedure is usually associated with the name of
Milton van Dyke (1964, 1975). We present a slight variant of the principle, which
we hope is transparent and readily applicable.

30
1. Mathematical preliminaries
Definition (matching principle)
We are given two asymptotic expansions of a function, defined as 
and valid
for x = O(1) and X = O(1), where  
(and either 
or
as
in the form
respectively. These two expansions are valid in adjacent regions, so that the break-
down of one leads to the variable used in the other i.e. there are no other regions,
and associated asymptotic expansions, between them. Here, N and M are not used
simply to count the first so-many terms in the expansions; they may be used to des-
ignate the type of terms e.g. first three using the asymptotic sequence 
and the
first exponentially small term. However, N and M must retain these interpretations
throughout the matching process. Now we form
and
the matching principle then states that
or expressed in terms of x, if preferred. We say that the expansions ‘match to this
order’, because we can match only the terms that we have in the expansions.
Let us apply this matching principle, as we have described it, in the following example.
E1.11 An example of matching
We will show that these two expansions match:
both defined as 
(This is based on example E1.8.) Note that, although (1.66)
uses the first two terms in the sequence 
n = 0, 1, 2, ...., the expansion (1.65)

31
retains the first two (in size), plus the first exponentially small term and then the first
which involves both the sequences 
and 
these two specifications define
N and M here.
To proceed, we write 
in terms of X and expand:
where we have retained terms O(1) and
(which constitute M here). Correspond-
ingly, we write
(1.66), in terms of x and expand:
where we have retained terms O(1), 
and 
which is N here.
Finally, we write (1.68), say, in terms of X:
which is identical to (1.67): the two expansions match (to this order).
This example makes clear that we need not restrict the matching to the first N and
first M terms (in size)—but we must accurately identify N and M and then retain
precisely these terms when the expansions are further expanded. Of course, as we
have seen, there is also no requirement to work to the same number of terms in each
original asymptotic expansion. However, we should offer one word of warning. In the
above example, we included the term 
which arises from the two otherwise
disjoint asymptotic sequences 
and 
To retain such terms, we must ensure
that all terms that might contribute are also included; here, these are 
and 
We
may not elect to keep this term alone, and ignore those in and 
To take this one
step further, if we decided, in this example, to include the term 
we must also
include the terms of order 1, 
(And for this same reason,
it is obvious that we must retain all terms of orders 1, 
when we wish to go as
far as 
A number of examples of expanding and matching can be found in Q1.19,
1.20.

32
1. Mathematical preliminaries
In our presentation of the matching principle we have described how it can be
applied to functions which involve 
and exponential terms (or functions which can
be expanded in terms of these). However, when we apply this same procedure to
logarithmic functions, we encounter a difficulty which requires a careful adjustment
of the matching principle.
1.9
MATCHING WITH LOGARITHMIC TERMS
To see that we have a problem, let us consider an appropriate example, expand and
then attempt to match in the way described above.
E1. 12 A logarithmic example
We are given
and we construct the asymptotic expansions for x = O(1) and 
as
So we obtain
where we have written down the first two terms. (Note that 
as
Correspondingly, we have
where we have retained, again, the first two terms. We now match (1.69) and (1.70),
and so we write (1.69) in terms of X and expand:
retaining terms O(1), 
as required for (1.70). Similarly, from (1.70), we obtain

33
when we retain the terms O(1),  
used in (1.69). It is clear that (1.71) and
(1.72) do not satisfy the matching principle: the term 
appears in one expansion
but not in the other.
However, it is easily confirmed that the two 1-term expansions [f ~ 1/(1 + x),
F ~ 1] do match, as do the 1-term/2-term expansions
Further, it is easily checked that any additional terms retained in the
expansion of 
by expanding the 
contribution, will also lead
to a failure of the matching principle. Perhaps if we retained all these terms, we might
succeed; let us therefore rewrite (1.69) as
which immediately matches with (1.70) when we treat 
in (1.70),
in the same way.
In order to investigate the difficulty, let us consider the three simple functions
and ln x (and we may extend this to any function which is constructed
from these elements, or can be represented as a series of such). Now introduce a new
scaled variable, 
X say, and so obtain, respectively,
the first two are the corresponding functions but of a different size (taking X = O(1)
and 
i.e.
and O(1), respectively. We note, however, that the logarithmic
function does not follow this pattern: 
producing two terms of
different size i.e.
and O(1), respectively. Indeed, we could write
but in order to match any dependence in x (or X) we would need to retain the term
ln X with
(The retention of
but ignoring ln x, is at the heart of the problem
we have with (1.71) and (1.72); but retaining 
and ln x allowed the matching
principle to be applied successfully.)
The device that we therefore adopt, when log terms are present, is to treat
for the purposes of retaining the relevant terms; the matching principle, as
we stated it, is then valid. Indeed, the matching principle will produce an identity (as be-
fore), with the correct identification of all the individual terms involving logarithms i.e.
the interpretation 
is used only for the retention of the appropriate terms.

34
1. Mathematical preliminaries
Thus, for example, we must regard all the terms
as 
when selecting terms to use for matching. We conclude this discussion with
one more example (and a few others are given in Q1.21).
E1.13
Another logarithmic example
Given
then as
we write
keeping the first two terms in the asymptotic expansion, but treating ‘ln
For 
we write 
to give
if we include terms as far as 
To match, we write (1.73) as
retaining terms O(1), 
as required for (1.74). Similarly, we write (1.74) as
again retaining terms O(1),
as required for (1.73), but with ‘1n 
it is
immediately apparent that the two expansions match (to this order): (1.75) and (1.76)
are identical (with
The processes of expanding, examining breakdowns, scaling and matching are the
essential elements of singular perturbation theory; these will provide the basis and the
framework for the rest of this text. However, there is one final aspect to which we

35
should briefly return: the production of approximations that may prove useful in a
mainly numerical context.
1.10
COMPOSITE EXPANSIONS
When we have obtained two, or more, matched expansions that represent a function,
we are led to an intriguing question: is it possible to use these to produce, for example,
an approximate graphical representation of the function, for all x in the domain? The
main difficulty, of course, is that presumably we need to switch from one asymptotic
expansion to the next at a particular value of x–which runs counter to the matching
principle. One possibility might be to plot the function so that, for some values of
x, both matched expansions are used and allowed to overlap, but this still involves
using first one and then the other. A single expression which represents the original
function, asymptotically, for 
would be far preferable. Such an expression can
usually be found; it is called a composite expansion.
Suppose that we have a function which is described by two different asymptotic
expansions, 
and 
say, valid in adjacent regions, with
(We are using the notation that was introduced in example E1.11; the exten-
sion to three or more expansions follows directly.) We now introduce a function
which possesses the properties that
both as 
If such a function exists, it is called a composite expansion for the
original function (for obvious reasons); note that the only requirement is that the
correct behaviour, 
or 
is generated—any other (smaller) terms may not be
correct if these expansions were continued further. The issue now is how we find
we present two commonly used constructions that lead to a suitable choice for 
The
simpler uses a straightforward additive rule, and the other a multiplicative rule.
Definition (composite expansion—additive)
We write
where 
denotes the ‘overlap’ terms which are those terms involved in the match-
ing.
The inclusion of 
becomes obvious when we note that the terms that match must
appear in both 
and 
and so are counted twice; 
then removes one of them.
Given the pair 
and 
it is an elementary exercise, in particular cases, to check
that the expansion of (1.77), either for 
or 
recovers the appropriate
leading-order terms. Further, it is then possible to compare the approximation,

36
1.
against the original function, 
by estimating 
for 
we will
return to this shortly. An example of the additive rule is now presented.
Mathematical preliminaries
E1.14
A composite expansion (additive)
From E1.8 (see equations (1.52), (1.53) and (1.55)), we have
and
where 
and the matching involves (see E 1.11)
Following (1.77), we define
and then we obtain directly
retaining O(1) and 
terms. Correspondingly, for
X = O(1), we have
retaining terms O(l) and 
Thus, to this order, (1.79) is a composite expansion
for the function (1.78), for 
To confirm the accuracy of this approximation,
we compare (1.78) and (1.79), for 
in figure 3.

37
Figure 3. Comparison of the composite expansion, equation (1.79), with the exact function
with
The agreement between the composite expansion, (1.79), and the original function,
as depicted in figure 3, is quite remarkable (and we have not chosen a particularly small
value of which would make the agreement even more pronounced). This suggests
that we should be able to obtain a formal estimate for the error when we use the
composite expansion; we will examine this conjecture in a simpler version of E1.14
(so that the manipulation is particularly routine and transparent).
E1.15
Error using a composite expansion
From E 1.14, we are given
and so we form the composite expansion

38
1. Mathematical preliminaries
The error in using this composite expansion is, with
But the maximum value of
occurs at
  for then
and so we have the estimate
and hence the error, for 
is 
at most (indeed, this upper bound is approx-
imately 
for small
This example demonstrates that estimates for the error in using a composite expansion
are readily derived, at least in particular cases, when the original function is known.
However, corresponding results for the solutions of differential equations are not so
easily obtained—and this is the situation of most practical interest. Then we have
available only the equation and its asymptotic solution, but not the exact solution of
the equation, of course. Thus any estimates will need to be based on an analysis of
appropriate differential inequalities; we will touch on these ideas later in this text. (We
should add that only rarely is it possible satisfactorily to complete such calculations; in
addition, it is often deemed not worthwhile to devote much energy to this exercise,
essentially because the results and the context persuade us that we have the appropriate
and correct asymptotic form of the solution.)

39
To conclude this discussion, we briefly describe the multiplicative rule which can
be used as an alternative for the construction of a composite expansion. So, with the
same notation as introduced earlier:
Definition (composite expansion—multiplicative)
Now we write
provided that 
for
Here, the terms involved in the matching 
appear in both 
and 
and so
dividing by
cancels one of these. It is clear, therefore, that a composite expansion, to
a given order, is not unique; indeed, any number of variants exists—we have presented
two possible choices only. We will provide an example of the application of (1.82), but
we are unable to use the expansions quoted in E1.14 (which would have been useful
as a comparison) because, there,
However,
a slightly simpler version of E1.14 is possible.
E1.16 A composite expansion (multiplicative)
See E1.14; let us be given
and
the matching of these expansions involves simply 
Thus, (1.82) gives
and so
and
thus (1.83) is a (multiplicative) composite expansion for (1.78). (An examination of
the accuracy of this expansion can be found in Q1.24, and a few additional examples
of composite expansions appear in Q1.22, 1.23.)

40
1. Mathematical preliminaries
This concludes our presentation and discussion of all the elements that constitute
classical singular perturbation theory. However, this is far from a complete description
of all the techniques that are needed to solve differential equations. These will be
introduced as they are required; suffice it to record, at this stage, that one approach
that subsumes much that we have done thus far will be carefully developed later—the
method of multiple scales.
FURTHER READING
In this chapter we have introduced, with carefully chosen explanations and examples,
the basic ideas that are at the heart of singular perturbation theory. However, other
approaches are possible, emphasising one aspect or another, and a number of good texts
are available, which some readers may find both interesting and instructive. We offer
the following as some additional (but not essential) reading, with a few observations
about each. Of course, such a list is unlikely to be exhaustive, so I have included only
my own favourites; I apologise if yours has been omitted.
Any list of texts must include that written by van Dyke (1964), and especially its
annotated edition (1975); this provides an excellent introduction to the ideas, together
with their applications to many of the classical problems in fluid mechanics. Two
other good texts that present the material from a rather elementary stand-point are
Hindi (1991) and Bush (1992), although the former is somewhat sophisticated in
places; both these cover quite a wide range of applications. A text that also provides
an introduction, although perhaps in not so much detail as those already cited, is
Kevorkian & Cole (1996), but it offers an excellent introduction to the application of
these methods to various types of problem. (This publication is a revised and updated
edition of Kevorkian & Cole (1981), which was itself a rewritten and extended version
of Cole (1968), both of which are worth some exploration.) A nice introduction to
the subject, mainly following the work of Kaplun (see below), is given in Lagerstrom
(1988). Nayfeh (1973, 1981) provides many examples discussed in detail (and often
these are the same problem tackled in different ways); these two books are useful as
references to various applications, but perhaps are less useful as introductions to the
relevant underlying ideas.
A carefully presented discussion of how singular perturbation theory manifests itself
in ordinary differential equations, and a detailed description of methods of solution
with applications, can be found in O’Malley (1991). An outstanding collection of
many and varied problems, most of them physically interesting and important, is given
in Holmes (1995), but this text is probably best avoided by the novice. Eckhaus (1979)
presents a very formal and rigorous approach to the subject, and some interesting appli-
cations are included. Smith (1985) uses an instructive mixture of the formal approach
combined with examples and applications (although almost all of these relate to ordi-
nary, not partial, differential equations); a large number of references are also included.
A discussion of the matching principle, via expansion operators, can be found in the
papers by Fraenkel (1969).
We now turn to some texts that are more specialised in their content. A collection of
the work and ideas of Kaplun, particularly with reference to applications to problems in

41
fluid mechanics, can be found in Kaplun (1967); this is advisable reading only for those
with a deep interest in fluids. The construction of asymptotic solutions to ordinary
differential equations (that is, in the absence of a small parameter) is described in Wasow
(1965) and also in Dingle (1973); this latter book provides a very extensive analysis
of asymptotic expansions, their properties and how to construct useful forms of them
that provide the basis for numerical estimates.
There are various texts that describe the techniques for finding asymptotic ex-
pansions of functions defined, for example, by differential equations or as integrals;
excellent examples in this category are Erdelyi (1956), Copson (1967) and Murray
(1974). But the outstanding text has got to be Olver (1974), for its depth and breadth;
furthermore, this provides an excellent reference for the behaviour of many standard
functions (and the results are presented, comprehensively, for functions in the complex
plane). Finally, we mention two texts that discuss the properties of divergent series:
Hardy (1949) and Ford (1960). The former has become a classical text; it covers a lot
of ground but is written in a pleasant and accessible style—it cannot be recommended
highly enough.
EXERCISES
Q1.1 Maclaurin expansions I. The following real functions are defined for suitable real
values of x. Use your knowledge of Maclaurin expansions to find power-series
representations of these functions as 
giving the first three terms in
each case; state those values of x for which the expansions are convergent.
(Some of these may not be expressible wholly in terms of integral powers of x.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Q1.2 Maclaurin expansions II. Repeat as for Q1.1, but for each of these series also find
the general term in the expansion.
(a)
(b) sin(l + x);
(c)
Q1.3 Exact solutions of ODEs. Find the exact solutions of these ordinary differential
equations and explore their properties as 
(for example, by sketching
or plotting the solutions for various 
You may wish to investigate how an
appropriate approximation, for
might be obtained directly from the
differential equation (The over-dot denotes the derivative with respect to t,
time, for problems in 
the prime represents the derivative with respect
to x )
(a)
(b)
(c)
with
with
with
(d)
with

42
1. Mathematical preliminaries
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
with
repeat (e) for
with
with
[Hint: seek a solution
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
with
repeat (i) for
with
for « = 1;
repeat (k) for n = 1/2 and
repeat (k) for n = 2 and
repeat (k) for n = 3 and
Q1.4 Uniform or non-uniform? Is the behaviour of each of these functions uniformly
valid as 
and 
(To answer this, compare 
followed by
with the reversed order of taking the limits.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Q1.5 Limits involving exp(x) and ln(x). (a) For x > 1 and 
show that 0 <
and hence that 
(b) Interpret these as
inequalities for
lnx, choose
and show that
(c) Now write x = 1/y and hence
as
(d) In (b), write 
and show that
as 
(e) In (d), write x = exp(y) and deduce that
for
Q1.6 Examples of O, o and ~. Determine which of the following are correct as
(a)
(c)
(e)
(g)
(i)
(k)
(b)
(d)
(f)
(h)
(j)
Q1.7 Dominant behaviour. Find the dominant behaviour, i.e. find g (x) so that
for each of these functions, f(x).
(a)
(d)
(g)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(f)
F[G(x)] where
for
as

43
Q1.8 Properties of O and o. For the limit
(a)
(b)
given that f (x) = O[g(x)], F(x) = O[G(x)], show that f F = O(g G);
given that f (x) = O[g(x)], F(x) = o[G(x)], show that f F = o(g G).
Q1.9 Asymptotic sequences. Verify that these are asymptotic sequences, where n =
0, 1, 2, . . . .
(a)
(c)
(b)
Q1.10 Non-uniqueness of asymptotic expansions. Find two asymptotic expansions of the
function 
valid as 
based on the asymptotic sequences:
(a) 
for a suitable function 
which is to be deter-
mined.
Q1.11 Error function. The error function is defined by
where 
as 
Obtain asymptotic expansions of erf(x) for:
(a) 
and in each case find the general term and decide
if these series are convergent or divergent. Use your result in (b) to give an
estimate for the value of erf(2).
Q1.12 A sine integral. Obtain an asymptotic expansion of
for 
and decide if the series is convergent or divergent. Also obtain
an expression for the remainder, as an integral, and find an estimate for it.
Q1.13 Exponential integral. Find an asymptotic expansion of
this will involve Euler’s constant
It might be helpful, first, to show that
as

44
1. Mathematical preliminaries
Q1.14 An integral I. Find the first four terms in an asymptotic expansion of the integral
for (a) 
(b)
Q1.15 An integral II. Find the first four terms in an asymptotic expansion of the integral
for (a)
(b)
(and in this case, introduce the constants
Q1.16 An integral III. Find the first two terms in an asymptotic expansion of the integral
as 
Explain why your result is not valid if 
[Hint: simply
use integration by parts.]
Q1.17 An integral IV. Use an appropriate integration by parts to find an expansion,
valid as
of the integral
in particular, find the general term and also an expression for the remainder.
Show that this is an asymptotic expansion and that the series diverges. Find an
estimate for the remainder and use this to select the number of terms, for a
given x, which will minimise the error when using the series to find the value
of I (x).
Q1.18 Approximation for a Bessel function. The Bessel function
is a solution of the
equation
first write
find the equation for z(x) and show that, for large
x, this becomes
approximately. Hence seek a solution

45
where 
and 
are constants to be determined; also find the recurrence relation
for the coefficients 
(This is to be compared with the familiar Frobenius
method for second order ODEs.) Write down the most general solution avail-
able (by using both values of 
and retain terms as far as 
Show that this
is consistent with the solution
although it is not possible, here, to find values for C and
Q1.19 Expansion of a function with a parameter. For these functions (all with the domain
expand as 
for each of x = O(l), 
and
and find the first two terms in each asymptotic expansion. Show that your
expansions satisfy the matching principle (and you may wish to note wherever
any breakdowns are evident in your two-term expansions). Remember that the
matching principle applies only to adjacent regions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
for this one, also include
(f)
Q1.20 Expansion with exponentially small terms. For these two functions (both with the
domain 
expand as
for x = O(1) and retain terms O(1),
and 
for 
expand and now retain the first two terms
only. Show that your expansions satisfy the matching principle.
(a)
(b)
Q1.21 Matching with logarithms. The domain of these functions is given as x > 0 with
in each case, find the first two terms in each of the asymptotic expan-
sions valid for x = O(1) and for 
as 
Show that, with the
interpretation 
your expansions satisfy the matching principle.
(a)
(this example was introduced by Eckhaus);
(b)
(c)
Q1.22 Composite expansions I. For these functions, given that
find the
first two terms in asymptotic expansions valid for x = O(1) and for

46
1. Mathematical preliminaries
as 
Hence construct additive composite expansions.
(a)
(b)
What do you observe about your composite expansion obtained in (b)?
Q1.23 Composite expansions II. See Q1.22; now, when they are defined, find the corre-
sponding multiplicative expansions. (You may wish to compare, by plotting the
appropriate functions, the original function and the two composite expansions.)
Q1.24 Estimate of error. See E1.16; find an estimate of the error in using this form of
the composite expansion.

2. INTRODUCTORY APPLICATIONS
In the previous chapter, we laid the foundations of singular perturbation theory and,
although we will need to add some specific techniques for solving certain types of
differential equations, we can already tackle simple examples. In addition, we will see
that we can apply these ideas directly to other, more routine problems—and this is
where we shall begin. Here, we will describe how to approach the problem of finding
roots of equations (which contain a small parameter), and how to evaluate integrals of
functions which are represented by asymptotic expansions with respect to a parameter.
Finally, we begin our study of differential equations by examining a few important,
fairly straightforward examples which are, nonetheless, not trivial.
2.1
ROOTS OF EQUATIONS
At some stage in many mathematical problems, it is not unusual to be faced with the
need to solve an equation for specific values of an unknown. Such a problem might
be as simple as solving a quadratic equation:
or finding the solution of more complicated equations such as

48
2. Introductory applications
In this section, we will describe a technique (for equations which contain a small
parameter, as in those above) which is a natural extension of simply obtaining an
asymptotic expansion of a function, examining its breakdown, rescaling, and so on.
We will begin by examining the simple quadratic equation
and seek the solutions for
The essential idea is to obtain different asymptotic
approximations for 
valid for different sizes of x, and see if these admit (ap-
proximate) roots. Given that 
we could have roots anywhere on the
real line, and so all sizes of x must be examined. (We will consider, first, only the real
roots of equations; the extension to complex roots will be discussed in due course.)
One further comment is required at this stage: we describe here a technique for find-
ing roots that builds on the ideas of singular perturbation theory. In practice, other
approaches are likely to be used in conjunction with ours to solve particular equations
e.g. sketching or plotting the function, or using a standard numerical procedure (such
as Newton-Raphson). There is no suggestion that this expansion technique should be
used in isolation—it is simply one of a number of tools available.
Returning to (2.1), if x = O(1), then
and so we have a root x = – 1 (approximately). In order to generate a better ap-
proximation, we may use any appropriate method. For example, we could invoke the
familiar procedure of iteration, so we may write
with 
Then we obtain
and so on (but note that iteration may not generate a correct asymptotic expansion at
a given order in 
It is clear from this approach that a complete representation of the
root will be obtained if we use the asymptotic sequence 
and so an alternative is
to seek this form directly—and this is more in keeping with the ideas of perturbation
theory. Thus we might seek a root in the form
so that (2.1) can be written as

49
(where the use of ‘= 0’ here is to imply ‘equal to zero to all orders in 
thus
and so on. We have one root
It is clear that (2.2) admits only one root; the other—it is a quadratic equation that we
are solving—must appear for a different size of x.
The ‘asymptotic expansion’ (we treat the function as such)
remains valid for
and so there is no new root for x = o(1); however, this
expansion does break down where 
We define
and write
or
This approximation admits the roots X = 0 and X = –1, so now the quadratic equa-
tion has a total of three roots! Of course, this cannot be the case; indeed, it is clear that
the root X = 0 is inadmissible, because the ‘asymptotic expansion’
breaks down where 
(which is x = O(1) and so returns us to (2.5)). The only
available root is X = –1, and this is the second (approximate) root of the equation
(leaving X = 0 as no more than a ‘ghost’ of the root x ~ –1). The expansion for F
does not further breakdown (as 
and so there are no other roots—not that we
expected any more! We may seek a better approximation, as we did before, in the form
which gives
i.e.
thus
or
The two roots of the quadratic equation, (2.1), are therefore

50
2. Introductory applications
it is left as an exercise to confirm that these results can be obtained directly from
the familiar solution of the quadratic equation, suitably approximated (by using the
binomial expansion) for 
(Similar problems based on quadratic equations can
be found in exercise Q2.1.)
This simple introductory example covers the essentials of the technique:
find all the different asymptotic forms of 
and investigate if roots
exist for each (dominant) asymptotic representation. Let us now apply this to a slightly
more difficult equation which, nevertheless, has a similar structure.
E2.1
A cubic equation
We are to find approximations to all the real roots of the cubic equation
for
First, for x = O(1), we have
and this approximation admits the roots x = ±1; a better approximation is then ob-
tained by writing
so that we obtain
This equation requires that
and so on; two roots are therefore
Now the ‘asymptotic expansion’
remains valid as 
but not as 
it breaks down where 
or
We write 
and then
or

51
The only relevant root is X = 1 (because the other two are the ghosts of the roots
that appear for x = O(1)). To improve this approximation, we set
to give
i.e. 
so that a third root is 
as 
Thus the three
(real) roots are
Our introductory example, and the one above, have been rather conventional poly-
nomial equations, but the technique is particularly powerful when we have to solve,
for example, transcendental equations (which contain a small parameter). We will now
see how the approach works in a problem of this type.
E2.2
A transcendental equation
We require the approximate (real) roots, as 
of the equation
For x = O(1), we now have two possibilities:
but only the first option admits any roots for real, finite x. Thus x = ±1 (approxi-
mately) and then only the choice x = +1 is acceptable (because we require x > 0); a
better approximation follows directly:
The ‘expansion’ is written
where the term
must be exponentially small for x = O(1) or larger (because
no roots exist if this term dominates). Now, for x > 0, there is no breakdown as

52
2. Introductory applications
thus any other roots that might exist must arise as 
Indeed, as
we see that the expansion (2.8) breaks down where 
and so we set
to give
This approximation has one root at X = 0, but this cannot be used directly because
the expansion, (2.9), itself breaks down as 
This occurs where
i.e. 
so a further scaling must be introduced:
to produce
Since we have
we have a root near 
to obtain an improved approximation, we write
and so obtain
As 
there is no further breakdown, and so we have found two real roots
A number of other equations, both polynomial and transcendental, are discussed in the
exercises Q2.2, 2.3 and 2.4. However, all these involve the search for real roots; we now
turn, therefore, to a brief discussion of the corresponding problem of finding all roots,
whether real or complex. It will soon become clear that we may often adopt precisely
the same approach when any roots are being sought (although, sometimes, there may
be an advantage in writing 
and working with two, coupled, real equations).
The only small word of warning is that the size of the real and imaginary parts, measured
in terms of
may be different e.g. x = O(1) now implies that 
which

53
can be satisfied if either, but not necessarily both, 
and
are O(1). Let us see how
this arises in an example.
E2.3
An equation with complex roots
Here, using the more usual notation for a complex number, we consider
and immediately we obtain
and so we have roots
approximately. Thus we write
and so the equation becomes
This is satisfied if 
etc., and thus we have two complex roots
and we observe that the imaginary part is O(1), but that the real part is
The full ‘expansion’ is clearly not uniformly valid as 
there is a breakdown
where 
or 
We introduce 
and write
and so
which produces the single, available root near Z = – 1 and then, more accurately, we
have 
The equation has three roots, two of which are complex:
Finally, a class of equations for which this direct approach (for complex roots) is not use-
ful is characterised by the appearance of terms such as 
(or anything equivalent).

54
2. Introductory applications
In this case, it is almost always convenient to formulate the problem in real and imag-
inary parts, and the appearance of a small parameter does not affect this approach in
any significant way; we present an example of this type.
E2.4
A real-imaginary problem
We seek all the roots of the equation
as 
note that
and so the form of this problem does indeed exhibit this more complicated structure.
Let us write z = x + iy, and then (2.9) becomes
or
We see immediately that the right-hand sides of these two equations do not presage a
breakdown of these contributions, as x or y increases or decreases; thus we proceed
with x = O(1) and y = O(1). Now equation (2.10b) possesses the solutions
and this is the relevant choice (rather than y = 0) because we require sin x cosh y > 1
(from (2.10a)). Then equation (2.10a) gives
and this is consistent only if n = 2m (m = 0, ±1, ±2, ...) because cosh y > 0. Finally,
the solution arises only for 
since cosh 
as 
we see that a
solution exists where 
and so we introduce 
Thus we obtain

55
and so we have the set of (approximate) roots
A few examples of other equations with complex roots (some of which may be real,
of course) are set as exercises in Q2.5.
2.2
INTEGRATION OF FUNCTIONS REPRESENTED
BY ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSIONS
Our second direct, and rather routine application of these ideas is to the evaluation
of integrals. In particular, we consider integrals of functions that are represented by
asymptotic expansions in a small parameter; this may involve one or more expansions,
but if it is the latter—and it often is—then the expansions will satisfy the matching
principle.
The procedure that we adopt calls upon two general properties: the first is the
existence of an intermediate variable (valid in the overlap region; see §1.7), and the
second is the familiar device of splitting the range of integration, as appropriate. We
then express the integral as a sum of integrals over each of the asymptotic expansions
of the integrand, the switch from one to the next being at a point which is in the
overlap region. The expansions are then valid for each integration range selected and,
furthermore, the value of the original integral (assuming that it exists) is independent
of how we split the integral. Thus the particular choice of intermediate variable is
unimportant; indeed, it may be quite general, satisfying only the necessary conditions
for such a variable; see (1.56), for example. Let us apply this technique to a simple
example.
E2.5
An elementary integral
We are given
and we require the value, as 
of the integral
(Note that the integral here is elementary, to the extent that it may be evaluated directly,
although we will integrate only the relevant asymptotic expansions; this example has
been selected so that the interested reader may check the results against the expansion
of the exact value.)

56
2. Introductory applications
First, we expand
for x = O(1) and for 
to give
and
both for 
we have retained terms as far as 
in each expansion. (You
should confirm that these two expansions satisfy the matching principle.)
Now these two expansions are valid in the overlap region, represented by
defined by
thus we express the integral as
The only requirement, at this stage, is that we are able to perform the integration of the
various functions that appear in the asymptotic expansions. Note that the first integral
has been expressed as an integration in X—the most natural choice of integration
variable in this context. To proceed, we obtain
and this is to be expanded for 
and 
(note!). Thus we obtain

where the ellipsis (· · ·) indicates further terms in the various binomial expansions; we
keep as many as required in order to demonstrate that 
vanishes identically (at this
order), to leave
Thus we have found that
as 
as far as terms at 
here we see that the integration over x =O(l)
provides the dominant contribution to this value.
This example has presented, via a fairly routine calculation, the essential idea that
underpins this method for evaluating integrals. Of course, there is no need to exploit
this technique if the integral can be evaluated directly (as was the case here); let us
therefore examine another problem which is less elementary.
E2.6
Another integral
We wish to evaluate the integral
as 
here, the expansion of the integrand requires three different asymptotic
expansions (valid for x = O(l), 
Thus we obtain
57

58
2. Introductory applications
In this problem, we require two intermediate variables; these are defined by
all as 
The integral is then written as
and we will now retain terms that will enable us to find an expression for
correct
at 
Thus we find that

59
(You should confirm that, in the above, both and 
cancel identically, to this order.)
Further examples that make use of these ideas can be found in exercises Q2.6, 2.7 and
2.8. With a little experience, it should not be too difficult to recognise how many
terms need to be retained in each expansion in order to produce 
to a desired
accuracy. The region that gives the dominant contribution is usually self-evident,
and quite often this alone will provide an acceptable approximation to the value of
the integral. Furthermore, terms that contain the overlap variables can be ignored
altogether, because they must cancel (although there is a case for their retention—
which was our approach above—as a check on the correctness of the details).
2.3
ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS: REGULAR PROBLEMS
We now turn to an initial discussion of how the techniques of singular perturbation
theory can be applied to the problem of finding solutions of differential equations—
unquestionably the most significant and far-reaching application that we encounter.
The relevant ideas will be developed, first, for problems that turn out to be regular
(but we will indicate how singular versions of these problems might arise, and we will
discuss some simple examples of these later in this chapter). Clearly, we need to lay
down the basic procedure that must be followed when we seek solutions of differential
equations. However, these techniques are many and varied, and so we cannot hope
to present, at this stage, an all-encompassing recipe. Nevertheless, the fundamental
principles can be developed quite readily; to aid us in this, we consider the differential
equation
for 
This problem, we observe, is not trivial; it is an equation which, although
first order, is nonlinear and with a forcing term on the right-hand side.
The first stage is to decide on a suitable asymptotic sequence for the representation
of 
Here, we note that the process of iteration on the equation, which can be

60
2. Introductory applications
written for this purpose (with a prime for the derivative) as
gives
and so on, so that 
takes the form 
(for appropriate functions
When this solution is used to generate 
it is clear that we will produce terms
in 
and
and so this pattern will continue: the equation implies the ‘natural’
asymptotic sequence 
so this is what we will assume to initiate the solution method.
(It should be noted that the boundary condition is consistent with this assumption,
as is the alternative condition 
On the other hand, a boundary value
would force the asymptotic sequence to be adjusted to accommodate
this i.e.
Thus we seek a solution of the problem (2.11) in the form
for some 
(and we do not know which xs will be allowed, at this stage). The
expansion (2.12) is used in the differential equation to give
where ‘= 0’ means zero to all orders in 
thus we require
and so on. Similarly, the boundary condition gives
of course, to evaluate on x = 1 implies that the asymptotic expansion, (2.12), is valid
here—but we do not know this yet. This is written down because, if the problem turns
out to be well-behaved i.e. regular, then we will have this ready for use; essentially,
all we are doing is noting (2.14)—we can reject it if the expansion will not permit
evaluation on x = 1.
The next step is simply to solve each equation (for 
in turn; we see directly
(from (2.13a)) that the general solution for 
is
so that

61
where 
is an arbitrary constant. Then, from (2.13b), we have
which can be written (on using the integrating factor 
as
This produces the general solution
where 
is a second arbitrary constant. It is immediately clear that these first two terms
in the expansion are defined (and well-behaved i.e. no hint of a non-uniformity) for
so we may impose the boundary conditions, (2.14a,b); these produce
Thus our asymptotic expansion, so far, is
and this is certainly uniformly valid for 
we have a 2-term expansion of the
solution. (Note that the specification of the domain is critical here; if, for example,
we were seeking the solution with the same boundary condition, but in 
then
(2.17) would not be uniformly valid: there is a breakdown where 
i.e.
see the problem in (2.34), below.) The evidence in (2.17) suggests that
we have the beginning of a uniformly valid asymptotic expansion i.e. (2.12) is valid
for 
and for 
(and it is left as an exercise to find
and to check that
the inclusion of this term does not alter this proposition).
In order to investigate the uniform validity, or otherwise, of (2.12), one approach is
to examine the general term in the expansion; this is the solution of
where 
with 
The solution to (2.18)
is
but 
and 
are bounded functions for 
and hence so is 
and
then so is 
and hence all the 
In particular, 
as 
and
constants) as
there is no breakdown of the asymptotic

62
2. Introductory applications
expansion. The problem posed in (2.11) is therefore regular, resulting in a uniformly
valid asymptotic expansion.
More complete, formal and rigorous discussions of uniform validity, in the context
of differential equations, can be found in other texts, such as Smith (1985), O’Malley
(1991) and Eckhaus (1979). Typically, these arguments involve writing
where 
and then showing that
remains bounded for
and for 
We will outline how this can be applied to our problem,
(2.11); first, we obtain
with 
for 
Since each 
satisfies an appropriate differential
equation and boundary condition, this gives
where
comprises the 
terms, and smaller, from the expansion of 
(after
division by 
A uniform asymptotic expansion requires that 
is bounded as
for 
and 
To prove such a result is rarely an elementary exercise
in general, and it is not trivial here, although a number of approaches are possible.
One method is based on Picard’s iterative scheme (which is a standard technique
for proving the existence of solutions of first order ordinary differential equations in
some appropriate region of (x, y)-space); this will be described in any good basic text
on ordinary differential equations (e.g. Boyce & DiPrima, 2001). Another possibility,
closely related to Picards method, is formally to integrate the equation for
thereby obtaining an integral equation, and then to derive estimates for the integral
term (and hence for 
We will outline a third technique, which involves the
construction of estimates directly for the differential equation, and then integrating a
reduced version of the equation for
At this stage we do not know if 
is of one sign, for 
or if it changes
sign on this interval; however, we may proceed without specifying or assuming the
nature of this property, but it will affect the details; first we write
But we do know that each 
is bounded (for 
and hence so is 
which
we will express in the form 
(a constant independent of 
and so

63
This same property of the functions 
leads to a corresponding statement for
(again, independent of 
which now gives
where the upper sign applies if 
and the lower if 
(Often in
arguments of this type, we cannot incorporate both signs, and we are reduced to
working with the modulus of the function; we will see here that we can allow the
form given in (2.20).) Between the two inequalities, we have an expression associated
with a constant coefficient Riccati equation; let us therefore consider
where 
and 
for arbitrary (bounded) functions 
and
If an appropriate unique solution of (2.21), satisfying 
exists for all
and all 
as specified, then we will certainly have satisfied (2.20). However, we will,
in this text, give only the flavour of how the development proceeds, by considering
a restricted version of the problem with the special choice: 
and 
constant (but
satisfying the given bounds).
To solve (2.21), we introduce 
to obtain
which has, in our special case, the general solution
where the arbitrary constants are A and B, and the auxiliary equation for the exponents
is
The roots of this equation have been written as
where 
for i = 1, 2, as 
Finally, the solution which satisfies the
condition on x = 1 is
which is bounded for 
as 
Thus the
error is 
for 
as required. (A comprehensive discussion

64
2. Introductory applications
requires the analysis of the equation for
with general, bounded 
and
which is possible, but beyond the aims of this text.)
As should be clear from this calculation, it is to be anticipated that special prop-
erties, relevant to a particular problem, may have to be invoked. Here, for example,
we took advantage of the underlying Riccati equation; other problems may require
quite different approaches. However, we must also emphasise that, for many practical
and important problems encountered in applied mathematics, these calculations are
often too difficult to succumb to such a general analysis. Indeed, the conventional
wisdom is that, if breakdowns have been identified, rescaling employed and asymp-
totic solutions found (and matched, as required), then we have produced a sufficiently
robust description. It should be noted that the process of rescaling might involve a
consideration of all possible scalings allowed by the governing equation, which will
then greatly strengthen our trust in the results obtained. Those readers who prefer the
more rigorous approach that such discussions afford are encouraged to study the texts
previously mentioned. In this text, however, we shall proceed without much further
consideration of these more formal aspects of the asymptotic solution of differential
equations.
Now that we have presented the salient features of the method of constructing
solutions, we apply it to another example.
E2.7
A regular second-order problem
We seek an asymptotic solution, as 
of
with 
and 
the primes here denote derivatives. First, we assume
that there is a solution, for some 
of the form
Thus we obtain
and so on, with
(if the expansion is valid at the end-points). The general solution of (2.23a) is

65
and then (2.23b) becomes
which, in turn, has the general solution
where 
are the new arbitrary constants. The functions 
and 
are clearly
defined for 
and there is no suggestion of a breakdown, so we impose the
boundary conditions (2.24) to give
and then our asymptotic expansion (to this order) is
Now that we have obtained the expansion, (2.25), we are able to confirm that we
have a 2-term uniformly valid representation of the solution. In order to examine the
general term in this asymptotic expansion, if this is deemed necessary, we can follow
the method described earlier. Thus we may write
where, in particular, we have 
and 
for 
the general
solution for 
is
where 
and 
are determined to satisfy the two boundary conditions. The essentials
of the argument are then as we have already outlined in our first, simple, presentation:
is bounded (on [0, 1]), so is 
and hence so is 
etc., for all 
Further,
as 
and as 
for 
the asymptotic expansion is uniformly
valid.
Some further examples of regular expansions can be found in Q2.9 and 2.10, and an
interesting variant of E2.7 is discussed in Q2.15.

66
2. Introductory applications
2.4
ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS: SIMPLE SINGULAR PROBLEMS
Now that we have introduced the simplest ideas that enable solutions of differential
equations to be constructed, we must extend our horizons. The first point to record is
that, only quite rarely, do we encounter problems that can be represented by uniformly
valid expansions (although, somewhat after the event, we can often construct such
expansions—in the form of a composite expansion, for example; see §1.10). The
more common equations exhibit singular behaviour, in one form or another; the
simplest situation, we suggest, is when the techniques used above (§2.3) produce
asymptotic expansions that break down, resulting in the need to rescale, expand again
and (probably) invoke the matching principle. (Other types of singularity can arise, and
these will be described in due course.) To see how this approach is a natural extension
of what we have done thus far, we will present a problem based on the equation given
in (2.11).
We consider
for 
the important new ingredient here is the variable coefficient (which, we
note, is 
for x = O(1)). We seek a solution in the form
and we will need to find the terms 
and 
(at least) in order to include a
contribution from the new part of the coefficient. The equations for the 
are
and so on; the boundary condition requires that
In this problem, we should expect that evaluation of the expansion on x = 1 is
allowed—all terms are defined for x = O(1)—but we must anticipate difficulties as
The solutions for the functions 
and 
follow from the results given in
(2.15) and (2.16), respectively, but with the particular integral omitted; thus

67
The 2-term asymptotic expansion, 
is uniformly valid for
Let us find the next term in the expansion; this is the solution of
Thus, introducing the integrating factor 
we have
and so
where the arbitrary constant must be A = 0 (to satisfy 
This third term
in the asymptotic expansion is very different from the first two: it is not defined on
x = 0, so we must expect a breakdown. The expansion, to this order, is now
as 
for x = O(1); as 
we clearly have a breakdown where the second
and third terms in the expansion become the same size i.e. 
or
Note that this breakdown occurs for a larger size of x (as x is decreased from O(1))
than the breakdown associated with the first and third terms, so we must consider
The problem for 
is formulated by writing
where the relabelling of y is an obvious convenience (and we note that y = O(1) for
The original equation, in (2.26), expressed in terms of X and Y, requires
the identity
and then we obtain

68
2. Introductory applications
but the boundary condition is not available, because this is specified where x = O(1).
Equation (2.28) suggests that we seek a solution in the form
which gives
Immediately we obtain 
(an arbitrary constant), and then equation (2.29b)
becomes
which integrates to give
where 
is a second arbitrary constant.
The resulting 2-term expansion is therefore
the two arbitrary constants are determined by invoking the matching principle: (2.30)
and (2.27) are to match. Thus we write the terms in (2.27) as functions of X, let
(for X = O(1)) and retain terms O(1) and 
(which are used in (2.30)); conversely,
write (2.30) as a function of x, expand and retain terms O(1), 
and 
From
(2.27) we construct
and from (2.30) we write
(This expansion requires the standard result:

69
which the interested reader may wish to derive.) The two ‘expansions of expan-
sions’, (2.31) and (2.32), match when we choose 
and
the asymptotic expansion for X = O(1) is therefore
We now observe that, although the expansion (2.27) is not defined on x = 0, the
expansion valid for 
does allow evaluation on x = 0 i.e. X = 0; indeed, from
(2.33), we see that
In summary, the procedure involves the construction of an asymptotic expansion
valid for x = O(1) and applying the boundary condition(s) if the expansion remains
valid here. The expansion is then examined for 
seeking any breakdowns,
rescaling and hence rewriting the equation in terms of the new, scaled variable; this
problem is then solved as another asymptotic expansion, matching as necessary. A
couple of general observations are prompted by this example. First, the matching
principle has been used to determine the arbitrary constants of integration because
the boundary condition does not sit where 
thus the process of matching
is equivalent, here, to imposing boundary conditions (and thereby obtaining unique
solutions for 
In the context of differential equations, this is the usual role of
the matching principle, and it is fundamental in seeking complete solutions.
The second issue is rather more general. In this example, the expansion for x = O(1),
(2.27), had to be taken to the term at 
before the non-uniformity (as
became evident. This prompts the obvious question: how many terms should be
determined so that we can be (reasonably) sure that all possible contributions to a
breakdown have been identified? A very good rule of thumb is to ensure that the
asymptotic expansion contains information generated by every term in the differential
equation. Thus our recent example, (2.26),
requires 
terms to include the nonlinearity 
and 
terms for the dominant
representation of the varying part of the variable coefficient. In a physically based
problem, the interpretation of this rule is simply to ensure that every different physical
effect is included at some stage in the expansion. As an example of this idea, consider
the nonlinear, damped oscillator with variable frequency described by the equation:

70
2. Introductory applications
At O(1) we have the basic oscillator; at 
the variable frequency; at 
the non-
linearity; at 
the damping. Thus, in order to investigate the leading contributions
(at least) to each of these properties of the oscillation, the asymptotic expansion must
be taken as far as the inclusion of terms 
(There is no suggestion that each will
necessarily lead to a breakdown, and an associated scaling, but each needs to be ex-
amined.) One further important observation will be discussed in the next section; we
conclude this section with two examples that exploit all these ideas.
E2.8
Problem (2.11) extended
We consider the problem
which is the same equation and boundary condition as we introduced in (2.11), but
now the domain is 
The asymptotic solution for x = O(1), which satisfies the
boundary condition, is (2.17) i.e.
and this breaks down where 
or 
Thus we introduce
but for this size of x, we observe that 
and so this also must be scaled: we
write
Equation (2.34) becomes
and we seek a solution
which gives
and so on. This result may cause some surprise: this sequence of problems is purely
algebraic—there is no integration of differential equations required at any stage.
Equation (2.36a) has the solution

71
and we will need to invoke the matching principle to decide which sign is appropriate.
Thus from the first term in (2.35), we see that
from (2.37) we obtain
and then (2.38) and (2.39) match only for the positive sign. (Note that, because y has
also been scaled, this must be included in the construction which enables the matching
to be completed.) The solution for the first term is therefore
and then the second term is obtained directly as
the resulting 2-term asymptotic expansion is
We have found that this problem, (2.34), requires an asymptotic expansion for
x = O(1) and another for 
In addition, it is clear that (2.40) does not
further break down as 
(and it is fairly easy to see that no later terms in
the expansion will alter this observation): two asymptotic expansions are sufficient.
The appearance of an algebraic problem implies that all solutions are the same—any
variation by virtue of different boundary values 
is lost for 
how is
this possible? The explanation becomes clear when (2.35) is examined more closely; the
terms associated with the arbitrary constants (at each order) are exponential functions,
and for 
these are all proportional to 
they are exponentially
small. Such terms have been omitted from the asymptotic expansion for 
if
they had been included, then the matching of these terms would have ensured that
information about the boundary values would have been transmitted to the solution
valid for 
albeit in exponentially small terms.

72
2. Introductory applications
E2.9 An equation with an interesting behaviour near x = 0
We consider the problem
as 
we assume that
for some x = O(1). We obtain the sequence of equations
and so on; the boundary condition (if available here) gives
The general solution of (2.42a) is simply
(which is not defined on x = 0, so we anticipate the need for a scaling as 
if a
bounded solution exists), and then (2.42b) gives
The asymptotic expansion is therefore
and this is defined for x = O(1), including x = 1, but not as 
So the boundary
condition, (2.43), can be applied, requiring the arbitrary constants to be 
and
i.e.
or

73
As 
expansion (2.44) breaks down where
or
and then 
we introduce the scaled variables
and then the equation in (2.41) becomes
For this equation, it is clear that we must seek a solution in the form
and then (2.45) yields
and so on. The first equation here can be written as
where 
is an arbitrary constant; thus
and both 
and the choice of sign are to be determined by matching.
From the first term in (2.44) we obtain
and from (2.47) we have
which matches with (2.48) only for the positive sign and then with 
Thus
(2.47) becomes

74
2. Introductory applications
and then equation (2.46b) is
or
The general expression for 
is therefore
and so we have the expansion
and this is to be matched with (2.44). From (2.44) we obtain
and, correspondingly from (2.49), we have
or
which matches only if 
(because the term 
in 
must be eliminated).
The solution valid for 
is therefore
and this expansion is defined on X = 0, yielding
We observe, in this example, that the value of the function on x = 0 is well-defined
from (2.51), but that it diverges as 
This demonstrates the important property
that we require, for a solution to exist, that the asymptotic representation be defined

75
for 
but that solutions obtained from these expansions may diverge as
we may have x = 0 in the domain, but
The examples that we have presented thus far (and others can be found in Q2.11-2.15),
and particularly those that involve a rescaling after a breakdown, possess an important
but rather less obvious property. This relates to the existence of general scalings of the
differential equation, and the resulting ‘balance’ of (dominant) terms in the equation;
this leads us to the introduction of an additional fundamental tool. This idea will now
be explored in some detail, and use made of it in some further examples.
2.5
SCALING OF DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Let us first return to our most recent example
given in (2.41). We may, if it is convenient or expedient, choose to use new variables
defined by
where 
and 
are arbitrary positive constants; X and Y are now scaled versions of x
and y, respectively. Thus, with 
equation (2.52) becomes
and then a choice for 
and 
might be driven by the requirement to find a new
asymptotic expansion valid in an appropriate region of the domain. In this example,
the first term of the asymptotic expansion valid for x = O(1) is y ~ 1/x (see (2.44))
and so any scaling that is to produce a solution which matches to this must satisfy
Y ~ 1/X i.e. 
With this choice, equation (2.53) becomes
and from our previous analysis of this problem, we know that the breakdown of the
asymptotic expansion valid for x = O(1) occurs for                  i.e.             the issue
here is whether this can be deduced directly from the (scaled) equation.
The clue to the way forward can be found when we examine the terms, in the
differential equation, that produce the leading terms in the two asymptotic expan-
sions, one valid for x = O(1) and the other for 
From (2.41) and (2.45),

76
2. Introductory applications
these are
where ‘–’ denotes terms used, in the first approximation, with x = O(1), and 
de-
notes, correspondingly, the terms used where 
(The derivative has not
been labelled, but it will automatically be retained, by virtue of the multiplication
of terms, when labelled terms are used in an approximation.) The important inter-
pretation is that some terms—here all—used where x = O(1) are balanced against
some terms not used previously (in the first approximation), but now required where
When we impose this requirement on (2.54), and note that the breakdown
is as 
i.e. 
then the only balance occurs when we choose
or, because we may define 
in any appropriate way, simply 
It is impossi-
ble to balance the term in 
against the O(1) terms here (to give different leading
terms) because, when we do this, the dominant term then becomes
which is plainly inconsistent. Note that 
and 
as 
can never be
balanced.
Thus, armed only with the general scaling property, the behaviour y ~ 1/x as
and the requirement to balance terms, we are led to the choice 
this
does not involve any discussion of the nature of the breakdown of the asymptotic
expansion. This new procedure is very easily applied, is very powerful and is the most
immediate and natural method for finding the relevant scaled regions for the solution
of a differential equation. We use this technique to explore two examples that we have
previously discussed, and then we apply it to a new problem.
E2.10
Scaling for problem (2.11) (see also (2.34))
Consider the equation
with a boundary condition given at 
where 
as 
the
domain is either 
or 
The solution of the first term in the asymptotic
expansion valid for x = O(1) is (see (2.15))
The general scaling, 
X, 
in (2.55) gives

77
if the domain is 
then from (2.56) we see that y = O(1) as 
(unless
; see below). So we select 
(2.57) becomes
and there is no choice of scaling, as 
which balances the term 
against
We conclude that a second asymptotic region does not exist, and hence that the
expansion for x = O(1) is uniformly valid on this (bounded) domain, which agrees
with the discussion following (2.17). (In the special case 
as
and so a matched solution now requires 
producing
again, there is no choice of 
as 
which balances
against
On the other hand, if the domain is 
then 
as 
and we
require 
for a matched solution to exist; equation (2.57) now becomes
This time, with 
(because 
the O(1) terms balance 
if
e.g. 
or 
which recovers the scaling used to give (2.40) in E2.8.
E2.11
Scaling for problem (2.22)
Consider the equation
with 
and suitable boundary conditions (which may both be at one end,
or one at each end). The general solution of the dominant terms from (2.58), with
x = O(1) as 
is
(as used to generate (2.25)). In this example, the asymptotic expansion, of which (2.59)
is the first term, may break down as 
or as 
or, just possibly, as
with 
All these may be subsumed into one calculation by introducing a
simple extension of our method of scaling: let 
where we may allow
in this formulation. Then with the usual
(2.58) becomes

78
2. Introductory applications
(Note that we have used the identity
and similarly for the second derivative; this is valid for 
For general A and B,
(2.59) implies that y = O(1) as 
so we select
and no balance exists (that is, between 
and 
as 
Again we deduce, on
the basis of this scaling argument, that the asymptotic expansion is uniformly valid for
(exactly as we found was the case for expansion (2.25)). The special case
in which 
produces 
as 
and so we now require
but any balance is still impossible.
E2.12
Scaling procedure applied to a new equation
For our final example, we consider the equation
where r (x) is either zero or r (x) = x; the two boundary conditions are either one at
each end of the domain, or both at one end—it is immaterial in this discussion. The
general solution of the dominant terms in (2.60) as 
for x = O(1), is
the latter applying when r (x) = x. The general scaling in the neighbourhood of any
is 
and 
which gives
for the equation with 
Because this equation is linear and homogeneous, the
scaling in y is redundant: it cancels identically. (We may still require 
to measure
the size of y, but it can play no rôle in the determination, from the equation, of any
appropriate scaling near 
The balance of terms, as 
requires either that
or that 
and only the latter is consistent, so 
the
former balances the terms 
and Y, but then 
is the dominant contributor! Thus
any scaled region must be described by 
although this analysis cannot
help us decide if an 
exists, or what 
might be; we will examine this issue in the
next section.

79
The case of r (x) = x is slightly different, because the equation is no longer homo-
geneous: there is a right-hand side. The same scaling now produces
but 
can be found by the condition that any solution we seek for Y must match to
(2.61b). If y = O(1) as 
then 
and the result is as before: the only balance
is provided by 
On the other hand, if 
then
as 
so 
and then we have
But the new term is the same size as an existing term, and so the same result follows
yet again: 
is the only available choice. (Taking 
gives the same result.)
The technique of scaling differential equations, coupled with the required behaviour
necessary if matching is to be possible, is simple but powerful (as the above examples
demonstrate). It is often incorporated at an early stage in most calculations, and that
is how we will view it in the final introductory examples that we present; additional
examples are available in Q2.16. We will shortly turn to a discussion of a classical type
of problem: those that exhibit a boundary-layer behaviour (a phenomenon that we
have already met in E1.4; see (1.16)). However, before we start this, a few comments
of a rather more formal mathematical nature are in order, and may be of interest to
some readers.
Let us suppose that we have scaled an equation according to 
and
and that we have chosen 
to satisfy matching requirements; we will express this as
for some known n. The scaling, or transformation,
will be represented by 
this transformation of variables belongs to a continuous group
or Lie group. (Note that this discussion has not invoked the balance of terms, which then
leads to a choice 
this would constitute a selection of one member of the group.)
We now explore the properties of this transformation. First we apply, successively, the
transformation 
and then 
this is equivalent to the single transformation 
and
so we have the multiplication rule:

80
2. Introductory applications
But we also have 
so this law is commutative. Furthermore, the
associative law is satisfied:
in addition, we have the identity transformation 
i.e. 
for all
Finally, we form
and so 
is both the left and right inverse of 
Thus the elements of 
for all real
form an infinite group, where   is the parameter of this continuous group. (If n is
fractional, then we may have to restrict the parameter to
Although we have not used the full power of this continuous group—we eventually
select only one member for a given —there are other significant applications of
this fundamental property in the theory of differential equations. For example, if a
particular scaling transformation leaves the equation unchanged (except for a change
of the symbols!) i.e. the equation is invariant, then we may seek solutions which satisfy
the same invariance. Such solutions are, typically, similarity solutions (if they exist) of
the equation; this aspect of differential equations is generally outside the considerations
of singular perturbation theory (although these solutions may be the relevant ones in
certain regions of the domain, in particular problems).
2.6
EQUATIONS WHICH EXHIBIT A BOUNDARY-LAYER BEHAVIOUR
There are many problems, posed in terms of either ordinary or partial differential
equations, that have solutions which include a thin region near a boundary of the
domain which is required to accommodate the boundary value there. Such regions are
thin by virtue of a scaling of the variables in the appropriate parameter and, typically,
this involves large values of the derivatives near the boundary. The terminology—
boundary layer—is rather self-evident, although it was first associated with the viscous
boundary layer in fluid mechanics (which we will describe in Chapter 5). Here, we
will introduce the essential idea via some appropriate ordinary differential equations,
and make use of the relevant scaling property of the equation.
The nature of this problem is best described, first, by an analysis of equation (1.16):
with 
and 
(and we will assume that 
and 
are not functions
of 
and that 
In this presentation of the construction of the asymptotic
solution, valid as 
we will work directly from (2.63) (although the exact
solution is available in (1.22), which may be used as a check, if so desired). Because
we wish to incorporate an application of the scaling property, we need to know where
the boundary layer (interpreted as a scaled region) is situated: is it near x = 0 or near

81
x = 1 (or, possibly, both)? Here, we will assume that there is a single boundary layer
near x = 0; the problem of finding the position of a boundary layer will be addressed
in the next section, at least for a particular class of ordinary differential equations. Let
us now return to equation (2.63).
As should be evident from example E1.4, and will become very clear in what follows,
it is the appearance of the small parameter multiplying the highest derivative that is
critical here. The presence of 
in another coefficient is altogether irrelevant to the
general development; it is retained only to allow direct comparison with E1.4. We seek
a solution of (2.63) in the form
and then we obtain
and so on. The only boundary condition available to us (because of the assumption
about the position of the boundary layer) is
Thus
and indeed, in this problem, we then have 
although exponentially
small terms would be required for a more complete description of the asymptotic
solution valid for x = O(1); so we have
The scaled version of (2.63) is obtained by writing 
for 
and
(because y = O(1) as 
although any scaling on Y will vanish identically
from the equation); thus
The relevant balance, as we have already seen in (2.62), is 
or
giving

82
2. Introductory applications
We seek a solution of this equation in the usual form:
which gives
and so on. We have available the one boundary condition prescribed at x = 0 (which
is in the region of the boundary layer) i.e. at X = 0, so
From (2.67a) and (2.68) we obtain
where 
is an arbitrary constant, and then (2.67b) becomes
Thus
where 
and 
are the arbitrary constants, which must satisfy 
from
this gives the solution
The 2-term asymptotic expansion valid for 
is therefore
which is to be matched to (2.65); this should uniquely determine 
and 
We write
(2.65) as
retaining terms O(1) and 
(as used in (2.70)); correspondingly, we write (2.70) as

83
and the 
term is included because that was obtained for (2.65)—although it had a
zero coefficient. In order to match (2.71) and (2.72), we require 
and
i.e.
(It is left as an exercise to show that (2.65) and (2.73) are recovered from suitable
expansions of (1.22).) We should note that (2.65) exhibits no breakdown—there is
only one term here, after all—but (2.73) does break down where
i.e.
x = O(1), as we would expect. Any indication of a breakdown in the asymptotic
expansion valid for x = O(1) will come from the exponentially small terms; let us
briefly address this aspect of the problem.
The first point to note is that, from (2.70) and (2.73), we would require not only
O(1) and 
but also 
terms (and others), in order to complete the matching
procedure; this is simply because we need, at least in principle, to match to all the terms
(cf. (2.72))
Thus the expansion valid for x = O(1) must include a term 
to allow matching
to this order (and then it is not too difficult to see that a complete asymptotic expansion
requires all the terms in the sequence
n = 0, 1, 2,…, m = 0, 1, 2,…).
In passing, we observe that this use of the matching principle is new in the context
of our presentation here. We are using it, first, in a general sense, to determine the
type(s) of term(s) required in the expansion valid in an adjacent region in order to
allow matching. Then, with these terms included, the ‘full’ matching procedure may
be employed to check the details and fix the values of any arbitrary constants left
undetermined. We will find the first of the exponentially small terms here.
For x = O(1), we seek a solution
where 
in this example); thus equation (2.63) be-
comes
(Again ‘= 0’ means zero to all orders in 
We already have that
satisfies the
original equation, and so
must satisfy

84
2. Introductory applications
with 
we obtain
or
(constant). Thus the
expansion (2.74) becomes
and this is to be matched to the asymptotic expansion (2.73); from (2.75) we obtain
and from (2.73) we have
which match if
Thus the solution valid for x = O(1), i.e. away from
the boundary layer near x = 0, incorporating the first exponentially small term, is
One final comment: this solution, (2.76), produces the value
so now the boundary value is in error by 
To correct this, a
further term is required; we must write (at the order of all the first exponentially small
terms)
where
It is left as an exercise to show that
with the solution 
ensures that the boundary condition on
x = 1 is correct at this order. The inclusion of the term 
in the expansion
valid for x = O(1) forces, via the matching principle, a term of this same order in
the expansion for 
and so the pattern continues. (The appearance of all
these terms, in both expansions, can be seen by expanding the exact solution, (1.22),
appropriately.)
E2.13
A nonlinear boundary-layer problem
We consider the problem

85
with 
for 
we are given that the boundary layer
is near x = 1. We seek a solution, for 1 – x = O(1), in the form
and so
etc., with
for
Thus we obtain
which leads to
but this solution does not satisfy the boundary condition on x = 1.
For the solution near x = 1, we introduce 
(with 
and
so that 
i.e.
The solution in the form
gives
and so on; the available boundary condition requires that
Thus
and
where 
and 
are the arbitrary constants to be determined by matching; that is,
we must match

86
2. Introductory applications
with (2.78). From (2.79) we obtain
from (2.78) we have
and these match if we select 
and 
thus (2.79) becomes
The fundamental issue relating to boundary-layer-type problems, which we have
avoided thus far, addresses the question of where the boundary layer might be lo-
cated. In the examples discussed above, we allowed ourselves the advantage of knowing
where this layer was situated—and the consistency of the resulting asymptotic solution
confirmed that unique, well-defined solutions existed, so presumably we started with
the correct information. We now examine this important aspect of boundary-layer
problems.
2.7
WHERE IS THE BOUNDARY LAYER?
For this discussion, we consider the general second-order ordinary differential equation
in the form
with suitable boundary conditions and for                 note that the coefficient of      must
be 
The coefficient a (x) will satisfy either a(x) > 0 or a(x) < 0, for 
the
term 
(or smaller) as 
for 
and for all solutions
that may be of interest. Of course, this describes only one class of such boundary-layer
problems, but this does cover by far the most common ones encountered in mathe-
matical modelling. (Some of these conditions, both explicitly written and implied, can
be relaxed; we will offer a few generalisations later.) The guiding principle that we will
adopt is to seek solutions of (2.80) which remain bounded as 
for
The starting point is the construction of the asymptotic solution valid for suitable
x = O(1), directly from the equation as written in (2.80)—but this will necessarily
generate a sequence of first-order equations. It is therefore impossible to impose the
two boundary conditions (as we have already demonstrated in our examples above); the
inclusion of a boundary layer remedies this deficiency in the solution. We introduce
the boundary layer in the most general way possible: define 
for some g (x)

87
and some 
and write 
Then we have
and so equation (2.80) becomes
where 
We will further assume, whatever the choice of 
(and in almost
all problems that we encounter, 
that the terms in 
and 
dominate as
Thus the ‘classical’ choice for the balance of terms, 
applies here for
general g(x) (which we have yet to determine).
The differential equation valid in the boundary layer can now be written
which has the first term in an asymptotic expansion, 
satisfying
At this stage, 
has yet to be determined; let us choose 
(we may not
choose 
then we are left with the simple, generic problem for
which also solves the difficulty over the mixing of the x and X notations in (2.83).
Thus all boundary-layer problems in this class have the same general solution, from
(2.84),
However, we are no nearer finding the position of the boundary layer itself; this we
now do by examining the available solutions for g(x).
The general form for g(x) is
where C is an arbitrary constant (and this proves to be the most convenient way of
including the constant of integration). First, we suppose that a(x) > 0, and examine

88
2. Introductory applications
(2.85) when expressed in terms of x (as will be necessary for any matching); this gives
But we are seeking solutions that remain bounded as 
and this is possible only
if the exponent in (2.87) is non-positive for 
Thus we require
and this means that          for the same xs i.e.            (for otherwise x < C can occur
in the domain, and the integral will change sign). Then, for x sufficiently close to
we have
and we have a choice for the boundary-layer variable. Hence, for a (x) > 0, the bound-
ary layer must sit near the left-hand edge of the domain. Conversely, the same argument
in the case a (x) < 0 requires that the boundary layer be situated near 
(the right-
hand edge of the domain). When we apply this rule to equation (2.63):
we see that 
and so the boundary layer is
in the neighbourhood of x = 0 (and we introduced 
for this example).
Similarly, equation (2.77):                                       has a(x) = – 1 < 0,
and so the boundary layer is now near x = 1 (and we used
It is rarely necessary to incorporate the formal definition of g ( x ) to generate the
appropriate variable that is to be used to represent the boundary layer (although it
will always produce the simplest form of the solution). For example, the equation of
this class: 
has a boundary layer near x = 2
(because a (x) = –1/(2 + x) < 0 for 
Now an appropriate scaled variable is
simply 
giving
and this choice will suffice, even though higher-order terms will require the expansion
of
(but this is usually a small price to pay—and we already know that
this asymptotic expansion will breakdown for 
so retaining 
in the
coefficient has no unforeseen complications). It should also be noted that, exceptionally,
a boundary-layer-type problem may not require a boundary layer at all, in order to
accommodate the given boundary value (to leading order or, possibly, to all orders).
This is evident for the equation given in (2.63) (and see also the exact solution, (1.22));
in this example, if the boundary values satisfy the special condition 
then no
boundary layer whatsoever is required. Note, however, that if 
then

89
the boundary layer is present, but only to correct the boundary value at 
—the
leading term (for x = O(1)) is uniformly valid. We call upon all these ideas in the next
example.
E2.14 A nonlinear, variable coefficient boundary-layer problem
We consider
with 
for 
Because the coefficient of 
is negative for
the boundary layer will be situated at the right-hand edge of the domain i.e.
near x = 1. Away from x = 1, we seek a solution
etc., and we may use the boundary condition on x = 0:
Thus we obtain
and then the application of the boundary condition yields the solution
we note that 
remains real and positive as 
(The second term can also be
found, but it is a slightly tiresome exercise and its inclusion teaches us little about the
solution.) Clearly, 
as the right-hand boundary is approached, which does not
satisfy the given boundary condition 
and so a boundary layer is required.
(Of course, if 
then (2.90) would be a uniformly valid 1-term asymptotic
solution.)
We introduce 
(so that 
and write 
equation
(2.88) then becomes
and so

90
2. Introductory applications
which gives, with
The solution of (2.92), which satisfies the boundary condition 
is
and 
is to be determined by matching. From (2.90) we have directly that
and from (2.93) we see that 
thus matching requires 
and the first
term in the boundary-layer solution is
and then a composite expansion can be written down, if that is required.
The fundamental ideas that underpin the notion of boundary-layer-type solutions, in
second-order ordinary differential equations, have been developed, but many variants
of this simple idea exist; see also Q2.17–2.20. These lead to adjustments in the for-
mulation, or to generalisations, or to a rather different structure (with corresponding
interpretation). We now describe a few of these possibilities, but what we present is
far from providing a comprehensive list; rather, we present some examples which em-
phasise the application of the basic technique of scaling to find thin layers where rapid
changes occur. In the next section, we briefly describe a number of different scenarios,
and present an example of each type.
2.8
BOUNDARY LAYERS AND TRANSITION LAYERS
Our first development from the simple notion of a boundary layer is afforded by an
extension of our discussion of the position of this layer, via equation (2.80); here,
we consider the case where 
Such a point is analogous to a
turning point (see Q2.24) and the solution valid near 
takes the form of a transition
layer. (The terminology ‘turning point’ is used to denote where the character of the
solution changes or ‘turns’, typically from oscillatory to exponential, in equations such
as 
The general approach is to seek a scaling–just as for a boundary
layer–but now at this interior point. Let us suppose that 
for given
constants 
and n, then equation (2.80) becomes
and we introduce

91
to give
where we have used the same notation as in (2.81). The balance that we seek is given
by the choice 
or 
provided that n < 1 (in order that this balance
does indeed produce the dominant terms, with F = O(1) or smaller). The procedure
then unfolds as for the boundary-layer problems, although we will now have solutions
in 
and in 
where 
together with a matched
solution where 
If
then the balance of terms requires
and then either (n = 1) all three terms in the equation contribute to leading
order, or (n > 1) the balance is between 
and F. (This description assumes that
F = O(1); note also that the chosen behaviour of a(x) used here need only apply near
for this approach to be relevant.)
E2.15
An equation with a transition layer
Consider the equation
for 
where, for real solutions, we interpret 
the boundary
conditions are
We will find the first terms only in the asymptotic expansions valid away from x = 0
(where the coefficient 
is zero), in 
and then in 
and
finally valid near x = 0. For x = O(l), we write 
and so, from (2.94),
we obtain
we determine the arbitrary constant by imposing the boundary conditions (2.95a,b),
thereby producing solutions valid either on one side, or the other, of x = 0:
Note that these solutions do not hold in the neighbourhood of x = 0 i.e. we may
allow                   but with                        this solution would be valid for                         to
leading order, if the function given in (2.96) were continuous at x = 0, and then no
transition layer would be needed (to this order, at least).

92
2. Introductory applications
Near x = 0, we write 
and, in order to match, we require y = O(1), so we
write 
equation (2.94) then gives
and hence we select 
Thus in the transition layer we have the equation
and we seek a solution 
where
(The lower limit in the integral here is simply a convenience; with this choice, the
arbitrary constant following the second integration is 
Note that this integral exists
for 
These arbitrary constants are determined by matching; from
(2.96a,b) we obtain directly that
From (2.97), we first write
now let us introduce the constant
(where
is the gamma function), then
and matching (2.98) and (2.100) requires 
and 
The first term
of the asymptotic expansion valid in the transition layer (around x = 0) is therefore

93
This example has demonstrated how boundary-layer techniques are equally applicable
to interior (transition) layers and, further, they need not be restricted to single layers.
Some problems exhibit multiple layers; for example
has transition layers both near x = 1/2 and near x = –1/2, and the solution away
from these layers is now in three parts.
A type of problem which contains elements of both boundary and transition layers
occurs if the coefficient, a(x), of 
is zero at one (or both) boundaries. Because
at an internal point, it is not a transition layer, but the fact that 
at
the end-point affects the scaling—it is no longer 
in general—and this must be
determined directly (as we did for the transition layer).
E2.16
A boundary-layer problem with a new scaling
We consider the equation
for 
with 
and 
note that 
and so we must
expect a boundary layer near x = 0. Away from x = 0, we seek a solution
which gives
and so on, with
and
for
Thus we obtain
in order to satisfy the boundary condition (and as 
this does not approach
and so a boundary layer is certainly required). The equation for 
is
therefore
or

94
2. Introductory applications
which has the general solution
and 
requires 
(It should be noted that 
as
which, alone, indicates a breakdown where 
this, as we shall see
below, is irrelevant).
For the boundary layer, we scale 
with
then the equation,
(2.101), becomes
and so we must select 
which leads to
(The apparent scaling, 
is therefore redundant—it is smaller than that required
in the boundary layer.) We seek a solution 
with
and the available boundary condition,
then gives
Finally, we determine 
by invoking the matching principle; from (2.102) we obtain
and from (2.103) we see that
which match if 
the boundary-layer solution is therefore
where k is given in (2.104).

95
Boundary layers also arise even in the absence of the first-derivative term; indeed,
equations of the form
with 
for 
can have a boundary layer at each end of the domain. (If
then the relevant part of the solution is oscillatory and boundary layers are
not present. If a (x) = 0 at an interior point, then we have a classical turning-point
problem and near this point we will require a transition layer.) The solution away
from these layers is simply given, to leading order, by y(x) = –f (x)/a(x). To see the
nature of this problem, consider the case a (x) = 1. The equation that controls the
solution in the boundary layers is then 
and so 
and
exponentially decaying solutions—ensuring bounded solutions as 
—arise for
A = 0 or B = 0, appropriately chosen, either on the left boundary or on the right
boundary.
E2.17
Two boundary layers
Consider the equation
for 
with 
the solution for suitable x = O(1) is written
as 
to leading order, where
This solution, (2.106), clearly does not satisfy the boundary conditions as 
nor as
The boundary layer near x = 1 is expressed in terms of
with 
equation (2.105) then becomes
which leads to the choice 
Seeking a solution 
then
and for bounded (i.e. matchable) solutions as 
we must have 
The
boundary condition, 
gives 
and so

96
2. Introductory applications
and this is completely determined, as is (2.106), so matching is used only to confirm
the correctness of these results (and this is left as an exercise).
The boundary layer near x = 0 is written in terms of 
with
again); equation (2.105) now becomes
The boundary layer is, not surprisingly, the same size at this end of the domain:
and then with 
we obtain
A bounded solution, as 
requires the choice 
and 
will ensure
that the boundary condition
is satisfied i.e.
The next term
in the asymptotic expansion
satisfies
with 
(for boundedness) and 
(because 
i.e.
it is left as another exercise to confirm that this matches with (2.106).
In our examples so far (and see also Q2.21, 2.22), the character and position of the
boundary layer (or its interior counterpart, the transition layer) have been controlled
by the known function a (x), as in 
(or a (x) y in our most recent example).
We will now investigate how the same approach can be adopted when the relevant
coefficient is a function of y. In this situation, we do not know, a priori, the sign of
y—and this is usually critical. Typically, we make an appropriate assumption, seek a
solution and then test the assumption. For example, if the two boundary values for
y—we are thinking here of two-point boundary value problems—have the same sign,
then we may reasonably suppose that y retains this sign throughout the domain. On
the other hand, if the boundary values are of opposite sign, then the solution must
have at least one zero somewhere on the domain (and this indicates the existence of a
transition layer).
E2.18
A problem which exhibits either a boundary layer or a transition
layer: I
(An example similar to this one is discussed in great detail in Kevorkian & Cole, 1981
& 1996; see Q2.23.)

97
We consider the equation
for 
with 
and 
(where 
and 
are independent of
for suitable x = O(1), we seek a solution in the usual form
which gives
and so on. The general solution to equation (2.108a) is
we exclude the solution 
because we will consider problems for which
and 
(Any special solutions which may need to make use of the zero solution
are easily incorporated if required.) The next term in this asymptotic expansion is
obtained from (2.108b) i.e.
which yields
where 
is the second arbitrary constant (and we have taken
It is clear, however, that it is impossible to proceed without more information about
the boundary values, 
and 
Let us examine, first, the problem for which both
values are positive; we therefore assume that a solution, y > 0, exists and hence that
any boundary layer must be situated in the neighbourhood of x = 0 (indicated by the
term 
with y > 0). With this in mind, we may use the one available boundary
condition away from x = 0, i.e. 
thus we obtain
Correspondingly, with 
we see that 
we will assume hereafter that
(but we clearly have an interesting case if 
for then the
solution does have a zero near 
even with 
possibility not pursued
here).

98
2. Introductory applications
Now, as 
we see that 
and if this does not equal
then a boundary layer is required near x = 0. For this layer, we write 
with
(= O(1)), and then (2.107) becomes
with the choice 
We seek a solution
where
and we have chosen to write the arbitrary constant of integration as 
any
other choice produces a solution which cannot be matched—an investigation that is
left as an exercise. The next integral of (2.113) gives the general solution
and to satisfy 
this can be written as
The value of the remaining arbitrary constant, 
is now determined by matching
(2.114) and (2.111); from (2.111) we obtain
and from (2.114) we see that
which requires that 
Thus we have successfully completed the initial cal-
culations in the construction of asymptotic expansions valid for x = O(1) and for
these demonstrate that, in the case 
and 
we have a solution
which satisfies y > 0 for
E2.19
A problem which exhibits either a boundary layer or a transition
layer: II
We repeat example E2.18, but now with the boundary values 
(chosen to avoid
the difficulties already noted) and 
and thus the solution must change sign (at
least once) in order to accommodate these boundary values. This indicates the need

99
for a transition layer at some 
and determining 
becomes an
essential element in the construction of the solution.
For x = O(1) we have, as before (see (2.111)),
but this can hold only for 
but 
where 
is
introduced below); for 
we have the corresponding solution
Near 
we write 
with 
which essentially
repeats (2.112) i.e. 
and so
and this gives the same general solution, to leading order, as before (see (2.113),
et seq.):
However, for a transition layer, we do not have any boundary conditions; here, we
must match (2.117) to both (2.115) and (2.116).
From (2.115) and (2.116) we obtain
respectively, both for X = O(1); from (2.117), with
we have
as 
We observe, immediately, that a property of this transition layer is to admit
only a change in value across it from        to        (which will fix the value of
and that the matching excludes 
(so this cannot be determined at this stage). Now
(2.119) does match with (2.118) when we choose
which requires that

100
2. Introductory applications
and hence a transition layer exists at 
provided
If this condition is not satisfied, for given 
and 
then the adjustment to the given
boundary value must be through a boundary layer near x = 0. Thus, for example, with
and 
there is a transition layer at 
and the jump
across the layer is between ±3/2 (to leading order). On the other hand, the problem
with 
and 
does not admit a transition layer; the boundary layer near
x = 0 is used to accommodate the change in value from 
(to leading order)
to 
The dominant solution in the transition layer is given by (2.117) with
although 
is unknown at this stage. (The role of 
is to
determine the position of the transition layer, correct at
These two examples, E2.18 and E2.19 (and see also Q2.23), demonstrate the complex-
ity and richness of solutions that are available for this type of problem, depending on
the particular boundary values that are prescribed. All this can be traced to the nonlin-
earity associated with the 
term; if this term were simply 
then we would have
a fixed boundary layer, or fixed transition layers, independent of the specific boundary
values (as we have seen in our earlier examples). We conclude this section with an
example which shows how these ideas can be extended, fairly straightforwardly, to
higher-order equations. (The following example is based on the type of problem that
can arise when examining the displacement of a loaded beam.)
E2.20
A problem with two boundary layers
We consider
for 
(and the use of 
here is merely an algebraic convenience), with
Before we begin the detailed analysis of this problem, a couple of points should be
noted. First, the variable coefficient, 
in (1.121), is positive for
and so, second, this implies that we have available (locally) two exponential solutions.
These arise from, approximately,
and so we may select one exponential near x = 0 and the other near x = 1, ensuring
exponential decay as we move away from the boundaries. Thus we must anticipate

101
boundary layers near both x = 0 and x = 1; we will assume that they exist—we
can always ignore them if they are not required (because the boundary values are
automatically satisfied).
Hence, for x = O(1) away from x = 0 and x = 1, we seek a solution with
where
but no boundary conditions are available (by virtue of the assumed existence of bound-
ary layers). For the boundary layer near x = 0, it is clear that we require
(but we do not know 
at this stage; since
presumably
as
although the size of 
in this limit is unknown). Thus equation
(2.121) becomes
We seek a solution 
where
satisfies
provided 
as 
we will assume that this condition applies, and we
will check it shortly. The boundary conditions are 
and we must not
allow the term which grows exponentially away from X = 0, so 
and then
Immediately we observe that the term 
is unmatchable to
unless we select 
(and then 
this we do, so that
Correspondingly, for the boundary layer near x = 1, we write
and now choose 
to give
Thus the first term in the expansion,
 satisfies

102
2. Introductory applications
and then (exactly as described for 
we obtain
We now determine the constants 
and 
by matching (2.123) with, in
turn, (2.124) and (2.125). First, from (2.123) with 
and 
we obtain
from (2.124) we have
which requires
and then
Again, from (2.123), but now with
and 
we obtain
and, finally, (2.125) gives
Now we require 
and 
thus, collecting all these results, we see
that
and hence, to leading order, we have
with
So, indeed, boundary layers are required at each end in order to accommodate the
boundary conditions there (although we may note that the solution for 
does
satisfy 
but not the derivative conditions).
Some further examples of higher-order equations that exhibit boundary-layer be-
haviour are offered in Q2.26.
This chapter has been devoted to a presentation of some of the fairly routine ap-
plications of singular perturbation theory to various types of mathematical problem.

103
Although we have touched on methods for finding roots of equations, and on inte-
gration, the main thrust has been to develop basic techniques for solving differential
equations—the most important use, by far, of these methods. We shall devote the rest
of the text to extending and developing the methods for solving differential equations,
both ordinary and partial, and their applications to many practical problems that are
encountered in various branches of mathematical modelling. Many of the examples
and exercises in this chapter are, perforce, invented to make a point or to test ideas;
however, a few of the later exercises that are included at the end of this chapter (see
Q2.27–2.35) begin to employ the techniques in physically relevant problems. In the
next chapter, we will show how these ideas can be applied to a broader class of prob-
lems and, in particular, begin our discussion of partial differential equations. This will
allow us, in turn, to begin to extend the applications of singular perturbation theory
to more problems which arise within a physically relevant context.
FURTHER READING
A few of the existing texts include a discussion of the methods for finding roots of
equations, and for evaluating integrals of functions which contain a small parameter;
in particular, the interested reader is directed to Holmes (1995) and Hinch (1991).
Differential equations that give rise to regular problems are given little consideration—
they are quite rare, after all—but some can be found in Holmes (1995) and in Georgescu
(1995). We have already mentioned those texts that present a more formal approach to
perturbation theory (Eckhaus, 1979; Smith, 1985; O’Malley, 1991), but some further
developments along these lines are also given in Chang & Howes (1984).
The whole arena of scaling with respect to a parameter, and we should include here
the construction of non-dimensional variables, is fairly routine but very powerful.
These ideas play a rôle, not only in the identification of asymptotic regions (as we have
seen), but also in providing more general pointers to the construction of solutions. A
very thorough introduction to these ideas, and their connection with asymptotics, can
be found in Barenblatt (1996). A discussion of the applications of group theory to the
study of differential equations is likely to be available in any good, relevant text; one
such, which emphasises precisely the application to differential equations, is Dresner
(1999).
The nature of a boundary layer (which is, for our current interest, limited to a
property of certain ordinary differential equations) is described at length, and carefully,
in most available texts on singular perturbation theory. We can mention, as examples
of the extent and depth of what is discussed, the excellent presentations on this subject
given by Smith (1985) and Holmes (1995). The determination of the position of
a boundary layer is also covered in most existing texts, although O’Malley (1991)
probably provides the most detailed analysis. (This work also includes a number of
relevant references which the interested reader may wish to investigate.) An excellent
discussion of the interplay between boundary layers and transition layers (for nonlinear
equations) is given in Kevorkian & Cole (1981, 1996). (Those readers who wish
to examine techniques applicable to turning points, at this stage, are encouraged to
study Wasow (1965) and Holmes (1995); we will touch on these ideas in Chapter 4.)

104
2. Introductory applications
Finally, some examples of higher-order equations, which exhibit boundary-layer-type
solutions, are discussed in Smith (1985) and O’Malley (1991).
EXERCISES
Q2.1 Quadratic equations. Write down the exact roots of these quadratic equations,
where 
is a positive parameter.
Now, in each case, use the binomial expansion to obtain power-series repre-
sentations of these roots, valid for 
writing down the first three terms
for each root. (You may wish to investigate how these same expansions can be
derived directly from the original quadratic equations.)
Finally, obtain the corresponding power series which are valid for
Q2.2 Equations I. Find the first two terms in the asymptotic expansions of all the
real roots of these equations, for
Q2.3 Equations II. Repeat Q2.2 for these slightly more involved equations.
Q2.4 Kepler’s equation. A routine problem in celestial mechanics is to find the eccentric
anomaly, u, given both the eccentricity 
and the mean anomaly nt
(where t is time measured from where u = 0, and 
where P is the
period); u is then the solution of Kepler’s equation
(see e.g. Boccaletti & Pucacco, 1996). For many orbits (for example, most
planets in our solar system), the eccentricity is very small; find the first three
terms in the asymptotic solution for u as 
Confirm that your 3-term
expansion is uniformly valid for all nt.
Q2.5 Complex roots. Find the first two terms in the asymptotic expansions of all the
roots of these equations, for
(a)
(d)
(f)
(h)
(j)
(a)
(b)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(b)
(e)
(g)
(i)
(c)
(e)
(a)
(d)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(f)
(c)

105
Q2.6 Simple integrals. Obtain estimates for these integrals, for
by first finding
asymptotic expansions of the integrand for each relevant size of x, retaining
the first two terms in each case. (These integrals can be evaluated exactly,
so you may wish to check your results against the expansions of the exact values.)
Q2.7 More integrals. See Q2.6; repeat for these integrals (but here you are not
expected to have available the exact values).
Q2.8  An integral from thin aerofoil theory. An integral of the type that can appear in the
study of thin aerofoil theory (for the velocity components in the flow field) is
obtain the first terms in the asymptotic expansions of the integrand (for
with x away from the end-points, for each of: (a) 
away from x
and away from 
(b) 
(c) 
Hence find an
estimate for 
Repeat the calculations with 
and then with
for away from the end-points, and then with
respectively. Again, find
estimates for 
and for 
show that your asymptotic
approximations for 
satisfy the matching principle.
Q2.9 Regular expansions for differential equations. Find the first two terms in the
asymptotic expansions of the solutions of these equations, satisfying the given
boundary conditions. In each case you should use the asymptotic sequence
and you should confirm that your 2-term expansions are uniformly valid.
(You may wish to examine the nature of the general term, and hence produce
an argument that shows the uniform validity of the expansion to all orders in
(a)
(c)
(a)
(c)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(b)
for
for
(d)
(f)

106
2. Introductory applications
Q2.10 Eigenvalue problems. A standard problem in many branches of applied mathe-
matics and physics is to find the eigenvalues (and eigenfunctions) of appropriate
problems based on ordinary differential equations. In these examples, find the
first two terms in the asymptotic expansions of both the eigenvalues 
and
the eigenfunctions; for each use the asymptotic sequence
Q2.11 Breakdown of asymptotic solutions of differential equations. These ordinary differ-
ential equations define solutions on the domain 
with conditions
given on x = 1. In each case, find the first two terms in an asymptotic solution
valid for x = O(1) as 
which allows the application of the given
boundary condition(s). Show, in each case, that the resulting expansion is not
uniformly valid as 
find the breakdown, rescale and hence find the
first term in an asymptotic expansion valid near x = 0, matching as necessary.
Finally find, for each problem, the dominant asymptotic behaviour of
as
Q2.12 Another breakdown problem. See Q2.11; repeat for the problem
but show that, for a real solution to exist, the domain is 
where
and then find the dominant asymptotic behaviour of
as
Q2.13 Breakdown as
Find the first two terms in an asymptotic solution,
valid for x = O(1) as 
of
with 
Now show that this expansion
is not uniformly valid as
find the breakdown, rescale and find the first
two terms in an expansion valid for large x, matching as necessary. Show, also,
that this 2-term expansion breaks down for even larger x, but do not take the
analysis further.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

107
Q2.14
 Q2.15
Breakdown as 
II. See Q2.11 (a) and (c); for these equations and bound-
ary conditions, and the asymptotic solutions already found for x = O(l), take
the domain now to be 
Hence show that the expansions are not uni-
formly valid as
find the breakdown, rescale and then find the first
terms in the expansions valid for large x, matching as necessary.
Problem E 2.7 reconsidered. Find the first two terms in an asymptotic expansion,
valid for x = O(1) as 
of
with
Show that, formally, this requires
two matched expansions, but that the asymptotic solution obtained for x =
O(1) correctly recovers the solution for 
D i.e. it is uniformly valid. (Note
the balance of terms, when scaled near x = 0!)
Q2.16
Q2.17
Scaling of equations. See Q2.11 and Q2.14; use the dominant terms only, valid
for x = O(1), together with appropriate scalings associated with the relevant
balance of terms, to analyse these equations. Compare your results with the
scalings obtained from the breakdown of the asymptotic expansions.
Boundary-layer problems I. Find the first two terms in asymptotic expansions,
valid for x = O(1) (away from the boundary layer) as 
for each of
these equations, with the given boundary conditions. Then, for each, find
the first term in the boundary-layer solution, matching as necessary. (You
may wish to use your expansions to construct composite expansions valid for
D, to this order.)
Q2.18 Boundary-layer problems II. See Q2.17; repeat for these more involved equations.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

108
2. Introductory applications
Q2.19 Two boundary layers. The function 
is defined by the problem
with 
Find the first two terms in an asymptotic expan-
sion valid for x = O(1), as 
away from x = 0 and x = 1. Hence show
that, in this problem, boundary layers exist both near x = 0 and near x = 1,
and find the first term in each boundary-layer solution, matching as necessary.
Q2.20 A boundary layer within a thin layer. Consider the equation
for 
with 
Find the first terms in each of three
regions, two of which are near x = 0, matching as necessary. (Here, only the
inner-most region is a true boundary layer; the other is simply a scaled-thin-
connecting region.)
Q2.21 Boundary layers or transition layers? Decide if these equations, on the given
domains, possess solutions which may include boundary layers or transition
layers; give reasons for your conclusions.
Q2.22 Transition layer near a fixed point. In these problems, a transition layer exists at
a fixed point, independent of the boundary values. Find, for (a), the first two
terms, and for (b) the first term only, in an asymptotic expansion (as
valid away from the transition layer and the first term only of an expansion
valid in this layer; match your expansions as necessary.
Q2.23 Boundary layer or transition layer? (This example is based on the one which is
discussed carefully and extensively in Kevorkian & Cole, 1981 & 1996.) The
equation is
for 
and given 
Suppose that a
transition layer exists near
find the leading terms in the
asymptotic expansions valid outside the transition layer, and in the transition
layer. Hence deduce that a transition layer is required if and 
are of opposite
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)

109
sign and 
and then find the leading terms in all the relevant
regions for:
Q2.24 Transition layers and turning points. Consider the equation
introduce
and find a choice of 
which produces
an equation for 
in the form
and identify F. If F changes sign on the domain of the solution, then the point
where this occurs is called a turning point; find the equation that defines the
turning points in the case
Q2.25 Transition layer at a turning point. Consider the equation
find the position of the turning point and scale in the neighbourhood of the
transition layer. Write down the general solution, to leading order, valid in the
transition layer, as 
(This solution is best written in terms of Airy func-
tions. A uniformly valid solution is usually expressed using the WKB method;
see Chapter 4.)
Q2.26 Higher-order equations. For these problems, find the first terms only in asymptotic
expansions valid in each region of the solution, for
Q2.27 Vertical motion under gravity. Consider an object that is projected vertically up-
wards from the surface of a planetary body (or, rather, for example, from our
moon, because we will assume no atmosphere in this model). The height above
the surface is z(t), where t is time, and this function is a solution of
where R is the distance from the centre of mass of the body to the point
of projection, and g is the appropriate (constant) acceleration of gravity. (For
our moon, 
The initial conditions are
find the relevant solution in the form t = t(z) (and you
may assume that
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)

110
2. Introductory applications
(a)
(b)
Write your solution, and the differential equation, in terms of the non-
dimensional variables 
and introduce the
parameter 
Suppose that the limit of interest is 
(which
you may care to interpret); find the first two terms of an asymptotic ex-
pansion, valid for 
(in the form 
directly from the
governing equation. (You should compare this with the expansion of the
exact solution.) From your results, find approximations to the time to reach
the maximum height, the value of this height and the time to return to the
point of projection.
A better model, for motion through an atmosphere, is represented by the
equation
where 
is a constant. (This is only a rather crude model for air
resistance, but it has the considerable advantage that it is valid for both
and 
Non-dimensionalise this equation as in (a), and then write
Repeat
all the calculations in (a).
(c) Finally, in the special case 
(i.e. 
the escape speed), find
the first term in an asymptotic expansion valid as 
Now find the
equation for the second term and a particular integral of it. On the assump-
tion that the rest of the solution contributes only an exponentially decaying
solution, show that your expansion breaks down at large distances; rescale
and write down—do not solve—the equation valid in this new region.
Q2.28 Earth-moon-spaceship (1D). In this simple model for the passage of a spaceship
moving from the Earth to our moon, we assume that both these objects are fixed
in our chosen coordinate system, and that the trajectory is along the straight line
joining the two centres of mass. (More complete and accurate models will be
discussed in later exercises.) We take x(t) to be the distance measured along this
line from the Earth, and then Newton’s Law of Gravitation gives the equation
of motion as
where m is the mass of the spaceship, 
and 
the masses of the Earth
and Moon, respectively, G is the universal gravitational constant and d the
distance between the mass centres. Non-dimensionalise this equation, using d
as the distance scale and 
as the time scale, to give the non-
dimensional version of the equation (x and t now non-dimensional) as
where

111
where 
We will construct an asymptotic solution, for
as 
(The actual values, for the Earth and Moon, give
and a trajectory from surface to surface requires
approximately.) Write down a first integral of the equation.
(a) Find the first two terms in an asymptotic expansion valid for x = O(1),
by seeking 
(cf. Q2.27), and use the data 
as
and write
(Here, 
is the non-dimensional initial speed away from the Earth, 
is small
and the condition on k ensures that the spaceship reaches the
Moon, but not at such a high speed that it can escape to infinity.) Show that
this expansion breaks down as
(b) Seek a scaling of the governing equation in the neighbourhood of x = 1
by writing 
(which is consistent with the
solution obtained in (a), where the first term, 
provides the
dominant contribution at x = 1). Find the first term in an asymptotic ex-
pansion of 
match to your solution from (a) and hence determine
(Be warned that ln terms appear in this problem.)
Q2.29 Eigenvalues for a vibrating beam. The (linearised) problem of an elastic beam
clamped at each end is
for 
with 
where 
is the
eigenvalue (which arises from the time-dependence), and 
Young’s mod-
ulus. Find the first term in an asymptotic expansion of the eigenvalues. (This
problem can be solved exactly, and then the exponents expanded for
this is an alternative that could be explored.)
Q2.30 Heat transfer in 1D. An equation which describes heat transfer in the presence
of a one-dimensional, steady flow (Hanks, 1971) is
with temperature conditions 
Find the first two
terms in an asymptotic expansion, valid for x = O(1) as  
and the
leading term valid in the boundary layer, matching as necessary.
Q2.31 Self-gravitating annulus. A particular model for the study of planetary rings is
represented by the equation

112
2. Introductory applications
where 
and 
are constants, with the density,
satisfy-
ing 
(This example is based on the more general
equation given in Christodoulou & Narayan, 1992.) For 
(the narrow
annulus approximation), introduce 
and then write
the density as
find the first three terms in an asymptotic ex-
pansion for P. On the basis of this information, deduce that your expansion
would appear to be uniformly valid for
Q2.32 An elastic displacement problem. A simplified version of an equation which de-
scribes the displacement of a (weakly) nonlinear string, in the presence of
forcing, which rests on an elastic bed, is
where 
is a constant, with 
Find the first two terms in an
asymptotic expansion, for
and use this evidence to deduce that this
expansion would appear to be uniformly valid for
Laminar flow through a channel. A model for laminar flow through a channel
which has porous walls, through which suction occurs, can be reduced to
Q2.33
where 
is an arbitrary constant of integration, with
(This is taken from Proudman,
1960; see also Terrill & Shrestha, 1965, and McLeod in Segur, et al., 1991;
here, the stream function is proportional to the function 
and
1/(Reynolds’ Number).) Assume that A(0) exists and is non-zero, and then
find the first term in an asymptotic expansion for 
and for 
valid
for x = O(1), and then the first two terms valid in the boundary layer (the first
being simply the boundary value there).
Slider bearing. The pressure, p, within the fluid film of a slider bearing, based
on Reynolds’ equation, can be reduced to the equation
Q2.34
written in non-dimensional form; here, 
is a constant and 
is the
given (smooth) film thickness, with 
(and
Find the first two terms in an asymptotic expansion, for 
valid for
x = O(1), and then the first term only in the boundary layer, matching as
necessary. (The first term in the boundary layer can be written only in implicit
form, but this is sufficient to allow matching.)
An enzyme reaction. The concentration, 
of oxygen in an enzyme reaction
can be modelled by the equation
Q2.35

113
with 
where 
is a constant. The boundary conditions specify
the concentration on r = 1 and that the flux of oxygen must be zero at r = 0;
these are expressed as
(a) Find the size of the boundary layer near r = 1 (in the form
for suitable 
and hence show that
satisfies
(b)
where we have assumed that 
and 
as 
(which
is consistent with the equation).
From the result in (a), deduce that
is exponentially small as
for 1 – r = O(1), seek a solution (which is exponentially small) in terms
of the scaled variable 
and show that 
where
satisfies
Solve this equation, apply the relevant boundary condition, match and hence
show that
where
is a constant (independent of 
which should be identified.

This page intentionally left blank

3. FURTHER APPLICATIONS
The ideas and techniques developed in Chapter 2 have taken us beyond elementary
applications, and as far as some methods that enable us to construct (asymptotic)
solutions of a few types of ordinary differential equation. The aim now is to extend
these methods, in particular, to partial differential equations. The first reaction to this
proposal might be that the move from ordinary to partial differential equations is a very
big step—and it can certainly be argued thus if we compare the solutions, and methods
of solution, for these two categories of equation. However, in the context of singular
perturbation theory, this is a misleading position to adopt. Without doubt we must have
some skills in the methods of solution of partial differential equations (albeit usually in
a reduced, simplified form), but the fundamental ideas of singular perturbation theory
are essentially the same as those developed for ordinary differential equations. The only
adjustment, because the solution will now sit in a domain of two or more dimensions,
is that an appropriate scaling may apply, for example, in only one direction and not in
the others, or in time and not in space.
In this chapter we will examine some fairly straightforward problems that are repre-
sented by partial differential equations, starting with an example of a regular problem.
The approach that we adopt will emphasise how the methods for ordinary differential
equations carry over directly to partial differential equations. In addition, we will take
the opportunity to write a little more about more advanced aspects of the solution
of ordinary differential equations, in part as a preparation for the very powerful and
general methods introduced in Chapter 4.

116
3. Further applications
3.1
A REGULAR PROBLEM
A simple, classical problem in elementary fluid mechanics is that of uniform flow of an
incompressible, inviscid fluid past a circle. (This is taken as a two-dimensional model
for a circular cylinder placed in the uniform flow.) Represented as a complex potential
(w), the solution of this problem can be written as
where 
is the velocity potential, 
the stream function, U the constant speed of the
uniform flow (moving parallel to the x-axis) and a is the radius of the circle, centred
at the origin. In terms of complex potentials, this solution is constructed from the
potential for the uniform flow (Uz) and that for a dipole at the origin 
the
complex variable is 
Both 
and 
satisfy Laplace’s equation in two
dimensions:
and, if we elect to work with the stream function (as is usual), then we have
expressed in plane polar coordinates. We now formulate a variant of this problem:
uniform flow past a slightly distorted circle.
Let the distorted circle be represented by
where 
will be our small parameter; in terms of
the problem is to solve
(where subscripts denote partial derivatives) with
and
The condition (3.4) ensures that there is the prescribed uniform flow at infinity i.e.
as 
(see (3.1)), and (3.5) states that the surface of the distorted
circle is a streamline (designated 
of the flow. We see, immediately, that there

117
is a small complication here: 
is embedded in the second boundary condition, (3.5).
In order to use our familiar methods, we must first reformulate this condition.
We assume (and this must be checked at the conclusion of the calculation) that
on 
can be expanded as a Taylor series about r = a i.e.
Now the problem—albeit via a boundary condition—contains the parameter 
in
a form which suggests that we may seek a solution for 
based on the asymptotic
sequence 
Thus we write
and then
with
and from (3.6):
and so on. The problem for 
is precisely that for the undistorted circle, so
as given in (3.1).
The problem for
now becomes that of finding a solution of Laplace’s equa-
tion which satisfies
and 
as 
The most natural way to proceed is to represent 
as a
Fourier Series, and then a solution for 
follows directly by employing the method
of separation of variables. As a particularly simple example of this, let us suppose that
and so
the relevant solution is then

118
3. Further applications
and so we have
This two-term asymptotic expansion is clearly uniformly valid for 
and for
and it is also analytic in this domain, so the use of the Taylor expansion to generate
(3.6) is justified. It is left as an exercise (Q3.1) to find the next term in this asymp-
totic expansion and then to discuss further the validity of the expansion; it is indeed
uniformly valid. A few other examples of regular expansions obtained from problems
posed using partial differential equations can be found in Q3.2 and Q3.3.
This exercise has demonstrated that, as with analogous problems based on ordinary
differential equations, we may encounter asymptotic expansions that are essentially
uniformly valid i.e. the problem is regular. However, this is very much a rarity: most
problems that we meet, and that are of interest, turn out to be singular perturbation
problems. We now discuss this aspect, in the context of partial differential equations,
and highlight the two main types of non-uniformity that can arise.
3.2
SINGULAR PROBLEMS I
The most straightforward type of non-uniformity, as we have seen for ordinary differ-
ential equations, arises when the asymptotic expansion that has been obtained breaks
down and thereby leads to the introduction of a new, scaled variable. This situation is
typical of some wave propagation problems, for which an asymptotic expansion valid
near the initial data becomes non-uniform for later times/large distances. Indeed, the
general structure of such problems is readily characterised by an expansion of the form
where c is the speed of the wave and the functions f ,g and h are bounded (and typically
well-behaved, often decaying for 
However, for a solution defined
in 
(which is expected in wave problems), we clearly have a breakdown when
irrespective of the value (size) of (x – c t). Thus we would need to examine
the problem in the far-field, defined by the new variables 
(In this
example, we have used x – ct (c > 0) for right-running waves; correspondingly, for
left-running waves, we would work with x + ct.) We present an example of this type
of singular perturbation problem.
E3.1
Nonlinear, dispersive wave propagation
A model equation which describes small-amplitude, weakly dispersive water waves can
be written as

119
where we have again used subscripts to denote partial derivatives, and here the speed
(associated with the left side of the equation) is one. (This equation is usually called the
Boussinesq equation and it happens to be one of the equations that is completely integrable,
in the sense of soliton theory, for all
see johnson, 1997, and Drazin & Johnson,
1992.) Our intention is to find an asymptotic solution of (3.9), valid as 
subject
to the initial data
where
as
(and, further, all relevant derivatives of f(x) satisfy this
same requirement).
The equation for 
(where u is the amplitude of the wave), on using our
familiar ‘iteration’ argument, suggests that we may seek a solution in the form
for some xs (distance) and some ts (time). Thus we obtain from (3.9)
(where ‘= 0’ means zero to all orders in 
which gives
and so on. The initial data, (3.10), then requires
and
Equation (3.12a) is the classical wave equation with the general solution (d’Alembert’s
solution)
for arbitrary functions F and G; application of the initial data for 
(given in (3.13))
then produces
(We note, in this example, that the particular initial data which we have been given
produces a wave moving only to the right (with speed 1), at this order.)

120
3. Further applications
The equation for
(3.12b), is most conveniently written in terms of the characteristic
variables
so that we have the operator identities
Thus (3.12b) becomes
which can be integrated directly to give
where J and K are arbitrary functions. The initial data, (3.14), requires
and
or
where A is an arbitrary constant. These two equations enable us to find J and K as
hence the solution for 
becomes
where we have written 
For convenience, let us set
then we have the asymptotic solution (to this order):
This two-term asymptotic expansion, (3.17), contains terms f, H and 
all of
which are bounded and decay as their arguments approach infinity (because of our
given f(x)), and so there is no non-uniformity associated with these. However, if we

121
follow the right-going wave (by selecting any x – t = constant) then, as t increases
indefinitely, we will encounter a breakdown when 
This leads us to intro-
duce a new variable 
and otherwise we may use 
(because we are
following the right-running wave) and we observe that no scaling is associated with
this variable. Thus we transform from (x, t) variables (the near-field) to 
variables
(the far-field), i.e.
and so our original equation, (3.9), becomes
where
The nature of the appearance of 
in this equation is identical to the original
equation, suggesting that again we may seek a solution in the form
which gives
and so on. This equation can be integrated once in 
and, when we invoke decay
conditions at infinity (i.e. 
all 
as 
which mirrors our
given conditions on f(x)), we obtain
This equation is very different from our previous leading-order equation (in the near-
field) : that was simply the classical wave equation. Our dominant equation in the far-
field, (3.21), describes the time evolution of the wave in terms of the wave’s nonlinearity
and its dispersive character 
Equation (3.21) is a variant of the famous
Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation; its solutions, and method of solution, initiated
(from the late 1960s) the important studies in soliton theory. For solutions that decay as
it can be demonstrated that the later terms 
in the asymptotic expansion
contribute uniformly small corrections to 
as 
(This is a far-from-trivial
exercise and is not undertaken in this text; the interested reader who wishes to explore
this further should consult any good text on wave propagation e.g. Whitham, 1974.)
In summary, we have seen that this example (which we have worked through rather
carefully) describes a predominantly linear wave in the near-field (where t = O(1) or
smaller) but, for 
(the far-field), the wave is, to leading order, described
by a nonlinear equation. Equation (3.21) can be solved exactly and, further, we may

122
3. Further applications
impose initial data at 
in terms of matching (first term to first term), this is
equivalent to solving (3.21) with 
as 
(where F is a suitable arbitrary
function) and hence, for the right-going wave, we select 
and the solution
is uniformly valid for 
i.e. 
This uniform validity generated
by the far-field solution is an unlooked-for bonus, but it should be remembered that
the basic expansion (3.11) is not uniformly valid, and so we certainly have a singular
perturbation problem.
Other examples of wave propagation problems, which exhibit a breakdown and con-
sequent rescaling, are set as exercises in Q3.4–3.8. In addition, we present one further
example which embodies this same mathematical structure, but which is a little more
involved. However, this is a classical problem which should appear in any standard text
and, further, it has various different limits that are of practical interest (and some of
these will be discussed later; see also Q3.10 and Q3.11).
E3.2
Supersonic, thin-aerofoil theory
We consider irrotational, steady, supersonic flow of a compressible fluid past a (two-
dimensional) thin aerofoil. The equations of mass and momentum conservation can
be reduced to the single equation
where a is the local sound speed in the gas, and the velocity is
The corresponding energy equation (Bernoulli’s equation) is
where
and
as
and
is a constant describing the na-
ture of the gas: pressure 
(an isentropic gas). The aerofoil is described by
with 
where the upper/lower surfaces are
denoted by +/–. Using U and  
to non-dimensionalise the variables, eliminating
and then writing the resulting non-dimensional velocity potential as 
we
obtain
where 
is the Mach number of the oncoming flow from infinity. The
aerofoil is now written as 
(which defines 
for this problem)
and so 
ensures that we have a thin aerofoil. (Thus 
implies that there is
no aerofoil present, and then the non-dimensional velocity potential is simply x i.e.

123
everywhere.) The non-dimensional version of the physical configuration is
shown in figure 4. Finally, the boundary conditions are
and
where the first, (3.23), ensures that, upstream, we have only the given uniform flow
with 
and the second, (3.24), states that the surface of the aerofoil is
a streamline of the flow.
Equation (3.22), with 
and 
is predominantly a wave equation (but
here expressed in spatial variables, x and y); the form of this equation suggests that we
seek an asymptotic solution
and then we obtain
and so on. Correspondingly, the boundary conditions give
and
Figure 4. Sketch of the uniform flow (speed = 1, Mach number >1) past the aerofoil

124
3. Further applications
This second condition is rewritten as an evaluation on y = 0, by assuming that
possesses a Taylor expansion (cf. §3.1), so we now obtain
or
and so on. It is not possible to solve, in any simple compact way, for both the upper
and lower surfaces together (as will become clear), so we will consider only the upper
surface, 
(The problem for the lower surface follows a similar, but different,
construction.)
The general solution of equation (3.26), for the case of supersonic flow
is given by d’Alembert’s solution:
where 
and F and G are arbitrary functions. The contribution to the
solution from G, in the upper half-plane, extends into x < 0 and so, in order to satisfy
(3.23), we must have
(The contribution from F extends into x > 0 for y > 0.)
Condition (3.29a) (upper surface) now requires that
and so 
to within an arbitrary constant, which may be
ignored in the determination of a velocity potential (because such a constant cannot
contribute to the velocity field). Thus we have
in y > 0. (It will be noted that the corresponding problem in the lower half-plane
requires the retention of 
with
The solution of equation (3.27), for 
is approached in the same way that we
adopted for the similar exercise in E3.1: we introduce characteristic variables, which
here are 
With these variables, equation (3.27) becomes

125
for 
(where we have used our solution for 
and otherwise
which generates only the zero solution when the boundary conditions are applied. The
boundary conditions relevant to the solution of (3.31) are (from (3.28) and (3.29b))
and
because of the form of this latter boundary condition, it is a little more convenient to
find the asymptotic solution for 
(Of course, from this it is then possible to
deduce both 
and 
if these are required; see later.) From (3.31) we obtain directly
that
where J and K are arbitrary functions, and condition (3.32) then requires that
cf. the solution for 
The boundary condition (3.33) is satisfied if
and then we obtain directly (because we may use
(for 
where we have written 
The two-term asymptotic
expansion for 
is therefore
as 
for 
and
It is clear, for 
and 
bounded, that the expansion (3.35) breaks down where
—the far-field. (This same property is exhibited by the expansions for
and 
The assumption that we have 
and 
bounded (and correspondingly,
and 
for the lower surface), for
 
implies that these aerofoils are sharp
at both the leading and trailing edges—which is certainly what is aimed for in their
design and construction. However, if these edges are suitably magnified than it will
become evident that a real aerofoil must have rounded edges on some scale. This in turn
implies that stagnation points exist, where
and then the asymptotic
expansion, (3.35), certainly cannot be uniformly valid near to 
and 
even
for y = O(1): a boundary-layer-type structure is required near 
and near

126
3. Further applications
This, and other aspects of compressible flow past aerofoils, will be put to one side in
the current discussion (but some additional ideas are addressed in Q3.10 and 3.11).
Here, we will work with the mathematical model for the flow in which 
and
are bounded, so that the only non-uniformity arises as
The solution in the far-field is written in terms of the variables 
and
with 
Equation
(3.22) now becomes
where, for simplicity, we have written down only the leading terms on the right-hand
side of the equation. We seek a solution
and then 
satisfies the nonlinear equation
or
and note that 
The general solution for 
is
where H is an arbitrary function; solution (3.39) provides, for general H, an im-
plicit representation only for 
(which has far-reaching consequences, as we shall see
shortly).
We determine H by matching, and this is most easily done by matching 
and
—but for this we require the expansion of 
It is left as an exercise to show that,
from (3.35), we obtain
which gives

127
when we retain the O(1) term only. From (3.39), we find that
where we have retained the O(1) and
terms (and we have assumed that H possesses
a suitable Taylor expansion). These two expansions, (3.41) and (3.42), match precisely
when we select 
and then
We conclude this important example by making a few observations.
First, the behaviour of the far-field solution, (3.43), as 
recovers the near-
field solution, and so (to this order, at least) the far-field solution is uniformly valid in
(although our original expansion, (3.25), exhibits a singular behaviour). The
solution (3.43), as Y increases, can be completely described by the characteristic lines,
in the form
along which 
These lines are therefore straight, but not par-
allel; they first intersect for some 
(which depends on the details of the function
and then the solution becomes multi-valued in 
—which is unacceptable,
unless we revert to an integral form of equation (3.38) and then admit a discontinuous
solution. This discontinuity, at a distance 
from the surface of the aerofoil, man-
ifests itself in the physical world as heralding the formation of a shock wave. It should be
no surprise that the characteristic variable plays a significant rôle in the solution of this
wave-type (hyperbolic) equation; indeed, the results described here can be obtained by
seeking asymptotic expansions for these, rather than for the functions themselves (see
Q3.9). A final point, which embodies an important idea, is to note that the near-field
solution takes essentially the correct form (to leading order) even for the far-field, in
the sense that the solution 
is replaced by 
where 
is the
appropriate approximation to the characteristic variable. One way to interpret this is
to regard 
as the correct solution, but that it is in the ‘wrong place’ i.e. it
is not constant along lines 
but rather, along lines
We have seen, in these two somewhat routine examples, and the similar problems in
the exercises, how the simplest type of singular perturbation problem can arise. The
other fundamentally different problem that we may encounter, just as for ordinary
differential equations, is where the small parameter multiplies the highest derivative:

128
3. Further applications
the boundary- (or transition-) layer problem. We now turn to an examination of this
classical singular perturbation problem in the context of partial differential equations.
3.3
SINGULAR PROBLEMS II
There are two partial differential equation-types that are often encountered with small
parameters multiplying the highest derivative(s): the elliptic equation (e.g. Laplace’s
equation) and the parabolic equation (e.g. the heat conduction, or diffusion, equation).
These two, together with the wave equation (i.e. of hyperbolic type) discussed in §3.2,
complete the set of the three that constitutes the classification of second-order partial
differential equations. The two new equations are exemplified by
respectively. Of course, the use of singular perturbation methods to solve these partic-
ular examples is somewhat redundant, because we are able to solve them exactly (for
using standard techniques. Thus we will discuss two simple—but not completely
trivial—extensions of these basic equations.
E3.3
Laplace’s equation with nonlinearity
We are going to find an asymptotic solution, for 
of the equation
where u is prescribed on the boundary of the region. First, we will make a few general
observations about this problem and then obtain some of the details in a particular
case.
The appearance of in equation (3.44) suggests that we may seek a solution
which turns out to be consistent with the matching requirements to the boundary
layers; thus we obtain
and so on. Immediately we see that we can find 
which satisfies the given data
on x = 0 and x = a, but only in very special circumstances will this also satisfy the
data on y= 0 and y = b: the solution will (in general) require boundary layers near
y = 0 and near y = b. No such layers exist near x = 0 and x = a. All this follows
from the term 
the term 
simply contributes a (small) nonlinear adjustment

129
to the solution. To proceed, let us be given, as an example, the specific data:
and we will find the first two terms in the solution valid away from the boundary layer,
and then the first terms in each boundary-layer solution. From (3.46a), we obtain
where A and B are arbitrary functions; the available data, (3.47), requires that
The next term, 
satisfies (3.46b) with
Equation (3.46b) can be written
and so the solution for 
is
and we have the asymptotic solution
This two-term asymptotic expansion does not satisfy the given data on y = 0 or on
y = 1; thus we require (thin) layers near these two boundaries of the domain.
The first stage involves finding the size of the boundary layers; let us introduce
with 
as 
for the boundary layer near y = 0. Further, we note
that u = O(1) here and, of course, there is no scaling in x. Thus, with
equation (3.44) becomes
and so we have

130
3. Further applications
and we must choose 
or simply 
and then seek a solution
The matching condition, from (3.98), gives 
so
The simplest solution available  for       involves using the method of separation of variables
and so, noting the boundary value on y = 0, i.e. Y = 0, given in (3.48), we write
Thus we obtain
where C and D are arbitrary constants; a bounded solution valid away from the bound-
ary layer 
requires C = 0 and then 
as 
The condition on
Y  = 0 is then satisfied if we select D = 1, and therefore the solution in the boundary
layer near y = 0 is
Near y = 1, the boundary layer is clearly the same thickness, so here we write
and set 
to obtain the equation
cf. equation (3.50) with 
The matching condition this time, again from (3.98),
is
we seek a solution
where
with
The solution is obtained altogether routinely by writing
so that
with
with

131
which produces
where the constants 
are determined as the coefficients of the Fourier-series rep-
resentation of
this is left as an exercise. Thus the solution in the boundary
layer near y = 1 is
where the 
are known. This completes, for our purposes, the analysis of this
boundary-layer problem.
This example has admirably demonstrated, we submit, how the ideas of singular per-
turbation theory (here exhibited by the existence of boundary layers) developed for
ordinary differential equations, carry over directly to partial differential equations. The
boundary layers have been required in the y-direction, by virtue of the presence of the
parameter 
but not in the x-direction. Of course, the method of solution has required
some knowledge of the methods for solving partial differential equations, but that was
to be expected; otherwise no other complications have arisen in the calculations.
For our second example, we consider a physically-based problem: heat conduction,
and so the governing equation will now be parabolic.
E3.4
Heat transfer to fluid flowing through a pipe
We consider a circular pipe of radius r = 1 (we will describe this problem, from the
outset, in terms of non-dimensional variables), extending in a straight line in
the role played by the length of the pipe will be discussed later. Through the pipe
flows a fluid, with a known velocity profile represented by u = u(r), 
the
equation for the temperature, 
of the fluid is
where we have assumed no variation in the angular variable around the pipe. The non-
dimensional parameter, 
is proportional to the thermal conductivity of the fluid.
We seek a solution of equation (3.53), for 
subject to the boundary conditions
The fluid enters the pipe (at x = 0) with an initial temperature distribution 
and
the temperature of the pipe wall (r = 1) is prescribed along the pipe 
i.e. heat

132
3. Further applications
is transmitted to (or possibly lost by) the fluid as it flows along the pipe. (Note that,
in order to avoid a discontinuity in temperature at the start of the pipe—which is
not an essential requirement in the formulation of the problem—then we must have
Finally, observe that 
multiplies the highest derivative terms, so we
must expect a boundary-layer structure.
We will choose the velocity profile to be that associated with a laminar, viscous flow
i.e. 
and then we seek a solution
where we have been careful not to commit ourselves to the second term in this
asymptotic expansion. Thus we have, from (3.53),
when we invoke the boundary condition (3.54a); this solution is, apparently, valid for
all 
but (in general) it cannot possibly accommodate the boundary condition on
r = 1 in x > 0, (3.54b). This observation, together with the form of the governing
equation, (3.53), suggests that we need a boundary layer near r = 1; let us set
with 
as 
and write
Thus equation (3.53) becomes
and, as 
we must use the balance (using the ‘old’ term/‘new’ term concept):
which is satisfied by the choice 
and so we have
We seek a solution of this equation in the form
with 
and a matching condition for
Although it is possible to find the appropriate solution of (3.57), satisfying the given
boundary conditions, it is somewhat involved and we are likely to lose much of the
transparency of the results. Thus we will complete the solution in the special case:
constant wall temperature 
x > 0, 
and we will seek a solution
in x > 0, thereby ignoring the discontinuity that is evident as
so that

133
(This difficulty in the solution can be discussed separately—but not here—or the
discontinuity can be replaced by a smooth function that takes 
from 
at
Now, since
we must find a solution of (3.57), subject to
To proceed with the solution of this problem, we write 
and
so
this is solved very simply by introducing the similarity solution. Set
for some m, then we find directly that m = –1 /3 and
where A and a are arbitrary constants, and then all the boundary conditions are satisfied
by
Thus the solution in the boundary layer, R = O(1), is
in this special case. We have the first terms in each of the outer region (away from
the pipe wall) and the region close to the pipe wall (the boundary layer): (3.55b) and
(3.58), respectively.
We have completed all the detailed calculations that we will present, although we
make a few concluding comments that highlight some intriguing issues. First, knowing
the temperature in the fluid near the pipe wall enables us to find the heat transferred
to 
or from 
the fluid, if that is a property of particular interest.
Second, a more technical matter: what is the form of the solution in the outer region,
i.e. what terms in the asymptotic expansion must be present in order to match to
the boundary-layer solution? To answer this, we need to know the behaviour of the
boundary-layer solution as 
(because we have 
for 1 – r =
O(1) as 
For our similarity solution, (3.58), this can be obtained by using a

134
3. Further applications
Figure 5. Schematic of the boundary-layer region, which grows from the pipe wall, and the ‘fully
developed’ region for 
and larger.
suitable integration by parts:
Thus we will need to match to
for suitable functions 
and g(r, x). (It turns out that g satisfies a nonlinear, first
order partial differential equation, and that 
is governed by a linear, first order partial
differential equation, with coefficients dependent on g.) This result has particularly
dramatic consequences in the case 
for then the solution away from
the pipe wall is apparently exactly
However, the requirement to match
to the boundary-layer solution introduces an exponentially small correction to the
outer solution—and this is the sole effect of the presence of the different temperature
at the pipe wall, at least for x = O(1).
Finally, we address the problem-and there is one-associated with the length of the
pipe. As we have just commented (and we will relate all this only to the simple case of
the similarity solution with 
if the total length of the pipe is
as 
for x = O(l) and 1 – r = O(l). That is, the asymptotic expansion valid
away from the boundary layer must include the exponentially small term of the form

135
as measured in terms of 
then the flow away from the wall is t = 1, with only
exponentially small corrections. The boundary layer remains thin 
along
the full length of the pipe, but note that lines of constant temperature, emanating
from the neighbourhood of the wall, are the lines 
i.e.
Thus, defining the boundary-layer thickness in terms of a particular temperature, this
thickness increases as x increases, although it remains 
However,
if the pipe is so long that 
then the exponential term in (3.59) becomes
O(1), and the temperature now has an O(1) correction. In other words, the O(1)
temperature at the pipe wall has caused heat to be conducted through the fluid to
affect the whole pipe flow,
Indeed, we see that the scaling
in our
original equation, (3.53), balances dominant terms from both sides of the equation for
there is no longer a boundary layer at the wall; this is shown schematically
in figure 5.
The two examples presented above have shown how the notion of a boundary
layer, as developed for ordinary differential equations, is relevant to partial differen-
tial equations—and essentially without any adjustment to the method; some similar
examples can be found in exercises Q3.12–3.14. We have now seen the two basic
types of problem (breakdown and rescale; select a scaling relevant to a layer), although
the equations that we have introduced as the vehicles for these demonstrations—quite
deliberately—have been relatively uncomplicated. We conclude this section with an
example that, ultimately, possesses a simple perturbation structure (as in §3.2), but
which involves a set of four, coupled, nonlinear partial differential equations. As be-
fore, the purpose of the example is to exhibit the power (and inherent simplicity) of
the singular perturbation approach.
E3.5
Unsteady, one-dimensional flow of a viscous, compressible gas
The flow of a compressible gas, with temperature variations and viscosity, is described
by the equations
which are the equations of momentum, mass conservation, energy and state, respec-
tively. Here, 
is the coefficient of (Newtonian) viscosity, 
the thermal conductivity,
the gas constant and 
is associated with the isentropic-gas model (see E3.2); we
shall take all these parameters to be constant. Any movement of the gas is in the
direction—we use primes here to denote physical variables—with no variation in other

136
3. Further applications
directions, so any disturbance generated in the gas is assumed to propagate (and possibly
change) only in 
is time. The speed of the gas is 
and its pressure, density and
temperature are 
and 
respectively.
First, we suppose that the gas in its stationary 
undisturbed state is described
by
all constant. The gas is now disturbed, thereby producing a weak pressure wave (often
called an acoustic wave, although this is usually treated with temperature fixed); the size
of the initiating disturbance will be measured by the parameter 
We introduce
the sound speed, 
of the gas in its undisturbed state, defined by
and then we move to non-dimensional variables (without the primes) by writing
we let a typical or appropriate length scale (e.g. an average wave length) be 
and also
define
The governing equations, (3.60)–(3.63), therefore become
where the Reynolds Number is 
and the Prandtl Number is
with 
(Note that we have elected to define the speed in the defi-
nition of 
as 
which is proportional to the scale of the speed generated by the
disturbance; a suitable choice of 
is a crucial step in ensuring that we obtain the
limit of interest.)

137
We now seek a solution of the set of equations (3.65)–(3.68), for 
and 
fixed
as
 bywriting
where q (and correspondingly 
represents each of p, 
T and u. The first terms
in each of these asymptotic expansions satisfy the equations
which follow from (3.65)–(3.68), respectively. These equations then give
and then, selecting the right-going wave (for simplicity), we have
for some f(x) at t = 0. For a solution-set which recovers the undisturbed state for
we also have
However, our experience with hyperbolic problems (see §3.2)is that asymptotic ex-
pansions like (3.69) are not uniformly valid as t (or x) 
for x – t = O(1) i.e.
in the far-field. Let us investigate the result of the non-uniformity directly, without
examining the details of the breakdown (which is left as an exercise).
The variables that we choose to use in the far-field are
for each q, so we have the identities
equations (3.65)–(3.68) become (when we retain only those terms relevant to the
determination of the dominant contributions to each Q):

138
3. Further applications
where
Again we expand
for each Q; immediately we see that the leading-order terms satisfy
(cf. (3.71)), but these functions are otherwise unknown.
The terms 
are defined by the equations
from (3.72)–(3.75), respectively, and this last equation is used only to define 
The
first three equations involve the combinations of terms:
respectively, and so we may eliminate all of 
and 
between them, which we
do. The resulting single equation involving 
and 
is written in terms
of one function—     say—by using (3.77); this gives the leading term (for U) in the
far-field as the solution of
Thus 
is described by an equation in which the time 
of the
solution is controlled by both nonlinearity 
and dissipation 
cf. the

139
KdV equation, (3.21). Equation (3.78), like the KdV equation, is also an important
equation; it is the Burgers equation (Burgers, 1948) which can be solved exactly by
applying the Hopf-Cole transformation (Hopf, 1950; Cole, 1951) which transforms the
equation into the heat conduction (diffusion) equation. As with the corresponding
KdV problem (in E3.1), the matching condition is 
as 
and, for
suitable 
the asymptotic expansions (3.76) are uniformly valid as 
The
solution that we have obtained describes a weak pressure wave moving through the
near-field (t = O(1)) and, as t increases into the far-field, the wave-front steepens, but
this effect is eventually balanced by the diffusion (when
Finally the wave
will settle to some steady-state profile—a profile which is regarded as a model for a
shock wave in which the discontinuity is smoothed; see Q3.5.
This concludes all that we shall present here, as examples of fairly routine singular per-
turbation problems in the context of partial differential equations. Further ideas—very
powerful ideas—which are applicable to both ordinary and partial differential equa-
tions will be developed in the next chapter. We complete this chapter on some further
applications by examining two rather more sophisticated problems that involve ordinary
differential equations. The first employs the asymptotic expansion in a parameter in
order to study an important equation in the theory of ordinary differential equations:
Mathieu’s equation. The second develops a technique, which is an extension of one of
our earlier problems associated with wave propagation, that enables the asymptotic so-
lution of certain ordinary differential equations to be written in a particularly compact
and useful form—indeed, one that exhibits uniform validity when none appears to
exist.
3.4
FURTHER APPLICATIONS TO ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
The Mathieu equation, for x(t),
where 
and 
are constants, has a long and exalted history; it arose first in the work of
E-L. Mathieu (1835–1900) on the problem of vibrations of an elliptical membrane. It
also applies to the problem of the classical pendulum in which the pivot point is oscil-
lated along a vertical line, one result being that, for certain amplitudes and frequencies
of this oscillation (which corresponds to certain 
and 
the pendulum becomes
stable in the up position! It is also relevant to some problems in electromagnetic-wave
propagation (in a medium with a periodic structure), some electrical circuits with spe-
cial oscillatory properties and in celestial mechanics. The equation is conventionally
analysed using Floquet theory (see e.g. Ince, 1956) in which the solution
for 
in general, a complex constant, has y(t) periodic (with period 
or 
for
certain 
We will show how some of the properties of this equation are readily
accessible, at least in the case

140
3. Further applications
E3.6
Mathieu’s equation for
We consider the equation
where we use the over-dot to denote the derivative with respect to t; special curves
in the 
separate stable (oscillatory) from unstable (exponentially growing)
solutions: on these curves there exist both oscillatory and linearly growing solutions.
We will seek these curves in the case
First, with 
we obtain
which has periodic solutions, with period 
or 
only if 
(n = 0, 1, 2 ...)
although n = 0 might be thought an unimportant exceptional case. The form of the
equation suggests that we should seek a solution in the form
and invoke the requirement that each 
be periodic; each 
is a constant inde-
pendent of 
We will explore the cases n = 0 and n = 1 ( and the case n = 2 is left
as an exercise).
(a) Case n = 0
Equation (3.79), with (3.80a,b), becomes
where, as is our convention, ‘= 0’ means zero to all orders in 
Thus we have the
sequence of equations
and so on. The only periodic solution for
—and trivially so—is
which we will normalise to 
= 1. Then equation (3.81b) becomes
and the solution for 
which is periodic requires 
thus

141
where A is an arbitrary constant. Finally, from equation (3.81c), we obtain
which has a periodic solution for 
only if 
and so the method
proceeds. Thus the transitional curve in the 
along which a 
or
periodic solution exists, is
(b) Case n = 1
This time, although the general procedure is essentially the same, the appearance
of non-trivial periodic solutions at leading order complicates things somewhat.
Equation (3.79) now becomes
and thus we obtain the equations
and so on. The general solution of equation (3.83a) is simply
for arbitrary constants A and B; we may now proceed, collecting all terms pro-
portional to A, and correspondingly to B, but it is far easier (and more usual) to
treat these two sets of terms separately. Thus we select A = 1, B = 0, and A= 0,
B = 1; this will generate two transitional curves: one associated with
and one with 
which is the usual presentation adopted. Let us choose
then (3.83b) can be written
and a periodic solution for 
requires 
(because otherwise there would
be a term proportional to t 
therefore we obtain

142
3. Further applications
where C and D are arbitrary constants. Finally, from (3.83c), we have the equation
for which periodic solutions,
require 
(and D = 0). Thus, to this
order, the transitional curve for
it is left as an exercise to show that, with the choice
then
In summary, we have the stability boundaries given by
Set as an exercise, the case n = 2 can be found in exercise Q3.15. A corresponding cal-
culation to those described here, but now formulated in a way consistent with Floquet
theory, is set in Q3.16. More information about Mathieu equations and functions, and
their applications, is available in the excellent text: McLachlan (1964).
For our final discussion in this chapter, we will incorporate the idea introduced at
the end of E3.2, namely, a ‘correct’ solution in the ‘wrong place’, but applied here
to ordinary differential equations. We will describe the method of strained coordinates,
which has a long history; it was used first, in an explicit way, by Poincaré (1892), but
other authors had certainly been aware if the idea earlier, in one form or another.
Some authors refer to this as the PLK method after Poincaré, Lighthill (1949) and Kuo
(1953). The idea is exactly as mentioned above: the solution
(say), which is not uniformly valid, is made so by writing
where
is a suitably chosen strained coordinate. Of course, only relatively special
problems have solutions that possess this structure, but it is regarded as a significant
improvement—over matched expansions—when it occurs. Indeed, we have met a
problem of this type in Chapter 1: E1.1, our very first example. There we found that
a straightforward asymptotic expansion led to

143
(see equation (1.7)), but the use of the ‘strained’ coordinate
(see (1.8))
immediately removes the non-uniformity that is otherwise present as 
Further,
the leading term above (~ sin t) is essentially correct, but ‘in the wrong place’; if t is
replaced by 
then sin becomes a uniformly valid first approximation as 
We
will show how this method develops for a particular type of equation (first examined by
Lighthill, 1949 & 1961; similar examples have been discussed by Carrier, 1953 & 1954).
E3.7
An ordinary differential equation with a strained coordinate
asymptotic structure
We consider the problem
(and
possesses the property that it can be expanded uniformly for
as 
this is essentially the problem discussed by Lighthill (1949). The ideas are
satisfactorily presented in a special case (which leads to a more transparent calculation);
we choose to examine the problem with
where 
and 
are constants independent of 
Thus (3.84) and (3.85) become
We will start by seeking the conventional type of asymptotic solution, as
in the form
and then       satisfies
which produces the general solution
where A is an arbitrary constant. It is immediately clear that, with 
this solution
is not defined on x = 0, although we may use the boundary condition on x = 1,

144
3. Further applications
which we choose to do, to give:
The behaviour of 
is discussed in Q3.18, where it is shown that the
asymptotic expansion is not uniformly valid as 
it breaks down where
Here, we will approach the problem of finding a solution by introducing
a strained coordinate.
The strained coordinate, 
is defined by
which, if this expansion is uniformly valid on the domain in 
(that corresponds to
may be inverted to find
note that, if (3.89) is uniformly valid, then
for all x on the domain. The solution we seek is now written in terms of the
strained coordinate as
and the reason for using (3.89), rather than 
becomes evident when we
see that we transform of the original problem into functions of, and derivatives with
respect to, only 
Thus, with
the equation in (3.86) can be written
where, as in our previous convention, ‘= 0’ means zero to all orders in 
From equation
(3.91) we obtain
and so on. Because we have defined (3.89) with each 
the boundary condi-
tion on x = 1 becomes simply

145
The solution of (3.98), with (3.94), produces exactly the solution obtained earlier,
(3.88), but now expressed in terms of rather than x:
We now turn to the vexing issue of solving (3.93)—and it is vexing because this is one
equation in two unknown functions: 
and 
How do we proceed?
The aim of this new technique is to obtain a uniformly valid asymptotic expansion—
if that is at all possible—for 
1], although we have yet to determine
(which corresponds to x = 0). If there is to be any chance of success, then we must
remove any terms that generate non-uniformities in the asymptotic expansion for
from Q3.18, it is clear that the only such term here is 
i.e.
Thus we define 
so as to remove this term from the equation for 
it is
sufficient to remove such singular terms in any suitable manner, but if it is possible
to choose 
so as to leave an homogeneous equation for 
then this is the
usual move. (Other choices produce different asymptotic representations of the same
solution, but all equivalent to a given order in 
Here, therefore, we elect to write
the equation for 
as
An immediate response to this procedure is to observe that the term that causes all
the difficulty, 
has now appeared as a forcing term in the equation for 
—so
all we have succeeded in doing is moving the non-uniformity from one asymptotic
expansion to another! As we shall see, this is indeed the case, but the non-uniformity
in the expansion for the strained coordinate is not as severe as that in the expansion for
y. Before we address this critically important issue, we may note, from (3.97), that
where B is an arbitrary constant; but from (3.94) we see that we require B = 0 and so
Further, if this same strategy for selecting the equations for each 
is adopted,
then
for every n = 1, 2, ..., and the exact solution, in terms of 
becomes
It is typical of these problems that it is not necessary to solve completely the equations
for each 
it is sufficient to examine the nature of the solutions as 
Thus we
will employ the same approach as described in Q3.18. First, from (3.92), we substitute
leaving

146
3. Further applications
for 
into (3.96) and then cancel 
everywhere), to give
and then, for
this can be written
This is easily integrated to produce the solution
where the term involving the arbitrary constant of integration is suppressed because it
is less singular than the term retained. Thus the asymptotic expansion (3.89) becomes
which exhibits a breakdown where 
exactly as for (3.87) (see Q3.18)—
just what we most feared! But there is a very important difference here: the original
expansion broke down where
and we still required a solution valid on
x = 0; now we have a breakdown at 
but, because x = 0 corresponds
to
the burning question now is: are we allowed to use (3.99) with 
and
hence define 
The answer is quite surprising.
We have seen that
where 
is the constant 
it is fairly straightforward to show that
where the 
are constants bounded as 
Thus the asymptotic expansion (3.89),
for the strained coordinate, becomes
obtained directly from (3.99), we require
tobenosmaller  than
Of course,

147
and this series converges for
where 
is some constant independent of 
Hence the expansion converges for
—but 
is to be no smaller than 
which is larger
than 
Thus the asymptotic expansion with 
(which maps to
is not just uniformly valid—it is convergent! This is an altogether unlooked-
for bonus; the method of strained coordinates, in this example, has proved to be a very
significant improvement on our standard matched-expansions approach.
Some further examples that make use of a strained coordinate are set as exercises Q3.19–
3.25. Although our example, E3.7, has demonstrated, to the full, the advantages of the
strained coordinate method, not all problems are quite this successful. Many ordinary
differential equations of the type discussed in E3.7 do indeed possess convergent series
for the coordinate—so the complete solution is no longer simply asymptotic—but
other problems may produce a strained coordinate that is uniformly valid only (without
being convergent). In the exercises, the question of convergence is not explored (but,
of course, the interested and skilful reader may wish to investigate this aspect).
In this text, at this stage, we have introduced many of the ideas and techniques
of singular perturbation theory, and have applied them—in the main—to ordinary
and partial differential equations of various types. In the next chapter we present one
further technique for solving singular perturbation problems. This is a method which
subsumes most of what we have presented so far and is, probably, the single most
powerful approach that we have available. When this has been completed, we will
employ all our methods in the examination of a selection of examples taken from a
number of different scientific fields.
FURTHER READING
A few regular perturbation problems that are described by partial differential equations
are discussed in van Dyke (1964, 1975) and also in Hinch (1991). A discussion of wave
propagation and breakdown, and especially with reference to supersonic flow past thin
aerofoils, can be found in van Dyke (above), Kevorkian & Cole (1981, 1996) and in
Holmes (1995). Any good text on compressible fluid mechanics will cover these ideas,
and much more, for the interested reader; we can recommend Courant & Friedrichs
(1967), Ward (1955), Miles (1959), Hayes & Probstein (1966) and Cox & Crabtree
(1965), but there are many others to choose from. A nice collection of partial differential
equations that exhibit boundary-layer behaviour are presented in Holmes (1995). Most
of the standard texts that discuss more general aspects of singular perturbation theory
include Mathieu’s equation, and related problems, as examples; good, dedicated works
on ordinary differential equations will give a broad and general background to the

148
3. Further applications
Mathieu equation (such as Ince, 1956). A lot of detail, with analytical and numerical
results, including many applications, can be found in McLachlan (1964).
The method of strained coordinates is described quite extensively in van Dyke
(1964, 1975), Nayfeh (1973), Hinch (1991) and, with only slightly less emphasis, in
Kevorkian & Cole (1981, 1996).
EXERCISES
Q3.1 Flow past a distorted circle. Find the third term 
in the asymptotic expan-
sion, for 
 
of the problem described by
with
and
for
Hence write down the asymptotic solution to this order and observe that,
formally at least, there is a breakdown where 
Deduce that the
solution in the new scaled region is identical (to the appropriate order) to that
obtained for r = O(1), the only adjustment being the order in which the terms
appear in the asymptotic expansion (and so the expansion can be regarded as
regular). Use your results to find an approximation to the velocity components
on the surface of the distorted circle.
Q3.2 Weak shear flow past a circle. Cf. Q3.1; now we consider a flow with constant,
small vorticity past a circle. Let the flow at infinity be
which has the constant vorticity 
(in the 
the problem
is therefore to solve
with 
as 
and
Seek a solution
find the first two terms and,
on the basis of this evidence, show that this constitutes a two-term, uniformly
valid asymptotic expansion. Indeed, show that your two-term expansion is the
exact solution of the problem.
Q3.3 Potential function outside a distorted circle. (This is equivalent to finding the potential
outside a nearly circular, infinite cylinder.) We seek a solution, 
of the
problem
with

149
where 
Write 
find
and then determine 
in the case 
On the basis of this evi-
dence, confirm that you have a two-term, uniformly valid asymptotic expansion
in
Q3.4 The classical (model) Boussinesq equations for water waves. These equations are writ-
ten as the coupled pair
where 
is the horizontal velocity component in the flow,
 
the
surface displacement i.e. the surface wave, and 
is a constant independent of
Find the first terms in the asymptotic expansions
for x = O(1), t = O(1), as 
(the near-field). Then introduce
the far-field variables: 
for right-running waves, and hence
find the equations defining the leading order; show that the equation for u
takes the form
the Korteweg-de Vries equation.
Show that a solution of this equation is the solitary wave
where 
is a free parameter.
Q3.5 Long, small-amplitude waves with dissipation. A model for the propagation of long
waves, with some contribution from dissipation (damping), is
where 
and 
are positive constants independent of 
Follow the same
procedure as in Q3.4 (near-field then far-field, although here the right-going
characteristic will be 
Show that, in the far-field, the leading term,
for u (say), satisfies an equation of the form
the Burgers equation. Show that this equation has a steady-state shock-profile
solution
for suitable constants
C and 
(> 0), which should be identified. (This
solution is usually called the Taylor shock profile; Taylor, 1910.)

150
3. Further applications
Q3.6 A nonlinear wave equation. A wave is described by the equation
where 
Seek a solution (for right-running waves only) in the form
find the first two terms and demonstrate the existence of a breakdown when
Now introduce 
and show that the leading term
in the expansion valid for 
satisfies the equation
This calculation is now extended: define
and then determine f and g so that
where
satisfies (*) and 
satisfies the corresponding equation for left-going
waves. (You may assume that both f and g possess Taylor expansions about
x + t and x – t, respectively.)
Q3.7 A multi-wave speed equation. A particular wave profile, u(x, t; 
with 
as
is described by the equation
where
and c are constants (independent of  
Show that, if
then on the time scale 
the wave moving at speed 
and the wave
moving at speed 
each decay exponentially (in time), to leading order as
Show, also, that on the time scale 
the wave moving at speed
c has diffused a distance 
about the wave front and, to leading order,
it satisfies a Burgers equation (see Q3.5).
Q3.8 Water waves with weak nonlinearity, damping and dispersion. The propagation of a
one-dimensional wave on the surface of water can be modelled by the equations

151
where 
is the horizontal velocity component in the flow, and
is the surface wave; cf. Q3.4. Find the first terms in the near-field expansions
of 
and 
as 
and then obtain the equation for the leading term in
valid in the far-field 
You should consider only right-going
waves. (The equation that you obtain here is a Korteweg-de Vries-Burgers
(KVB) equation; see Johnson, 1997.)
Q3.9 Supersonic, thin-aerofoil theory: characteristic approach. The characteristics for equa-
tion (3.22) can be defined by the equation 
where 
is the
streamline direction (so that 
and 
is the inclination of
the characteristic relative to the streamline (so that tan 
where
M is the local Mach Number). Show that
and hence deduce that, on the characteristics,
Finally, since to leading order 
show that
Q3.10
and confirm that this is recovered from equation (3.39).
Thin aerofoil in a transonic flow. Show that the asymptotic expansion (3.35) is not
uniformly valid as
(a) Set 
write 
and 
and hence deduce that a
scaling consistent with equations (3.22) and (3.24) is
and that 
then satisfies, to leading order,
(b) Given that 
use the scaling in (a) to show that there is a
distinguished limit in which 
what now is the equation for
to leading order?
Q3.11 Thin aerofoil in a hypersonic flow. See (3.35); show that this expansion breaks
down as 
when 
Introduce 
leave x un-
scaled and write 
show that terms from both the left-
hand and right-hand sides of equation (3.22) are of the same order in the
case 
for a particular choice of 
What is the resulting

152
3. Further applications
leading-order equation for 
[This result can only give a flavour of how
things might proceed because, with 
strong shock waves most cer-
tainly appear and then a potential function does not exist. To investigate this
properly, we need to return to the original governing equations, without the
isentropic assumption.]
Q3.12 Asymmetrical bending of a pre-stressed annular plate. The lateral displacement,
of a plate is described by the equation (written in non-dimensional
variables)
and 
corresponds to weak bending rigidity. The annular plate is defined
by 
with the boundary conditions
where 
is a constant independent of 
Seek a solution
find the equation for u and then find the first two terms in each of
the asymptotic expansions of
as 
valid away from the boundaries
of the region, and in the two boundary layers (near 
Match your
expansions as necessary. [For more details, see Nayfeh, 1973.]
Q3.13 A nonlinear elliptic equation. The function 
satisfies the equation
and it is defined in 
The boundary conditions are
Use the asymptotic sequence 
and hence obtain the first two terms
in the asymptotic expansion valid away from the boundaries x = 0 and y = 0;
this solution is valid on y = 1. Now find the first term only in the asymptotic
expansion valid in the boundary layer near y = 0, having first found the size
of the layer; match as necessary. Repeat this procedure for the boundary layer
near x = 0 and show that, to leading order, no such layer is required. However,
deduce that one is needed to accommodate the boundary condition at
Write the solution in this boundary layer as
(written in appropriate variables) and formulate the problem for the leading
term in the asymptotic expansion for V, but do not solve for V.

153
Q3.14 The steady temperature distribution in a square plate. The temperature,
in a plate is described by the heat conduction equation (written in non-
dimensional variables)
where the plate is 
with the temperature on the boundary
given by
and
Seek the first term of a composite expansion by writing
where 
is the relevant boundary-layer variable. Determine
completely 
and 
and then show that
Q3.15
where
Mathieu’s equation for n = 2. See E3.6; find the asymptotic expansion of 
as
far as the term 
in the case n = 2 (and there will be two versions of this,
depending on the choice of either sin or cos).
Q3.16 Mathieu’s equation based on Floquet theory. Write the Mathieu equation
as an equation in 
by setting 
where 
is a
constant;
is periodic with period
or
(Note that the transitional
curves are now 
Seek a solution
in the case n = 1; because we now have 
the solution will be that which
is valid near the transitional curves. Show that
where 
is a free parameter.

154
3. Further applications
Q3.17 A particular Hill equation. (Hill’s equation is a generalisation of the Mathieu
equation.) Consider the equation
where 
is a constant independent of 
seek a solution
Q3.18
where the 
are independent of
Impose the condition that 
and 
are
to be periodic; what condition(s) must 
and   satisfy?
Matched expansion applied to E3.7. Consider
with
(and 
constants independent of 
Find the equation for the
second term of the expansion, 
and from this deduce that
this can be done by first approximating the equation for
before integrating
it—see the method leading to equation (3.96). Hence show that the asymptotic
expansion for 
breaks down where 
rescale x and y in
the neighbourhood of x = 0, and then find and solve the equation describing
the dominant term in this region (matching as necessary). What is the behaviour
of 
as 
based on your solution?
Q3.19 A strained-coordinate problem I. (This is a problem introduced by Carrier, 1953.)
Find an asymptotic solution of
as
in the form
Find 
and 
use your solution to find the dominant behaviour of
where 
(You may assume that the asymptotic expansion of
the coordinate is uniformly valid on
Q3.20 A strained-coordinate problem II. See Q3.19; follow the same procedure for the
problem
as
Use your results to show that

155
Q3.21 A strained-coordinate problem III. See Q3.20; follow this same procedure for
as 
Show that 
as 
where 
is the appro-
priate solution of the equation 
(which does possess one real
root).
Q3.22 A strained-coordinate problem IV. See Q3.19; follow this same procedure for the
problem
as 
(You may observe that this problem can be solved exactly.)
Q3.23 A strained coordinate problem V. See Q3.19; follow this same procedure for the
problem
as 
If the boundary condition had been 
with the same
domain, briefly investigate the nature of this new problem.
Q3.24Duffing’s equation. The equation for the motion of a simple pendulum, without
the approximation for small angles of swing, takes the form
If x is small, and we retain terms as far as 
we obtain an equation like
this is Duffing’s equation (Duffing, 1918) which was introduced to improve the
approximation for the simple pendulum (without the complications of working
with sin x). Seek a solution of this equation, for 
and
by using a strained-coordinate formulation:
where the 
are constants. Determine the solution as far as terms in
choosing each 
in order to ensure that the solution is periodic.

156
3. Further applications
Q3.25 Weakly nonlinear wave propagation. A wave motion is described by the equation
with
(which ensures, certainly to leading order, that we have only a right-going
wave). Seek a solution in the form
and hence find the solution correct at

4. THE METHOD OF MULTIPLE SCALES
The final stage in our presentation of the essential tools that constitute singular per-
turbation theory is to provide a description of the method of multiple scales, arguably the
most important and powerful technique at our disposal. The idea, as the title implies,
is to introduce a number of different scales, each one (measured in terms of the small
parameter) associated with some property of the solution. For example, one scale might
be that which governs an underlying oscillation and another the scale on which the
amplitude evolves (as in amplitude modulation). Indeed, this type of problem is the most
natural one with which to start; we will explore a particularly simple example and
use this as a vehicle to present the salient features of the method. However, before we
embark on this, one word of warning: this process necessarily transforms all differen-
tial equations into partial differential equations—even ordinary differential equations!
This could well cause some anxiety, but the comforting news is that the underlying
mathematical problem is no more difficult to solve. So, for example, an ordinary dif-
ferential equation, subjected to this procedure, involves an integration method that
is essentially unaltered; the only adjustment is simply that arbitrary constants become
arbitrary functions of all the other variables.
4.1
NEARLY LINEAR OSCILLATIONS
We will show how these ideas emerge in this class of relatively simple problems; indeed,
we start with an example for which an exact solution exists. Let us consider the linear,

158
4. The method of multiple scales
Figure 6. (a) Upper figure is a plot of the function 
for 
with
(b) Lower figure is a plot of the function 
for 
with
damped oscillator which is governed by
with
where 
This problem can be solved exactly (and having the solution available
will help initiate the discussion); the solution is
where the ‘e’ subscript denotes ‘exact solution’. This solution represents an oscillation,
with a fixed period, and with an amplitude which decays exponentially, albeit slowly.
(This type of solution is depicted in figure 6a, and another function with a different
modulation is shown in figure 6b.) Now this solution, (4.2), has three important
characteristics: first, it is an oscillation controlled by 
(usually called the
fast scale); second, the amplitude decays slowly according to 
(usually called
the slow scale); third, even if we express the solution in terms of T and 
it will still
require an asymptotic expansion, as 
by virtue of the factor 
in the
denominator. Any construction of an asymptotic solution directly from (4.1) must
accommodate all these elements.

159
Figure 7. Sketch of the 
with the line 
included.
The appearance of two time scales in (4.2) is quite clear: T (fast) and
 (slow), so
we could write the solution as
The underlying idea in the method of multiple scales is to formulate the original problem
in terms of these two scales from the outset and then to treat
function of two variables; this will lead to a partial differential equation for X. Clearly,
T and 
are not independent variables—they are both proportional to t—so we have,
apparently, a significant mathematical inconsistency. How, therefore, do we proceed
with any confidence? The method and philosophy are surprisingly straightforward.
We seek an asymptotic solution for 
as 
as a function with its
domain in 2-space; this is certainly more general than in the original formulation.
The aim is to obtain a uniformly valid expansion in 
and 
This will,
typically, require us to invoke periodicity (and boundedness) in T, and boundedness
(and uniformity) in 
If we are able to construct such an asymptotic solution, it will
be valid throughout the quadrant 
in 
Because the solution is
valid in this region, it will be valid along any and every path that we may wish to follow
in this region; in particular, it will be valid along the line 
which
is the statement that T and
are suitably related to t. This important interpretation
is represented in figure 7, and this idea is at the heart of all multiple-scale techniques.
We will now apply this method to (4.1), presented as a formal example.

160
4. The method of multiple scales
E4.1
A linear, damped oscillator
Given
with
we introduce
where the 
are constants, and write
where each 
is to be periodic in T and, we hope, uniformly valid as 
and as
(Note that the choice of T, in (4.5), follows exactly the pattern of a strained
coordinate; cf. Q3.24.) From (4.5) we obtain the operator identity
and so equation (4.3) becomes
where, as usual, ‘= 0’ means zero to all orders in 
When we insert (4.6) for X, we
obtain the sequence of equations

161
and so on. The initial conditions, (4.4), become
which give
et cetera. It is now a very straightforward exercise to solve each of these problems, in
sequence.
The general solution of (4.7a) is
although it is rather more convenient to write this as
where 
and 
are arbitrary functions; we require, from (4.8),
which we satisfy by selecting
The equation for 
(4.7b), can now be written
where, for simplicity, we have written 
But for 
to be periodic
in T, all terms on the right-hand side, in 
and 
must vanish (for otherwise
we will generate particular integrals for 
like 
this removal of
secular (i.e. non-periodic) terms requires
The solution of (4.11a) and then (4.11b), with (4.10), gives directly

162
4. The method of multiple scales
leaving
Thus, at this stage, we have the asymptotic solution
but 
and 
are, as yet, unknown. Before we proceed to examine the
equation for 
it is instructive to note, in (4.13), that the oscillatory component of
the solution depends on
Thus, at this order, 
vanishes identically and so we may just as well set 
this
is the usual simplification that is adopted in these problems. The reason for this redun-
dancy readily becomes clear: in the definition of the fast scale, the term 
could be
written 
and then subsumed into the general 
of the solution. Thus
to set 
from the outset is permitted.
The equation for 
from (4.7c) and with 
becomes
where 
to make plain all the terms (sin T, cos T) which generate
secular behaviour, we further write this as
Thus 
is periodic in T if
with initial conditions (from (4.48))
and so

163
Equation (4.15) can be written
where 
is an arbitrary constant; but (4.16) then requires
Equation (4.14) can be written in a similar fashion:
and it follows that the solution for 
will contain a term 
unless
We must make this choice in order to avoid a non-uniformity as
(because this
second term in the asymptotic expansion will grow like 
relative to the first). Thus
we are left with
and hence, noting (4.17), we have 
(and the arbitrary 
is now unim-
portant). Thus we have the solution
where 
this should be compared with the expansion of the exact
solution, (4.2).
We have used this example to introduce and illustrate all the essential features of the
technique. It should be clear that the transformation from an ordinary to a partial
differential equation does not introduce any undue complications in the method of
solution. We do see that we must impose periodicity and uniformity at each order, and
that this produces conditions that uniquely describe the solution at the previous order.
Indeed, the removal of terms that generate secularities is fundamental to the approach.
Further, as we have seen, suitable freedom in the choice of the fast scale enables non-
uniformities also to be removed. The only remaining question, at least in the context
of ordinary differential equations, is how the method fares when the equation cannot
be solved exactly (so we have no simple guide to the form of solution, as we did above).
We explore this aspect via another example.
E4.2
A Duffing equation with damping
We consider the problem
with

164
4. The method of multiple scales
where 
and 
is a constant independent of  
cf. Q3.24. We seek an
asymptotic solution in the form
where
and note that we have omitted the term 
in accordance with our earlier observa-
tion. Equation (4.18) becomes
which gives the sequence of equations
and so on. The initial conditions, (4.19), become
as far as terms 
The solution to (4.20a), with (4.21) and (4.22), is
The problem for 
can be written
where
with

165
The function 
is periodic in T only if
thus, with (4.23), we obtain
(Note that, if we allow 
then 
and 
which corresponds to
the results obtained in Q3.24; the change of sign in 
is because here the leading
term involves cos rather than sin.) This leaves the solution of (4.24) as
with
The analysis of equation (4.20c), for 
follows the same pattern (and see
also E4.1), but here the details are considerably more involved; we will not pur-
sue this calculation any further (for we learn nothing of significance, other than to
show that 
which is left as an exercise). The solution, to this order, is
therefore
Other examples based on small adjustments to the equation for a linear oscillator can
be found in exercises Q4.1–4.9. It might be anticipated, in the context of oscilla-
tors governed by ordinary differential equations, that the method of multiple scales
is successful only if the underlying problem is a linear oscillation i.e. controlled by an
equation such as 
this would be false. In an important extension of these
techniques, Kuzmak (1959) showed that they work equally well when the oscillator
is predominantly nonlinear. Of course, the fundamental oscillation will no longer be
represented by functions like sin or cos, but by functions that are solutions of nonlinear
equations e.g. the Jacobian elliptic functions.
4.2
NONLINEAR OSCILLATORS
Equations such as
possess solutions that can be expressed in terms of sn, cn or dn, for example. (In the
Appendix we present all the basic information about these functions that is necessary for

166
4. The method of multiple scales
the calculations that we describe.) We discuss an example, taken from Kuzmak (1959),
which exemplifies this technique.
E4.3
A nonlinear oscillator with slowly varying coefficients
We consider the problem
for 
together with some suitable initial data; this is a Duffing equation with
slowly varying coefficients. The equation clearly implies that the slow scale should be
but what do we use for the fast scale? Here, we define a general form of fast
scale, T, by
where 
is to be determined, and the period of the oscillation in T is defined
to be a constant—an essential requirement in the application of multiple scales in
this problem. (In some more involved problems, it might be necessary to introduce
Equation (4.27) is transformed according to
which gives, with
and we seek a solution
where each 
is periodic in T. (The boundedness and uniform validity, that we aim
for as 
will depend on the particular 
we will assume that these
functions allow this.) Now (4.30) in (4.29) yields the sequence of equations
as far as 
Note that, although the first equation—for 
—is necessarily
nonlinear, all equations thereafter are linear.

167
An exact solution of equation (4.31) is
where
(The confirmation of this, using the properties given in the Appendix, is left as an
exercise.) Here, 
is a constant (to ensure that the period in T is a constant which,
with the chosen form (4.33), is 1). Given 
and 
equations (4.34a,b) provide
two equations for the three unknown functions: 
and 
A third equation
is obtained by imposing periodicity on
The task of solving (4.32) is not as difficult as it might appear; the important ma-
noeuvre is to write
and then to solve for 
Equation (4.32), with (4.35), gives
but from (4.31) we also have that
and so (4.36) becomes, after multiplication by
Now, for 
to be periodic with period 1, 
must be similarly periodic
(because 
is, in (4.35)). Thus we must have, for any T,
which can be written
which is our third relation. When (4.33) is used in (4.37), the integration is possible
(but this does require some additional skills with, and knowledge of, elliptic functions
and integrals; see e.g. Byrd & Friedman, 1971), to give

168
4. The method of multiple scales
initial data will determine both this constant and 
Then, for known and suitable
and 
equations (4.34a,b) and (4.38) enable the complete description of the
first term in the asymptotic expansion (4.30).
This example has demonstrated that we are not restricted to nearly-linear oscillations,
although we must accept that mathematical intricacies, and the required mathematical
skills, are rather more extensive here than in the two previous examples. In addition,
problems of this type, because they are strongly nonlinear, often force us to address other
difficulties: we have used a periodicity condition, (4.37), but this fails if the solution
is not periodic—and this can happen. If the solution evolves so that 
then the
periodicity is lost because the period becomes infinite in this limit. In this situation, it
is necessary to match the solution for m = 1 to the periodic solution approximated as
an example of this procedure can be found in Johnson (1970). Some additional
material related to this topic is available in Q4.10 & 4.11.
4.3
APPLICATIONS TO CLASSICAL ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
The method of multiple scales is particularly useful in the analysis of certain types of
ordinary differential equation which incorporate a suitable small parameter. We will dis-
cuss three such problems, the first of which we have already encountered: the Mathieu
equation(§3.4 and E3.6). The next two involve a discussion of a particular class of
problems—associated with the presence or absence of turning points (see §2.8)—with
a solution-technique usually referred to as WKB (or, sometimes, WKBJ); we will write
more of this later.
The Mathieu equation, discussed in §3.4 is
to which we will apply the method of multiple scales. However, before we undertake
this, we need to know what the fast and slow scales should be; this requires a little care.
Let us consider the equation with 
(fixed independent of
then we could select 
The equation for 
becomes
In general, we find that each 
has a particular integral proportional to
  unless 
and then we have particular integrals that grow
in t. This condition will occur for 
and so the critical values of are
(n = 0, 1, 2 ...). From these points on the 
will emanate the transitional curves,

169
in the 
which separate purely oscillatory from exponentially growing so-
lutions; see 
Further, for any given n, the asymptotic expansion will take the
form
and so we should then use the slow scale 
We note that the fast scale can be
taken simply as t. With these points in mind, we consider an example in some detail.
E4.4
Mathieu’s equation (n = 1) for
We use the method of multiple scales for the equation
with 
thus we have the case n = 1 and so we introduce the scales
Equation (4.39), with 
then becomes
where 
has been expanded in the usual way, and then we seek a solution
thus we generate the sequence of equations
and so on.
Equation (4.41a) has the general solution
and then (4.41b) can be written

170
4. The method of multiple scales
Thus a solution for 
which is periodic in T requires
which possess the general solution
where 
and 
are arbitrary—possibly complex which then requires
the complex conjugate to be included—constants. We see that
(a)
(b)
(c)
if 
then 
and 
are oscillatory and so 
is oscillatory in
both T and
if
then there exists a solution which grows exponentially;
if
then (see (4.42)) one of 
or 
is constant and the other grows
linearly.
The method of multiple scales has enabled us, albeit in the limit 
to describe
all the essential features of solutions of Mathieu’s equation, and how these change as
the parameters select different positions and regions in 
The corresponding
problem for n = 2 is discussed in Q4.12, and related exercises are given in Q4.13 &
4.14.
We now turn to an important class of problems that are exemplified by the equation
(cf. Q2.24)
where 
is given. In the simplest problem of this type, 
takes one sign
throughout the given domain (D) i.e. a > 0 (oscillatory) or a < 0 (exponential). A
more involved situation arises if a changes sign in the domain: a turning-point problem
(see Q2.24). The intention here is to examine the solution of the equation in the case
so that, for 
the coefficient is slowly varying. We use the
method of multiple scales to analyse this problem and hence give a presentation of the
technique usually referred to as ‘WKB’. (This is after Wentzel, 1926; Kramers, 1926;
Brillouin, 1926, although the essential idea can be traced back to Liouville and Green.
Some authors extend the label to WKBJ, to include Jeffreys, 1924.) We will formulate
an oscillatory problem 
and use this example to describe the WKB approach.
E4.5
WKB method for a slowly-varying oscillation
We consider

171
with 
for
and with suitable initial conditions. The most natural
and convenient formulation of the multiple-scale problem follows E4.3: we introduce
and seek a solution
Equation (4.44) becomes
and, in this first exercise, we will not expand 
(but see Q4.15). Thus (4.45) leads to
the sequence of equations
for the O(1) and 
problems.
To solve (4.46a), we first select 
and then obtain the general solution
where 
and
are arbitrary functions. (Other choices of  
lead to a formulation in
terms of 
but then the period will depend on 
which leads to additional non-
uniformities—see E4.6—unless 
is constant; we have made the simplest choice of
this constant.) The equation for 
now becomes
where we have written
The solution for  
is periodic in T, i.e. in
if
and so
So, for example, if we are given the initial data 
then we have

172
4. The method of multiple scales
and a solution (with T = 0 at 
say), expressed in terms of 
is
This describes a fast oscillation (by virtue of the factor 
with a slow evolution of the
amplitude; these are the salient features of a WKB(J) solution. (Note that a property
of this solution is 
which is usually called ‘action’; typically, energy
and so 
is conserved—not the energy itself.)
The problem of finding higher-order terms in the WKB solution is addressed in Q4.15,
and the corresponding problem with 
is discussed in Q4.16, and
an interesting associated problem is discussed in Q4.17. We now consider the case of
a turning point.
It is apparent that the solution (4.47) is not valid if 
which is the case at a
turning point. In (4.43), we will write 
with 
throughout
the domain D, and analytic (to the extent that 
may be written as a uniformly
valid asymptotic expansion, as 
for 
This choice of 
has a
single (simple) turning point at x = 0; a turning point elsewhere can always be moved
to x = 0 by a suitable origin shift. The intention is to find a solution valid near the
turning point and then, away from this region, use the WKB method in x < 0 and
in x > 0. Thus the turning-point solution is to be inserted between the two WKB
solutions and, presumably, matched appropriately. We will present all these ideas, using
the method of multiple scales valid as 
in the following example.
E4.6 A turning-point problem
We consider
where both 
and 
are positive, O(1) constants, 
and analytic for
and 
The turning point is at x = 0, and the first issue is to decide
what scales to use in the neighbourhood of this point; this has already been addressed
in 
Let us write
(and any scaling on y is redundant, in so far as the
governing equation is concerned, because the equation, (4.48), is linear) to give
and so a balance of terms is possible if 
i.e. 
fast scale. The
slow scale is simply 
However, a more convenient choice of the fast variable

173
(cf. §2.7)is
where h ( X ) > 0 is to be determined; then we have the operator identity
Finally, before we use this to transform equation (4.48), we need to decide how to
replace x in the coefficient 
in equation (4.48): should we use Z or X or both?
Now the important property of the fast scale, (4.49), is that it is zero at the turning
point; thus we elect to write any part of a coefficient which has this same property
in terms of Z, and otherwise use X. With this in mind, we use (4.49) and (4.50) in
(4.48) and then, with 
we obtain
where, for simplicity, we have written
We seek a (bounded) solution in the form
and hence we obtain the sequence of equations
and so on.
The bounded solution of (4.52a) can be expressed in terms of the Airy function, Ai
(see e.g. Abramowitz & Stegun, 1964). At this stage, however, we have not yet made
a suitable choice for h(X); let us choose
and then we have

174
4. The method of multiple scales
This solution is oscillatory for Z > 0 and exponentially decaying for Z < 0; in par-
ticular
and
The equation for  now becomes
and a particular integral of this equation is necessarily proportional to ZAi(Z), which
immediately leads to a non-uniformity in 
Thus we
mustselect
it is left as an exercise to show that, if we had written
then another non-uniformity would be present unless  k = constant, and we have
already set k = 1. We alluded to this difficulty at the end of E4.5. Finally, the leading-
order solution will be completely determined once we have found h(X) (introduced
in (4.49)).
From (4.53) and (4.51), we have the equation
we consider the case X > 0, then it is convenient to write
This is
and so
which gives (with the appropriate choice of sign)

175
with X > 0 and h ( X ) > 0. (It follows directly from this result that
The case X < 0, where the corresponding choice is G(X) = –Xh(X), is left as an
exercise; you should find that 
as 
a continuous h ( X ) can
be defined.
In order to complete the calculation, we require the solution in X > 0 and in
X < 0, away from the neighbourhood of the turning point. Following E4.5 we have,
for X > 0 and writing
where 
and 
and 
are arbitrary constants (because we will not impose any
particular conditions at 
For X < 0 (see Q4.16) we obtain
for a bounded solution (as 
and with 
(Re-
member that, since the original equation, (4.48), is second order, only two boundary
conditions may be independently assigned.)
The solution in the neighbourhood of the turning point is
where G(X ) is given by (4.55) and 
is an arbitrary constant. The final task is therefore
to match (4.57) with (4.56a,b). First, in Z < 0, X < 0, we have (from (4.57) and
(4.54b))
From (4.56b) we have

176
4. The method of multiple scales
where we have used (4.55) (and note that 
thus matching occurs if we
choose
For Z > 0, X > 0, from (4.57) and (4.54a), we have
from (4.56a) we obtain
which also matches if we choose
The matching conditions are usually called, in this context, connection formulae: they
‘connect’ the solutions on either side of the turning point i.e. the relation between
and 
Here, we have three relations between the four constants 
and
so only one is free; that only one occurs here is because, of the two (independent)
boundary conditions that we may prescribe, one has been fixed by seeking a bounded
solution in X < 0 i.e. the exponentially growing solution has already been excluded.
A number of other examples of turning-point problems are offered in the exercises;
see Q4.18–4.21. This completes all that we will write about the routine applications to
ordinary differential equations; we now take a brief look at how these same techniques
are relevant to the study of partial differential equations.
4.4
APPLICATIONS TO PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
It is no accident that we will discuss partial differential equations which are associated
with wave propagation; this type of equation is analogous to oscillatory solutions of
ordinary differential equations. (These two categories of equations are the most natural
vehicles for the method of multiple scales, although others are certainly possible.) In
particular we will start with an equation that has become a classical example of its type:
Bretherton’s model equation for the weak, nonlinear interaction of dispersive waves
(Bretherton, 1964).

177
E4.7
Bretherton’s equation
The equation that we will discuss is
where 
is defined in 
and 
we will further assume that
we have suitable initial data for the type of solution that we seek. The aim is to produce
a solution, via the method of multiple scales, for 
First we observe that, with
there is a solution
where, given k (the wave number),
(the frequency) is defined by the dispersion relation:
The presence of the parameter, 
together with a naïve asymptotic solution (generating
terms proportional to 
or 
suggests that we must expect changes on the slow
scales 
and 
The fast scale is defined in much the same way that we adopted for
E4.3 and E4.5; thus we write
The solution now sits in a domain in 3-space, defined by
A solution described by these variables will have the property that
both the wave number and the frequency slowly evolve. (Note that the correct form of
the solution with 
is recovered if k = constant and 
The retention
of the parameter in the definitions of k and 
allows us to treat these functions as
asymptotic expansions, if that is useful and relevant; often this is unnecessary.
From (4.61) we have the operator identities
and also
etc., as far as 
It is sufficient, for the results that we present here, to
transform equation (4.58) but retain terms no smaller than 
thus, with

178
4. The method of multiple scales
we obtain
Before we proceed with the details, we should make an important observation. The
transform, (4.61), defining the fast scale 
(usually called the phase in these problems),
implies a consistency condition that must exist if 
is a twice-differentiable function,
namely
this additional equation is called the conservation of waves (or of wave crests), and it
arises quite naturally from an elementary argument. Consider (one-dimensional) waves
entering and leaving the region 
the number of waves, per unit time, crossing
into the region is given as 
and the number leaving, across x, we will write as
The total number of waves (wave crests) between 
and x is 
if the number of
waves does not change (which is what is typically observed, even if they change shape)
then
or, upon allowing differentiation with respect to x,
which immediately recovers (4.63) if the dependence on (x, t) is via (X, T).
Returning to equation (4.62), we seek a solution
with
and then we obtain the sequence of equations

179
and so on. We will take the solution of (4.65) to be (cf. (4.59))
and this requires
The equation for 
(4.66), will include terms generated by 
which involve
or
—and all these must be removed if 
is to be periodic. The terms in
give
and those in
leaving
The two equations, (4.69) and (4.70), which ensure the removal of secular terms,
look rather daunting, but quite a lot can be done with them. However, we first need
to introduce two familiar properties of a propagating wave. One is the speed at which
the underlying wave—the carrier wave—travels, usually called the phase speed. This is
defined as the speed at which lines
 move i.e. lines such that
so
The other—and for us, the far more significant—property is the speed at which the
energy propagates (and therefore, for example, the speed at which the amplitude
modulation moves); this is defined as 
the group speed. From our result
in (4.68), we have

180
4. The method of multiple scales
Equation (4.70), after multiplication by 
can be written as
or
which describes the property 
(the wave action; see E4.5) propagating at the group
speed, 
and evolving by virtue of the non-zero right-hand side of this equation.
Similarly, equation (4.69) can be written first as
and if we elect to write 
then (4.61) and (4.64) allow us to interpret
and 
and then we obtain
Thus the correction to the phase, 
also propagates at the group speed and evolves.
Finally, from (4.63), and noting that (4.68) (or (4.72)) implies 
we obtain
the wave number (and, correspondingly, the frequency) propagate unchanged at the
group speed. (The initial data will include the specification of
This example has demonstrated that the method of multiple scales can be used to
analyse appropriate partial differential equations, even if we had to tease out the details
by introducing, in particular, the group speed. A related exercise can be found in
Q4.22.
In our analysis of Bretherton’s equation, we worked—not surprisingly—with real-
valued functions throughout i.e. 
There is, sometimes, an advantage in working
within a complex-valued framework e.g. 
complex conjugate. We will use this
approach in the next example, but also take note of the general structure that is evident
in E4.7.
E4.8
A wave profile,
satisfies the equation
A nonlinear wave equation: the NLS equation

181
where 
In this problem we seek a solution which depends on x  –  c t (here,
c is the phase speed), on 
is the group speed) and on t (time). We expect
that the dependence on 
is slow i.e. in the form 
but we will allow
an even slower time dependence; we define
although we have yet to determine c and 
With 
and
(4.74), equation (4.73) becomes
and we seek a solution
with
‘cc’ denotes the complex conjugate. This solution represents a primary
harmonic wave 
together with appropriate higher harmonics (the number
of which depends on 
i.e. on the hierarchy of nonlinear interactions). The wave
number of the primary wave, k, is given and real; 
X and T are real (of course), but
each 
is complex-valued. We will assume that c and 
are independent of
First we use (4.76a) in (4.75) to give the sequence of equations
as far as the 
terms. The solution of (4.77a) is given in the form
(see (4.76b)), and so we-require
which defines the phase speed; at this stage 
is unknown. Equation (4.77b), for
now becomes

182
4. The method of multiple scales
with the given form of solution
which requires
with 
(and 
still arbitrary. (We note that
and that, with
we have 
so 
the classical result for group speed.)
The final stage is to find the solution—or, at least, the relevant part of the solution—
of equation (4.77c). The usual aim in such calculations is to find, completely, the first
term in (we hope) a uniformly valid asymptotic expansion. In this case we have yet
to find
 
(although we know both c (k) and 
the determination of
arises from the terms 
in equation (4.77c). We will find just this one term; the rest
of the solution for 
is left as an exercise, the essential requirement being to check
that there are no inconsistencies that appear as 
is determined. These terms, 
in
(4.77c) give the equation
where the over-bar denotes the complex conjugate. When the earlier results are in-
corporated here, we find the equation for
This equation, (4.79), is a Nonlinear Schrödinger (NLS) equation, another of the ex-
tremely important exactly-integrable equations within the framework of soliton theory;
see Drazin & Johnson (1992). Thus we have a complete description of the first term
in the asymptotic expansion (4.76a,b):
where 
is a solution of (4.78) and both c (k) and 
are known.
We should comment that, because of the particular form of solution that we have
constructed in this example, it is appropriate only for certain types of initial data.
Thus, from (4.80), we see that, at t = 0, we must have an initial wave-profile that is
predominantly a harmonic wave, but one that admits a slow amplitude modulation i.e.

183
Any initial conditions that do not conform to this pattern would require a different
asymptotic, and multi-scale, structure. Other examples that correspond to E4.8 are set
as exercises Q4.23–4.26; see also Q4.27.
Before we describe one last general application of the method of multiple scales—
perhaps a rather surprising one—we note a particular limitation on the method.
4.5
A LIMITATION ON THE USE OF THE METHOD OF MULTIPLE SCALES
The foregoing examples that have shown how to generate asymptotic solutions of par-
tial differential equations appear reasonably routine and highly successful. However,
there is an underlying problem that is not immediately evident and which cannot be
ignored. In the context of wave propagation, which is the most common application
of this technique to partial differential equations, we encounter difficulties if the pre-
dominant solution is a non-dispersive wave i.e. waves with different wave number (k)
all travel at the same speed. To see how this difficulty can arise, we will examine an
example which is close to that introduced in E4.8.
E4.9
Dispersive/non-dispersive wave propagation
We consider the equation (cf. (4.73))
where 
is a given constant and
we seek a solution in the form
where
The equation then becomes
and we look for a solution periodic in 
in the form of a harmonic wave:
where 
all this follows the procedure described in E4.8.
Here, we find that
but 
is yet to be determined. At the next order, the equation for 
can be written

184
4. The method of multiple scales
and so we require
It is immediately evident that we have a non-uniformity as 
From (4.82) we see
that 
corresponds to a non-dispersive wave i.e. c = ±1 for all wave numbers, k.
When we set 
in (4.83), and use 
no solution exists, although for any
no complications arise and we may proceed.
This failure is not to be regarded as fatal: for the assumed initial data (the harmonic
wave), or any other reasonable initial conditions, an asymptotic solution (with
can be found by the method of strained coordinates. For a wave problem, as we have
seen (e.g. Q3.25), this simply requires a suitable representation of the characteristic
variables. Nevertheless, in the most extreme cases, when the method of multiple scales
is still deemed to be the best approach, the resulting asymptotic solution may not be
uniformly valid as T (or 
in our discussion of ordinary differential equations)
Typically, the multiple-scale solution will be valid for T (or
no larger than O(1),
but this is usually an improvement on the validity of a straightforward asymptotic
expansion.
4.6
BOUNDARY-LAYER PROBLEMS
The examples that we have discussed so far involve, usually with a rather straightforward
physical interpretation, the slow evolution or development of an underlying solution.
Boundary-layer problems (see §2.6–2.8), on the other hand, might appear not to possess
this structure. Such problems have different—but matched—solutions away from, and
near to, a boundary. However, the solution of such problems expressed as a composite
expansion (see §1.10) exhibits precisely the multiple-scale structure: a fast scale which
describes the solution in the boundary layer, and a slow scale describing the solution
elsewhere. We will demonstrate the details of this procedure by considering again our
standard boundary-layer-type problem given in equation (2.63) (and see also (1.16)).
E4.10
A boundary-layer problem
We consider
with 
where 
and 
are constants independent of
and 
The boundary-layer variable for this problem (see (2.66)) is
and so we write 
which leads to equation (4.84)

185
written in the form
with
Note the appearance of the evaluation on 
which may cause some anxiety; we
will now address this issue. To see the consequences of this, and before we write down
the complete asymptotic expansion, it is instructive first to solve for 
i.e.
with the boundary conditions
This second condition involves 
and to accommodate such terms the asymptotic
expansion must include them; thus we seek an asymptotic solution
and evaluation on 
is now no longer an embarrassment.
The sequence of equations, generated by using (4.87) in (4.85), starts
The general solution of (4.88a) is
and then we may write (4.88b) as
which itself has the general solution
We seek a solution which is uniformly valid for 
and 
but this
latter implies 
thus we require, for uniformity,

186
4. The method of multiple scales
The boundary conditions, at this order, give
and so we have the solutions
which completely determines the first term of the asymptotic expansion:
as given in equation (2.76). The other terms in the expansion follow directly by im-
posing uniformity at each order; the terms 
for 
are used to remove the ex-
ponentially small contributions 
that appear in the boundary condition on x = 1.
The method of multiple scales is therefore equally valid, and beneficial, for the analysis
of boundary-layer problems. However, the example that we have presented is particu-
larly straightforward (and, of course, we have available the exact solution). We conclude
this chapter by applying the method to a more testing example (taken from Q2.17(a)).
E4.11
A nonlinear boundary-layer problem
We consider the problem
with 
for 
The slow scale is clearly x, but for the fast
scale we will use the most general formulation of the boundary-layer variable; see §2.7.
Thus we introduce
and then we write 
so that equation (4.89) becomes
with
The terms that are exponentially small on x = 1, as 
are 
and so we
seek a solution

187
The first two equations in the sequence, obtained by using (4.91) in (4.90), are
and (4.92a) has the general solution
with
Equation (4.92b) can then be written
which has the general solution
A solution that is uniformly valid as 
requires
and so, incorporating the boundary conditions, (4.94), we readily obtain
Combining this with (4.93), we have the first term of a uniformly valid representation
of the solution:
which should be compared with the solution obtained in Q2.17(a).

188
4. The method of multiple scales
Now that we have seen the method of multiple scales applied to boundary-layer prob-
lems, it should be evident that this provides the simplest and most direct approach
to the solution of this type of problem. Not only do we avoid the need to match—
although, of course, the correct selection of fast and slow variables is essential—but
we also generate a composite expansion directly, which may be used as the basis for
numerical or graphical representations of the solution. Further examples are given in
exercises Q4.28–4.35.
This concludes our presentation of the method of multiple scales, and is the last
technique that we shall describe. In the final chapter, the plan is to work through a
number of examples taken from various branches of the mathematical, physical and
related sciences, grouped by subject area. These, we hope, will show how our various
techniques are relevant and important. It is to be hoped that those readers with interests
in particular fields will find something to excite their curiosity and to point the way
to the solution of problems that might otherwise appear intractable.
FURTHER READING
Most of the texts that we have mentioned earlier discuss the method of multiple scales,
to a greater or a lesser extent. Two texts, in particular, give a good overview of the
subject: Nayfeh (1973), in which a number of problems are investigated in many dif-
ferent ways (including variants of the method of multiple scales), and Kevorkian &
Cole (1996) which provides an up-to-date and wide-ranging discussion. The appli-
cations to ordinary differential equations are nicely presented in both Smith (1985)
and O’Malley (1991), where a lot of technical detail is included, as well as a careful
discussion of asymptotic correctness. Holmes (1995) provides an excellent account of
both the method of multiple scales and the WKB method. This latter is also discussed
in Wasow (1965) and in Eckhaus (1979). Finally, an excellent introduction to the rôle
of asymptotic methods in the analysis of oscillations (mainly those that are nonlinear)
can be found in Bogoliubov & Mitropolsky (1961)—an older text, but a classic that
can be highly recommended (even though it does not possess an index!).
EXERCISES
Q4.1 Nearly linear oscillator I. A weakly nonlinear oscillator is described by the equation
where a (> 0) is a constant (independent of and 
the initial conditions
are
Use the method of multiple scales to find, completely, the first term in a
uniformly valid asymptotic expansion. (It is sufficient to use the time scales
T = t and 
Explain why your solution fails if a < 0.

189
Q4.2 Nearly linear oscillator II. See Q4.1; repeat this for the problem
with
Q4.3 Nearly linear oscillator III. See Q4.1; repeat this for the problem
where 
(> 0) is a constant (independent of 
and 
is an integrable
function; the initial condition is 
What condition must 
satisfy
if, on the basis of the evidence of your two-term expansion, the asymptotic
expansion is to be uniformly valid?
[Hint: remember that the general solution of
where
is an arbitrary constant.]
Q4.4 A nearly linear oscillator with forcing. See Q4.1; repeat this for the problem
where 
and 
are constants, both independent of 
Find the general form
of the first term, given that 
Explain the consequences
of (a) 
(b) 
Also, write down the equations defining the slow
evolution of the solution in the cases: (c) 
(d) 
(See Q4.7,
4.8 for more details.)
Q4.5 A slowly varying linear oscillator. A damped, linear oscillator is described by the
equation
with 
and 
Obtain the complete description of the (general)
first term of a uniformly valid asymptotic expansion, for which you should use
the fast scale defined by 
(and the slow scale is
Q4.6 A coupled oscillatory system. An oscillation is described by the pair of equations
with 
and the initial conditions are 
Introduce
and 
use the method of multiple scales
and find, completely, the first term of a uniformly valid asymptotic expansions.

190
4. The method of multiple scales
Also, from the equations that define the third term in the expansions, show
that the solution is uniformly valid (as 
only if
Q4.7 Forcing near resonance I. Consider an oscillation described by a Duffing equation
with (weak) forcing:
with 
is the given frequency of the forcing and the initial condi-
tions are 
Given that
(where 
is
a constant independent of 
find the equation which describes completely the
first term of a uniformly valid asymptotic expansion. [Hint: write the forcing
term as 
where 
are the fast/slow scales, respectively.]
Q4.8 Forcing near resonance II. See Q4.7; repeat this for 
in the equa-
tion
(see Q4.4), where 
is a constant independent of (and note the appearance of
subharmonics).
Q4.9 Failure of the method of multiple scales. An oscillator is described by the equation
with 
Introduce 
and 
(with 
and
analyse as far as the term at 
which ensures the complete description
of the solution as far as 
Show that a uniformly valid solution cannot be
obtained using this approach. (You may wish to investigate why this happens
by examining the energy integral for the motion.)
Q4.10 Nonlinear oscillation I. A (fully) nonlinear oscillation is described by the equation
with 
Show that a solution with
is x = a cn[4K(m)t; m] for a
suitable relation between a and m. Now use the method of multiple scales,
with the scales T (where 
and 
to find the first term of
an asymptotic expansion which is periodic in T. (The periodicity condition
should be written as an integral, but this does not need to be evaluated.)
Q4.11 Nonlinear oscillation II. See Q4.10; follow this same procedure for the equation
where a solution with 
can be written 
for
suitable a, b and m.

Q4.12 Mathieu’s equation for n = 2. See E4.4; consider Mathieu’s equation
191
with 
(which is the case n = 2). Introduce T = t and
show that 
and find the equation for the 
term in the asymptotic
expansion for x; from this, deduce that the exponent which describes the
amplitude modulation (cf. E4.4) is
What is the nature of the solution of this Mathieu equation, for various
(These results should be compared with those obtained in Q3.15.)
Q4.13 A particular Hill equation. See Q4.12; follow this same procedure for the Hill
equation
where 
is a fixed constant (independent of 
and 
for
Show that 
and that the leading term is periodic in T and
only if
where 
are to be identified. (These results should be compared with those
obtained in Q3.17.)
Q4.14 Mathieu’s equation away from critical 
See Q4.12; consider Mathieu’s equa-
tion, but now with 
away from the critical values: set
n = 0, 1, 2,..) and fixed independent of 
Introduce 
with
and 
and find the solution correct at 
(You should
note the singularities, for various 
that are evident here.)
Q4.15 WKB: higher-order terms. See E4.5; consider the equation
with 
introduce 
and write
Show that
and then expand both 
Determine
and
in terms of  
and the constant 
(which is independent

192
4. The method of multiple scales
of 
(This procedure is a very neat way to obtain higher-order terms in the
WKB approach.)
Q4.16 WKB (exponential case). Consider the equation
where 
for 
and 
Introduce 
and
and hence find, completely, the first term of a uniformly valid asymp-
totic expansion (which will be the counterpart of equation (4.47)).
Q4.17 Eigenvalues. Use the method of multiple scales, in the WKB form, to find the
leading approximation to the eigenvalues 
of the problem
with 
and a > 0 for 
(You should in-
troduce 
and 
Evaluate your results, explicitly,
for the cases: (a) 
(b) a (X) = 1 + X. [Written in the form
it is evident that this is the problem of find-
ing approximations to the large eigenvalues.]
Q4.18 A turning-point problem I. Consider
where 
with f > 0 and analytic throughout the given domain.
Show that the relevant scaling (cf. §2.7) in the neighbourhood of the turning
point (at x = 1) is 
and then introduce the more useful fast
scale 
and use x as the slow scale. Show that
where 
= constant and Ai(X) is the
(bounded) Airy function (a solution of 
Determine h(x) and
write down the first term of the asymptotic expansion of
Q4.19 A turning-point problem II. Show that the equation
where 
and 
has turning points at x = 0 and at x = 1. [Hint:
write 
Use the WKB approach (for 
to find the first term
in each of the asymptotic expansions valid in x < 0 , 0 < x < 1, x > 1. Also
write down the leading term in the asymptotic expansions valid near x = 0
and near x = 1.
Q4.20 A higher-order turning-point. Show that the equation

193
with 
and f > 0 throughout the given domain, has a turning point
at x = 0. Find the equation that, on an appropriate fast scale (X ), describes
the solution near x = 0 (as 
Show that this equation has solutions
which can be written in terms of Bessel functions: 
for suitable
and v.
Q4.21 Schrödinger’s equation for high energy. The time-independent, one-dimensional
Schrödinger equation for a simple-harmonic-oscillator potential can be
written
where E (= constant) is the total energy. Let us write 
and
define 
to give
this equation has turning points at 
and we require exponentially de-
caying solutions as
(and oscillatory solutions exist for
Find the leading term in each of the regions, match (and thus develop ap-
propriate connection formulae) and show that the eigenvalues (E) satisfy
where n is a large integer. (This problem can be solved
exactly, using Hermite functions; it turns out that our asymptotic evaluation of
E is exact for all n.)
Q4.22 A weakly nonlinear wave. A wave is described by the equation
where 
Introduce
and derive the equations that completely describe the leading-order solution
which is uniformly valid. (Do not solve your equation for
Q4.23 A weakly nonlinear wave: NLS I. A wave is described by the equation
with
Introduce 
(where c (k)
and
are independent of
and seek a solution

194
4. The method of multiple scales
where
Determine c (k) and
(and confirm that
satisfies the
usual condition for the group speed) and find the equation for
Q4.24 A weakly nonlinear wave: NLS II. See Q4.23; repeat all this for the equation
Q4.25 A weakly nonlinear wave: NLS III. See Q4.23; repeat all this for the equation
Q4.26 Kd V 
NLS. Consider the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation
where 
is a parameter. Introduce 
and
(and here 
and 
will be corrections to the original c and
because the given KdV equation has already been written in a suitable moving
frame). Seek a solution
where 
find c(k),
and the equation for 
(This
example demonstrates that an underlying structure of the KdV equation is
an NLS (Nonlinear Schrödinger) equation; indeed, it can be shown that, in
the context of water waves, for example, the relevant NLS equation for that
problem matches to this NLS equation—see Johnson, 1997.)
Q4.27 Ray theory. A wave (moving in two dimensions) slowly evolves, on the scale
so that
where
show that
(a)
where
and
(b)
(the eikonal equation);
(c)
(so the vector k is ‘irrotational’).
(Given that the energy in the wave motion is E(X, Y, T), it can be shown
that 
where 
All this is the basis for ray
theory, or the theory of geometrical optics, which is used to describe the properties
of waves that move through a slowly changing environment.)
Q4.28 Boundary-layer problem I. Use the method of multiple scales to find, completely,
the first term of a uniformly valid asymptotic expansion of the solution of
where

195
Q4.29 Boundary-layer problem II. See Q4.28; repeat this for the problem
with
Q4.30 Boundary-layer problem III. See Q4.28; repeat this for the problem
with
Q4.31 Boundary-layer problem IV. See Q4.28; repeat this for the problem
with
Q4.32 Boundary-layer problem V. See Q4.28; repeat this for the problem
with
Q4.33 Heat transfer problem. See Q4.28; repeat this for the heat transfer problem
(as given in Q2.30)
with
[Take care!]
Q4.34 A more general boundary-layer problem. See Q4.28; repeat this for the problem
where
is a given integer, with the boundary conditions
Q4.35 Two boundary layers. See Q4.28; repeat this for the problem
with
but note that two fast scales are
required here, to accommodate the two boundary layers—one near x = 0 and
the other near x = 1.

This page intentionally left blank

5. SOME WORKED EXAMPLES ARISING FROM PHYSICAL PROBLEMS
In this final chapter, the aim is to present a number of worked examples where most
of the details are given explicitly; what little is left undone may be completed by the
interested reader (although no formal exercises are offered). Also, we will not dwell
upon the purely technical aspects of finding the solution of a particular differential
equation. These examples are taken from, or based on, texts and papers that introduce,
describe, develop, explain and solve practical problems in various fields; references to
appropriate source material will be included. Most have arisen—not surprisingly—
from the physical sciences, but we have attempted to provide a fairly broad spread of
topics. Each problem is described with sufficient detail (we hope) to enable it to be
put into context, although it would be quite impossible to include all the background
ideas for those altogether unfamiliar with the particular field. To this end, the prob-
lems are collected under various headings (such as ‘mechanical & electrical systems,
‘semiconductors’ or ‘chemical & biological reactions’) and so the reader with particular
interests might turn to specific ones first. Nevertheless, the hope is that every problem
is accessible, as an example in singular perturbation theory, to those who have followed
this (or any other suitable) text. The technique adopted to construct the asymptotic
solution will be mentioned, and a reference will be given to a relevant section or
example from the earlier chapters of this text.
A number of the examples and exercises that have already been discussed have been
taken from various important applications; in some cases, those presented in this chap-
ter build on and expand these earlier problems. The reader should be aware, therefore,

198
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
that the relevant calculations in the previous chapters may need to be rehearsed before
embarking on some of the new material presented here. In each group of problems,
every example will be labelled by a suitable name, and the full list of these will appear
in the preamble to that group. The titles of the groups are: 5.1 Mechanical & elec-
trical systems; 5.2 Celestial mechanics; 5.3 Physics of particles & light; 5.4 Semi- and
superconductors; 5.5 Fluid mechanics; 5.6 Extreme thermal processes; 5.7 Chemical &
biochemical reactions. These chosen headings are intended simply to provide a general
guide to the reader; there is no doubt that some examples could be placed in a different
group—or appear in more than one group. Further, many other examples could have
been included (and the author apologises if your favourite has been omitted); the in-
tention in a text such as this is to give only a flavour of what is possible. Nevertheless, it
is hoped that sufficient information is available to encourage the interested researcher
to appreciate the power of the techniques that we have described.
Although the physical basis for each problem will be outlined, the relevant non-
dimensional, scaled equations will usually be the starting point for the analysis. There is
little to be gained by presenting the original physical problem, in all its detail, together
with the non-dimensionalisation, et cetera, if only because of the requirement, for
example, to define all the physical variables in every problem. Further, the reasonable
limitation on space also precludes this. The interested reader should be able to fill in
the details, particularly with the aid of the original reference(s).
5.1
MECHANICAL & ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
The examples collected under this heading are based on fairly simple mechanical or
physical principles; more advanced and specific topics (such as celestial mechanics)
which might have appeared in this group are considered separately. The examples to
be discussed are: E5.1 Projectile motion with small drag; E5.2 Child’s swing; E5.3
Meniscus on a circular tube; E5.4 Drilling by laser; E5.5 The van der Pol/Rayleigh
oscillator; E5.6 A diode oscillator with a current pump; E5.7 A Klein-Gordon equa-
tion.
E5.1
Projectile motion with small drag
We consider a projectile which is moving in the two-dimensional (x, z)-plane under
the action of gravity (which is constant in the negative z-direction) and of a drag force
proportional to the square of the speed (and acting back along the local direction of
motion). The non-dimensional equations are most conveniently written as
where 
and the initial conditions are given as

199
is the angle of projection 
The small parameter is 
(>0), and for
motion such as that for a shot-put (see Mestre, 1991) its value is typically about 0.01. In
these projectile problems, the main interest is in estimating the range (and maximum
range), x, for a given vertical displacement (z), which may be zero; here, we find x
where z = h. We seek a solution, following the straightforward procedure (which may
produce a uniformly valid solution; cf. §2.3):
and then from (5.1a,b) we obtain
At the next order, we have the equations
which give, after an integration and on using the initial conditions 
on
t = 0,
Thus we have, for example,
which remains valid only if t is smaller than 
and at this stage we do not know
the domain 
for which z = h at
Finally, we integrate once again to find how the position of the object, (x, z), de-
pends on time (t), on 
and on

200
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
where 
each for
Now we suppose that h = O(1) as 
then the time at which this is attained
is also O(1), and hence our asymptotic expansions are valid for 
In
particular, for z = h and selecting the larger of the roots for 
i.e. further away, we
find (from (5.6)), that
where
provided that 
(For the case of the shot-put
application of this model, the landing point is below the projection point, so h < 0
and this condition is certainly satisfied.) Finally, using this asymptotic expansion for
in (5.5), we find that the range is
from which, for example, we can estimate the angle which maximises the range; this
is left as an exercise.
This example has proved to be particularly straightforward; indeed, because of the
specific application that we had in mind—the shot-put—all the asymptotic expansions
are uniformly valid. On the other hand, if we had projected the object from the top
of a high cliff, then we would encounter the problem of 
i.e. 
and
then the validity of the original expansions would be in doubt. The expansions are
not valid when
but we still have u = O(1) although 
this
investigation is also left as an exercise.
E5.2
Child’s swing
We are all familiar with the child’s swing, and the technique for increasing the arc
(i.e. the amplitude) of the swing. The process of swinging the legs (coupled with a

201
Figure 8. Pendulum of variable length, 
swinging through the angle 
(in a verticalplane).
small movement of the torso) causes the centre of gravity of the body to be raised and
lowered periodically. This can be modelled by treating the swing as a pendulum which
changes its length, 
by a small amount; the model equation for this (in the absence
of damping) is
for 
the angle of the swing, given 
see figure 8. We choose to represent the
child’s movement on the swing by 
where 
is a (positive) constant
and 
is a constant frequency to be selected. We will further simplify the problem by
analysing only the initial stages of the motion when 
is small, so we write sin
(For larger amplitudes, we must retain sin 
this complicates the issue somewhat.
A number of more general observations about this problem can be found in Holmes,
1995.)
Thus we approximate equation (5.7) as
which we will solve using the method of multiple scales (cf. E4.1).
We take the fast scale as T = t (or, more generally, 
but there is no advantage
in this, for we are led to the choice 
and, by virtue of the term in 
a slow
scale 
thus we have the identity

202
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Equation (5.8), with 
becomes
and we seek a solution in the form
which is periodic in T. In this problem, we have yet to choose the frequency 
is
what the child can control in order to increase the amplitude of the swing. Without
any damping in the model, we must anticipate that we can find an 
which allows the
amplitude to grow without bound. First, with (5.10) in (5.9), we obtain
and so on. Equation (5.11a) has the general solution
for arbitrary functions 
and 
which leads to equation (5.11b) in the form
In order to make clear the forcing terms in equation (5.12), which may lead to
secularities in T, we expand the last term to give
We see immediately that periodicity in T  requires 
and so 
we
will, for simplicity, choose 
(We are not particularly concerned about how
the motion is initiated, which would serve to select a particular value of 
 Now if
(all sign combinations allowed), then we require 
for period-
icity in T, and the amplitude remains constant: the arc of the swing is not increased.
However, we are seeking that condition which will allow the amplitude to increase on
the time scale 
thus we expect that 
will increase as 
increases. This is possi-
ble only if 
and this can arise here if 
(all sign combinations to be
considered), and 
so we may choose 
(and the sign of 
 is immaterial).
Thus with
periodicity in T requires that

203
and the amplitude grows. We conclude, therefore, that the adjustments provided by
the child on the swing must be at twice the frequency of the oscillation of the swing—
which is what we learnt as children.
E5.3
Meniscus on a circular tube
The phenomenon of a liquid rising in a small-diameter tube that penetrates (vertically)
the surface of the liquid is very familiar, as are the menisci that form inside and out-
side the tube. In this problem, we determine a first approximation to the shape of
the surface (inside and outside) in the case when the surface tension dominates (or,
equivalently, the tube is narrow). The basic model assumes that the mean curvature
at the surface is proportional to the pressure difference across the surface (which is
maintained by virtue of the surface tension). With the two principal curvatures of radii
written as 
and 
then this assumption can be expressed as
where z is the vertical coordinate and the pressure difference is proportional to the
(local) height of the liquid above the undisturbed level far away from the tube; this
relation is usually referred to as Laplace’s formula. In detail, written in non-dimensional
form, this equation (for cylindrical symmetry) becomes
where the surface is 
r is the radial coordinate with r = 0 at the centre of
the tube, and the tube wall (of infinitesimal thickness) is at r = 1; the liquid surface
satisfies
as 
 (see figure 9). The non-dimensional parameter
is inversely
proportional to the surface tension in the liquid and proportional to the square of the
tube radius (and is usually called the Bond number). We will examine the problem of
solving equation (5.13) for 
with the boundary conditions
where 
is the given contact angle between the meniscus and the tube (measured
relative to the upward vertical side of the tube). For wetting, then we have
which we will assume is the case for our liquid. We solve the interior 
and
the exterior (r > 1) problems independently. The discussion that we present for the
exterior problem is based on Lo (1983); another description of both the interior and
exterior problems is given in Lagerstrom (1988). As we will see, this problem results in
the construction of a uniformly valid expansion (interior), and a scaling and matching
problem in the exterior (cf. §§2.4, 2.5).

204
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Figure 9. Circular tube (centre r = 0) penetrating the surface of a liquid whose undisturbed level is z = 0.
Interior problem
It is a familiar observation, at least for 
 
 that the narrower the tube then
the higher the liquid rises in the tube; this suggests that the height of the liquid will
increase as 
When this is coupled with the property (the confirmation of which
is left as an exercise) that no relevant solution of equation (5.13) exists if we ignore the
term 
we are led to write the solution in the form
where h(0) = O(1) (and h(0) > 0). Now we seek an asymptotic solution
and so the leading-order problem becomes
with
(The prime denotes the derivative with respect to r.) One integration of (5.14) gives
directly that

205
and then (5.15b) requires that the constant of integration be zero. The condition
(5.15c) now shows that
which defines the height of the column of the liquid (measured at the centre-line of
the tube). The solution for 
can be written down immediately; it is conveniently
expressed in terms of a parameter as
which satisfies condition (5.15a). We have found the first approximation to the height
of the liquid at r = 0 (namely, 
and the shape of the surface of the liquid
inside the tube: a section of a spherical shell. Further terms in the asymptotic expansions
can be found quite routinely; these expansions are uniformly valid for
Exterior problem
Finding the solution for the shape of the surface outside the tube is technically a more
demanding exercise. First, the deviation of the surface from its level (z = 0) at infinity
is observed to be not particularly large—as compared with what happens inside. This
suggests that we attempt to solve equation (5.13) directly, subject to
Let us write
so that we are not committing ourselves, at this stage, to the size of the next term in
the asymptotic expansion; in fact, as we shall see, logarithmic terms arise, although we
will not pursue the details here. The equation for 
is simply
where the arbitrary constant A is determined from (5.16a) as 
One further
integration of (5.17) then yields

206
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
where B is a second arbitrary constant. The complications alluded to earlier are now
evident:
 In r as 
which can never accommodate the condi-
tions at infinity, (5.16b), for any choice of B.
Now any solution of equation (5.13) which admits (5.16b) must balance contribu-
tions from each side of the equation; because the difficulties in (5.18) arise as
and this is where these other boundary conditions are to be applied, we write
where 
as 
Whether z also needs to be scaled is unclear at this stage;
let us therefore write 
and then (5.13) becomes
and so, provided that 
as 
we must select 
We choose
and hence obtain the equation
valid far away from the tube. The solution of this equation is to satisfy the boundary
conditions at infinity and also to match to the solution valid for r = O(1) i.e. to (5.18).
We seek a solution of equation (5.19) in the form
where
which has solutions 
and 
the modified Bessel functions; but 
grows
exponentially as 
(and 
decays), so we select the solution
where C is an arbitrary constant. Now this modified Bessel function has the properties:
so the conditions at infinity, (5.16b), are satisfied.
Finally, we match the first term valid for 
(5.20), to the first term valid
for r = O(1), (5.18). The latter gives

207
and so
where we have retained the logarithmic term in 
(as we have learnt previously is
necessary; see §1.9). From (5.20) we obtain
or, reverting to the R-variable, simply
For (5.21) and (5.22) to match, we choose
We note that the left-hand side of equation (5.13) allows z to be shifted by a constant,
which at this order is B, and this contains a term In 
The asymptotic procedure for the
full equation may proceed provided 
(the right-hand side)   0  for r = O(1), and this
is the case even in the presence of this logarithmic term, since In 
as
Of course, the appearance of this term indicates the need to include logarithmic terms
throughout the asymptotic expansions.
This completes the description of the exterior problem so far as we are concerned
here; much more detail can be found in Lo (1983).
E5.4
Drilling by laser
This problem is a one-dimensional model for the process of drilling through a thick
block of material using a laser. The laser heats the material until it vaporises, and we
assume that the vapour is continuously removed; the essential character of this problem
is therefore one of heat transfer at a boundary—the bottom of the drill hole—which
is moving. In suitable non-dimensional variables, the temperature relative to ambient
conditions satisfies the classical heat conduction equation
with
(which describes the initial state and the condition at infinity, respectively), and

208
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Figure 10. Sketch of a laser drilling through a block of material; the bottom of the drill hole moves
according to
the vaporisation condition at the bottom of the drill hole at 
see figure 10.
The speed of the drilling process is controlled by
which is based on Fourier’s law applied at the bottom of the hole. This set, (5.23)–(5.26),
is an example of a Stefan problem; see Crank (1984) for more details (and important
additional references) about this problem and other moving-boundary, heat-transfer
examples. (A discussion of this particular problem can also be found in Andrews &
McLone, 1976, and, in outline, in Fulford & Broadbridge, 2002.)
Our intention is to seek a solution of this set of equations for 
For many
common metals, 
is fairly small (about 0.2); small 
signifies that rather more (latent)
heat than heat content is required to vaporise the material, once it has reached the
vaporisation temperature. We shall approach the solution by seeking a straightforward
expansion in powers of 
but we will need to take care over the evaluation on the
moving boundary. We will find that the resulting solution is not uniformly valid as
and the way forward requires a careful examination of what is happening in
the early stages of the heating process.
We write
so that equations (5.25) and (5.26) yield
and

209
respectively, where all the evaluations on x = X have been mapped to 
by
allowing Taylor expansions about 
(and constructed for
The subscripts
in x denote partial derivatives and the over-dot is the time derivative. The leading-order
problem is then described by the equations
with 
as 
where
Thus 
and then the complete solution for 
(obtained by using the
Laplace transform, for example) is
where erfc is the complementary error function:
All this appears to be quite satisfactory, at this stage.
The solution for 
(5.30), can now be used to initiate the procedure for finding
the next term. In particular, (5.29b) becomes
which means that
and this asymptotic expansion is not uniformly valid as 
indeed, we see that it
breaks down when 
But we still have 
so 
 
further, for
the general 
in equation (5.26) to be O(1) then, retaining T = O(1) which is
necessary in order to accommodate (5.25), we see that 
in this region. Thus
we define the new variables
which produces the problem in this region as

210
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
with
where
One essential difficulty that we have overlooked thus far is that the process of heating
the material, starting from ambient conditions at t = 0, requires the temperature to be
raised before any vaporisation occurs, and therefore before the hole can begin to form.
Because we have a failure of our original asymptotic expansion only when
this should contain the time period over which the initial heating phase occurs. Let the
hole be unformed for 
(and we assume that 
if it is smaller, we
will rescale), then in this time interval we have 
and so the boundary
condition (5.35) now reads
The resulting problem for 
(which excludes (5.34c) and uses (5.36) in place of (5.35))
no longer contains 
and it can be solved exactly:
(Many of these standard solutions that we use in theories of heat conduction can be
found in Carslaw & Jaeger, 1959.) The additional boundary condition (5.35c) now
becomes the condition which, when attained, heralds the formation of the hole. From
(5.37), we see that 
on 
at the time
and after this time the hole develops.
Finally, we complete the formulation of the problem for 
but for times
larger than 
we introduce 
and write
with 
to give
with
and

211
The leading-order problem, as 
is therefore (with 
equations
(5.39), (5.40) and (5.41), and (5.42a,b) replaced by
The solution for 
        can be found (by using the Laplace transform again) and
then used to determine 
some details of this calculation are given in Crank (1984).
Although the form of 
is cumbersome, the resulting expression for 
on
is very straightforward, yielding
which matches precisely with (5.31) when this is expanded for 
 
The difficulties
in 
as 
have been overcome.
This example has required us to undertake some quite intricate analysis in terms of
singular perturbation theory, coupled with a careful appreciation of the details of the
physical processes involved. This problem, perhaps more than the previous three, shows
how powerful these techniques can be in illuminating the details. We now turn to a
far more routine type of calculation, although the equation and physical background
are important, and the resulting solution has far-reaching consequences.
E5.5
The van der Pol/Rayleigh oscillator
This classical example requires a fairly routine application of the method of multiple
scales to a nearly linear oscillator (cf. E 4.2), although the solution that we obtain takes a
quite dramatic form. The equation first came to prominence following the work of van
der Pol (1922) on the self-sustaining oscillations of a triode circuit (for which the anode
current-voltage law takes the form of a cubic relation). However, essentially the same
equation had already been discussed by Rayleigh (1883), as a model for ‘maintained’
vibrations in, for example, organ pipes. (A simple transformation takes Rayleigh’s equa-
tion into the van der Pol equation.) We will write the equation in the Rayleigh form
for 
in the context of the van der Pol problem, 
is proportional to the grid
voltage, V. [A circuit diagram is given in figure 11, and the governing equations for
this triode circuit are
where 
and 
are positive constants.]

212
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Figure 11. Circuit diagram for the triode oscillator.
The method of multiple scales leads us to introduce
and then equation (5.44), for
becomes
We seek a solution in the form
which is periodic in T and uniformly valid as 
The equations for the first
three terms are
The general solution of equation (5.45a) is
(for arbitrary functions 
and 
and then equation (5.45b) can be written

213
where 
For 
to be periodic in T, i.e. in 
we require
which may be integrated to give
where 
Hence, for any initial amplitude 
as
the solution exhibits a limit cycle (ultimately an oscillation in T with amplitude 2). This
is the raison d’être of the triode circuit.
If we proceed with the analysis (the details of which are left as an exercise) we find,
first , that
where 
and 
are additional arbitrary functions. (The constant 
is fixed by the
initial data 
At the next order, we deduce that the amplitude
remains bounded as 
only if
Another problem with an electrical background, but with a rather different asymp-
totic structure, will now be described.
E5.6
A diode oscillator with a current pump
In this problem, which contains two small parameters (one of which is used to simplify
some of the intermediate results, as expedient), we seek the initial condition which
leads to a periodic solution. The circuit (figure 12) is represented by the equations
and then Kirchhoff’s law gives
which leads to the non-dimensional equation
Typical values of the parametersare: 
(This equation was brought
to the author’s attention by a colleague, Dr Armstrong.)

214
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Figure 12. Circuit diagram for the diode oscillator with a current pump.
We seek the first term of an asymptotic expansion for
for  fixed (and we may take advantage of small 
  to simplify some of the details, but
this is not essential). Thus the problem for
from (5.47), becomes
which can be solved exactly (by writing
it is convenient to
express the initial value as
and then we obtain
The nature of this solution is, perhaps, not immediately apparent, but it becomes more
transparent if we invoke 
We provide approximations to 
for various t,
below (the details of which are left as an exercise):

215
Figure 13. Sketch of the solution (5.49) for small
(Most of these results require the use of asymptotic estimates of
for various t, as 
see e.g. Olver, 1974, or Copson, 1967; cf. Q1.16.) This
(approximate) solution is sketched in figure 13. Clearly 
and so this
first term is not periodic; however, for 
the solution is exponentially small
(as
and if this becomes as small as 
then the term 
omitted in (5.48)
cannot be ignored. (This observation also follows when we find the next term in the
asymptotic expansion and seek a breakdown; this is a rather tiresome process here, so
we treat the problem as one of rescaling the differential equation, as discussed in
For 
although the precise domain is not yet known, we write
and then (5.47) becomes
We seek a solution

216
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
and so, from (5.51), we obtain the equation
which can be integrated directly:
where 
is an arbitrary constant. This solution is to match to the asymptotic expan-
sion for 
and, in particular, to the first term, (5.49). Further, we are seek-
ing the condition(s) that ensure the existence of a periodic solution, so we also
impose
In principle, we are able to match (5.49) and (5.52) for arbitrary 
but the
result is not particularly useful; further, the periodicity condition implies that, for small
then 
must be small. Thus we again invoke 
and from (5.52) we obtain
(for
which matches with (5.50f) if we choose
Indeed, this match is valid for 
The periodicity requirement, (5.53),
now becomes 
and thus from (5.52) (with 
and (5.50a) we
obtain
Thus (5.54) and (5.55) imply that we must have
where 
and so
i.e. for the given 
we have

217
Thus for a periodic solution to exist, we require the initial amplitude, a, to be
restricted in value, a conclusion that can also be reached on the basis of an examina-
tion of the direction field for this equation. For a given 
the amplitude
is chosen by selecting 
and 
which satisfy (5.54) and (5.55),
where 
is given by (5.56). The problem of the existence of solutions to this set—
solutions do exist!—is left as an additional investigation.
This example has demonstrated how we can extract fairly simple estimates from a
solution with a complicated structure, even though the governing differential equation
may have persuaded us that no serious difficulties would be encountered.
Finally, we apply the method of multiple scales to a partial differential equation of
some importance.
E5.7
Klein-Gordon equation
The general form of the Klein-Gordon equation, written in one spatial dimension, is
where V(u) (which can be taken as a potential, in quantum-mechanical terms) is,
typically, a function with nonlinearity more severe than quadratic. We will consider
the problem for which
and so introduce a parameter which we will allow to satisfy 
The equa-
tion with this choice arises, for example, in the study of wave propagation in a cold
plasma. (The choice V(u) = –cos u gives rise to the so-called sine-Gordon equation—a
pun on the original name—and this equation has exact ‘soliton’ solutions; see e.g.
Drazin & Johnson, 1992.) We follow the technique described in §4.4, and so we intro-
duce
and then with 
we obtain the equation
We seek a solution which is to be periodic in 
in the form

218
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
and so we obtain the set of equations
where we have elected to take k (and hence 
as constants, for the purposes of this
discussion. A suitable solution of equation (5.58) is
with 
and 
are arbitrary functions. Equation (5.59), for 
now
becomes
where
We use                                                               and then observe that        is periodic in
i.e. in 
only if
which have the general solutions
for arbitrary functions F and 
Thus the leading term in the asymptotic expansion
is
where 
and 
we observe that we may write the oscillatory
term as
Both the wave number (k) and the frequency 
have small-amplitude corrections—
we assume that 
is a bounded function—which produces an approximate speed
of the carrier wave of
which shows that the inclusion of the nonlinearity in the equation is to change the

219
speed of the wave. Indeed, larger waves travel faster—a typical observation in many
wave propagation phenomena. Note also that the amplitude function,
represents propagation at the speed
which is precisely the group speed, 
see
§4.4. The initial data for this solution must take the form
where k is a given constant (rather than appear in the more general form sin
and for a suitable amplitude function.
This concludes the set of examples that have been taken from a rather broad spectrum
of simple mechanical and electrical systems. We will now consider the more specialised
branch of classical mechanics.
5.2
CELESTIAL MECHANICS
We present three typical problems that arise from planetary, or related, motions: E5.8
The Einstein equation (for Mercury); E5.9 Planetary rings; E5.10 Slow decay of a
satellite orbit.
E5.8
The Einstein equation (for Mercury)
Classical Newtonian (Keplerian) mechanics leads to an equation for a single planet
around a sun of the form
where 
is a small parameter (about 
for Mercury, the planet for which the
equation was first introduced). The plan is to find an asymptotic solution of equation
(5.60), using the method of multiple scales (cf. E4.2), subject to
(It happens that equation (5.60) can be integrated as it stands, in terms of Jacobian
elliptic functions, but this tends to obscure the character of the solution and is therefore;
hardly worth the effort since 
is so small.)
where is the polar angle of the orbit, u is inversely proportional to the radial coordinate
of the orbit and h measures the angular momentum of the planet. However, when a
correction based on Einstein's theory of gravitation is added, the equation becomes

220
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
We introduce
and then the equation for 
becomes
We seek a solution, periodic in T and bounded in 
in the familiar form
and so obtain
and so on. The initial conditions give
The general solution for 
from (5.61a), is
for arbitrary functions 
and 
the initial conditions, (5.62a,c), require that
and so we select
Equation (5.61b) then becomes
where 
is periodic in T, i.e. in 
only if

221
Then, with conditions (5.63), we see that
which leaves the solution for 
as
It is left as an exercise to show that the solution of equation (5.61c), for 
is
periodic in T and bounded as 
if
with 
and
This example has proved to be a particularly straightforward application of the method
of multiple scales; the next is a rather less routine problem that contains a turning point
(see E4.6).
E5.9
Planetary rings
In a study of a model for differentially rotating discs (Papaloizou & Pringle, 1987), the
radial structure of the azimuthal velocity component for large azimuthal mode number
(essentially 
here) satisfies an equation of the form
This equation clearly possesses a turning point at 
(see §2.8); let us examine the
solution near this point first. For the neighbourhood of 
 we set
where 
as 
and ignore the scaling of v (because the equation is
linear), so equation (5.64) becomes (with
Thus we select 
and with 
we obtain the leading-order
equation
which is an Airy equation (see equations (4.52), (4.54)) with a bounded solution

222
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
where C is an arbitrary constant. The solution in 
and 
is now found
by using the WKB method (see E4.5). (In this example, we will find an approximation
to the solution, in each of the three regions, by using only the appropriate local variable;
as we have seen in §4.3, all this could be expressed using formal multiple scales.)
For R > 0, 
is oscillatory and so in 
we seek a solution of equation (5.64)
in the form
where 
(as 
is a scaling to be determined, 
is a constant
and 
is to be written as a suitable asymptotic expansion when we know
Thus we obtain
where 
and the prime denotes the derivative with respect to r. Thus
we require 
and so we write
and hence we obtain
and so on. These two equations are readily solved, to give
where A is an arbitrary constant.
The corresponding solution for 
(the details of which are left as an exercise) is

223
where B is a second arbitrary constant. The matching of (5.68) and (5.69) with (5.65)
(using the results quoted in (4.54)) follows directly. From (5.68) and (5.65) we find
that matching is possible if
from (5.69) and (5.65) we obtain
which implies the connection formula A = 2B. (We also see that, if C = O(1), then A
and B are 
as
Our final example under this heading is related to problem E5.1, but now placed
in a celestial context. Our presentation is based on that given by Kevorkian & Cole
(1981, 1996).
E5.10
Slow decay of a satellite orbit
The equations for a satellite in orbit around a primary (in the absence of all other
masses), with a drag proportional to the
 are first written down in terms of
polar coordinates, 
These are then transformed to 
and 
(where
t is time), and finally—this is Laplace’s important observation—to 
and 
we
obtain the non-dimensional equations
where 
is a measure of the drag coefficient on the satellite. We seek a solution
of this pair of equations, for 
subject to the initial conditions i.e. conditions
prescribed at what we will call
Here, v 
at 
i.e. t = 0) is the initial component of the velocity vector in
the 
we assume that this is given such that v > 1 and that it is independent
of
The form of equations (5.70), and our experience with problems of this type,
suggests that we should introduce new variables (multiple scales) 
and
more general choices for T (e.g. 
or 
are unnecessary in this
problem. Before we proceed, observe that equations (5.70) contain 
only through

224
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
so it is convenient to solve for u and 
first (and then t follows after
an integration or, at least, by quadrature). Thus, for the purposes of constructing a
solution, let us set 
with 
(and the condition on t
at 
is redundant at this stage). Thus our equations (with
become
and we seek a solution
which is periodic in T.
From equations (5.71) we obtain
and so on.
The exact solution of equations (5.72), which describe a Keplerian ellipse, is usually
written in the form
where 
is the eccentricity, 
denotes the position of the pericentre
(i.e. at 
and 
is the angular momentum. (We may write
where 
is the semi-major axis, if this is useful.) Equation (5.73b)
now becomes (with appropriate use of equations (5.74))
which may be integrated, at least formally, to give

225
where A is an arbitrary function. This expression can be used directly in (5.73a) to
give
and we impose the condition that 
be periodic in T. This can be done quite gener-
ally by writing 
solving for 
and then imposing periodicity.
However, by virtue of the integral term in (5.75), this produces a somewhat involved
and far-from-transparent result. In order to make some headway, and to produce useful
solutions, let us suppose that the satellite orbit is initially almost circular—a fairly com-
mon situation—so that the value of 
is small. In particular, the initial conditions give
and so now we are assuming that v is close to 1; it will soon become clear that this
approximation holds as 
because we will show that 
decreases to zero from
its initial value.
For small e, we find that
and so we expand equation (5.75) as
where Â is a new arbitrary function (replacing A). Now the solution, 
of equation
(5.76) is periodic in T if
which have solutions (correct to this order in e):
where 
(which is small).

226
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
We see, therefore, that the small drag in this model leaves the pericentre unaffected
the eccentricity decreases towards zero (from its already assumed small
value) and the semi-major axis 
also approaches zero as
Thus the orbit gradually spirals in and, as it does so, it becomes more circular.
We have seen how we might tackle the problem of orbits that graze the atmosphere
of a planet, although here it was expedient to assume that the orbit was initially nearly
circular. If this is not the case, then
will not be small and we face a more
exacting calculation, although the essential principles are unaltered.
5.3
PHYSICS OF PARTICLES AND OF LIGHT
In this section, we will examine some problems that arise from fairly elementary
physics; these will touch on quantum mechanics, light propagation and the move-
ment of particles. In particular, we discuss: E5.11 Perturbation of the bound states of
Schrödinger’s equation; E5.12 Light propagating through a slowly varying medium;
E5.13 Raman scattering: a damped Morse oscillator; E5.14 Quantum jumps: the ion
trap; E5.15 Low-pressure gas flow through a long tube.
E5.11
Perturbation of the bound states of Schrödinger’s equation
This is a classical problem in elementary quantum mechanics; it involves the time-
independent, one-dimensional Schrödinger equation
where 
is the given potential and E is the energy (i.e. the eigenvalues of the
differential equation). We seek solutions for which 
as 
and
is finite (and conventionally, we choose 
to provide a normalisation of
the eigenfunction, 
In this example, we choose
and this is to be a uniformly valid approximation as 
for 
The
problem then becomes
with 
as 
and
We seek a solution by assuming a straightforward expansion, and we will comment
on the conditions that ensure a uniform expansion valid for all x; see §2.3. Thus we
write

227
and so equation (5.77) gives
with
and
We assume that a solution exists for 
will give an example shortly—then
(5.78b) can be written
which is integrated over all x. After using integration by parts on the first term, and
invoking the decay conditions at infinity, we obtain
which reduces to
when we make use of (5.78a) and (5.80b). Thus the correction to the energy is known
(and we assume that 
and 
are such as to ensure that this correction is finite). The
same procedure applied to equation (5.78c) yields
A simple potential is that associated with the harmonic oscillator, namely
then equation (5.78a) becomes
which can be rewritten in terms of 
to give

228
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
This is Hermite’s equation with solutions that guarantee 
at infinity only if
In particular,
and each of these solutions has been chosen to satisfy the normalisation condition on
(5.80a). A typical choice for 
is
but in order to ensure that 
is uniformly valid for all x, then 
(to avoid
a breakdown as
and
(to avoid a breakdown as
for p > 2;
the case p = 2 and 
is equivalent to 
Let us calculate 
for m = 0
(so we have 
and 
and for a perturbation with
p = 2 and 
thus
and so the energy becomes
Observe that, at this order, we do not need to determine 
to  find
Calculations of this type, for various 
and 
can be found in any good
text on quantum mechanics.
E5.12
Light propagating through a slowly varying medium
Fermat’s principle states that light travels between any two points on a path which
minimises the time of propagation. If the path, in two dimensions, is written as y =
y(x), and the speed of light at any point is c(x, y), then y(x) must satisfy
This equation can be obtained either from the eikonal equation (see Q4.27) for rays or
as the relevant Euler-Lagrange equation in the calculus of variations. [In the special case
where the medium varies only in x, so that c = c(x), we obtain

229
if, for a light ray, we set 
then
which is Snell’s law.]
Let us suppose that the properties of the medium slowly change on the scale 
in
the form
and so the inherent difficulty of this problem is now evident: we seek 
yet y
appears in the function c. In the case that c = constant, the light rays are straight lines
e.g.
let us seek a solution of (5.81) which satisfies precisely these conditions i.e.
For the given c, (5.82), and with 
we see that both 
and 
are 
and
so, from (5.81), we have that 
a cursory analysis of the problem suggests
that we write the solution in the implicit form
where 
Thus
and we will assume that 
is such that A, and all its relevant derivatives, lead to
uniform asymptotic expansions in the domain where the material exists. This ensures,
for example, that we may write
for all X, Y  in the domain. Differentiation of (5.84) yields
which can be solved for 
(given 
from (5.85)). We seek a solution in the form

230
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
and then (5.86) and (5.85) in equation (5.81) produces, at leading order, the equation
for
This equation can be solved in general (by introducing 
and expressing
the solution in terms of 
once 
is expressed in these same variables); this is
left as an exercise. We present a simple example: 
for which the
solution can be written (on introducing
which satisfies 
on 
as required by the condition at the
origin.
This problem of finding the path of a light ray has used the idea of multiple scales in
a less routine way; we now examine an equation for which a more familiar approach
(§4.2) is applicable.
E5.13
Raman scattering: a damped Morse oscillator
Under certain circumstances, a small fraction of the incidence light propagating through
a medium may be scattered so that the wavelength of this light differs from that of
the incident light—usually it is of greater wavelength. This is called Raman scattering.
An example of this (Lie & Yuan, 1986), which incorporates the Morse (exponential)
model for the potential energy of atoms as a function of their separation, is
This equation also includes a (weak) linear damping term, which we will characterise
by 
we wish to find a solution, subject to the initial conditions
Because equation (5.87) is nonlinear (although the underlying solution—valid for
be expressed in terms of elementary functions), we must expect a development
along the lines of that described in E4.3.
We introduce fast and slow scales according to
and then seek a solution which has a constant period (in T). Equation (5.87) therefore

231
becomes, with
where the solution is to be
The equations for the 
are therefore
and so on. The most general solution of equation (5.89), with a constant period 
is
for arbitrary 
and 
note that, for a constant period, we will require that
The initial conditions, (5.88), now on 
are satisfied by
the choices
and the existence of a real, oscillatory solution (of the form (5.91)) requires that
0 > a > – ln 2.
The periodicity condition, which will define 
can be obtained from (5.90) by
first writing 
and then using the T-derivative of (5.89); this
yields
This can be integrated once directly, when multiplied by 
so that we now have
i.e.
For 
to be periodic, then so must be both F and
with the period prescribed as

232
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
we therefore obtain the periodicity condition
Finally, the evaluation of the integral (which is left as an exercise) yields
and so we have, after solving for
where 
We observe that 
as 
and that
with
This describes the evolution (shift) of the frequency, 
as the
damping progressively affects the solution.
E5.14
Quantum jumps: the ion trap
In the study of the discontinuous emission or absorption of energy (quantum jumps),
a single ion is trapped (in an electromagnetic device called a Paul trap; see Cook, 1990)
and its motion is governed by an equation of the form
Here, 
is a parameter, v(x) is a given function (sufficient for the existence of
and we seek the complex-valued function 
for 
In this case, we see
that the oscillatory term on the right oscillates rapidly and so we use the method of
multiple scales in the form
which gives the equation
We seek a solution

233
which is uniformly valid as 
from (5.92) we obtain
and so on.
The solution of (5.93a) is immediately seen to be
where 
is an arbitrary function; then (5.93b) becomes
This can be written as
and hence for 
to remain bounded as 
also ensures periodicity in
require
A solution of this equation can be expressed as
but very little headway can be made, at this stage, without some knowledge of v(x).
We do note, however, that for k < 0 the solutions for
are essentially exponential
(growing and decaying), but for 
bounded and 
large enough, the solutions are
oscillatory.
Our final example is a problem of a gas flow but, because the density is so low, the
model is based on an approach that invokes the ideas of statistical mechanics.
E5.15
Low-pressure gas flow through a long tube
The flow of a gas through a long circular tube, i.e. radius/length is small, where
molecular collisions are assumed to occur only with the wall of the tube, can be
represented by the Clausing integral equation

234
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Here, 
is the rate of molecular collisions (with the wall) between x and
and 
the rate contributed by those molecules that have their first collision
between these same stations. The kernel, K(x – y), measures the probability that a
molecule which has collided with the wall at x = y will collide again between the
stations. (This type of process is called a free-molecular or Knudsen flow.)
When we introduce the appropriate models for 
and 
non-
dimensionalise and use the symmetry of  n(x) (i.e. n(x) + n(–x) = 0 so that n(0) = 0),
we obtain the equation
with the normalised boundary condition 
(See Pao & Tchao, 1970,
and DeMarcus, 1956 & 1957, and for more general background information, Patterson,
1971.) At first sight, equation (5.94) looks quite daunting and very different from
anything we have examined so far in this text. However, the first terms on the right
do indicate the presence of boundary layers near x = ±1/2, so perhaps our familiar
techniques can be employed.
For x away from the ends of the domain, the expansion of the first terms in (5.94)
leads to the asymptotic form of the equation:
Now we must estimate the integral, for which we use ideas discussed in §2.2 and
exercise Q2.8. This is accomplished by expressing the domain of integration as
and 
where 
but such that
It is left as an exercise (which involves considerable effort) to show that (5.95) eventually
can be written as
and so 
as 
must satisfy

235
But 
so we have simply
this is the first term in the asymptotic expansion, where 
is an arbitrary constant,
valid away from the boundary layers (see §2.6). (If we were to apply the boundary
condition on x = 1/2, then we would deduce that 
which turns out to be
correct, as we shall see below.)
For the boundary layer near x = 1/2, we write 
and
which gives (from (5.94))
But the dominant contribution to the integral will come from the behaviour of N
outside the boundary layers i.e. we use 
When we do this, the
integral term yields the result
and this is used in (5.96), together with the boundary condition 
to
give
The corresponding solution in the boundary layer at the other end is obtained from this
result by forming 
where 
Note that, because the boundary
condition has been used here, 
is now determined (in a way analogous to matching)
and so 
away from the boundary layers. This concludes all that we will
write about this very different type of boundary-layer problem; see Pao & Tchao
(1970) for more details.
5.4
SEMI- AND SUPERCONDUCTORS
The study of semiconductors and of superconductors, as it has unfolded over the last
50 years or so, has thrown up any number of interesting and important equations that
describe their properties and design characteristics. We will look at three fairly typical
examples: E5.16 Josephson junction; E5.17 A p-n junction; E5.18 Impurities in a
semiconductor.

236
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
E5.16
Josephson junction
The Josephson junction between two superconductors, which are separated by a thin
insulator, can produce an AC current when a DC voltage is applied across the junc-
tion (this by virtue of the tunnelling effect). An equation that models an aspect of this
phenomenon (Sanders, 1983) is
where a and b are given constants, and 
We will construct the
asymptotic solution, using the method of multiple scales, for 
Note that,
in the absence of the term 
then 
is a solution of the complete problem.
We anticipate that the presence of 
will force a non-zero solution which, if it
remains bounded, should be 
for all time (t); thus we write 
Further, we
introduce
and so 
satisfies the equation
We assume a bounded, periodic solution can be written as
and so we may expand
Thus we obtain the set of equations
and so on. These equations follow the pattern for a nearly linear oscillator; see §4.1.
The general solution of (5.98a) is
with initial conditions

237
then equation (5.98b) becomes
where 
Immediately we see that 
is periodic in T, i.e. in 
only if
and so we have
which shows that a bounded solution (as 
requires 
Thus the solution,
to this order, is
the construction of higher-order terms is left as a fairly routine exercise.
E5.17
A p-n junction
A p-n junction is where two semiconducting materials meet; such junctions may
perform different functions. The one that we describe is a diode. We analyse the
device for 
where the junction sits at x = 0 (and, by symmetry, it extends into
and an ohmic contact is placed at x = 1. In suitable non-dimensional,
scaled variables we have
where e is the electrostatic field, p the hole density and n the electron density. The
term ‘+1’ in (5.99a) is a constant ‘doping’ density and we will assume that the current
density, I(x) (appearing in (5.99b,c)), is given; indeed, in this simple model, we take
I(x) = constant. The boundary conditions are
and is our small parameter (typically about 0.001). (See Shockley, 1949; Roosbroeck,
1950; Vasil’eva & Stelmakh, 1977; Schmeisser & Weiss, 1986.) It is evident that the set
(5.99) exhibits the characteristics of a boundary-layer problem (§§2.6, 2.7) because the
small parameter multiplies the derivatives in each equation. However, a neat manoeuvre
allows one equation to be independent of

238
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Let us introduce u = np, then equations (5.99) can be rewritten as
with
Now away from the boundary layer (whose position is yet to be determined) we write
each of
and 
as asymptotic expansions
and then the leading order (from (5.100)) yields
Thus we must select the solution
it is now evident that the condition 
(see (5.101 a)) cannot be attained by this
solution, so the boundary layer must be at x = 0—the position of the junction—and
thus we are permitted (in this soluiton) to use the boundary conditions at x = 1, to
give
Now from equations (5.100a,b), it is clear that the boundary-layer thickness is
and so we introduce 
and write 
for each of e, p
and u, to obtain the set
with 
at X = 0 and matching conditions for 
Thus, from equations
(5.103), the leading-order terms (zero subscripts) in the straightforward asymptotic
expansions satisfy the equations

239
and the last equation simply requires that
(which is equivalent to the observation, from (5.100c), that there is no boundary-
layer structure in the solution for
The first two equations, (5.104a,b), give an
equation for
which can be integrated once (by setting 
to give
where A is an arbitrary constant. Sadly, we cannot integrate once again (so a numerical
approach might be considered), but we can make a few observations.
The boundary condition on X = 0 becomes 
and, in addition, the match-
ing condition is satisfied if
(see (5.102c) which requires the choice
(It is left as an exercise to show that there is a solution for which
However, more success in the development of useful analytical detail is possible if we
use (5.104a,b) to produce an equation for
One integration then produces the result
where the arbitrary constant must, in order to satisfy the matching condition at infinity,

240
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
take the same value as A above:
Thus, although we are unable to write down an expression for 
in terms of
elementary functions, we do have a simple relation between 
and 
in particular,
we see that
the electrostatic field at the junction, x = 0. More details can be found in the references
cited above; also a discussion of similar problems is given in Smith (1985) and O’Malley
(1991).
E5.18
Impurities in a semiconductor
A significant issue in the design and operation of semiconductors is the presence, and
movement, of impurities. In particular, the level of impurities that diffuse from the
outer surface of the material and move to occupy vacant locations within the structure
can be modelled (King, Meere & Rogers, 1992) by the equations
Here, 
is the concentration of the impurities, 
the concentration of
vacancies (holes), and 
and 
are positive constants; the boundary and initial
conditions are
All these boundary values are constants—and 
is positive—and, further-
more, the appearance of the same values at t = 0 and as 
suggests that we could
use a relevant similarity solution. The small parameter, 
is associated only with the
and so we may anticipate the existence of a boundary-layer structure in v,
but not in c; cf. E3.3. Indeed, it should be clear that this necessarily must be near
x = 0 and used to accommodate the boundary value given by (5.106d).
Away from x = 0, we seek a solution with

241
which, from (5.105), must therefore satisfy the equations
and then (5.107b) gives
where 
is an arbitrary function. We may impose the initial conditions, (5.106a,b),
and so 
then (5.107a) becomes simply
and the (similarity) solution which satisfies (5.106a,c,e) is
(provided that t = 0 is interpreted as 
Thus
which does not satisfy the boundary value on x = 0
and so we require
the boundary layer near here.
Let us introduce 
and write
then equations (5.105) become
the leading-order problem (zero subscript) therefore satisfies
The solution of this pair is to satisfy the matching conditions

242
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
and thus (5.108a) gives directly
and then (5.108b) becomes
The appropriate solution of this equation, which satisfies both the matching condition
and (5.106d), is
Higher-order terms, in both the outer and boundary-layer solutions, can be found
altogether routinely (although the calculations are rather tedious).
This completes our few examples in this group; we now turn to one of the areas where
singular perturbation theory has played a very significant rôle.
5.5
FLUID MECHANICS
The study of fluid mechanics is broad and deep and it often has far-reaching conse-
quences. Many of the classical techniques of singular perturbation theory were first
developed in order to tackle particular difficulties that were encountered in this field.
Examples that are available are numerous, and any number could have been selected for
discussion here (and some have already appeared as examples in earlier chapters). We
will content ourselves with just four more very different problems that give a flavour
of what is possible, but these are all fairly classical examples of their type. Many others
can be found in most of the texts already cited earlier. We will discuss: E5.19 Viscous
boundary layer on a flat plate; E5.20 Very viscous flow past a sphere; E5.21 A piston
problem; E5.22 A variable-depth Korteweg-de Vries equation for water waves.
E5.19
Viscous boundary layer on a flat plate
The solution of this problem (about 1905), with Poincaré’s work on celestial mechanics,
together laid the foundations for singular perturbation theory. In this example, we
consider an incompressible, viscous fluid (in y > 0) flowing over a flat plate,
the flow direction at infinity being parallel to the plate. The governing equations are the
Navier-Stokes equation (in the absence of gravity) and the equation of mass conservation:

243
Figure 14. Sketch of the viscous boundary layer on a flat plate.
where 
is the Reynolds number (and we have used subscripts throughout to denote
partial derivatives). We will consider the problem of steady flow
with
the boundary conditions for uniform flow at infinity are
which imply that the pressure p 
constant away from the plate (and we will not
analyse the nature of the flow near x = 0); the plate will extend to infinity
The presence of the small parameter 
multiplying the highest derivatives, is the
hallmark of a boundary-layer problem. In particular, the (inviscid) problem can satisfy
v = 0 on y = 0, but not 
as 
(in x > 0), so we expect a boundary-layer
scaling in y; see figure 14.
Outside the boundary layer, the solution is written
and so equations (5.109) give
subject to the boundary conditions (5.110a,b,d), for zero-subscripted variables; this
has the solution
(It is clear that this solution has additional problems for 
on y = 0, where the
stagnation point exists at the leading edge of the plate.) Note that this solution can be
expressed in terms of the stream function: 
(where, in general,
The region of the boundary layer is described by the scaled variable 
where
as 
and x is unscaled. (We would need to scale x near excep-
tional points such as the leading edge, a point of separation and the trailing edge of a

244
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
finite plate.) By virtue of the existence of a stream function, we see that we must also
scale 
we write
and then we must choose 
to give
This set is to be solved, subject to the boundary conditions (5.110c,d), written in
boundary-layer variables, and matching conditions for 
The leading-order
problem (zero subscripts) satisfies
with
and the matching conditions
To solve equations (5.111), we note, first, that 
and then the matching
condition requires 
throughout this region. Next we use (5.111c) to allow the
introduction of a stream function
and then (5.111a) can be
written
with
and
The relevant solution (Blasius, 1908) takes a similarity form:
direct substitution then yields the ordinary differential equation
for
with
This equation must be solved numerically; the properties of the solution agree well
with experimental data for laminar flows. It is left as an exercise to show that there are

245
solutions of the form
and
the values of the constants, 
and 
are obtained from the numerical solution as
From the behaviour as 
we see that the solution outside
the boundary layer must now match to
which shows that we require a term 
in the asymptotic expansion valid in
the outer region.
Thus we seek a solution of the set (5.109) in the form
where q represents each of u, v and p. The problem for the second terms in this region
therefore becomes the set
with
and, in terms of the stream function
This is a classical problem in inviscid flow theory, where the exterior flow is distorted
by the presence of a parabolic surface—the effect of the boundary layer which grows
on the plate. The exact solution can be expressed in terms of the complex variable
(and 
denotes the real part):
which gives
(It can be shown that, in order to match, the boundary-layer solution must now contain
a term 
not 
as might have been expected. For more general surfaces
than a flat plate, the next term in the boundary-layer expansion is indeed

246
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
We will not proceed further with this analysis here (but far more detail is available in
many other texts e.g. van Dyke, 1975), although we should add one word of warning.
The details that we have presented suggest that we may continue, fairly routinely,
to find the next term in the boundary-layer expansion, and then the next in the
outer, and so on, and that these will develop according to the asymptotic sequence
However, this is not the case: a term 
ln 
appears and this considerably
complicates the procedure (again, see e.g. van Dyke, 1975).
The two essential types of problem that are usually of most interest in fluid mechanics
are associated with (a) 
(the previous example) and (b) 
(the next
example). Problems for small Reynolds number (sometimes referred to as Stokes flow
or slow flow) have become of increasing interest because this limit relates to important
problems in, for example, a biological context. Thus the movement of platelets in
the blood, and the propulsion of bacteria using ciliary hairs, are examples of these
small-Reynolds number flows. We will describe a simple, classical problem of this
type.
E5.20
Very viscous flow past a sphere
In this example, we take 
(and since 
where U is a typical speed of
the flow, d a typical dimension of the object in the flow and v the kinematic viscosity,
this limit can be interpreted as ‘highly viscous’ or ‘slow flow’ or flow past a ‘small
object’). We consider the axisymmetric flow, produced by a uniform flow at infinity
parallel to the chosen axis, past a solid sphere; see figure 15. (This could be used as a
simple model for flow past a raindrop.) It is convenient to introduce a stream function
(usually called a Stokes stream function, in this context), eliminate pressure from the
Navier-Stokes equation and hence work with the (non-dimensional) equation
for 
and 
where
with
and
this latter condition ensuring that there is an axisymmetric flow of speed one at infinity.
(The subscripts here denote partial derivatives; we have mixed the notation because,
we submit, this is the neatest way to express this equation.) The velocity components

247
Figure 15. Coordinates and velocity components for the uniform flow past a sphere.
(see figure 15) are given by
Note that equation (5.114) does not exhibit the conditions for a boundary-layer struc-
ture, as 
because the highest derivatives are retained in this limit—indeed, this
term dominates. It is therefore unclear what difficulties we may encounter.
Let us seek a solution
then from (5.114) we simply have that
and all the boundary conditions appear to be available. Indeed, there is an exact solution
(Stokes, 1851) which satisfies all the given conditions:
and for a number of years this was thought to be acceptable, and that higher-order
terms would simply provide small corrections in the case 
However, difficulties
were encountered when a more careful analysis was undertaken, and a little thought
suggests why this should be so. At infinity the motion (convective terms) dominate, i.e.
the left-hand side of the equation, but near the sphere the viscous terms dominate (the
right-hand side); thus an approximation which uses only the right-hand side (as
above does) cannot be uniformly valid—it must break down as
We introduce 
where 
as 
and then from (5.117)
we see that we must also scale 
Equation (5.114) yields immediately

248
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
that the appropriate choice is 
(Oseen, 1910), but unfortunately this scaling
recovers the full equation—the small parameter is removed identically! However, the
good news is that this scaling (obviously) is associated with the region far away from
the sphere (the ‘far field’), where the uniform flow exists and, presumably, this should
be the first term in an asymptotic solution valid here; we expect, therefore, that
Of course, (5.118) and (5.117) match directly, and we should now regard (5.117) as
valid only for r = O (1) (the ‘near field’) and then (5.118) is valid for
When we express (5.117) in far-field variables, we obtain
and so we require a term 
in the far-field expansion; let us write
The equation for 
from (5.114), is
where
with
and
the former condition being given by the matching, and the latter ensuring that the
flow at infinity is unchanged.
The relevant solution of equation (5.120a) is
where A – E are arbitrary constants, and then 
written in near-field
variables, gives
The term in 
is unmatchable, and so it must be removed, and otherwise this

249
expression is to match to (5.119); this requires that
i.e.
Finally, to be consistent with the development of this asymptotic expansion, we set
and then 
 satisfies
where 
is given by (5.117). It is left as an exercise to show that the solution of
this equation, which satisfies the boundary and matching conditions, is
And, to complete our presentation, we comment that 
expanded for
produces
and the term here in 
contributes, apparently, to a change in the uniform flow at
infinity—which is impossible—and hence the need for a matched solution in the far
field. It was this observation that first alerted the earlier researchers to the difficulties
inherent in this problem; this complication is typical of flows in the limit
Another general area of study in fluid mechanics is gas dynamics, where the compress-
ibility of the fluid cannot be ignored. We have already seen some of these problems
(E3.2, E3.5 and Q3.9–3.11); we now look at another classical example.
E5.21
A piston problem
We consider the one-dimensional flow of a gas in a long, open-ended tube. The gas
is brought into motion by the action of a piston at one end, which moves forward at
a speed which is much less than the sound speed in the gas. (This is usually called the
acoustic problem.) The gas is modelled by the isentropic law for a perfect gas (pressure
and is described by the equations

250
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
Figure 16. Sketch of a piston moving a gas (according to 
in an open tube.
where a is the (local) sound speed in the gas and u its speed along the tube. The initial
and boundary conditions are
and
with 
and V(0) = 0; see figure 16. (The problem of a closed tube,
described in a Lagrangian framework and using the method of multiple scales, is
discussed by Wang & Kassoy, 1990.)
We are already familiar with the result, in small-disturbance theories—which this
is for 
the simple, near-field wave-propagation problem is not uniformly
valid as t (or 
see E3.2. In particular, for disturbances propagating down
the tube (into
which are described by e.g. u(x, t) ~ F(x – t), there will
be a breakdown where 
(or, equivalently, when 
with x – t =
O(1). Note that, in this problem, because the tube is open, there can be no disturbances
propagating back towards the piston. We introduce 
and 
(to make
the evaluation on 
as simple as possible) and then write 
and
to give
with
and
We seek an asymptotic solution, which is to be uniformly valid as 
in the form

251
which gives (from (5.121)
and so on. Further, we assume that the boundary condition at the piston can be
expressed as a Taylor expansion about t:
the validity of which certainly requires that 
remains finite as 
(and so
must be finite).
From (5.123) we find that
where 
is an arbitrary function, but 
and 
are otherwise undetermined at this
stage. From (5.124), we multiply the first by 
and then add to it (5.124b),
which eliminates 
and 
to produce
The terms in 
are now replaced by using (5.126) to give the equation
for
This is a nonlinear equation which, for given 
is readily solved. However, this
solution is incomplete without the weak acoustic shock wave that propagates ahead of
this solution; we must therefore write down the conditions for the insertion of a shock
(discontinuity).
First, from (5.122), this initial condition requires that 
To further deter-
mine 
we impose the Rankine-Hugoniot conditions that define the jump conditions
across the shock. The conditions ahead are undisturbed; let the conditions behind the
shock be denoted by the subscript ‘s’ and write the speed of the shock as
 In this

252
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
problem, these conditions (see e.g. Courant & Friedrichs, 1967) can be written as
and so
(Here, 
is the perturbation of the density.) This latter result confirms, from (5.126),
that 
behind the shock and, since 
ahead of the shock, we have
for 
Thus from (5.127) we obtain the implicit result
where F is an arbitrary function which, from (5.125), can be determined to give
(since, at the piston,
Thus the near-field solution 
is recovered, although this needs to be written
to accommodate the existence of the wave front there i.e.
where H is the Heaviside step function: 
We conclude
with the observation that the shock wave travels faster than the local sound speed
behind the shock; that is, from (5.128), 
as compared with
(and remember that 
). Much more detail can be found in
any good text on gas dynamics.
As our final example, we use a similar technique to that employed in the previous
problem, but now in a quite different context: waves on the surface of water. (See
Q3.4 for a much simpler but related exercise.)
E5.22 A variable-depth Korteweg-de Vries equation for water waves
We consider the one-dimensional propagation of waves over water (incompressible),
which is modelled by an inviscid fluid without surface tension. The water is stationary
in the absence of waves, but the local depth varies on the same scale 
that is used to
measure the weak nonlinearity and dispersive effects in the governing equations. For
right-running waves, the appropriate far-field coordinates are 
and

253
Figure 17. Wave propagation in stationary water over variable depth.
where 
is to be determined. The non-dimensional equations are
with
and
Here (u, w) are the velocity components of the flow, p the pressure in the fluid relative
to the hydrostatic pressure (with pressure constant at the surface) and 
is
the surface of the water. The bottom is represented by the function 
see
figure 17.
We seek a solution in the familiar form:
where q represents each of u, w, p and 
The leading-order problem gives, from
(5.129),
with
This set is easily solved; the relevant solution (in which 
is not a function of z) is

254
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
where the surface boundary condition finally gives
and 
is arbitrary at this stage. For rightward propagation, we select
so that the characteristic variable becomes
which, with D = 1 (constant depth), recovers the standard result: 
Note
that, in this calculation, we have taken the evaluation at the surface to be on z = 1;
see below.
At the next order, equations (5.129) give
with
and
The boundary conditions at the surface, 
have been written by invoking
Taylor expansions, and so become the corresponding boundary conditions evaluated
on z = 1, valid as 
(and for sufficiently smooth surface waves). Again, this set
is fairly easily solved; the details are left as an exercise, but some of the intermediate
results are
and

255
Finally, the surface boundary condition for 
gives the equation for 
identically
cancels—in the form of a variable-coefficient Korteweg-de Vries equation (see E3.1
and Q3.4):
This is usually expressed in terms of 
to give
which recovers the classical Korteweg-de Vries equation for water waves when we
set D = 1. This equation is the basis for many of the modern studies in water-wave
theory; more background to this, and related problems in water waves, can be found
in Johnson (1997).
5.6
EXTREME THERMAL PROCESSES
This next group of problems concerns phenomena that involve explosions, combus-
tion and the like. The two examples that we will describe are: E5.23 A model for
combustion; E5.24 Thermal runaway.
E5.23
A model for combustion
A model that aims to describe ignition, followed by a rapid combustion, requires a
slow development over a reasonable time scale that precedes a massive change on a
very short time scale, initiated by the attainment of some critical condition. A simple
(non-dimensional) model for such a process (Reiss, 1980) is the equation
where 
is the concentration of an appropriate chemical that takes part in the
combustive reaction. The whole process is initiated by the small disturbance 
at
time t = 0. (It should be fairly apparent that this equation can be integrated completely
to give the solution for c, but in implicit form and so the detailed structure as
is far from transparent; this integration is left as an exercise.)
By virtue of the initial value 
we first seek a solution in the form

256
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
and then from (5.130) we obtain
with
This set is very easily solved to give the asymptotic solution
and it is immediately evident that this expansion breaks down when 
let us
write 
and 
to produce the new equation
Again, we seek a straightforward solution
so that (5.132) gives
and so on, together with the requirement to match to (5.131).
The general solution to equation (5.133a) is
where A is an arbitrary constant; with 
we obtain
and hence matching to the first term in (5.131) requires the choice A=1. Thus we
have
the next term can be found similarly and leads to

257
which clearly exhibits a catastrophic breakdown as 
Thus we have a gradual
acceleration of the process, until the time 
is reached and then—presumably—
combustion occurs. This breakdown is not simple: it is at a time given by
When logarithms (or exponentials) arise, we have learnt (§2.5) to
return to the original equation and seek a relevant scaling (although the presence
of a logarithm here indicates that ln 
terms are likely to appear in the asymptotic
expansion). Let us set 
then 
from (5.134), where
as 
thus we write 
and it is immediately clear from (5.132) that
we must choose 
The equation for 
is therefore
the original equation! In order to proceed, we need an appropriate solution—but this
is no longer required to satisfy the initial condition. The general solution to equation
(5.135) can be written as
and for small 
this gives 
and so to match we require the arbitrary
constant, B, to be zero (but we will return to this origin shift below). In passing, we
note that for close to unity, we obtain 
and so the state of full combustion
is attained as
Finally, we reconsider the matching of (5.136), with B = 0, to the expansion (5.134).
From (5.136) we obtain
which with 
gives
and the matching is not possible, as it stands, because of the presence of the ln
term. However, this suggests that the variable used in this region of rapid combustion
should include an origin shift. If we write, now, 
Then
(5.137) produces
and matching with (5.134) requires that 
Thus the
combustion occurs in an O(1) neighbourhood of the time 
the appear-
ance of shifts expressed in terms of ln are quite typical of these problems.

258
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
E5.24
Thermal runaway
A phenomenon that can be encountered in certain chemical reactions involves the
release of heat (exothermic) which increases the temperature, and the temperature nor-
mally controls the reaction rate. It is possible, therefore, to initiate a reaction, then heat
is released which raises the temperature and so increases the rate of reaction which
releases even more heat, and so on; this is called thermal runaway. In the most extreme
cases, there is no theoretical limit to the temperature, although physical reality inter-
venes e.g. the containing vessel might melt or the products explode. A standard model
used to describe this (Szekely, Sohn & Evans, 1976; see also Fowler, 1997, which
provides the basis for the discussion presented here) is the equation
where T is the temperature and 
is a parameter. In this example, we will examine the
nature of the steady-state temperature in one dimension i.e. the solution of
as 
for various 
The boundary condition is that the external temperature is
maintained; we will represent this by T = 0 on 
and so we seek a solution
for 
(and we will assume symmetry of the temperature distribution about
x = 0).
An important property of the solution of (5.138) can be derived by first writing
where
satisfies the equation
with the boundary conditions
This problem has the exact solution
where 
is the maximum temperature (attained at x = 0) defined by

259
which follows immediately when evaluation on x = ±1 is imposed. It is left as an
exercise (which may require a graphical approach) to confirm that (5.140) has zero,
one or two solutions for 
given 
depending on whether 
or
respectively, where the critical value 
is the solution of
it can be shown that there does exist just one 
It turns out that the
consequences of this are fundamental: for any 
if the initial temperature is high
enough, or for any temperature if 
then the time-dependent problem produces
a temperature that increases without bound—indeed, 
in a finite time. What
we will do here is to examine the temperature attained according to the steady-state
equation, (5.138), for various 
although we will approach this by considering different
sizes of temperature (as measured by
It is immediately apparent that the approximation that led to (5.139) cannot be valid
if the temperature is as large as 
see equation (5.138). Let us therefore write
and then (5.138) becomes
and so if we seek a solution 
(with 
as 
) we obtain simply
where A and B are arbitrary constants. Such a solution is unable to accommodate
a maximum temperature at x = 0 (if the solution is to be differentiable, and
constant 
for all x does not satisfy (5.141)). Thus (5.142) can describe the solution
only away from x = 0, but then we may impose the boundary conditions on x = ±1,
so
and the single arbitary constant, A, may be used in both solutions by virtue of the
symmetry. Near x = 0, let 
and seek a solution 
where
is the (scaled) maximum temperature attained in the limit 
note
that, at this stage, we do not know the scalings 
and 
Equation (5.141) becomes

260
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
and for an appropriate solution to exist, to leading order for X = O(1), we must have
which implies that 
is exponentially small as 
Let us write
then from (5.144) with (5.145) included, we obtain the equation for 
as
and this gives a meaningful first approximation, independent of 
only if we choose
e.g. 
This equation then has the general solution
for arbitrary constants 
and C. This solution is to be symmetric about X = 0, so
(which is satisfied with 
), and 
is to match to
(5.143). Thus we must have 
and then we obtain
which matches only if, first, we choose the scaling 
and then
(valid in X > 0, X < 0, respectively). Thus, in particular, we find that
and so the maximum temperature becomes
where, from (5.145), we have
for given 
we may write this equivalently as 
where
and so 
determines 
is the interpretation that we employ.
The calculation thus far indicates that, for suitable 
the resulting steady-state
temperature (if it can be attained through a time-dependent evolution) is already very
large, namely 
But it is also clear from (5.147) that even smaller 
exist that give

261
and then the temperature expansion, (5.146), is not uniformly valid; in par-
ticular this expansion breaks down when 
that is, for
Let us therefore rescale 
write 
and then equation (5.141)
becomes
with
This branch of the solution, interpreted as a function of  
is
usually called the hot branch. We seek a solution 
to give
but we cannot use the boundary conditions here because of the evident non-
uniformity as 
in equation (5.148). However, if we set 
at x = 0
(where 
by symmetry) we obtain
(where we have set 
and this latter integral can be expressed in terms of
an exponential integral, if that is useful. A solution with the property that
as 
(which is necessary if matching is to be possible to the solution valid near
x = ±1, where 
is exponentially small i.e.
must satisfy
where 
as 
or – 1. (Of course, matching is then
trivial, for we simply choose A = B.) Thus we may integrate (5.149) from x = 0 to,
say, x = 1:
and now we find that 
increases as
 increases. So once we have reached this ‘hot
branch’, which is accessed by using
the temperature will increase
without bound (or, rather, until some other physics intervenes). Even more details
of this problem, and related thermal processes, can be found in the excellent text on
modelling by Fowler (1997).
The final group of problems bear some relation to those just considered, for they also
involve chemical processes, but we include in this section some mention of biochemical
processes as well.
at x = ±1.

262
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
5.7
CHEMICAL AND BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS
The examples that are presented here are intended to show that it is possible to model,
and describe using perturbation theory, some very complex processes that, perhaps fifty
years ago, were thought to be mathematically unresolvable. Certainly, some extensive
simplification is necessary in the development of the model—and this requires consid-
erable skill and knowledge—but the resulting differential equations remain, generally,
quite daunting. We will describe: E5.26 Kinetics of a catalysed reaction; E5.27 Enzyme
kinetics; E5.28 The Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction.
E5.26
Kinetics of a catalysed reaction
In a model (the Langmuir-Hinshelwood model; see Kapila, 1983) for the kinetics of a
particular type of catalysed reaction, the concentration of the reactant varies according
to the equation
with
(where 
is a given constant. The parameter
 is a rate constant and,
for 
we observe that the equation reduces to a purely algebraic problem which
is readily solved:
We have selected the positive sign so that 
On x = 1, this gives the value
and so we will require a boundary layer near x = 1; see §§2.6, 2.7. (Note that, from
this solution, c = 1 on x = 0, so we can expect that 
as 
in the solution
of the full equation.) Let us introduce 
and write
the equation for C is then
We seek a solution

263
and so 
satisfies
with 
The general solution of this equation can be found, albeit in implicit
form, as
where 
and 
A is an arbitrary constant which is
evaluated as
when the boundary condition on X = 0 is imposed. As 
(which will give the
behaviour outside the boundary layer), we see that
which therefore automatically matches with the solution already found in the region
away from the boundary layer, (5.151). It is left as a straightforward exercise to find
higher-order terms, or to write down a composite expansion valid for 
see
§1.10.
This first example has presented us with a very routine exercise in elementary
boundary-layer theory; the next has a similar structure, but in only one of the two
components.
E5.27
Enzyme kinetics
A standard process in enzyme kinetics concerns the conversion of a substrate (x) into
a product, by the action of an enzyme, via a substrate-enzyme complex (y); this is the
Michaelis-Menton reaction. A model for this process is the pair of equations
where 
and 
are positive constants and the initial conditions are
The parameter 
measures the rate of the production of y; we consider the problem
posed above, with 
It is clear that we should expect a boundary-layer structure

264
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
in the solution for y, but not for x. A suitable boundary-layer variable is
(rather than simply 
and we will take the opportunity to use the method of
multiple scales here, using T = t and 
(see §4.6). We introduce
and 
and then equations (5.152) become
with
The asymptotic solutions are expressed in the usual way:
which gives immediately that 
only; then we obtain
and so on.
In (5.155a) we choose to make the 
as simple as possible—the real
purpose behind the introduction of f(T) = f(t)—and so we write
and then we have simply
This is solved with ease, to produce
where 
is an arbitrary function. The initial conditions, (5.154), require that

265
From (5.155c) we now have
which integrates to give
and then uniformity as 
requires that
which defines 
Thus
where C is an arbitrary constant. The initial condition, (5.154), then yields the result
C = 1; the implicit solution for 
is therefore described by
(Although this equation appears unsatisfactory and rather involved, its solution has a
simple interpretation: 
starts at 
and decreases to zero, eventually expo-
nentially like 
as
Finally, we look at equation (5.155b), which can be written as
the important information we require from this equation is the condition that defines
(in (5.156)). This requires that the term in 
on the right-hand side, is
removed (because otherwise 
will contain a term 
which leads to a non-
uniformity as 
The relevant term is
or

266
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
but this contains 
so now we must call on equation (5.155d) to find this term.
In this equation, the avoidance of non-uniformities requires the removal of all terms
that depend on only T (for otherwise we will have 
It is left as an exercise to
show that this condition produces the equation for
or
this, and then the equation for 
can be integrated, and solutions expressed in terms
of
In our final example, we are able to use ideas from singular perturbation theory in
only a rather superficial way, but this is such an important problem that we could not
ignore it.
E5.28
The Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction
This is a famous and much-studied phenomenon, first demonstrated by Belousov in
1951. He discovered that a steady oscillation of the concentration of a catalyst, between
its oxidised and reduced states, was possible. In a suitable medium, this can be exhibited
as a dramatic change in colour—a colour being associated with a state—with a period
of a minute or so. A set of model equations for this chemical reaction is
where the concentration of the catalyst is represented by z (Tyson, 1985). The constants
and v are positive and independent of 
measures the rate constant for the
production of x, and gives the size of the corresponding constant for y and of the
nonlinearity in (5.158a). We will consider the problem with 
The initial
conditions are relatively unimportant here, but we will assume that they are sufficient
to start the oscillatory process. It would be impossible in a text such as ours, with its
emphasis on singular perturbation theory, to give a comprehensive description of the
relevant solution of the set (5.158). This would involve, for example, a detailed (but
local) stability analysis. We will content ourselves with a brief overview that emphasises
the various scales that are important.
The first point to note is that equations (5.158a,b) have a boundary-layer structure,
so that there is a short time 
during which the initial values are lost and the
solution settles to a (local) steady state (sometimes referred to as quasi-equilibrium).
Note, however, that (5.158c) allows a relatively long evolution time, so for times of

267
size O(l) we have (with
These we will label state I.
From I it is clear that, if 
then both x and z must increase, but then eventually
the nonlinearity in equations (5.158) will become important (and most particularly
the term 
in (5.158a)). This observation provides the basis for the scaling in this
situation: we write 
and 
and so equations (5.158)
become
These three equations each have a different time scale, so another story unfolds here.
On a very short time interval
Y  evolves from its initial value (close to 1) to a
(local) steady state governed by 
Then on a longer—but still short!—time
interval
X now evolves so that 
and then on an O(1)
time scale we have
 these together constitute state II:
In terms of the relevant scales, this is sufficient for the oscillatory process. Of course,
how the solution actually evolves, and jumps between states I and II, needs more
discussion than we are able to present here. A careful analysis demonstrates that, pro-
vided
then the solution slowly (O(1) scales) evolves in state I,
becomes unstable and jumps to state II; this also slowly evolves until it becomes unsta-
ble and reverts to state I. This is the essence of the oscillatory process (sometimes called
a relaxation oscillation, because the solution ‘relaxes’ back to a former branch of the
solution).
We have chosen to ignore many important elements in our presentation of the
Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction, mainly because they require much that goes well
beyond the methods of singular perturbation theory. An illuminating discussion of
this process can be found in Fowler (1997) and this text, in conjunction with Murray
(1993), provide an excellent introduction to many chemical, biochemical and biolog-
ical models and their solutions.
In this final chapter, we have presented and described a number of examples taken
from the physical and chemical sciences, and in each the ideas of singular perturbation

268
5. Some worked examples arising from physical problems
theory play a significant rôle. As we implied earlier, such a collection could not be
exhaustive—indeed, we can hope to give only an indication of what is possible. Even
if the particular applications offered here are of no specific interest to some readers,
they do provide a set of additional worked examples that should help to reinforce the
ideas that contribute to singular perturbation theory. Other examples, some described
in detail and some set as exercises, are available in many of the texts previously cited.
In addition, interested readers are encouraged to investigate the references to related
material that have been provided throughout this chapter.

APPENDIX: THE JACOBIAN ELLIPTIC FUNCTIONS
Given the integral
where m is usually called the modulus, we then define the jacobian elliptic functions
We see immediately that we have the identities
Further, 
as 
and 
as
The relevant differential relations are
similarly we have

270
Appendix
and
The (real) period of the Jacobian elliptic functions is 4K(m) where
are the complete elliptic integrals of the fast and second kinds, respectively. (The Jacobian
elliptic functions are doubly-periodic in the complex plane; for example, the other period
of cn(u; m) is 2iK(1 – m).)
The interested reader can find more information in texts that specialise in the func-
tions, such as Lawden (1989) or Byrd & Friedman (1971).

ANSWERS AND HINTS
The answer, where one is given, is designated by the prefix A; for example, the answer
to Q1.1 is A1.1. In some cases a hint to the method of solution is included; in a few
of the more involved calculations, some intermediate steps are given.
CHAPTER 1
A1.1 (a)
for
(b)
for
for
(d)
for
(e)
(c)
for
(f)
(cf. (d)) for
for x > 0. [N.B.
as
(g)
A1.2 (a)
for
(b)
for
(c)
for

A1.3 (a)
(b)
which is periodic but of large amplitude as 
(c)
(d) 
(e)
and note the behaviour
near x = 0 and near x = 1; (f) 
and only near x = 0
is interesting (cf. (e)); (g)
and the P.I. dominates for x = O(1) as 
(h) first
and then 
(i) 
where
(j)
(k) 
(l) 
(m)
(n)
A1.4 (a) both limiting processes give 0—uniform; (b) for 
first, the limit is 0;
for 
first, the limit is 1—non–uniform; (c) for 
first, the function
tends to 
for 
first, the function tends to
(d) for 
first, the limit is 0; for 
first, the limit is 1—non–uniform.
(a) simply perform the integrations; (b) multiply the result in (a) by
(d) raise the result in (b) to the power
(a) yes; (b) yes; (c) yes; (d)
(e) 
(f) yes—see Q1.5(e);
(g) yes; (h) yes; (i)
(j) yes; (k) 
and so
A1.5
A1.6
A1.7 (a) 
(b) –1/ln x; (c) 
(d) 
(e) x ln x; (f) — ln x;
(g)
(a) suppose that 
then 
(b) as in (a), but with
(a) 
(b)
(c)
as required for (a); (b) write as
so p(x) = x – 1.
(a) 
and ratio test gives
as 
for all finite x, so convergent for these xs;
(b)
and the ratio test
fails for all finite x—divergent. Consider
with x = 2, then 0.9952 < erf(2) < 0.9954. (Accurate value is 
0.99532.)
A1.8
A1.9
A1.10
A1.11
A1.12
divergent;
then
272
Answers and hints

273
A1.13
A1.14
A1.15
A1.16
(a) 
(b)
(a) 
(b)
fails because
A1.17
A1.18
ratio test gives
n/x, so diverges;
which is minimised by n = [x].
where
N.B. More complete descriptions of
produce
A1.19(a)
where
where
match 
&
match
(b)
where
where
match
match
(c)
where
where
match
match
(d)
where
where
match
match
(e)
where
where
match
match
(f)
where
where
match
where
match
match 
&
A1.20 (a)
where
match:
(b)
where
match:
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
Write as
with the general term

274 Answers and hints
A1.21 (a)
where
match:
(b)
where
match:
(c)
1n
where
match: 1n
1n
A1.22 (a)
where
(b)
where
which is identical to the expansion for
F with
A1.23 (a)
does not exist at
(b)
A1.24 Form
CHAPTER 2
A2.1 (a)
(b)
(c)
and for
(a)
(b)
(c)
A2.2 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
A2.3 (a)
(c)
1n
1n
(b)
(d)
1n
(e)
A2.4

A2.5 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(f)
A2.6 (a)
(d)
A2.7 (a)
(d)
(b)
(c)
(b)
(c)
(f)
A2.8 I
A2.9 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
A2.10 (a)
(b)
(c)
A2.11 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
A2.12
A2.13
(e)
N.B. 
Solution 
for 
x = O(l) 
is 
correct 
on 
x = 0;
(e)
275

276
Answers and hints
A2.14 (a)
(c)
A2.15
where
scaling does not produce a balance of terms.
A2.16 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
A2.17(a)
(b)
(c)
A2.18 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(and we cannot determine
(e)
(f)
A2.19
A2.20
A2.21 (a) boundary layer near x = 1; (b) boundary layer near x = 0; (c) transition
layer near x = 1/2; (d) transition layer near x = 0; (e) solution depends on the
particular boundary values.
A2.22 (a)
matching gives
the
no balance for large
(d)
(e)
at this order);
for
and
for
both away from x =
(b)

277
for
and
for
both away from
A2.23
for
and
for
both away from
so that the jump is be-
tween
and the result follows;
(a)
and
B is unknown at this order; (b)
(c)
A2.24 Choose
then
and the turning points are the zeros of
if the derivative is non-zero at the zero.
A2.25
where Ai and Bi are the Airy functions.
A2.26 (a)
(b)
(c)
A2.27
where
(a)
then
returning at time
(twice the
previous time); (b)
max. height
at time
then max. height
at time
returning at
time
(not twice now); (c)
then breakdown where
which gives
(for the dominant terms).
A2.28
then
(a)
which breaks down because the first term approaches a constant, but the second
is dominated by
(b)
where
are constants, with
(and
is also
determined).
special case gives

278
Answers and hints
A2.29
A2.30
A2.31
A2.32
A2.33
A2.34
A2.35
with
where
where
(a)
(b) solution for
then
the con-
stant
is given by 1n
CHAPTER 3
A3.1
A3.2
A3.3
A3.4
A3.5
A3.6
A3.7
A3.8
A3.9
A3.10
A3.11
From (3.39):
constant; dy/dx follows.
where

279
A3.12
A3.13
A3.14
A3.15
A3.16
A3.17
A3.18
A3.19
A3.20
A3.21
A3.22
A3.23
A3.24
A3.25
where
near
near
matching gives:
from which we can
obtain
with
we obtain
with
we write
where
with the boundary conditions
as
introduce
then
and
where
thus we obtain
You will obtain
(for cos t).
Introduce
then
with
then
after matching;
dominant behaviour of
satisfies
and then
and
as
and
as
and
With
is undefined at
near this point we have
and
satisfies 
the 
equation
where
where
CHAPTER 4
A4.1
The equation for the amplitude is
and so
if a < 0
then amplitude and phase are undefined at

280
Answers and hints
A4.2
A4.3
A4.4
A4.5
A4.6
A4.7
A4.8
A4.9
A4.10
A4.11
For
The equation for the amplitude is
and so
requires
and
to remain
bounded as
where
(so amplitude is constant) and then the phase is
For
the particular integral is a
constant (which is not a problem); for
the particular integral is secular.
For
The equation for the amplitude is
and so
where
are
constants.
Write the first term in u as
and then
and so
where
where
Note that the forcing contributes to the term
subharmonic.
in the form
periodicity requires
and then (except for zero
initial data)
and/or
grow linearly in
for all
The energy integral is
for non-zero initial data: all
trajectories are unbounded for
so nearly periodic, bounded solutions
do not exist.
where
with
where
is an arbitrary constant.
where
with
where
is an arbitrary constant.

281
A4.12
A4.13
A4.14
A4.15
A4.16
A4.17
A4.18
A4.19
A4.20
A4.21
where
Then exponential growth for
oscillatory for
linear growth on
and then the second term is periodic if
and the third if
Thus
where
are constants and
(for a bounded solution as
here,
First
and then
where
is an
arbitrary constant; thus the eigenvalues are given by
for
for x > 1.
Ai(X), where
is an arbitrary constant.
For x > 1 (bounded solution):
for x < 0:
for 0 < x < 1:
First
then with
we obtain
and
so
For
for
for
for
where
Near x = 0:
near x = 1:

282
Answers and hints
Matching gives
leaving
which
gives the required result.
A4.22
A4.23
A4.24
A4.25
A4.26
A4.27
A4.28
A4.29
A4.30
A4.31
A4.32
A4.33
A4.34
A4.35
First
then
First
and then
As for A4.23, then
First
then
First
then
E.g.
etc.
**In the next five answers, we have
and 
so
where
and so
where
B = constant and so
where
and so
where
and so
The use of
gives rise to a solution which is not defined on x = 0;
use
then
With
and so
where
With
we obtain
and so
where

REFERENCES
Abramowitz, M. & Stegun, I. A. (ed.) (1964), Handbook of Mathematical Functions. Washington: Nat. Bureau
of Standards. (Also New York: Dover, 1965)
Andrews, J. G. & McLone, R. R. (1976), Mathematical Modelling. United Kingdom: Butterworth.
Barenblatt, G. I. (1996), Scaling, self-similarity, and intermediate asymptotics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Blasius, H. (1908), Grenzschichten in Flüssigkeiten mit kleiner Reibung, Z. Math. Phys., 56, 1–37. (Trans-
lated as ‘Boundary layers in fluids with small friction,’ Tech. Memor. Nat. adv. Comm. Aero., Washington
no. 1256.)
Boccaletti, D. &Pucacco, G. (1996), Theory of Orbits 1: Integrable Systems and Non-perturbative Methods. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
Bogoliubov, N. N. & Mitropolsky, Y. A. (1961), Asymptotic Methods in the Theory of Nonlinear Oscillations.
Delhi: Hindustan Publishing.
Boyce, W E. & DiPrima, R. C. (2001), Elementary Differential Equations and Boundary Value Problems. (7th
Edition) New York: Wiley.
Bretherton, F. P. (1964), Resonant interaction between waves. The case of discrete Oscillations, J. Fluid
Mech., 20, 457–79.
Brillouin, L. (1926), Rémarques sur la méchanique ondulatoire, J. Phys. Radium, 7, 353–68.
Burgers, J. M. (1948), A mathematical model illustrating the theory of turbulence, Adv. Appl. Mech., 1,
171–99.
Bush, A. W (1992), Perturbation Methods for Engineers and Scientists. Boca Raton, FL: CRC.
Byrd, P. F. & Friedman, M. D. (1971), Handbook of Elliptic Integrals for Engineers and Physicists. 2nd edn. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Carrier, G. F. (1953), ‘Boundary problems in applied mechanics’ in Advances in Applied Mechanics III. New
York: Academic Press.
(1954), Boundary layer problems in applied mathematics, Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 7, 11–17.
Carslaw, H. W. & Jaeger, J. C. (1959), Conduction of Heat in Solids. Oxford: Clarendon.
Chang, K. W. & Howes, F. A. (1984), Nonlinear Singular Perturbation Phenomena: Theory and Applications.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

284
References
Christodoulou, D. M. & Narayan, R. (1992), The stability of accretion tori. IV. Fission and fragmentation
of slender self-gravitating annuli, Astrophys. J., 388, 451–66.
Cole, J. D. (1951), On a quasi-linear parabolic equation occurring in aerodynamics, Quart. Appl. Math., 9,
225–36.
(1968), Perturbation Methods in Applied Mathematics. Waltham, MA: Blaisdell.
Cook, R. J. (1990), ‘Quantum jumps’ in Progress in Optics, XXVIII (E. Wolf, ed.). Amsterdam: North-
Holland.
Copson, E. T. (1967), Asymptotic Expansions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Courant, R. & Friedrichs, K. O. (1967), Supersonic Flow and Shock Waves. New York: Interscience.
Cox, R. N. & Crabtree, L. F. (1965), Elements of Hypersonic Aerodynamics. London: English Universities Press.
Crank, J. (1984), Free and Moving Boundary Value Problems. Oxford: Clarendon.
DeMarcus, W. C. (1956, 1957), The problem of Knudsen flow, Parts I, II (1956) & III (1957), US AEC
Rep. K-1302.
Dingle, R. B. (1973), Asymptotic Expansions: their Derivation and Interpretation. London: Academic Press.
Drazin, P. G. & Johnson, R. S. (1992), Solitons: an Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dresner, L. (1999), Applications of Lie’s Theory of Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations. Bristol: Institute
of Physics Publishing.
Duffing, G. (1918), Erzwungene Schwingugen bei veränderlicher Eigenfrequenz, F. Vieweg u. Sohn (Braun-
schweig).
Eckhaus, W. (1979), Asymptotic Analysis of Singular Perturbations. (Studies in Mathematics and its Applications,
Vol. 9.) Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Erdelyi, A. (1956), Asymptotic Expansions. New York: Dover.
Ford, W B. (1960), Divergent Series, Summability and Asymptotics. Bronx, NY: Chelsea.
Fowler, A. C. (1997), Mathematical Models in the Applied Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fraenkel, L. E. (1969), On the method of matched asymptotic expansions. Parts I–III, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc.
65, 209–84.
Fulford, G. R. & Broadbridge, P. (2002), Industrial Mathematics: Case Studies in the Diffusion of Heat and Matter.
(Australian Mathematical Society Lecture Series vol. 16). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Georgescu, A. (1995), Asymptotic Treatment of Differential Equations. London: Chapman & Hall.
Hanks, T. C. (1971), Model relating heat-flow value near, and vertical velocities of, mass transport beneath
ocean rises, J. Geophys. Res., 76, 537–44.
Hardy, G. H. (1949), Divergent Series. Oxford: Clarendon.
Hayes, W D. & Probstein, R. F. (1960), Hypersonic Flow Theory I: Inviscid Flows. New York: Academic Press.
Hinch, E. J. (1991), Perturbation Methods. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holmes, M. H. (1995), Introduction to Perturbation Methods. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Hopf, E. (1950), The partial differential equation
Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 3, 201–30.
Ince, E. L. (1956), Ordinary Differential Equations. New York: Dover.
Jeffreys, H. (1924), On certain approximate solutions of linear differential equations of the second order,
Proc. Land. Math. Soc., 23, 428–36.
Johnson, R. S. (1970), A non-linear equation incorporating damping and dispersion, J. Fluid Mech., 42(1),
49–60.
(1997), A Modern Introduction to the Mathematical Theory of Water Waves. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kaplun, S. (1967), Fluid Mechanics and Singular Perturbations. (P. A. Lagerstrom, L. N. Howard, C. S. Liu,
eds.) New York: Academic Press.
Kevorkian, J. & Cole, J. D. (1981), Perturbation Methods in Applied Mathematics. (Applied Mathematical
Sciences, Vol. 34.) Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
(1996), Multiple Scale and Singular Perturbation Methods. (Applied Mathematical Sciences, Vol. 114.)
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Kapila, A. K. (1983), Asymptotic Treatment of Chemically Reacting Systems. Boston: Pitman.
King, J. R., Meere, M. G., & Rogers, T. G. (1992), Asymptotic analysis of a nonlinear model for substitu-
tional diffusion in semiconductors, Z. angew Math. Phys,, 43, 505–25.
Kramers H. A. (1926), Wellenmechanik und halbzahlige Quantisierung, Z. Physik, 39, 829–40.
Kuo, Y. H. (1953), On the flow of an incompressible viscous fluid past a flat plate at moderate Reynolds
number, J. Math. and Phys., 32, 83–101.
Kuzmak, G. E. (1959), Asymptotic solutions of nonlinear second order differential equations with variable
coefficients J. Appl. Math. Mech. (PMM), 23, 730–44.
Lagerstrom, P. A. (1988), Matched Asymptotic Expansions: Ideas and Techniques. New York: Springer-Verlag.

285
Lawden, D. F. (1989), Elliptic Functions and Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Lie, G. C. & Yuan, J.-M. (1986), Bistable and chaotic behaviour in a damped driven Morse oscillator: a
classical approach, J. Chem. Phys., 84, 5486–93.
Lighthill, M. J. (1949), A technique for rendering approximate solutions to physical problems uniformly
valid, Phil. Mag. 40, 1179–1201.
(1961), A technique for rendering approximate solutions to physical problems uniformly valid, Z.
Flugwiss., 9, 267–75.
Lo, L. (1983), The meniscus on a needle–a lesson in matching,J. Fluid Mech., 132, 65–78.
McLachlan, N. W. (1964), Theory and Applications ofMathieu Functions. New York: Dover.
McLeod, J. B. (1991), ‘Laminar flow in a porous channel’ in Asymptotics beyond All Orders (H. Segur, S.
Tanveer, & H. Levine eds.). New York: Plenum Press.
Mestre, N. de (1991), The Mathematics of Projectiles in Sport. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Miles, J. W. (1959), The Potential Theory of Unsteady Supersonic Flow. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Murray, J. D. (1974), Asymptotic Analysis. Oxford: Clarendon.
(1993), Mathematical Biology. (Biomathematics Vol. 19.) Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Nayfeh, A. H. (1973), Perturbation Methods. New York: Wiley.
(1981), Introduction to Perturbation Techniques. New York: Wiley.
Olver, F. W. J. (1974), Introduction to Asymptotics and Special Functions. New York: Academic Press.
O’Malley, R. E. (1991), Singular Perturbation Methods for Ordinary Differential Equations. (Applied Mathematical
Sciences, Vol. 89.) New York: Springer-Verlag.
Oseen, C. W. (1910), Uber die Stokes’sche Formel, und uber eine verwandte Aufgabe in der Hydrodynamik,
Ark. Math. Astronom. Fys., 6(29).
Pao, Y.-P. & Tchao, J. (1970), Knudsen flow through a long circular tube, Phys. Fluids, 13(2), 527–8.
Papaloizou, J. C. B. & Pringle, J. E. (1987), The dynamical stability of differentially rotating discs–III, Mon.
Not. R. Astron. Soc., 225, 267–83.
Patterson, G. N. (1971), Introduction to the Kinetic Theory of Gas Flows. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
Poincaré, H. (1892), Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la Méchanique Céleste II (available New York: Dover, 1957).
Proudman, I. (1960), An example of steady laminar flow at large Reynolds number, J. Fluid Mech., 9,
593–602.
Rayleigh, J. W. S. (1883), On maintained vibrations, Phil. Mag., 15, 229–35.
Reiss, E. L. (1980), A new asymptotic method for jump phenomena, SIAMJ. Appl. Math., 39, 440–55.
Roosbroeck, W. van (1950), Theory of the flow of electrons and holes in germanium and other semicon-
ductors, Bell System Tech.J., 29, 560–607.
Sanders, J. A. (1983), ‘The driven Josephson equation: an exercise in asymptotics’ in Asymptotic Analysis
II—Surveys and New Trends (F. Verhulst, ed.). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Schmeisser, C. & Weiss, R. (1986), Asymptotic analysis of singularly perturbed boundary value problems,
SIAMJ. Math. Anal., 17, 560–79.
Segur, H., Tanveer, S., & Levine, H. (eds.) (1991), Asymptotics beyond All Orders. (NATO ASI Series B:
Physics Vol. 284). New York: Plenum Press.
Shockley, W. (1949), The theory of p-n junctions in semiconductors and p-n junction transistors, Bell System
Tech.J., 28, 435–89.
Smith, D. R. (1985), Singular-perturbation Theory: An Introduction with Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Stokes, G. G. (1851), On the effect of the internal friction of fluids on the motion of pendulums, Trans.
Camb. Phil. Soc., 9(11), 8–106.
Szekely, J., Sohn, H. Y., & Evans, J. W. (1976), Gas-Solid Reactions. New York: Academic Press.
Taylor, G. I. (1910), The conditions necessary for discontinuous motion in gases, Proc. Roy. Soc., A84,
371–77.
Terrill, R. M. & Shrestha, G. M. (1965), Laminar flow through a channel with uniformly porous walls of
different permeability, Appl. Sri. Res., A15, 440–68.
Tyson, J. J. (1985), ‘A quantitative account of oscillations, bistability, and travelling waves in the Belousov-
Zhabotinskii reaction’ in Oscillations and Travelling Waves in Chemical Systems (R. J. Field & M. Burgur
eds.). New York: Wiley.
van der Pol, B. (1922), On a type of oscillation hysteresis in a simple triode generator, Phil. Mag., 43, 177–93.
Van Dyke, M. (1964), Perturbation Methods in Fluid Mechanics. New York: Academic Press.
(1975), Perturbation Methods in Fluid Mechanics (Annotated Edition). Stanford, CA: Parabolic Press.

286
References
Vasil’eva, A. B. & Stelmakh, V. G. (1977), Singularly disturbed systems of the theory of semiconductor
devices, USSR Comp. Math. Phys., 17, 48–58.
Wang, M. & Kassoy, D. R. (1990), Dynamic response of an inert gas to slow piston acceleration, J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 87, 1466–71.
Ward, G. N. (1955), Linearized theory of Steady High-speed Flow. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wasow, W. (1965), Asymptotic Expansions for Ordinary Differential Equations. New York: Wiley.
Wentzel, G. (1926), Eine Verallgemeinerung der Quantenbedingungen für die Zwecke der Wellenmechanik,
Z. Phys., 38, 518–29.
Whitham, G. B. (1974), Linear and Nonlinear Waves. New York: Wiley.

SUBJECT INDEX
Acoustic problem, 249
acoustic wave, 136
Airy equation, 221
Airy function, 173
amplitude modulation, 157
angular momentum, 224
applications
1D heat transfer, 195
asymmetrical bending of a pre-stressed annular
plate, 152
Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction, 266
Boussinesq equation, 119
Boussinesq equation for water waves, 149
celestial mechanics, 219
chemical and biochemical reactions, 262
child’s swing, 200
combustion model, 255
connection between KdV and NLS equations, 194
decay of satellite orbit, 223
diode oscillator with a current pump, 213
drilling by laser, 207
Duffing equation, 155
Duffing equation with damping, 163
earth-moon-spaceship, 110
eigenvalue problem, 106
Einstein’s equation for Mercury, 219
elastic displacement, 112
enzyme kinetics, 263
enzyme reaction, 112
extreme thermal processes, 255
flow past a distorted circle, 116, 148
fluid mechanics, 242
gas flow through a long tube, 233
gas flow (unsteady, viscous), 233
heat transfer in 1D, 111, 195
heat transfer to a fluid flowing through a pipe, 131
Hill’s equation, 154, 191
hypersonic flow (thin aerofoil), 151
impurities in a semiconductor, 240
incompressible, inviscid flow past a circle, 116
Josephson junction, 236
Kepler’s equation, 104
kinetics of a catalysed reaction, 262
Klein-Gordon equation, 217
Korteweg-de Vries equation (variable depth) for
water waves, 252
laminar flow through a channel, 112
light propagating through a slowly varying medium,
228
low-pressure gas flow through a long tube, 233
Mathieu’s equation away from critical, 191
Mathieu’s equation based on Floquet theory, 153
Mathieu’s equation, case n = 0, 140
Mathieu’s equation, case n = 1, 141, 169
Mathieu’s equation, case n = 2, 153, 191
mechanical & electrical systems, 198
meniscus on a circular tube, 203
nonlinear, dispersive wave propagation, 118

288
Subject Index
perturbation of the bound states of Schrödinger’s
equation, 226
physics of particles and of light, 226
piston moving a gas in a long tube, 250
p-n junction, 237
planetary rings, 221
potential function outside a distorted circle, 148
projectile motion with small drag, 198
quantum jumps—the ion trap, 232
Raman scattering: damped Morse oscillator, 230
ray theory, 194
Rayleigh oscillator, 211
satellite orbit (decay), 223
Schrödinger’s equation for high energy, 193
self-gravitating annulus, 111
semiconductors, 235
semiconductor impurities, 240
shot-put, 199
slider bearing, 112
superconductors, 235
supersonic, thin aerofoil theory, 122
supersonic, thin aerofoil theory (using
characteristics), 151
swing (child’s), 200
thermal runaway, 258
thin aerofoil in a hypersonic flow, 151
thin aerofoil in transonic flow, 151
thin aerofoil theory, 151
transonic flow (thin aerofoil), 151
triode oscillator, 211
unsteady, 1D flow of a viscous, compressible
gas, 135
van der Pol oscillator, 211
vertical motion under gravity, 109
very viscous flow past a sphere, 246
vibrating beam, 111
viscous boundary layer on a flat plate, 242
water waves over variable depth, 252
water waves with weak nonlinearity, damping
and dispersion, 150
wave propagation (nonlinear, dispersive), 118
waves with dissipation, 149
weak shear flow past a circle, 148
asymmetrical bending of a plate, 152
asymptotic expansion, 14
complex variable, 16
composite, 35
conditions for uniqueness of, 15
definition, 14
integration of, 55
non-uniqueness, 14, 43
used in integration, 55
with parameter (1), 20
with parameter (2), 24
asymptotic sequence, 13
definition, 13
natural, 18
asymptotically equal to, 12
Behaves like, 12
Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction, 266
Bernoulli’s equation, 122
Bessel function
asymptotic behaviour, 44
modified, 206
big-oh, 11
Blasius equation, 244
blow up, 21
Bond number, 203
bound state (perturbations of), 226
boundary layer
nonlinear problem, 84
on a flat plate, 242
ordinary differential equations, 80
position, 86
two of them, 95, 108, 195
using method of multiple scales, 183, 194
within a layer, 108
boundary layer or transition layer, 90
examples, 96, 98
Boussinesq equation, 119
Boussinesq equation for water waves, 149
breakdown, 21, 22
Bretherton’s equation, 177
Burgers equation, 139
in a multi-speed equation, 150
Carrier wave, 179
catalysed reaction (kinetics), 262
celestial mechanics, 219
characteristic variables, 120
chemical and biochemical reactions, 262
child’s swing, 200
Clausing integral equation, 233
combustion model, 255
complementary error function, 209
completely integrable, 119
complex roots, 53
composite expansions, 35, 184
definition—additive, 35
definition-multiplicative, 39
error in using, 37
connection formula, 176, 223
conservation of waves (wave crests), 178
continuous group, 79
convergent series, 16
cubic equation, 50
D’Alembert’s solution, 124
definition
asymptotic expansion, 14
asymptotic expansion with parameter (1), 20
asymptotic expansion with parameter (2), 24
asymptotic sequence, 13
asymptotically equal to, 12
behaves like, 12
big-oh, 11

Subject Index
289
breakdown, 22
composite expansion (additive), 35
composite expansion (multiplicative), 39
Jacobian elliptic functions, 219
little-oh, 11
matching principle, 30
uniformity, 22
differential equations
scaling, 75
turning point, 90
with boundary-layer behaviour, 80
diode (semiconductor), 237
diode oscillator with current pump, 213
dispersion relation, 177
dispersive/non-dispersive wave, 183
divergent series, 16
estimates for, 16
doping (semiconductor), 237
drilling by laser, 207
Duffing equation with damping, 163
Duffing’s equation, 155
Earth-moon-spaceship, 110
eccentricity, 224
eigenvalue
in Schrödinger’s equation, 226
problems, 106, 192
vibrating beam, 111
eikonal equation, 194, 228
Einstein’s equation for Mercury, 219
Einstein’s theory of gravity, 219
elastic displacement, 112
ellipse (Keplerian), 224
elliptic equation, 128
elliptic functions, 165
definitions, 269
enzyme kinetics, 263
enzyme reaction, 112
equation
Airy, 173, 221
Bernoulli’s, 122
Blasius, 244
Boussinesq, 119, 149
Bretherton, 176
Burgers, 139
Clausing, 233
cubic, 50
differential, scaling, 75
Duffing, 155
Duffing with damping, 163
eikonal, 228
Einstein’s for Mercury, 219
elliptic, 128
Euler-Lagrange, 228
first order, linear, 4
Hermite, 228
Hill, 154, 191
hyperbolic, 128
Kepler’s, 104
Klein-Gordon, 217
Korteweg-de Vries, 121, 149, 255
Laplace’s, 128
linear oscillator, 2
linear oscillator with damping, 160
Mathieu, 139
Mathieu, away from critical, 191
Mathieu, case n - 0, 140
Mathieu, case n = 1, 141, 169
Mathieu, case n = 2, 153, 191
multi-wave-speed, 150
Navier-Stokes, 242, 246
Nonlinear Schrödinger, 181, 193
ordinary differential, first order (regular problem), 59
ordinary differential, first order (singular problem),
66,70
ordinary differential, second order (regular problem), 64
parabolic, 128
quadratic, 47
Riccati, 63
scaling of, 75
Schrödinger’s, 193, 226
second order, linear, 2, 6, 8
sine-Gordon, 217
transcendental, 51
two-point boundary-value problem, 7
with boundary-layer behaviour, 80
error in composite expansion, 37
error function, 43
Euler-Lagrange equation, 228
exponential integral, 17, 43, 261
estimates for, 43
extreme thermal processes, 255
Far-field, 121
fast scale, 158
Fermat’s principle, 228
Floquet theory, 139
applied to Mathieu’s equation, 153
flow of a compressible gas (unsteady), 135
flow past a distorted circle, 116, 148
flow through a channel (laminar), 112
fluid mechanics, 242
Fourier’s law, 208
free-molecular flow, 234
frequency, 177
function
Airy, 173
Bessel, 44
complementary error, 209
error, 43
gamma, 92
gauge, 10
Heaviside step, 252
Hermite, 193, 228
Jacobian elliptic, 165, 269
Jacobian elliptic (definitions), 219

290
Subject Index
modified Bessel, 206
stream, 243
Gamma function, 92
gas (isentropic), 122, 135, 249
gas constant, 135
gas flow through a long tube, 233
gas flow (unsteady, viscous), 135
gauge function, 10
set of, 13
geometrical optics, 194
ghost of a root, 49
group
continuous, 79
infinite, 80
Lie, 79
group speed, 179
in solution of Klein-Gordon equation, 217
in solution of Nonlinear Schrödinger equation, 180
Harmonic wave, 181
heat transfer
one dimensional, 111, 195
to a fluid flowing through a pipe, 131
Heaviside step function, 252
Hermite functions, 193
Hermite’s equation, 228
higher harmonics, 181
Hill, equation, 154, 191
Hopf-Cole transformation, 139
hot branch, 261
how many terms ?, 69
hyperbolic equation, 128
hypersonic flow (thin aerofoil), 151
Implicit solution, 126
impurities in a semiconductor, 240
infinite group, 80
integral in thin aerofoil theory, 105
integration
using asymptotic expansions, 55
using overlap region, 56
intermediate variables, 26
examples, 26
invariant, 80
ion trap, 232
isentropic gas, 122, 135, 249
Jacobian elliptic functions, 165, 269
for Einstein’s equation, 219
Josephson junction, 236
KdV—see Korteweg-de Vries
Keplerian ellipse, 224
Keplerian mechanics, 219
Kepler’s equation, 104
kinetics of a catalysed reaction, 262
Kirchhoff’s law, 213
Klein-Gordon equation, 217
Knudsen flow, 234
Korteweg-de Vries equation, 121, 149, 255
connection to Nonlinear Schrödinger equation, 193
Korteweg-de Vries equation (variable depth), 252
Laminar flow through a channel, 112
Landau symbols, 12
Langmuir-Hinshelwood model, 262
Laplace transform, 209
Laplace’s equation, 128
Laplace’s formula, 203
laser drilling, 207
Lie group, 79
light propagation, 228
limit cycle, 213
limit process, non-uniform, 4, 6
linear differential equation
first order, 4
second order, 2, 6, 7
linear oscillation, 2
bounded solution, 3
periodic solution, 3
linear, damped oscillator, 160
little-oh, 11
logarithmic terms—matching with, 32
Mach number, 122
Maclaurin expansion, 41
maintained vibrations, 211
matching principle, 28
definition, 30
van Dyke’s, 29
with logarithmic terms, 32
Mathieu’s equation, 139
away from critical, 191
case n = 0, 140
case n = 1, 141, 169
case n = 2, 153, 191
transitional curves, 141
Mathieu’s equation and Floquet theory, 153
mechanical & electrical systems, 198
meniscus on a circular tube, 203
Mercury—Einstein’s equation for, 219
method of multiple scales, 157
boundary-layer problems, 184, 194, 195
limitations, 183
method of separation of variables, 130
method of strained coordinates, 142
Michaelis-Menton reaction, 263
modified Bessel functions, 206
Morse oscillator, 230
motion under gravity, 109
multiple scales (method of), 157
multi-wave-speed equation, 150
Natural asymptotic sequence, 18
Navier-Stokes equation, 242, 246

Subject Index
291
near field, 121
nearly linear oscillations, 157, 188, 189
Newtonian mechanics, 219
Newtonian viscosity, 135
NLS—see Nonlinear Schrödinger
non-dispersive/dispersive wave, 183
nonlinear oscillator, 165, 190
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation, 181, 193
connection to Korteweg-de Vries equation,
193
non-uniform, 21
non-uniform limiting process, 4, 6
non-uniformity at infinity, 71
non-uniformity near the origin, 72
normalisation, 226
notation
asymptotically equal to, 12
behaves like, 12
big-oh, 11
little-oh, 11
number
Bond, 203
Mach, 122
Prandtl, 136
Reynolds, 136, 243
Ordinary differential equations
exact solutions, 41
first order, singular, 66
regular problem (first order), 59
uniform validity, 61
oscillation
linear, damped, 160
linear, simple, 2
nearly linear, 156, 187, 188
maintained, 211
nonlinear, 165, 190
relaxation, 267
self-sustaining, 211
oscillator
diode, with current pump, 213
in the Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction, 266
Morse with damping, 230
nonlinear, 165, 190
Rayleigh, 211
van der Pol, 211
overlap—maximum possible, 28
overlap region, 26
example, 26
used in integration, 56
Parabolic equation, 128
partial differential equation (regular problem), 115
Paul trap, 232
pendulum (stable up), 139
pendulum (child’s swing), 201
pericentre, 224
periodicity, 159, 225
perturbation of the bound states of Schrödinger’s
equation, 226
phase, 178
phase speed, 179
physics of particles and of light, 226
Picard’s iterative scheme, 62
piston problem, 249
planetary rings, 221
PLK method, 142
p-n junction, 237
Poincaré, H., 14
position of a boundary layer, 87
potential function outside a distorted circle, 148
Prandtl number, 136
pressure wave, 136
projectile motion with small drag, 197
projectile range, 198
Quadratic equation, 47
quantum jumps, 232
quasi-equilibrium, 266
Radius of convergence, 16
radius of curvature, 203
Raman scattering, 230
range (projectile), 199
Rankine-Hugoniot conditions, 251
ratio test, 18
ray theory, 194
Rayleigh oscillator, 211
regular, 21
regular problem
first order ordinary differential equation, 59
flow past a circle, 116
ordinary differential equations, 59
partial differential equation, 115
second order ordinary differential equation, 64
uniform validity, 61
relaxation oscillation, 267
resonance, 190
Reynolds number, 243
Riccati equation, 63
roots (ghost of), 49
roots of equations, 47
complex, 53
cubic, 50
quadratic, 47
transcendental, 51
Satellite orbit (decay), 223
scale
fast, 158
slow, 158
scaling
differential equations, 75
introduction to, 21
Schrödinger’s equation—perturbation of bound states, 226
Schrödinger’s equation for high energy, 193

292
Subject Index
secular terms, 161, 179
self-gravitating annulus, 111
self-sustaining oscillations, 211
semiconductor, 237
semiconductor impurities, 240
semi-major axis, 224
separation of variables, 130
shock profile (Taylor), 149
shock wave, 127
shock wave (weak), 251
shot-put (application of projectile motion), 199
similarity solution, 133, 241
Blasius, for boundary layer on a flat plate, 244
sine integral, 43
sine-Gordon equation, 217
singular, 21
singular problems (simple differential equations), 66,
118
slider bearing, 112
slow flow, 246
slow scale, 158
Snell’s law, 229
soliton theory
Boussinesq equation, 119
Korteweg-de Vries equation, 121
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation, 182
sine-Gordon equation, 217
speed
group, 180, 181,219
phase, 178
stagnation point, 243
Stefan problem, 208
Stokes flow, 246
Stokes stream function, 246
strained coordinates, 142
stream function, 244
Stokes, 246
superconductors, 235
supersonic flow (thin aerofoil theory), 122
using characteristics, 151
surface tension, 203
swing (child’s), 200
Taylor shock profile, 149
theory of geometrical optics, 194
thermal conductivity, 131, 135
thermal runaway, 258
hot branch, 261
thin aerofoil theory, 105
hypersonic flow, 151
integral problem, 105
supersonic, 122
transonic flow, 151
time scales, 159
transcendental equation, 51
transition layer, 90
transition layer or boundary layer, 90
transitional curve (Mathieu equation), 141
transonic flow (thin aerofoil theory), 151
triode circuit, 211
tunnelling effect, 236
turning point, 90, 170, 192
two boundary layers, 95, 108, 195
two-point boundary-value problem for linear equation, 7
Uniform, 21
uniformity, 22
uniformly valid, 21, 22
Van der Pol oscillator, 211
van Dyke’s matching principle, 29
velocity potential, 122
vertical motion under gravity, 109
vibrating beam (eigenvalues for), 111
vibrations of elliptical membrane, 139
viscosity, 135
viscous boundary layer, 242
viscous flow of a compressible gas, 135
viscous flow past a sphere, 246
Water waves, 150,252
wave
acoustic, 136
action, 180
carrier, 179
conservation, 178
dissipative, 149
harmonic, 181
higher harmonics, 181
non-dispersive, 183
water, 150, 252
pressure, 136
wave action, 180
wave number, 177
wave propagation
characteristic variables, 120
d’Alembert’s solution, 124
dispersive/non-dispersive, 183
far field, 121
near field, 121
non-dispersive/dispersive, 183
nonlinear, dispersive, 118
weak shear flow past a circle, 148
wetting, 203
WKB method, 170
WKB—exponential case, 192
WKB—higher-order terms, 191
WKBJ—see WKB method

