T h e  U l t i m a t e  G u i d e  T o  S e t u p
A  V i d e o  S t u d i o  A t  H o m e
A E R A A F  P A T E L
Home Video 
Studio Setup

Page 1
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Table Of Contents
INTRODUCTION
2
WHY TO HAVE A HOME STUDIO?
4
WHICH VIDEO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
7
WHICH LIGHTING SETUP TO CHOOSE
FROM?
13
WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
16
WHICH STUDIO MONITORS TO INVEST
IN?
26
WHICH LAPTOPS TO BUY?
31
                36
RECORDING AND EDITING SOFTWARES
   RESOURCES                                                                  44
   CONCLUSION                                                                50
   OTHER EQUIPMENTS                                                  40

INTRODUCTION
Page 2
A E R A A F  PAT E L

INTRODUCTION
Page 3
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Do you want to know how to build the greatest home studio
for digital coaching? Everything from audio setup to video
setup to lighting setup to studio monitors and the
headphones you should use will be covered. I'll discuss it. The
best editing tools on the market, as well as apps for your
phone that will help your coaching business. 
As a advanced business visionary, you'll be able to record
your individual skill on video and teach people whatever you
know. Before long you'll be able to create and offer a course.
Another basic step is to create the method of making
recordings as simple and ef{cient for you as possible.
Most courses will take between 2-3 hours to create and gives
a lifetime of earnings.
Setting up a straightforward domestic or of{ce studio can go
a long way toward ensuring that you halt delays and
take action on your plans.
Recordings, webinars, and podcasts increment engagement,
which in turn helps boost accomplishment.
The more you'll make openings for human connection, the
better experience it'll be for your students. Continuously keep
in mind to put yourself in your student’s shoes.

WHY TO HAVE A HOME STUDIO?
Page 4
A E R A A F  PAT E L

WHY TO HAVE A HOME STUDIO?
Page 5
A E R A A F  PAT E L
These days, anybody can coach anyone as long as they get
it their core niche and how to offer utilizing the tools
available. If you can connect with people then you'll be able
to reach a massive number of new people who wish to learn,
be motivated, or be engaged with videos and podcasts.
Building a video studio may appear to be a daunting
endeavour, especially if you're on a tight budget, but it's
actually rather simple. All you need is a dedicated area, a
calm atmosphere, and the appropriate technology at the best
price possible for your budget. How you build your video
studio is heavily in|uenced by the type of videos you intend to
capture. For the most part, this eBook refers to the types of
video that may be required for online coaching, such as
webinars, digital courses, interviews, and so on.
Think about the impact a world-class video/podcast/webinar
will make to your coaching business:
Rank higher in search engines
Increased activity to your website.
Draw in more backlinks
Increased conversions.
Increased revenue.

WHY TO HAVE A HOME STUDIO?
Page 6
A E R A A F  PAT E L
And much more…
You'll be able to change a livestream into a permanent video
lesson. Following, you'll be able take all or parts of the videos
and change over it into blog posts, eBooks, podcasts, and
different other formats.
Digital courses got to have a professional look. A high-quality
video appears to your viewers that you’re competent of
making persuasive content. They will respond emphatically
and trust a coach who approaches professionally from
beginning to end.
Choosing the right sort of camera can make an colossal
contrast in the result of your video. When it comes to video
making, there are distinctive models. A few individuals prefer
Canon, and a few incline toward Nikon. In the beginning you
can go with basic options.

WHICH VIDEO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 7
A E R A A F  PAT E L

WHICH VIDEO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 8
A E R A A F  PAT E L
With Logitech C922 Webcam you can stream and record
vibrant, true-to-life HD 1080p video that captures the most
exciting details at 30fps. Get fast, smooth uploads with
H.264 – advanced compression technology that demands less
network bandwidth.
Logitech C922 Webcam

WHICH VIDEO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 9
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Canon EOS 200D DSLR Camera
So if you need to have a few great quality recordings. That’s a
perfect model. And there’s one more called 
,
which are culminate webcams for you to begin with. There
are so numerous options. If you go on YouTube, you’ll get
indeed more befuddled. But since our utilization is not
outside, it’s all inside, the stationary cameras are best.
Logitech C 930
 has autofocus innovation that
produces it the favored camera for live events with a smooth
and exact wrap up like a camcorder, total with superb image
quality.
Canon EOS 200D DSLR Camera

WHICH VIDEO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 10
A E R A A F  PAT E L
But since coaching is all indoor shooting, the {rst step you
can do is moving from Logitech to Canon. You also get a DSLR
camera for like Rs. 30,000. So in the event that you’re, in case
you’re brand new, start with Logitech, but on the off chance
that you’d like to upgrade yourself a small bit but you don’t
have an awfully enormous budget. You'll go for anything
beneath Rs.30,000- Rs.40,000 i.e. $500-$600 range, which
you'll be able to connect straight into your laptop and utilize
as your webcam.

WHICH VIDEO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 11
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Sony a7 III Full-Frame Mirrorless
This camera has exceptional imaging capability and high-
speed performance contained in a compact body and gives
you the control, precision and adaptability to capture
excellent videos. Digital coaching is mostly indoors shoot, so
you can place your camera right in front of you. You can blur
the back ground to make the students pay attention to you.
Most of the digital creators recommend 
. Although this camera is at a higher band
in terms of price and I would not suggest going for it initially
when you are staring out digital coaching space. However, no
restrictions if you can afford then this is great product.
Sony a7 III Full-Frame
Mirrorless Camera

WHICH VIDEO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 12
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Now that we are done talking about video setups, we move
on to the lighting setup. Make sure there is plenty of light in
the room and hitting your face. Many record their recordings
with light at the back of them and no center on their faces. As
a result, their faces see dim and unattractive. You got to to
begin with siting in a way where you've got more
characteristic light hitting your face, ideally with a window
before you. In case you don’t have extraordinary natural light,
you’ll got to contribute in a few lighting hardware for your
home video studio. Once you’ve got your lighting gear, try
with the {nest position on camera. Now lets see some lighting
options:

WHICH LIGHTING SETUP TO CHOOSE FROM?
Page 13
A E R A A F  PAT E L

WHICH LIGHTING SETUP TO CHOOSE FROM?
Page 14
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Each lighting mode has
10 adjustable brightness
to choose, which is right
on my face. I can choose
different color tones;
during the daytime, I use
a white tone; during the
evening time, I use a
yellow sepia tone, so it
also looks very good when it’s hitting my face. So I have a
lighting option with this ring and I can change the color tone
from white light to a softer tone, making it even more like a
yellow kind of light. And it has the option to change the
colors. So based on what kind of |avor you want, you would
keep it white light in the mornings and in the evening I would
put two yellow lights and you can decide on that.
DigiTek Ring Light

WHICH LIGHTING SETUP TO CHOOSE FROM?
Page 15
A E R A A F  PAT E L
This RGB LED Wand is an incredibly convenient versatile
lighting installation apt for YouTube, Photo-Shoot, Video
Shoot, Live Stream, Makeup & More. It gives 10% to
100% dimming with most extreme illumination as well as a
full range RGB and 13 pre-programmed extraordinary scenario
lighting. And the best part is it comes with infrared remote
control. You can use these in webinars.
DIGITEK RGB LED Light Wand

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 16
A E R A A F  PAT E L

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 17
A E R A A F  PAT E L
So, {rst and foremost, I'm going to talk about ampli{ers. The
cheapest solutions sometimes connect straight into your
camera, which might be a problem if you want to walk about
when teaching. For recordings when you're sitting stationary,
you can get a high-quality noise-cancelling lavalier for a
reasonable price. A distant one will be required if you want
more space to move. Ampli{ers are classi{ed into two types:
energetic mouthpieces and condenser microphones. You may
explicitly connect in an energetic ampli{er, and then you
don't require any power supply to record; it instantly takes up
the sound.
Types of Microphone:
A lavalier microphone is also wireless and may be discreetly
fastened into your shirt or belt. It is sold as a set that includes the
transmitter. The lapel is attached, as is the receiver, which may
receive signals from the transmitter even from long distances It's
useful if you're shooting outside. You should be standing close to
your phone. You can have a splitter if you obtain one. two
microphones for doing interviews. Don’t attach a lavalier
microphone too close to your head. You’ll be surprised by how
much it picks up.

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 18
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Shotgun Microphones: Another type of microphone used
in television is the shotgun microphone. They're mounted to a
camera, so even if someone is a long distance away, it will act
like a shotgun, pointing at that person and picking up their
voice. Shotgun mics are a popular and high-quality
alternative for shooting video with a compact, professional
camera. They have shock mounts that assist decrease noise
caused by mechanical movements surrounding the mic. It
may concentrate on recording crisp sounds and vocals in front
of it. Even while recording outside, it does not pick up many
ambient sounds on the sides and behind the mic.

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 19
A E R A A F  PAT E L
This microphone is a great all-arounder. It's one of the
greatest microphones for capturing your instrument or
speech clearly. Incredible studio-quality sound. A microphone
stand may be required. So, in terms of microphone stands, I'm
utilising a tabletop stand. So, if you go to Amazon and search
for podcasts, tabletop, or mic stands, you'll discover a plethora
of these possibilities.
Lewitt LCT 440 Pure Microphone

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 20
A E R A A F  PAT E L
The {rst thing you'll notice about the FiFine T669 (if you're
used to a low-end mic) is how sensitive it is. It requires far less
effort to talk at the same loudness as a regular cheap mic
(less than 1.5k). This is when the FiFine mic volume is set to
50%. Increase it to 100% and whispers can become quite loud.
Even distant discussions may be plainly heard. However, this
is considered a disadvantage because you do not want
background and ambient noise in your meetings. Fortunately,
Zoom {lters away surrounding noise, and the volume
adjustment on the mic also helps to reduce it.
Fi{ne T669 Condenser

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 21
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Bulfss Scissor Arm Stand
This is a professional dynamic and condenser microphone
stand suspension scissor arm. The microphone stand is
attached to the table where I keep my laptop. You may have
seen my setup on my YouTube channel. For my camera, I can
move this microphone up and down, forward and backward.
Some individuals prefer a stand with no visible microphone
and a shotgun microphone or something aiming from the top.
It will be fantastic if you simply follow what I'm doing here. If
you're too far away from the camera to obtain decent audio, a
boom pole con{guration allows you to move closer to the
microphone and get incredibly sharp and clean audio.

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 22
A E R A A F  PAT E L
 The second item you'll need is a sound card,
which is something that allows you to collect sound and link
it directly to your system. When it comes to sound cards, the
quality varies based on the brand, model, and price.
Nonetheless, internal sound cards often provide higher audio
quality than external sound cards. An external sound card is a
box that connects to a computer in order to add audio ports.
External solutions, on the other hand, are considerably easier
to install and much more portable, allowing them to be
utilised on various devices. An external sound card is a useful
piece of computer and of{ce equipment. An audio interface is
a separate sound card. Most of them now use a USB
connection to connect to a computer. However, it is important
double-checking because certain devices employ different
connection types, such as thunderbolt. The audio interface
will allow you to connect an external microphone of high
quality.
Sound Card:

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 23
A E R A A F  PAT E L
What is the best way to connect your camera to your laptop?
You'll need an HDMI cable for this. There are several sorts of
sound cards depending on how many inputs you want. A
band will want additional inputs, but a home studio setup for
your voice will just require one. You could also require another
line input for whatever else you want to capture.
Audient iD4 Soundcard
This gives the {nest sound quality in its class to ensure you
hear every nuance, every aspect of your audio, allowing you to
hear your mix more correctly.

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 24
A E R A A F  PAT E L
This is intended to provide extremely minimal noise and
distortion for your recordings. The Audient EVO 4 is a small
and portable audio interface that offers two-channel
recording and is popular among music producers, podcasters,
voice-over artists, streaming services, and video creators.
They come in two variants. Audient iD4 features a normal
USB port, whereas Evo has a USB-C port.
Audient Evo 4 Soundcard

WHICH AUDIO DEVICES TO INVEST IN?
Page 25
A E R A A F  PAT E L
You must connect them since all of these sound cards are USB
powered. The camera will usually have an HDMI output. It will be
either a tiny HDMI or a standard HDMI. You can choose to buy
that cable and then search Amazon for HDMI video capture. I
believe it's known as Etzin video capture. It seems to be a USB
stick, but it is what you use to link your camera to that speci{c
health stream HDMI video capture. You just put your HDMI video
capture device into your USB port and you're done. You are not
required to do anything else. Simply open your zoom, and
whether you're using a DSLR or a mirrorless camera, it will begin
to appear as one of the cameras on zoom. If you're hosting a
Zoom webinar, you should record it in some way. So, for a video
setup, you'd need a camera, a camera stand, a ring light, a video
cable, and an HDMI to micro HDMI connection. A USB cable must
be connected from the sound card to your laptop or workstation,
and a microphone must be connected to the sound card.
Different types of cables are used with microphones. Obtain a
cable known as an XLR cable. So an XLR to XLR connection,
which is often used, connects the microphone to the sound
card, which is then linked to your laptop.

WHICH STUDIO MONITORS TO INVEST IN?
Page 26
A E R A A F  PAT E L

WHICH STUDIO MONITORS TO INVEST IN?
Page 27
A E R A A F  PAT E L
The initial worthwhile investment would be in high-quality
headphones. Investing in better microphones would yield
better results. You can also have a table top studio monitor or
headphones. Below are my recommendations:
KRK ROKIT RP8 G4 8
Rokit self-powered speakers produce clear, smooth sound.
Amazing quality of sound That, I believe, is in. I guess it is in
the amount of Rs.27,000.

WHICH STUDIO MONITORS TO INVEST IN?
Page 28
A E R A A F  PAT E L
One of the best budget monitor speakers... I strongly
recommend for beginners to set up their home studio...
My two suggestion they should include in the package two
6.35mm or 1/4” TRS cables (gold {nish) which provides best
stereo quality setup and free plugins included are for only pro
tool users if it is meant to be budget speakers then they
should also consider for non Mac operators so a plug-in which
supports cubase for windows would have been great option.
Mackie CR3X

WHICH STUDIO MONITORS TO INVEST IN?
Page 29
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Top audio engineers and professional audio reviewers have
lauded these headphones. It provides great clarity and
moulds around the ears for superior sound isolation in noisy
conditions while remaining durable and comfortable.
Audio Technica ATH MX-50 Headphones

WHICH STUDIO MONITORS TO INVEST IN?
Page 30
A E R A A F  PAT E L
When you go up to the next level, these headphones offer an
incredibly lightweight diaphragm for great impulse
performance and excellent sound reproduction. It's somewhat
pricey, but it delivers exactly what you might be searching for.
You don't have to get into pro audio gear unless you truly
want to nerd out. You may just go with the 
, which costs less than Rs.15,000.
Audio Technica
ATH MX 50
Beyerdynamic DT 990 PRO

WHICH LAPTOP TO INVEST IN?
Page 31
A E R A A F  PAT E L

WHICH LAPTOP TO INVEST IN?
Page 32
A E R A A F  PAT E L
The throbbing heart of your home recording studio is your
computer. It's entirely OK to start with the laptop or desktop
you already have. Most commercial applications and plugins
are likely to operate on it already. If you must purchase
something, start with a dependable computer that will serve
as the foundation of your home studio. Look for something
that is speedy, has adequate storage, and can analyse the
audio you're capturing rapidly. The computer is by far the
most expensive item when starting a home studio from
scratch. You should ideally choose the quickest one you can
afford. Everyone already has some kind of computer. Every
computer is fast enough to get you started. So, regardless of
your budget, I advocate starting with what you have.
CPU, RAM, and storage all have an impact on how much you
can save, your libraries and plugins, and how much you can
execute concurrently in a session.

WHICH LAPTOP TO INVEST IN?
Page 33
A E R A A F  PAT E L
If you must use a laptop, an Apple MacBook Pro is a fantastic
choice. Yes, you could use a Windows PC; but, Apple
equipment is more commonly used in home studios. It does
not have to be the most recent model. Because they are
speedier and easier to update, desktop computers are
commonly utilised in professional recording studios. Still,
laptops are growing increasingly popular and are an excellent
alternative for digital instructors who travel frequently.
If you're attempting to {gure out what speci{cations you'll
need for your computer, {gure out how much you can afford.
It’s your choice, your demands, OS comfort, and price limits
will determine whether you choose a Mac or a PC. A suitable
starting point would be a computer with the following
speci{cations: 8GB Ram Intel Core i5 or i7 processor Minimum
storage capacity is 256GB.
There will be lots of comparable used choices available. They
are also usually much cheaper, and it is easier to {nd a
second-hand or refurbished PC.

WHICH LAPTOP TO INVEST IN?
Page 34
A E R A A F  PAT E L
With up to 20 hours of battery life, you can get more done. The
latest 8-core CPU provides up to 2.8x faster speed, allowing
you to go through work|ows faster than ever before. It has
long been the go-to option for video, music, and other creative
applications, but desktop and laptop PCs may now be terri{c
alternatives if you choose the correct hardware.
Then you must choose between a desktop and a laptop
computer. If you construct the system yourself, choosing a
desktop can save you money. If mobility is vital to you,
though, invest in a laptop that allows you to create videos or
podcasts anywhere you go.
MacBook Pro

WHICH LAPTOP TO INVEST IN?
Page 35
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Another option would be to go for Windows Laptop with good
con{guration as already mentioned above. I personally use
below Laptop:
ASUS TUF Gaming F15
A gaming laptop are performance laptops which are basically
used for gaming purposes. They are higher on side in terms of
graphics. And to support the graphics you get other high
con{gurations. You can easily run high end softwares and
tools on this laptop. With my experience using this laptop for
the past 12 months, you will be satis{ed with it.

RECORDING AND EDITING SOFTWARES
Page 36
A E R A A F  PAT E L

RECORDING AND EDITING SOFTWARES
Page 37
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Let's talk about recording and editing softwares:
GarageBand(Mac)
Now, on to the audio program Garageband (Mac) This is
included with the Mac and is simple to use. GarageBand  is a
free music producing program that comes preloaded on the
majority of Apple devices.  It's also quite effective. I could see
the waveforms graphically, and you can add my add-ons
Everything in the video editing phase is so clean and tidy. You
may utilise it to spice up your game a little bit more. However,
for a typical podcast or video creation at home GarageBand is
more than adequate. You won't need anything else unless you
have a speci{c need for it
ScreenFlow(Mac)
This is an amazing resource for getting started with
generating your own amazing videos. It includes styles and
templates, as well as the ability to create excellent
animations and freehand annotation.

RECORDING AND EDITING SOFTWARES
Page 38
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Audacity
Audacity is a free audio recording programme that was
created by volunteers. The {nal piece of your home video
production jigsaw is editing. There are several editing
software alternatives available, ranging from free to
expensive. Apple's iMovie is perhaps the most popular free
alternative, particularly among Mac users. If you want
additional bells and whistles, you may upgrade to 
.
Final Cut
Pro
If you're currently on a tight budget and don't have much
money to spend, I'll give you some ideas to get you started.
Smartphone cameras offer highly con{gurable capabilities
that are more than adequate for a {rst-time home studio. The
cameras on today's cellphones are amazing. Anything from
the iPhone 6 and equivalent Samsung phones will provide
suf{cient video quality. I strongly recommend utilising Spark
Camera if you have an iOS smartphone (iOS). Spark Camera is
the most user-friendly method to record movies on your
iPhone. With a few clicks, you can capture, edit, and share
your movies. It's a lovely software that allows you to shoot
short {lms of up to one minute in length.

RECORDING AND EDITING SOFTWARES
Page 39
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Quik is available for Android users (iOS & Android) GoPro's
Quik app is a free photography and video editing software. It
stands out for offering a plethora of functionality equal to a
desktop picture or video editor in a slick-looking and
reasonably-fast software. It works nicely with other apps and
works well whether you want to focus on photographs,
videos, or both. 
And if you want to let go a little bit longer, there’s another app
called 
, which is excellent. InShot (iOS & Android)
InShot is a powerful HD Video Editor and Photo Editor with
professional features. Music, transition effects, text, emoji, and
{lters can be added, and the backdrop can be blurred. You
may put stickers on your {lms, edit them, and add text to
them. You can do multiple things, or you don’t have to depend
on any kind of video editing software. When you consider that
people spend hours watching smartphone footage, you
realize that your phone is good enough to start with. You don’t
need professional quality equipment to shoot video at a
quality level that will work for your initial educational
products.
InShot

OTHER EQUIPMENTS
Page 40
A E R A A F  PAT E L

OTHER EQUIPMENTS
Page 41
A E R A A F  PAT E L
You can tell the difference between cheap and costly seats in
your shoulders, neck, and lower back over time. You can
possibly have bad acoustics, which soundproo{ng might
assist with. 
In your home studio the {rst component of soundproo{ng you
should consider purchasing for your home studio is a
re|ection {lter. This is a microphone stand sound shield.
Functioning as a portable voice booth This should assist to
prevent any bad acoustics. preventing noise from entering the
room. 
After that, consider foam cushions that may be attached to
your wall. This will assist to minimize acoustic ambience in
the space, and the more you obtain, the better. Your room will
be better handled.
Let us see some of the options for below:
Re|ection Filter for Microphone
Good Seats/Chair
Wall Foam Pads
Green Cloth for Background

OTHER EQUIPMENTS
Page 42
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Troy Studio Re|ection Filter
This is not a sound
proof booth, it is to
meant to remove
room re|ections and
help create a dry clear
voice; and it does this
well enough. For the
price it is worth it.
CELLBELL ® GC03 Transformer
The CELLBELL chair is
constructed of high-quality
PU leather and features a
detachable headrest and
back support cushions. It
features a high backrest that
offers good back and neck
alignment and support.

OTHER EQUIPMENTS
Page 43
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Foam WallPads
A green screen is a bright
green canvas backdrop that
allows picture and video
editors to modify the whole
background in post-
production.
The primary purpose of wall
padding is to provide a safe
level of absorption for a
person making impact with
an established
object. Perhaps your budget
is tight or you don't need
full-time cushioning.
Another option is to use gym
mats, commonly used for gymnastics, wrestling or martial
arts.
Green Screen Cloth

RESOURCES
Page 44
A E R A A F  PAT E L

RESOURCES
Page 45
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Syteme.io - Courses, Funnels and Marketing Platform 
Getresponse - Landing Pages, Webinars, Autoresponders,
Automation
Clickfunnels - Funnels
ClickMagick - Link Tracking
Bluehost - Web Hosting Platform 
WebinarKit - Automated Webinar Software
Instamojo - Payment Gateway
Razorpay - Payment Gateway
Git Mind - Mind Mapping Tool
WPX Hosting -  Web Hosting Platform

RESOURCES
Page 46
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Executive Ma{a - Insta Engagement Tool
XSplit - Streaming and recording software 
Collectchat - Chat bot   
Designrr - EBook Creation
VIDIQ - Keyword & Audience Research 
Onstream live - Streaming Platforms
Restream - Live Streaming 
Buzzsprout - Podcast tool
Mindmeister - Mind Mapping Tool
Fiverr - Freelance
Flodesk Email Marketing System

RESOURCES
Page 47
A E R A A F  PAT E L
Wistia - Video Hosting
eCamm Live - Video Streaming
UseProof - Social Proof
Mint - Finance Tool
YNAB - Finance Tool
Zoom - Webinar
Inshot - Video Editing
Heading
TypeForm - Data Collection
Disclaimer : Some of the links are af{liate links.

ABOUT ME
Page 48
A E R A A F  PAT E L
AERA AF PATEL
Freedompreneur Mentor & Digital Coach
Invest in Self Education and Live a Freedom
Lifestyle 

FOLLOW ME
Page 49
A E R A A F  PAT E L
FOLLOW US ON BELOW ACCOUNTS:
GIVE ME A 5 STAR RATING:

CONCLUSION
Our audience has a lot going on. In a sense, you are
competing for attention. From the outset, be clear about
the aim of your video or podcast and concentrate it on
topics that will help people be the best they can be. Speak
from your heart. For example, instead of reading a script
when {lming your lectures or speaking to the camera,
consider speaking from memory. This may make a huge
impact for your audience. Even if the learning content is of
same quality, or even if you periodically fumble, you will
create trust and a relationship with your audience faster.

