GASTROINTESTINAL  
SYSTEM – MOTILITY 
Learning Objectives 
1. Describe the anatomy of the muscle layers 
in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract.   
 
2. Explain gastrointestinal motility and 
pacemaker function. 
  
3. Explain the patterns of motility in the fed 
and fasted states.    

GENERAL ANATOMY  
Enteric nervous system 
(Auerbach’s plexus) 
Smooth muscle in the wall of the GI tract is single unit type. 
These cells are electrically coupled by gap junctions.  

ELECTRICAL SLOW  
WAVES = PACEMAKERS  
•
Not all electrical slow waves reach 
threshold.  
  
•
At threshold, voltage gated calcium 
channels open triggering an  action 
potential. Contraction in the intestine 
follows an action potential. In the 
stomach all electrical slow waves lead 
to contraction. 

SEGMENTATION: MOTILITY 
IN THE FED STATE 
“SLOSHING” back and forth! 
Alternating contraction is bordered by relaxation.  

PERISTALSIS: MOTILITY  
IN THE FED STATE  
Outer muscle layer contracts; Inner muscle layer relaxes 
PROGRESSIVE MOVEMENT 

MIGRATING MOTOR 
COMPLEX IN FASTING 
•MIGRATING MOTOR COMPLEX (MMC) sweeps the  
GI tract to prevent over growth of bacteria. “GOOD  
HOUSEKEEPING ROLE”  
 
• MMC is initiated by the hormone, motilin, which is  
secreted by an empty stomach as well by the duodenum. 
 
• MMC usually starts in the stomach but can initiate in  
the small intestine (duodenum and jejunum). The  
frequency of contractions differs from the peristalsis  
associated with feeding.  

SPHINCTERS 
• Tonic inhibition of the smooth muscle  
(inner circular) layer of muscularis externa  
when there is no motility within the tract. 
 
• Regulated relaxation by turning off tonic  
inhibition to open the sphincter.  
 
• Regulated opening in response to Migrating  
Motor Complex (MMC) between meals.  

MASS MOVEMENTS 
•
Waves of contraction that propel semi-solid feces  
into distal colon, and then into rectum and anal canal.  
Involves the inner circular layer of the muscularis  
externa.  
 
•
Occur 1-3 times per day. 
 
•
External anal sphincter is under voluntary control.  
 
•
Defecation expels fecal material. It occurs with the  
relaxation of the anal sphincter and an increase in intra-
abdominal pressure.  

   VOMITING 
•
Protective function against ingestion of toxins. Also  
triggered by either delayed  emptying or rapid emptying 
(dumping syndrome) of the stomach.  
 
•
Expulsion of chyme from stomach usually but can  
include duodenal contents.  
 
•
Controlled by Vomiting Center located in medulla  
of brain stem.  
 
•
Respiratory and abdominal muscles are used in vomiting,  
not smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract wall.  

GENERAL CONCEPTS   
1. Movement involves the coordinated activities of the two  
outer muscle masses in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract.  
2. Movement and activities are coordinated by the enteric  
nervous system with modulation from the CNS. 
3. Pacemakers cells generate spontaneous electrical activity  
called electrical slow waves. An action potential can fire at  
the peak of a slow wave; contraction follows.   
4. In the fed state two types of motility occur, segmentation  
(or mixing) and peristalsis. In the fasted state, the migrating  
motor complex sweeps the tract clean.  
5. Tonic contractions occur at the sphincters and when there  
is no motility within the tract.  

