Cybersecurity Resume
HackYourFuture@email.com
Country
HackYourFuture
HackYourFuture
SUMMARY
Passionate Cybersecurity Junior with a strong foundation and proficiency in cybersecurity, specializing in vulnerability
assessment and incident response. Actively pursuing opportunities to enhance cybersecurity expertise and stay updated with
the latest trends and advancements through diverse courses, certifications, and personal projects.
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Network Engineer
Verizon
11/2019 – 08/2023
•Supported a major UK customer with over 11,000 managed locations and 14,000 devices, ensuring seamless network 
operations and infrastructure management, resulting in increased customer satisfaction
•Diagnosed, tested, and replaced hundreds of network infrastructure components, including routers, switches, access points, 
firewalls and VPN concentrators, effectively resolving network issues and ensuring smooth and reliable network operations.
•Automated a significant portion of daily tasks with Python to reduce investigation time by 30%, resulting in an increased 
number of daily processed incidents.
•Developed a tool to generate daily reports, providing reliable and accurate information about the current state of incidents 
over the past 24 hours, enabling informed decision-making and proactive incident management.
EDUCATION
Master's Degree in System Engineering and Informatics
Silasian University
06/2021
CORE COMPETENCIES
Vulnerability Assessment and 
Remediation
Effective Communication
Incident Handling
Creative Problem Solving
Threat Assessment
Attention to Detail
PROJECTS
Vulnerability Assessment Lab
06/2023 – present
•Set up and configured a Windows virtual machine (VM) on VirtualBox, creating a secure and isolated environment for testing 
and analysis.
•Conducted comprehensive vulnerability scans using Nessus to identify and assess potential security risks and weaknesses.
•Developed and implemented effective remediation strategies to address identified vulnerabilities, minimizing potential 
risks and strengthening system resilience.
Multi Honeypot Platform
06/2023 – present
•Deployed T-Pot on Azure Cloud, bolstering security measures and enabling advanced threat detection and analysis
•Monitored and analyzed honeypot data generated by T-Pot, enabling early detection and response to potential cyber threats
SIEM Implementation in Azure Cloud
06/2023 – present
•Successfully deployed Microsoft Sentinel a SIEM solution in Azure Cloud, fortifying cloud’s cybersecurity capabilities and 
enabling proactive threat detection and response.
•Enhanced threat detection with custom KQL analytics rules, enabling swift incident response to safeguard assets.
•Conducted incident investigations using SIEM tools and techniques to analyze cybersecurity incidents.
•Implemented remediation actions to mitigate and resolve identified cybersecurity incidents, minimizing the impact on 
critical assets and preventing recurrence
CERTIFICATES
CompTIA Security+
Microsoft Cybersecurity Architect
Microsoft Security Operations 
Analyst

